
Microwave Mixer Technology
and Applications

For a complete listing of titles in the 
Artech House Microwave Library,
turn to the back of this book.

Microwave Mixer Technology
and Applications
Bert Henderson
Edmar Camargo

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover design by Vicki Kane
ISBN 13: 978-1-60807-489-1
© 2013 ARTECH HOUSE
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book 
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publisher.
 All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been 
appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of 
a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service 
mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

 
 
To our wives, Marcia and Ann

vii 
 
Contents 
 
Preface  
 
 
 
 
 
       xi 
 
CHAPTER 1      Origins of Electronic Mixers 
 
                             1 
   
              1.1 History of Radio Development                                         1 
     
              1.2 Single Ended Circuits    
 
                          18 
  
              1.3 Singly Balanced Mixers  
 
                         23 
  
              1.4 Doubly Balanced Star Circuit 
                                       29 
   
              1.5 Special Receiver Architectures                                             30 
 
              1.6 Harmonic Mixers 
 
 
                          42 
   
              1.7 Self-Oscillating Balanced Mixers  
                         44 
   
              1.8 Distributed Mixers   
 
 
                         45 
   
              1.9 Summary   
 
 
 
          
             46 
 
CHAPTER 2     System Parameters and Performance   
                         49 
 
              2.1 System Overview   
 
 
           
             49 
 
              2.2 Digital Modulation  
 
 
           
             54 
 
              2.3 Error Performance 
 
 
                         64 
 
              2.4 Receiver Architectures  
 
                         68 
 
              2.5 Mixer Linearity 
 
 
                         74 
 
              2.6 Noise  
 
 
 
                         76 
 
              2.7 Noise and Distortion in Communication Subsystems         93 
 
              2.8 Dynamic Range 
 
 
                       102 
 
              2.9 Summary 
 
 
 
    
           103 
 
CHAPTER 3    Semiconductor Modeling   
 
                       105 
 
          3.1 Modeling Schottky Diodes   
                                105 
 
          3.2 Modeling Bipolar Transistors 
                                 109 
 
          3.3 Modeling Field Effect Transistors              
                121 
  
          3.4 Summary   
 
 
                151 
 
 
CHAPTER 4    Passive and Active Coupling Structures  
155 
 
          4.1 Balun Structure  
 
 
                155 
 
          4.2 Marchand Balun  
 
 
                164 
 
          4.3 Microstrip Baluns  
 
 
                169 
 
          4.4 Lumped Elements 
 
 
                187 
 
          4.5 Slotline Type  
 
                                 191 
 
          4.6 Active Approach  
 
 
                194 
 
          4.7 180 Hybrid Couplers (Magic-T) 
 
                203 
 
          4.8 Quadrature Hybrids  
 
                                 221 

viii 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
          4.9 Summary 
 
 
                                 225 
 
 
Appendix 4A — Guanella 4:1 Transformer 
                230 
 
           Appendix 4B — Compensated Balun  
                232 
 
           Appendix 4C — Active 180 FET  Power Divider                 235 
 
           Appendix 4D — Alternative 180 FET Power Divider          237 
 
          Appendix 4E — Active 180  FET Combiner   
                239 
 
 
CHAPTER 5      Diode Mixer Theory  
 
 
 
           241 
 
            5.1 History of Linear and Nonlinear Analysis    
           242 
 
           
5.2 Linear Mixer Analysis  
 
                       243 
 
            5.3 Frequency Conversion Matrix  
                       247 
 
            5.4 Computer Simulation Example      
                       276 
 
          
5.5 Large Signal Conversion Analysis 
 
           289 
 
           
5.6 Subharmonic Mixer 
 
 
                       300 
 
            5.7 Balanced Diode Circuits  
 
                       313 
 
            5.8 Mixer Circuit Synthesis  
 
                       323 
 
            5.9 Summary  
 
 
 
                       326 
 
 
Appendix 5A — Parasitic Losses in Diode Mixers 
           329 
 
Appendix 5B — Conversion Matrix Including Parasitics       333 
 
Appendix 5C — Image Imp. and RF-Image Conversion        340 
 
 
Appendix 5D — Saleh Exp. Diode Mixer Performance         341 
 
CHAPTER 6   
Diode Applications  
 
 
                       345 
 
       
6.1 Single Ended   
 
 
                       345 
 
           
6.2 Singly Balanced   
 
 
                       353 
 
          
6.3 Doubly Balanced   
 
 
                       384 
 
          
6.4 Triply Balanced 
 
 
                       400 
 
          
6.5 Quadrature Mixers 
 
 
                       413 
 
          
6.6 Subharmonic Mixers    
 
                       416 
                        
6.7 Summary  
 
 
 
                       424 
 
CHAPTER 7  
BJT Mixer Theory   
 
 
                       431 
   
       
7.1 Low Frequency Mixer   
                       
           433 
   
         
7.2 Conversion Matrix  
 
 
                       441 
                      
7.3 Mixer Properties  
 
 
                       449 
  
        
7.4 Design Study: CDMA Down-Converter                        453 
 
        
7.5 Cascode Approach 
 
 
                       457 
 
 
7.6 Singly Balanced Mixer  
 
                       461 
 
       
7.7 Singly Balanced Subharmonic              
           473 
 
        
7.8 Doubly Balanced Mixer 
 
                       475 
 
        
7.9 Design Study: WiFi 2.45 GHz Gilbert Mixer    
           490 
 
      
7.10 Differential Triple Level 
 
                       495 
 
      
7.11 Doubly Balanced Subharmonic 
                       500 
                    
7.12 Subharmonic Triple Level 
 
                       504 

Contents                                                                    ix 
 
     
7.13 Summary  
 
 
 
                       508 
 
 
Appendix 7A — 2SC5006 Gummel Poon Parameters            511 
 
 
Appendix 7B — AT305 Spice Parameters 
 
           512 
 
CHAPTER 8 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
          
           513 
 
 
8.1 Single Ended   
 
          
 
           513 
 
 
8.2 Parallel Combined Mixers  
 
           
           517 
  
 
8.3 Integrated Circuit Topologies 
 
           
           531 
 
   
8.4 Doubly Balanced  
 
 
           
           543 
 
 
8.5 Image Reject  
 
          
                         572 
 
 
8.6 Subharmonic Topologies 
 
                       580 
 
 
8.7 Summary  
 
 
 
           
           585 
 
CHAPTER 9  
FET Mixer Theory   
 
 
           
           589 
 
 
9.1 Gate LO Injection  
 
 
           
           591 
 
 
9.2 Source LO Injection   
 
          
           614 
 
 
9.3 Drain LO Injection   
 
 
          
           616 
 
 
9.4 Resistive Approach 
 
           
 
           624 
 
 
9.5 Cascode Mixer   
 
 
           
           637 
 
 
9.6 Singly Balanced 
 
 
           
           642 
 
 
9.7 Doubly Balanced  
 
 
 
           659            
 
 
9.8 Subharmonic Mixing  
 
 
           665      
 
 
9.9 Distributed Mixers 
           
 
 
           669 
 
 
9.10 Summary 
 
           
             
           674 
 
 
Appendix 9A — NE67300 Parameters 
 
           679 
 
 
Appendix 9B — Transistor NMOS 0.13 µm Tech. 
           685 
 
CHAPTER 10   Passive FET Applications   
 
                       687 
 
 
10.1 Single Ended  
 
 
                       687 
 
 
10.2 Floating Approach    
 
                         697 
 
 
10.3 Singly Balanced  
 
 
                       707 
 
 
10.4 Doubly Balanced   
 
 
                       725 
 
 
10.5 Distributed GaAs Applications  
                       751 
 
 
10.6 Summary    
 
 
                       753 
 
CHAPTER 11  Active FET Applications   
 
                       757 
 
 
11.1 Single Ended  
 
 
                       757 
 
 
11.2 Singly Balanced  
 
 
                       775 
 
 
11.3 Doubly Balanced  
 
 
                       791 
 
 
11.4 Subharmonic Approach 
             
           814 
 
 
11.5 Self-Oscillating FET Mixer 
 
                       820 
 
 
11.6 Distributed Applications  
 
                       826 
 
 
11.7 Summary    
 
 
                       838 
 

x 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Appendix    
Sampling Mixers  
 
 
                       843 
About the Authors    
 
 
 
 
 
           857 
Index 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           859 
 


xi 
 
PREFACE 
 
In view of the extensive coverage available in existing books on the topic of 
microwave mixers for graduate and professional engineers, another book in this 
area warrants some explanation. This work is intended to provide the new 
generation of design engineers with basic theory, a glimpse into the history of 
mixer technology development, and to professional engineers it offers a wealth of 
material on important publications and patents. Therefore we expect this text will 
improve the understanding of frequency conversion circuits and provide a 
platform for those who want to go further and extend the state of the art. Another 
aspect of this book is its emphasis on practical applications, counterbalancing the 
available resources that tend to focus on theoretical aspects more so than the basic 
concepts of how devices are used for mixing.  Over one thousand patents on 
mixers and frequency conversion were reviewed, with many of the important and 
interesting ones discussed in the application-oriented chapters. In addition, 
important contributions from the technical literature are included to provide a 
solid theoretical foundation.     
This text represents the authors’ efforts to introduce the basic theory of 
mixing using diodes, bipolar transistors, and FETs. Discussion of the theory is 
followed by numerous circuit applications based on patents and other publications 
from the literature.  Very often the original patent manuscripts are incomplete or 
unclear, so their language is clarified, and in many cases circuit simulations are 
done to verify the patents’ statements. Therefore we feel the material in this book 
is useful for undergraduate students who desire to learn basic concepts and to 
improve their ability and confidence in developing new circuits. And it is also a 
book for professionals looking for clues for specific applications which are 
available in most chapters. We see this book as a kind of handbook, and we hope 
its material will warrant a place in the bookshelf of professional designers. 
The book is organized into eleven chapters as follows: Chapter 1 
introduces the origins of mixer technology, starting with the prevacuum tube era 
up to its golden age in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Most of the basic topologies 
were developed within this time frame and formed the basis for analog radio 
development until the late 1970s. The application of mixers in systems is 
discussed in Chapter 2 along with the parameters associated with mixers. A few 
spreadsheet examples analyzing the role of mixers in receivers are presented, 
including cascaded analyses of gain, IP3, noise figure including image and LO 
noise, and phase noise.  Chapter 3 discusses the modeling of diode, bipolar, and 
FET devices that apply particularly to use in frequency conversion circuits.  
Chapter 4 discusses the basic building blocks in mixers, with emphasis on balun 
theory, one of the most important components in a mixer.  
The remaining chapters are more specific to the various mixing devices, 
each followed by a chapter on application circuits. Chapter 5 introduces the basic 
theory of diode mixers, including the conventional theory by Torrey and Whitmer 

xii 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
in the 1940s, the work of Saleh in the 1970s, and the work of Maas in recent 
years.  Chapter 6 summarizes patents and major publications on the application of 
diodes to various topologies and classes of mixers. The theory of bipolar transistor 
mixers is dealt with in Chapter 7, followed by applications in Chapter 8. The 
theory of FET mixers is in Chapter 9, detailing the principles of operation of the 
FET family for active and passive approaches.  Chapter 10 discusses applications 
of passive FET mixers, and Chapter 11 presents applications of active FET 
mixers.  
 
This text assumes as minimum prerequisites: familiarity with basic 
electronics and simple circuit analysis, familiarity with the Fourier representation 
of simple waveforms, and knowledge of microwave fundamentals and 
communication theory.  With this background the reader will certainly have a 
better appreciation and ability to absorb the technical content.  
 
We would like to thank and acknowledge the support of Agilent and 
AWR in providing circuit simulation software: Advanced Design System (ADS) 
by Agilent, and Microwave Office by AWR; and recognize Regis Camargo for 
providing the book cover design concept.   
It is with deep appreciation that we acknowledge the support of our 
wives, Ann Henderson and Marcia Camargo, who helped make the writing of this 
book a pleasant task. We also would like to honor our parents who put us onto the 
right path, Tiburcio and Terezinha França Camargo, and Connie and Lillian 
Henderson.   
 
 
 
 

1 
Chapter 1 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
This chapter presents the historical context for the emergence of the mixer as a 
critical component in radio communication systems. The origins of electronic 
mixers are closely associated with the origins of radio communications, starting 
with the first major advance, which was detection of RF signals in receivers. The 
quality of detectors improved considerably with the introduction of diode tubes 
for simple detection of continuous wave (CW) and amplitude modulated (AM) 
radio signals. The introduction of heterodyning and super-heterodyning receivers 
was the second major advance in the development of radio, which increased the 
importance of the mixer by its ability to provide frequency conversion. Increased 
gain was also obtained using regeneration and super regeneration methods. Clever 
implementation of frequency conversion, as well as improving tube technology 
itself, led to dramatic performance gains. Improvements in tube technology 
included the introduction of high-quality diode, triode, tetrode, and pentode tubes. 
Numerous patents were developed for tube-based mixer circuits, some related to 
tube technology itself and others related to improved heterodyne operation. 
Valuable insights can be derived from these early developments in mixer 
technology. Many of the early tube design ideas were simply transferred to 
semiconductors such as diodes, and in particular FETs, which are a natural 
replacement for the tube due to similarities in their electrical properties.  
 
 
1.1  HISTORY OF RADIO DEVELOPMENT 
 
At the turn of the 20th century, wireless communications technology consisted of 
using a spark gap in the transmitter to generate electromagnetic waves, and using 
a coherer in the receiver for detection. The spark gap comprised two electrodes 
terminated by metallic spheres and separated by a gap while surrounded by a gas 
atmosphere. When a high voltage pulse was applied between the electrodes, a 
spark was formed by ionizing the gas, which in turn reduced its electrical 
resistance, producing a current pulse. This generator was connected to an antenna 
and capacitors that constituted a tank circuit. Damped oscillations were produced 

2 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
by the “spark” and a portion of this spectrum would be selected by the tank’s 
resonant frequency, with the resulting EM energy being radiated.  
 
An example of this transmitter used for Morse code transmission is 
shown in Figure 1.1. It consisted of a Morse code key and a battery connected to 
the primary of a high voltage transformer, whose secondary coil was connected to 
the spark gap, tank circuit, and antenna. When the key was closed, a high voltage 
appeared at the secondary of the transformer that would charge the capacitor. 
After reaching a certain voltage, a spark would jump between the electrodes 
causing damped oscillations in the tuned circuit. The high peak voltage reaching 
the antenna caused energy to radiate into free space.  
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.1    A simple spark gap transmitter consisting of a Morse key and a high voltage transformer 
connected to a spark gap in between a tank circuit. The filtered signal is delivered to 
the aerial. 
 
On the receiver side, a resonant circuit was connected to the antenna and 
tuned to the transmitting frequency. The filtered RF signal was detected by a 
device called a “coherer,” [1], which comprised metal fillings enclosed in a glass 
capsule and kept at low pressure between two electrodes. With no signal present, 
the filings were slightly oxidized, causing the impedance of the coherer to be high. 
Once an RF signal incident at the coherer reached a certain threshold level, the 
fillings would become aligned due to electro-static interaction and become slightly 
welded due to microscopic sparks between them. The resistance between the 
electrodes then would fall to a few ohms. However, after being subjected to 
potential differences set up by the impressed signal, the coherer would not by 
itself resume its initial high resistance state, so a small hammer was provided to 
gently tap the glass capsule and mechanically shake the fillings to restore the 
initial high resistive state. A diagram of a typical receiver of the time is shown in 
Figure 1.2 [2]. The electromagnetic wave picked up by the antenna generated a 
current to ground. The resulting voltage in the transformer, tuned by the capacitor, 
is applied to the coherer that would become a low resistance device allowing 
current to be developed on the resistor R.  
Aerial 
Spark Gap 
Coil 
Capacitor 
Transformer 
Battery 
Tuned Circuit 
Earth 
Morse 
Key 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.2       The received signal is filtered by the tank circuit and applied to the coherer. This 
transient is sensed by the head phone. 
 
The operation of this “on-off” system sounds very crude nowadays, but it 
met the requirement at that time of transmitting and receiving Morse code without 
wires. Many engineers and scientists contributed to the further development of 
wireless communications, but two inventors stand out as major contributors: 
Marconi [3] who filed a patent for his “Apparatus for Wireless Telegraphy” in 
November 1900, and Tesla [4] who filed a very similar system in July 1900, 
“System of Signaling.” They proposed a wireless transceiver system that was 
reliable for the transmission of Morse code. However, it was not capable of 
transmitting voice over electromagnetic waves. A few more years would pass 
before a cost efficient system would be developed to transmit voice. Reginald 
Fessenden [5] was the scientist pursuing the transmission of voice over a pure 
sinusoidal carrier or a “continuous wave.” He tried to improve the spark system 
for that purpose but was not successful. The only source of pure electrical 
sinusoidal signal with high power was from an alternator (dynamo), normally used 
to generate electricity. The problem was its inability to generate high frequencies. 
Eventually, he teamed up with another engineer, Alexanderson [6], who was able 
to build a high-speed alternator operating at 100 kHz and generating 1kW of 
power. He added a carbon microphone to the alternator circuit, providing 
amplitude modulation to the carrier. In spite of the success of his invention, it 
soon became obsolete with the advent of the diode vacuum tube in 1905 by 
Fleming [7] and the triode vacuum tube in 1908 by Lee de Forest [8].  
 
The device invented by Fleming, depicted in Figure 1.3, consisted of a 
filament b surrounded by a cylinder c isolated from each other, all contained in a 
vacuum glass bulb. By heating the filament it becomes a source of electrons inside 
the tube. Applying a positive potential to the cylinder, electrons flow from the 
filament to the cylinder creating a current in the external circuit. If the potential 
applied to the cylinder is negative, then the electrons are repulsed and there is no 
current in the circuit. This device allowed rectification of high frequency 
- 
+ 
Aerial 
Ground 
Tuning 
Capacitor 
Coherer 
R 
Tank 
DC block 
Capacitor 

4 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
alternating signals and replaced the coherer due to its many advantages. This 
vacuum tube diode is considered to be the device that initiated the field of 
electronic science. The hot filament became known as cathode and the cold 
cylinder as the anode. 
 
                                               
 
 
Figure 1.3      Vacuum tube diode where a current is detected by the galvanometer if a positive voltage 
is applied to the cylinder with respect to the filament. If the voltage is reversed, then 
there is no current detected in the galvanometer.  
 
The description of current as a function of voltage is given by the Child-
Langmuir equation [9], valid for low anode voltages and before a space charge is 
built up between the electrodes, which limits the current. The constant K takes 
into account the geometry of the tube, also called a valve. 
 
 
2
3
KV
I 
   
 
 
 
 
                     (1.1) 
 
 
The invention of the triode, called the audion by Lee De Forest, was the 
second most important milestone in the new field of electronics. As observed in 
Figure 1.4, De Forest added a grid, a, between the cathode, F, and the anode, b. 
The application of a small voltage on the grid allowed control of the flow of 
electrons between the heated cathode to the cold anode, which provide a detected 
signal to the telephone terminal, T. His objective was to detect high frequency 
signals achieved by coupling his device to an antenna by means of a transformer. 
The capacitor C’ is part of the tank circuit and C” is used to block DC current 
from flowing from grid to cathode. The circuit showed improved sensitivity, due 
to the voltage gain impressed by the tube. It is an example of an active rectifier for 
RF signals. In this circuit the grid remained unbiased, but it could become biased 
by the charge stored on the blocking capacitor. 
 
V
I 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
5 
                
 
 
Figure 1.4       Triode applied as wireless telephony receiver. Originally proposed as an active rectifier 
it can also operate as a signal amplifier and as a generator and beat receiver.  
 
 
Later it became usual practice to bias the grid negatively to control the 
current. If the grid potential becomes positive, then current would start flowing to 
the grid, which degraded performance and could destroy the device by melting the 
fine wires comprising the grid. The I,V description of this device follows a similar 
equation developed for diodes [9] with K1, K2 constants. 
 
 
2
3
2
1
)
(
pk
gk
p
V
K
V
K
I


    
 
      
        
         (1.2) 
 
The current is a stronger function of the control voltage, Vpk, so K2 is a 
small fitting parameter. The fact that the device can provide gain allowed the 
development of sinusoidal sources, amplifiers, and a myriad of new applications.  
 
A clear explanation of the triode operation as an amplifier/rectifier was 
given by Armstrong [10]. Figure 1.5 shows a transfer characteristic Iplate versus 
Vgrid of a typical audion of the time. If the grid is biased near point M, the transfer 
characteristic is very close to a diode characteristic, where plate current will be 
amplified for a positive grid voltage swing and will be nearly zero on the negative 
swing. The same effect can be obtained if bias is shifted to point N, except that the 
positive part of the incoming wave train would be rectified.  
 
The circuit of Figure 1.6 uses such a characteristic to detect amplitude 
modulated (AM) information contained in high frequency signals. The 
potentiometer P is adjusted to set the grid bias to point M in the transfer 
characteristic. The initial wave train sets up oscillations in the parallel LC circuit 
and the positive half cycles generate a high “wing” (plate) current while the 
negative ones are heavily compressed. B1, B2, B3 are voltage supply to filament, 
plate and grid, respectively. 
 
Vpk 
Ip 
Vgk 

6 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.5     Plate current function of grid potential with respect to filament. The transconductance 
of this device is about 0.2 mA/V.  After [10]. 
 
 
This asymmetrical characteristic is similar to one produced by a diode, 
the difference here is that the positive half cycles are amplified by the wing (plate) 
current circulating in the load. The load is composed of a capacitor C in parallel 
with a microphone that can be represented by a resistor. The high frequency 
charge on the capacitor, which discharges through the telephone, has a long time 
constant. This arrangement constitutes a low pass filter detecting the low 
frequency signal modulating the carrier. The high frequency signal is therefore 
rectified and amplified simultaneously using the same device.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.6     Active rectifier proposed by Armstrong using an audion valve.  After [10].  
 
The stability of a triode is dependent on the load, which can be evaluated 
from the circuit representing a triode amplifier shown in Figure 1.7. The model 
Headphones 
B2 
B1 
L 
T
C 
P
B3 
CT 
Wing (plate)  
current, Ip (mA) 
1.0 
M 
P 
N 
0.5 
0 
 -5  -3   0   3   5 
Vgk -Volts 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
7 
includes parasitic capacitances, Cg = grid to ground, Cag = anode to grid, Ca = 
anode to ground, and the voltage generator is dependent on gate voltage, with gain 
µ. The plate (anode) resistance, rp, is much lower than the load.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                
 
 
            
 
             
     
    
 
 
                
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
                   
Figure 1.7      Equivalent circuit for a triode amplifier. 
  
 
The input admittance for this circuit is approximately given by: 
 
 










L
p
ag
g
L
p
ag
g
in
R
r
C
C
j
X
r
C
j
R
Y




1
                     (1.3) 
 
From this equation it is found that if the load is capacitive, CL, then the 
real part of input admittance, Yin, is equal to: 
 
p
L
ag
g
in
r
C
C
R
Y



1
)
Re(
        
 
 
 
         (1.4)    
 
 
In this case Yin is positive and the circuit is stable. On the other hand if 
the load is inductive, LL, then the real part of input admittance is equal to: 
 
  
p
L
ag
g
in
r
L
C
R
Y

2
1
)
Re(


 
 
 
       
         (1.5) 
 
 
This shows there is a combination of parameters and frequency where the 
real part of the input conductance is negative, rendering the circuit unstable. 
 
 
1.1.1  Heterodyne Concept 
 
The application of the heterodyne principle emerged as an application to radio 
communications and was proposed by Reginald Fessenden [11], in his patent 
“Wireless Signaling” granted in 1902. In his proposal, shown in Figure 1.8, the 
Rg 
Eg 
Vg 
Cg 
Cag 
Ca 
ZL = RL + j XL 
µVg 
rp 

8 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
sending station contains two antennas of different length transmitting two signals 
simultaneously with a small difference in frequency. The inventor does not 
describe how the oscillations are generated, but one can think of a spark gap 
generator coupled to the magnetic coil 5. Once the spark passes between terminals 
3 and 4, signals of different frequencies are generated and the antennas will select 
oscillations that fall within its own resonating frequency. Therefore, at each spark 
two signals are radiated simultaneously. At the receiver side two antennas, 6 and 
7, are tuned to the corresponding transmitter frequencies and both are connected 
to a coherer or any other type of detector. The first oscillations reaching the 
coherer are of same amplitude, as explained in Figure 1.9, but after a few periods 
there is a difference in the potential applied to the coherer resulting from the 
beating signal. This signal is sensed by the coherer and activates a Morse code 
relay. 
 
               
 
 
Figure 1.8      Dual frequency transmitter and receiver antenna, the origin of heterodyne system.  
                   
 
 
Figure 1.9  Beating of two sinusoids, whose beat or frequency difference is the desired signal. 
 
This invention paved the way to modern communication systems, by 
indicating the convenience of beating two sinusoids to extract the frequency 
difference signal. Later, one of the transmitted signals became a local oscillator at 
the receiver, a common practice in any heterodyne or super-heterodyne receiver. 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
9 
1.1.2  Regenerative Receiver 
 
The next major advance in receiver development was the introduction of the 
regenerative circuit by Armstrong [12] in 1914, which is essentially an AM 
detector, converting an RF signal to audio. His invention, reproduced in Figure 
1.10, contained two interlinked circuits: a tuned receiving circuit coupling the 
antenna to the audion grid, “tuned grid circuit,” and the “wing circuit” containing 
the remaining high frequency and DC circuitry. The linking between both circuits 
is through the impedance connected from cathode (filament) to a common point. 
This introduces a positive feedback from wing to grid and the amount of feedback 
is controlled by an auto-transformer. If the amount of feedback is kept below the 
onset of oscillations, very high gain can be obtained from a tuned circuit, 
increasing the sensitivity of a receiver. The valve therefore can simultaneously act 
as a tuned RF amplifier and as a local oscillator. Armstrong added capacitor C’ in 
series with the grid, which moves the bias somewhere near the center of the valve 
transfer characteristic. The result is the grid to filament circuit acts as a rectifier 
whose detection threshold is dependent on how much charge is accumulated on 
the grid as a result of signal applied to the terminals.  
          
 
 
Figure 1.10    The regenerative receiver introduced innovative concepts in the design, including 
impedance matching, positive feedback, and active mixer.  
 
More innovations were provided by this invention, like the addition of a 
capacitance in parallel to the grid circuit and an inductance in series to boost the 
gain. In modern terms this arrangement performs impedance matching from 
source to grid, to improve the power transmission. The detected audio signal is 
also coupled back to the grid and is amplified. Due to high gain, regenerative 
circuits use fewer components and their architecture is simpler. In this single stage 

10 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
the level of distortion is very low, resulting in a very high linearity receiver. 
However, it is not practical for high volume commercial usage because it requires 
careful adjustment by the user. It is impressive that this invention introduced the 
use of positive feedback, impedance transformation, signal amplification, active 
rectification, and the concept of active mixer, all with a single tube. 
 
1.1.3  Super-Regenerative Receiver 
 
The super-regenerative amplifier circuit was developed based on the principles of 
the regenerative amplifier, using positive feedback. In such a circuit, the amplifier 
gain increases and becomes very high right before it enters into an oscillatory 
state. Right at this point the system is at its most sensitive state, and any 
disturbance can make it oscillate. This high sensitivity, however, is transient 
because once oscillations start, the tube compresses and the system becomes 
insensitive to any impressed signal. In Armstrong’s proposal [13],  by controlling 
the amount of natural damping of the system and the amount of positive feedback 
or regeneration, the transient state can be made constant and controllable so that 
the system may be maintained at all time in the super-regenerative state.  
 
In order to do that, he used two oscillators: one oscillator constitutes the 
regular regenerative receiver, and the second is used to alternatively apply positive 
feedback bringing the circuit on the verge of self oscillation and switch on 
dampening to bring the circuit back to stable condition. Another way of stating 
this effect is to say one tube acts as an RF oscillator whose oscillations are 
periodically quenched by a second oscillator operating at a lower frequency. At 
the end of the quench period, oscillations in the RF tube build up in response to 
initial conditions imposed by the incoming radio signal. Thus, after a fixed 
elapsed time imposed by the low frequency oscillator, the RF oscillations build up 
to a level whose amplitude is proportional to the instantaneous amplitude of the 
received radio signal at the moment that oscillations began. The longer the time 
between the quenching periods, the greater is the achieved gain. Among the 
various topologies proposed in the patent, the one shown in Figure 1.11 is the 
simplest.  
 
The RF signal from the antenna is coupled to a resonant LC circuit and 
then coupled to the grid of tube 23. The RF signal is amplified, and part of it is fed 
back to the grid by the transformer connected to the plate. The feedback is made 
positive by the transformer coupling circuit. Part of the amplified signal is coupled 
by another transformer to a detector. The second tube oscillates at the frequency 
determined by the resonant circuits, generating a low frequency voltage that 
modulates the plate of the first tube. Adjusting the circuit the low frequency signal 
controls the amount of feedback and dampening creating a very high RF gain. In 
fact the maximum gain depends exponentially on the relative frequencies of the 
two oscillators. The resulting output signal from the RF oscillator is a series of 
oscillation bursts whose amplitudes are proportional to the RF amplitude. The 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
11 
output can then be demodulated with a simple AM detector. The low frequency 
generator may generate an audible signal after detection, similar to a whistle that 
is annoying. By adjusting the low frequency generator to a higher frequency, the 
interfering signal falls into the supersonic region and cannot be heard by the 
human ear.  
         
 
 
Figure 1.11    The super-regenerative circuit is capable of very high gain by using controlled positive 
feedback. 
 
 
An interesting effect of this circuit is its capacity to operate as an FM 
demodulator as well. If a narrow band FM signal is applied to a super-regenerative 
radio, mixing products are produced. If the difference frequency is close to the 
quenching period of oscillations, they will lock and FM modulates the quenching 
frequency. This produces a variation in the gain that exactly follows the FM 
modulation of the received signal. The gain variation contains the extracted FM 
modulation in terms of amplitude, which is applied to a speaker.  
 
 
1.1.4  Super-Heterodyne Concept 
 
The most important contribution from Armstrong is the super-heterodyne 
principle, which he developed while in Europe during World War I. By that time, 
the detection of high frequency signals presented several challenges: the 
propagated signal strength would generally decay as the carrier frequency 
increased, making direct detection impractical; and direct amplification of short 
wave signals was difficult due to the poor frequency response of vacuum tubes. 
Heterodyning improved sensitivity of receivers, but the poor stability of local 
oscillators made it difficult to implement. The use of a low frequency amplifier 
after the detector would improve sensitivity to a certain extent, but the noise of the 
low frequency amplifier was a serious limiting factor. Armstrong recognized that 
the sensitivity of the detector for weak signals lies in the amplification of the radio 
frequency currents before applying them to the detector. So the obvious solution 

12 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
was to add a cascade of tuned amplifiers to bring the signal up to a reasonable 
level for detection. This solution worked successfully in certain frequency ranges. 
However, this solution faced serious drawbacks: (1) inter stage capacitance placed 
severe limits on maximum frequency of operation; (2) the high gain circuit 
became unstable and difficult to stabilize; and (3) it was not practical to tune the 
amplifiers to different frequencies. 
 
In his patent “Method of Receiving High Frequency Oscillations” [14], 
filed in 1919 and granted in 1920, Armstrong proposed a new radio architecture 
that overcomes these problems while adding many advantages. He proposed an 
indirect method of amplification that operates independently of RF frequency and 
provides high gain, selectivity, and sensitivity compared to previous solutions. 
The method consists of converting the frequency of incoming signal down to a 
pre-determined lower frequency. At that intermediate frequency a fixed amplifier 
tuned at IF can provide high gain without danger of oscillations, since the output 
frequency is different than the RF frequency. After the signal is amplified to a 
desirable high level, it is then detected by a diode detector. The gain is now stable 
and may be high, thus improving the RF performance. His original diagram is 
reproduced in Figure 1.12. The first diode, 4, operates as a single ended receiver 
mixer. The IF signal is amplified by the multistage high gain amplifier and the 
second diode, 9, is either an amplitude peak detector or a synchronous 
demodulator if a signal at IF frequency is applied to the diode. This conceptual 
diagram gave birth to the signal mixers used in all frequency translation 
applications.  
              
 
 
 
Figure 1.12      Single converter block diagram used to explain the super-heterodyne process.  
 
 
The circuit schematic of Figure 1.13 shows the first proposal for a super-
heterodyne receiver, where the first tube is a regenerative stage, operating 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
13 
simultaneously as a local oscillator and mixer. In Figure 1.14 Armstrong proposes 
the “dual conversion system,” which provides exceptional selectivity, stable gain, 
and very high rejection of image signals. This is a more complex system requiring 
two LOs and two IF amplifiers, which translates into higher cost. Armstrong 
mentioned that theoretically there is no limit to how many conversions can be 
employed but in practice, most modern communication systems use dual 
conversion.
 
Figure 1.13      Self oscillating converter design with a high gain IF amplifier. 
 
 
Figure 1.14     Example of the dual conversion system to improve isolation between output/input and 
to overcome the limits on amplification from the tubes. 
 
  
 
1.1.5  Continuous Wave Receiver 
 
This invention conceived by Armstrong [15] is the precursor of  “direct conversion 
receivers.” In his proposal, illustrated in Figure 1.15, there are two resonant 
circuits, one coupled to the antenna that he called the resonant receiving circuit 
tuned to the incoming signal. The second, called the resonant detector circuit, is 
coupled with the resonant receiving circuit and includes the detector. The former 
is similar to the circuit used in the regenerative circuit and the latter is a series 
resonant circuit. The capacitor C2 is part of both high frequency circuits coupling 

14 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
energy from the wing to the grid. Therefore, a current induced in the receiving 
circuit will circulate in the valve producing currents of the same frequency in the 
detector circuit that are coupled back to the receiving circuit, reinforcing the 
original current. This positive feedback is adjusted to sustain oscillations in the 
circuit. Any DC current in the grid is blocked by capacitor C1, which is charged to 
a potential determined by the oscillations and biases the valve at a high gain point.  
 
If the oscillations generated in the circuit are of the same frequency as the 
received RF signals, the difference is null and no signal will be heard in the 
telephone, R. Adjusting the frequency of oscillations to differ slightly from the RF 
signal, a low frequency beating signal is produced and is audible in the 
headphone. The circuit is most effective when the electromagnetic coupling 
between the antenna and the resonant receiving circuit is extremely loose, 
facilitating the tuning of the LO frequency to that of the incoming signal. The 
functions of RF amplifier, local oscillator, and detector are all combined in a 
single valve.  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.15     Continuous wave receiver is similar to a self oscillating mixer with LO frequency set 
close to the incoming RF signal.  
 
 
1.1.6  Frequency Modulated Transceiver 
 
Moved by the need to make the radio systems more immune to the effects of 
fading and static noise, Armstrong [16] conceived the idea of modulating the 
carrier frequency instead of its amplitude. He correctly noticed the degrading 
effects of fading and static noise have a great impact on the carrier amplitude, but 
not on its frequency. Figure 1.16 depicts the schematic for the FM transmitter. The 
RF frequency is determined by the oscillator composed of tube 5 that contains a 
transformer to feedback the wing to grid signal in the proper phase for oscillation. 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
C5 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
15 
The modulator system contains a microphone modulating the grid of valve 7, 
which in turn varies the reactance of the transformer connected to the oscillator, 
modulating its frequency. The oscillator is connected to a high gain amplifier and 
limiter which eliminates all amplitude variations. A bandpass filter 20 is used to 
reject all harmonics generated in the limiting process. The RF power amplifier 23 
delivers the signal to the antenna for transmission.  
 
    
 
 
Figure 1.16      FM transmitter where the LO frequency is modulated by a variable reactance tube. 
 
 
The FM receiver shown in Figure 1.17 contains an RF amplifier, a 
limiter, and a bandpass filter to eliminate amplitude modulations introduced by 
fading and other propagation effects. Once the signal is received, the next step is 
to transform the frequency variations into amplitude variations to be sensed by a 
telephone or a loudspeaker. The circuit proposed by Armstrong is a signal divider 
consisting of two outputs arranged in such a way that amplitude variations are 
common to both outputs and frequency variations are differential. The principle of 
operation can be summarized by applying a generator Vin with an internal 
resistance R between terminals A and C.  
 
 
39
40
41
39
40
41
1
1
1
1
C
j
C
j
L
j
R
C
j
C
j
L
j
V
V
in
AC
















    
      
        (1.6) 
 
 
39
40
41
40
41
1
1
1
C
j
C
j
L
j
R
C
j
L
j
V
V
in
BC














     
      
        (1.7) 
 
 
Armstrong devised two main frequencies, the low end of the band where 
L41, C40 resonates and the high end of the band where C40, C39, L41 resonates. 

16 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Therefore, VAC and VBC have two defined values, low end where L41, C40 resonates 
and high end where L41, C40, C39 resonates.  
 
39
1
RC
j
V
V
in
AC



 at ω = ω1   and    VAC = 0 at ω = ω2              
            (1.8) 
 
39
RC
j
V
V
in
BC



  at ω = ω2   and   VBC = 0 at ω = ω1 
        (1.9) 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.17      FM receiver containing a tuned RF receiver and a frequency discriminator circuit. 
 
C40 
L41 
C39 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
17 
 
At the low frequency end, voltage VAC is high and decreases with 
increasing frequency, reaching zero at the high end. At the low end VBC starts at 
zero volts, and reaches a negative value at the high end. The equations indicate 
that |VAC| < |VBC| at the high voltage points.  To correct this inequality, elements 
36 and 38 move the zero crossings to the band center, transforming the 
denominators of both equations to make the amplitudes more similar to each 
other. A plot of voltage as a function of frequency is shown in Figure 1.18 for a 
typical circuit, operating between 1.20 and 1.25 MHz.  
 
                        
 
 
Figure 1.18      Performance of frequency to voltage converter circuit. 
 
 
The resulting converted voltages are amplified by 42 and 43 and 
delivered to the detectors 48 and 49. If the detectors are linear, any amplitude 
variation at a fixed frequency affects equally both outputs of the signal divider 
that is cancelled in the output headphone. However, any frequency variation 
results in different voltages applied to the detectors, resulting in an output current 
at the headphone. The headphone acts to transform two balanced signals into an 
unbalanced signal, giving the frequency voltage relation depicted in Figure 1.19.  
                
 
 
                     
 
Figure 1.19      Ideal frequency to amplitude conversion. 
 
 
The whole frequency detecting system is floating so that any amplitude 
variations external to the system will affect both balanced lines and will not be 
sensed by the headphone. 
 

18 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
1.2  SINGLE ENDED CIRCUITS 
 
With the consolidation of the super-heterodyne architecture by mid 1920, the 
mixer became the most important element in the receiver chain. In consequence, 
several patents found in the literature for single ended mixers use either diode or 
triode tubes. The patents in this section were selected for specific important 
features offered by single ended mixers. The first uses a special bridge circuit to 
match the antenna to the mixer tube, providing properties similar to a balanced 
configuration. The second invention proposes a feedback arrangement to 
neutralize the tube parasitic feedback and consequently improve the frequency of 
operation. The third invention was targeted for noise reduction but the key feature 
is the feeback at the IF band.  
 
 
1.2.1 Bridge Combiner Applied to Mixer 
 
The circuit of Figure 1.20 originated in 1929 and contains an LO, the input bridge, 
and the mixer circuits [17]. The LO signal is generated by a Hartley oscillator 
circuit, enclosed within a shielded cavity 10. The RF and LO are both applied to 
the grid of a triode mixer tube 16, and the plate circuit is connected to an output 
transformer that couples IF energy to the load. Further filtering of RF and LO 
signals are assumed to be part of the IF circuit.  
 
            
 
 
Figure 1.20      Bridge mixer circuit with LO generator. 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
19 
 
 
 
The bridge circuit is better explained by means of schematic in Figure 
1.21, composed of input coupling coils 24, 26, condenser 30, and the grid to 
cathode capacitance C. RF signal from the antenna couples energy to coils 24, 26, 
which resonate with capacitor 28. The induced current develops voltage at node A 
feeding the grid. By balancing the bridge, the RF voltage at the junction of 24, 26 
has the same potential as node F, so a virtual ground is imposed. The LO signal is 
inserted at the junction of 24, 26 so that current flows in opposite directions to 
ground. The LO voltages at nodes A and B are the same, so that both RF and LO 
are applied to the grid. Due to the direction of the LO current, there is ideally no 
LO signal coupled to the antenna. LO to RF isolation is therefore obtained with a 
single ended mixer.  
 
             
 
 
Figure 1.21     The bridge circuit is formed by input inductors, input tube capacitance, and external 
variable capacitors.  
 
 
1.2.2 UHF Triode Converter 
 
During World War II there was an effort to develop high frequency radars 
resulting in the discovery that at UHF bands triode tubes offered better signal to 
noise ratio because of their shorter cathode to plate electron transit times, 
compared to more complex tubes such as tetrodes and pentodes. The tradeoff is 
that triode tubes are less stable due to parasitic voltage feedback between plate to 
ground, plate to grid capacitance and inductances between cathode to ground. A 
patent was disclosed in 1944 [18], proposing a circuit to neutralize this feedback. 
The goal is to provide in the path between the plate and cathode a low impedance 
at the signal frequency and a high impedance at the IF. Referring to Figure 1.22, 
to achieve this effect, both the plate and anode of the converter triode were fitted 
with a second lead 7 and 8. The leads were connected to an open circuited stub 
quarter wave long at the signal frequency. This provided the low impedance at 

20 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
signal frequency and the high impedance at IF needed to overcome the parasitic 
feedback. The LO was generated by a separate triode tube, V2. In this case it is 
convenient to use the inter-electrode capacitances to generate oscillations. The 
tube is connected in common grid with a coaxial short stub on the bias line for 
high impedance at the signal frequency and low impedance for other frequencies. 
The coaxial tank circuit is connected to the cathode providing the oscillation 
conditions. Power is lightly coupled from the cathode tank circuit.  
 
            
 
 
Figure 1.22  A UHF triode converter merging coaxial transmission lines with vacuum tube 
components. 
 
 
1.2.3  Noise Reduction Technique 
 
Noise reduction using feedback is addressed in the patent filed in 1946 by Strutt et 
al [19]. Thermal noise is introduced by the components connected to the 
frequency conversion tube. Noise is also produced by current fluctuations within 
the tube itself, which is the subject of the patent. The current fluctuations in the 
tube are categorized as emission-fluctuations and subdivision-fluctuations. 
Emission-fluctuations, also called cathode noise, are due to irregularities in the 
flow of electrons from the cathode. Subdivision-fluctuations are due to 
irregularities in the subdivision of the current between positively biased 
electrodes.  
For tubes having screen grids, the subdivision-noise current in the anode 
and screen-grid circuits, respectively, are equal and opposite to each other. The 
subdivision-noise currents run between the anode to the screen-grid, without 
affecting the cathode. Thus the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in screen-grid tubes is 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
21 
higher in the cathode circuitry than in the anode circuitry. Based on this, it has 
been proposed to introduce regenerative feedback at the input, increasing the 
signal current and improving the overall SNR. However, this arrangement makes 
it difficult to avoid self-excitation over a wide frequency band.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.23      SNR improvement with positive/negative feedback. 
 
 
The invention proposes regenerative feedback at the IF band where it is 
easier to control the circuit stability. It also proposes using negative feedback at IF 
as a means to trade off stability and SNR improvement. Referring to Figure 1.23, 
positive IF feedback is obtained by coupling screen-grid 8 to inductor 20 via 
capacitor 18. The tank circuit 21 is tuned to the IF frequency and coupled to the 
tank circuit 2 that is tuned to the signal frequency. Negative IF feedback is 
obtained by coupling the IF output through capacitor 19 to inductor 22. 
 
 
1.2.4 Cascode Mixer-Amplifier 
            
Efforts during the development of radars in World War II included the focus on 
reducing noise and increasing gain while maintaining stability. This work led to 
the use of the cascode amplifier circuit that employed two triode tubes. The 
cascode circuit has the noise figure of a triode tube, and the gain and isolation of a 
pentode tube. The noise figure of the cascode is essentially that of the input triode. 
The gain is proportional to the trans-conductance of the first triode and the load 
resistance on the anode of the second triode. A frequency converter would use 

22 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
such a cascode amplifier followed by a separate frequency conversion circuit. In 
contrast, the circuit proposed in 1955 [20] uses the first triode for gain and the 
second triode for frequency conversion, combining the amplification and 
frequency conversion in one circuit, thus improving economy and efficiency. 
Previously, the problem with this arrangement was the introduction of LO signal 
into the first triode, which degraded performance and allowed LO leakage out the 
antenna. Referring to Figure 1.24, the patented circuit solves this problem by 
using a trap 45 between first triode 15 and second triode 25 to peak the RF signal 
voltage, and short the LO voltage thus isolating it from triode 15.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.24      The cascode amplifier-mixer with trap to prevent local oscillator in driven stage from 
affecting driving stage. 
 
 
1.2.5  Frequency Translator Circuit 
 
Another problem encountered in frequency conversion is variation in the 
conversion gain, caused by variations between production lots of tubes and by 
inexact tuning of the LO resonant circuit. A circuit was disclosed in 1941 [21] 
having goals to maximize SNR and increase signal gain, while reducing the effect 
of variations in tubes and circuitry. It also solved the problem of variation in LO 
tuning voltage over a wide frequency range. The patent’s design accomplishes this 
by keeping a constant ratio of LO injection voltage to DC voltage at the signal 
grid. Referring to Figure 1.25, the LO signal from triode 24 is applied to an 
autotransformer 20. Conductor 8 taps the LO voltage and impresses it between 
cathode 5a and grid 5c. Part of this voltage is rectified by diode 12 and the 
resulting DC voltage on resistor 10 is applied to the grid of the mixer tube 5. This 
bias is proportional to the LO peak voltage impressed on the translator. If the LO 
voltage is higher, then the mixer is biased more negative, maintaining the ratio LO 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
23 
peak voltage/DC voltage constant, and vice versa. The mixer output signal is 
partially shared by the inductance 8 due to the common grid connection of the 
mixer tube. Therefore, a large signal on the plate is partially rectified by the same 
diode protecting the mixer against overloading.  
 
             
 
 
Figure 1.25      The mixer is used as a frequency translator system with feedback to maintain a high 
conversion gain over the tuning range. 
 
 
1.3  SINGLY BALANCED MIXERS 
 
This topology contains two similar mixers with LO applied in phase and the RF 
applied in counter phase, or vice versa. Therefore, LO and RF signals are out of 
phase and isolated from each other.  
 
 
1.3.1  An Ultra-High Frequency Mixer 
 
The schematic of Figure 1.26 was realized in two approaches using a dual anode 
tube [22]. The LO signal is applied between the center tap of inductance 6b and 
the grounded cathode, causing the diodes to switch on-off in phase with each other 
at the LO frequency. The incoming RF signal excites the antenna that is tuned by 
tank circuit 6a, 6b, and which in turn couples the RF differentially to the diodes. 

24 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
The fact that the diodes are switched in phase by the LO creates an equivalent 
impedance between anode and cathode such that the RF current flows between the 
two anodes. The grounded cathode has no effect on these currents in a well 
balanced circuit. A trap LC filter was added in the IF circuit to block high 
frequencies from reaching the output transformer that combines the push-pull IF 
currents.  
 
           
 
 
Figure 1.26      Schematic of a UHF receiving system with a special two-anode tube using lumped 
elements.  
 
The first application of this circuit makes use of Lecher lines as depicted 
in Figure 1.27. The LO signal  is fed from left to right using a pair of lines, one of 
which splits into two additional lines. All three lines  terminate onto a common 
ground plane. The line splitting actually divides the signal into two half power 
signals of the same phase, both referenced to the common conductor. The length 
of line from the split point to ground is approximately half wavelength at the RF 
frequency; therefore, it comprises a resonant circuit at that wavelength. The RF 
signal coming from aerial conductors are fed through the ground plane apperture 
and are made to run parallel to each one of the resonator lines before being 
grounded. The RF signal therefore induces current on the Lecher resonator, 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
25 
transferring RF power. The diodes are located at the middle of the resonator where 
the RF and LO voltages are highest.  
 
        
 
 
Figure 1.27      Lecher line version of a UHF mixer. 
 
The second application uses a shielded Lecher system, within a coaxial 
structure, as shown in Figure 1.28. A Lecher system is observed in the two 
conductors 3,4 and plays a similar function to that in the previous version. It is 
shorted to the center conductor of a coaxial line on the right and terminated on the 
left on a current loop. The Lecher line is contained within a cavity measuring half 
wavelength, and contacts are made at its midpoint to the anodes of the diodes. The 
dual diode tube is installed externally to this cavity. 
 
                
 
 
Figure 1.28      Coaxial version of the UHF mixer. 

26 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The LO signal is applied to the coaxial line, and it splits in two with 
equal amplitude and phase when it reaches the Lecher system. Due to the 
dimensions of the cavity the fields at its left end are low, and it behaves essentially 
as a short circuit for the LO, preventing LO from propagating into the receiver 
cavity. The incoming RF signal from the antenna is applied to a coaxial receiving 
cavity, which measures half wavelength at the RF frequency, and is 
perpendicularly attached to the LO cavity. At the mid point from the back short, 
20, the current loop gain protruding from the LO cavity is placed in close contact 
with the center conductor. The RF signal induces current into the probe that is fed 
into the LO cavity in counter phase on terminals 3,4. The contact from the Lecher 
line to the diodes contains a capacitor for DC and IF signal blocking. The IF 
signal is extracted from the anode with an inductive wire, that presents a high 
impedance to the RF and LO signals for IF isolation.  
 
 
1.3.2  Differential Mixer 
     
A precursor to the modern differential mixer circuit is found in a patent filed in 
1946 [23]. It provides isolation between the signal and LO inputs, and between 
these inputs and the IF output, by using circuit balance without filtering. Referring 
to Figure 1.29, the signal or LO input is applied at port 10, with the other input 
applied to port 21. The IF output is taken at port 25. Isolation is achieved as 
follows. The polarity of signal B at anode of tube 12 is 180° opposite that of 
signal C at cathode of tube 12. Signal C is coupled to the cathode of tube 15 via 
resistor 17 and capacitor 18 to produce signal D. Signal B also couples to the 
cathode of tube 15 via capacitor 19 to produce signal E.  
     
 
 
Figure 1.29      An example of an early differential mixer using a phasing circuit to improve R – L 
isolation. 
 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
27 
 
Signals D and E cancel each other. The same process causes cancellation 
at the cathode of tube 12. Resistors 13 and 16 are adjusted for balance to 
maximize the cancellation. This cancellation at the two cathodes effects the 
isolation between ports 10 and 25, and ports 21 and 25. Isolation between ports 10 
and 21 presumably is effected by isolation in the tubes. The mixing is obtained 
from the application of signal, for example, from node C to node F that is the plate 
of device 15. Application of a signal voltage at the plate modulates the bias 
voltage and the bias current as well, creating a beat note with the signal applied 
from terminal 21. The IF current circulating from cathode to anode passes through 
resistor 17, generating the output IF voltage. The same applies to the device 11, 
generating an IF current that adds up in phase to current generated by device 15, 
improving the conversion efficiency. The capacitor 18 is used to bypass the sum 
of input frequencies and is transparent to the desired difference frequency.  
 
 
1.3.3  Push-Push/Push-Pull Operation 
 
A mixing arrangement was proposed [24] where the RF signal is fed in push-push 
to the mixing tube and the local oscillator is fed in push-pull. This approach, 
represented in Figure 1.30, has been demonstrated to show a better signal-to-noise 
ratio compared to other alternatives. 
 
The incoming signal is picked up by antenna D and tuned by the L1, C1 
tank circuit. After filtering, the RF signal is split into two signals of equal phase 
and amplitude by means of the transformer with inductances L2’, L2” and parallel 
tube capacitances, C3’, C3”. The capacitance C2 is connected to points of the same 
potential so it is transparent in this mode. On the anode side, the incoming signal 
is filtered by a low pass circuit L7’, L7” and C4’, C4”. The LO voltage is 
magnetically coupled from winding L3 to the transformer containing L2’, L2”, and 
is split into two signals with the same amplitude and 180º phase relative to each 
other before being applied to the grid. The capacitance C2 comprises with L2’, L2” 
a tuned circuit at the LO frequency.  
The large LO signal voltage modulates the tube transconductance, and at 
the anode side is filtered by the same filter L7, C7 used by the RF signal. The IF 
signals at both anodes follow the phase of LO, so they are in counter phase and 
combined by the output transformer, L4’, L4” and L6. The capacitances C4’, C4” 
are in resonance with L4’, L4”. The coils L5’, L5” filter the high frequency signals 
preventing them from reaching the output load. The capacitances C4’, C4” can be 
adjusted to make the anode impedance more capacitive at the RF and LO 
frequencies, improving stability or more inductive introducing positive feedback 
into the circuit improving conversion gain. If the amount of inductance in the 
anode is sufficient, then the circuit will start self oscillating, removing the need for 
an external signal source. 
 
 

28 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Figure 1.30      Dual push-pull/push-push mixer. The LO signal, O, is magnetically coupled to the 
input splitting transformer.           
 
 
1.3.4 Bifilar Line Mixer 
 
The use of bifilar wire wound on a rod of magnetic material is disclosed in this 
invention with applications in the VHF and low UHF frequency bands [25]. The 
schematic in Figure 1.31 displays  two rods each with two windings, connected at 
one side to a source of RF signals, say an antenna, and on the other side to a pair 
of diode tubes  and a LO source. The IF load is connected to the point of junction 
of both anodes, represented by resistor 22. 
 
        
 
Figure 1.31      Mixer with diodes and magnetic rods wound with bifilar wire transmission lines. 
 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
29 
 
The operating principle of this mixer is best described by Figure 1.32, 
where it is arranged in a bridge format. The resistors 34 represent the diode in 
series with resistor 22. The LO source 21 applies current that is split equally into 
each rod and then applied to the diodes. The inductances 15, 18 and 16, 19 are in 
series with respect to the LO. If the circuit is balanced, the potential at the RF 
terminals, 15, 16 are the same, so there is no LO current circulating on the RF 
source. The currents originating from the RF source 31 flows in parallel to coils 
15, 18 and return from coils 16, 19, so both circuits are in parallel with respect to 
the RF source. The RF signal is applied to the diodes in differential form and the 
node 37 is a virtual ground so that LO is isolated from RF.  
 
                          
 
 
Figure 1.32      Schematic of an equivalent circuit for the bifilar mixer. 
 
 
1.4  DOUBLY BALANCED STAR CIRCUIT 
 
The star type of mixer was explored with by Hahnle in 1937 [26], where four 
diodes are connected to a common point. The other terminals are connected to 
identical transformers that couple power from LO, RF and deliver the converted 
signal to a load. The mixer diagram contained in Figure 1.33 shows all cathodes 
connected to the star point and the transformers have been split to simplify the 
figure. Therefore, transformer U1 actually comprises a transformer with one 
primary magnetically coupled to two secondary windings; the same is true for 
transformers U2 and U3. The connections are such that the signals applied to one 
transformer are orthogonal to the other two transformers, thus providing isolation 
and differential application to the diode tubes. Also, it is immaterial if the LO and 
RF, respectively, are applied to U1 and U2 or to U2 and U1.  
The mixer is proposed to reduce the undesired harmonics of the 
modulating signal (i.e., fh-2fn, fh+3fn, where fh = carrier frequency and fn = 

30 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
modulating frequency). One approach to reduce the harmonics is to reduce the 
magnitude of modulating voltage so that the rectifier resistance is a linear function 
of current. The other is to have the carrier strongly modulate the tubes resulting in 
a rectangular waveform with constant on and constant off resistances. The tube 
has an internal resistance that varies from 5,000 ohms to practically infinite, 
50,000,000 ohms. Making the load resistance the geometrical average of those 
two values, 500,000 ohms results in small variations in the on and off resistances. 
Therefore, the sidebands, fh + 2fn and above are greatly reduced. 
 
   
 
 
Figure 1.33     Vacuum tube diode star mixer with the star center grounded. RF and LO signals are 
magnetically coupled to the diodes as well the load collecting the IF signal. 
 
 
1.5  SPECIAL RECEIVER ARCHITECTURES 
 
Special architectures were developed in the early days of radio and are still in use 
today, such as quadrature mixers used for image rejection and SSB generation. 
They are the object of this section along with circuits specifically invented for TV 
receivers. 
 
 
1.5.1  SSB Concept  
 
 
The concept of SSB transmission started with the work of Carson [27], who noted 
that in normal AM systems most of the energy is located in the carrier, which does 
not transmit any information. With or without a signal at the input of the system 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
31 
the same energy is wasted in transmitting the carrier. His basic patent disclosed 
the key process to generate multiplex systems. He assumed the transfer 
characteristic of a modulator follows a nonlinear relationship given by the 
equation. 
 
 
...
4
3
2





dv
cv
bv
av
V
       
 
 
       (1.10) 
 
        
      
 
 
Hence, if the input signals are the carrier and the modulating signal, the 
total input voltage is given by: 
                  
 
)
cos(
)
cos(
t
B
t
A
v
IF
LO




    
 
                      (1.11) 
                
 
Applying v into equation for V, the output will contain a series of terms 
that can be filtered and only the signals at the vicinity of LO are retained. 
Therefore: 
 
 
 
3
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
)
cos(
cv
t
t
bAB
t
aA
v
LO
IF
LO






            (1.12) 
 
 
Rearranging the terms, the equation modifies to: 
 
 


)
cos(
t
aA
v
LO

 
 
        
)
cos(
)
cos(
t
bAB
t
bAB
IF
LO
IF
LO







   
       (1.13) 
 
 
The first term represents the carrier that is unmodulated and the other two 
represent the modulated carrier that contains the desired information. To eliminate 
the carrier, the inventor proposed making a = 0, which can be done by using two 
identical modulators 180° out of phase. One modulator follows the equation for V 
and the other has its input phase reversed by 180 and follows V’. Therefore, 
 
 
 
...
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
'
4
3
2









v
d
v
c
v
b
v
a
V
         
       (1.14) 
 
 
If the output signal of both modulators is added, then the total output 
voltage is equal to: 
 
 
...
)
(
2
)
(
2
'
''
4
2







v
d
v
b
V
V
V
  
                     (1.15) 
 
 
Assuming coefficient d << b, and applying the input signal, the output 
voltage of this balanced modulator will contain: 

32 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 

t
t
bB
V
IF
LO
IF
LO
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
''








 
       (1.16) 
 
The inventor found it difficult to tune the circuit to accommodate both 
side bands and found that if only one of the bands is transmitted, then it is easier 
to tune the circuits. This worked well because there is actually no need to transmit 
both. The carrier is suppressed and one sideband is filtered off, leaving the other 
sideband to be transmitted; thus, it is a single sideband generator. On the receive 
side, the SSB signal contains either the first or second term in (1.17). 
 
 
t
B
IF
LO
)
cos(



  or 
t
B
IF
LO
)
cos(



   
                  (1.17) 
 
 
They cannot be detected by an envelope detector because no energy is 
present at the carrier frequency. Thus the inventor proposed to re-inject the carrier 
at the receiver with the same frequency as the transmitter.  
 
 
t
C
LO)
cos(
       
 
 
 
               (1.18) 
 
Adding those two voltages into a square law detector, the result is the 
product of both signals, with the additive and difference components. The additive 
results in a nonaudible high frequency and is disregarded. The difference provides 
the original modulating signal. 
 
 
t
BC
V
IF )
cos(
det


 
 
 
 
        
      (1.19) 
 
The realization of this concept is detailed next by means of Figure 1.34, 
where two modulators are operated in push-push mode. The carrier and the 
modulating signal are both applied to the two tubes in parallel, one with common 
cathode that rotates the phase at the output and one in common grid that maintains 
the same phase. At the output the voltages are induced on the windings 19 and 20 
with opposing phases so the carrier is cancelled and there is no transmission, since 
the windings are the reverse of each other. If a modulating signal is applied they 
appear at the anodes with the same phase and are added by the output transformer. 
The windings have a low reactance for the modulating signals, which are shorted 
at the anode. Hence the carrier is cancelled and the two sidebands are available at 
the output, depending on the Q and tuning of output tank circuit. If it is tuned at 
the center of the high side band and the tuned circuit is of high Q, the lower side 
band is attenuated and a single sideband modulated signal is available at the 
antenna.  
 
  

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
33 
   
 
 
Figure 1.34      SSB modulator using an active differential circuit (i.e., common cathode and common 
grid with RF transformer). 
 
  
The circuit proposed to recover a SSB signal is reproduced in Figure 
1.35, beginning with a tuned RF amplifier applying signal to a detector, and 
comprising an internal LO generator operating at the same frequency as the carrier 
on the transmitter. The RF and LO are both applied to the detector to recover the 
modulated signal. However a better performing circuit was later proposed by 
Hartley [28], which became widely used.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.35      SSB Demodulator with re-injection of LO into the mixer circuit. 
 

34 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
In the Hartley modulator of Figure 1.36, the information signal passes 
through filter F3, then is split in half and applied to filters F1 and F2. They are 
composed of a ladder network of LC cells, each one applying a certain phase 
rotation to the incoming signal. Filter F1 has one more cell compared to filter F2, 
so that the phase difference between them is 90º.  
 
  
     
 
 
Figure 1.36    Hartley SSB modulator using lumped elements to create 90 phase shifts for modulating 
and LO signals.  
 
 
In Figure 1.37 one can observe the characteristic impedance of the 
lumped element filter given by dotted lines which are approximately constant 
within the frequencies of interest. The phase difference B, is uniform over a large 
frequency band so that the signal applied to modulator tubes M1 and M2 have 
constant phase difference. On the other hand, the LO is also applied with a 90º 
phase difference to each modulator, by means of resistor 10 and capacitor 9 in 
parallel with each  path. Applying trigonometry relations it is easy to find that the 
output voltages, respectively, of tubes M1 and M2 are given by the equations: 
 
 

t
t
A
M
LO
IF
LO
IF
)
cos(
)
cos(
1







   
        
       (1.20) 
 

t
t
A
M
LO
IF
LO
IF
)
cos(
)
cos(
2







 
 
       (1.21) 
 
where M1, 2 are amplitude coefficients.  
 
The equations show the upper sidebands at each mixer output are 
opposed in phase and the lower sidebands are in the same phase. So, if the 
windings sum the two signals, then only the lower sideband will be transmitted. In 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
35 
contrast, if the windings are in the differential mode, then only the upper sideband 
will be transmitted.  
 
Figure 1.37      Impedance of filters F1, F2 represented in dot line are similar within the frequency 
band of interest. The phase difference, B = B1-B2 is approximately constant in the band.  
 
 
1.5.2 Image Reject Circuit 
 
A common problem in super-heterodyne receivers is the inability to reject image 
signals that are the mirror of the desired signals with respect to the LO signal. This 
problem is aggravated when the percent frequency difference between RF and LO 
is small, which makes it impractical to separate RF and image using a filter. This 
section presents some classical solutions invented by tube engineers to reject the 
image given RF and image signals that are close in frequency.  
 
 
1.5.2.1  Image Free Receiver 
 
 The radio broadcast band lies between 550 KHz and 1500 KHz, with the standard 
IF frequency set to 475 KHz, which allows separation of signal and image using 
RF filters. The proposal of this invention [29] is to use an IF signal located above 
the broadcast range. In this case the whole image band for the broadcast can be 
filtered by a low pass filter and the receiver will be image free. The low pass filter 
connected to the antenna consists of a series of LC components as shown in 
Figure 1.38. The RF signal coming from the low pass filter, shown in the second 
part of the figure, is fed into the center tap of an autotransformer, and delivered at 
each grid in equal amplitude and phase. The tubes 8, 8’ have their anodes 
connected in counter-phase to the output transformer and part of the signal is 
coupled back to the input autotransformer to generate oscillations. 

36 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
Figure 1.38      Image signals are upconverted to above the RF band where they are filtered.  
 
 
The LO signal is also connected in counter phase at the input 
transformer, so that there are no LO signals leaking to the antenna and to the 
subsequent IF signals in the absence of RF signals. The LO is tuned by the input 
variable capacitor to convert the input RF to a higher IF frequency, which is then 
amplified and detected.  
 
 
1.5.2.2  High Separation Between LO and RF 
 
This invention was proposed to solve pull-in effects but at the same time is a good 
procedure to eliminate image effects. The “pull-in” effect describes the tendency 
of the LO to drift toward the signal frequency when the signal and LO frequencies 
are very close, such that the IF-to-LO frequency ratio is on the order of a few 
percent. This problem was addressed in 1946 using a harmonic mixer [30], which 
is an interesting dual to the subharmonic mixer used in modern AM direct 
converters.  
 
Instead of directly solving the feedback mechanism responsible for pull-
in, the approach offers the solution of increasing the separation between signal 
and LO frequencies by running the LO at a frequency of fLO = 2fS + fIF. The LO 
frequency is approximately twice the signal frequency. Referring to Figure 1.39, 
this causes the outputs of the conversion tube V1 to be at frequencies fS and fS + 
fIF, which in turn beat together in detector tube V2 to produce the baseband audio 
output at fIF. Separating the signal and LO frequencies as described earlier also 
solved the overloading problem caused by space-charge coupling. When signal 
and LO frequencies are close to each other, the coupling between the signal-grid 
and the virtual cathode generates oscillation currents in the signal grid. The virtual 
cathode is located between the signal and screen grids. The oscillation currents 
reduce conversion efficiency, and saturation of the signal grid. Another benefit of 
separating signal and LO frequencies is reduced complexity of the image filter, 
since the first IF is higher in frequency, the image is also further separated from 
the signal frequency making it easier to reject by filtering.  
           

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
37 
            
 
 
Figure 1.39      Configuration of an early harmonic mixer with LO about twice the signal frequency. 
 
 
1.5.2.3  Image Reject Mixer 
 
This invention overcomes the filtering problem of rejecting the image in a receiver 
mixer by using two detectors and phasing them to reject the image and to enhance 
the desired signal. The inventor provided an analysis of the how the circuit of 
Figure 1.40 can achieve the desired performance [31]. The incoming signal 
induces at the antenna both the desired and image signals, with the following 
frequencies:  
 
 
 
 

R

 desired RF frequency 
 

I

undesired image frequency 
 
 
The desired and image frequencies are mirrored above and below the LO 
frequency, separated from the LO by the IF. If the desired is above the LO, then 
the image is below it, and vice versa. Taking the desired RF to be below the LO 
and the image to be above the LO, one has: 
 
 

IF

IF frequency 
 

LO

 local oscillator frequency  
 
LO
I
R
LO
IF









 
 
 
The incoming signals are applied to the detectors with the same phase, 
while the LO signal is applied to one detector with a positive 45° phase shift and 
to the other detector with a negative 45° phase shift. The resulting detector output 
voltages are as follows: 
 

38 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 










)
4
cos(
)
4
cos(
1
det






t
t
t
t
K
V
LO
I
R
LO
       (1.22) 
 










)
4
cos(
)
4
cos(
2
det






t
t
t
t
K
V
LO
I
R
LO
       (1.23) 
 
 
The output of the first detector is shifted in phase by +45° by the parallel 
tuned circuit, and the output of the second one is shifted in phase by -45°, 
resulting in the following voltages: 
 
 









)
cos(
)
2
cos(
'
1
det
t
t
t
t
K
V
LO
I
R
LO





 
       (1.24) 
 









)
cos(
)
2
cos(
'
2
det
t
t
t
t
K
V
LO
I
R
LO





            (1.25)                    
 
 
The two signals are applied in opposing phase via the transformer 
coupling to the IF load. This causes the cos(ωI  – ωLO)t terms to cancel with each 
other, thus rejecting the detected image signal. This also causes the cos(ωLOt + π/2 
- ωRt) and cos(ωLOt - π/2 - ωRt) terms to add constructively.  
 
     
 
 
 
Figure 1.40      Image reject mixer with phasing generated by LC filters. 
 
 
 
1.5.3  TV Receivers 
 
Early TV receivers contained mixer circuits that separated both sound and video 
carriers and independently demodulated the video and audio information. Such an 
approach required high Q components to separate the video IF from sound IF, 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
39 
which rendered TV receivers expensive. In order to discuss TV mixers, a brief 
review of sound and video carriers is presented. The American standard for analog 
black and white TV system contained two carriers, one for the video and one for 
the audio, separated by 4.5 MHz [32]. The large bandwidth and significant low 
frequency content of the video signal, along with low cost detection, resulted in a 
dedicated modulation system for TV systems. The AM VSB + C, which stands for 
amplitude modulated vestigial side band plus carrier, was adopted consisting of 
transmitting one side band and part of the other, called a “vestige of the full 
band.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Transmission 
 
 
 
(b) Shaping at receiver 
 
Figure 1.41      Frequency response for video signal illustrating the sound (S) and vision (P) (or video) 
carriers. 
 
The spectrum of transmitted video is depicted in Figure 1.41 (a) showing 
the position of the video, P, and sound, S, carriers. On the receiver side, the 
spectrum is shaped as in part (b) of the figure, so that effectively only one 
sideband is used in the receiver. The video information is AM modulated and the 
sound information is FM modulated.  
 
 
1.5.3.1 Inter-Carrier Sound System 
 
In the invention from [33], the inventor proposes to let both carriers reach the AM 
detector and use the same detector to mix the video and sound carrier. The output 
signal will contain video information and the FM sound carrier that is separated 
from baseband video and is subsequently demodulated. The separation of the 
sound carrier from the video signal is a relatively simple task since it is realized at 
4.5 MHz. This principle is summarized in the block diagram of Figure 1.42. 
Besides lowering costs, the frequency drift of LOs for sound and video, which 
may cause interference in the receiver is minimized. Application of this principle 
requires a modification on the video frequency spectrum of Figure 1.41(b), whose 
roll off tail invades the sound bandwidth. The inventor proposes changing the 
curve shape in the area where the sound carrier is located, making it flat with 
frequency, to avoid interference on the sound signal. 
 
 
 
frequency 
P 
S 

40 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Figure 1.42      The video is demodulated by the envelope detector and operates as a mixer to recover 
the sound carrier, which is applied to a frequency discriminator circuit. 
 
The “roll off” of the filter used to shape the video signal is represented by 
curve X in Figure 1.43. If a circuit with same amplitude response but opposite 
phase Y is added to X, the resulting performance is a nearly flat response, curve X 
+ Y.  
                          
 
 
Figure 1.43    Flattening by adding tuned circuits with equal slope but different phase versus 
frequency. 
 
Electronically, this effect can be obtained by a circuit such as the one 
represented in Figure 1.44, which contains a tuned absorber circuit coupled with a 
tuned transformer. The tuned trap, represented by plot Y, has a response tuned to 
be of same magnitude as response X but with proper transformer winding it is 
magnetically coupled to the tuned transformer with opposed phase. Combining the 
responses of tuned transformer X with the one from the tuned absorber, Y, results 
Sound 
Video 
RF  
LO 
Envelope 
Detector 
FM 
Detector 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
41 
a flat response within +/- 75KHz band around the sound carrier, S, shown in 
Figure 1.44. 
                            
 
 
Figure 1.44    Schematic of flattening circuit containing a tuned transformer and a coupled damped 
tuned circuit. The circuits are factory tuned to meet the desired frequency response. 
 
 
1.5.3.2 Dual IF Mixer 
 
A self oscillating mixer design was disclosed in 1939, [34], targeting TV receiver 
applications. Referring to Figure 1.45, this approach uses the secondary emission 
grid of a pentode tube, which the inventor denoted auxiliary cathode 4. 
Oscillations are produced by coupling the signal from the auxiliary grid 4 to 
control grid 2. This modulates the primary electron path between the cathode 2 
and anode 5 used by the signal current. This modulation produces a beat note 
between the incoming signal and oscillation frequencies, translating the spectrum 
containing vision and sound carrier to an IF around 41 to 45 MHz.  
 
                   
 
 
Figure 1.45     Self oscillating mixer, its LO beats with the incoming RF carrier to translate spectrum 
to two distinct IF carriers: video and sound. 

42 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The video IF is coupled from a band pass transformer, whose secondary 
winding, L5, is connected to terminal 8 that in turn connects to an envelope 
detector. The sound IF is extracted from the primary winding by means of 
inductance L4 and capacitance divider C8, C9 connected to terminal 9 driving a 
frequency discriminator circuit. Note the use of a tuned LC circuit at sound IF. 
Similar to the previous invention the video and sound are separated within the 
same mixing process with the same LO frequency. 
 
 
1.6 HARMONIC MIXERS 
 
Early work on receiver design had to deal with LO leakage to the antenna, which 
would interfere with adjacent receivers. This effect was related to the small 
separation between LO and RF frequencies in short wave radios, and the 
complexity to overcome this caused increased cost that reduced the popularization 
of receivers. The main receiver blocks, RF amplifier, LO oscillator, mixer and IF 
amplifier, each required one tube, which made the product too expensive. The self 
oscillating mixer partially solved the problem by removing one tube and using the 
self oscillating mixer also as a detector. 
 
But this approach did not work for a single tuned oscillating circuit 
because the tuning to produce the IF reduced sensitivity, requiring an additional IF 
tube to recover the gain. Use of two tuned circuits in the oscillator, one for the RF 
and the other for the LO, did not work either, due to interaction of both circuits. 
Tuning at RF would detune the LO and vice versa. That would not work for a 
commercial product, which is when the subharmonic receiver was born, proposed 
by Harry Houck to solve this issue. His proposal is in Figure 1.46, where tuned 
circuits are connected to the tube: circuit A tuned to the RF frequency, circuit B 
tuned to the LO frequency, and circuit C, D to the IF frequency. The RF frequency 
is set at twice the LO frequency plus the IF frequency.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.46      Original subharmonic receiver built with a single tube. 
 
 
That solution completely solved the problem and in 1924 RCA 
announced their product, Radiola Super-Heterodyne Second Harmonic Receiver. 
There is no paper or patent by Houck, and those events were registered by 
Armstrong, [35]. The spectrum for this type of frequency translator is represented 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
43 
in Figure 1.47, where the IF frequency is defined by, fIF = 2.0fLO +/- fs. One can 
notice the magnitude of LO is very much reduced, reducing the LO leakage. The 
presence of image noise is indicated by the dotted line; it degrades system noise as 
discussed in Chapter 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.47      Spectrum of a subharmonic mixer.  After [35]. 
 
The first patent on this application was filed in 1929 [36], and a balanced 
version of a harmonic receiver was proposed, Figure 1.48. The incoming signal at 
frequency fS is coupled from the antenna to the secondary of the input 
transformer. The LO signal is applied to the plate that can either be biased near 
voltage saturation or near the cut-off of plate current.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 1.48     Schematic of subharmonic mixer where the circuit is in parallel for RF signal and 
balanced for LO signal.  
 
The first type of bias is more efficient and results in heavily compressed 
positive voltages. Negative voltages relative to bias voltage will cause the current 
to drop accordingly. The LO is applied in opposed phase to the plates so that the 
active rectification alternates on each device. The RF signal is applied in parallel 
to the grid of triodes, 19, 20. The oscillator is set to operate at subharmonic 
frequencies according to the formula: fIF = 2fLO +/- fs. The current waveforms for 
the LO and RF on each triode are represented in Figure 1.49. The rectified LO is 
applied in counter phase while the RF is applied in phase. However, the angle of 
fLO/2 
fLO 
fS 
fLO/2+fS 
fLO/2 - fS 
fLO - 
fLO + fS 
-VRF
+VRF 
RF 
+VIF +VLO 
+VIF -VLO 
LO 
IF 

44 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
the cosines double along with the LO frequency; thus, the phase difference also 
doubles, so that at 2fLO the signals on each plate are in phase. Consequently, the IF 
currents generated are also in phase and are added via capacitive coupling and 
presented to a single ended IF amplifier without need of a transformer to add the 
signals. 
 
           
 
 
Figure 1.49      Current waveforms at the plate. 
 
 The invention proposes a self biased approach for the device biased near 
cut-off, by replacing the plate power supply by a capacitor. The positive semi-
cycle charges the capacitor positively, acting as plate supply.  
 
 
1.7  SELF-OSCILLATING BALANCED MIXERS 
 
This circuit was proposed for ultrahigh-frequency operation and push-pull and/or 
push-push modes of operation [37]. An example application is for a receiver 
mixer operating in push-pull while the local oscillator operates in push-push. In 
this arrangement it is desirable that the oscillator frequency is stablized and the 
receiver circuit is very selective. The  circuit is depicted in Figure 1.50 using two 
triodes connected in common grid, with a coaxial line tank circuit cavity including 
a pair of parallel conductors also called a Lecher line.  
 
In push-pull mode the impedances 4 and 5 are shorted by the counter 
phase of each line. The Lecher line constitutes a tank circuit tuned at the incoming 
signals exciting the antennas to the frequency of the incoming signal. The signals 
are applied in push-pull mode to the cathodes, where they mix with the LO signal. 
The plate impedance 8 and the tank circuit 9 produces a push-pull damping 
impedance that stabilizes the circuit in this mode. In push-push mode the 
impedances 4 and 5 are common and the Lecher line impedance is essentially a 
common inductive impedance connecting the cathode to impedance 4. The 
inventor suggested that if impedances 8’, 8” are capacitive, then both modes 
become stable, and if 5 is a capacitive, it does not affect the push-pull mode but it 
can make the push-push less stable. That tendency to oscillate can be enhanced by 
applying a tank circuit at the plate. 
 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
45 
     
 
 
Figure 1.50     Ultra high frequency self oscillating mixer making use of a coaxial line to stabilize 
oscillations. 
 
The parameters 4, 5, 8’, 8” and tank circuit impedance are used to adjust 
the oscillation frequency. The tank circuit consists of a shielded two conductor 
line making a series resonant circuit. The conductors are terminated by push-pull 
capacitance, 11, and push-push mode capacitance, 13. The other two capacitances, 
12’, 12” are used for balancing the circuit. The IF signal is generated by mixing 
the incoming RF signal at the active device along with the LO signal. The IF 
circuit consists of impedance 4, the anode to cathode and inductances 7’, 7” to 
output load. The connection A’, A” should be capacitive to avoid shorting the IF 
signal. The inductances 7’, 7” are used to filter IF from RF and LO.  
 
 
1.8  DISTRIBUTED MIXER 
 
Achieving wide band operation requires low parasitic capacitance. In contrast, 
achieving high power operation requires multiple tubes or transistors in parallel 
that increase parasitic capacitance. A distributed mixer proposed in 1959 [38] uses 
multiple tubes or transistors for wideband operation, to overcome the bandwidth 
limitation. The fundamental idea of the distributed mixer is similar to that of a 
distributed amplifier (i.e., to build an artificial transmission line by having the 
tube or transistor provides the distributed shunt capacitance). The distributed 
series inductance is introduced using inductors or high impedance transmission 
lines. This is depicted in Figure 1.51, where both the LO and RF signals are 
applied to the input terminal 1, and the IF is extracted from terminal 2. The input 
and output filter networks are designed so that the phase delay of each tap where 
the tubes are connected is equal the sum or difference frequencies. The inventor 

46 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
also proposes combining two such distributed mixers in a singly balanced 
configuration to provide isolation between the signal and LO ports.  
 
    
 
Figure 1.51    The RF and LO applied in the artificial distributed grid line. The plate contains 
amplified LO and RF signals that must be filtered. The desired IF signal is delivered to 
the output load.  
 
 
The input circuit for this invention uses a band-pass filter characteristic 
that passes both the RF and LO frequencies. The inductive arms of each of these 
filter sections comprise similar inductances and are mutually coupled. The 
capacitance arms comprise external condensers, C1, Cn plus the grid to cathode 
capacitances. The output circuit is a low pass LC filter, which passes the RF-LO 
frequency, and rejects the RF and LO frequencies and their harmonics. A band-
pass filter would also be required at the output if the RF+LO frequency is desired 
at the output.  
 
 
1.9 SUMMARY 
 
This chapter presented the basic circuit patents that enabled the development of 
radio technology. The circuits were at the same time simple and highly 
sophisticated in meeting the demand for sensitive and selective receivers. From 
this early technology nearly 100 years ago the super-heterodyne and direct 
conversion approaches were developed. Super-heterodyne remains the most 
widely used receiver architecture today for high performance systems, and direct 
conversion has transitioned from a mere historical curiosity to being the dominant 
approach for cell phones due to its excellent tradeoff between cost and 
performance.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Origins of Electronic Mixers 
47 
REFERENCES   
 
[1] 
M. Schwartz, “History of Communications,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, September 2009, pp 20 – 26. 
[2] 
J. S. Stone, "Method of Selective Electric Signaling," US Patent 714,756, 
issued February 12, 1902. 
[3]  
Guglielmo Marconi, “Apparatus for Wireless Telegraphy,” US Patent 
763,772, issued June 28, 1904. 
[4] 
Nikolai Tesla, “System of Signaling,” US Patent 725,605, issued April 14, 
1903. 
[5]  
R. A. Fessenden, “Apparatus for Signaling by Electromagnetic Waves,” US 
Patent 706,747, issued August 12, 1902. 
[6]  
E. F. W. Alexanderson, “High Frequency Alternator,” US Patent 1,008,577, 
issued November 14, 1911. 
[7]  
J. A. Flemming, “Instrument for Converting Alternating Electric  
Currents Into Continuous Currents,” US Patent 803,684, issued November 7, 
1905. 
[8]  
L. De Forest, “Space Telegraphy,” US Patent 879,532, issued February 18, 
1908. 
[9]  
Millman, J. and C. C. Halkias, Electronic Devices and Circuits, New York, 
McGraw Hill, 1967. 
[10]  E. H. Armstrong, “Operating Features of the Audion,” Electrical World, 
December 12, 1914. 
[11]  R. A. Fessenden, “Wireless Signaling,” US Patent 706,740, issued August 
12, 1902. 
[12]  E. H. Armstrong, “Wireless Receiving System,” US Patent 1,113,149, 
issued October 6, 1914. 
[13]  E. H. Armstrong, “Signaling System,” US Patent 1,424,065, issued July 25, 
1922. 
[14]  E. H. Armstrong, “Method of Receiving High Frequency Oscillations,” US 
Patent 1,342,885, issued June 8, 1920. 
[15]  E. H. Armstrong, “Wireless Receiving System for Continuous 
Waves,” US Patent 1,611,848, issued December 2, 1926.  
[16]  E. H. Armstrong, “Radio Telephone Signaling,” US Patent 1,941,447, 
issued December 26, 1933. 
[17]  H. O. Peterson, “Method and Means for Combining Frequencies,” US 
Patent 1,725,721, issued August 20, 1929. 
[18]  Herold, “Ultra High Frequency Triode Converter,” US Patent 2,435,541, 
issued January 26, 1944.  
[19]  Maximilian. J. O. Strutt and Aldert Van Der Ziel, “Frequency Changing 
Circuit Arrangement,” US Patent 2,582,725, issued January 15, 1952.  
[20]  M. Marks et al, “Cascode Amplifier-Mixer With Trap to Prevent Local 
Oscillator in Driven Stage From Affecting Driving Stage,” US Patent 2,789,213, 
issued June 1955. 

48 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
[21]   Winfield, “Oscillator Translator System,” US Patent 2,266,670, issued 
1941.  
[22]   W. Dallenbach, “Oscillator-Modulator Circuit,” US Patent 2,382,693, 
issued August 14, 1945. 
[23]  R. F. Post, “Mixing Circuit,” US Patent 2,602,889, issued July 8, 1952. 
[24]  A. Van Weel, “Push-Pull Mixing Circuit Arrangement,” US Patent 
2538715, issued January 16, 1951. 
[25]  F. X. Beck, “Converter Circuit,” US Patent 2,654,836, issued October 6, 
1953. 
[26]   W. Hahnle, “Arrangement for Modulation,” US Patent 2,144,655, issued 
January 24, 1939. 
[27]   John R. Carson, “Method and Means for Signaling with High  
Frequency Waves,” US Patent 1,449,382, issued March 27, 1923. 
 
[28]   R. V. L. Hartley, “Modulation System,” US Patent 1,666,206, issued April 
17, 1928. 
[29] W. Van B. Roberts, “Superheterodyne Receiver Control,” US Patent 
1,853,179, issued April 12, 1932. 
[30]   Libby, “Converter System,” US Patent 2,516,889, issued 1946. 
[31]   C. W. Hansell, “Receiving Circuits,” US Patent 2,044,745, issued June 16, 
1936. 
[32]  A. B. Carlson, Communication Systems, McGraw-Hill Ltd, 1975, p. 459. 
[33]   L. W. Parker, “Television Receiver,” US Patent 2,448,908, issued 
September 7, 1948. 
[34]  Eaglesfield, “Frequency Changing Circuit,” US Patent 2,271,418, issued 
1939. 
[35]   Edwin H. Armstrong, “The Super-Heterodyne – Its Origin, Development, 
And Some Recent Improvements,” Proceedings of the Institute of Radio 
Engineers, New York, March 5, 1924, pp 539-552.  
[36]   R. A. Heising, “Radio Receiving System,” US Patent 1,813,923, issued 
July 14, 1931. 
[37]  A. Van Weel, “Ultra High Frequency Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 2,475,064, 
issued July 5, 1949. 
[38]   B. M. Sosin, “Signal Mixers,” US Patent 2,978,579, issued April 4, 1961. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
Chapter 2 
System Parameters and Performance 
A number of important aspects of systems are presented in this chapter with 
emphasis on the role of mixers. A summary of the overall system is first provided, 
followed by sections on digital coding, receiver architectures, and the effects of 
noise and distortion. Transmission of information through the system is via one or 
more carrier signals at discrete frequencies, requiring mixers to convert the 
frequency of the information signal up to the transmit frequency, and then back 
down at the receiver. While the mixing process is modeled as being linear, it also 
involves nonlinearity that adds noise and distortion to the information signal, 
which must be minimized by careful design of the system and the mixers used. 
This chapter summarizes the basic mixer performance parameters with emphasis 
on quantifying noise and inter-modulation levels and their effects on overall 
system performance. At the end of the chapter some numerical examples are given 
to illustrate the calculation of noise and distortion levels in a front end receiver.  
 
 
2.1 SYSTEM OVERVIEW     
 
Radio links initially used analog transmission at high frequency (HF) bands above 
30 MHz. Then in the 1950s the frequencies used moved to the microwave bands, 
in particular to the C and X bands which are still very active in many countries. 
Operation at microwave frequencies offers various benefits including line-of-sight 
propagation, minimum interference by atmospheric noise, and the ability to use 
wide instantaneous bandwidth that is necessary for frequency modulation (FM). 
The longest hauls were spaced at about 50 km, and later with the availability of 
satellite transponders link distances reached thousands of kilometers. The key 
factor was the signal to noise ratio (SNR) that determined the quality of 
communication.  
Use of analog modulation began showing signs of saturation in the early 
1980s, as increasing data rates caused inefficient use of spectrum and ever 
increasing transmitter output power was required for better SNR. This resulted in 
a significant shift in radio communications in which digital systems became the 

50 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
dominant technology by supporting high data rates and being scalable to provide 
large system capacity. The number of transmitter and receiver points increased 
dramatically, allowing the path distance to decrease, which in turn aligned with 
the lower power levels available from semiconductor devices. Link distances now 
are a few meters for computer communication, a few km to 10 km for cell phones, 
and at most 5 km for mmWave digital radios. Except for satellite communications, 
long distance hauls were replaced by fiber trunks. Also, in terms of metrics  the 
SNR ratio was replaced by bit error rate (BER), and in terms of modulation FM 
was replaced by quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) and other modulation 
formats where the carrier is amplitude and phase modulated, requiring both 
amplitude and frequency integrity during transmission. 
From an architectural point of view, modern wireless communication systems 
are divided into several layers, with each one standardized to facilitate the 
management of networks. One might think it is easier to categorize these layers by 
hardware and software, but with the increased clock speeds of digital technology 
running at gigahertz frequencies, such a simplistic division is difficult to apply. A 
generally accepted division [1,2] is depicted in Figure 2.1, where two main layers 
are identified:  the data link and physical layers. The data link layer contains the 
medium access control layer (MAC), which specifies access to the transmission 
medium, data checking and frame generation, and reception.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1 
Layers in modern communication systems. 
 
The physical layer, sometimes called the PHY layer, implements the 
specifications of the communication link that comprises the electrical or optical 
components. In addition, it contains the standards for the protocols used by these 
components, including encoding, decoding, clocking and data framing. 
Sometimes, the physical layer is divided into the PHY and physical medium 
dependent layers (PMD), where the PHY layer specifies the physical protocol 
standards and the PMD layer specifies the link parameters and related 
components. 
 
 
2.1.1 Baseband  Physical Layer 
 
The most familiar baseband physical layer is the RS-232 that connects a PC to a 
printer or other peripheral equipment by cable. The standard for RS-232 contains 
MAC 
PHY 
PMD 
Data Link Layer 
Physical Layer 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
51 
25 pins and was developed for two-way serial transmission up to 20 Kbps. 
Another basic building block for transmission over copper wire lines is the 
telephone standard created in North America. A single channel operates at 64 
Kbps, a T-1 line carries 24 channels, and a T-1C line carries 48 channels. The 
channel capacity hierarchy is described in the table; T stands for terrestrial 
(nonsatellite) services.  
 
1 channel   
= 64 Kbps 
T-1 
= 1.544 Mbps = 24 single channels 
T-1C 
= 3.152 Mbps = 48 single channels 
T – 2 
= 6.312 Mbps = 96 single channels 
T – 3          
= 44.736 Mbps = 672 single channels 
 
Note that the T-3 data rate is almost 29 times that of T-1, but T-3 only 
carries 28 times the number of channels compared to T-1. The reason is that any 
two T-1 lines are usually out of synchronization with each other, so combining 
their T-1 data streams into a T-3 line requires some added overhead. A standard 
was also created for optical transmissions, designated as synchronous optical 
network (SONET), and follows a similar hierarchy: 
 
 
OC1  
= 51.84 Mbps 
 
OC3    = 155 Mbps 
 
OC12  = 622 Mbps 
 
OC48  = 2.488 Gbps 
 
 
Modern radio communications are now required to compete with the low 
end SONET standards, and be able to replace fiber links when necessary. This is a 
direct impact from the Internet revolution and the trend toward broadband 
communications.  
 
 
2.1.2 RF Physical Layer 
 
Communication system architectures can generally be divided into point-to-point, 
point-to-multipoint, cellular mobile radio, and local area network. The main 
characteristics of each are described next. 
 
 
2.1.2.1 Point-to-Point Links 
 
This legacy communication model depicted in Figure 2.2 represents microwave 
radio relay links. The analog or digital baseband information is applied to a 
transmitter and sent by microwave/mmWave radio waves to a receiver to recover 
the original information. Usually, point-to-point links are bidirectional so that 

52 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
transmission occurs from left to right and another system operates in parallel from 
right to left at another frequency. This simultaneous communication both ways is 
referred to as full-duplex. Each link is called a transceiver, an abbreviation for 
transmitter and receiver. The range of each link is limited to within a building, 
campus, city, or wider, thus varying from a few meters to many km depending on 
the type of service.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 2.2 
Simplified communication system illustrating the addition of noise into the channel. 
 
In order to cover longer distances, a series of “repeaters” are inserted between 
the transmitter and receiver. They can be built either as a “transponder,” where the 
signal is received, amplified and converted to another frequency for 
retransmission, or as a complete receiver transmitter, where the signal is converted 
to baseband, processed and converted again to a different carrier frequency. The 
second approach provides a better quality of service.  
A similar fixed system is applied to light wave communications, where fiber 
replaces free space as the transmission medium, and light replaces radio waves. 
The link length can vary from less than a kilometer (short haul) to thousands of 
kilometers (long haul) depending on the specific application. For example, optical 
data links are used to connect computers and terminals within the same building 
or between two buildings with a relatively short transmission distance (<10 km). 
For short hauls, the low loss and wide bandwidth of optical fibers are not of 
primary importance, they are used because of their other advantages, such as 
immunity to electromagnetic interference and extremely high channel capacity.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.3 
Representation of a typical light wave link. 
 
 
When the link length exceeds a certain value, in the range of 20 to 100 
km depending on the operating wavelength, it becomes necessary to compensate 
for the fiber loss, as the signal would otherwise become too weak to be detected 
reliably. Such compensation is traditionally carried out using repeaters, often 
called regenerators, because they regenerate the optical signal as opposed to 
simple amplification. Similarly to radio links, regenerative repeaters generally 
Noise 
 Power 
Prec 
Pout 
Pout 
Transmitter 
Receiver 
Receiver 
RX 
Transmitter 
TX 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
53 
provide better BER over long hauls than simple amplification as they improve the 
SNR at each point it is used. A regenerator is simply a receiver transmitter pair 
that detects the incoming optical signals, recovers the electrical bit stream, and 
then converts it back into optical form by modulating the optical source. This 
process has been called demod remod.   
 
 
2.1.2.2 Point-to-Multipoint 
 
This architecture is also called a broadcast or distribution network, with the idea 
having been borrowed from conventional AM radio where a transmitter serves 
multiple receivers. With AM radio the size and complexity of the high number of 
receivers is kept as low as possible, with the transmitter assuming the burden of 
higher cost and complexity. A similar concept is applied in Figure 2.4, where a 
central transmitter broadcasts to a large number of receivers. An example of such 
a system is TV receive-only (TVRO), where TV programming is transmitted 
directly from a satellite to many home receivers. Another example that fits into 
this category is the very small aperture terminal (VSAT), where the signal is also 
transmitted from a satellite to many receivers. But a key difference is VSAT uses 
bidirectional communication, as the ground terminals also communicate with the 
satellite. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.4 
Point-to-multipoint communication system. 
 
 
2.1.2.3 Cellular Mobile Radio 
 
Another important point-to-multipoint architecture is cellular mobile radio, where 
many handsets communicate with a hub or a base station within a cell, and many 
cells are aggregated together to guarantee communication within a desired area, 
especially in urban areas. The representation of a cell by a hexagon illustrates how 
HUB 
Terminal 
RX 
RX 
RX 
RX 

54 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
a network of cells relates to each other. Since telephone conversation requires full 
duplex operation, each phone connection requires two carrier frequencies within 
the cell. To minimize interference within the cell between various handsets, the 
power level of each handset can be dynamically adjusted to obtain a threshold 
level of communication quality. Similarly, base station transmitted power is 
adjusted to cover the cell while minimizing the level in adjacent cells. This 
approach allows for frequency re-use in nonadjacent cells. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.5 
Example of cellular radio concept. Each dot represents a base station.  
 
 
2.1.2.4 Local Area Networks (LANs) 
 
Many LAN applications require networks in which a large number of users within 
a local area (e.g., a building or a university campus), are interconnected in such a 
way that any user can access the network randomly to transmit data to any other 
user. Since transmission distances are relatively short (<10 km), copper cables, 
mmWave radio links, or low cost fibers are used for the interconnection. The 
major motivation behind the use of optical fibers is the large bandwidth offered by 
fiber-optic communication systems.  
 
 
2.2 DIGITAL MODULATION 
 
The majority of present day communication systems use digital modulation, 
instead of analog, due to the ability to send and receive information more 
efficiently given the same level of noise and distortion. Many types of digital 
modulation exist with varying tradeoffs between SNR, the amount of bits per 
second (BPS), which can be passed in a given bandwidth, the link distance, and 
the number of carriers. This section summarizes the most common modulation 
schemes and their performance metrics with emphasis on the performance of the 
mixer within the system.  

 
System Parameters and Performance 
55 
 
2.2.1 Baseband Signal  
 
In digital communication systems, an analog signal is sampled, quantized, and 
formatted into a pulse code modulation (PCM) baseband signal, [3]. The digital 
signal varies between two fixed levels as depicted in Figure 2.6 (a), with ideally 
zero transition time between levels. The high and low levels are represented, 
respectively, by a logical “1” or “0.” A typical binary sequence varies between 
“1” and “0” according to the PCM coding of the message. The on-off sequence of 
Figure 2.6 is called unipolar because it has only one polarity and is synchronous, 
which means the pulses have equal duration and there is no separation between 
them. This type of code is also referred to as non-return-to-zero (NRZ), because 
the rectangular pulses last the entire bit period, Tb with bit rate defined by R = 1/ 
Tb. Figure 2.6 (a) shows the time domain waveform of an idealized binary 
sequence: 1010101010, and its frequency domain spectrum is shown in Figure 2.6 
(b). Since the high and low states alternate with each other, this signal occupies 
the widest bandwidth, as compared with an actual waveform with nonuniform 
groupings of 1’s and 0’s. The spectrum of Figure 2.6 (b) follows the sinc function 
sin(x)/x = sinc(x), with x = fTb. The first null of the sinc function occurs at a 
frequency fb = 1/Tb. Theoretically the spectrum extends to infinity but according to 
the Nyquist theorem the original information is contained within the frequency, fc 
= 1/(2Tb).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                            
                                                                                                fb=1/Tb = 4 MHz and fc=1/2Tb = 2MHz 
           a) Time domain waveform  
 
 
  b) Frequency spectrum  
   
Figure 2.6 
Time and frequency plots of a NRZ signal with a 10101010101 sequence. 
 
Because of the Nyquist relation, the baseband signal can be filtered to 
eliminate frequency components above fc. In practice the cutoff frequency of the 
low pass filter is designed to be somewhere between fc and fb. A Nyquist type of 
filter is employed for this purpose because it minimizes intersymbol interference 
(ISI) that degrades the quality of the recovered signal, [3]. ISI results from the 
spreading of a pulse into an adjacent pulse in the time domain. Notice in Figure 
2.6 that a nonvarying (DC) level exists, which carries no information and wastes 
V(t) 
t 
0 
Tb = 0.25 microseconds 
 1     0     1    0      1     0      1    0  

56 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
power. Using the polar NRZ scheme, where the signal swings between ± 1 to 
represent logical “0” and “1,” the DC level is eliminated if the coding process is 
such that the probabilities of logical zeros and ones are equal. This is the simplest 
and most widely used coding to generate a baseband signal. Other codes are 
available, including return to zero (RZ), where the pulse lasts less than the bit 
period, typically half the value of NRZ. RZ is more appropriate for baseband 
transmission such as used in lightwave technology. For wireless transmission 
NRZ is attractive not only for its simplicity but also for its better signal-to-noise 
performance. 
 
 
 
 
The base band can be directly applied to coax copper wire or to optical 
fiber link; however, it cannot be transmitted directly via radio waves, as it would 
require unrealistically large antennas. Therefore, the baseband signal is converted 
to a higher frequency carrier that is appropriate for the channel. The carrier is 
modulated using amplitude shift keying (ASK), frequency shift keying (FSK), 
phase shift keying (PSK), or a combination thereof.  
 
 
 2.2.2 Amplitude Shift Keying (ASK) 
 
The mathematical description of a modulated waveform is given by (2.1). The 
magnitude of carrier signal A(t) is varied to represent a logical “0” or “1,” while 
maintaining both the frequency, 0, and phase, (t), constant. Phase is arbitrary 
and in general referenced to zero. Equation (2.2) introduces the amplitude 
modulation index, m(t). For two level ASK, the modulation index m(t) is either 
logical “0” or “1,” and for the following discussion represents a NRZ baseband 
signal. The level of AM is sometimes described in terms of percentage 
modulation, which equals 0% and 100%, respectively, for m(t) = 0 and m(t) = 1.    
 
 
)]
(
cos[
)
(
)
(
0
t
t
t
A
t
S




 
 
 
                  (2.1) 
 
)]
(
cos[
)]
(
1[
)
(
0
t
t
t
m
A
t
SASK





 
 
 
         (2.2)   
 
 
S(t) can be represented by the two states as follows: 
 
 



1
),
cos(
0
),
cos(
)
(
0
1
0
0
binary
t
A
binary
t
A
t
S


 
 
 
These states occur within the time interval given by the inverse of the bit 
rate, but they never occur simultaneously. The frequency domain spectrum is 
obtained by applying the Fourier transform to (2.2). It can be proven the 
frequency domain takes the form of (2.3); which consists of the carrier component 
at f0, upper sideband at f0+fc, and lower sideband at f0-fc. The graphical 
representations of a filtered modulated baseband time domain waveform and 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
57 
normalized power spectrum are given in Figure 2.7 (a) and (b), respectively. The 
baseband is low-pass filtered with a cut off frequency equal to fc. 
 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
0
0
0












AM
AM
A
SASK
 
         (2.3) 
 
The bandwidth of a ASK modulated carrier signal is twice the baseband 
value due to the presence of the upper and lower sidebands. Binary ASK 
modulation (BASK) occurs when the baseband signal switches between -1 and +1 
instead of 0 and 1. ASK can be demodulated with a simple envelope detector and 
is used in low cost applications. But ASK is sensitive to noise and amplitude 
distortions so it is employed where a high quality system is not required. 
Multilevel level ASK is sometimes used (e.g., quaternary ASK  with four levels at 
-2 V, -1 V, +1 V, +2 V).  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Modulated base band waveform                    b)Spectrum of ASK modulated waveform 
 
Figure 2.7 
ASK modulated waveforms and spectrum. 
 
 
2.2.3 Frequency Shift Keying (FSK) 
 
Digital FSK modulation is similar to analog FM, as the information is contained in 
the carrier frequency and amplitude is kept constant. The primary benefit of FM 
over AM is the immunity FM has to amplitude noise and interference. Since 
frequency is the time derivative of phase, frequency and phase modulation are 
closely related to each other. For frequency modulation, the instantaneous 
frequency can be written as containing a carrier frequency added to a frequency 
term, Δfm(t) that is proportional to the message waveform, m(t).  
 
 
)
(
)
(
t
fm
fc
t
f



 
 
 
 
 
         (2.4) 
 
 
In FSK the logical “1” and “0” states are represented by two discrete 
frequencies, f1 and f2. A proportionality constant is defined that is equal to half the 
difference frequency, 
2
/)
(
1
2
f
f
f



, which is converted to an angle by 
integrating the instantaneous frequency over time (2.5). Including this in the 
 1     0   1    1   0   1    0   0  
f0 
f 
f0+fc 
f0-fc 
A 

58 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
original modulated signal results in (2.6), which is the classical representation of a 
frequency modulated signal.  
 
 
















t
t
c
t
c
dt
t
fm
f
dt
t
fm
dt
f
t
f
t
)
(
2
2
)
(
2
2
)
(
2
)
(






      (2.5) 
]
)
(
2
2
cos[
)
(
)
(
dt
t
m
f
t
f
t
A
t
S
t
c








  
 
 
         (2.6)       
 
In FSK applications the modulated waveform and spectrum can easily be 
determined if one assumes a binary FSK signal is actually composed of two 
complimentary ASK modulated signals with 100% modulation index as 
represented in Figure 2.8 [4]. The logical “0” is represented by frequency f1 and 
the logical “1” by frequency f2. These states occur within the time interval given 
by the inverse of bit rate, but never at the same time. 
 
   



1
),
2
cos(
0
),
2
cos(
)
(
2
1
binary
t
f
A
binary
t
f
A
t
S


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.8 
FSK waveform generated by adding two ASK waveforms at two carrier frequencies.  
 
The bandwidth is obtained directly from the FSK spectrum in Figure 2.9, 
given by the difference between (f2 + fm) – (f1 - fm), where fm is the modulation 
frequency, which equals the inverse of the bit rate. The result in (2.7) can 
alternatively be represented by (2.8).  
 
)
(
2
)
(
2
1
2
f
f
f
f
f
BW
m
m






 
 
        
        (2.7) 
)
1(
2



mf
BW
 
 
 
 
 
        (2.8) 
 
In the equations,  = f/fm is the phase modulation index, defined by the 
ratio of peak frequency deviation to the modulation frequency, fm. For  << 1 the 
separation diminishes between the two frequency lobes at f1 and f2, and vice versa 
ASK2 
ASK1 
FSK 
 1    1    0    1   0    1   0    0    1   1 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
59 
for the case  >> 1. Notice the bandwidth occupied by this two level FSK is more 
than twice that of two level ASK. FSK can also be represented by expressing the 
angle in terms of a carrier f0 and an offset frequency Δf.  
 
]
)
(
2
cos[
)
(
0
1
t
f
f
A
t
S
c
FSK




  
 
 
         (2.9) 
]
)
(
2
cos[
)
(
0
2
t
f
f
A
t
S
c
FSK




 
 
 
       (2.10) 
 
Minimum bandwidth is obtained when the spacing between the carriers is 
such that each carrier peak is at a null of other carrier, in which case lobes will 
merge. One disadvantage of FSK is the large bandwidth required, which makes 
this system attractive for use where bandwidth is not a concern. That can be the 
case for mm-wave systems, where binary and quaternary FSK systems are 
generally applied. The spectrum of a quaternary modulation consist of four 
carriers plus the side bands. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 2.9  
Filtered spectrum of two level FSK modulation, assuming fRF = 10MHz; fm = 1 MHz 
and f  = 2 MHz, BW = 6 MHz.  
 
 
2.2.4 Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) 
 
Let’s take a carrier with constant amplitude and frequency and allow its phase to 
change proportionally to the signal, (2.11). Now let’s make this proportionality 
phase constant kp =  and allow m(t) to change between two values, 0 and 1, 
proportionally to the baseband digital waveform. The modulated voltage (2.12) 
will switch between A and -A. This type of signal is called antipodal.  
 
 
)
(
)
(
t
m
k
t
p


  
 
 
 
          
     (2.11) 
 
)]
(
cos[
)
(
)
(
0
t
m
k
t
t
A
t
S
p



  
 
       
     (2.12) 
  
 
To determine the frequency spectrum of (2.12), let's set kp = /2, and use 
a modulating signal that is NRZ polar with m(t) = ±1. Equation (2.12) can be 
written as (2.13) using trigonometric identities, then further reduced to (2.14) by 
noting that m(t)kp = ±/2; cos(±/2) = 0; and sin(±/2) = ±1 = m(t). The 
frequency spectrum of (2.14) is given by (2.15), where M(ω) in the frequency 
domain corresponds to m(t) in the time domain. Equation (2.15) shows the 
f1 
f2+fm 
f1-fm 
f2 
fRF 

60 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
baseband signal is translated to upper and lower sidebands about the carrier 
frequency, with the carrier itself being suppressed. Thus it is similar to an AM 
double sideband suppressed carrier modulation. 
 
 
]
)
(
sin[
)
sin(
]
)
(
cos[
)
cos(
)
(
0
0
p
p
k
t
m
t
A
k
t
m
t
A
t
S




      (2.13)   
 
)
sin(
)
(
)
(
0t
t
Am
t
S



  
       
 
 
       (2.14)   
 
)
(
2
)
(
2
)
(
0
0









M
A
M
A
SPSK
               
       (2.15) 
 
 
The time domain waveforms for the base band, the carrier, and the BPSK 
modulation are in Figure 2.10 (a) for the digital sequence (+1-1+1+1-1+1-1). 
While there is a finite rise/fall time, the transition time is fast relative to the period 
of the waveform, resulting in a wide frequency spectrum. The maximum 
bandwidth occurs when the baseband signal is a sequence of alternating 0's and 
1's.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a)  Time domain waveforms for polar NRZ   
b) Frequency domain spectrum, assuming base 
baseband, carrier, and modulated signals  
 
   band is a sequence of alternating 0's and 1's
 
  
Figure 2.10 
BPSK waveforms and spectrum. 
 
The unfiltered spectrum for a signal centered at ω0 = 70 MHz is shown in 
Figure 2.10 (b), with a data rate of 300 Kbps. With proper filtering applied to the 
baseband signal, frequency components above and below the first null can be 
greatly rejected. 
 
 
2.2.5 Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) 
 
In QPSK, the stream of PCM bits is grouped into a symbol prior to application to 
the modulator. The symbol is therefore a group of two bits having the four 
possibilities: 00, 01, 10 and 11. Since the symbol comprises two bits, the symbol 
Digital 
base band 
Carrier 
wave 
BPSK 
waveform 
Frequency - MHz 
Relative Level - dB 
-70 
-60 
-50 
-40 
-30 
-20
-10 
0 
62 
66 
70 
74 
78 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
61 
rate is half the bit rate. With QPSK modulation these four symbol possibilities are 
coded into one of four phase states that are separated by 90 degrees. One can 
consider QPSK as the linear combination of two independent BPSK signals that 
are in quadrature with each other. From vector theory they are called orthogonal to 
each other. Thus their respective maxima and minima occur independently, so one 
signal does not interfere with other. And twice as much information can be sent in 
the same bandwidth compared with BPSK. This modulation can be represented in 
the complex plane by considering the modulated signal of (2.16) as a vector and 
calculating its projection onto the x, y plane. Equation (2.16) can be written as 
(2.17), which has sine and cosine components of the same angle , so the 
components are orthogonal to each other.  
 
 
)]
(
cos[
)
(
)
(
0
t
t
t
A
t
S




 
 
 
                (2.16)                     
 
))
(
sin(
)
sin(
)
(
))
(
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
0
0
t
t
t
A
t
t
t
A
t
S






        (2.17)   
 
 
If the amplitude and phase of (2.17) are projected, respectively, onto the 
x and y axes we obtain the I and Q components as defined by (2.18) and (2.19), 
where Ac is the peak value of A(t). The x-axis becomes the I-axis for the in-phase 
component, and the y-axis becomes the Q-axis for the in-quadrature component. 
The waveform expressed in terms of I and Q is given by (2.20).  
 
 
))
(
cos(
t
A
I
c


 
 
 
 
        
       (2.18)   
 
))
(
sin(
t
A
Q
c


 
 
 
 
        
       (2.19)   
 
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
(
0
0
t
Q
t
I
t
S




  
 
       
       (2.20)   
 
 
If the phase becomes proportional to the modulating signal, similarly to 
(2.11), the final modulated waveform represented in the I, Q plane is in (2.21). 
One possible representation of QPSK is in Figure 2.11, where the vector assumes 
any of the points (00, 01, 10, 11). The mapping of symbols onto the I,Q plane is 
called the constellation. The amplitude Ac is constant which makes this 
modulation nearly constant amplitude. The amplitude is not constant when the 
transitions from state to state cross the origin. 
 
))
(
sin(
)
sin(
)
(
))
(
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
0
0
t
t
A
t
m
t
t
A
t
m
t
S
c
c






            (2.21) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.11 
QPSK constellation. 
0,-1 
-1,-1 
-1,0 
0,0 
0 
Q 
I 

62 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 Figure 2.12 shows an example of time domain waveforms and the 
normalized power spectrum for the 70 MHz carrier that is QPSK modulated. The 
spectrum shows that for the same carrier frequency as depicted in Figure 2.10 for 
BPSK, the bit rate is around 150 Kbps, illustrating that QPSK requires half the 
bandwidth of BPSK.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) Time domain waveforms    
 
 
b) Frequency domain spectrum  
 
Figure 2.12 
QPSK waveforms and spectrum. 
 
In another example, the black plot in Figure 2.13 represents a filtered 
QPSK signal centered at 80 MHz that contains all the information required for 
transmission over the channel and recovery at the destination. The transmit chain 
includes a mixer and power amplifier that both introduce nonlinearities that cause 
distortion. This increases the sideband levels, a phenomena called spectral re-
growth, as depicted by the gray plot in the figure. These adjacent sideband lobes 
can fall into adjacent communication channels causing interference.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.13 
The power spectrum of a 80 MHz carrier QPSK modulated with a 10 Mbps data rate 
and Gaussian low-pass filtered with a 2.5 MHz cutoff frequency.  
   
I - code 
QPSK  
waveform 
Q - code 
0     1    0   0    1    0    1 
0    0    1    1     0   1    1 
100 
60 
80 
40 
120 
Frequency - MHz 
Relative Level - dB 
-70 
-60 
-50 
-40 
-30 
-20
-10 
0 
Relative Level - dB 
-70 
-60 
-50 
-40 
-30 
-20 
-10 
0 
62 
66 
70 
74 
78 
Frequency - MHz 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
63 
To overcome the problem of undesirable amplitude modulation in QPSK, a 
few variations of QPSK have been proposed including offset QPSK (OQPSK), 
and differential QPSK (/4-QPSK). In OQPSK, the symbol duration of one BPSK 
signal relative to the other is delayed by the period of a half symbol. The result is 
the transition from one state to another is always /2, while in QPSK it can be /2 
or , depicted in Figure 2.14. In /4–QPSK, the four reference states are shifted 
from symbol to symbol by /4 so that 8 phase states exists, four of them for even 
symbols and four for the odd symbols. In both cases the phase change never 
crosses the origin of the phase constellation diagram. Both processes avoid the 
null that the simple QPSK creates, thereby reducing amplitude variation and in 
turn requiring less linearity from the mixer and power amplifier. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) QPSK constellation  
 
b) OQPSK constellation 
 
Figure 2.14 
QPSK compared to OQPSK. 
 
 
2.2.6 Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM) 
 
Similar to QPSK, QAM comprises a linear combination of two independent 
signals in quadrature with each other. With QAM each independent channel is 
ASK modulated with multiple levels. The resulting combination is a signal that is 
modulated both in amplitude and phase. Its spectral shape is similar to BPSK and 
QPSK, but the bandwidth per data bit is much lower, since M-ary coding is used 
instead of binary, so there are M bits (in the constellation) during each bit interval. 
If BW equals the bandwidth of BPSK and there are M2 points in QAM, then the 
bandwidth per data bit of the QAM is: BWQAM = BW/log2M2. The savings in 
bandwidth is the main reason for using QAM instead of BPSK. In QAM more 
than two bits can comprise a symbol. For example, 16-QAM groups four bits 
together to form one of sixteen symbol possibilities (24 = 16). By grouping four 
bits to form one symbol, the symbol rate for 16-QAM is one quarter the original 
bit rate. The cost is the need for improved SNR to differentiate between more 
closely spaced phase/amplitude points. QAM involves amplitude and phase 
modulation as given by: 
 
]
cos[
)
(
)
(
0
j
j
t
t
m
A
t
S




 
 
 
                     (2.22) 
Q 
I 
Q 
I 

64 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Where, j = 1, 2, … M depends on the symbol  
             M = maximum number of symbols 
             m(t) = pulse waveform  
 
Since QAM and QPSK can be considered as composed of two orthogonal 
waveforms, QPSK equations (2.17) to (2.19) are equally applicable to QAM. A 
16-QAM constellation is depicted in Figure 2.15 showing 16 symbols coded at 16 
different phase and amplitude states. The filtered power spectrum for BPSK, 
QPSK or QAM signals are similar in shape and can be represented by an ideal 
nearly rectangular pulse.  
 
 
    
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.15 
Signal constellation for a 16QAM signal. 
 
 
2.3 ERROR PERFORMANCE 
 
2.3.1 Bit Error Rate (BER) 
 
The objective of digital communication systems is to transmit a message that has 
been coded with a certain digital alphabet, within a certain time, and with a 
minimum number of errors. Conventional analog transmission is concerned with 
faithful reproduction of a message waveform, whereas in digital transmission the 
concern is the detection of pulses and resolving them sufficiently to measure their 
amplitude and phase relative to expected levels. Most systems in use today are 
digitally modulated, where the data rate and error probability are equally as 
important as bandwidth and signal-to-noise ratio are for analog systems. For 
digital communication systems the critical figure of merit is the bit-error-rate 
(BER), which measures the ratio of bits transmitted to bits detected correctly by 
the receiver in the presence of noise. BER is defined by the probability that a 
logical “0” zero is interpreted as a logical “1” and vice versa. The bell shaped 
curves in Figure 2.16 are Gaussian representing the probability of occurrence of 
nominal “0” and nominal “1,” and their crossing area indicates the zone of the 
Transition between 
quadrants crosses zero 
I 
Q 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
65 
probability of error. A simple illustration of the effect of noise on the detection of 
a simple BPSK signal is depicted in the figure. A noise voltage, Vn, is added to the 
signal V(t), which as shown in the figure, falls within the area of high probability 
of correct detection. If however the amplitude of Vn is large enough to make the 
total voltage cross the horizontal line at V(t) = 0, then a bit error occurs. The 
assumption is made that an equal amount of noise is added to zeros and ones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.16 
Relationship between noise added to the signal and BER. 
 
For complex modulated signals, meaning they have varying amplitude 
and phase, an expected amplitude and phase exist for each symbol in the 
constellation, which is surrounded by the detection region. Adjacent symbols in 
the constellation have detection regions with borders that correspond to the V(t) = 
0 horizontal line of Figure 2.16. Four Gaussian curves can represent the error at 
each of the four borders. When the total voltage extends to a neighboring region a 
symbol error occurs. 
Since the digital signals have to be transmitted with radio waves, a 
relation between BER and the conventional signal to noise ratio is necessary to 
specify the quality of a digital communication system. In digital communications 
the ratio Eb/N0 is the fundamental measure of signal quality, which is closely 
related to the SNR. Eb represents the bit energy or power in the presence of a bit 
and No is noise level. The relation is given by (2.23), where Bn is the effective 
noise bandwidth of the receiver,  fb is the bit rate, and S/N is SNR. 
 
b
n
b
f
B
N
S
N
E

0
    
 
 
                                    (2.23) 
 
One of the most important methods to determine the performance of 
different modulation schemes is to compare their probability of error in terms of 
Eb/N0. The probability is calculated from Gaussian integrals or error functions; an 
approximation for the Gaussian distribution is in (2.24), which resembles a 
“waterfall” when represented graphically. The calculation of bit error rate as a 
V(t) 
Vn 
Vpp 
Nominal 1 
Nominal 0
0 >> 1 Error 
1>> 0 Error 
-1 
2 
8
6
4 
1
0 

66 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
function of Eb/N0 also depends on the modulation and detection schemes, and 
other parameters. Thus, the use of bit error plots is useful for estimation and 
comparison between different modulation methods.  
 
2
/
)
/
(
0
2
0
)
/
(
2
1
N
E
b
b
e
N
E
BER



  
 
 
 
       (2.24) 
 
 
 
 
 
          
The BER plots in Figure 2.17 were calculated for a communication 
channel where noise is assumed to be added to the signal. This noise is modeled as 
being additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) discussed later in this chapter. The 
plots show BER increases from 10-10 to 10-3 as Eb/N0 varies from 2 to 20 dB. For 
many communication systems, the threshold for acceptable BER is 10-6, meaning 
only one in a million detected bits is in error. For BPSK systems 10-6 BER occurs 
in the range of Eb/N0 = 11 to 12 dB. For two-level coherent FSK, 10-6 BER occurs 
in the range of 14 to 15 dB. In some regards FSK is an easier modulation format 
to implement, but at the price of requiring a 3 dB higher Eb/N0 than BPSK.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.17 
BER diagram as a function of Eb/N0 for most common modulation formats. 
 
Notice that BPSK and QPSK have equivalent BER, which is to be 
expected since QPSK equates to the addition of two BPSK signals in quadrature 
with each other; the probability of error is the same for each BPSK signal. If 
signal fading is taken into account, which reduces signal level, then the BER 
curves shift to the right so a higher signal to noise ratio is required for the same 
quality of reception. In system calculations, the Eb/No can be converted to the 
carrier to noise ratio (C/N) giving a direct relation between the digital and analog 
measures. 
 
FSK 
16QAM 
2            6            10          14           18      
Eb/N0 (dB) 
1E-10 
1E-8 
1E-6 
1E-4 
1E-2 
BER 
BPSK, 
QPSK 
64 QAM 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
67 
2.3.2 Error Vector Magnitude (EVM) 
 
Another digital modulation figure of merit used by designers is the error vector 
magnitude (EVM), defined by error vectors, EV, in Figure 2.18. The figure 
represents the first quadrant (upper right) of a 16 QAM constellation where the 
large grey dots represent the expected vectors. The symbol “1111” is selected to 
visualize the effect that noise has on the process of reconstituting the original data. 
The complex voltage is sampled periodically at discrete times, and the resulting 
measured voltages for that particular symbol are represented by the dots. Thus the 
dots represent the same symbol transmitted multiple times with noise added. In 
addition to noise, distortion and interfering signals can also cause the measured 
symbols to deviate from the expected value. For instance AM/AM distortion 
causes the measured voltage to move along the radial axis, while AM/PM 
distortion causes it to move in angle. The measured vector for a given symbol, Vm, 
compares to the expected vector, V, defining an error vector EV.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.18 
Representation of a burst of noise mixed with RF signal. 
 
 
All the vectors, except one, falls within the boundary of the expected 
“1111” symbol. One of the measured symbols falls outside the decision boundary 
and is interpreted as another symbol, causing an error to occur. The EVM is 
defined as the root-mean-square value of the difference between measured and 
ideal symbols, (2.25), over a window of M symbols.  
 
 
2
/
1
1
2
1
2


















M
n
n
M
n
n
m
rms
V
V
V
EVM
n
   
        
     
    (2.25)
 
 
EV 
I 
Q 
V
Vm 

68 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
EVM is usually expressed in percentage and in some cases in decibels due to the 
relation between this digital figure of merit and the conventional analog signal to 
noise ratio, (2.26). For instance, an EVM of 5% is equivalent to SNR = 26 dB. 
 
)
log(
20
EVM
SNR


           
 
 
       
    (2.26) 
 
 
2.4 RECEIVER ARCHITECTURES 
 
Various applications for receivers exist, each one having a different set of 
performance requirements. The ideal receiver must process both strong and weak 
signals, which requires high sensitivity, high selectivity, and high rejection of 
image and spurious. This must be accomplished with minimum DC power, size, 
weight, and cost. The most important parameter in digital transmission is the bit 
error rate that measures performance from transmitted baseband to received 
baseband. For low level signals the receiver noise dominates the mechanisms 
degrading BER; for high level signals, distortion generated mainly by the receiver 
mixer is dominant. The BER degradation in the transmitter is caused mainly by 
PA distortion and LO phase noise. At present two main approaches are used for 
reception and demodulation of an RF signal to base band: the conventional super-
heterodyne method and the direct conversion method.  
 
 
2.4.1 Super Heterodyne 
 
 
A typical super heterodyne receiver contains three sections: the RF, IF, and 
baseband (BB) as represented in Figure 2.19. This architecture is used in most 
digitally modulated systems. The receive (RX) path begins at the diplexer whose 
main function is to block the high power transmit (TX) signal from leaking into 
the RX path, which could otherwise saturate or even damage the low noise 
amplifier (LNA). The LNA function is to amplify the incoming RF signal with 
minimum added noise and distortion. A bandpass filter (BPF) is placed between 
the LNA and the mixer to reject image signals from the antenna, and image noise 
generated by the LNA. The RX signal is applied to the mixer at the RF port along 
with the local oscillator (LO). The RF is the small signal mixer input, and the LO 
is the large signal input. The mixer generates the intermediate frequency (IF) 
output signal equal to the difference between the RF and LO frequencies. The 
image frequency is aptly named because it is the mirror image of the RX 
frequency about the LO, so the difference between the image and LO frequencies 
is also at the same IF, causing interference from signal and noise converted from 
the image frequency. Instead of using a BPF to reject image signals and noise, 
another option is to use an image rejection mixer (IRM), which will be detailed in 
subsequent chapters. 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
69 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.19 
Typical super-heterodyne receiver with QPSK demodulator. 
 
 
The majority of gain is positioned in the IF section, with gain control 
added to optimize the tradeoff between noise figure and mixer power 
compression. A sharp IF filter selects the desired band and rejects unwanted down 
converted signals. The I,Q demodulator mixes the IF with LOIF, using two mixers 
driven in quadrature by the LOIF. The ninety degree phase difference passes to the 
respective analog baseband outputs, so they are also in quadrature with each other. 
These analog outputs are then converted to digital baseband by the analog to 
digital converter (ADC). The clock recovery (C/R) block is responsible for 
extracting a sample of LO from the RF signal that is used to precisely control the 
phase of IFLO. To avoid unwanted mixing, IFLO and RFLO frequencies should not 
have an integer multiple relation. An example of a typical spectrum at the receiver 
input is in Figure 2.20, depicting the desired RX band and a number of 
neighboring bands that can interfere with the desired signal. If the IF frequency is 
high enough to adequately separate the RF from the LO and image, then an image 
filter can be used to reject image signals, and reduce LO leakage into the LNA. 
Alternately, if there is insufficient separation between the RF and image 
frequencies, then image rejection must be accomplished using phase cancellation. 
The transmitter uses a block diagram that is similar to the reverse of the receive 
block diagram, with the LNA replaced by a power amplifier.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.20 
Spectrum of signals at the antenna and at the mixer output for a super-heterodyne 
system. 
 
 
TX 
IFLO 
0 
/2 
TX filter 
RF unit 
I/Q demodulator 
BB LP 
Filter
IF
LNA 
IF  
Filter
RX 
RFLO 
image 
filter 
hybrid 
ADC 
VGA
ADC 
C/R 
image 
channel 
desired 
channel 
TX  
band 
0 
LO 
RX 
band 
Frequency 
image 
filter 
Image 
band 
IF 
channel 
filter 

70 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
In most transceivers, the RX and TX mixers share the same LO to 
minimize cost. LO sharing restricts the choice of IF frequencies that can be used, 
defined by (2.27) or (2.28), where FTX-RX refers to the center band spacing 
between transmit and receive bands. The equation applies to a full duplex system, 
and includes high-side and low-side LO injection, meaning the LO frequency is 
higher or lower than the RF. But this equation is not sufficient to fully determine 
the frequency plan since the transmitter can generate undesirable spurious signals 
that can fall into the receive IFRX band, degrading receiver quality. Therefore, a 
careful analysis of the mixing products for the receiver and transmitter is required. 
Interference from adjacent cells or from nearby generators complicates the task of 
obtaining spectral purity.    
 
 
RX
TX
RX
TX
F
IF
IF




 
 
 
 
       (2.27) 
 
for FLO > FRX > FTX or FTX > FRX > FLO          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
RX
TX
RX
TX
F
IF
IF




 
 
 
 
       (2.28) 
 
for FLO > FTX > FRX or FRX > FTX > FLO         
 
 
For the sake of illustration, let's assume the spectrum of Figure 2.20 is 
planned for a typical GSM cellular band system with an up-link band at 824 to 
849 MHz, and down-link at 869 to 894 MHz. Both bands are 25 MHz wide, and 
are separated by 45 MHz. Within each band the individual channels are spaced at 
30 KHz. A standard IFRX frequency is 85.36 MHz, which makes IFTX equal 
130.36 MHz. Since the system is full duplex, both up- and down-link channels are 
used simultaneously.  
An alternative architecture, called super-heterodyne subharmonic, uses a 
subharmonic mixer (SHM) that produces the second LO harmonic internally, 
which mixes with the RF input to produce the IF. The most popular SHM is built 
with two diodes connected in parallel with anode connected to cathode at both 
ends. This is called an antiparallel diode pair (APDP), which is discussed in the 
diode theory Chapter 5.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.21 
Spectrum of signals at the antenna and mixer output for a super-heterodyne 
subharmonic spectrum.  
 
Frequency 
 IF                       3fLO -fLO   fLO  fLO+fRF     fim  2fLO   fRF           3fLO fLO+fRF 2fRF     4fLO fLO+fRF     
Image Filter 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
71 
 
For now it is important to know it produces the second harmonic of the 
input LO and causes it to mix with the RF signal to produce the IF. The APDP 
suppresses the second LO harmonic from exiting the IF port, thus easing the 
required filter rejection. However, the image signal still needs to be suppressed 
through filtering or phase cancellation. A representative spectrum of the signals 
involved in mixing is in Figure 2.21. The image filter rejects all signals except the 
desired RF signal, so that mixing only occurs between fRF and 2fLO. The two 
arrows with dotted lines indicate LO harmonics suppressed by the subharmonic 
mixer from exiting the RF or IF ports; and solid arrows indicate LO harmonics 
that must be suppressed by filtering. The continuous black spectra are the desired 
input RF and output IF signals.    
 
 
2.4.2 Direct Conversion  
 
A representative block diagram for the direct down-conversion receiver is in 
Figure 2.22. It is actually a high performance I,Q demodulator designed to operate 
at high frequencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.22 
Direct conversion QPSK type of receiver contained in a single die represented by the 
dotted lines. 
 
The transmitter block diagram is similar to the receiver. One difference is 
the LORF frequencies for RX and TX are not equal because the down- and up-link 
frequencies are different. In direct conversion systems the signal carrier and the 
LO are at the same frequency, translating the center of the signal spectrum to 0 
Hz, and to twice the carrier frequency that is removed by a simple low pass filter. 
For frequency and phase modulated signals, down conversion must be performed 
with quadrature mixers, otherwise the signal contained in the negative side will 
fold over to the positive side causing interference and degraded performance. The 
fact that high Q filters are not needed allows circuit integration onto a single die. It 
is evident by comparing the block diagrams of Figure 2.19 and Figure 2.22 that 
BB LP 
Filter 
LORF 
0 
/2 
TX filter 
I/Q demodulator 
LNA 
RX filter 
hybrid 
DAC 
DAC 
TX 
C/R 

72 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
direct conversion is much simpler. Therefore, this approach potentially reduces 
cost, and involves fewer signals as shown in Figure 2.23. The down-converted 
signal is low pass filtered as indicated in the figure near DC.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.23 
Direct conversion spectrum. 
 
 
In spite of its simplicity this approach has many drawbacks, including 
LO leakage to the antenna that can interfere with nearby receivers. This is a 
century old problem and essentially relies on the reverse LNA gain and mixer 
isolation to minimize the leakage. Another problem associated with the LO is it 
can mix with itself to produce a DC offset at the baseband output, which can be 
larger than the signal level and much larger than thermal noise. A negative effect 
of the DC is to cause large variations in the mixer conversion gain [5]. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.24 
Envelope of signals near the second harmonic are converted to DC. After [5]. 
 
 
One path to generate this DC is for the LO leaking out the RX input to 
partially reflect back into the receive chain, and be amplified by the LNA and then 
mix in the mixer with the LO. The DC level is dependent on the relative phase of 
the two signals at the LO frequency. Additional problems are caused by flicker 
noise and distortion. The flicker noise in semiconductors increases at low 
frequencies proportionally to 1/f, degrading system noise figure. The flicker noise 
power can be higher than the thermal noise at baseband. Also, with direct 
conversion, second order distortion is more important than third order. Two types 
of second order signals exist: a single tone signal from the antenna at 
approximately half the desired RF frequency can have its second harmonic 
generated by the LNA or mixer. The envelope of this second harmonic is detected 
Base Band 
Signal 
Envelope of 
 2nd Harmonic 
DC 
LO Signal 
RF Spectrum 
0 
LO 
LPF 
Frequency 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
73 
by the mixer and converted to DC as depicted in Figure 2.24. The other second 
order product arises from two high level closely spaced signals mixing together in 
the mixer to produce an undesired baseband signal.     
 
To overcome these drawbacks, two options have been proposed as 
alternatives to the direct conversion receiver: the direct conversion subharmonic 
and the quasi-zero IF. The direct conversion subharmonic architecture uses the 
same block diagram as in Figure 2.22, but mixing involves the second harmonic 
of the LO instead of the fundamental. The second LO harmonic is said to be 
“virtual” because it is generated internally to the mixer, and there is very little 
leakage of it to the antenna, thus reducing the DC offset level compared with 
fundamental LO mixing. The additional advantages of this system include 
improved second order suppression over fundamental LO operation, and 
conversion from RF directly to base band without need for an IF filter. A typical 
spectrum at the RF terminal is in Figure 2.25 [6].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.25 
Direct conversion subharmonic spectrum. After [6]. 
 
Instead of centering the down converted output at DC, the quasi zero IF 
or low IF receiver converts to an IF centered some kHz above DC, just enough to 
avoid the DC offset problem in direct down-converters. However, the low IF 
architecture reintroduces the need for image rejection. The Weaver receiver 
architecture [7, 8], shown in Figure 2.26, meets this requirement. It was originally 
applied to SSB modulation but works equally well for image rejection. Let’s 
assume the input signal to the mixer, SRF(t), comprises a desired signal and its 
image described by (2.29). The signals at  and , respectively, in Figure 2.26 
correspond to the RF input signal multiplied by cos(LO1)t and sin(LO1)t. The 
signal at  comprises the IF at cos(IF1)t, and image at cos(2LO1-IF1)t + 
cos(2LO1+IF1)t that is removed by the low pass filter. The same process applies 
to . Assuming IF = LO2 - IF1, then the second conversion provides the desired 
IF, (2.30). If the frequency of LO2 equals the IF, then the output is centered at DC, 
so LO2 is offset slightly to provide the low IF output.  
 
t
t
A
t
t
A
t
S
IF
LO
I
IF
LO
R
RF
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
1
1
1
1








 
      (2.29) 
t
t
A
t
S
IF
R
)
cos(
)
(
2
)
(
1
1



 
 
 
 
 
       (2.30) 
 
RF Signal  
Base Band  
0 
fLO             2fLO = fRF            3fLO 

74 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
      
Figure 2.26 
Direct conversion Weaver image rejection system. After [7]. 
 
 
2.5 MIXER LINEARITY 
 
In addition to the desired IF output, the mixer generates other undesired 
intermodulation (IM) products involving harmonics of the RF and LO. One 
category involves single-tone RF input signals, and another involves two or more 
RF tones. They are all caused by the nonlinear current-voltage characteristic of the 
switching device, and by the perturbation of the LO-controlled conduction 
waveform by the RF voltage or current. The determination of distortion levels can 
be a complex task, in many cases requiring a numerical solution, and ultimately 
measurement of the mixer in question. The IM frequencies can be analyzed by the 
application to the mixer of a single tone Vgcos(t), or two tones Vg1cos(1t) + 
Vg2cos(2t). For two RF input tones at 1 and 2, the output frequencies are given 
by fIM = ± mLO ± n11 ± n22.  
 
Table 2.1 
Frequency Components of Distortion Components 
 
 
Second Order 
Third Order 
Single Tone 
(LO ± 21) 
(LO ± 22) 
 (LO ± 31) 
(LO ± 32) 
Two Tone 
[LO ± (1 + 2)] 
[LO ±  (1 - 2)] 
[LO ±  (2 - 1)] 
[LO ±  (21 - 2)] 
[LO ±  (22 - 1)] 
[LO ± (22 + 1)] 
[LO ± (21 + 2)] 
 
 
In addition to distortion, gain compression is also of importance, and 
typically denoted as the input or output power where gain drops by 1 dB from the 
 

1 
1 
Baseband 
output 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
75 
linear region. This characteristic in a mixer cannot be estimated from a simple I,V 
series as in amplifier because the causes of compression are different as discussed 
in later chapters. The second order distortion components are particularly critical 
in direct conversion systems as discussed previously, but in many applications of 
superheterodyne systems they can be filtered if the information bandwidth is small 
compared to carrier frequency. The third order distortion terms are more 
problematic because their frequencies are adjacent to the desired IF output, and 
depending on the type of modulation employed, the IM frequencies can be close 
or equal to those of the desired IF products. Both third-order and second-order two 
tone IM levels are specified in terms of intercept point.    
Two tone third order intercept point (IP3) is a well established metric for 
quantifying two tone IM suppression. As depicted in Figure 2.27, if two input 
signals at frequencies fRF1 = fLO + f1 and fRF2 = fLO + f2 and with power levels PRF1 
and PRF2, are incident at the mixer RF port, then IF products at f1 and f2 having 
power levels PIF1 and PIF2, and IM3 products at 2f1 - f2 and 2f2 - f1 having power 
equal to PIM3, will exist at the mixer IF port. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.27 
Signal, spurious, and noise power levels at system output. 
 
Another depiction of third order distortion, as well as gain compression, 
is in Figure 2.28. The black plot shows the IF output power PIF1 or PIF2 versus RF 
input power. The output power follows the input power dB-for-dB in the linear 
region, until the onset of gain compression, and at a certain point gain reduces by 
1 dB that is the standard metric for gain compression. In contrast the red plot 
depicts PIM3 versus RF input power, with PIM3 increasing 3 dB for every 1 dB 
change in PRF1 and PRF2. Since the IM product power increases faster than the 
fundamental signal power, a point exists where the two levels would intercept 
each other in the absence of compression, this is called the intercept point. The 
input (IIP3) and output intercept (OIP3) points, respectively, are the RF input and 
IF output power levels where the two linear lines cross each other, are relate to 
each other as OIP3 = IIP3 + gain.   
Psignal 
PIM3
kT0
f 2
f1
2 f1- f2 
2 f 2-f1
Freq 

76 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The linear transfer curve for Pout vs. Pin depicted in Figure 2.28 is 
approximate. Due to the interaction of IM products at 2f1-f2 and 2f2-f1 generated 
by third, fifth, and higher order terms, the PIM3 versus input power plot can have 
curvature at low input power levels. The intermodulation suppression, (S), in 
terms of decibels below the carrier, dBc, is in (2.32). The output intercept point is 
defined by (2.32), in terms of IM suppression, which equals PIM3 – PIF2 or PIM3 – 
PIF1 as depicted in Figure 2.28, and described by (2.31).  
 
2
3
1
3
IF
IM
IF
IM
P
P
P
P
S




   dBc    
 
                
       (2.31) 
2
1
3
2
2
IF
IF
P
S
P
S
OIP




    dBm    
 
 
 
       (2.32) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.28 
The black plots show IF output power versus RF input power; the red plots show IM3 
output power versus RF input power.   
 
 
 
2.6 NOISE 
 
The topic of noise in mixers is very important, and has been treated in 
considerable detail [9, 10]. The following discussion gives an overview of the 
subject, with emphasis on understanding the AM and PM components of noise, 
and the determination of their respective levels.  
 
 
2.6.1 Noise Sources 
 
Two main types of noise exist: Johnson and shot. Johnson noise is generated 
thermally in all lossy conductive elements such as resistors. Shot noise is caused 
by energy changes in carriers as they cross a junction. Current in a homogeneous 
semiconductor (i.e., without a junction does not generate shot noise). These two 
IIP3 
Pin - dBm 
Pout, PIM3 - dBm 
P1dB 
1dB 
OIP3 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
77 
noise sources are characterized as power densities in watts per hertz. Noise 
generated internally to the receiver includes thermal and shot noise from each 
component.  Noise is also introduced by the local oscillator at each mixing stage. 
And if the receiver contains baseband components, quantization noise and jitter in 
the analog to digital converter (ADC) are also introduced. Noise effects occurring 
at RF and IF are discussed in this chapter but baseband ones are not. 
A distinction exists between interfering signals and noise. Interfering 
signals external to a receiver include leakage from the transmitter if the system in 
question is a transceiver, atmospheric static, and nearby radiators such as 60 Hz 
power lines, electric motors, broadcast radio stations, and computers. Interfering 
signals within a receiver include the local oscillator fundamental and harmonics, 
clock signals for digital devices, and signals caused by instability in active 
devices. These signals can pass to the receiver output through the main signal path 
due to insufficient filtering and isolation. They can also reach the output via 
common interconnections to DC power, clock and control signals, and due to 
insufficient shielding such as is common in printed circuit cards. The common 
property of these interferers is they all comprise discrete frequencies; in contrast, 
noise is continuously distributed over frequency and described by a power spectral 
density. Interfering signals sometimes behave like noise and can be approximated 
as a power spectral density, but strictly speaking they are not noise.        
 
 
2.6.1.1 Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) 
 
Thermal noise is modeled in systems as additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). 
It is additive due to the assumption of system linearity, which means that 
superposition holds. It is called white due to the assumption of constant noise 
power spectral density across frequency. And it is Gaussian because the 
probability of the noise voltage or current exceeding a given level is modeled as 
having a Gaussian distribution, which averages to zero. Actual noise levels vary 
with frequency, so the AWGN model is used by reducing the bandwidth to a point 
where it is discussed in terms of spectral density instead of a finite BW.  
The variance of Johnson noise equals the noise power in watts/Hz, and 
the standard deviation equals the rms terminal voltage in volts/√(Hz) referenced to 
one ohm. Since the mean value is zero, the standard deviation equates to the rms 
value. These levels obey the relation P = V2/R, where R is the terminal resistance, 
and P corresponds to available noise power, Pn in (2.33). Thermal noise power 
spectral density is proportional to temperature, with the proportionality factor 
being Boltzmann’s constant, k. Available noise power is calculated by multiplying 
noise power density, kT, by the noise bandwidth, B. The familiar version of 
thermal noise power density of -174 dBm/Hz is obtained by setting T equal to T0 = 
290 °K.    

78 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
kTB
Pn 
   (Watts)    
 
                    
    (2.33) 
 
 
 
 
 
Pn = Available thermal noise power, watts  
 
k= Boltzmann’s constant = 1.38 x 10-23 J/K 
 
T = Physical temperature in degrees Kelvin, °K 
 
B = Equivalent noise bandwidth, Hz 
 
The noise power in dBm/Hz is given by: 
 
 
)
log(
10
)
log(
10
)
(
0
0
B
kT
dBm
Pn


 
 
 
 
       
 
)
log(
10
174
B



   dBm 
 
   
      
    (2.34) 
Pn 0 = Thermal noise power in watts at T0 = 290 °K 
 
Thermal equilibrium requires that thermal noise power density be equal 
in objects having equal physical temperatures. A result of this is that if two objects 
at the same temperature have different terminal resistances, then they have the 
same thermal noise power but different noise voltages. A higher noise voltage will 
be across the terminals of the object with higher resistance and can increase the 
effects of unwanted noise. For example, placing a high-value resistor in series 
with the tune voltage connection to a VCO can degrade phase noise. 
A model representing an AWGN signal source is depicted in Figure 2.29. 
RG is the source impedance of the voltage generator, and RL is the load resistance. 
The noise voltage across RL to ground is given by (2.35).   
 
 
G
L
L
G
G
L
L
n
L
R
R
R
kTBR
R
R
R
V
V




4
 , Volt           
    (2.35) 
 
RG and RL form a voltage divider that halves the open circuit generator 
voltage, Vn, and if RL = RG then the maximum available power is transferred to the 
load. Assuming RL = RG the resulting noise power at the load, PnL, equals kTB:  
  
 
kTB
R
V
P
L
L
nL


2
, Watt 
 
          
    (2.36) 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.29 
Representation of noisy signal source. 
 
+
RG
RL
Vn
VL

 
System Parameters and Performance 
79 
 AWGN voltage in the sidebands about a carrier comprise amplitude 
modulated (AM) and phase modulated (PM) noise components that are modeled 
as being in quadrature with each other, and with each having half of the available 
power  [11, 12]. Robins [12], gives a detailed discussion of this by arguing that 
one can represent narrow band noise as a sinusoid for a period of time equal to 
1/B, where B is the noise bandwidth. For example, in a 1 Hz bandwidth, it is valid 
to use a sinusoidal representation of noise voltage for approximately up to one 
second. And during a given second the voltage of a noise sideband spaced p 
rad/sec away from the carrier frequency ,  can be approximated as: 
 
 
t
p
V
t
v
n
n
)
sin(
)
(



    
 
     
 
      (2.37) 
   
If this noise voltage is superposed with the carrier voltage, the resulting 
total voltage is: 
 
 
)
(
sin
)
(
t
v
t
V
t
v
n
c



  
    
        
     
      (2.38)
 
 
A voltage that is amplitude and phase modulated can be written as a 
sinusoid with an amplitude modulation index m(t) and phase modulation θ(t):  
 
 



)
(
sin
)
(
1
)
(
t
t
t
m
V
t
v
c




 
        
    
       (2.39) 
 
Setting (2.38) equal to (2.39), and assuming θ is small so that sin(θ) ≈ θ 
and Vn « Vc, the amplitude and phase modulation components are shown to be in 
quadrature with each other as in (2.40). The same result is obtained by 
generalizing (2.38) to have upper and lower sideband noise components, each 
having arbitrary amplitude and phase.    
 
    


pt
V
V
t
m
c
n cos
)
(

     &     


pt
V
V
t
c
n sin
)
(


     
      (2.40) 
 
Equation (2.40) indicates that when phase noise voltage is at a maximum, 
amplitude noise voltage is at a minimum and vice versa. Thus, the AM and PM 
noise voltages are uncorrelated to each other, and the AM and PM components 
add in power instead of voltage. Correlated has been defined as meaning the 
respective voltage and currents are “somewhat the same;” if they are uncorrelated, 
then the variance of the sum equals the sum of the variances [9]. Or equally that 
the average value of the square of the sum equals the average value of the sum of 
the squares. For example the rms value of [sin(x) + cos(x)]2 equals the rms value 
of sin(x)2 plus the rms value of cos(x)2. This is because the rms value of the 
2sin(x)cos(x) cross product is zero. Thus, given a thermal noise floor of -174 
dBm/Hz at T0=290K, the amplitude and phase noise power densities each equal -

80 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
177 dBm/Hz. The caveat is that this may be true at the input to a device, but due 
to compression and other effects such as AM-to-PM conversion, the AM and PM 
components may not be equal at the device output.  
 Real world RF and LO sources applied to a mixer have noise that can 
propagate through the mixer and appear at the mixer IF output. The mixer also 
generates noise that appears at the IF output. These noise signals have frequency 
components that include sidebands about the LO fundamental. The sidebands 
spaced from the LO by an amount equal to the IF mix with the LO and convert to 
the IF. These are at the RF and image frequencies, and comprise the main source 
of mixer noise. Noise sidebands about the LO harmonics can also convert to the 
IF and increase the noise level [13]. In certain cases, the RF and LO inputs to the 
mixer can be correlated (e.g., in a synthesizer where the RF and LO are derived 
from the same reference). This can cause unexpected results (e.g., obtaining an 
output IF with greater than the expected 3 dB increase in phase noise when two 
input signals mix together having equal phase noise levels).    
 
 
2.6.2 NOISE FIGURE 
 
Noise figure, F, is defined as the ratio of total output noise power density 
including internally generated noise, to total output noise power density excluding 
internally generated noise. It equals the ratio of thermal noise power density, kT, 
plus input referred noise power density of the device, N, to the thermal noise 
power density alone given in (2.42). The phrase noise factor is sometimes used in 
place of noise figure. According to the IEEE definition the two are 
interchangeable; noise figure is used for the rest of this chapter and can be 
expressed in terms of dB: 
 
 
)
log(
10
F
FdB 
 
 
 
 
      
    (2.41)      
 
 Noise power in a system is characterized in absolute terms by a noise 
temperature, T, or equivalently by noise figure. Since kT noise density is half AM 
and half PM, noise figure includes both AM and PM noise components. Thus it is 
important to understand the different means through which AM and PM noise 
propagate through a system, which is developed later in this chapter. Figure 2.30 
depicts the application of kT to the system input, along with N, the input-referred 
internally generated noise power density of the stage. The output noise power 
density, Nout, equals the sum of these two noise components multiplied by the 
device gain, G. 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.30 
Thermal and input referred noise applied to a single stage. 
 
Equivalent noise temperature, T, alone can be used to characterize 
thermal noise power density, because T is proportional to noise power density. 
Noise temperature is commonly used to describe noise power for very low noise 
systems such as for radio astronomy. As T goes to zero, noise figure goes to 1, so 
distinguishing between 0.1 and 0.001 dB noise figure becomes awkward.  
An older definition of noise figure is the ratio of input signal-to-noise-
ratio, SNR, to output SNR, which is equivalent to the earlier definition as 
demonstrated by (2.42).  It is important to note the ratio of input referred device 
noise density, N, to kT equals noise figure less 1 (i.e., N/kT=F-1).   
 
 
kT
N
kT
N
kT
kT
N
B
N
kT
G
GP
kTB
P
SNR
SNR
F
out
in
in
out
in








1
)
(
)
(
  (2.42) 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F = Noise figure of the stage 
 
SNR = Ratio of signal power to noise power  
 
Pin = Input signal power,   W  
 
G = Transducer power gain (typically in 50 ohms) 
 
kT = Input thermal noise power density   W/Hz 
 
B = Equivalent noise bandwidth,    Hz 
 
N = Noise power density of the stage,   W/Hz 
 
 
2.6.3 Cascaded Noise Figure 
 
The cumulative noise figure of two or more cascaded devices is described by the 
Friis equation, given the gain and noise figure of the individual stages. Equation 
(2.43) gives the Friis equation for two cascaded devices. Conjugate match 
between stages is assumed, but the equation is also valid for F measured in a 
system with a standard impedance, and using transducer gain, G, in the equation, 
which is gain measured with source and load terminations equal to the standard 
impedance, as was the case when the noise figure of an individual stage is 
measured [14, appendix N].   
kT
N
Nout = G(kT+N)

82 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
1
2
1
1
G
F
F
Ftotal



 
           
 
     
       (2.43)     
    
 
 
Ftotal = Noise figure of the two devices cascaded together 
 
Fn= Noise factor of the nth device 
 
Gn = Gain of the nth device 
 
The derivation of (2.43) is straightforward. By inspection of Figure 2.31, 
the total output noise power density is G1G2(kT+N1) + G2N2 . Since noise figure 
equals the total output noise power density referred to the input, divided by 
thermal noise density kT, cumulative noise figure is given by (2.44). The same 
approach can be used to derive the cascaded noise figure equation for multiple 
devices; however, it is generally simpler to apply (2.43) repetitively to two stages 
at a time, working from input to output of multiple cascaded devices.  
We note in (2.44) that for stage 2 only its device noise power density, N2 
is included in the cascaded equation. Because F2 originally included kT when F2 
was measured, kT is subtracted from F2. When calculating cascaded noise figure 
thermal noise power density kT is included only once at the input to the first stage. 
We will see this again with cascaded phase noise. 
 
 
kT
G
G
N
G
N
kT
G
G
Ftotal
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
)
(



 
 
 
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
)
(
G
F
F
kT
G
N
kT
N
kT
Ftotal






               
       (2.44)      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.31 
Noise sources for two cascaded stages.  
 
If gain compression is present one may include the reduced gain in the 
Friis equation as a rough approximation, but with the caveat that significant error 
can be introduced. The noise figure of a compressed stage is generally higher than 
when operated linearly due to AM to PM conversion, and harmonics can be 
generated whose noise sidebands can convert in frequency to the IF and increase 
system noise figure.     
kT
N1
N2
Nout = G1G2(kT+N1)+G2N2

 
System Parameters and Performance 
83 
2.6.3.1 Image Noise 
 
Noise power at the signal and image frequencies converts to the IF output 
frequency. The signal and image frequencies are the mirror image of each other 
about the LO frequency. For IF output frequency equaling fRF – fLO or fLO – fRF, the 
image frequency equals 2fLO– fRF. For IF output frequency equaling fRF + fLO, the 
image frequency equals 2fLO+ fRF.  When the signal and image noise levels into 
the mixer are equal, and the image and signal paths have equal conversion loss 
through the mixer, then the cumulative system noise figure can increase by up to 3 
dB over the noise figure with no image noise present. The noise figure of the 
mixer itself remains unchanged, but the noise figure of the system can increase, 
and the increased system noise figure can be attributed to an effective mixer noise 
figure. If an amplifier, or a cascade of devices, having gain at both signal and 
image frequencies precedes the mixer, then depending on the relative gain and 
noise figure at the signal and image frequencies, the cumulative system noise 
figure can increase by much more than 3 dB.  
The increase to system noise figure caused by frequency converted image 
noise can be analyzed using two approaches that provide the same analytical 
result. The first approach uses the attenuator noise model in which the mixer is 
modeled as an attenuator with a characteristic temperature depending on its noise 
level [9]. An application of this is to analyze noise in the image band. This treats 
the mixer’s signal, image, and IF ports as the three ports of a passive power 
divider, with the noise power levels at the three ports subject to thermal 
equilibrium. The signal and image share the same physical port, but for the 
purposes of analysis they are considered to be separate. As depicted in Figure 
2.32, the input-referred noise power density of the mixer is NSSB; kTR is the 
thermal noise power density at the signal frequency; and kTI is the thermal noise 
power density at the image. Both kTR and kTI are from the source resistance at the 
mixer RF input port. Since the thermal noise is broadband, it can be assumed that 
kTR equals kTI.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.32 
SSB mixer noise block diagram. 
 
The mixer is passive so it can be modeled as a passive three port 
attenuator as depicted in Figure 2.33. The attenuator has gain GI between ports 1 
and 3, and gain GR between ports 2 and 3. Let port 1 correspond to the image 
kTI
Ʃ
kTR
NSSB
Nout

84 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
input, port 2 corresponds to the signal input, and port 3 corresponds to the IF 
output. Thus GI and GR, respectively, are the image and signal gain through the 
attenuator, with GI + GR  ≤ 1. Image thermal noise power density, kTI is incident at 
port1; signal thermal noise power density, kTR and the input referred device noise 
power density, NSSB, are incident at port 2; Nout is at port 3. Nout equals the noise 
power density, kTL directed back toward the stage from the output load at port 3. 
Thermal equilibrium causes these to relate to each other as described in (2.45). 
The resulting expression for NSSB is given by (2.46).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.33 
Three port attenuator model. 
 
 


R
R
SSB
I
I
L
out
G
kT
N
G
kT
kT
N




  
        
       (2.45) 
 
If 
T
T
T
T
L
R
I



, where T is the physical temperature of the 
terminations and attenuator, then the noise power density referred to the attenuator 
input at port 2 is:  
 
 
R
R
I
SSB
G
G
G
kT
N
)
1(



 
 
        
       
       (2.46) 
 
The total output noise power density for an amplifier cascaded with a 
mixer as shown in Figure 2.34 is given by: 
 
 
r
SSB
i
i
i
i
r
r
r
r
out
G
N
G
G
N
kT
G
G
N
kT
N
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
)
(
)
(





   (2.47) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.34 
Cascaded amplifier and mixer using attenuator model. 
 
Recalling the definition of noise figure, F = Nout/GkT, combining (2.46) 
and (2.47), and setting TI  = TR = T, we obtain the expression for total noise figure: 
 
kT I 
 1  
3 N out  
 
NSSB + kTR   2  
kTI
Ʃ
kTR
NSSB
Nout
N1I
N1R
G1I
G1R
G2I
G2R

 
System Parameters and Performance 
85 
 
R
R
R
I
R
R
I
I
I
R
total
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
F
F
F
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1





      
 
       (2.48)     
 
Setting 1/G2R =  L2R = F2R, the final version is: 
 
 
R
R
I
R
R
R
I
I
I
R
total
G
G
G
F
G
G
G
G
F
F
F
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1




 
 
          (2.49) 
 
 
In the limiting case where G1I = G1R , F1I = F1R, and G2I = G2R , (2.49) 
reduces to (2.50). Alternately if mixer image gain G2I = 0, then (2.49) reduces to 
the Friis (2.43) as expected. 
 
 
1
2
1
2
2
G
F
F
Ftotal



 
 
  
 
       
       (2.50)
 
          
The second approach to analyzing the contribution of image noise to 
overall system noise figure is to consider an effective mixer noise figure that 
includes the gain and noise figure at the image frequency of the device or cascade 
of devices preceding the mixer. Starting with noise figure given by (2.42) the 
measured noise figure is  F = (kT + N) / kT.  N is the device noise power density 
referred to the mixer RF input. The thermal image noise power density present at 
the mixer input when the mixer noise figure was characterized is subtracted and 
replaced by the cumulative noise power density delivered to the mixer image port 
by the preceding stages. Referring to Figure 2.34 the net noise power density 
incident at the mixer image port is: 
 
 

1
1
1

I
I
I
F
G
kT
  
 
  
 
 
      (2.51) 
 
This noise power density referred to the mixer RF input is: 
 
 


R
I
I
I
I
G
G
F
G
kT
2
2
1
1
1

 
 
 
 
 
       (2.52) 
 
This additional noise power density at the mixer RF input is included to 
obtain the effective mixer noise figure: 
 

86 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 


R
R
I
I
I
I
SSB
R
effective
kT
G
G
F
G
kT
N
kT
F
2
2
1
1
1




 
 
      (2.53) 
 
Setting TR = TI = T, the final version of the effective mixer noise figure 
becomes:  
 
 


R
I
I
I
R
effective
G
G
F
G
F
F
2
2
1
1
2
1



 
 
 
       (2.54) 
 
The total system noise figure is: 
 
 
R
effective
R
Total
G
F
F
F
1
1
1



 
 
 
 
       (2.55) 
 
Combining (2.54) and (2.55) gives (2.56), which is the same as (2.49) for 
the total system noise figure derived using the attenuator model.   
 
 
R
R
I
R
R
R
I
I
I
R
Total
G
G
G
F
G
G
G
G
F
F
F
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1




 
 
       (2.56) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This method of analyzing the increase in system noise figure due to 
image noise is valid for active mixers as well as passive, in contrast to the 
attenuator based model that uses thermal equilibrium based on the assumption of a 
passive mixer. Equations (2.49) and (2.56) can be configured to represent the 
conventional Friis equation with an additional factor, ΔF [14]: 
 
 
R
R
R
total
G
F
F
F
F
1
2
1
1





 
           
 
        
         (2.57) 
Where     


R
I
I
I
G
G
G
F
F
2
2
1
1
1



  
 
 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
87 
2.6.4 LO AM Noise 
 
In addition to incident thermal noise and noise generated by each stage, the LO 
applied to a mixer can also impart its amplitude and phase noise, sometimes 
causing the overall system noise figure to increase by many dB above the 
expected value. AM and PM noise sidebands about the LO behave differently in 
how they transfer to the IF in the mixing process. The upper and lower AM noise 
sidebands mix with the LO and convert to the IF, thus AM noise is generally 
relevant at frequencies offset from the LO by an amount equal to the IF. In 
contrast, phase noise transfers from LO to the IF carrier directly with the same 
relative level in dBc/Hz, thus phase noise is generally relevant at frequencies close 
to the LO carrier.  
Figure 2.35 depicts the level of noise power relative to carrier power as a 
function of offset frequency from the carrier. The relative noise decreases as offset 
increases, with three zones having different slopes intersecting each other at two 
characteristic points, the flicker noise corner frequency, and at f0/2Q equal to the 
oscillating frequency, f0, divided by the oscillator unloaded Q. The 1/f noise has 
both AM and PM components. It is often assumed that the limiting action in an 
oscillator removes the AM noise, but many types of oscillators have significant 
levels of AM noise that can propagate up through the LO chain and into the mixer.  
It is prudent to perform an analysis to quantify the increase in system noise figure 
caused by LO AM noise. The LO AM noise sidebands, offset from the LO by an 
amount equal to the IF, convert and add to the noise at the IF frequency, and can 
pose a serious problem if the LO AM noise is large, or if the gain and noise figure 
in the signal path preceding the mixer are low.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                              
sig
P
FkT
                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.35 
Relative noise power versus offset frequency in an oscillator. 
 
Offset Frequency, fm 
Relative Noise level 
(dBc/Hz) 
f0/2Q 
1/f - flicker 
9 dB/octave 
6 dB/octave 

88 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
In wideband systems the LO frequency tuning range generally precludes 
the use of filters to remove LO AM noise; however, if the tuning range of the LO 
is sufficiently narrow a filter can be added between the LO buffer amplifier and 
the mixer to reject the AM noise. The noise power density of the LO chain is 
calculated by multiplying the gain and noise figure of the LO chain with the 
thermal noise power density, kT, incident at the LO chain input.  
The total system noise figure for Figure 2.34 including image and LO 
noise is given by (2.58) through (2.60).   
 
 
 
R
R
LO
OUT
age
OUT
RF
OUT
total
G
kTG
N
N
N
F
2
1
,
Im
,
,



 
    
      (2.58) 
 
Nout,LO is the noise power density at the IF output of the mixer resulting 
from LO noise. If this LO noise power approaches or exceeds the level of the 
noise from the signal path that is already present at the mixer IF output, then the 
system noise figure will increase. For example, if the noise power density at the 
mixer output without any LO noise contribution equals the LO noise power 
density contribution at the mixer output, then the increase to system noise figure 
will be 3.0 dB. Nout,LO is due to frequency conversion and leakage, and includes 
AM noise at the upper and lower sidebands of the LO that convert to the IF 
frequency, and AM and PM noise already at the IF frequency that leaks through 
the mixer. All three components appear at the mixer IF output, and can be written 
as: 
 



USB
C
LO
LO
LSB
C
LO
LO
LO
OUT
G
kTG
F
G
kTG
F
N
)
(
5.0
)
(
5.0
,
 
   
 
 

IF
LI
LO
LO
G
kTG
F

       
 
 
 
       (2.59)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FLO and GLO in (2.59) are the cumulative noise figure and gain of the LO 
chain ending at the mixer LO input, at the frequencies corresponding to the lower 
noise sideband (LSB), upper noise sideband (USB), and IF. FLO includes the noise 
power from the LO source, which can be modeled by making the first stage of the 
LO chain represent the LO source by setting its gain to 0dB, and noise figure 
equal to the dB difference between the output noise power density of the LO 
source and kT. GC is the mixer conversion gain for noise power at the LO 
sidebands that convert to the mixer IF output; and GLI is the reciprocal of the 
mixer LO-IF isolation. The 0.5 factors in the LSB and USB terms indicate that 
only the AM half of the noise power is included in these two components. 
Combining (2.58) and (2.59) gives the total noise figure for the system of Figure 
2.34:   

 
System Parameters and Performance 
89 







R
R
LSB
C
LO
LO
R
R
I
r
R
R
I
I
I
R
total
G
G
G
G
F
G
G
G
F
G
G
G
G
F
F
F
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
)
(
5.0
1
 
    
 
 
 
 


R
R
LI
LO
LO
USB
C
LO
LO
G
G
G
G
F
G
G
F
2
1
)
(
5.0


   
      (2.60)
 
  
 
One final note about the conversion gain, GC, its reciprocal, Lc, can be 
approximated as the product of the mixer LO-to-RF isolation and mixer 
conversion loss. This represents the LO AM noise leaking from the LO port to the 
RF port, and then converting to the IF. Alternately, one can measure LC by 
injecting a small signal tone into the mixer LO port at the noise sideband 
frequency, and then measure its conversion loss to the IF frequency at the mixer 
IF output.   
 
 
2.6.5 Phase Noise 
 
Phase noise is associated with both the RF and LO [12,15]. It is conventionally 
defined as the ratio of single sideband (SSB) phase noise to carrier power, and is 
denoted by L(fm) in units of 1/Hz, and by LdB(fm) =10 log{ L(fm) } in dBc/Hz. 
Ideally L(fm) is a small fractional number, and LdB(fm) is a large negative number. 
Thermal kT noise is half AM and PM, thus the phase noise component of the 
room temperature thermal noise floor equals kT0/2 = -177 dBm/Hz. If a carrier is 
passed through a frequency multiplier, the output phase noise is higher than the 
input by 20log(M), where M is the frequency multiplication factor. The resulting 
increase in noise power at sidebands about the carrier comes from the carrier 
itself, resulting in reduced power at the carrier center frequency.  
 The LO phase noise transfers directly to the IF output. So given a 
noiseless RF signal mixing with an LO having a particular phase noise spectrum, 
meaning its dBc/Hz level versus offset frequency, the IF will have the same phase 
noise spectrum relative to the IF carrier power also in dBc/Hz.  The phase noise 
spectrum of the RF input signal also transfers to the IF directly, as well as phase 
noise internally generated by the mixer. While the LO phase noise is the dominant 
contributor, we will see that filtering can be added to the LO chain so that at 
higher offset frequencies the RF phase noise may dominate. The addition of these 
components is in watts instead of volts since these components of phase noise are 
assumed to not be correlated with each other. For example, if the phase noise for 
LO and RF are both at -110 dBc/Hz at 100 kHz offset from the respective center 
frequencies, then the IF phase noise will be -107 dBc/Hz at the same offset, 
assuming internally generated phase noise power is negligible. Furthermore, the 
LO and RF phase noise at the IF frequency leaking through the mixer add to the 

90 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
IF phase noise. Again, the addition is in terms of watts since both are assumed to 
not be correlated with each other, nor with the other components discussed 
previously.   
 
 
2.6.6 Cascaded Phase Noise 
 
Cumulative phase noise for a number of cascaded stages can be calculated 
similarly to cascaded noise figure, but the effects of frequency multiplication, 1/f 
corner frequency, and gain compression must be included [11, 16]. And for 
systems having mixers, it is important to include the contributions from LO phase 
noise.  
Noise figure of each device is used in the calculation of cascaded phase 
noise. Normally noise figure is of concern at a wide offset from the carrier 
frequency, where noise power can be approximated as constant with frequency. In 
contrast, phase noise is normally analyzed closer to the carrier frequency, where 
the 1/f flicker noise exhibited by some resistor and semiconductor devices 
becomes important. Output phase noise of a device widely offset from the carrier 
is generally constant at FkT/2 watts/Hz. The 1/f slope can be modeled by 
multiplying this FkT/2 noise floor by (1+fc/fm), where fc is the estimated corner 
frequency and fm is the measurement offset frequency. If better accuracy is 
needed, then the output phase noise levels can be measured directly at various 
offset frequencies. In addition, gain as a function of offset frequency, G(fm), for 
each stage is also included, for example to model filter rejection of noise 
sidebands.   
As with conventional cascaded noise figure, thermal noise power is only 
applied to the input of the first stage. Thus when considering cascaded phase noise 
for two or more stages, the transfer function giving output phase noise, Lout(fm) in 
terms of input phase noise Lin(fm), must be derived with the kT0/2 component 
being added only once at the input to the first stage in the cascade. When 
calculating phase noise, input noise temperature is normally set to equal T0 = 290 
°K.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.36 
Noise sources applied to the jth stage within a cascade. 
 
In calculating cascaded phase noise, (Fj-1) is used for each stage, except 
the first one that includes uses F1 to include input thermal noise. Figure 2.36 
shows the noise sources involved in analyzing cascaded phase noise. The first and 
kT0/2
N1(fm)
Lout,j(fm)
Nj(fm)
Lout,1(fm)
Nin,j(fm)
1
j

 
System Parameters and Performance 
91 
jth stages are shown. The input noise power, Nin,j, is the output noise power from 
the preceding stage, and includes the kT0/2 thermal noise power density 
component passed up through the chain. Nin,j(fm) is the input referred phase noise 
generated by the jth device, and Lout,j(fm) is its output phase noise.    
Equation (2.61) defines output phase noise Lout,j(fm) in terms of Figure 
2.36. Nin,j varies with offset frequency fm, so it is designated as Nin,j(fm). The same 
is true for internally generated noise, Nj, and gain, Gj. To include the option of 
frequency multiplication, the frequency multiplication factor, Mj, is included. For 
example, if the jth stage is a frequency doubler, then Mj = 2. But for an amplifier, 
attenuator, or filter Mj = 1. Cj is the input carrier power at zero offset from the 
carrier frequency, f0.   
 
 


)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
0
,
2
,
f
G
C
f
G
f
N
f
N
M
f
L
j
j
m
j
m
j
m
j
in
j
m
j
out


                           (2.61) 
 
 
The parameters in the equation are defined as follows: 
 
Lout,j(fm) = Output phase noise (ratio) at offset frequency fm, 1/Hz 
Mj = Frequency multiplication factor of stage j 
Nin,j(fm)  = Phase noise power from preceding stage, W/Hz 
Nj(fm) = Internally generated noise power at fm, W/Hz 
f0 = Carrier center frequency, Hz 
fm = Offset from carrier center frequency, Hz 
Gj(f0) = Gain of stage j  at carrier center frequency 
Gj(fm) = Gain of stage j at offset frequency fm 
Cj = Carrier power input to stage j at f0, W 
 
 
The definition of noise figure is F = Nout/GkT, where Nout is the total 
output noise power density including internally generated and thermal noise. Nout  
is assumed constant for large offset frequency, fm. But as fm reduces and 
approaches the carrier frequency, Nout can increase as 1/f. Thus Nout becomes a 
function of fm: Nout(fm), and can be approximated by multiplying the constant Nout 
by (1+fc/fm), where fc is the corner frequency at which output noise power doubles. 
Noise figure at wide offset from carrier, F, is similarly multiplied by (1+fc/fm), and 
becomes a function of fm, F(fm).   
 
 
0
0
1
)
(
)
(
GkT
f
f
F
GkT
f
F
f
N
m
c
m
m
out








 
               (2.62)
 
 
 
Recall that with T = T0 =290 K internally generated device noise power 
density for all stages except the first one is N = (F-1)kT0, and noise figure F = 

92 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Nout/GkT0. Combining these gives device noise power density N = Nout/G - kT0.  
Substituting in Nout(fm) from (2.62) we get device noise power density as a 
function of offset frequency, N(fm) for all stages except the first one (that does not 
have the -1 term):  
 
 
 
0
0
0
1
1
1
)
(
kT
f
f
F
kT
kT
f
f
F
f
N
m
c
m
c
m






















         
    (2.63) 
 
Recalling the definition of input phase noise is Lin(fm) = Nin/C, and 
combining (2.62) and (2.63) we get output phase noise in terms of input phase 
noise and noise figure. The ½ factor represents suppressing the AM and leaving 
only the PM noise power. Corner frequency, fc = 0 for components without 
semiconductor devices due to their lack of flicker noise. 
 





























C
f
f
F
kT
f
L
M
f
G
f
G
f
L
m
c
m
in
m
m
out
1
1
2
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
0
2
0
             (2.64) 
 
To represent output phase noise for a passive mixer, (2.64) is modified to 
become (2.65) by adding two types of LO phase noise. The first is the LO phase 
noise, LLO(fm), at offset fm multiplied by ML
2 (ML = 1 for fundamental LO) to 
represent the LO phase noise transferred directly to the IF output. The second is 
LO phase noise at the IF frequency that leaks through the mixer, represented by 
the final term in (2.65). The mixer LO to IF gain (reciprocal of isolation), GLI, is 
included in this second component. A similar contribution from the RF phase 
noise leaking to the IF output is assumed to be negligible, and thus it is not 
included.   
 
























C
f
f
F
kT
f
L
M
f
L
M
f
G
f
G
f
L
m
c
m
LO
L
m
RF
R
m
m
out
1
1
2
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
0
2
2
0
 
 
     



C
P
f
L
G
LO
IF
LO
LI
)
(
 
 
 
       (2.65) 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
93 
Excellent agreement between measured cumulative phase noise and 
(2.65) has been obtained using measured data for Schottky diode mixers, SRD 
frequency multipliers, amplifiers, filters, and attenuators. The parameters in (2.65) 
are defined as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
         
G (f0) = RF to IF gain at zero offset from carrier center frequency fo 
 
G (fm) = RF to IF gain at offset frequency fm 
LRF(fm) = RF phase noise at offset frequency fm 
LLO(fm) = LO phase noise at offset frequency fm 
LLO(fIF) = LO phase noise at the IF frequency 
MR = RF harmonic factor, MR =1 for fundamental RF 
ML = LO harmonic factor, ML =1 for fundamental LO 
F = Mixer noise figure (wide offset from carrier) 
fm = Measurement noise offset frequency 
fc = 1/f flicker noise corner frequency 
C = Input RF signal carrier power, mW 
f0 = Center frequency at zero offset  
 
 
 
 
GLI = LO to IF leakage gain at the IF (normally less than unity) 
PLO = LO carrier power incident at mixer 
 
 
2.7 NOISE AND DISTORTION IN COMMUNICATION SUBSYSTEMS 
 
An example is given to illustrate the calculation of cascaded noise figure, 
cascaded phase noise, and cascaded distortion. The example system, depicted in 
Figure 2.37, converts a 2.1 GHz RF input to a 100 MHz  IF output using a 2 GHz 
LO. The receive chain comprises a first LNA, a BPF to reduce image noise, a 
second LNA, and the mixer. The image frequency is 2fL-fR=1.9 GHz. The LO 
chain, depicted in Figure 2.38, comprises a 100 MHz crystal oscillator that 
includes a buffer amplifier, a 20x SRD frequency multiplier to produce the 2 GHz 
LO, a BPF to reject adjacent picket tones and shape phase noise, and an amplifier.  
 
 
2.7.1 System Cascaded Noise Figure 
 
To calculate cascaded noise figure, the gain and noise figure at both signal and 
image frequencies are specified for each stage, along with the L-I and R-I 
isolation of the mixer. Gain and noise figure for each stage individually and 
cumulatively are given in Table 2.2.  For simplicity gain and noise figure levels 
are the same at the signal and image frequencies for all stages in the RF chain 
except for the BPF, which has 20 dB rejection at the image frequency. The BPF 
reduces the image noise from the first LNA, but does not reduce image noise from 
the second LNA; thus, a residual amount of image noise degradation will exist 
regardless of the level of image rejection in the BPF. In contrast, if the mixer has 

94 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
image rejection (i.e., if mixer image gain is lower than mixer signal gain, then 
image noise from all stages preceding the mixer is reduced). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.37 
Super-heterodyne receiver. 
 
 
Table 2.2 
 Cascaded System Noise Figure Including Image Noise and LO AM Noise 
EACH STAGE Signal Gain Signal NF Image Gain Image NF
Isolation
Stage
GR  dB
FR   dB
GI  dB
FI   dB
IRI, ILI dB
1
LNA
15.0
1.5
15.0
1.5
2
BPF
-2.0
2.0
-22.0
22.0
3
LNA
13.0
2.0
13.0
2.0
4
Mixer
-7.0
7.5
-7.0
7.5
20.0
CUMULATIVE Signal Gain Signal NF Image Gain Image NF
Stage
GR  dB
FR   dB
GI  dB
FI   dB
1
LNA
15.00
1.50
15.00
1.50
2
BPF
13.00
1.56
-7.00
8.06
3
LNA
26.00
1.64
6.00
9.70
4
Mixer
19.00
1.68
-1.00
10.21
Results Comparison
Total NF  dB
   Baseline (no image or LO noise)
1.68
   Baseline plus image noise
1.94
   Baseline plus image & LO noise
1.95
 
            
The first two columns of Table 2.3 show that if the loss of the BPF goes 
from -22 to -2 dB, giving a 20 dB reduction in image rejection, then total NF 
increases from 1.97 dB to 4.68 dB. Columns 3 and 4 show that if image 
conversion loss of the mixer increases from 7 dB to 17 dB, equating to image 
rejection increasing from 0 dB to 10 dB, then the noise figure reduces from 1.97 
to 1.73 dB. Columns 5 and 6 show that if the mixer R-I isolation drops from 20 
dB to 0 dB, increasing IF noise originating from LO AM sideband noise, then 
total NF increases from 1.97 dB to 4.01 dB. It is apparent that careful 
consideration must be given to managing image and LO AM noise to minimize 
their impact to system noise figure.  
The results of Tables 2.2 and 2.3 were obtained using (2.60) and (2.66), 
which is the Friis equation for four cascaded stages. The 1.68 dB noise figure 
shown is the system noise figure without image and LO noise.   
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
LO 
IF 
RF 
BPF 
 
LNA2 
LNA1 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
95 
Table 2.3 
Total System NF from Table 2.2 with Variations in BPF Image Gain, Mixer Image Gain, and Mixer 
Isolation 
 
              
 
The first and second affect image noise contribution; the third affects LO noise 
contribution. 
 
3
2
1
4
2
1
3
1
2
1
1
1
1
G
G
G
F
G
G
F
G
F
F
Ftotal







         
 
       
      (2.66)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68
.1
10
1
10
10
1
10
10
1
10
10
log
10
10
13
2
15
10
5.7
10
2
15
10
2
10
15
10
2
10
5.1





















dB
Ftotal
 
 
 
Cumulative NF including image noise was calculated using (2.49) and 
the data of Table 2.2. First, cumulative gain and NF for signal and image paths for 
stages 1 through 3 in Figure 2.37 were calculated using (2.43). These cumulative 
results are designated as G13R, G13I, F13R, F13I, and assigned to the LNA stage 
preceding the mixer of Figure 2.34. The four parameter values are used with 
(2.49) as shown in (2.67). Gain and NF values with a single digit index refer to the 
designated stage of Figure 2.37 (e.g., G4I refers to image gain for stage 4). Ftotal = 
1.94 dB as in Table 2.2 for baseline plus image noise. 
 
R
R
I
R
R
I
I
R
total
G
G
G
F
G
G
F
F
F
13
4
4
4
14
14
13
13
1




 
 
 
      (2.67) 
 
939
.1
10
10
1
10
10
10
10
log
10
10
26
10
7
7
10
5.7
10
19
10
1
696
.9
10
645
.1



















dB
Ftotal
 
Noise Figure versus Image Gain and Mixer Isolation
Img Gain Total NF Img Gain Total NF
Mixer Isola Total NF
BPF dB
dB 
Mixer dB
dB
IRI , ILI  dB
dB 
-2
4.68 
-5 
2.11
0
4.01
-7
3.00 
-7 
1.97
5
2.71
-12 
2.30 
-9 
1.87
10
2.20
-17 
2.05 
-11 
1.81
15
2.02
-22 
1.97 
-13 
1.77
20
1.97
-27 
1.94 
-15 
1.75
25
1.95
-32 
1.93 
-17 
1.73
30
1.94

96 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Cumulative NF including LO and image noise was calculated using 
(2.60). First, the cumulative gain and NF of the LO chain are obtained, 
respectively, at the noise sideband frequencies, and at the IF. Next, the gain for 
LO sideband noise converting to the IF, designated Gc in (2.60), is estimated as 
equal to the mixer conversion gain, G4R= -7dB, added to the mixer L-to-R gain 
(reciprocal of isolation), GLR = -20 dB, summing to -27 dB. And the mixer L-to-I 
gain (reciprocal of isolation), GLI = -20 dB, is used to estimate leakage of LO 
noise at the IF frequency. Equation (2.60) is broken into A, B, and C parts in 
(2.68); with the A part reused from (2.67) for the image noise contribution, the B 
part is the contribution from LO AM noise sidebands, and the C part is the LO 
noise at the IF that leaks from the mixer LO to IF ports. Total gain and noise 
figure for the B part are GLOtotal = -30 dB, and FLOtotal = 48 dB. The total gain and 
noise figure for the C part at the 100 MHz IF are obtained by assuming the noise 
level at the output of the BPF is at kT0 = -174 dBm/Hz.  So the total gain and 
noise figure are that of the amplifier, which are assumed to be 10 dB and 5 dB, 
respectively, giving GLOtotal = 10 dB and FLOtotal = 5 dB at 100 MHz. Ftotal = 1.95 
dB as in Table 2.2 for baseline plus image and LO noise. 
 


954
.1
log
10




C
B
A
dB
Ftotal
  dB 
 
      (2.68) 
 
563
.1
10 10
939
.1


A
 
 








2
2
4
4
14
LR
R
LR
R
R
LOtotal
LOtotal
G
G
G
G
G
F
G
B
 
 
001585
.0
10
10
10
20
7
10
)
19
48
30
(













B
 
 
003981
.0
10
10
)
19
20
5
10
(
14






R
LI
LOtotal
LOtotal
G
G
F
G
C
 
 
 
2.7.2  System Cascaded Phase Noise 
 
The LO chain is first analyzed, and then the LO results are applied to the RF chain 
analysis. The LO chain is depicted in Figure 2.38, starting with a 100 MHz crystal 
oscillator with an integrated buffer amplifier, the output of which is applied to the 
SRD frequency multiplier to generate a 2 GHz tone. With a frequency 
multiplication factor, M, equal to 20, the phase noise increases by 20log(M) = 26 
dB. The narrowband BPF passes the 2 GHz carrier, and rejects phase noise as 
offset frequency increases. The amplifier stage has 20 dB gain and 5 dB noise 
figure, and provides +18 dBm output power to pump the mixer.  

 
System Parameters and Performance 
97 
Table 2.4 gives gain and NF for each stage individually, and phase noise 
and noise power cumulatively. The rows give the parameters of interest: 
frequency multiplication factor, 1/f corner frequency, carrier output power, gain, 
noise figure, cumulative SSB phase noise, and cumulative noise power density. 
The later four are broken out by offset frequency. The first stage is the crystal 
oscillator, with +20 dBm carrier output power, and phase noise ranging from -110 
dBc/Hz at 100 Hz offset to -176 dBc/Hz at 100 MHz offset. Oscillator noise 
figure and noise power density are calculated using the carrier output power, SSB 
phase noise, and -177 dBm/Hz noise floor.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.38  
The LO chain comprises a low frequency VCO, multiplier, filter, and amplifier. 
 
The SRD multiplier has 15 dB conversion loss, so given +20 dBm input 
power at 100 MHz, it delivers +5 dBm at 2GHz to the BPF. SRD multipliers are 
discussed in the Appendix on sampling mixers. The SRD noise figure at 100 MHz 
offset from carrier is estimated at 16 dB, equal to conversion loss plus 1 dB for 
additional noise. The (1+fc/fm) factor is applied to the wideband noise figure, 
increasing it to 46 dB at 100 Hz offset from the carrier. The corner frequency, fc, 
is estimated at 100 kHz for the SRD and the amplifier stages. Cumulative SSB 
phase noise is calculated using (2.64), and cumulative noise power density is 
calculated by adding the SSB phase noise and carrier power, both in dB. Given 
M=20, and 20log(M) = 26, the output phase noise of the SRD is 26 dB higher than 
the input phase noise from the oscillator. Noise figure levels at the various offsets 
for the oscillator are much higher than those of the SRD, swamping out the SRD 
internal noise power, so the increase in phase noise is no greater than the 
theoretical 20log(M). The BPF has 2 dB insertion loss, so given its +5 dBm input 
power, it delivers +3 dBm to the amplifier. The BPF has a gain versus offset 
frequency profile that starts at -2 dB at 100 Hz offset, decreasing to -30 dB at 100 
MHz offset. This rejects the phase noise so at 100 MHz offset it is equal to that of 
the crystal oscillator. Phase noise is calculated using (2.64). BPF output phase 
noise at 100 Hz offset is -84 dBc/Hz, same as at the SRD output; however, at 100 
MHz offset BPF output phase noise is -175.9 dBc/Hz, which is 25.9 dB lower 
than the -150 dBc/Hz at the SRD output.  
The amplifier has 15 dB gain and 3 dB noise figure. With +3 dBm input 
power it delivers +18 dBm power to the mixer. Phase noise is calculated using 
(2.64). Amplifier output phase noise at 100 Hz offset is -84 dBc/Hz, which is 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Multiplier 
BPF 
Xtal VCO 
Amp 
X20 

98 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
equal to its input phase noise from the BPF. The internal noise power of the 
amplifier at this offset is swamped out by the incident noise power from the BPF. 
However, at 100 MHz offset, the input phase noise is -175.9 dBc/Hz and output 
phase noise is -174.5 dBc, with the 1.4 dB degradation influenced by the 5 dB 
amplifier noise figure. 
 
Table 2.4  
Cascaded Phase Noise Results for the LO  
 
PHASE NOISE
LO Chain
Xtal Osc
SRD X20
BPF
Amplifier
    Freq Mult Factor
20
1
1
    1/f Corner Freq, Hz
1.00E+05
1.00E+05
    Output Pwr, dBm
20
5
3
18
Stage Gain, dB Fcenter
-15.0
-2.0
15.0
1.E+02
-15.0
-2.0
15.0
1.E+04
-15.0
-5.0
15.0
1.E+06
-15.0
-15.0
15.0
1.E+08
-15.0
-30.0
15.0
Stage Noise Figure, dB
1.E+02
87.0
46.0
2.0
33.0
1.E+04
37.0
26.4
5.0
13.4
1.E+06
23.0
16.4
15.0
3.4
1.E+08
21.0
16.0
30.0
3.0
Cum Phase Noise, dBc/Hz
1.E+02
-110.0
-84.0
-84.0
-84.0
1.E+04
-160.0
-134.0
-137.0
-137.0
1.E+06
-174.0
-148.0
-160.9
-160.9
1.E+08
-176.0
-150.0
-175.9
-174.5
Cum Noise Power, dBm/Hz
1.E+02
-90.0
-79.0
-81.0
-66.0
1.E+04
-140.0
-129.0
-134.0
-119.0
1.E+06
-154.0
-143.0
-157.9
-142.9
1.E+08
-156.0
-145.0
-172.9
-156.5  
 
Figure 2.39 shows cumulative output phase noise for each stage in the 
LO chain. The 20log(M) = 26 dB increase in phase noise caused by the SRD is 
evident. Notice that the BPF cleans up the phase noise at 100 MHz offset, 
returning it to the level it was at the crystal oscillator output. 
 
 
2.7.3 Cascaded Phase Noise – Receive Chain 
 
The receive chain to be analyzed is depicted in Figure 2.37, comprising a 1st LNA, 
BPF, 2nd LNA, and mixer. Table 2.5 has the same format as Table 2.4. Output 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
99 
phase noise for the first LNA is calculated using (2.69); which includes kT/2 
because this is the first stage of the chain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.39 
Cascaded LO phase noise at the output of each stage. 
 
 
Noise figure at wide offset is 1.5 dB and increases to 31.5 dB at 100 Hz, 
due to the (1+fc/fm) factor with fc=100kHz. The noise figure values at the various 
offsets are first calculated, and then applied to (2.69). For example, at 100 MHz 
offset noise figure, F(fm), equals 1.5 dB; gain, G1, is constant at 15 dB; and output 
carrier power, C1, is -10 dBm. Plugging these into (2.64) gives output phase noise 
at -150.5 dBc/Hz at 100 MHz offset. At 100 Hz offset, output phase noise is -
120.5 dBc/Hz, following the 30 dB increase from the 1/f profile.    
 
 
1
1
1
0
1
)
(
2
)
(
C
G
f
F
kT
f
L
m
m
out

 
 
 
                  (2.69) 
 
The BPF has 2 dB insertion loss, so given the -10 dBm input power, it 
delivers -12 dBm to the second LNA. The bandwidth of this BPF is wider than 
100 MHz, so its gain is approximated as constant across the offset frequency 
range. Phase noise is calculated using (2.64) with fc=0.  
The second LNA has 17 dB gain and 2.0 dB noise figure. With -12 dBm 
input power it delivers +5 dBm power to the mixer. Phase noise is calculated 
using (2.64). Second LNA output phase noise at 100 Hz offset is -120.3 dBc/Hz, 
which is 0.2 dB higher than its input phase noise from the BPF. 
The mixer has 7 dB conversion loss, so with +5 dBm input power it 
delivers -2 dBm to the IF load. The phase noise from the LO chain is included 
with the calculation of the mixer phase noise. As an example, the mixer output 
Output Phase Noise - LO Chain Stages
-180.0
-170.0
-160.0
-150.0
-140.0
-130.0
-120.0
-110.0
-100.0
-90.0
-80.0
-70.0
-60.0
1.E+02
1.E+03
1.E+04
1.E+05
1.E+06
1.E+07
1.E+08
Offset Freq (Hz)
Phase Noise (dBc)
1  Xtal
2  SRD
3  BPF
4  LNA
 

100 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
phase noise at 10kHz is calculated below using (2.65); including phase noise from 
the LNA/BPF/LNA preceding the mixer and from the LO chain whose noise is 
included in the calculation of cumulative phase noise at the mixer output.   
 
         
10
5
4
5
10
5.7
10
177
10
137
10
9.
139
10
7
10
7
4
10
1
1
10
10
1
10
10
10
10
10
10
)
10
(
























Hz
Lout
 
 
 
 
   









10
5
10
18
5.
174
30
10
10
 
 
 
dBc
E
dB
Hz
Lout
2.
135
)
032
.3
log(
10
)
10
(
14
4




 
 
Figure 2.40 shows cumulative output phase noise for each stage in the 
receiver chain. It is apparent that from 100 Hz to 100 kHz cumulative phase noise 
is limited by the LO chain, and from 100 kHz to 100 MHz it is limited by the 
receive chain. In the absence of improvements in the receiver chain, the excellent 
phase noise obtained using the BPF in the LO chain is underutilized. Thus, both 
the LO and RF chains need to be analyzed together to obtain optimal overall phase 
noise performance.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.40 
Cascaded LO phase noise results. 
 
 
 
 
 
Output Phase Noise - Receiver Chain Stages
-180.0
-170.0
-160.0
-150.0
-140.0
-130.0
-120.0
-110.0
-100.0
-90.0
-80.0
-70.0
-60.0
1.E+02
1.E+03
1.E+04
1.E+05
1.E+06
1.E+07
1.E+08
Offset Freq (Hz)
Phase Noise (dBc)
1  LNA
2  BPF
3  LNA
4 
Mixer

 
System Parameters and Performance 
101 
Table 2.5  
 Cascaded Receiver Phase Noise Results Including LO Phase Noise. 
 
 
   
PHASE NOISE
Receiver Chain
LNA
BPF
LNA
Mixer
    Freq Mult Factor
1
1
1
1
    1/f Corner Freq, Hz
1.00E+05
1.00E+05
1.00E+05 1.00E+05
    Output Pwr, dBm
-10
-12
5
-2
Stage Gain, dB  Fcenter
15.0
-2.0
17.0
-7.0
1.E+02
15.0
-2.0
17.0
-7.0
1.E+04
15.0
-2.0
17.0
-7.0
1.E+06
15.0
-2.0
17.0
-7.0
1.E+08
15.0
-2.0
17.0
-7.0
Stage Noise Figure, dB
1.E+02
31.5
2.0
32.0
37.5
1.E+04
11.9
2.0
12.4
17.9
1.E+06
1.9
2.0
2.4
7.9
1.E+08
1.5
2.0
2.0
7.5
Cum Phase Noise, dBc/Hz
1.E+02
-120.5
-120.5
-120.3
-84.0
1.E+04
-140.1
-140.1
-139.9
-135.2
1.E+06
-150.1
-150.0
-149.9
-149.6
1.E+08
-150.5
-150.4
-150.4
-150.3
Cum Noise Power, dBm/Hz
1.E+02
-130.5
-132.5
-115.3
-86.0
1.E+04
-150.1
-152.1
-134.9
-137.2
1.E+06
-160.1
-162.0
-144.9
-151.6
1.E+08
-160.5
-162.4
-145.4
-152.3  
 
 
2.7.4 System Cascaded Third Order Intercept Point 
 
The third order intercept point is given by (2.32) for a single device in terms of 
gain, and suppression of IM3 products relative to the output signal. 
Communication subsystems comprise many cascaded devices, or stages, so it is 
very useful to calculate the cumulative intercept point for a number of stages.  
Equation (2.70) gives the cumulative output intercept point for M 
cascaded stages in terms of the gain and output intercept point of each stage, and 
the order of intermodulation, n. OIPn is the cumulative output intercept point; 
OIPn,m is the output intercept point for mth stage; Gm is gain for the mth stage. The 
equation adds the IM3 products from each stage in phase (coherently), giving a 
conservative but realistic estimate for cumulative intercept point [17].   
 









2
/)
1
(
1
,
2
/)
1
(
,
2
/)
1
(
n
M
n
M
n
M
n
n
n
OIP
G
OIP
OIP
 
 
      (2.70) 
 


...
2
/)
1
(
2
,
1





n
M
n
M
M
OIP
G
G
 

102 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
When applied to third order IM products, cumulative OIP3 is given by 
(2.71).    
 
...
1
1
1
1
2
,3
1
1
,3
,3
3







M
M
M
M
M
M
OIP
G
G
OIP
G
OIP
OIP
  
       (2.71) 
 
 
An example calculation is given for the receive chain of Figure 2.37, with Table 
2.6 giving the gain and OIP3 of each stage. 
 
Table 2.6  
 Gain and OIP3 Values for Each Stage of the Receive Chain 
 
 
LNA 
BPF 
LNA 
Mixer 
Gain (dB) 
15.0 
-2.0 
17.0 
-7.0 
OIP3 (dBm) 
+10 
+99 
+15 
+2 
 
Using (2.71) cumulative OIP3 for the receive chain is: 
 
94
.0
10
1
10
1
10
1
10
1
log
10
)
(
10
10
2
17
7
10
99
17
7
10
15
7
10
2
3























dBm
OIP
 
 
2.8 DYNAMIC RANGE 
 
Various types of dynamic range can be defined, including spur free dynamic range 
(SFDR), instantaneous dynamic range [18], and single-signal dynamic range. 
SFDR is associated with third order two tone intercept point and noise figure. 
SFDR equals the two tone third order suppression, when the IM power level 
equals the system noise floor. Referring to Figure 2.27, the SFDR equals 
suppression, S = Psignal – PIM3, when PIM3 = Pnoise = kT0. Equation (2.72) gives the 
SFDR in terms of IIP3 in dBm, noise figure, FdB, and bandwidth, B in Hz. SFDR 
increases as IIP3 increases, and as noise bandwidth and noise figure decrease.   
 


))
(
)
log(
10
)
log(
10
(
3
2
0
3
dB
F
B
kT
IIP
SFDR




,dB     
      (2.72) 

)
(
)
log(
10
174
3
2
3
dB
F
B
IIP
SFDR




, dB 
 
 
Instantaneous dynamic range is the power ratio of the two pulsed signals 
that a radar receiver can successfully decode. Single signal dynamic range is 

 
System Parameters and Performance 
103 
normally defined as the difference between the 1 dB power compression point and 
the system noise floor. If referred to the input, then the system gain need not be 
known.   
 
 
2.9 SUMMARY 
 
This chapter discussed the basics of communications systems, including the 
important modulation schemes and their performance metrics. Emphasis was 
given to optimizing the system and the mixers used for frequency conversion to 
minimize additive noise and distortion. Both receiving and transmitting design 
methodologies were discussed, and the critical performance parameters for mixers 
were presented.   
 
 
REFERENCES   
 
[1]  
M. Muhammad, N. M. Salleh, M. S. Zakaria, V. R. Gannaphaty, M. N. 
Husain, I. M. Ibrahim, M. S. Johal, M. R. Ahmad, M. Z. A. Abdul Aziz,  
“Physical and MAC Cross Layer Design For Wireless Mesh Networks,” Asia 
Pacific Conference on Applied Electromagnetic Proceedings, 2007, pp. 1-5.  
[2]  
J. Jun, F. Xing, Z. Jing, Z. Ping, “Design of a Communication Test Set 
Physical Layer,” The 8th International Conference on Electronic Measurement 
and Instruments, ICEMI2007, pp. 2-6 to 2-10. 
[3]   Bernard Sklar, Digital Communications Fundamentals and Applications, 
New Jersey, Prentice Hall, 2nd edition, 2001. 
[4]  
A. Bruce Carlson, Communication Systems, McGraw-Hill International 
Edition, 1975, pp. 396. 
[5] 
Asad A. Abidi, “Direct-Conversion Radio Transceivers for Digital 
Communications,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, December 1995, Vol. 30, 
No. 12, pp. 1399 – 1410. 
[6]   H. C. Jen, S. C. Rose and R. G. Meyer, “A 2.2 GHz Sub-Harmonic Mixer 
for Direct-Conversion Receivers in 0.13 µm CMOS,” IEEE International Solid 
State Circuits Conference, ISSCC 2006, pp. 1840 – 1849.  
[7]  
Donald K. Weaver, “A Third Method of Generation and Detection of 
Single Side Band Signals,” Proc. IRE, 1956, Volume 44, No. 12, pp. 1703 – 1705.  
[8]   Lessing Luu and Babak Daneshrad, “An Adaptive Weaver Architecture 
Radio With Spectrum Sensing Capabilities to Relax RF Component 
Requirements,” IEEE Journal of Selected Areas on Communications, Volume 25, 
No. 3, April 2007, pp. 538 – 545.  
[9]  
Stephen Maas, Noise in Linear and Nonlinear Circuits, Artech House Inc., 
2005, Artech House, ISBN 1-58053-849-5.   

104 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[10]  A. R. Kerr, “Shot Noise in Resistive Diode Mixers and the Attenuator 
Noise Model,”  IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory & Techniques, February 
1979, Volume MTT-27, No. 2.   
[11]  Silvio A. Cardero. “Calculate the Effect of RF Building Blocks on AM and 
PM Noise,” Microwaves and RF, December 2000, pp. 56-63, 236.   
[12] W. P. Robins, Phase Noise in Signal Sources, Peter Peregrinus Ltd., IEE, 
London, UK, 1998. 
[13]  J. Phillips, K. Kundert, “Noise in Mixers, Oscillators, Samplers, and Logic 
An Introduction to Cyclostationary Noise,” Proceedings of IEEE Custom 
Integrated Circuits Conference, May 2000, pp. 431-439.   
[14]  William F. Egan, Practical RF System Design, John Wiley & Sons, 
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2003. 
[15]  J. Breitbarth, J. Koebel, “Additive (Residual) Phase Noise Measurement of 
Amplifiers, Frequency Dividers, and Frequency Multipliers,” Microwave Journal, 
June 2008, pp. 66-82. 
[16] K. V. Puglia, “Phase Noise Analysis of Component Cascades,” IEEE 
Microwave Magazine, Volume 2, No. 4, December 2002, pp. 71-75. 
[17]  S.A. Maas, “Third-Order Intermodulation Distortion in Cascaded Stages,” 
IEEE Microwave and Guided Letters, June 1995, Volume 5, No. 6, pp. 189-191. 
[18] James Tsui, Digital Techniques for Wideband Receivers, Norwood, MA, 
02062, Artech House, 1995. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

105 
Chapter 3 
Semiconductor Modeling  
The mixing function is carried out in modern systems by a semiconductor switch 
consisting of a diode or transistor. The majority of mixers employ diodes, due to 
their performance, simplicity, low cost, and small size compared with transistors. 
Both resistive and reactive (varactor) diodes can be used, but the majority of 
mixers use Schottky diodes. In monolithic integrated circuits transistors compete 
with diodes in almost all aspects but they do add complexity to the design. 
Conventional Silicon bipolar junction transistors (BJT) were first used in active 
mixers during the 1950s and 1960s, mainly in single ended, low cost approaches. 
Most radio and TV receivers of that time used a BJT mixer. With the maturing of 
Silicon IC technology, and in particular after the invention of the multiplier 
proposed by Gilbert, BJT devices became ubiquitous in mixers operating at 
frequencies that were within the capability of these devices.  And more recently 
HBT devices are being implemented into mixers, allowing competitive transistor 
mixer performance at high frequencies. 
 
The FET was introduced as a mixing element due to the similarity of its 
electrical properties with those of vacuum tubes.  FETs were initially applied to 
mixers using circuit structures that had previously been used for tubes and bipolar 
transistors.  Initial applications operated in the active mode and later it was 
discovered that FETs can also operate in the passive mode, using the channel 
conductance as a variable resistor. Recently, with the advent of RF CMOS 
technology, FET mixers have become an important option along with bipolar 
transistors and diodes. The basic assumption of the foregoing models is the quasi-
static assumption, which means the current, charge, or flux is an algebraic 
function of one or more control voltages or currents. Therefore, the nonlinear 
elements change instantaneously with control voltages, so that the same relations 
valid at DC are also valid under large signal voltages and at high frequency.  
 
 
3.1  MODELING SCHOTTKY DIODES 
 
The Schottky diode is a rectifying metal-semiconductor junction. Many types of 
metals can be used to form a Schottky diode including gold, molybdenum, 

106 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
titanium, and aluminum deposited on top of a semiconductor.  For many years the 
semiconductor of preference has been N-type silicon because compared with P-
type silicon, N-type provides higher mobility of electrons resulting in higher 
frequency of operation. On the other hand, in detector applications P-type material 
is preferred for its lower 1/f noise properties. Silicon remains an important 
material in many applications, but GaAs diodes dominates at high microwave 
frequencies and mmWave for its comparatively higher mobility.  Discrete diodes 
are available in single form, as duals, quads, and in configurations including tee, 
ring, and, star.  Diodes were initially available in chip form requiring bond wire 
connections and packaging. In the 1970s  the beam lead [1] type of packaging was 
developed to reduce inductance and is still in widespread use in 
microwave/mmWave applications.   
 
 
3.1.1 Equivalent Circuit 
 
The nonlinear model, [2], contains a current source and associated parasitics as 
shown in Figure 3.1. The I/V description is given by the exponential relation in 
(3.1). The junction capacitance is bias dependent, showing low capacitance when 
reverse biased and high capacitance when forwarded biased.  When Vj  >> nVT, 
the current source generates a high current according to (3.1), equivalent to a low 
resistance shorting the capacitance. Notice the nonlinear parameters are defined in 
terms of junction voltage that is not accessible, as voltage is measured at the 
external terminals including the intrinsic series resistance, Rs. The thermal voltage 
VT is a temperature dependent parameter having a value of 26 mV at room 
temperature. The ideality factor, n, denotes how much a junction deviates from the 
ideal exponential I,V, and equals unity for an ideal diode. The saturation current, 
IS is defined by (3.2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Circuit schematic.  
 
 
   (b) Symbol. 
Figure 3.1       Model for a Schottky diode. A refers to anode and C to cathode. Vj is the voltage at the 
junction and Vd is the voltage at the external terminal. After [2].  
 
 
The parasitic elements Ls, Cp are dependent on package configuration 
and assembly. The beam lead packaging approach [3] provides lower Ls and Cp 
than a wire bonded die, making it ideal for microwave and millimeter-wave 
applications. If diodes are inserted into plastic packaging, the parasitics limit the 
frequency of operation.   
 
C 
A 
Id 
Vj 
Cj(Vj) 
Cp 
Ls 
Rs 
I(Vj) 
Vd 
C (-) 
A (+) 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
107 
 










1
T
j
V
V
S e
I
I

  
 
 
 
 
      (3.1) 
 
Where,  
VT = kT/q  
k = 1.38 x10-23 J/ºK = Boltzmann constant 
T = temperature, ºK 
 
q = 1.6x10-19 C = electron charge 
 
IS = diode saturation current 
 
 = ideality factor 
 
 
KT
q
d
S
B
e
T
A
A
I



2
*
*
 
 
 
 
 
        (3.2) 
 
 
 
 
 It is interesting to observe that Is is proportional to the diode area, Ad, 
and to the square of temperature, T. The additional constants are the Richardson 
constant, A**, which equals 120 A/cm2/K2 for free electrons, and the barrier 
height, B, which is approximately equal the built in potential, Vbi.  If the diode is 
operating with a reverse voltage applied to its terminals, then the current given by 
(3.2) is reduced to zero. If the reverse voltage is higher than VB, then avalanche 
breakdown can occur and the current equation is modified to (3.3). The term VB 
represents the avalanche breakdown of the diode and mb is a fitting parameter. 
 
 
b
m
B
j
S
V
V
I
I








1
 
 
 
 
          
        (3.3) 
 
The junction capacitance is the important nonlinear element in a reverse 
biased junction and is described by (3.4). The parameter Cj(0) represents the 
capacitance with diode biased at zero volts, and m represents the type of junction 
and is in general equal to 1/2.  
 
 
m
bi
j
j
j
V
V
C
V
C







1
)
0
(
)
(
       
 
 
               (3.4) 
 
If the diode is forwarded biased with Vj close to Vbi, then capacitance 
approximates infinity causing numerical problems in simulators. Due to this 

108 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
model limitation, the capacitance model is changed to a linear C(V) when Vj is 
near Vbi. This capacitance description works well in time domain simulators but in 
harmonic balance simulators, using Q(V) works better. 
 
 
3.1.2  Model Extraction 
 
The relation between voltage and current for the circuit in Figure 3.1(a) is given 
by (3.5). At low currents the voltage drop in the series resistor can be disregarded 
and the convenient (3.6) results. Based on this equation one can measure the diode 
I/V and plot the results in the form of log(Id) versus Vd.  
 
 








S
d
T
d
S
d
I
I
V
I
R
V
ln

   
 
 
 
        (3.5) 
 
T
d
S
d
V
V
I
I



)
ln(
)
ln(
   
 
 
 
        (3.6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2       Plot used to determine the Schottky diode to determine, IS, VT, Vbi and RS.  
 
 
From this plot, Is, is obtained by extrapolating the line to the y-axis 
crossing Vd = 0. At this voltage the Vbi is also obtained by applying (3.7). The 
slope of the straight line provides the ideality factor, .  
 
 







d
S
T
bi
A
I
T
A
V
V
2
*
*
ln
1
   
 
 
 
        (3.7) 
 
 
 
The series resistance RS is found from the difference in voltage Vd 
between ideal I/V and the slope caused by the series resistance, RS =Vd/Id at high 
Vd 
Vd 
IS 
Slope=1/(nVT) 
Log(Id) 
Slope=1/RS 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
109 
currents.  A better evaluation of series resistance is obtained from S-parameters at 
high frequency with an unbiased diode. The equivalent circuit is then the series 
resistance and a capacitance to ground, Cj(0). The S11 plot for a typical GaAs 
diode is in Figure 3.3 showing a resonance at 29 GHz between the equivalent 
series capacitance and parasitic inductance. The series resistance obtained from 
RF measurements maybe a little different than the one measured at DC, due to 
temperature effects on the junction, which do not exist in the unbiased diode. 
 
 
freq (100.0MHz to 30.00GHz)
S(1,1)
m2
m2
freq=
S(1,1)=0.852 / -179.539
impedance = 4.000 - j0.200
29.00GHz
 
Figure 3.3   Smith chart plot of diode S11 for a typical GaAs diode.  Determination of RS, Cj(0), and Lp. 
 
 
3.2 MODELING BIPOLAR TRANSISTORS  
 
The bipolar junction transistor (BJT) mixer, depending on circuit conditions can 
provide power gain in the conversion process, in contrast with Schottky diodes 
where conversion is always lossy. Since the early 1960s silicon technology has 
dominated the market for BJTs: silicon devices have become capable of operating 
at low microwave frequencies and are still employed in active mixers up to the 
UHF band. Recently, gallium arsenide (GaAs) and silicon germanium 
heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs) were developed with superior 
performance at high frequencies compared to silicon devices. Therefore, it became 
an option for mixer design in microwave/mmWave frequencies. HBTs are 
available only in npn, while silicon bipolar devices are available both in npn and 
pnp, even though for RF applications only npn is employed due to its higher 
mobility resulting in more gain at higher frequencies.  
 
 
3.2.1  Ebers-Moll and T-Model 
 
The Ebers-Moll model, [4], was developed in the early 1950s with the purpose of 
representing the bipolar transistor I/V characteristic. The circuit is in Figure 3.4 
consisting of two diodes and two current sources controlled by current. The 
currents through the diodes are described by (3.8) and (3.9) and the terminal 
currents are on (3.10) to (3.12). Only four parameters are necessary to be 
determined, IES, ICS, F, and  R. The first two can be determined by measuring the 

110 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
device IC as a function of VBE and IE as a function of VBC. The other two 
parameters, are the common emitter forward and reverse current gain, which are 
assumed to be independent of bias in this model. The i parameters are obtained 
from (3.13) with i = F for forward and i = R for reverse operation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Circuit schematic.  
 
(b) Symbol. 
 
Figure 3.4       Nonlinear Ebers-Moll model consisting of four resistive parameters.  After [4].  
 
 
  
 








1
KT
qV
ES
F
BE
e
I
I
 
 
 
 
 
         (3.8) 
 








1
KT
qV
CS
R
BC
e
I
I
 
 
 
 
 
         (3.9) 
 
R
F
F
C
I
I
I


 
 
 
 
        
       (3.10) 
 
R
R
F
E
I
I
I




 
 
 
 
                     (3.11) 
 



R
R
F
F
B
I
I
I






1
1
 
 
 
 
       (3.12) 
 
)
1
/(
i
i
i





 
 
 
 
 
       (3.13) 
 
 
The family of input and output DC I/V characteristics for a common 
emitter configuration provided by the model is shown in Figure 3.5. The transfer 
characteristics ICE(VBE) is not shown but it is similar to the input exponential 
characteristics. The ICE(VCE) plot depicts the normal operating region where the 
emitter base junction is forward biased and the base collector junction is reverse 
biased. This is called the first quadrant of operation, where ICE and VCE are 
positive. The inverse region of operation corresponds to operation in the third 
quadrant with base emitter junction reverse biased and base collector forward 
biased.  The cut-off region is defined when both junctions are reverse biased.  
 
FIF 
IF 
IR 
RIR 
IC 
B 
C 
IE 
E 
IB 
E 
B 
C 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Input IBE(VBE) plot.               (b) Output ICE(VCE) with IBE as a parameter. 
 
Figure 3.5      DC I/V for a bipolar device modeled after Ebers-Moll. 
 
 
This simple model can provide reasonable accuracy if the access 
resistances and capacitances are added to the model and if device operation is 
within a narrow voltage range relative to bias.  The T-model is obtained from 
Ebers-Moll model by making IR = 0 so that currents are described by (3.14) –  
(3.16). A base resistor, rB and capacitances are added to the circuit model, making 
it useful for manual calculations and is very efficient in a nonlinear simulator. 
 








1
KT
qV
ES
E
BE
e
I
I
 
 
 
 
         
       (3.14) 
E
F
C
I
I


 
 
 
 
         
        
       (3.15) 

/
C
B
I
I 
 
 
 
 
         
       
       (3.16) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.6       Nonlinear T-model consisting of three resistive parameter and three reactances. 
 
VBE
IBE 
IC 
CB
CJE 
B
FIE 
CD 
rB 
C 
IE 
E 
B’ 
Ib 
IBE3 
IBE2 
IBE1 
VCE 
ICE 

112 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
The base emitter capacitance includes two terms: diffusion, CD, and 
depletion, CJE. The diffusion term corresponds to capacitance created by charges 
injected by the emitter into the base. The charge in the base, QB, depends on the 
magnitude of collector current and on the time the carriers take to transit through 
the base, F, defined by (3.17). The diffusion capacitance is then obtained by the 
derivative of the charge defined by (3.18).  The depletion term is given by the 
capacitance of a reverse biased junction, (3.19). The base collector capacitance 
CBC, is also caused by depletion and is defined by a similar equation. 
 
F
C
B
I
Q


   
 
 
 
 
 
      (3.17) 
F
m
BE
C
F
D
g
dV
dI
C




  
  
 
 
      (3.18) 
bi
BE
JE
J
V
V
C
C


1
0
       
 
 
 
 
      (3.19) 
 
 
As long as the signals swinging in the I/V planes are contained in the first 
I/V quadrant, where both I and V are positive, the collector junction is reverse 
biased and emitter junction is forward biased. Under these conditions, CBC is much 
lower in value compared to the emitter capacitance, CBE = CJE + CD. 
 
 
3.2.2 Gummel-Poon 
 
If more accurate results are required, then a more complete analysis of the device 
under large signal operation is needed, which can be provided by the popular GP -
Gummel-Poon model [5]. This model is derived from the Ebers-Moll with added 
circuit elements and modified equations, based  in the device physics.  The circuit 
schematic in Figure 3.7 shows the GP model has more parameters to be 
determined, for a complete characterization. The first current, ICT, called the 
transport (3.20) is defined by the difference between forward and reverse currents, 
(3.21) and (3.22). The coefficients F, R are ideality factors of base emitter and 
base collector diodes, respectively, and C, E are called base-collector and base-
emitter leakage emission coefficients. One can notice the saturation current is no 
longer constant; a dimensionless coefficient qbb has been introduced that takes into 
account two effects. The first corresponds to the base width modulation, also 
called Early effect, (3.24). This effect appears in the I/V characteristic as a slope 
on the current function of voltage in the manner indicated in Figure 3.8. 
 
 
 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.7      Gummel-Poon model for a BJT including access resistances and additional diodes to 
account for base current leakages at low currents.  After [5].  
 
  
 
EC
CC
CT
I
I
I


 
 
 
 
 
       (3.20) 
 










T
R
BC
T
F
BE
V
V
V
V
bb
S
CC
e
e
q
I
I


   
 
 
 
       (3.21) 
 




















1
1
T
C
BC
T
R
BC
V
V
SC
V
V
R
S
EC
e
I
e
I
I



 
 
 
       (3.22) 
 


S
b
bb
q
q
q
4
1
1
2



  
 
 
 
       (3.23) 
 
AF
BC
AR
BE
b
V
V
V
V
q



1
1
     
 
 
 
       (3.24) 
 




















1
1
T
R
BC
T
F
BE
V
n
V
KR
S
V
n
V
KF
S
S
e
I
I
e
I
I
q
 
 
 
       (3.25)
 
 
 
Where qb, qS and qbb are dimensionless coefficients.  
 
 
 
The second effect on qbb corresponds to high level injection where qs >> 
qb, so that (3.21) becomes approximately described by (3.26). The ideality factor 
in this condition is doubled reducing collector current at high currents. Those 
equations were developed for silicon BJT and not all of them are relevant for HBT 
modeling. Actually the important terms for HBTs are the saturation current, IS, 
VBE 
R
E' 
E 
B 
C' 
C 
ICT=ICC-IEC 
CJ
RE 
VCB 
IBC 
CD 
CJ
E'
IBE
VB'
RB 
B' 
VC' 

114 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
forward and reverse Early voltages, VF, VR,and forward and reverse corner 
currents, IKF, IKR.   
 
 
      
 
Figure 3.8        I/V plots for a typical BJT device modeled by Ebers-Moll, (black) and Gummel-Poon 
(gray), showing a positive slope.  
 
 
 
T
F
BE
V
n
V
KF
S
CC
e
I
I
I
2

    
 
 
 
      (3.26) 
 
  
The BJT base currents are represented in the model by splitting the 
current into two components, a term that is a fraction of collector current and 
another related to leakage currents in the device. The diode base-emitter current, 
IBE, and base-collector current, IBC, are given by (3.27) and (3.28), with ISE and ISC 
defined as the base-emitter and base-collector leakage saturation current.   
The two diode models are still used for III-V HBTs, with different 
saturation current and ideality factor for each term [6].  
 
 




















1
1
T
E
BE
T
F
BE
V
V
SE
V
V
F
S
BE
e
I
e
I
I



   
 
        
       (3.27) 
 




















1
1
T
C
BC
T
R
BC
V
V
SC
V
V
R
S
BC
e
I
e
I
I



   
 
       
       (3.28) 
 
 
The common emitter DC current gain defined by  = IC/IB is a function 
of bias current and its representation simulated on ADS using the GP model is in 
Figure 3.9. Gain is relatively constant within a certain range of bias and it drops at 
low and high currents. The low current gain drop simulates the effect of leakage 
currents at the device surface that are not controlled by base voltage. The gain 
reduction at high current levels simulates the emitter crowding and Kirk effects. 
The emitter crowding occurs at high levels due to nonuniform current density 
within an emitter finger. The term is usually used to describe the situation in 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
115 
which high current density appears at the edge of the emitter stripe, resulting from 
voltage drop across the base. Consequently, the device becomes unevenly biased 
with reduced collector current for the same base current. This effect is not relevant 
in HBTs, where the base has low resistance compared to silicon bipolars, and the 
voltage along the emitter surface is evenly distributed.  
 
 
       
 
Figure 3.9        Current gain, ,  as a function of collector current for a typical BJT modeled after 
Gummel-Poon. The same plot using Ebers-Moll model would give a flat gain from low 
to large currents.  
 
 
  
 
The Kirk effect occurs in both homo and heterojunction devices and 
results from the increased charge density associated with high current flowing 
through the base-collector region. In this region of high and low fixed charge 
density, respectively, an excess charge builds up at forming a dipole at the 
collector side of the collector-base region, increasing the electric field in that area, 
making the base extend over the collector. In this process a large current of holes 
is injected into the base to maintain charge balance and the base transit time 
increases. These effects reduce the device current gain. The capacitances in the 
GP model includes both diffusion and depletion terms similar to the T-model, 
(3.29) – (3.30). The diffusion capacitance is in the first term of the equation, 
where high level current effects are included in the GP model through the 
coefficient qbb. 
 
      
 
je
T
BE
m
bi
BE
JE
V
V
bb
S
T
F
F
BE
V
V
C
e
q
I
V
C









1
0



 
 
       (3.29) 
 
jc
T
R
BC
m
bi
BC
JC
V
V
bb
S
T
R
R
BC
V
V
C
e
q
I
V
C









1
0



 
 
     (3.30) 
 
Where F = represents the forward base transit time 
            R = represents the reverse base transit time 
 = IEC/IBE,   

116 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Recent studies [7, 8], revealed the diffusion charges are determined from 
the integral of current by integrating the small signal transit time, F, times 
current, Qin = F(Vbc,I)dI instead of simple multiplication as indicated in the 
previous equations. Those effects are in place in more advanced models and the 
GP equations can be modified by replacing them with the equations provided in 
the references.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.10      Transit frequency dependency on current density and collector voltage for bipolar 
devices for a Si bipolar measuring 0.4X14µm2.  After [10]. 
 
Two figures of merit frequently used for transistors are the fT and fmax. 
The fT is defined as the frequency where the common emitter gain is equal to 
unity, (3.31), [9]. The resulting equation shows fT as a function of device gm and 
capacitances. The parameter fmax is defined as the maximum frequency of 
oscillation of a device, and according to (3.32) is a function of base resistance and 
device capacitances. 
 
 
)
(
2
JC
JE
D
m
T
C
C
C
g
f



    
 
 
 
       (3.31) 
 
JC
BB
T
C
r
f
f

8
max 
     
 
 
        
       (3.32) 
 
 
 
The limiting frequency of operation is seen in (3.31) to be dependent on 
collector current. This is observed in the plot of Figure 3.10 showing fT increasing 
more or less monotonically with current density, up to a peak value, [10]. As 
already discussed the base transit time increases at high currents with resulting fT 
VC
0 
10 
20 
30 
10-3 
            10-2    
          10-1 
                             100 
               101 
 
 
 
JC[mA/µm2] 
fT(GHz) 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
117 
reduction. Those parameters are small signal derived and strongly dependent on 
biasing conditions. Even though they are not very useful in large signal 
applications or in digital circuits, they are used as a figure of merit for technology 
performance.  
The GP model was developed for silicon bipolar devices and successfully 
provides gain, power and efficiency information and works well for such devices 
at moderate frequencies. The temperature models contained in the GP model are 
designed for silicon bipolars and are not capable of taking into account self 
heating  effects which is common in HBTs. But in spite of differences in device 
physics and technology between BJT and HBT, the GP has been used to model 
HBTs with relative success. In a recent publication, [6], it is shown how 
modifications in the GP model can improve its representation of HBTs in PA 
applications. Other advanced models were developed to improve simulation of 
real devices, including linearity and temperature effects, namely, Mextram, 
Hicum, and VBIC models. Mextram was developed by Philips and Hicum, High 
Current Model, was jointly developed by Conexant and Dresden University. The 
VBIC or Vertical Bipolar Inter Company is a public domain model receiving 
contribution from many industries. An additional model important for HBT is the 
UCSD or University of California in San Diego model.  
 
 
3.2.3 Model Extraction 
 
Automated equipment and related software capable of acquiring the necessary 
data for extracting the parameters of most common models are available in the 
market. However, the Gummel-Poon model can be extracted with simple DC 
supply, multimeters, and a network analyzer to measure S-parameters. The 
parameters to describe I/V are obtained from the DC plot log(I) versus VBE in the 
forward and reverse mode, Figure 3.11.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.11      Plot of IC, IB as a function of VBE to determine the DC parameters of GP model in the 
normal mode. A similar plot can be carried out in the reverse mode. 
 
IK 
ISE 
IB 
 
VB
IS 
IC 
Slope=1/nFVT 
Log(I) 
Slope=1/nLVT 
Slope=1/RE 

118 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Forward mode is defined for operation with VBE > 5FVT and VBC < - 
5RVT also denoted as the normal operating region. The reverse mode 
corresponds to VBE < -5FVT and VBC > 5RVT. As already discussed in the diode 
section, the plot corresponding to the collector current provides, IS, F. The same 
parameters are determined from the base current plot.  IK is also determined from 
same plot and is defined as the current at the crossing of two asymptotes from low 
and high injection base currents. The DC current gain, defined by the ratio IC/IB is 
linear within the region where both plots IC and IB are parallel to each other. The 
Early voltage VAF is obtained from the extrapolation of IC(VCE) curve in the linear 
range at the point where it crosses the horizontal axis, i.e. IC = 0, Figure 3.12. In 
the reverse mode the Early voltage is denoted VAR.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.12     Plot to determine the Early voltage. 
 
 
The emitter resistance can be determined by different methods [11, 12], a 
straightforward procedure is to use the open-collector measurement, based on 
(3.33). By applying a current source to the base of a grounded emitter device, the 
approximate voltage on the emitter resistance is measured by applying a voltage 
meter at the collector, Figure 3.13. A plot of VCE ( VRE) versus IE = IB provides a 
nearly straight line whose slope is equal to RE. The collector resistance is 
determined by a similar process with open emitter and grounded collector. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.13      Schematic of measurement of VCE (IB) with IC = 0 to determine RE.  After [11, 12]. 
 
 
B
E
R
T
CE
I
R
V
V









1
ln
 
 
       
                    (3.33) 
 
 
 
The base resistance uses a similar measurement set up with an additional 
voltmeter to monitor VBE as well, [13]. Another equation applicable to the circuit 
provides the relation between base voltage and base resistance 
 
VBE 
IB 
VCE 
VCE 
IC 
VAF 
IB 
Slope = 1/RE 
VCE 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
119 
 
B
B
B
E
S
B
F
T
BE
I
R
I
R
I
I
V
V










ln
 
 
 
      (3.34) 
 
 
 
Subtracting (3.34) from (3.33) and dividing by IB, gives an equation 
relating the difference of collector and base voltage to the base current, (3.35). 
This ratio when plotted as a function of 1/IB results in approximately a straight 
line, whose extrapolation to 1/IB = 0 gives the value of RB  depicted in Figure 3.14. 
 
 
B
R
S
B
F
B
T
B
CE
BE
R
I
I
I
V
I
V
V


















1
ln
ln
 
 
      (3.35) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.14    Plot of linear equation (3.35). The term in the bracket is dominated by ln(IS).  After [13]. 
 
 
The access resistances can also be determined from S-parameters at a 
range of frequencies low enough to allow disregarding capacitive effects [5]. The 
method consists in the application of a base current and DC shorting the emitter 
and collector to ground. The bias current should be sufficiently high to induce a 
small dynamic resistance, Rd, in the base-emitter and base-collector junctions. The 
equivalent circuit is in Figure 3.15 showing the access resistances and parasitic 
inductances.  
 
 
2
/
B
T
d
I
V
R 
 
 
       
 
 
 
      (3.36) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.15      Schematic of bipolar device with base overdrive current with emitter and collector 
grounded. After [5]. 
 
Ib/2 
Cbias 
Lbias 
50 
50 
Ve 
Vc 
Ib 
Rd 
RC 
Re 
Rd 
LC 
Rb 
Le 
Lb 
Rce 
1/IB 
RB 
(VBE-VCE)/IB 

120 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The extraction process requires Vc = Ve which is ensured by having 
similar current in both base-emitter and base-collector junctions. Since RC is 
different than Re a current source is inserted into the DC collector circuit to force 
equal current Ib/2 in both junctions. The measured S-parameters are converted to 
Z-parameters and compared with the Z-parameters for the circuit in Figure 3.15, 
described in (3.37).  
 
 













)
(
)
(
2
/
c
e
e
c
e
e
e
e
b
e
e
b
d
L
L
j
R
R
L
j
R
L
j
R
L
L
j
R
R
R




 (3.37) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
The junction capacitances are obtained from unbiased device (cold BJT 
or HBT), [14], whose equivalent circuit for small devices is represented in Figure 
3.16. A transistor cell with few emitters is considered small in this context. The 
unbiased circuit refers to the absence of collector current. Bias is however applied 
to the base to determine capacitance as a function of voltage. The pad 
capacitances C11p and C22p are determined separately.  The access resistances are 
de-embedded from the measured S-parameters. Then a two port Y-parameter 
matrix is built for the remaining circuit, from which the capacitances are easily 
extracted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.16      Schematic of a BJT or HBT to extract the junction capacitance as a function of bias.  
After [14]. 
 
 
From the plot of capacitance versus voltage, CJE0, CJC, MJE and MJC are 
determined.  The diffusion capacitance was demonstrated in [15], to be defined as 
a function of the GP parameters indicated in (3.38). 
 
 
KF
JE
AR
F
I
C
V


    
 
 
 
 
      (3.38) 
 
 
The standard procedure in device modeling is to gather as many as 
possible parameters from DC and RF/microwave measurements. Those are 
considered the initial parameters or initial guess of preliminary model that are then 
Cbc 
Cbe 
C22p 
Rbe 
50 
50 
C11p 
RC 
Rbc 
Rb 
Re 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
121 
submitted to a curve fitting process where the parameters are numerically fine 
tuned to optimize the match between measured and model parameters.  
 
 
3.3 MODELING FIELD EFFECT TRANSISTORS 
 
As discussed previously, the I/V characteristic of diodes and bipolar transistors are 
described using exponential functions. Approximating that relation in terms of a 
power series results in square, cubic and higher order terms, which translate into 
spurious signals when those devices are employed as mixers. The initial 
application of silicon junction field effect transistors (JFET), was very successful 
due to its square law relation between drain current and gate voltage. The mixing 
properties exhibited lower distortion content allowing for operation at higher 
signal levels compared with exponential I/V devices. The next FET type 
introduced was the silicon MOS, or metal oxide semiconductor that also exhibits a 
square law characteristic and became used as a low frequency mixing element. 
The MOS technology including CMOS, which stands for complementary metal 
oxide semiconductor, was initially applied to RF applications and to analog 
circuits. Later CMOS entered into the digital world after its speed became 
attractive to digital designers and in recent years became applied to high 
frequency analog circuits. The development of this technology was followed 
closely by sophisticated physics based models capable of predicting 
manufacturing variables relating to the device performance.  
One of the first high frequency FETs appeared in 1967 as a gallium 
arsenide MESFET, [16], short for metal semiconductor FET, showing a fT of 1 
GHz. Microwave silicon MESFETs were more advanced at the time, in 1970 a 
fmax of 12 GHz and 12 dB gain at 2 GHz was reported, [17]. The GaAs FET 
devices provided impressive breakthroughs for signal processing components and 
later evolved into other types of devices including the high electron mobility 
transistor (HEMT), and pseudomorphic high electron mobility transistor 
(PHEMT) in depletion and enhancement forms. In depletion mode there is current 
flowing between source and drain with no bias applied to the gate. Application of 
a negative potential on the gate decreases the flow of current due to smaller 
channel thickness controlled by a 
"depletion" region under the gate. In 
enhancement mode the device is constructed so that the channel is already 
depleted at zero gate bias. A positive potential on the gate reduces the depletion 
thickness allowing more current to flow between source and drain. The 
enhancement devices became attractive in many applications because both drain 
and gate are biased positively compared to depletion where a symmetrical supply 
voltage is required. The analytical models initially developed for JFETs were 
modified to represent these devices. They are sufficient to predict conversion loss 
and impedance matching given variations in frequency and bias.  However, they 
are not adequate for representing certain large signal behavior. The following 

122 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
section reviews a few analytical FET models that are adequate for mixer analysis 
including distortion effects.  
 
 
3.3.1 Curtice 
 
One of the first nonlinear GaAs FET models was proposed by Curtice [18] in 
1980, where the theoretical transfer characteristic of a depletion mode MESFET 
has a quadratic relation between drain current and gate voltage. It is common to 
refer to this model as quadratic Curtice. The schematic of the large signal n-type 
model is represented in Figure 3.17. The equations describing the current are 
given by the set of (3.39) – (3.42), separated into two parts, one for gate voltage 
above threshold, and the other for gate voltage below threshold where the current 
is ideally zero. The threshold voltage is therefore defined as the gate-source 
voltage that causes drain current to equal zero. Additionally the active area is 
defined as the product of two functions, one is a function of gate voltage, F(VGS), 
and the other a function of drain voltage, G(VDS). The nonlinear equations are 
described as a function of internal gate-source and gate-drain voltages. The model 
shows access resistances RG, RD, RS that represent the effect of materials employed 
in the device structure to make the connection between the internal gate, source 
and drain to the external circuitry.  
 
 
)
(
)
(
)
,
(
DS
GS
DS
GS
DS
V
G
V
F
V
V
I

 for VGS > Vth            
       (3.39) 
 
2)
(
)
(
th
GS
GS
V
V
V
F


          
          
 
          
       (3.40)    
 
)
tanh(
)
1(
)
(
DS
DS
DS
V
V
V
G




           
        
       (3.41)   
  
0
)
,
(

DS
GS
DS
V
V
I
 for VGS  Vth            
          
 
       (3.42) 
 
Where   VGS = gate source voltage, V 
VDS = drain source voltage,V 
Vth = threshold voltage, V 
 
The drain current at zero gate voltage is equal to IDSS, and  = IDSS/Vth
2 at 
this point. The threshold is defined as the gate voltage where drain current 
transitions from   zero and starts flowing in the circuit. Another form of (3.39) 
normally found in text books is (3.43) defined in terms of pinch off voltage, VP, 
the voltage that pinches off the channel making drain current zero. Since this 
transition region is not well defined, semiconductor manufacturers prefer to define 
VP as a percentage value of IDSS. The current in the region between VD'S' = 0 and 
VD'S' = VDsat is given by (3.41) in the form of a hyperbolic tangent. The saturation 
drain voltage, VDsat expresses the point above which the hyperbolic term becomes 
constant, reflecting a nearly constant current. The drain current is therefore said to 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
123 
be saturated when VDS > VDsat. The drain source conductance is defined by the 
parameter, . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.17      Curtice_I nonlinear MESFET model.  After [18]. 
 
 
2
1
)
(







P
GS
DSS
GS
V
V
I
V
F
                    
 
 
       (3.43)   
 
Equations (3.39) – (3.42) do not describe device behavior beyond the 
gate voltage limits, determined on the positive side by the Schottky junction 
conduction and on the negative side by the breakdown.  Positive gate voltage: A 
Schottky diode represents the gate source junction, so the gate-to-source voltage, 
VGS, can become positive as long as there is no gate conduction.  The maximum 
voltage is limited by the forward voltage of the Schottky junction, VF, and in most 
MESFETs this limit is around 0.6 V. The drain current from VGS = 0 to 0.6 V 
increases above IDSS and limits out to a value called Imax provided by the 
manufacturer.  Voltages above this limit should be avoided because RF losses are 
introduced in the gate circuit and cause higher order circuit nonlinearities and the 
device may be destroyed. Negative gate voltage: When the reverse gate voltage 
exceeds the threshold voltage, the conducting channel within the device is pinched 
off and ceases to conduct. The limit is the breakdown of the gate source Schottky 
diode, ranging from a few negative volts for a small signal device to more than -5 
V for power devices. The limit on the drain side is set by the breakdown of the 
drain-to-gate junction. This junction is reverse biased in normal operation, but if 
the drain voltage reaches the breakdown value, VB, then drain current starts 
flowing into the gate circuitry, degrading performance, and depending on 
temperature and voltage it can destroy the device. The breakdown effects are not 
taken into account in the original Curtice model.  
 
The red traces plot in Figures 3.18(a) and (b) illustrate the I/V of device 
NE673 and the Curtice model in black traces are superimposed. If the circuit 
operation is constrained to operate within the dotted line depicted in Figure 
3.17(a), the model is useful for estimating certain classes of mixers as will be 
detailed in further chapters. 
D' 
S 
D 
G 
S' 
G' 
DGS 
VGS 
CGS 
CGD 
RS 
RG 
ID(VGS,VDS) 
RD 
S'
Cds 
VG'S' 
VD'S' 

124 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) IDS(VDS, VGS)   
 
 
   (b) IDS (VGS)VDS= 3V 
 
Figure 3.18      I/V for NE673 device for VGS between -1.6V and = 0.4V. 
 
 
The capacitances in the model follows the "division by capacitance" 
principle, [19], where the charge in the gate is controlled by the gate-source and 
gate-drain voltage, therefore: 
 
 
dt
dV
V
Q
dt
dV
V
Q
dt
dQ
I
gd
gd
g
g
g
g
g
g







    
 
       (3.44) 
 
dt
dV
V
Q
I
g
g
g
s



      
 
 
 
 
       (3.45) 
 
dt
dV
V
Q
I
gd
gd
g
d



       
 
 
 
 
       (3.46) 
 
 
This is consistent because Ig = Id + Is, and the capacitances are defined as 
in the conventional manner: 
 
 
gs
g
gs
V
Q
C



       
 
 
 
 
      (3.47) 
 
gd
g
gd
V
Q
C



       
 
 
 
 
      (3.48) 
 
In this model the author assumed the gate-drain capacitance to be 
constant, which is a good approximation if the signal swings within the saturated 
area. For the gate-source diode the model uses the capacitance of a reverse biased 
Schottky junction defined by (3.4). Comparing this capacitance model with 
-1.75
-1.50
-1.25
-1.00
-0.75
-0.50
-0.25
0.00
0.25
-2.00
0.50
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.000
0.100
VGS
IDS.i
test
S ,
1
2
3
4
5
0
6
0.024
0.048
0.072
0.096
0.000
0.120
VDS
IDS.i
VDsat 
VB 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
125 
measured data from device NE67300 MESFET the error can be as high as 15 % if 
the gate voltage swing is within pinch off and zero, Figure 3.19. If gate voltage 
goes above zero the real capacitance becomes approximately constant, while the 
capacitance from the Schottky equation rises sharply. Therefore, for signals giving 
a positive gate voltage the error in the capacitance becomes too high. In spite of 
this limitation, many designers still use this capacitance model due to simplicity of 
model extraction and reasonable estimate of certain circuits. One problem with 
this model is the nearly infinity value reached when gate voltage is on the order of 
the built in voltage, creating convergence problems in the electrical simulator. 
 
             
 
 
Figure 3.19      Gate-source capacitance from device NE673 in black plot compared with Schottky 
junction capacitance in red plot for VGS between -1.8 to 0 V. 
 
Instead of using hyperbolic tangent in (3.41), some authors [20] prefer 
the cubic expression of (3.49). The resulting current description is similar and it is 
easier to calculate trans-conductance derivatives. Table 3.1 shows typical values 
for the MESFET NE673 by NEC, device with 0.3 µm gate length and 280 µm 
width. 

















3
3
1
1
)
1(
)
(
DS
DS
DS
V
V
V
G


 for 0 < VDS < 3/      (3.49) 
 
)
1(
)
(
DS
DS
V
V
G



 for VDS > 3/    
      
 
       (3.50) 
 
 
Table 3.1  
Curtice Model DC Parameters, NE673   
DC 
Parameter 
Value 
DC 
Parameter 
Value 
β 
0.038 
Rs 
3.0 Ohm 
α 
7.8 
Rd 
1.5 Ohm 
λ 
0.102 
Rg 
4.0 Ohm 
Vp 
-1.55 volt 
 
 
  

126 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Equation (3.39) can also be used to represent enhancement mode devices 
simply by changing the gate and threshold voltage polarities. The concept is still 
the same: gate voltage above which drain current starts flowing in the channel. 
Notice the term IDSS is defined at zero gate voltage for depletion devices and has  
no meaning for enhancement mode.  
The symbol used to represent GaAs MESFETs, Figure 3.20, was 
borroughed from JFETs, with an arrow at the gate indicating type of channel. If 
type N, the arrow is from left to right, if type P, the arrow is from right to left. 
Since there is no type P MESFET devices, there is no need for an arrow and with 
time it was eliminated. In spite of wide spread usage of the MESFET symbol, 
some publications still use the JFET symbol to represent MESFETs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (a) 
 
  (b) 
 
Figure 3.20      FET symbols: (a) JFETs has an inward arrow representing n type; (b) MESFET has no 
arrow because only n type are manufactured. 
 
 
3.3.2 Curtice-Ettenberg 
 
The transfer characteristic of real MESFETs is not quite quadratic depending on 
gate length, doping profile of the transistor active layer, device size, and other 
parameters. In 1985 Curtice and Ettenberg noticed that it is more accurate to 
represent the same relation by a cubic approximation [21], represented by the 
voltage series in (3.51). This approach is also called cubic Curtice by some 
authors. The voltage V1 is represented in (3.52) as a function of drain voltage that 
invalidates the assumption for the function F(VGS) to be a function of gate voltage 
alone. This is an important correction required for power amplifiers; however, for 
small signal devices used in mixer applications c can be made equal to zero 
making F(VGS) a function of VGS only.  
 
 
3
1
3
2
1
2
1
1
0
)
(
V
A
V
A
V
A
A
V
F
GS




 
 
 
       (3.51) 
 




DS
DS
c
j
GS
V
V
e
V
V




0
1
1 

 
 
 
       (3.52) 
 
Where  A0,…A3 = fitting parameters 
                =  A4VDS - the time delay accounts for the time signal takes to 
 
 
      transit  between source and drain   
            VDS0 = drain voltage where the An coefficients are measured.    
            c = pinch-off voltage coefficient 
S 
G 
D 
S 
G 
D 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
127 
The equivalent circuit represented in Figure 3.21 shows the following 
changes compared to the previous Curtice model: introduction of  resistor Ri to 
represent the time constant to charge CGS and resistor RDS to adjust the output 
conductance. The gate-source diode was eliminated and a current source was 
added to simulate the Schottky gate-source junction, (3.53). Gate current starts to 
flow for gate voltage amplitudes larger than Vbi in the Schottky junction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.21      Curtice-Ettenberg nonlinear MESFET model.  After [21]. 
 
  
A current source was introduced between drain and gate to represent the 
breakdown effect; the current is defined by (3.54). The resistance R1 represents the 
breakdown resistance and R2 is the resistance relating breakdown voltage to 
channel currents. 
 
 









bi
in
bi
in
G
bi
in
gs
V
t
forV
V
t
forV
R
V
t
V
I
)
(
,0
)
(
,
)
(
   
 
      (3.53) 
 
 
 









B
dg
B
dg
B
dg
dg
V
t
forV
V
t
forV
R
V
t
V
I
)
(
,0
)
(
,
)
(
1
   
 
      (3.54)
 
 
 
DS
B
B
I
R
V
V
2
0 

      
 
 
 
 
      (3.55) 
 
 
A different model for the gate-source capacitance was proposed, which is 
a function of both drain and gate voltages, extracted from measured data. The 
G
S 
D 
RG 
RD 
Ri 
D' 
IDG(Vout,Vin) 
IGS(Vin) 
S' 
G'
VGS 
CGS 
CGD 
RS 
ID(VGS,VDS) 
S' 
RDS 
CDS 
Vin(t) 
Vout(t) 

128 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
coefficient C0 is the value of CGS evaluated at VGS
DC and biased at VDS. The gate-
drain capacitor was assumed to be linear. 
 
 
0
75
.3
75
.3
]
0125
.0
1[
909
.0
C
V
V
V
C
GS
DC
GS
DS
GS




   
 
      (3.56) 
 
 
The model can be applicable to the enhancement mode by proper change 
of gate and threshold voltages from negative to positive. In spite of certain 
drawbacks this model is still often used by designers. One of the disadvantages of 
this model is the fact it may not be able to model a zero transconductance when 
the gate is pinched off.  S. A. Maas [22] provided a simple correction to this 
equation for these cases.  The corrections are as follows: 
     
 
P
DS
V
V
V
I
A
A




max
max
0
0
  
 
 
      
       (3.57) 
 
 
P
DS
V
V
V
I
A
A




max
max
1
1
  
 
 
       
      (3.58) 
 
 
 
Where  Vmax = maximum gate voltage, can be zero volts 
 
  
IDS = error of IDS at VGS=-VP  
 
 
The plot of Figure 3.22(a) shows the simulated I/V (gray) compared to 
measured data (black) with corrections to provide zero current and 
transconductance, simulated in part (b) of figure.  The parameters used to generate 
the plots are listed in Table 3.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   (a) IDS(VGS)VDS=3V      
 
 
       (b) gm(VGS) VDS=3V      
 
Figure 3.22      Curtice model with cubic transfer characteristic simulated in gray compared with the 
measured data in black traces for the device NE67300. 
 
1
2
3
4
5
0
6
20
40
60
80
0
100
VDS
IDS.i, mA
test..IDS.i, mA
 
-1.8
-1.6
-1.4
-1.2
-1.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
-0.0
0.2
-2.0
0.4
0.014
0.029
0.043
0.057
0.071
0.086
0.000
0.100
VGS
gm_mS
IDS.i, A
 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
129 
Table 3.2  
 DC   Parameters Cubic Model 
Parameter 
Value 
Parameter 
Value 
A0 
0.0709 
Vds0 
4.0 
A1 
0.0605 
γ 
3.2 
A2 
0.0052 
Rds0 
3000 
A3 
-0.0036 
Rd 
1.4 
β 
0.074 
Rg 
2.0 
 
 
              
 3.3.3 Chalmers (Angelov)  
 
The previous FET models are reasonable for estimating conversion gain and 
impedance for a mixer. If more accurate results are required and there is a need for 
linearity information one has to look for a model capable of representing in 
addition, the distortion levels, IMD2, IMD3. This is possible if the first, second and 
third derivatives of d(ID)/d(VG) are not discontinuous over the range of device 
operating voltages and currents. The Chalmers model, also known as Angelov, 
whose circuit schematic is illustrated in Figure 3.23 is capable of providing this 
feature [23]. In this model the gate dependent part of current is described by a 
hyperbolic represented in (3.59) and the argument is given by the series in (3.60).   
 
 
)
(
)
(
)
,
(
DS
GS
DS
GS
DS
V
G
V
F
V
V
I

 
 
)
tanh(
)
1
))(
tanh(
1(
)
,
(
DS
DS
pk
DS
GS
DS
V
V
I
V
V
I






     (3.59)  
 
...
)
(
)
(
)
(
3
3
2
2
1







pk
GS
pk
GS
pk
GS
V
V
P
V
V
P
V
V
P

      (3.60) 
 
)
(
)
(
sec
2
DS
GS
pk
m
V
G
V
h
I
g





   
 
 
       (3.61) 
 
 
 
Its derivative in (3.61), contains a squared hyperbolic secant whose shape 
accounts for a Gaussian bell shape type, which, if properly adjusted can represent 
various shapes of FET transconductance. The parameter Ipk is the drain current 
and Vpk is the gate current at the gate voltage where the transconductance is 
maximum, gmpk. The transconductance gmpk is intrinsic which means the series 
access resistances have to be taken into account. If one considers the first 
derivative of current in relation to VGS, the term P1 defines the transconductance at 
Vpk; the term P2 makes the derivate of the drain current asymmetrical and P3 
adjusts the drain current at gate voltage close to pinch off.  If the accuracy at low 
drain voltages is important then P1 and Vpk dependence on drain voltage needs to 
be taken into account, (3.62) – (3.63). The additional parameters are determined 
from a transconductance plot at low drain voltages, defining gmpk0, Vpk0 and P10.  
  

130 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
)
tanh(
)
(
0
0
DS
pk
pks
pk
pk
V
V
V
V
V




          
 
       (3.62)         
 















)
(
cosh
1
1
1
)
(
2
1
10
1
1
DS
DS
BV
P
P
P
V
P
 
 
       (3.63) 
 
 
 Therefore, P1 = gmk/ Ipk is defined in the saturation region and P10 = 
gm0/Ipk0 is defined at low VDS. The fitting parameter B is on the order of 1.5 and 
its dependence in terms of gate voltage is taken into account in the expression:  
= 0/(1-KgVGS), with 0 determined at zero gate bias and Kg is a fitting parameter. 
It has been found experimentally [24] that the transconductance and drain 
resistance measured from S-parameters in the MHz to GHz range are different 
than the values determined from DC measurements. This phenomena is called 
dispersion and is attributed to trapping of electrons at the FET surface and within 
the device and occurs in the KHz range. This problem can be minimized if 
measurements to determine the device parameters are made under pulsed 
conditions, (i.e., the bias is applied during a small interval of time sufficient to be 
able to make the evaluations but not enough for the dispersion effects take place 
and for temperature to change). 
        
 
 
 
Figure 3.23      Chalmers equivalent circuit of the MESFET.  After [23]. 
 
 
The approach from the authors, [25], is to take this effect into account by 
multiplying the term P1d to obtain (3.65). The equation P1d takes into account the 
effect of frequency on transconductance and is added as a pole in ftr, the corner 
frequency where the dispersion effect occurs. The term P1dc is the value of P1 
measured in the saturation region at DC and P1rf is the extraction of P1 under RF 
conditions.  
 
 


2
1
1
1
1
1
1
/
1
1
tr
sdc
srf
sdc
sdc
srf
d
f
f
P
P
P
P
P
P




  
     
       (3.64) 
G 
S 
Rgd 
DGS 
CDS 
DGD 
VGS 
CGS 
CGD 
RS 
RG 
ID(VGS,VDS) 
S' 
G' 
RD 
D' 
S' 
RF 
CF 
VDS 
VGS 
Ri 
D 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
131 
 















)
(
cosh
1
1
1
)
(
2
1
10
1
1
1
DS
d
DS
BV
P
P
P
P
V
P
 
     
       (3.65) 
 
 
The RF, CF parameters in the equivalent circuit are added to fit the static 
output conductance to that measured by S-parameters. This correction only works 
for small signal applications. For large signal, the resistor is replaced by a 
resistance that is a function of gate voltage, (3.66), with RF0 the minimum value of 
RF and RFp0 is the value of RF at the pinch off voltage. The forward current on the 
gate junctions are modeled by Schottky diodes, (3.1), with Is replaced by Igs and Vj 
replaced by (Vgs – Vbi) for the gate-source junction and by Igd and (Vgd – Vbi) for 
the gate-drain junction. Breakdown effects in the model considers two currents in 
the circuit when drain voltage is close to the breakdown voltage, VB. 
 
 
)
tanh(
1
0
0




Fp
F
F
R
R
R
 
 
 
 
     (3.66) 
 
 
There is a rise in the drain current that was modeled by the author as a 
decrease in output conductance and shows up in the I/V plot as an increase in 
current, (3.67). This effect is more noticeable when gate voltage in near pinch off, 
which makes total voltage on the drain junction the sum of VB and pinch-off 
voltages. The second current is a reverse current on the drain-gate junction that 
builds up with time and may quickly drive the device into destruction. This 
current is represented by an equation similar to the one used for forward 
conduction, (3.68) – (3.69).  
 
 
)
tanh(
)
1(
)
(
)
(
DS
V
V
kb
sb
DS
DS
DS
V
e
V
V
G
B
dg







           (3.67)  
 
 











T
B
gs
V
V
V
gb
gs
gsb
e
K
I
I

1
   
 
 
 
       (3.68) 
 











T
B
gd
V
V
V
db
gd
gdb
e
K
I
I

1
   
 
 
 
       (3.69) 
 
 
An illustration of DC currents and transconductance for a MESFET 
modeled after the Chalmers model is found in Figure 3.24, where the peak of 
transconductance occurs around VGS = + 0.35 V. Gray traces are measured and 
black traces are from Angelov model. 
 

132 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.0
2.5
20
40
60
80
0
100
VDS
IDS.i, mA
,
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
-2.0
0.5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
100
VGS
gm_mS
g
_
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
          a) IDS(VGS,VDS)  
 
            b)gm(VGS)VDS=2V 
 
Figure 3.24      Chalmers model for NE67300 for: Ipk = 58 mA; Vpk=-0.25V; P1 = 1.2; P2 = 0.24; P3 = 
0.64;  = 4.2; = 0.04. Gate voltage swept from -1.6 to +0.4V. 
 
 
An additional current correction is the introduction of a linear function to 
account for temperature dependency. This effect is important for large devices 
operating at high power but not so much for the smaller devices (< 300 µm gate 
width) used in mixers.  
 
The new family of FET devices HEMTs and PHEMTs appeared in the 
mid 1980s with several advantages in terms of low noise, gain and frequency of 
operation compared to MESFETs. The mechanism of operation is different, which 
reflects in different properties, the most obvious is a higher transconductance. 
Also the transconductance in general peaks at a gate voltage equal to or lower than 
zero volts and its profile as a function of gate voltage resembles a Gaussian shape. 
The device turn on is much more abrupt and the threshold voltage is closer to 
zero, which are desirable features for mixer designs. For these reasons PHEMTs 
or HEMTs became an attractive option in new mixer designs. In spite of the 
different mechanism of operation, in terms of electrical circuit, similar models 
applied to MESFETS are equally applicable to HEMTs. A simulation of I/V and 
transconductance for a low noise HEMT device is in Figure 3.25 showing the 
Gaussian profile for gm, illustrating the model versatility.   
 
 
    
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.0
2.5
10
20
30
40
0
50
VDS
IDS.i, mA
      
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
-0.0
0.2
-1.0
0.4
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
100
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
80
VGS
gm_mS
IDS.i, mA
 
 
          a) IDS(VGS,VDS)  
 
            b)IDS(VGS)VDS=2V 
 
Figure 3.25      Chalmers model for NE32100 for the following parameters: Ipk = 20 mA; Vpk=-0.25V; 
P1 = 3.2; P3 = 0.5;  = 2;  = 0.16. 
 
 
 
Vpk 
Ipk 
gmpk 
 
α 
Vknee 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
133 
Some of the model parameters are extracted from I/V and gm,VG plots 
indicated in the figure. A similar hyperbolic tangent with an argument represented 
by a power series with gate-source voltage as a variable, was applied to model the 
capacitances due to  similarities of the  IDS(VGS, VDS) and CGS (VGS, VDS) profiles. 
The functions are expressed by (3.70) for the gate-source capacitance and (3.71) 
for the gate-drain capacitance. 
 
 
)]
tanh(
1
)][
tanh(
1[
2
1
0





GS
GS
C
C
   
 
     (3.70) 
 
)]
tanh(
1
)][
tanh(
1[
4
3
0





GD
GD
C
C
   
 
     (3.71) 
 
 
The functions i, for i=1 - 4 are expressed by four independent series 
represented by (3.72) – (3.75).  
 
 
3
3
2
2
1
0
1
GS
gsg
GS
gsg
GS
gsg
gsg
V
P
V
P
V
P
P





   
 
       (3.72) 
 
3
3
2
2
1
0
2
DS
gsd
DS
gsd
DS
gsd
gsd
V
P
V
P
V
P
P





    
       (3.73) 
 
3
3
2
2
1
0
3
GS
gdg
GS
gdg
GS
gdg
gdg
V
P
V
P
V
P
P





    
       (3.74) 
 
3
3
2
2
1
1
0
4
)
(
DS
gdd
DS
gdd
DS
GS
cc
gdd
gdd
V
P
V
P
V
V
P
P
P






      (3.75) 
 
 
The author provided simplified expressions usable if a maximum 
accuracy of 10% is sufficient. 
 
 
)]
tanh(
1
)][
tanh(
1[
1
1
0
DS
gsd
GS
gsg
GS
GS
V
P
V
P
C
C



   
       (3.76) 
]
)
tanh(
1
)][
tanh(
1[
1
1
1
0
DS
GS
cc
gdd
GS
gdg
GD
GD
V
V
P
P
V
P
C
C




          (3.77)  
 
             
                   
 
Figure 3.26     Capacitance from Chalmers model for the NE67300 device biased at VDS = 2V and gate 
voltage ranging from -1.8 to +0.4 V in 0.4 V increments.  
 

134 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
An example of a capacitance model for a MESFET is observed in Figure 
3.26 for the gate source capacitance. The model capacitance in the gray plot 
compares well with the measured capacitance in the black plot. The capacitance 
was obtained from S-parameter measurements at low frequency (in the hundredths 
of MHz) as a function of voltage. The parameter values are as follows: P0gsg = 0; 
P1sgs = 0.1; P2gsg = 0.072; P3gsg = 0.028.   One limitation of this model, considering 
the maximum value of tanh() is a maximum drain current equal to 2Ipk. In case 
the drain current goes above this limit, the model may not provide a good fit to 
transconductance, limiting model accuracy.  
 
 
3.3.4 Model Extraction 
 
The extraction of parameters for MESFET models follows a similar strategy 
applied to BJTs. The first step is the de-embedding of the series resistances, which 
can be obtained from DC measurements. The conventional Fukui [26], method is 
still one of the most widely. It consists in making three measurements with a 
forward current Ig applied to the gate, one with drain open and source grounded, 
one with drain grounded and source open and one with source and drain grounded. 
Equation (3.78) describes this circuit in all three situations where the difference is 
in Req, which can be Rs, Rd, or Rs in parallel with Rd respectively.  
 
 









s
g
T
g
eq
g
GS
I
I
V
I
R
R
V
ln
)
(

  
 
 
      (3.78) 
 
Three equations are developed from basic (3.77), namely, 
 
 


g
GDS
GS
I
eshort
drainsourc
V
opendrain
V
R
/
)
(
)
(
1



     (3.79) 
 


g
GS
GS
I
opendrain
V
opensource
V
R
/
)
(
)
(
2



  
       (3.80) 
 
 
The solution for the system results in the following: 
 
 
2
1
2
1
1
R
R
R
R
Rs







   
 
      
       (3.81) 
 
s
d
R
R
R



2
  
 
 
      
      
       (3.82) 
 
 
The gate resistance is found by applying two different currents to the 
diode, monitor the difference in voltages and calculate the resistance by means of 
(3.83). The currents should be close to maximum gate current to guarantee the 
logarithm term is nearly constant at two close currents.   
 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
135 
 
eq
GS
IGS
GS
GS
g
R
I
V
V
R






)
(
)
(
2
1
2
1
  
 
 
       
       (3.83) 
 
 
Another alternative to determine the source or drain resistance is to apply 
a voltage at the gate and monitor the voltage over Rs and Rch with a multimeter 
connected to the drain. The evaluation is valid if the gate current is sufficiently 
high, so that Rch << Rs and the effect of channel resistance is minor. The process is 
repeated for the drain resistance.  
 
The access resistances and capacitances can also be obtained by "cold" 
FET S-parameter measurements, [27]. The method consists of DC shorting the 
drain and source to ground and inserting a high gate current. The equivalent 
circuit is in Figure 3.27 where the region under the gate is described by a 
distributed RC network. The Z parameters for this network can be shown to be 
given by the set of (3.84) – (3.86). Equation (3.84) is a linear function of gate 
current, so that Z11 can be measured for two current values and inserted in a plot. 
Extending the straight line for zero gate voltage provides Rs, Rg and Rch. There are 
four resistive parameters to determine with three equations. Fukui’s method can 
be used in addition to determine all the resistances. The parasitic inductances are 
calculated using (3.85) and (3.86). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.27      Equivalent model for a MESFET biased with a low positive current at the gate and no 
voltage bias at the drain, source grounded.   
  
 
 
)
(
/
3
/
11
g
s
g
T
ch
g
s
L
L
j
I
V
R
R
R
Z








   
       (3.84) 
 
s
ch
s
L
j
R
R
Z
Z





2
/
21
12
   
       
 
       (3.85) 
 
)
(
22
d
s
d
ch
s
L
L
j
R
R
R
Z






   
       
 
       (3.86) 
 
 
The extraction of the model DC parameters is self explained in their 
definitions. For instance, the first coefficient of (3.60) in the Angelov model, P1, is 
Lbias 
+VGS 
50 
50 
R0
Rd 
RS 
C0 
Ld 
Rg 
LS 
Lg 
Lbias 

136 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
obtained from the ratio between gmk and Ipk. The other coefficients P2, P3 are 
adjusted for best fit on the gm(Vgs) curve.  
 
Additional useful equations to take account of dispersion and for 
modeling capacitance are described next, (3.87) – (3.97), where the small signal 
parameters are obtained directly from S-parameters measured at low frequencies 
in the order of hundredths of MHz, [28]. At these frequencies, the inductance 
effects can be neglected and only the resistive and reactive elements are 
significant for the device S-parameters.  
 
 










22
22
*
1
1
S
S
gd
 
 
 
      
    
       (3.87) 
 
 
 
Where    = -1  if 0 < 22 < 180  
 
 
  = 1  if -180 < 22 < 0  
 
 
 
)
1(
2
1
*
21
*
d
m
g
S
g


  
 
      
    
       (3.88) 
 
)
1(
2
1
*
12
*
d
gd
g
S
C


 
 
 
      
       (3.89) 
 




















*
*
*
*
11
*
1
1
2
1
d
d
m
dg
gs
g
g
g
C
C


 
                    (3.90) 
 










*
*
*
22
*
1
1(
2
1
m
dg
d
ds
g
C
g
C


 
       
       (3.91) 
 
 
In these equations, gm
* = gm'/Y0, gd
* = gd'/Y0, C* = C'/Y0 with Y0 = 20 
mS. The device intrinsic parameters are defined by first taking into account the 
series resistances, Rd, Rs, Rg using the equations: 
 
 
'
)'
'
(
d
d
d
m
s
g
R
g
g
R
D



    
 
 
       
       (3.92) 
 
)
1('
D
g
g
m
m


   
 
 
 
 
       (3.93) 
 
)
1
/(
'
D
g
g
d
d


   
 
 
 
 
       (3.94) 
 
)
1
/(
)'
'
)(
'
'
(
'
D
C
R
C
R
g
g
C
C
dg
d
gs
s
d
m
gs
gs





 
       (3.95) 
)
1
/(
)'
'
('
'
D
C
R
C
R
g
C
C
dg
d
gs
s
d
dg
dg




 
 
       (3.96) 
'
'
)'
'
('
(
'
d
gs
d
m
dg
g
ds
ds
g
C
g
g
C
R
C
C




 
     
       (3.97) 
 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
137 
3.3.5 Alternative Models 
 
There are other models in the literature also capable of providing continuous high 
order derivatives of currents, [29, 30]. For instance, the Nelson-Maas [31] 
approach proposes a drain current function, (3.98), whose sine argument is 
defined in terms of gate voltage per (3.99). The coefficients a1-to-4 are fitting 
parameters and Vf is the maximum gate voltage over which the model is intended 
to operate. The interesting feature of this model is the coefficients are fitted not 
only to the measured current components but also to its measured derivative 
components as well. 
 
 


)
tanh(
)
3
sin(
)
2
sin(
)
sin(
4
3
2
1
DS
DS
V
x
a
x
a
x
a
a
I





  (3.98) 
 
)
(
)
(
th
f
th
GS
V
V
V
V
x



 at (Vth < VGS < Vf) and (VDS > 0)  
       (3.99) 
  
 
 
A popular model among ADS users is the EEHEMT [32] model, which 
allows independent fitting of DC and RF parameters and has been successfully 
applied to power amplifiers. The basis to construct the drain equation is the 
transconductance profile from Figure 3.28. It assumes a nearly constant value 
below Vth, a linear region between Vth up to Vg0 and a nearly constant region just 
above Vg0. The compression region is divided into three sections, with an 
individual equation for each and equations for transition between the regions. As 
can be expected, the I/V for this model is complex with long fitting equations. It 
has already been pointed out that capacitance models work well in time domain 
simulators but not in harmonic balance ones. Here it is more convenient for the 
software to derive charge waveforms instead and convert them to the frequency 
domain by multiplication with j. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.28      Transconductance profile employed in the EEHEMT model. The region between Vth 
and Vb is modeled by a sine function. Between Vg0 and Vc0 transconductance is 
saturated. Vc0 indicates where gm compression starts and α controls a smooth transition 
to full compression.  After [32]. 
gm(DC) 
Vgs 
Va 
Vc0 
Vth 
Vg0 
gmmax 
α 

138 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The charge at the gate in the EEHEMT model is assumed to be a function 
of gate to source and drain to source voltages, (3.100) and the reactive gate current 
is obtained by its derivative with respect to the corresponding voltage, (3.101). 
The derivative relative to its own voltage, defines a capacitance, Cgs, and the 
derivative relative to a voltage in another branch, defines a transcapacitance, Cm. 
Application of transcapacitances needs to obey the conservation of charge which 
means (3.103) must be valid.  
 
 
)
,
(
ds
gs
gs
gs
V
V
Q
Q

 
 
 
 
 
     (3.100) 
 
 
dt
dV
V
Q
dt
dV
V
Q
I
ds
ds
gs
gs
gs
gs
g






  
 
 
     (3.101) 
 
dt
dV
C
dt
dV
C
I
ds
m
gs
gs
g


 
 
 
 
     (3.102)   
 
 
gs
m
ds
gs
V
C
V
C





  
 
 
 
 
     (3.103)   
 
 
This approach has been demonstrated to be equivalent to the principle of 
division of gate charge in two components, (3.104), where each charge is 
dependent on gate source and gate drain voltages. Manipulating the equations it 
can be shown the gate current is actually given by (3.105) where the term 
associated with the gate source derivative contains parts of Is and parts of Id and 
the term associated with gate drain derivative contains similar dependencies, [33]. 
The gate current under this formulation does not compare to the original (3.44) 
where the components are distinctly associated with Is and Id, respectively.  
Therefore, depending on the simulation conditions, the reactive currents 
associated with drain and source may violate charge conservation, causing 
convergence problems in harmonic balance simulators.  
 
 
gd
gs
g
Q
Q
Q


 
 
 
 
 
     (3.104)        
 
d
s
gd
gs
g
I
I
dt
dQ
dt
dQ
I




 
 
 
 
  
 
dt
dV
V
Q
V
Q
dt
dV
V
Q
V
Q
I
gd
gd
gs
gd
gd
gs
g
gd
g
gs
g
























 
     (3.105) 
 
 
 
Another alternative model that frequently appears in recent publications 
is the table-based approach. This model consists of a series of DC and S-

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
139 
parameter measurements performed over a large range of gate and drain bias to 
fill up a table in two or three dimensions. This data is reduced to a model capable 
of representing DC, small signal and large signal operation. During simulation the 
data in the table is accessed using interpolation between data points. The 
interpolation technique must guarantee not only continuity in the I/V but on their 
derivatives as well.  The literature has several papers making use of this technique 
originally developed for MOS devices, [34 – 36]. 
 
The Root (Agilent) model, [37, 38], is a popular table based model, 
commercially available, whose drain current is described by (3.106). The first 
term represents the DC component and the last term represents the nonlinear 
currents at frequencies above t, the dispersion cut-off frequency. A direct 
evaluation of drain currents at DC and large currents at high frequencies is the 
best way to determine (3.105). Such a procedure has indeed been proposed in a 
work reported in [39], where the IRF,VRF, Qg
RF and Qd
RF are measured at 2 GHz.  
However, most of the published work on table models has been on DC I/V 
acquisition and derivation of capacitances and other high frequency components 
from bias dependent S-parameters. The data is then processed to obtain the high 
frequency drain current and charge at the gate. The model uses H() as a diagonal 
matrix with elements h(n0) with n = 0,1,2,... and 0 the fundamental frequency, 
which is equal to 1 at DC and becomes zero at high frequency. The reactive 
component of drain current is represented by the gate charge QD and  is a 
diagonal matrix with elements at n0. 
 
high
DS
GS
D
DS
GS
D
DC
DS
GS
D
DS
V
V
I
H
V
V
Q
j
V
V
I
H
I
)
,
(
))
(
1(
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
(







 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (3.106) 
 
 
The principle of charge division is applied in Root’s model to determine 
the reactive currents. A three terminal voltage controlled charge source element, 
(VCQS), and two capacitances Qgs(Vgs, Vds) and Qgd(Vgs, Vds) are arranged in the 
configuration shown in Figure 3.29(a). The VCQS defines charge as a function of 
one or more controlling voltages and is analogous to a voltage controlled current 
source (VCCS). The model in terms  of capacitance is in Figure 3.29(b) showing 
the conventional Cgs and Cgd capacitance, plus a  gate voltage dependant 
transcapacitance, which is the reactive analogue of transconductance.  
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 3.29      Charge modeling (a) Three terminal VCQS element plus gate charges; (b) Equivalent 
capacitance circuit. After [37]. 
Ids 
S 
D
G
+ Qgd - 
+ Qgd - 
S 
D 
G 
Cgs Cm 
Cgd 
Cds 

140 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
GD(VG) 
S 
DGS 
CGD 
CGS 
VG 
RS 
CDS 
S 
VDS 
VGS 
DGD 
RG 
G 
RD 
D 
 
 
Following this approach, the authors report that some of the nonlinear 
modeling problems in conventional models are solved: (1) the time delay that is 
absent in conventional nonlinear models is taken into account by the 
transcapacitance between drain and source, Cm  -gm; (2) the large signal model 
can be reduced to small signal at any bias; (3) the high frequency current 
description includes the dispersion effects. 
 
On the other hand it has been pointed out the model has difficulty in 
getting higher order derivatives under certain circuit conditions. One of the causes 
is the interpolation procedure used, in particular cubic splines, when the signal 
amplitude is smaller than the voltage spacing between data points 
 
 
3.3.6  Cold FET  
 
A special model is required for a FET when it is operating in the cold FET 
condition, [40], that is in absence of applied DC bias in the channel, Figure 3.30. 
The resistance of the channel is controlled by the voltage applied to the gate, 
changing the resistance from a high value (off condition) to a low value (on 
condition) as the gate voltage is swept from pinch off to the maximum gate 
voltage. Hence, in a first approximation, the cold FET can be represented by a 
single nonlinear element GDS(VG). An evaluation of the channel conduction as a 
function of gate voltage for a commercial MESFET device, the NE71000, is found 
in the literature and represented in Figure 3.31. The experimental results suggest 
representing the function by a piece wise equation described by (3.107) – (3.109). 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.30      Cold FET model; there is no channel current. The important nonlinear element is the 
channel resistance that is dependent on gate voltage.  After [40]. 
 
 
)
(
P
DS
V
g
G


 for VGS > 0.0 
  
  
                    (3.107) 
 
)
(
P
GS
DS
V
V
g
G


for VGS > VP  
 
        
        (3.108) 
 
0

DS
G
  for VGS < VP  
 
       
                    (3.109) 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.31      Measured GDS of a NE71000 MESFET.  From [40]. 
 
 
The parameter g, represents the slope of the channel conductance in the 
on-state. An equation describing the channel conductance in terms of gate voltage 
and appropriate for computer simulation is given by the expression, [41]: 
 
 
)
1
tanh(
)
(
2
1
0
g
V
g
g
V
G
GS
GS
DS



 
 
 
   (3.110) 
 
Where  g0, g1, g2 = fitting parameters 
 
 
A resistive model capable of representing the device in the first and third 
I/V quadrants is applicable to a wider range of circuit configurations. The first 
quadrant refers to Vds and Ids both positive; the second to negative Vds and positive 
Ids; the third to Vds and Ids both negative; and the fourth to positive Vds and 
negative Ids. A simple model supported by most commercial simulators, the 
Curtice-Ettenberg model, has been successfully demonstrated to describe channel 
conductance in the first and third quadrants, [42]. The model is determined for 
VDS0 = 0, employing (3.52) and (3.53) with c = 0. The parameters for a 
0.5x300µm2 FET from the reference is in Table 3.3, and the simulated I/V plot is 
in figure 3.32 for the following gate voltages, -1, -.75, -.5, -.25 and 0 volts. 
 
 
 
Table 3.3 
Typical Curtice-Ettenberg Model for a Cold FET  
DC  
Parameter 
Value 
DC 
Parameter 
Value 
A0 
0.334 
Rg 
2.0 
A1 
0.404 
Rd 
1.3 
A2 
0.124 
Rs 
6.7 
A3 
0.001 
Cgs0 
0.191 
γ 
1 
Cgd0 
0.14 
τ 
2 ps 
 
 
After [42]. 
 
 

142 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
            
  
 
Figure 3.32      Channel resistance in first and third quadrant using Curtice-Ettenberg model. 
 
 
Most authors assume the output drain-source capacitance to be constant, 
while the gate-source capacitance is nonlinear and can be described by an 
expression similar to the one employed for the channel conductance (3.110), [41]. 
The fitting parameters C0, C1, C2 model the dependence of both CGS and CGD on 
VGS. 
 
 
)
tanh(
2
1
0
C
V
C
C
C
GS
GS


 
 
         
                    (3.111) 
 
 
Finally, the model includes diodes to represent effects from gate 
conduction under larger gate drive voltage. The cold FET model described for 
MESFET devices can also be applicable to MOS devices given a few 
modifications. The diodes are eliminated since there is no DC gate conduction. 
However, in standard MOS technology there are substrate diodes from drain and 
source to ground that have to be included in the model of Figure 3.14, which have 
to be considered at large signals. 
 
 
3.3.7 Dual Gate MESFET 
 
The dual gate device has found applications in many functions, from gain 
controlled amplifiers to broadband distributed amplifiers and is particularly 
interesting to mixer designers. The reason is the isolation provided by the device 
between gate 1 and gate 2 that allows mixer design without the need for couplers 
or baluns to combine LO and RF signals. The DC description of this device has 
been proposed as equivalent to a cascode connection of two single gate devices as 
represented in Figure 3.33, [43]. The DC conditions are contained in the set of 
equations: 
 
 
2
1
D
D
D
I
I
I


  
 
          
 
       
     (3.112) 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
143 
 
2
1
DS
DS
DS
V
V
V


 
 
 
       
        
     (3.113) 
 
1
2
2
DS
G
GS
V
V
V


 
 
 
       
   
     (3.114) 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
     (a) Dual gate MESFET                             
 (b) Cascode model 
 
Figure 3.33      Dual Gate and cascode (two single gate FETs) representations.  After [43]. 
 
The current description has been proposed as a combination of two single 
ended models, but it results in a transcendental equation that requires numerical 
solution. An interesting alternative approach has been proposed to describe the 
current with the introduction of a conduction parameter to overcome 
transcendental problems, [44]. The dual gate has four operating modes depending 
on internal bias conditions of transistors T1, T2.  
 
 
0

D
I
and 
0


T
GS
V
V
 
       
        
       
     (3.115) 
 
Mode : T1, T2 are in saturation. The current is controlled by VGS1 and is 
independent of VG2 and VDS. FET1 acts as a current source and VDS1 adjusts itself to 
establish the required VGS2 to allow FET2 to carry current ID. Voltage on the gate 
of FET1 modulates drain current and voltage at the gate of FET2 modulates drain 
voltage of FET1.   
 
 
2
1
)
(
T
GS
D
V
V
I


 
Dsat
T
GS
V
V
V



1
0
        
    (3.116) 
 
 
 
 
2
1
GS
GS
V
V

 
 
 
 
 
1
2
1
GS
G
DS
V
V
V


 
 
 
 
1
2
DS
DS
DS
V
V
V


 
 
 
 
 
which applies to  
Dsat
DS
V
V

1
and 
sat
Ds
DS
V
V
2
2 
 
 
Mode : T1 is in resistance mode and behaves as a nonlinear source 
resistor for saturated device T2: Drain current ID(VGS1, VG2) is independent of VDS. 
The drain resistance of FET1, RDS1 behaves as a source resistor for FET2, making 
VGS2 more negative than VG2.  
T2 
T1 
VDS2
VGS2 
G1 
ID1S 
D1 
VDS1 
VG2 
VDS 
VGS1 
D 
IDS 
G2 
IDS 
VG2 
G2 
G1 
D 
VGS1 
VDS 

144 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
2
1
2
)
(
DS
T
G
D
V
V
V
I



 
 
 
 
     (3.117)  


2
2
2
2
2
1
)
)(
1(
]
[
1
1
T
G
T
G
T
G
DS
V
V
a
V
V
BV
V
V
BV
a
V










 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (3.118) 
where 
)
(
1
T
GS
V
V
a
BV


 
 
Mode : T2 is in resistance mode and behaves as a nonlinear load for T1. 
In this mode, only VGS1 modulates the drain current.  
 
 
2
1
)
(
T
GS
D
V
V
I


   
 
 
 
 
     (3.119) 
 


2
1
2
2
2
1
)
(
1
T
GS
G
T
DS
T
G
DS
V
V
a
V
V
V
V
V
V







       (3.120) 
 
Mode : both T1 and T2 are in resistive mode, and behave as a series 
connected nonlinear resistance between drain and source terminals. This is the 
only mode where VDS controls drain current. 
 
 


2
1
1
1
)
(
2
DS
DS
T
GS
k
D
V
V
V
V
a
I




         
          
     (3.121) 
 
















DS
GS
T
DS
T
DS
T
DS
V
V
V
V
AV
V
V
V
AV
V
2
1
1
2
1
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    (3.122) 
 
with, 
)
(
2
1
G
GS
k
V
V
a
AV


 
 
The VDS2 and VGS2 in all modes are given by: 
 
2
1
DS
DS
DS
V
V
V


 
1
2
2
DS
G
GS
V
V
V


 
 
The enhancement conductance factor, ak, is applied to reduce the value of 
VDsat near saturation and is defined as follows.  
 
                    



T
GS
k
Dsat
V
V
a
V




1
/
1
1
1
 
 
 
    (3.123) 
 
The point D1 in Figure 3.33(b) represents the pseudo drain for the 
common source transistor and pseudo source for the common gate device. The I/V 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
145 
plot considering two independent devices is in Figure 3.34, obtained from the 
Cubic Curtice model for the NE673 device connected in cascode mode. To gain 
better insight into how the dual gate works, let’s compare the common source 
device FET1 loaded with a resistor R and with a current source. The load line is 
then mapped into the I/V plane as depicted in the figure by the dotted line.  
 
   
1
2
3
4
0
5
0.016
0.032
0.048
0.064
0.000
0.080
VDS1
IDS1.i
VDS2
 
 
Figure 3.34      DC parameters for a dual gate with VG2 = constant.  Two instances of the NE67300 
model were connected in cascode to simulate a dual gate.  
 
The gain is a function of resistance and proportional to its value. High 
gain requires high load resistance, but its value is limited by the DC voltage drop 
that can drive FET1 out of saturation. The device FET2 acting as a current source 
shows a high impedance for a broad range of voltages and a constant large 
current.  Operation at mid current in modes  or  corresponds to T1 in saturation, 
with high trans-conductance. If current is high, then T1 enters the resistive region 
reducing its trans-conductance.  The I/V plot from external drain to ground is in 
Figure 3.35, for a fixed VG2, showing a reduction in VDsat (2.0 V) compared to a 
single gate device VDsat (1.0 V).  
 
                 
 
Figure 3.35     DC I/V function of VG1 and external drain to ground voltage, VDS, with VG2 =  cte. 
 
Therefore VDsat is much higher resulting in degraded output power 
compared with a single ended device. A popular dual gate device developed by 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0
2.5
3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
4.5 
0.0 
5.0
0.016 
0.032 
0.048 
0.064 
0.000 
0.080 
VDS, V
IDS1.i

146 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
NEC is the NE25339, having gate lengths Lg1 = 1 µm, Lg2 = 1.5 µm, and gate 
width equal to 800 µm. 
 
 
3.3.8 MOSFET 
 
The majority of MOS FETs built are of the enhancement type, a normally off 
device, requiring application of a voltage to the gate to induce a current between 
drain and source terminals. The devices can be N channel or P channel, which is 
related to the type of current—of electrons or holes—respectively. In CMOS 
technology both types are available. Even though depletion MOS can be 
fabricated, they are not offered by foundries due to better processing and 
performance obtained from enhancement mode. The devices were initially 
modeled for long channel (L > 5 µm) devices after conventional MOSFET theory 
and were inserted into the SPICE simulator in the 1970s. A few levels of SPICE 
were specifically developed for MOS models capable of including more effects 
occurring in smaller geometry transistors, following the trend for devices in the 
order of 1 µm. With the advancement of technology towards even shorter 
channels (submicron), the BSIM (Berkeley Short-Channel Insulated Gate FET 
Model), [45], simulator was introduced in early 1980s with more modeling 
options and more robustness not only for convergence of nonlinear circuits but 
also capability of handling thousands of devices. Still the conventional models are 
important for preliminary analysis and are reviewed in this section with extensions 
to short channel models used by BSIM when they were introduced. 
The original MOS nonlinear model from Shockley is found in [46] and 
the schematic is depicted in Figure 3.36. The device itself is simple, consisting of 
two capacitances, a current source and the source and drain access resistances.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.36      Large signal model for n-channel MOS devices used for enhancement and depletion 
type devices.   
 
DBD 
S 
RS 
CGD 
id(VG,VD) 
RD 
CBS 
D 
B 
G 
CGS 
CGB 
CBD 
DBS 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
147 
VGS = 0 
VGS = cte 
VDsat 
triode 
region 
VDS 
IDS 
Saturated region 
active region 
VDS < VDsat 
VDS > VDsat 
VGS 
Vth 
IDS 
 
Four terminals are represented, G for gate, D for drain, S for source and 
B for bulk or substrate. The model also contains two diodes representing the 
reversed pn junctions formed between the drain and source with the substrate 
contact. There are additional parasitic capacitances between source and drain to 
ground in parallel with the diodes. The static model for the drain current is defined 
for three regions: the linear, or triode, region where VDS < VDsat; the saturation 
region where VDS > VDsat; and the cutoff region for VGS < 0 as in Figure 3.37(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
              (a) IDS(VGS) characteristic.                          (b) IDS(VDS) characteristic. 
 
Figure 3.37     I/V for MOS devices illustrating the areas of operation in the first quadrant. 
 
 
 
The transfer characteristic is quadratic, represented in Figure 3.37(a), 
showing its enhancement nature, where current starts to flow for voltages above 
the threshold, Vth. 
 
The current in the linear region is described by (3.124) as a function of 
applied drain and gate voltages, threshold voltages, saturated drain voltage, and 
the transcondutance parameter . For low drain voltages the drain current is linear 
with gate voltage while it is quadratic in respect to drain voltage. The saturation 
region is defined as the region where output conductance becomes equal to zero, 
(i.e., when the current derivative relative to drain voltage is equal to zero). Per this 
definition the current reaches saturation for a drain voltage defined by (3.125) and 
remains constant for higher drain voltages.   
 







2
2
1
)
(
DS
DS
th
GS
ds
V
V
V
V
i

, for VDS < VDsat                   (3.124) 


DS
th
GS
DS
DS
V
V
V
dV
dI



  -->  
th
GS
Dsat
V
V
V


           
    (3.125) 
 
The equation for the saturated region is given by (3.126) where it is 
assumed the current is constant for VDS > VDsat. In real devices the current is not 
actually constant but shows a slope revealing an output conductance due to 

148 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
channel modulation effects. It is accounted for by the conductance parameter,  , 
to control the output conductance of the device. 
 


)
1(
2
2
DS
th
GS
ds
V
V
V
i





, for VDS > VDsat 
    
    (3.126) 
 
Comparing this equation with (3.39) describing the MESFET one can see 
they are essentially the same except for the factor 2 dividing . Below the 
threshold voltage, VGS < Vth, the current 
0

ds
i
. The transconductance parameter 
 is a function of device parameters represented in (3.127).  
 
eff
ox
n
L
W
C


  
 
 
 
 
     (3.127) 
Where  
W = channel width, µm 
Leff = effective channel length, µm 
VDsat = drain saturation voltage 
 
µn = electron mobility near the silicon surface, cm2/V-s 
 
The transconductance in the saturation region is given by the derivative 
of current with respect of gate voltage, (3.128), while the transconductance 
dependence on current is given by (3.129).  
 
)
(
th
GS
m
V
V
g


  
 
 
 
 
     (3.128) 
DS
m
I
g

2

   
 
 
 
      
     (3.129) 
 
 
In small signal operation the diodes are reverse biased and no current 
flows to the substrate. In the large signal regime there may be instantaneous 
negative voltage in short intervals of time that turn the diodes on and introduce 
distortion. The effect of these diodes are taken into account in the definition of 
threshold voltage, (3.130), where 
sis the surface potential when channel 
inversion occurs and VSB represents the substrate potential. Channel inversion is 
specific to MOS devices, where an oxide exists between the gate plate and the 
substrate of p-type material. Applying a positive potential to the gate attracts 
electrons on the substrate material under the gate in such a density the gate surface 
is inverted from p-type to n-type material, allowing current to flow. In (3.130), Vt0 
is the threshold voltage when the substrate voltage is set to zero and  is called the 
body effect coefficient. 
 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
149 


S
SB
S
t
th
V
V
V







0
  
 
       
     (3.130) 
A
ox
N
q
C


2
1

 
 
 
 
 
     (3.131) 
   
Where Cox = gate capacitance per unit area, pF 
        
NA = doping density of p-type material 
 
 
A number of symbols exist to represent CMOS devices and a common 
representation for n-channel devices is in Figure 3.38. The representation of p-
channel is similar with inversion of arrow direction and power supply 
connections. In later chapters it will be shown the substrate terminal may be used 
to introduce LO to modulate the channel current.   
 
 
 
 
 
  (a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 3.38      MOS symbols for n-channel: (a) n-channel with substrate connection to negative rail; 
(b) n-channel with shorted substrate; (c) substrate connection not indicated.  
 
One of the reasons CMOS technology has been so successful is its low 
power dissipation and scalability in terms of constant electric field in the channel. 
In particular, if gate length are reduced, then VTH and bias are also reduced and 
doping increases all by the same constant factor. Those properties are very 
attractive for digital systems, but the dynamic range is reduced in this process, 
which is undesirable for analog applications. On the other hand, the models scale 
well for gate length exceeding 4 µm. For smaller geometries there are a number of 
effects in the device physics that invalidated the scaling, in particular the carrier 
velocity saturation in high electric fields and the reduction of mobility. Therefore, 
efforts were made to adapt the previous (3.124) – (3.126) for the triode and 
saturation region to represent those effects. An early BSIM formulation indicated 
the equations were multiplied by coefficients 1 and 2 defined in [45]. An 
additional parameter was additionally introduced, sc and is defined in the same 
reference. The new currents are described by (3.132) and (3.133) respectively for 
the triode and saturation region. The new equations shows a reduction in the drain 
current compared to long channel devices. The equation for drain current in the 
saturation region has an additional particularity: At gate voltages near threshold 
the I/V relationship is approximately quadratic, while when gate voltage is high, 
sc(VGS - Vth) >> 1, the I/V relationship becomes linear. Therefore the plot in 
Figure 3.37(a) is nearly a straight line for a short channel device instead of 
S 
G 
D 
S 
G 
D 
S 
G 
D 

150 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
quadratic. The VDsat voltage is defined by (3.134) with short gate effects included 
in the physical parameter sc.  
 









2
1
2
)
(
)
(
1
DS
DS
th
GS
th
GS
sc
DS
V
a
V
V
V
V
V
i



 
 
     (3.132) 
 
 
 
 
 
      for VGS > Vth and 0 < VDS < VDsat      




)
1(
)
(
1
2
2
2
DS
th
GS
sc
th
GS
DS
V
V
V
V
V
i









 for VGS> Vth and VDS>VDsat       (3.133) 
 
 
sc
th
GS
Dsat
V
V
V



 
 
 
 
 
     (3.134) 
)
(
0
BS
S
sc
SB
S
t
th
V
V
V
V









     
      
     (3.135) 
 
 
The simplest capacitance model for MOS technology considers the oxide 
gate capacitance per unit area, Cox, so total capacitance under the gate is CoxWL.  
In the triode region the channel is continuous under the gate so CGS and CGD are 
equal and correspond to half the total capacitance. In saturation the channel 
pinches off near the drain so there is almost no effect of drain voltage on 
capacitance, one can consider CGD = 0. The total charge stored in the channel is 
considered for CGS and the result is equal 2/3(WLCox). Additional capacitance 
equations found in BSIM were developed to unify the three regions of operation 
in a single equation avoiding the discontinuity often found when using different 
equations for different regions of operation.  
 
Table 3.4 
Capacitance as a Function of the Region of Operation 
Operation Region 
CGB 
CGS 
CGD 
Cutoff 
CoxWLeff 
0 
0 
Linear 
0 
CoxWLeff/2 
CoxWLeff/2 
Saturation 
0 
(2/3) CoxWLeff 
0 
 
 
 
 
The additional capacitances in the model consist of two substrate 
capacitances, CBD and CBS, which are of depletion type associated with the reverse 
biased source and drain relative to the substrate. Those are the main voltage 
dependent capacitances in the model. 
 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
151 
0
0
1

BS
BS
BS
V
C
C


, source to substrate capacitance                        (3.136) 
 
 
0
0
1

BD
BD
BD
V
C
C


, drain to substrate capacitance 
 
     (3.137) 
 
 
 
 The MOSFET analysis considers the device operating in its normal 
region of operation, with gate source voltage above the threshold region, where it 
is assumed there is a strong inversion in the p channel material. For gate voltages 
lower than the threshold voltage but still high enough to create a depletion region 
at the silicon surface, the device is said to operate in weak inversion mode. The 
low current between source and drain operates as a npn bipolar transistor where 
the source acts as emitter, the substrate as the base and the drain as the collector. 
Therefore, it is expected the drain current in weak inversion follows an 
exponential law.  
 
 
3.4 SUMMARY 
 
The models for most common semiconductor devices including Schottky diodes, 
bipolar transistors, GaAs FETs, and MOS FETs were discussed in this chapter. 
The objective has been to provide designers with knowledge of simple models that 
will help them investigate conversion properties in mixers and determine 
impedance matching. The Gummel Poon and the Chalmers (Angelov) models 
were introduced as tools that are quite sophisticated in terms of the design 
information they can provide, and their parameters are quite simple to extract for a 
given device. More accurate models are not as simple to construct, and have a 
larger number of parameters to determine, requiring in certain cases advanced 
equipment and software tools. These models are beyond the scope of this chapter. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
M. P. Lepselter, H. A. Waggener, R. W. MacDonald, and R. E. Davis, 
"Beam Lead Devices and Integrated Circuits," Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume 
53, No. 4, 1965, pp. 405. 
[2] 
S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, 1981, 
page 262.  

152 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
[3] 
Agilent data sheet: "Beam Lead Schottky Diodes for Mixers and 
Detectors," Diode Type HXCH, 5300 Series. 
[4] 
P. E. Gray, D. DeWitt, A. R. Boothroyd, and J. F. Gibbons, “Physical 
Electronics and Circuit models of Transistors,” SEEC, Volume 2, John Wiley, 
1964.  
[5] 
F. Sischka, “Gummel-Poon Bipolar Model: Model Description and 
Parameter Extraction,” Agilent Technologies, Munich, 2001. 
[6] 
J. McMaken, S. Nedeljkovic, J. Gering, and D. Halchin, "HBT Modeling," 
IEEE Microwave Magazine, April 2008, pp. 48-72. 
[7] 
M. Iwamoto, D. E. Root, J. B. Scott, Al. Cognata, P. M. Asbeck, B. 
Hughes, and D. C. D'Avanzo, "Large Signal HBT Model with Improved Collector 
Transit Time Formulation for GaAs and InP Technologies," 2003 IEEE MTT 
Symposium Digest, pp. 635-638. 
[8] 
Michael Schroter and Tzung-Yin Lee, "Physics-Based Minority Charge and 
Transit Time Modeling for Bipolar Transistors," IEEE Transactions on Electron 
Devices, Volume 46, No. 2, February 1999, pp. 288-300. 
[9] 
C. L.Searle, A. R. Boothroyd, E. J. Angelo Jr., P. E. Gray, and D. O. 
Peterson,  Elementary Circuit Properties of Transistors,  SEEC, Volume 3, John 
Wiley, 1964. 
[10] M. Schroter, D. R. Pehlke, and T-Y Lee, "Compact Modeling of High 
Frequency Distortion in Silicon Integrated Bipolar Transistors," IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices, Volume 47, No. 7 July 2000, pp. 1529-1535. 
[11] T. H. Ning and D. D. Tang, "Method for Determining the Emitter and base 
Series Resistances of Bipolar Transistors," IEEE Transactions on Electron 
Devices, Volume 31, No. 4, April 1964, pp. 409-412. 
[12] K. Morizuka, O. Hidaka, and H. Mochizuki, "Precise Extraction of Emitter 
Resistance from an Improved Floating Collector Measurement," IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices, Volume 42, No. 2, February 1995,  
pp. 266-273. 
[13] T. Zimmer, A. Meresse, Ph. Cazenave, and J. P. Dom,,"Simple 
Determination of BJT Extrinsic Base Resistance," Electronic Letters, 10th 
October 1991, Volume 27, No. 21, pp. 1895-1896. 
[14] C. Chang, P. Asbeck, P. Zampardi, and K. C. Wang, "Direct Measurement 
of Cbe and Cbc Versus Voltage for Small HBT's with Microwave S-Parameters 
for Scaled Gummel-Poon BJT Models," IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory 
and Techniques, Volume MTT-47, No 1, January 1999, pp 108-110. 
[15] T. Zimmer, J. B. Duluc, and N. Lewis, "Method for BJT Transit Time 
Evaluation," Electronic Letters, 1st October 1998, Volume 34, No. 20,  
pp. 1979-1980. 
[16] W.W. Hooper and W. I. Lehrer, "An epitaxial GaAs Field Effect 
Transistor," Proceedings of the IEEE, November 1969, pp. 2085-2086. 
[17] P. Wolf, "Micro. Properties of Schottky-Barrier Field Effect Transistors," 
IBM Journal of Research and Development, March 1970, pp. 125-141. 

 
Semiconductor Modeling 
153 
[18] W. R. Curtice, “A MESFET model for use in the design of GaAs Integrated 
Circuits,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 
MTT-28, No. 5, May 1980, pp. 448-456. 
[19] Stephen A. Maas, Nonlinear Microwave and RF Circuits, Artech House, 
Inc. 2003, p. 90. 
[20] H. Statz, P. Newman, I. M. Smith, R. A. Pucel, and H. A. Haus, “GaAs 
FET Device and Circuit Simulation in Spice,” IEEE Transactions on Electron 
Devices, Volume ED-34, February 1987, pp. 160-169. 
[21] W. R. Curtice and M. Ettenberg, “A nonlinear GaAs FET model for use in 
the design of output circuits of power amplifiers,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-33, No. 12, December 1985, 
pp. 1383-1394. 
[22] Stephen A. Maas, “Fixing the Curtice FET Model,” Microwave Journal, 
March 2002, pp. 68-80. 
[23] I. Angelov, H. Zirath, and N. Rorsman, "A New Empirical Nonlinear 
Model for HEMT and MESFET Devices," IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Volume 40, No. 12, December 1992, pp. 2258- 2266. 
[24] C. Camacho-Penalosa and C. S. Aitchinson, "Modeling Frequency 
Dependence of Output Impedance of a Microwave MESFET at Low 
Frequencies," Electronic Letters, June 6th, 1985, Volume 21, No. 12, pp. 528-529. 
[25] I. Angelov, L. Bengtsson, and M. Garcia, "Extensions of the Chalmers 
Nonlinear HEMT and MESFET Model," IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Volume 44, No. 10, October 1996, pp. 1664-1674. 
[26] H. Fukui, "Determination of the Basic Device Parameters of a GaAs 
MESFET," The Bell System Technical Journal, Volume 58, No. 3, March 1979, 
pp. 771-797. 
[27] G. Dambrine, A. Cappy, F. Heliodore, and E. Playez, "A New Method for 
Determining the FET Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit," IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 36, No. 7, July 1988, pp. 1151-1159. 
[28] R. A. Perichon, P. Gouzine, and E. Camargo, "Determination 
Experimentale d'un Schema Eequivalent Non Lineaire Simple Representatif du 
TEC AsGa," L'Onde Electrique, Volume 64, No. 2, Mars Avril, 1984, pp. 79-85. 
[29] Anthony E. Parker and David J. Skellern, "A Realistic Large-Signal 
MESFET Model for SPICE," IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume 45, No. 9, September 1997, pp. 1563-1571. 
[30] Vicentiu I. Cojocaru and Thomas J. Brazil, "Improved Prediction of the 
Intermodulation Distortion Characteristics of MESFETs and PHEMTs via a 
Robust Nonlinear Device Model," 1998 IEEE MTT Symposium Digest, pp. 749- 
752. 
[31] Stephen 
Maas 
and 
David 
Nelson, 
"Modeling 
MESFETs 
for 
Intermodulation Analysis of Mixers and Amplifiers," 1990 International 
Microwave Symposium,  pp. 1291-1294. 
[32] Clausen William, Small and Large Signal Modeling of MM-Wave MHEMT 
Devices, Master Thesis, University of South Florida, 2003.  

154 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
[33] Stephen A. Maas, Nonlinear Microwave and RF Circuits, Artech House, Inc., 
2003, p. 92. 
[34] B. R. Chawla, H. K. Gummel, and Pl Kozak, "MOTIS - An MOS Timing 
Simulator," IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems, Volume CAS-22, No. 12, 
December 1975, pp. 901-910. 
[35] S. H. Homayouni, D. M. P. Schreurs, G. Crupi, and B. K. J. C. Nauwelaers, 
"Technology Independent Non-Quasi-Static Table Based Nonlinear Model 
Generation," IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 
57, No. 12, December 2009, pp. 2485- 2852. 
[36] C. J. Wei, Y. A. Tkachenko, and D. Bartle, "Table-Based FET Model 
Assembled from Small-Signal Models," Proceedings of RAWCON, 1998,  
pp. 355-358. 
[37] David E. Root and Brian Hughes, "Principles of nonlinear active device 
modeling for circuit simulation," ARFTG Conference Digest, December 1988, pp. 
1-24. 
[38] D. E. Root, S. Fan, and J. Meyer, "Technology Independent Large Signal 
Non Quasi-Static FET Models by Direct Construction from Automatically 
Characterized Device Data," European Microwave Conference, 1991, pp. 927-
932. 
[39] D. G. Morgan, G. D. Edwards, A. Phillips, and P. J. Tasker, "Full 
Extraction of PHEMT State Functions Using Time Domain Measurements," 2001 
MTT Symposium Digest, pp. 823-826. 
[40] S. Peng, “A Simplified Method to Predict the Conversion Loss of Resistive 
Mixers,” IMS 1997 Symposium Digest, pp. 857-860. 
[41] E. W. Lin and W. H. Ku, “Device Considerations and Modeling for the 
Design of an InP-Based MODFET Millimeter-Wave Resistive Mixer with 
Superior Conversion Efficiency,” IEEE Transactions on MTT, Volume 43, No. 8, 
August 1995, pp. 1951-1959. 
[42] F. De Flaviis and S. A. Maas, “X-Band Doubly Balanced Resistive FET 
Mixer with Very Low Intermodulation,” IEEE Transactions on MTT, Volume 43, 
No. 2, February 1995, pp. 457-460.  
[43] C. Tsironis and R. Meierer, “Microwave Wide band Model of GaAs Dual 
Gate MESFET’s,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume 30, No. 3, Mar 982, pp. 243-252. 
[44] R. A. Minasian, “Modeling DC Characteristics of dual-gate GaAs 
MESFETs,” IEE Proceedings, Volume 130, Pt. I, No. 4, August 1983, pp. 182-
186. 
[45] B. J. Sheu, D. L. Scharfetter, P. K. Ko, and M. C. Jeng, "BSIM: Berkeley 
Short-Channel IGFET Model for MOS Transistors,” IEEE Journal of Solid State 
Circuits, Volume SC-22, No. 4, August 1987, pp. 558-566. 
[46] S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, 1981, 
page 440.  

155 
Chapter 4 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
While the switching devices used in a mixer are critical, so also are the coupling 
structures that connect them to the RF, LO, and IF ports.  The quality of electrical 
performance is largely determined by the coupling structures, including frequency 
coverage, conversion loss, inter-port isolation, and impedance matching.  
Mechanical performance is also largely driven by the coupling structures, which 
tend to dominate size, packaging, and sometimes also environmental 
considerations.  This chapter discusses baluns, both active and passive, and 180 
degree hybrid couplers also known as the magic-T.  Passive baluns based on 
transmission lines or lumped components are covered, as are active baluns using 
bipolar or FET devices.    
 
 
 
4.1 BALUN STRUCTURE 
 
Electrical circuits in general operate in one of two modes: unbalanced or balanced.  
The current return for an unbalanced connection is through ground, while the 
current return for a balanced connection is through a second connection point that 
is not grounded.  Unbalanced connections are sometimes referred to as single 
ended, and balanced connections are sometimes referred to as differential. Two 
points having 180 degrees phase difference are sometimes referred to as opposed 
or opposite in phase.  The component used to interface between balanced and 
unbalanced configurations is called a balun, short for balanced to unbalanced.  A 
distinction is made between voltage and current baluns [1, 2].  The voltage balun 
maintains the two terminal voltages relative to ground equal in magnitude and 
opposite in phase regardless of the load.  In contrast, the current balun maintains 
the two terminal currents equal in magnitude but opposite in phase regardless of 
the terminal voltages. Either way, balance in a balun is typically measured by 
comparing the S-parameter amplitude and phase transfer characteristics between 
the single ended port and the two respective balanced ports.  Baluns are used in 
many types of devices including antennas, amplifiers, frequency multipliers, and 

156 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
mixers. They are used in mixers to combine multiple switching devices, and 
provide isolation between ports and cancellation of certain mixing products.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.1      A coaxial line over a ground plane illustrates a balun. 
 
 
The operation of a balun is illustrated by considering a coaxial 
transmission line above a ground plane as in Figure 4.1.  On the left side at port 
P1 it is driven in single ended mode by the generator, with the external shield 
connected to ground.  On the right side the output is balanced with the current 
flowing between ports P2 and P3 through load resistor RAB.   For balanced 
operation, S21 and S31 are ideally equal in magnitude and 180 different in phase.  
Circuit balance is degraded by a second (parasitic) transmission line that is formed 
by the outer shield of the coaxial line and ground.  It is short circuited on the left, 
and presents input impedance ZG on the right, with ZG = jZG0tan, where ZG0 is 
the characteristic impedance.  If ZG is high then S21 ≈ – S31.  But if ZG is low, then 
P2 and P3 will be unbalanced and S21 ≠ – S31.  If ZG0 is high, then ZG is a 
wideband high impedance.  But if ZG0 is low, then the balun has increased 
frequency dependence because ZG is high only at frequencies where the 
transmission line length approaches a quarter wave ( = 90 degrees). Series 
inductance can also be added to the outside conductor to extend the low frequency 
end of operation, by passing the coaxial line through a ferrite sleeve or coiling it 
around a piece of ferrite material, [3]. The ferrite dramatically increases 
inductance and loss to the parasitic current flowing on the outside of the shield, 
increasing ZG and thus also bandwidth.   The differential currents flowing inside 
the coaxial line cancel the magnetic field outside the coaxial outer shield so they 
are not affected by the ferrite.     
Usage of transmission lines (wire pairs) instead of individual wires 
increases bandwidth by absorbing the otherwise parasitic inductance and 
capacitance into the characteristic impedance.  The wires are typically wound 
around a piece of magnetic material, for example a ferrite core having a binocular 
or toroidal shape.  The currents in the two lines flow in opposite directions, 
creating what is called the odd mode.  The odd mode causes a negligible net 
magnetic field in the ferrite material that minimizes ferrite losses; also, the odd 
mode electric field is primarily between the two wires minimizing stray 
capacitance.  Currents can also flow in the same direction in the two wires, 
creating the even mode that is generally undesired.  In the even mode the electric 
P1
ZG = jZGOtan 
Ground 
RAB 
RS 
P2 
P3 
VS 
ZG0 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
157 
fields are primarily between the respective wires and ground, corresponding to the 
parasitic characteristic impedance ZG0 discussed earlier.  The even mode generates 
a strong magnetic field that interacts with the ferrite and enhances mutual 
inductance between the wires.  This causes a high even mode impedance between 
the wires, and increased losses in the magnetic material, both being desirable for 
broadband operation.  Even and odd mode analysis is usually associated with 
symmetrical coupled lines.  Much has been written about the analysis of coupled 
lines applied to transmission line transformers [4, 5].   
 
  
4.1.1 Bifilar Transmission Line  
 
A special class of transformers suitable for the VHF and UHF bands uses a two-
wire (bifilar) transmission line. This simple technology comprises one or more 
twisted pairs of insulated wire, wrapped around one or more pieces of high 
permeability ferrite material.  The use of ferrite materials provides the benefit of 
increasing even mode impedance, and odd mode coupling.    Various transformer 
configurations have been described, with the earliest ones typically having integer 
impedance ratios [6].  More recent designs have been proposed that have a wider 
range of impedance ratios [5, 7].    
In 1950 Guanella patented a balun with a 1:1 impedance ratio represented 
in Figure 4.2 [8].  The input at the left is single ended, and the output across RL on 
the right is balanced.  To maintain balance at low frequencies, the grounded lead 
must have a high inductive reactance to isolate the bottom end of RL from ground.  
This is accomplished by the transmission line being wound on a ferrite core to 
increase reactance of the ground return winding at low frequencies.  In practice 
the inductive reactance should be at least ten times the load impedance. Some 
ferrite materials have higher permeability than others.  With higher permeability 
material, the number of turns required for a given reactance decreases.  This 
results in a shorter physical length transmission line that in turn increases the 
upper end of the operating bandwidth.  At high frequency the ferrite permeability 
decreases, and the impedance is maintained by the twisted pair transmission line.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.2      Bifilar transmission line 1:1 transformer balun proposed by Guanella. 
V2 
I1 
I2 
Vg 
V1 
RL 
Rg 

158 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
To transform an unbalanced to balanced line and introduce a 1:4 
impedance transformation, the circuit can be modified by adding a second twisted 
pair line as shown in Figure 4.3.  This was referenced by Guanella in a 1949 
patent [9].  The 1:4 ratio is obtained by connecting the transmission lines in 
parallel at the input, and in series at the output.   The series and parallel 
connections allow the input and output impedances to be determined by analyzing 
half the circuit, then combining the results from each half.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3      Guanella 1:4 transformer wound on single ferrite cores. 
 
The transformer input impedance on the left is obtained by finding the 
input impedance of one transmission line terminated with load resistor RL/2.  The 
transformer input impedance on the left equals half the transmission line input 
impedance because of the parallel connection of the two transmission lines on the 
left.  RL/2 terminates each line because the two transmission lines are connected in 
series at the output, with the series combination terminated by RL.    Output 
impedance on the right is similarly analyzed by finding the impedance of a single 
line terminated in 2Rg, then doubling the single line impedance due to the series 
connection of transmission lines on the right.  2Rg terminates each line because 
the two transmission lines connect in parallel on the left and are terminated by Rg.  
Assuming no losses, the transformer input and output impedances are given, 
respectively, by (4.1) and (4.2), where Z0 is the characteristic impedance of a 
single transmission line, l is the transmission line phase shift, and l is the 
physical line length.  The well known equation for the impedance of a lossless 
transmission line is used for (4.1) and (4.2).  
 At lower frequencies where l approaches zero, it is easy to see the 
impedance transformation ratio is 1:4.  And as frequency increases so that l 
ranges from 0 to 360 degrees the 1:4 impedance ratio is maintained if Z0
2 = RGRL.    
The port impedances and available gain are derived in Appendix 4A.  Available 
gain from the low impedance parallel connection to the high impedance series 
connection is given by (4.3).  If Z0
2 = RGRL, and RL = RG/4, then GA = 1.   
+    V   - 
V2 
I1 
I2 
Vg 
V2 
V1 
RL = 4 RG 
Rg 
I1+I2 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
159 
l
R
j
l
Z
l
jZ
l
R
Z
I
I
V
Z
L
L
in




sin
2
cos
sin
cos
2
2
0
0
0
2
1
1





          
         (4.1)      
     
l
R
j
l
Z
l
jZ
l
R
Z
I
V
Z
G
G
out




sin
2
cos
sin
cos
2
2
2
0
0
0
2
2




         
         (4.2) 
 
)
(
cos
4
)
(
sin
,
,
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
l
Z
l
R
Z
R
R
in
Pavail
out
Pavail
G
L
G
L





         (4.3) 
 
 
The Guanella balun of Figure 4.3 is a current balun.  It supports equal 
and opposite current flow into and out of the load resistor, RL, regardless of 
terminal voltages.  The two bifilar lines can be wound onto the same ferrite core 
because the voltage, V, is the same magnitude for both transmission lines 
regardless of variations in the load resistance.  In contrast, if a center tap to ground 
is introduced at the center of the load resistor, so the load is divided into two 
resistors each approximately equal to 2RG, then the input-to-output voltages across 
the two transmission lines are not necessarily equal, which requires that each 
bifilar line instead be wound on a separate ferrite core.  An alternate version of the 
circuit is shown in Figure 4.4 that allows both bifilar lines to be wound on the 
same ferrite core regardless of whether or not the output load has a grounded 
center tap [2].  If slight differences exist between the top and bottom load resistor, 
then current can flow to and from ground where the resistors tie together to 
maintain equal voltage V across both transmission lines.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.4      Alternate version of 1:4 impedance ratio transformer allowing construction on a single 
ferrite core.  From [2].  
 
A transformation ratio of less than 1:4 is obtained in the circuit of Figure 
4.5 by combining the Guanella 1:4 transformer with a 1:1 transformer and making 

160 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
the connections in such way that the voltages on the left side are in series, and the 
currents at the right side are in parallel across the load resistor [10].  Both the 
input and output are unbalanced.  The voltage VL on the right side is the same for 
both transformers. VL appears at the left side of the 1:1 transformer and is also 
divided in half by the 1:4 transformer due to its 1:2 voltage ratio. Since these two 
voltages are in series on the left, the total voltage Vg = ( 1+1/2)VL = 1.5 VL, causing 
the overall impedance ratio to be 1.52:1 =  2.25:1.  If Zg is 100 ohms, for example, 
then load resistor RL is 44.44 ohms. For a matched condition the characteristic 
impedances of all three lines are 67 ohms, equal to the geometric mean of the 
input and output resistances. A 1:1 balun can be added on the right to provide a 
balanced output if desired. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.5   Transformer balun for an impedance ratio of 1:2.25 obtained by the use of three 
transformers in parallel.  After [10].  
 
A 1:4 impedance ratio auto-transformer is embodied by the Ruthroff 
balun depicted in Figure 4.6, [11]. In this circuit the input voltage, V1, appears at 
the output, adding to the output voltage, V2, which is across the transmission line.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.6      4:1 Transmission line transformer proposed by Ruthroff.  After [11]. 
 
Rg 
I2 
V1 
I1 
V2 
RL 
Vg 
V1 
I1+I2 
RL=Rg/2.25 
1:1
Zg 
1:4 
Vg 
VL 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
161 
There is a time delay between voltages V1 and V2 due to the length of the 
transmission line, which limits the high frequency response of the circuit. 
Equations for the input and output impedances are developed in [11] assuming 
lossless transmission lines. The (low) input impedance on the left is given by (4.4) 
as a function of transmission line parameters and load resistance, RL. The (high) 
output impedance on the right is a function of the transmission line parameters 
and the generator impedance, Zg.  
 
 
l
jZ
l
Z
l
jZ
l
Z
Z
Z
L
L
in




sin
)
cos
1(
2
sin
cos
0
0
0




        
 
         (4.4) 
 
l
jZ
l
Z
l
jZ
l
Z
Z
Z
g
g
out




sin
cos
sin
)
cos
1(
2
0
0
0




 
 
         (4.5) 
 
The insertion loss of the transformer is also developed in [10], and given 
by (4.6); it is obtained by taking the ratio of available power from the generator to 
the power delivered to the load. Minimum loss is obtained when RL = 4Rg and Z0 = 
2Rg. Inserting these values into (4.6) gives the simplified insertion loss of (4.7). 
 


2
2
2
0
2
0
2
)
cos
1(
4
sin
cos
)
cos
1(
2
l
R
R
l
Z
Z
R
R
l
R
l
R
L
L
g
g
L
L
g
I


















      (4.6) 
 
   
    
2
2
2
)
cos
1(
4
sin
4
)
cos
3
1(
l
l
l
LI







     
     
       (4.7)
 
 
 
The low frequency response from (4.6) is flat down to DC (βl = 0), which 
is not correct, since the reactance of the transmission line in Figure 4.6 is in shunt 
with the load, increasing the loss as frequency approaches DC. The cutoff low 
frequency can be defined by the frequency where the reactance is less than 10 
times the value of Rg or RL. The minimum inductance, Lm, is provided by (4.8), 
specified in terms of number of turns, N; permeability, µ0;, core effective cross 
section area, Ae; and the average magnetic patch length in the core, Le, [12].  
 
8
0
2
10
)
(
)
2
(
4.0


cm
L
cm
A
N
L
e
e
m


 
 
         
         (4.8) 

162 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
The connection of the Ruthroff transformer as a balun is depicted in 
Figure 4.7, with the balanced load, RL, connected between the input terminal and a 
floating transmission line at terminal 2. Note that terminal pair 1,3 are at one end 
of the bifilar line, and terminal pair 2,4 are at the other end.  Thus current exiting 
terminal 1 is equal in magnitude with current entering terminal 3.  This introduces 
a phase reversal at terminal 2 relative to terminal 3, balancing the load, RL. The 
load is directly connected to the generator in this type of balun with no isolation 
between load and generator.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.7      A 4:1 Ruthroff transmission line balun.  After [11]. 
 
The design of bifilar transmission lines is usually empirical.  Some bifilar 
wire uses enamel insulation that is very thin, providing relatively low 
characteristic impedance and also a means of gluing the wires together.   Another 
approach is to twist individual wires together that are already insulated.  As the 
number of twists increases, the line impedance decreases [13].   The wire gauge, 
insulation type and thickness, and the number of twists/inch determine the 
characteristic impedance of the transmission line. If additional bifilar pairs are 
added in parallel and the combination of wires is twisted with the same number of 
turns, then the characteristic impedance will be lower than that of a single twisted 
pair. The evaluation of the line impedance can be determined using conventional 
time domain reflectometry (TDR) equipment or a vector network analyzer.  
The high permeability material usually is formed into a toroidal or 
binocular shape. A list of typically available magnetic materials is in Table 4.1, 
[12].  Practical information on the construction of transfomers for the frequency 
range of 2 to 30 MHz is found in the literature, [14]. For example, with a relative 
permeability of 100 to 125 at 1 MHz, a parallel pair using number 30 wire wound 
on a toroid core having of 0.5 inch diameter, provides a characteristic impedance 
of 100 ohm. A twisted pair of number 20 wire provides an impedance of 25 ohms.  
     
 
3 • 
2 
I1+I2 
I2
1 • 
I1 
RL 
Vg 
Rg 
V1 
V2 
4 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
163 
Table 4.1 
Magnetic Materials Properties 
Material
Supplier
Permeability (µi)
Bulk Resistivity 
(W-cm)
Q1 (NiZn)
Allen - Bradley
125
1.00E+09
Q2(NiZn)
Allen - Bradley
40
1.00E+10
H(NiZn)
Allen - Bradley
850
10E4 to 10E5
E     (Powdered 
Iron)
Arnold 
Engineering
10
1.00E-01
C2050(NiZn)
Ceramic 
Magnetics
100
3.00E+07
C2025(NiZn)
Ceramic 
Magnetics
175
5.00E+06
CMD5005    (NiZn)
Ceramic 
Magnetics
1400
7.00E+09
61 (NiZn)
Fair-Rite
125
1.00E+08
43 (NiZn)
Fair-Rite
850
1.00E+05
77 (NiZn)
Fair-Rite
2000
1.00E+02
3C8 (MnZn)
Ferroxcube
2700
10E2 to 10E3
K5(NiZn)
TDK
290
2.00E+06
KR6(NiZn)
TDK
2000
1E5 to 1E6 
 
Source: [12]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.8        Effect of magnetic material on the transformer bandwidth for a 4:1 transformer (12.5 to 
50 Ohms). (       ) Autotransformer; (          ) Transmission Line Transformer; (       ) 
Transmission Line Transformer with Core.  From [12].  
 
 
3 
2 
0 
1 
    Transducer Loss - dB 
Frequency - MHz 
0.1 
1.0 
10 
100 

164 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
A good example of the effect of magnetic material on insertion loss 
versus frequency is shown in Figure 4.8, [12]. The plot on the right shows 
measured results for a transmission line twisted pair balun based on the circuit of 
Figure 4.6 and built without magnetic material, while the full response is for the 
same transmission line balun but formed on a ferrite toroid core.  The plot on the 
left is for a nontransmission line autotransformer formed on a ferrite toroid core.  
The widest bandwidth is obtained by the transmission line balun built using 
magnetic material. 
 
 
4.2 MARCHAND BALUN  
 
The Marchand balun, [15], was introduced using coaxial components and has 
remained a preferred means for building baluns due to its low loss, wide 
bandwidth, and good amplitude and phase balance.  While the line lengths in the 
Marchand balun are a quarter wave long at the center frequency of operation, it 
can be designed to operate over a very wide bandwidth, with the line lengths 
being as small as one twentieth of a wavelength at the low frequency end.  The 
balun can also perform impedance transformation between the balanced load and 
unbalanced input, but bandwidth reduces as the ratio of input to output impedance 
increases or decreases from unity, [16].  The coaxial version proposed by Roberts, 
[17], is depicted in Figure 4.9(a). The coaxial transmission line of impedance Zb 
forms an open circuited stub in series with the load impedance, R1, while the outer 
conductors of the coaxial transmission lines with Za and Zb form a parasitic even-
mode shunt short circuited balanced line stub of characteristic impedance Zab.  
The equivalent transmission line circuit is in Figure 4.9(b), showing the 
unbalanced input on the left and the balanced output with load, R1, on the right. 
Let us define M as the impedance looking into the open circuit transmission line, 
and N as the impedance looking into the short circuit line. Neglecting losses, the 
values for M and N are given by (4.9) and (4.10):  
 
b
b
jZ
M

cot


 
 
 
 
 
         (4.9) 
b
ab
jZ
N

tan


 
 
 
 
 
       (4.10) 
 
The impedance, ZD, looking into junction D is given by the parallel 
combination of R1 with the impedance, N, and this is in series with the impedance, 
M.  The impedance, ZD, is given by (4.11) and is further developed into (4.12). 
 
M
N
R
N
R
Z D



1
1
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.11) 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
165 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.9      Marchand balun proposed by Roberts.  From [16]. 
 
 
b
b
ab
ab
ab
ab
D
jZ
jZ
R
jZ
R
Z



cot
tan
tan
1
1



     
 
       (4.12) 
b
b
ab
ab
ab
ab
ab
ab
ab
ab
D
jZ
Z
R
Z
R
j
Z
R
Z
R
Z





cot
tan
tan
tan
tan
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
1





     (4.13) 
           
Since the input impedance, Zin, is real, it is desired that ZD also be real.  
This can be accomplished by the reactance of M cancelling (compensating) out 
that of N at the center frequency of operation.  In other words, the reactance of the 
series open circuit line cancels the reactance of the parasitic shunt short circuit 
line.  This is facilitated by the fact that M = -jZbcotθb does not appear in the real 
part of ZD, in (4.9), thus impedance Zb can be adjusted for reactance cancellation at 
center frequency without affecting the real part of ZD.  It is further assumed that θb 
= θab = θ = π/2, meaning they are a quarter wave long at center frequency. 
Frequency variability is included as: 
0
2 f
f


 , where f0 is the center 
frequency.  Also, a conventional approximation is to make Zab = R1, so that ZD 
simplifies to:  
 


b
D
Z
R
j
R
Z






2
1
2
1
sin
cot
sin
 
 
       (4.14) 
 
 
 
                  
b) 
Equivalent Circuit 
a) 
Coaxial Balun 
ZD 
N 
M 
D 
Za 
Zb 
Zab 
R1 
Zin 

166 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Two conditions exist to cause the impedance ZD in (4.14) to be real: 
make cot = 0 that in turn makes ZD = R1, or make sin2() = Zb/R1. The cotangent 
condition establishes the center frequency when  = π/2. This is a narrow band 
case with optimal match at center frequency.  However, the balun can give wider 
bandwidth if center frequency VSWR is allowed to degrade.    As an example, 
consider a balun that transforms the 50 ohm generator impedance to a 70 ohm 
load impedance.  Here Zin = Zb = 50 ohms, Zab = R1 = 70 ohms, and θb = θab = θ.  
Values for θ where the 70 ohm load is transformed to 50 ohms are for sin2θ = 
Zin/R1 = 50/70 giving θ = 58°, 122°. The bandwidth is obtained from the 
difference in the angles (2 - 1)/0 = (f2 - f1)/f0 = 0.72, corresponding to 72% 
bandwidth, and a frequency ratio of 122/58 = 2.1. At mid band, θ = θ0 = π/2, 
making Zin = R1 = 70 ohms, giving a 1.4:1 VSWR.  The results of this analysis are 
in Figure 4.10.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 4.10      Input impedance as a function of frequency.  From [17]. 
 
A more detailed analysis of balun optimization was proposed by Oltman, 
[16]. The circuit is compensated if the real part of the impedances are equal and if 
the reactance slope of both impedances are similar but of opposite sign. The slope 
of reactance is given by (4.15).  Under this condition the reactance slope is zero if 
R1
2 = ZabZb, which was Marchand’s condition for optimal match.   
 
ab
b
ab
D
Z
Z
Z
R
j
f
Z





2
2

 at f = f0 
 
 
       (4.15) 
 
Oltman extends this to widen the bandwidth for a given mismatch 
amount.  The minimum mismatch at a specific off-center frequency occurs when 
reactance crosses zero at that frequency.  The resulting minimization criteria is 
given by (4.16), where fx is the lower or upper crossing frequency. 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
167 


2
2
1
2
tan
1
tan








R
Z
Z
Z
ab
ab
b
  with 
0
2 f
f x


 
 
       (4.16) 
 
Given the result of (4.15), the optimum generator impedance, S, is given 
as: 
 







2
1
1 1
2
R
Z
Z
R
S
ab
b
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.17) 
 
The top graph of Figure 4.11 shows the variation of the balun impedance 
for different values of Zab, Zb, and R1.  It is seen that a reactance slope of zero at 
center frequency exists for ZabZb= R1
2. But increased bandwidth of fx1 to fx2 is 
obtained for ZabZb < R1
2, per the previous example with 50 ohm input and 70 ohm 
output.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.11   Input impedance of the balun as  Zab , Zb, and R1 vary.  Variables x and r are the 
imaginary and real parts, respectively, of impedance ZD at point D normalized to load 
resistor, R.  From [16].  
 
The bottom plot shows that bandwidth is widest for Zab > R1, again 
indicating a high even mode impedance is desirable.  Alternately, load impedance, 
R1, can be transformed to a lower impedance at the junction D by inserting an 

168 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
impedance matching transmission line between junction D and the output, 
according to (4.18).   
 
 


tan
tan
1
0
1
0
jR
Z
j
R
Z
Zin



 
 
 
 
       (4.18) 
 
 The Marchand balun has been classified by the number of matching 
elements, [18]. In order to give more flexibility, a transmission line with 
impedance ZL is added between point D and load R1. A second order balun means 
Za = ZL, and Zb and Zab are used for impedance compensation. Third order means 
one of the lines is not matched, (e.g., Za); and, with fourth order all four elements 
can vary. Employing Chebyshev filter theory to match Zin to R1, the resulting 
element values in Table 4.2 are obtained, and the return loss is calculated for the 
circuit in the Figure 4.12. 
 
 
 
Table 4.2 
Marchand Balun Parameter Values versus Order 
 
      .
Order
Za 
Zb
Zab
ZL
Return 
Loss - dB
2
-
21
241
-
-9.5
3
-
17.5
215
70.7
-12.4
4
65
20
250
76
-14.9
Bandwidth, B = 10:1
Source Resistance, Z0 = 50 ohms
Load Resistance, R = 100 ohms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.12      Marchand balun mismatch properties as a function of orders 2, 3, and 4. 
 
 
 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Frequency - GHz 
Return Loss - dB 
2nd order 
3rd order 
4th order 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
169 
4.3 MICROSTRIP BALUNS  
 
One configuration of a simple microstrip balun is shown in Figure 4.13(a) [19].  A 
/2 line gives the 180º phase difference between ports 2 and 3, which is needed 
for odd mode excitation of ports 2 and 3 given an input signal at port 1.  If the 
source resistance at port 1 is R, and the load resistances at ports 2 and 3 each equal 
2R, then the port 1 input impedance equals R, so that S11 = 0, and port 1 is 
perfectly matched.  The reason for this is the input impedance of the transmission 
line at port 1 equals 2R, regardless of Z0, because the line is a half wave long.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
(a) 
Basic balun  
      (b) Compensated balun 
Figure 4.13      Microstrip balun.  After [19]. 
 
 
This impedance in parallel with the 2R load at port 3, gives total input 
impedance at port 1 equal to R.  S21 = -1/√2, and S31 = 1/√2 so insertion loss 
between port 1 and ports 2 & 3, respectively, is 3 dB with a 180 degree phase 
difference.  Input impedances into ports 2 and 3, respectively, are 2R/3, giving a 6 
dB return loss.  The center of the /2 transmission line for the basic balun of 
Figure 4.13(a) is a virtual ground for the odd mode, and a virtual open for the even 
mode (ports 2 and 3 driven with same amplitude and phase). Since the electrical 
length of the /2 line changes with frequency, the phase difference between the 
balanced ports deviates from 180 as the operating frequency deviates from center 
frequency. One way to improve the bandwidth of the basic balun is to add a 
second /2 line and two /4 lines as in Figure 4.13(b).  This balun structure is 
closely related to the rat-race hybrid discussed later in this chapter.  An analysis is 
given in Appendix 4B that shows if all the characteristic line impedances equal 
R√2, and all three ports are terminated with R, then S11 = 0 so the input is perfectly 
matched; S21 = j/√2 and S31= -j/√2 so insertion loss between port 1 and ports 2 and 
3 is 3 dB with a ± 90 degree phase shift; and S22 = S33 = -1/2 giving input 
impedance equal to R/3 at ports 2 and 3. Reference [19] says the additional lines 
compensate the even and odd mode impedances to improve bandwidth.  Another 
consideration is the phase of S31 and S21 both vary for the compensated balun, but 
for the simple balun the S31 phase is constant at 0 degrees while S21 phase varies 
with frequency.  When these baluns are used in diode mixers, the reference states 
L4 = /4  
Zo = R2 
L1 = /2 
 Zo = R2 
L2 = /2  
Zo = R2 
L3 = /4  
Zo = R2 
2 
3 
1 
Length = /2 
Z0 = 2R 
2 
3 
1 

170 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
conversion loss is lower for the compensated balun but has similar bandwidth.  In 
contrast, there is an improvement in both the level and bandwidth of the isolation 
for the compensated balun.  The increase in bandwidth is 25% to 30%.   
Another common balun topology uses a power splitter followed by a 
phase shifter in each arm to provide the total difference of 180 at the output 
balanced line.  This balun is narrow band due to its dependence on differences in 
transmission line lengths. An approach proposed in the literature, [20], is depicted 
in Figure 4.14, with the line parameters described in Table 4.3.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.14     Microstrip transmission line balun built with a in-phase power divider and phase shifter 
to rotate the phase.  
 
The Rbal represents the desired balanced impedance at the output ports, 
and Z0 represents the source impedance connected at the unbalanced port. The 
resistor in the power divider per design is equal to 2Z0. This balun provides 26% 
bandwidth considering a VSWR of 1.2:1 and the values in Table 4.3. 
 
Table 4.3 
Microstrip Transmission Line Parameters 
     
 
     
Element
Impedance Length
Z1
.84Z0
/4
Z2
1.19Z0
/4
Z3
/4
Z4
ZBal
L+/2
Z5
0.5Z4
/4
4
0Z
Z
 
 
 
4.3.1  Microstrip Edge Coupled Lines 
 
The coupled line circuit is an important building block for baluns. Two coupled 
lines can be treated as a four port network terminated with ZS and ZL impedances 
(or equivalent admittances). The general diagram is depicted in Figure 4.15. Two 
Z3 
Z2 
Z2 
Z0 
Z1 
Z3 
`Z
Z4 
Z5 
R=2Z0 
L 
L + /2 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
171 
symmetric coupled lines can be analyzed by separation into even- and odd-mode 
representations to ease analysis, with the two results being combined using 
superposition to analyze excitation at a single port. Symmetry of the coupled lines 
allows the usage of superposition; asymmetric lines cannot be analyzed using this 
approach.  The electric and magnetic walls at the lines of symmetry represent 
short and open circuits, respectively, facilitating analyses for odd- and even-mode 
excitation.   
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Odd mode.  
 
 
    (b) Even mode. 
Figure 4.15    Symmetry on a pair of coupled lines excited by even and odd mode generators. After 
[21].  
 
 
The cross section of a pair of symmetrical coupled lines is shown in 
Figure 4.16(a) with the equivalent capacitances represented in Figure 4.16(b). The 
capacitance between the two lines without considering the ground plane is C12, 
while the capacitance between the line and ground is C11 for the left line and C22 
for the right line.  C11 and C22 are equal if the lines have the same width.  The 
designations C11 and C22 follow from the capacitance matrix that describe these 
capacitances. If the propagation of signal is a perfect transverse electromagnetic 
(TEM) mode, then the characteristic impedance of the lines can be determined 
from the capacitances and the propagation velocity, Vp. The odd mode of 
propagation, Zoo is obtained by considering only the fields between the two lines 
without coupling to the ground plane. The even mode impedance, Zoe is obtained 
by considering only the fields between the lines and ground without coupling 
between the lines. The equivalent capacitances in each mode are: Coo = C11 + 2C12 
and Coe = C11 = C22.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Cross section coupled line 
                 (b) Capacitances of coupled lines 
Figure 4.16      Cross section and capacitance of two coupled lines.  After [21]. 
-Vg/2 
Vg/2 
ZL 
ZL 
2
1
Zs 
Zs 
Electric Wall  
Short Circuit 
3
4
Vg/2 
Vg/2 
2 
1 
Zs 
Zs 
ZL 
ZL 
Magnetic Wall  
Open Circuit 
3 
4 
C22 
C12 
r 
C11 

172 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
oe
p
oe
C
V
Z
1

 (4.19)   
oo
p
oo
C
V
Z
1

 (4.20) 
 
 
 
In Figure 4.15, for the even mode case the ports are excited in phase and 
the voltage amplitudes are similar with respect to a common ground. In the odd 
mode case, the ports are excited in counter phase, and voltage magnitudes are 
similar with respect to the line of symmetry between the coupled lines. The S-
parameters for this structure are found in the standard references, [21]. The S-
parameters for an ideal coupler are on the (4.22) to (4.25) assuming (4.21) is valid.  
 
 
oe
oo
S
L
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z


2
0
        
 
 
 
       (4.21) 



sin
)
(
cos
)
(
cos
)
(
11
oo
oe
S
L
S
L
Z
Z
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
S





  
 
       (4.22) 



sin
)
(
cos
)
(
sin
)
(
21
oo
oe
S
L
oo
oe
Z
Z
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
j
S





 
 
       (4.23) 


sin
cos
2
31
















Zoe
Z
Zoo
Z
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
S
oo
oe
L
S
S
L
             (4.24) 
0
41 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.25) 
 
At the frequency where  = 90 the S-parameters simplify to: 
 
0
11 
S
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
C
Z
Z
Z
Z
S
oo
oe
oo
oe




)
(
)
(
21
        
          
 
 
       (4.27) 
 
2
31
1
)
(
2
C
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
j
S
oo
oe
oo
oe





 
 
 
       (4.28)   
 
0
41 
S
         
                
 
 
 
       (4.29)    
 
 
The four port S-parameters are given by (4.30) for an ideal coupler 
represented in terms of coupling coefficient, C, and for source and load 
impedances defined by (4.19).  These relations are useful for designing various 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
173 
1 
4 
1 
4 
forms of microstrip edge coupled circuits, in particular baluns for mixer 
applications 
 























0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
]
[
2
2
2
2
C
C
j
C
C
j
C
j
C
C
j
C
S coupler
(4.30) 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
4.3.2 Coupled Microstrip Line Balun 
 
Before addressing the balun itself, let’s analyze two particular cases of coupled 
lines, starting with two ports open circuited as shown in Figure 4.17(a).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 4.17      Bandpass edge coupled lines: (a) open circuit, (b) short circuit.  After [22].  
 
 
 
The open circuit ports allow transformation of the four-port network into 
a two-port. The Z-parameters for this structure are given by, [22]: 
 
 

cot
2
11
Zoo
Zoe
j
Z



 
 
 
 
      (4.31) 
 

csc
2
12
Zoo
Zoe
j
Z



   
 
 
                     (4.32) 
 
The input impedance is given by (4.33), assuming the angle  at the 
center frequency of operation is equal to /2 and the output is terminated in a load 
equal to RL: 
 
 
2
2
1






oo
oe
L
in
Z
Z
R
Z
  
 
                      (4.33) 

174 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
2
/)
(
1
2
oo
oe
L
Z
Z
R
j
V
V



  
                       
       (4.34) 
 
 
If we make RL = (Zoe - Zoo)/2, then Zin is matched to RL and the phase shift from 
input to output is - 90º. A second coupled line of interest consists in replacing the 
open circuits by short circuits giving the complementary coupled line structure 
represented in Figure 4.17(b), which has similar properties. 
 
 
 
The Y-parameters for this structure are given by: 
 
 

cot
2
11
oe
oo
Y
Y
j
Y



 
 
 
 
       (4.35) 
 

csc
2
12
oe
oo
Y
Y
j
Y



 
 
 
 
       (4.36)
 
                  
 
These results can be used to obtain the input impedance and voltage gain, 
assuming the angle  at the center frequency of operation is equal to /2 and the 
output is terminated in a load equal to RL: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
2
1






oo
oe
oo
oe
L
in
Z
Z
Z
Z
R
z
                      
 
       (4.37) 
 


oo
oe
L
oo
oe
Z
Z
R
Z
Z
j
V
V
2
1
2


 
 
 
 
       (4.38)
 
                      
 
In this short circuit case, if RL = 2ZoeZoo/(Zoe - Zoo), then Zin is matched to 
RL and the phase shift from input to output is + 90º. A balun structure built with an 
in-phase power divider and using open coupled lines in one arm, and a pair of 
short circuit coupled lines in the other, is found in the patent literature, [23], and 
depicted in Figure 4.18. This balun, built on an alumina substrate with the 
parameters listed in Table 4.4, provided more than one octave bandwidth, centered 
at 8.0 GHz. The loss through the power divider is 3.6 +/- 0.5 dB and phase 
difference between gain to both ports is 170 +/- 5 over the band. 
 
 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
175 
Table 4.4 
Transmission Line Parameters 
                               
Element
Impedance Length
Z1
42
/4
Z2
60
/4
Zoeq
50
/4
Yoeq
1/50
/4
 
 
 
        After: [23]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.18   Microstrip balun with open coupled lines introducing -90 phase rotation and short 
coupled lines introducing +90 phase rotation for a differential phase of 180.  After 
[23].  
 
While one may be tempted to build a balun using two edge coupled 
microstrip lines as depicted in Figure 4.19, the frequency range over which half 
power is transferred from input port 1 to output ports 2 and 3 is very narrow, and 
the difference between the respective transfer phases is much below the desired 
180 degrees.  Performance is limited by the need to isolate port 3 from ground, 
and by the even mode impedance as discussed earlier, which can be increased by 
going from conventional microstrip to balanced microstrip.  This is done by 
adding an air gap between the bottom side of the substrate and the ground plane.  
Superior performance is obtained by using two broadside coupled lines as in 
Figure 4.28. Performance can also be improved by minimizing the gap between 
the edge coupled microstrip lines and arranging the lines in a spiral shape similar 
to that of Figure 4.31(b) to add inductance between port 3 and ground.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.19      Two edge-coupled line balun. 
Zeq, L 
Z1, L1 
Z2, L2 
Rbal 
Yeq, L 
1 
3 
2 

176 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
4.3.3 Three Coupled Lines 
 
If the Wilkinson divider from the balun of Figure 4.18 is eliminated and the 
coupled lines somehow paralleled, then the balun can be simplified and reduced in 
size. The circuit with three coupled lines in Figure 4.20(a) depicts a class of balun 
that follows this approach, patented in 2000, [25]. In general there is no direct 
synthesis for this type of structure and the design is done indirectly. A simple 
design method for this type of structure is found in an earlier publication, [24], 
consisting of splitting the three line coupler into two paralleled coupled lines as 
shown in Figure 4.20(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
 
            
(a) 
 
 
                         (b) 
Figure 4.20      (a) Three coupled lines; (b) two parallel coupled lines.  From [24]. 
 
 
The initial step is the design of the individual coupled lines, followed by 
adding the Y-parameters from each to obtain the overall Y matrix. Y-parameters 
are either determined from standard models or from a computer simulation. As is 
required for any type of coupled structure, a final electromagnetic analysis is 
useful to confirm and optimize the performance.   
 
 
4.3.4 Planar Marchand Balun 
 
The coaxial balun configuration of Figure 4.9(a) can easily be transformed into a 
planar configuration using two identical sets of coupled lines as represented in 
Figure 4.21, [26]. Planar realizations of the Marchand balun have become widely 
used in mixers and amplifiers. Common planar realizations include microstrip line 
topologies, coupled lines on microstrip, and suspended lines.  Both micro-strip 
coupled lines in the Marchand balun require a high ratio of even-mode to odd-
mode impedance, due to the reasons explained in Figure 4.1. The impedance of 
both sections can be evaluated from (4.19) and (4.20), with one solution for the 
equivalent impedances of the coupled lines given by Zs: 
 
oo
e
S
Z
Z
Z
0

 
 
 
 
                   (4.39) 
Circuit  A 
Circuit  B 
Zout 
Zin 
Zout 
Zin 
Zout 
Zout 
l = /4 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
177 
Applying the conditions stated in Figures 4.17 and 4.18 for short and 
open coupled lines, the bottom coupler is transformed into a two port network and 
the top coupler into a 3 port network. Merging the equations, the S-parameter 
matrix for a 3 port Marchand balun is given by:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.21      Marchand balun with two identical quarter wave long coupled lines.  From [26]. 
 
 
For (4.40) the load impedance equals Z0 as shown in Figure 4.21.  In 
contrast, to generalize the load impedance, for example, to Z1, the S-parameters 
are modified to generalized three port S-parameters, using the transformation 
proposed by Bodway, [27]. The resulting matrix is in (4.41). 
 
 





































2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
3
1
]
[
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
j
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
j
C
C
C
j
C
C
C
j
C
C
S balun
   (4.40)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
      
Z1 
Z0 
Zs2 
Z2 
Zs1 
b8 
b6 
a6 
b5 
a5 
b7 
a7 
a4 
b4 
a2 
a3 
b1 
b2 
a8 
b1=-a1 
b6=-a6 
b5=a5 
a4=b7 
b4=a7 
Z0 
Z0 
a1 
b3 

178 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
































































































































1
2
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
'
0
1
2
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
Z
Z
C
C
Z
Z
C
Z
Z
C
j
Z
Z
C
Z
Z
C
C
j
Z
Z
C
Z
Z
C
j
Z
Z
C
C
Z
Z
C
Z
Z
C
C
j
Z
Z
C
Z
Z
C
C
j
Z
Z
C
Z
Z
C
C
j
Z
Z
C
Z
Z
C
S balun
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (4.41) 
 
 
For optimum power transfer, 
2
/
1
31
21

S
S
, 
0
11 
S
,  and the 
phase difference between S21 and S31 is 180 degrees. Under those conditions, the 
coupling coefficient is then given by (4.42).  
 
 
1
2
1
0
1 

Z
Z
C
  
 
 
 
       (4.42) 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
The case of Z1 = 50 ohms results in a coupling of 4.8 dB for the 
individual coupled-line sections, and the balun will provide the optimum 
conditions.  Output return loss and isolation between the ports are both 6 dB. To 
improve isolation and output match, the insertion of a resistor and a half 
wavelength line between the output ports has been proposed as shown in Figure 
4.22 [26].  The added resistors, R, and the half wave long line are said to improve 
isolation and output match. The optimum values for R can be determined 
analytically as R = 2Z1. The impedance Z2 is recommended to be high to minimize 
capacitance to ground. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
179 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.22      Resistively matched microstrip Marchand balun.  From [26]. 
 
 
It has been discussed that proper balun operation requires high even 
mode impedance, which can be obtained by increasing the distance from the strip 
to ground. When this is not possible, the alternative is to lower the odd 
impedance. In such a case attention has to be devoted to avoid excessive  
capacitance to ground and small gaps between the lines. When this is not 
practical, the number of coupled lines may be increased to three or more.  This is 
one of the reasons why Lange couplers are commonly used in balun realizations.  
 
 
4.3.5 Suspended Microstrip 
  
A version of the coaxial balun, which makes use of micro-strip line suspended in 
air is shown in Figure 4.23, [28]. In this version, the bottom side metal (dashed) 
contains the input unbalanced line and the open circuit compensation stub. The 
(solid) lines indicate top side metal, which is grounded at the bottom of the figure.  
The balanced output connections G and F are located at the top of the figure, a 
quarter wave distance from the ground connection at the bottom. The substrate is a 
low dielectric material with low loss at the frequency of operation. The two 
grounded lines also constitute the shorted stubs in the model, with impedance Zab 
between them.  The equivalent circuit of Figure 4.9 applies equally to this 
structure. An important point in the publication is the recommendation to keep 
fields contained within the coupled lines to avoid radiation. To meet this condition 
the ground plane line width is taken to be equal to or greater than three times the 
conductor line, B > 3b. This design criteria is similar to that of the coaxial balun. 
R 
R 
Z2 
Z0 
Z1 
Z1 

180 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Another version of the coaxial balun adapted to suspended micro-strip 
lines is shown in Figure 4.24, [29]. In this third order Marchand balun, the top 
metal contains the input unbalanced line, the output lines, and the series 
compensating stub. The input line and stub are separated by one line width from 
the output balanced lines, except near the junction where they are closer to each 
other for a short distance. The middle conductor contains the ground plane for the 
balun lines. To minimize the even-mode coupling of the top side lines to the 
fixture ground, the widths of the suspended ground lines are five times the widths 
of the top lines for isolation. In this condition the fields are largely contained in 
the dielectric between the top lines and the suspended ground lines.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.23    Suspended microstrip balun with unbalanced input at bottom-side at H, represented by 
the dotted line. The signal from the input microstrip line is transferred to the two lines 
at the top side with outputs G and F and grounded at the input H reference.  From [28].  
 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
181 
0
2 f
f


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.24    Layout for suspended microstrip balun, with two substrates attached on top of each 
other.  From [29].  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 4.25    Equivalent circuit for the third order suspended microstrip balun, with added matching 
section, Zc, between the compensation junction and the load. a = (-jZacot/(2-jZacot); 
b = (-jYbcot/(2-jYbcot); c = (Zc-1)/(Zc+1); d = (R-Zc)/(R+Zc). After [29].  
 
The equivalent circuit is similar to the coaxial type of balun, except the 
balanced line is lumped into a single transformer Zc. In the model the impedance 
from junction to load corresponds to twice the balun impedance. Equations were 
developed for that structure using the theory of small reflections at junctions, and 
the design equations are given in [29], where  is the  reflection coefficient within 
the band, and ωq is fractional bandwidth, (f2-f1)/f0.  The paper applies the theory to 
 
 
 
Input 
b 
-b 
Z0=1 
Za 
Yb 
Z=1 
Z=1 
ZC 
Z=R 
-d 
c 
-c 
a 
-a 
d 
R 

182 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
a coupler designed for a 100 to 50 ohms transformation, with ωq = 0.67, and  = 
0.03. The impedance values are: Za = 46.2 ohms, Zb = 39.0 ohms and Zc = 70.7 
ohms. The results obtained are in the plots contained in Figure 4.26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.26    Performance of the balun from figure 4.25. It covers nearly one octave band with input 
return loss in the order of 10 dB.  From [29].  
 
 
4.3.5.1 Tapered Coupled Line Balun 
 
A popular broadband balun uses suspended substrate to transition between 
unbalanced and balanced microstrip lines.  The microstrip line at the unbalanced 
end tapers to a different width at the balanced end.  And the ground plane metal at 
the unbalanced end tapers in width to equal the same width as the top strip at the 
balanced end.  It is desirable to maintain the same characteristic impedance along 
the line, which is accomplished by specially tapering the top and bottom lines.  
Various types of tapers have been used, including Klomfpenstein, Hecken, and 
Tchebycheff [30].  An early tapered microstrip balun was found to have improved 
performance with the first half of its top line length forming the taper, and the 
second half having constant width [31], as in Figure 4.27.  Another early tapered 
microstrip balun was used in a wideband doubly balanced mixer [32].  Since the 
tapered balun is suspended above ground, normally in a metal enclosure with 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
183 
ground metal above, below, and on the sides, a parasitic even-mode exists.  As 
discussed previously, this causes in-band resonances, the effect of which can be 
reduced by designing to achieve a high even-mode impedance.  In the case of the 
doubly balanced mixer [32], ferrite absorber was placed inside the enclosure to 
reduce effects from the parasitic mode.  It also attenuates cavity resonances from 
the enclosure.  The even-mode impedance ideally is at least ten times that of the 
odd-mode impedance.  In contrast, the Marchand balun is much more tolerant of 
the even-mode, requiring even mode impedance to be only about three times the 
odd-mode impedance [33].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 4.27      Tapered microstrip balun, unbalanced at left, balanced at right: (a) top metal; (b) 
bottom metal.  
 
 
4.3.6 Broadside Coupled Balun 
 
A broadside coupled balun using three metal layers appeared in a patent issued in 
1988, [34].  It is an implementation of a planar Marchand balun, comprising top, 
middle, and bottom (ground) metal layers as shown in Figure 4.28. The top and 
middle metal layers comprise a transmission line, and the middle and ground 
layers form another transmission line. A third one is created by the top and bottom 
layers, and constitutes a parasitic impedance. The unbalanced signal is applied in 
the middle layer, and then broadside coupled into the top metal layers, which in 
turn are connected to the balanced load.   The signal voltage is balanced and at a 
maximum at the mid-point where there is a gap between the two short circuited 
stubs.  The design was proposed as being implemented using thin film technology 
with alumina for the bottom dielectric, and the top dielectric layer having similar 
dielectric constant and about 1/5 the thickness compared with the bottom 
dielectric. The inventor also proposed applying this in GaAs technology.   
Additional variations are also proposed having different open and short circuit 
configurations. 
 
 
 
 
 

184 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
                           
 
 
Figure 4.28      Broadside coupled balun. 
 
 
A version of this planar Marchand balun applicable to GaAs MMIC 
technology was patented in 1991 [35, 36] for wide band microwave applications. 
The balun is depicted in Figure 4.29(a), with a cross section of transmission lines 
TL1 and TL2 shown in Figure 4.29(b).  
  
 
(a) 3D Layout view.  
 
                       (b) Cross section. 
Figure 4.29      MMIC balun constructed on top of GaAs substrate. 
 
 
The oxide separating the top and middle metal is thin compared to the 
GaAs substrate, resulting in a tightly coupled TL1 transmission line, reducing the 
odd mode impedance so the parasitic even mode of TL3 is less critical. A 
series/shunt Marchand balun configuration is created at the junction where the gap 
exists in the middle metallization.  
  
The schematic for this circuit is in Figure 4.30(a) and the impedances Z1 
and Z2 describe the input line and the open stub, respectively. The short stub Z3 
comprises two parallel short stubs ZS1 and ZS2. The output balanced line Z4 is 
replaced by ZB. The inventors used a polyimide material with thickness between 
2.5 and 10 µm for TL1, with r = 5.5. The GaAs substrate is about 100 µm thick, 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
185 
with r = 12.9. A plot of the balun performance is in Figure 4.30(b), showing 
equal power splitting over the 6 to 18 GHz band with 1.5 to 2.0 dB insertion loss.  
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Equivalent TL model. 
                        (b) Insertion loss.  
Figure 4.30      MMIC balun circuit and performance. Source for (b): [36]. 
 
 
A similar circuit was built by the patent authors on 0.125 mm thick 
alumina substrate using a polyimide dielectric 0.05 mm thick in place of GaAs 
oxide. The measured performance is similar to the one obtained with the MMIC 
version. 
 
 
4.3.7 Planar Spiral Transformer—Marchand Balun 
 
 
The planar spiral balun of Figure 4.31(a) is a direct mapping from the planar 
micro-strip balun of Figure 4.21, but where each 90 degree coupled line is wound 
on itself, [37].  The balun comprises two spiral transformers, one of which is 
depicted in Figure 4.31(b). Coiling the transmission lines increases the even mode 
impedance that improves balun performance, without increasing odd mode 
impedance.  The mutual capacitance and inductance of the lines also increase, so 
the resonant frequencies are much lower for the same length of line, and for a 
given frequency the line dimensions are smaller. That makes the structure more 
compact, with lower resistance and lower insertion loss. Operation of the balun 
can be approximated by considering a cascade of multiple coupled lines, [38], in 
the manner depicted in Figure 4.31(b). The line length from port a to c is 
calculated from (4.43). The line length from b to d is assumed to be of the same 
length.    
 
 











1
0
)
(
2
)
(
4
n
k
tot
k
S
W
n
W
ID
L
  
 
       (4.43) 

186 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Equivalent circuit.                                                 (b) Multicoupled line model.   
Figure 4.31      Marchand balun realized using spiral multiply coupled lines.  From [37, 38] 
 
 
        
 
 
 
       
 
Where ID = Inner square width; n is the number of coupled lines on each 
side; W is line width; and S is line spacing. The area A of one coil is obtained 
from:  
 
2
)]
(
2
[
S
W
n
ID
A



 
 
 
 
       (4.44)
 
 
        
 
The analytical description is complex, but fortunately most electrical 
simulators, have models for 2, 3, and 4 coupled lines. A good methodology for the 
design of spiral transformers on MMIC following this approach is described as 
follows: 
 
a. 
Calculate the /4 wavelength at the center frequency. 
b. Line widths and line gaps are selected to minimize chip area.  
c. 
Determine the inner square width (ID), for both size and coupling.  
d. Let Ltot = /4, then calculate the number of coil turns, n, from the 
equation. 
e. 
Use a multicoupled micro-strip model to synthesize the initial design 
of this transformer. 
f. 
Finally, a planar EM simulator is utilized to determine the final 
layout.  
 
 
A spiral balun using a similar circuit to Figure 4.31(a) was patented [39], 
and the layout is depicted in Figure 4.32(a). It was designed for MMIC 
applications on GaAs substrates. There is no construction detail so one can 
assume it is built using conventional technology. The simulated performance 
shown in Figure 4.31(b) covers roughly 12 to 24 GHz with 1 dB insertion loss and 
12 dB return loss at the worst point within the band.  
 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (a) Layout. 
 
 
 
(b) Results. 
Figure 4.32      Planar spiral Marchand balun over a GaAs substrate. 
 
 
4.4 LUMPED ELEMENTS 
  
Lumped element baluns are widely used in MMICs due to their considerable 
space savings compared with distributed ones. The simplest application 
corresponds to the use of high-pass and low-pass networks connected in parallel 
as shown in Figure 4.35. The elements can be designed according to filter theory. 
If the low- and high-pass filters are Butterworth, then their normalized reactances 
equal 2 for each element. The source and load are normalized to the reference 
impedance Z0.   
 
 
0
0
2

Z
L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.45)
 
0
0
2
1

Z
C 
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.46)
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
Calculating the relation between V2 and V3, a 180 degree phase difference 
if found at ω = ω0, (4.47).  The phase is frequency independent; however, the 
amplitude, given by the next equation, shows V2 decreases and V3 increases with 
frequency and a crossover occurs where V2 = V3 at resonance. At this particular 
frequency, equal power division occurs. The circuit is therefore narrow band and 
its usability depends on how much amplitude mismatch can be accepted. 
 
 
2
0
3
2










V
V
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.47) 

188 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
IND
ID=L1
L=LL nH
IND
ID=L2
L=LL nH
IND
ID=L3
L=LH nH
IND
ID=L4
L=LH nH
IND
ID=L5
L=LL nH
IND
ID=L6
L=LL nH
CAP
ID=C1
C=CH pF
CAP
ID=C2
C=CH pF
CAP
ID=C3
C=CL pF
CAP
ID=C4
C=CL pF
CAP
ID=C5
C=CH pF
CAP
ID=C6
C=CH pF
PORT
P=1
Z=50 Ohm
PORT
P=2
Z=50 Ohm
PORT
P=3
Z=50 Ohm
LL=2.28
LH=5.3
CL=.76
CH=1.41
IND
ID=L1
L=L nH
IND
ID=L3
L=L nH
CAP
ID=C1
C=C pF
CAP
ID=C3
C=C pF
PORT
P=1
Z=50 Ohm
PORT
P=2
Z=50 Ohm
PORT
P=3
Z=50 Ohm
 
2
1
1
2
0
1
2











V
V
  
 
 
 
       (4.48) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.33    First order lattice lumped balun with normalized reactances equal to 2 for inductors 
and capacitors.  
 
 
An alternative approach that increases the bandwidth of a lumped 
element balun was published recently, [40], where additional cells are employed 
to increase bandwidth. Figure 4.34 shows first and second order lattice baluns; the 
second order balun includes two low-pass and two high pass T-sections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 4.34      Lumped lattice balun: (a) first order; (b) second order.  From [44]. 
 
1 
V2 
V3 
V1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
189 
 
If the same reactance values are employed for the low-and high-pass 
elements, then the amplitude imbalance essentially is the same, and there is no 
benefit to using more elements. The reference proposes shifting the resonance 
frequency of the low-pass and high-pass filters to increase bandwidth. The 
resonance of the low-pass filter is increased by a factor n, and the highpass is 
decreased by same factor 1/n. This affects impedance match, which is corrected 
by reducing the characteristic impedance of the T-sections. This is done by 
replacing 2 by a constant m < 2. The design equations are as follows:  
 
 
0
0

n
mZ
LLP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.49)        
 
0
0
1

n
mZ
CLP 
 
 
 
 
   
       (4.50) 
 
0
0

n
mZ
LHP 
 
 
 
 
       
 
       (4.51) 
 
0
0
mZ
n
CHP 
  
 
 
 
     
       (4.52) 
 
 
The ratio between the voltages, V2/V3, given in the following equation, 
shows the voltages are in counter phase and the frequency response is obtained by 
calculating the zeros and poles as a function of factor n.  
 
 
)
2
(
)
2
(
2
2
0
2
4
2
0
2
2
4
0
3
2










n
n
V
V
 
 
 
  
       (4.53) 
 
0
0
2
2
1



n
n


  
 
 
 
       (4.54) 
 
 
 
The authors proposed to differentiate (4.53) with respect to voltage to 
optimize bandwidth. The point for maximally flat is found for n = 1.22, with 
larger values resulting in symmetrical amplitude deviations around the resonance 
frequency. Several values of n and corresponding performance are summarized in 
Table 4.5. The values are derived from filter theory using Butterworth max-flat 
equations. The authors proposed a test circuit with ideal components having 
values for the circuit on Figure 4.34(b), [40].  Simulated performance of the 
circuit with ideal inductors and capacitors is shown in Figure 4.35. The inductors 
employed are 2.28 and 5.3 nH, and capacitors are 0.74 and 1.41 pF, respectively, 

190 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
2500
2750
3000
3250
3500
3750
4000
4250
4500
Frequency (MHz)
Magnitude and Phase
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
Gain dB
-180
-150
-120
-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
120
Phase deg
DB(|S(2,1)|) (L)
Schematic 1
DB(|S(3,1)|) (L)
Schematic 1
Ang(S(2,1)) (R, Deg)
Schematic 1
Ang(S(3,1)) (R, Deg)
Schematic 1
for low-pass and high-pass values.  Amplitude balance is within 1 dB and the 
phase difference is close to 180 deg over about 2.8 to 4.3 GHz.   
 
Table 4.5  
Design Parameters for Chosen Specifications 
           
Amplitude 
Balance
n
m
Bandwidth
Reflection 
loss - dB
Max Flat
1.22
1.3
+/- 0.05
1.26
1.3
1:1.6
35
+/- 0.1
1.28
1.3
1:1.8
35
+/- 0.2
1.31
1.26
1:2.1
28
+/- 0.5
1.39
1.25
1:2.7
22
+/- 1
1.51
1.2
1:3.7
17
+/- 1.25
1.56
1.14
1:4.0
14
 
Source: [40]. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.35    Example lumped lattice balun of Figure 4.34(b), with amplitude and phase performance 
over about 2.8 to 4.4 GHz.  
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
191 
4.5 SLOTLINE TYPE 
 
A slot line arranged as a power splitter can function as a balun, as shown in Figure 
4.36, by having output ports that are 180 degree apart in phase.  The input signal 
is coupled into port 1 by some means at a point located a quarter wave length (up) 
from the short.  The energy propagates (upward) within the slot to the point where 
it splits into two new slots connected in series across the first slot. One can notice 
the fields are distorted so that left and right slots have the fields reversed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.36      Slot line “balun” has reversed E fields at ports 2 and 3. 
 
 
The E fields are maximum at the point located a quarter wave length 
away from the respective shorts for ports 2 and 3, which are convenient locations 
for attaching a mixing device. Thus, the applied signal is split into two parts with 
equal amplitude and in counter phase. Based on this principle several applications 
appear in the literature using slot lines for balun construction. The balun presented 
in Figure 4.37, makes use of an asymmetrical coplanar line.  A detailed cross-
section is given in Figure 4.38(b), [41]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.37    Asymmetrical coplanar balun, top view.  From [41]. 
slot 
1 
2 
3 
metal 

192 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
Figure 4.38      Cross section views of Figure 4.37: (top) slotline; (bottom) CPW.  From [41]. 
 
 
The circuit consists of an input slot line on the left, a transition from slot 
line to coplanar ring, a mode suppression resistor, and two coplanar lines at the 
output. A signal applied to port 1 on the slot is split in two at the coplanar 
interface. Both signals travel the quarter wave long ring in counter phase, then 
each couple into another coplanar line that in turn connects to ports 2 and 3. The 
signals at each output port are equal in magnitude and opposite in phase. The 
operation of the circuit can be understood by considering the even and odd modes 
of propagation in the symmetrical circuit.  This assumes that slotline supports both 
the even and odd modes.  Figure 4.39 contains two circuits that represent half the 
total circuit.  The left (a) assumes voltages are applied to ports 2 and 3 in phase, 
and the right (b) assumes voltages are applied in counter phase. In both cases the 
circuit is symmetric and can be divided in two with terminations depending on the 
mode of propagation. The even mode equivalent half-circuit comprises an open 
circuit transmission line cascaded with the series combination of a resistor having 
twice the isolating resistor value and the port 2 (or 3) impedance, Z0. The open 
circuit is due to the voltages having equal phase on each side of the coplanar line, 
so no energy couples into the slot; thus, it is terminated in an open circuit.  The 
resistor equals 2R resulting in the final value of R when two instances the 
equivalent half-circuit (a) are paralleled to form the full circuit.  In the odd mode 
circuit (b), the signals are applied in counter phase. Therefore, at the joining point 
2,3 the voltages add, and transfer from the coplanar lines to the circular slot lines, 
where they split into two with opposing phase. Hence the potential at both ends of 
the resistor, R, are the same. The resistor is then short circuited for odd mode 
signals, so it does not appear in (b).  The terminating impedance at the left of 
equivalent half-circuit (b) is Z0/2.  The full circuit comprises two instances of this 
equivalent half-circuit connected in series, resulting in Z0 terminating the left end 
of the full circuit in (b).   

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
193 
 
The impedance of both slot and coplanar lines were designed for 100, 
so that the impedance of the circular slot-line was 70.7, and the isolating resistor 
was 50. The gap the for slot line impedance was 1.2 mm and the width and gap 
for the coplanar line were 0.3 and 0.4 mm, respectively.  If the impedance of the 
lines were chosen to be 50, then the resulting dimensions would be impractical 
to realize with this substrate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
            (b) 
Figure 4.39      Fundamental modes of operation: (a) even; (b) odd. From [41]. 
 
The performance reported in the paper is depicted in Figure 4.40, 
showing good amplitude and phase balance over 2.5 to 3.5 GHz. If the 
performance is limited to insertion loss of 0.5 dB, phase imbalance of +/- 1º, and 
return loss to 20 dB, then the bandwidth is reduced to nearly 10%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Coupling, isolation, and return loss. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

194 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Amplitude and phase balance. 
 
Figure 4.40    Experimental results for the slot line balun. The circuit was built on a RT/Duroid 6010 
substrate, with r = 10.8, substrate thickness of 1.5 mm and metal thickness of 18 µm.  
The center frequency was 3.0 GHz.  From [41].  
 
 
4.6 ACTIVE APPROACH 
 
The active 180º power splitter was originally used in audio circuits, with signals at 
the emitter and collector in counter phase and having equal voltage amplitudes. 
The same approach can be implemented with a FET, such as the one depicted in 
Figure 4.40.  S21 is the gain from the gate to drain, and S31 is the gain from the gate 
to source.  S21 and S31 are derived in Appendix 4C using a simple FET model.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.41  Single device balun using the device as a three port component. 
      
 
        







ds
D
ds
D
S
gs
ds
S
ds
m
S
D
m
S
ds
gs
D
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
S









0
0
0
0
21
)
(
2


  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.55) 
Rg 
RS 
RD 
VD 
VS 
VG 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
195 









ds
D
ds
D
S
gs
ds
S
ds
m
S
D
D
ds
gs
m
D
S
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
S










0
0
0
0
31
)
(
2


   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.56) 
 
        
 
 
The output conductance, gds, is included as it assumed to be much lower 
than the gate and source conductances. One can observe that at low frequencies a 
180º phase shift exists between source and drain voltages, and their magnitudes 
are equal if RS = RD. When frequency starts to increase, a difference from 180 
degree phase difference arises due to the gate-source and gate-drain capacitances, 
limiting usability. Additionally, the impedance connected to source and drain has 
to be high enough to avoid mismatch and minimize power imbalance between 
ports.   
 
An alternative option is to use the properties of a CS-common source and 
CG-common gate device [42], as in Figure 4.42(a), where the gate circuits are tied 
to a common port and the two drains are independent. Employing a simplified 
equivalent circuit for the FETs, and assuming both terminations have the same 
output conductance, g = g2 = g3, with input termination, g1, the S21 and S31 are 
developed in Appendix 4D and given below.  S21 is the gain from input to CS 
drain, and S31 is the gain from input to CG drain.   
 




ds
gs
ds
ds
m
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
gg
g
S








2
2
1
2
1
1
1
21
        (4.57) 
 
         






ds
gs
ds
ds
m
ds
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
gg
g
g
S








2
2
1
2
1
1
2
31
        (4.58) 
 
 
Both devices will have the same magnitude and opposed phase if the 
trans-conductance is much higher than the output conductance and as long as the 
only important reactance in the circuit is Cgs. Notice there are two Cgs capacitances 
in parallel at the input port, which reduces the maximum operating frequency by a 
factor of two. Notice the CG device is usually much lower impedance compared 
with CS and can be adjusted to be close to 50 ohm, determining the input match. 
On the other hand, the output impedance of the CS device is lower than that of the 
CG device.  Experience has shown obtaining good amplitude and phase balance is 
difficult for this circuit.  
 
An alternative balun circuit, [43], is obtained by rearranging the circuit of 
Figure 4.42(a), and replacing the drain bias resistors with active loads, as in Figure 
4.42(b). The presence of the inductor and capacitor in the circuit establish the 
frequency range of operation. The bias of each device is provided by an additional 
circuit not shown. 
 

196 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Conventional bias.  After [42]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (b)      Modified bias. 
Figure 4.42      Example of active common-source/common-gate balun. 
 
 
4.6.1 Differential Active Balun 
 
 
The differential topology can operate as a balun if one of the terminals is AC 
grounded. For example, in the circuit of Figure 4.43, if the base of Q2 is tied to 
ground with a capacitor, and a signal is applied to the base of common emitter Q1, 
then the signal at the collector of Q1 is 180 degrees out of phase with the signal 
applied to the base of Q1. The signal at the Q1 emitter is fed in phase to the emitter 
of common base Q2 and appears with the same phase at the collector of Q2. Thus, 
the phase difference between the two collectors is 180°, and the collectors have 
similar amplitudes if the load impedances are equal. 
 
A metric for evaluating the quality of active baluns, often used for op-
amps, is the common mode rejection ratio (CMRR), which compares the 
differential gain with common mode gain. Differential gain, gm, applies when both 
M2 
M1 
OutP 
In 
OutN 
VSS 
VDD 
Bias 
Circuit 
VDD1 
M2 
M1 
VDD2 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
197 
inputs are equal in amplitude but opposed in phase, as depicted in Figure 4.43. 
This is equivalent to the gain of half the differential amplifier with the emitter 
connected to ground, and is given by (4.59), assuming a T-model for the devices 
and disregarding the Miller impedance, Zcb.  In contrast, common mode gain gmm 
is ideally zero and applies when both input voltages are equal in amplitude and 
phase. In common mode the amplifiers are in parallel and the gain is the gain of a 
common emitter device with twice the emitter impedance, ZE, given by (4.60). 
The CMRR per definition is given by (4.61).   
 
  


b
e
m
r
r
g
)
1(





 
 
 
 
 
       (4.59) 
 
E
m
m
mm
Z
g
g
g
2
1

 
 
                     
 
       (4.60) 
          
E
m
E
m
E
m
m
m
Z
g
Z
g
Z
g
g
g
CMRR
2
2
1
2
1
/





 
       (4.61) 
 
 
Therefore high CMRR is obtained by either replacing the emitter 
impedance by a current source or by realizing ZE with a parallel tuned LC circuit 
that is high impedance at the resonance frequency. If a current source is used, the 
collector is attached to the emitters of Q1, Q2, and ground. However there is a 
frequency limitation to the operation of this current source. At microwave 
frequencies, the collector-base reactance of the current source decreases, causing 
CMRR to reduce. An improved method was proposed for minimizing the CMRR 
degradation, [44].  The idea is to represent the differential mode and common 
mode amplifiers with Z-parameters as in (4.60) and impose cancellation of 
CMRR.  
 
Therefore, making the denominator equal to zero provides the solution 
indicated in (4.63). The transimpedance parameter, Z21, for a current source, 
assuming a simplified T-model with Miller capacitance is in (4.64), confirming 
the degradation effect on CMRR caused by the collector to base capacitance. 
 
21
12
22
11
21
12
22
11
21
21
))
(
)
2
)(
2
(
)
2
)(
2
(.
2
Z
Z
Z
R
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
R
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
CMRR
c
E
E
E
c
E
E










  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
    (4.62) 
 
2
21
Z
Z Eopt


  
 
 
 
 
    (4.63) 
 
cb
e
Z
r
Z



21
 
 
 
                   
    (4.64) 
 
 

198 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.43      Differential amplifier topology with impedance ZE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
       
 
According to (4.63), the optimum impedance for the differential common 
emitter amplifier may result in negative resistance that must be avoided. An 
emitter impedance should be selected that trades off best CMRR and circuit 
stability.  In the reference, the author proposed adding capacitance in parallel with 
the current source. The improved balun is depicted in the schematic of Figure 
4.44(b), consisting of a cascade of common emitter and common collector 
differential amplifiers. The capacitance Ccp and inductance Lcp were optimized for 
CMRR up to 20 GHz. A similar approach is also applicable to FETs. 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Schematic of a cascade of two baluns, using RC in the emitter in first stage and 
 an inductance in the collector of the second stage. 
(-)Vout/2 
(+)Vout/2 
Rc 
+VCC 
(+)Vin/2 
ZE 
(-)Vin/2 
Rc 
Q1 
Q2 
IT 
IS 
IE 
OUT+ 
C1 
Ccp1 
L1 
Q2 
Le 
Le 
Q1 
Q3 
Q4
OUT-
Lcp

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) CMRR over frequency for each stage independently and for the cascade. 
Figure 4.44     Improved cascaded balun and respective CMRR.  From [44]. 
 
 
 
4.6.2 Active 180  Combiner  
 
The active circuits described so far, generate a balanced signal from a single 
ended input, but they cannot generate a single ended output from a balanced input 
signal. Transforming a balanced signal into a single ended output requires 
different circuitry. One option is to use a differential amplifier and extract the 
signal from only one of the devices, terminating the unused collector (or drain) 
with a dummy resistor. The amplifier gain is then gm/2 and the CMRR is half the 
value provided by (4.60). Using a differential pair with a current mirror load, as 
displayed in Figure 4.45(a), improves gain and CMRR [45].  Due to the current 
mirror the collector currents of Q3 and Q4 are equal, which makes I4 = I3 = -I1 and 
Iout = -I4 - I2 = I1 - I2. Therefore, when a base current is applied to Q1 with a 
positive phase it will appear at the output also with a positive phase. Since this is a 
differential circuit, a base current is simultaneously applied to Q2 with a negative 
phase, so that Iout equals the sum of both currents. If both input signals are at the 
same phase, then Iout = 0. The gain of this configuration can be found by 
considering the collector currents given by (4.65) and (4.66). By manipulating the 
equations, the output current Iout is given by (4.67), and transconductance by 
(4.68) that resembles a bell shape function, showing transconductance is 
maximum for low input voltages.  
 
 
T
id
V
V
EE
F
e
I
I



1
1

    
 
 
 
 
       (4.65) 
 
T
id
V
V
EE
F
e
I
I


1
2

    
 
 
 
 
       (4.66) 
30 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
-10 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
     Stage1 
     Stage2 
     Overall 
Frequency GHz 
CMRR (dB) 

200 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 







T
id
EE
F
out
V
V
I
I
2
tanh

   
 
 
 
       (4.67) 
 







T
id
T
EE
F
md
V
V
h
V
I
g
2
sec
2

   
       
 
 
       (4.68) 
 
 
 
With  
Vid = the differential input current 
 
      
 gmd = small signal transconductance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Conventional 
 
 
 
(b) Improved 
Figure 4.45      Current mirror to convert differential to single ended output. 
 
 
There are many variations of this circuit in the literature, each designed 
to meet a specific need. The additional current mirror Q5, Q6 in Figure 4.45(b) 
minimizes offset of the output current [45]. As already mentioned, the common 
mode gain of the ideal circuit is zero, but in real circuits imbalances exist in the 
differential and common mode currents, given by (4.69) and (4.70) in terms of 
imbalance errors d and m in the differential and common mode, respectively, 
[46].  
 
 
)
1(
2
1
d
I
I



 
 
 
 
 
       (4.69) 
 
)
1(
3
4
m
I
I



  
 
 
 
       
       (4.70) 
 
2
1
2
4
)
1(
I
I
I
I
I
m
out







 
 
2
2
)
1
)(
1(
I
I
I
m
d
out






 
 
)
(
2
d
m
out
I
I





 
 
 
 
 
       (4.71) 
R2 
R1 
I4 
I3 
Vout 
IEE 
Q4 
Q3 
Q2 
Q1 
Iout 
+VCC 
I2 
I1 
V1 
V2 
-VEE 
I4 
I3 
Vout 
IEE 
Q4 
Q3 
Q2 
Q1 
Iout 
+VCC 
I2 
I1 
V1 
V2 
Q5 
Q6 
-VEE 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
201 
 
The common mode transconductance, gmm, is then given by the ratio of 
output current to input common mode voltage, Vic, (4.72). In the ideal case m = d 
= 0 and gmm = 0. The ratio I2/Vic is the same as used in the definition of (4.60), so 
that it has been replaced in (4.72) and the CMRR is given by (4.73), [46].  
 
 
)
(
2
1
)
(
2
d
m
E
m
m
d
m
ic
mm
Z
g
g
V
I
g









            
      (4.72) 
 
d
m
El
mA
g
CMRR




2
1
  
 
        
       
       (4.73) 
 
 
 
This configuration works well with silicon bipolars at VHF and UHF but 
it will not operate well at microwave frequencies, where PNP devices have 
inferior mobility affecting gain and other parameters. A third option, shown in 
Figure 4.46, is a concept long used by audio amplifier designers, which uses two 
FETs connected in cascode, with the source of Q1 connected to the drain of Q2. 
The output voltage, in terms of input voltages V1 and V2, is given by (4.74) for the 
case of all equal terminations. The equation, derived in Appendix 4E, shows that 
for input voltages of same magnitude and phase, the output voltage is 
approximately zero. If they are equal in magnitude and opposed in phase, then 
they add constructively.  
 
 
)
(
2
)
2
(
)
(
0
0
0
0
2
1
0
3
ds
gs
ds
m
gs
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
V
V
g
g
V









       
 
      (4.74) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.46      Modified cascode active balun with resistive bias. 
 
 
The circuit performs well at low frequencies where leakage current to the 
FET gates is small, and load impedance at port 3 does not affect the port 
Q1 
Q2 
+VDD
V1 
V2 
V3 

202 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
impedance. As frequency increases, the output voltage is no longer a perfect 
combination of two input voltages. 
 
 
4.6.3 Active Current Based Balun 
 
The active examples shown so far are voltage baluns. An example of a current 
based balun is found in a patent [47] and reproduced in Figure 4.47. The input for 
the balun is the base of T1, terminal 1, and the two outputs are at the collector of 
T2 and T3, terminals 2 and 3. A constant voltage supply is connected to the base of 
T2, making it a common base amplifier. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
           
 
Figure 4.47      Current based balun consisting of a current mirror, devices T4 and D1 plus common 
base T3 and common emitter T3 amplifiers.  
 
 
The diode (a transistor connected as a diode) and transistor T4 form a 
current mirror that biases T1. Both T1 and T4 have the same area so their bias 
currents are the same. A voltage applied to terminal 1 creates signal current i that 
appears at terminal 2 with the same phase as the voltage. The signal current 
develops a voltage drop on R1, decreasing the T3 emitter potential by the same 
amount. The current in R2 is given by -iR1/R2, having the same amplitude as the 
current in R1 if R1 = R2 but in counter phase.   
 
 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
203 
4.7 180º HYBRID COUPLERS (Magic-T) 
 
The magic-T, also known as a 180° hybrid coupler, is a very useful component 
that finds application in many types of devices including mixers and antennas.  
The name magic-T is likely derived from its implementation early in the 20th 
century in waveguide resembling a T shape. It is depicted functionally in Figure 
4.48, as having four ports with inputs at P1 and P2 and outputs at Σ and Δ.  Signal 
power incident at port P1 splits, with half delivered to port Σ and half delivered to 
port Δ with a 180 degree difference between the two transfer phase angles.  In 
contrast, signal power incident at port P2 splits, with half delivered to port Σ and 
half delivered to port Δ, with equal transfer phase angles. Ports P1 and P2 are 
isolated from each other because, for example, signal power incident at P1 splits 
between the 0°-0° and 0°-180° paths, causing cancellation when the two halves 
combine at P2.  The opposite is true for power incident at P2: it cancels at P1.  
There are many implementations of the magic-T, perhaps the most widely known 
is the ratrace coupler commonly implemented in microstrip. Critical performance 
metrics for the magic-T are bandwidth, insertion loss, isolation, and amplitude and 
phase balance.  The Σ and Δ ports, respectively, are commonly called the sum and 
difference ports.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.48      Functional diagram of the 180° hybrid. 
 
  
4.7.1 Waveguide 180° 
 
An early description of a waveguide magic-T is given in a 1942 patent [48] that 
includes descriptions of the waveguide implementation shown in Figure 4.49. The 
waveguide ports that face toward the upper left and lower right corners of the 
figure correspond to ports P1 and P2 of Figure 4.48.  The port facing the lower left 
corner corresponds to the difference port, and the remaining port that faces up 
corresponds to the sum port. The field lines for the sum and difference 
connections are depicted in Figure 4.49 (a) and (b).   
 
 
 
 
Σ
Δ
π
0
0
0
P1
P2

204 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.49     Waveguide implementation of the 180° hybrid, illustrating the points P1,P2 and the  
and  ports. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Δ port excitation  
 
(b) Σ port excitation 
Figure 4.50      Electric field lines for the waveguide 180° Hybrid.  
 
 
4.7.2 Bifilar Hybrid 
  
Bifilar coupled-lines can also be used to form a 180° hybrid, [14]. For example, a 
1:4 Ruthroff transformer combined with a 1:1 balun becomes a 180° hybrid, as 
depicted in Figure 4.51. Assuming lossless lines, the sum and difference port input 
impedances, respectively, are Rin,Σ = RL /2  Rin,Δ = 2RL.   The input voltage, Vg1, is 
applied to T1, which divides Vg1 into two differential voltages VA, VB that in turn 
are applied to load 2RL and to T2.  The voltage across the two series windings of 
T2 is given by (4.75). The impressed differential VA and VB voltages cancel each 
other at port Σ, so VT = 0. If a voltage is applied to port Σ, then the resulting VA 
and VB are in phase and applied to the load resistors RL that are in parallel to 
ground. The high common mode impedance of T1 isolates the in-phase signals VA 
and VB from generator Vg1.    
 
 
S
B
S
A
V
V
V
V




 
 
 
 
 
       (4.75) 
P1 
P2 
Δ 
Σ 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
205 
2
B
A
S
V
V
V


      
 
 
 
 
       (4.76) 
    
Therefore, both generators are isolated from each other and both apply 
signal to the load. Vg1 applies signal to the load resistors in series, and Vg2 applies 
signal to the load resistors in parallel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.51      Bifilar transformer as a hybrid.  After [14]. 
 
 
4.7.3 Ratrace Hybrid 
  
The ratrace hybrid, illustrated in Figure 4.52, is a popular 180 hybrid coupler 
[49].  It can be analyzed by using the line of symmetry, aa, to take advantage of 
even- and odd-mode analysis, similarly to the that for coupled-lines.  The circuit is 
first solved for two ports, and then the full four port parameters are derived by 
superposition. The angle 1 is designed for center frequency at 90º, equivalent to 
/4.The resulting S-parameters for the ratrace hybrid are expressed below as a 
function of ratrace line admittance, Yr = 1/Zr and reference admittances, Y0 = 
1/Z0. 
 
 
2
2
0
2
2
0
44
33
22
11
2
2
r
r
Y
Y
Y
Y
S
S
S
S






 
 
 
       (4.77)
 
 
 
0
42
31

S
S
        
 
 
 
 
       (4.78) 
 
2
2
0
0
32
41
34
12
2
2
r
r
Y
Y
Y
Y
j
S
S
S
S







  
 
       (4.79) 
Σ 
VS 
T2 
IL 
Vg2 
Rg2 
RL 
IL 
I4 
I3 
VB 
VA 
I1 
I2 
Vg1 
V1 
RL 
Rg1 
T1 
Δ 

206 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.52      Ratrace hybrid.   
 
 
The ports 3 and 1 are uncoupled, according to (4.76), and the same holds 
true for ports 2 and 4. For matched conditions, Y0
2 = 2Yr
2, and inserting this 
condition into the equations, one finds that S21 = -S41 = 1/2, which results in 3 dB 
power split and ports 2 and 4 being 180 out of phase.  The parameters S32 = S34 
indicate that signal applied at port 3 splits in half and appears at ports 2 and 4  
with equal amplitude and phase. This circuit operates over a narrow band due to 
the ¾ wavelength long line.  
 
To decrease the sensitivity of the long line with frequency, [50] proposes 
to replace that line with a coupled line, with both ends shorted, as shown in Figure 
4.53. This coupled line is known to reverse the phase by 180º with a quarter 
wavelength long line. The characteristic impedance of the coupled line is in the 
following equation showing Zc as a function of even an odd impedance, with line 
length expressed by angle . The even and odd impedances are obtained from 
simplified equations 
 
 






2
/
1
2
2
2
cos
sin
2


oo
oe
oo
oe
oo
oe
c
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z




       
       (4.80) 
 


r
oo
Z
Z
1
2 

 
 
 
 
       
       (4.81) 
 


r
oo
Z
Z
1
2 

 
 
 
 
 
       (4.82) 
 
 
 
For matched operation, the impedance of the coupled line section is made 
equal to the impedance of the ratrace, Zr. For a 50 ohms reference impedance and 
3.0 dB coupling, the even and odd mode impedances, respectively, equal 176.2  
and 30.2. These values provide a balun with 180º +/- 15º over a 2:1 frequency 
range.  Such a high even mode impedance is difficult to obtain, but adequate 
bandwidth performance is still achieved with realizable values. 
1 
1 
1 
2=31 
a 
a 
1 
Zr 
2 
3 
4 
Z0 
Z0 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
207 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.53      Ratrace with extended bandwidth.  From [50]. 
 
 
The effect of frequency variation is observed by scaling the angle  = 
0f/f0 to the mid band frequency in the characteristic impedance (4.78).  The 
impedance increases as a function of frequency and becomes maximum at the 
extreme of the band, determined by the angle that makes Zc infinite, (4.83) – 
(4.84). The author concludes that a better result can be obtained by mismatching 
the impedance at mid band by decreasing Zoe, Zoo by 10%, resulting in lower 
overall mismatch within a 2:1 frequency range. 
 
 
oo
oe
oo
oe
Z
Z
Z
Z



1
cos
 
 
 
 
 
       (4.83) 
 
1
2
180




  
 
               
 
       (4.84) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An alternate means of extending the bandwidth of the ratrace coupler is 
described [51] using coplanar lines as depicted in Figure 4.54.  The 180 degree 
phase shift is obtained by swapping the positive and negative sides of the coplanar 
strip transmission line.  An equivalent circuit is derived for which a Chebychev 
response is fitted resulting in a multioctave response.  The ratrace coupler is used 
in the singly balanced mixer shown in Figure 4.54, which has typically 6 to 7 dB 
conversion loss over a 10 – 40 GHz RF frequency range. Another example of a 
ratrace hybrid implementing the 180 degree phase shift by swapping positive and 
negative lines uses suspended substrate with wideband microstrip to CPW 
transitions [52], depicted in Figure 4.55, with measured performance in Figure 
4.56.  Usable performance is achieved over about 4 to 12 GHz, with 4 to 6 dB 
insertion loss, and 25 to 40 dB isolation between ports.    
 
 
 

208 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Figure 4.54      Singly-balanced mixer using coplanar strip multioctave ratrace coupler.  From [51]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.55      Ratrace hybrid using wideband microstrip to CPW transitions to achieve 180 phase 
shift by interchanging positive and negative lines.  From [52].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.56      Simulated and measured results for the ratrace hybrid.  From [52].  
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
209 
4.7.4 Lumped Ratrace 
  
The derivation of this hybrid as reported in the literature, [53], is done by equating 
the ABCD parameters for the transmission lines of a distributed ratrace coupler, to 
the ABCD parameters for a low-pass filter composed of 90º lines and using a 
high-pass filter to represent the 270º line. Comparing the two results in the 
following high-pass and low-pass networks:  
 
 
1

C
LB
X
 
 
 
 
 
0
Z
X C 
 
 
 
0
Z
X L 
  and  
0
Y
BC 
 
 
1

C
LX
B
  and  
0
Y
BL 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Low pass 
 
 
     (b) High pass 
Figure 4.57      Derivation of lumped ratrace by correlation.  After [53]. 
 
 
Replacing the lines from the ratrace by the equivalent lumped elements, 
one obtains the circuit of the Figure 4.58, where the difference signal is at terminal 
4 and the sum is at terminal 3. The insertion loss performance plots are in Figure 
4.59 complemented by the plots on Figures 4.60 and 4.61 for phase and return 
loss. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.58      Lumped ratrace built with low pass and high pass filters.  After [53]. 
 
 
 
3,Σ 
C 
C 
C 
L 
1 
2 
4, Δ 
L 
L 
L 
C 
2C 
2C 

210 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.59      Lumped ratrace insertion loss between ports 2-4, 1-2 and 1-4. From [53]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.60      Lumped ratrace insertion phase between  ports 1-3,1-4, 2-3 and 2-4.  From [53]. 
 
A variation of this publication is found in a patent, [54], for a lumped rat-
race layered on top of GaAs. The proposal is to replace the ratrace transmission 
line sections with lumped equivalents found through application of ABCD 
matrices.  In another patent, [55], lumped elements are used to replace a Marchand 
balun prototype with lumped elements using LTCC technology. 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.61      Lumped ratrace return loss of each port.  From [53]. 
 
 
4.7.5 Coupled Line Balun Converted to Hybrid 
 
A 180 degree hybrid can be formed by combining a simple transmission line 
balun with an in-phase power splitter. Following this idea, a publication, [56], 
proposed adding the balun built with coupled lines to an in–phase coupled line 
power splitter. The schematic of the proposed hybrid is in Figure 4.62, showing 
the details of the combination. A similar version of this 180° hybrid was patented 
in 1970 [57].    
The S-parameters of an ideal balun and power divider are given by the 
following equations. The hybrid matrix combining both circuits is given by the S-
parameter hybrid as indicated. The objective is therefore to combine the S -
parameter matrix from a balun with input impedance Z0 and output Z1 with the S -
parameter matrix from a power divider with input impedance Z0 and output 
impedance Z1. The matrices are combined after the multiport connection method 
found in the reference.  For Sbalun, S12 refers to port 2 and  Δ-port 1; for Sdivider S12 
refers to port 2 and Σ-port 1 of Figure 4.62. 
 
2
/
1
2
/
1
2
/
1
2
/
1
0
12
12
12
12
S
S
S
S
Sbalun



 
 
 
 
      (4.85)
 
 

212 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
2
/
1
2
/
1
2
/
1
2
/
1
0
12
12
12
12




S
S
S
S
Sdiivider
  
 
 
      (4.86) 
  
 
 
 
 
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Shybrid



 
 
 
       (4.87) 
 
 
 
By combining the balun and in-phase power divider, their individual 
antiphase and in-phase power splitting characteristics are maintained, with the 
balun isolated from the power divider input under matched conditions.  The Shybrid 
can be identified as the S matrix of an ideal 180 degree hybrid. The circuit in 
Figure 4.62, besides operating as a hybrid, also transforms the source impedance 
Z0 at ports 1 and 4 to match the load impedances at ports 2 and 3. This is obtained 
by designing the in-phase and balun independently. The matching input 
impedance for the divider is in matrix (4.85), SCdivider, by imposing the S11 = 0, 
resulting 
1
0
2
Z
Z
Za 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.62      Hybrid with coupled line balun in-phase divider.  From [56]. 
 
 
The input matching condition for the balun is obtained by making S11 = 0 
and S22 = S33 = 0.5 in the equation for the coupled line balun, (4.38). The required 
even and odd mode impedances for the coupled line sections are given by (4.87) 
and (4.88) and the coupling required for transforming impedance Z0 to Z1 is in 
(4.89). 
Z0 
 
 
 
 
 
/4 Zoe, Zoo 
Impedance transforming 
Z0 
Z1 
In phase divider 
/4 
Za 
Z0 
 - Port 1 
Z1 
Port 2 
Port 3 
 - Port 4 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
213 
 
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
1
0
1
0
2
1
0
1
0
2
1
0
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
1
0
1
0
2
1
0
1
0
2
1
0
1
0
2
1
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
S
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
Cdivider

















(4.88)
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
C
C
Z
Zoe



1
1
0
       
 
 
 
 
       (4.89) 
 
C
C
Z
Zoo



1
1
0
       
 
 
 
 
       (4.90)
 
1
0
0
2Z
Z
Z
C


 
 
 
 
 
       (4.91)
 
 
 
The proposed layout is indicated in Figure 4.63.  It was built on a 1.6 mm 
thick FR-4 substrate having dielectric constant equal to 4.4. The coupled line 
section was realized using three-conductor coupled lines [56].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Figure 4.63      Hybrid with coupled lines.  From [56]. 
 
 

214 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The measured results for the balun alone gave a bandwidth from 1 to 3.2 
GHz with an insertion loss of about 0.5 dB within the band. The phase imbalance 
with respect of 180 degrees difference is 5 at the low end of the band and 10 at 
the higher end. Insertion loss of the power divider alone over 1.25 to 3.0 GHz is ≈ 
0.5 dB. The measured and simulated performance for the sum and difference port 
of the hybrid are in Figure 4.64 (a) and (b), respectively. Total phase variation is -
5º and + 5º respectively within the aforementioned band. 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
`` 
 
(a) 
 - port    
 
 
(b)   - port 
Figure 4.64      Coupled line hybrid performance.  From [56]. 
 
 
 
4.7.6 Slotline Microstrip Hybrid Junction 
 
Using the properties of propagation on slotline, micro-strip line and the coupling 
between them, a 180 degree hybrid junction can be realized with those 
transmission medium, [58].  A suspended substrate having a microstrip line 27 on 
the bottom side and ground plane with slotlines 35, 36, 37 on the top side is 
depicted in Figures 4.65(a) and (b).  Figure 4.65(a) shows excitation of the slotline 
35 at port 32, which causes an equal division of power into slotlines 36 and 37, 
with a 180 degree phase difference between E fields at slotline ports 33, 34.  This 
180 degree phase difference causes cancellation of coupled fields into the 
microstrip 27, thus the microstrip and slotline 35 are isolated from each other.  In 
Figure 4.65(b) excitation occurs at port 31 of the microstrip 27, causing equal 
power division into slotlines 36 and 37 with equal phase.  Isolation between the 
microstrip and slotline 36 is caused by cancellation of the E fields in slotlines 36 
and 37 at the slotline Y junction.  The microstrip port 31 is the sum port, and the 
slotline port 32 is the difference port. Alternative slotline and microstrip 
configurations are given in the reference.    
 
     

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
215 
R1
1
1'
2
2'
4
4'
3
3'
R4
R3
R2
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
TL2A(Z01,θ)
TL1A(Z01,θ)
TL1B(Z01,θ)
TL2B(Z01,θ)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
(a) Power division with 180º phase                        (b) Equal phase power division 
Figure 4.65    Coupling of E fields in microstrip to slotline medium.  Dashed lines are microstrip line 
on bottom side; solid lines are slot lines in top side ground plane metal and arrows 
depict E-fields.  
 
4.7.7 Broadband Hybrids 
 
The 180 degree hybrid combiners discussed so far have frequency limitations 
largely caused by the use of quarter wave transmission line lengths.  A class of 
180° hybrids exists that are not limited in this way and thus can operate over 
extremely wide, multi-octave frequency ranges.  A wideband 180 degree hybrid 
was described by Mouw in 1968 in conjunction with a doubly balanced mixer in a 
“star” configuration [59].  A simplified depiction of it is found in Figure 4.66, 
which has four balanced ports represented by resistors R1, R2, R3, and R4.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.66      Wideband four-port hybrid using four equal transmission lines.  It has four balanced 
ports at R1, R2, R3, and R4.  In practice ports R1 and R2 are unbalanced by grounding at 
points  1’ and 2’.  From [59].  
  

216 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
R1
1
1'
4
4'
3
3'
+
+
+
-
-
-
2
4
R
2
4
R
2
3
R
2
3
R
TL2C(Z02,φ)
TL1A(Z01,θ)
TL1B(Z01,θ)
TL2D(Z02,φ)
Ports 3 and 4 connect to port 1 via transmission lines TL1A and TL1B; 
ports 3 and 4 also connect to port 2 via transmission lines TL2A and TL2B.  
These four transmission lines all have equal characteristic impedance, Z01, and 
phase shift θ.  Signal power incident at port 1 is delivered with equal amplitude 
and phase to ports 3 and 4; and power incident at port 2 is delivered with equal 
amplitude but in opposed phase to ports 3 and 4.  Thus, ports 1, 2, 3, and 4 of 
Figure 4.66, respectively, correspond to ports Σ, Δ, 2, and 1 of the magic-T in 
Figure 4.48.  It is also easily seen that ports 1 and 2 are isolated from each other 
by cancellation.      
 
Figure 4.67 shows the equivalent circuit of the portion of the hybrid that 
is associated with port 1.  Since port 2 is a virtual ground relative to port 1, R2 
does not affect S11, S31, or S41.  Resistors R3 and R4 can be halved, and 
connected at the center point since that point is also a virtual ground relative to 
port 1.  The circuit described thus far has no frequency limitation, since all four 
ports are assumed balanced.  For example, when the circuit is evaluated in a linear 
simulator, using ideal transformers to interface the four balanced ports to single 
ended ports, the resulting S-parameters show no frequency dependence.  
However, when this ideal circuit is realized in a test circuit, three frequency 
limiting factors come into play.  One is that the ports 1 and 2 are actually 
unbalanced, for example with nodes 1’ and 2’ grounded.  As discussed previously 
for the coupled-line baluns, an even mode impedance exists between ground and 
the grounded lines of TL1A, TL1B, TL2A, and TL2B that adds frequency 
dependence.  Also, the low frequency end of operation is limited by the 
inductance of the grounded lines of TL1A, TL1B, TL2A, and TL2B; a high 
reactance relative to the load resistances is required to maintain amplitude and 
phase balance at ports 33’ and 44’, and isolation between ports 1 and 2, at low 
frequencies.    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.67   Equivalent circuit of port 1 with parasitic short circuit TL2C and TL2D.  TL2C 
comprises lines of TL2A and TL2B connecting to 2’.  TL2D comprises lines of TL2A 
and TL2B connecting to 2.  From [59].  
 
 
The third factor limiting bandwidth is the addition of the parasitic 
transmission lines TL2C and TL2D, depicted in Figure 4.67.  TL2C comprises the 
lines of TL2A and TL2B that connect to node 2’.  And TL2D comprises the lines 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
217 
2r
1
1'
4
3'
R
TL1A(Z01,θ)
TL2C(Z02,φ)
of TL2A and TL2B that connect to node 2.  TL2C and TL2D have characteristic 
impedance Z02, and phase shift φ.  The lines present a short circuit across nodes 4 
and 3’, and across nodes 3 and 4’ at φ = nπ/2, n=0,1,2...  Ideally Z02 is infinite, but 
in practical terms it should at least be significantly higher than Z01 and R1 through 
R4.  Z02 can be thought of as the even-mode impedance, and its value varies 
depending on the implementation, for example in balanced microstrip or bifilar 
coupled lines wrapped around magnetic material.  Due to symmetry, the 
equivalent circuit of Figure 4.67 can be divided into two identical half circuits—
one half is shown in Figure 4.68. TL1A retains characteristic impedance, Z01, and 
phase shift θ.  Resistor r = R1 = R2, and resistor R = R3 = R4.  The same analysis 
can be done for the port 2 portion of the hybrid, resulting in the same equivalent 
circuits as shown in Figures 4.67 and 4.68.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.68      Equivalent half circuit for port 1.  From [59].  
 
 
 
The input impedance at ports 1 is given by (4.92), with Z01 and θ 
referring to TL1A, and Z02 and Φ to TL2C [59].  If the parasitic transmission line 
TL2C is ignored, then the simplified input impedance is given by (4.93), in which 
case the maximum bandwidth condition is given by (4.94).  The same analysis and 
results apply to the analysis of input impedance at port 2. 
 





cot
cot
cot
1
cot
cot
2
01
02
01
02
01
01
01
2
1
R
Z
j
Z
Z
Z
Z
j
R
Z
Z
Z
Z
i
i










        
       (4.92) 




cot
1
cot
2
01
01
01
2
1
R
Z
j
j
R
Z
Z
Z
Z
i
i




  
 
                      (4.93) 
01
2
Z
R
r


  
 
 
 
                      (4.94) 

218 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
The input impedance at ports 3 and 4 is given by (4.95).  If the parasitic 
transmission lines are ignored, then the simplified input impedance is given by 
(4.96). 





cot
cot
2
cot
cot
1
cot
2
02
01
01
02
01
01
01
4
3
Z
Z
r
Z
j
Z
Z
j
r
Z
Z
Z
Z
i
i






 
      (4.95) 


cot
2
1
cot
2
01
01
01
4
3
r
Z
j
r
Z
Z
Z
Z
i
i




  
 
 
       (4.96)
 
 
 
 
S-parameters can also be derived, and simplified as in (4.97) – (4.98) by 
neglecting the parasitic transmission lines.  The simulation results based on these 
equations are in Figure 4.69 for the return loss and Figure 4.70 for the insertion 
loss performance.  
 
 


cot
1
2
2
cot
1
2
2
01
01
01
01
22
11
















r
R
j
Z
R
r
Z
r
R
j
Z
R
r
Z
S
S
 
                     (4.97) 
 


cot
1
2
2
cot
1
2
2
01
01
01
01
44
33
















R
r
j
Z
r
R
Z
R
r
j
Z
r
R
Z
S
S
 
                     (4.98) 

























sin
2
cos
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
01
01
24
23
14
13
r
Z
Z
R
j
r
R
r
R
S
S
S
S
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (4.99) 
 
   
 
The wideband hybrid circuit can also be described as a Wheatstone 
bridge, with transmission lines TL1A, TL1B, TL2A, and TL2B replacing the four 
resistors of the bridge, [60]. The two resistors between the opposite corners of the 
bridge become ports 1 and 2.  The author also discusses use of the hybrid in the so 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
219 
called termination insensitive mixer.  It is also used in triple balanced mixers as 
will be discussed in Chapter 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.69      VSWR of the hybrid of Figure 4.66: (top) given Z01=R=2r, (bottom)  given Z01= 
(2Rr)0.5, R=2r.  From [59].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.70   Insertion loss of the hybrid of Figure 4.66: (top) given Z01=R=2r, (bottom)  given 
Z01=(2Rr)0.5, R=2r; in all cases θ=φ.  From [59].  

220 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
4.7.8 Suspended Microstrip Line Wideband Hybrid 
 
A suspended microstrip line implementation of the wide band hybrid discussed 
earlier was proposed in a patent by Mouw, [61], comprising two double sided 
substrates as shown in Figure 4.71.  The hybrid was used in a doubly-balanced 
star mixer, with the diodes located between the top substrate and bottom substrate.  
Ports 1 and 2 are the RF and LO ports of the mixer, corresponding to the ports P1 
and P2 of the magic-T in Figure 4.48.  One can observe in the top substrate, the 
top metallization contains an input line at port 2 that splits into two lines 
terminated by the compensating open-circuit stub.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Top substrate 
 
 
 
 
(b) Bottom substrate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.71  The two substrates comprising Mouw’s 180° hybrid. The connection between the 
substrates is the diode in star configuration connected at 56 – 59 at the top and 60 – 63 
terminal at the bottom.  
 
 
 
The two metal lines on the bottom side are grounded at their extremes 
and open at the mid-point gap, where they couple energy from the top lines.  The 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
221 
same arrangement is true for the bottom substrate of Figure 4.71(b).  Terminals 56 
– 60 connect together to make port 4; similarly, terminals 59 – 63 make port 4’, 
terminals 57 – 61 make port 3’, terminals 58 – 62 make port 3.  These four points 
connect to the four diodes, as discussed in Chapter 6.  An alternate form of this 
balun is realized using just one suspended substrate having four grounded metal 
lines on the bottom side to form the four diode ports is depicted in Figure 4.72, 
[62].  A MMIC version of the mixer circuit using a fully planar version of the 
magic-T is shown in Figure 4.73 [63].     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.72      A planar magic-T with suspended microstrip using two metal layers.  From [62].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.73      A MMIC star mixer using a planar version of the magic-T. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

222 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
4.8 QUADRATURE HYBRIDS 
 
4.8.1 Branchline Coupler 
 
Quadrature 3 dB couplers can provide the important function of signal combining 
in mixers [64].   The branch-line quadrature coupler is represented in Figure 4.74 
in both rectangular and the circular forms. The analysis of operation can be 
simplified by noting the coupler’s horizontal and vertical symmetry.  Referring to 
the rectangular layout, the symmetry runs along the A and B lines, making it 
possible to characterize the whole by analyzing only one quarter of the circuit. 
The symmetry planes crossing at these lines are assumed to be either electric or 
magnetic walls as discussed earlier in this chapter for coupled-lines, so that four 
possibilities are possible: dual open circuit at Y1 and Y2 for a magnetic wall, dual 
short circuit for the same line sections for an electric wall, and mixed 
electric/magnetic walls (short-open, open-short).  The analysis is based on the 
reflection coefficients for each of these conditions. 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       (a) Rectangular version. 
             
               (b) Circular version. 
Figure 4.74      Branchline quadrature coupler.   
If the through lines and branch lines are a quarter wavelength long at the 
center frequency of operation, and the impedance of the lines are related by the 
expression, Y1
2 - Y2
2 = Yc
2, then the coupler is matched at all ports. The S-
parameter matrix for the coupler is given in (4.100) as a function of the reference 
Yc and line admittance Y1. For a 3 dB coupler, a solution is Y2 = Yc and Y1 = 2Yc.  
Therefore, given signal excitation at port 1, the quadrature coupler provides equal 
power division with 90 phase difference at ports 2 and 3. If the ports are 
terminated in 50 ohms then port 4 is isolated from port 1.  This circuit is limited to 
narrow band operation around the frequency where the lines are quarter wave. 
 
Yc
Y2
Y1
Y1
Y2
A
B
Yc
Y1
Y2
A
B
Y1
Y2
Yc
Yc
Yc
Yc
Yc
Yc

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
223 
 































0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
Y
jY
Y
Y
Y
jY
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
jY
Y
Y
Y
jY
S
c
c
c
c
  
 
     (4.100) 
 
 
 
4.8.2 Lange Hybrid Coupler 
 
This type of coupler performs well over an octave or more of bandwidth.  It 
equates to two coupled lines, but uses four or more to obtain the same coupling 
but with wider gaps that are realizable.  The physical layout for the four line 
version of the coupler is in Figure 4.75.  Equations for the design are available in 
the literature, [65], and are derived in terms of the desired coupling, K, and 
characteristic impedance, Z0. The line length, 
2l , is a quarter wavelength at the 
center frequency of operation. The design problem is to find the gap between the 
lines, S, and the line width, W, for a given substrate thickness, h, and dielectric 
constant, r. The set of design equations are given next for an N-line coupler (N 
even).     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.75     Lange coupler as an association of four coupled lines.  From [65]. 
 
 
 

224 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
R
R
N
R
N
K
2
)
1
)(
1
(
)
1
)(
1
(
2
2






 
 
 
 
     (4.101) 
 
 
R
R
N
R
N
R
Z
Z
Z
oo






1
]1
)1
][(
)1
[(
0
 
 
     (4.102) 
 
 
oe
oo
Z
Z
R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (4.103) 
 
 
Where, Zoo and Zoe, respectively, are the odd and even mode impedances 
of two adjacent coupled lines, of which all pairs in the structure are identical. The 
determination of impedance ratio, R, and normalized odd impedance are available 
from standard design charts, reproduced in Figure 4.76(a) and (b).  These values 
can then be used with tables of coupled line data to determine S/h and W/h to 
determine dimensions for the coupler. More accurate results can be obtained from 
EM analysis of a coupled line structure. For the particular case of 50 ohms and 3 
dB coupling, which is the object of the present quadrature hybrids, the desired 
dimensional relations are obtained from the plot on Figure 4.77 for dielectric 
constant ranging from r = 2 to 16.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    Impedance ratio versus coupling.                                 Normalized odd mode  impedance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        versus  coupling.  
 
Figure 4.76      Design charts for four lines Lange couplers.  From [65]. 
 
 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
225 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.77      Gap and line width normalized to substrate height versus dielectric constant.  From 
[65]. 
 
 
4.9 SUMMARY 
 
This chapter included extensive material on various types of coupling structures 
required to apply LO and RF to a mixer and extract the converted IF signal. The 
passive components ranged from waveguide, to coaxial, to various forms of 
transmission lines using solder, chip and wire, and monolithic integrated circuits 
on a GaAs or Si die. The bifilar components, which are still useful today in lower 
frequency applications, operate over multi-octave bandwidths and allow size 
reduction. Active approaches with bipolar or FETs were also introduced, and are 
useful to build mixer circuits in a monolithic semiconductor die. 
 

226 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
J. S. McLean, “Balancing Networks for Symmetric Antennas: Part 1- 
Classification 
and 
Fundamental 
Operation,” 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Electromagnetic Compatibility, Volume 44, No. 4, November 2002, pp. 503-514. 
[2] 
C. Trask, “A Single-Core 4:1 Current Balun of Improved Performance,” 
Sonoran Radio Research, P.O. Box 25240, Tempe, AZ.  
[3]  
C. T. Rauch, “Balun for an Antenna,” US Patent 7,319,435, issued January 
15, 2008.  
[4] 
E. Rotholz, “Transmission-Line Transformers,” IEEE Transactions On 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-29, No. 4, April 1981, pp. 327-
331. 
[5]  
C. Trask, “Transmission Line Transformers: Theory, Design and 
Applications – Part 2,” High Frequency Electronics, January 2006, pp. 26-33. 
[6] 
J. Sevick, “A Simplified Analysis of the Broadband Transmission Line 
Transformer,” High Frequency Electronics, February 2004. 
[7] 
P. Gomez-Jimenez, P. Otero, and E Marquez-Segura, “Analysis and Design 
Procedure of Transmission-Line Transformers,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 56, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 163-
171.   
[8] 
G. Guanella, “Device for Intercoupling Single-Ended and Double-Ended 
Circuits,” US Patent 2,509,057, issued May 23, 1950. 
[9]  
G. Guanella, “High-Frequency Matching Transformer,” US Patent 
2,470,307, issued May 17, 1949. 
[10] J. Sevick, “Design of Broadband Ununs With Impedance Ratios Less than 
1:4,” High Frequency Electronics, November 2004. 
[11]  C. L. Ruthroff , “Some Broad-Band Transformers,” Proceedings of the 
IRE, Volume 47, August 1959, pp. 1337-1342. 
[12] J. Sevick, “Magnetic Material for Broadband Transmission Line 
Transformers,” High Frequency Electronics, January 2005. 
[13]  P. Lefferson, 
“Twisted 
Magnet 
Wire 
Transmission 
Line,'' 
IEEE 
Transactions on Parts, Hybrids, and Packaging, December 1971, Volume PHP-7, 
No. 4, pp. 148-154. 
[14]  O. Pitzalis, Jr., Robert E. Horn, and Ronald J. Baranello, “Broadband 60-W 
HF Linear Amplifier,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, June 1971, Volume 
SC-6, No. 3, pp. 93-103. 
[15] N. Marchand, “Transmission Line Conversion Transformers,” Electronics, 
December 1944, Volume 17, No. 12, pp. 142-145.  
[16] George Oltman, “The Compensated Balun,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, March 1966, Volume MTT-14, No. 3, pp. 
112-119. 
[17] Willmar K. Roberts, “A New Wide-Band Balun,” Proceedings of the IRE, 
December 1957, pp. 1628-1631. 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
227 
[18] J. H. Cloete, “Exact Design of the Marchand Balun,” Microwave Journal, 
May 1980, pp. 99-102. 
[19] R. Knochel, B. Mayer, and U. Goebel, “Unilateral Microstrip Balanced and 
Doubly Balanced Mixers,” 1989 IEEE MTT-Symposium Digest. 
[20]  Ross Lumpe Jr., “Wideband  Balun Realized by Equal Power Divider and 
Short Circuit Stubs,”  US Patent 4,725,792, issued February 16, 1988. 
[21] H. R. Ahn and B. Kim, “Toward Integrated Circuit Size Reduction,” IEEE 
Microwave Magazine, February 2008, pp. 65-75. 
[22]  G. L. Matthaei et al, Microwave Filters, Impedance Matching Networks 
and Coupling Structures, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1964, pp. 221. 
[23] R. Jacques and D. Meignant, “Novel Wide Band Microstrip Balun,” 
European Microwave Conference, September 1981. 
[24] C. Cho and K. C. Gupta, “A New Design Procedure for Single Layer and 
Two-Layer Three-Line Baluns,” IEEE Transactions on  Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume 46, No. 12, December 1998, pp. 2514-2519. 
[25] H. Tanaka, Y. Sasaki and T. Hashimoto, “Unbalanced-to-Balanced 
Converter,” US Patent 6,040,745, issued March 21, 2000. 
[26] K. S. Ang and I. D. Robertson, “Analysis and Design of Impedance-
Transforming Planar Marchand Baluns,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT- 49, No. 2, February 2001, pp. 402-406. 
[27] G. E. Bodway, “Two Port Power Flow Analysis Using Generalized 
Scattering Parameters,” Microwave Journal, Volume 10, May 1967. 
[28] R. Bawer and J. J. Wolfe, “A Printed Balun for Use with Spiral Antennas,” 
IRE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, May 1960, pp. 319-325. 
[29] G. J. Laughlin, “A New Impedance-Matched Wide-Band Balun and Magic 
Tee,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT- 
24, No. 3, March 1976, pp. 135-141. 
[30] Carro, P.L., de Mingo, J., Garcia-Ducar, P., and Sanchez, C., ”Synthesis of 
Hecken-Tapered Microstrip to Parallel-Strip Baluns for UHF Frequency Band,” 
Microwave Symposium Digest (MTT), 2011 IEEE MTT-S.  
[31] B. F. Gunshinan, “Microstrip Balun,” US Patent 3,523,260, issued August, 
4, 1970.   
[32] D. Neuf, “Double Balanced Microwave Mixer Using Balanced Microstrip 
Baluns,” US Patent 3,652,941, issued March 28, 1972.  
[33] S. A. Maas, Microwave Mixers, Second Edition, Artech House, Inc., 685 
Canton St., Norwood, MA 02062, 1993. 
[34] W. Marcczewski and W. Niemyjski, “Microwave Balun for Mixers and 
Modulators,” US Patent 4,755,775, issued July 5, 1988. 
[35] A. M. Pavio, “Monolithic Multilayer Planar Transmission Line,” US Patent 
5,025,232, issued June 18, 1991. 
[36] A. M. Pavio and A. Kikel, “A Monolithic or Hybrid Broadband 
Compensated Balun,” IMS-1990 Symposium Digest, pp. 483-486. 

228 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
[37] K. S. Ang, S. B. Economides, S. Nam, and I. D. Robertson, “A Compact 
MMIC Balun Using Spiral Transformers,” IMS-1999 Symposium Digest, pp. 655-
658. 
[38] P.S. Wu, C. H. Wang, T. W. Huang, and H. Wang, “Compact and Broad-
Band Millimeter_Wave Monolithic Transformer Balanced Mixers,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-53, No. 10, 
October 2005, pp. 3106-3114. 
[39] J. G. Padilla, “Ultra-Wideband Planar Coupled Spiral Balun,” US Patent 
6,683,510, issued January 27, 2004. 
[40] D. Kuylenstierna and P. Linner, “Design of Broadband Lumped Element 
Baluns,” IMS-2004 Symposium Digest, pp. 899-902. 
[41] L. Fan and K. Chang, “A 180º out-of-Phase Power Divider Using 
Asymmetrical Coplanar Stripline,” IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave Letters, 
Volume 6, No. 11, November 1996, pp. 404-406. 
[42] M. C. Tsai, M. J. Schindler, W. Struble, M. Ventresca, R. Binder, R. 
Waterman, and D. Danzilio, “A Compact Wideband Balanced Mixer,” IMS-1994 
Symposium Digest, pp. 5-8. 
[43] P. R. Andrys and P. H. Thompson, “Double Balanced Differential Active 
Ring Mixer With Current Shared Active Input Balun,” US Patent 6,057,714, 
issued May 2, 2000. 
[44] Christophe Viallon and Thiery Parra, “Microwave Differential Structures 
Optimization: Application to a Double Balanced SiGe Active Down-converter 
Design,” IEEE International Workshop on Radio Frequency Integration 
Technology, November 30 – December 2, 2005, Singapore, pp. 91-94. 
[45] Tatsuo Tanaka, "Differential Amplifier," US Patent 4,555,670, issued 
November 26, 1985.  
[46]  P. R. Gray, P. J. Hurst, S. H. Lewis, and R. G. Meyer, Analysis and Design 
of Analog Integrated Circuits, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001, pp. 296.  
[47] A. Prins and H. J. Velo, “Single-Ended/Push-Pull Converter,” US Patent 
4,001,706, issued January 4, 1977. 
[48] W. A. Tyrrell, “Coupling Arrangement for Use in Wave Transmission 
Systems,” US Patent 2,445,895, issued July 27, 1948. 
[49]  R. E. Collin, Foundations for Microwave Engineering, IEEE Press, 2001, 
pp. 437-442. 
[50] S. March, “A Wideband Stripline Hybrid Ring,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, June 1968, pp. 361. 
[51] Chi-Yang Chang, Chu-Chen Yang, Dow-Chih Niu, “A Multioctave 
Bandwidth Rat-Race Singly Balanced Mixer,” IEEE Microwave and Guided 
Wave Letters, Volume 9, No. 1, January 1999, pp. 37-39. 
[52] Kim, Y.G., Song, S.Y, Kim, K.W., “A Compact Wideband Ring Coupler 
Utilizing a Pair of Transitions for Phase Inversion,” IEEE Microwave and 
Wireless Components Letters, Volume 21, No. 1, January 2011, pp. 25-27. 
[53] S. J. Parisi, “180º Lumped Element Hybrid,” IMS-1989 Symposium Digest, 
pp. 1243-1246. 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
229 
[54] M. Dydyk, R. F. Keilmeyer, Jr, J. K. Lauchner, “Lumped Element 
Realization of Ring Hybrids Including  Circuit and Tank Circuit Means,” US 
Patent 5,175,517, issued December 29, 1992. 
[55] S. Ohi, H. Matsubara and N. Ohyama, “Balun,” US Patent 7,116,185, 
issued October  3, 2006. 
[56] K. S. Ang and Y. C. Leong, “Converting Baluns Into Broad-Band 
Impedance-Transforming 180º Hybrids,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT- 50, No. 8, August 2002, pp. 1990-1995. 
[57] R. E. Blight, “Broadband Microstrip Hybrid Tee,” US Patent 3,530,407, 
issued September 22, 1970. 
[58] H. G. Oltman Jr, N. Pelner, and E. N. Torgow, “Slot Line/Microstrip 
Hybrid”, US Patent 3,946,339, issued March 23, 1976. 
[59] R.B. Mouw, “A Broadband Hybrid Junction and Application to the Star 
Modulator,” IEEE Trans. MTT, November 1968.   
[60] David E. Norton, “Three Decade Bandwidth Hybrid Circuits,” Microwave 
Journal, November 1988, pp.117-126. 
[61] R. B. Mouw, “Hybrid Junction and Mixer or Modulator,” US Patent 
3,818,385, issued June 18, 1974. 
[62] S. A. Maas and K. W. Chang, “A broadband, planar, doubly balanced 
monolithic Ka-band diode mixer,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, December 1993, Volume 41, pp. 2330-2335. 
[63] K. W. Chang, T-Hung Chen, L. C. T. Lui, and S. B. T. Bui, "Diode Mixer 
Implemented in a Planar Mononolithic IC", US Patent 5,428,838, issued June 27, 
1995. 
[64] R. E. Collin, Foundations for Microwave Engineering, IEEE Press, 2001, 
pp. 437-442. 
[65] A. Presser, “Interdigitated Microstrip Coupler Design,” IEEE Transactions 
on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT- 26, No. 10, October 1978, 
pp. 801-805. 
 
 

230 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Appendix 4A – Guanella 4:1 Transformer 
 
While two port Z and Y parameters, respectively, are useful for connecting 
networks in series and parallel, H parameters are useful for connecting them in 
parallel at one port and in series at the other.  For two networks connected in 
series at the input, and in parallel at the output, the H parameters for the respective 
networks are simply added.  Since the Guanella 1:4 balun has two transmission 
lines connected in parallel at the input and in series at the output, the ABCD 
matrix for the lossless transmission line is transformed to the H matrix, and then 
multiplied by 2 since the transmission lines are identical.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4A.1      Guanella 1:4 transformer (see Figure 4.3). 
 
The ABCD matrix of a lossless transmission line is: 
 
 










)
cos(
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
)
cos(
0
0
l
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
ABCD
LINE
T




 
      (4A.1) 
 
The H matrix in terms of the ABCD matrix is:  
 






C
A
B
D
H
1
det
1
  
 
 
 
      (4A.2) 
 
The H matrix of the lossless transmission line is obtained and then 
multiplied by 2 to represent the complete balun: 
 
I1+I2 
V2 
I1 
I2 
Vg 
V2 
V1 
RL = 4 RG 
Rg 
+    V   - 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
231 















0
0
)
tan(
)
cos(
1
)
cos(
1
)
tan(
Z
l
j
l
l
l
jZ
H
LINE
T




 
  
      (4A.3)
 
LINE
T
BALUN
H
H

2
 
 
The input impedance on the high impedance side of the Guanella 
transformer in terms of H parameters, given source resistance, Rg, is Zin,HI: 
 





)
)
tan(
2
)
(
cos
4
)
tan(
cos
)
tan(
4
2
1
)
(det(
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
22
11
,
Z
l
jR
l
Z
R
l
l
l
Z
R
jZ
h
R
h
R
H
Z
g
g
g
g
g
HI
in












 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (4A.4) 
 
With Rg =25 ohms, Z0=50 ohms, and βl=π/4 the resulting impedance is  
Zin,HI = 100 ohms. The input impedance on the low impedance side of the 
Guanella transformer in terms of H parameters, given load impedance, ZL, is 
Zin,LOW: 






0
0
2
0
2
0
22
11
,
4
)
tan(
2
)
(
cos
)
tan(
2
tan
2
(
cos
det
Z
l
Z
jZ
l
l
Z
l
j
Z
l
Z
h
Z
H
h
Z
Z
L
L
L
L
LOW
in












 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     (4A.5) 
 
With ZL = 100 ohms, Z0 = 50 ohms, and βl = π/4 the resulting impedance 
is Zin,LOW = 25 ohms. These equations for Zin,HI and Zin,LOW give the same 
numerical results as (4.1) and (4.2). The available gain for the balun going from 
the series end to the parallel connected end in terms of Z parameters is: 
 
2
11
21
G
L
G
A
Z
Z
Z
R
R
G


  
 
 
 
      (4A.6) 
 
Converting the HBALUN matrix to a Z matrix: 
 






1
det
1
21
12
22
h
h
H
h
Z
   
 
 
 
      (4A.7) 

232 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 


















j
l
Z
l
j
Z
l
j
Z
l
j
Z
l
l
Z
Z
2
)
cot(
)
sin(
)
sin(
)
2
sin(
4
)
2
cos(
1
)
tan(
2
0
0
0
0
2
0






        (4A.8) 
 
The available gain from high impedance to low impedance is then: 
 
)
(
cos
4
)
(
sin
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
,
l
Z
l
R
Z
R
R
G
G
L
G
HighToLow
A




    (4A.9) 
 
In this case RG = 100 ohms, and RL = 25 ohms and gain is equal to 1, or 0 
dB. The available gain in the opposite direction, from low impedance to high 
impedance, is obtained by swapping RG and RL, and is also given in (4.3):  
 
)
(
cos
4
)
(
sin
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
,
l
Z
l
R
Z
R
R
G
L
G
L
LowToHigh
A




 
 
In this case RG = 25 ohms, RL = 100 ohms, Z0=50 ohms, and βl=π/4.  
These give GA = 1 = 0 dB. 
 
 
Appendix 4B – Compensated Balun  
 
The balun shown in Figure 4B.1 can be analyzed by first writing the Y matrix for 
the circuit.  The Y matrix is inverted to solve the Z matrix that gives node voltages 
in terms of driving current.  Then the S-parameters are easily obtained from Z 
parameters.  Terminations G1, G2, and G3, respectively, are at ports 1, 2, and 3.  
The ABCD matrix for the lossless transmission line is in (4B.1) and the equivalent 
two port Y matix is in (4B.2). 
 
 










)
cos(
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
)
cos(
0
0
l
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
ABCD
LINE
T




   
      (4B.1) 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
233 
















)
sin(
)
cos(
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
)
cos(
0
0
0
0
l
jZ
l
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
Y
LINE
T






  
                     (4B.2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4B.1  Compensated microstrip balun (see Figure 4.13). 
 
By inspection, the YBALUN matrix for the compensated balun is: 
 































)
sin(
)
cos(
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
1
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
sin(
)
cos(
3
3
3
1
1
1
3
1
1
3
3
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
1
l
jZ
l
l
jZ
l
G
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
l
jZ
l
G
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
jZ
l
l
jZ
l
G


















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (4B.3) 
To simplify the matrix inversion, the parameters are assigned values: 
 
βl1 = π 
βl2 = 3π/2 
βl3 = π/2 
G1 =  G2 = G3 = 1/R 
Z1 =  Z2 = Z3 = R√2 
 
These values are substituted in to simplify the Y matrix, except for βl1 = 
π in the denominator sin(βl1) terms that instead are substituted after inverting to 
get the Z matrix.  After substitution the Y matrix becomes: 
 
T1  
T2  
T3  
2 
3 
1 
T1: L1 =   /2  Zo = R2 
T2: L2 = 3/4  Zo = R2 
T3: L3 =   /4  Zo = R2 

234 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 

























)
sin(
2
1
1
)
sin(
2
1
2
1
)
sin(
2
1
)
sin(
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
l
R
j
R
l
R
j
R
j
l
R
j
l
R
j
R
R
j
R
j
R
j
R
YBALUN




 (4B.4) 
 
Inverting the Y matrix and substituting in the βl1 = π terms gives the 
following Z parameters: 
 
2
/
11
R
Z

 
)
4
/(
2
21
j
R
Z


 
)
4
/(
2
31
j
R
Z

 
4
/
22
R
Z

 
4
/
33
R
Z


 
 
Once the Z matrix including port terminations is obtained, S-parameters 
are obtained as follows, with Rn as the nth port terminating resistance. 
 
1
2


n
nn
nn
R
Z
S
;  on diagonal 
 
 
 
 
1
2


m
n
nm
nm
R
R
Z
S
;  on diagonal 
 
With all termination resistances equal to R, the resulting S parameters 
are: 
0
11 
S
 
2
1
21
j
S


 
2
1
21
j
S

 
2
/
1
23
33
22




S
S
S
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
235 
Appendix 4C – Active 180 FET Power Divider 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4C.1     Active power divider with simplified FET model. Node 1 corresponds to gate, node 2 
corresponds to drain, and node 3 corresponds to source.   
 
 
The Y matrix including the termination resistors, gD and gS is in (4C.1). 
Replacing the current source relation with input voltages, there results (4C.2). 
 










































3
2
1
0
3
1
3
1
1
0
0
)
(
)
(
V
V
V
C
j
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
C
j
C
j
g
V
V
g
V
V
g
I
gs
ds
S
ds
gs
ds
ds
D
gs
gs
m
m




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (4C.1) 
 










































3
2
1
0
1
0
0
0
V
V
V
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
C
j
g
I
gs
ds
S
m
ds
m
gs
m
ds
ds
D
m
gs
gs




   (4C.2) 
 
 
Inverting the Y matrix gives the Z matrix.  Since the driving current is 
only at port 1 (gate), the second and third columns of the Z matrix are not needed.   
 
2 
1 
3 
gm(V1-V3) 
gds 
I1 
Cgs 
g0 
gS 
gD 

236 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 

























































































0
0
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
2
1
I
x
x
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
x
x
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
x
x
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
V
V
V
ds
D
ds
D
S
gs
ds
S
ds
m
S
D
D
ds
gs
m
D
ds
D
ds
D
S
gs
ds
S
ds
m
S
D
m
S
ds
gs
ds
D
ds
D
S
gs
ds
S
ds
m
S
D
D
ds
gs
ds
S
ds
m
S
D






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (4C.3) 
 
Once the Z matrix including port terminations is obtained, S- parameters 
are obtained as follows, with Rn as the nth port terminating resistance. 
 
1
2


n
nn
nn
R
Z
S
; on diagonal 
m
n
nm
nn
R
R
Z
S
2

; off diagonal 
 





ds
D
ds
D
S
gs
ds
S
ds
m
S
D
m
S
ds
gs
D
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
S









0
0
0
0
21
)
(
2


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (4C.4) 
 







ds
D
ds
D
S
gs
ds
S
ds
m
S
D
D
ds
gs
m
D
S
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
S










0
0
0
0
31
)
(
2


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (4C.5) 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
237 
Appendix 4D – Alternative 180 FET  Power Divider 
 
The schematic for the circuit of Figure 4.42 using a simplified FET model is in 
Figure 4D.1. Notice there is DC current at port 1 from bias of common gate 
device, which means there is a need for a DC block and feed circuit at node 1 not 
shown in the figure. The Y matrix for this circuit including the termination 
resistors is in (4D.1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4D.1     Active power divider with simplified FET model. Node 1 corresponds to connection of 
gate of common source device and source of common gate device, node 2 corresponds 
to drain of common source device, and node 3 corresponds to drain of common gate 
device.  
 
 







































3
2
1
3
2
2
1
1
2
1
0
0
0
2
0
0
V
V
V
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
I
ds
ds
m
ds
m
ds
gs
ds
m

      (4D.1) 
 
 
To simplify results let’s make the output terminations the same g = g3 = 
g2, and leave the input termination as g1.  Inverting the Y matrix gives the Z 
matrix.  Since the driving current is only at port 1 (gate), the second and third 
columns of the Z matrix are not needed.   
 
2 
1 
3 
gm1 
gds1 
I1 
g1 
Cgs1 
Cgs2 
gm2 
gds 
g2 
g3 
Gate1 
Gate2 
Source2 
Source2 
Drain2 
Drain1 

238 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 































0
0
1
31
21
11
3
2
1
I
x
x
Z
x
x
Z
x
x
Z
V
V
V
 
 
 
The Z parameters for this circuit is given by (4D.2) to (4D.4) as follows: 
 
 




ds
gs
ds
ds
m
ds
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
Z








2
)
(
1
2
1
11
       (4D.2) 
 
 




ds
gs
ds
ds
m
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
Z








2
1
2
1
1
21
        (4D.3) 
 
 




ds
gs
ds
ds
m
ds
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
Z








2
1
2
1
2
31
       (4D.4) 
 
 
Once the Z matrix with port termination included is obtained, S- 
parameters are derived as follows, with Rn as the nth port terminating resistance. 
 
1
2


n
nn
nn
R
Z
S
; on diagonal 
m
n
nm
nn
R
R
Z
S
2

; off diagonal 
 
 




ds
gs
ds
ds
m
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
gg
g
S








2
2
1
2
1
1
1
21
       (4D.5) 
 
 
 






ds
gs
ds
ds
m
ds
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
gg
g
g
S








2
2
1
2
1
1
2
31
       (4D.6) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Active and Passive Coupling Structures 
239 
Appendix 4E – Active 180 FET Combiner  
 
Using the simplified FET model, the circuit from Figure 4.46 can be represented 
as shown in Figure 4E.1. The DC biasing circuitry was suppressed for ease of 
calculation. The Y matrix for this circuit including the termination resistors is in 
(4E.1), assuming the common drain and common source devices are similar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4E.1     Active power combiner. Node 1 corresponds to connection to the gate of common 
drain device, node 2 corresponds to connection to the gate of common source device, 
and output node 3 corresponds to the connection point of the common-source drain 
with common-drain source.  
 
 






































3
2
1
3
2
1
2
1
2
0
0
0
0
V
V
V
C
j
g
g
gm
C
j
g
C
j
g
C
j
C
j
g
I
I
gs
ds
gs
m
gs
gs
gs





    (4E.1) 
 
 
Inverting the Y matrix we obtain the Z matrix that provides the required 
voltage relations. Similar to previous manipulation, let’s make the following 
terminations the same g2 = g3 = g1= g0.  The Z-parameters of interest are in (4E.2) 
and (4E.3). 
 
 
)
(
2
)
2
(
0
0
0
31
ds
gs
ds
m
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
Cgs
j
g
Z








  
   
    (4E.2) 
 
 
)
(
2
)
2
(
0
0
0
32
ds
gs
ds
m
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
Z







   
 
    (4E.3) 
2 
1 
3 
gm 
gds 
gm 
gds 
Cgs 
Cgs 
g1 
g2 
g3 
I1 
I2 

240 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
The S-parameters derived from the Z parameters are in (4E.4) and (4E.5).  
The output voltage as a function of the two input voltages is in (4E.6), the final 
result for output voltage is in (4E.7).  
 
 
 
)
(
2
)
2
(
)
(
2
0
0
0
0
31
ds
gs
ds
m
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
Cgs
j
g
g
S








   
        
       (4E.4) 
 
)
(
2
)
2
(
2
0
0
0
0
32
ds
gs
ds
m
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
S







  
 
       (4E.5) 
 
 
2
2
32
1
1
31
2
32
1
31
3
g
V
Z
g
V
Z
I
Z
I
Z
V




  
                     (4E.6)
 
 
      
 
 
 
)
(
2
)
2
(
)
(
0
0
0
1
0
2
1
0
3
ds
gs
ds
m
gs
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
V
g
C
j
V
V
g
g
V









   
 
      (4E.7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

241 
Chapter 5 
Diode Mixer Theory 
Mixing is the process used to translate the center frequency of an RF signal to an 
intermediate frequency (IF).  Ideally, any modulation present on the RF signal 
transfers perfectly to the IF without the introduction of noise or undesired signals.  
Frequency translation is accomplished by combining, or “mixing,” the RF signal 
with a local oscillator signal, LO, to create the IF signal.  The IF equals the sum or 
difference between the RF and LO frequencies.  The RF level is usually much 
lower than that of the LO, so it can be approximated as a small signal that 
converts to the IF using a linear process.  The small signal RF is modulated by the 
time varying admittance (or impedance) created by the large signal LO “pumping” 
a nonlinear device, which is analyzed as a nonlinear process.  Various nonlinear 
devices are used including diodes, FETs and BJTs.  Frequency conversion from 
RF to IF can be described mathematically by multiplying the Fourier series of the 
RF signal with that of the admittance or impedance waveform, resulting in the 
Fourier series of the IF output.  The terms RF and IF are not used consistently in 
the literature; for example, in an up-converter RF sometimes refers to the output, 
and IF to the input. However, in this chapter the RF is the small signal input and 
the IF is the desired output regardless of which frequency is higher.   
This goals of this chapter are to provide an overview of mixer theory in a 
simple yet sufficiently detailed manner to allow a solid understanding of the diode 
mixer circuits presented in Chapter 6, as well as provide insights for 
understanding the transistor based mixers of the later chapters.  The method of 
presentation is to use the most basic of mixer circuits with a detailed presentation 
of the theory.  We begin with a discussion of the basic square wave mixer and the 
concept of the conduction waveform whose Fourier coefficients are derived using 
a nonlinear analysis, which are then used to calculate small signal mixer 
performance using linear analysis.  The conversion matrix is introduced using the 
classic analysis of the Y-mixer to illustrate the inter-relationships between mixer 
performance, port impedances and terminations, and the diode I/V equation.  
Closed form equations are derived for conversion loss and port impedances, and 
then verified by harmonic balance simulations.  The classic nonlinear analysis 
approaches are described for estimating gain compression and intermodulation 
(IM) suppression, followed by a detailed discussion of subharmonically pumped 

242 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
diode mixers.  The effects of diode series resistance, junction capacitance, and 
lead inductance are given using the standard approach that ignores terminations to 
higher order mixing products, and another that uses a five term conversion matrix 
that is solved numerically and includes diode parasitics.  Next, a simple method is 
described for determining which mixing products will be present at the various 
ports of a balanced mixer, to help select the best circuit for a given mixer 
application. The chapter ends with a discussion of mixer synthesis using an 
existing linear approach that is applied to the conversion matrix.     
 
 
5.1  HISTORY OF LINEAR AND NONLINEAR ANALYSIS 
 
If the RF input signal is a complex modulated waveform, the IF output ideally will 
have an identical modulation spectrum shifted to the new center frequency. As the 
incident RF level increases, gain compression and intermodulation occur.  To 
capture these effects, the analysis must abandon the linear-conversion assumption 
and use a fully nonlinear approach in which the RF signal and LO are both 
included in the large signal analysis.  Linear analysis is useful to calculate 
conversion loss, noise figure, port impedances, and optimal port terminations.  It 
requires a single integration to calculate Fourier coefficients of the admittance (or 
impedance) waveform associated with LO harmonics.  In contrast, a full nonlinear 
analysis provides the same results plus information about gain compression and 
intermodulation.  The tradeoff is the full nonlinear analysis is significantly more 
complicated, with the easiest part being the inclusion of a double integration to 
calculate the Fourier coefficients associated with both LO and RF harmonics.   
Over the years many published analyses have used the linear approach, 
including the work by Torrey and Whitmer in 1948 [1], Barber in 1967 [2], Saleh 
in 1971 [3], Egami in 1973 [4], and Held and Kerr in 1978 [5].  These include the 
“conversion matrix” discussed later in this chapter that includes effects of 
arbitrary terminations to RF, IF, image, and other mixing products. The early 
linear analyses limited the conversion matrix to include only the RF, IF, and 
image, with all other mixing products assumed short or open circuited.  This 
resulted in closed form approximations for conversion loss and optimal port 
impedances that gave valuable insight into mixer behavior.  The later analyses 
included additional mixing products in the conversion matrix that provided results 
needed for modern mixer design purposes, and required computer simulation.     
The early nonlinear analyses were carried out without the conversion matrix by 
approximating the diode as an ideal switch or exponential diode resulting in 
closed form equations [6, 7, 8, 10].  In light of their simplicity, they provided 
surprisingly valuable estimates for compression and intermodulation.  One such 
approach is used in modern system simulators to estimate IM suppression [9].    
These simplified approaches do not include effects from terminations to image, 
sum, and higher order mixing products, which are required for modern mixer 
design purposes.  In contrast, nonlinear analyses that include the conversion 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
243 
matrix are carried out numerically.  The first report of accurate simulation of 
intermodulation in a diode mixer including nonlinear capacitance was given in 
1987 [11].  The analysis showed that terminating the image in a high-impedance 
inductive load reduced conversion loss as expected, but could also increase IM 
and noise levels.  Providing a short circuit termination to the image port reduced 
conversion loss without degrading noise or IM levels. 
The distinction between linear and nonlinear analysis methods in recent 
years has largely become academic.  With the advent of SPICE and harmonic 
balance simulation software, and high quality nonlinear device models, mixers can 
now be analyzed and designed without the need for limiting assumptions such as 
small signal RF, exclusion of nonlinear junction capacitance, and all mixing 
products shorted except RF, LO, and IF.  Having said this it is instructive to 
review the development of linear and nonlinear analysis methods and the resulting 
closed form approximations to understand the underlying relationships that drive 
mixer performance and behavior.  
 
 
5.2 LINEAR MIXER ANALYSIS 
 
The periodic time varying impedance, generated by the LO pumping the nonlinear 
device, can be approximated as a switching function having a rectangular or a 
square waveform [2].  Both linear and nonlinear analyses have been done using 
this ideal approach.  Alternately one can model the mixing process by applying 
the sum of the RF and LO voltages to the equation relating the current and voltage 
of the mixing device; for example, using the exponential diode equation.  This 
approach also yields a time varying modulation waveform, and both linear and 
nonlinear versions of this approach have been published.  The simplest equation 
relating the current and voltage at the mixing device is a quadratic.  A practical 
device that provides a true quadratic current-voltage relationship does not exist 
[12]; however, it is most closely approximated by the FET.  On the other hand, the 
simplest mixing device is the two terminal diode rectifier, whose current-voltage 
transfer function is exponential, which can be viewed as a high degree 
polynomial.  
Regardless of whether the mixing process is characterized as a small 
signal voltage or current being modulated by a switching waveform, or as the RF 
and LO voltages applied to a nonlinear I/V transfer function, at the most basic 
level the math is the same.  Given sinusoidal RF and LO input signals, the mixing 
process is characterized by multiplying the two sinusoids as in (5.1).  The familiar 
trigonometric identity shows the multiplication results in two new sinusoids 
having frequencies ωLO + ωRF and ωLO – ωRF, respectively, referred to as the sum 
IF and difference IF.      
 

244 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 





t
t
t
t
IF
LO
IF
LO
IF
LO
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
1
cos
cos










       (5.1)  
 
Modulating the RF signal produces an ensemble of IF output signals.  
Given a linear analysis with fIF = fRF-fLO, the output ensemble comprises terms at 
fIF and nfLO±fIF as depicted in Figure 5.1 for n=1, 2, 3.  The frequency notation is 
f±n = nfL±fIF, which is useful in the conversion matrix.  In contrast, given a fully 
nonlinear analysis, the output ensemble comprises terms at pfIF and nfLO±mfIF as 
depicted in Figure 5.2, for n=1,2,3; p=1,2;  and m=1,2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 5.1      Mixer output spectrum given a linear analysis with fIF = fRF-fLO includes terms at fIF and 
nfLO±fIF for n=1,2,3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.2       Mixer output spectrum with RF included in the nonlinear analysis, with fIF = fRF-fLO 
includes terms at pfIF and nfLO±mfIF for n=1,2,3 and p=m=1,2. 
 
fIF                    f-1     f+1                      f-2     f+2                       f-3     f+3 
            image     signal                        sum 
fR - fL 
2fL - fR 
fL 
fR 
3fL - fR 
fL + fR 
2fL + fR 
4fL - fR 
3fL 
2fL 
2(fR - fL) 
3fL -2fR 
2fL - fR 
-fL + 2fR 
fR 
fIF                      f-1      f+1                        f-2      f+2       
      f-3       f+3        
fR - fL 
fL 
4fL - 2fR 
3fL - fR 
2fR 
fL +fR 
2fL 
5fL - 2fR 
4fL - fR 
fL + 2fR 
2fL + fR 
3fL 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
245 
 
If two small signal tones are applied, fRF1 and fRF2, then their resulting 
intermodulation products will also be present, most notably the second and third 
order ones.  
 
 
5.2.1 Simple Mixer 
 
Perhaps the simplest and most popularized method of characterizing the linear 
mixing process is to represent it as the product of the RF signal and a rectangular 
or square wave switching function.  If the switching function varies between 0 and 
1 at the LO frequency, then the product between it and the RF signal produces an 
IF output consisting of the RF signal switched on and off at the LO frequency.  
The IF spectrum contains the RF fundamental, and the sum and difference 
frequencies of (5.1). This simple case of the switching waveform varying between 
0 and 1 corresponds to the single-ended mixer, which uses a single mixing device 
to switch the RF signal on and off at the LO frequency, and illustrates mixing as a 
process of multiplication.  If the switching function instead varies between +1 and 
-1 as depicted in Figure 5.3, and as represented by the Fourier series in (5.2), then 
the product of the RF multiplying the switching function results in the voltage 
given by (5.3).  During the interval 0 to π, the RF signal multiplies 1 and thus is 
unchanged.  But between π to 2 π, the RF multiplies -1.  Thus the IF output equals 
the RF input signal shifted in phase by 180 degrees at the LO frequency.  While 
this may appear to be a phase modulation process, it is fundamentally 
multiplicative. The spectrum of Vout for (5.3) corresponds to the doubly balanced 
mixer, in which the RF fundamental is suppressed, and the output signals  have 
frequencies equal to nfLO±fRF where n=odd. For example, referring to the ring 
doubly balanced mixer of Figure 5.4, it can be seen that the IF output equals the 
RF input switched 180 degrees in phase at the LO frequency. This is 
accomplished as the LO alternately switches the diodes D1/D2 on and D3/D4 off, 
and vice versa, alternately grounding the opposite polarity ends of the RF balun 
through the grounded center tap of the LO balun.   
 
      
1
-1
2π
π
ωLt
S(t)
 
 
Figure 5.3       Doubly balanced mixer switching function. 
 
 
 

246 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
)
sin(
1
4
)
(
,...
5,3,1
t
n
n
t
S
LO
n





  
 
 
         (5.2) 










,...
5,3,1
)
sin(
1
4
)
sin(
n
LO
RF
RF
OUT
t
n
n
t
V
V



 
         (5.3)
 
 
 








)
cos(
)
cos(
2
RF
LO
RF
LO
RF
OUT
t
V
V





 
 
 





)
3
cos(
)
3
cos(
3
1
RF
LO
RF
LO
t




 
 
 







...
)
5
cos(
)
5
cos(
5
1
RF
LO
RF
LO
t




       (5.4) 
 
 






RF
OUT
C
V
V
L
log
20
    
 
 
 
              (5.5) 
 
       







n
2
log
20
 at nωL±ωR.   
 
        = 3.92 dB;  at ωL±ωR 
 
Taking the desired IF output to be the sum or the difference product with 
n=1, ωIF = ωLO ± ωRF, conversion loss is the familiar value of 3.92 dB.  This 
analysis so far assumes no losses in the switching device, and the remaining RF 
signal power converted to nωLO ± ωRF is lost.  Conversion loss can be reduced to 
theoretically 0 dB by using reactive terminations at the nωLO ± ωRF mixing 
frequencies.  One may assume the power at the nωLO ± ωRF frequencies reflects 
back into the mixing device and remixes to add constructively or destructively 
with the desired IF, depending on the reactance of each termination.  In practical 
circuits use reactive terminations to affect mixer performance is limited to one or 
a few of the mixing terms, generally the image and sum, and useful over only a 
narrow frequency range.   
An important point about the doubly balanced diode mixer is illustrated 
by Figure 5.4 concerning IM distortion, which is mentioned here briefly and 
developed more fully later in this chapter and Chapter 6.  At a particular instant in 
time the phase of RF and LO signals relative to the four diode currents are as 
depicted in the figure.  The LO forward biases diodes D1 and D2, and reverse 
biases diodes D3 and D4. And the RF adds a slight forward bias to diodes D2 and 
D3, and a slight reverse bias to diodes D1 and D4.   Ideally, diodes D1 and D2 turn 
on at the same instant in time, and diodes D3 and D4 turn off at the same instant, 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
247 
D2
i2
D3
i3
D4
i4
D1
i1
LO
RF
IF
+VLO
+VRF
IIF
-VRF
-VLO
controlled by solely the LO.  However, the effect of the RF current voltage is to 
cause them to turn on and off at slightly different times; this is also true for D3 and 
D4.  This effect has been described as phase modulation of the zero crossings of 
the respective conductance waveforms of the four diodes [13].  The effect is to 
introduce IM distortion that increases with increasing RF signal level.  It is 
assumed for the small signal linear mixing analysis that this effect is negligible, 
thus conductance is controlled only by the LO.  But for the large signal analyses, 
both LO and RF signals are included in analyzing the diode conductance.  This 
discussion so far concerns the diode mixing device, but the same problem occurs 
for balanced mixers using FET and BJT devices, with the level of distortion 
produced being dependant on the circuit implementation.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4       Doubly balanced mixer schematic. 
 
In this discussion so far, the linear mixer has been described as having an 
RF input port, an IF output port, and also ports for higher order products.  These 
virtual ports are at the frequencies of the various mixing products, and share the 
same physical connection point.  In the ensuing discussion, the conversion matrix 
is introduced that represents a linear mixer having three virtual ports: the RF 
input, IF output, and the image.  The “Y,” “Z,” “H,” and “G” mixers are 
introduced, and the “Y” mixer is examined in detail.  
 
 
5.3  FREQUENCY CONVERSION MATRIX 
 
During the 1940s significant work was done to analyze and design crystal rectifier 
mixers for radar applications [1].  The analysis process assumed the crystal 
rectifier was pumped by a large signal LO that controlled the switching 
characteristics.  The RF signal was applied at a level much below that of the LO, 
allowing for the approximation of linear mixing. This in turn allowed the use of a 
conversion matrix relating the currents and voltages of the RF, IF, and other 

248 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
mixing products.  And to simplify the analysis to obatin closed form equations, 
this early linear analysis ony considered the RF, IF and image signals.  Three 
virtual ports were involved that shared the same physical point.  In modern linear 
analyses, more ports can be analyzed using computer simulation, but the 
underlying approach is the same. The assumption of small signal RF allows 
separation of the analysis into large signal and small signal parts. The large signal 
part concerns the LO and bias, and the small signal part uses conventional linear 
network analysis to relate the RF, IF, image, and other mixing products to each 
other.  The conductance waveform of the nonlinear element is determined in the 
large signal analysis for a given LO power, and then used in the small signal 
analysis.  The conductance waveform is determined by taking the derivative of the 
large signal current in the nonlinear device with respect to the voltage across it.  
The Fourier series of the conductance waveform is obtained, and its coefficients 
are applied to a conversion matrix, relating the currents and voltages of the small 
signal mixing products to each other.  The conversion matrix can be expressed in 
an impedance or admittance form, as is convenient, depending on the mixing 
device.  Usually (but not always) one form can be obtained from the other by 
inversion.  If the conversion matrix is an admittance matrix, then it multiplies the 
array of unknown node voltages, equaling the array of known driving currents at 
the nodes.  The admittance matrix is inverted, and then multiplied with the array 
of known currents to solve for the unknown voltages.  Port impedances and 
conversion factors for the three signals are thus obtained, as well as the effects of 
image termination on conversion loss and RF and IF port impedances. 
 
 
5.3.1 Conversion Matrix  
 
The conversion matrix approach was introduced by Petersen and Llewellyn in 
1945 [14], and enlarged upon in major works by Torrey and Whitmer in 1948 [1], 
and by Saleh in 1971 [3].   The method starts with the basic relationship that 
current through the device is a function of the voltage controlling the device.       
 
 
 
)
(v
f
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (5.6)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The current and voltage are assumed to comprise (a) dc, (b) large signal, 
and (c) small signal components: 
 
 










1
0
2
)
(
n
k
t
j
k
t
jn
n
k
LO
e
i
e
I
I
t
i


  
 
        (5.7) 
 










1
0
2
)
(
n
k
t
j
k
t
jn
n
k
LO
e
v
e
V
V
t
v


  
 
        (5.8) 
(a) 
    (b) 
 
      (c) 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
249 
 
The large signal LO fundamental and harmonics are given by (5.7b) and 
(5.8b) for n≠0, and the DC terms in (5.7a) and (5.8a) for n=0.  The small signal 
sidebands centered around the LO fundamental and harmonics are given by (5.7c) 
and (5.8c), and have frequency ωk = (kωLO + ωIF) and ω-k = (kωLO - ωIF), as in 
Figure 5.1.  It should be noted that (5.7c) and (5.8c) are not Fourier series because 
-ωk ≠ ω-k.   
 
The nonlinear device is treated as a conductance g(t), where i(t) = 
g(t)v(t), which is analogous to the switching waveform already introduced. The 
conductance is represented by the Fourier series in (5.9), where g(t) is the 
derivative of the I/V characteristic of the nonlinear device.  As we will see, the gn 
Fourier coefficient values also populate the admittance matrix of (5.12).  For the 
conductance waveform represented by (5.9), g0 is the average value, g1 is at the 
fundamental LO frequency, g2 is at the LO second harmonic frequency, and so 
forth.   
 
 





n
t
jn
n
LO
e
g
t
g

)
(
 
 
 
 
 
         (5.9) 
  
 
 
Figure 5.5 illustrates that harmonic currents are generated by a sinusoidal 
voltage pumping a nonlinear device.  The currents include DC, fundamental, and 
harmonics with frequencies equal to nωLO (n = 0, 1, 2,...).   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.5      LO voltage and harmonics generated by the nonlinear conductance. 
 
 
 
Small signal voltages vk and currents ik in (5.7c) and (5.8c), respectively 
relate to each other by the admittance matrix defined in (5.12) that contains the gn 
values from (5.9) for n = 0 to ±4.  Recalling the frequency nomenclature of Figure 
5.1, we have: 
 
IF
LO
k
k






 
...
3,2,1,0

k
 
 
 
       (5.10) 
I
V 
G 2 
BPF
2ωLO 
G 3 
BPF
3ωLO 
VDC 
G0 
LPF     
0 
VLO 
G1 
BPF
ωLO 

250 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
For k = 1, ω1 = ωLO + ωIF. If we assign the IF as ωIF  = ωRF - ωLO, then ω1 
= ωRF.  And for k = -1, ω-1 = ωLO - ωIF = 2ωLO-ωRF, which is the image frequency, 
thus ω-1 = ωIM.  Similarly, for k=2, we find that ω+2 = ωLO + ωRF and ω-2 = 3ωLO-
ωRF, comprising sidebands about the LO second harmonic frequency.  Thus 
mixing products of order k comprise sidebands about the kth LO harmonic 
frequency, as depicted in Figure 5.1.  For example, for k = -1, 0, +1 the voltages 
are given by (5.11), and the currents have the same form.  
 
0
)
(
1
1'
t
j
IF
LO
e
v
v





 
= RF 
 
        
     (5.11a) 
 
0
0
0'
t
j
IF
e
v
v


 
 
= IF 
 
 
     (5.11b) 
0
)
(
1
1'
t
j
IF
LO
e
v
v





 
= Image  
 
     (5.11c) 
 
Since ik and vk of (5.12) are small signal, the approximation can be made 
that yk = gn for n=k.    Equation (5.12) comprises what is known as the conversion 
matrix. 
 



































































2
1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
4
1
0
1
2
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2
1
0
1
4
3
2
1
0
2
1
0
1
2
v
v
v
v
v
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
i
i
i
i
i
       (5.12)
 
 
 
          
The meaning of (5.12) is readily understood.  For example, taking the top 
row we get (5.13).  The current i+2 and voltage v+2 are both at frequency ωLO + 
ωRF, so they are related by the average (non time varying) conductance term y0.  
Next, the voltage v+1  is at frequency ωRF, which converts to current i+2 at 
frequency ωLO + ωRF by multiplication with y1, which is the Fourier coefficient of 
the conduction waveform at ωLO.  Next, the voltage v+0  is at frequency ωRF - ωLO, 
which converts to current i+2 at frequency ωLO + ωRF by multiplication with y2, the 
Fourier coefficient of the conduction waveform at 2ωLO.  The same pattern holds 
for the remaining current and voltage terms of (5.12) and (5.13).   
 
2
4
1
3
0
2
1
1
2
0
2











v
y
v
y
v
y
v
y
v
y
i
    
 
       (5.13) 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
251 
The yk coefficients could be complex to represent resistive and reactive 
nonlinearities of the mixing element. For this discussion they are limited to 
resistive nonlinearities, which is a valid approximation for mixers whose mixing 
element has little or no capacitive effects. Under these assumptions, the I/V 
relation and respective derivatives are real.  The fact still remains that the voltages 
and currents at the various frequencies have relative phase between them, which 
are a function of time.   
The phase due to time can be eliminated by selecting the origin of time to 
be zero in the equations. With these assumptions the admittance matrix can be 
greatly simplified. First, the terms with negative index are the complex conjugate 
of the terms with positive index, (5.14). Secondly, the matrix represents the I/V 
relation for a linear passive circuit, so the matrix is symmetrical, and consequently 
is reciprocal, (5.15).  
 
*
n
n
y
y


 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5.14) 
n
n
y
y


 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5.15) 
 
Under these conditions, the coefficients yn will be real, and di/dv is an 
even function of time, which implies v is also an even function of time, and the 
coefficients yn are real.  This assumption causes no limitations, as there is no clear 
time t = 0 reference, so the LO waveform can be shifted in time arbitrarily.   In the 
classical analysis [1] the admittance matrix is reduced to three ports by assuming 
Vn = 0 for all n, except n = -1, 0, 1 relating the IM, IF and RF signals in (5.16).  
This simplifying assumption that all other voltages are shorted defines what is 
called the “Y” mixer.  The shorted voltages all have frequencies centered about 
the LO second harmonic or higher; the short circuits are implemented within the 
circuit structure.   Other versions have been studied: the “Z” mixer having open 
circuited ports, and the “H” and “G” mixers having a mix of open and short 
circuits [3].   
 
IM
IF
RF
IM
IF
RF
V
V
V
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
I
I
I
0
1
2
1
0
1
2
1
0

 
 
 
 
      (5.16) 
 
The three-port “black-box” circuit can be extracted from (5.16) and 
represented by Figure 5.6.  The three ports may share the same physical 
connection point, but their frequencies are harmonically related by the Fourier 
series, so they are orthogonal to each other and obey superposition within the 
linearized network. 
 

252 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Including the terminations at each port in the matrix equation, the 
resulting matrix relates the voltages at each port to the input drive current, IRF.  
Note that port terminations RIM = 1/GIM, RIF = 1/GIF, RRF = 1/GRF.  
 
 
IM
IM
IM
V
G
I


  
 
 
 
                   (5.17a) 
 
IF
IF
IF
V
G
I


  
 
 
 
 
     (5.17b) 
 
RF
RF
RF
V
G
I
I


0
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.17c) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.6       Nonlinear conductance mixer circuit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The black box concept, and (5.16), can be represented schematically by 
Figure 5.7, where G0 = G2 = g0 + g1 + g2 , and G1 = g0 + 2g1.  The negative 
conductance values indicate a lossless network to the RF, image, and IF.  One 
consequence of a lossless three port circuit is it is impossible to conjugately match 
all three ports simultaneously.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.7       Equivalent circuit representation of conductance mixer. 
- g2 
- g1 
- g1 
G2 
G0 
VIF 
VIM 
IIF 
GIF 
GIM 
IIM 
IRF 
I0 
VRF 
GRF 
G1 
GIF 
I0 
VIF 
VIM 
VRF 
IIF 
GRF 
GIM 
IIM 
gd(t
IRF 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
253 
 
The conductance coefficients given in complex form by (5.9) can 
alternately be written in terms of cosines in (5.18).  The gn coefficients from this 
equation equals those used in (5.16).  Note the factor of 2 in (5.18).  
 





1
0
)
cos(
2
)
(
k
LO
k
t
k
g
g
t
g

 
        
 
       (5.18) 
 
 
 
The port terminations can be added into (5.16) to simplify later 
calculation of S-parameters. Noting that only the RF port is driven, the conversion 
matrix is given by (5.19).  The gk values describe the conductance waveform, and 
are dependent on the characteristics of the nonlinear device, LO pumping power, 
and terminations to DC and the LO fundamental and harmonics.  And, GRF, GIF, 
and GIM are the load conductances at the RF, IF, and image frequencies.  This 
analysis applies to any nonlinear device used to generate the conduction 
waveform, including diodes, and FET channel conductance.  In the case of active 
operation with FETs and BJTs, the conductance waveform describes the mixing 
effects with the added advantage of providing conversion gain instead of loss.   
 
 
IM
IF
RF
IM
IF
RF
RF
V
V
V
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
I




0
1
2
1
0
1
2
1
0
0
0
 
 
       (5.19) 
 
 
Inverting the conductance matrix of (5.19), one obtains the impedance 
matrix in (5.20). This matrix multiplies the known (independent) currents to 
obtain the unknown (dependent) voltages.  If IRF is the only driving current, then 
IIF and IIM equal zero, and (5.20) reduces to (5.21), which includes only the first 
column of the resistance matrix. The parameter  of (5.20) and (5.21) is the 
determinant of the Y-matrix in (5.19).   
       






















































IM
IF
RF
RF
IF
RF
IF
RF
IM
IF
IM
IF
IM
IM
IF
IM
IF
RF
I
I
I
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
V
V
V
2
1
0
0
0
2
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
2
1
2
1
0
2
0
2
1
2
1
0
0
)
)(
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
)(
(
)]
(
[
)
(
)
(
)
)(
(
1
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (5.20) 
 
With the determinant  defined as: 
 
)]
(
)
(
2
[
]
)
)(
)[(
(
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
RF
IM
IM
RF
IF
G
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
g











 
 
 

254 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 









IF
IM
IM
IF
RF
IM
IF
RF
G
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
I
V
V
V









0
2
2
1
0
2
1
2
1
0
0
       
 
       (5.21) 
 
 
Conversion loss is defined in (5.22) in terms of transducer gain, which is 
the most common way of defining gain in microwave and RF circuits.    
 
 
oad
eredToTheL
PowerDeliv
eSource
ableFromTh
PowerAvail
LC 
 
 
        
       (5.22) 
 
 
The following power definitions are required to evaluate the conversion 
loss.  Equation (5.23) gives the available power in terms of signal current, IRF, and 
the signal source impedance, RRF.  Equation (5.24) gives power delivered to the IF 
load in terms of IF current IIF and the IF port termination, RL.   
 
 
2
2
8
2
2
1
RF
RF
RF
RF
RF
I
R
R
I
P








 
 
                      (5.23) 
 
 
L
IF
L
IF
IF
R
V
R
V
P
2
1
2
2
2








   
 
  
       (5.24) 
 
 













2
4
log
10
IF
RF
IF
RF
C
V
I
R
R
L
,dB 
 
     
       (5.25) 
 
Noting that the ratio IRF/VIF is defined by the middle row of (5.21), the 
conversion loss in dB, Lc, is obtained: 
 
 




























2
0
2
1
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
)]
(
[
)]
(
)
(
2
[
]
)
)(
)[(
(
4
log
10
IM
RF
IM
IM
RF
IF
IF
RF
C
G
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
R
R
L
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      (5.26) 
 
 
The “Y” mixer conversion loss of (5.26) is valid for any termination at 
RF, IF, and image. It can be simplified in certain cases, which will be addressed 
next.   
 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
255 
5.3.2  Four Cases with Specific Port Terminations 
 
Various cases with different port terminations were examined in the classic linear 
analysis of Torrey and Whitmer [1] and later by Barber [2].  They are designated 
as L0 through L3. For the L0 case, the IF load is matched to the IF output 
impedance by (5.28), and the RF and IM ports are terminated in what is said to be 
the LO conductance given by (5.27).  The historical significance of the L0 case is 
it was used for acceptance testing of the crystal rectifier [1]. 
 
    
 
2
0
g
g
G
G
IM
RF



 
 
 
                    (5.27) 
 
RF
IF
G
g
g
g
g
G




2
0
2
1
0
2
 
 
                     
      (5.28) 
 
 
Substituting these impedances into (5.26), results in conversion loss in 
(5.29). 
 
 
 
2
1
2
0
2
1
2
0
0
0
)
(
)
(
4
g
g
g
g
g
g
L



  
 
         
 
       (5.29) 
 
 
The L1 case is defined for matched RF and IF ports with the image short 
circuited. The three port becomes a two port network, and the IF impedance is 
given by (5.30) [2]. 
 
 
RF
IF
G
g
g
g
G



0
2
1
0
 
 
 
 
       (5.30) 
 
 
 
 
Minimum conversion loss is found by substituting (5.30) in for GIF in the 
conversion loss (5.26), and then taking the derivative with respect to GRF and 
setting it equal to zero.  The resulting RF and IF impedances are given by (5.31), 
and conversion loss is given by (5.32). 
 
 
2
0
1
0 1









g
g
g
G
G
IF
RF
 
 
 
 
       (5.31) 
 
2
2
0
1
2
1
0
1
1
1























g
g
g
g
L
 
 
 
       (5.32) 
 

256 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The L2 case is the most widely used. It is defined for equal RF and IM 
port terminations, GRF = GIM, where GRF is optimized for minimum loss, given by 
(5.33). With this, optimum conversion loss and IF port termination, respectively, 
are given by (5.35) and (5.34) [2]. 
 










































2
1
2
1
2
0
2
1
0
0
2
2
0
1
2
0
2
0
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
IM
RF
 
       (5.33) 
 
 
0
2
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
1
g
g
g
g
g
GIF















 
 
 
 
       (5.34) 
 
2
0
1
0
2
2
2
/
1
0
2
2
0
1
0
2
2
1
1
2
1
1




































































g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
L
  
       (5.35) 
 
 
 
Case L3 is defined for optimal RF termination and open circuit image.  
This is a more complex case to analyze since the image port has image voltage 
developed at its terminal. The IF impedance as a function of RF impedance is 
defined by: 
 
)
(
)
2
(
0
0
0
2
2
2
0
2
1
2
1
0
2
1
0
RF
RF
RF
IF
G
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
g
g
G








               (5.36) 
 
 
The IF and RF optimum termination are given in (5.37) and (5.38), and the 
conversion loss in (5.39) [2].  
 































0
2
2
0
1
0
2
2
0
1
2
0
2
1
1
1
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
GIF
 
 
                      (5.37) 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
257 
 









































0
2
2
0
1
0
2
2
0
1
2
0
2
2
0
2
1
1
1
1
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
GIF
               (5.38) 










































































































0
2
2
0
1
0
2
2
0
1
2
2
/
1
0
2
2
0
1
2
0
1
0
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
L
           (5.39) 
 
Values for g0, g1, and g2 are derived later in this chapter and substituted 
into these equations; the conversion loss results are summarized in Table 5.3.   
 
 
5.3.3 Optimal RF and IF Match with Arbitrary Image Terminations 
 
Equation (5.26) gives conversion loss for the “Y” mixer as a function of g0, g1, g2, 
GIM, and GIF. The RF and IF impedances are developed next.  The derivations of 
conversion loss given by (5.26), and of RF input impedance are based on having 
only one source, IRF, at the RF input port.  In contrast, obtaining the IF output 
impedance requires the source to be at the IF port.  
The top row of (5.21), which is Z11 equals VRF/IRF; the middle row is Z21, 
which equals VIF/IRF; and the middle column of (5.20) contains Z22, which equals 
VIF/IIF.  From these we find the corresponding S parameters using (5.40) and 
(5.41) that relate Snn to Znn, and Snm to Znm [15].  They are different from the 
normal equations relating Z and S parameters because the impedance matrix here 
includes the terminating impedances [16].  Equations (5.42) and (5.43), 
respectively, give the reflection coefficient S11 at the RF input, and the RF input 
impedance ZRF.  Equations (5.44) and (5.45), respectively, give S22 and ZIF.  
Appendix 5C gives the corresponding equations for the image port impedance, 
and conversion loss from RF to image that is used in the plots of Figure 5.13.    
Equation (5.26) gives Lc = 1 / |S21|, which can also be derived by substituting Z21 
of (5.20) into (5.41).   
 
;
;1
2
m
n
R
Z
S
n
nm
nm



on diagonal 
 
                      (5.40) 
 

258 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
m
n
nm
nm
R
R
Z
S
2

; off diagonal  
 
 
         
       (5.41) 
 






1
)
(
)
(
2
)
)(
(
)
(
)
)(
(
2
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
11














RF
IM
IM
RF
IF
IF
IM
RF
G
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
S
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.42) 
 
11
11
1
1
S
S
R
Z
RF
RF



;  
ZRF is RF port impedance  
 
 
 
 








3
0
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
0
2
0
2
1
0
2
0
2
2
g
G
g
G
g
g
G
G
g
g
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
g
Z
IF
IM
IF
IM
IF
IM
IF
IM
IF
IM
RF













 
             
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.43) 
 






1
)
(
)
(
2
)
)(
(
)
(
)
)(
(
2
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
22














RF
IM
IM
RF
IF
RF
IM
IF
G
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
S
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.44)  
22
22
1
1
S
S
R
Z
IF
IF



;  
ZIF is IF port impedance 
 
 
 
 








3
0
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
0
2
0
2
2
0
2
0
2
2
g
G
G
g
g
G
G
g
g
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
g
Z
IM
RF
RF
IM
RF
IM
RF
IM
RF
IM
IF













 
            
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.45) 
 
 
 
Referring to Figure 5.6, if the image port has a fixed termination that is 
not conjugately matched, then it is possible to conjugately match both the RF and 
IF ports, since the three port network effectively becomes a two port.  (Actually, 
since this analysis has no reactance components, it might be more accurate here to 
say optimally matched instead of conjugately matched).  By setting RF port 
impedance, ZRF, of (5.43) equal to the RF termination RRF = 1/GRF, and setting IF 
impedance, ZIF, of (5.45) equal to the IF termination RIF = 1/GIF, equations are 
derived that give the port impedances at which RF and IF are both optimally 
matched for any value of image termination.  Equation (5.46) gives GRF,opt, which 
is the optimal RF port termination value, in terms of GIM, g0, g1, and g2.  The value 
of GIF,opt is obtained by substituting GRF,opt into (5.47).  The minimum conversion 
loss is obtained using these port termination values.  Figures 5.13 and 5.14 plot 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
259 
calculated performance versus image termination, RIM, and LO power using GRF,opt 
and GIF,opt of (5.46) and (5.47).   
 
)
)(
(
)
2
2
)(
(
2
1
0
2
0
0
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
0
3
0
2
0
2
1
0
2
2
0
2
0
,
g
g
G
g
G
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
G
g
g
G
IM
IM
IM
IM
IM
opt
RF












 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5.46) 
 
0
2
2
2
0
0
,
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
0
2
0
3
0
2
1
0
2
0
,
,
)
(
)
2
(
)
2
(
)
(
g
G
g
g
G
g
G
G
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
G
IM
IM
opt
RF
IM
IM
IM
opt
RF
opt
IF













        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5.47) 
 
While the foregoing analyses of the Y-mixer, truncated to include only 
the RF, image, and IF signals, gives approximate results, the closed form results 
give some valuable insights.  First, (5.26) shows that conversion loss is a strong 
function of image termination, as expected.  And (5.31) shows that for short 
circuit image, the RF and IF impedances equal each other, while (5.37) and (5.38) 
show RF and IF impedances diverge for open circuit image, with IF impedance 
being much larger than RF impedance.  Equation (5.43) shows the RF port 
impedance is a function of the IF and image terminations.  Similarly, (5.45) shows 
the IF port impedance is a function of the RF and image terminations.  So for a 
fixed image termination, if the RF port termination varies it affects IF output 
impedance, and varying the IF port termination affects RF input impedance.  
Using this approach the optimal RF and IF port matches must be determined 
iteratively by trial and error.  In contrast, (5.46) and (5.47) give the optimal RF 
and IF port matches directly for arbitrary image termination.  In the following 
section values are obtained for the g0, g1, and g2 Fourier coefficients for three 
conductance waveforms that approximate the pumped Schottky diode: constant, 
linear, and exponential.  Plots are then given for calculated conversion loss and 
port impedances that show the equations agree closely with harmonic balance 
simulations.    
 
 
5.3.4 Pumped Nonlinear Conductance 
 
Figure 5.8 depicts three simplified I/V models of a resistive device.  Values for g0, 
g1, and g2 are given based on (5.18).  Model 1 assumes a linear relationship 
between voltage and current, resulting in a square wave for the pumped 
conductance. Model 2 assumes a quadratic I/V relationship resulting in a linear 
conductance. Model 3 assumes the conventional exponential I/V relation resulting 
in an exponential conductance.  The conductance waveform, g(t), for the three 
models are adjusted to have equal g0 values, which is the DC conductance.  The 

260 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
resulting g1 and g2 values for models 1 – 3 are not equal; thus, conversion loss and 
optimal matching will vary among the three models. 
Given sinusoidal voltage excitation, the diode exponential I/V equation 
can be expanded into (5.50).  The diode current with sinusoidal voltage excitation 
is: 
 

1
)
cos(


t
x
S
D
LO
e
I
I

;   
T
D
V
V
x 
         
                                   (5.48) 
 
 
The exponential function with cosine in the exponent can be represented 
by a Fourier series with Bessel function coefficients given by (5.49), for which n 
is the harmonic and i is a dummy variable.  This assumes the existence of a 
sinusoidal junction voltage, which in practice is not the case.  The analysis 
assumes no parasitic resistance in series with the diode junction, which would 
otherwise distort the sinusoidal junction voltage by the voltage drop from the 
nonlinear current.  However, regardless of these simplifying assumptions, the 
results agree with harmonic balance simulations for zero series resistance and 
yield useful insights reported in a later section.  The addition of different values 
for series resistance are later included in harmonic balance simulations to see their 
effects on conversion loss and port impedances.   
 





1
0
cos
)
cos(
)
(
2
)
(
n
n
t
x
t
n
x
I
x
I
e


;     













0
2
!
!
2
i
n
i
n
i
n
i
x
x
I
              (5.49) 
 
 








...
)
2
cos(
)
(
)
(
2
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
2
1
)
(
0
2
0
1
0
t
x
I
x
I
t
x
I
x
I
x
I
I
I
LO
LO
S
D


        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (5.50) 
 
In(x) is a modified Bessel function of order n with argument x = VD/VT, 
and VT = ηq/kT ≈ 0.026 volts.  VD is the voltage across the diode engendered by 
the LO voltage, VL, and equals LO voltage multiplied by the voltage divider 
formed by Rg and Rd of Figure 5.9.  Rg is the internal resistance of the LO voltage 
generator, and Rd is the impedance offered by the diode to VD and is given by 
(5.53).   VD and VL are related as follows:  
 
 
 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
261 
 
d
g
d
L
D
R
R
R
V
V


 
 
 
 
 
       (5.51) 
 
The conductance values for model 3 of Figure 5.8 are given by (5.52).  
The numerical g values in Figure 5.8 for model 3 are obtained using (5.52) with 
VD = 0.4524 volts, VT = 0.026 volts, and Is = 3 x 10-10 amps.  Conductance g(t) is 
given in Figure 5.8 in terms of (5.18), which gives the generalized Fourier 
expansion of the conductance waveform.   
 







T
D
V
V
T
S
V
V
I
e
V
I
g
T
dc
0
0
 
 
 
                    (5.52a) 
 
)
(
)
(
0
1
0
1
1
x
I
x
I
g
V
V
I
e
V
I
g
T
D
V
V
T
S
T
dc








  
       
     (5.52b) 
 
)
(
)
(
0
2
0
2
2
x
I
x
I
g
V
V
I
e
V
I
g
T
D
V
V
T
S
T
dc








  
     
     (5.52c) 
 
 
 
5.3.5 LO Impedance 
 
Consider a single diode in series with a sinusoidal LO voltage source, VL, and 
internal resistance, Rg, as in Figure 5.9.  The diode can be represented by resistor 
RD, which is the resistance offered by the diode to the LO pumping voltage. 
 
 
 
+
VL
RG
RD
 
 
Figure 5.9        LO voltage source in series with diode resistance.  
 
 
RD equals the ratio of the sinusoidal LO induced voltage across the diode, 
VD, to the LO current, ID, through the diode.  The current used in (5.53) is 

262 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Model 1  
Linear I = f(V)  (dotted line) 
Constant g(V)  (full line) 
square wave for g(t) 








t
t
g
LO

cos
2
2
1
08
.0
)
(
            
g 0= 0.04, g1 = 0.08/π, g2 = 0 
  
 
 
Model 2 
Quadratic I = f(V2) (dotted line) 
Linear g(V) = di/dv= 2V  (full line)  
Half sinusoidal for g(t)  









t
t
t
g
LO
LO




2
cos
3
2
cos
2
1
1
125
.0
)
(
 
 
g0 = 1/8π, g1 = 1/32, g2 = 1/24π 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model 3 
Exponential I= f(eV) (dotted line) 
Exponential g(V) = di/dv = eV 

t
t
t
g
LO
LO


2
cos
8.1
cos
94
.1
1
04
.0
)
(



  
 
g0 = 0.04, g1 = .039, g2 = .036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.8   Simple diode models, with the peak value of g(t) adjusted to give the same DC 
conductance in the three models.  
V 
I, G 
G(t) 
t 
t 
I, G 
V 
G(t) 
t 
t 
V 
I, G 
G(t) 
t 
t 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
263 
 
the Fourier component at the LO fundamental from (5.50), which gives the 
Fourier series for the nonlinear diode current.  From this we get the LO input 
resistance, RD, to the diode, with x = VD/VT: 
 
 

x
I
I
V
I
V
R
S
D
D
D
D
1
2


 
 
 
         
       (5.53) 
 
For low frequency operation, the diode junction and parasitic 
capacitances can be ignored.  But for higher frequencies the capacitive reactance 
from diode junction and parasitic capacitances can be added using the zero voltage 
junction capacitance, Cj0, and estimates for package capacitance from EM 
simulation or data sheets. 
Power delivered to the diode, PD, is: 
 
)
(
1
2
1
2
x
I
I
V
R
V
P
S
D
D
D
D








  
          
       
       (5.54) 
 
As VL increases, PD also increases, causing RD to decrease.  It is 
important to know how much available LO power, PAv,LO, is required to sustain 
PD, since mismatch occurs as RD varies.  Equation (5.55) gives the required level 
of PAv,LO as a function of VD, RD, and Rg.     
 
 
g
D
g
D
D
D
g
g
D
D
g
L
LO
Av
R
R
R
R
P
R
R
R
R
V
R
V
P
4
)
(
8
)
(
8
2
2
2
2
2
,





        (5.55) 
 
 
Table 5.1 gives calculated results for (5.53) through (5.55) as VD varies, 
with Rg = 50 ohms.  When VD = 0.495 volts, RD = 49.6 ohms, giving the expected 
result that PAv,LO = PD.  It is interesting to see that as RD goes to ~25 or ~100 
ohms, PAv,LO is only 0.5 dB above PD; however, as RD drops to ~10 ohms, PAv,LO 
increases to 2.6 dB above PD, and as RD rises to 223 ohms, PAv,LO increases to 2.2 
dB above PD.  These results for PAv,LO and RD are in agreement with Figure 5.14 
that gives calculated values, and Figure 5.18(a) that gives harmonic balance 
simulation results for a single diode operating as a Y-mixer, with 50 ohm 
terminations to the LO, RF, and IF, and diode series resistance Rs = 0.   
 
Referring to model 3 of Figure 5.8 and using (5.52), the diode voltage, 
VD, required to obtain the g values used in model 3 is Vd = 0.452 volts.  The 
resulting diode impedance is RD = 223 ohms, and the power delivered to the load 
is PD = -3.4 dBm.  The available LO power in 50 ohms required for this is PAv,LO = 

264 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
-1.15 dBm.  One would likely use a higher LO drive to a practical mixer, resulting 
in a lower value for RD.   
Table 5.1  
 Calculated LO Resistance of a Single Diode versus LO Power, PL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Is = 3E-10 amps, VT = 0.026 volts. 
 
5.3.6 Parasitic Losses 
 
The analysis so far assumes an ideal diode having no parasitic losses.  The 
increase to conversion loss due to series resistance, Rs, junction capacitance, Cj0, 
and lead inductance, LD, has been approximated by including these diode 
parasitics in the RF input and IF output circuits as shown in Figures 5.10(a) and 
(b).  This method of estimating parasitic losses is marginally useful as it does not 
include the effects on terminations to the image 2fL-fR, sum fL+fR, 3fL-fR, and 
other mixing products.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.10      Equivalent circuits at RF and IF frequencies. Is = 3E-10 amps, VT = 0.026 volts. 
VD (volts pk) 
PD (dBm) 
RD (ohm)  
PL(dBm) 
0.540 
+11.6 
10.0 
+14.2 
0.514 
+7.2 
24.3 
+7.7 
0.495 
+3.9 
49.6 
+3.9 
0.475 
+0.5 
101 
+1.0 
0.452 
-3.4 
223 
-1.2 
Rg
Ig
V1
RRF
Cj0
LD
RS
V2
V3
V1
RIF
Cj0
LD
RS
V2
V3
IIF
RL
a) RF input        
circuit 
b) IF output        
circuit 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
265 
 
Figure 5.10(a) represents the RF input circuit to the mixer.  RG is the 
source impedance, and RRF is the diode RF input resistance.  Figure 5.10(b) 
represents the IF output circuit.  IIF  is the IF current generated by the diode; RIF is 
the diode IF resistance; and RL is the IF load resistance.  Insertion losses for both 
circuits are combined to estimate cumulative loss.  Equation (5.56), derived in 
Appendix 5A, gives the total estimated parasitic loss.   
 
 


IF
RF
dB
Total
L
L
L
log
10
,

   
 
 
       (5.56)
 








g
RF
RF
s
g
j
RF
D
j
D
RF
RF
s
g
RF
R
R
R
R
C
R
L
C
L
R
R
R
L
4
1
2
2
0
2
0
2









 
 








L
IF
IF
s
L
j
IF
D
j
D
IF
IF
s
L
IF
R
R
R
R
C
R
L
C
L
R
R
R
L
4
1
2
2
0
2
0
2









 
 
In contrast to this analysis, an alternate analysis is presented in Appendix 
5B using the conversion matrix with five mixing terms, which includes the effects 
of parasitic reactances on these terms, and agrees with harmonic balance 
simulations.  The five terms in the numerical analysis are RF, IF, image, sum, and 
3ωL-ωR; all others are short circuited.  
 
An example giving results for both analysis approaches is given for a 
mixer diode with image and sum terminations RIM = RΣ = 106 ohms (open), R3L-R = 
10-6 ohms (short), and RF and IF terminations both equal 50 ohms.  The diode 
pump voltage VD = 0.604 volts, and diode parameters VT = 0.026/,  = 1.16, IS = 
9.5 10-14 amps.  RF frequency, fRF = 11 GHz, LO frequency, fLO = 10 GHz, and IF 
frequency, fIF = 1 GHz.  Conversion loss and port impedances are first calculated 
using the conversion matrix approach described in Appendix 5B.  Equation (5.56) 
is then used to calculate the change in conversion loss due to the addition of 
parasitic reactances, using the values for |ZRF| and |ZIF| obtained from conversion 
matrix analysis.  The increase in insertion loss, ΔL, is evaluated for Rs = 0, 5, and 
10 ohms; Cj0 = 0 and 0.1 pF, and LD = 0 and 0.25 nH.  Results are summarized in 
Table 5.2.  The closest agreement in ΔL occurs for the addition of series resistance 
alone.   
The three different diode resistance parameters commonly discussed in 
manufacturer diode data sheets are described.  The first is the junction resistance, 
Rj, given by (5B.5) in Appendix 5B.  The second is the series resistance, Rs, 
caused by bulk resistance in the semiconductor.  The third is dynamic resistance, 
RD = Rj + RS. 
 

266 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Table 5.2 
Insertion Loss Including Parasitic Resistance and Capacitance 
 fRF = 11 GHz, FLO = 10 GHz, FIF = 1GHz. 
 
5.3.7  Mixer Performance versus Conductance Waveform 
 
The conductance, g, values from the three models in Figure 5.8 are applied to the 
four conversion loss cases of (5.29), (5.32), (5.35), and (5.39), resulting in the 
conversion loss values given in Table 5.3.  It is interesting to note that the 
exponential model provides lowest losses, which correlates with g1 being larger 
for model 3 than for models 1 and 2.  Plots are generated for the Y-mixer square-
wave and exponential diode cases of Figure 5.8 and Table 5.3.  Figures 5.11 
through 5.14 show variation in conversion loss and RF and IF port impedances as 
the image termination varies from a very low (short circuit), up through a very 
high resistance (open circuit).  Figure 5.11 depicts the square wave case, and 
Figures 5.12 through 5.14 depict the exponential diode case.   
 
Table 5.3 
Comparison of LC Values and Port Terminations for the Three Models in Figure 5.8. 
 
 
   
Figures 5.11 to 5.14 each have three plots for the RF and IF ports 
optimally terminated for open circuit image, broadband image, and short circuit 
image.  Broadband image means the image and RF ports are terminated equally, 
Parasitic Values 
5x5 Conversion Matrix 
Appendix 5B 
Equation 
(5.56) 
Rs 
ohms 
Cj0  
pF 
LD 
nH 
LTotal 
dB 
ΔL 
dB 
|ZRF| 
ohms 
|ZIF| 
ohms 
LTotal 
dB 
ΔL 
dB 
0 
0 
0 
2.92 
0 
44.5 
139.4 
1.11 
0 
5 
0 
0 
4.23 
1.31 
60.3 
166.5 
2.11 
1.0 
5 
0.1 
0 
4.22 
1.29 
57.28 
135.8 
1.85 
0.74 
5 
0.1 
0.25 
6.63 
3.44 
153.5 
224.8 
3.76 
2.65 
10 
0 
0 
5.36 
2.44 
76.1 
192.5 
3.05 
1.94 
10 
0.1 
0 
5.38 
2.46 
71.2 
152.9 
2.75 
1.64 
10 
0.1 
0.25 
7.42 
4.49 
155.8 
222.5 
4.19 
3.08 
 
Square 
Wave 
Quadratic 
Expo- 
nential 
RF 
term 
IM 
term 
IF 
term 
L0 dB 
7.7 dB 
5.7 dB 
4.0 dB 
g0-g2 
g0-g2 
RIF 
L1 dB 
8.9 dB 
6.3 dB 
2.2 dB 
RRF 
0 
RIF 
L2 dB 
7.1 dB 
5.4 dB 
3.9 dB 
Rmin 
Rmin 
RIF 
L3 dB 
5.6 dB 
4.1 dB 
3.7 dB 
RRF 
∞ 
RIF 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
267 
not necessarily in 50 ohms.  Optimally terminated means the RF and IF port 
terminations equal their respective port input impedances.     
The plots in Figures 5.11 and 5.12 are based on (5.26), (5.43), and (5.45).  
Figure 5.11 gives results for the square wave case with the g values of model 1 in 
figure 5.8: g0 = 0.04, g1 = 0.08/π, and g2 = 0 (no second harmonic).  In Figure 5.11 
(a), with open circuit image, the optimal RF and IF termination values, 
respectively, are 44.2 ohms and 74.2 ohms. These values were determined using 
equation (5.26) for conversion loss, setting image termination RIM to infinity (open 
circuit), then iteratively varying termination values RRF =1/GRF and RIF =1/GIF to 
make the IF input impedance ZIF = RIF and the RF input impedance ZRF = RRF.  
Figure 5.11(a) shows the minimum conversion loss is 5.6 dB for image 
termination, RIM, above 1000 ohms, effectively an open circuit.  Minimum 
conversion loss occurring for open-circuit image is expected because the RF and 
IF port terminations were optimized for this.  In contrast, Figure 5.11(c) gives 
results with RF and IF terminations optimal for short circuit image, with both RF 
and IF ports equaling 32.4 ohms, but unexpectedly conversion loss is still lowest 
when image is open circuited due to g2 = 0.  Figure 5.11(b) gives results with RF 
and IF terminations optimal for broadband image. The optimal RF and IF port 
values, respectively, are 36.6 and 48.2 ohms. For all three image termination 
cases, the conversion loss was determined for fixed RRF and RIF while RIM was 
swept from small to large values and plotted in Figure 5.11. Notice Gc increases 
with RIM due to g2 =0 for the square wave model-1 case. 
Figure 5.12 gives results for the exponential diode with the g values of 
model 3 in Figure 5.8: g0 = 0.04, g1 = 0.039, and g2 = 0.036.  In Figure 5.12(a), 
with open circuit image, the optimal RF and IF termination values, respectively, 
are 326 ohms 1050 ohms, for which the minimum conversion loss is 3.71 dB at 
RIM = infinite.  As image termination goes to a short circuit, conversion loss 
increases to about 5.8 dB.  In Figure 5.12(b), with broadband image termination, 
the optimal RF and IF termination values, respectively, are 214 ohms and 374 
ohms, for which conversion loss is 3.94 dB at RIM = RRF.  Minimum conversion 
loss is 3.3 dB with image shorted, and maximum conversion loss is 4.62 dB with 
image open circuited.  In Figure 5.12(c), with short circuit image, the optimal RF 
and IF termination values are both 103 ohms, for which the minimum conversion 
loss is 2.16 dB at RIM = short.  As image goes to an open circuit, conversion loss 
increases to 8.16 dB.   
 
In contrast to Figures 5.11 and 5.12, Figures 5.13 and 5.14 give results 
for optimally terminated RF and IF ports.  The RF and IF port values for Figures 
5.13 and 5.14 agree with the optimal values of Figures 5.11 and 5.12.  Figures 
5.13 and 5.14 are based on (5.46) and (5.47), and give optimal RF-to-IF 
conversion gain, and optimal RF and IF port impedances.  Figure 5.12 also gives 
optimal RF-to-image conversion gain. 

268 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
1 10 3


0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

1 105

10

8

6

4

2

0
30
40
50
60
70
80
Square Wave - Opt RF & IF Terminations for Image = Open Circuit
0
10

Gc
80
30
R.IF
R.RF
2 104

2 10 3


R.IM
 
 
1 10 3


0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

1 105

10

8

6

4

2

0
30
40
50
60
70
80
Square Wave - Opt RF & IF Terminations for Image = RF Term
Gc
RIF
RRF
RIM
 
 
1 10 3


0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

1 105

10

8

6

4

2

0
30
40
50
60
70
80
Square Wave - Opt RF & IF Terminations for Image = Short Circuit
Gc
RIF
RRF
RIM
 
Figure 5.11    Square wave Y-mixer calculated conversion gain, Gc, and RF and IF port impedances 
versus image termination, RIM.  The values for RRF and RIF are optimized for image 
termination (a) open, (b) equal RRF, and (c) shorted.   g0 = 0.04, g1 = 0.08/π, g2 = 0. 
(a) Image open 
(b) Image = RF impedance 
(c)  Image shorted 
RF and IF terms opt for   
  Image term = open ckt 
Opt RF term = 44.2 ohms 
Opt IF term = 74.2 ohms 
RF and IF terms opt for 
  Image term = RF term 
Opt RF term = 36.6 ohms 
Opt IF term =  48.2 ohms 
RF and IF terms opt for 
  Image term = short ckt 
Opt RF term = 32.4 ohms 
Opt IF term =  32.4 ohms 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
269 
    
1 10 3


0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

1 105

10

8

6

4

2

0
0
200
400
600
800
1 103

Exponential - Opt RF & IF Terminations for Image = Open Circuit
Gc
RIF
RRF
RIM
 
      
1 10 3


0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

1 105

10

8

6

4

2

0
0
200
400
600
800
1 103

Exponential - Opt RF & IF Terminations for Image = RF termination
Gc
RIF
RRF
RIM
 
      
1 10 3


0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

1 105

10

8

6

4

2

0
0
200
400
600
800
1 103

Exponential - Opt RF & IF Terminations for Image = Short Circuit
Gc
RIF
RRF
RIM
 
Figure 5.12     Exponential Y-Mixer calculated conversion gain, Gc, and RF and IF port impedances 
versus image termination, RIM. The values for RRF and RIF are optimized for image 
termination (a) open, (b) equal RRF, and (c) shorted.    g0 = 0.04, g1 = 0.039, g2 = 0.036, 
VD = 0.452, VT = 0.026, IS = 3 10-10. 
(a)  Image open 
(b) Image = RF impedance 
(c) Image shorted 
RF and IF terms opt for 
  Image term = open ckt 
Opt RF term = 326 ohms 
Opt IF term = 1050 ohms 
RF and IF terms opt for 
  Image term = RF term 
Opt RF term = 214.2 ohms 
Opt IF term =  373.4 ohms 
RF and IF terms opt for 
  Image term = short ckt 
Opt RF term = 102.8 ohms 
Opt IF term =  102.8 ohms 

270 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Figure 5.13(a) uses the exponential diode g values of model 3 in Figure 
5.8: g0 = 0.04, g1 = 0.039, and g2 = 0.036.  As image termination varies from short 
to open circuit, optimal conversion loss varies from 2.1 dB to 1.6 dB, passing 
through the maximum loss of 3.4 dB at RIM = RRF ≈ 200 ohms.  Also RF port 
impedance increases from 104 ohms to 668 ohms, and IF port impedance 
increases from 104 ohms to 2450 ohms.  The conversion loss from RF-to-image is 
also plotted (at 10x), and peaks sharply at RIM = RRF where RF-to-IF conversion 
loss is also maximum.  Since at this point RF-to-IF conversion loss is 3.4 dB, with 
approximately half the RF power converted to IF, the question arises as to where 
the other half of the RF power goes since it does not convert to image and there is 
no mismatch loss at RF and IF ports.  An explanation for the lost RF energy is that 
it is converted to either DC or dissipated into high frequency components.  
Conversion to DC is shown by including the second order term for the RF signal 
in the analysis [15].  
Figure 5.13(b) gives mixer performance with diode voltage, VD, equal to 
0.4473 volts peak, IS = 3 10-10 amps, VT = 0.026/1.08 volts, giving g0 = 0.136, g1 = 
0.132, and g2 = 0.122 using (5.52).  As image termination varies from short to 
open circuit, optimal conversion loss drops from 2.1 dB to 1.5 dB, passing 
through the maximum loss of 3.4 dB at RIM = RRF = 65 ohms.  Conversion loss 
from RF-to-image is also plotted (at 10x), and again displays a sharp peak at 
RIM=RRF where RF-to-IF conversion loss is also maximum.   
LO power is calculated using (5.55) with the diode voltage VD = 0.4524 
that is used in Figure 5.13(a); also VD = 0.4473 is used in Figure 5.13(b), and the 
respective power levels are PL = -1.15 dBm and PL = +1.67 dBm.  Saturation 
current IS = 3 10-10 for both, but η = 1 for Figure 5.11(a), and η = 1.08 for Figure 
5.13(b).   Comparing the Figures 5.13(a) and 5.13(b), RF-to-IF conversion loss 
values are almost identical, but the optimal RF and IF impedances are 
substantially higher for the lower LO drive level.  Also the point at which RIM = 
RRF and where Lc is maximum shifts higher for the lower LO drive level.   
Figure 5.14 shows mixer performance with optimally terminated RF and 
IF, versus PL swept over -5 dBm to +15 dBm, for open circuit image, 50 ohm 
image, and short circuit image.  In Figure 5.14(a) with open circuit image, as LO 
power increases, optimal conversion loss drops from 1.6 dB to 1.4 dB, RF optimal 
impedance drops from 1967 to 29 ohms, and IF optimal impedance drops from 
7161 to 107 ohms.  In Figure 5.14(b), for image terminated in 50 ohms, as LO 
power increases, optimal conversion loss begins at 2.6 dB, passes through a 
maximum of 3.4 dB at PAv,LO = 4.1 dBm, and then ends at 2.56 dB.   Over the LO 
power range, RF optimal impedance drops from 397 to 15 ohms, and IF optimal 
impedance drops from 435 to 46 ohms.  In Figure 5.14(c), for short circuit image, 
as LO power increases, optimal conversion loss drops from 2.2 dB to 1.9 dB, and 
RF and IF optimal impedance both drop from 328 to 3.8 ohms.  In all three plots 
LO impedance decreases from 700 to 9 ohms. To calculate results in Figure 5.14, 
the LO power level, PAv,LO, and diode voltage, VD, are calculated and given in 
Table 5.1. Then a curve fitting process is employed to determine the polynomial 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
271 
in (5.57).  For a given LO power, VD is then used in (5.52) to calculate the g 
values.  The g values are used to obtain Lc, RRF, and RIF, respectively, using 
(5.26), (5.46), and (5.47).  LO input impedance given by RD is calculated using 
(5.53). Equation (5.57) approximates VD as a function of PL, and agrees closely 
with the values given in Table 5.1.   
 
4
6
3
5
2
4
)
10
11
.2
(
)
10
06
.7
(
)
10
26
.9
(
)
01
.0
(
466
.0
LO
LO
LO
LO
D
P
x
P
x
P
x
P
V








 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5.57) 
 
5.3.8 Saleh Mixer Theory and Classification 
 
The foregoing conversion matrix analysis has concerned the Y-mixer, for which 
all out of band mixing products have short circuit port terminations.  Recalling the 
frequency notation ω±k = kωLO ± ωIF, the product is said to be of even or odd 
order, respectively, if k is an even or odd integer.  Saleh also analyzed three other 
options: The Z-mixer having all out-of-band frequencies open-circuited; the H-
mixer having all odd-order out-of-band frequencies open circuited and all even-
order ones short circuited; the G-mixer having all odd-order out-of-band 
frequencies short circuited and all even-order ones open circuited [3].  The phrase 
“out-of-band” refers to all frequencies other than the IF at ω0, the RF signal at ω1, 
and the image at ω-1. These classifications are summarized Table 5.4.   
 
Table 5.4 
Mixer Classification 
  
 
 
 
 
 
In the foregoing discussion for the Y-mixer, the analysis started with an 
admittance matrix that was inverted to obtain an impedance matrix, from which 
the conversion loss and port impedances were obtained.  For the Z-mixer, the 
analysis begins with an impedance matrix that is inverted to obtain the admittance 
matrix, from which mixer performance is obtained.  Since the G- and H-mixers 
have a combination of open- and short-circuited image terminations, the analysis 
is more complex.  Saleh divides the voltage and current waveforms of the G- and 
H-mixers into even and odd components in the time domain, and uses 
superposition to obtain the solution.  For the Z-, G-, and H-mixers, closed form 
approximations are obtained for conversion loss and port impedances that contain 
the Fourier coefficients of the switching waveform.   
Even Order 
Odd Order 
Designation 
Open 
Open 
Z-Mixer 
Short 
Open 
H-Mixer 
Short 
Short 
Y-Mixer 
Open 
Short 
G-Mixer 

272 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

1 105

1 106

1 107

10

8

6

4

2

0
0
200
400
600
800
1 103

Gc
RRF
RIF
10ImLc
RIM
 
 
 
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

1 105

1 106

1 107

10

8

6

4

2

0
0
200
400
600
800
1 103

Gc
RRF
RIF
10ImLc
RIM
 
 
Figure 5.13  Exponential Y-mixer performance versus image termination, RIM, with optimally 
terminated RF and IF ports.  Plots are for RF-IF conversion gain, Gc; RF-Image 
conversion loss, ImLc;  and RF and IF Port impedances.  
(a): g0 = 0.04, g1 = 0.039, g2 = 0.036, VD = 0.4524, η = 1.0, VT = 0.026, IS = 3 10-10.   
(b): g0 = 0.136, g1 = 0.132, g2 = 0.122, VD = 0.4473, η=1.08, VT = 0.024, IS = 3 10-10.  
(a)  
(b)  

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
273 
           
6

4

2

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
4

3

2

1

0
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

Exp Diode -  Image = Open Circuit
Gc
RRF
RIF
RLO
PL
 
           
6

4

2

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
4

3

2

1

0
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

Exp Diode -  Image = 50 Ohms
Gc
RRF
RIF
RLO
PL
 
          
6

4

2

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
4

3

2

1

0
1
10
100
1 103

1 104

Exp Diode -  Image = Short Circuit
Gc
RRF
RIF
RLO
PL
 
Figure 5.14  Exponential Y-mixer performance versus LO power, PLO (dBm), with optimally 
terminated RF and IF ports.  Plots are for RF-IF conversion gain, Gc; RF, IF, and LO 
port impedances.  VT = 0.026, ISAT =3 10-10 amps. 
(a) Image Open 
(b) Image = 50 Ohm 
(c) Image Shorted 

274 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 5.3.8.1 Saleh Theory for Switching Model 
 
Saleh first analyzed the four mixer types using a switch in place of the diode, 
having “on” resistance, Rmin, greater than zero ohms; and, “off” resistance, Rmax, 
less than infinite ohms.  His goals were to determine which of the four mixer types 
is best, and what the optimal switching waveform shapes are for the four types.  
After lengthy mathematical development the conclusion was the H- and G-mixer 
are superior to the Z- or Y-mixer types for the following reasons: 
 
 
Optimum pulse duty ratio for the Z- and Y- mixer depends on the 
values of Rmin and Rmax, in contrast, it is 50% for the H- or G-mixer 
types regardless of Rmin and Rmax. 
 
 
Given Rmin<< Rmax the optimum resistance waveform for the Z- and 
Y-mixer is a train of narrow pulses that requires a broadband 
pumping circuit.  In contrast, for the H- or G-mixer types, it is a 
square wave that is easier to realize. 
 
 
The following relationships are also given for the four mixer types:   
 
 
Z- or Y-mixer. Optimum conversion loss if 
max
min
R
R

is 
 
3
/
1
max
min
3.
18





R
R
Lopt
, in dB  
 
         
       (5.58) 
 
Optimum RF and IF resistances if Rmin << Rmax , are  
 


3
/
1
max
2
min
,
,
)
3
(
3

R
R
R
R
opt
IF
opt
RF


          
       (5.59) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H- and G-mixer. Conversion loss is given by 
 
 
2
/
1
max
min
3.
27





R
R
Lopt
, in dB  
 
         
       (5.60) 
 
 
Optimum RF and IF resistances for the H- mixer, given Rmin << Rmax , are  
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
275 


2
/
1
max
min
,
2
R
R
R
opt
RF


   
         
     (5.61a) 


2
/
1
max
min
,
2
R
R
R
opt
IF


   
 
     (5.61b)
 
 
 
 
 
Optimum RF and IF resistances for the G- mixer, given Rmin<< Rmax , are  
 
 


2
/
1
max
min
,
2
R
R
R
opt
IF


 
 
 
     (5.62a) 
 


2
/
1
max
min
,
2
R
R
R
opt
RF


 
 
 
     (5.62b)
 
 
 
 
For the strongly pumped diode Rmin/Rmax can approach zero, causing the 
theoretical conversion loss to approach 0 dB.  However, in the practical mixer the 
diode junction capacitance, C, and series resistance, R, will limit conversion loss.  
In this case the optimum conversion loss is given by (5.63) with Z = R + 1/(jC). 
 
 
























2
2
min
.
1
1
2
1
ON
OFF
OFF
ON
C
Z
Z
Z
Z
L
 
         
      (5.63) 
 
 
5.3.8.2 Saleh Theory for Exponential Diode Mixer Model 
 
After analyzing the mixer as a perfect switch, Saleh next analyzed it as an 
exponential diode.  Results were obtained for the single exponential diode Y-, Z-, 
G-, and H-mixers.  Saleh’s results for the Y-mixer agree with the foregoing Y-
mixer results given in Table 5.3 and Figures 5.11, 5.12, and 5.13.  Saleh also 
showed that the ring doubly balanced diode mixer has some striking 
characteristics.  Most notably the G- and H- mixers are the dual of each other in 
terms of conversion loss and optimum RF and IF port terminations.  In particular, 
the conditions that apply to the G-mixer for open, broadband, and short image, 
respectively, are the same that apply to the H-mixer for short, broadband, and 
open image.  The Y- and Z-mixers have the same duality.  Also, given the 
series/parallel diode configuration of the ring doubly balanced mixer, its optimum 
port impedances for the Y-, Z-, G-, and H-mixers are the same as for individual 
diodes.  Equations giving exponential mixer performance for various terminations 
are given in Appendix 5D. 

276 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
5.4 COMPUTER SIMULATION EXAMPLE 
 
The analysis approach discussed so far yields closed form approximations for 
mixer performance given limiting assumptions that include small signal RF, fixed 
terminations to out-of-band products, and reactances being ignored.  The results 
are valuable in understanding the general relationships between LO drive, diode 
parameters, and port terminations; however, they lack sufficient accuracy for 
practical design.  Important advances have been made in computer simulation of 
diode and transistor mixers that include multiple LO harmonics and arbitrary 
reactive terminations to their sidebands, nonlinear junction capacitance, and 
multiple devices.    
A 1973 paper [4] includes both resistive and reactive parts in solving 
both the nonlinear and linear parts of the problem.  A constant junction 
capacitance was assumed, and harmonic balance was used to analyze the LO 
waveform, which included three LO harmonics.  Results were given for 
conversion loss and the RF and IF port impedances.  A 1978 paper [5] includes 
the effects of nonlinear junction capacitance and arbitrary terminations to higher 
order LO harmonics and their sidebands.  The focus of the paper is on correctly 
analyzing noise, by calculating the level of down-converted noise originating from 
higher order sidebands.  Arbitrary sideband terminations, as well as shot and 
thermal noise, are included.  Analysis results closely agree  with the experimental 
data.   
A 1980 paper [17] presents an analysis with nonlinear and linear portions 
that solves a mixer with multiple diodes.  The nonlinear problem is first solved for 
each diode including nonlinear conductance and capacitance.  The admittance 
matrix for each diode is determined, and combined into an overall admittance 
conversion matrix for the whole mixer.  The noise generated by each diode is 
assumed to not be correlated with any other diode.  Analysis results for a two-
diode mixer were presented.  The effects of image and idle frequency terminations 
on conversion loss and port impedances are discussed, which are similar to those 
found for the earlier analytical mixer analyses.   
The first report of accurate simulation of IM in a diode mixer including 
nonlinear capacitance was given in 1987 by Maas [11].  The analysis showed that 
terminating the image in a high-impedance inductive load reduced conversion loss 
as expected, but could also increase IM and noise levels.  The analysis also 
showed that IM levels are minimized with high level LO, which moves the 
operating point of the diode quickly between on and off states, minimizing time 
spent in the nonlinear region.     
 
 
5.4.1 Harmonic Balance Simulation of a Single Diode Mixer 
 
Harmonic balance simulations were carried out for the single shunt diode mixer of 
Figure 5.15 using the AWR Microwave Office simulator.  The diode model is that 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
277 
of a silicon Schottky diode, with saturation current at 3.0 10-10 amps, ideality 
factor, η = 1, and series resistance set to 0, 5, and 10 ohms.  Diode capacitances 
are set to zero to compare results with the Y-mixer analyses in the foregoing 
discussion.  The RF input signal is at 11 GHz at -10 dBm; the LO input is at 10 
GHz and stepped over -6 to +24 dBm; the IF output is at 1 GHz; and the image is 
at 9 GHz.  S-parameter blocks were constructed for the RF, LO, IF, and image 
connections to the diode, to implement the assumptions of the Y-mixer.  The 
image termination is stepped from 0 ohms (short circuit) up through 2400 ohms to 
approximate an open circuit.  Conversion loss and the real part of LO, RF, and IF 
port impedances are plotted versus LO power and image termination, and for 
various values of RF, LO, and IF port termination values.  The simulation results 
closely follow those of the foregoing Y-mixer analyses. 
           
IND
ID=L1
L=1e15 nH
CAP
ID=C1
C=1000 pF
CAP
ID=C2
C=1000 pF
CAP
ID=C3
C=1000 pF
SDIODE
ID=SD2
LOAD
ID=Z1
Z=RIM Ohm
CAP
ID=C4
C=1000 pF
Xo
Xn
. . .
SWPVAR
ID=SWP2
VarName="Rsd"
Values={0,5,10}
UnitType=Resistance
Xo
Xn
. . .
SWPVAR
ID=SWP5
VarName="RIM"
Values={0,10,25,50,100,250,500,1000,2500}
UnitType=Resistance
1
2
SUBCKT
ID=S2
NET="IF_1"
1
2
SUBCKT
ID=S3
NET="LO_10"
1
2
SUBCKT
ID=S4
NET="RF_11_Ymixer_image_open"
1
2
SUBCKT
ID=S1
NET="IM_9"
PORT
P=2
Z=RIF Ohm
PORT_PS1
P=3
Z=RLO Ohm
PStart=-4 dBm
PStop=-2 dBm
PStep=.25 dB
PORTF
P=1
Z=RRF Ohm
Freq=11 GHz
Pwr=PRF dBm
RIM=1e6
SDM Dnx
Rsd=0
PRF=-10
 
Figure 5.15     Single diode circuit used in the harmonic balance analysis.  S-parameter blocks separate 
the various mixing frequency terms, allowing them to have arbitrary port terminations.  
The inductor provides the DC ground return for rectified LO current. 
 
The diode is shunt to ground.  The RF, IF, LO, and image ports connect 
to the diode via S-parameter blocks that function as filters to pass the desired term 
and short or open circuit all others.   
  Figure 5.16 shows simulated conversion gain and port impedances for 
RF, LO, and IF as image termination, RIM, is swept from a short circuit up through 
an open circuit.  Diode series resistance Rs = 0.  Figure 5.16 is directly comparable 
with figure 5.12 that gives calculated mixer results.  Figures 5.16(a), (b), and (c), 
respectively, have optimal termination values for RF and IF with image: (a) open 
circuited, (b) image and RF terminations equal, and (c) image short circuited.  
These RF and IF termination values are the same as used for Figure 5.12.  LO 
power is set to -2.75 dBm into 50 ohms, which gives fairly close agreement with 
the calculated results of Figure 5.11 that are based on LO power at -2.92 dBm.  

278 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
The values for conversion loss, RF and IF port impedances of the two approaches 
are close enough to validate the Y-mixer analysis.   
Figures 5.17 through 5.23 show simulated conversion loss and port 
impedances for RF, LO, and IF versus LO power swept from -6 dBm to +24 dBm.  
In Figure 5.17 image termination is stepped from 0 to 5000 ohms with diode 
series resistance, Rs, equal 5 ohms.  In Figures 5.18 through 5.20 Rs is set to 0, 5, 
and 10 ohms to show the effect of diode series resistance for the three image 
termination cases.  In Figures 5.21 through 5.23 RF input power is stepped from -
10 dBm up to 0 dBm to compare compression for the three image termination 
cases.  One important fact is illustrated which is that the LO port impedance is 
usually easy to impedance match if the LO harmonics are short circuited. 
Many trends shown in Figures 5.17 through 5.23 are in agreement with 
calculated results for the Y-mixer.  First, LO, RF, IF, and image port impedances 
all increase with decreasing LO power.  This accelerates as LO power drops 
below about +4 dBm because of the increasingly large mismatch between diode 
LO impedance and the fixed LO source resistance.  Also, LO port impedance 
remains relatively constant with variations in RF, IF, and image terminations.  
And RF port impedance also is much less sensitive than the IF port impedance to 
image termination.  For image short circuited, the RF and IF port impedances 
converge; and, for image termination approaching an open circuit, IF impedance 
increases to three or four times the RF impedance.  Finally, given a fixed image 
termination, the RF impedance is a function of the IF termination, and vice versa, 
so a pair of optimal RF and IF port terminations can be found as per (5.46) and 
(5.47).     
Figure 5.17 shows an optimal LO power level at which conversion loss is 
insensitive to image termination.  This occurs where the RF and LO impedances 
equal each other.  For broadband operation, given a particular set of RF and IF 
port terminations, it appears desirable to operate the mixer near this LO power 
level, since conversion loss remains relatively constant as the image terminating 
impedance varies.  However, if the mixer is operated narrow band, then a short 
circuit image should be chosen with the associated optimal LO power level.  High 
impedance image terminations should be used with caution since they can degrade 
noise figure and intermodulation performance [11].  
Figures 5.18 through 5.20 show that conversion loss increases by 1 to 2 
dB as diode series resistance, Rs, increases from 0 to 5 ohms.  Conversion loss 
further increases by 0.5 to 1 dB as Rs increases from 5 to 10 ohms.  Also, large 
increases in RF, LO, and IF impedances occur with relatively small increases in 
Rs.  Rs ≈ 5 ohms is typical of GaAs Schottky diodes, and Rs ≈ 5 to10 ohms is 
typical of silicon Schottky diodes.   
Figure 5.19 shows that with short circuit image and with Rs=0 ohms 
minimum conversion loss approaches 2.1 dB as RIF drops from 100 to 50 ohms.  
In contrast, Figure 5.20 shows that with open circuit image at Rs=0 minimum 
conversion loss approaches 1.9 dB as RIF increases from 50 to 100 ohms.  Figure 
5.18 shows that with image terminated in 50 ohms and with Rs=0 ohms, 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
279 
conversion loss approaches 3.4 dB as RIF decreases from 100 to 50 ohms, similar 
to image short.  Also, the lowest conversion loss is obtained with this broadband 
image termination over a broader LO power range than for the image short and 
open cases.  Also, the lowest conversion loss for open, short, or broadband image 
termination is obtained over the broadest LO power range with the resistively 
terminated image. 
Figures 5.21 through 5.23 show the sensitivity of conversion gain 
compression to LO power variation and IF/image terminations.  Figures 5.21 
through 5.23 have (a) and (b) parts that, respectively, show results for IF 
impedance, RIF, equal to 50 and 100 ohms.  For all of these figures, Rs = 5 ohms, 
LO power, PLO, varies from -6 to +24 dBm, and RF input power, PRF, is stepped 
from -10 dBm to 0 dBm.  Figure 5.20 shows that for the same LO power level, 
conversion loss is lower for RIF equal to 100 ohms than for 50 ohms; however, 
gain compression is more sensitive to PLO.  Figure 5.22, with image short 
circuited, also shows that gain compression is more sensitive to LO power as IF 
port termination impedance increases.  Figure 5.23, with image open circuited, 
shows gain compression varies much less with LO power over the range of LO 
power where conversion loss is lowest.    
 
 
5.4.2 5x5 Conversion Matrix with Diode Parasitics Included 
 
The discussion so far has concerned the 3x3 Y-mixer conversion matrix that 
includes voltages and currents at the LO, RF, IF, and image frequencies, with all 
other frequency components having zero voltage (short circuited).  The simplicity 
of not including higher order terms allowed for the derivation of closed form 
equations for mixer performance.  The analysis is now expanded to a 5x5 
conversion matrix that includes arbitrary terminations to the sidebands 
surrounding 2fLO, namely at 3fLO - fRF and fLO + fRF, as depicted in Figure 5.1.  The 
cost of the increased complexity is that the solution is carried out numerically.  
Since it is carried out numerically, the parasitic resistance, Rs, junction 
capacitance, and diode lead inductance can also be included in the analysis by 
beginning at the diode junction and working outward toward the port connection 
points.  The details of the analysis are given in Appendix 5B, and a summary of 
the calculated and harmonic balance simulated results for an example using a 
M/A-Com MA4E2037 GaAs beam lead diode operated at +4.0 dBm LO power in 
50 ohms are given, respectively, in Tables 5.5 and 5.6(a) and (b).  The RF, LO, 
and IF frequencies, respectively, are 11, 10, and 1 GHz.  It should be noted that 
for the harmonic balance simulation the S-parameter .s2p SUBCKT files 
interfacing the RF and IF ports to the diode in the circuit of Figure 5.15 had their 
respective reference impedances set to equal the respective port termination value. 

280 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
.01
.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
Image Termination, RIM (Ohm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms) >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; RRF=326 ohms
IF: RIF=1050 ohms
Rs = 0 ohms
LO: 10 GHz @ -2.75 dBm; RLO=50 ohms
ZIF (ohms) >>
Optimum RRF & RIF for RIM=Open Circuit
 
.01
.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
Image Termination, RIM (Ohm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms) >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; RRF=214 ohms
IF: RIF=374 ohms
Rs = 0 ohms
LO: 10 GHz @ -2.75 dBm; RLO=50 ohms
ZIF (ohms) >>
Optimum RRF & RIF for RIM=RRF
 
.01
.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
Image Termination, RIM (Ohm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms) >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; RRF=103 ohms
IF: RIF=103 ohms
Rs = 0 ohms
LO: 10 GHz @ -2.75 dBm; RLO=50 ohms
ZIF (ohms) >>
Optimum RRF & RIF for RIM=Short Circuit
 
Figure 5.16   Exponential Y-mixer harmonic balance simulated performance versus image 
termination, RIM.  Plots are for conversion gain, Gc, and RF, IF, and LO port 
impedances.  Gc - blue; ZIF - orange; ZRF - cyan; ZLO – brown. 
(a) Image open 
(b) Image = RF impedance 
(c) Image shorted 
Image term = open ckt 
Opt RF term = 326 ohms 
Opt IF term = 1050 ohms 
Image term = RF term 
Opt RF term = 214 ohms 
Opt IF term =  374 ohms 
Image term = short ckt 
Opt RF term = 103 ohms 
Opt IF term =  103 ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
Ohms 
Ohms 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
281 
 
    
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p36
p35
p34
p33
p32
p31
p27
p26
p25
p24
p23
p22
p21
p20
p19
p18
p17
p16
p15
p14
p13
p12
p11
p10
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 0,10,25,50,100,250,500,1k,5k ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 50 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
ZIF (ohms) >>
5k
5k
0
5k
0
0
 
 
    
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p36
p35
p34
p33
p32
p31
p30
p27
p26
p25
p24
p23
p22
p21
p20
p19
p18
p17
p16
p15
p14
p13
p12
p11
p10
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 0,10,25,50,100,250,500,1k,5k ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 100 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
ZIF (ohms) >>
5k
5k
0
5k
0
0
 
 
Figure 5.17      Exponential Y-mixer harmonic balance simulated performance versus LO Power, PLO 
dBm, with diode Rs = 5 ohms.  Image port termination, RIM varies over 0 to 5000 ohms, 
and RR F = RLO= 50 ohms.  Plots are for conversion gain, Gc, and RF, IF, and LO port 
impedances.  IF Termination: (a) RIF = 50; (b) RIF = 100. Gc - blue; ZIF - orange; ZRF - 
cyan; ZLO – brown. 
 
Ohms 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
(a) 
(b) 

282 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
    
    
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p12
p11
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 50 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 50 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
ZIF (ohms) >>
10
0
0
Rs = 0,5,10 ohms
10
10
0
0
0
5
 
 
     
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p12
p11
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 50 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 100 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
ZIF (ohms) >>
10
0
0
Rs = 0,5,10 ohms
10
10
0
0
0
5
 
 
Figure 5.18      Exponential Y-mixer harmonic balance simulated performance versus LO Power, PLO 
(dBm), and diode Rs = 0, 5, 10 ohms.  Plots are for conversion gain, Gc, and RF, IF, 
and LO Port Impedances.  Port terminations: RIM = RRF = RLO =50 ohms,  IF: (a) RIF 
=50; (b) RIF =100 ohms.  Gc - blue; ZIF - orange; ZRF - cyan; ZLO – brown. 
Ohms 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
(a) 
(b) 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
283 
 
     
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p12
p11
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
<<  Gc (dB)
ZIF & ZRF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 0 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 50 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
10
0
0
Rs = 0,5,10 ohms
10
0
5
 
 
    
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p12
p11
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
<<  Gc (dB)
ZIF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 0 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 100 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
10
0
0
Rs = 0,5,10 ohms
10
0
5
ZRF (ohms)  >>
10
 
 
Figure 5.19      Exponential Y-mixer harmonic balance simulated performance versus LO Power, PLO 
(dBm), and diode Rs = 0, 5, 10 ohms.  Plots are for conversion gain, Gc, and RF, IF, 
and LO port impedances.  Port terminations: RIM =0, RRF = RLO =50 ohms,  IF: (a) RIF 
=50; (b) RIF =100 ohms.  Gc - blue; ZIF - orange; ZRF - cyan; ZLO – brown.
Ohms 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
(a) 
(b) 

284 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Figure 5.20      Exponential Y-mixer harmonic balance simulated performance versus LO Power, PLO 
(dBm), and diode Rs = 0, 5, 10 ohms.  Plots are for conversion gain, Gc, and RF, IF, 
and LO port impedances.  Port terminations: RIM =106, RRF = RLO =50 ohms,  IF: (a) RIF 
=50; (b) RIF =100 ohms.  Gc - blue; ZIF - orange; ZRF - cyan; ZLO – brown.  
 
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p12
p11
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZIF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 1e6 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 50 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
10
0
0
Rs = 0,5,10 ohms
10
0
5
ZRF (ohms)  >>
10
10
0
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p12
p11
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZIF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 1e6 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 100 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
10
0
0
Rs = 0,5,10 ohms
10
0
5
ZRF (ohms)  >>
10
10
0
Ohms 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
(a) 
(b) 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
285 
  
 
Figure 5.21      Exponential Y-mixer harmonic balance simulated performance versus LO Power, PLO 
(dBm), and RF input power, PRF = -10 to 0 dBm.  Diode series resistance, Rs = 5 
ohms.  Plots are for conversion gain, Gc, and RF, IF, and LO port impedances.  Port 
terminations: RIM = RRF = RLO =50 ohms,  IF: (a) RIF =50; (b) RIF =100 ohms.  Gc - 
blue; ZIF - orange; ZRF - cyan; ZLO – brown. 
 
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p24
p23
p22
p21
p20
p18
p17
p16
p15
p14
p13
p12
p11
p10
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZIF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 50 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10,-8,-6,-4,-2,0 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 50 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
-10
0
0
-10
ZRF (ohms)  >>
Rs = 5 ohms
0
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p24
p23
p22
p21
p20
p18
p17
p16
p15
p14
p13
p12
p11
p10
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZIF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 50 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10,-8,-6,-4,-2,0 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 100 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
-10
0
0
-10
ZRF (ohms)  >>
Rs = 5 ohms
Ohms 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
(a) 
(b) 

286 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
Figure 5.22      Exponential Y-mixer harmonic balance simulated performance versus LO Power, PLO 
(dBm), and RF input power, PRF = -10 to 0 dBm.  Diode series resistance, Rs = 5 
ohms.  Plots are for conversion gain, Gc, and RF, IF, and LO port impedances.  Port 
terminations: RIM =0,  RRF = RLO =50 ohms,  IF: (a) RIF =50; (b) RIF =100 ohms.  Gc - 
blue; ZIF - orange; ZRF - cyan; ZLO – brown. 
 
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p24
p23
p22
p21
p20
p18
p17
p16
p15
p14
p13
p12
p11
p10
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZIF & ZRF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 0 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10,-8,-6,-4,-2,0 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 50 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
-10
0
0
-10
Rs = 5 ohms
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p24
p23
p22
p21
p20
p18
p17
p16
p15
p14
p13
p12
p11
p10
p9
p8
p7
<<  Gc (dB)
ZIF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 0 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10,-8,-6,-4,-2,0 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 100 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
-10
0
0
-10
ZRF (ohms)  >>
Rs = 5 ohms
Ohms 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
(a) 
(b) 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
287 
 
 
 
Figure 5.23      Exponential Y-mixer harmonic balance simulated performance versus LO Power, PLO 
(dBm), and RF input power, PRF = -10 to 0 dBm.  Diode series resistance, Rs = 5 
ohms.  Plots are for conversion gain, Gc, and RF, IF, and LO port impedances.  Port 
terminations: RIM =106,  RRF = RLO =50 ohms,  IF: (a) RIF =50; (b) RIF =100 ohms.  Gc 
- blue; ZIF - orange; ZRF - cyan; ZLO – brown. 
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p24
p23
p22
p21
p20
p18
p17
p16
p15
p14
p13
p12
p11
p10
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 1e6 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10,-8,-6,-4,-2,0 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 50 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
-10
0
0
-10
Rs = 5 ohms
ZRF (ohms)  >>
-10
0
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Power (dBm)
Single Diode Mixer
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
p24
p23
p22
p21
p20
p18
p17
p16
p15
p14
p13
p12
p11
p10
p9
p8
p7
p6
p5
p4
p3
p2
p1
<<  Gc (dB)
ZRF (ohms)  >>
ZLO (ohms)  >>
Rim = 1e6 ohms
RF: 11 GHz @ -10,-8,-6,-4,-2,0 dBm; R=50 ohms
IF Term = 100 ohms
LO: 10 GHz; R=50 ohms
-10
0
0
-10
Rs = 5 ohms
ZRF (ohms)  >>
-10
0
Ohms 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
(a) 
(b) 

288 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Cases 3 and 4 show that IF impedance more than doubles while RF 
impedance is unchanged as 3L-R termination goes from short to open.  Cases 3 
and 5 show that RF impedance doubles and IF impedance changes very little as 
the L+R termination goes from short to open.  And in general as the image, sum, 
and 3L-R terminations increase, the RF and IF port impedances increase almost 
proportionately.   
 
Table 5.5  
Calculated Mixer Performance versus Port Termination Resistance at the Image 2L-R, Sum L+R, and 
3L-R Frequencies.   
 
|Zxx| are port impedance magnitudes.  LO port source resistance is 50 ohms, calculated LO input 
impedance, |ZLO|, equals 86 ohms, PLO = +4 dBm. 
 
Table 5.6(a) 
 Harmonic Balance Simulation Results for LO Power Equal to +4, +5, and +6 dBm.  ZRF and ZIF are 
the port impedances.   
Port terminations correspond to the six cases of Table 5.5; all other frequencies are short circuited. 
 
Calculated results of Table 5.5 generally agree with simulated results of 
Table 5.6(a) for all six cases.  The lowest conversion loss occurs for case 6, when 
the image 2L-R and sum L+R are both short circuited, the 3L-R product is open 
circuited, and RF and IF ports are optimally matched.  Optimal match is obtained 
by iteratively adjusting RF and IF port terminations to equal the respective port 
impedances.  For case 6, the calculated optimal RF port impedance and 
 
Port Termination (ohms) 
Calculated 
Case 
RF 
11 GHz 
IF 
1 GHz 
2L-R 
Image 
9 GHz 
L+R 
Sum 
21GHz 
3L-R 
19GHz 
Lc 
dB 
|ZRF| 
Ohms 
|ZIF| 
Ohms 
1 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
8.17 
131 
188 
2 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
7.30 
190 
305 
3 
100 
100 
short 
short 
short 
3.28 
84 
96 
4 
100 
100 
short 
short 
open 
2.84 
84 
235 
5 
100 
100 
short 
open 
short 
6.29 
236 
105 
6 
147 
287 
short 
short 
open 
1.94 
147 
287 
 
PLO = +4 dBm 
PLO = +5 dBm 
PLO = +6 dBm 
 
Lc 
dB 
|ZRF| 
ohms 
|ZIF| 
ohms 
Lc 
dB 
|ZRF| 
ohms 
|ZIF| 
ohms 
Lc 
dB 
|ZRF| 
ohms 
|ZIF| 
ohms 
1 
8.37 
137 
188 
7.84 
125 
170 
7.48 
117 
157 
2 
7.31 
172 
299 
6.92 
162 
271 
6.64 
155 
248 
3 
3.20 
113 
118 
3.26 
101 
103 
3.47 
91 
91 
4 
4.01 
116 
231 
3.45 
101 
209 
3.14 
91 
192 
5 
6.07 
152 
143 
5.90 
153 
116 
5.69 
155 
99 
6 
2.93 
172 
269 
2.68 
160 
249 
2.63 
151 
229 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
289 
termination are 147 ohms; the calculated optimal IF port impedance and 
termination are 287 ohms; and calculated conversion loss is 1.94 dB.  Harmonic 
balance simulated results obtained using these RF and IF port termination values 
with +4 dBm LO drive are given in Table 5.6(a).  RF and IF port impedances, 
respectively, are |ZRF| = 172 ohms, |ZIF| = 269 ohms, and Lc = 2.93 dB.  The 
simulations were carried out using the circuit of Figure 5.15 with all LO 
harmonics short circuited.  The diode parameters appear in Appendix 5B. 
 
Table 5.6(b)  
Harmonic Balance Simulation Results for Case 6 with LO Power Equal +4, +5, and +6 dBm.   
RF and IF ports are optimally matched at each LO power level; RIF=|ZIF|, and RRF=|ZRF|.  Optimal 
terminations were obtained iteratively by simulation. 
 
 
5.5 LARGE SIGNAL CONVERSION ANALYSIS 
 
As discussed earlier for the doubly balanced mixer of Figure 5.4, IM distortion is 
introduced by the RF signal affecting the phase of the conductance waveforms of 
the four diodes. In addition, IM distortion, gain compression, and cross 
modulation are introduced by the nonlinearity of the device I/V characteristic.  IM 
distortion and gain compression reduce the upper end of the dynamic range; IM 
distortion is manifest as undesired mixing products that can obscure the desired IF 
and increase the effective system noise floor.  Cross modulation causes a strong 
signal to be transferred to another signal, in particular, to the desired IF.     
 All circuits display nonlinear behavior, the extent of which depends on 
drive level.  If the RF signal level is low enough, it can be treated as a small 
signal, with its effects on the conductance waveform considered negligible.  Small 
signal analysis results in the mixer output signals located above and below the LO 
harmonic frequencies as depicted in Figure 5.1. In contrast, if the RF input signal 
cannot be approximated as a small signal, then under large signal analysis there 
are multiple signals spaced about the LO harmonic frequencies as depicted in 
Figure 5.2.  The multiple sidebands comprise RF harmonics that result from the 
RF signal being included in the nonlinear analysis.     
For a mixer with small signal RF input, a nonlinear analysis is first 
performed to determine the large-signal voltages and currents in the diode, from 
which can be determined the Fourier components of the conductance waveform. 
The coefficients are then used in a conversion matrix to perform the linear portion 
of the analysis.  In contrast, for large signal RF input, the nonlinear analysis 
includes both RF and LO signals.  Modern approaches to performing these 
analyses involve transient or harmonic balance approaches.  These are widely 
 
PLO = +4 dBm 
PLO = +5 dBm 
PLO = +6 dBm 
 
Lc 
dB 
|ZRF| 
ohms 
|ZIF| 
ohms 
Lc 
dB 
|ZRF| 
ohms 
|ZIF| 
ohms 
Lc 
dB 
|ZRF| 
ohms 
|ZIF| 
ohms 
6 
2.89 
173 
288 
2.67 
152 
252 
2.57 
133 
218 

290 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
V
V(t)
0
0
t
available in commercial circuit simulation software, and have been described by 
[12].  But simplified power series and switching models are still useful to 
understand performance limitations and trends.  Two simplified approaches that 
give useful insight into mixer behavior given a large signal RF involve the power 
series expansion for the exponential diode, and the switching function 
approximation of the diode conductance.   
 
 
5.5.1  Gain Compression  
 
5.5.1.1 Exponential Model 
 
A popular analysis method in the literature for diode mixers is to apply a 
sinusoidal junction voltage to the exponential diode equation. Difficulties with the 
sinusoidal junction-voltage assumption are that the currents are very sensitive to 
the level of the junction voltage. Also, there is no saturation effect; that is, there is 
no point where the current components cease to change much with LO power. So, 
there is always some uncertainty as to what LO level to use in the calculation. 
 
 
5.5.1.2 Switching Model 
 
Conversion gain compression of a single diode mixer can be represented using the 
switching model of the linear rectifier, which has very high off impedance and 
very low on impedance [6].  The applied voltage, V, is the sum of sinusoidal RF 
and LO voltages given by (5.64).   
 
)
cos(
)
cos(
t
V
t
V
V
R
R
L
L




 
 
         
       (5.64) 
 
The switching function is defined so that the output voltage, V(t), of the 
mixer is proportional to input voltage V when V is positive, and V(t) is equal to 
zero when V is negative, as depicted in Figure 5.24.  The RF signal level is much 
lower than the LO signal level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.24   Output voltage, V(t) in the switching model is proportional to input voltage V when V is 
positive.  V(t) equals zero when input voltage V is negative. 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
291 
 
V(t) comprises harmonics of both LO and RF, and is represented by the 
double Fourier series in (5.65).  The Fourier coefficients Amn and Bmn are solved 
by integrating over 0 to π for variables x and y, respectively, for LO and RF 
frequencies.  When input voltage V passes through zero, the switch changes 
between on-off states.  This threshold point is represented by (5.66), where input 
voltage equals zero, and the variable k is the ratio of RF to LO voltage.  Since the 
output voltage is zero when input voltage V is negative, the integration range for x 
reduces to 0 to cos-1(-kcos(y)) radians, since output voltage is zero between cos-1(-
kcos(y)) and π.   
 
)]
sin(
)
cos(
[
)
(
0
0
t
m
t
n
B
t
m
t
n
A
t
V
L
R
mn
m
n
L
R
mn














  
(5.65) 
0
)
cos(
)
cos(


y
k
x
; 
   
L
R V
V
k
/

  
       (5.66) 
 
The Fourier coefficients are computed by substituting in x = (ωLt)  and y 
= (ωRt), then performing the double integration of (5.67) over the region bounded 
by (5.66).  Bmn=0 due to orthogonality between sines and cosines.     
 
dy
dx
mx
y
k
x
ny
V
A
y
k
L
mn












0
))
cos(
(
cos
0
2
1
)
cos(
)]
cos(
)
[cos(
)
cos(
2
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5.67) 
 
The details of how the integration is carried out are in the reference.  The 
resulting Fourier coefficient A01 is the voltage component at the RF signal 
frequency [6]: 
 
2
01
R
V
A

 
 
 
 
         
 
       (5.68) 
The Fourier coefficient A11 is the voltage component at the IF: 
 
 
)]
(
)
1(
)
(
)
1
[(
3
4
2
2
2
11
k
K
k
k
E
k
k
V
A
L




                      (5.69) 
 
K(k) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind, and E(k) is the 
complete elliptic integral of the second kind, given by (5.70). 
 



2
/
0
2
)
sin(
1
)
(



k
d
k
K
 
 
                                  (5.70a) 
 

292 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 



2
/
0
2
)
sin(
1
)
(


d
k
k
E
  
 
 
     (5.70b)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conversion gain, GC, can be approximated by taking the ratio of A11/A01 
in (5.71).  GC is plotted in Figure 5.25 as a function of k = VR/VL.   
 







01
11
log
20
A
A
GC
  
 
 
 
      (5.71) 
 
GC equals the theoretical value of 3.92 dB for k ≤ 0.1, where RF power is 
at least 20 dB below LO power, PLO.  Gain compression at 1-dB occurs for k ≈ 
0.876, corresponding to input RF power, P-1dB, being 1.15 dB below LO power.  
This result agrees with the harmonic balance simulation data in Figure 5.21 for a 
single-diode Y-mixer with RIM = 50 ohms with PLO = +1 dBm and PRF = 0 dBm.  
In contrast, the simulated results in Figure 5.22 for open circuited image have a 
wider spread, with RF input power at 1 dB gain compression, P-1dB ≈ (PLO – 3) 
dBm, likely due to unequal RF and IF impedances with open circuit image. 
 
                       
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
6

5.5

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

Gc
k
 
Figure 5.25       Conversion gain versus k = VR/VL for switched linear rectifier. 
  
 
5.5.2  Intermodulation 
 
Accurate calculation of IM levels in mixers has long been an important goal, 
beginning with approximate power series and switching analyses in the 1930s, and 
progressing to the modern numerical approaches of the 1980s up to the present.  
The first report of accurate simulation of IM in a diode mixer including nonlinear 
capacitance was given in 1987 by Maas [11].  The analysis showed that 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
293 
terminating the image in a high-impedance inductive load reduced conversion loss 
as expected, but could also increase IM and noise levels.  The analysis also 
showed that IM levels are minimized with high level LO, which moves the diode 
quickly between on and off states, minimizing time spent in the nonlinear region.  
This is facilitated by the diode having low junction capacitance and low series 
resistance.  
 
 
5.5.2.1 Exponential Model 
        
A popular representation in the literature of IM generation in diode mixers is to 
use the exponential diode I/V equation with the assumption of a sinusoidal 
junction voltage. As stated previously for analyzing gain compression using the 
exponential model, the sinusoidal junction voltage assumption has serious 
limitations.  And the method provides calculated IM levels that tend to be higher 
than measured results.  Approaches have been developed for multiple input 
signals to a single diode [8] and for a doubly balanced diode mixer [10].   
 
5.5.2.2 Switching Model 
 
Given its simplicity, the switching model provides surprisingly good estimates for 
IM suppression.  A version of it is used in two popular system simulators [9].  The 
Fourier series in (5.65), includes the RF and LO voltages for the switching model 
of a single linear rectifier.  It is extended to include multiple RF signals by using a 
switching function, S(t), instead of using the limits of integration to effect 
switching as done in (5.67), [7].  Equation (5.72) gives the input voltage, V, 
comprising three sinusoids: the large signal LO voltage, VL, and small signal RF1 
and RF2 voltages, VR1 and VR2. Equation (5.73) describes the output voltage, V(t), 
in terms of a triple Fourier series.  Bmnp = 0 in (5.73) due to orthogonality between 
sines and cosines.   
 
)
cos(
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
2
1
1
t
V
t
V
t
V
V
R
R
R
R
L
L






                   (5.72) 
 
]
)
sin(
)
cos(
[
)
(
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
t
p
n
m
B
t
p
n
m
A
t
V
R
R
L
mnp
m
n
R
R
L
mnp
p




















      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (5.73) 
 
 
0
2
)
sin(
)
(
0







d
V
t
S
 
 for V < 0    
       
     (5.74a) 
 









2
)
sin(
)
(
0
d
V
t
S
  for V > 0   
                    (5.74b) 

294 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 


p
L
R
n
L
R
p
n
m
L
mnp
V
V
V
V
p
n
m
p
n
m
p
n
V
A

































2
1
2
2
2
3
2
1
1
!
!
1

    (5.75) 
 
 
)...
1
(
)1
(
)
(
)1
(








z
z
z
z
z
z
    
 
     (5.76a) 
 






2
1
       
 
 
 
  
     (5.76b) 
 
2
2
3







      
 
 
 
  
     (5.76c) 
  
Equation (5.74) is the switching function, S(t), that is multiplied by input 
voltage, V of (5.72), to obtain the output voltage, V(t) of (5.73).  The switching 
function comprises the signum function (definite integral) and an offset factor π/2, 
and equals 0 for input voltage, V < 0, and π for V > 0.  Thus, output voltage, V(t), 
equals 0 for V < 0, and is proportional to V, for V > 0.  The Fourier coefficients 
Amnp that give the voltage components, are developed in the reference and given 
by (5.75) that uses the gamma function defined by (5.76) [7].   Approximate 
conversion loss and IM levels given by (5.75) are summarized in Table 5.7, for VL 
= 0.495 volts, and VR1 = VR2 = 0.005 volts applied to  a single diode mixer.  The 
simplifying assumptions are made that input and output power, respectively, equal 
the voltage component, Amnp, squared and divided by the termination resistance.  
And that all source and termination resistances are equal.   Again, the difference 
between single-tone and two-tone third order IM products is 9.5 dB as expected, 
and the same for the second-order IM products is 6.0 dB as expected.  
Furthermore, the absolute IM suppression levels are in line with typical measured 
values, as indicated by the positive input intercept IIP3 and IIP2 values, 
respectively, at +12.9 dBm and +9.9 dBm.  IIP2 is normally higher than IIP3 in 
doubly balanced mixers due to cancellation of second order products; however, 
IIP2 is lower than IIP3 for this single diode mixer model that has no such 
cancellation. 
Other interesting estimates are obtained from (5.75).  The second order 
two tone input intercept point is found to be 6 dB above the LO power.  This is 
obtained by equating |A110|= |A111|, and noting the result is (VR1/VL)2 = 4.  Also, the 
third order two tone input intercept is found to be 9 dB above the LO power.  This 
is obtained by equating A110 = A121, and noting the result is (VR1/VL)2 = 8 [18].      
 
 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
295 
Table 5.7  
Calculated Conversion Gain and IM Levels for the Switching Diode 
 
 
The switching function analysis was extended to approximate IM levels 
for the doubly balanced diode mixer [9].  The analysis includes approximations 
for imperfections in baluns and diodes, and a nonzero diode threshold voltage 
given by (5.77).  
 
 
 




0
2
sin
)
(
0








d
V
V
t
S
F
 
 for V < VF               (5.77a) 
 














2
sin
)
(
0
d
V
V
t
S
F
  
for V > VF                 (5.77b) 
 
 Figure 5.27 depicts the threshold voltage at VF, where the diode switches 
between on and off states, depending on input voltage, V, given by (5.72) for a 
single RF input signal.  The output voltage, Vout(t), is represented by the Fourier 
series of (5.78), and is proportional to V, for V ≥ VF, and equal to zero for V < VF. 
Referring to Figure 5.26 the RF and LO baluns, respectively, introduce 
the RF and LO input signals to the diodes differentially.  Ideally the balun 
produces voltages that are equal in amplitude but 180 degrees different in phase at 
the two diode connection points.  In contrast, the IF signal and ground 
connections, respectively, connect to the diodes in phase at the RF and LO balun 
diode connection points.   Thus the RF and LO ports are ideally isolated from the 
IF port, with LO-to-IF isolation approximated as 20log(|1-α|) dB, and RF-to-IF 
isolation approximated as 20log(|1-β|) dB.  The factors α and β provide a 
simplified means of quantifying the amplitude imbalance between the differential 
voltages at the diode connection points. Balun phase imbalance is not included. 
The effects of unequal voltages across the four diodes are also included in the 
Description 
Ratio 
Value 
=20log(Ratio)  
Conv Gain                      
|A101| / VR1 
    -3.92   dB 
Two Tone 3rd Order Suppr.   
|A121| / |A110| 
  -97.9     dBc 
Single Tone 3rd Order Suppr. 
|A130| / |A110| 
-107.4     dBc 
  Difference                    
|A121| / |A130| 
     9.54   dB 
  IIP3 
 
 +12.9     dBm 
Two Tone 2nd Order Suppr.     
|A111| / |A110| 
  -26.0     dBc 
Single Tone 2nd Order Suppr. 
|A120| / |A110| 
  -32.0     dBc 
  Difference                     
|A111| / |A120| 
     6.02   dB 
  IIP2 
 
   +9.9     dBm 

296 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
analysis using the factors δ2, δ3, δ4 that are defined by (5.85) as equaling the 
voltages across three of the diodes normalized to the first one. 
 
        
 
 
Figure 5.26      Doubly balanced mixer with imbalance factors α and β. 
 
 
Figure 5.27      Threshold voltage at VF for switching mixer. 
 
Typical values can be assigned to the factors indicating imperfections in 
the mixer circuit as follows: α = β = 0.7; δ2= 0.85, δ3= 0.95, δ4= 1.05, and VF/VL = 
0.1.  Integer m refers to LO harmonics, while n refers to harmonics of RF.  
Positive values for m and n are used in (5.79) – (5.85), which provide the 
suppression results of Table 5.8 for single-tone IM products.   It has been pointed 
out that (5.83) indicates IM suppression is equally affected by changes in LO or 
RF power [10].  It should be noted that the LO power is set at a level required to 
sustain the large signal switching waveform, and ΔP increases as RF signal level 
is reduced below this fixed LO level.   
 
OFF       ON 
Vd 
Id 
VF 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
297 
t
n
m
B
t
n
m
A
t
V
R
L
mn
R
L
mn
n
m
out
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
(
















(5.78)
 
 
 




mn
mn
A
P
m
S
log
20
1




    dBc  
 
 
     (5.79a) 
 
...
2
cos
2
cos
2
sin
2
sin
2
1
2
3
2
1
!
1






























































n
m
B
n
m
B
n
m
n
m
n
B
A
EE
OO
IF
mn
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     (5.79b) 
m = odd; n = odd: 

)
(
)
(
)
(
1
4
3
3
2
4
2
3
2
4






















n
BOO
(5.80) 
 
m = even; n = even: 

)
(
)
(
)
(
1
4
3
3
2
2
4
2
3
4























n
BEE
(5.81) 
 
m = odd; n = even: 

)
(
)
(
4
3
3
2
2
4














n
BOE
 
      (5.82) 
 
m = even; n = odd: 

)
(
)
(
4
3
2
3
2
4













n
BEO
          
       (5.83) 
 
)
(
1
4
3
2








IF
B
 
 
         
 
       (5.84) 
 
1
2
2
V
V


     
1
3
3
V
V


     
1
4
4
V
V


  
 
  
      (5.85)         
This analysis yields some interesting results.  Equation (5.81) indicates 
that maximum suppression of IM products with even valued RF and LO 
harmonics is achieved if the four diode voltages are identical to each other 























































2
sin
2
cos
2
cos
2
sin
2
2
2
...




n
m
B
n
m
B
V
V
n
m
n
m
EO
OE
L
F

298 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
regardless of the extent of imbalance in the baluns.  This suggests that maximum 
suppression of these IM products is achieved using a monolithic diode ring or star 
quad. Additionally, for products having even LO harmonics and odd RF 
harmonics, and vice versa, the analysis indicates suppression is infinite if the 
threshold voltage, VF = 0.  This result would likely not hold if phase imbalance 
had been included along with amplitude imbalance in the analysis. 
 
 
Table 5.8 
Equations Approximating Suppression of Single Tone IM Products with LO Harmonics (m), and RF 
Harmonics (n)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Calculated results are the same for ±m and ±n integer harmonic values. 
 
 5.5.2.3 Square Wave LO 
 
The analyses presented so far are for sinusoidal LO pumping.  Square-wave LO 
pumping has also been analyzed and shown to be an important means of reducing 
IM levels.  The effect of square-wave LO on the exponential diode is to minimize 
the time spent in the nonlinear region of the diode I/V curve.  Similarly, with the 
switching model, a square wave LO reduces the ability of the RF signal to phase 
modulate the conduction waveform compared to an LO voltage with a finite 
transition time.  A practical LO square-wave signal has finite rise and fall times, 
Ƭr, Tf,  and it has been shown that IM levels are proportional to the product of Ƭr 
and LO frequency.  So for a given rise time, IM levels increase as LO frequency 
increases; and, as rise time approaches zero seconds, IM levels are said to 
m (LO) 
n  (RF) 
Smn Suppression (dBc) 
1 
1 
0 
1 
2 
ΔP - 41 
1 
3 
2 ΔP - 28 
2 
1 
-35 
2 
2 
ΔP - 39 
2 
3 
2 ΔP - 44 
3 
1 
-10 
3 
2 
ΔP - 32 
3 
3 
2 ΔP - 18 
4 
1 
-35 
4 
2 
ΔP - 39 
5 
1 
-14 
5 
3 
2 ΔP - 14 
6 
1 
-35 
6 
2 
ΔP - 39 
7 
1 
-17 
7 
3 
2 ΔP - 11 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
299 
approach zero [13]; however, given the fact that some nonlinearity always exists 
in the switching device one cannot expect perfect IM suppression.  Some 
considerable improvement in single-tone and two-tone IM suppression has been 
achieved recently by commercially available diode mixers [19], with IIP3 levels in 
the range of +30 dBm to +50 dBm reported.   
 
 
5.5.2.4 Definition of IM Order 
 
IM products comprise harmonics of both the large signal LO and the small signal 
RF inputs: fmnp = mfLO ± nfRF1 ± pfRF2;   it is customary for the mixing order to be 
defined as |n| + |p| and not include the LO harmonic integer, m. This is because 
changes in the IM level equal the change in the small signal input power 
multiplied by the small signal harmonic integer associated with that input.  The 
LO harmonic integer m is not included in the order because changes in IM level 
do not equal the change in LO power multiplied by m.  For example the frequency 
of a two-tone-third-order IM product is given by mfLO ± 2fR1 ± fR2 or mfLO ± fR2 ± 
2fR1, and the frequency of a two-tone-second-order IM product is given by mfLO ± 
fR1 ±f R2.  The frequency of a single-tone-third-order IM product is given by mfLO ± 
3fR, and the frequency of a single-tone-second-order IM product is given by mfLO ± 
2fR. For the above m = 1 unless otherwise stated. 
 
 
5.5.3 Mixer Classification 
 
The previous mixer classification proposed by Saleh relates to the various forms 
of input and output mixer terminations. Another classification   relates to various 
diode configurations to improve IM suppression, [20]. Some of these circuit 
configurations are widely used today, but the proposed classification is more of 
historical interest and is described in Table 5.9.  
It is well known that adding one or more additional series diodes can 
dramatically improve IM suppression.  For example, the diode ring quad of a 
doubly balanced mixer can be replaced with a diode octal ring having eight 
diodes.  IM suppression increases because input RF voltage is shared across more 
diodes, so less RF signal voltage is available to phase modulate the switching 
point, assuming LO voltage remains the same across each diode.  Of course, more 
LO power is required, and conversion loss increases due to the additional series 
resistance.  The addition of a parallel RC in series with each diode also improves 
IM suppression, most likely by self biasing the diode so its conduction waveform 
is again less susceptible to phase modulation. 
 
 
 
 
 

300 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Table 5.9  
Classes of Mixers with LO Power Range 
   
MIXER CLASS
CIRCUIT
LO POWER/DB 
MIXERS (dBm)
+13 to +24
Class 3, type 3
+20 to +30
Class 1
+7 to +13
Class 2, type 1
+13 to +24
Class 2, type 2
Class 3, type 1
+20 to +30
Class 3, type 2
+20 to +30
 
 
   
 
 
5.6 SUBHARMONIC MIXER 
 
For many mixer applications it is desirable to use an LO harmonic instead of the 
fundamental.  Such mixers are commonly referred to as subharmonic mixers 
(SHM).  The LO harmonic is generated by the mixer itself, with the LO harmonic 
sometimes referred to as the “virtual LO.”  The SHM is more immune to DC 
offset at the output and to second order IM distortion than fundamental mixers, 
which is important when converting down to baseband.  Also, the SHM is very 
useful at frequencies above 100 GHz and at THz, including radio astronomy, 
where fundamental LO sources are either cost prohibitive or unavailable.  Most 
SHM applications use the second LO harmonic instead of higher harmonics, 
because conversion loss increases for higher LO harmonics.  For some situations 
higher conversion loss is acceptable, allowing use of higher LO harmonics; one 
notable example is in spectrum analyzers.  The remainder of this chapter discusses 
the SHM with the IF generated by the second LO harmonic, 2fLO.  For this case 
the desired IF output is fIF = (2fLO-fRF) or (fRF -2fLO), with fLO ≈ fRF/2, and fIF << fRF.  
For up conversion the desired IF output is fIF = 2fLO+fRF, with fLO ≈ fIF/2, and fRF 
<< fIF.  SHMs use the same switching device types as fundamental mixers; (e.g., 
diodes, FET, BJT).  Theoretical SHM conversion loss using second LO harmonic 
is equal to that of fundamental mixers [21, 22, 23].  But in general it is higher and 
more sensitive to LO power. 
 
The most popular subharmonic diode mixer is the anti-parallel diode pair 
(APDP) comprising two parallel diodes reversely connected to each other. Figure 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
301 
5.28 shows shunt [24] and series [25] APDP SHM circuits.  The APDP replaces 
the single diode normally used for fundamental LO conversion.  The APDP 
conducts twice during each LO cycle instead of once, with one diode conducting 
on the positive LO half cycle, and the other conducting on the negative LO half 
cycle.  This supports the conversion of the RF signal at fRF to the IF at 2fLO ± fRF.  
Mixing products containing odd LO harmonics are cancelled and those with even 
LO harmonics are not, as discussed in Section 5.7.3.  This highlights one of the 
important features of the SHM: IM cancellation of certain mixing products is 
obtained without a balun. Another feature of the SHM is the wide frequency 
separation between LO and RF/IF, allowing simplified filtering between LO, RF, 
and IF, which is especially valuable for up-converters. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
APDP in shunt with the RF, IF and LO circuits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     (b) APDP in series with the RF, IF and LO circuits. 
Figure 5.28       Shunt and series circuit options for APDP subharmonic mixer circuits. 
 
Two or more APDP can be combined to tailor the mixing products that 
are suppressed by cancellation.  For example, two or more APDP can be 
combined using quadrature hybrids to obtain image rejection for down-
conversion, or sideband cancellation for up-conversion.   The image rejection 
SHM of Figure 5.29 has two APDP with RF applied in phase, and LO applied 45 
degrees out of phase [26].  Two IF output ports are connected in quadrature to the 
two APDP.  As discussed in Section 5.7.3, IF1 provides the 2fL ± fR products while 
cancelling the fR - 2fL product.  IF2 provides the fR - 2fL product while cancelling 
the 2fL ± fR products.  RF and LO isolation to both IF ports is only a few dB. 
Fundamental mixing products, fL ± fR and fR -fL, all cancel at IF1 and IF2 ports.   
 
 
+VRF,m
IFOUT
i1
i2
+VLO,n
HPF
LPF
HPF
LPF
+VRF,m
IFOUT
i1
i2
+VLO,n
λ/2 at RF
λ/4 at LO
λ/2 at RF
λ/4 at LO

302 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.29      Image reject singly balanced mixer configuration. 
 
The doubly balanced SHM of Figure 5.30 has four APDP with RF and 
LO both applied differentially across the APDP ring [27].  Notice the RF and IF 
share the same port, and are isolated from each other by filtering.  The 2fL ± fR and 
fR - 2fL products are both provided to the IF output port, while the LO fundamental 
is isolated by circuit balance.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.30       Doubly balanced subharmonic mixer configuration 
 
The down converting APDP SHM can be analyzed using the conversion 
matrix approach with the same Y-mixer approximations as used for the 
fundamental mixer.  These approximations applied to the SHM are that voltages 
across the diodes are shorted for frequencies at or above the fifth LO harmonic.  
The analysis starts with the diode conductance waveform for the APDP, which is 
shown to have only even LO harmonic components [28]. The odd Fourier 
coefficients, g, all equal zero. Referring to Figure 5.31, individual diode currents 
are ID1 and ID2, with total current equal to ID = ID1 + ID2.  The voltage across the 
APDP is VDcos(ωLt).   
The corresponding diode conductances are gD1 and gD2.  Since the diodes 
are in parallel, the total conductance equals gD1 + gD2.   
 

1
1




T
D V
V
S
D
e
I
I
  
 
 
 
     (5.86a) 
+VRF,m
i2
i1
+VLO,n
-45
i4
i3
IF1
IF2
+VLO,n
i1
i6
i7
i8
i3
i2
i4
i5
+VRF,m
IFOUT

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
303 
)1
(
/
2


T
D V
V
S
D
e
I
I
  
 
 
 
     (5.86b) 
T
D V
V
T
S
D
D
D
e
V
I
dV
dI
g




1
1
1
 
 
        
 
     (5.87a) 
T
D V
V
T
S
D
D
D
e
V
I
dV
dI
g
/
1
2
2



 
 
 
        
     (5.87b) 
                                        
ID=ID1+ID2
ID2
VD +
ID1
 
Figure 5.31       Antiparallel diode pair voltage and currents. 
 
 
Since the voltage impressed onto the APDP is sinusoidal, gD1 and gD2 can 
be expanded into the Fourier series of (5.49) with Bessel function coefficients.  
Noting from (5.49) that the modified Bessel function of the first kind, In(x), used 
in the expansion is an even function for n = even, and an odd function for n = odd.  
The total diode conductance gD1 + gD2 is given by (5.88), with x = VD/VT: 
 













,...
6
,4
,2
0
1
2
1
)
cos(
)
(
2
)
(
2
n
n
T
V
V
S
D
D
t
n
x
I
x
I
V
e
I
g
g
T
dc

      (5.88) 
 
The odd order g values equal zero, and the even order coefficients 
become:  
 

x
I
e
V
I
g
n
V
V
T
S
even
n
T
dc
2
,

    
0
,

odd
n
g
 
 
      (5.89) 
 
These conductance values are used in the conversion matrix for the down 
converting APDP SHM, which is given next and developed in the same manner as 
(5.19) for the fundamental diode mixer.  VRF is the input RF voltage, and V2L-R is 
the voltage of the desired IF output.  All the voltage components with frequencies 
above 4fLO - fRF are assumed to be zero, meaning they are shorted across the 
APDP.  The port terminations are G0 to fRF, G1 to fLO - fRF, G2 to 2fLO - fRF, G3 to 
3fLO - fRF, and G4 to 4fLO - fRF.  The odd conductance values g1 and g3 are present in 

304 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
the matrix for clarity, but they are assigned the value zero.  Finally, as with the 
fundamental mixer, parasitic resistances and capacitances are assumed equal to 
zero in this analysis.   
 
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
RF
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
RF
V
V
V
V
V
G
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
I
I
I
I
I














4
3
2
1
4
0
1
2
3
4
1
3
0
1
2
3
2
1
2
0
1
2
3
2
1
1
0
1
4
3
2
1
0
0
4
3
2
*
  (5.90)  
 
The conductance matrix is inverted, forming an impedance matrix with 
elements Rij.  The terminations G1 and G3 do not appear in the resistance matrix, 
as one might expect since g1 = g3 = 0.  Conversion loss is obtained by substituting 
R31 = V2L-R/IRF into (5.41) to get S31.  The resulting conversion loss from fRF to 
2fLO-fRF is given by:  
 




































4
0
4
2
2
2
4
2
4
2
0
3
0
4
2
0
2
0
4
2
4
2
0
2
4
2
2
0
4
0
4
2
0
2
2
2
2
log
20
g
G
G
g
g
G
G
G
G
g
G
G
G
g
G
G
G
G
G
g
g
g
g
g
G
G
G
g
LC
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (5.91) 
 
RF input impedance is obtained by substituting R11 = VRF/IRF into (5.40) 
to get S11, then substituting S11 into (5.43) to get ZRF.   
 








4
4
2
2
2
4
2
3
0
4
2
2
0
4
2
2
4
2
2
0
4
2
2
2
4
2
0
2
0
2
2
g
G
g
g
G
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
g
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
g
ZRF














 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (5.92) 
 
IF output impedance is obtained similarly, by substituting R33 = V2L-R/I2L-
R into (5.40) to get S33, then substituting S33 into (5.45) to get ZIF.    
 








4
0
4
2
2
3
0
4
0
2
0
4
0
2
4
2
2
0
4
0
2
4
4
0
0
2
0
2
2
g
G
G
g
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
g
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
g
ZIF














 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (5.93) 
 
The conductance coefficient values are calculated using the same 
parameters that were used for the fundamental mixer: VD = 0.452 volts peak, VT = 
0.026 volts, and IS = 3x10-6 A, which are used in (5.90) to give: g0 = 0.08, g2 = 
0.071, and g4 = 0.05.  These values are used to obtain conversion loss and port 
impedances for different values of G4.  Equations (5.92) and (5.93) show that RF 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
305 
input impedance ZRF is a function of IF termination, G2; and that IF output 
impedance ZIF is a function of RF termination, G0.  Thus optimal values of G0 and 
G2 can be found such that ZRF = 1/GRF and ZIF = 1/GIF.  Table 5.10 summarizes 
these optimally terminated conversion loss and port impedance values, for G4 
equal short, open, and G0.    
 
Table 5.10 
Subharmonic Mixer Calculated Performance 
4L-R 
Termination 
4L-R Term 
G4
-1 ohms 
 
LC (dB) 
RF Term 
G0
-1 ohms 
IF Term 
G2
-1 ohms 
Open 
106 
3.3 
56 
162 
Broadband 
50 
4.4 
39 
72 
Short 
10-6 
4.3 
27 
27 
 
The resistance, RD, offered to the LO by the APDP equals half that of the 
fundamental mixer, because for the same LO voltage twice the current flows 
during one cycle.  Figure 5.31 shows the total current passing into the APDP, ID, 
equals ID1 + ID2. Using the Fourier-Bessel function expansion of (5.45), and 
recalling that the modified Bessel function of the first kind, In(x), is an odd 
function for n = odd, then total diode current, ID, is given by (5.94) where x = 
VD/VT.  It should be noted that currents for odd-RF/odd-LO and even-RF/even-LO 
circulate around the diodes and do not exit to the connection ports.  In contrast, 
currents for oddRF/evenLO and evenRF/oddLO products pass through the APDP 
and exit the connection ports.   
 






odd
n
n
S
D
D
D
t
n
x
I
I
I
I
I
)
cos(
)
(
4
2
1

         
 
       (5.94)
 
 
The large signal APDP resistance, RD, presented to the LO equals the 
ratio of the voltage to current at the LO fundamental: 
 
 

x
I
I
V
I
V
R
S
D
D
D
D
1
4


 
 
 
 
 
       (5.95)
 
 
 
 
      
                 
 
 
 
Given an APDP in series with a LO voltage source having voltage, VL, 
and internal resistance, Rg, the voltage across the APDP is: 
 
 
D
g
D
L
D
R
R
R
V
V


 
 
 
 
       
      (5.96) 
 
The power delivered to the APDP is: 
 

306 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
)
(
2
1
2
1
2
x
I
I
V
R
V
P
S
D
D
D
D








  
 
 
       (5.97)
 
 
 
 
 
        
The available LO power is related to the diode voltage as: 
 
 
2
2
2
2
,
8
)
(
8
D
g
g
D
D
g
L
LO
Av
R
R
R
R
V
R
V
P



 
 
      
       (5.98) 
 
When PAv,LO is at the right level to make diode resistance RD = Rg, then 
all the available LO power is delivered to the APDP.  As the LO drive power 
varies above or below this level RD no longer will equal Rg, so less power will be 
delivered to the APDP.   Table 5.11 gives calculated values for PD, RD, and PAv,LO 
as VD varies, with IS = 3E-10 amps and VT = 0.026 volts. 
 
Table 5.11 
APDP Diode Resistance, RD, Presented to Fundamental LO as LO Power, PAv,LO, Varies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.32 shows calculated port impedances to RF, LO, and IF, and 
conversion loss for the SHM using an APDP with exponential diodes.  Equations 
(5.95) through (5.98) were used, with diode parameters: VT = 0.026 V, and IS = 3E-
10 A.  The termination to the 4L-R product is open circuit (top), 50 ohms 
(middle), and short circuit (bottom).  For each of these 4L-R termination values, 
the RF and IF ports were optimally terminated so that ZRF = 1/GRF and ZIF = 1/GIF.  
The LO available power, PAv,LO, is mapped to diode voltage, VD, using the curve 
fit relation of (4.103) that agrees closely with the results of Table 5.11.   
 
4
5
3
4
2
4
3
)
10
44
.1(
)
10
95
.1(
)
10
54
.9
(
)
10
78
.8
(
45
.0
LO
LO
LO
LO
D
P
x
P
x
P
x
P
x
V









    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5.99) 
 
 
The results in Figure 5.32 agree with the known fact that SHM APDP 
conversion loss has an inflection point as LO power varies. Also it is noted that 
when the 4L-R voltage is short circuited, the RF and IF port impedances equal 
each other, as is the case with the fundamental mixer with shorted image 2L-R.  
VD (volts pk) 
PD (dBm) 
RD (ohm)  
PAv,LO (dBm) 
0.500 
7.8 
20.8 
8.6 
0.475 
3.5 
50.4 
3.5 
0.450 
-0.8 
122 
0.03 
0.425 
-5.1 
293 
-2.1 
0.4125 
-7.3 
453 
-2.8 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
307 
2

1

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
SHM - Exp Diode -  4L-R Termination = Open Circuit
Gc
RRF
RIF
RLO
PLO
 
2

1

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
SHM - Exp Diode -  4L-R Termination = 50 Ohms
Gc
RRF
RIF
RLO
PLO
 
2

1

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
SHM - Exp Diode -  4L-R Termination = Short Circuit
Gc
RRF
RIF
RLO
PLO
 
Figure 5.32    Calculated Gc & port impedances for subharmonic mixer with exponential APDP.  RF 
and IF are optimally terminated; VL = 0.452 volts peak. 
G0 = 1/39   Opt RF port term 
G2 = 1/72   Opt 2L-R port term 
G4 = 1/50   4L-R port 
G0 = 1/56    Opt RF port term 
G2 = 1/162    Opt 2L-R port term 
G4 = 10-6 
     4L-R port 
G0 = 1/27    Opt RF port term 
G2 = 1/27    Opt 2L-R port term 
G4 = 106 
    4L-R port 

308 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Similarly the lowest conversion loss is obtained with open circuit 4L–R, which is 
also true for the fundamental mixer with open circuit image. Finally, if the 4L–R 
product is terminated in 50 Ohms (or thereabouts), then conversion loss is less 
sensitive to LO power variation, and it is similar to loss when 4L–R is short 
circuited.  
 
Harmonic balance simulations were carried out for the APDP SHM.  The 
circuit is shown in Figure 5.33, and the results are given in Figures 5.34 and 5.35, 
which are organized similarly to Figure 5.21.  The diode parameters are also the 
same, VT = 0.026 V, IS = 3E-6 A, Rs = 0 ohms, and diode capacitance was set to 
zero for comparison with the calculated results.  The RF input is at 11 GHz with -
10 dBm drive, LO input is at 5 GHz with power varying from -2 to +8 dBm, and 
the 2L-R IF output is at 1 GHz.  The 4L-R port termination is varied from open to 
short circuit: 1e6 ohms (open circuit), 50 ohms, and 1e-6 ohms (short circuit).  For 
each of these 4L-R termination values, the port impedances of the RF and IF were 
set to the same optimal values used to compare with the calculated results of 
Figure 5.32. 
 
IND
ID=L1
L=1e15 nH
CAP
ID=C1
C=1000 pF
CAP
ID=C2
C=1000 pF
CAP
ID=C3
C=1000 pF
SDIODE
ID=SD2
LOAD
ID=Z1
Z=RIM Ohm
CAP
ID=C4
C=1000 pF
Xo
Xn
. . .
SWPVAR
ID=SWP1
VarName="Rsd2"
Values={0,5,10}
UnitType=Resistance
Xo
Xn
. . .
SWPVAR
ID=SWP3
VarName="PRF"
Values={-20,-17,-14,-11,-8}
UnitType=Power
Xo
Xn
. . .
SWPVAR
ID=SWP5
VarName="RIM"
Values={0,10,25,50,100,250,500,1000,2500}
UnitType=Resistance
SDIODE
ID=SD1
1
2
SUBCKT
ID=S2
NET="Rm2L_1"
1
2
SUBCKT
ID=S3
NET="LO_5p0"
1
2
SUBCKT
ID=S4
NET="RF_11_SHM1"
1
2
SUBCKT
ID=S1
NET="4LmR_9"
PORT
P=2
Z=RRF Ohm
PORT_PS1
P=3
Z=RLO Ohm
PStart=-2 dBm
PStop=8 dBm
PStep=.25 dB
PORTF
P=1
Z=RIF Ohm
Freq=1 GHz
Pwr=PRF dBm
SHM Dnx
Rsd2=5
PRF=-10
 
 
Figure 5.33       Schematic of harmonic balance simulated Y-mixer SHM with APDP. 
 
S-parameter blocks connect the RF, LO, IF, and 4L-R ports to the APDP.  
They function as filters to pass the desired term and short or open all others.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
309 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.34  Calculated performance for subharmonic mixer with exponential APDP versus 
fundamental LO Power over -2 to +8 dBm, and RF power stepped -20 to -8 dBm.  
Series resistance, Rs = 0 ohms;  4L-R termination: (a) open, (b) 50 ohm, (c) short. Plots 
are for conversion gain, Gc, and port impedances ZRF, ZIF, and ZLO. 
(a)  ZRF=56 ohms 
       ZIF=162 ohms 
       Z4L-R=106 ohms 
(b) ZRF=39 ohms 
      ZIF=72 ohms 
      Z4L-R =50 ohms 
(c) ZRF=27 ohms 
      ZIF=27 ohms 
      Z4L-R =10-6 ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
Ohms 
Ohms 

310 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Figure 5.35 Calculated performance for subharmonic mixer with exponential APDP versus 
fundamental LO Power over -2 to +8 dBm, and RF power stepped -20 to -8 dBm.  
Series resistance, Rs = 5 ohms;  4L-R termination: (a) open, (b) 50 ohm, (c) short. Plots 
are for conversion gain, Gc, and port impedances ZRF, ZIF, and ZLO. 
 
  
(a)  ZRF=56 ohms 
       ZIF=162 ohms 
       Z4L-R=106 ohms 
(b ) ZRF=39 ohms 
       ZIF=72 ohms 
       Z4L-R =50 ohms 
(c)  ZRF=27 ohms 
      ZIF=27 ohms 
      Z4L-R =10-6 ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Ohms 
Conversion gain - dB 
Conversion gain - dB 
Ohms 
Ohms 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
311 
The harmonic balance simulated results in Figure 5.34 agree closely with 
the calculated results in Figure 5.32. As RF signal drive increases, gain 
compresses more quickly for the 4L-R shorted than for it terminated in 50 ohms or 
a short.  It was noted during simulation that varying the termination to the R-L 
port did not change simulated results; however, varying the 3L-R port termination 
caused slight variation in simulated results for lower LO drive levels.  The R-L 
and 3L-R terminations were varied by adjusting values in the S-parameter block 
connecting the RF port to the APDP.  With port termination to 4L-R set to 10-6 
ohms, and RF and IF set to 10 ohms, conversion gain increased 0.5 dB and 
became less sensitive to LO power.   
The results in Figure 5.32 are based on using fixed values for RF and IF 
terminations determined iteratively using (5.92) and (5.93).  Recall that RF port 
impedance ZRF is a function of IF termination, G2; and IF port impedance ZIF is a 
function of RF termination, G0.  This allows one to set ZRF = 1/GRF and ZIF = 1/GIF 
and solve for optimal RF and IF terminations in terms of g0, g2, g4, and G4.  
Equations (5.100) and (5.101) give the optimal RF and IF terminations.    
 













2
2
0
4
2
0
0
4
4
2
2
2
4
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
4
3
0
2
4
0
4
2
0
2
2
0
4
2
0
0
4
,
2
2
g
g
G
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
G
g
g
G
G
opt
RF














     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.100) 
 













2
4
0
4
2
0
0
4
4
2
2
2
4
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
4
3
0
2
4
0
4
2
0
2
2
0
4
2
0
0
4
,
2
2
g
g
G
g
g
G
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
G
g
g
g
G
g
g
G
G
opt
IF














    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.101) 
 
 
It is useful to analyze the two special cases where the 4L-R termination, 
G4, is short circuit or open circuit.  For the short circuit case, we take the limit as 
G4 goes to infinity.  The result is the optimal RF and IF terminations equal each 
other as shown in (5.102).  The resulting optimal conversion loss, Lc,opt is given by 
(5.103).  Figure 5.36 plots values for these equations for various values of LO 
available power.  The same diode parameters are used here as for Figure 5.32. 
   
 
Short circuit the 4L-R port: 
 
 
2
2
2
0
,
,
g
g
G
G
opt
RF
opt
IF



 
                
 
     (5.102) 
 
 
2
2
2
2
0
0
,
g
g
g
g
L
opt
c



 
 
 
      
       
     (5.103) 
 

312 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
           
2

1

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
SHM - Exp Diode -  4L-R Termination = Short Circuit
Gc_opt
RRF_opt
RIF_opt
RLO
PLO
 
Figure 5.36     Calculated optimal conversion gain, Gc, (dB) and optimal port terminations (ohms) for 
a SHM with exponential APDP.  The 4L-R termination is short circuit.  
 
For the open circuit 4L-R termination case, the limit is taken as G4 goes 
to zero, resulting in (5.104) – (5.105).   
 
 
Open circuit the 4L-R port: 
 
 









2
2
2
0
0
2
4
0
3
0
4
0
2
2
2
4
2
0
2
2
2
0
0
,
2
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
opt
RF








  (5.104) 









2
4
2
0
0
2
4
0
3
0
4
0
2
2
2
4
2
0
2
2
2
0
0
,
2
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
G
opt
IF








  (5.105) 
 












2
2
4
0
2
0
4
0
0
4
0
2
4
2
2
0
2
2
4
0
2
0
4
0
2
4
0
2
2
2
0
0
2
4
2
2
2
0
4
0
,
2
2
2
2
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
L opt
c















   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.106) 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
313 
                
2

1

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
SHM - Exp Diode -  4L-R Termination = Open Circuit
Gc_opt
RRF_opt
RIF_opt
RLO
PLO
 
Figure 5.37    Calculated optimal conversion gain, Gc, (dB) and optimal port terminations (ohms) for a 
SHM with exponential APDP.  The 4L-R termination is open circuit. 
 
 
Figures 5.36 and 5.37 show the optimal port terminations, respectively, 
for the 4L-R port short and open circuited, versus LO power for a single APDP.  
From plots like these one can estimate conversion loss and optimal port matches 
at a given LO power for the APDP.  The diode parameters are: VT = 0.026 V, IS = 
3E-6 A.   
 
 
5.7 BALANCED DIODE CIRCUITS 
 
So far this chapter has discussed the theory of diode mixers in terms of a single 
diode, or a single APDP for the subharmonic mixer.  By combining multiple 
diodes in a balanced network, large improvements in IM suppression and port-to-
port isolation can be achieved by cancellation.  Many types of balanced networks 
exist that comprise quadrature couplers, 180 degree baluns, in-phase power 
combiners, and various types of active circuits.  The following discussion 
addresses the conventional forms of balanced mixers.    
 
 
5.7.1 Simplified Analysis 
 
In order to compare the various types of balanced circuits it is useful to have a 
means of quickly identifying which mixing products are directed to the RF, LO, 
and IF ports.  Equation (5.107) describes the diode current, id(t), as the product of 

314 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
the conductance and RF voltage waveforms, each represented by their Fourier 
series.  Each diode in the balanced mixer is assigned a double Fourier series with 
the respective phase angles based on the network.  The simplifying assumptions 
are that the diodes are identical, and the network has perfect amplitude and phase 
balance.  The Fourier series are combined and reduced to (5.109), with inm 
representing the current component, and nθ+mφ the relative phase angle.   
 











n
m
t
jm
m
t
jn
n
d
RF
LO
e
v
e
g
t
i
)
(
)
(
)
(




 
 
     (5.107) 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(




m
n
j
m
t
m
n
m
n
n
d
e
e
v
g
t
i
RF
LO











 
       
     (5.108) 
  
)
(
)
(
)
(




m
n
j
t
m
n
m
nm
n
d
e
e
i
t
i
RF
LO











  
       
     (5.109) 
 
 
5.7.2 Single Ended 
 
The single-ended diode mixer depicted in Figure 5.38 comprises a single diode 
coupled through an embedding network to the RF, LO and IF ports.  Isolation 
between ports is obtained through filtering, so the RF, LO, and IF frequencies 
cannot overlap each other.  The embedding network provides impedance 
matching, and the diode is grounded to provide a current return path for the RF, 
LO, and IF.  A series diode version is also possible but the filtering is more 
complex.  The diode current is described by (5.109). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.38       Single ended mixer. 
 
 
5.7.3 Singly Balanced 
 
A singly balanced mixer can be viewed as a pair of single ended mixers connected 
together with a balun or a quadrature coupler. The LO or RF signals are applied to 
the two diodes with a 180 or 90 degree phase difference.  The resulting diode IF 
currents combine at the IF port, adding constructively for the desired product and 
LO
RF
LPF
HPF
IF
BPF

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
315 
cancelling for some of the others.  Two single-ended mixers can be combined to 
form a singly balanced mixer, as in Figure 5.39.  The diode voltage is defined as 
positive at the anode and negative at the cathode.   The LO input is applied to a 
balun that in turn provides current to diodes D1 and D2, turning them on and off 
together.  The RF current is defined as entering the IF node, so the RF voltage is 
in phase with D1 voltage, and 180 out of phase with the D2 voltage.  And the IF 
output current, IIF, is defined as exiting the IF node, so it is IIF = i2 - i1.   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.39       Singly balanced mixer. 
 
The diode currents are calculated using the same approach as for the 
single ended mixer. For diode D1, the LO and RF are applied in phase with diode 
current i1, so θ=φ=0.  Diode current, i1 is: 
 



)
(
)
(
1
t
jm
m
t
jn
n
RF
LO
e
v
e
g
i


 
        
 
    



t
m
n
nm
RF
LO
e
i
i
)
(
1


 
 
 
 
    (5.110)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
For diode D2, the LO is applied in phase, but the RF is applied with 180 
degree relative phase to diode current i2, so θ=0 and φ=π. Diode current, i2 is: 
 










m
t
jm
m
n
t
jn
n
RF
LO
e
v
e
g
i
)
(
)
(
2



 
        
 
      










m
jm
t
m
n
m
n
n
e
e
v
g
i
RF
LO



)
(
2
    
 
 
 











m
m
t
m
n
nm
n
RF
LO
e
i
i
)1
(
)
(
2


 
 
     (5.111)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Referring to the current polarities in Figure 5.39, the IF current is: 
i2
D1
i1
LO
RF
ILO
ILO
IRF
D2
LPF
HPF
IF
IIF

316 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
















m
m
t
RF
m
LO
n
nm
n
IF
e
i
i
i
I
)1
(
1
)
(
1
2


               (5.112a) 


m
nm
nm
i
i
)1
(
1
'



    
 
 
     
   (5.112b) 
 
Equation (5.112a) shows the IF current is zero for even RF harmonics, 
and nonzero for odd RF harmonics.  Equation (5.112a) can be reduced to the 
shorthand notation of (5.112b) that gives only the argument of the Fourier series 
and shows cancellation for RF harmonics.  It is shown that mixing products with 
even RF harmonics are cancelled by this circuit.  Notice this is true for both odd 
and even LO harmonics, so this circuit supports both fundamental and 
subharmonic mixing.  In addition to suppressing half the possible IM products, 
namely those with even RF harmonics, isolation is obtained between the LO port 
and the RF and IF ports without filtering, since the RF and IF are connected at a 
virtual ground point relative to the LO port.  This allows the LO frequency range 
to overlap the RF and IF bands, which is important in many applications.  The 
isolation can be very wide band, limited by the bandwidth of the LO balun.  
However, the RF and IF ground returns for the singly balanced mixer can be 
challenging to implement.  They are provided schematically for the mixer of 
Figure 5.39 by the grounded center tap of the LO balun, which is at ground 
potential to the LO.  The challenge is to implement the RF and IF ground returns 
in a way that does not limit the LO bandwidth or add losses in the LO circuit.   
Thus, the singly balanced mixer with a 180 degree balun has four 
improvements over single-ended: cancellation of half the mixing products 
produced; LO-RF and LO-IF isolation exists for overlapping frequencies; the LO 
current return path does not depend on grounding the diodes; and AM noise is 
suppressed by circuit balance, which is easily shown using the analysis procedure 
outlined earlier and applying the RF voltage to the LO port to represent noise as a 
single CW signal.  Finally, it should be mentioned that the RF and LO ports can 
be reversed, with the result that even LO harmonics are cancelled, and wideband 
RF-LO and RF-IF isolation is provided, while LO-IF isolation is only obtained by 
filtering.   
Another singly balanced circuit has the RF and LO connected to the two 
diodes using a quadrature hybrid as in Figure 5.40.  One side of each diode 
connects to a coupler port, and the other side of the diodes connect to the IF 
output port.  The RF and LO connect to the remaining two coupler ports.  Two 
inductors, L, form low-pass filters to provide the IF ground return; capacitor, C, 
forms a high-pass filter to provide RF and LO ground returns.  In this circuit both 
RF and LO harmonics are suppressed, and RF and LO VSWR is relatively good 
because signals reflected back from the diodes are directed to the opposite port. 
However, the price for the good VSWR is poor RF to LO isolation.  
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
317 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.40      Singly balanced quadrature mixer. 
 
 
The following analysis shows that the IF output includes the fL- fR and fR -
fL difference products, while the fL + fR sum product is cancelled.  Results are 
summarized in Table 5.12.   It should be emphasized that this mixer provides no 
significant IM rejection.  
 
 
)
(
2
1
t
jm
n
m
t
jn
m
n
RF
LO
e
e
v
g
i
















 
 
  
    
 











m
t
m
n
j
n
nm
n
RF
LO
e
j
i
i
)
(
1


  
 
 
     (5.113)   
)
2
(
)
(
2

















t
jm
m
t
jn
m
n
n
RF
LO
e
e
v
g
i
 
 
     
 













m
t
m
n
j
m
n
nm
n
RF
LO
e
j
i
i
)
(
2
1


 
 
     (5.114) 



















m
t
m
n
j
m
n
n
nm
n
IF
RF
LO
e
j
j
i
i
i
i
)
(
2
1
1


    (5.115a) 




m
n
n
nm
nm
j
j
i
i
1
'




 
 
 
 
   (5.115b) 
 
 
 
 
VRF
RRF
IRF
VLO
RLO
ILO
RIF1
I1
I2
D1
D2
0°
-90°
C
L
L

318 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Table 5.12  
Quadrature Mixer Analysis Results 
n 
m 
iIF 
Description 
0 
1 
1-j 
Poor RF to IF isolation 
1 
0 
1-j 
Poor LO to IF isolation 
1 
1 
0 
fL+fR sum product cancels at IF output 
1 
-1 
-2j 
fL-fR IF with high-side LO is present at IF output 
-1 
1 
2j 
fR-fL IF with low-side LO is present at IF output 
 
 
 
 
The APDP SHM can be considered as a kind of singly balanced mixer 
due to its property of cancellation of certain mixing products through the action of 
the two reverse connected diodes, without a balun.  The shunt APDP SHM of 
Figure 5.28 is analyzed as follows, with m referring to RF harmonics, and n to 
harmonics of the LO fundamental.  Equation (5.118) shows mixing products at the 
IF are present for n+m=odd, which includes the desired 2fLO±fRF product.  And 
mixing products cancel for n+m=even, which includes the undesired fLO±fRF, and 
the virtual 2fLO.   
 
 











m
m
n
nm
n
i
i
)1
(
1
  
 
 
 
     (5.116)   









m
nm
n
i
i2
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.117) 



















m
t
m
n
j
m
n
nm
n
IF
RF
LO
e
i
i
i
i
)
(
2
1
1
1


 
   (5.118a) 



1
1
'



m
n
nm
nm
i
i
  
 
 
 
   (5.118b) 
   
 
The APDP image rejection mixer of Figure 5.29 is similarly analyzed in 
(5.119) through (5.126).  Equation (5.125b) shows mixing products present at IF1 
include 2fLO ± fRF, while fRF -2fLO are cancelled.  And (5.126b) shows the opposite; 
(i.e., mixing products present at IF2 include fRF - 2fLO, while 2fLO ± fRF are 
cancelled).  Equations (5.125b) and (5.126b) also show 2fLO and 2fRF cancel at IF1 
and IF2, but there is only about 6 dB isolation to fundamental fLO and fRF. 
 











m
jm
jn
t
m
n
j
m
n
n
e
e
e
v
g
i
RF
LO




)
4
/
(
)
(
1
 
    
    (5.119)  



m
n
m
nm
n
j
i
i
1
1
2
1
1























  
 
 
    (5.120) 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
319 
)
4
/
(
)
(
2















jn
t
m
n
j
m
n
m
n
e
e
v
g
i
RF
LO
  
 
    (5.121) 




n
n
m
nm
n
j
i
i























1
2
1
1
2
  
 
 
    (5.122) 


m
m
nm
n
i
i
1
3










   
 
 
 
    (5.123) 


n
m
nm
n
i
i
1
4










  
 
 
 
 
    (5.124) 
 
4
3
2
1
1
ji
ji
i
i
iIF




   
 
 
 
  (5.125a) 
 








n
m
n
nm
j
j
i
1
1
1
2
1
1
'


























 
 
  (5.125b) 
 
4
3
2
1
2
i
i
ji
ji
iIF





 
  
 
 
  (5.126a) 
 
 








n
m
n
nm
j
j
i
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
'



























 
 
  (5.126b) 
 
 
 
5.7.4 Doubly Balanced  
 
The doubly balanced ring and star mixers of Figure 5.41 can be considered as the 
combination of two singly balanced mixers.  The diodes are driven differentially 
by both LO and RF signal sources, using baluns to provide the required phase 
shifts. If the diodes have low parasitic capacitances, then bandwidth is limited by 
the baluns.  Since the size of a passive balun is usually proportional to 
wavelength, at lower frequencies monolithic mixers with active baluns are 
normally used due to their smaller size.  Passive distributed and semi-lumped 
circuit baluns are also used over a wide range of frequencies and in various 
technologies.   
Ideal doubly balanced mixers produce IF output currents that involve 
mixing between only odd RF and odd LO harmonics; thus, they suppress three 
quarters of the possible IM products.  They also offer improved spurious 
suppression over singly balanced mixers by dividing the RF power between more 

320 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
D1
i1
D2
i2
IF
D4
D3
i3
i4
RF
RF
LO
LO
IIF
+VLO
+VLO
-VLO
-VLO
+VRF
+VRF
-VRF
-VRF
D2
i2
D3
i3
D4
i4
D1
i1
LO
RF
IF
+VLO
+VRF
IIF
-VRF
-VLO
diodes, reducing the perturbation of the conductance waveform.  The ratio of RF 
to LO voltage across each diode largely governs the extent to which the RF signal 
can perturb the conduction waveform.  This ratio remains the same by going from 
two diodes of the singly balanced mixer to four diodes for doubly balanced.  But 
the LO voltage must increase to pump the extra diodes, so overall the ratio is 
reduced, so IM distortion is also reduced.  In addition, isolation between the RF, 
LO, and IF ports is provided by circuit balance, so the RF, IF, and LO frequency 
ranges can overlap each other.  However, in many practical microwave doubly 
balanced mixers the RF and IF bandwidths do not overlap due to the details of the 
RF balun construction.  Normally the high end of the IF bandwidth is limited by 
series inductance.  Use of the ring doubly balanced mixer is more widespread than 
the star mixer; however, the star mixer has some important features highlighted in 
Chapter 6.  In the star mixer schematic of Figure 5.41(b), the two RF and LO 
ports, respectively, connect together.   
 
As discussed earlier, a challenge with singly balanced mixers is to 
simultaneously provide ground returns for the RF, LO, and IF circuits, especially 
when their frequencies overlap.  The doubly balanced circuit overcomes this by 
providing RF, LO, and IF ground return paths through the diodes that largely do 
not affect each other.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 5.41    The doubly balanced mixer can be viewed as the combination of two singly balanced 
mixers in the (a) ring or (b) star configurations. 
 
For example, in the ring doubly balanced mixer of Figure 5.41(a), LO 
current flows into D1 or D3, and respectively returns through D2 or D4.  RF current 
flows into D1 and D2, and returns through D3 and D4.  IF currents originate in the 
four diodes and flow to the RF balun, where they collect at the IF port and go to 
ground through the IF load.  The IF ground return is through the grounded center 
tap of the LO balun, where the IF current enters and flows to the four diodes 
through the LO balun.  The IF ground return for the singly balanced mixer is also 
through the grounded LO balun center tap, so while the doubly balance mixer 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
321 
improves the RF ground return circuit, the IF circuit performance is largely the 
same.  Finally, similarly to the singly balanced mixer, the three ports of the doubly 
balanced diode mixer are all interchangeable for the RF, LO, and IF.  The 
limitation is each port must have the requisite frequency coverage, and changes in 
performance should be expected;  (e.g., IM suppression), depending on the balun 
implementations. 
Observing the phase relationships of the ring mixer in Figure 5.40(a), the 
current components in each diode are: 
 













m
t
m
n
m
nm
n
RF
LO
e
i
i


)1
(
1
 
 
 
     (5.127) 
 










m
t
m
n
nm
n
RF
LO
e
i
i
)
(
2


 
 
 
 
 













m
t
m
n
n
nm
n
RF
LO
e
i
i


)1
(
3
 












m
t
m
n
n
m
nm
n
RF
LO
e
i
i
)
(
4
)1
(


 
 
The resulting IF and RF output currents for the ring mixer are:      





















m
t
m
n
m
n
nm
n
IF
RF
LO
e
i
i
i
i
i
I
)
(
4
3
2
1
)1
(
1
1
)1
(


    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.128) 






















m
t
m
n
m
n
nm
n
RF
RF
LO
e
i
i
i
i
i
I
)
(
4
3
2
1
)1
(
1
1
)1
(


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (5.129)
 
 
 
 
Equation (5.128) shows that the IF port supports only odd RF and odd 
LO harmonics, and products with all other RF and LO harmonics are cancelled.   
Equation (5.129) shows the RF port supports odd RF and even LO harmonics, and 
products with all other RF and LO harmonics are cancelled.  Thus the 2fLO ± fRF 
image product generated by the mixer will be present at the RF port but 
suppressed at the IF port.  And the RF fundamental incident at the RF port is also 
supported, because it is 0fLO ± fRF, where zero functions as an even number.  This 
also holds for the star mixer.  
 
 
 
 

322 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
5.7.5 Triply Balanced 
 
The triply balanced mixer in Figure 5.42(a) for ring, and 5.41(b) for star, can be 
thought of as the combination of two doubly balanced mixers.  The rectangles 
represent baluns at the three ports. The benefits of the triply balanced circuit are 
additional cancellation of IM products; overlapping frequency isolation between 
the RF, LO, and IF ports; and that the RF, LO, and IF current return paths are all 
differential and through the diodes.  The overall effect is that triply balanced 
mixers can have overlapping multi-octave RF, LO, and IF frequency coverage.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  Ring Version 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (b) Star Version 
Figure 5.42       Triply balanced mixer circuits. 
 
 
The triply balanced mixer, also known as the doubly doubly balanced 
mixer, allows all three circuits to have overlapping frequencies, but at the cost of 
increased complexity. The IF output also ideally produces IM products 
comprising only odd RF and odd LO harmonics, but due to the third balun triply 
balanced mixers in general have improved second order IM suppression compared 
II
IL 
IR 
II
IL 
IR 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
323 
to doubly balanced mixers. In contrast to doubly balanced mixers, the differential 
IF port of the triply balanced mixer substantially reduces the ground return 
inductance that limits the upper end of the IF frequency range for doubly balanced 
mixers.  Thus triply balanced mixers are available with multi-octave overlapping 
RF, LO, and IF frequency ranges.   
 
 
5.7.6 Balanced Mixers and the Conversion Matrix for a Single Diode 
 
The obvious question arises as to how the conversion matrix analysis for a single 
diode relates to mixers with multiple diodes. An exhaustive analysis and 
explanation is beyond the scope of this book.  For a detailed treatment the reader 
is directed to the literature.  On the other hand, some useful relationships do exist 
that are useful for an overall understanding and for design purposes; one relates to 
port impedance, and the other relates to mixing product terminations.  For diode 
impedances, taking the doubly balanced mixer of Figure 5.41 as an example, we 
note that for both the LO and RF circuits, current splits between two parallel 
branches, with each branch having two series diodes.  Thus the impedance of the 
four diodes should approximately equal that of a single diode, assuming zero 
transmission line length between them, perfect transformer balance, and all four 
diodes being identical.  In contrast, the IF current flows through all four diodes in 
parallel, so it is a reasonable approximation that the cumulative IF impedance of 
the four diodes should approximately equal one quarter that of a single diode.  
And for translating the cumulative RF, LO, and IF diode impedance to the 
respective ports, the transformer impedance ratio must be taken into account. 
The second point relates to terminations to different mixing products.  If 
we want to reactively terminate the 2fLO-fRF image product, the termination is most 
effective at the RF port.  Similarly, if we want to reactively terminate the sum 
fLO+fRF product, then the reactive termination is placed at the IF port.  This is 
because the doubly balanced mixer directs these currents to these ports.  For 
example, in the doubly balanced mixer of Figure 5.41, recall that odd fLO ± oddfRF 
currents exit the IF port, and even fLO ± oddfRF products exit the RF port.  
Additionally, oddfLO ± evenfRF products exit the LO port, and the evenfLO ± evenfRF 
products circulate around the diode ring.     
 
 
5.8 MIXER CIRCUIT SYNTHESIS 
 
This section describes a synthesis procedure to obtain conjugate match at the RF 
and IF ports using standard two-port network theory [29].  This is due to the 
mathematical similarity between the conversion matrix for a linear time-varying 
mixer, and the admittance matrix of the conventional linear time-invariant two-
port network.  The only difference is the frequencies at the nodes of the 
conversion matrix are different from each other, in contrast to the linear time-

324 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
invariant two-port network, but this is accounted for in the proposed procedure.  
Ports 1 and 2, respectively, are defined as the RF and IF ports.  The RF and IF 
voltages, respectively, are v1(t) and v2(t), given as:   
 
 
)
(
)
(
1
1
1
1




t
V
t
v
   
 
 
 
     (5.130) 
)
(
)
(
2
2
2
2





t
V
t
v
 
 
 
 
       
     (5.131) 
 
 
The LO frequency, Δω, equals the difference between the IF frequency, 
ω2, and the RF frequency, ω1.   
 
1
2






  
 
 
 
 
     (5.132) 
 
The S-parameters for the network are given as: 
 
11
11
11


S
S
  
 
 
 
 
     (5.133) 
22
22
22


S
S
   
 
 
 
 
     (5.134) 

t
S
S






21
21
21
   
 
 
 
     (5.135) 

t
S
S






21
12
12
  
 
 
 
     (5.136) 
 
Since the numerator and denominator for S11 and S22 represent waves 
having the same frequency, S11 and S22 are time invariant.  In contrast, the 
numerator and denominator for S21 and S12 have different frequencies, so S21 and 
S12 are time variant.  However, the source and load reflection coefficients for 
conjugate match contain only the product S21S12 for which the time variant 
components cancel.  Thus the conjugate RF source and IF load port reflection 
coefficients are time invariant and given as: 
 
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
4
C
C
B
B
S




  
 
 
     
     (5.137) 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
C
C
B
B
L




  
 
   
  
     (5.138) 
2
2
22
2
11
1
1





S
S
B
  
 
 
 
     (5.139) 
2
2
11
2
22
2
1





S
S
B
 
 
 
 
     (5.140) 




22
11
1
S
S
C
  
 
 
 
 
     (5.141) 




11
22
2
S
S
C
  
 
 
 
 
     (5.142) 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
325 
12
21
22
11
S
S
S
S



 
 
 
 
 
     (5.143) 
 
Let’s consider three cases for frequency conversion: (1) frequency 
difference with low side LO; (2) frequency difference with high side LO; (3) 
frequency sum.  The three cases are represented by the equations:    
 
 
LO
RF
IF
f
f
f


                
 
 
 
 
     (5.144)     
RF
LO
IF
f
f
f


                                                                                  (5.145)   
RF
LO
IF
f
f
f


                                                                                   (5.146)   
 
 
The application of each case is discussed next, starting with low side LO. 
The output voltage of a mixer is proportional to the multiplication of input RF 
voltage and the conduction waveform operating at the LO frequency according to 
(5.147).  For low side LO, the output voltage is given by (5.148), and the forward 
transmission coefficient is given by the ratio of output to input voltages 
represented by (5.156). 
 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
1
1
1
2









t
V
t
G
t
v
LO
LO
LO
 
 
     (5.147)   
 
]
)
[(
)
(
1
1
1
21
2
LO
LO t
V
K
t
v









    
 
     (5.148)   
 
]
[(
)
(
21
21
LO
LOt
K
t
S






 
 
 
 
     (5.149)       
 
 
Similarly, the reverse transmission coefficient is determined to be:  
 
 
 
]
[(
)
(
12
12
LO
LOt
K
t
S





                   
 
 
     (5.150)   
 
 
Hence the product of (5.147) and (5.150) is in agreement with the 
assumption of time invariance discussed previously, since the time variant phase 
angles cancel with each other. Similarly for the sum case, (5.146) is equivalent to 
(5.144), if one swaps the subscripts RF and IF, so the same the set of equations is 
applicable. And for the high side LO case, (5.145), the same result is obtained but 
the proof is a bit more involved.  It can be shown that the forward and reverse 
coefficients, defined by (5.151) and (5.152) are time dependent.  
 
 
 


1
1
21
21
2
)
2
(
)
(









LO
LO
t
K
t
S
  
       
     (5.151)   
 
]
2
)
2
[(
)
(
2
2
12
12









LO
LO
t
K
t
S
 
      
     (5.152)   
 
 
The authors proposed a change in the phase of transmission variables to 
make it possible to use a similar set of equations, resulting in a time independent 
product of forward and reverse transmission coefficients. These modified 

326 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
equations are in (5.153) and (5.154), whose product in (5.155) provides a time 
independent product. 
 
 
'
2
1
'.
1
21
21



S
S
 
 
 
 
 
     (5.153)  
 
'
2
1
'
2
12
12




S
S
       
 
 
 
     (5.154)   
 
0
'
'*
12
21
12
21


K
K
S
S
 
 
 
 
     (5.155)   
 
Where the phases are defined by the following equations. 
 
 
1
1
1'





t
 
 
2
2
2'





t
 
 
 
These phase changes affect the parameters C1, C2, and  as described in 
(5.156), (5.157) and (5.158). Use of those equations in place of (5.141), (5.142) 
and (5.143) allows determination of conjugate matched impedances at both input 
and output ports.  
 
       
 
 
 
 
22
11
1
S
S
C



 
      
 
 
 
     (5.156)   
11
22
2
S
S
C




           
 
 
                   (5.157)    
12
*
21
*
22
11
'
'
S
S
S
S



                            
 
     (5.158)        
 
 
5.9 SUMMARY 
 
This chapter introduced the basic theory for mixing. Employing simple models for 
the conversion process, the analysis of conversion gain, port impedances, inter-
modulation, and other parameters were introduced. Simple linear and nonlinear 
algebraic relations between voltage and current resulted in a series of plots 
showing how varying image and sum terminations, as well as LO drive power, 
affect the frequency conversion process. These results were validated using 
nonlinear simulation, highlighting the accuracy of the basic theory.  The same 
approach was applied to subharmonic mixing.  The concepts introduced in this 
chapter for diode mixers are extended to bipolar and FET devices in subsequent 
chapters.   
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
327 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Henry C. Torrey and Charles A. Whitmer, “Crystal Rectifiers,” McGraw-
Hill, 1948. 
[2] 
Mark R. Barber, “Noise Figure and Conversion Loss of the Schottky 
Barrier Mixer Diode,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume MTT-15, November 1967, pp. 629-635.  
[3] 
Adel A. M. Saleh, Theory of Resistive Mixers, The M.I.T. Press, Research 
Monograph #64, 1971, Cambridge, MA, ISBN 0262190931.  
[4] 
Shunichiro Egami, “Nonlinear, Linear Analysis and Computer-Aided 
Design of Resistive Mixers,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume MTT-22, March 1973, pp. 270-275. 
[5] 
Daniel N. Held, Anthony R. Kerr, “Conversion Loss and Noise of 
Microwave and Millimter-Wave Mixers: Part 1 – Theory,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-26, February 1978, pp. 49-55. 
[6] 
W. R. Bennett, “New Results in the Calculation of Intermodulation 
Products,” Bell System Technical Journal, 1933, pp. 228-243.  
[7] 
D. G. Tucker, “Intermodulation Distortion in Rectifier Modulators,” 
Wireless Engineer, June 1954, pp. 145-152.   
[8] 
William R. Gretsch, “The Spectrum of Intermodulation Generated in a 
Semiconductor Diode Junction,” Proc. of the IEEE, Volume 54, No. 1, November 
1966.   
[9] 
Bert C. Henderson, “Reliably Predict Mixer IM Suppression,” Microwaves 
and RF, November 1983, Volume 22, No. 11. 
[10] Dror Regev, “Characterization of Spurious-Response Suppression in 
Double-Balanced Mixers,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume MTT-38, No. 2, February 1990, pp. 123-128. 
[11] Stephen A. Maas, “Two-Tone Intermodulation in Diode Mixers,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-35, No. 3, 
March 1987, pp. 307-314. 
[12] Stephen A. Maas, Nonlinear Microwave and RF Circuits, Second Edition, 
Artech House, 2003, ISBN 1-58053-484-8. 
[13] H.P. Walker, “Sources of Intermodulation in Diode-Ring Mixers,” The 
Radio and Electronics Engineer, Vol. 46, No. 5, May 1976, pp. 247-255.   
[14] L. C. Peterson and F. B. Llewellyn, “The Performance and Measurement of 
Mixers in Terms of Linear-Network Theory,” Proc. IRE, Volume 33, July 1945, 
pp. 458-476.   
[15] Marion E. Hines, “Inherent Signal Losses in Resistive-Diode Mixers,” 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-29, 
April 1981, pp. 281-292. 
[16] Inder Bahl, Microwave Solid State Circuit Design, Second Edition, Wiley 
Interscience, 2003, ISBN 0-471-20755-1.      
[17] Marek T. Faber, Wojciech K. Gwarek, “Nonlinear-Linear Analysis of 
Microwave Mixer with Any Number of Diodes,” IEEE Transactions on 

328 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-28, November 1980, pp. 1174-
1181. 
[18] Alan Podell, private correspondence regarding D.G. Tucker (Ref 7). 
[19] F. Marki, C. Marki, T3 Primer, A Mixer for the 21st Century, Marki 
Microwave, Inc., 215 Vineyard Court, Morgan Hill, CA 95037.  
[20] D.L. Cheadle, “Selecting Mixers for Best Intermod Performance,” 
MicroWaves, Volume 12, Nos. 11 and 12, November and December, 1973, pp. 
48-54, pp. 58-62.   
[21] M. V. Schneider, W. W. Snell, “Harmonically Pumped Stripline Down-
Converter,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 
MTT-23, No. 3, March 1975. 
[22] A. R. Kerr, “Noise and Loss in Balanced and Subharmonically Pumped 
Mixers: Part I,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume MTT-27, No. 12, December 1979. 
[23] K. Itoh, M. Shimozawa, “Fundamental Limitations of Conversion Loss and 
Output Power on an Even Harmonic Mixer with Junction Capacitance,” 2001 
IEEE MTT-S Digest, pp. 1333-1336. 
[24] B. Thomas, A. Maestrini, D. Matheson, I. Mehdi, P. de Maagt, “Design of 
an 874 GHz Biasable Sub-Harmonic Mixer Based on MMIC Membrane Planar 
Schottky Diodes,” 33rd International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter and 
Terahertz Waves, IRMMW-THz, Sept 2008. 
[25] Kenji Itoh, Akio Iida, Yoshinobu Sasaki, Shuji Urasaki, “A 40GHz Band 
Monolithic Even Harmonic Mixer with an Antiparallel Diode Pair,” 1991 IEEE 
MTT-S Digest. 
[26] H. Okazaki, Y. Yamaguchi, “Wide-Band SSB Subharmonically Pumped 
Mixer MMIC,” IEEE 1997 MTT-S Digest, pp. 1035-1038. 
[27] J. L. Merenda, D. Neuf, P. Piro, “4 To 40 GHz Even Harmonic Schottky 
Mixer,” 1988 IEEE MTT-S Digest, pp. 695-698. 
[28] M. Cohn, J.E. Degenford, and B.A. Newman, “Harmonic Mixing With an 
Antiparallel Diode Pair,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume 23, No. 8, August 1975, pp. 667-673.   
[29] Y.H. Liew, J. Joe, “RF and IF Ports Matching Circuit Synthesis for a 
Simultaneous Conjugate-Matched Mixer Using Quasi-Linear Analysis,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 50, No. 9, 
September 2002, pp. 2056-2062. 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
329 
V1
'
RIF
Cj0
LD
RS
V2
'
V3
'
IIF
RL
APPENDIX 5A 
 PARASITIC LOSSES IN DIODE MIXERS 
 
This discussion relates to the circuits of Figure 5.10.  Losses due to diode series 
resistance and junction capacitance have been approximated by considering the 
RF input and IF output circuits separately.  The insertion loss between RF 
generator and the diode’s RF port input resistance, RRF, is derived first.  The 
insertion loss between the IF equivalent current source and the IF load, RL, is 
derived second.  Both losses are then combined to obtain the total loss.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
RF Input  
 
                  (b)    IF Output 
Figure 5A.1      RF input and IF output equivalent circuits. 
 
5A1 RF Losses 
 
 
Given the RF input circuit of Figure 5A.1(a), the available RF input power is:  
 
 
g
g
g
g
avail
RFgen
R
V
R
I
P
8
8
2
2
,


 
 
 
         
      (5A.1) 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
The node voltages V1, V2, and V3 are defined in Figure 5A.1(a), and 
power delivered to diode internal resistance, RRF is: 
 
 
RF
RFdiode
R
V
P
1
2
2
3







  
 
 
         
      (5A.2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
Voltage V3 is determined by taking the admittance matrix for the RF 
input circuit: 
Rg
Ig
V1
RRF
Cj0
LD
RS
V2
V3

330 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
3
2
1
3
2
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
I
I
I
V
V
V
C
j
R
R
R
R
L
j
R
L
j
L
j
L
j
R
j
RF
RF
s
s
s
D
RF
s
D
RF
D
RF
D
RF
g














    (5A.3) 
 
 
With the currents defined as 
 
 
 
0
0
3
2
1



I
I
I
I
g
       
 
 
 
The admittance matrix is inverted and the resulting |Z31| term is:   
 








2
2
0
2
2
0
31
1
RF
s
g
j
RF
D
RF
j
D
RF
s
g
RF
g
R
R
C
R
L
C
L
R
R
R
R
R
Z









(5A.4)
 
         
 
 
Voltage V3 can now be obtained as: 
 
 
g
g
g
R
V
Z
I
Z
V
31
31
3


  
 
 
 
      (5A.5) 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
Taking insertion loss to be the reciprocal of available gain, and by 
combining (5A.1), (5A.2), and (5A.5), then insertion loss becomes: 
 
 
2
31
,
4 Z
R
R
P
P
L
g
RF
RFdiode
avail
RFgen
RF


 
 
 
 
      (5A.6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
Combining (5A.4) and (5A.6) gives insertion loss to the RF input circuit: 
 








g
RF
RF
s
g
j
RF
D
j
D
RF
RF
s
g
RF
R
R
R
R
C
R
L
C
L
R
R
R
L
4
1
2
2
0
2
0
2









(5A.7)
 
        
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
331 
5A2 IF Losses 
 
 
 
Insertion loss for the IF circuit, LIF, is determined using the same 
approach.  Given the IF input circuit of Figure 5A.1(b), available IF power is:  
 
 
IF
IF
IF
IF
avail
IFout
R
V
R
I
P
8
8
2
2
,


 
 
 
 
      (5A.8) 
 
 
 
The node voltages V1’, V2’, and V3’ are defined in Figure 5A.1(b), and 
power delivered to load resistance, RL is: 
 
 
L
Loaf
R
V
P
1
2
2
3 






 
 
 
 
 
      (5A.9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
V3’ is determined by taking the admittance matrix for the IF output circuit: 
 
 
'
'
'
'
'
'
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
3
2
1
3
2
1
0
I
I
I
V
V
V
L
j
R
L
j
L
j
L
j
R
R
R
C
j
R
R
D
IF
L
D
IF
D
IF
D
IF
s
s
s
j
IF
IF
s














     (5A.10)              
 
 
The admittance matrix is inverted and the resulting |Z31’| term is:   
 








2
2
0
2
2
0
31
1
'
IF
s
L
j
IF
D
IF
j
D
IF
s
L
IF
g
R
R
C
R
L
C
L
R
R
R
R
R
Z









(5A.11) 
 
Voltage V3’ can now be obtained as: 
 
 
IF
IF
IF
R
V
Z
I
Z
V
'
'
'
31
31
3


 
 
 
 
    (5A.12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
Taking insertion loss to be the reciprocal of available gain, and by 
combining (5A.8), (5A.9), and (5A.12), then insertion loss becomes: 
 

332 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
2
31
,
'
4 Z
R
R
P
P
L
g
IF
load
avail
IFout
IF


 
 
 
 
    (5A.13) 
 
 
 
Combining (5A.11) and (5A.13) gives insertion loss to the IF output 
circuit: 
 
 








L
IF
IF
s
L
j
IF
D
j
D
IF
IF
s
L
IF
R
R
R
R
C
R
L
C
L
R
R
R
L
4
1
2
2
0
2
0
2









 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
(5A.14) 
 
The total RF and IF insertion loss in dB is: 
 
 


IF
RF
dB
Total
L
L
L
log
10
,

 
 
 
 
    (5A.15) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
333 
Rg
Ig
V1
Rj
Cj
LD
RS
V2
APPENDIX 5B 
 CONVERSION MATRIX INCLUDING PARASITICS  
 
The analysis in Chapter 5 of the Y-mixer provided closed form equations for 
mixer performance using a 3x3 conversion matrix without parasitic elements.  In 
this appendix the analysis is done numerically, the conversion matrix is enlarged 
from three to five frequencies, and includes effects from diode junction 
capacitance, bulk resistance, and lead inductance.  The analysis follows the 
discussion given in [12]. 
The approach is to first solve for diode voltage, vD(t) of (5B.1), and then 
use it to find the Fourier coefficients of diode conductance and capacitance that 
populate the conversion matrix.  The diode junction is represented in Figure 5B.1 
by junction resistance Rj, and capacitance, Cj.  The voltage across the junction is 
V2, which equates to diode voltage, VD.  V2 is given by the admittance matrix of 
(5B.2) in terms of driving current, Ig, and parasitic resistance, capacitance, and 
inductance.  The current, Ig, represents the LO current source, and Rg = 50 ohms is 
the LO source resistance.  The matrix is inverted, and the magnitude |V2| = |VD| is 
given by (5B.3).   This is a transcendental function, as junction resistance, Rj, is a 
function of VD, given by (5B.4), which includes the modified Bessel function of 
(5.49).  Rj is the ratio of LO fundamental voltage across the junction, to the LO 
fundamental current passing through Rj.  Current Ig is determined using (5B.5) for 
a given available LO power and source resistance, Rg.  Rj of (5B.4) is substituted 
into (5B.3), and |VD| is solved iteratively.   The junction capacitance is 
approximated as the zero voltage average capacitance, Cj = Cj0.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5B.1       Diode equivalent circuit. 
 
 
Values for |VD| are calculated and given in Table 5B.1 for different values 
for Rs, Cj0, and LD, calculated using PLO,Avail = +4 dBm, and Rg = 50 ohm.   Also 
shown are values for conversion gain, Gc, and the magnitude of RF and IF 
impedances, |ZRF| and |ZIF|, which are calculated using the conversion matrix 
analysis discussed next.   
 
)
cos(
)
(
t
V
t
v
LO
D
D


  
 
 
 
      (5B.1) 
 

334 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 






























0
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
0
g
j
j
D
S
D
S
D
S
D
S
g
I
V
V
C
j
R
L
j
R
L
j
R
L
j
R
L
j
R
G





  (5B.2)
 
 
 
 


2
0
2
2
2
0
1
1



















j
D
g
S
g
j
LO
LO
D
g
j
g
j
S
g
g
D
R
L
G
R
G
C
L
G
C
G
R
R
G
I
V


    (5B.3)     
 
 
 
 
 







T
D
s
D
V
V
I
I
V
Rj
1
2
 
 
 
 
 
     (5B.4)
 
8
2
,
g
g
Avail
LO
R
I
P

 
 
 
 
 
     (5B.5) 
 
 
Table 5B.1 
Values are given for VD solved iteratively for PLO,Avail = +4 dBm, for various values of Rs, Cj0, and LD   
Rs  
 ohms 
Cj0 
  pF 
LD 
 nH 
VD 
  volts 
Gc 
dB 
|ZRF| 
ohms 
|ZIF| 
ohms 
0 
0 
0 
0.606 
-2.76 
45.5 
135 
5 
0 
0 
0.604 
-4.22 
60.1 
166 
5 
0.1 
0 
0.603 
-4.28 
58.1 
137 
5 
0.1 
0.25 
0.604 
-6.62 
154 
125 
10 
0 
0 
0.602 
-5.47 
77.8 
197 
10 
0.1 
0 
0.601 
-5.54 
73.7 
155 
10 
0.1 
0.25 
0.602 
-7.44 
155 
223 
     Conversion gain, and RF and IF impedances are then calculated using the conversion matrix. 
 
The Fourier coefficients of the diode conductance waveform are given by 
(5B.6), where Ik(x) is the modified Bessel function given in (5.49). 
 
  
 
 
 
...
2,1,0
;)
(


k
V
x
I
I
g
T
k
S
k
    
T
D
V
V
x 
            
 
      (5B.6)   

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
335 
 
The diode parameter values used in (5B.6) are given next for a popular 
GaAs beam lead diode.   
 
16
.1


     
 
 
Ideality factor 
 
0224
.0
026
.0



T
V
 
Barrier voltage, volts 
 
14
5.9


E
Is
    
 
Saturation current, amps 
 
 
This analysis also includes the contribution to admittance from the 
varying junction capacitance.  The approach is to calculate the Fourier coefficients 
of the time varying junction capacitance, which are then used in the conversion 
matrix.  The junction capacitance is calculated in (5B.7) over one LO cycle using 
the sinusoidal diode voltage, vD(t), and the results are fitted to a sixth order power 
series in (5B.8).  The parameter values are from the same GaAs diode.  Equations 
(5B.7) and (5B.8) agree to within ±0.39% over one LO period.   
 










)
cos(
1
)
(
0
t
V
C
V
C
LO
D
j
D
j
    
 
        
      (5B.7) 
 
 
62
.0

D
V
 
 
Diode voltage, volts 
 
07
.1


 
 
Built-in potential, volts 
 
5.0


 
 
C-V exponent 
 
6
5
4
3
2
000839
.0
016
.0
115
.0
403
.0
611
.0
00815
.0
518
.1
)
(













t
C j
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5B.8) 
 
With the transcendental (5B.7) transformed into the power series (5B.8), 
it is straight forward to compute the Fourier series of junction capacitance given 
by (5B.9).  The coefficients for m ≥ 5 are assumed to equal zero.  Equations 
(5B.8) and (5B.9) agree to within ±0.54% over one LO cycle. 
 
 
 








1
0
0
)
cos(
)
(
m
LO
m
j
j
t
m
c
c
C
t
C

  
 
      (5B.9) 

336 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
The coefficients, cm, normalized to 1 farad, are as follows: 
 
 
073
.1
0 
c
 
 
336
.0
1 
c
 
 
079
.0
2 
c
 
 
018
.0
3 
c
 
 
00604
.0
4 
c
 
 
 
The conversion matrix is next obtained using the Fourier coefficients of 
the diode conductance and capacitance waveforms calculated earlier. The parasitic 
components in Figure 5B.1 are also included in the analysis, along with arbitrary 
port terminations to the five mixing frequencies.  The frequencies used in the 
analysis are defined in Table 5B.2 by ω±n = nωLO ± ωIF.   
 
Table 5B.2  
Definition of Frequency Terms 
ω  
Description 
Equation 
 
LO 
fRF – fIF 
ω+2 
sum 
fLO + fRF 
ω+1 
RF 
fRF 
ω0 
IF 
fRF - fLO 
ω-1 
image 
2fLO - fRF 
ω-2 
3L-R 
3fLO - fRF 
 
 
The admittance matrix, G, representing Rj is given by: 
 
 
0
1
2
3
4
1
0
1
2
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2
1
0
1
4
3
2
1
0
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g

G
 
        
 
                   (5B.10)
 
 
 
The susceptance matrix, Yc, representing Cj is given by: 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
337 
0
0
1
2
3
4
1
0
1
2
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2
1
0
1
4
3
2
1
0
2
1
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
j
C
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
j
j
j
j
j










c
Y
        (5B.11)
 
      
 
The port termination conductance values are given by GL: 
 
 
2
1
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0



G
G
G
G
G
L
G
  
 
 
    (5B.12) 
 
 
The diode parasitic impedances for Rs and LD are given by matrix ZP: 
 
D
s
D
s
D
s
D
s
D
s
L
j
R
g
L
j
R
L
j
R
L
j
R
L
j
R
2
1
1
0
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0













P
Z
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    (5B.13)
 
 
 
The conversion matrix is calculated in (5B.14) by starting with the diode 
junction conductance and capacitance, and working outward to include the 
parasitic series resistance and inductance, and then the shunt port terminations.  
Equation (5B.14) first sums the junction admittance matrix, G, and susceptance 
matrix, Yc, and then inverts them to obtain an impedance matrix.  This matrix is 
summed with the Zp matrix to include parasitics, and the sum is inverted to obtain 
an admittance matrix.  This matrix is summed with the GL matrix to include port 
terminations, and then inverted to provide the final impedance matrix, Z.   
 
 
1
1
1


















L
p
c
G
Z
Y
G
Z
  
 
           (5B.14) 
 

338 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The unknown port voltages are calculated in terms of the known driving 
currents.   
 
 
2
1
0
1
2
2
1
0
1
2









I
I
I
I
I
V
V
V
V
V
Z
    
 
 
with Z defined by 
 
 
55
54
53
52
51
45
44
43
42
41
35
34
33
32
31
25
24
23
22
21
15
14
13
12
11
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z

 
       
 
 
    (5B.15) 
 
S-parameters for the mixer are calculated using values from the Z matrix 
and (5.40) to (5.45):   
 
Conversion loss:  
IF
RFG
G
Z
S
32
32
2

 
 
 
    (5B.16) 
 
RF port:      
1
2
22
22


RF
G
Z
S
                    
 
    (5B.17) 
 
)
1(
1
22
22
S
G
S
Z
RF
RF



  
 
 
       
    (5B.18) 
 
IF port: 
1
2
33
33


IF
G
Z
S
 
 
 
 
    (5B.19) 
 
)
1(
1
33
33
S
G
S
Z
IF
IF



 
 
 
 
                  (5B.20) 
 
The values for conversion gain and RF and IF impedances in Table 5B.1 
are calculated using the (5B.16) – (5B.20) with port terminations:  
 
 
 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
339 
6
2
1
10




G
G
 
6
2
10

G
 
50
1
1
0

G
G
 
 
The LO port impedance is derived starting with the junction resistance, 
Rj, given by (5B.4).  This is inverted and summed with the susceptance from the 
fundamental component of the time varying junction capacitance:   
 
1
0
2
1
C
C
f
j
R
Y
j
LO
j
j



 
 
 
 
    (5B.21) 
 
Working outwards from the junction, the series parasitic elements are 
included by inverting Yj and adding the result with the series impedances: 
 
j
S
LO
LO
Y
R
L
f
j
Z
1
2




           
 
      
    (5B.22) 
 
The reflection coefficient for the LO port is given by (5B.23) with Rg 
being the LO generator source resistance. 
 
   
g
LO
g
LO
LO
R
Z
R
Z




 
 
 
 
       
    (5B.23) 
 
The rectified DC current is given by (5B.24) using the zero’th order 
modified Bessel function.   
 
)
(
0 x
I
I
I
s
DC 
          
T
D
V
V
x 
  
 
                  (5B.24) 

340 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
APPENDIX  5C 
 IMAGE IMPEDANCE AND RF-IMAGE CONVERSION  
 
It is instructive to obtain the conversion loss from RF input to image output, and 
the image port impedance.  This is a continuation of the Y-mixer with all mixing 
products short circuited except RF, IF, and image.  In the following equations, 
GIF, GRF, and GIM are the respective port termination conductances.  For 
conversion loss we begin with (5.20) and obtain Z31 that relates the voltage at the 
image output port, VIM, to the input current, IRF, at the RF input port: 
 





)
(
)
(
2
)
)(
(
)
(
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
1
31
RF
IM
IM
RF
IF
IF
G
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
g
g
Z












 (5C.1)    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substituting this into (5.41) we obtain S31, the gain from RF input to 
image output: 
 





)
(
)
(
2
)
)(
(
)
(
2
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
1
31
RF
IM
IM
RF
IF
IF
IM
RF
G
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
g
g
G
G
S












(5C.2)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
RF-to-image conversion loss in dB is: 
 
 
31
,
log
20
S
L
image
to
RF
c




 
 
 
         
      (5C.3) 
 
 
The image port impedance is obtained by substituting Z33 of (5.20) into 
(5.40).   The resulting S33 is: 
 







1
)
(
)
(
2
)
)(
(
)
(
2
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
33














IM
RF
IM
IM
RF
IF
RF
IF
G
G
g
G
g
g
g
g
G
g
G
g
G
g
g
G
g
G
g
S
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5C.4) 
 
 
 
And the image port impedance is obtained: 
 
 
)
1(
1
33
33
S
G
S
Z
IM
IM



 
 
 
 
 
      (5C.5) 
 








3
0
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
0
2
0
2
1
0
2
0
2
2
g
G
g
G
g
g
G
G
g
g
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
G
G
g
g
Z
IF
RF
RF
IF
RF
IF
RF
IF
RF
IF
IM













 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (5C.6) 

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
341 
APPENDIX 5D 
  SALEH EXPONENTIAL DIODE MIXER PERFORMANCE 
 
Results for the single exponential diode Y-, Z-, G-, and H-mixers are summarized 
in Tables 5D.1 – 5D.4.  The variables used in the tables are defined as follows:  VP 
is the fundamental LO voltage across the diode, VT equals kT/q = 0.026 V, IDC is 
the rectified DC current, IS is the diode saturation current, RS and GS are port 
impedances for the small signal RF, while R0 and G0 are port impedances for the 
IF.   
It is shown that the ring doubly balanced diode mixer has some striking 
characteristics.  Most notably the G- and H- mixers are the dual of each other in 
terms of conversion loss and optimum RF and IF port terminations.  In particular, 
the conditions that apply to the G-mixer for open, broadband, and short image are 
the same that apply to the H-mixer for short, broadband, and open image.  The Y- 
and Z-mixers have the same duality.  These are summarized in Tables 5D.5 and 
5D.6.  Also, given the series/parallel configuration of the ring doubly balanced 
mixer, its optimum port impedances for the Y-, Z-, G-, and H-mixers are the same 
as for individual diodes.   Thus the equations in Tables 5D.1 – 5D.4 also apply to 
at least the doubly balanced ring mixer case.     
 
Table 5D.1 
Single Exponential Diode Y-Mixer Results 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parameter 
Short Image 
Broadband Image 
Open Image 
Conv Loss 
 (dB) 
 
T
P V
V
686
.8

 
T
P V
V
2
343
.4
3

 
T
P V
V
2
343
.4

 
GS Opt 
(Siemens) 
T
P
T
DC
V
V
V
I

 
P
DC V
I
2

 


2
3
2
2
T
P
T
DC
V
V
V
I

 
G0 Opt 
(Siemens) 
S
G

 
2
/
S
G

 
4
/
S
G

 
IDC 
(Amps) 
)
(
0
T
P
V
V
S
V
V
I
e
I
T
DC

 

342 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
Table 5D.2 
Single Exponential Diode Z-Mixer Results 
 
 
Table 5D.3 
Single Exponential Diode G-Mixer Results 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parameter 
Short Image 
Broadband 
Image 
Open Image 
Conv Loss 
 (dB) 
 
2
2
343
664
.7
b


 
 
b
686
.8
3

 
 
b
2
686
.8

 
RS Opt 
(Ohm) 
2
2
DC
T
I
V

 
b
I
V
DC
T 2

 
b
I
V
DC
T
2

 
R0 Opt 
(Ohm) 
4
S
R

 
2
S
R

 
S
R

 
IDC 
(Amps) 
     


S
P
S
T
P
T
P
P
I
I
I
V
V
V
V
I





4
4
2
2
 
     
4
2
)]
/(
[
1
SAT
DC
P
I
I
I
b



 
Parameter 
Short Image 
Broadband Image 
Open Image 
Conv Loss 
 (dB) 
 
B
/
686
.8

 


3
3
/
686
.8
3
B


 


2
3
/
686
.8
B

 
GS Opt 
(Siemens) 
B
V
I
T
DC
2
4


 
3
2
3
8
B
V
I
T
DC


 
4
2
3
16
B
V
I
T
DC


 
G0 Opt 
(Siemens) 
S
G
4
2


 
S
G
8
2


 
S
G
16
2


 
IDC 
(Amps) 
     
4
PI


         
T
P
V
V
B

2

 
      

 
Diode Mixer Theory 
343 
Table 5D.4 
Single Exponential Diode H-Mixer Results 
 
 
 
Table 5D.5 
Doubly Balanced Ring G-Mixer With Exponential Diode 
Sinusoidal Voltage Pump 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parameter 
Short Image 
Broadband Image 
Open Image 
Conv Loss 
 (dB) 
 
)
4
(
log
686
.8
A
e

 
)
4
(
log
686
.8
3
A
A
e


 
)
4
(
log
686
.8
A
A
e

 
RS Opt 
(ohm) 
DC
e
T
I
A
V
)
4
(
log
16
2


 
)
4
(
log
8
2
A
I
A
V
e
DC
T


 
DC
T
I
V
A
2
4


 
R0 Opt 
(ohm) 
S
R
16
2


 
S
R
8
2


 
S
R
4
2


 
IDC 
(Amps) 
     
PI

2

         
T
DC V
V
S
P
e
I
I
A 
      
Parameter 
Short Image 
Broadband Image 
Open Image 
Conv Loss 
 (dB) 
 
P
T
V
V 
343
.4

 
T
T
V
V
2
2
172
.2
3



 
P
T
V
V 
343
.4

 
GS Opt 
(ohm) 
T
DC
V
V
T
S e
V
I
2
2


 
P
DC
V
V
T
S e
V
I
2
4



 
2
4
8
2
P
V
V
T
S
V
e
V
I
T
DC



 
G0 Opt 
(ohm) 
S
G
4
2


 
S
G
8
2


 
S
G
16
2


 

344 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Table 5D.6 
Doubly Balanced Ring H-Mixer With Exponential Diode 
Sinusoidal Voltage Pump 
 
 
Parameter 
Short Image 
Broadband Image 
Open Image 
Conv Loss 
 (dB) 
 
P
T
V
V 
343
.4

 
T
T
V
V
2
2
172
.2
3



 
P
T
V
V 
343
.4

 
RS Opt 
(ohm) 
2
4
8
2
P
V
V
T
S
V
e
V
I
T
DC



 
P
DC
V
V
T
S e
V
I
2
4



 
T
V
T
S
V
e
V
I
DC

2

 
R0 Opt 
(ohm) 
S
R
16
2


 
S
R
8
2


 
S
R
4
2


 

345 
Chapter 6 
Diode Applications 
 
A vast array of diode mixer circuits and technologies have been developed since 
the early days of radio some 100 years ago. Diodes were the first devices used in 
“frequency changing” modulators and still are present in the majority of mixer 
circuits used today. Semiconductor diode technology evolved from the crystal 
point contact, then the copper oxide rectifier, then the Silicon contact signal diode 
junction. It is now dominated by Schottky barrier diodes, which are widely 
available in silicon or gallium arsenide. Diode mixer circuits are implemented 
using waveguide, lumped element, coaxial, and planar technologies that include 
the microstrip, slotline, finline, and coplanar families. The circuits presented in 
this chapter have been selected from a wide range of patents and publications on 
the subject and are grouped by circuit topologies including single ended, singly 
balanced, doubly balanced, triply balanced, quadrature, subharmonic, and selected 
special circuits. 
 
 
6.1  SINGLE ENDED 
 
 Diode mixers were first built using point contact crystal diodes, and later 
Schottky diodes became dominant due to improved performance and reliability. 
Most single ended diode mixer patents appeared early in the progression of mixer 
technology. Early mixers were also built using thermionic emission tubes, which 
suffered from the inherent reliability and variability problems caused by the heat 
applied to the cathode to excite electron flow. An interesting innovation in 1921 
was a point contact rectifier fitted with a socket to become a drop-in   replacement 
for a tube rectifier [1], as depicted in Figure 6.1. The single diode demodulated the 
amplitude modulated (AM) signal in the usual way, by first rectifying the RF 
signal and then envelope detecting it to extract the modulated audio signal. This is 
effectively a single ended mixer used as a direct converter, wherein the AM 
signal’s carrier wave is the LO and the sidebands are the RF. The sidebands mix 
with the carrier to produce the baseband output. 
 

346 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.1  
A point contact diode replacement for a tube diode (1921). 
 
6.1.1 Coaxial Circuits 
 
An example of an early single ended diode coaxial mixer is found in short 
wavelength voice communication systems introduced by Ohl in 1939 [2]. It used a 
point contact rectifier connected between the ends of two parallel semi-circular 
conducting rods, see 2 in Figure 6.2. The rods together act as the probe in a 
waveguide aperture antenna, supporting the point contact rectifier at the point of 
optimum conversion efficiency. A focusing lens is placed in front of the 
waveguide antenna, and a local oscillator is applied either from a radiating second 
antenna near the lens, or by directly connecting the LO source to the detector 
through the two rods. The point contact rectifier was used instead of a tube 
because of its much lower parasitic capacitance. 
 
The point contact diode comprised a crystal and a very fine tungsten 
contact wire whose position on the crystal could be moved to optimize 
performance. The tip of the wire was plated with a highly conductive alloy of 
gold, silver, and platinum [3]. The authors list the material options for the crystal, 
including boron, arsenic, tellurium, iron-pyrite, and silicon. Of these, silicon is the 
best due to its hardness, resistance to oxidation at low temperatures, and electrical 
resistance. It was noted that the noise produced during the rectification process 
was dramatically reduced by having a good back contact to ground at the base of 
the semiconductor. This was accomplished by electroplating the silicon crystal’s 
backside with chromium, or in the case of iron-pyrite plating it with gold. The 
communication system was dual conversion, with the second mixer also 
accomplished using a semiconductor diode. Development of crystal mixers at 
microwave frequencies progressed rapidly during World War II to support the 
development of radar, which was led by the British.  
 
 
 

 
Diode Applications 
347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.2  
Short wave communication system operating at 1 GHz, 1939. 
 
 
A crystal rectifier mixer developed during that period in Britain 
comprises a single ended coaxial design having a circular waveguide RF input [4]. 
As depicted in Figure 6.3, the RF input to the mixer comprises a transition from 
waveguide to a telescoping coaxial line that in turn connects to the cathode of the 
detector. The IF output uses a second coaxial section whose vertical center 
conductor also connects to the cathode of the detector diode, and utilizes a sliding 
dielectric block to capacitively short circuit the RF and LO signals to isolate them 
from the IF output, and to provide the LO ground return. The LO is capacitively 
coupled to the anode end of the crystal detector via a second telescoping coaxial 
section. And a fourth coaxial section also connects to the anode end of the 
detector diode to provide RF and IF ground returns. This ground return section 
also uses a sliding dielectric block for impedance matching. 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.3       Single ended coaxial mixer, 1945. 
 
 
Other crystal diode microwave mixers were developed during this period. 
The invention displayed in Figure 6.4 depicts a mixer having a waveguide RF 
input port that transitions to a coaxial line using a current loop wire [5]. The 
coaxial line is connected to the detector diode. The LO is connected to the diode 
via a second coaxial line. The IF output comprises a third coaxial line connected 
to the diode via a conical inductor having a higher self resonance due to lower 
inter-winding capacitance. The IF ground return current flows through the wire 
loop waveguide probe. 
                            

348 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.4   
Waveguide mixer using conical inductor, 1951. 
 
 
Figure 6.5 depicts an improved mixer from this period [6]. It has a 
rectangular waveguide RF input, and represents a significant advance in 
bandwidth and simplicity of construction. The waveguide RF input terminates in a 
backshort, with a “cross conductor” placed at a certain distance in front of the 
backshort. The rectangular waveguide has the usual cross section whose width is 
twice the height. The cross conductor runs the full width of the waveguide, and is 
centered on the waveguide’s cross section. The diode is connected perpendicularly 
to the cross conductor, between it and the waveguide wall, at center of the 
waveguide width where the E-field is maximum for the TE10 mode. Both ends of 
the cross conductor pass through the waveguide side walls, and continue on to 
form coaxial lines. The LO is introduced through one coaxial line, and the IF is 
extracted via the other. The RF energy is coupled to the diode by means of its 
electric field being parallel to the diode, which is located at the TE10 mode 
maximum. Broad bandwidth is achieved because the LO port has no back short, 
and LO to RF isolation is achieved through waveguide mode orthogonality rather 
than by filtering. The RF and LO signals are isolated from the coaxial IF port by 
means of a back short choke, which allows for a broadband IF port. Also, the 
diode connection at the waveguide wall provides a broadband ground return for all 
three signals. 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.5   
Rectangular waveguide mixer, 1952. 
 

 
Diode Applications 
349 
 
In Figure 6.6 a coaxial mixer is depicted with further improvements, 
having conversion loss of 5 dB and bandwidth of 80 MHz [7]. The distinguishing 
characteristics cited are the IF connection to the crystal diode is isolated from the 
RF and LO signals, and the machining and assembly operations are simplified. 
The LO is inserted by a capacitive probe that excites a TEM mode in the coaxial 
structure, coupling it to the crystal diode to generate the desired mixing products. 
The circuit is claimed to provide LO, RF to IF isolation, with the LO to RF 
isolation largely dependent on how energy is absorbed by the diode. If the LO and 
RF are matched to the diode, then isolation is high; otherwise, it will be degraded 
by the reflections from the mismatched impedances. A second embodiment is 
Figure 6.6(b), which uses a much simpler construction, and presumably has 
degraded performance as a tradeoff. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 6.6   
Coaxial mixer, 1951; (a) diode is mounted on an enlarged coaxial mount; (b) the diode 
and IF filtering is assembled in a small cavity. 
 
 
 
A waveguide subharmonic mixer is depicted in Figure 6.7 [8]. It is 
designed to operate with an RF frequency at least twice that of the LO. The major 
goal of the design is to reduce RF signal losses by minimizing RF leakage out the 
LO port. The mixer comprises a coaxial resonator having a center conductor that 
is physically less than a quarter wave long at the RF frequency. The center 
conductor is capacitive loaded at its top by an adjustable screw that allows the 
capacitance to be tuned by adjusting the screw. The capacitive loading makes the 
center conductor be electrically a quarter wave long at the RF frequency. The RF 
is injected into the cavity near the base of the center conductor, where a low 
impedance exists. The diode anode is connected to the center conductor, also near 
its base. The diode cathode is connected to a line that runs through a hole in the 
side wall of the cavity that allows the IF output to connect to a subsequent gain 
stage, and also provides a capacitive short circuit for the RF and LO ground 
returns. The LO is injected to the diode anode via a coaxial line that runs up 
through the hollow center conductor of the coaxial resonator. The LO is connected 
to the coaxial line via a transformer, with the ground connection of the secondary 
also providing the IF ground return. An open circuit shunt line that is a quarter 
wave long at the RF frequency, is also connected to the diode’s anode, in parallel 
with the LO connection. This shunt line provides the anode’s RF ground return 
and isolates RF from leaking out the LO port. But the open circuit shunt stub does 

350 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
not short out the LO, which is at less than half the RF frequency. The high 
selectivity of the coaxial resonator and open circuit shunt stub cause this design to 
trade off low conversion loss for narrow band operation. 
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.7  
 Single ended coaxial mixer, 1952. 
 
 
Point contact crystal diodes continued to be used at millimeter-wave 
(mmW) frequencies into the 1950s. Figure 6.8 depicts a single ended diode mixer 
operating at mmW RF and LO frequencies [9]. The mixer comprises a rectangular 
waveguide with 0.28 inch width and 0.14 inch height, and having an adjustable 
back short. A point contact crystal diode is mounted in front of the back short, 
centered on the waveguide’s 0.28 inch width at the TE10 mode’s electric field 
maximum. The crystal element is mounted at the top of the waveguide, with one 
end of a metal whisker contacting the crystal, and the other end of the metal 
connecting to the center conductor of a coaxial line that forms the IF output port. 
The mmW RF and LO are applied together to the diode via the waveguide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.8   
Crystal contact waveguide mixer, 1956. 
 
 
Figure 6.9 depicts another point contact crystal mixer design [10]. Its 
goals are to provide broadband operation while minimizing loss of RF energy due 
to leakage. Another goal is to provide an improved method of packaging and 
mounting the point contact crystal that facilitates replacement of the diode. The 
RF and LO inputs to the mixer are incident together at a rectangular waveguide 
aperture. A fixed back short is placed at the other end of the waveguide. A vertical 
E-field probe is centered on the waveguide’s width (long dimension) and is 
located approximately a quarter wave at the RF frequency in front of the back 
short toward the RF and LO input. The tip of the probe is centered on the 
 

 
Diode Applications 
351 
waveguide’s height (short dimension). The probe passes through the top wall of 
the waveguide and then forms a coaxial line that in turn connects to the whisker of 
the diode. Thus the RF and LO are connected to the diode. The IF port comprises 
a coaxial line whose center conductor is a wire connected to the end of the probe. 
The whisker contacts the crystal inside a removable cylindrical package. The 
crystal is mounted to a ground connection that provides the broadband ground 
return for the RF, LO, and IF signals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Figure 6.9   Crystal mixer with replaceable diode, 1960. 
 
 
Further innovations with single ended diode mixers appear to not be 
covered by patents until the 1970s and 1980s when Schottky diodes came into 
usage with stripline and microstrip on printed circuits. The patent 1974 [11] by 
Otremba, describes a single ended mixer with reactive terminations to the image 
and LO second harmonic that optimize conversion loss. Two such mixers are 
combined to form a ratrace singly balanced mixer. The resulting mixer is claimed 
as an improvement over the 1972 ratrace mixer design by Halford [12]. 
 
 
6.1.2 Microstrip Circuits 
 
Stripline and microstrip fabrication became popular for microwave components in 
the 1960s.  Conventional microstrip circuits are built with metallic transmission 
line traces formed on one side of the substrate while the other side is fully 
metalized ground plane. Single ended mixers benefit from the simplicity and 
desirable electrical and mechanical properties of this transmission medium.  
 
Two single ended diode microstrip mixer designs patented in the 1980s 
are introduced next. The first is in Figure 6.10 illustrating a mixer that is simple to 
fabricate and assemble, provides sharp filtering, is sufficient to isolate the RF and 
LO ports, and shorts the image signal to minimize conversion loss [13]. The RF 
port is on the left at 1, and connects to the diode’s cathode by microstrip line 15. 
The coupled line notch filter 17 presents a high impedance at the LO frequency 
looking into microstrip line 15 at the diode connection point. Similarly, the LO 
port is on the right side at 2, and connects to the diode 7 by microstrip line 16. The 
notch filter 18 causes a high impedance to appear at the RF frequency looking into 
microstrip line 16 at the diode connection point. Thus the RF and LO signals are 

352 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
connected to the diode and remain isolated from each other’s ports. The IF is 
connected to the diode by the low pass filter 12. The RF and LO ground returns 
are provided by the capacitive stubs of the low pass filter that are connected to the 
diode’s anode. The IF ground return is provided by the microstrip line 13, which 
is a quarter wave long at the RF and LO frequencies and thus provides an open 
circuit to the these while providing a short circuit at the IF. Short circuits are 
provided at the image frequency to the diode’s cathode by the coupled line notch 
filter 20, and to the anode by the shunt stubs of the low pass filter. Thus a short 
circuit exists across the diode at the image frequency that provides reduced 
conversion loss. The frequency components of the current through the diode is 
given by (5.113) and reproduced in (6.1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.10  
 Narrowband single ended mixer. 
 
 
t
m
n
n
n
m
m
m
n
nm
d
RF
LO
e
i
t
I
)
(
)1
(
)
(
















 
 
 
         (6.1)
 
 
        
 
 
The second patent is in Figure 6.11 and describes a similar single ended 
diode microstrip mixer [14]. Its goal is to provide reduced conversion loss over a 
wider bandwidth. The RF input is at 1, and couples to the diode via microstrip line 
2. The LO input is at 4, and couples to the diode first through the edge coupled 
bandpass filter 5, and then through microstrip line 2.  
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.11   Wideband single ended microstrip mixer. 
 
LO 
RF 
IF 
Id 
+ 
VRF
F 
- 
+ 
VLO 
- 
IIF 

 
Diode Applications 
353 
 
The RF and LO ground returns are provided by the open circuited stub at 
A. The IF port is node 8 and connects to the diode’s anode via low pass filter 6. 
The IF ground return comprises the combined lengths of microstrip line 2 and 
open circuited microstrip line 10, which totals a quarter wave long at the IF 
frequency. The capacitor 9 blocks the lower IF frequency from exiting through RF 
port 1, and decouples the RF load from affecting the IF ground return. 
 
 
6.2  SINGLY BALANCED 
 
6.2.1 Transformer-Less  
 
A mixer design with the goal of reducing complexity and cost was disclosed by 
Podell in 1962 [15], which does not need a transformer to provide isolation. 
Instead, the signal and LO sources, respectively, have low and high impedances, 
or vice versa, and were applied to the diodes as shown in Figure 6.12. The low 
impedance source, F2, could comprise a cathode (or emitter) follower stage; and 
the high impedance source, F1, could comprise an amplifier having a high 
impedance output.  The bias resistor 7 is larger than other resistors in the circuit.  
The mixer operation is explained by assuming the LO is assigned to F1 and is 
applied at the point where the two diode cathodes are connected together. 
Harmonic balance simulation of the circuit with no bias applied shows, for 
example, with 50 ohm RF source impedance at F2, 50 ohm IF load resistor, and 
300 ohm LO source impedance at F1 with LO power at +10 dBm, conversion loss 
is 13 dB, LO to IF isolation is 17 dB, and RF to IF isolation is 11 dB.  Silicon and 
GaAs diode models were used with very similar results. 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.12   Balanced mixer without a transformer. 
 
 
The two silicon diodes switch on and off according to the polarity of F1 
LO, with LO ground current passing through the IF load resistor on the right and 
the low impedance of F2 on the left. The voltage-divided signal from F2 is present 
at the diode cathode connection point when the diodes are switched on, and 
disconnected with diodes off. The resulting waveform at the IF output load 
includes the desired IF and other mixing products. The following equations apply 
to the circuit. Assuming positive polarities from sources F1 and F2, the RF signal 
i2 
i1 

354 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
is in phase with current i1 and LO is in counter phase. In contrast, LO and RF are 
in counter phase with current i2.  The diode currents are developed in terms of 
Fourier series as discussed in Chapter 5, according to the polarities of Figure 6.13.   
Equation (6.4) suggests mixing products with even RF harmonics are suppressed, 
while those with odd RF harmonics are present.  However, given the lack of actual 
balance in the RF circuit of Figure 6.13(b), suppression of even RF harmonics will 
be poor.  The frequency components of the diode currents are developed in (6.2) 
and (6.3).  To simplify notation, just the phase components of the IF output 
current are given by (6.4), showing which mixing products cancel. 
 
t
jm
t
jn
n
m
nm
n
t
jm
t
jn
m
nm
n
RF
LO
RF
LO
e
e
i
e
e
i
i





)
(
)
(
1
)1
(







         (6.2) 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
)1
(
t
jm
t
jn
m
n
m
nm
n
t
jm
t
jn
m
nm
n
RF
LO
RF
LO
e
e
i
e
e
i
i
















 (6.3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.13   Equivalent circuits at LO, RF and IF frequencies from left to right. 
 


0
)1
(
1
)1
(
2
1







m
n
IF
i
i
i
for m=odd; =0 for m=even                 (6.4)  
 
 
Another example of a singly balanced diode mixer without transformer 
was disclosed in 1995 and shown in Figure 6.14, using the silicon point contact 
diode 1N21C. The application is for cell phones where small size and low cost is 
required, [16]. The main feature is that the goals of the design are realized by 
removing the transformer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.14   Transformer-less diode mixer. 
 
iRF 
Rlow 
Rlow 
i2 
i1 
iIF 
Rlow 
Rlow 
i2 
i1 
i2 
i1 Rhigh 

 
Diode Applications 
355 
 
Instead, an inductor is placed across the diodes to prevent the build up of 
DC voltage across the two diodes, and at their connection point. The inductance 
L1 presents a high impedance at the LO frequency, so L1 does not short out the 
LO. Performance is said to be equal to that of a balanced mixer.  Assuming 
positive RF and LO polarities at their respective ports, the resulting IF current is 
shown in (6.5) to include odd RF harmonics and suppress even RF harmonics. 
 


0
1
)1
(
2
1






m
IF
i
i
i
for m=odd; =0 for m=even       
         (6.5)  
 
 
6.2.2 Lumped Balun  
 
Another mixer designed by Podell, disclosed in 1964, obtained wider bandwidth 
using transmission line transformers in contrast to designs using conventional 
transformers having separate primary and secondary windings [17]. The design 
shown in Figure 6.15 includes a 1:4 impedance ratio transmission line transformer 
using bifilar wire to obtain RF and LO frequency coverage of 10 - 1000 MHz. The 
LO source connects to point 10’; the RF source connects to point 44’, and the IF 
output connects to point 62’. The transmission line transformer, A, ideally 
comprises a binocular (dual hole) ferrite core having two wires passing through 
each hole. Each pair of wires comprises a transmission line, both of which are 
connected in parallel on the left at the LO input and connected in series on the 
right at the diodes. The characteristic impedance of the bifilar transmission lines 
should be the geometric mean of the input and output impedances. An analysis of 
the currents and voltages present in the transformer indicates the impedance 
presented to the diodes on the right side of the core is four times the impedance 
presented by the transformer to the LO source: the voltage on the right is double 
that on the left, and the current on the right is half that on the left. The transformer 
presents the LO voltage to the series connected diodes 36’ and 34’, making them 
switch on and off simultaneously.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.15   Singly balanced mixer with improved bandwidth. 
 
 

356 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The RF signal is presented with opposed phase to the diodes at the 
common point 42’. The IF current is collected at the common point, and then 
passes through the diplexer element 84 that isolates the RF and IF ports.The RF 
and IF ground returns are provided by the ferrite transformer, 2, whic uses bifilar 
wires 6 and 8 operating in the odd mode to provide low impedance paths for the 
RF and IF currents. In contrast, the mutual inductance of wires 6 and 8 in the core 
causes a high impedance to the even-mode generated in the wires by the LO 
signal, keeping the LO from shorting out. To maximize the RF and IF bandwidths, 
the grounded ends of wires 6 and 8 should connect to ground physically near 
points 48’ and 66’. A self biased version of the mixer of Figure 6.14 is also 
disclosed. 
 
The mixer of Figure 6.16 disclosed in 1989, comprises two coaxial 
transmission lines, each having a diode connected in series with the center 
conductor and located midway along the length of each line [18]. The circuit is 
similar to that in Figure 6.15, but the implementation is different. Instead of using 
bifilar wires, this mixer uses coaxial transmission lines surrounded by ferrite 
material to increase inductance of the outer conductor. The design is reported as 
having 3.5 to 4.5 dB conversion loss over the 50 – 550 MHz cable band, with 
nearly a full octave of LO bandwidth. Isolation between LO-RF and LO-IF is 40 
dB, input intercept point (IIP3) is at least +20 dBm, with a minimum LO power of 
+10 dBm. The coaxial lines are much less than a quarter wave long at the LO and 
RF frequencies. They are connected together at each end: in phase at one end, and 
opposing phase at the other. The in-phase end has the outer conductors tied 
together (60) and the inner conductors tied together (38), while at the opposed 
phase end the inner conductors of both transmission lines respectively tie to the 
outer conductors of the other transmission line. The LO port is at the opposed 
phase end, and the RF/IF port is at the in phase end, with the circuit providing 
isolation between the LO and RF/IF ports. The RF/IF port connects to a diplex 
circuit (58) that provides isolation between the RF and IF ports. The diodes are in 
series, with the cathode of one (40) connected to the anode of the other (42). This 
arrangement causes the RF signal to be applied in opposing phase to the diodes, 
and the LO signal to be applied in phase. The RF/IF ground return to node 60 is 
provided by the inside surface of the outer conductor of the coaxial lines. Thus 
shorter coaxial lines equate to higher RF/IF frequency range. However, shorter 
transmission lines also tend to short out the LO, raising the upper end of the LO 
bandwidth. This effect is reduced by increasing the inductance of the outer 
conductors by surrounding the coaxial lines with ferrite material. 
 
According to the LO phase in Figure 6.16, a negative LO voltage applied 
to node 72 turns on diode 42, and a positive LO voltage applied to node 70 turns 
on diode 40; thus, the LO is applied in phase to both diodes and they switch on 
and off simultaneously. The ferrite material surrounding the transmission lines 
increases inductance to ground between points 72 - 60 and 70 - 60, thus increasing 
the low end of the LO bandwidth.  And the transmission line action of coaxial 
lines 44 and 46 enforces equal magnitude currents to flow in opposite directions in 

 
Diode Applications 
357 
the respective inner and outer conductors. This isolates the RF/IF port from the 
LO port because ideally no net RF/IF current leaves nodes 70 or 72. Similarly, the 
LO is isolated from the RF/IF port because ideally no net LO current leaves node 
38 and the ground point 60 causes a virtual ground to the LO at the RF/IF port . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.16   The mixer comprises two diodes in line with the center conductor of the coaxial 
transmission lines. The mixer was intended for cable TV applications. 
 
 
6.2.3  H-Mixer  
 
The mixer of Figure 6.17, is based on the H Mixer described by Saleh [19] and 
was disclosed in the invention reported in [20]. Its goals are to minimize 
conversion loss and maximize IIP3. The improved dynamic range is due to 
shaping the LO into a square wave to switch the diodes quickly with 
predominantly odd harmonics. The circuit elements that shape the LO waveform 
are narrow band, thus the tradeoff is reduced bandwidth. 
 
The square wave LO voltage is shaped by allowing only the odd 
harmonics of the LO voltage to exist across the diode. The even harmonics are 
shorted by lines 115 and 115a, which are quarter wave long at the LO frequency 
and shorted to ground. The lines present an open circuit to the fundamental LO 
and other odd harmonics, allowing these voltages to exist across the diodes. 
Further efficiency is obtained by recovering mixing products, including energy 
from the sum frequency, by open circuiting all mixing products other than the RF, 
image, LO, and IF. The open circuit to diode currents is provided by the series 
resonant filter composed of inductor 110 and capacitor 112. Self bias is provided 
by routing the rectified LO current through resistor R95a. Appropriately adjusting 
the self bias voltage level allows for the optimum tradeoff between LO drive level, 
conversion loss, and IIP3. Also, circuit balance is improved by forcing the diodes 
to share the same current.  
 
The hybrid 104 interfaces the RF and LO inputs to the diodes. The hybrid 
can be either a 180° or 90° type. In the 180° version, the RF (signal) at frequency 
ωs, is incident at the sum port of the hybrid, and the LO (pump), at frequency ωp, 
I 
I 

358 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
is incident at the difference port. Thus the RF is applied in phase, and the LO is 
applied 180° out of phase, to the two diodes. The RF and LO ground returns are 
provided by capacitors C122. The IF load is represented by resistor R93a, which is 
AC coupled to the diodes.  The IF ground return is provided by lines 115 and 
115a.  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.17   High intercept band limited mixer for operation in the 800 MHz cellular band.   
 
 
A specific embodiment of the mixer is disclosed that is said to be suitable 
for cellular bands between 869 – 894 MHz. Component values are: C112 = 1 pF; 
L110 = 33 nH; Lines 115 and 115a are 1.42 inches with dielectric constant of 9.6; 
C122 = 25 pF, R95a = 240 ohms; C91 = C92a = 20,000 pF; and the load resistor is 50 
ohms.  
 
 
6.2.4 Multilayer Ceramic Substrate  
 
The reduced size mixer of Figure 6.18 was disclosed in 2007 [21]. It uses a 
multilayer ceramic substrate having an integrated Marchand balun for LO, a high 
pass filter for RF, and a low pass filter for IF. The two diodes are mounted on the 
top side of the ceramic assembly. The circuit operates with RF at 2 GHz  and IF at 
50 MHz. The Marchand balun provides the RF and IF ground returns, through the 
grounded ends of the two balanced lines.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.18   Small sized mixer using a multilayer substrate. 
12 
13 
16 
15 
C2 
C1 
C3 
L2 
L3 
L2 
11 

 
Diode Applications 
359 
 
 
The balun, the high pass filter, and the low pass filter are formed from 
transmission lines integrated into a stack of multilayer substrates. The mixer 
diodes are also integrated within the stripline circuit. The Marchand balun is 
obtained by using two meandered broadside coupled transmission lines.  
 
 
6.2.5 Waveguide and Crossbar 
  
Microwave mixers were first realized using waveguide. Figure 6.19 shows a 
singly balanced waveguide mixer disclosed in 1946, that uses two rectifying 
crystals located at opposite ends of a waveguide [22]. The mixer functions as a 
suppressed carrier modulator for a radio communications system. Compared with 
earlier designs, its goal is to provide simplified impedance matching, wider 
bandwidth, and lower distortion. The LO, or carrier wave, having frequency ωc is 
incident at waveguide 13. The RF signal, at frequency ωm, is applied to the input 
of transformer 28. The modulated upper and lower sidebands, having frequencies 
ωc ± ωm, exit the waveguide with the 90° bend, which is shown on the bottom side 
of Figure 6.18 but actually extends into the page at point 12.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.19  
 Waveguide suppressed carrier modulator. 
 
 
The LO electric field (E-field) propagates in waveguide 13 toward the 
junction at point 12, where it splits into two waves, respectively, traveling toward 
diodes 15 and 16. The junction at point 12 causes the two E-fields traveling 
toward the diodes to be 180° out of phase with each other. In contrast, the RF 
signal is applied in phase to the two diodes. The LO signal switches the diodes on 
and off to modulate the RF signal, which in turn produces the upper and lower 
modulated sideband signals in both diodes. 

360 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The sideband signals are produced with the same polarity in the diodes, 
so their resulting E-fields propagate from the diodes toward the junction at point 
12 with the same phase.  They combine at the junction point 12 and propagate 
down the waveguide with the 90° bend (into the page).  Recalling the LO carrier 
E-fields traveling toward the diodes are 180° out of phase, they cancel at point 12 
and thus are suppressed from exiting along with the sideband E-fields.  Bias can 
be applied to optimize the conversion efficiency of the two crystal rectifiers.    
An improved waveguide mixer was disclosed in 1948 [23].  The major 
innovation of the mixer, shown in Figure 6.20, is locating the two diodes next to 
each other, thus reducing size, increasing bandwidth, and improving circuit 
balance.  The diodes are in series across the E-plane of the waveguide in which 
the RF signal propagates.  As shown in Figure 6.20, the cathodes of the diodes are 
AC connected together, separated by two series capacitors.           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.20  
 Balanced crystal microwave converter. 
 
The RF voltage signal is in phase with one diode, and 180° out of phase 
with the other. The RF current passes through the two diodes, and the two series 
capacitors that also pass the LO but block the IF.  The IF is DC connected 
differentially across the two diode cathodes using wires having inductance that 
presents a high impedance to the RF signal.  The LO is AC coupled in-phase to 
the diode cathodes through the blocking capacitors.  Thus circuit balance isolates 
the LO from the RF and IF.  And the RF and IF are isolated from each other by 
means of filtering. The magic-T hybrid waveguide patent of Tyrell is referenced 
[24].  
 Interest in waveguide as a medium for microwave mixers waned as 
stripline and microstrip became popular.  However, waveguide construction 
continues to be important for millimeter-wave mixers. A millimeter-wave 

 
Diode Applications 
361 
waveguide mixer, shown in Figures 6.21(a), and (b), was disclosed in 1967 [25].   
The goals of the design were wide bandwidth and low conversion loss for an up-
converter.  The innovation was to place the diodes at the intersection between two 
coaxial lines and a waveguide that connect the RF, LO, and IF to the diodes.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 6.21   Waveguide mixer:  (a) LO signal in the waveguide on the left couples to coaxial line 3, 
and RF signal in the waveguide on the right couples to coaxial line 5. Coaxial filters 6, 
7 provide isolation between RF and LO ports. (b) detail showing diode polarity: top 
and bottom diodes, respectively, have anode and cathode connected to the coaxial line 
thus are 180 out of phase for LO and RF signals. A simple mathematical analysis 
demonstrates the IF signals are generated in phase and propagate in the waveguide 2.  
  
This minimizes the signal connection lengths, which in turn reduces the 
periodicity of mismatch ripples.  It also minimizes the lengths of the RF and LO 
ground returns, which maximizes the upper bound of their bandwidths.  The RF 
signal from the waveguide is coupled to a coaxial line 3 that passes through filter 
6 to reject LO leakage.  The line continues through the side wall of the waveguide 
where it transitions to an air-dielectric stripline consisting of cavity 2 with a 
metallic slab line. The diodes are attached to the slab and grounded to the cavity 
walls.    
The LO is incident at coaxial line 3 and delivered to the diodes, while 
passing through filter 6 to reject RF signal.  Conversely the RF signal is incident 
at coaxial line 5, and passes through filter 7 that rejects the LO signal. Both RF 
and LO signals excite the diodes with 180 phase difference since the diodes are 
in opposed direction with respect to the electric field in cavity 2.  The circuit 
operates as an upconverter so that IF signals generated by the diodes are higher in 
frequency than the RF input, and are in phase with each other and propagate into 
the waveguide 2 having been excited by line 4.  The diodes are located in the 
center of the waveguide at the point of maximum E-field, and the up converted 
upper and lower sideband signals excite a wave that travels in the waveguide 2 
LO 
RF 

362 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
toward the viewer of Figure 6.21(b).   A waveguide back short also extends into 
the page, with length equal to a quarter wave at the IF operating band to provide a 
high impedance across the diodes to maximize conversion efficiency.  Figure 
6.21(a) depicts waveguides associated with coaxial lines 3 and 5, but a 
waveguide-to-coaxial transition is not required. 
As seen in Figure 6.21(b), the RF and LO connections to the diodes 
provide immediate ground returns via the inside walls of waveguide that also 
forms the ground walls of the striplines. The RF and LO signals propagate from 
the coaxial lines 3 and 5 in TEM mode while the IF propagates out the IF 
waveguide 2 in TE mode, with the mode orthogonality providing inherent 
isolation between IF and RF/LO. The cutoff frequency of the IF waveguide is 
above the operating band of the RF signal, which provides additional RF-IF 
isolation, and improves conversion efficiency.  
 An improved mixer design was also disclosed by the same inventor in 
1969 [26].  As is evident in Figure 6.22, it has many of the same features as the 
mixer of Figure 6.21.  It places the diodes together at the intersection of the 
waveguide and coaxial line connections to minimize conversion loss (both 
absolute and ripple), and maximize bandwidth.   But it represents an improvement 
by its ability to operate over certain frequency combinations not allowed by the 
mixer of Figure 6.21.  The limitation is due to the reflected impedances from the 
RF and LO filters that short out the diodes at certain RF and LO frequencies.  This 
design solves this problem by changing the means of diplexing the two signals.  
The innovation is to use one TEM mode transmission line to connect two signals 
to the diodes, and a waveguide transmission line to connect the third signal to the 
diodes.  The two signals are diplexed onto a coaxial line, with one signal 
connected via a stepped impedance coaxial low pass filter at point 3.  The second 
signal is connected at point 5 via a waveguide operating as a high pass filter with 
its cutoff frequency above the band of the first signal.  Thus the two signals are 
isolated from each other, and connected to the diodes, without the presence of 
impedance reflections that would otherwise limit frequency response.  Since the 
RF and LO signals, as well as the diodes, are coupled to a single bar, this type of 
structure is known as a crossbar mixer.  
The mixer can be used either as an up or down converter.  If used as a 
down converter, the RF signal could be connected to the waveguide 5, which 
induces the RF signal current onto the coaxial line, which in turn flows to the 
diodes.  The LO is connected to the coaxial line at point 3, and operates lower in 
frequency than the RF.  The coaxial line passes through the RF signal waveguide 
walls.  It then passes through the wall of the second waveguide, and then 
transitions to stripline before connecting to the diodes.  The RF and LO currents 
on the stripline inside the waveguide cannot excite a waveguide mode since the 
stripline runs orthogonally to the E-field vector of waveguide 2.  The RF and LO 
ground returns are immediately provided by the diode connections to the 
waveguide wall, which also forms the ground planes for the stripline.  
 

 
Diode Applications 
363 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.22   Waveguide millimeter-wave mixer. 
 
 
The resulting modulated IF diode currents excite the TE10 waveguide 
mode at the point of maximum E-field in waveguide 2, causing the E-field of the 
IF to propagate into the waveguide toward the observer of Figure 6.22.  A 
waveguide back short also extends into the page, with length equal to a quarter 
wave at the IF operating band to provide a high impedance across the diodes to 
maximize conversion efficiency.  The mixer can also be used as an upconverter by 
changing the port arrangement according to the frequencies involved.   
 
 
6.2.6 Finline and Crossbar  
 
Waveguide and stripline/microstrip fabrication offer complementary features.  
Waveguide mixers can be extremely broadband and offer low conversion loss, but 
their tightly tolerance machined parts and packaged diodes are expensive.  In 
contrast, stripline and microstrip mixers offer reduced cost and size, but can have 
higher conversion loss especially at millimeter-wave frequencies.  They are lower 
in cost due to photolithographic fabrication and usage of beam lead or chip diodes.  
They offer reduced size due to a higher than unity dielectric constant.  Combining 
conventional waveguide and microstrip techniques can provide the benefits of 
both while minimizing the negatives.  In this patent the microstrip lines are of the 
suspended type, where the circuit traces are on the substrate and the ground planes 
are the waveguide walls.  
The mixer shown in Figure 6.23 was disclosed in 1979 [27].  It is said to 
have improved performance and reduced cost compared with conventional printed 
and waveguide mixers.  Schematically, it is similar to the mixer of Figures 6.21(a) 
and (b), but its construction is different.  It comprises two machined metal blocks 
with a printed circuit board sandwiched between them.  Two beam lead diodes 
connect in series, anode to cathode, to the crossbar.  The other ends of the diodes 
are grounded.  The diodes are centered on waveguide 3 at the E-field maximum.   
Any diode mixer can be used as an up or downconverter, with the RF, 
LO, and IF connections made at any port according to their frequencies. The 

364 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
following describes a down converter application.  The LO is incident at 
waveguide 2, where it’s E-field induces a current in line 14, the suspended 
microstrip, that is a quarter wave long at the center of the LO band. The resulting 
current is AC connected, via printed capacitor 17, to the crossbar that in turn 
connects to the diodes.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.23   Waveguide mixer with blocking capacitor, LO probe, IF filter and diode connections 
all to the crossbar printed on a suspended substrate and mechanically sandwiched 
between two blocks that together form a waveguide.  
 
 
The LO field is from the center conductor to ground so the LO is 180° 
opposed in phase with one diode, and in phase with the other.   The RF signal is 
incident at waveguide 3, with electric field applied to both diodes in series, 
inducing currents in the diodes that are equal in phase with both diode polarities.  
Back shorts are provided for the RF and LO waveguide transitions to the 
suspended substrate line.  The large signal LO causes the diodes to modulate the 
RF signal input, resulting in IF currents that add in-phase at the diode connection 
point, and pass to the line on the right of the diodes.  Isolation is provided between 
the LO and IF ports by the printed capacitor 17 that passes the LO but blocks the 
IF; and, the printed lowpass filter 33 that blocks the LO but passes the IF.  The RF 
and LO ground returns are provided immediately via the top and bottom diode 
connections to the ground conductors at 19 and 19a.  The mixer of Figure 6.23 
was built using HP 5082-2299 beam lead diodes.  With RF frequency at 11.8 
GHz, DSB noise figure measured 6.5 dB, including 2.6 dB of downstream IF 
noise figure contribution.   
Finline is also used to transition between waveguide and printed 
microstrip or stripline transmission lines. Finline comprises fin shaped metalized 
regions that gradually transition without the need for a quarter wave long back 
short and thus can be very wideband.   The mixer of Figure 6.24, disclosed in 
LO 
RF 
IF 

 
Diode Applications 
365 
1981, is similar schematically to that of Figure 6.15, in that the RF and LO do not 
coexist on the same transmission line, but different in terms of fabrication [28].  It 
has one waveguide port, and two microstrip ports.  The RF signal is incident at 
waveguide port 76, where the E-field excites the finline 58 with field vectors 
beginning at metallization 58b and ending at 58a, creating an odd-mode that 
transitions into slotline 60.  The finline traces are metalized onto the back side of 
the soft dielectric substrate.  Slotline 60 terminates in slotlines 62 and 64, that are 
connected in series across slotline 60, and ideally have widths approximately half 
that of slotline 60.  The lengths of slotlines 62 and 64 are both equal to a quarter 
wave at the center of the RF operating band.   
Two GaAs beamlead diodes are connected in series anode-to-cathode 
across the end of slotline 60.  They are located on the top side of the substrate and 
connect across slotline 60 via holes in the substrate.  The anode-to-cathode 
connection point of the diodes also connects to a section of microstrip, 26, with 
length that is preferably less than one tenth of the LO’s wavelength.  This 
microstrip line is diplex connected to the IF and RF, with the IF connection via a 
low pass filter, and the RF connection via a band pass filter.  The low pass filter is 
composed of series sections of high and low impedance microstrip lines, with a 
high impedance line connected to microstrip 26 to reject the RF.  The bandpass 
filter comprises microstrip line resonators that are capacitively end coupled.  
Microstrip 26 is kept relatively short so the high impedance provided to the IF by 
the first end-coupled capacitor does not appear as a short in the IF band.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  (a) PCB circuitry. 
 
 
(b) Waveguide mounted circuitry. 
Figure 6.24   Finline and microstrip millimeter-wave mixer. 
 
The LO currents run through the series diodes, with a virtual ground at 
the anode-to-cathode connection, which provides LO-IF and LO-RF isolation.  As 

366 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
with singly balanced mixers in general, this circuit balance also provides rejection 
to AM noise on the LO, and rejection of second order intermodulation products at 
the RF port.   Slotlines 62 and 64 keep slotline 60 from shorting out at the diodes, 
and essentially are the equivalent of the waveguide back short in conventional 
waveguide.  The RF and IF ground returns are provided by the diode connection 
at slotline 60, which also connect to the backside metallization under the RF and 
IF microstrip lines.  These currents have to run around the ends of slot lines 62 
and 64, which limits the upper end of the RF bandwidth, but should not degrade 
bandwidth of the lower frequency IF.     
 
 Another finline mixer is shown in Figure 6.25 that was disclosed in 1983 
[29].  Like the mixer of Figure 6.24, it has two metal blocks, between which is 
sandwiched a printed substrate.  All mixing elements are contained within the 
crossbar printed line. In contrast, it has two waveguide ports and one microstrip 
port. It is similar schematically to the mixer of Figures 6.21(a) and (b).  The LO is 
incident at the finline waveguide port, which transitions first to a balanced 
microstrip line, and then to a single ended microstrip line.  The length of the 
finline transition and balanced microstrip is at least three wavelengths at the LO 
center band.  Ground metallization begins on the back side of the substrate at the 
demarcation between balanced and single ended microstrip.  The microstrip line 
then connects to the two diodes at their anode-to-cathode connection point, so the 
LO excites the diodes 180 degrees out of phase.   
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.25  
 Complete finline millimeter-wave mixer. 
 
The diodes are connected in series, and located at the center of the RF 
waveguide at the point of maximum E-field.  The RF signal voltage is incident 
across the diodes, exciting them in equal phase.  A quarter wave waveguide back 
Two Diodes  
Coax Launch 

 
Diode Applications 
367 
short is located behind the diodes, to provide a voltage maximum across the 
diodes at the center of the RF frequency range.  A rectangular opening is made in 
the substrate’s ground plane to facilitate the back short.  The isolation between 
RF-LO and RF-IF is provided by the orthogonality between LO and IF microstrip 
lines and the RF waveguide.  LO-IF isolation is provided by the diplexer, which is 
composed of the blocking capacitor 56 in the LO microstrip, and the printed low 
pass filter in the IF line.  Typical operating frequency ranges are given as: RF & 
LO at 26 to 100 GHz, and IF at DC to 14 GHz.  
Another finline mixer disclosed in 1983 is shown in Figure 6.26 [30].  
This example makes use of finlines, slotlines, microstrip and coplanar lines 
printed in both sides of substrate. Like the mixer of Figure 6.24, the diodes are 
series connected across the slotline port, with the diode anode-to-cathode 
connection point diplex connected to the other two ports.  In contrast, the back 
side slotline arrangement is different, and the high frequency diplexed port uses 
finline instead of microstrip.  Like the mixer of Figure 6.25, this mixer has two 
waveguide ports, but both are finline and there is no waveguide back short.   
The RF signal is incident at the waveguide port with the finline to 
slotline transition that ends with the two diodes series connected across the 
slotline.  The anode-to-cathode connection point of the diodes connects to the 
center conductor of a coplanar waveguide (CPW). The CPW line is a quarter wave 
long at the RF center frequency. The end of the CPW opposite the diodes 
transitions to microstrip. At the demarcation between CPW and microstrip, 
backside metallization abruptly begins on the substrate to provide the microstrip 
ground plane.  At this same point, the grounded sides of the CPW form capacitive 
stubs that couple the CPW ground current to the microstrip ground, to facilitate 
the LO and IF ground returns.  These capacitive stubs, 31, 32, acting together 
comprise a short circuit to the slotline mode (odd-mode) of the CPW.  The quarter 
wave length of the CPW causes this short circuit to reflect back as an open circuit 
across the diodes, to maximize RF voltage.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 Full mixer circuit 

368 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
     
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.26  
Layout of finline millimeter-wave mixer on microwave flexible substrate. 
 
The LO signal is incident at the other waveguide port, which has a finline 
to microstrip transition.  In contrast to the mixer of Figure 6.15, this finline 
transitions to single ended microstrip without passing through an intermediary 
balanced microstrip line.  The microstrip line connects to a bandpass filter 
comprising two shorted stubs, 27-29, each a quarter wave long at the LO 
frequency and spaced at a quarter wave, which are present to short out the IF to 
improve LO-IF isolation.  The IF low pass filter comprises five transmission line 
sections, alternating between high and low impedance, that are all a quarter wave 
long at the RF and LO frequencies.  The first high impedance section 26 is shown 
in Figure 6.25 and the other sections are contained in another substrate not shown 
in the figure.   
 
 
6.2.7 Stripline and Microstrip (Single Sided) 
 
A major goal of mixer designs is to obtain a single sided circuit (i.e., one having 
only top-side metal patterning, and with unpatterned ground plane on the bottom 
side).  This approach is desirable not only for MMIC realizations but also for thick 
film, thin film, and low cost microwave soft susbtrates.  
 
The stripline mixer shown in Figure 6.27, which uses a ratrace magic-T 
hybrid, was disclosed in 1963 [31].  The application of the mixer was for an 
airborne FM altimeter using two antennas, one for transmit and the other for 
receive.  The antenna connectors are orthogonal to the plane of the stripline, and 
extend into the page in Figure 6.27.  The operating frequency was centered at 1.6 
GHz, and swept over 50 MHz. The ratrace hybrid has four ports that are arranged 
so the “sum” port connects to the two diode ports in phase, and the “difference” 
port connects to the two diode ports 180° out of phase.  The RF and LO, 
respectively, can be connected to either the sum or difference ports.  RF and LO 
(b)   Diode detail 

 
Diode Applications 
369 
power is delivered to the diodes, and the RF and LO ports are isolated from each 
other due to cancellation.   
In the mixer of Figure 6.27, the LO is connected to port 34a, which in 
turn is connected via a microstrip line to the sum port at point 40.  The sum port 
connects to each diode port via a quarter-wave long microstrip line that maintains 
an equal phase shift to both diode ports.  The RF signal connects to port 42a, and 
then to the difference port at point 44.  The difference port connects to diode port 
50 via a quarter-wave line, and to diode port 52 via a three-quarter-wave long line.  
Thus the difference port connects to the two diode ports 180° out of phase.  
Adding the lengths of the sum and difference port lines, the circumference of the 
ratrace hybrid is seen to be 1.5 wavelengths long at band center, which is the 
standard dimension for a ratrace. The diodes 54 and 56 are separated from the 
diode ports of the ratrace hybrid via a microstrip line that is about a half 
wavelength long at the operating frequency, 1.6 GHz.  Matching stubs 80 and 82 
are shorted to ground to provide impedance matching and the ground return path 
for the IF.  The IF is coupled from the diodes at points 64 and 66 via a lowpass 
filter, which in turn connect to an audio transformer (not shown) at points 72 and 
74.  The open circuit shunt stubs 58a and 58b provide the RF and LO ground 
returns.  They are short enough to provide a high impedance to the IF output, so 
RF ground return is accomplished without loading down the IF.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.27  
 Stripline balanced mixer.  Port connections: LO at 34a, Rx antenna at 42a, IF across 
72-74, TX antenna at 28b, and TX at 28a. 
 
The mixer of Figure 6.28 disclosed in 1970, is an improved ratrace mixer 
said to have reduced noise figure and delay distortion, [32].  The trade-off for the 
improved conversion efficiency is the small operating bandwidth of about fifteen 
percent. The RF is connected to the sum port at point 14.  The LO is connected at 
the difference port via microstrip 19.  The RF and LO ground returns are 
accomplished with open-circuited quarter-wave stubs 34a, b.  The open-circuited 
stubs 35a, b provide a low impedance ground return for the sum and second 
harmonic signals, enhancing efficiency without loading down the IF signal.  The 
IF output is taken by summing in-phase the outputs of the two diodes through a 
lowpass filter comprising high impedance lines 37a, b that provide a high 
impedance to the RF and LO, followed by microstrip line 38 that gives low 

370 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
impedance to RF and LO.   The IF ground return is obtained through the short-
circuit quarter-wave lines 33a, b, which provide a low impedance to the IF, and 
high impedance to the RF and LO.  The one-eighth wave long stubs 31a, b and 
32a, b are harmonic suppression filters that further improve conversion efficiency.   
The in-phase port capacitive coupled at point 21 is an auxiliary port that can be 
used for circuit monitoring. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.28   1970 Ratrace on microstrip or stripline. 
 
 
One difficulty with the ratrace hybrid is the sum or difference port can be 
surrounded (blocked) by the two IF lines, requiring a microstrip crossover for the 
RF or LO port.  The mixer of Figure 6.28 overcomes this problem by using an 
orthogonal connector directed into the page to obviate the need for the crossover. 
The practical realization of this mixer is in Figure 6.29 where the RF is connected 
to the sum port via a microstrip to waveguide transition at point 14.  The LO is 
applied via microstrip16. 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.29   Layout of microstrip ratrace mixer at bottom side of block converter. 
 
Another difficulty is the relatively large size of the ratrace hybrid.  The 
mixer of Figure 6.30, disclosed in 1979, overcomes both difficulties by using only 
half the ratrace ring [33].  The mixer is disclosed as having the RF connected to 

 
Diode Applications 
371 
line 16, the LO connected to line 15B, and the IF connected to line 18.  The RF is 
incident at the anode-to-cathode connection point of the two diodes.  The opposite 
ends of the diodes are connected to the ends of a microstrip line that is one half 
wavelength long at band center.  The LO is capacitive coupled to one end of the 
half wavelength line, and the IF is connected via a lowpass filter to the center 
point of the half wavelength line, thus forming a diplex filter.   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.30    Reduced ratrace mixer has a simple circuit layout but operating bandwidth is only 
about 5 % of the LO frequency. 
 
The half wavelength line provides a 180° phase shift at center frequency 
between the anode of diode 13 and the cathode of diode 12. This boundary 
condition provides the LO ground return, and the virtual ground at the diode 
connection point that isolates the RF and LO ports from each other.  The high 
impedance line of the IF lowpass filter and its subsequent low impedance open-
circuit stub are both sized to present a high impedance to the RF and LO signals, 
and a low impedance to the IF.  The IF ground return is provided by the short 
circuited stub 17 that is a quarter wave long at the RF and LO.  The line is a low 
impedance to the low frequency IF, and a high impedance to the RF and LO.  The 
capacitor at 14 is a high impedance to the IF, thus it keeps the IF current from 
leaking out the LO input.   
  
The next circuit in Figure 6.31, disclosed in 1986, can be considered 
another variant of the ratrace mixer [34].  The goal of this design is further size 
reduction by combining the RF preselection filter and the mixer balun.  Another 
goal is to provide a mixer with a high frequency IF output.  The RF is connected 
at point 1, the LO is at point 13, and the IF is at point 16.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.31   Reduced ratrace mixer with differential mode for RF signals and common mode for the 
LO. The mixer is bandwidth limited by the frequency dependency of line 8. 
RF 
RF 
IF 
LO 
IF 
LO 

372 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
The RF signal passes through the bandpass filter 3, and is coupled into 
the line 8.  Line 8 is approximately a half wave long at center frequency, thus it 
provides the ground return path for the RF current.  The LO is capacitive coupled 
to the mixer at the anode-to-cathode diode connection point.  The LO ground 
returns are provided by open-circuit stubs 9 and 10, which are a quarter-wave long 
at the LO frequency.  The LO and IF are isolated by means of diplex filtering 
from capacitor 13 and inductor 14.  The RF is isolated from LO and IF by circuit 
balance.  The IF return is not shown and can be accomplished by an inductor to 
ground.  
 
A single sided mixer, shown in Figure 6.32, using a Marchand balun 
instead of a ratrace hybrid was disclosed in 1990 [35].  It is built using low cost 
epoxy glass substrate material that has substantial insertion loss at higher 
microwave frequencies.  The mixer is able to operate up to about 10 GHz with 
low conversion loss by using a section of low loss coaxial line, soldered to the 
substrate to function as a Marchand balun.  The low loss coaxial cable comprises 
two quarter wave sections, L1 and L2.  The center conductors of L1 and L2 are 
connected in series, but their outer conductors are separated from each other at the 
middle of their combined length.  The RF is connected to the center conductor at 
the left end of L1, and the center conductor at the right end of L2 is open with the 
outside conductor shorted to ground.  Since L2 is a quarter wave long, the short 
circuit at the right end of L2 causes a voltage maximum at the outer conductor at 
the left end of L2.  And since the current entering L2 equals the current exiting L1, 
the voltage at the right end of L1 is substantially equal and opposite to that at the 
left end of L1.  The two voltages would be exactly equal and opposite if the 
impedance at the RF input were zero ohms, but the impedance is presumably 50 
ohms, which is still low relative to that at the right end of L2. The voltage 
difference across the disconnected outer conductors excites equal and opposite 
currents running in the microstrip lines to diodes D1 and D2.  The field lines from 
the resulting odd mode in the coupled microstrip lines are not totally contained 
within the lossy epoxy glass substrate, thus reducing loss.  Thus the RF signal is 
divided and directed to the two diodes 180° out of phase.  The RF ground returns 
are composed of the stubs S1 and S2, and the low impedance LO connection point 
at capacitors C1 and C2.  The LO is connected in-phase to the diodes, with current 
return provided by the open circuit stubs at the cathode ends of the diodes.  The IF 
is connected differentially at the stubs S1 and S2, via inductors CH1 and CH2 that 
are high impedances to the RF and LO.  The IF is blocked from leaking out the 
LO by capacitors C1 and C2.  The IF ground return is provided by the ground vias 
at the end of the microstrip lines running under the coaxial lines.  The length of 
the coaxial line is on the order of quarter wave length and the diameter is 
suggested by the author to be in the order of one-tenth of the cable length.  A 
mixer was built with 11 mm of cable length and 1.2 mm diameter on top of a 0.8 
mm thick eploxy glass substrate, operating over 4.2-4.4 GHz with LO-RF 
isolation of 26 dB, and NF at 10 dB.      

 
Diode Applications 
373 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.32  
 Microstrip mixer with coaxial line Marchand balun. 
 
 
6.2.8 Stripline and Microstrip (Double Sided) 
 
Conventional microstrip circuits are patterned on only one side of a substrate or 
PCB, with the other side fully metalized and grounded. In double sided circuits, 
both sides of the substrate are patterned, generally to obtain balanced transmission 
lines. Double sided balanced mixer circuits are generally more broadband than 
single sided ones. The extra degree of freedom can be crucial in allowing the three 
circuits (RF, LO, and IF) to occupy the same physical metal while remaining 
isolated from each other and  completing their own circuit paths without impeding 
the others.  Double sided construction allows magic-T hybrids to be built using 
balanced microstrip, slotline, CPW, and combinations thereof, in contrast to single 
sided microstrip that relies almost exclusively on microstrip line length that is 
inherently narrow band. Double sided construction improves the ability to 
simultaneously obtain broadband balun structures and current return paths to the 
RF, LO, and IF.     
An early circuit built with double sided construction, shown in Figure 
6.33, was disclosed in 1967 [36].   It uses a Marchand balun composed of a 
microstrip line 34, on the top side of the substrate, crossing over a slotline located 
on the bottom side, to form the difference port of a magic-T.  In the following 
discussion the LO is incident at the difference port, and the RF is incident at the 
sum port. The microstrip line crosses perpendicularly to the slotline, and continues 
to form an open circuited quarter wave shunt stub 33.  The quarter wave stub 
provides a broadband virtual ground that effectively connects the microstrip line 
to one side of the slotline.  The slotline opens up the ground plane under the 
microstrip and excites a wave in the slot.  The slotline 38 divides the ground 
planes under the microstrip and behaves as a waveguide so that it provides a high 
impedance at the crossover point since it is a quarter wave length long from the 
top back short. Thus the frequency response of the balun is dependent on the 

374 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
dimensions of the microstrip open circuit stub and the slotline dimensions.  
Bandwidth is maximized with a low impedance microstrip stub and high 
impedance slotline backshort.   The sum port 42 is connected across the slot line 
balun by microstrip lines 40 and 45, which at low frequencies short out the slot 
line. However, when the combined length of lines 40 and 45 are a certain length, 
they present a high impedance in parallel with the slotline. Under this condition 
the LO signal transfers from the slotline to the microstrip lines, and couples to 
ports 39 and 41. It is at those ports that currents from the sum (RF) port and 
difference (LO) ports coexist, and travel toward diodes 54 and 56 via microstrip 
lines 43, 44, 47, and 49, which provide impedance matching.  The other side of 
the diodes from lines 44 and 48 are connected to low impedance open circuit 
shunt stubs that provide the broadband ground returns to the RF and LO currents.  
The IF currents generated by the diodes are summed in phase by the high 
impedance microstrip lines connecting to line 53 that in turn connects to the IF 
port.  The disclosure provides equations governing the impedance relationships 
within the balun, based on the topology being similar to the Marchand balun.  The 
impedance of the microstrip line 37 is Za; the impedance of the open circuit stub 
33 is Zb; and the impedance of slot line 38 is Zab.  Defining R as the balanced 
impedance across the slotline gap, R2 is selected to be approximately equal ZabZb. 
The LO impedance is then given by the familiar Marchand balun equation, (4.12).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 6.33  Double-sided balanced mixer built with microstrip and slotline structure. 
 
LO 
RF 
IF 

 
Diode Applications 
375 























0
0
0
2
cot
2
tan
2
tan
f
f
jZ
f
f
jZ
R
f
f
jRZ
jx
r
Z
b
ab
ab



   
  
       (6.6) 
 
Assuming the impedance of line 32 equals that of the LO generator, a 
matched condition is obtained when the following condition is true:  
 





2
1
2
R
Z
Z
R
Z
ab
b
a
  
 
 
      
       (6.7) 
 
The mixer of Figure 6.33 was built using Teflon fiberglass board and 
gave the following performance:  Conversion loss was 8 to 10 dB over about 1.5 
to 3.5 GHz, with +13 to +16 dBm LO power.  LO to RF isolation measured 18 to 
20 dB.  Given (4.1) for input impedance to the balun as a function of frequency, 
and given the diodes in series to the LO and in parallel to the RF, mismatch loss 
was calculated at 1.89 dB for LO, and 0.76 dB for RF.   
 
 
6.2.9 Coplanar Waveguide and Slotline 
 
The goal of the mixer in Figure 6.34 is to minimize conversion loss, with the 
tradeoff being reduced bandwidth. Disclosed in 1974, this mixer uses image and 
sum enhancement to obtain a very low measured conversion loss of 2.6 to 3.15 dB 
[37].  The mixer uses slotline and CPW to form the hybrid junction where the two 
GaAs Schottky diodes are located, as shown in the enlarged view of Figure 6.35.   
The dotted lines in Figure 6.34 represent metalized traces on the top side 
of the substrate, and the solid lines represent metal patterning on the bottom 
ground plane side.  The LO input is coupled to microstrip line 26 via the 
directional filter ring 52.  The IF output is taken directly from microstrip line 26, 
with isolation between LO and IF provided by the directional filter.  Microstrip 
line 26 transitions from the top to bottom side through via 44, to connect to the 
left end of CPW line 22.  Both diodes are located at the opposite (right) end of the 
CPW line, connected between the end of the CPW line and the two ground planes 
separated by slot line 18.  The RF signal input is incident at 50 ohm microstrip 
line 31 and impedance transforms via microstrip line 32 to the 100 ohm slot line 
transition.  The RF signal energy then travels along slot line 18 to appear across 
the diodes.  Thus the diodes are connected in parallel relative to the CPW line that 
conveys the LO and IF signals, and they are connected in series relative to the 
slotline conveying the RF signal.   The diodes are in parallel for both the LO and 
IF signals so the diode impedance is halved at these frequencies. The diodes are in 

376 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
series for the RF signals so the diode impedance is doubled and provide a close 
match to the 100 ohm slot line impedance.   
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.34   Image and sum enhanced mixer. The solid lines indicate top side slots engraved in the 
metalized ground plane. The dashed lines indicate far side microstrip line circuitry. 
 
 
Image and sum enhancement is accomplished by providing low 
impedances approaching short circuits across the diodes at these frequencies.  
While the low impedance allows little or no voltage to exist across the diodes at 
the image and sum frequencies, the associated currents can flow.  Referring to 
Figure 6.34, the electrical lengths of L1 and L2 equal a quarter wave at the sum 
frequency, and the combined electrical length of L1 and L2 equals a quarter wave 
at the signal frequency.  Thus the short circuits at the ends of the slotlines L1 
transform to short circuits at the diodes at the sum frequency, and they transform 
to open circuits at the diodes at the signal frequency. 
    
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.35   Detail of the hybrid junction including the diodes. 
 
A low impedance is also provided across the diodes at the image 
frequency by the three-element image reject filter 40, formed by the microstrip 
elements above the slotline 18.  The measured performance is described in Table 

 
Diode Applications 
377 
6.1. An equivalent electrical circuit representing the mixer is found in Figure 6.36 
and it is easily related to the fields located within the coplanar line 22, 23, 24.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.36  
Equivalent electrical circuit indicating the electric fields and the open circuits imposed 
by the short quarterwave length slotline stubs.  
 
Table 6.1 
 Measured Data for the Mixer 
      
9.4 GHz
7.8 GHz
1.0 GHz
3.15 dB
2.6 dB
40 mW
+13 dBm
>25 dB
<1.4:1
Input P1dB
Image band isolation
VSWR (across signal band)
Conversion Loss
1.0 GHz band
0.5 GHz band
Signal frequency
LO frequency
Signal Bandwidth
LO Power
 
 
The singly balanced mixer of Figure 6.37 was disclosed in 1985 [38] 
along with a doubly balanced version.  It uses microstrip and CPW lines to form a 
hybrid junction.  The mixers disclosed followed similar work published in 1980 
by Ogawa et al [39, 40].  The RF and LO inputs are connected to CPW lines, with 
the LO CPW center conductor connecting to the common point of the diodes in 
the CPW mode, so the diodes are in parallel to the LO.  The E-fields established in 
the CPW by the LO have the polarity depicted in Figure 6.37 by the solid arrows, 
and the fields established by the RF are depicted by the dashed arrows.  The RF 
CPW line connects across the LO CPW line at the point where the LO CPW line 
necks down to have narrowed gaps and line width in the CPW going toward the 
diodes.   
The LO CPW line going toward the LO input has much wider line and 
gap widths that present a high impedance back short to the two slotline modes set 
up by the RF CPW connection.  This high impedance seen by the RF signal 
looking toward the LO port causes the RF energy to propagate toward the diodes, 
with the resulting electric fields set up so the diodes are in series to the RF and LO 

378 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
electric fields.  LO to RF isolation is achieved because the center conductor and 
ground planes of the RF CPW are both connected to the grounds of the LO CPW.  
This circuit orthogonality allows very little of the LO voltage to become present 
across the RF CPW line. The RF and LO ground returns are provided by the CPW 
immediately where the diodes are connected, thus the upper end of the RF and LO 
frequency ranges are not limited by parasitics from their ground returns.    The 
gaps in the CPW line prior to the diodes widen out to provide a higher impedance 
to the RF and LO modes for impedance matching.  The RF and LO bandwidths 
are limited by the CPW line lengths and impedances, and the electrical length of 
the top side ground metal running from the diodes to the substrate edge where the 
top side ground metal connects to the bottom side metal.  The electrical distance 
from diodes to substrate edge is ideally a quarter wave at the center operating 
frequency.  As frequency decreases below this point, approaching DC, the 
impedance in parallel with the diodes approaches a short circuit.  The same is true 
as frequency increases toward the point of having a half-wave electrical distance 
that also presents a short circuit across the diodes.   
LO to IF isolation is provided by diplex filtering.  The LO is high pass 
filtered to the diodes by the blocking capacitor on the LO CPW line at the gap in 
the center conductor metal trace. The IF is low pass filtered to the diodes by the 
alternating high and low impedance microstrip lines between the diodes and the IF 
port.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.37  
Mixer built using CPW transmission lines. The detail illustrates how the fields from RF 
and LO are injected into the CPW transmission line. 
 
The low pass filter leads off with a high impedance connection to the 
diodes to keep the LO from shorting to ground in the low impedance open circuit 
stubs.  Bottom side metallization exists on the lower half of the substrate between 
the IF port and the diodes, to provide the microstrip ground for the IF low-pass 
ELO 
ERF 

 
Diode Applications 
379 
filter.  The IF ground return currents run along the top side metal, from the diode 
connection points to the substrate edges where the topside ground metal connects 
to the bottom side ground metal.  Thus some considerable parasitic phase shift 
exists in the IF ground return path, which limits the IF bandwidth. The lower end 
of the RF and LO bandwidths generally coincide with the upper end of the IF 
bandwidth. The previous mixer circuits of Figures 6.34 and 6.37 were built using 
ceramic substrate materials.  Double sided mixers are also commonly built using 
“soft” dielectric materials composed of Teflon based materials.  The mixer of 
Figure 6.38, disclosed in 1976, uses soft dielectric, which allows a balanced 
microstrip line to be cut out and twisted 180 degrees to form the Magic-T hybrid 
junction [41].  This junction provides the phase relationships to the diodes to 
achieve singly balanced operation, and obtain isolation between the RF and LO 
ports.  The RF port is at point 14, with the RF signal applied to the two diodes in 
phase.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.38    Singly balanced mixer formed by cutting the soft dielectric material and twisting the 
balanced microstrip line 180° to form the hybrid junction. This is similar to the ratrace 
with the half wave long line replaced by a 180 phase shifter. 
 
The LO port is at point 16, with the LO signal applied 180 degrees out of 
phase to the diodes.   The RF and LO ports are thus isolated from each other, and 
the correct phase relationships are presented to the diodes.  IF currents are 
summed at metalized pad 35 that provides capacitive low impedance ground 
returns for the RF and LO signals, but does not short out the low frequency IF.  
Bondwire 37 functions as an inductor that forms a low pass filter with capacitance 
from metalized pads 35 and 39.  Operation over 26 to 40 GHz with VSWR less 
than 2:1 is claimed.  The mixer of Figure 6.38 is very similar to the rat race mixer 
by providing the same RF and LO phase relationships to the diodes; however, it 
does so without using quarter wave lengths and thus is more broad band than the 
rat race hybrid.   
Figure 6.39 shows another variation of the rat race hybrid that has 
improved bandwidth, but by routing the IF on the opposite side of the circuit 

380 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
board from the RF and LO, thus obviating the IF crossover that limits the IF upper 
frequency [42].  The left of Figure 6.39 shows the IF circuitry on substrate 31, and 
the right side shows the RF/LO circuitry on substrate 21 seen from the back side.  
The mixer is constructed by flipping substrate 21 such that the letters D and G, 
respectively, align with each other.  A metal ground plane is placed between 
substrates 21 and 31. The circle AM is three half-wavelengths long, so that the LO 
signals are 180 out of phase at the diodes and the RF signals are in phase to the 
diodes.  The diodes are placed in holes at 22 and 23 so they connect, respectively, 
to the IF circuitry at points 32 and 33.  Microstrip lines T22/T23 are 44 ohms, and 
T12/T13 are 72 ohms; both provide impedance matching between the diodes and 
the IF port.  The DC ground return for currents caused by rectification of the LO 
is provided by the inductive microstrip line of length L, which ends in the ground 
via 35.   The frequency of operation is 9.3 to 9.9 GHz, with an IF of 1860 MHz. 
The LO ground return takes place by open stubs filters P2, P3. They also give a 
low impedance to RF signals if IF frequency is sufficiently low.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.39   Ratrace mixer with IF (left) on opposite side of board from RF and LO (right). 
 
A major challenge with singly balanced mixers is obtaining the LO 
ground return without shorting out the RF signal.  The ground return is readily 
obtained in doubly balanced mixers by the second pair of diodes, which 
unfortunately are not available in singly balanced mixers.   
The mixer of Figure 6.40, disclosed in 1985, solves this problem of 
shorting the RF, and also reduces the physical size, by capacitively coupling the 
negative RF line to ground [43].  The LO and IF signals use a grounded CPW line 
whose center conductor ties to the joinning point of the two diodes.  Thus the 
diodes are in parallel to the LO and IF.  The opposite ends of the diodes are 
connected to the ground planes adjacent to the GCPW center conductor, which 
provide the LO and IF ground returns.  The LO and IF are isolated from each 
other by a diplex filter comprising a high pass series capacitor for the LO, and a 
series inductor and shunt capacitor lowpass filter for the IF.   
The RF is connected across the diodes in series in such a way that the RF 
is not shorted out by the LO/IF ground lines.  This is accomplished by connecting 

 
Diode Applications 
381 
the positive RF balanced microstrip line to a diode at one GCPW ground plane, 
using an inductive wire.  The negative RF balanced microstrip line on the bottom 
side of the substrate connects to the opposite diode lead on the top side of the 
substrate, at the other GCPW ground plane, through a via and then using an 
inductive wire 29.  The negative RF balanced microstrip on the bottom side of the 
substrate is capacitively coupled to the ground plane with a gap 34 cut in the 
metal.  The capacitive loading is claimed to reduce the size of the RF balun, as 
well as keep it from shorting across the ground plane.  The diodes are in series to 
the RF, and they provide the RF current return.  It appears that the RF and LO 
frequencies may not overlap each other.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.40   Singly balanced mixer using RF balun with capacitively coupled ground return. 
 
 
6.2.10 MMIC Singly Balanced Diode Mixers 
 
An early MMIC mixer, shown in Figure 6.41, was disclosed in 1968 that uses a 
quadrature coupler to deliver 9.5 GHz RF and 8.5 GHz LO signals to the mixer 
diodes for use in a radar [44].  A silicon substrate was employed, with diffused PN 
junctions.  An off chip IF transformer was used to collect the differential 500 
MHz IF currents from the two surface oriented diodes at 22 and 23.  The mixer is 
claimed to have 5 dB conversion loss.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.41  
Singly balanced quadrature MMIC mixer. 
 
RF
LO 
RF 
LO 
IF 
22 
23 
IF+
IF- 

382 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Another MMIC circuit, operating at 94 GHz and measuring 0.035 by 
0.080 inches is shown in Figure 6.42 [45].  It was disclosed in 1970 and includes 
an integrated 31.3 GHz Gunn oscillator, diode frequency tripler, and mixer 
integrated onto a 0.004 inch thick GaAs substrate.   The Gunn diode oscillator is 
located at the left, with the diode consisting of area 26, which is a heavily doped 
n-type region.  A varactor diode frequency tripler is located in the middle, which 
has conversion loss as low as 4 dB.   
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.42      Integrated Gunn oscillator, frequency tripler, and mixer. 
 
The rat race mixer is at the right side, with the LO injected on the left 
side of the ring at point 94a.  The RF signal port connects to microstrip line 20, 
and the 100 MHz IF is extracted through the bondwire 22a.  The GaAs mixer 
diodes are at 100 and 98.  The microstrip line 103 forms the RF and LO ground 
returns, as well as part of the lowpass filter for the IF.   
The MMIC mixer of Figure 6.43, disclosed in 1985, takes advantage of 
the two balanced coplanar strips 20 and 21, feeding a bow-tie antenna, to form a 
hybrid junction by connecting the two strips to the two outer lines of a three-strip 
coplanar transmission line 22, 23, and 24 [46].  The three coplanar strips run 
parallel to each other, with the center strip connected to the diode common 
connection point.  Thus the two diodes 13 and 14 are connected in series across 
the two balanced strips, and in parallel with the three-strip coplanar line that runs 
to the LO and IF ports.  The electrical length of the coplanar strips between the 
hybrid junction and the bow-tie antenna is a quarter wave at the signal frequency.   
The dotted line 26 indicates the demarcation between where back side ground 
metallization is applied below the line, and not applied above it. The circuit was 
designed for operation at 30 GHz with an IF of 2 GHz.  
Beginning at the diodes, the three-strip coplanar line runs a half wave 
length to a point where DC is injected onto the two ground strips, and the center 
strip continues on to the IF and LO.  Positive DC is injected on one ground strip, 
and negative on the other, according to the diode polarity to improve diodes 
sensitivity.  DC is injected onto both ground strips via low pass filters composed 

 
Diode Applications 
383 
of alternating 90 ohm and 20 ohm microstrip lines, which reject the RF and LO by 
25 dB.  Open circuit, 30 ohm, microstrip shunt stubs that are a quarter wave long 
at the LO frequency are also connected to the points where DC is injected to the 
ground strips, to provide the RF and LO ground returns.  The IF and LO are diplex 
filtered from the center strip to provide LO to IF isolation. The IF low pass filter 
comprises 90 ohm series microstrip lines with 30 ohm shunt stubs.  The IF low 
pass filter rejects RF and LO by 30 dB, and allows the IF to go to DC for doppler 
radar and phase detector applications.  The LO high pass filter consists of two 
coupled microstrip lines that form a capacitor to block the low frequency IF. The 
RF and LO are isolated through mode orthogonality at the hybrid junction.  
Broadside coupled hair pin filter sections can be added to the back side of the 
balanced coplanar strips, between the diodes and the bow-tie antenna, to short 
across the lines at the sum and image frequencies, in turn to minimize conversion 
loss and noise figure.  A doubly balanced version of the mixer is also disclosed. 
An equivalent electrical circuit to represent the transmission line functions is in 
the next figure, facilitating understanding of mixer operation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     (a)  Full circuit                                                    (b) Diode detail 
Figure 6.43   MMIC mixer connected directly to a bow tie antenna using coplanar strips to build a 
hybrid junction.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.44   Equivalent circuit for the singly balanced planar mixer MMIC with bow-tie antenna. 
 

384 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
6.3 DOUBLY BALANCED 
 
The doubly balanced topology continues to be the work horse of diode mixers.  
Compared with single-ended and singly balanced circuits, the doubly balanced 
topology offers significantly better IM rejection and port-to-port isolation, with 
two of the three frequency bands able to overlap without filtering depending on 
type of mixer.  And all this with substantially the same implementation cost in 
terms of materials, labor, and space as the singly balanced. The doubly balanced 
mixer originated in the late 1920s, with the first patent granted in 1932 [47].  The 
goals of this mixer were to obtain isolation and IM rejection using circuit balance 
with copper oxide diode rectifiers.  The mixer comprises two diode pairs, each 
connected cathode-to-cathode as shown in Figure 6.45. The balanced LO connects 
to terminals 5,6, with the RF and IF at terminals 7 – 8 and 9 – 10, respectively; 
however, the RF, LO, and IF can be applied at any of the three specified ports.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.45   Doubly balanced mixer using two diode pairs, 1932. 
 
This mixer was simplified to the modern doubly balanced circuit 
comprising one diode ring quad and two center tapped transformers in a patent 
granted in 1935 [48], shown in Figure 6.46.  This circuit dramatically simplified 
the implementation by cutting the number of transformers in half while providing 
the same functionality.  These early doubly balanced mixers were realized using 
conventional transformers with magnetically coupled wire coils.  Observe that 
generator 5 can switch the diodes on/off  but it is not impressed either at the 
output load or at the input generator. Let's assume the signal at 11 is the 
modulating signal. In a given cycle of generator 5 it will switch on diodes 1 – 3 
which allows signal 11 to be impressed on load 7. in the next cycle generator 5 
will switch on diodes 2 – 4, causing the signal from 11 to appear at load 7 in 
reversed phase.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.46   First patented diode ring quad doubly balanced mixer, 1934. 
 
LO 
RF 
IF 

 
Diode Applications 
385 
This action represents a modulated carrier wave with carrier suppressed. 
For proper operation it is desirable the generator or LO signal 5 is of much higher 
amplitude than the modulating signal 11.             
       
 
6.3.1 Lumped Element 
 
The DB mixer of Figure 6.47 was disclosed in 1979 for use in a television receiver 
[49].  Such a high volume commercial application requires low cost parts and 
construction techniques.  The goal of this design is to simplify assembly and 
provide low conversion loss and low IM distortion over a relatively broad 
bandwidth. This DB mixer design is an attempt to minimize the parasitic 
reactances normally associated with wire and core baluns.  The mixer comprises a 
metal ground plane over which two dual hole (binocular) ferrite cores are placed.  
Both cores have a glass packaged axial leaded Schottky barrier diode located 
inside their two holes.  The diode leads are connected either to the ground plane or 
to a capacitive plate separated from the ground plane by a dielectric layer.  Each 
core hole also has a metal ground return wire passing through it, 130, 136 and 
230, 236. Both edges of return wire are shorted to ground carrying a current which 
is reverse the current through the diode. This is important to neutralize the core 
magnetization, reducing inductive reactance to these currents, thus increasing 
bandwidth of operation. The RF is applied in opposing phase to capacitors C4 and 
C6, which induce currents in the four diodes as they are being switched on and off 
by the LO.  The signal current in diodes 220 and 120, respectively, return to 
ground through capacitors C5 and C3.  The signal currents in diodes 222 and 122, 
respectively, return to ground directly through ground connections 224 and 124.  
The IF currents are taken differentially through the windings of the RF 
transformer 52 that resonate with capacitors C4 and C6.   
 
                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.47  
DB mixer with LO balun having no windings on the ferrite cores. 
 

386 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The DB mixer of Figure 6.48 includes an inductor in parallel with the LO 
balun connections to the diode ring [50].  The inductor is said to resonate out the 
averaged diode junction capacitance. This nonlinear capacitance contributes to 
degrade intermodulation and its effect is neutralized by a resonating inductance 
placed in parallel with the diodes at the LO frequency. The inductance is 
orthogonal to the RF so it does not degrade conversion performance. Notice the IF 
is extracted from the center tap of RF transformer.  
 
                             
 
 
Figure 6.48 
 DB mixer using inductor to resonate out parasitic capacitance. 
 
The DB mixer of Figure 6.49 is said to minimize the time for the diodes 
to switch between conductive and non-conductive states [51].  The goal is 
improved IM distortion.  The reduced time is due to the inductor 14, which acts as 
a current source.  The RF is connected across nodes 1 and 2; the LO is connected 
across nodes 5 and 6, and the IF output is across nodes 7 and 8.    
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.49  
Doubly balanced mixer that minimizes time for diodes to alternate between on and off 
states. 
 
 
RF
IF
LO

 
Diode Applications 
387 
 
Each of the four diodes has one of the four possible RF/LO phase 
combinations, and the IF is connected to pass only mixing products with odd RF 
and odd LO harmonics; thus, this circuit qualifies as a DB mixer even though it 
deviates from the normal ring and star configurations.  The similarity of inductor 
usage depicted in Figures 6.48 and 6.49 is striking. 
 
 
6.3.2 Coaxial Transmission Line 
 
The doubly balanced mixer of Figure 6.50 uses the star mixer topology [52] that 
was introduced in 1937 with vacuum tube technology [53].  The invention uses a 
Magic-T composed of transmission lines to provide the four diodes with the 
appropriate relative phase angles for the RF and LO signals.  The transmission 
lines can be realized in any medium, including waveguide, twisted pair wires, 
coaxial lines, stripline, or microstrip. In contrast to more narrow band mixer 
circuits, like the ratrace, that depend on line lengths to provide phase cancellation, 
the wide bandwidth of this design is achieved by arranging the transmission lines 
so the RF and LO baluns connect to the diodes while presenting to each other 
broadband high impedance back-shorts.   
In the schematic of Figure 6.50 port (1) has connections 1,1’ and port (2) 
has connections 2,2’.  This mixer was introduced by Mouw, and a magic-T that is 
discussed in chapter 4.  Port (1) can be the RF input and port (2) the LO input, or 
vice versa.  The IF port is connected to node 39, at the junction of the four 
resistors R31, R32, R41 and R42 representing the diodes at the LO input drive 
level. Port (1) has two transmission lines connected in parallel to it, as does port 
(2).   The four transmission lines, 21 – 24, are arranged to isolate port (1), port (2), 
and node 39 from each other, while delivering the RF and LO energy in the 
correct relative phase angles to the four diodes.  Transmission lines 21 and 22 are 
connected in parallel to port (1), while transmission lines 23 and 24 are connected 
in parallel to port (2).  The other ends of transmission lines 21 – 24 connect to the 
diodes and to each other at nodes 3, 3’, 4, and 4’.  Transmission line 23 connects 
across resistors R31 and R41, while line 24 connects across R32 and R42.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.50   Schematic of a doubly balanced star mixer. The diodes, represented as resistors in the 
figure on the right, insert into the mixer at 3, 3', 4, and 4'. 
 

388 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The point where R31 and R41 connect together, and the point where R32 
and R42 connect together, both present virtual grounds to transmission lines 23 
and 24, and so are isolated from port (2).  Thus, relative to port (2), these two 
points can be connected together to form node 39.  Similarly, transmission line 21 
connects across R41 and R32, while line 22 connects across R31 and R42, with 
virtual grounds at the two resistor connections relative to port (1).  Since port (1) 
presents equal positive voltages at nodes 3 and 4, and equal negative voltages at 
nodes 3’ and 4’, both port (2) and node 39 are isolated from port (1).  Similarly, 
port (1) and node 39 are isolated from port (2).  Thus ports (1) and (2) and node 
39 are isolated from each other, and connected to the four diodes.  This hybrid 
junction is limited in frequency as follows:  At the diode-end of transmission line 
23, its two wires connect to the two positive wires 26 and 28 of transmission lines 
21 and 22;  And at the diode-end of transmission line 24, its two wires connect to 
the two  negative wires 27 and 29 of lines 21 and 22.  Thus the positive wires of 
lines 21 and 22 form their own high impedance transmission line, as do the 
negative wires of lines 21 and 22, comprising two high impedance lines 
presenting back-shorts, respectively, to lines 23 and 24.  The reverse is also true, 
as the positive and negative wires of transmission lines 23 and 24 present high 
impedance back-shorts to transmission lines 21 and 22.  As frequency is swept, 
the impedance of these back-shorts go through peaks and nulls that establish the 
mixer’s bandwidth. With careful physical arrangement of transmission lines and 
the use of ferrite absorber, many octaves of bandwidth can be achieved for the RF 
and LO circuits.  In contrast, the IF bandwidth is limited by the inductance of its 
ground return. The IF current must flow through the ground (negative) wires of 
transmission lines 21 – 24 to the RF and LO connectors, and then back through 
the mixer housing walls to get to the ground side of the IF connector.  Figure 5.50 
shows additional IF ground returns 36, 37, 38 that if used must not short out the 
RF and LO, constraining the IF to be below the RF and LO frequency ranges.   
 
 
6.3.3  Waveguide Mixers 
 
The DB star mixer of Figure 6.51 has wider bandwidth than previous waveguide 
mixer designs, allowing for an RF to LO frequency ratio greater than 2:1 [54]. 
This is achieved by locating the diodes immediately adjacent to each other, rather 
than at multiples of a quarter wavelength as in previous waveguide mixers, which 
generally were all singly balanced.  The LO is presented to the four diodes via the 
coaxial transmission line on the left of figure. The RF is presented to the diodes 
via the waveguide section running perpendicular to the page and toward the 
reader.  And the IF is connected to the diodes via the coaxial line low pass filter 
on the right of figure.  Thus the IF and LO ports are isolated from the RF through 
mode orthogonality, and the LO and IF ports are isolated from each other through 
a diplex filter.  

 
Diode Applications 
389 
 
The diodes are located at the middle of the waveguide’s long dimension 
(horizontal), where the electric field is at its maximum for the TE10 mode.  The RF 
port waveguide back-short extends into the page, and terminates in a short circuit.  
The distance between the diodes and the short circuit is a quarter wave length at 
the RF frequency, which maximizes the RF voltage across the four diodes.  The IF 
connection to the diodes is via a rectangular metal bar that forms a stripline within 
the waveguide cavity, then protrudes through the waveguide wall to form the 
coaxial line low pass filter that the blocks RF and LO leakage out the IF port.  
Thus the RF signal is impressed across the series-parallel connected four diodes, 
and isolated from the IF port via mode orthogonality and filtering from the coaxial 
low pass filter.   
 
The LO port begins as a coaxial line at the left of figure.  Two other 
coaxial lines connect in parallel to the first coaxial line, with the opposite ends of 
their center conductors connected across the four diodes at the middle of the 
waveguide.  The polarity of the LO is such that LO current alternately passes 
through diodes 1 – 4 then diodes 3 – 2 as LO polarity changes.  The result of the 
RF and LO connections to the diodes is that each of the four diodes has one of the 
four possible RF/LO relative phase combinations.  The IF is connected to the 
diodes to reinforce mixing products containing odd RF and odd LO harmonics.  
The IF ground return is via quarter wave stubs 11, which offer a high impedance 
to the high frequency RF and LO signals, while offering a low impedance to the 
lower frequency IF signal. 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.51   Waveguide doubly balanced diode mixer with coaxial ports for the LO and IF signals. 
The RF port is the waveguide perpendicular to the paper, and the IF return for diodes 
3,4 is by means of shorted quarter wavelength stubs 11. 
 
The doubly balanced mixer of Figure 6.52 uses finline construction, [55].  
Typical conversion loss of this mixer is 6 dB at Ka band.  The mixer allows for 
either SB or DB operation depending on how the diodes are connected.  The 
figure depicts the diodes connected to form a DB mixer.  The mixer is constructed 
LO 
IF 

390 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
using waveguide split into two halves (blocks) with the break located where the 
current flow is at a minimum.  The assembly comprises the two metal halves, the 
PCB dielectric circuit card, the IF SMA connector, and the four beam lead 
Schottky barrier diodes.  Assembly simply involves attaching the beam lead 
diodes and SMA connector to the suspended substrate card, and screwing the two 
blocks together.  The mixer provides low conversion loss and has superior 
spurious suppression compared with SB mixers.  It also can be biased for low LO 
power operation.     
A waveguide hybrid junction, disclosed in [56], combines energy from 
the LO in the H-plane waveguide 20 and RF in the E-plane waveguide 28.  The 
waveguide ports are perpendicular to each other, thus they are isolated electrically 
from each other, and they set up modes inside the assembly that are also 
orthogonal to each other. Two finline transitions 70 and 72, couple to the LO and 
RF electric fields, with the LO coupled in equal phase to both finlines, and the RF 
coupled in opposing phase.  The RF and LO electric fields transition down the 
finline traces, going from wide gap to increasingly narrow gap, where at the most 
narrow gap, the resulting slotline splits into two series connected slotlines, each of 
which is terminated by a diode.  Thus both finlines are terminated in two series 
connected diodes that each comprise a diode pair.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.52   Doubly balanced finline mixer.  Mixer construction is shown on the left. The top and 
middle right show the finline transitioning into slots where the diodes are mounted, 
with two options for diode connection. Bottom right indicates the electrical equivalent 
circuit. 
 
LO 
RF 

 
Diode Applications 
391 
The common point of each diode pair connects to a low impedance section at the 
end of a microstrip low pass filter, which is at a virtual ground relative to the 
finline. The opposite, high impedance ends of both low pass filters are connected 
in parallel, with the resulting connection point being the IF port.  Thus the IF is 
isolated from the two finlines, and so also the RF and LO ports, by means of the 
virtual ground connections and high frequency rejection from the low pass filters.   
 
 
6.3.4  Microstrip 
 
Producing a broadband fully planar (single-sided) microstrip DB mixer remains an 
important challenge in the field of mixer design.  This is certainly important for 
MMIC realizations, but also for reduced cost thick-film, thin-film, and SMT 
construction.  The current state of the art involves using various combinations of 
Lange couplers to connect to the nonlinear mixing devices either in quadrature or 
in 0°/180° relative phase [57].  The current state of the art for MMICs also 
involves using broadside coupled balanced spiral transformers, which are the 
smallest realizations.   
For many years the ratrace hybrid has been the most popular circuit for 
planar microstrip balanced mixers.  The mixer of Figure 6.53 uses a ratrace hybrid 
for the LO and IF, and a bifilar wire balun, T3, to realize a DB mixer for a 
television receiver application, [58].  The DB mixer uses four Schottky diodes 
arranged in a ring configuration with a paralleled resistor-capacitor in series with 
each diode for self bias.  Rectified LO current circulates around the ring, with 
equal current in all four diodes, so the voltage developed across the four resistors 
is also equal.   
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.53   Ratrace balun applied to ring mixer for LO insertion and IF extraction. The RF signal 
is inserted by a bifilar transformer.  
 

392 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The result is a higher RF input level can be applied before the 1-dB input 
compression point is reached.  The capacitors pass the RF and LO current to 
minimize resistive losses to them.  In addition, four shunt open circuit shunt stubs 
short the image frequency to minimize conversion loss. 
An interesting application shown in Figure 6.54 was disclosed by [59], in 
which a split ring microstrip resonator is employed. It provides image rejection, 
and balun function since input is single ended and output is balanced. The ring 
resonators are tuned with capacitors, which can be implemented as voltage tuning 
varactor diodes.  A semi-lumped resonator can be used to resonate at the required 
signal frequency, while providing a short circuit at the image or other mixing 
frequency to optimize performance. High volume commercial mixer applications 
require minimal cost, small size, and good performance.  One such mixer design is 
depicted in the schematic diagram of Figure 6.55 [60], with the microstip circuitry 
shown in Figure 6.56. This minimalist doubly balanced mixer topology employs 
single sided microstrip construction with a monolithic diode cross over quad.  No 
vias or tightly controlled tolerances are required.  The mixer is designed for an RF 
and LO frequency range of 4 to 5 GHz, with IF at 30 MHz. The stated 
performance is conversion loss of 4.5 to 6.5 dB, with +13 dBm LO drive. The LO-
RF and LO-IF isolations are 25 to 50 dB; RF input power at 1 dB compression is 
+8 dBm; input third-order-intercept-point is +20 dBm; and R-I isolation is 22 dB 
minimum.  The IF band starts at DC and goes up to 500 MHz.  Conversion loss 
and isolation are given in Figure 6.57.  
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.54   Split ring bandpass filter/balun combination. 
 
The mixer operates as follows. The LO connects to the crossover diode 
ring quad at points 34 and 35 through microstrip line 28 that is a half wavelength 
long at the LO center frequency.  The 180° phase shift of this line ensures the 
maximum LO voltage exists across the diodes.  A second microstrip line, which is 
a quarter wavelength long at the LO center frequency, connects between the point 
35 and ground. This line is a quarter wave shorted stub that presents a high 
RF 
IF 

 
Diode Applications 
393 
impedance to the LO signal, and provides the IF ground return.   The halfwave 
line imposes a 180° phase shift between points 34 and 35.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.55   Schematic of a low cost mixer. 
 
 
The RF balun has the same structure as the LO, with the addition of a 
simple diplex filter to isolate the RF and IF ports.  The high pass portion of the 
diplexer is a series capacitor 45, and the low pass portion is a high impedance line 
50.  The nominal value of the series capacitor is 8 pF, which has 7 ohms 
impedance at 30 MHz, and 1000 ohms at 30 MHz.   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.56   Microstrip implementation of a low cost mixer. 
 
   
 
a) Conversion Loss 
 
     
b) Isolation:  (     )  L - R and (      ) L - I 
 
Figure 6.57   LO is 3.7 – 4.7 GHz @ + 13 dBm; RF is 4 – 5 GHz @ - 10 dBm. 
 
 
RF 
LO 
RF 
LO 
IF 

394 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
6.3.5 Planar Star Mixers 
 
Microstrip mixers using a diode star configuration similar to that of Figure 6.50 
have also been realized in microstrip using hybrid and MMIC forms [61]. They 
require a modification on the conventional Marchand balun for its application, in 
the manner illustrated in Figure 6.58. 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.58  
 Marchand balun modified for star mixer application. From [61]. 
 
These are useful for high microwave frequency and millimeter wave 
MMIC applications.  To obtain reduced size suitable for MMIC circuits, spiral-
transformer Marchand baluns have been used in MMIC mixers [62].  The 
referenced paper refers to these as transformers, but strictly speaking they are 
Marchand baluns.  Two transformer versions were proposed: the first uses a 
double-spiral transformer on GaAs; the second uses two cascaded trifilar 
transformers on GaAs. For both versions the even mode impedance is maximized, 
and the odd mode impedance,  Z0d, is set approximately equal to (6.8), where Zd is 
the diode impedance and Z0 is the source impedance.   The layout and schematic 
of each are in Figure 6.59, detailing the connections and number of layers. The 
length of the coupled line section is a quarter wave long at the frequency of 
operation. 
 
0
0
5.0
Z
Z
Z
d
d 
 
 
 
 
 
        (6.8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
(a) Double spiral 
 
 
(b) Trifilar transformer 
Figure 6.59  
 Balun transmission line schematic and layout. From [62]. 

 
Diode Applications 
395 
The mixer chips and their performance are shown in Figures 6.60 and 
6.61.  The double spiral circuit provides the lowest conversion loss, but with less 
bandwidth due to higher capacitance from the air bridges used to form the 
transformer.  The trifilar baluns are wider in bandwidth and still have good 
conversion loss within the 26 – 45 GHz frequency band. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.60  
 Star mixer and performance using double-spiral baluns. From [62]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.61  
Star mixer and performance using tri-filar transformer. From [62]. 
 
 
6.3.6  Balanced Microstrip 
  
Conventional microstrip is single ended with signal path on the top side and 
ground on the bottom.  Balanced microstrip refers to usage of both top and bottom 
sides to run signal lines that are 180 degrees apart in phase.  Its objectives are to 
provide a microstrip construction of a microwave mixer having broad frequency 
coverage with low conversion loss and high isolation.   
 
 
 
 

396 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
6.3.6.1 Ring Configuration 
 
An important balanced microstrip mixer design was disclosed in February 1970, 
and is shown in Figure 6.62 [63].  It comprises a single substrate with balanced 
microstrip lines connected to a Schottky diode ring quad, with the whole assembly 
being suspended in air inside a metal enclosure. The ring quad comprises four 
diodes connected anode to cathode. Coaxial connectors are placed on the outside 
walls of the enclosure for the RF, LO, and IF connections.  The RF and LO 
connections are made through the respective walls to the single-ended microstrip 
lines.  The two microstrip lines begin in a single ended configuration at the 
housing walls, and transition to balanced microstrip at the diode quad in the 
middle of the housing cavity. 
The width of the top and ground plane sides of both microstrip lines taper 
equally, forming a balanced microstrip line at the point of connection to the diode 
ring quad. The taper provides a transition from unbalanced to balanced operation. 
For an ideal tapered balun the voltage on the top trace will be equal and opposite 
to the voltage on the bottom trace, and the taper will produce the proper 
impedance transformation to match the RF and LO signals to the diodes.  The 
equal and opposite voltages divide the power equally across the diodes, and 
provide the virtual ground needed for isolation to the opposite balanced microstrip 
line.  To analyze and optimize the amplitude and phase balance of the baluns, the 
top and bottom traces at the balanced end of the tapered line can each be 
connected to a port using an EM simulator.  The grounded ends of the ports 
connect to a (imaginary) conducting wall placed in the middle of the cavity, 
perpendicular to the balanced lines and running through the diodes.  With the RF 
input designated as port 1, and the two new ports designated as ports 2 and 3, the 
quality of amplitude and phase  
In the schematic of Figure 6.63 the single ended RF input on the left is 
transformed up in impedance to a balanced line that connects to two DC blocking 
capacitors, which in turn connect to the diodes. Two inductors are series 
connected across the capacitors, with their common point being the IF output port.  
The impedance of the two blocking capacitors is high enough at the IF frequencies 
to block the IF current from exiting the RF port, so it exits to the IF port through 
the two series connected inductors.  The capacitor impedance is also low enough 
at the RF frequencies to pass the RF signal into the diodes.  The impedance of the 
two inductors is low enough to pass the IF current, but high enough to keep the 
RF signal from shorting out.  The LO circuitry is the same, with the exception that 
the series inductors connected to the LO balanced line provide the IF ground 
return. The IF port couples inductively to the diodes, which restricts the IF 
frequency to the MHz range. Also cavity resonances and unwanted propagation 
modes are suppressed by introduction of microwave absorber material.  
 
 
 

 
Diode Applications 
397 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Top  
 
(b) Bottom  
 
(c) Isometric 
Figure 6.62   Balanced microstrip doubly balanced mixer. 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.63   Electrical circuit for the balanced microstrip. 
 
The RF and LO connections in general are interchangeable, but 
differences in performance can be expected depending on their respective tapers.  
The balanced microstrip lines are suspended in air, away from the metal covers, to 
maximize the even mode impedance. The use of soft substrate with low dielectric 
constant contributes positively since the even and odd mode phase velocities are 
closer in value, in contrast to high dielectric materials.  
 
  
6.3.6.2 Star Configuration 
 
The star mixer using Mouw’s broadband magic-T [52] is discussed in the 
realization of three mixers [64].  The three use suspended substrate coplanar strips 
(SSCPS), conductor-backed coplanar strips (CBCPS), and absorber-backed 
coplanar strips (ABCPS).  The circuit configuration is given in Figure 6.64, and 
the schematic is the same as in Mouw’s coaxial line version.  The RF and LO 
lines comprise a magic-T that connect to the four corners of the diode star, and the 
IF connection is at the center point of the star.  It is interesting to note that the 
grounded ends of the IF CPS are floating, and thus contribute to limiting the IF 
bandwidth. The planar circuit is used to realize Mouw’s hybrid junction using 
CPW to CPS T-junctions.  The even mode impedance is increased by elevating 
the substrate above ground as with the SSCPS.  In contrast, the even mode 
impedance is dampened by the absorber in the ABCPS case. The odd mode 
impedance exists across adjacent coupled strips, and the even mode impedance 
exists between the strips and ground.  

398 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
RF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
Figure 6.64  Very wideband star mixer using absorber, with RF launcher and diode connections 
detailed. From [64]. 
 
Using ABCPS with a 0.025 inch thick alumina substrate, measured data 
for a few mixer designs shows conversion loss is below about 11 dB over about 1 
to 34 GHz. It provided the widest bandwidth, with degradation in conversion loss 
of about 1 dB.  The limitation to operational bandwidth in doubly balanced planar 
mixers is the crossover parasitic inductance and capacitance.  Some variations of 
this circuit were disclosed in earlier years [65, 66], one of which is given in Figure 
6.65, utilizing double sided construction with CPW and slotline transmission lines 
on the substrate top side to 34 GHz.  The importance of this mixer is the fact that 
the RF and LO transmission lines overlap each other on the left side of the diodes 
to form a magic-T, leaving the IF output free of parasitic crossover lines, allowing 
for extremely wideband IF.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.65   Double-sided DB mixer using CPW and slotline. From [65]. 
 

 
Diode Applications 
399 
The star nature of the diode connection is better explained in Figure 6.66 
by the equivalent electrical circuit. The circuit uses two pairs of diodes, one with 
common anodes and the other with common cathodes. The ground connection is 
common for all diodes and IF is extracted the common diode connection point. 
The LO and RF currents are applied as indicated in the figure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
Figure 6.66   Transmission line equivalent circuit for the mixer in figure 6.65, detailing the star 
nature of the diode connections. From [65]. 
 
 
The frequency components of currents through diodes D1, D2 are given 
by (6.9) and (6.10).  The diode currents are defined as flowing from anode to 
cathode.   The currents on diodes D3, D4 are similar, and the total IF output current 
is given by (6.11).  
 
 
)
(
)
(
1
t
jm
t
jn
m
nm
n
RF
LO
e
e
i
I







  
 
 
         (6.9) 
 
 









t
jm
t
jn
m
nm
n
RF
LO e
e
i
I2
    
  
 
       (6.10) 
 
 
4
3
2
1
I
I
I
I
IIFout





 
 
 
 
       (6.11) 
 



m
n
nm
m
n
IFout
i
I
)1
(
1
)1
(
1







 
 IIFout  0 for n = odd and m = odd 
 
 
Another realization of this approach is in Figure 6.67, [67]. The signal 
applied at port A propagates on the coplanar line with electric field from center 
conductor to ground. The coplanar line splits into two slotlines, ideally making the 
electric fields across the left and right diode pairs be equal in magnitude but 180° 
opposed in phase. In contrast the signal applied at port B couples into the coplanar 
line ideally making the electric fields across the left and right diode pairs be equal 
-VRF, +VLO 
+VRF, +VLO 
-VRF, -VLO 
I1 
I2 
I3 
I4 
+VRF, -VLO 
IIFout 

400 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
in both magnitude and phase.  The circuit is clearly the paralleling of two singly 
balanced mixers.  
 
 
                                                                       
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                ( a) Top view of the mixer.                
 (b) Bottom view showing the ground side  
 
Figure 6.67  
DB mixer using CPW and slotline for the RF/LO hybrid (ports A and B).  The IF 
output circuit comprises a microstrip lowpass filtered power divider to combine outputs 
from the two diode pairs.  The via provides an IF ground return.   
 
 
6.4 TRIPLY BALANCED  
 
Triply balanced mixers remain the most widely used circuit for achieving wide 
dynamic range with multi-octave frequency coverage and overlapping LO, RF, 
and IF frequency bands. As explained more fully in Chapter 5, they combine two 
doubly balanced mixers such that two of the three ports (RF, LO, and IF) are 
connected together differentially and the third is connected in phase.  Thus they 
are equally referred to as double-doubly balanced mixers.  Figure 6.68 shows a 
triply balanced mixer block diagram.  The RF input is at point G, the IF output at 
point O with both connected differentially to the two doubly balanced mixers.  
The LO is connected in phase to the mixers [68]. All three ports are 
interchangeable depending on the respective operating bandwidths. A similar 
block diagram was granted in 1993 in another patent [69]. Triply balanced mixers 
have been built using various technologies including: conventional transformers 
with magnetically coupled wire coils, transmission line transformers using bifilar 
wire and ferrite cores, printed balanced microstrip lines on double sided substrates 
and in multilayer LTCC, and using spiral transformers in MMIC form.  Numerous 
triply balanced mixers have been published.  A MMIC mixer with RF and LO 
ports covering 6 to 10 GHz and IF centered at 5 GHz was reported having less 
than 10 dB conversion loss and better than 25 dB isolation [70].  A triply balanced 
A 
B 

 
Diode Applications 
401 
MMIC mixer using CPW and slotline was reported with frequency coverage as 
follows: RF at 6 – 20 GHz, LO at 8 – 18 GHz, and IF at 2 – 7 GHz.  Conversion 
loss ranges from 6.2 to 9.8 dB, with isolation between ports greater than 20 dB 
[71].  More recently a triply balanced MMIC mixer using lumped element baluns 
was reported with frequency coverage as follows: RF at 2.0 – 5.5 GHz, LO at 5.0 
GHz, and IF at 2.0 GHz [72].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.68   Triply balanced mixer block diagram with input signal at frequency f1 applied to G and 
LO signal applied at J.  At the IF output, 0, the f1+f2 products add constructively and 
2f1+f2 cancels. 
 
 
6.4.1 Triply Balanced Circuits 
 
Numerous triply balanced mixers have been disclosed in the patent literature.  The 
first patented triply balanced mixer uses two diode ring quads connected together 
with balanced microstrip lines [73].  Figure 6.69 shows the circuit schematic, and 
Figure 6.70 shows a top view of the implementation.  The circuit has two diode 
ring quads with opposing polarities, connected to each other at opposite corners 
where the IF balun also connects differentially.  The RF and LO ports comprise 
points 13 and 16 that each connect to two balanced microstrip lines in parallel.  
The other ends of the balanced microstrip lines connect to each other and to the 
diodes, forming a magic-T hybrid as discussed in Chapter 3. Point 13 is the sum 
port, point 16 is the difference port, points 71 and 73 comprise the first diode port, 
and points 72 and 74 comprise the second diode port.  Power incident at ports 13 
and 16, respectively, is applied to the two ring quads in phase and 180° out of 
(2f1+f2)(1+2) 
f22 
O 
(f1+f2)(1+2) 
N 
I 
f22 
f1(1+) 
f11 
G 
180 
Divider  
Doubly 
Balanced
Mixer 
180 
Balun 
Doubly 
Balanced
Mixer 
0 
Divider 
Local 
Oscillator
f11 
f22 
(f1+f2)(1+2) 
(f1+f2)(1+2+) 
(2f1+f2)(1+2+2) 
H 
M 
K 
L 
J 

402 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
phase.  The top and bottom diode ring quads each comprise a doubly balanced 
mixer.  Thus this circuit is in accordance with the triply balanced block diagram of 
Figure 6.68.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.69   Triply balanced mixer schematic. The RF and LO ports, respectively, are at 13 and 16, 
or vice versa. The IF port is at 18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.70   Triply balanced mixer implementation showing top view. Bottom view is similar. 
 
The mixer is said to have an RF and LO frequency range of 0.5 to 12 
GHz, and IF range covering DC to 0.5 GHz.  While the IF does have a DC 
connection to the diodes, the lowest usable IF frequency range does not extend to 
DC.  Given the limited inductance offered by the ferrite core to the grounded wire 
of the two-wire IF balun, points 75 and 77 short to ground at very low 
frequencies. 
Subsequent improvements were made resulting in the triply balanced 
mixer whose implementation is shown in Figure 6.71 [74].  The circuit is the same 
except the difference portion of the magic-T is implemented using CPW and 
slotline, and the in-phase portion is implemented using constant impedance 
unbalanced-to-balanced microstrip transitions with cosine curve taper. The 
construction is two sided, with one diode quad attached to the top and the other to 

 
Diode Applications 
403 
the bottom of the substrate.  The LO input is at port 148 that connects to a 
broadband coupled four port balun, built with balanced microstrip lines 245, 145 
on top and lines 246, 146 on the bottom.  The RF access is by means of a coplanar 
line which transforms into a double slot balun comprising slot 119 at the top and 
126 at the bottom. The IF is extracted using a bifilar transmission line wounded on 
a ferrite core, 57.  
 The mixer is said to have RF and LO frequency range of 2 to 20 GHz, 
and IF range covering 0.05 to 6 GHz.  The preferred length of the constant 
impedance lines is a quarter wavelength at the lowest operating frequency, but 
said to be usable to 1/40th of a wavelength. Isolation between ports is typically 20 
to 30 dB.  The constant impedance and CPW-slotline baluns, respectively, are said 
to have usable bandwidths of about 0.1 to 24 GHz and 1 to 20 GHz.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
     (a) Top view of triply balanced mixer   
             (b) Bottom view of triply balanced mixer 
Figure 6.71  
Triply balanced mixer using a double slot balun and coplanar and balanced microstrip.  
 
The triply balanced mixers discussed so far have at least one 
interconnection involving a microstrip line crossing over another or an 
ungrounded (inductive) line.  These introduce parasitic capacitance or inductance 
that limits performance. A triply balanced mixer was disclosed that is without 
such interconnects [75].  Figure 6.72 shows the schematic and Figure 6.73 shows 
the top side of the planar mixer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.72  Schematic of an alternative triply balanced mixer. 
 
 
 
 
 
LO 
RF 
IF 

404 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
Figure 6.73  
Top side of triply balanced mixer substrate, illustrating the edge coupled balun, 44, 
followed by balanced lines 45, 46. The balun on the right is simply composed of 
balanced lines 31, 37. 
 
The bottom side is shown in Figure 6.74, further illustrating the balun 
details. The mixer uses the two diode ring quads having the same polarity, and the 
difference portion of the hybrid magic-T comprises three edge coupled microstrip 
lines.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
Figure 6.74  
Bottom side of triply balanced mixer substrate. 
 
Another method to avoid crossover connections is to use orthogonal 
balanced microstrip construction, having RF and LO baluns that are physically 
perpendicular to each other.  Although challenging in terms of assembly, this 
construction approach is very common and utilizes the leads from the two diode 
ring quad packages to make connections to the two boards.  The leads exit the 
diode package and first solder to the four microstrip traces at the end of the 
horizontal balun, then two leads bend upwards and two leads bend downwards 
and solder to the four microstrip traces of the end of the vertical balun.   
A hybrid alternative was invented by Marki that combines the planar 
substrate with the orthogonal interconnections. A single planar PTFE (teflon) 
substrate has both RF and LO baluns printed onto it, such that one can be cut out 
and bent ninety degrees to form the orthogonal balun.  Removing the crossing and 
ungrounded interconnections in the RF and LO circuits dramatically improves 
their performance. However, in the triply balanced mixers discussed so far the IF 
balun still connects to the diodes using bifilar wires having significant inductance 
that limits the upper end of the IF bandwidth to about 8 GHz.  An improvement 

 
Diode Applications 
405 
was made in 1982 to replace the wire and core IF balun with balanced microstrip 
lines that allows for IF coverage up to 15 GHz and higher, [76].  Triply balanced 
mixers can also be realized using two star diode quads as discussed in Chapter 5, 
with an example design shown in Figure 6.75 [77]. The star quad has four diodes 
all connected at a common point, with the other end of each diode comprising four 
more connection points for a total of five, in contrast to the diode ring quad that 
has only four connection points.  The IF is connected differentially across the 
common points of the two star quads, and the RF and LO signals couple into the 
other diode connection points through the magic-T circuitry comprising the U-
shaped balanced microstrip lines. The mixer shown in Figure 6.75 has one star 
quad on top-side, and the other one (not shown) on bottom-side of the double 
sided alumina substrate.    
 
                            
 
 
Figure 6.75 
 Triply balanced mixer using single substrate and two star diode quads. From [77]. 
 
The triply balanced mixers discussed so far all utilize double sided 
balanced microstrip.  In contrast, a single sided microstrip design is described that 
uses two diode cross over ring quads, and five baluns that each comprise a multi-
section Wilkinson power divider and two open circuited couplers [78].    
 
                         
    
Figure 6.76   Single-sided triply balanced mixer. 
 
Figure 6.76 shows the cost for avoiding double sided construction is the 
necessity for numerous crossing microstrip lines that can limit isolation and 
LO 
RF 
IF 

406 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
bandwidth. Much work has been done to implement triply balanced mixers in 
multilayer low temperature co-fired ceramic (LTCC) to reduce size and cost.  One 
such mixer has LO frequency coverage over 0.5 to 3.5 GHz with conversion loss 
in the range of about 5.7 to 7.5 dB, and isolation typically 25 to 30 dB [79].  It 
employs transformers with 1:4 impedance ratio to connect RF and LO, and 1:1 
impedance ratio for the IF connection.   
Another LTCC triply balanced mixer achieves high LO isolation by 
swapping the LO and IF ports, and extracting the IF at the center tap of the RF 
balun [80].  Figure 6.77 shows the schematic for the mixer.  In the conventional 
triply balanced circuit, the LO is isolated from the RF port by means of the hybrid 
magic-T alone.  In this mixer, it is claimed that “double isolation” is achieved by 
adding to this the isolation afforded by the diode ring quads, since the LO and RF 
have orthogonal diode connections Some interesting circuit variations of the triply 
balanced mixer use diode bridge quads in place of diode ring quads.   
     
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.77    LTCC triply balanced mixer with high isolation. 
 
 
6.4.2 Bridge Quad Mixers  
 
An ancestor to the modern triply balanced topology was patented in 1940 [81].  
Figure 6.78 shows it comprises four diode bridge quads, and has balanced 
connections to the RF, LO, and IF ports.  While it is not obvious at first glance, 
the circuit conforms to the triply balanced block diagram of Figure 6.68.  And it 
achieves triply balanced performance in terms of overlapping RF, LO, and IF 
frequency coverage, and improved IM suppression.  Two of the four diode bridge 
quads comprise one doubly balanced mixer, and the remaining two bridge quads 
comprise the other.  For purposes of analysis, the first doubly balanced mixer, 
DBM1, shall comprise bridge quads 1 and 4, and second doubly balanced mixer, 
DBM2, shall comprise bridge quads 2 and 3.  The signal source balun 5 connects 
to DBM1 and DBM2 in phase at point B and again at point D, while the IF output 
load circuit connects to them differentially across points A and C.  The LO 6 
connects differentially to DBM1 and DBM2.  Using the method in Chapter 5, with 

 
Diode Applications 
407 
n and m, respectively, referring to LO and RF harmonics, it can be shown that the 
IF diode currents of DBM1 combining at point A comprise odd RF and  odd LO 
harmonics as shown below.  This shows the two bridge quads 1 and 4 together 
comprise a doubly balanced mixer.  The IF diode currents of DBM2, which 
combine at point C, give the same result.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.78  
 Predecessor to the modern triply balanced mixer, 1940. 
 
The frequency components of the current emerging from node A is given 
by (6.12).  Diode currents are assumed to flow from anode to cathode.  The RF 
signal voltage at B is positive and at D it is negative. Notice that iA  0 when n and 
m are both odd.  
 
42
41
14
11
i
i
i
i
iA





 
 
 
 
       (6.12) 
 


)
(
)
(
)1
(
1
)1
(
)1
(
t
jm
t
jn
m
n
m
n
nm
m
n
A
RF
LO e
e
i
i













        



)
(
)
(
)1
(
1
.
1
)1
(
t
jm
t
jn
m
n
nm
m
n
A
RF
LO e
e
i
i









 
 
Two important mixer circuits are known as the “class IV” or the 
“Termination Insensitive Mixer” (TIM), and the Paramixer, both of which are 
arguably variations of the triply balanced mixer. The comparison between these 
mixer types is depicted in Figure 6.79. The triply balanced mixer has two diode 
ring quads comprising diodes 81, 82, 83, 84, and diodes 86, 87, 88, 89, with 
numbering corresponding to the triply balanced mixer in Figure 6.69.  
 
The TIM was patented in 1980, [82].  The two ring quads of the triply 
balanced mixer are replaced by two bridge quads that are connected by 100 ohm 
resistors at the LO connection points. The TIM diode bridge quads comprise 
diodes 81, 82, 83, 84, and diodes 86, 87, 88, 89, with numbering corresponding to 
the TIM in Figure 6.80. In this circuit configuration, the IM products comprising 
even RF and even LO harmonics are forced to pass through the two 100 ohm 

408 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
resistors minimizing overall distortion. In contrast, in the triply balanced mixer 
these currents circulate around the two diode ring quads and cannot be resistively 
terminated. Attenuating these products is desirable because they include the 
second harmonic of the RF signal that is a constituent part of the third-order 
single-tone and two-tone IM products.  In comparison to the triply balanced 
mixer, the TIM has reduced variation in IM suppression versus frequency when 
reactive loads such as filters are placed adjacent to the RF and IF ports.  One 
viewpoint is that energy from mixing products other than the desired IF reflect off 
the reactive load and re-mix to add constructively or destructively causing 
variation in the IM product.  The internal termination resistors dampen some of 
these IM products, without attenuating the desired IF.  The cost is increased 
circuit complexity and reduced bandwidth due to parasitic inductance from longer 
interconnects.     
 
Another reason that mixers built using bridge quads instead of ring quads 
may have superior IM suppression is that the peak LO voltage may not be 
clamped by the diodes as much.  This is important because IM suppression 
improves as the ratio of RF to LO voltage decreases. In a modern doubly balanced 
mixer schematic such as the one on Figure 5.41(a), the LO forward biases diodes 
D1 and D2 on, and reverse biases diodes D3 and D4 off, with the reverse bias 
limited by the turn on voltage across D1 and D2.  The RF current is applied 
differentially across the diode ring quad. As the RF voltage rises, given the 
polarity shown, diodes D2 and D3 are slightly forward biased, and diodes D1 and 
D4 are slightly reverse biased, which perturbs circuit balance at the RF frequency 
and generates IM products containing RF harmonics.  In contrast, if the polarity of 
diodes D3 and D4 were reversed, changing the ring to a bridge quad, the LO 
voltage is no longer limited by the diodes.  However, a second bridge quad must 
be introduced to utilize the polarities of both LO half cycles, and the circuitry 
introduced to separate the two bridge quads can help reduce the clamping effect 
between them.   
   
The Paramixer [83, 84] also uses diode bridge quads in place of ring 
quads to further its goal of maximizing dynamic range.  It was patented in 1978, 
two years prior to the TIM patent. The TIM and Paramixer have identical RF 
circuits, but the Paramixer includes DC bias decoupling to ensure DC current is 
equal throughout each bridge quad.  DC current is routed through the diodes of 
each bridge quad as if it were a ring quad.  The Paramixer also includes filters in 
the LO and IF circuits that terminate out-of-band signals, and an impedance 
transformer to optimize the RF port impedance match. The goals are improved 
termination insensitivity to IM products, and multioctave operation. The 
schematic of a termination insensitive mixer is shown in Figure 6.80, [82], 
illustrating the two ring mixers and the 100 ohm bridge resistors. The RF, LO, and 
IF baluns comprise balanced transmission lines that can be realized using 
balanced microstrip or bifilar wire wrapped around a ferrite core. 
 

 
Diode Applications 
409 
-R, +I
+R, -I
+L
-L
-R, +I
+R, -I
+L
-L
81
82
84
83
87
86
88
89
81
82
89
88
87
86
83
84
-R, +I
-R, -I
+R, -I
+R, +I
+L
-L
10
9
3
4
6
5
7
8
R4
R3
-R, -I
+R, +I
-R, -I
+R, +I
 
Triply Balanced 
             Class IV  TIM 
 
      Paramixer 
Figure 6.79  
Comparison between triply balanced, TIM, and Paramixer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.80  
 Class IV termination insensitive mixer (TIM). 
 
 
The Paramixer circuit is depicted in Figure 6.81. It comprises the same 
magic-T hybrid as already discussed for the TIM circuit. It should be noted that 
diode bridge quads 56 and 58 alternately switch on and off by the LO, causing a 
short/open circuit across points a and c, and open/short across points b and d.  It 
can be seen that these conditions for points a, b, c, d cause the IF output to equal 
the RF signal envelope with its phase reversed at the LO frequency.  The resistors 
R3 and R4 are shown to provide a constant impedance to the LO currents.   
 

410 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.81 
 Paramixer circuit schematic. 
 
 
Details of the RF and IF circuits are given in Figure 6.82. The 
transmission line transformers 24 and 22 enforce odd mode currents, while 
suppressing even mode ones. The current, IS, from the “first RF source” splits into 
two halves that each equal IS/2, and pass through transformers 22 and 24. The 
positive voltage from transformer 22 turns off diodes D4, D5, the current is then 
routed through resistor R4, flowing to node 70. At the same time the positive 
voltage from transformer 24 turns on diodes D7, D9. The negative voltage from 
transformer 24 turns off D3, D6 forcing current to pass through resistor R3 and 
then to node 72 that turns on D8, D10.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.82   Paramixer circuit: schematic for the LO section of the circuit. 
 

 
Diode Applications 
411 
 
The overall effect is that during the positive cycle the top quad is off and 
bottom quad is on, and vice versa. Constant loads to the RF and LO sources are 
maintained as the diode bridge quads alternately turn on and off.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.83   Paramixer circuit: schematic for the RF and IF sections of the circuit. 
 
Resistors R3 and R4 have values equal to the impedance of the 
transmission line transformers 22 and 24, and should equal the impedance offered 
by a single diode to the LO power incident at it.  This applies equally to the TIM. 
It is further pointed out in the patent out that to obtain the maximum dynamic 
range, the operating point for the diode forward current, in quadrant 1 (upper 
right) of the diode I,V curve, should be at half the peak RF signal current.  And the 
operating point for the diode reverse voltage in quadrant 3 (lower left) should be 
at half the peak RF signal voltage.  These two conditions are satisfied 
simultaneously if the characteristic impedance of the RF signal generator and 
resistors R3 and R4 equal the maximum reverse voltage of the RF signal divided 
by the maximum forward current of the RF signal.  Furthermore, the bias 
decoupling resistors R8 and R9 should equal half the value of R3 and R4 for 
optimum impedance match in Figure 6.81.   
 
 
6.4.3 Multiple Mixer Circuits 
 
The approach used by triply balanced mixers to combine two doubly balanced 
mixers using in-phase and 180° power combiners has been extended to combining 
four doubly balanced mixers to further increase dynamic range [85].  Figure 6.84 
shows the triply balanced mixer, designated by the author as a “second order” 
cancellation circuit.  Figure 6.85 shows two second order circuits combined to 
form a “third order” cancellation circuit.  The resulting performance for both is 
shown in Table 6.2 for three cases: individual mixers, second order circuit, and 
third order circuit.   
 

412 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
        
LO
In 
Phase
Div
180°
Hybrid
IF
180°
Hybrid
RF
 
Figure 6.84   Second order cancellation block diagram. After [85]. 
 
LO
Balun
Balun
Balun
Balun
In 
Phase
Div
Balun
In 
Phase
Div
IF
Balun
In 
Phase
Div
RF
 
 
Figure 6.85    Third order cancellation block diagram. After [85]. 
 
 
LO power increases 3 dB going from individual mixers to second order, 
and another 3 dB going from second to third order.  Conversion loss increases 1 
dB going to second order, and another 1 dB going to third order.  IIP3 increases 
4.2 dB going to second order, and another 4.3 dB going to third order.  P1dB 
increases 4 dB going to second order, and another 4 dB going to third order.  L - R 
isolation increases about 27 dB going to second order, and another 18 dB going to 
third order.  L - I isolation increases about 22 dB going to second order, and 
another 4 – 9 dB going to third order.  Results are also presented for two and four 
mixers combined using quadrature couplers.   
 
Table 6.2 
Performance of Second and Third Order Circuits  
           
Mixer 
1
Mixer 
2
2nd Order 
Cancel dB
Mixer 
3
Mixer 
4
2nd Order 
Cancel dB
3rd Order 
Cancel dB
Conv Loss, dB
5.7
5.7
6.7
5.7
5.7
6.8
7.7
IIP3, dBm
9.5
9.5
13.7
9.5
9.5
13.5
18
P1dB , dBm
1
1
5
1
1
5
9
L - R Isolation, dB
28
29
56
28
29
57
75
L - I Isolation, dB
37
38
59
36
36
64
68
 
After [85] 

 
Diode Applications 
413 
6.5  QUADRATURE MIXERS 
 
In down conversion applications rejection of the image frequency can be achieved 
by filtering or by phase cancellation.  This is also true for up conversion 
applications where the upper or lower sideband is selected and the other is 
rejected.  The phase cancellation approach requires usage of quadrature hybrids 
that introduces a 90° phase difference between the inputs.  An early diode mixer 
utilizing quadrature hybrids to form a doubly balanced mixer is depicted in Figure 
6.86 [86].  It supports the difference frequencies but cancels the sum frequency.  
Given RF and LO frequencies fRF and fLO, the difference frequencies fRF - fLO and 
fLO – fRF appear at the IF output, but the sum frequency fRF + fLO is suppressed.  
The four inductors provide the IF ground returns. The circuit of Figure 6.86 can be 
analyzed using the method presented in Chapter 5 to show which mixing products 
appear at the IF output.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.86   Doubly balanced mixer using quadrature couplers, suppresses the sum frequency. 
 
Assigning integer m to represent RF signal harmonics, and integer n to 
represent LO harmonics, the IF output current is given by (6.13). The sum 
frequency is given by m=n=1, while the difference frequencies correspond to m = 
-1, n=1 and m=1, n= -1.  For the sum frequency, (6.12) equals zero.   
 


)
(
)
(
)1
(
)1
(
t
jm
t
jn
n
n
m
n
n
m
nm
m
n
IF
RF
LO e
e
j
j
j
j
i
i












    (6.13) 
 
An improved quadrature mixer circuit is shown in Figure 6.87 that has 
separate quadrature couplers for the RF and LO inputs [87]. The result is higher 
isolation between RF and LO ports.  The top 6.87(a) circuit has IF output f0 with 
difference fS - fL and fL - fS signals, but the sum product fS + fL cancels.  
 
 
IFoutput 
LOinput 
RFinput 
DCreturn 

414 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.87 Doubly balanced mixer using quadrature couplers with IF equal to the (a) difference 
frequency, (b) sum frequency. 
 
The bottom circuit is the opposite of Figure 6.87(b), with IF output fM 
only at the sum fS+fL, with signals at the difference frequencies cancelled. The 
analysis of Chapter 5 is again applied with m and n, respectively, representing RF 
and LO harmonics.  Equations (6.14), and (6.15) give the phase components of the 
output current for f0 and fM:   
 


n
m
m
m
m
n
f
j
j
j
j
I









)1
(
)1
(
0
  
 
       (6.14) 


n
m
n
m
n
m
m
n
fM
j
j
j
j
I











)1
(
)1
(
)1
(
)1
(
         (6.15)   
(a) 
f0=fL- fS 
fL 
fS 
(b) 
fM=fL+ fS 
fL 
fS 

 
Diode Applications 
415 
A QPSK demodulator was patented [88] where the two input RF signals 
are phase shifted and then mixed with two singly balanced mixers delivering 
separate IF outputs as depicted in Figure 6.88.  For both IF outputs the sum 
product is suppressed. The top IF output, IF1, provides the two difference 
products, fRF1 – fRF2, and fRF2 – fRF1 with the same phase angle of 180°.  In contrast, 
the bottom IF output, IF2, provides the fRF1 – fRF2 with 90° phase shift, and the fRF2 
– fRF1 product with -90° phase shift.  Using the same analysis method for the 
frequency components of current, one obtain (6.16) and (6.17) that give the phase 
components of the currents for outputs IF1 and IF2.  The integers m and n, 
respectively, refer to the RF1 and RF2 ports.     
 


1
1




n
m
nm j
I
IF
 
 
 
 
 
       (6.16) 




m
n
n
nm
j
j
I
IF





1
2
 
 
 
         
       (6.17) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
Figure 6.88     Doubly balanced mixer using in-phase and quadrature couplers, with sum frequency at 
IF1, and difference frequencies at IF2. 
 
A quadrature mixer using microstrip on the substrate top side, and CPW-
slotline on the bottom side was disclosed in 1978 [89].  The top side is shown in 
Figure 6.89(a), and the bottom side is in Figure 6.89(b).  The mixer combines two 
singly balanced mixers on the bottom side, each comprising two Schottky diodes, 
connected in-phase to the RF signal, and in quadrature for the LO input and IF 
output.  The RF signal for each SB mixer is driven differentially using a top-side 
microstrip line that couples energy into the bottom side slot line that in turn drives 
each diode pair differentially.  At this point, the slotline transitions to a CPW line 
that connects the LO and IF signals to the diodes, which appear in parallel to 
ground to the CPW lines.    

416 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
    
 
(a)   
 
 
                    (b) 
Figure 6.89     Quadrature mixer using double sided substrate with microstrip on top side, and CPW-
slotline on bottom side. (a) top side, (b) bottom side. 
 
The other end of the CPW lines connect using vias to the top side 
microstrip lines, which in turn connect to the LO and IF quadrature couplers using 
a diplex filter to isolate LO from IF.  An image rejection mixer product line that 
was popular in 1980s used this circuit arrangement but reversed the RF and LO 
ports to improve RF port VSWR and conversion loss.   
 
 
6.6 SUBHARMONIC MIXERS 
 
The basic theory of antiparallel-diode-pair (APDP) subharmonic mixers  (SHM) is 
presented in Chapter 5, where it is shown that SHMs generate an IF output 
frequency equal to ±nfLO±mfRF; generally n=2 and m=1 unless otherwise noted. 
The switching element of a n=2 SHM goes through two conduction cycles during 
each cycle of the fundamental LO, generating a conductance waveform rich in 
even harmonics and suppressed odd harmonics. The switching element capable of 
delivering this feature comprises two diodes, connected in parallel with the 
cathode of one connected to the anode of the other, and vice versa.   This is known 
as the APDP. The relative amplitudes of the harmonics are optimized by adjusting 
the level of the fundamental LO that in turn varies the duty cycle of the switching 
waveform.  With conventional balanced mixers, suppression of mixing products 
with even LO or even RF harmonics is achieved using baluns.  In contrast, SHMs 
built using a single APDP achieve suppression without baluns, but because of the 
inherent suppression they are sometimes referred to as balanced.  To add to the 
confusion multiple APDP can be connected using a combination of  0 – 180 
degree baluns and/or quadrature couplers to achieve image rejection and improved 
suppression to undesired mixing products.  Some desirable properties of SHMs 
are the very low level of LO second harmonic leakage power, low LO AM noise, 
and minimal circuit complexity.   

 
Diode Applications 
417 
  A balanced subharmonic mixer dating to the 1930s uses two diode 
bridge quads connected together with the LO pumping them, and the RF and IF 
isolated from each other using balanced low-pass and high-pass diplex filters [90].   
The circuit is shown in Figure 6.90 configured as an up-converter.  The low 
frequency RF input is at port 24, the high frequency IF output passes through the 
load resistor 25, and the LO is applied at 17.  The LO is isolated from RF and IF 
by means of circuit balance, and alternately switches the diode bridge quads on 
and off.  The diode currents are analyzed as done in Chapter 5, with n and m, 
respectively, referring to LO and RF harmonics.  The phase components of the 
diode currents from the left and right diode bridge quads passing to the IF output 
load 25 are: 

1
)1
(
)1
(
14
12
13
11








m
n
Lfet
i
i
i
i
i
 

1
)1
(
44
42
43
41








m
Right
i
i
i
i
i
 


1
)1
(
1
)1
(






m
n
Right
Lfet
i
i
 
 
 
       (6.18) 
≠0 for n=even & m=odd  
 
By adding the left and right current components it is shown that the total 
current passing to the high frequency IF load contains only even LO and odd RF 
harmonics, as expected for the doubly balanced subharmonic mixer.  Furthermore, 
since the current in the left and right diode quads each contain only odd RF 
harmonics and any LO harmonic, both support the RF current, which is fRF = 1fRF 
± 0fLO.   The LO current can also be shown to be supported in each diode quad. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.90   Doubly balanced SHM using two diode bridge quads with balanced diplex filter for RF 
to IF isolation, 1930. 
 
 
Diode SHM circuits have evolved so the majority of modern 
implementations use a single APDP in either a series or shunt configuration.  The 
GaAs MMIC SHM of Figure 6.91 uses the series APDP with open and short 
circuit stubs to provide narrow-band filtering between the RF, LO, and IF.  The 
mixer operates over the frequency range of 36-40 GHz, with typically 9.5 to 10.6 
dB conversion loss, -69 dBm second LO harmonic leakage power, with 

418 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
fundamental LO drive at +6 dBm, [91]. The short circuit shunt stub left of the 
APDP provides the RF and IF ground returns while presenting an open circuit at 
the fundamental LO.  On the right side of the APDP the open circuit shunt stub 
provides the LO ground return, the edge coupled capacitor blocks the IF and 
passes RF, while the series-L shunt-C distributed lowpass filter passes IF and 
blocks RF.  The intended application for this SHM requires low second harmonic 
LO leakage power and circuit simplicity that equates to small size, making the 
circuit a good fit.   
 
The SHM is analyzed by assigning the polarities to the diode currents, i1 
and i2, and then finding the IF output current, iIFout.  Again the integers n and m, 
respectively, are LO and RF harmonics.  The result is that mixing products where 
n ± m is an odd integer exit at the IF output, while products where n ± m is an 
even integer circulate around the APDP. Thus the desired 2fLO-fRF product appears 
at the IF output port, while the fLO ± fRF products cancel at the IF port.  The phase 
components of the diode currents comprising the IF output current are given by 
(6.19). 
 
m
i
)1
(
1


 
 
n
i
)1
(
2


 
 
n
m
IFout
i
i
i
)1
(
)1
(
2
1






  
 
 
      (6.19) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.91  
A mmWave SHM with APDP with L-R isolation provided by the proper terminations 
and the series connection. From [91].  
 
 
The SHM of Figure 6.92 uses the shunt APDP configuration, and 
operates at the astounding frequency range of 840 to 900 GHz.  The SHM is used 
for this extremely high frequency application to improve feasibility of LO signal 
generation, [92].  The RF input on the left side transitions from waveguide to a 
beam-lead GaAs membrane that contains the APDP diodes connected shunt to 
ground immediately at the RF input to minimize loss.  The fundamental LO is 
injected through the waveguide at the center of the assembly where it couples to 
the wide printed traced that forms a probe.  LO energy propagates left towards the 
diodes due to the open circuit presented to the right caused by the high-impedance 
+VRF,m
IFOUT
i1
i2
+VLO,n
λ/2 at RF
λ/4 at LO

 
Diode Applications 
419 
line.  In contrast, the IF exits to the right, being conveyed from the diodes through 
the series-L shunt-C low pass filter.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.92    An APDP connected in parallel to the signal line operating as a SHM at 896 GHz. 
From [92]. 
 
 
The SHM of Figure 6.93, [93], uses the series APDP but in a novel 
configuration that provides wider bandwidth while preserving circuit simplicity.  
The MMIC SHM operates over the frequency range of 23 – 37 GHz, with 
typically 9.4 – 12.0 dB conversion loss.  The RF and LO are isolated by means of 
an edge coupled directional coupler that also injects both into the left side of the 
APDP.  The shunt capacitor to ground at the right side of the APDP provides the 
RF and LO ground return.  The IF is coupled from the APDP through the shunt-C 
series-L lowpass filter, and the IF ground return is provided on the left side of the 
APDP by the shorted quarter wave stub.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.93   Wideband series APDP SHM with L - R isolation provided by the coupler. From [93]. 
 
 
The SHM of Figure 6.94 uses two GaAs beam lead diodes in a ratrace 
configuration printed over a 0.015 inch thick alumina substrate, [94]. The SHM 
operates over the multi-octave frequency range of 10 – 110 GHz in both 
fundamental and subharmonic modes.  Conversion loss in the SHM mode ranges 
from about 12 to 20 dB.  DC bias is injected to allow for LO drive power down to 
0 dBm.    
LO 
RF 
IF 

420 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 6.94   Multioctave ratrace SHM. From [94]. 
 
 
The SHM of Figure 6.95 uses four APDP arranged in a ring, with 
balanced RF and LO connections to provide isolation between RF and LO, [95].  
This is an improvement over a single APDP that provides isolation only by 
filtering.  Thus the SHM of Figure 6.95 allows RF and LO frequencies to overlap, 
and operate over multioctave range.   The SHM operates over the RF frequency 
range of 4 – 40 GHz, given a 2 – 20 GHz fundamental LO.  The IF operates up to 
1 GHz, so it can be diplex connected with the RF.  Conversion loss is typically 8 
to 12 dB over the 4 – 40 GHz range, with fundamental LO to RF isolation of 
typically 24 to 26 dB, and  isolation of the second LO harmonic at typically 55 to 
60 dB.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.95    Multioctave triply balanced SHM. From [95]. 
 
 
An alternative subharmonic mixer makes use of coplanar and slot lines as 
disclosed in patent [96]. The circuit in Figure 6.96 shows the transmission line 

 
Diode Applications 
421 
schematic for a core cell of the mixer where LO signal is applied at node 6 and 
propagates in the CPW to modulate diodes 81, 82 with polarity depicted by the 
solid arrows.  A high impedance slot line extends to the right of the diodes, which 
presents a high impedance to the LO, causing the majority of LO power to be 
delivered to the diodes.  That slotline, however, delivers the RF signal power to 
the diodes with the polarity depicted by the dashed arrows.  The diodes are in 
parallel to the LO signal, and in series to the RF signal.  The RF and LO signals 
are isolated from each other by the mode orthogonality.  The wire bond 7 
equalizes the ground potential on the CPW; the distances d1 = d2 = LO/4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.96   SHM core cell, composed of coplanar line on left of diodes and slotline on the right. 
 
 
The complete mixer is given in Figure 6.97 where two core cells are 
combined.  The LO is combined on the left side by means of a coplanar Wilkinson 
power splitter. The RF signal is coupled on the right using a CPW line, with each 
half of the CPW line behaving as a slotline for each cell. Two diodes are in series 
in each slotline, and two of these are in parallel by combining the slotlines to form 
the CPW, so the RF input impedance averages to that of a single diode.   The IF 
current is collected at the CPW center conductor by adding the currents from 
diodes i15 + i16 and subtracting the currents from diodes i17 + i18. The current in the 
diode, due to application of VRF and VLO voltages is approximately given by: 
 
 
T
LO
RF
V
V
V
Se
I
i
/)
(
15


 
 
T
LO
RF
V
V
V
Se
I
i
/
)
(
16


 
 
T
LO
RF
V
V
V
Se
I
i
/)
(
17



 
 
T
LO
RF
V
V
V
Se
I
i
/
)
(
18



 
 
 
Adding the branch currents gives the IF current defined as: 
 
 

t
f
f
I
i
RF
LO
S
)
2
(
2
cos
4
18



   
 
 
     (6.20) 
ELO 
ERF 
ELO 

422 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
     
   
                  
  
  
Figure 6.97  
Complete CPW/slotline SHM using four diodes. IF signal decoupling is by additional 
circuit not shown. 
 
 
The SHM of Figure 6.98 uses two singly balanced APDP with the RF 
driven in quadrature, the LO driven in phase, and having two differential IF 
outputs that are in quadrature, [97]. A detailed view of current polarities in the 
diodes is shown in part (b) of Figure 6.98. The LO current splits into two halves 
that are routed through the diodes and return to ground. The RF current is applied 
in opposed phase to the diodes, sinking into a virtual ground at the joining point. 
The quadrature baseband down converter operates over the frequency range of 1.4 
to 1.7 GHz, with typically 6 dB conversion loss. 
 
       
     
 
         (a) Mixer configuration  
                ( b) Detail of currents on diodes 
 
Figure 6.98   Quadrature SHM with differential baseband output. From [97]. 
 

 
Diode Applications 
423 
 
Many SHM applications require higher than the second LO harmonic. 
The SHM shown in Figure 6.99(a) operates with the fourth LO harmonic, [98].  
The LO power must be divided in half with phase angles offset by /2, which can 
easily be provided by 90 hybrid. The open stub on the right is at LO/4 shorting 
the LO fundamental and is an open circuit to the RF signal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 6.99  
Quadrature SHM using fourth harmonic LO. From [98]. 
 
 
The short stub is an open at the LO frequency and a ground return to the 
RF frequency. The conversion loss presented by the author is in Figure 6.99(b), 
showing nearly 8.5 dB conversion loss at a pump power of +15 dBm at 2.5 GHz. 
The signal frequency is at 10 GHz. 
 
The SHM of Figure 6.100 operates with 12th, 14th, and 16th LO harmonics 
using APDP configuration, [99].  This mixer was designed to convert an RF signal 
band from 35 to 40 GHz down to DC to 1.5 GHz using diodes built on a 0.15 µm 
HEMT process. The RF is filtered by means of a band-pass edge-coupled 
transmission line filter and a quarter wave length open stub filters RF on the IF, 
LO side. The IF/LO diplexer uses lumped LC elements. The circuit layout is in 
Figure 6.101 depicting a large area dedicated to the IF/LO diplexer and a smaller 
area to the RF side.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.100    A MMIC high harmonic order downconverter mixer. From [99]. 
 

424 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                    
Figure 6.101   Layout for the mixer occupying a space of 1x2.5 mm2. From [99]. 
 
 
 
The conversion loss for the circuit operating at the 16th LO harmonic of 
a S band source (2 – 3 GHz) is on Figure 6.99, obtained from pumping + 17 dBm 
into the diodes. The LO to RF isolation is in the order of 65 dB.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.102   Conversion loss versus RF frequency, with FLO = 2.23 GHz, PLO = +17 dBm. From 
[99]. 
 
 
6.7  SUMMARY 
 
This chapter summarized the important diode mixer circuits and some lesser 
known ones that have interesting features.  A discussion of their operating 
principles and performance levels was given.  The various topologies presented 
include single ended, singly balanced, doubly balanced, and triply balance with 
TIM and Paramixer variations. Quadrature and image rejection mixers were also 
covered.  This material is expected to be helpful to engineers by providing a 
starting point for new designs, and a view of what performance levels have 
already been achieved.  

 
Diode Applications 
425 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
F.W. Young, “Carrier Wave Receiving System,” US Patent 1,526,408, 
issued February 17, 1925. 
[2] 
R.S. Ohl, “Detector System for Very Short Electric Waves,” US Patent 
2,378,944, issued June 26, 1945.  
[3] 
Edward B. Craft and Jonathan W. Harris, “Alloy,” US Patent 937,284, 
issued October 19, 1909. 
[4] 
E.C. Cork et al, “Circuit Arrangements For Mixing Oscillations,” US 
Patent 2,455,657, issued December 7, 1948. 
[5] 
W.W. Salisbury, “High Frequency Mixer,” US Patent 2,547,412, issued 
April 3, 1951. 
[6] 
R.V. Pound, “Ultrahigh Frequency Mixer,” US Patent 2,605,399, issued 
July 29, 1952. 
[7] 
Alexander Horvath, “Crystal Mixer for Multiplex Broadcasting,” US Patent 
2,567,208, issued September 11, 1951. 
[8] 
B.F. Wheeler et al, “High-Frequency Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 2,616,037, 
issued October 28, 1952. 
[9] 
E.G. James et al, “Crystal Contact Devices,” US Patent 2,731,561, issued 
January 17, 1956. 
[10] S.E. Howe, “Microwave Crystal Mixer,” US Patent 2,961,531, issued 
November 22, 1960. 
[11] Klaus Otremba, “Frequency Converting Device for RF Signals,” US Patent 
3,943,450, issued May 9, 1976. 
[12] Ben R. Hallford, “Microwave Balanced Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 
3,659,206, issued April 25, 1972. 
[13] Shinkawa et al, “Mixer Circuit Arrangement,” US Patent 4,211,977, issued 
July 8, 1980. 
[14] Saka et al, “Microwave Integrated Circuit Mixer,” US Patent 4,450,584, 
issued May 22, 1984.   
[15] Allen F. Podell, “Mixer Employing Dual Diode Circuit Biased in Their 
Exponential Operating Regions,” US Patent 3,189,836, issued June 15, 1965. 
[16] Risto Vaisanen, “Transformless Diode Mixer,” US Patent 5,379,458, issued 
January 3, 1995. 
[17] Allen F. Podell, “Balanced Mixer Circuit and Inductive Device Usable 
Therein,” US Patent 3,327,220, issued June 20, 1967. 
[18] Pierre Dobrovlny, “Radio Frequency Mixer,” US Patent 4,823,400, issued 
April 18, 1989. 
[19] A. A. M. Saleh, Theory of Resistive Mixers, PhD Thesis, MIT, 
Massachusetts, January 1970, pp. 24 - 35, 94-97, and 116-137. 
[20] Dean F. Peterson, “High-Intercept Band Limited Mixer,” US Patent 
5,493,720, issued February 20, 1996. 
[21] Ryo Tatsumi, Mitsuhiro Matsumoto, and Tomoya Bando, “Mixer and 
Converter Using Same,” US Patent 7,292,837B2, issued November 6, 2007. 

426 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[22] Paul J. Pontecorvo, “Modulator,” US Patent 2,462,893, issued March 1, 
1949. 
[23] George Rodwin, “Balanced Crystal Microwave Converter,” US Patent 
2,576,481, issued November 7, 1951. 
[24] Warren A. Tyrrell, “Coupling Arrangement for Use in Wave Transmission 
Systems,” US Patent 2,445,895, issued July 27, 1948. 
[25] George Ctirad Spacek, “High Frequency Converter,” US Patent 3,584,306, 
issued June 8, 1971. 
[26] George Ctirad Spacek, “High Frequency Converter,” US Patent 3,638,126, 
issued January 25, 1972. 
[27] Erich H. Kraemer and John C. Rolfs, “Integrated Circuit Planar High 
Frequency Mixer,” US Patent 4,276,655, issued June 30, 1982. 
[28] John Reindel, “Millimeter Wave Printed Circuit Mixer,” US Patent 
4,406,020, issued September 20, 1983. 
[29] Chi P. Hu, “Millimeter Wave Stripline Planar Mixer,” US Patent 
4,412,354, issued October 25, 1983. 
[30] Robert N. Bates and Philip M. Ballard, “R. F. Balanced Mixer,” US Patent 
4,542,535, issued September 17, 1985. 
[31] Howard Putnam, “Strip Line Hybrid Ring and Balanced Mixer Assembly,” 
US Patent 3,310,748, issued March 21, 1967. 
[32] Ben R. Hallford, “Microwave Balanced Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 
3,659,206, issued April 25, 1972. 
[33] Keiro Shinkawa and Chuichi Sodeyama, “Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 
4,249,263, issued February 3, 1981. 
[34] Akira Takayama, “Frequency Conversion Circuit,” US Patent 4,677,693, 
issued June 30, 1987. 
[35] Dominique Podvin, “Balanced High-Frequency Mixer Having a Balun 
Circuit,” US Patent 5,142,697, issued August 25, 1992. 
[36] George D. Vendelin, “Stripline Compensated Balun and Circuits Formed 
Therewith,” US Patent 3,571,722, issued March 23, 1971. 
[37] Lawrence E. Dickens and Douglas W. Maki, “Integrated Circuit, Image and 
Sum Enhanced Balanced Mixer,” US Patent 3,939,430, issued February 17, 1976. 
[38] Eugene C. Findley, “Coplanar Microwave Balun, Multiplexer and Mixer 
Assemblies,” US Patent 4,739,519, issued April 19, 1988. 
[39] H. Ogawa, M. Aikawa, and K. Morita, “K-Band Integrated Doubly 
balanced Mixer,” MTT-28, March 1980, pp. 180-185.  
[40] M. Aikawa, H. Ogawa, “A New MIC Magic-T Using Coupled Slot Lines,” 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT 28, June 
1980, pp. 679-683. 
[41] John Reindel, “Microcircuit Reverse-Phased Hybrid Ring Mixer,” US 
Patent 3,950,703, issued April, 13, 1976. 
[42] Maurice Marchand and Yan Haentjens, “Ultra-High Frequency Hybrid 
Mixer,” US Patent 4,377,005, issued March 15, 1983. 

 
Diode Applications 
427 
[43] Clement F. Lacour and Yannick Latouche, “Microwave Mixer,” US Patent 
454,112 issued September 10, 1985. 
[44] Philip R. Thomas and Tom M. Hyltin, “Microwave Integrated Circuit 
Mixer,” US Patent 3,416,042, issued December 10, 1968. 
[45] Tom M Hyltin, “Integrated 94 GHz Local Oscillator and Mixer,” US Patent 
3,534,267, issued October 13, 1970. 
[46] Stephen J. Nightingale, “Singly balanced Planar Mixer,” US Patent 
4,607,394, issued August 19, 1986. 
[47] C. K. Keith, "Frequency Translating System," US Patent 1,855,576, issued 
April 26, 1932. 
[48] F. A. Cowan, "Modulating System," US Patent 2,025,158, issued June 7, 
1934. 
[49] Pierre Dobrovolny, “Integrated Mixer Arrangement,” US Patent 4,152,653, 
issued May 1, 1979. 
[50] Xiaohui Li, “Compensated Ring Mixer,” US Patent 5,854,974, issued 
December 29, 1998. 
[51] Martin L. Grogan, “Modulation Device for Substituting for a Doubly 
balanced Mixer,” US Patent 4,313,094, issued January 26, 1982. 
[52] R. B. Mouw, “Hybrid Junctions and Mixers and Modulators Constructed 
There from,” US Patent 3,512,090, issued October 18, 1967. 
[53] W. Hahnle, “Arrangement for Modulation,” US Patent 2,144,655, issued 
January 24, 1939. 
[54] George Ctirad Spacek, "High Frequency Converter," US Patent 3,638,126, 
issued January 25, 1972. 
[55] Joseph S. Wong, Kuo-Ing Chung, Kenneth A. Rudenauer, “Orthogonal 
Hybrid Fin Line Mixer,” US Patent 4,480,336, issued October 30, 1984. 
[56] R. M. Walker and Nicholas P. Kernweis, “Orthogonal Hybrid T for 
Microwave Waveguides,” US Patent 3,192,489, issued September 15, 1961. 
[57] Y. Lai, C. Lin, C Lin, Y. Wang, "A New Ka-Band Doubly Balanced Mixer 
Based on Lange Couplers," IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 
Volume 18, No. 7, July 2008, pp. 458-460. 
[58] Sadao Igarashi, “Doubly balanced Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 4,306,311, 
issued December 15, 1981. 
[59] Stephen B. Einbinder, “Balanced Split Ring Resonator,” US Patent 
5,361,050, issued November 1, 1994. 
[60] Rod Kirkhart, "Low Cost Planar Double Balanced Mixer," US Patent 
7,305,217B2, issued December 4, 2007. 
[61] S. Basu, S. Maas, “Design and performance of a Planar Star Mixer,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT 41, No. 11,  
November 1993, pp. 2028-2030. 
[62] C. Kuo, C. Kuo, C. Kuo, S. Maas, Huei Wang, “Novel Miniature and 
Broadband Millimeter-wave Monolithic Star Mixers,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT 56, No. 4, April 2008, pp. 793-
802. 

428 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[63] Donald Neuf, “Doubly Balanced Microwave Mixer Using Balanced 
Microstrip Baluns,” US Patent 3,652,941, issued March 28, 1972. 
[64] C.Y. Chang, et al, “Ultra-Broad-Band Doubly Balanced Star Mixers Using 
Planar Mouw’s Hybrid Junction,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume 49, No. 6, June 2001, pp. 1077-1085. 
[65] H. Ogawa, M. Aikawa, and K. Morita, “K-Band Integrated Doubly 
Balanced Mixer,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume MTT 28, March 1980, pp 180-185. 
[66] M. Aikawa, H. Ogawa, “A New MIC Magic-T Using Coupled Slot Lines,” 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT 28, June 
1980, pp. 679-683. 
[67] Eugene C. Findley, “Coplanar Microwave Balun, Multiplexer and Mixer 
Assemblies,” US Patent 4,739,519, issued April 19, 1988.  
[68] R. H. Merriam, "Quadruple-Balance Mixer," US Patent 3,515,993, issued 
October 24, 1967. 
[69] Robert A. Sowadski, "Spurious Product and Local Oscillator Radiation 
Suppression System for Use in Super-Heterodyne Radio Receivers," US Patent 
5,179,728, issued January 12, 1993. 
[70] T. N. Ton, G. S. Dow, T. H. Chen, M. Lacon, T. S. Lin, S. Bui, and D. 
Yang, "An X-Band Monolithic Double Double-Balanced Mixer for High 
Dynamic Receiver Application," IEEE MTT 1990 International Microwave 
Symposium Digest, pp. 197-200. 
[71] J. Eisenberg, J. Panelli and W. Ou, "A New Planar Double Doubly-
Balanced MMIC Mixer Structure," IEEE Microwave and Millimeter Wave 
Monolithic Circuits Symposium, 1991, pp. 69-72. 
[72] Hwann-Kaeo Chiou and Hao-Hsiung Lin, "A Miniature MMIC Double 
Doubly Balanced Mixer Using Lumped Dual Balun for High Dynamic Receiver 
Application," IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave Letters, Volume 7, No. 8, 
August 1997, pp. 227-229. 
[73] Thomas A. Milligan and Peter Will, "Broadband High Frequency Mixer," 
US Patent 4,063,176, issued December 13, 1977. 
[74] Anthony M. Pavio, "Broadband High Baluns and Mixer," US Patent 
4,125,810, issued November 14, 1978. 
[75] Warren L. Seely, "Broadband Mixer with Coplanar Balun," US Patent 
4,355,421, issued Octpber 19, 1982. 
[76] B. C. Henderson, "Full Range Orthogonal Circuit Mixers Reach 2 to 26 
GHz," Microwave System News, January 1982, Volume 12, No. 1, pp. 122-126. 
[77] R. S. Bischoff, R. C. Blanc and P. B. Harper, "New Technology in 
Synthesized Sweeper Microcircuits," Hewlett-Packard Journal, April 1991, pp. 
36-45. 
[78] William J. Drennen, "Planar Triply-Balanced Microstrip Mixer," US Patent 
5,740,528, issued April 14, 1998. 
[79] Radha Setty and Daxiong Ji, "Triple Balanced Mixer," US Patent 6,917,796 
B2, issued June 12, 2005. 

 
Diode Applications 
429 
[80] Doron Gamliel, "Ultra High Isolation Mixer," US Patent 7,013,122 B2, 
issued March 14, 2006. 
[81] R. S. Caruthers, "Double Balanced Modulating System," US Patent 
2,205,843, issued June 25, 1940. 
[82] Peter Will, "Broadband Doubly Balanced Mixer Having Improved 
Termination Insensitivity Characteristics," US Patent 4,224,572, issued September 
23, 1980. 
[83] Donald H. Steinbrecher, "Doubly Balanced Mixer with Optimized 
Dynamic Range," US Patent 4,112,374, issued September 5, 1978. 
[84] Donald H. Steinbrecher, "Doubly Balanced Mixer with Optimized 
Dynamic Range," US Patent 4,230,956, issued October 28, 1980. 
[85] F. X. Li, G. Corsetto, “Multi-Order Cancellation Technology,” Microwave 
Journal, October, 1997, pp. 84-91.   
[86] Theodore S. Saad, "High Frequency Signal Combining," US Patent 
3,532,989, issued January 24, 1966. 
[87] Robert Tenenholtz, "Balanced Mixer," US Patent 3,706,042, issued 
December 12, 1972. 
[88] William H. Childs and Christopher E. Mahle, "Planar QPSK Demodulator," 
US Patent 4,281,293, issued June 28, 1981. 
[89] Lawrence E. Dickens, "Image Phased and Idler Frequency Controlled 
Mixer Formed on an Integrated Circuit Dielectric Substrate," US Patent 
4,118,670, issued October 3, 1978. 
[90] R. S. Caruthers, "Modulating System," US Patent 2,086,601, issued June 
13, 1937. 
[91] Kenji Itoh, Akio Iida, Yoshinobu Sasaki, Shuji Urasaki, “A 40 GHz Band 
Monolithic Even Harmonic Mixer with an Antiparallel Diode Pair,” 1991 IEEE 
MTT International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 879-882. 
[92] B. Thomas, A. Maestrini, D. Matheson, I. Mehdi, P. de Maagt, “Design of 
an 874 GHz Biasable Sub-Harmonic Mixer Based on MMIC Membrane Planar 
Schottky Diodes,” 33rd International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter and 
Terahertz Waves, IRMMW-THz, September 2008, pp. 1-2. 
[93] Che-Hung Lin, Yu-Ann Lai, Jui-Chieh Chiu, and Yeong-Her Wang, “A 
23–37 GHz Miniature MMIC Subharmonic Mixer,, IEEE Microwave and 
Wireless Components Letters, Volume 17, No. 9, September 2007, pp. 679-681. 
[94] Chun-Hsiang Chi, Chung-Hung Wu, Wei-Ting Wang, Chi-Hau Lai, Dow-
Chih Niu, and Chi-Yang Chang, “A 10-110GHz Fundamental/Harmonic Rat-Race 
Mixer,” Proceedings of the 37th European Microwave Conference, Munich 
Germany, October 2007, pp. 652-655.   
[95] J. L. Merenda, D. Neuf, P. Piro, “4 to 40 GHz Even Harmonic Schottky 
Mixer,” IEEE 1988 MTT International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 695-
698. 
[96] Michel Houdart, "Microwave Subharmonic Mixer Device," US Patent 
4,485,488, issued November 27, 1984. 

430 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[97] Mitsuhiro Shimozawa, Kenji Kawakami, Hiroshi Ikematsu, Kenji Itoh, 
Nobuyuki Kasai, Yoji Isota, and Osami Ishida, “A Monolithic Even Harmonic 
Quadrature Mixer Using a Balance Type 90 Degree Phase Shifter for Direct 
Conversion Receiver,” IEEE 1998 MTT International Microwave Symposium 
Digest, pp. 175-178. 
[98] J. D. Buchs, Gunther Begemann, “Frequency Conversion Using Harmonic 
Mixers with Resistive Diodes,” IEE Journal of Microwave Optics and Acoustic, 
Volume 2, May 1978, pp. 71-76.   
[99] R. Katz, S. Maas, A. Sharma, D. Smith, “A Novel Monolithic HEMT 
Harmonic Mixer At Q-Band,” IEEE 1995 Microwave and Millimeter-Wave 
Monolithic Circuits Symposium, pp. 39-42. 
 
 

431 
Chapter 7 
BJT Mixer Theory 
Silicon bipolar transistors were commonly used in the RF front ends of television 
receivers during the 1960s as an improved alternative to diodes for the mixing 
function. But their application was limited to UHF band and below due to the 
frequency limitations of silicon technology. This barrier was overcome by the 
introduction of hetero-junction bipolar (HBT) devices, which provided the 
capability to operate over the microwave and lower mm-Wave frequency bands. 
This caused renewed interest in the application of bipolar devices for the mixer 
function, and HBT technology became an advantageous option for mixer circuits. 
The theory of operation and key design features for junction bipolar devices are 
discussed in this chapter. While originally developed for silicon bipolar, these 
concepts are equally applicable to modern GaAs hetero-junction devices.  
The base, collector and emitter currents in the bipolar device are depicted 
in Figure 7.1(a). The small signal DC transconductance is defined by the 
derivative of collector current with respect to base emitter voltage at a specific 
bias point Q. Employing simplified Ebers-Moll model (3.10) from Chapter 3, the 
transconductance is given by the ratio of collector current and thermal voltage. In 
mixer operation the transconductance is pumped by the LO voltage and under this 
condition, a large signal transconductance is defined by the ratio between the 
fundamental collector current and the driving voltage, (7.2). 
The transconductance produces gain in amplifiers and can also provide 
gain instead of loss in active mixers. This fact brings additional tradeoffs in 
receiver design. Let's consider the case of a receiver where the mixer is located 
before a narrow band low noise IF amplifier and after a RF low noise amplifier. 
Compared to a passive mixer, the active conversion gain will mask the IF 
amplifier noise, according to (2.43), improving overall receiver noise if the mixer 
noise is lower than the combination passive mixer and IF amplifier. But this 
tradeoff has to take into account the fact that optimum conversion gain and noise 
figure in the mixer itself are not coincident. In addition, the distortion generated 
by the mixer has to be considered, since design for optimum conversion gain does 
not necessarily deliver minimum distortion.  
 The mixing process is carried out by injecting a large LO voltage to one 
of the transistor terminal in such a way that maximizes the transconductance 

432 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
modulation. The small signal RF voltage at frequency, f1, is multiplied by this 
modulated function generating conversion to another frequency,  f2. The fact that a 
transistor has a third terminal allows construction of different types of mixers 
depending on where the LO is injected:  LO injection at the base, LO injection at 
the emitter, and LO injection at the collector. All three approaches result in 
modulation of the transconductance. It is intuitive that base injection is more 
efficient due to the lower LO voltage required to modulate the device. In principle 
the RF signal can be applied to any terminal, but in order to obtain high 
conversion gain the RF signal must be applied to the base. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (a) 
 
 
    (b)      
 
 
(c) 
Figure 7.1   
BJT mixer classification: (a) base injection; (b) emitter injection; (c) collector injection. 
 
Q
be
C
m
V
I
g




T
V
IC

    
 
  
      
        (7.1) 
LO
C
m
V
I
G 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (7.2) 
 
 
 
The small signal transconductance can be obtained from the device I/V 
plot for a specific bias point. The plot in Figure 7.2 is for a commercial device 
type 2SC5006 by NEC, calculated from the parameters in Appendix 7.A. The 
maximum dissipation power is 150 mW, which restricts the safe operating current 
to a maximum of 50 mA for a 3V collector voltage, not including derating. The 
contour for safe operation is depicted in the figure by the PDmax hyperbole. The 
simulated gm shows a slightly different profile compared to (6.2) that does not 
account for base series resistance, rb, and emitter resistance, RE.   
As discussed in Chapter 3, bipolar devices have two main frequency 
ranges of operation that needs to be considered when applied to mixers: a low 
frequency range, where the input impedance is essentially resistive and gain is 
constant; and a high frequency range, where the input impedance is capacitive and 
gain drops with increase in frequency. The limit for frequency operation is 
determined when common emitter current gain equals unity, the so called fT - 
transition frequency. One can still obtain power gain at this frequency but 
RIF 
VLO 
VRF 
IC 
IE 
IB 
IC 
RIF 
VLO 
VRF 
IC 
RIF 
VLO 
VRF 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
433 
performance as an amplifier is compromised. The power limit for amplifier is 
given by the frequency where power gain equals 1 (0 dB). Some authors designate 
this frequency as fmax, the maximum frequency of oscillation since output power is 
totally applied at the input to enable oscillations. Those limits are more or less 
valid for mixers since they affect the efficiency of transconductance modulation. 
Another parameter of interest is the common base transition frequency, denoted as 
f. It is defined as the frequency where the common base current gain is equal to 
unity. The common base and common emitter frequency limits are defined by 
(7.3) and (7.4), which show their dependency on device parameters.  
 
)
(
2
1





C
C
r
f


  
 
 
        
         (7.3) 
 
)
(
2



C
C
g
f
m
T


  
        
 
 
         (7.4) 
 
  
0.62 0.64 0.66 0.68 0.70 0.72 0.74 0.76 0.78 0.80 0.82 0.84
0.60
0.86
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
1.2
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
70
VBE
ICE.i, mA
gm_S
    
Figure 7.2   
Bipolar typical DC I/V and DC transconductance. The maximum powe dissipation is 
indicated by the curver PDmax. 
 
The parameters r, C and Cµ are from a hybrid  model found in 
classical text books, such as the one from reference [1]. 
 
 
7.1 LOW FREQUENCY MIXER 
 
The LO injection at the base along with the RF voltage is the most common 
application of bipolar as mixers and is the case considered in this section. Low 
frequency in this context refers to the range of frequencies discussed above, where 
gain is nearly constant and the circuit reactances are much smaller than the 
PDmax 

434 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
resistive elements, or where the frequency of operation is much smaller than fT. A 
rough approximation for this limit is to assume the frequency of operation is 
above fT/10, which is around 450 MHz for the device 2SC5006. The bipolar 
transistor can then be represented by a low frequency T- model represented in 
Figure 7.3, containing a diode and a current source dependant on the base emitter 
voltage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.3  
 Bipolar T-model used to describe mixer function. 
 
The applied base-emitter voltage contains two components, a DC bias 
voltage VDC plus a signal component, Vbe.  The resulting collector current due to 
the application of these voltages is described by (7.5) that considers two terms, 
DC and signal voltage. If the signal voltage can be assumed to be small in 
amplitude, then the exponential can be approximated by a second order series 
given in (7.6).  Even though the equation is valid only for small signal conditions, 
where both LO and RF signals are small, i.e. in the order of VT, it does provide 
qualitative information about the conversion process. The DC collector current, 
IDC is dependent on the externally applied DC voltage and on the DC level 
resulting from pumping the transistor with an LO voltage. The base resistance was 
disregarded in this calculation. 
 
T
be
T
DC
V
V
V
V
ES
C
e
e
I
I


 
 
 
 
 
        (7.5) 

















2
2
1
1
T
be
T
be
DC
C
V
V
V
V
I
I
  
 
 
        (7.6) 
 
 
Adding the LO and RF signals to the base so that Vbe = VLOcosLOt + 
VRFcosRFt, the current is expressed by the following frequency components: 
  



















2
cos
cos
2
1
cos
cos
1
T
LO
LO
RF
RF
T
LO
LO
RF
RF
DC
C
V
t
V
t
V
V
t
V
t
V
I
I




 
rB 
B
IE 
E
Vbe' 
IC 
FIE 
C 
IB 
B' 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
435 




























t
V
V
t
V
V
t
V
V
V
V
V
V
I
I
RF
T
RF
LO
T
LO
RF
T
RF
T
LO
T
RF
DC
C



2
cos
4
1
cos
cos
4
1
4
1
1
2
2
2



















t
V
V
V
t
V
V
V
t
V
V
RF
LO
T
LO
RF
RF
LO
T
LO
RF
LO
T
LO





cos
2
cos
2
2
cos
4
1
2
2
2
 (7.7)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
  
Assuming down converter operation, a low pass filter is applied to the 
collector, shorting the voltages at all frequency components to ground except the 
IF. Notice those components are either at DC or at frequencies that are of no 
interest in the down conversion process. The IF current at the desired frequency is 
allowed to circulate on an external load, RIF, generating the output IF voltage, VIF.   
 
 

t
V
V
R
V
V
RF
LO
T
LO
IF
RF
IF




cos
2
2
 
 
 
        (7.8) 
 
A more accurate method for mixer analysis, is to split the exponential 
into three components, DC, RF and LO, as in (7.9). VLO is the peak voltage across 
the diode engendered by the LO voltage, VL, and equals LO voltage multiplied by 
a voltage divider formed by Rg and Rd. Rg is the LO generator impedance, and Rd 
is the diode impedance offered by the base-emitter junction. The RF voltage is 
small signal and the exponential is approximated by a linear function, (7.11); the 
LO voltage is assumed to be a large signal sinusoidal voltage that is replaced by a 
Fourier series expansion, similar to (5.49).  In reality the LO voltage on the diode 
is not sinusoidal, making (7.12) an approximated solution to the problem. In spite 
of this limitation, the analysis of a mixer in this approach provides an insight to 
several performance parameters. 
 
T
RF
RF
T
LO
LO
T
DC
V
t
V
V
t
V
V
V
ES
C
e
e
e
I
I



cos
cos

 
 
 
         (7.9) 
  
T
DC
V
V
ES
DC
e
I
I


'
 
 
 
 
 
       (7.10)  
 
t
V
V
e
RF
T
RF
V
t
V
T
RF
RF

cos
1
cos


  
 
 
       (7.11) 






1
0
cos
cos
)
(
2
)
(
t
n
x
I
x
I
e
n
t
x


 
 
                      (7.12) 
 

436 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
In(x) is a modified Bessel function of the first kind, order n and argument 
x, defined by the ratio VD / VT. Normalizing the current components to the DC 
value the collector current becomes: 
 








...
)
2
cos(
)
(
)
(
2
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
2
1
)
(
0
2
0
1
0
t
x
I
x
I
t
x
I
x
I
x
I
I
I
LO
LO
DCCQ
C


    (7.13) 
   
 
Substituting 7.11, 7.13 into 7.9 and making IDC = IDCQI0(x), one obtains: 
 














t
V
V
t
x
I
x
I
I
I
RF
T
RF
LO
DC
C


cos
1
...
cos
)
(
)
(
2
1
0
1
(7.14)  
 
Eliminating the higher order harmonics and developing the multiplication 
of terms, the collector current of interest becomes defined by (7.15). 
 








t
x
I
x
I
t
x
I
x
I
t
V
V
I
I
RF
LO
RF
LO
RF
T
RF
DC
C
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
cos
0
1
0
1





   
 




t
x
I
x
I
t
x
I
x
I
RF
LO
LO
)
2
cos(
)
(
)
(
cos
)
(
)
(
2
0
2
0
1



                       (7.15) 
 
The spectral representation of the collector current, (7.15), is depicted in 
Figure 7.4, where the solid lines represent the applied signals at the base, and the 
dotted lines represent the converted signals at the collector. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.4   
Collector current spectrum components from (7.15). 
 
 
 
 
Amplitude 
IF  =  LO - RF 
LO+RF    
RF         2LO-RF 
2LO  
LO  

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
437 
7.1.1 Fourier Coefficients 
 
The determination of I0(x) can be made by approximate equations, [2], as follows: 
If x is small, then the simplified form in (7.16) applies. If x > 5 (7.17) provides 
results with 3% accuracy, and accuracy becomes 1% for x > 10.  
 
 


n
x
x
I
n
n
2
/
)
(

 for x  0 
 
 
          
       (7.16)  
 





x
n
x
e
x
I
x
n
2
1
2
)
(
2

   
for x  5 
          
       (7.17) 
 
 
 
 The normalized Fourier coefficients are represented in the following 
plot, [3]. Notice they are a strong function of LO voltage for small amplitudes. 
Increasing the LO voltage above 5VT causes the normalized coefficients to 
saturate asymptotically and be less dependent on LO drive level.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.5   
Normalized Fourier components for sinusoidal excitation in BJTs. After [2]. 
 
 
7.1.2 Small Signal Impedance 
 
The small signal base impedance, Zbase, is calculated by applying a small RF 
voltage and calculating the resulting base current. The base current is defined by 
dividing the RF term from the collector current in (7.13) by the current gain, β. 
The base impedance is defined per (7.18), similar to the impedance of a linear 
amplifier, with transconductance controlled by the LO drive. The DC small signal 
collector impedance according to T-model is high for bipolar devices. 
 
! 
Bessel Function 
x(VLO/VT) 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
0.4 
0.8
1.2 
1.6 
2.0 
)
(
)
(
2
0
3
x
I
x
I
)
(
)
(
2
0
2
x
I
x
I
)
(
)
(
2
0
1
x
I
x
I

438 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
)
cos(
1
t
V
V
I
i
RF
T
RF
DC
B



 
 
mQ
DC
T
T
RF
DC
RF
base
g
I
V
V
V
I
v
Z





1
             
          
       (7.18)
 
 
 
 
7.1.3 Large Signal Impedance 
 
Conventionally, impedance is a linear concept where the relation between voltage 
and current is independent from the particular magnitude of the drive signal. In 
large signals both the voltage and current becomes distorted and are represented 
by Fourier series. The extension of the impedance concept to large signal is 
possible if it is constrained to the specific drive level and is defined by the ratio 
between voltage and current at the fundamental frequency of operation.  One also 
has to determine conditions for the harmonics. In general they are considered 
shorted to ground. Therefore, the large signal base impedance at the LO frequency 
is defined by dividing the applied LO voltage (assumed sinusoidal in the equation) 
to the base current as given by (7.19). 
 








...
2
cos
)
(
)
(
2
cos
)
(
)
(
2
1
0
2
0
1
t
x
I
x
I
t
x
I
x
I
I
I
LO
LO
DC
B



 
m
D
DC
B
D
LO
G
x
I
x
I
V
I
I
V
Z









)
(
)
(
2
0
1
   
          
 
       (7.19)             
 
The conclusion from this equation is that LO impedance is equivalent to 
RF impedance with small signal transconductance replaced by its large signal 
value, Gm. At low frequency the diode impedance from the T-model can be given 
by similar values as those provided by Table 5.1. But due to transistor action the 
diode impedance appears at the base terminal multiplied by the current gain. 
Therefore, at low frequencies VD = VLO and there is nearly no power absorbed by 
the transistor.  
 
 
7.1.4 Conversion Gain 
 
The schematic of the low frequency mixer represented in Figure 7.6 employs the 
device 2SC5006, which has fT = 4 GHz. Since operation below fT/10 can be 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
439 
considered low frequency, the mixer is set for down-converter operation with fRF 
= 130 MHz and fLO = 100 MHz. The quiescent operating point is set at ICQ = 2 
mA, requiring a base voltage of 0.71 V. Both LO and RF signals are combined 
and then applied to the base as depicted in Figure 7.6.   
The IF frequency is extracted from the collector by the tank circuit, that 
presents a high impedance to IF signals and nearly zero impedance to all other 
frequency components. The IF currents flow to the load resistor, which determines 
the converted output IF voltage as in (7.20). The RF and image terminations at the 
collector are equal, and the IF load is not matched to the device output impedance. 
There are a couple of reasons to skip this matching, namely, the output impedance 
of bipolar transistors are high at low frequency which is the case of down 
conversion mixer; tentative to match will increase the voltage at the collector 
increasing the feedback through the capacitive divider to the base making the 
circuit potentially more unstable. In addition, if collector IF voltage becomes high, 
it has to be limited by the maximum available voltage swing in the circuit.  
 

t
x
I
x
I
V
I
V
R
V
RF
LO
T
DC
RF
L
out




cos
)
(
)
(
0
1
                     
       (7.20) 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.6   
Schematic of a BJT tuned mixer with LO and RF injected into the base.  
 
Applying a LO peak voltage of 250 mV at 100 MHz, makes x  10 and 
the ratio I1(x)/I0(x) = 0.8, per the plot in Figure 7.5. The voltage conversion gain is 
equal to GCV = Vout/VRF = 6.15, for a load resistor equal to 100 ohm. The 
simulation of the same circuit with a full model using ADS gives a voltage 
conversion gain of 6.7. This is very reasonable accuracy for a hand calculation of 
a bipolar low frequency mixer. The conversion gain can also be normalized to the 
quiescent transconductance resulting in a function dependent on normalized 
quantities, VLO/VT. The conversion gain then follows the plot in Figure 7.5 for 
current I1/I0 (i.e., gain increases sharply with LO voltage and stabilizes for a value 
of x > 5).  
 
 
 
 
RB 
RE 
Vout 
L,C 
+VCC 
+Vbias 
RL 
VLO 
VRF 
RS 

440 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
)
(
)
(
0
1
x
I
x
I
R
g
G
L
mQ
CV 
 
 
 
 
                      (7.21) 
  
 
7.1.5 High Frequency and DC Effects 
 
The DC term in collector current expressed by (7.9) assumes a constant DC 
voltage applied to the junction. A more realistic result should include the base and 
emitter bias resistors, as they introduce DC feedback and affect the actual DC 
voltage applied to the junction. The junction voltage is therefore changed from 
VBE to VBE' according to the equation: 
 
 
 
R
BE
BE
V
V
V


'
 
 
 
 
         
       (7.22) 
 
 
The bias circuit is represented by a voltage supply in series with a base 
bias resistor RB, in shunt with the base. Its value in general is large so that it does 
not affect the AC signals. The voltage VR is defined as follows: 
 
 
C
B
E
C
B
B
E
E
R
RI
R
R
I
I
R
I
R
V













    
       (7.23) 
 
C
BE
BE
RI
V
V


'
 
        
       
 
         
       (7.24) 
 
The quiescent DC current is obtained by inserting the voltage from (7.22) 
into (7.9) and iteratively solving for DC current, resulting in:  
 
T
DC
BE
V
RI
V
S
DCQ
e
I
I


    
 
 
 
       (7.25) 
 
The introduction of LO drive voltage distorts the collector waveform, 
generating a DC term of its own. This effect is taken into account by considering 
the DC term of the Fourier expansion in (7.26). The feedback effect from RE 
needs to be accounted for in the amount of LO voltage applied to the junction; 
(i.e., VLO' = VLO - REIC). If the voltage developed in the emitter resistance is small 
compared to Vbe, then its effect can be ignored. On the other hand it has to be kept 
in mind that a minimum amount of RE is required for temperature stabilization in 
either BJTs or HBTs.   
 







T
LO
DCQ
DC
V
V
I
I
I
'
0
          
 
 
 
       (7.26) 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
441 
With,   
T
LO
V
V
T
LO
V
V
e
V
V
I
T
LO
'
2
'
'
0








 
 
This simplified analysis may not be adequate if the following conditions 
apply: (1) base capacitance has to be taken into account, requiring base current 
and consequently conjugate impedance matching for optimum performance; (2) 
the mixer is required to be matched to the generator, in which case feedback 
networks are inserted into the circuit, making it more difficult to determine 
voltages and currents without using a computer simulator; (3) emitter impedance 
is employed to stabilize the circuit, enhancing the amount of feedback. To address 
those conditions an improved approach to analyze bipolar mixers is described in 
the next section.  
 
 
7.2 CONVERSION MATRIX  
 
It can be said the analysis method employed for the diode mixer is also valid for 
bipolar transistors, essentially by replacing the diode conductance with the 
transistor transconductance. As far as the nonlinear element behavior is 
concerned, that is correct, since the nonlinearities are described by similar 
equations. However, the nonlinear transistor elements are embedded in a larger 
number of parasitics, making it more difficult to treat analytically. An approach 
similar to the one applied to FETs reported in the literature, [4], is applied here, 
making use of a non-linear hybrid- type of model, represented in Figure 7.7. In 
this model, the base emitter capacitance, C, corresponds to the parallel 
combination of the junction capacitance, Cj, and diffusion capacitance, CD. Notice 
the base and collector physical ports are each terminated by four terminations at 
different frequencies, corresponding to 4 virtual ports. The top circuits are labeled 
LO for the input LO termination, ZGLO, and output LO termination, ZDLO. The 
other terminations correspond to the RF, image, and IF signals at the base and 
collector. All other frequency components are assumed to be shorted. The circuit 
is analyzed using the Z-matrix representation, (7.27), because there are more 
impedances in series in the circuit than in shunt and the resulting multi-frequency 
matrix is called the conversion matrix. Only the first two terms of Fourier series 
for gm(t) are necessary to simulate image, RF and intermediate frequencies, i.e. gm0 
and gm1, and are include in the conversion matrix for the circuit. The conversion 
matrix does not take into account the effect of feedback capacitance, Cµ. 
 
 
 
 

442 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.7   
Representation of a transistor mixer model with ports terminated at RF, IF, IM and LO 
frequencies. After [4]. 
 
 
 



































































6
5
*
4
3
2
*
1
6
66
63
62
*
61
5
55
53
52
*
4
*
44
43
*
41
36
3
33
25
2
22
14
*
1
*
11
*
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
I
I
I
I
I
I
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
E
  (7.27)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
The matrix components are defined by the following equations. The 
termination impedances at each port are denoted Zk with k = 1, 2, ...6. 
 
 
j
k
j
E
B
R
C
j
jR
R
r
Z
Z
Z








1
33
22
11
with k = 1,2,3      (7.28a) 
 
0
66
55
44
R
R
Z
Z
Z
E 



 
 
 
 
     (7.28b) 
 
E
R
Z
Z
Z



36
25
14
  
 
 
 
     (7.28c) 
Cµ 
Vb 
R0 
1=RF 
2=IM 
3=IF 
1=RF 
2=IM 
3=IF 
ERF 
ELO 
RE 
F1 
Z1 
FG
ZGLO 
F6 
Z6 
F5 
Z5 
F2 
Z2 
F3 
Z3 
F4 
Z4
FDLO 
ZDLO 
C 
Rj 
gm(t)Vb 
RB 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
443 
 

C
j
R
R
Z
Z
Z
k
E
B
1
33
22
11





     
 
 
     (7.28d)
 
j
j
m
E
R
C
j
R
R
g
R
Z

1
0
0
41
1


 7.28e)  
j
j
m
R
C
j
R
R
g
Z

1
0
1
61
1


  (7.28f)
 
j
j
m
E
R
C
j
R
R
g
R
Z

2
0
0
52
1


(7.28g)   
j
j
m
R
C
j
R
R
g
Z

1
0
1
62
1


  (7.28h)
 
j
j
m
E
R
C
j
R
R
g
j
R
Z

3
0
0
63
1


(7.28i)   
j
j
m
R
C
j
R
R
g
Z
Z

3
0
1
53
43
1



 (7.28j) 
 

C
j
R
g
R
Z
m
E
1
0
0
41


     (7.28k)        

C
j
R
g
R
Z
m
E
2
0
0
52


       (7.28m) 
 
 

C
j
R
g
R
Z
m
E
3
0
0
63


 
 
 
 
 
    (7.28n) 
 
 
Once the conversion matrix is established, the available conversion gain 
can be solved by computer simulation using (7.29). Simulation will also provide 
information about the effect of terminations on conversion gain and port 
impedance at the frequencies of interest.  
 
 




2
1
6
1
2
1
6
2
6
4
Re
4
Re
E
I
R
R
Z
E
Z
I
G
L
g
C


    
             
      (7.29) 
 
 
 
An analytical solution for the conversion gain is possible by calculating 
the ratio (I6/E1), in the manner proposed by reference [5]. It consists in calculating 
the ratio of two determinants, /z. The first determinant, , is obtained by 
deleting the first row and sixth column of (7.27).  And the second, z, is the 
determinant from (7.27). 
 
36
25
14
63
52
41
6
66
5
55
*
4
*
44
3
33
2
22
*
1
*
11
61
5
55
*
4
*
44
3
33
2
22
1
6
)
)(
)(
)(
)(
)(
(
)
)(
)(
)(
(
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
E
I












 
 
 





)
)(
(
6
66
*
1
*
11
61
1
6
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
E
I
  
 
           
       (7.30)
 
 

444 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
)
)(
)(
)(
(
5
55
*
4
*
44
3
33
2
22
63
52
41
36
25
14
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z






 
           
       (7.31) 
 
 
 In down conversion mode, Z1 and Z6 are matched and Z4, Z5 are nearly 
zero with the purpose of improving the trans-conductance modulation. The 
reverse and forward transfer parameters Z25, Z36, Z52, Z63 are low due to the low 
impedance attached to the collector at these frequencies, making parameter  
small and able to be disregarded.  In up conversion mode, Z1, Z4, Z5 are matched, 
while Z6 is shorted. Z2 corresponds to the image frequency, which is either close 
to the RF impedance or filtered. The reverse transfer parameters are still low in 
value but the forward transfer parameters are not negligible in this condition. So,  
is not zero but still is smaller than the first term of denominator of (7.30), and a 
small error occurs if it is disregarded. The error obviously depends on circuit 
parameters and frequency of operation. Thus the following approximation can be 
made: 
 
)
)(
(
6
66
*
1
*
11
1
0
1
1
6
Z
Z
Z
Z
C
j
R
g
E
I
j
m





            
                        
      (7.32) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The output resistance R0 is included in the numerator of (7.32), and in the 
denominator since it is included in the expression Z66 = RE + R0. This resistance is 
usually high in small size bipolar devices, and if it is much larger than load 
impedance it is not practical to match. In this case it can be neglected, so the 
available conversion gain can be defined as: 
 
 
2
1
1
2
*
1
*
11
2
1
1
)
(
2















C
g
R
R
Z
Z
R
R
C
g
G
m
g
L
L
g
m
C


  
                 (7.33) 
 
 
7.2.1 Transconductance modulation 
 
 
The small signal components of the collector current can be described by 
multiplying the time varying transconductance with the input small signal voltage, 
as in (7.34), with gm(t) defined in (7.35). The time varying transconductance is 
obtained from the derivative of current with respect to base voltage, evaluated 
over the LO base voltage waveform. The term transconductance mixer is 
sometimes found in the literature to describe the same modulation effect.  To 
obtain gm(t) from I/V characteristics it is first necessary to obtain gm(VBE). In this 
case it was approximated in Figure 7.8 by a bi-linear relation, where gm = 0 for 
voltage below VBEQ and is proportional to VBE for voltages above. The best bias 
point for mixer operation is the one that maximizes the transconductance 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
445 
modulation, (i.e. 
BE
be V
V
BE
m
V
G



/
). The best bias point is therefore at VBEQ where 
the Fourier coefficients of rectified sinusoidal LO voltage are maximum.  
 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
t
v
t
g
t
i
be
m
C

 
 
 
 
         
       (7.34) 
 
...
2
cos
cos
)
(
2
1
0




t
g
t
g
g
t
g
LO
m
LO
m
m
m


 
       (7.35) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
The output waveform is symmetric around t = 0 so that the Fourier series 
can be of the cosine form. The coefficients for this waveform are standard and 
described by (7.36a, c). The parameter to be determined in this case is the gmax 
function of LO drive level. 
 

max
0
g
gm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (7.36a) 
2
max
1
g
gm 
 
 
 
        
 
 
     (7.36b)      

3
2
max
2
g
gm 
  
 
 
 
 
     (7.36c)      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.8   
Representation of gm(t) assuming a linear gm(Vbe), derivated form I, V plot. 
 
 
Application of harmonic balance simulation to determine the large and 
small signal coefficients can be carried with the circuit shown in Figure 7.9. In 
this schematic, the collector is short circuited, the base is biased with voltage 
source VB and resistor RB, and the source is decoupled with base capacitor CB. The 
simulated coefficients are obtained by taking the ratio between collector currents 
and applied base voltage in (7.37). The large signal impedance is obtained from 
same equations but evaluated at the LO frequency only.   
gm(VBE)  
t=0 
t=
gma
VBE 
gm(t)  
VBE
t 
t 

446 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
VLO (mV)
RB
gm0 (mS)
gm1(mS)
gm2 (mS) IDC (mA)
170
105
74
0.018
7
340
96
70
0.02
6
680
84
63
0.022
5
170
127
94
0.024
15
340
117
89
0.03
12
680
103
80
0.034
9
170
145
107
0.025
33
340
133
102
0.033
27
680
116
95
0.042
20
125
250
500
 
 
RF
RF
C
m
v
i
g
)
(
0


 
 
 
 
 
     (7.37a) 
 
RF
LO
RF
C
m
v
i
g
)
(
1




  
 
                
     (7.37b) 
 
RF
RF
LO
C
m
v
i
g
)
2
(
2




  
        
       
   
     (7.37c) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.9   
Circuit schematic to determine Fourier coefficients from an electrical simulator. 
 
  
 
Employing the circuit of Figure 7.9 and use the parameters for the bipolar 
device type 2SC5006 by NEC, (7.38) was applied to determine the 
transconductance Fourier coefficients, for different values of base resistor, bias, 
and LO drive voltages. The results are in table 7.1. By replacing the small signal 
voltage VRF by VLO in (7.38), one obtains the large signal coefficients described in 
Table 7.2. 
 
Table 7.1 
Small Signal Transconductance Fourier Coefficients Function of LO Drive and Bias Resistor RB 
CB 
RE 
+VBB 
VLO 
VRF 
+VCC 
RB 
IC 
IB 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
447 
VLO (mV)
RB
GM0 (mS)
GM1(mS)
GM2 (mS)
IDC (mA)
170
87
88
38
7
340
64
77
35
6
680
46
62
31
5
170
78
102
52
15
340
59
86
47
12
680
43
68
40
9
170
77
114
60
33
340
60
95
54
27
680
44
73
45
20
125
250
500
 
The parameter of importance in the conversion is gm1, which is 
responsible for the conversion process for fundamental mixers and therefore 
should be maximized. It should also be noted that gm1 can be increased by external 
bias or by applying a larger LO voltage. The peak value of 0.5 V corresponds to 
+4 dBm considering a matched 50 ohm generator.  The dependency of gm1 on 
equivalent base resistance, RB, suggests the option of employing an active base 
bias capable of providing low source impedance. The large signal parameter is 
useful in the matching of large signal LO generator. 
 
Table 7.2 
Large Signal Transconductance Fourier Coefficients as a Function of LO drive and Bias Resistor RB 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.2.2 Nonlinear Capacitance 
 
The nonlinear capacitors on bipolar devices have already been discussed in 
Chapter 3 and the equations for the simplified T- model are reproduced in (7.38), 
(7.39). The capacitances are voltage dependent, set by external bias and large 
signal drive level. Nonlinear reactances are not efficient at frequency conversion, 
except in the special case of varactors. However they affect mixer impedance 
which in turn affect mixer performance. In general their average value is sufficient 
to determine its impedance contribution. The base capacitance, C, is given by, 
(7.38) composed of two terms: the first is the diffusion capacitance expressed as 
the product = gmQ, where  is the transit time of carriers in the base; the second is 
the junction capacitance relevant when the junction is reverse biased. The 
feedback capacitance Cµ is the capacitance of the collector base reverse biased 
junction and Vbi is the built in voltage. 
 
 
5.0
5.0
1
1


















bi
be
j
m
bi
be
j
j
C
V
V
C
g
V
V
C
dV
dI
C



        (7.38) 

448 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
5.0
1








bi
bc
j
V
V
C
C
       
 
 
 
      (7.39) 
 
 
7.2.3 Base and Collector Impedance 
 
  
The base and collector impedances can be determined directly from matrix (7.27) 
replacing gm(t) by gm0 and applying the corresponding terminations as follows: for 
base impedance calculations at RF, LO and image frequencies, the collector is 
terminated with a low impedance at those frequencies, and with a load resistor, RL 
at the IF.  For collector impedance calculations at IF frequency, the base is 
terminated either with 50 ohm, an open, or a short circuit to ground. An open 
circuit is a better termination as it minimizes effects from negative feedback. 
Analytical expressions can be obtained by reducing the schematic of Figure 7.7 to 
the schematic of Figure 7.10.  
 
The base RF impedance in terms of device parameters, load impedance, 
and source impedance is in (7.40). In the particular case where the load impedance 
is low, and the base emitter reactance is much lower than the junction resistance 
the impedance is described by (7.41). The collector termination can make use of 
L,C elements but a better choice is an open stub measuring quarter wave length at 
the LO frequency. It provides a near zero impedance at that frequency and a low 
impedance at RF and IM if the IF frequency is much lower than either frequency. 
At IF frequency the open stub reactance is small in value and does not interfere 
with power transfer to the load.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
Figure 7.10    Schematic for determining in/out device impedance. 
 
 
 
The low frequency base impedance is obtained by making   0, 
resulting in ZB  rB+Rj + RE(1+gmRj)  rB+ Rj +RE( +1). This expression is 
equivalent to (7.18) when RE = 0. Equation (7.42) gives the output impedance at 
the IF frequency with the base impedance terminated in the generator impedance, 
C 
RE 
E 
E 
B 
C 
Cµ 
gm0Vb 
rB 
Rj 
gd 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
449 
Zg. The term ZE represents either an emitter resistance, RE, or an inductance, jLE, 
but not both simultaneously. The collector impedance at other frequencies is not 
relevant since it is nearly shorted in normal operation.  
 



























)
1(
1
1
1
1
)
1(
0
0
E
m
j
L
j
j
E
m
L
E
B
B
Z
g
C
j
R
Z
C
j
C
j
R
C
j
R
Z
g
C
Z
j
Z
R
Z









   (7.40) 
 
     




C
j
Z
g
C
j
Z
R
Z
E
mQ
E
B
B




1
               
 
       (7.41) 
 
 




















m
j
g
j
g
m
j
g
IF
g
R
Z
C
j
R
Z
g
R
Z
C
C
Z
1
1
1
1
1
1
1




 
       (7.42) 
 
The collector impedance at IF frequency can be approximated by the 
feedback capacitance, Cµ, if the termination between base and ground is a short 
circuit.   
 
 
7.3 MIXER PROPERTIES 
 
7.3.1 LO Power 
 
Ideally the base impedance should be conjugately matched at RF and LO 
frequencies for best efficiency. However, it is not possible to achieve a 
simultaneous match at both.  The general approach is to match the device at RF 
and accept the mismatch at the LO. This mismatch reduces the LO voltage 
appearing across the internal base-to-emitter node that controls the current, 
reducing transconductance modulation and consequently conversion gain. It is 
simple, though, to increase the LO drive power to recover the conversion 
performance. Once the desired LO voltage is known for a given application, the 
trans-conductance can be linearized at this LO voltage and frequency. The large 
signal LO impedance is determined by replacing in (7.40) the small signal gm of 
(7.1) with the large signal trans-conductance, Gm of (7.2). The large signal base 

450 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
impedance can then be determined allowing calculation of drive LO power to the 
mixer according to the equation: 
 
 
)
Re(
2
1
11
2
Z
V
P
LO
LO 
 
 
 
 
                   (7.43) 
 
 
7.3.2 Noise Figure 
 
The mechanism of noise generation in a mixer is different than that of an amplifier 
because the device parameters vary in time in response to the LO signal. An 
approach, [6], was proposed to use the time averaged values for the noise 
parameters using a similar equation developed for amplifiers by making the 
following substitutions: ω  ωRF, gm  gm1 and Cbe  Cbe,av, where the suffix av 
stands for average value.  Essentially three noise sources exist in a bipolar device: 
flicker noise, shot noise, and thermal noise. The first is inversely proportional to 
frequency so it is not generally relevant at high operating frequencies. The shot 
noise is modeled by current sources proportional to collector current and is 
connected in parallel with the collector to emitter signal generator. The thermal 
noise is associated with any lossy element in the circuit, and is represented as a 
current generator for any parallel resistor, and as a voltage generator for any series 
resistor. A dedicated computer program is required to enter the noise sources and 
calculate the noise figure, taking into account fundamental and harmonics of the 
LO generator. The noise figure for a bipolar mixer in terms of the device 
parameters can be estimated from (7.44), where, gm1 corresponds to the conversion 
trans-conductance, and the effect of frequency is normalized to fT. At high 
frequencies the limitation becomes the reactance C, included in the equation 
through the parameter fT = gm/(2C). 
 






















2
2
1
1
1
2
)
(
2
1
1
T
S
E
B
S
m
m
S
S
E
B
f
f
R
R
R
R
g
g
R
R
R
R
F

          (7.44) 
 
 
With Rs = Real part of generator impedance, ZS 
 
 
For the noise factor of (7.44), it is not practical to include effects from 
the source impedance. A better approach for circuit simulation is to consider the 
noise factor of (7.45).   
 
 


2
min
Sopt
S
S
n
Y
Y
G
R
NF
NF



 
 
 
 
       (7.45) 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
451 
 
Where 
S
S
S
jB
G
Y


is the source admittance connected to the base 
 
 
  
n
R  is the equivalent noise resistance  
 
 
 
min
NF
is the minimum noise figure 
 
 
The minimum noise figure is obtained from the derivative of (7.45) 
relative to the source impedance equated to zero, (i.e.,
0
/

S
dZ
dF
).  The 
definitions [7] of these parameters for a SiGe HBT are given by the set (7.46). In 
spite of differences in technology, the noise sources for the model used to derive 
the expressions are similar to the ones employed in silicon devices.   
 
 


















2
1
min
1
2
1
1
T
B
m
f
f
R
g
NF


  
       
     (7.46a) 
 










n
m
n
m
n
m
Sopt
R
g
R
g
C
R
g
G
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2



 
       
     (7.46b) 
 


n
m
Sopt
R
g
C
B
1
2
2




              
 
    
                   (7.46c) 
 
1
2
1
m
B
n
g
R
R


   
 
 
 
        
    (7.46d) 
 
7.3.3 Linearity 
 
While single ended BJT mixers provide good noise figure results, the conversion 
process is not actually linear, there is always a certain degree of distortion even at 
low voltage levels. The intermodulation products in particular of third order are 
more harmful because they are translated in frequency and show up within the IF 
band. For intermodulation analysis the nonlinearity is considered mild and Taylor 
series expansion is usually applied to the transconductance as shown in (7.47).  
The problem in mixers is the coefficients are a function of time due to the effect of 
the LO signal, and thus are more complex to determine compared with amplifiers. 
The terms gm(t), gm2(t), and gm3(t) are obtained from the first, second and third 
order derivatives of the IC(Vbe) evaluated at the quiescent point with LO 
superimposed. 
 
 
3
3
2
2
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
t
V
t
g
t
V
t
g
t
V
t
g
t
I
RF
m
RF
m
RF
m
C



        (7.47) 
 
 
The analysis of bipolar linearity for single ended mixers is rare in the 
literature since efforts have been dedicated to the differential mixer approach, 

452 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
which provides a great advantage in reduction of distortion. Detailed information 
on the gmn(t), n =1,2,3, is demonstrated for FETs in Chapter 9 and can be extended 
to bipolars. One method to improve linearity is similar to amplifier linearization, 
namely, inserting an emitter resistor, which is briefly addressed next. To a first 
order approximation, the non-linear effects can be lumped into a dynamic emitter 
resistance, re, which is given by (7.48).  Applying a voltage signal at the transistor 
base, and employing a T-model for the transistor, it is easily concluded that the 
voltage will appear at the terminals of re, assuming rB is of much smaller value. 
Note the emitter resistance, re, in the model of Figure 7.3 corresponds to the 
differential diode resistance. This voltage will develop a non-linear current IE. 
 
T
BE
V
V
S
BE
E
BE
e
e
I
V
I
V
r


 
 
 
         
 
      (7.48) 
 
 
Inserting an external emitter resistance, RE, the base voltage is applied to 
(re + RE). The input voltage is now shared between a linear and a non-linear 
resistor. The higher the RE, the lower the portion of voltage dropped across the 
nonlinear resistance, so the circuit becomes more linear at the expense of gain 
reduction. If an external base resistance, RB, is added, it will also linearize the 
circuit. Therefore, constant current drive and linearization by an external resistor 
fundamentally produce the same effect; they both minimize the internal Vbe swing 
on the nonlinear element compared with the applied signal. However, these 
corrections must be traded-off with gain reduction to obtain the optimal result. 
This effect, discussed for the common emitter circuit is equally applicable to the 
common base. This approach works well at low frequencies where gain is high but 
not so well at high frequencies due to gain reduction. An alternative at high 
frequencies is to use inductive feedback instead of resistive, preserving the DC 
circuit conditions.  
 
 
7.3.4 Stability 
 
A common problem when matching impedance in active devices is the possibility 
of unstable operation, which is a function of device terminations and bias 
conditions. In general, oscillations in active mixers are of linear nature, generated 
by positive feedback in the circuit. Therefore, S-parameter theory employed in 
amplifier stability analysis can equally be applied with some modifications. The 
mixer is considered as a two port network, RF input and IF output and all other 
terminations are considered part of the two port network and properly terminated. 
For instance, a low impedance at RF, image and LO frequencies is connected to 
the collector. Using stability circles, one can check the potential stability at one 
port as the terminating impedance at the other port varies. The first condition to 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
453 
evaluate is stability as a function of bias variation around the bias operating point. 
The second stability condition is to check for negative real impedance observed on 
small signal S11 from a LO pumped device. Another test is to increase the LO 
drive from a low level up to a large signal level and verify the magnitude of S11 
over the desired frequency range is always less than one. An additional test is to 
verify conversion gain stability. The conversion gain should track the LO input 
drive level. Any erratic behavior or gain jump, it is a symptom of instability.  
 
A better tool to verify stability is the time domain check with the 
application of a small pulse to the circuit. If oscillations build up, then the circuit 
is unstable and the frequency where the instability occurs can be ascertained from 
the output spectrum. If the transients impressed in the circuit decay, then the 
circuit is stable. This verification works well with circuits modeled with lumped 
elements. At higher frequencies the distributed nature of elements must be 
considered, and time domain analysis may not always work.  
 
 
7.4 DESIGN STUDY: CDMA DOWN – CONVERTER 
 
 
 
 
The design target is to convert the 869 – 894 CDMA band to an IF of 85 MHz 
using high side LO. The 2SC5006 device was used, and the design parameters 
were determined using the circuit of Figure 7.11. The device parameters are found 
in Appendix 7A for the Gummel–Poon model. S-parameter blocks were employed 
to artificially terminate the circuit with desired impedances, and the Gummel Poon 
device model was used in the ADS simulator. The base bias is delivered by the 
resistive divider Rb1, Rb2, selected to deliver a quiescent current of 2.0 mA into a 5 
ohm emitter resistor. Initially, the output S-parameter block, which acts as a low 
pass filter with short circuit impedance at the collector, was set to pass IF signals 
and block all higher frequency signals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.11   Mixer initial schematic with virtual input and output matching network. 
 
Vin 
Lbias 
Vout 
+VCC 
RE 
Rb1 
Rb2 
 
[S]in 
 
[S]out 

454 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The input S-parameter block was set as a through line for LO and RF 
signals, and image and IF terminations were varied. Simulation results for 
conversion gain are summarized in Table 7.3. It is interesting to note that an open 
circuit IF impedance at the base degrades conversion gain regardless of image 
termination. This is due to the fact that an open circuit condition enhances internal 
device negative feedback. If the IF termination is 50 ohm or a short circuit, then 
there is less effect from image termination on the conversion gain. 
 
Table 7.3  
Effect of IM and IF Termination at the Base 
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The test circuit was then extended to the mixer circuit of Figure 7.12. The 
collector S-parameter block was replaced by an open circuit stub tuned at the LO 
frequency, and an external load of 100 Ohm. An initial stability analysis showed 
instability occurring in the low MHz range of frequencies, which can be 
suppressed by a parallel RC resistor combination in series with the base.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.12   Mixer final schematic with bias network Rb1, Rb2.  
 
 
ZIM 
ZIF 
Gc - 
dB 
50 
50 
9.6 
open  
open 
3.37 
open  
50 
8.2 
50 
open 
3.8 
short 
short 
10.2 
open  
short 
8.9 
short  
open 
3.47 
open  
50 
8.37 
50 
short 
9.38 
Vin 
LS 
+VCC 
Lbias 
Cp 
Vout 
RE 
Rb1 
Rb2 
Rst 
Cst 
/4 
Cp2 
RL 
Ls

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
455 
 
The base impedance at LO and RF frequencies were determined by 
applying two voltage generators at the Vin port and measuring the base current at 
the corresponding frequency. The results were: ZRF = 12.38 - j35.8  and ZLO = 
7.9 - j33.7 . Approximate results from (7.41), for the desired bias and values 
from Tables 7.1 and 7.2, provide the following impedance values ZRF = 9.37 - j35 
 and ZLO = 9.37 - j30.  A simple LsCp network was applied to match the gate to 
the RF generator impedance. The collector impedance at IF, with the base 
terminated in 50  per (7.43), is equal to ZIF = 158 - j663 , which is 
approximately equal to the simulated small signal impedance, ZIF = 360 - j890 .  
A similar network was applied at the output side to transform the external load 
impedance of 50  to 100  at the collector terminal. This network helps to short 
higher harmonics and other high frequency mixing products. The component 
values are given in Table 7.4.  The LO generator voltage was set to 0.25 V at the 
device base. The level of LO power to achieve this voltage is + 2 dBm.  
 
Table 7.4  
     Circuit Element Values 
 
                               
Element Value
Element
Value
LS
10.36 nH LS2
60 nH
CP
5.45pF CP2
13.8 pF
Rb1
4500 Rst
100 
Rb2
800 
Cst
10 pF
 
 
 
Impedance matching at RF and LO frequencies is depicted in the Smith 
charts of Figure 7.13. The first plot on the left shows impedance optimized for RF 
match and with LO mismatched with a VSWR of 3:1, giving gain of 15 dB. It is 
intuitive that matching the base impedance at LO frequency will result in a 
mismatch at RF frequency due to the frequency difference and large signal effects.  
 
RFf req (850000000.000 to 950000000.000)
SZRF
RF
SZLO
LO
                 
RFfreq (850000000.000 to 950000000.000)
SZRF
RF
SZLO
LO
 
 
 
 
     (a) RF matched 
 
    
    (b) Best tradeoff for gain vs. match 
Figure 7.13   RF and LO base impedance represented in the Smith Chart. 

456 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
A better trade-off between impedance and gain is possible by slightly 
mismatching the RF and improving LO match. The plot on the right shows RF 
matched with VSWR of 1.6 and LO VSWR of 2.2. Improving LO match results in 
more LO signal power into the device and better gain performance, at the expense 
of slightly degraded RF mismatch. This tradeoff increased conversion gain from 
15 to 17 dB. The conversion gain is in Figure 7.14 for RF frequency swept from 
850 to 950 MHz, with the LO frequency fixed at 1 GHz.   
 
   
 
 
8.2E8
8.4E8
8.6E8
8.8E8
9.0E8
9.2E8
9.4E8
8.0E8
9.6E8
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
5
25
RFfreq
Gainc
 
          
 
Figure 7.14   Conversion gain for near matched RF and LO impedance at Vcc = 6 V. 
 
 
The stability analysis of the final circuit revealed stable operation for bias 
supply ranging from 1 to 10 mA over the 100 MHz to 12 GHz frequency range. 
The source and load stability circles within this range are depicted in Figure 7.15. 
A transient analysis was also performed for this circuit and it showed a decaying 
transient within a few nS. 
 
 
indep(S_StabCircle3) (0.000 to 51.000)
S_StabCircle3
              
indep(L_StabCircle1) (0.000 to 51.000)
L_StabCircle1
 
 
(a) 
Source stability circles 
(b)    Load stability circles 
Figure 7.15   Stability circles for input and output mixer circuits. 
 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
457 
7.5  CASCODE APPROACH 
 
The cascode amplifier is known to provide higher gain compared to using a single 
stage due to higher output impedance and higher reverse isolation. In addition, the 
cascode topology offers higher frequency of operation due to a reduction in the 
equivalent input capacitance. The effective input capacitance of a single common 
emitter amplifier equals the base emitter capacitance, Cπ, plus of Cµ multiplied by 
gmRc after Miller’s theorem: 
 
 


C
R
g
C
C
c
m
eq
)
1( 


 
 
 
                    (7.49) 
 
In contrast, the effective shunt capacitance appearing at the input of a 
cascode amplifier is lower, being a function of total voltage gain, AV. If the 
devices are similar, then AV is given by the ratio of the trans-conductance of each 
device, Av = –  gm2/gm1 ≈ -1, therefore: 
 




C
C
C
A
C
C
v
eqcascode
2
)
1(





   
 
       (7.50) 
 
Since the input capacitance is smaller, the circuit will operate at higher 
frequencies. It can also be shown that output capacitance of a cascode is given by 
Cµ of the common base device, minimizing internal feedback from the collector of 
transistor-2 to the base of transistor-1.  
In the conventional cascode mixer, represented in Figure 7.16, the RF 
signal is applied to device Q1 operating as a linear RF amplifier/mixer. The LO is 
applied to Q2 operating as an emitter follower that switches the collector voltage 
of Q1 thereby modulating its transconductance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.16  Cascode down-converter configuration with tank circuit at the drain. 
 
VLO 
RRF 
Vout 
RLC 
Ie 
+VCC 
Q1 
Q2 
RLO 
VRF 

458 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Device Q2 is also switched and approximately operates as a common base 
IF amplifier. Under these conditions, the amplifier benefits of a cascode 
configuration are not known to be applicable to a cascode mixer. The real benefit 
here is the natural isolation between the base 1 from common emitter and base 2 
of common base device allowing adding both LO and RF signals, eliminating the 
need for other components to carry out this task. The transconductance 
modulation is illustrated in Figure 7.17 where a 100 MHz voltage applied to the 
base of Q2 (black) modulates the current (red) at the same frequency, but with a 
shift in phase between the two. Thus, the LO voltage modulates the current at the 
LO frequency, and that current is multiplied by the RF current component from 
Q1, providing the mixer function. 
 
 
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
20
0
1
2
3
4
-1
5
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.0
3.5
time, nsec
ts(IC.i), mA
ts(VLO), V
 
Figure 7.17  Transconductance modulation observed on the  collector current. 
 
 
7.5.1 Design Study: Cascode mixer 
 
The same frequency and device of the design study 7.4 is employed here. A more 
detailed schematic of a cascode mixer is in Figure 7.18. The Q1 collector voltage 
is biased near the saturation voltage, and current for the cascode Q1, Q2 is set by 
the current mirror device Q3. A low impedance at the LO, RF and sum frequencies 
at the collector of Q2 is obtained from a quarter wave long open stub at LO 
frequency. The level of second harmonic voltage is high at the collector, so to 
reduce it an open circuit stub that is a quarter wave long at the second harmonic 
was also applied at the collector. 
To complete the output circuit a low pass filter Lout, Cout is employed to 
deliver a clean IF signal to the load. One problem in this type of design is how to 
guarantee circuit stability which can be generated from one of the following 
circuit locations: the emitter impedance of transistor Q1 can generate negative 
resistance at the base if the parasitic capacitance to ground dominates the 
impedance, according to (7.41); the transistor Q2 is a common base device with 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
459 
collector grounded at the frequency of operation. One can easily demonstrate with 
a simple equivalent circuit for the transistor that emitter impedance can be 
determined from (7.51). If the element Rst represents a resistance, then the 
impedance is positive. However, if it represents a reactive inductance, then the 
emitter impedance can become negative. In addition to these two locations, the 
circuit layout can also introduce positive feedback not represented in the 
schematic. After addressing these causes of instability, addition of a negative 
feedback circuit, Rf, Cf can also help stabilize the circuit. 
 




C
j
g
R
C
j
Z
m
st
Q
E


1
2
,
  
 
 
 
     (7.51) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.18  Cascode down-converter configuration employing similar RF and LO matching circuits. 
 
 
The base matching at Q1 and Q2 are of similar topologies. The base 
impedance of each was determined by applying a large signal LO voltage 
generator to the base of Q2 and a small signal voltage to the base of Q1 and 
monitoring the base current of both. The Q2 base impedance can be estimated 
from (7.41) by making ZE = ZE,Q2 the collector impedance of Q1. On the other 
hand resistor Rst shunts the base impedance of Q2, contributing to the impedance 
matching at the cost of gain. A trade off analysis is required to optimize this 
resistor for matching, stability, and gain. The component values for the RF 
frequency band of 864 to 869 MHz and LO at 1 GHz are in Table 7.5. The mixer 
was biased at 5V and 2 mA, and the output load was set to 100 ohm. The 
conversion gain is illustrated in Figure 7.19 for two conditions. The first shows 
VIF 
Q3 
Q1 
Q2 
IE 
+VCC 
VLO 
VRF 
LS1 
LS2 
Cp1 
Cp2 
C
Rf 
Rst 
Cout 
Lout 


3 
Lbias 
RE 
LE 

460 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the designed conversion gain which is relatively constant at 15 dB over the RF 
frequency range of 780 to 940 MHz, and LO power of 4 dBm. The circuit was 
simulated to be stable for an LO range from 1 to 7 dBm. The simulation assumes a 
Q-factor of 6 for the on-chip inductors.  The second condition applies to 
conversion gain under the conditions provided by a recent publication on a 
BICMOS technology [8]. The matching inductors were replaced by the models 
from that publication. The device bias was made equal to the one from the paper, 
(i.e., 2V and 1.7 mA). And the bias inductor, Lbias was replaced by a 300  
resistor. The resulting conversion loss, depicted by the second plot, shows a 10 dB 
degradation compared with the initial ideal design. This agrees with the 
performance reported by [6] is about 5.9 dB conversion gain at the RF frequency 
of 1.9 GHz, and LO drive of 0 dBm. The reported noise figure is equal to 15 dB.  
 
Table 7.5 
Circuit Element Values 
                            
Element Value Element Value
LS1
7.8 nH LS2
18 nH
CP
8.8 pF CP2
4.5 pF
Lbias
300 nH Rst
230 
1
96
Cst
12 pF
2
47
3
40
   
 
                     
8.0E8
8.2E8
8.4E8
8.6E8
8.8E8
9.0E8
9.2E8
7.8E8
9.4E8
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
20
RFfreq
 
 
Figure 7.19   Conversion gain performance for GaAs technology (top curve), MOS technology 
(bottom curve). 
 
 
 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
461 
7.6 SINGLY BALANCED MIXER 
 
A singly balanced transistor mixer could be designed in the same approach as a 
diode mixer, with a balun to insert LO signal and a power divider to insert the RF 
signal into say the base of transistors. And this was effectively common when 
Silicon technology became available in the early 1960s. With the maturity of IC 
technology the trend  moved to integrate circuits for lower cost production and the 
application of a differential amplifier circuit as a mixer became a better 
alternative. Usually the differential devices are driven by the LO signal operating 
as switches and the current source device operates as a linear RF amplifier. 
Therefore, instead of selecting a device when starting a design, one starts by 
considering which technology is best suited for the design at hand. One of the key 
parameters to be selected is the process fT, which is inversely related to the 
parasitic capacitances of the device.  Usually fT is selected to be much higher than 
the maximum target frequency of operation. However, high fT has a higher cost 
that must be traded off with process performance.  The majority of differential 
mixers, either singly- or doubly-balanced, do not use inductors for compensating 
capacitance degradation, which in turn limits high frequency performance. If 
image or sideband rejection is desired, then filters or phasing circuits must be 
applied. In the differential schematic of Figure 7.20, the LO voltage applied at the 
bases of the differential pair, Q1, Q2 are of equal amplitude and 180º opposed in 
phase. This makes the emitters a virtual ground to the LO, and isolates the LO 
from the current source created by Q3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.20      Differential amplifier operating as a single balanced mixer. 
 
 
VRF 
(-)VIF/2 
(+)VIF/2 
RL 
+VCC 
(+)VLO/2 
(-)VLO/2 
RL 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
IM 
IN 
IE 

462 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
In a differential amplifier, the largest contributor to distortion is the base 
nonlinearity of the top devices, but in mixers they operate as switches which 
theoretically are linear. They do however introduce nonlinear effects during the 
transition time but the major source of nonlinearity is the lower device acting as 
an RF amplifier.  If the output signals at RLare combined differentially, then the 
RF signal is cancelled, and the IF and LO signals add constructively. In down-
converter mode the LO can be suppressed by a lowpass filter comprising a 
capacitor connected in shunt with the differential output, resulting in a clean IF 
signal. 
 
 
7.6.1 Analysis of Mixing Effects 
 
A detailed analysis of the conversion process can be obtained by calculating the 
currents IM and IN in the circuit of Figure 7.20. The emitter current of Q1 is related 
to base emitter voltage by the expression below. In general, collector current is 
approximately equal to the emitter current, IM = IEQ1, where  ≈ 1 and IS is the 
saturation current, therefore:  
 
 
    
T
LO
V
V
S
EQ
e
I
I
2
1 
       
T
LO
V
V
S
M
e
I
I
2

 
T
LO
V
V
S
N
e
I
I
2


 
 
 
 From this result, the ratio between IM and IN is given by the exponential 
relation (7.52) and the current IE, usually called tail current, by (7.53).  
 
 
T
LO
V
V
N
M
e
I
I

           
 
 
 
 
       (7.52)  
 
N
M
E
I
I
I


            
 
 
 
    
       (7.53)   
 
 
Expressing IM and IN in terms of IE and replacing the term VLO/VT by , 
one obtains (7.54a,b).  
 
T
LO
V
V
M
E
N
E
M
e
I
I
I
I
I




 
 




e
I
I
E
N
1
  (7.54a)       and   






e
e
I
I
E
M
1
   (7.54b) 
 
 
The differential output current is equal to id = (IN - IM) resulting in (7.55).  
 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
463 
 














e
e
e
I
I
E
d
1
  
                              
       (7.55) 
 
 
Multiplying and dividing the equation by e/2 the equation for differential 
current is given by (7.56), a familiar relationship between output current and input 
voltage for a differential amplifier. 
 
 







T
LO
E
d
V
V
I
I
2
tanh
                     
 
 
       (7.56) 
 
 
 
The current in each collector is found from (7.54) and (7.55), resulting in 
(7.57a,b).    
 














T
LO
E
M
V
V
I
I
2
tanh
1
2
 
 
 
         
     (7.57a) 
 














T
LO
E
N
V
V
I
I
2
tanh
1
2
  
 
 
         
     (7.57b)  
 
 
If a small signal RF voltage is applied to Q3, then the emitter current for 
the differential pair, IE, is obtained by adding the DC collector current of Q3 to the 
amplified RF current. Employing the hybrid  model, the RF current is 
approximated by gmVRF.  
 
           

t
V
g
I
I
RF
RF
m
DC
E

cos


 
 
                      (7.58) 
 
 
Two conditions exist for the hyperbolic tangent in (7.56): a. small signal 
where the hyperbolic tangent can be replaced by a McLauren expansion, ( i.e. 
tanh(x) = x); b. large signal where the full hyperbolic tangent is applied.  
  
 
7.6.1.1 Small Signal LO  
 
If the circuit operates as a mixer, then (7.58) can be directly applied to (7.56). The 
LO voltage is also approximated by MacLauren expansion and the output current 
is defined by (7.59a). The output voltage is determined from the voltage 
developed differentially across output load resistor RL. 
 

464 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
  










t
V
V
t
V
g
I
I
LO
T
LO
RF
RF
m
DC
out


cos
2
cos
      
    (7.59a) 
  








t
V
V
t
V
g
t
V
V
I
I
LO
T
LO
RF
RF
m
LO
T
LO
DC
out



cos
2
cos
cos
2
  (7.59b) 

t
V
V
V
R
g
t
V
V
R
I
V
LO
RF
T
LO
RF
L
m
LO
T
LO
L
DC
out






cos
4
cos
2
  (7.59c) 
 
 
7.6.1.2 Large Signal LO  
 
 
 
If the LO voltage is large, then one has to consider the behavior of the 
hyperbolic tangent in (7.57), [9]. This complex function can be visualized in the 
plots of Figure 7.21, which shows complete current switching occurs when the 
magnitude of sinusoidal voltage applied to the base is greater than 5 times VT. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.21  
Collector current versus input voltage. Solid line for x =1VT; dotted line for x = 5VT; 
traced line for x >> 5VT.  
Ip/2 
t
IM/IE, IN/IE 
-VL=2VT 
VL=2VT 
1.0 
IM/IE, IN/IE 
0 
8VT 
-8VT 
Vin 
Vin 
Vin 
t

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
465 
  
 In the circuit of Figure 7.20, half of VCC is applied to the collector of the 
RF amplifier and half to the differential amplifier. The maximum current of Q1, Q2 
is approximately given by IQ1 = (VCC/2-Vsat)/RL which is approximately twice the 
peak current. The center of the plot in Figure 7.21 corresponds to the quiescent 
bias current IQ1  Ip/2 = IE/2. Replacing the hyperbolic tangent by a Fourier series 
representing a square wave, the currents IM, IN, becomes: 
 
 
 




























t
I
V
V
I
I
LO
E
T
LO
E
M

cos
4
1
2
2
tanh
1
2
       (7.60a) 

































t
I
V
V
I
I
LO
E
T
LO
E
N
cos
4
1
2
2
tanh
1
2
   (7.60b) 
 
 
The differential current is therefore expressed by (7.61). Substituting IE 
by (7.58), the output current is then given by (7.62). 
 
 









t
I
I
I
I
LO
E
N
M
out

cos
4
)
(
  
       
       (7.61)
 
t
t
V
g
t
I
I
LO
RF
RF
m
LO
DC
out





cos
cos
4
cos
4


 





t
t
V
g
t
I
I
RF
LO
RF
LO
RF
m
LO
DC
out












cos
cos
2
cos
4
  (7.62) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
  
Notice the conversion process is independent on the LO voltage as long 
as it is much larger than VT, but is dependent on bias. The voltage developed by 
Iout on a differential output load resistance RL is given by (7.63). If the emitter 
resistor is considered, then output voltage is given by the next equation. An 
approximation valid in general is to consider gm(RE + re) > 1 giving Vout expressed 
in (7.64).  
 
 

t
V
R
g
V
RF
LO
RF
L
m
out





cos
2
            (7.63) 
 
 

t
R
r
g
V
R
g
V
RF
LO
E
e
m
RF
L
m
out







cos
)
(
1
2
 
 
 
        
 

466 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 

t
R
r
V
R
V
RF
LO
E
e
RF
L
out






cos
)
(
2
                     (7.64) 
 
 
High side LO mixing refers to the situation where the LO frequency is 
higher than RF, and down conversion refers to the IF equal to the difference 
frequency term (LO - RF). In general power is lost in the unwanted sum term 
(LO + RF), whose conversion loss is approximated by the factor 2/. In low side 
LO mixing, the LO frequency is lower than RF frequency and the IF remains the 
difference. The conversion trans-conductance assuming RE = 0 and gmre <<1 is 
given by (7.65).  
 
 
m
RF
conv
g
V
I
g
RF
LO



2



 
 
 
       (7.65)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
Comparing (7.59) and (7.64) one can say converted voltage at the small 
signal condition is proportional to LO power. The large signal LO condition on 
the other hand makes the circuit less dependent on temperature.  An additional 
point is that the collector of the RF device is a virtual ground, so it has no LO 
voltage and Q3 operates as an ordinary small signal linear device. Notice Iout 
represents a differential current so that RF voltage is eliminated by phase 
cancellation but LO voltage adds constructively. Also note the mixing products 
were obtained directly from the I/V relationship without the use of the conversion 
matrix.  
 
 
7.6.1.3 Square Wave LO  
 
Driving a BJT with a square wave, whose maximum and minimum peak values, 
Imax and Imin respectively, are given by (7.66) causes the current to also be a square 
wave, [10]. This conclusion comes from the resulting two current levels at the 
collector corresponding to the input levels. 
 
 
T
LO
T
V
BE
V
V
V
S
e
e
I
I


max
  
      
 
       
     (7.66a) 
 
 
T
LO
T
V
BE
V
V
V
S
e
e
I
I


min
  
 
 
      
     (7.66b) 
 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
467 
 
The DC current is obtained from the average value between both current 
levels, (7.67); and the peak-to-peak value is given by the difference between the 
two levels, (7.68).  
 
x
e
I
e
e
e
I
I
I
I
T
V
BE
V
T
LO
T
LO
T
V
BE
V
S
V
V
V
V
S
DC
cosh
2
2
min
max








      (7.67) 
x
e
I
e
e
e
I
I
I
I
T
V
BE
V
T
LO
T
LO
T
V
BE
V
S
V
V
V
V
S
pp
sinh
2
2
2
min
max








         (7.68) 
 
 
Taking the ratio between (7.67) and (7.68), the peak-to-peak current 
becomes a function of DC current and the hyperbolic tangent, which is depicted in 
Figure 7.22. The tanh(x) function shows the peak to peak current is a function of 
drive voltage at low drive levels. But for large drive, where x > 2 the peak to peak 
current modulation becomes independent of input drive.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.22  
Behavior of hyperbolic tangent function of x. 
 
 
  
)
tanh(
2
x
I
I
DC
pp 
 
 
 
 
       
       (7.69) 
 
 
Therefore, for x > 2 the peak value is equal to IDC defining the magnitude 
of the square waveform. For the differential configuration, 2IDC = IE, so the 
emitter current from each device under square wave drive becomes: 
 
 









t
t
I
I
LO
LO
E
M




3
cos
3
4
cos
4
1
2
   
       (7.70) 


















t
t
I
I
LO
LO
E
N
3
cos
3
4
cos
4
1
2
         (7.71) 
 
tanh(x) 
x 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 

468 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The differential current description assumes LO voltage is applied 
equally to both bases, and total emitter current is equal to the current source 
current. The differential Iout is therefore the same as (7.57) for IM and IN, meaning 
that conversion efficiency of a differential amplifier is the same for sinusoidal or 
square wave drive. This conclusion does not take into account the transition on-off 
time for square wave which is lower than sinusoidal. The longer transition time of 
sinusoidal drive means the RF signal can modulate the switch conductance 
resulting in greater distortion. Therefore, LO voltage rise time affects 
intermodulation, so whatever is faster provides better intermodulation 
performance. In practice, the square wave drive makes sense if the switching 
device capacitance does not affect the rise time, otherwise the drive waveform 
will have no effect on distortion.  
 
 
7.6.2  Impedance Matching 
 
For the differential configuration two modes of operation exist:  differential mode 
and common mode. The normal mode of operation for Q1, Q2 of Figure 7.20 is the 
differential mode; the common mode is of no interest, except for the stability 
analysis. Transistor Q3 operates in single ended mode. 
 
 
7.6.2.1 Differential Mode  
 
The LO impedance for Q1, Q2 is obtained by considering one half of the 
differential circuit since the emitter is a virtual ground relative to the differential 
LO drive. The impedance is therefore determined from a single switching device 
with the collector terminated into load RL, and with the same bias as in the 
differential configuration. Equation (7.41) can be applied to make an estimation of 
input impedance, with gm replaced by gm0. The reactive elements in the model are 
also calculated at the bias point. The resulting base impedance (at RF or LO) is 
doubled to obtain the total differential mode impedance. The IF impedance is 
differential and determined in a similar way. 
 
 
If the LO generator delivers a square wave to the base, then the 
impedance matching process does not follow the same approach as for a 
sinusoidal drive. It is important to maintain the square wave shape so reactive 
elements must be used with care to avoid distorting the square wave. If the LO is 
close to the mixer, transmission lines are minimum and the circuit connections can 
be considered lumped. If the device reactances are low enough, then instead of 
conjugate matching it is more straightforward to simply ensure the mixer base 
impedance is higher than the generator output impedance, so the mixer does not 
load the generator. If the LO is physically far from the mixer, or external to the 
die, the best interface is a uniform transmission line whose characteristic 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
469 
impedance equals the generator impedance, and terminate the line with a matched 
load.  
 
 
7.6.2.2 Common Mode  
 
In this case half the differential circuit is again considered, gm is replaced by gm0, 
and the emitter resistance of Q1 is replaced by half the collector impedance of Q3. 
The resulting impedance is divided by 2, as both sides of the differential circuit 
are connected in parallel.   
 
 
7.6.3  Conversion Gain 
 
According to (7.41), the RF input impedance at low frequencies is relatively high 
compared to 50 Ohm, depending on the device size and bias. Therefore the 
generator is only lightly loaded, and there is no need to conjugate match the RF 
port. In this condition it is more practical to calculate the voltage conversion gain, 
GCV, (7.72). If an external emitter resistor is added, then the second equation is 
applicable 
 
 
L
m
e
m
m
L
R
g
r
g
g
R
Gcv


2
1
2









 for gmre <<1                      (7.72) 
 
)
(
2
)
(
1
2
E
e
L
E
e
m
m
L
CV
R
r
R
R
r
g
g
R
G













 for gm(re + RE) >> 1 
 
 
When the frequency of operation is high the input RF current is no longer 
negligible, then power conversion gain should be used.  Assuming conjugate 
match and the fact the differential pair is switching in a square wave manner, the 
conversion gain can be described by (7.73).   
 
 
2
)
(
1
2








E
e
RF
in
L
C
R
r
C
R
R
G

 
 
 
                    (7.73) 
 
 
A single balanced differential mixer can provide lower noise figure than 
double balanced or other architectures because fewer sources of noise are 
participating in the frequency translation. The effect of capacitive emitter 
impedance was discussed in terms of the circuit stability. If it is made inductive, 
then there is some gain reduction, but stability, linearity and matching are 
improved.  

470 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
7.6.4 Linearity in Singly Balanced Mixer 
  
The distortion in a differential mixer is generated by the RF amplifier while the 
mixer switch performs the frequency translation with comparatively small amount 
of distortion. Any nonlinearity generated at this level will be transferred to the 
signal during the conversion process. For inter-modulation analysis the 
nonlinearity is considered mild and the Taylor series expansion is usually applied 
to the trans-conductance as shown in (7.74), [11]. The first term corresponds to 
the linear term, ic = gmVRF.  
 
 























3
2
6
1
2
1
T
RF
T
RF
T
RF
C
c
V
V
V
V
V
V
I
i
 
 
       (7.74) 
 
 
The second order inter-modulation product is given by the ratio of second 
order distortion with fundamental component, (7.75). The third order is given by 
relating third order level with fundamental, (7.76).  In Chapter 2 the intercept 
point was defined as the point where the IF power and intermodulation power, 
both as a function of RF input power, equal each other. A similar definition has 
been demonstrated in [11] using voltages instead of power. The former is more 
often employed at microwave and higher frequencies where it is easier to measure 
power while the latter is employed in lower frequencies. Therefore, the second 
order intercept point is described by (7.77) and the third order by (7.78). The 
effect of the emitter resistor is obtained by multiplying VRF/VT by the factor 
1/(1+gmRE). The input intercept point is obtained by applying the relation IP2 = 
Vin/IM2 and IP3 = Vin/IM3. 
 
 
T
RF
V
V
IM
2
1
2 
  
 
 
 
           
       (7.75)
 
2
3
8
1







T
RF
V
V
IM
 
 
 
 
          
       (7.76) 
 
T
RF
V
IM
V
IP
2
2
2


 
 
 
 
           
       (7.77) 
 
T
RF
V
IM
V
IP
2
2
3
3


     
 
 
        
       (7.78) 
 
 
The definition of distortion in terms of device parameters is available in a 
classical paper on bipolar amplifier linearity, [12]. The paper assumes the gain of 
a common emitter amplifier is given by (7.79), showing a predominance of 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
471 
collector to base capacitance, CJC. Therefore the analysis assumes CJE to be 
constant in the forward region and concentrates on the effect of feedback 
capacitance nonlinearity. The source, RS and Load RL are assumed to be resistive 
and the subscript Q designates quiescent values for voltages and currents.  
 
 










L
JCQ
m
JEQ
B
S
S
R
C
g
C
j
R
R
R
S
1
21
1
2


  
 
       (7.79) 
 
 
The conclusions for intermodulation are given by (7.81) and (7.82) 
referred to the output. The diffusion capacitance, CD, is considered constant and 
replaced by its equivalent, (7.80), with 1 representing the transit time of carriers 
in the base. The collector to emitter capacitance is represented by C0. The factor 
1/n is the exponent used to describe the relationship between capacitance, CJC, and 
voltage. 
 
 
1
1


T
Q
m
D
V
I
g
C


 
 
 
 
 
       (7.80) 
 
 
L
JCQ
Q
T
JEQ
CEQ
L
jCQ
Q
L
T
JEQ
out
M
R
C
I
V
C
V
n
R
C
I
R
V
C
V
I




1
2
2
1
1
2


 
                  (7.81) 
 
 
L
Q
T
JEQ
CEQ
L
Q
L
T
JEQ
out
M
R
C
I
V
C
V
n
n
R
C
I
R
V
C
V
I
0
1
2
0
2
2
2
3
1
1
1
2
1
2


















     
      (7.82) 
 
The distortion is expressed in terms of Vout, the peak value of output 
signal voltage across RL, at the IF frequency. The equations shows distortion, to a 
first order approximation, is frequency independent. Also note the only mixing 
effect assumed is the conversion loss represented by the 1/ term. The equations 
show a linear relationship to signal level at the load, Vout, for second order 
products; and a squared relationship for the third order. In both it is seen that inter-
modulation levels decrease with higher bias voltage and current. The equations 

472 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
were developed for operation at high frequencies, therefore above fT/. The 
equations do not take Kirk effect into account which may provide an optimistic 
distortion at high currents.  
 
 
7.6.5  Noise in Singly Balanced Mixers 
 
The treatment of noise figure in a differential mixer is more straightforward 
compared to a single stage or cascode because the noise is assumed to originate 
mainly from the RF amplifier. This assumption is correct as long as the switches 
are driven by a large signal LO that makes the switching nearly square wave. 
Under this assumption the RF amplifier noise is transferred to the IF band. The 
instantaneous switching process increase the input referred noise contribution 
from the RF amplifier by a factor of (/2)2 or 3.9 dB, [13]. As shown in Figure 
7.23, the noise sidebands about the LO convert in frequency down to IF band.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.23   Noise contribution from the harmonics of LO. After [13]. 
 
 
The noise figure of a bipolar device in terms of the device parameters 
from (7.44) is reproduced next, where gm1(t) becomes gm. 
 




































2
2
2
1
2
)
(
2
1
1
2
T
S
E
b
S
m
m
S
S
E
b
f
f
R
R
r
R
g
g
R
R
R
r
F


 (7. 83)        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
The four noise parameters NFmin, Rn, GS, and BS defined by the set (7.45) 
are equally applicable with NFmin multiplied by the conversion loss. A larger RF 
device will reduce the base resistance and emitter access contribution to lower 
noise figure. Also, based on Friss equation for cascaded noise figure, the RF gain 
should be maximized to minimize the contribution of noise figure from the 
switching quads. During design those parameters need to be traded off with 
linearity. 
 
 
 3LO 
Frequency 
5LO 
  RF  LO  IM 
IF 
Power 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
473 
7.7 SINGLY BALANCED SUBHARMONIC  
 
The differential amplifier circuit was also considered for subharmonic mixers at 
about the same time fundamental mixers were investigated. A subharmonic 
differential mixer proposed in a patent by Motorola, [14], is represented in Figure 
7.24. The LO and RF signals are applied to the base of Q1 and the IF signal is 
extracted from the collector of Q2. In order to understand the operating principle 
of this circuit, let’s calculate the trans-conductance that relates the collector 
current of Q2 to the base voltage of Q1. The resulting expression, (7.84) has a bell 
shaped characteristic around zero volts for gm(Vbe), therefore its trans-conductance 
is symmetrical for positive and negative values of input voltage. A linearized 
version of this function is the simple triangular shape shown in Figure 7.25, which 
adequately represents the application of a dynamic LO voltage at the base of 
transistor Q1.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                         (a)                                                          (b) 
Figure 7.24   Differential amplifier as subharmonic mixer (a) schematic, (b) equivalent circuit. 
 
 
 
 
 
2
2
1











KT
V
q
KT
V
q
T
E
m
e
e
KT
qI
V
d
di
g
 
 
 
   
     (7.84) 
 
 
 
In this case V = Vbe2 – Vbe1 = Vbe1 since Vbe2 = 0. Applying a LO 
voltage lower than V0 (100 mV), the resulting modulation for gm(t) is a DC term 
plus a sinusoidal term that is twice the frequency of the applied LO voltage. If the 
LO voltage is much greater than V0, the modulated gm(t) has its negative peaks 
clipped, turning the waveform into a sequence of half rectified peaks. The Fourier 
components are still predominantly composed of even harmonics. The equation 
for gm therefore is defined for two conditions depending on LO voltage. 
  
 
t
g
g
t
g
LO
m
m
m

2
cos
)
(
2
0 

  for  VLO < V0       
     
       (7.85a) 
-VEE 
Q2 
+Vcc 
IE 
Q1 
Icc 
IE 
Rb 
IE2 
RE 
αIE2 
αIE1 
IE1 
B 
C 
C 
Rb 
B 

474 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
...
4
cos
2
cos
)
(
4
2
0




t
gm
t
gm
gm
t
g
LO
LO
m


 for VLO > V0     (7.85b) 
 
 
If a small RF signal is added to the LO signal before application to the 
base of Q1, then the current at Q2 is approximated by the product as follows:  
 
 
t
V
t
g
t
I
RF
RF
m
C

cos
)
(
)
(

 
 
       
    
     (7.86a) 
 
t
t
gm
gm
t
I
RF
LO
C


cos
)
2
cos
(
)
(
2
0 

              
     (7.86b)     

t
t
gm
V
t
V
gm
t
I
RF
LO
RF
LO
RF
RF
RF
C
)
2
cos(
)
2
cos(
2
cos
)
(
2
0










    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (7.87) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.25   Idealized transconductance waveforms. 
 
 
 
An additional approach proposed by the inventors is to apply the RF 
signal at the base of Q1 and the LO signal at the base of Q2. This does not change 
the trans-conductance function of the drive voltage, and it is a good way to isolate 
the RF signal source from the LO source.  
 
                        
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
0.0
3.0
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
-50
10
freq, GHz
dBm(Vload)
IF
LO
RF
LO2
 
Figure 7.26  Spectrum of differential harmonic mixer, illustrating besides the LO, RF and IF 
components, the spurious generated. 
-V0 
V0 
VLO 
gm(V) 
t 
t 
gm(t) 
VLO<V0 
gm(t) 
VLO>V0 
t 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
475 
 
The circuit from Figure 7.24 was analyzed using ADS with the RF 
frequency at 1.8 GHz and LO at 1 GHz. The input circuit was matched by a 
simple series L, parallel C circuit, resulting in conversion gain of 5 dB, with 
devices biased at 4 mA each. The spectrum of the simulation is in Figure 7.26. 
 
 
7.8  DOUBLY BALANCED  MIXER 
 
The analysis of a single balanced differential mixer can directly be applied to a 
double balanced differential, since the double balanced topology can also be 
thought of a parallel “push-pull” combination of two single balanced mixers. 
When doing this combination, the collectors are cross coupled eliminating the  LO 
and RF voltages at the sum points, while adding the IF currents.  A direct 
consequence of parallel blocks is that conversion gain remains unchanged if the 
circuits are well balanced. Compared with singly balanced, the doubly balanced 
configuration has higher port-to-port isolation between RF, LO and IF signals and 
it generates lower spurious levels. The reason for double balanced configuration is 
a higher port-to-port isolation between RF, LO and IF signals, generating less 
spurious and suppression of both RF and LO signals. One of the first reports of 
using two differential amplifiers with cross-coupled collectors appeared in the 
patent for a phase detector [15].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.27   Differential amplifiers comprising a doubly balanced mixer. 
 
 
Q1 
(-)VLO/2 
(-)V0/2 
RL
+VCC 
Q3 
Q4 
IR 
IM 
(+)V0/2 
(+)VLO/2 
ZE 
RL
Q5 Q6 
IT 
IN 
(+)VRF/2 
(-)VRF/2 
IO 
IU 
Q2 
IV 
IW 
(+)VLO/2 
IE 

476 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The objective of the inventor was to eliminate transformers by making 
use of the 180° phase shift provided by differential circuits. The circuit schematic 
was originally built with discrete components and later was implemented into IC 
technology in the form shown Figure 7.27 after the patent [16]. The proposed 
inventions are capable of providing an output voltage proportional to the product 
of two input voltages with the same or different frequencies. They operate as a 
mixer, when two signals with different frequencies are supplied to the circuit, the 
desired mixing products appear at the output. If two input voltages with equal 
frequencies are applied, then the output voltage is proportional to the phase 
difference between the signals. The multiplier function is understood by 
considering the currents in the circuit as follows. The differential output current 
for this circuit is obtained from the sum of the currents in Figure 7.27. Assuming 
the relation between IR, IO and IU, IT is given by (7.88), the set (7.89a,d),  defines 
each current component as a function of IM, IN, respectively and as function of the 
LO voltage VLO. 
 
 
)
(
T
O
U
R
out
I
I
I
I
I




   
 
         
    
       (7.88) 
 
T
LO
V
V
M
R
e
I
I


1
  
 
 
 
 
    (7.89a)
 
T
LO
T
LO
V
V
V
V
N
U
e
e
I
I


1
  
 
 
 
 
     (7.89b)  
T
LO
V
V
M
O
e
I
I


1
  
 
 
 
 
     (7.89c) 
 
T
LO
T
LO
V
V
V
V
N
T
e
e
I
I


1
  
 
 
 
 
    (7.89d) 
 
 
 
Noting that IV is the sum of IR and IU, and subsequently replacing the 
terms IM, IN, the output is given by (7.90a). A similar argument is valid for current 
IW in (7.90b).  
 
 
T
LO
T
LO
T
LO
V
V
V
V
N
V
V
M
U
R
V
e
e
I
e
I
I
I
I






1
1
 
 
       
     (7.90a) 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
477 
 
T
LO
T
LO
T
LO
V
V
V
V
N
V
V
M
T
O
W
e
e
I
e
I
I
I
I






1
1
 
  
 
    (7.90b) 
 
 




















T
RF
T
LO
T
RF
T
LO
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
E
V
e
e
e
e
I
I
1
1
1
      
 
          
     (7.91) 
 
  
 
Adding IE/2 and -IE/2 to (7.91), then multiplying and dividing the 
equation by exp(-VLO/2VT) and exp(-VRF/2VT), gives the following equations for 
IV and IW:  
 
 
 




















T
RF
T
LO
E
V
V
V
V
V
I
I
2
tanh
2
tanh
1
2
      
      
     (7.92a) 
 
 




















T
RF
T
LO
E
W
V
V
V
V
I
I
2
tanh
2
tanh
1
2
    
 
     (7.92b) 
 
 
For mixer operation, the RF is small signal, so the hyperbolic tangent can 
be replaced by the first term of the MacLauren expansion, tanh(x)  x. The LO 
can be assumed to have square wave shape, and is replaced by the first term of the 
Fourier series, 

2
2
tanh







T
LO
V
V
. After the substitutions, (7.92) becomes: 
 
 








t
t
V
V
I
I
LO
RF
T
RF
E
V



cos
4
cos
1
2
 
     
     (7.93b) 
 
 



t
t
V
V
I
I
I
LO
RF
T
RF
E
E
W



cos
4
cos
2
2 

 
      
     (7.93b) 
 
 
The differential converted current is obtained from the difference 
between the two currents: 
 

478 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 

t
V
V
I
I
LO
RF
T
RF
E
out





cos
2
 
 
       
       (7.94) 
 
 
If the circuit is weakly nonlinear in terms of the RF voltage magnitude, 
the voltages and currents are considered to be of mild non-linearity and the 
hyperbolic tangent becomes, 
3
)
tanh(
3
x
x
x


. Applying two equal tones at the 
RF frequencies 1 and 2, the third order distortion component is given by (7.95), 
and the argument x becomes defined by the sum of both tones. An illustration of 
the relative magnitude of the distortion components along with the fundamental is 
in Figure 7.28.  
 
 
)
cos
(cos
)
cos
(cos
2
2
1
2
1
t
t
a
t
t
V
V
x
T
RF








 






t
t
t
a
t
t
t
a
I
I
LO
LO
E
out










cos
2
cos
2
cos
24
3
cos
)
cos
(cos
2
2
1
1
2
3
2
1






  
 
 
 
 
 
                  
       (7.95) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.28   IF spectrum for two tones after (7.95). 
 
 
Another alternative to analyze the mixer operation is to consider the 
differential output current to be defined as a function of currents IM, IN, by re-
arranging (7.89) as shown in (7.96).  
 
 
)
(
U
T
O
R
out
I
I
I
I
I




 
 
       
 
       (7.96) 
 










T
LO
N
M
out
V
V
I
I
I
2
tanh
  
        
    
       (7.97)
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
Where IM, IN, delivered by the collector currents of devices Q1 and Q2 are 
given by (7.98)a,b, defined in terms of gm, VRF, and RE.   
LO - ( 21 - 2) 
 LO-1  LO-2      
 
2a/π 
3a3/(48π) 
LO - ( 22 - 1) 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
479 
 










t
V
R
r
g
g
I
I
RF
RF
E
e
m
m
E
M

cos
)
(
1
2
1
 
  
    (7.98a) 
 










t
V
R
r
g
g
I
I
RF
RF
E
e
m
m
E
N

cos
)
(
1
2
1
 
      
    (7.98b) 
 
 
 
Substituting (7.98) into (7.97), and replacing the hyperbolic tangent by 
its square wave fundamental coefficient, one obtains the small signal mixer output 
differential current, (7.99). The converted voltage is calculated from the flow of 
Iout current into the output load, RL. The voltage conversion gain can easily be 
obtained from (7.100). If there is conjugate match at the input, then the internal 
base voltage is no longer equal to generator voltage, VRF and the effect of input 
base match has to be included in the equation. At lower frequencies the voltage 
gain is sufficient, and if gmRE >> 1 it becomes essentially the ratio of RL to RE. 
 
 
 
t
t
V
R
r
g
g
I
LO
RF
RF
E
e
m
m
out



cos
cos
2
)
(
1
2









         (7.99) 
 







t
t
R
r
g
V
g
R
V
RF
LO
RF
LO
E
e
m
RF
m
L
out











cos
cos
)
(
1
2
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (7.100) 
 


E
L
E
e
m
m
L
CV
R
R
R
r
g
g
R
G


2
)
(
1
2




  
         
   (7.101) 
 
 
The gain expression is useful for an initial design when doing hand 
estimations for the circuit. Its main approximation is the assumption of square 
wave form for the LO voltage. Comparing results for double balanced with single 
balanced, it is observed that both have similar output voltage, but the LO term is 
suppressed by circuit phasing at each collector for double balanced. A simple low 
frequency transformer is sufficient to recover the IF signal. The RF section is 
differential, so the impedance can be calculated from a single stage and doubled to 
provide the differential impedance.   
 
 
7.8.1 Gilbert Multiplier  
 
The work of Barrie Gilbert, [17, 18], was initially intended for wideband amplifier 
operation, but it resulted in a current multiplier circuit that, like all multiplying 
devices is applicable to frequency conversion as well. The initial application of 

480 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the differential topology was intended for voltage multiplication, which is 
constrained to small voltages to avoid distortion. Gilbert, [13], proposed the use of 
a differential topology for multiplying input and output currents, avoiding the 
voltage limitation and therefore improving linearity. The conversion of the applied 
voltage to current is provided by external circuits. The key contribution of his 
invention is depicted in Figure 7.29, showing a differential amplifier with the 
addition of current mirrors using bipolar devices connected as diodes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.29   Differential current amplifier. 
 
 
This arrangement transforms the applied current into voltage following a 
logarithmic law, which when applied to the bases of the differential devices, 
generates current having an anti-logarithmic characteristic. The resulting relation 
between the collector and base current turns out to be linear. In this circuit the 
following relation between the currents are valid, assuming the devices are 
maintained active by biasing the emitter-base junction much higher than the 
thermal voltage. The dc current gain is also assumed to be high so that collector 
and emitter current are approximately equal. 
 
 
b
a
D
I
I
I


 
 
2
1
I
I
I E


 
 
 
 
In the original work, Ia was defined as xID and Ib as (1-x)ID. and x varies 
between 0  1, which means they are complimentary. The parameter x was 
defined as the modulation factor for the current ID. The voltages between the base-
emitter junction of the various transistors are denoted as VO, VQ, VR, and VS as 
depicted in Figure 7.28.  
 
VQ 
VR 
VS 
Ib 
IE 
ID 
Ia 
I1 
I2 
VO 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
481 







S
a
O
I
I
q
KT
V
ln
      (7.102a),     







S
Q
I
I
q
KT
V
1
ln
  (7.102b), 








S
E
R
I
I
I
q
KT
V
1
ln
 (7.102c),      







S
b
S
I
I
q
KT
V
ln
 (7.102d)       
 
              
Note that since all devices share the same chip, they have similar 
parameters, in particular the saturation current. The loop equation applied to the 
circuit provides: 
 
S
R
Q
O
V
V
V
V



 
 
 
Replacing the terms, eliminating the common factor IS, and performing 
some algebra, one obtains the following collector currents as a product of the 
currents IaIe, IbIe, normalized to the total current ID.  
 
e
D
a I
I
I
I 
1
  (7.103a),   
 
e
D
b I
I
I
I 
2
(7.103b)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One can notice the ratio of emitter currents from the differential amplifier 
is the same as the ratio of the current in the mirrors. Replacing Ia  [xID] and Ib  
[(1-x)ID] it is found that the two ratios are independent of the absolute value of ID. 
In order to validate the multiplication between the currents, it is essential that the 
normalization factor ID be maintained constant, which is accomplished if the input 
currents are derived from another differential circuit.  
The multiplier circuit requires the currents Ia, Ib, IE to be positive to 
maintain the devices active, which means operation in the first quadrant where 
collector current and base-to-emitter voltage are both positive. However, in a 
differential amplifier, two quadrant operation is possible if the devices are biased 
at the center of the transfer characteristic, so that output net current is zero for a 
zero input current. This extended operation is accomplished by defining a variable 
Ii(t) as follows:  
 
'
2
'
2
)
(
b
D
D
a
i
I
I
I
I
t
I




   
 
 
 
     (7.104) 
 
and the new prime currents are defined by: 
 
2
)
('
D
a
a
I
I
t
I


,  
2
)
('
D
b
b
I
I
t
I


 
 

482 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The collector currents Ia’(t) and Ib’(t) will swing between +/- Ia, Ib around 
ID. Combining (7.104) and (7.103) we obtain (7.105a,b) that defines the new I1, I2:  
 







D
i
E
I
I
I
I
1
2
1
  (7.105a),   







D
i
E
I
I
I
I
1
2
2
 (7.105b) 
 
 
The currents represented by previous equations describe the performance 
of a single balanced circuit in two quadrants. A four quadrant multiplier is 
obtained by paralleling an additional differential amplifier covering the other two 
quadrants. This option was proposed in the same patent by doubling the previous 
circuit and cross coupling the collectors, as illustrated in Figure 7.30. The input 
signal is the pair of currents xIB, (1-x)IB and yIE, (1-y)IE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.30   Four-quadrant current multiplier. 
 
 
The output collector currents in this circuit are given by the following set 
of equations: 
 
 
E
C
xyI
I

2
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (7.106a) 
 
E
C
yI
x
I
)
1(
3


 
 
 
 
 
   (7.106b) 
 
E
C
I
y
x
I
)
1(
5


 
 
 
 
 
   (7.106c) 
 
E
C
I
y
x
I
)
1
)(
1(
6



  
 
 
 
   (7.106d) 
 
 
The value allowed for y is the same as for x, and varies between 0 and 1. 
The differential output current is given by the following equation, and the 
differential output voltage is developed across the resistor, RL: 
 
 
IC6 
IC5 
Vo = RLIout 
(1-y)IE 
(1-x)IB 
Q5 
Q6 
Q4 
IC2 
IC3 
yIE 
xIB 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
483 
 
5
3
2
6
C
C
C
C
out
I
I
I
I
I




 
 
 
 
     (7.107) 
 
 
C
out
out
R
I
V

 
 
 
 
 
 
     (7.108)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
        
 
The multiplication effect can be understood as follows.  The output 
current is normalized to the emitter current, resulting in the function Z: 
 
 
xy
x
y
I
I
Z
E
out
4
2
2
1





 
 
 
 
     (7.109) 
 
 
 
 
The polynomial can be factored as follows: 
 
 
)1
2
)(
1
2
(



y
x
Z
 
 
 
 
      
    (7.110) 
 
 
The parameters x, y are proportional to the input signals xIB, yIE 
respectively. The input signals can also be described by (7.111). If the devices are 
biased such that x = y = 0.5 then the output voltage is balanced and equal to 0.  
 
 
1
2 
x
X
 
 
 
 
     
 
     (7.111) 
 
 
1
2 
Y
y
 
 
 
 
     
 
     (7.112) 
 
 
 
The output differential current can be defined by (7.113), as the product 
of two input currents. This redefinition of variables results in input current 
amplitude ranging from -1 to +1.  
 
 
XY
Z 
 
 
 
 
     
 
     (7.113) 
 
 
In addition to the work on the differential current multiplier, Gilbert also 
realizes in 1967 [19] that the switching quad performs the same tasks as a diode 
ring mixer. Since then the circuit topology became known as Gilbert mixer, or 
Gilbert cell.  
 
 
7.8.2  Linearity and Noise Figure  
 
Similar assumptions made for the singly balanced mixer is applied here, i.e., the 
switches are considered ideal and do not introduce distortion in the conversion 
process, and the differential RF amplifier or transconductor does. The 
amplification is assumed linear as long as the amplitude of the input signal is 
smaller than the maximum input voltage, VL, determined from the transfer 

484 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
characteristic in Figure 7.22, valid for a differential amplifier circuit. Above this 
point there will be compression and clipping of the signal, generating distortion. 
The differential output current expressed in terms of output differential current is 
given by (7.114), [11]. Expanding the hyperbolic tangent after Taylor the 
coefficients a1, a2, a3 are determined. In a perfect differential amplifier a2 = 0. 
Therefore, the input referred voltage intercept point for the third order inter-
modulation is provided by (7.115).  
 
...
2
tanh
2
3
3
2
2
1











di
di
di
T
di
dout
v
a
v
a
v
a
V
V
I
I
   
     (7.114) 
T
V
a
2
1
1 
;   
0
2 
a
;  


3
3
2
3
1
T
V
a 
 
T
ip
V
a
a
V
4
3
4
3
1
3


 
 
 
 
 
     (7.115) 
 
Small differences in each half of a differential amplifier caused by 
imperfect layout symmetry, imperfections in the epitaxial layers, and other small 
imperfections give rise to mismatches in circuit parameters, resulting in an offset 
voltage, Vos.  If there is mismatch, the second order input referred voltage 
intercept point is given by (7.116). If there is an emitter degeneration resistor, then 
the distortion improves accordingly, predicted by (7.117) and (7.118).  
  


os
T
ip
V
V
V
2
2
2

  
 
  
          
         
   (7.116)
 


3
2
2
)
1(
2
E
m
os
T
ip
R
g
V
V
V


 
  
          
         
   (7.117) 
2
3
3
)
1(
4
E
m
T
ip
R
g
V
V


 
  
          
         
   (7.118) 
 
 
In reality assuming the Gilbert cells do not introduce non-linearities is an 
approximation. The effect on non-linearity originating from this differential cell 
was analyzed by Meyer, [20], where he combined analytical and computer 
simulation means. The inter-modulation expressed as the ratio of amplitude of 
third order current component and fundamental component, referred to the output 
is in (7.119). In this function the input signal current Is was normalized to the 
quiescent current and the LO voltage normalized to the thermal voltage.  
 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
485 
 

)
(
)
(
3
3
2
2
3
B
f
A
f
V
V
f
I
I
V
T
LO
Q
K
IM














   
 
    (7.119) 
 
With  
T
Q
b V
I
r
A
1
0


 
 
 
Q
T
JE I
V
C
B
0


 
 
 

t
t
I
I
RF
RF
RF
K
2
1
cos
cos




 
 
 
 
 
The first conclusion from the equation is that the distortion level 
increases as the square of signal level, the same as for an amplifier as described in 
(7.82). The effects of other parameters are shown in Figures 7.31 and 7.32, where 
the normalized input signal is fixed at IK/IQ =0.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.31   IM3 function of LO drive level. After [20]. 
 
 
Figure 7.31 shows the VIM3 level improves slightly with higher LO drive, 
confirming that distortion is mainly a function of the RF stage. The dependency 
observed is a function of the switching waveform, which approximates the ideal 
square wave at larger drive (dashed line in the figure), with a consequently higher 
value of conversion trans-conductance.  For this plot CJE = 0. In 
the 
plot 
of 
Figure 7.32(a), CJE is still disregarded, the LO voltage is fixed at 500 mV and the 
ratio of signal current to bias current is also fixed. Therefore, increasing any of the 
parameters bias, LO frequency, base resistance or transit time causes the IM3 level 
to increase. Those parameters are defined by functions A, B for (7.119). If rb is 
made equal to zero, then IM3 drops to -100 dB. In Figure 7.32(b), the ratio of 
signal to bias, and LO drive level are held constant, while CJE is varied. With rb = 
0 the simulation result indicates a large dependency on base capacitance, CJE. 
 
 
--- 01rbIQ/VT = 0.6 
.... 01rbIQ/VT = 0.3 
IM3 - dBc 
VLO/VT 
0 
1
2
3
4
-60 
-70 
-80 

486 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
(a) IM3 function of ωLO1rbIQ/VT    
           (b) IM3 versus LOCJEVT/IQ 
Figure 7.32   VIM3 level versus frequency, bias, and device parameters. After [20]. 
 
 
The noise mechanism in a doubly balanced mixer using differential 
amplifier configuration is similar to singly balanced. In [13] it was pointed out 
that theoretically both singly and doubly balanced mixers have similar noise 
figure, but doubly balanced are more complex to layout and have more noise 
contributors resulting in higher noise figure.  
 
 
7.8.3 Linearization of Mixers Built with Differential Amplifier 
 
The linearization process largely consists of correcting the nonlinearities of the RF 
amplifier. A simple method to improve linearity is by emitter degeneration, which 
means adding a resistor to the emitter, transforming the exponential Ice(Vbe) 
relation to be more linear at the cost of lower gain.    
                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.33   Effect of emitter resistance on the amplifier transfer characteristic.  
 
The output differential voltage is given by the difference of output 
currents 7.57a, 757b on a load RL represented in Figure 7.33 by the solid line. 
Adding an emitter resistor it can be proven the transconductance changes from 
RE 
-2VT 
1.0 
Vout 
0 
8VT 
-8VT 
Vin=VLO 
2VT 
CJE = 0 
IS/IQ =0.2 
VLO= 500  
IM3 - dB 
LO1rbIQ/V
0.01 
-60 
-70 
-80 
0.1 
1 
rb = 0 
IS/IQ =0.2 
VLO= 500 
IM3 - dB 
LOCJEVT/IQ 
10-3 
-40 
-60 
-80 
10-2 
10-1 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
487 
IE/2VT to IE/(2VT+REIE), resulting in lower gain. However the input voltage 
swing limited to 2VT is now increased to 8VT, so that the maximum allowable 
input differential input voltage increases and the circuit becomes more linear [21].  
The linearization method represented in Figure 7.34, employs an emitter resistor 
connected differentially from emitter to emitter. The differential connection of RE 
allows the level of degeneration to be adjusted without affecting DC bias.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.34   Linear RF transconductor amplifier. 
 
The collector of Q1, Q2 are attached to the top quad devices not shown in 
the figure, which are driven by the LO voltage. The bias current is determined by 
the resistor RB, which delivers the base current for Q4, Q5, plus emitter current for 
the mirror Q3, and RBB which also provides base current to Q1, Q2.  Since the 
currents are equal in each device, the currents in RB and RBB are given by (7.120a) 
and (7.120b) respectively, where  is the ratio of collector to emitter current.  The 
voltage on RB is given by the difference between –VEE and the Q3 transistor 
voltage, VCE.  
 
E
RB
I
I
)
2
3
(



  (7.120a);              
E
RBB
I
I
)
4
5
(



  (7.120b) 
 
B
BB
CE
EE
B
BB
CE
EE
CC
E
DC
R
R
V
V
R
R
V
V
V
I
I










)
(
)
2
3
(
)
4
5
(
)
(
2




    (7.121) 
 
 The current in each collector is given by the sum of DC current and the 
signal current generated by the applied voltage, Vin. Using the T-model described 
in Chapter 3 to represent the bipolar devices, this voltage is developed around the 
RE terminals. For differential signals, half of this resistor is on each side of the 
IE 
Q2 
Q3 
IC2 
Q4 
Q5 
IC1 
IE 
IE 
IDC/2 
IDC/2 
Vin(t) 
RB 
RE 
-VEE 
Q1 
+VCC 
RBB 
R1 
R2 

488 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
circuit. If one considers the applied peak to peak voltage the following equations 
describe IC1 and IC2.  
 
E
in
DC
E
C
R
t
V
I
i
I
)
(
2
1
1



 
 
 
      
     (7.122) 
E
in
DC
E
C
R
t
V
I
i
I
)
(
2
2
2



 
 
 
      
     (7.123) 
 
An alternative to RF linearization proposed by Gilbert is the use of the 
Micromixer, [23], represented in the next figure. The traditional differential RF 
amplifier was replaced by a class AB amplifier while the mixer quad is 
conventional. The RF stage comprises a current mirror and a common base 
transistor formed by Q1, Q2, Q3 and CD. The RF signal, Vgen, drives the input stage 
through the current mirror and the emitter of the common base transistor, Q1. On 
the positive RF cycle the current flows mainly through the common emitter 
device, Q3, while the common base is non conducting. Therefore a half sinusoid 
current IC3 is generated. Alternately, when the RF signal is negative the common 
base device conducts and the common emitter is not operational. The current IC1 is 
then a half sinusoid on the negative side and of opposite phase compared to IC3. 
The mixer is driven by the differential current, IC1 – IC3, where each current is 
highly non linear but the difference is linear. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.35   Micromixer schematic. After [23]. 
 
 
Another linearization method reported by Gilbert is the technique called 
multi-tanh, [24]. In this method two or more differential pairs are paralleled with 
different emitter areas and turn on voltage.  The effect is to extend the input 
voltage capacity, and therefore improve linearity of the equivalent trans-
conductance. An example of three differential pairs is in Figure 7.36, where the 
emitter areas of Q1a and Q2a are equal and emitter areas of Q1c and Q2b are set A 
CD 
Q1 
IC
Q2 
Q3 
IC
IB 
ZS 
Vgen 
QZ1 
VR
CC 
QZ2 
IC

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
489 
times larger than the area of Q1b and Q2c. The bias current for the center pair is K 
times the bias of the outer pairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.36  
Multi-tanh schematic. After [24]. 
 
 
The current sources are controlled by a single current mirror. The trans-
conductance of a differential pair is obtained by taking the derivative of output 
current with respect to input voltage, as in (7.124). The composite trans-
conductance in (7.125) obtained from reference [25], is shown to be set at 
different input voltages adding an offset voltage dependent on the ratio of device 
area. 
 
 







T
in
E
out
V
V
I
I
2
tanh
 
 








T
in
T
E
in
out
in
m
V
V
h
V
I
dV
dI
V
g
2
sec
2
)
(
2
  
                    (7.124) 





























T
os
in
T
os
in
T
in
T
E
in
m
V
V
V
h
V
V
V
h
V
V
h
K
V
I
V
g
2
sec
2
sec
2
sec
2
)
(
2
2
2
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
                   (7.125) 
 
With 
)
ln(A
V
V
T
os 
  
 
 
For small signal input, the transconductance of the composite structure is 
given by (7.125). The parameter values must be properly calculated to guarantee a 
constant gm. By differentiating (7.125) and equating to zero, the optimum values 
for the triplet provided in the literature are A = 13 and K = 0.75. An example of 
use of these parameters, applied to SiGe technology is in Figure 7.37, [26], where 
IE 
KIE 
IE 
Q2a 
Q2c 
Q1c 
Q1b 
Q1a 
Iou
Vin 
Q2b 

490 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
gm is approximately constant from - 0.075 to + 0.075V. The transconductance for 
each pair and for a single differential pair are also plotted for comparison. The 
plot shows the composite gm is reduced to more than half the value of a single 
differential pair. This is agreement with (7.126) that shows gm0 is divided by 2.15, 
using the above values for A and K. 
 
 












K
A
A
K
g
V
g
m
in
m
2
0
1
8
2
1
)
(
  
       
     (7.126) 
 
  
 
The multi-tanh circuit provides improvement in both noise figure and 
linearity: V1dB increases by 10 dB and input noise power increases by 3.3 dB, for a 
net increase in dynamic range of roughly 7 dB. The V1dB is the voltage for 1 dB 
gain compression, where 0dBV corresponds to +10 dBm in 50. The feed-
forward technique, [25], the classical linearization method applied in amplifiers, 
has also been adapted for mixer application by combining two signal paths with 
proper phase to cancel distortion. 
 
 
        
 
Figure 7.37   Composite gm compared to a single differential pair at the same total current. After 
[26]. 
 
 
 
7.9 DESIGN STUDY:  WiFi 2.45 GHz GILBERT MIXER 
 
For this exercise the mixer is assumed to operate from 2.4 GHz to 2.5 GHz with 
an IF of 100 MHz. The device selected for this example is the HP AT305, which 
has fT = 10 GHz at 1 mA, whose parameters are in Appendix 7B. 
 
7.9.1 Selecting Bias and LO Power 
 
 
Let's start with a singly balanced circuit that is half the full Gilbert cell circuit to 
determine bias voltage levels. The supply voltage is split, as shown in Figure 7.38, 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
491 
across current source Q4; RF amplifier, Q3; switching devices, Q1, Q2; and output 
load RL. The voltage values indicated are typical for a 5V supply voltage and 
current bias of IE = 2 mA, allowing a voltage swing of 1.5 Vpp at the LO frequency 
and nearly the same IF and RF voltage swings. A base peak LO voltage of 5VT = 
125 mV at each device is sufficient to switch the current on-off. That corresponds 
to a power of –10 dBm into 50 Ohm. In order to improve square wave shape of 
the switching waveform, the drive level was increased to 250 mV.  Device Q3, Q4 
carries twice the current of either Q1 or Q2 and should be designed with twice the 
emitter area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.38   Selection of DC voltages in a differential configuration. 
 
 
7.9.1.1 Impedance Considerations 
 
The equivalent impedance at the fundamental frequency, in differential mode can 
be obtained from a single ended grounded emitter transistor. The collector was 
also assumed grounded at the LO frequency since in doubly balanced operation 
the collectors are virtually shorted. Transistor Q4 was bypassed by a capacitor 
connected between collector and ground. The impedance was determined by 
applying three different LO voltages to the base from 100 MHz to 10 GHz and 
reading the resulting current at the fundamental frequency. The results are 
displayed in Figure 7.39(a) as follows: (1) small signal; (2) VLO = 0.125 V;  (3) 
VLO = 0.25V in the direction of the arrow. 
.8 V 
5.0 V 
3.5 V 
2.7 V 
2.0 V 
1.1 V 
1 V 
DC Voltages 
RL 
+VCC 
RL 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
I1 
I2 
IE 
Q4 

492 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The impedance indicated by marker M1 in the figure corresponds to 2.4 
GHz. The differential impedance is doubled and indicated by marker M. This 
impedance allows high impedance assumption at the LO port so that impedance 
was not conjugated matched. In this case a low impedance voltage source is 
sufficient to drive the switches. The common mode impedance requires the 
calculation of Q3 collector impedance, to serve as an emitter impedance of Q1. 
 
             
M
M1
    
M3
 
a) 
Differential 
 
 
b) Common mode  
Figure 7.39  
Large signal base impedance for common and differential mode. 
 
 
The net common mode impedance provided by Figure 7.39(b) 
corresponds to Q1, Q2 in parallel and with the Q3 device connected to the emitter. 
The small signal simulation shows the impedance trace is outside the Smith chart 
indicating unstable circuit.  
 
                                
M
     
 
 
Figure 7.40  
Small signal RF port impedance. 
 
A feedback resistor in series with a 1 pF decoupling capacitor was placed 
between the collector and base of Q1 and also of Q2, which moved the trace inside 
the chart as indicated by the black line with marker M3 at 2.4 GHz. The RF device 
is twice the size of switch devices and carries twice the current. The small signal 
impedance at the RF port from 100 MHz to 10 GHz is indicated in Figure 7.40. 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
493 
The marker is at 2.4 GHz, where the RF impedance is equal to ZRF = 37 – j40 Ω, 
which can be matched by simple series L parallel C elements.  
 
 
7.9.1.2 Collector Waveforms 
 
An ideal transformer was employed to drive the differential mixer.  The collector 
waveforms in Figure 7.41(a) have a square wave shape when driven by a 
sinusoidal generator at 1 GHz. The effect of frequency is illustrated in Figure 
7.41(b) where the frequency is at 2.4 GHz. The plots are for device Q1 and a 
similar waveform phase shifted by 180 is obtained for Q2. The required LO 
voltage was assumed to be 250 mV for a single device. Since there are two 
devices in differential mode, the drive generator voltage was doubled to 500 mV. 
This waveform distorts above 1 GHz, becoming a half wave sinusoid at 2.5 GHz 
and a distorted sinusoidal a 5 GHz due to effect of device capacitances.  
 
    
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.0
2.0
1
2
3
4
0
5
time, nsec
(
)
          
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
900
1
2
3
4
0
5
time, psec
 
a) 
fLO = 1 GHz 
 
 
b)     fLO= 2.4 GHz 
Figure 7.41  
Collector waveforms with base driven by a sinusoidal signal. 
 
 
7.9.1.3 Doubly Balanced Circuit 
             
Before building the Gilbert cell it is advisable to perform a large signal analysis on 
the singly balanced differential mixer, with LO signal only, to make sure the LO 
voltage at the collector swings within the expected voltage levels. The Gilbert cell 
in Figure 7.42 comprises devices Q1, Q2, Q5, Q6 and the RF amplifier the devices 
Q3, Q7. The linearization resistor R was set to 100 Ohms. The output signals are 
buffered by devices Q9, Q10 and are converted from balanced to single ended by 
an active 180 combiner Q14, Q15. Bias for the active combiner is not shown in the 
figure. The LO and RF signals are coupled by means of transformers to balance 
the unbalanced input signals. RF transformers using wire and ferrite material 
operating in excess of 3 GHz are commercially available. And if higher operating 
frequency is desired, a transmission line balun can be used, either surface mounted 
or printed directly onto the circuit board. The RF amplifier in the simulation was 
matched with simple series L parallel C network not shown in the figure. An 

494 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
external low pass frequency filter was added at the IF output to remove high 
residual frequency components, also not shown.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.42   Circuit with external transformers. 
The conversion gain from 2.2 to 2.8 GHz with an IF of 100 MHz is in 
Figure 7.43(a), showing 23 dB within the desired band of 2.4 to 2.5 GHz. The LO 
frequency is at the low side and drive power is + 3 dBm. The figure on the right 
shows an IF output voltage of 400 mV after filtering, corresponding to + 2 dBm. 
 
    
2.3E9
2.4E9
2.5E9
2.6E9
2.7E9
2.2E9
2.8E9
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
15
25
LOfreq
gain2
m7
m8
m7
LOfreq=
gain2=22.957
2.400E9
m8
LOfreq=
gain2=22.992
2.500E9
  
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
20
-400
-200
0
200
400
-600
600
time, nsec
ts(Vif), mV
 
(a) 
 Conversion gain 
 
 
        (b) IF voltage waverform. 
Figure 7.43  
Gilbert mixer performance in terms of conversion gain and IF voltage waveform. 
 
 
These results do not include inductor parasitic losses in Silicon 
technology, where Q factor can approach unity. An additional improvement to this 
circuit would be to replace the resistive bias network with an active circuit 
containing a bandgap stable reference, such as the one shown in Figure 7.44. The 
bandgap comprises transistors Q3, Q4 and resistors R4, R5. The other resistors are 
simple voltage dividers that are buffered by transistors Q1, Q2, Q3 and useful to 
bias the base of Gilbert cell devices.  
 
 
 
VIF 
RL 
+VCC 
RL 
Q1 Q2 
Q3 
VRF 
VLO 
Q4 
Q5 
Rb 
C 
R 
Rc 
Q6 
Q7 
Q8 
Q9 
Q10 
Q11 
Q12 
Q13 
Rb 
+VCC 
T1 
C 
T2 
Rb
Q14 
Q15 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
495 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.44  
Gilbert cell biasing circuit. 
 
 
7.10  DIFFERENTIAL TRIPLE LEVEL  
 
The work by Gilbert on the current multiplier was extended to a triple multiplier 
by Choma, [27], making the output voltage the product of three input voltages, 
Figure 7.45. His proposal was to stack one more cross coupled cell, resulting in an 
additional level of differential amplifier. A later patent [28], was applied to the use 
of the triple level concept for a stacked mixer. The proposal is to use the second 
level as a first mixer similar to conventional Gilbert cell. The output of the first 
mixer is applied to an additional mixer quad constituting a dual conversion 
system. To gain more insight into this type of structure, let us assume a 
fundamental LO and RF are applied, respectively, to the first (lowest) and second 
(middle) levels, represented by simplified (7.127) to (7.130), which are related to 
the currents in the schematic of Figure 7.45. As for the device modulation, only 
the first Fourier coefficient, gm1 = 2/, is considered. 
 
 

)
cos(
)
cos(
1
1
t
g
t
R
V
I
I
LO
m
RF
E
RF
T
C










 
 
     (7.127) 
 

)
cos(
)
cos(
1
3
t
g
t
R
V
I
I
LO
m
RF
E
RF
T
C











      
     (7.128)  
 

)
cos(
)
cos(
1
2
t
g
t
R
V
I
I
LO
m
RF
E
RF
T
C











  
     (7.129) 
+VCC 
R2 
Q1 
Q2 
R1 
R3 
Vb
Q3 
Vb
Vb3 
Q4 
R4 
R
GND 

496 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 

t
g
t
R
V
I
I
LO
m
RF
E
RF
T
C


cos
cos
1
4








    
      
     (7.130)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.45   Triple multiplier topology. After [27]. 
           
Adding the first two currents together, it is found the fundamental LO is cancelled 
and conversion to the first IF is available at the collector of devices Q1,Q3. The 
same is applied to the last two currents, and the IF is available at the collectors of 
Q2,Q4.   
 

t
R
V
g
t
t
R
V
g
I
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
RF
LO
E
RF
m
C
C








cos
cos
cos
2
1
1
3
1
  (7.131) 
Q2 
VX 
RE 
Q10 
Q7 
Q1 
Q4 
IC4 
IC3 
Q8 
IC1 
IC2 
Vo=VXVYVZ 
IC8 
IC7 
+VCC 
RL 
2IT 
Q9 
Q6 
IV 
IC6 
IT-IX/2 
RL 
Q5 
Q3 
RE 
VY 
VZ 
-VEE 
IT+IX/2 
IW 
IC5 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
497 

t
R
V
g
t
t
R
V
g
I
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
RF
LO
E
RF
m
C
C










cos
cos
cos
2
1
1
4
2
 (7.132)
 
 
 
 
On the third level, the signal is mixed at the left with a second LO, LOI 
with reference phase equal to zero. The modulation of the top quad is assumed to 
generate a similar conversion gain, gm2 = 2/. 
 


t
g
t
R
V
g
I
I
I
LOI
m
RF
LO
E
RF
m
C
C
C



cos
cos
2
1
)
(
2
1
2
1
3
1
5










  (7.133) 






















t
g
t
R
V
g
I
I
I
LOI
m
RF
LO
E
RF
m
C
C
C
cos
cos
2
1
)
(
2
1
2
1
4
2
7
   (7.134)  
 
 
 
Adding both IC5 and IC7, one obtains IV in (7.135) and by similar 
development, IW, that is equal to the sum of IC6 and IC8, (7.136). Both currents 
develop an IF voltage on load RL, which operate differentially. Notice that if we 
make ωLOI = (ωLO – ωRF) then the resulting frequency is directly at base band.  
 
 

t
t
R
V
g
g
I
RF
LO
LOI
E
RF
m
m
V





cos
cos
2
1
1
2
       
     (7.135) 
 
 

t
t
R
V
g
g
I
RF
LO
LOI
E
RF
m
m
W






cos
cos
2
1
1
2
 
     (7.136) 
 
 
While there is not much to gain by using this topology directly as two 
stacked mixers, the patent reported that by adding one more quad at the third level 
in parallel with the previous quad, it is possible to generate an I, Q mixer, 
provided the top quads are fed with quadrature LO.  The concept is illustrated in 
the block diagram of Figure 7.46 illustrating an AGC to control the gain level of 
an RF amplifier. The circuit schematic in Figure 7.47 shows similar equations are 
developed for the quad on the right. Therefore, currents IC9 and IC11 are in (7.137) 
and (7.138). 
 


t
g
t
R
V
g
I
I
I
LOQ
m
RF
LO
E
RF
m
C
C
C



sin
cos
2
1
)
(
2
1
2
1
3
1
9










  (7.137) 
 






















t
g
t
R
V
g
I
I
I
LOQ
m
RF
LO
E
RF
m
C
C
C
sin
cos
2
1
)
(
2
1
2
1
4
2
11
  (7.138)  

498 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
Figure 7.46   Block diagram of a dual conversion system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.47   Schematic of inntegrated stacked mixer. 
 
RFin 
+VCC 
IC12 
IC11
RL 
IX 
IC10 
RL 
IY 
IC9 
RE 
IC4 
IC3 
IC1 IC2 
2IT 
IT-IX/2 
RE 
-VEE 
IT+IX/2 
IC8 
IC7 
RL 
IV 
IC6 
RL 
IW 
IC5 
 
 
LO_1 
LOI -  
LOQ- +90 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
499 
 
The currents IX, IY from (7.139), (7.140) have same magnitude as IV, IW 
but are in quadrature. The converted signal is again at baseband if the second LO 
is given by ωLOI = (ωLO – ωRF). 
 
 

t
t
R
V
g
g
I
RF
LO
LOQ
E
RF
m
m
X





cos
sin
2
1
1
2
       
     (7.139) 
 
 

t
t
R
V
g
g
I
RF
LO
LOQ
E
RF
m
m
Y






cos
sin
2
1
1
2
 
     (7.140)
 
 
 
 
In the original patent, this circuit was developed for a RF frequency 
located at 930 MHz and the LO is located at 744 MHz. The second LO is applied 
at 186 MHz, the same frequency as first IF, so the output of the second conversion 
is at baseband. Notice the second LO voltage requires splitting the phase into 4 
different phases: 0º, 90º, 180º, 270º. The inventor suggests an addition application 
where the LO frequency of left quad is different than the frequency of the right 
quad resulting in two different IFs for the same RF input.  
 
An alternative to obtain the differential quadrature signals for LO2 is with 
the use of a polyphase filter such as the one indicated in Figure 7.48.  The design 
condition is RC = 1, therefore, if R = 100  the capacitor at 186 MHz is equal to 
0.855 pF. Harmonic balance simulation of the circuit shows the input signal 
amplitude is divided by two at each port, and the relative output phase angles are 
as shown in the figure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.48  
LO differential quadrature generator. 
R 
R 
R 
R 
C
C 
C 
V1 
V2 = V0 
V3 = V- 90 
C 
V4 = V180 
V5 = V90 

500 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Those are values calculated for an open circuit, which is a close 
approximation if the load is equal to 1000 . Lower load resistor values start 
degrading the phase relationship, so some kind of buffering is required. 
 
 
7.11 DOUBLY BALANCED SUBHARMONIC  
 
The need for subharmonic mixers in direct conversion receivers resulted in several 
innovations in circuit techniques that were used in conjunction with the quad cell.  
Two main approaches became standard: (a) QLT – quadrature on top, where the 
quad is transformed to operate subharmonically; (b) DRT – Differential on top, 
where the LO frequency is first frequency doubled and then fed to a conventional 
quad.  
 
 
7.11.1 QLT – Quadrature LO on Top 
 
In this topology, [29], each of the four LO switches in the quad are replaced by a 
pair of transistors that are parallel connected at emitter and collector, with the 
bases driven by an LO voltage in counter phase to the other. The paralleled 
transistors generate voltage at the second harmonic and suppress the fundamental 
frequency components, resulting in the mixing with one half the LO frequency. 
The second harmonic is generated by the application of a fundamental sinusoidal 
signal at the base of switching devices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.49   QLT subharmonic topology. Ater [29]. 
LO- 
LO90+ 
RF+ 
LO- 
RE 
IF- 
IF+ 
LO90+ 
LO+ 
RL 
LO- 
RL 
RF- 
LO+ 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 Q4 
Q7 Q8 
Q9 Q10 
Q5 Q6 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
501 
 
It has been shown, [30], that a square wave drive is not very efficient as a 
subharmonic mixer. The schematic in the figure shows the two pairs are driven 
90° apart in phase, with the phase difference becoming 180 at the second 
harmonic.  The current provided by the RF devices Q1 and Q3 is described by 
(7.141). The DC term was dropped since it will be suppressed by the differential 
output volage. 
 
 
)
2
cos
(cos
2
2
1
t
t
R
V
I
I
RF
RF
E
RF
Q
Q





 
     
    (7.141) 
 
 
The current provided by device Q3 is a half sinusoid and is multiplied by 
the current from the RF device. The same is true for device Q4 with LO phase 
shifted by 180º. The current subscripts take the number from the devices in Figure 
7.48.   

)
2
cos(
)
cos(
1
2
tanh
1
2
1
1
1
3
t
g
t
g
I
V
V
I
I
LO
m
LO
m
Q
T
LO
Q



















  (7.142)  
 



t
g
t
g
I
V
V
I
I
LO
m
LO
m
Q
T
LO
Q
)
2
2
cos(
cos
1
2
tanh
1
2
1
1
1
4























  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
    (7.143)
 
 
 
Equation (7.144) shows the combined output from devices Q3,Q4 cancels 
the mixing products with fundamental and odd LO harmonics, while those with 
even LO harmonics add constructively. The analysis is extended to combine the 
currents from the pairs Q7,Q8 and Q3,Q4, since they are connected together. 
 








t
t
R
V
t
g
I
RF
RF
E
RF
LO
m



2
cos
cos
2
)
2
cos
1(
2
2
34
    
    (7.144) 
 








t
t
R
V
t
g
I
RF
RF
E
RF
LO
m



2
cos
cos
2
)
2
cos
1(
2
2
78
 
     (7.145)
 
 
 
The result of adding I34 and I78 is the cancellation of mixing products 
with the RF second harmonic, leaving the desired product with second LO 
harmonic and fundamental RF, as shown in (7.146). The fundamental RF 
component is doubled at the output terminal but it is suppressed when taking the 
output differentially.  
 

502 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
t
t
R
V
g
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
IF


cos
2
cos
2
2


  
                    (7.146) 
 
 
 
The factor gm2 represents the second harmonic trans-conductance 
coefficient for a half sinusoidal waveform, which is equal to 2/(3). The IF 
voltage considering downconverter application is provided by (7.147) and the 
voltage conversion gain by (7.148). 
 
 

t
R
R
V
gm
V
RF
LO
L
E
RF
IF




2
cos
2
   
                    (7.147) 
 
E
L
CV
R
R
G

3
2

  
         
      
 
 
     (7.148) 
 
 
It is important to note that in this configuration the LO is required to 
provide four phase angles: 0º, 90º, 180º and 270º. Such an LO can be generated 
with a polyphase filter, using hybrid couplers, or from active circuits such as the 
one from next subsection. The alternative reported in this reference uses a ring 
oscillator that provides two balanced outputs in quadrature. The down-converter 
architecture using this subharmonic mixer in combination with ring oscillator is 
shown in Figure 7.50. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.50   Architecture of a subharmonic down-converter mixer. From [29]. 
 
 
7.11.2 DRT – Differential RF on Top 
 
 
This proposed topology, [31], reverses the traditional RF and LO ports, used in 
fundamental mixers, observed in the schematic contained in Figure 7.51. The 
switching devices are at the bottom and are replaced by a pair of paralleled 
devices. The applied LO is frequency doubled and then applied to the top quad for 
mixing with the RF. The RF is applied to the top quad and the converted signal is 
collected differentially from the load resistor terminals.  

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
503 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.51   DRT subharmonic topology. After [31]. 
 
 
In conventional mixers, the current I1 and I2 is 180º out of phase, which is 
obtained here by driving the second doubler at 90º offset compared to the first 
pair. The resulting second harmonic will be at the desired 180º phase. The 
generation of LO signals was obtained by first balancing a single ended signal 
then they are processed by a simple polyphase filter represented in Figure 7.52, 
The filter in this case is a simple high pass, low pass network applied to each side 
of the balanced signal to generated the requires four phases in quadrature. The 
required phase differences generated by the polyphase filter are maintained over a 
wider frequency range than the amplitude variation. Fortunately, conversion gain 
is not much affected as long as it is larger than the minimum required to switch 
the base emitter voltage. The differential amplifiers are used to generate the 
balanced signal and as buffer amplifiers after the filter to compensate for losses. In 
this particular design described in the reference a 0.6 nH inductance is inserted in 
series with emitter of RF quad to improve matching with minimum effect on noise 
figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
VLO/290 
VLO/2180 
VLO/2270 
VLO/290 
(-)VRF/2 
Vout 
R
+VCC 
I1 
(+)VRF/2 
R
I2 
(+)VRF/2 
IE 

504 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.52  
Quadri-phase LO generation. After [31]. 
 
 
7.12  SUBHARMONIC TRIPLE LEVEL  
 
The triple level SHM, [26], is similar to the stacked mixer described earlier, with a 
single LO frequency applied to two levels in quadrature with each other. Instead 
of a dual-conversion system, the authors decided to call this a successive mixer 
system. Each of the dual level mixers operate at a frequency half that of a 
fundamental mixer. The schematic of the mixer is in Figure 7.53, and the current 
equations for half RF amplifier, IC, and half of first level mixer, IA, IB are defined 
by (7.150), (7.151). The current subscripts are defined as defined in the figure. 
 

t
R
V
I
I
RF
E
RF
DC
C

cos


 
 
 
                   (7.149) 









t
R
V
I
t
g
t
g
I
RF
E
RF
DC
LO
m
LO
m
A



cos
2
cos
cos
2
1
     (7.150) 










t
R
V
I
t
g
t
g
I
RF
E
RF
DC
LO
m
LO
m
B



cos
2
cos
cos
2
1
      (7.151) 
 
Polyphase filter 
VLO 
VLO270 
VLO180 
VLO0 
VLO90 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
505 
The sum of currents flowing into Q1 and Q3 is given by (7.152) that 
shows cancellation of the fundamental LO frequency and constructive addition of 
the fundamental mixing between LO and RF.  The LO second harmonic is 
removed if the LO drive waveform is square wave, in which case gm2 = 0; it is also 
eliminated at the differential output by cancellation.  Similarly, the sum of current 
flowing into Q2, Q4 is given by (7.153). 
t
t
R
V
g
t
g
I
I
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
LO
m
DC
B
A



cos
cos
2
2
cos
2
1
2



         (7.152) 
t
t
R
V
g
t
g
I
I
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
LO
m
DC
F
E



cos
cos
2
2
cos
2
1
2



         (7.153) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.53   Subharmonic triple level mixer. After [26]. 
 
Q2 
VRF 
RE 
Q10 
Q7 
Q1 
Q4 
IE 
IB 
Q8 
IA 
IF 
Vo=VXVYVZ 
IE’ 
IB'’ 
+VCC 
RL 
2IDC 
Q9 
Q6 
IA’ IF’ 
IC 
RL 
Q5 
Q3 
RE 
VLOI 
VLOQ 
-VEE 
ID 

506 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The LO feeding the top quad is in quadrature with respect to the first 
quad, so the signal provided by the first mixing is multiplied by an LO voltage 
whose phase is shifted by /2. The resulting current in the devices Q5, Q7 is the 
current IAB multiplied by the LO switching voltage, gm1sin(LOt), depicted in 
(7.154). The LO voltage for the other half, Q6, Q8, is shifted in phase by 270. The 
resulting current for devices Q6, Q8 is in (7.155). In the expressions IAB = IA + IB 
and IEF = IE + IF and currents with (') corresponds to current on the third level 
where the second harmonic of LO is generated. 
   
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
)
sin(
2
1
1
t
t
t
R
V
g
t
g
I
LO
RF
LO
E
RF
m
LO
m
AB





 
 
)
cos(
)
2
cos(
'
2
1
t
t
R
V
g
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
A



    
 
    (7.154)   
)
sin(
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
)
sin(
2
1
1










t
t
t
R
V
g
t
g
I
LO
RF
LO
E
RF
m
LO
m
EF
 
)
cos(
)
2
cos(
'
2
1
t
t
R
V
g
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
B




 
          
    (7.155) 
 
Adding the currents from (7.154), (7.155) the positive side of the 
converted IF current is given by (7.156). The negative side is developed similarly 
for the currents IE', IF ' and is given in (7.157).  
 
t
t
R
V
g
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
IF


cos
2
cos
2
2
1


   
                    (7.156) 
t
t
R
V
g
I
RF
LO
E
RF
m
IF


cos
2
cos
2
2
1



 
         
     (7.157) 
 
The switching for the devices in second and third level is clearly 
described by waveforms in Figure 7.54. Each mixer is switched by a square wave 
shifted 90 º in phase relative to the other switch. The product of the two fLO 
signals result in an equivalent 2fLO signal. 
Figure 7.55 illustrates the application of two subharmonic mixers in a 
direct conversion receiver to convert a differential RF input signal to differential 
baseband, obtained from reference [26]. The differential quadrature signals have a 
45 phase difference between each port at the fundamental frequency. Generation 
of the second harmonic is accomplished by multiplying the frequency and phase 
by two, creating the differential quadrature at the second harmonic. The poly 
phase filter of Figure 7.55 can be used for this purpose by making R = 100  and 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
507 
C = 0.939 pF. The topology is able to provide 0, -45, 180 and 135 with the 
same voltage magnitude at each port. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.54   Equivalent switching waveform. 
 
 
      
 
 
Figure 7.55  
Subharmonic triple level mixer. From [26]. 
 
 
 
A parameter of importance in direct receivers, which is described in 
chapter II, is the second order intercept (IP2).  The two-tone IP2 measures rejection 
of intermodulation (IM) appearing at DC and baseband, and its frequency equals 
the difference in frequency between two closely spaced signals at the RF input.  
t 
t 
S1(t) 
S2(t) 
S(t)=S1(t)S2(t) 
t 

508 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Normally one signal is the desired one, and the other is an interferer.  Ideally, the 
second order intercept point of the mixer is very high.  The generation of IM 
levels is reduced by reducing nonlinearity, and further reduced in balanced circuits 
by cancellation that requires excellent circuit symmetry.  Unfortunately, 
imperfections in lithography and asymmetry in circuit layout cause IP2 values that 
can fall short of the system requirements. An expression for sensitivity of input 
IP2 from the same reference [26], is given in (7.158).  It is derived in terms of 
voltage referenced at the input, and differences in load resistors RL, bias current, 
IQ, and duty cycle for each switch. The effect of non zero output conductance is 
assumed to be the inverse of Early voltage, VA, a transistor parameter defined in 
Chapter 2.   
 
 
















Q
Q
T
L
L
A
I
I
V
d
d
d
R
R
V
IIP
)
2
1(
2
1
2
1
2
   
     (7.158) 
 
 
A typical example from the reference assumes a mismatch of all 
components of 1%, an Early voltage of 199 V, and a duty cycle of 0.49. This 
results in IIP2 equal to 38 dBm in a 50 ohm system, which is not very high. 
 
 
 
 
7.13  SUMMARY 
 
The basic principles of active BJT mixers were described.  Similarities with diode 
mixers were noted due to the similar exponential relation between current and 
voltage. The mixing process was discussed in detail sufficient for the reader to 
explore specific topics further using the references cited. The most common 
topologies were addressed, including the single ended mixer with base LO 
injection, the cascode mixer, and the differential singly- and doubly-balanced 
mixers. All these circuits can be built as either discrete or integrated circuits. 
Subharmonic mixers were also discussed and shown to have similar advantages to 
diode APDP SHMs, which respectively refer to anti-parallel diode pair and 
subharmonic mixers. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
509 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
C. L. Searly, A, R. Boothroyd, E. Angelo, Jr., P. E. Gray, and D. O. 
Pederson, Elementary Circuit Properties of Transistors, John Wiley, 1964, pp. 81. 
[2] 
K. K. Clarke and D. T. Hess, Communication Circuits: Analysis and 
Design, Addison Wesley Publishing Company, 1971, pp. 637. 
[3] 
K. K. Clarke and D. T. Hes, Communication Circuits: Analysis and Design, 
Addison Wesley Publishing Company, 1971, pp. 109. 
[4] 
B. A. Xavier and C. A. Aitchinson, “Simulation and Modelling of a Hetero 
junction Bipolar Transistor Mixer,” 1992 IEEE MTT International Microwave 
Symposium Digest, pp. 333-336. 
[5] 
R. A. Pucel, D. Masse, and R. Bera, “Performance of a GaAs MESFET 
Mixers at X Band,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume MTT 24, No. 6, June 1976, pp. 351-360. 
[6] 
B. A. Xavier and C. A. Aitchinson, “The Measured and Predicted Noise 
Figure of a GaAs Heterojunction Bipolar Transistor Mixer,” 1997 RFIC 
Symposium, pp. 135-138. 
[7] 
Guofu Niu, “Noise in SiGe HBT RF Technology" Physics, Modeling and 
Circuit Implications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume 93, No. 9, September 
2005, pp. 1583-1597. 
[8] 
N. Suematsu, M. Ono, S. Kubo, H. Sato, Y. Iyama, and O. Ishida, “L-Band 
Internally Matched Front-End Si-MMIC,” 26th European Microwave Conference, 
September 1996, pp. 37-40.  
[9] 
K. K. Clarke and D. T. Hess, Communication Circuits: Analysis and 
Design, Addison Wesley Publishing Company, 1971, pp. 117. 
[10] K. K. Clarke and D. T. Hess, Communication Circuits: Analysis and 
Design, Addison Wesley Publishing Company, 1971, pp. 105. 
[11] Willy Sansen, “Distortion in Elementary Transistor Circuits,” IEEE 
Tranactions on Circuits and Systems-II: Analog and Digital Signal Processing, 
Volume 46, No. 3 March 1999, pp. 315-325. 
[12] Howard E. Abraham and Robert G. Meyer, “Transistor Design for Low 
Distortion at High Frequencies,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, Volume 
ED 23, No. 12, December 1976, pp. 1290-1297 
[13] Keng Leong Fong and Robert G. Meyer, “Monolithic RF Active Mixer 
Design,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II Analog and Digital Signal 
Processing, Volume 46, No. 3, March 1999, pp. 231-239. 
[14] E. Thompson, “Integrated Harmonic Mixer Circuit Including an Emitter 
Coupled Differential Amplifier,” US Patent 3,491,301, issued January 20, 1970. 
[15] H. E. Jones, “Dual Output Synchronous Detector Utilizing Transistorized 
Differential Amplifiers,” US Patent 3,241,078, issued March 15, 1966.  
[16] R. R. Sinusas, “Double-Balanced Modulator Circuit Readily Adaptable to 
Integrated Circuit Fabrication,” US Patent 3,550,040, issued December 22, 1970. 
[17] Barrie Gilbert, “A new Wideband Amplifier Technique,” US Patent 
3,689,752, issued September 5, 1972. 

510 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[18] Barrie Gilbert, “A Precise Four-Quadrant Multiplier with Sub-nanosecond 
Response,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 3, No. 4, December 
1968, pp. 365-373.  
[19] Barry Gilbert and Rupert Baines, “Fundamentals of Active Mixers,” 
Applied Microwave & Wireless, Winter 1995, pp. 10-27. 
[20] Robert G. Meyer, “Inter-modulation in High-Frequency Bipolar Transistor 
Integrated Circuit Mixers,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 21, No. 
4, August 1986, pp. 534-537. 
[21] P. R. Gray, P. J. Hurst, S. H. Lewis, and R. G. Meyer, Analysis and Design 
of Analog Integrated Circuits, John Wiley, 2001, pp. 218. 
[22]  K. K. Clarke and D. T. Hess, Communication Circuits: Analysis and 
Design, Addison Wesley Publishing Company, 1971, pp. 371. 
[23] Barrie Gilbert, “The MICROMIXER: A Highly Linear Variant of the 
Gilbert Mixer Using a Bisymmetric Class-AB Input Stage,” IEEE Journal of Solid 
State Circuits, Volume 32, No. 9, September 1997, pp. 1412-1423. 
 
[24] Barrie Gilbert, “The Multi-tanh Principle: A Tutorial Overview,” IEEE 
Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 33, January 1998, pp. 2-17.    
[25] ST Lim and John R. Long, “A Low Voltage Broadband Feedforward-
Linearized BJT Mixer,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 41, No. 9, 
September 2006, pp. 2177-2187. 
[26] L. Sheng, J. C. Jensen and L. E. Larson , “A Wide Bandwidth Si/SiGe HBT 
Direct Conversion Sub-Harmonic Mixer/Downconverter,” IEEE Journal of Solid 
State Circuits, Volume 35, No. 9 September 2000, pp. 1329-1337. 
[27] J. Choma, Jr., “A Three Level Broad Banded Monolithic Analog 
Multiplier,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 16, No. 4, August 
1981, pp. 392-399. 
[28] W. J. Grandfield, “Stacked Double Balanced Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 
5,448,772, issued September 5, 1995. 
[29]  R. M. Kodkani and L. E. Larson, “An Integrated 50 GHz SiGe Sub-
Harmonic Mixer/Downconverter with a Quadrature Ring VCO,” 2007 Topical 
Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems, January 2007, 
pp. 223 -226.   
[30] M. Goldfarb, E. Balboni, and J. Cavey, “Even Harmonic Double -Balanced 
Active Mixer for Use in Direct Conversion Receivers,” IEEE Journal of Solid 
State Circuits, Volume 38, No. 9, October 2003, pp. 1762-1766. 
[31] K. Nimmagadda and G. M. Rebeiz, “A 1.9 GHz Double-Balanced 
Subharmonic Mixer for Direct Conversion Receivers,” 2001 IEEE Radio 
Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium, Phoenix, 2001, pp. 253-256. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
BJT Mixer Theory 
511 
APPENDIX 7A 
2SC5006 GUMMEL – POON PARAMETERS 
(Device made by NEC) 
                    
 
 
      
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
IS
6.16E-16
IRB
7.56E-04
Ne
2.19
BF
114
RC
5
VTF
0.668
NF
0.98
CJE
2.80E-12
ITF
0.7
VAF
50
VJE
0.954
PTF
40
IKF
1.50E-03
MJE
4.08E-01
TR
0
ISE
3.82E-13
CJC
1.00E-12
EG
1.11
BR
14.4
VJC
6.67E-01
XTB
0
NR
0.991
MJC
0.408
XTI
3
VAR
2.4
XCJC
0.8
KF
0
IKR
0.32
CJS
0
AF
1
ISC
0
VJS
0.75
fT
4.50E+09
NC
1
MJS
0
nf 1GHz
1.4 dB
RE
0.4
FC
0.5
nf 2GHz
2.2 dB
RB
4.37
TF
2.00E-11 Gain 1 GHz 12.5 dB
RBM
2.33
XTF
6
Gain 2 GHz
6.5 dB
BIAS: VCE = 2.5 to 5.5 V;  IC = 1 to 8 mA
PT = 150 mW
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

512 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
APPENDIX 7B 
   AT305 SPICE PARAMETERS 
(Device originally made by Hewlett Packard, now by AVAGO) 
 
 
 
 
    
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
IS
7.80E-17
IRB
Ne
2.5
BF
100
RC
61.57
VTF
6
NF
1.03
CJE
1.10E-13
ITF
1.40E-02
VAF
20
VJE
1.01
PTF
25
IKF
6.30E-03
MJE
6.00E-01
TR
ISE
2.40E-13
CJC
5.10E-14
EG
BR
14.4
VJC
7.60E-01
XTB
1.818
NR
0.991
MJC
0.52
XTI
VAR
XCJC
19
KF
IKR
CJS
7.00E-14
AF
ISC
VJS
0.75
fT
1.00E+10
NC
MJS
0.75
nf 1GHz
1.1 dB
RE
2.44
FC
0.5
RB
38.49
TF
1.20E-11 Gain 1 GHz
14 dB
RBM
XTF
4
AT305
 

513 
Chapter 8 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
In the 1960s Silicon bipolar transistors started replacing vacuum tubes in various 
applications, in particular AM, FM and TV broadcast receivers. By the end of the 
decade television receivers had transitioned from tube to solid state technology, 
with the exception of the high voltage generation that remained dependent on 
tubes. Many innovations in circuit topologies occurred, to improve selectivity, 
sensitivity, power consumption and cost.  An early innovation included combining 
a few transistors and capacitors onto a single monolithic circuit, surrounded by 
discrete components to complete the amplifier, oscillator and mixer functions.  
One of the critical challenges was to provide on chip inductors or alternate circuit 
techniques to replace or emulate such components in silicon IC technology. In the 
early 1990s bipolar technology started moving into areas that had been dominated 
by III-V compound FETs for many years.  Most notably was the advancement in 
Hetero-junction devices, in particular the Aluminum, InGaP HBT and SiGe HBT. 
These extended the performance advantages of bipolar technology into the 
microwave and millimeter-wave frequencies previously dominated by FETs.  In 
the case of SiGe devices the transition allowed easy integration with MOS 
technology, allowing the inclusion of digital and analog functions, and the 
subsequent evolution of subsystems onto a single chip. This chapter provides a 
summary of the most important work in the area of Si-BJT applied to mixers, 
selected from various patents from the early 1960s up to recently published work.    
 
 
8.1 SINGLE ENDED 
  
Most of the single ended BJT mixer applications were developed for TV and AM-
FM radio receivers. The initial applications largely consisted of replacing crystal 
diodes and tubes following classical mixer topologies. 
 
8.1.1 Regenerative Feedback 
 
In 1963 Barditch [1] et al. published a patent for a monolithic mixer circuit with 
regenerative IF feedback that obviated the need for the inductor.  The schematic is 

514 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
depicted in Figure 8.1, comprising a grounded emitter transistor driving an emitter 
follower with regenerative feedback at the IF frequency.  The large signal local 
oscillator and small signal inputs are both applied to the base of the emitter 
follower, generating mixing products at the emitter node 27.  The RC filter 29 
shifts the phase of the IF by 180 degrees and is fed back to the base of the inverter 
stage.  Thus a highly selective regenerative feedback is obtained without the use 
of a tuning inductor.  A few circuit variations are given in the patent, including 
one with the phase shift network placed between the two transistors, and another 
with the LO fed at the emitter of the first transistor.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.1  
Monolithic semiconductor mixer with positive feedback. 
 
 
8.1.2 Autodyne Approach 
 
In the early days of portable transistorized AM radios, a single transistor was used 
in an “autodyne” or SOM (self oscillating mixer) configuration to generate the LO 
and provide the mixing function. A problem encountered with the autodyne circuit 
was detuning and reduced selectivity of the IF tuned circuit, caused by varying 
reactance in the mixer transistor, which in turn was caused by varying RF signal 
strength. The mixer of Figure 8.2 was proposed to minimize this problem by using 
a low impedance transformer, T56, to couple the IF signal from the mixer to the IF 
tuned circuit [2].  The Autodyne function is performed by transistor Q44, with tank 
circuit composed of capacitors C52, C54, slug tuned transformer with primary and 
secondary inductances L50, L51, and inductor L56. The RF signal is amplified by 
transistor Q12 and applied to the base of Q44 mixing with the LO signal. In order to 
minimize the detuning problem caused by variations in the collector impedance 
with signal strength, the collector impedance of Q44 is minimized by making the 
L56 reactance low and loosely coupled to the tuned IF transformer. The LO 
frequency tuning is performed by C52. 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
515 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.2  
Mixer circuit for autodyne receiver with improved IF coupling. 
 
 
8.1.3 Cascode Topology 
 
The cascode topology was a common feature of many early television mixers 
using bipolar transistors due to its higher frequency response and higher gain. One 
such mixer is shown in Figure 8.3, which was introduced in 1972 for use in a 
television receiver [3]. The LO and RF are coupled by capacitors 20 and 22 into 
the base of the common emitter transistor, Q24 where mixing is performed. The 
generated IF current is then amplified by Q26.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.3     Cascode mixer circuit with base LO injection. 
 
A low impedance for RF and LO signals at the Q26 collector is provided 
by C48, which is also part of IF  type impedance transformer, L44, C50. Since the 
cascode configuration has high output impedance, the output transformer has high 
Q, improving rejection of unwanted signals.   An IC version of the cascode mixer 
is in Figure 8.4 also designed for a television receiver in 1976 [4]. The 
contribution here is the use of an emitter follower at the mixer-IF amplifier, 
 

516 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
buffering the mixer from IF load reactance, eliminating the need for high Q, high 
value inductors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.4  
Monolithic cascode mixer with emitter follower circuit at the output for buffering load 
effects. 
 
 
8.1.4 Mixer Linearization 
 
A simplified block diagram of a TV receiver is given in Figure 8.5, comprising a 
mixer capable of converting high level signals. The objective of the mixer 
disclosed in 1989 [5],  was to minimize cross modulation between TV channel 
carriers that otherwise degraded reception. In the mixer circuit of Figure 8.6, the 
LO and RF signals are applied to the base. The signal voltage is imposed across 
the base-emitter junction and the Schottky diode. The LO modulates the transistor 
trans-conductance and diode conductance simultaneously, both generating mixing 
products. Therefore the diode acts as an extended mixer improving power 
performance and consequently reducing intermodulation levels in the desired IF 
output. At the collector the L224, C238 circuit is tuned to the IF frequency rejecting 
high level LO and RF signals. The Rstab resistor improves circuit stability. 
Improved IM rejection is obtained by applying lower voltage to each non linear 
element while maintaining the same signal current, a feature used in cascaded 
diode mixers that is known to improve linearity. The authors reported a reduction 
of 13 dB in IM levels. The contribution to extending the operating level by the 
diode is controlled by the amount of coupling between the diode and the 
transistor, and the DC bias level applied to the diode. The frequency coverage of 
the mixer is sufficient for TV applications that operate over a wide frequency 
range in the VHF and UHF bands. 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
517 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.5  
Simplified TV receiver block diagram. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.6   
Diode added to emitter circuit reduces intermodulation. 
 
 
8.2 PARALLEL COMBINED MIXERS 
 
Early in their development, single ended BJT mixers were combined using RF 
transformers, which were a mature technology having been developed for tube 
circuits.  This approach was applied in many designs and configurations and still 
finds application today in many circuits. Transformers were later replaced by a 
topology successfully applied in solid state audio power amplifiers, namely, 
complimentary pair npn and pnp transistors.  
 
 
8.2.1 Transformer Coupled 
 
Some of the early work done with balanced BJT mixers is described in a patent 
disclosed in 1959, [6], for mixer topologies with npn and pnp transistors. In the 
topology of Figure 8.7(a), the devices are connected in common base; and in 
RF 
Amplifier 
Source  
RF signals 
Local 
Oscillator 
Extended 
Square 
Law Mixer 
IF  
Filters 
Sound and Vision 
Reproducing unit 
Signal 
Processing 
Unit 
R222 
C236 
C238
L224
R218 
R234 
R232 
Rstab 
Input 
+Vd 
+VCC 
Output 

518 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
8.7(b), they are connected in common emitter. The operating principle of both is 
the same, but have different input and output impedance levels. Note that device 
bias is not included in the figure.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
                                                       (b) 
Figure 8.7  
Balanced configurations for bipolar mixers. 
 
Assuming up-converter operation, the LO may be injected at terminal 17 
and coupled to the emitters in Figure 8.7(a), causing the collector current to be 
modulated.  The devices are driven by the LO in opposing phase through the 
transformer, but due to the opposite device polarities, pnp and npn, both devices 
conduct at the same time. The collector voltage waveforms have the same phase 
but different DC offset levels; the npn-transistor is biased positively and the pnp-
transistor is biased negatively. After proper DC decoupling, the waveforms are 
applied to the transformers having output ports 30 and 35.   The low frequency RF 
signal is applied to terminal 24, and coupled in phase to both emitters. The RF 
signal is therefore combined with the LO and the two mix together by the 
transistor non-linearity. The up-converted sidebands appear at each collector with 
opposite phase, as the phase of the L-R sideband is the difference between LO and 
RF phase angles, while the phase of the L+R sideband is their sum.  The voltages 
from both collectors combine in the output transformers.  The LO fundamental 
and harmonics, and mixing products involving even RF harmonics appear at 
terminal 30, and mixing products with odd RF harmonics, including the 
upconverted IF sidebands, appear at terminal 35.   
 
A different topology using pnp and npn devices with their collectors tied 
together is depicted in Figure 8.8. The LO is applied to terminal 67, and couples in 
phase to the bases of both transistors through transformer T45. LO harmonics are 
generated by the transistors, with even ones cancelling at the collector connection 
due to the reverse polarities of the transistors. The low frequency RF signal is 
applied at terminal 39.  It couples in counter phase to the base of each device 
through transformer T45, generating RF harmonics with the same polarity since the 
two transistor polarities are opposite, pnp and npn. The result is the IF sidebands 
at each collector are in phase and add constructively before being filtered by the 
output tuned circuit. If the RF and LO inputs are reversed, then the LO 
fundamental and harmonics, plus mixing product involving odd RF harmonics 
including the desired IF sidebands are produced.  If the RF and LO are both 
applied at terminal 67, then the RF and LO fundamental and harmonics appear 
amplified at the output, and the desired IF sidebands are cancelled. 
17 
30 
24 
35 
17 
30 
24 
35 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
519 
-V 
T45 
67 
39 
+V 
Q2 
4 
R4 
R3 
R2 
R1 
+V 
1 
2 
Tr1 
Tr2 
Q1 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.8  
Alternative topology for a balanced mixer with phasing introdued by transformer. 
 
 
A second work following similar principles, patented in 1969 [7], 
comprises a push-pull modulator using two npn devices. The input and output 
transformers shown in Figure 8.9 have center taps to apply DC bias to the circuit. 
The RF signal is applied in phase to the bases of Q1 and Q2 through the center tap 
of transformer Tr1, and cancels at the IF output node 2 by the common mode 
rejection of transformer Tr2. The LO is applied to terminal 1, and the resulting IF 
currents appear at the collectors of Q1 and Q2 in counter phase. The IF adds 
constructively in the output transformer and is available at terminal 2, along with 
mixing products with odd LO harmonics; those with even LO harmonics cancel.  
The main contribution of this patent was the use of feedback resistors R1 and R2 
which play a regulating effect with the application of large signal RF and class AB 
operation.  
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.9  
Active push-pull modulator. 
 
The increase in the RF signal amplitude generates a DC current due to 
rectification, which flows in the resistors R1 and R2, decreasing the base-to-emitter 
voltage since the external DC voltage is constant. The device gain is thus 
automatically reduced, maintaining the output level. 

520 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
8.2.2 Differential Pair with Transformer 
 
A differential SBM using transformers was proposed in 1972 [8], using four npn 
transistors, as shown in Figure 8.10, with LO square wave shaping. In this 
approach the RF signal, E1, is applied to the primary winding of transformer Tr1. 
The signal on the secondary winding is directly connected to the bases of T1, T2. 
The LO is applied at terminal T and coupled to the bases of T3, T4 forming 
differential pairs with T1, T2, respectively, through resistors R1 and R2. The bias 
circuits are designed for quiescent operation with each device sharing equal 
current with its pair when no LO is applied. When the polarity of the applied LO 
voltage is positive, T3 and T4 are highly conductive and pass the majority of total 
emitter current, thus switching off devices T1, T2. As soon as the LO voltage 
becomes negative, the total emitter current becomes dominated by T1, T2. 
Therefore, a low alternating LO voltage is sufficient to rapidly switch T1, T2 in a 
square wave manner.  
 
 
  
Figure 8.10 
 Differential pair with transformer for mixer and LO waveform generation. 
 
The IF signals from the transistor pairs have opposite phase, and are 
combined differentially by transformer Tr2, to become available at terminal A1. 
Since the devices are switched in-phase, the LO voltage is cancelled at both E1 
and A1 ports. If the output transformer has a broadband frequency response, a 
push-pull amplifier is formed by T1, T2 for the RF signal. The mixer provides an 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
521 
IO 
IF 
IC2 
IC1 
/2 
Q2 
Q1 
+V 
L2 
L1 
R7 
R6 
R5 
R4 
R3 
R2 
R1 
C7 
C6 
C5 
C4 
C3 
C2 
C1 
/4 
/4 
/4 
RF 
LO 
/4 
additional A3 port that can be used to provide square wave LO signal to other 
mixers. 
 
 
8.2.3 Active Modulator with Ratrace  
 
As operating frequencies increase above UHF into the microwave range, the 
performance of RF transformers degrade in comparison to distributed hybrids due 
to their semi lumped composition.  The rat-race hybrid fabricated using microstrip 
line was applied to a singly balanced bipolar mixer patented in 1978 [9]. The 
circuit in Figure 8.11 is a modified version of that patent, originally designed for 
an FM radio operating near 800 MHz, with IF output at 45 MHz, and 
instantaneous bandwidth of 20 MHz. The LO signal is applied at the differential 
port, and the RF at the common mode port. The converted IF signals at the 
collectors are filtered by L1, C3 and L2, C4 to remove high frequency components 
and to apply low impedance at the collector.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.11  
Schematic of active mixer employing a ratrace hybrid for RF and LO. 
 
To analyze the frequency components at the output, the collector current 
is expressed by (8.1) where the transconductance coefficients are from the Taylor 
expansion at the bias point, where n is the number of coefficients under 
consideration.  
 
n
be
mn
be
m
be
m
be
m
BE
m
c
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
I






...
3
3
2
2
1
0
          (8.1) 
 
The voltages applied to the transistor bases are given by the sum of RF 
and LO voltages, where for this ωO is the LO frequency per the reference:   
 

522 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
t
V
t
v
R
R
R

cos
)
(

 
 
 
 
 
         (8.2) 
t
V
t
v
O
O
O

cos
)
(

 
 
          
 
 
         (8.3) 
 

)
(
)
(
1
t
v
t
v
V
O
R
b


       
 
 
 
         (8.4) 

)
(
)
(
2
t
v
t
v
V
O
R
b


  
     
 
 
         (8.5)  
 
 
The collector current is obtained by substituting the base voltages into 
(8.1). The first term in the equation corresponds to the DC as determined by 
application of bias to the circuit. After LO injection, all even order gm coefficients 
contribute to the DC term. The second term corresponds to amplification of 
signals applied to the base that are filtered by the LC elements connected to the 
collector. The mixing currents of interest are given by (8.6) and (8.7). 
 
 


...
))
(
)
(
(
)
(
)
(
4
4
2
2
1





t
v
t
v
g
t
v
t
v
g
I
O
R
m
O
R
m
c
           (8.6) 
 


...
))
(
)
(
(
)
(
)
(
4
4
2
2
1





t
v
t
v
g
t
v
t
v
g
I
O
R
m
O
R
m
c
          (8.7) 
 
 
The IF current, I0, in the secondary of the output transformer will be 
proportional to the difference of the above collector currents. 
 
 







...
))
(
)
(
(
)
(
)
(
))
(
)
(
(
)
(
)
(
4
4
4
2
2
2
2
1
0











t
v
t
v
t
v
t
v
g
t
v
t
v
t
v
t
v
g
I
I
I
O
R
O
R
m
O
R
O
R
m
C
C
    (8.8)   
 


t
V
V
g
g
V
V
I
O
R
O
R
m
m
O
R
)
cos(
2
3
2
2
2
4
2
0










             (8.9) 
 
Mixing products involving even LO harmonics do not appear in the 
output current IO because they cancel in the subtraction of IC1-IC2.  This is 
beneficial, for example, in suppression of mixing products involving the second 
LO harmonic.  The patent reference is concerned with suppression of an 
intermodulation (IM) product caused by an undesired input signal, ωR’:  
 
 
 
O
R
IF
O
R








2
'
2
    
   
 
       (8.10) 
2
'
O
R
R





 
 
 
 
 
       (8.11) 
 
 
The undesired ωR’ input signal mixes with the fundamental LO to 
generate an output at half the desired IF.  The mixer also generates the second 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
523 
harmonic of this “half IF”, which interferes with the desired IF that resulted from 
the desired RF signal, ωR, mixing with the fundamental LO.  An objective of the 
patent was to suppress this half IF signal.  For example, if the undesired input 
signal is at 857.5 MHz it will mix with the LO at 835 MHz and convert down to 
22.5 MHz. The second harmonic of this is at the desired IF at 45 MHz.  The 
desired RF frequency is at 880 MHz.  Since mixing products involving even LO 
harmonics are suppressed by this mixer, the circuit has immunity to this 
interference. The authors claim the rejection of the half IF spurious to be on the 
order of 70 dB.  
 
 
8.2.4 Complimentary Devices 
 
The block diagram of Figure 8.12 describes an invention that was proposed for 
TV receiver applications.  The signals from the antenna are diplexed into two 
outputs, one at UHF (300 to 900 MHz) and the other at VHF (50 to 300 MHz). In 
VHF operation the oscillator 87 is applied to mixer 88, down-converting the VHF 
band to a fixed IF. In UHF operation, oscillator 87 is switched off, and oscillator 
85 is switched on. The IF signal is applied to the tuner amp and to the mixer/amp 
block, both operating as high gain IF amplifiers. Therefore, block 88 has to 
perform both as a mixer and as an IF amplifier, without distorting the AM 
information contained in the RF carrier. Those requirements drove the 
development of this invention disclosed in 1978, [10], which makes use of 
complimentary devices, minimizing the number of transformers required for the 
mixer operation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.12  
Front end block diagram of a TV receiver. 
 
 
The schematic for this circuit is in Figure 8.13. The circuit utilizes two 
bipolar devices, one pnp and one npn as mixing elements, with similar DC and RF 
characteristics. The RF and LO signals are both applied at the base of each device, 
and since they are complimentary, the LO signal at the collectors are in counter 
phase and therefore rejected. The IF current at the collector of device Q16 flows 

524 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
through the primary transformer T60 and into the collector of device Q20. The 
series combination of capacitors C48 and C50, are in parallel with the primary 
winding of the output transformer that is tuned to the IF frequencies, and which 
presents a low impedance to ground for LO, RF and harmonics. The interesting 
aspect of this invention is its ability to operate in two modes: in near class AB 
mode where each device has its transconductance modulated by the large LO 
drive; and, in deep class B where each device acts as a sampler.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.13  
Complimentary NPN, PNP, pair mixer. 
 
The operation in transconductance mode is similar to the modulated 
conductance of a Schottky diode. The operation as a sampler requires further 
explanation.  Consider the plots of Figure 8.14 that contains two DC levels, 69 
and 73, respectively, corresponding to the npn and pnp conduction levels. It also 
contains the LO sinusoidal waveform, 68, and another sinusoid, 70, representing 
the RF modulation signal. The DC level 73 in reality is higher than 69, but to 
simplify the explanation this arrangement is more clear. Level 69 represents the 
threshold of conduction for the npn device, which functions as a switch that is 
turned on by the tips of LO waveform above level 69. Therefore, samples of 
waveform 70 are applied to the primary of the transformer at terminal 42. The 
current pulses are filtered by the tuned circuit to provide IF waveform 72. Level 
73 is the conduction threshold for the pnp device. The negative portion of 
waveform 68 below level 73, makes the pnp device to conduct at alternate half 
cycles of the LO signal to produce pulses 74, which are filtered to generate 
waveform 75. The balanced IF signal generated is converted to single ended by 
the IF transformer. This circuit presents several advantages compared with single 
ended BJT mixers, one of which is the minimization of driving source distortion. 
During dynamic drive by the LO signal the impedance is modulated, affecting the 
driving waveform. In this arrangement, when the LO level is low, one device is 
turned off and the other conducts.  
 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
525 
T 3 
T 2 
Impedance 
Z of 20 
Z of 16 
time 
T 1 
 
 
Figure 8.14  
Waveforms for the complimentary pair circuit detailing the sampling process.  
 
As the signal increases, the off device starts to conduct, while the other 
decreases its conductivity. When the LO reaches the zero crossing, both devices 
are ideally showing the same conductivity. The LO progresses until maximum 
voltage is applied, reversing the conductance compared to the initial state. The 
resulting impedance, depicted in Figure 8.15, is essentially constant for the LO 
and RF drive, minimizing distortion to these sources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.15 
 LO and RF impedance as a function of time. 
 
Another advantage of this circuit is the minimization of nonlinearities at 
the base-emitter junction of the transistors. Those signals are fed back by the 
collector to base capacitance, C78 and C80, and are in counter phase to the 
incoming signal, reducing cross modulations. The requirement to operate both as a 
mixer or amplifier is realized by simply switching off half of the circuit and using 

526 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the remaining circuit as an IF amplifier. Another embodiment of the invention is 
depicted in Figure 8.16, where the RF is applied to the base of each device and the 
LO to the emitter. This alternative arrangement offers a reduction of LO leakage 
at the RF input port.   
           
 
Figure 8.16  
Alternative embodiment of the invention. 
 
8.2.5.1 Complimentary Pair with Transformers/Inductors 
 
A recent work which discloses the use of lumped inductors, transformers and 
complimentary devices in four different arrangements was introduced in 1999, 
[11]. In the first topology, shown in Figure 8.17, the LO is applied to the base of 
two devices with emitters tied together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.17  
Complimentary devices with output from paralleled collectors. 
 
The RF source is connected at the emitters, and the IF currents at both 
collectors are in phase. They are combined by capacitor C4, which resonates with 
the series connection of Z7 and Z8 at IF. At LO and RF frequencies Z7, and Z8 
should present a low impedance to ground and high impedance at IF. The 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
527 
impedances Z1 and Z2 should match the floating LO impedance to the series 
combination of T1 and T2. The floating generator would require a transformer or 
another type of floating circuit. The same applies to the floating DC supply. The 
RF and LO signals at the output terminal are opposed in phase.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.18  
Complimentary pair with collectors transformer coupled. 
 
The next proposal in Figure 8.18, uses transformers to couple the RF 
signal to the emitter, and the base circuit is similar to that of the previous circuit. 
The IF currents are extracted from the collector of each device by means of a 
transformer. In the example shown in Figure 8.19, the collectors are tied together 
and the LO signal is still applied to the base of each device.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.19  
Complimentary pair with emitter transformer coupled. 
 
The LO impedance is matched by impedance Z5 and impedances Z3, Z4 
simply decoupled DC power supplies DCS1, DCS2. The RF is coupled to the 
emitters via a transformer and the IF is extracted from the collector shunted by an 

528 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
inductor with impedance Z6. The circuit in Figure 8.20 uses the base approach of 
the previous figure and emitter connection from Figure 8.18.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.20  
Balanced configuration with collectors tied together. 
 
 
8.2.2 Doubly Balanced Transformer Coupled 
 
The application of bipolar transistors as switches is the object of a couple of 
patents, one of which is in reference [12].  The collectors and emitters of four 
transistors are connected together as shown in Figure 8.21 in a “star” 
configuration.  The transistors are connected to the source and load with 
transformers. Notice that transistors Q3 and Q4 are in series with the load, while 
Q1 and Q2 are in parallel. If the LO signal is applied to terminal S2, then the 
positive cycle switches off Q1 and Q2 and switches on Q3 and Q4 , with the reverse 
occurring when the LO is negative.  The LO signal is in counter phase at the 
primary winding of transformer U3 and thus cancels at the load at the output of U3. 
The RF signal is applied at terminal S1, and is modulated by the devices switching 
on/off.  The resulting IF sideband signals are in counter phase in the top circuit 
(Q1 and Q2) relative to those in the bottom circuit (Q3 and Q4), and thus add 
constructively at transformer U3. If the bandwidth of transformer U3 is wide 
enough, RF will also add constructively and appear at the output.  
 
If the LO carrier is applied to S1, then the top devices (Q1 and Q3)  are fed 
in counter phase with respect to the bottom devices (Q2 and Q4). Therefore, a 
positive LO cycle at the primary winding of U1 switches Q1 off and switches Q3 
on. At the same time, Q2 is switched on and Q4 is switched off. The RF signal is 
applied to S2, and is cancelled by phasing at the output transformer U3.  The phase 
of the RF signal appearing at the output transformer U3 is reversed at the LO rate, 
by Q3 and Q4 alternately switching on and off, resulting in only mixing products 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
529 
appearing with odd LO and odd RF harmonics, which include the desired IF 
sidebands. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.21  
Signal switching with 4 transistors. 
 
  
 
Another mixer employing a transformer, [13], is depicted in Figure 8.22.  
It has an interesting arrangement of four transistors resembling a triply balanced 
diode mixer.  The circuit has input and output transformer T1, T2, respectively, and 
two pairs of devices, TR1, TR2 and TR3, TR4.  Mixing is achieved by commutating 
the RF phase by 180 degrees at the LO frequency, as the transistor pairs 
alternately switch on and off.  The four transistors can be thought of as common 
base amplifiers. Linearity is improved by adding a resistor, R1 to R4, in series with 
each emitter.  
 
 
Figure 8.22  
Transformer coupled differential mixer. 
 
+ 
S1 
S1  S2 
S2 
Q1 
U1 
Q3 
Q2 
Q4 
U2 
U3 
V 
- 

530 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The LO signal is applied to the bases of the four transistors via 
transformer T3, causing them to switch on/off as their gain is modulated. Linearity 
can be improved by increasing the values of resistors R1, R4; however, this limits 
the conversion gain of the mixer due to power lost in the resistors. The load 
impedance could be increased to recover the losses as long as it is not overcome 
by the non-linear collector to base capacitance. The RF signal is applied to the 
common base amplifiers TR5, TR6 via transformer T1. Resistors R9 and R10 are 
used for linearity improvement.  
A doubly balanced mixer using transformers and operating in passive 
mode was described in a 1982 patent [14], Figure 8.23, where RF signals are 
applied at terminal 3, LO at terminal 29 and IF extracted from terminal 20. The 
emitters and collectors are DC connected to ground, with device conduction 
controlled by the LO signal applied to the bases. A positive LO polarity causes the 
collector-emitter paths for transistors 7 and 10 to conduct, and transistors 8 and 11 
to be biased off; the reverse occurs for the negative LO cycle.  The result is to 
commutate the phase of the RF signal appearing at the IF output by 180 degrees at 
the LO frequency.   A self bias resistor is also proposed for higher RF level 
operation, making use of rectified LO current from the base emitter junction to 
generate a base bias voltage on resistor R30, which is held during each cycle by the 
capacitor C31. The additional self bias circuit is represented in part b of the figure. 
A small external bias can also be introduced at this point to improve performance 
at lower RF operation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Schematic of passive mixer 
                                          (b) Self bias and external bias 
 
Figure 8.23  
Passive and active mode bipolar ring mixer. 
 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
531 
8.3 INTEGRATED CIRCUIT TOPOLOGIES 
 
Singly balanced mixers migrated from solely using discrete devices to being 
realized as integrated circuits, due to the ease of integrating differential 
topologies, the high level of circuit balance obtained from nearly identical 
devices, high isolation between ports, and the ability to provide gain with 
reasonable linearity. In the early stages of IC technology, the die contained just a 
few elements, which were packaged and inserted in between external components. 
The level of integration increased over the years and today fully integrated mixers 
are available. In addition, they have become integrated with other functions on a 
single die with minimal cost increase.  The most common additional function is 
the Local Oscillator. But the discrete hybrid approach is still applicable today 
when special features or performance levels cannot be provided by a fully 
integrated design.  
 
 
8.3.1  Self Oscillating Mixer 
 
A self oscillating mixer, SOM, is depicted in Figure 8.24, [15]. It combines three 
circuit functions using differential amplifier topology. The oscillator function is 
performed by transistor Q2, where the signal is fed back from collector to base, 
introducing an additional 180 phase shift in the voltage, which is a necessary 
condition for oscillation. The oscillation frequency is determined by the tank 
circuit, L0, C0 plus the transistor parasitics. The RF amplifier function is 
performed by Q1, whose input impedance is matched to the external source by a 
tuned transformer.  And the mixing function is performed by Q3.  The RF 
frequency is selected by tuning L1, C1. Capacitors C0, C1 are varactors that are 
tuned such that the IF frequency is constant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.24 
 Integrated self oscillating mixer using a diffierential configuration. 
C3 
L3 
C1 
L1 
C0 
L0 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
+VC 
+Vb2 
+Vb1 
In 
Out 

532 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
          The inventors assumed the LO current generated by the oscillator Q2 along 
with RF current from Q1 is applied to the emitter of mixer Q3. The tuned output 
transformer selects the converted IF signal and rejects all high frequency 
components. The devices comprise a classical differential topology in DC mode 
but the mixer operates single ended.The reported performance in the FM range 
(80 to 120 MHz) shows 30dB of conversion gain, input impedance equal to 100 
ohms, and load impedance of 10 KOhm. The bias current is only 2 mA. A 
simulation exercise was carried out for this circuit using device 2SC5002.  
 
63
66
69
72
75
78
81
84
87
60
90
4.8
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.2
4.7
5.3
time nsec
Vc, V
      
146
152
158
164
170
176
182
188
194
140
200
-100
-50
0
50
100
-150
150
time, nsec
 
                                 (a)                                                              (b) 
Figure 8.25  
(a). Voltage waveform at Q3 collector; (b). Voltage waveform at load. 
 
           The circuit was tuned to oscillate at 1 GHz with input signal frequency set 
to 900 MHz. The circuit provided 5 dB gain into an output load of 50 ohms at a 
current of 12 mA. The ADS transient engine was used to determine the 
waveforms. Notice at collector of Q3 the LO frequency adds to the converted IF 
frequency.  
 
8.3.2 Linearized Modulator 
The linearization of the IF amplifier used to drive the differential modulators was 
proposed as a means to achieve low distortion in this patent, [16]. The inventors 
applied feedback to the base of Q2, as shown in Figure 8.26, by sampling the 
emitter voltage to the op amp input, maintaining a linear correlation between 
output and input voltage. The inventors claim the circuit is capable of 100% AM 
modulation. The current source provides a constant bias current for the differential 
amplifier, contributing to maintain a constant gain, as long as the carrier amplitude 
is constant.  If the modulating signal exceeds a certain level, the bias current is 
reduced, reducing the differential amplifier gain and maintaining the output level 
constant with minimum distortion. If the modulation is set to operate at this 
limiting condition, the carrier signal does not need to be constant to maintain a 
constant output.  
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
533 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.26 AM modulator linearized by feedback 
 
Figure 8.26   AM modulator linearized by feedback. 
 
An improved version of this principle was patented by Daniel Talbot, 
[17]. He built a multiplier circuit employing two operational amplifiers, one for 
each phase. The circuit schematic is represented in Figure 8.27, which shows the 
multiplier input “X” where the LO signal is applied and input “Y” where the small 
signal is applied. In this circuit, the resistors R44, R46 and capacitors C52, C54 
stabilize the op amp. The RC roll off is below the op-amp cut-off frequency. The 
base-emitter junction resistor is in the feedback loop of the op amp.  Its function is 
the same as previously, namely, to minimize distortion in the voltage to current 
conversion. The resistor R38 can be assumed to be two equal resistors in series 
with a virtual ground at the connecting point, therefore it is also part of the 
feedback loop. Since it directly affects noise figure and inversely linearity, its 
value is set to optimize that trade off. A simple linearity test carried out by the 
inventor is worthy of note. A 4.5 MHz square wave signal was applied to “X” 
input. The R38 was set to be 1.8 K ohms the DC current for devices Q30, Q34 set to 
3 mA by adjusting current sources 32, 36. A DC voltage of 1 volt was applied to 
one “Y” terminal, while a 1 KHz audio signal with 2 V peak to peak was applied 
to the other. This resulted in 1 KHz side bands around 4.5 MHz, each 6 dB down 
(AM with carrier) the carrier at 100% modulation. The 2 KHz distortion sidebands 
were lower than -60 dBc. 
 

534 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Figure 8.27  
Alternative modulator linearization with op amp. 
 
 
8.3.3 Frequency Converter 
 
A frequency converter comprising a local oscillator and a doubly balanced type of 
mixer is reported in a patent from 1977, [18]. The schematic of the IC containing 
the converter is in Figure 8.28. The LO is generated by differential pair Q2, Q3, 
with a RC feedback coupling the collector of Q3 to the base of Q2. The RC is 
connected externally, so that frequency can be customized. A resonant parallel LC 
circuit is also connected to collector of Q3, which fine tune selects the frequency 
of operation. The signal at the base of Q2 is opposed in phase to the base of Q3 due 
to the differential configuration, and it is coupled to the bases of Q8, Q9. Note the 
LO signals flowing through resistors R4, R5 are cancelled at their connection with 
R6, keeping LO current from flowing through the bias circuit. The LO in this 
configuration is applied to the differential pair Q8, Q9, whose collector currents 
modulate the quad BJT ring Q4, Q5, Q6, Q7 at the LO frequency. As is the case 
with most mixer circuits, the RF and LO ports may be reversed in this circuit 
resulting in the mixer operating similarly. In this case the RF signal is applied to 
the quad Q4, Q5, Q6, Q7. Since the RF signals are isolated from the signals at the 
trans-conductor, the mixing still takes place in the quad. The modulated trans-
conductance of the RF amplifier results in a lower value of transconductance 
compared to the conventional port connection; assuming square wave modulation 
the gain is reduced to lower than half its original value. The output signal is 
extracted in single ended form from terminal t7 and then through a tuned 
transformer circuit. The IF filter in the figure illustrates the use of a high Q crystal 
resonator to recover the desired signal and reject all others.  

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.28  
Frequency converter schematic. Dotted line indicates the IC die. 
 
 
A more recent converter was disclosed [19] in 1981 in a patent for a 
differential monolithic converter. The die contains mixer and LO functions using 
resistors and capacitors, with minimum external components. The initial proposal 
uses the topology shown in Figure 8.29(a). The dashed line denotes the silicon die 
area. The RF signal is applied at the base of device Q6 with the collector current 
linearized by emitter resistor R8. The Q6 collector signal is applied to the 
differential pair, devices Q7, Q8. The mixing device Q8, is switched on-off by the 
LO voltage, while transistor Q7, whose base is AC grounded, is switched by the 
emitter current from Q8. But the mixing currents originating from Q7 are not in the 
load path and are not used.   
Therefore, this topology is not a true differential pair, it approximates a 
cascode mixer. Device Q7 however is important to control variation with 
temperature and voltage bias for device Q6. The large voltage applied on Q8 
changes its DC level to accommodate the nonlinear collector-emitter waveform 
affecting the bias current of Q7. This DC level shift is sensed by the base current 
of Q9 and delivered to bias the base of Q6 through a resistive divider in a negative 
feedback manner, maintaining a constant DC current during the mixing process 
thus stabilizing conversion gain. Resistor R14 is preferably made of the same 
material as the device base, so that its value tracks the DC gain of Q6, making the 
design more robust for manufacturing. This circuit also provides temperature 
compensation, using the drop of the base emitter junction voltage from Q9 when 
temperature increases. Lower Q9Vbe voltage results in increased base bias voltage 
for Q6, maintaining the collector current constant. The mixing products generated 

536 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
at the collector of Q8, are delivered to an external tuned transformer that filters out 
the desired IF output. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Cascode 
 
 
(b) Differential 
Figure 8.29  
Integration of mixer and LO function in the same die. 
 
The oscillator is composed of an amplifier Q10, which is connected to an 
external tank circuit. The collector voltage is sampled back to Q10 through a 
resistive divider and buffer device Q11, which also acts as a power divider, 
delivering the LO signal to the base of mixing device, Q8. The resistor R15 
controls the bias for the devices Q8, Q10, Q11 and also controls the loop gain for the 
oscillator. Bias is adjusted so that dynamic LO voltage switches Q8 from nearly 
off to full conduction. Therefore, the collector to emitter junction impedance is 
close to an ideal switch providing linear mixing operation.  
In order to improve conversion gain, a second embodiment of the patent 
was proposed by the inventor, by connecting the collector of Q7 to the tank circuit, 
shown in Figure 8.29(b). The LO signal is applied to the base of Q8, which also 
receives RF signal from the emitter, generating IF signal at the collector. The LO 
signal is also applied to the emitter of Q7, along with the RF signal, due to the 
high collector impedance of Q6. IF signal is available at the collector of both 
devices which are delivered to the output load. The inventor also modified the 
bias, inserting an emitter follower to provide base bias for Q8. That limits the 
amount of positive peak voltage on the base, but protects the device from a direct 
connection from collector to base.   
 
 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
537 
8.3.4 Differential Active Balun and Mixer  
 
An IC singly balanced mixer using differential amplifiers and an external IF 
output transformer is shown in Figure 8.30, [20]. The main contribution reported 
in this patent is the use of an active balun to drive the mixer devices.  The RF is 
applied at node 3 to the emitters of transistors 12, 13 that are the mixing devices.  
The single ended LO is applied at node 23 to the differential transistor pair 24, 25 
that provide the balanced LO drive to the mixing pair via coupling capacitors 
9,10. The differential outputs at the collectors of transistors 12, 13 couple to the 
single ended IF output at node 21 through transformer 19.  
 
       
 
Figure 8.30  
Differential amplifier mixer with active LO balun. 
 
 
The two problems this circuit addresses are obtaining low noise and high 
linearity simultaneously.  The solution is in two parts, first the RF is applied 
directly to the emitters of the mixing pair without an RF amplifier that would 
degrade linearity.  Secondly, noise at the IF frequency range generated by the 
active LO balun is suppressed by the high pass RC filter comprising the collector 
bias resistors 27, 28, base bias resistors 15, 16, and coupling capacitors 9, 10.  
Also, the values of resistors 15, 16 are minimized to minimize their noise 
contributions. 
 
 
8.3.5 Darlington Dielectric Resonator TVRO Converter 
 
An interesting mixer, disclosed in 1984, [21], is used in a TVRO block converter 
and shown in Figure 8.31.  The converter translates the 3.7 to 4.2 GHz band to a 
first IF located around 1 GHZ, which is then converted to a second IF.  Since this 

538 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
10 
12 
6 
8 
3.6 
3.8 
4.0 
4.2 
Frequency - GHz 
Q1 
Q2 
Out 
In 
/
DR 
T1 
T2 
MMIC 
is a consumer application, low cost and high performance are important, and the 
design approach supports these goals. The LO is frequency stabilized by means of 
a dielectric resonator coupled in the feedback loop of a Darlington MMIC 
amplifier gain block. The schematic is given in Figure 8.31(a), depicting the 
Darlington MMIC, the dielectric resonator represented by a tank circuit, and the 
coupling between the resonator and microstrip lines represented by transformers 
T1 and T2. The transmission line dimensions and the transformer coupling are 
calculated to meet the oscillation conditions. The RF and LO signals are applied to 
the base of Q1 and mixed.  The IF output is amplified and delivered to the output 
of Q2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Schematic  
 
(b) Measured conversion gain 
Figure 8.31  
Prototype Darlington dielectric resonator mixer. After [21]. 
 
 
A prototype circuit was built by the authors using a PC board substrate.  
Conversion gain for the mixer is shown in part b of Figure 8.31. The conversion 
gain has positive slope, ranging from 8 to 10 dB over the 3.7 to 4.2 GHz band.   
 
8.3.6  Doubly Differential Transformer Coupled  
Transformers are combined with differential amplifiers to realize a mixer having 
an improved tradeoff between noise figure and linearity, [22]. The schematic in 
Figure 8.32 represents the mixer as an up-converter, with IF input and RF output.  
A few circuit topology versions are given that minimize the effect of nonlinear 
emitter resistance in the IF input amplifiers.  The circuit comprises two 
differential pairs that are each driven by a common base IF amplifier.  

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
539 
Transformers are used to distribute the collector currents of the four differential 
pair devices, and also to feed signal back to the IF input. The LO and IF inputs to 
the mixer are differential, requiring additional transformers not shown in Figure 
8.32 to interface with single ended sources.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.32  
Differential circuit coupled with RF transformer. 
 
The IF input signals are applied in counter phase at the emitters 113, 114 
of devices 103, 106 operating in common base, as defined by (8.12).   
 
in
IF
Q
R
t
A
I
I
)
cos(
113



 (a)      
in
IF
Q
R
t
A
I
I
)
cos(
114



 (b)      (8.12) 
 
Where A = voltage amplitude of IF signal 
           IQ = quiescent bias current 
           Rin = input resistance 
 
Currents I113 and I114, respectively, are applied to differential pair 101, 
102 on the left half side and differential pair 104, 105 on the right half side.  The 
two pairs together comprise a ring doubly balanced mixer. The positive LO signal 
is applied at the bases of 101, 105, and the negative LO signal is applied at the 
bases of 102, 104.   The corresponding currents at the collector of each device in 
the ring are represented in (8.13) with the proper LO phase. The equation assumes 
the quad is switched by a unit voltage.  
 

540 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
2
cos
1
t
I
I
LO
E
C



   
 
                
       (8.13) 
 
 
Combining (8.12) and (8.13), the RF, IF, and LO currents are derived for 
each collector, and given by (8.14). 
 

t
t
Rin
A
Rin
t
A
t
IQ
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
RF
LO
)
cos(
)
cos(
4
)
cos(
2
)
cos(
1
116













        (8.14a) 
 

t
t
Rin
A
Rin
t
A
t
IQ
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
RF
LO
)
cos(
)
cos(
4
)
cos(
2
)
cos(
1
115













      (8.14b) 
 

t
t
Rin
A
Rin
t
A
t
IQ
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
RF
LO
)
cos(
)
cos(
4
)
cos(
2
)
cos(
1
117













       (8.14c) 
 

t
t
Rin
A
Rin
t
A
t
IQ
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
RF
LO
)
cos(
)
cos(
4
)
cos(
2
)
cos(
1
118













      (8.14d) 
 
The common mode collector currents, represented by (8.15) and (8.16), 
appear at the center tap of transformers 111, 112 and are extracted and terminated 
into an IF load R11 through transformers 107, 108. The secondary windings of 
transformers 111, 112 feed part of the amplified common mode signal back to the 
IF amplifier input, helping to correct the linearity of amplifier.  
 
in
RF
Q
R
t
A
I
I
I
I
)
cos(
2
116
115
119





    
                      (8.15) 
in
RF
Q
R
t
A
I
I
I
I
)
cos(
2
118
117
120





     
                      (8.16) 
 
The differential mode currents appearing at the secondary of transformer 
111 is given by (8.17), and at the secondary of transformer 112 by (8.18). 
 
]
)
cos(
)
[cos(
2
)
cos(
)
(
116
115
111
t
t
R
A
t
K
I
I
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
in
LO













    (8.17) 
]
)
cos(
)
[cos(
2
)
cos(
)
(
118
117
112
t
t
R
A
t
K
I
I
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
in
LO













    (8.18) 
 
The current in the load is given by I121 = I111 + I112, so the LO is 
suppressed and the up-converted RF currents add constructively resulting in 
(8.19). 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
541 
 

t
t
Rin
A
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
)
cos(
)
cos(
121









          
       (8.19) 
 
The specific contribution of this invention is the proposal of a set of 
linearized IF amplifiers to replace the amplifiers 103, 106 represented in Figure 
8.32. The first proposal is the application of an “augmented” common base 
amplifier shown in Figure 8.33. An inverting amplifier is connected between the 
emitter and base of device 305. The base voltage is given by (8.20), and the 
internal VBE voltage is given by (8.21). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.33  
Augmented op- amp common base amplifier. 
 
304
307
V
A
V
V


     
 
 
 
                      (8.20) 
)
1(
304
304
304
304
307
V
V
BE
A
V
V
V
A
V
V
V








            (8.21) 
 
The output impedance of the inverting amplifier is low so for practical 
purposes, the base of the circuit is still grounded.  The input impedance of the 
inverting amplifier is high and can be neglected. The effective input resistance, Rin 
is given by (8.22), with VT =kT/q. 
 
T
BE
V
V
s
V
BE
E
E
E
e
E
in
e
I
A
V
R
I
V
R
r
R
R
)
1(
304







   
      (8.22) 
 
The second term of (8.22) represents the device emitter resistance, re, 
which tends to zero at high current, turning the emitter into a virtual ground. The 
input impedance is then equal to RE. An alternative approach to decrease the effect 
of nonlinear re is shown in Figure 8.34, where the op-amp is replaced by a 
common emitter stage. The total current entering the node connecting base of 506 
and emitter of 504 is given by (8.23).  Current IE1 flows into the emitter 504, IB2 
flows into the base 506, and IB1 flows out of the base 505 and flows into the 
collector 507. 

542 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.34  
Augmented amplifier with bipolar transistor. 
 
















2
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
'




B
KT
qv
s
B
B
B
E
E
I
e
I
I
I
I
I
I
BE
              (8.23) 
 
Replacing this current into (8.22), there results: 
 
)
(
2
2
1
504
504
)
1
1
(
'
kT
qV
s
E
E
E
in
BE
e
I
V
R
I
V
R
R








        
       (8.24) 
 
The DC current gains, β1 and β2, respectively, apply to base currents 505 
and 506. Equation (8.24) shows the non-linear resistance, re, of device 505 is 
reduced by its DC gain, making the effective impedance equal to RE. An approach 
to decrease noise figure is to replace the bipolar or op amp device driving the 
base, by a transformer in the manner of Figure 8.35. In this figure, the voltage 
relations for a transformer, provides the following relation between base-emitter 
voltage and emitter to ground voltage: 
 
)
1(
804
804
804
804
807
L
V
V
LV
V
V
VBE








                     (8.25) 
 
Where, L represents the transformer turn ratio 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.35  
Augmented amplifier with transformer. 
RE 
RL 
505 
507 
503 
501 
504 
506 
IE’ 
IE1 
IB2 
IB1 
IE’ 
IE 
IB 
-LIB 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
543 
Similarly, the current relations at the emitter, are composed of three 
currents, IE‘ from the generator, IE from the device emitter and a current to the 
primary of transformer given by I = -LIB, where IB flows out of the base and into 
the secondary of the transformer. 
 
)
1(
'


L
I
I
L
I
LI
I
I
E
E
E
B
E
E






   
       
       (8.26) 
 
Replacing the emitter current by its exponential relation to current and 
calculating the equivalent dynamic emitter resistance, one obtains (8.27).  
 
kT
L
qV
s
kT
qV
s
E
e
I
e
I
I
EB
)
1(
804 


  
 
  
       (8.27) 
 
)
1(
'
)
1
(
804

L
e
I
I
kT
L
qV
s
E



    
 
 
                      (8.28) 
kT
qV
s
EB
kT
V
L
q
s
E
e
EB
e
I
L
L
V
e
I
L
V
I
V
r
)
1
)(
1(
)
1(
'
'
804
)
1
(
804
804









        (8.29) 
 
The equation demonstrates the transformer reduces the effective non-
linear resistance, inversely proportional to the number of turns.  Any of the 
linearized amplifiers proposed can be used to replace the common base IF 
amplifier of Figure 8.32 with improvements in linearity of the mixer.  
 
 
8.4 DOUBLY BALANCED 
 
In 1966 a patent for a phase modulator was proposed by Jones, [23], as a means to 
avoid the use of RF transformers. The circuit topology became known as the 
Gilbert cell based the subsequent work Gilbert did on linear analog multipliers. 
Most mixer designs using this circuit are not linear multipliers between two input 
signals, because one of the two inputs, VB of Figure 8.36, is switched on-off, 
while maintaining linearity to the other input voltage, VA, which is sufficient in 
mixer applications.  An extended application of Jones’ topology as a doubly 
balanced demodulator was reported by Sinusas in patent [24], using dual 
differential amplifier circuits.   
 
 

544 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
+V 
-V 
28 
40 
I = constant 
IB1 
30 
38 
IM 
VA 
50 
48 
VB 
VE 
IN 
IB2 
IR 
IS 
IT 
IU 
IV 
IW 
86 
96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.36  
Dual differential amplifier modulator. 
 
 
The time and frequency domain waveforms are displayed in Figure 8.37, 
where the voltage VB is supplied by a square wave generator to switching devices 
28, 38 with positive polarity, and to devices 30, 40 with negative polarity. The RF 
modulating signal, VA, in this example is triangular, and applied in counter phase 
to the bases of devices 48, 50. The signals VA and VB are interchangeable and 
their waveforms can be arbitrary. The modulating signal is linearly amplified by 
the devices 48, 50, and the instantaneous current at the collector of device 48 is 
equal to the collector current 50 shifted by 180. With no signals applied to the 
circuit, DC current flows from the positive voltage terminal and splits equally 
between the two differential amplifiers, and then is joined by the emitter resistor 
before sinking into the negative source. A well known property of the differential 
amplifier is the application of the voltage from Figure 8.37(a) to VB of Figure 
8.36, which causes devices 28, 38 to conduct and take over the current from 
devices 30, 40 effectively shutting devices 30, 40 off, and vice versa as the square 
wave changes polarity.  VB is considered as the LO. When devices 28,38 conduct, 
the current IM in collector 48 will correspond to the current IR in transistor 28, and 
the current IN in transistor 50 to the current IT in transistor 38. In the next half LO 
cycle, the inverse process takes place and the currents are supplied by devices 30 
and 40.  The triangular modulating signal of Figure 8.37(b) applied to node VA in 
Figure 8.36, is initially negative going and causes device 48 to conduct less and 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
545 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e 
+V 
  0 
+I 
 0 
-I 
+I 
 0 
-I 
+V 
  0 
-V 
Current Lead IM 
+V 
  0 
-V 
Current Lead IN 
Time Domain 
device 50 to conduct more compared to quiescent conditions, represented by the 
horizontal line at zero. The currents at the collectors of 48, 50 are no longer equal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
Figure 8.37  
Waveforms in the differential circuit. 
 
 
 
The current from the linear amplifier circulates directly to loads 86,96 
during the first half LO cycle through devices 28, 38 respectively. Devices 28 and 
38, respectively, deliver voltages inversely proportional to the current in Figure 
8.37(c) and 8.37(d), developed across load resistors 86 and 96.  Taking the 
difference between the voltages across load resistors 86 and 96 results in the 
voltage shown in Figure 8.37(e), which changes between positive and negative at 
the LO frequency, as currents IM and IN are steered between devices 28,38 and 
30,40.  It is important to observe that the output voltage is a direct result of the 
switching action and there is no nonlinear effect of the devices required by the 
process. The output waveform contains only the side bands, with the LO and 
carrier frequency components suppressed.  The corresponding frequency domain 
of the waveforms are shown in the right side of Figure 8.37.  
In addition to functioning as a mixer, it also works as a phase detector.  
The voltage multiplier analysis was discussed in Chapter 7, resulting in the 
equation describing the multiplication of two input voltages, VA and VB, being 
given by the product of two hyperbolic tangents. Applying the small signal 
hyperbolic tangent approximation, the collector current, IW, of device 96 is given 
by (8.31). 
0          fLO        f3LO        f5LO 
LO 
0      fRF        
RF 
0     fLO±fRF   3fLO±fRF  5fLO±fRF   
RFxLO 
Frequency Domain 

546 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
V
(t) 
(t) 
VA 
 





T
B
T
A
E
W
V
V
V
V
I
I
2
tanh
2
tanh
1
2
 
 
 
        
       (8.30) 
5
3
15
2
3
tanh
x
x
x
x



  
 
 
         
       





















...
)
(
2
1
3
1
4
1
2
2
2
4
2
B
A
B
A
T
T
B
A
W
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
I
I
    
         
       (8.31) 
 
The operation of this circuit as a phase detector can be understood by 
considering VA, VB as two sinusoidal small signals of equal amplitude and 
frequency, and offset in phase by, (t). The differential output voltage across load 
resistors 86,96 according to (8.32) is given by: 
 
B
A
t
K
t
t
K
V
B
A
out











)]
(
cos[
)]
(
)
cos[(
  
       (8.32) 
 
The output voltage, Vout, for phase offset (t) = nπ/2 is zero for 
n=1,3,5…; and maximum at ±K volts for n = 0,2,4,…  The differential voltage in 
this detector therefore goes to maximum for in phase, and minimum for 180 
degrees out of phase. If linear voltage versus phase is desired with voltage equal 
zero when in phase, (t)=0, then a /2 phase shift is added to one of the signals, 
making (8.32) change from cosine to sine. If the signals are small, sinx  x and the 
output voltage is linearly proportional to the phase difference in radians. 
Accordingly, the plot in Figure 8.38 shows zero volts for in-phase signals. As the 
phase difference increases, the voltage change is approximately linear for a 
relatively wide range, until the deviation from linear becomes significant and the 
sine of angle has to be included. For large phase differences the circuit still detects 
the difference, but is no longer linear with the phase difference. 
 
B
A
t
K
Vout





)]
(
sin[
'
     
 
 
 
      (8.33) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.38 
 Phase detector operation. 
 
 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
547 
8.4.1 Gilbert Multiplier 
 
The next major contribution to BJT mixer technology was an analog multiplier 
patented in 1970 by Barrie Gilbert, [25].  This was already introduced in Chapter 
7. His multiplier is based on current multiplication and includes a voltage to 
current converter, supporting the implementation of RF and LO sources as voltage 
generators. A general diagram proposed in his patent is depicted in Figure 8.39. 
The input signal M is applied to a “linearized” differential amplifier, 70, and the 
input signal N to another differential amplifier, 90. The linearization of amplifier 
90 is obtained by applying the output collector currents from terminals 91, 92 to 
the emitters of devices 98, 96, whose bases are grounded and collectors connected 
together at the voltage rail.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.39  
Four quadrant linear multiplier. 
 
Devices 96, 98 are essentially diodes, generating an emitter voltage that 
is the logarithm of current. This current is applied to the base of devices 72, 74 
and 76, 78, generating collector current in each that is exponentially related to the 
base voltage. Therefore, this logarithm conversion process results in a linear 
relation between collector current of devices 72, 74 and 76, 78 and the voltage 
applied at terminal N. It is interesting to note that the multiplication is achieved by 
means of the transistor non-linear characteristic, the multiplication itself is 
achieved largely distortion free and operates a over wide frequency range.  
An example of the linearization of a differential amplifier was described 
earlier that makes use of emitter degeneration. Gilbert proposed a different type of 
amplifier for this purpose, whose cell is shown in Figure 8.40. In this circuit, the 
input devices labeled 18’ and 20’, respectively, have their collectors cross 
connected to the collectors of devices 12’ and 10’.  The output currents then 
become X(ID+IE) and (1-X)(ID+IE). The current gain, defined by the ratio of output 
current, X(ID+IE) to the input current XID is given by (8.34). Notice that if IE =0 

548 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the gain is equal to common base gain,   1. With this arrangement the gain is 
boosted by the ratio IE/ID and the linear relation between output and input current 
makes the process a linear one. To be valid these relations requires: small signal 
currents, high DC gain, i.e. qV/kT >>1, and small series resistances.  
 







D
E
I
I
Gain
1
  
 
 
 
                      (8.34)       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.40 
 Cross coupling of collectors to improve gain. 
 
With the purpose of maintaining the gain low to avoid excessive current 
ratios and a larger dependency on , the inventor proposed cascading or 
“stacking” stages of this amplifier, as displayed in Figure 8.41. Note the output 
current of one stage becomes the input current to the next. In this particular 
example one of voltage inputs was grounded, transforming the differential input 
into single ended.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.41  
Cascaded current amplifier stages connected in series. 
20' 
18' 
12' 
IE 
(1-X)ID 
XID  
(1-X)(ID + IE) 
X(ID + IE) 
10' 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
549 
The gain is determined from the value of current I1 and the ratio of each 
current I2, I3, I4 to I1. The output signal is extracted differentially from load 
resistors 34, 36.The first stage, devices 40, 42 have emitter degeneration caused 
by resistors 48, 50 improving linearity and dynamic range of the stage. If the 
available rail voltage is low, the author proposed using the paralleled version of 
this amplifier represented in the Figure 8.42. Here the input devices 10” and 12” 
are cascaded and the collectors of each device are cross-crossed paralleled to 
terminals 30 and 32. The signals add in phase at the output terminals and the gain 
control shows the same relations between the emitter currents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.42  
Cascaded current amplifier stages connected in parallel. 
 
8.4.2 Micromixer - Matched Input Impedance 
A circuit that improves impedance matching and biasing was also patented by 
Barrie Gilbert, [26], which he called a “micromixer” [27].  The schematic, shown 
in Figure 8.43, contains three sections: the mixer, block 24; the RF input section, 
block 26; and the bias section, block 28. The mixer section is conventional, with 
RF input at 38, 40; LO input at 30, 32; and IF output at 34, 36. The RF section 
contains transistor Q11 operating in common base and a current mirror Q12-Q13. 
The RF input current applied to terminal 44 is divided into emitter current in Q11 
and the current in the mirror, Q12. These currents are non-linear as previously 
demonstrated in Chapter 7, but the differential current applied to the mixer, given 
by the difference in currents, (I1 - I2 = IRF) is linear relative to input RF voltage.  
 
 

550 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
Figure 8.43  
Matched RF input impedance. 
 
The input impedance of this circuit is given by the parallel combination 
of the impedance of common base device, Q11, and the impedance of current 
mirror, Q12, paralleled with common emitter device Q13, impedance. The common 
base input impedance is approximately given by the dynamic impedance of 
emitter base junction, re. The common emitter impedance is at least one order of 
magnitude higher than the impedance of the mirror, Q12, and can be disregarded in 
a first order approximation. Therefore, the impedance of both paths are 
substantially the same and the net input impedance is given by their parallel 
combination. The small signal input impedance is therefore given by (8.35), where 
IZ is the quiescent current of I1, I2.   
 
 




50
258
.0
*
2
25
2
mA
mV
I
V
R
Z
T
in
      
 
                      (8.35)
 
 
The matched condition is obtained for a specific bias current and is very 
sensitive to input drive. The author showed previously [27] that Rin mismatch 
occurs due to a very low input impedance under large signal drive. The optimum 
impedance is obtained by adding resistive attenuation at the input, as shown in 
Figure 8.44(a), allowing a larger bias current and less impedance variation versus 
signal drive level. Simulations showed that minimum impedance variation is 
obtained for attenuator resistor values between 50 and 100 ohms. But for better 
linearity a lower value is preferred, on the order of Rp = 33.3 ohms, where input 
impedance changes from 43 to 50 ohm. An alternative means to improve input 
impedance is in Figure 8.44(b), with device Q21 added to the circuit, operating in 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
551 
Q11 
Q13 
VBIAS 
42 
40 
38 
GND 
44 
Rp 
RF 
Rp 
cascode with Q13. The added device shields the RF input device Q13 from 
variations in the supply voltage, and from spurious generated by the quad mixer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Input impedance padding      
(b) Addition of cascode stage Q21 
Figure 8.44  
Matched input impedance options. 
 
The bias circuit section of Figure 8.43, block 28, contains a current 
source applied to two diode-connected transistors, Q14, Q15. The current source IQ 
provides current to the diodes establishing a bias voltage VBIAS, and a current to 
bias Q11 and Q12. Over temperature, the voltage drop of Q11, Q12 is  tracked by 
VBIAS resulting in a constant base current to Q11, constant collector current to 
diode connected Q12, and constant collector current Q13. The emitter area of the 
bias diodes can be scaled in accordance with the current required by the devices 
being biased, establishing the desired ratio between IQ and ID. The capacitor C1 
connected across the biasing diodes guarantees a low impedance to RF. If lower 
frequency operation is desired, an off chip capacitor should be added.  
 
 
8.4.3  Feedforward Linearization in Mixers 
 
Another alternative to minimize mixer distortion is to make use of feedforward 
concepts: distortion produced by a main and second error amplifier are designed 
to be equal in magnitude and opposed in phase so that they cancel when summed. 
In this regard, the feedforward amplifier of Figure 8.45 is an example that can be 
used as the RF amplifier in a Gilbert mixer, [28]. In this configuration the 
distortion voltages on Q1, Q2 are similar to the distortion voltages on Q3, Q4. This 
signal is detected by Q5, Q6 and fed forward in opposed phase at the collectors of 
Q3, Q4. It can be shown, [29], that the differential output current of this amplifier 
is given by (8.36). The parameter VBE is the distortion differential voltage 
generated by Q1, Q2 and VBE' is the distortion generated by Q3, Q4. If transistor 
transconductance, gmE is made equal to 1/RA then distortion is suppressed. 
Q21 
Q11 
Q13 
VBIA
42 
40 
38 
GND 
44 
Rp 
RF 
Rp 

552 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.45  
CasComp transcondutor. From [28]. 
  
 
mE
BE
A
BE
A
in
out
g
V
R
V
R
V
I
'





   
 
 
       (8.36) 
 
 
The second source of distortion in the Gilbert mixer is the switching 
quad, usually considered linear in most designs. In principle, the same technique 
can be applied to minimize distortion introduced by the switching quad. However 
simulations has shown it is not practical, one reason is the voltages VBE and 
VBE' in the (8.36) are not at the same frequency, and besides there is distortion 
introduced by the LO waveform. The proposal from the reference to circumvent 
this problem is to parallel two mixers as depicted in Figure 8.46. The fundamental 
components add in phase and the intermodulation are in counter phase and can be 
suppressed. The resistors RA, RB, are used to adjust the magnitude of the 
intermodulation products. The authors found an improvement of more than 7 dB 
in IIP3 compared with a single ended mixer, and it improves further at lower 
frequencies. The concept was confirmed by fabrication of the circuit on a 0.2 um 
SiGe HBT technology.  
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
553 
             
 
 
Figure 8.46  
Two mixers in parallel improve IIP3 by cancellation. From [28]. 
 
 
 
8.4.4  Linear Low Noise 
 
  
Differential mixers in general have good conversion gain, wide frequency 
coverage, good LO suppression, and high linearity. However, those characteristics 
are obtained at the cost of high noise figure, degraded by the emitter degeneration 
resistor, RE, used in the RF amplifier. In this proposal, the RF amplifier is tuned 
for a specific frequency range, trading off bandwidth for noise, [30]. The circuit of 
this mixer is depicted in Figure 8.47.  Two improvements are made to reduce 
noise figure compared to a conventional design: the degeneration resistor, RE, is 
replaced by an inductance LE; and a tuning inductance L1 is added in series with 
the base of transistor Q5 in the RF differential amplifier. Note that the RF amplifier 
is also a single ended to differential converter.  Assuming the presence of resistor, 
RE, the RF input impedance is given in Chapter 7 and reproduced in (8.37). The 
equations are valid for frequencies below T/0, where T is the transition 
frequency and 0 is the transistor DC current gain.  
  
 
 
 
 










2
/
1
1
)
2
(
)
(




C
R
j
R
r
j
Z
T
E
E
b
in
 
      
       (8.37) 
 
Replacing RE by an equivalent series RI-LE, representing the inductance 
and its parasitic resistance, the input impedance is modified to: 
 
 
 

554 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 













]
[
2
/
1
1
)
2
(
)
(
1
2
E
T
I
E
T
I
b
in
L
L
C
R
j
L
R
r
j
Z






   (8.38) 
 
          
 
Figure 8.47 
 Low noise mixer using inductor emitter degeneration. 
 
The remaining parts of the circuit are similar to a conventional design. 
The capacitors C4, C5, C6 and C7 were added to minimize the effect of parasitic 
inductances from the transistor package. The inventors reported in their patent a 
noise figure of 10 dB for the mixer, instead of the usual 15 to 16 dB.  
 
 
8.4.5 The Tree Mixer 
 
A variation of the differential BJT mixer, called a tree mixer by the inventors [31], 
is depicted in Figure 8.48. It consists of a first differential pair Q11, Q12 having a 
current source I at the emitters, and two differential inputs I/P1+ and I/P1– at the 
bases. The second differential amplifier actually contains two differential pairs 
with tied emitters Q15, Q16 and Q17, Q18; and cross coupled collectors, Q15, Q18 and 
Q16, Q17. The inputs to the bases of this differential amplifier are denoted I/P2+ and 
I/P2– and connect, respectively, to Q15, Q17 and Q16, Q18.  The differential output is 
taken from load resistors R19, R20.  
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
555 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.48  
The highly linear tree mixer. 
 
 
The principle of operation consists in adding an additional current source 
coupled to the collectors of the first differential amplifier through isolating 
impedances Z23 and Z24. Current source I1 adds with the small signal collector 
currents in Q11 and Q12, equaling the source I so that the first differential amplifier 
operates at a high current minimizing distortion compared with a conventional 
approach. The second differential amplifier operates with the current difference (I1 
- I), and therefore at a much lower current.  So it generates lower noise, and 
reduces the headroom constraints in relation to the power supply voltage due to 
the voltage drop across R19, R20.  The effective trans-conductance for the first 
differential amplifier is given by 1/(2RE) where RE = R13 = R14. The LO applied to 
the second differential amplifier acts to multiply the currents from Q11, Q12 
alternately by +1 and –1. The conversion gain, assuming output voltage is 
developed at the resistors R19 = R20 = RC, is equal to (8.39). By way of illustration 
the current, I, can be made equal to 30 mA and I1 = 24 mA, so the bias current for 
the second differential amplifier is 6 mA. 
 
E
C
CV
R
R
G

2

   
 
 
 
         
                      (8.39) 
 
 
 Another alternative proposed in the invention that is interesting for the 
case of low VCC is represented in Figure 8.49. The differential RF amplifiers use 
pnp devices and an emitter resistance to improve linearity. The total current 
passing through devices 11, 12 is greater than the total current in devices 15 to 18. 
The current in devices 11,12 is given by I/2 and the current in devices 15 to 18 can 
be selected to be less than (2I2-I). 

556 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
           
 
 
Figure 8.49  
The low voltage version of the tree mixer. 
 
8.4.6 Chroma Modulator 
A differential multiplier was invented for the modulation of video chroma signals 
from fs = 100 Hz to 1100 KHz, to a fixed carrier at fc = 4.58 MHz, [32]. The 
circuit of a conventional multiplier is shown in Figure 8.50(a). This is not a linear 
multiplier, since the collector current of Q1,..,Q4 are not linearly related to the ec 
voltage. For mixer applications this linearity is not required, because the purpose 
is frequency translation of information contained in the signal es to the output 
sideband signals e1, e2. One problem the inventors had with the conventional 
approach is the leakage of carrier signal at the output that cannot be eliminated by 
filtering.  
The inventors identified the problem as unbalance caused by nonsimilar 
source impedances for the devices Q1, Q4, equal to the parallel combination of R11 
and the carrier source impedance, while the Q2, Q3 impedance is given solely by 
R12. This impedance imbalance results in different voltages at the base-collector 
and different Miller effects. In the proposal, shown in Figure 8.50(b), devices Q11 
and Q12 are added with bias device Q13.The base of Q11, Q12 is now connected to a 
low impedance given by the emitter of Q13, forcing the load impedance for 
devices Q1,..,Q4 to be low as well. So, the unbalancing effect becomes less 
important and is minimized in the output signal taken from the collector of device 
Q12. Notice the single ended output is obtained by connecting only one side of the 
differential circuit to the external load, so the circuit is not fully doubly balanced. 
 
 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
557 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
      (a) Conventional   
 
 
  (b) Improved 
Figure 8.50 
 Analog multiplier circuits. 
 
 
 
8.4.7 Front End Mixer  
 
A balanced modulator (or down-converter mixer) built with differential amplifiers 
was disclosed in 1982, [33], and used in a front end receiver depicted in Figure 
8.51. The important parameters for a mixer in this configuration are the 
conversion conductance, noise figure, and maximum input signal level. Those 
parameters are controlled by a DC feedback loop from the detector output to the 
balanced modulator. The DC level is proportional to the input signal, and is used 
to control bias to the modulator and the amount of LO injection, to maintain the 
modulator gain within the optimum range of operation. The schematic for the 
balanced modulator is depicted in Figure 8.51. The modulator consists of ring Q17, 
Q18, Q19 and Q20 plus RF amplifier devices Q15, Q16. The current source for this 
stack of amplifiers is obtained from transistors Q13, Q14. The bias of this current 
source is controlled by the by the external DC level generated by the detector and 
applied to current mirror Q21. The LO signal injection is applied to an input 
variable attenuator controlled by the channel resistance of the FET, Q9. The single 
ended LO voltage is transformed into differential by the differential amplifier Q10, 
Q11 before being applied to the base of the mixing transistors. 
 
 
 

558 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.51 
 Mixer for front end receiver. 
 
The conversion trans-conductance is a function of R14 and bias, GC = 
k(1/R14, IQ) and the maximum acceptable input signal is given by Vin,max = R14IQ. 
The optimal receiver sensitivity is obtained by setting a high conversion gain and 
low noise figure when the DC detected control voltage is low. The RF amplifier 
noise figure is lower when operating at a lower bias current and mixer gain is 
maximum with higher LO drive. With an increase of signal level, the detected 
voltage increases and so does the bias current for the RF amplifier. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.52  
Front-end receiver with automatic level control for constant conversion gain. 
 
That degrades noise figure but signal level is higher so S/N ratio is not 
affected. In the specific case of this invention, the DC control voltage is also 
applied to the gate of the FET decreasing the amount of LO power applied to the 
mixer. The authors found the circuit to perform with lower distortion in this 
condition. However, notice that most mixers show lower cross and inter-
modulation with higher LO power drive. The circuit can be corrected easily by 
inverting the gate voltage controlling the attenuator.   
 
 
LOin 
IFout 
RFin 
+VCC 
Detect 
Input 
GND 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
559 
C1 
R
R7 
R6 
R5 
R4 
R3 
R2 
R1 
Q13 
Q12 
Q11 
Q10 
Q9 
Q8 
Q7 
Q6 
Q5 
Vr2 
Q4 
Q3 
Q1 
+VCC 
IF 
RF 
RF 
Vr1 
Q2 
AG
LO 
8.4.8  Amplifier Bypass 
A patent was proposed to extend the dynamic range of a differential pair mixer 
using the amplifier bypass technique [34].  As RF input signal level increases into 
the LNA stage, at a certain threshold level the RF is bypassed around the LNA, 
reducing the level of distortion.  The LNA shown in Figure 8.53 comprises an 
input differential amplifier connected in cascode.  The circuit also includes a 
second differential amplifier that provides the RF input to the doubly balanced 
mixer quad.  Additional functions are shown as blocks, including the LO and 
AGC. Initially let’s assume transistors T12, T13, and resistors R7, R8 are not in the 
circuit. The RF amplifier consists of devices Q1 to Q4, biased by a voltage supply 
in series with a resistor. The base of Q2 is RF grounded through capacitor C1 to 
generate the single ended to differential conversion. The differential signal from 
the RF amplifier connects to the bases of differential amplifier Q5, Q6, which is 
linearized by resistors R3, R4. The Q5, Q6 collectors connect to the emitters of 
mixer quad Q8 to Q11. The collectors of Q8 and Q10 are RF grounded to deliver a 
single ended output from collectors of Q9 and Q11. The AGC block detects the 
output signal level and controls the bias of Q1, Q2 and Q5, Q6.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.53  
Frequency converter with RF amp bypass. 
Therefore, with an increase of signal level, the bias decreases reducing 
the gain of the two differential stages, thus maintaining the output level constant. 

560 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Let us now introduce the components Q12, Q13, R7 and R8. Under normal operating 
conditions, the resistors R7 and R8 are calculated such that the devices Q12 and Q13 
are cut off. With an increase of signal level, voltage Vr1 decreases by AGC action 
making the devices enter into conduction. At this point part of the input signal 
starts to be bypassed directly to the mixer, avoiding distortion in the amplifiers.  
The resistors R7, R8 are noise sources, which are almost negligible when the 
devices Q12, Q13 are cut off. At large signal levels the resistors increase the 
amplifier noise level, but the overall signal to noise ratio is not degraded since the 
signal is larger. 
 
8.4.9 Balanced/Unbalanced Gilbert Cell Mixers  
A means of providing a single ended output using an active circuit was proposed 
in patent [35]. The circuit consists of a differential pair with a current mirror load, 
as shown in Figure 8.54. The current mirror comprises two identical pnp 
transistors Tr1 and Tr2, where Tr1 is connected as a diode, and the base of both 
devices connect together. Assuming R3, R5 are not in the circuit, then IC1, IC3, IC4 
equal each other as in (8.40). The result in this arrangement is the the input current 
IC1 is impressed at the output load, with output current described by (8.41).  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.54  
Unbalanced output converter with current mirror. 
 
 
A better description of this mechanism can be found if one considers a 
V applied at the base of Tr7, resulting in IC1 = IT/2+I. Applying the same V to 
IC1 
IC4 
IC2 
Iout 
IC3 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
561 
device Tr8, the current IC2  becomes  IT/2-I.  Applying (8.41), the output current 
is given by Iout = 2I, demonstrating that the output current fully recovers the 
signal without any loss. 
 
 
1
4
3
C
C
C
I
I
I


 
 
 
          
                      (8.40) 
 
 
 
2
1
2
4
C
C
C
C
out
I
I
I
I
I




 
 
          
                      (8.41) 
 
A more exact development of the relationship between the output signal 
and the RF input voltage becomes too complex, since the mirror load is at the 
third level of the circuit. The resistors R1, R2 are added to balance any base/emitter 
voltage offset due to the mismatch between devices, and mismatched temperature 
coefficients including Vbe/T.  R1, R2 are also used to limit the gain introduced 
by the current mirror, which is an active load for the mixer. If signal level is high 
a small distortion is introduced, as shown in Figure 8.55. The resistors R3, R4 are 
used to match the output impedance to the filter impedance.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.55  
Distortion introduced at high signal level. 
 
8.4.9.1 Unbalanced RF Input 
The proposed circuit, [36], uses an active common base, common emitter circuit 
to balance an input signal. The schematic is split into two sections: the RF and the 
mixer. The modified RF section is illustrated in Figure 8.56(a), and the mixer 
section is in Figure 8.56(b). 
 
The single ended input AI is at node NC, which connects to the emitter of 
transistor Q101 by resistor R111, and to the base of transistor Q102. Transistor Q101 is 
arranged in common base, with the base connection to ground via Schottky diodes 
D241, D242, and D243 plus impedance R244. Transistor Q102 is common emitter with 

562 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
impedance R112 connecting the emitter to ground. The collectors of Q101 and Q102 
constitute the differential output RF amplifier that drives the mixer section. The 
common base transistor Q101, is a noninverting current follower. The input 
impedance to this stage is given by R111 in series with the emitter impedance of 
Q101, which is a function of base to ground impedance. The common emitter 
transistor Q102, is an inverting trans-admittance stage with input impedance higher 
than the common base stage Q101. Its transadmittance gain, or voltage to current 
conversion factor, is approximately equal to the inverse of input impedance. The 
RF amplifier input impedance is approximately given by the impedance of the 
common base device. The input current applied to AI will substantially flow to the 
emitter of Q101 and to the symmetrical output S01. The signal voltage at node NC 
is approximately equal to the product of the input current and the input impedance 
of the current follower. This signal voltage is simultaneously applied to the trans-
admittance amplifier. The symmetry between the signal currents at the collectors 
of Q101 and Q102 is obtained if the product of trans-impedance gain and the input 
impedance of the current follower approximates unity gain. This is approximately 
true if the bias of both Q101 and Q102 are similar and the impedances R111 and R112 
are also close to being equal. Some asymmetry may result from the base to ground 
impedance of Q101. This asymmetry may be compensated by decrementing the 
magnitude of the impedance R111 with respect to that of impedance R112.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       (a)                                                                                (b) 
Figure 8.56 
 (a) Modified RF section; (b) mixer section. 
 
 
The linearity of this stage is demonstrated by studying a few factors, 
starting with the sum of base voltages which is constant and equal to Vc. An input 
signal current applied at AI flows to the emitter of Q101 modulating its base-emitter 
junction voltage. This current to voltage conversion is logarithmic. The collector 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
563 
current of Q101 substantially follows the input RF current, which is a property of 
the common base topology.  The base-emitter junction of Q102 is modulated 
inversely and also non-linearly, since the sum of base voltages of both devices is 
approximately constant. The collector current of Q102 is linear for a logarithmic 
base emitter voltage. Therefore, the transfer of an input current from terminal AI 
to SO1 and SO2 is substantially linear as long as the drive level is below a certain 
level. The presence of impedances R111 and R112 improves linearity since they 
increase the amount of input voltage that can be applied to the circuit. The 
stability of output signal currents at SO1 and SO2 over wide temperature ranges is 
obtained from the bias circuitry.  
The bias control consists of two current sensing transistors, Q201 and 
Q202. The collector current of each device is scaled from Q101 and Q102, 
respectively, and impedances R211, R212 also scaled from R111 and R112. The 
collector of Q201 is biased by current source Q221 that mirrors the same current to 
device Q222 with opposite phase. It is therefore subtracted from the collector 
current of Q202. Therefore the difference between both collector currents of the 
sensing devices feeds the base of device Q240. The voltage Vc biases Q101 and Q102. 
In steady state operation the bias current of Q101 and Q102 are substantially equal. 
The bias control circuit is an integrating control loop that maintains zero error; 
which equates to a zero difference current. Any difference is updated into control 
voltage VC and base bias of Q202 through voltage divider R211, R120. If there is a 
drop in voltage over R112, then the same drop occurs on R120, resulting in an 
increase in base voltage of Q240 and consequently an increase in VC. 
The mixer section is a conventional ring mixer topology, where the RF 
signals are applied from SO1 and SO2 to terminals 3, 4, and the output signals are 
extracted from the load resistors R5 and R6. The LO signal is coupled by means of 
an external balun with positive polarity to the bases of devices T1, T4, and with 
negative polarity to T2, T3.  
 
 
8.4.10 Linearization with Transconductance Amplifier 
 
This circuit replaces the usual RF amplifier in a differential mixer with one having 
a high degree of linearity, [37].  The mixer quad comprises devices Q306, Q308, 
Q310, Q312, which are biased through resistors R302 and R304 from a positive supply 
voltage. The trans-conductor for the positive RF input comprises devices Q318, 
Q320 and Q314, plus the current sources I315 and I330 shown in Figure 8.57. The 
object of this circuit is to transform the input voltage into a linear collector 
current.  This process can be analyzed by first simplifying the transconductor 
circuit. Since the circuit is differential, it can be split in two independent and equal 
circuits. The connection between the two parts is where resistors R322 and R324 tie 
together, which is a virtual ground.  The two resistors can be separated and the 
newly open ends can be grounded, with the resistors replaced by RE as in Figure 
8.57. 

564 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.57  
Balanced mixer with linearized transconductor. 
 
Assuming there is no feedback in the circuit, and applying a RF signal 
voltage at Vin, the resulting collector current is exponentially related to Vin. The 
base voltage of Q320 swings in an inverse exponential relation to input voltage Vin. 
This distortion is cancelled in device Q314 by the exponential voltage current 
relationship, making the output current IC a linear function of Vin.  Closing the 
feedback from the Q314 emitter to the Q320 base improves the linearization, and the 
addition of RE causes the amplifier gain to become proportional to RE.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.58  
Simplified transconductor circuit. 
 
Q318 
Q320 
Q314 
RE 
+VC
Vin 
IC 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
565 
The linear relationship between collector current Ic and input voltage Vin 
is demonstrated by (8.42):  
 
E
in
E
be
be
in
E
RE
C
R
V
R
V
V
V
R
V
I





2
1
         
   
     (8.42) 
 
 
In conventional mixers RE improves linearity but also degrades noise 
figure.  However, in this approach the negative effect of RE on the input 
impedance is buffered by device Q320. Therefore, the circuit offers a better trade-
off between noise figure and linearity.  
 
 
8.4.11 Low Voltage Operation 
 
Portable equipment like cell phones, require low bias voltages, usually in the order 
of 3.0 V.  This trend to require operation with lower rail voltages is driven by 
battery technology. The inventors of this patent, [38], developed the circuit in 
Figure 8.59 with reduced rail voltage in mind. The core cell is conventional, but 
the trans-conductor has different features. The RF signal is split into two parts, 
one feeding the base of Q11 via C15 and the other feeds the emitter of Q12, via R14. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 8.59 
 Low voltage operation. 
 
 

566 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The impedance adjustment between both devices is carried out by R51. 
The bias for Q12 comes from R21 that sets the emitter current. In order to allow Q11 
to be biased at the same current, an additional voltage source is created by Q24 that 
biases Q11. Note the potential V2 is lower than V1, which means the voltage on Q11 
is lower than Q12, but the same amount of current flows in both devices if the 
resistors are properly adjusted. Since low value resistors are used to bias Q11, Q12, 
it can operate properly using low supply voltage. 
 
 
8.4.12 Cross Coupled Even Order 
 
The circuit of Figure 8.60 is referred to as an even order mixer since it rejects all 
odd order components at the output, [39]. The circuit schematic shows the LO V1 
is applied to the base of Q1 and emitter of Q2. The signal V2 is applied at the base 
of Q2 and emitter of Q1. If the amplitudes are properly balanced those signals 
cancel at the output node V0. The output voltage is collected on the resistor RC and 
is given by (8.43). 
 
 
)
(
2
1
0
C
C
C
I
I
R
V



    
  
    
         
       (8.43) 
 
T
BE
V
V
V
V
C
e
I
2
1
1



   
 
 
 
                    (8.44a) 
 
T
BE
V
V
V
V
C
e
I
2
1
2



   
 
 
 
                    (8.44b) 
 









T
C
E
V
V
V
R
I
V
2
1
0
cosh
2
   
 
 
                    (8.44c) 
 
 
By approximating the argument of the hyperbolic cosine as a small 
signal, the output voltage is shown to have only even order terms. 
 





















...
!6
!4
!2
1
2
6
6
2
1
4
4
2
1
2
2
2
1
0
T
T
T
C
E
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
R
I
V
                         (8.45) 
 
 
This equation shows if the two signals are at different frequencies, the 
square term generates frequency translation. If they are at the same frequency it 
can operate as a frequency doubler. As a matter of fact it also shows potential for 
subharmonic application which appeared in the patent described at the end of 
chapter. The application of two signals, V1 = 1200 MHz at -20 dBm and V2 = 900 
MHz at -30 dBm resulted in the following output spectrum: 
 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
567 
Term
Order 
Amplitude 
(dB)
f1-f2
2
0
2(f1-f2)
4
-31.2
2f2
2
-14.7
f1+f2
2
0
2f1
2
3.6
3f1-f2
4
-24.9
2(f1+f2)
4
-31.2
3f1+f2
4
-24.9
4f1
4
-26.9
 
 
                 
 
 
Figure 8.60  
Cross coupled even order type. 
 
 
 
Table 8.1  
Spectrum of Output Voltage V0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

568 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
8.4.13 RF Section with Feedback  
 
Typical specifications for a cell phone down-converting mixer are conversion gain 
of 10 dB, input 1-dB gain compression point of –10 dBm, and noise figure at less 
than 9 dB. The conversion gain of a typical mixer can be higher than 20 dB, which 
may be undesirable if the signal levels at the output are above the compression 
point.  A design strategy that sets the maximum input signal power equal to the 
input compression point for a high conversion gain mixer will have a small 
margin for thermal noise at the IF. The objective of this patent, [40], is to improve 
linearity without sacrificing noise figure by using reactive feedback networks. 
Essentially the proposal is to add a parallel RC feedback network between the 
collector and base of RF amplifier, associated with an inductive series feedback 
connected to the emitters of same amplifier, as in Figure 8.61. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.61  
Reactive feedback mixer. 
 
 
 
8.4.13.1 Alternative Feedback 
 
In this proposal, [41], an additional trans-conductance stage is added in parallel 
with the main stage, Figure 8.62. The assumption here is that nonlinearities at the 
collector of both Q44 and Q46 contain similar types of distortion, so that the extra 
stage is used to feedback the distortion voltage, to add with the incoming RF 
signal. Since the base of both devices are in parallel they receive the same 
feedback corrected signal. In addition, the emitters of Q44 and Q46 are tied to a 
COMMON 
Cb 
D1 
IN1 
Lb 
Rb 
Q2 
Lb 
Q1 
Cb 
Rb 
IN2
IN3
IN4 
D2 
OUT1 
OUT2 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
569 
series feedback inductance, which creates feedback without degrading noise 
figure. The load resistor R54 for the feedback transconductor controls the amount 
of feedback along with impedance R56. Since two transistors are in parallel, there 
will be some noise increase compared to a conventional single gain stage, but the 
noise degradation is still lower than for other linearization approaches.  
Additionally, the trans-conductors are designed with large devices to minimize 
active base resistance and consequently also minimize noise figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.62  
Schematic of feedback mixer. 
 
 
8.4.14 RF Transformer Coupled 
 
In an attempt to improve linearity, a transformer connection was proposed [42], to 
replace the RF amplifier used in conventional differential or Gilbert cell mixers. 
The circuit schematic is represented in Figure 8.63, where two resistors have been 
added to the RF path, and also serve as bias for the differential mixer ring. The LO 
source impedance driving the bipolar quad ring is low, so the devices can be 
considered as common base for the RF signals applied to the emitters. The emitter 
impedance of a common base device is the inverse of its transconductance, which 
is degraded by the emitter resistors RE. The voltage gain is given approximately 
by (8.46): 
 
 
E
c
E
m
c
m
CV
R
R
R
g
R
g
G



0
0
1
   
 
        
          
     (8.46) 
 
 
 
In this circuit, the input impedance of common base can be controlled by 
the amount of bias current while the impedance of the RF generator is controlled 
by the transformation ratio. 
RF 
Q2 
Q1 
R56 
Q46 
LO 
R54 
+V 
Q44 
LO 
IF 

570 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.63  
RF transformer coupled differential mixer. 
 
 
The circuit Figure 8.64 adds an RF gain stage between the transformer 
and the mixer quad, [43].  The RF gain stage functions as a voltage-current 
converter, and comprises a common base differential amplifier, in contrast to the 
usual common emitter circuit used for this function.  The benefit of the common 
base topology is it has better linearity and also better signal-to-noise ratio.  For 
optimum noise and linearity the ratio of the input impedance of the common base 
circuit to the transformed source impedance can be adjusted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.64  
RF transformer coupled with common base. 
T5 
VIF 
R
T1 
T2 
VLO 
R
T5 
T4 
T6 
VRF 
-VEE 
-VEE 
LO
 
IF 
VDD 
RFIN 
RC 
RC 
RE 
RE 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
571 
 
The source impedance is controlled by the turns ratio of the transformer, 
and the common base input impedance is controlled by the varying VEE.  
Increased linearity results from increased transformed source impedance relative 
to common base input impedance.   
 
8.4.15 High Dynamic Range 
The proposal described in patent [44], is to bias the transistors like a class AB 
amplifier, as a means of improving the dynamic range of differential mixers. The 
schematic of the RF section is in Figure 8.65(a), where the differential RF signal 
is applied between RF1 and RF2, and the amplified signals OUT1 and OUT2 are 
applied to a conventional ring mixer not shown in the figure. RF inputs RF1 and 
RF2 each drive a gain stage.  Each gain stage consists of two parallel transistors of 
different size, so that one has a higher trans-conductance than the other and an 
inversely higher emitter resistor value. One is biased class A and the other biased 
class AB. The device biased in class A operates normally under small signal 
conditions, exhibiting trans-conductance compression when the input signal 
increases above a certain level. The device biased in class AB exhibits class A 
operation at small signal conditions, but its trans-conductance increases with drive 
level. Combining both devices in parallel, the total trans-conductance at larger 
signal levels is kept essentially constant for a wider range of input signals, as 
depicted in Figure 8.65(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Schematic 
                                         (b) Combined transconductance 
Figure 8.65  
Class AB mixer using two transistors of different size to obtain constant gain over a 
wider input power range. 
 
The supply voltage circuit for the base of the RF amplifier is given by 
circuit 70, containing a configuration that is independent of transistor DC current 
V
g0=g1+g2 
g1 
g2 
g 
RE71 
RB71 
70 
62 
RB2 
RE21  RE22 
RB1 
  RE11 RE12 
N12 
RF1 
ID 
N11 
RF2 
N21 
N22 
Out1 
Out2 
61 
+VCC 

572 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
gain . Additionally, making the devices RE71 and RB71 proportional, respectively, 
to RB and RE, then the currents in 61 and 62 track the current in voltage supply 
circuit 70. Two options are proposed to achieve this. First, the transistor ratios are 
the same; i.e., the devices N11, N12, and N21, N22 have the same area and trans-
conductance, as set by the ratio of resistors RB1/RE11, RB1/RE12 for branch 61, and 
RB2/RE21, RB2/RE22 for branch 62.  Second, the transistor ratios are different and 
resistor bias can be the same. 
 
 
8.5 IMAGE REJECT  
 
The amount of image rejection required in a radio receiver is dependent upon the 
system specification and the IF frequency. In many communication systems the 
requirement is on the order of 80 dB or more, which can only be achieved by 
filters. Since filters are large and have limited Q in monolithic form, achieving 
high levels of image rejection in IC has proved difficult.  However, in applications 
where less rejection is required, a monolithic approach becomes feasible. This is 
possible where a simplified filter can be integrated, or in the case of direct 
receivers or quasi-zero-IF receivers polyphase RC filters are relatively easy to 
integrate.  These provide the accurate phase shifting required for image rejection 
obtained by phase cancellation instead of filtering, or in addition to it. 
 
8.5.1 Voltage Tuned Image Filter 
A proposed approach uses a tunable notch filter between LNA and mixer to reject 
the image in a classical Super-heterodyne system, [45]. A circuit designed for 
Silicon technology operating at 1.9 GHz offered rejection on the order of 50 dB. 
The circuit schematic of the proposed receiver is in Figure 8.66, which comprises 
an LNA stage at the input composed of transistor Q1, emitter degeneration 
inductance Le1, and collector resonant circuit L1, C1 tuned at 1.9 GHz. A large 
device was used, 80x0.5 µm2 to decrease base resistance and improve noise 
figure. The image reject filter consists of transistors Q2, Q4 forming a cascode 
stage, and a notch filter Q3, L3, CR connected at the floating terminal. The 
resonance capacitance CR represents the varactor plus other associated 
capacitances. The resonance frequency is calculated using the equation and is 
tuned to notch the image frequency.  
 
 
R
R
notch
C
C
C
C
C
C
L
f




)
(
)
(
2
1
3
3
3



    
 
 
       (8.47) 
 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.66 
 Superheterodyne receiver. From [44]. 
 
 
At the resonance frequency the filter creates a zero impedance at the 
emitter of Q4, making the base impedance of Q3 have a negative resistance 
component. The resonant Q factor is increased by the negative resistance, 
allowing a deep notch in the image. The mixer itself is a conventional Gilbert cell 
with single ended input and differential IF output. Applying a -40 dBm RF signal 
at 1.9 GHz, the IF output power at 300 MHz is on the order of -6.5 dBm. The 
measured notch frequency tuning range was 230 MHz, from 2.40 to 2.63 GHz. 
The unit conversion gain is equal to 33.5 dB, the noise figure is 4.9 dB, and the  
IIP3 is -28 dBm.  
 
8.5.2 Conventional Image Rejection Mixers 
An interesting publication, [46], describes an integrated IRM comprising an LNA 
and two mixers on the same SiGe chip, with the IF quadrature elements off chip, 
whose block diagram is in Figure 8.67. To achieve the required 40 dB image 
rejection, both IF outputs must track each other within 0.2 dB amplitude and 1 
phase.  This requires the mixer circuits to have a very symmetrical layout. The 
LNA and mixers are also located closely together by using planar trifilar 
transformers to couple the RF amplifier Q1, Q2 to the mixers.  These transformers 
offer reduced size over other implementations.  The LNA had its impedance 
matched for optimum noise figure by properly dimensioning the emitter 
inductance.  The resulting circuit, which operates over 5.1 to 5.8 GHz, is shown in 
Figure 8.68.  Bias decoupling using resonant circuits allowed the circuit to operate 
with a very low Vcc rail voltage.  The current for the Gilbert cell transistors was 
selected to provide a good match to the emitter, which is the load for the RF 

574 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
0º 
90º 
LO 
IF 
90º 
+ 
RF 
 90º 
Hybrid 
LNA 
0º 
amplifiers. The emitter impedance of the switching quad is proportional to the 
transconductance of the bipolar devices, so bias was selected to provide the 
desired load impedance to the RF amplifier. The mixer provided a conversion gain 
of 14 dB, noise figure equal to 7 dB and image rejection in the order of 35 dB.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.67  
Conventional image rejection architecture. After [45]. 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.68  
Schematic of down-converter.  From [45]. 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
575 
8.5.3 Quasi-Zero IF Image Reject 
In direct conversion receivers the demodulated signal spectrum remains at low 
frequencies, starting at DC.  This reduces the component cost compared to double 
conversion due to the reduced parts count and removal of the IF filter.  As a result 
much attention has been paid to direct receivers for the cell phone market, which 
is extremely cost sensitive. Some tradeoffs exist, including DC offsets at the IF 
output caused by circuit imbalance, and the flicker noise corner frequency 
prevalent in CMOS.  DC offsets are particularly difficult if they vary with time 
because they appear as part of the desired signal, corrupting its integrity.  The DC 
and flicker noise problems can be avoided by slightly increasing the IF frequency.  
The use of a quasi-zero IF, in which the IF is low but still relatively far from DC, 
allows use of reasonably sized filters.  Image rejection is required by both zero-IF 
and quasi-zero IF receivers, but only about 15 dB rejection is required by zero-IF 
since the image level is known because it is the lower half of the channel.  In 
contrast, in quasi-zero IF, the image is separated from the desired signal by twice 
the IF, and can have a much higher level depending on whatever signals are 
present, requiring image rejection up to 60 dB or so.  Image rejection using filters 
is difficult due to the very high resonator Q to achieve adequate selectivity, thus 
image rejection using quadrature mixing is the preferred approach.  The image 
rejection mixer block diagram shown in Figure 8.67 uses two mixers.  Its image 
rejection is limited to amplitude and phase imbalance to the first order.  In 
contrast, if four mixers are used with differentially connected quadrature circuits, 
then higher image rejection will be achieved for the same circuit balance, as image 
rejection is limited by phase imbalance squared (second order).  It is still limited 
to the first order by amplitude imbalance.   
 
An alternative to the conventional IRM topology is to use polyphase 
filters, [47], which have the capability of discriminating between a positive and 
negative sequence of voltage vectors. If the signal and image are up-converted by 
two mixers whose LO’s are in quadrature, then the two IF output signals are 
described by the equations: 
 
 
t
t
t
V
IF
LO
IF
LO




cos
2
1
sin
]
)
sin[(
01




   
                    (8.48) 
 
t
t
t
V
IF
LO
IF
LO




sin
2
1
cos
]
)
sin[(
02




       
         
       (8.49) 
 
 
The two IF outputs for the desired signal are cos() and 
sin()=cos(+90) and the two IF outputs for the undesired image  are cos() and 
-sin()=cos(-90).  The two vector pairs are applied to the polyphase filter of 
Figure 8.69, and seen to add constructively for the desired IF (+,+), and cancel for 
the undesired image (+,-).  In Figure 8.69(a), the cos() signal is applied at the 
top, and becomes cos(+45) at the output.  The cos(+90) signal is applied at 

576 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the bottom, and also becomes cos(+45) at the output, so both signals add 
constructively.  In contrast, in Figure 8.69(b), the cos() signal is applied at the 
top and again becomes cos(+45) at the output.  But the cos(-90) signal is 
applied at the bottom and becomes cos(-135°) at the output, so the two signals 
cancel.  Therefore, the circuit is capable of suppressing the upconverted image. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) (+,+) addition 
 
 
 
 (b) (+,-) cancellation 
Figure 8.69  
Simplified two cells of a polyphase filter. 
 
 
If Gilbert cell mixers are used in a four-mixer IRM, then eight polyphase 
cells are required: four for each mixer, and twice that for differential connection. 
The bandwidth of effective image suppression is narrow for the single-stage 
polyphase filter of Figure 8.69. To increase bandwidth, more stages are added in 
cascade as shown in Figure 8.70, [48].  
 
  
 
 
Figure 8.70  
Cascade of polyphase filters for two of the four Gilbert mixers. 
 
 
A quasi-zero IF mixer designed after this principle is shown in Figure 
8.71, using four CMOS FET ring mixers connected differentially using polyphase 
filters for the LO, RF, and IF circuits [47].   
 
 
V-90 - 45= V -135 
V-90 
V90
V0 
V0+45 
V90-45 
=2V45 
V0 
V0+45 
=V45+V-135 
=0

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
577 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.71 
Block diagram of the polyphase IRM. From [46]. 
 
Due to the reduced sensitivity to phase imbalance, the mixer achieves 
average image rejection of 58 dB over a 10 MHz frequency range near DC, as 
shown in Figure 8.72. This represents a very wide percentage bandwidth at the IF 
output, and is obtained using a five-stage polyphase filter.   
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.72  
Performance of the polyphase IRM, comparing simulation with measured results on 
more than 5 samples. From [46]. 
 

578 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
HQ 
HI 
Frequency (Hz) 
50 
0 
-100 
       102 
   
106 
104 
-50 
100 
Phase of HI(s) and HQ(s)  
HQ 
HI 
10-2 
10-1 
100 
106 
104 
102 
  Amplitude of HI(s), HQ(s)  
Frequency (Hz) 
8.5.4 Note on Polyphase Filters 
 
The polyphase filter can be understood by analyzing an I,Q generator using a high 
pass and low pass filter as depicted in Figure 8.73. The transfer function is 
represented in terms of the Laplace transform, s, for the path IN-to-I by (8.50), 
and for IN-to-Q by (8.51).  
 
sRC
s
IN
s
I
s
HI



1
1
)
(
)
(
)
(
   
 
 
 
       (8.50)      
 
sRC
sRC
s
IN
s
Q
s
HQ



1
)
(
)
(
)
(
    
 
 
 
       (8.51) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.73  
I,Q generator with high pass, low pass filters. 
 
The magnitude of the responses are shown in Figure 8.74(a) for the low 
pass and high pass paths. The phase responses are in Figure 8.74(b), negative for 
the low pass and positive for the high pass. At the 3 dB point (0.707xVoltage) the 
two signals have equal magnitude with 3dB loss relative to input at IN, and the 
phase is -45C and +45C respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  Magnitude  
 
 
(b)  Phase 
Figure 8.74      Frequency response of an I,Q generator 
 
 
 
In the reverse the path, the transfer function becomes (8.52).   A simple 
poly-phase filter is represented in Figure 8.75, comprising two instances of the 
circuit of Figure 8.73 connected back-to-back.  

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
579 
QB 
Ii 
R 
R 
R 
R 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Qi 
IBi 
QBi 
I 
Q 
IB 
 
sRC
QsRC
sRC
I
s
I i




1
1
)
(
   
 
 
       
       (8.52) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.75  
Two high-pass low-pass circuits back-to-back. 
 
If the two pairs of quadrature input signals, Ii, Qi and IBi, QBi are 180 
apart in phase (differential), then the connection points of the two pairs are virtual 
grounds to each other, and (8.52) applies. The output currents in terms of applied 
currents are given by (8.53a, b).  
 
sRC
sRC
Q
sRC
I
s
I
Bi
i




1
1
)
(
     (a)          
sRC
sRC
I
sRC
Q
s
Q
i
i




1
1
)
(
  (b) 
 
sRC
sRC
Q
sRC
I
s
I
i
Bi
B




1
1
)
(
 (c)         
sRC
sRC
I
sRC
Q
s
Q
Bi
Bi
B




1
1
)
(
   (d)          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (8.53)  
 
 
The filter is analyzed with the input signals given by the set of equations 
described below and the output current given by (8.54). Taking only the frequency 
effects the Laplace variable becomes, 0 = 1/RC. 
 
)
cos(
)
(
t
t
Ii


 
)
90
cos(
)
(



t
t
Qi

 
)
cos(
)
(
t
t
I Bi



   
)
270
cos(
)
(



t
t
QBi

       
)
45
cos(
2
)
45
270
cos(
2
1
)
45
cos(
2
1
)
(











t
t
t
t
I



 (8.54)        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

580 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Take now the case of negative frequencies, which results after the 
conversion process. The output current is now given by (8.55).  
 
)
cos(
)
(
t
t
Ii



 
  
)
90
cos(
)
(




t
t
Qi

 
)
cos(
)
(
t
t
IBi



       
)
270
cos(
)
(




t
t
QBi

 
0
)
45
270
cos(
2
1
)
45
cos(
2
1
)
(











t
t
t
I


            (8.55) 
 
Polyphase filters distinguish positive from negative frequencies resulting 
from signal and image down conversion, at the frequency where the equality 0 = 
1/RC holds. The rejection properties for the single stage poly phase circuit is in 
Figure 8.76(a). The effect of more RC cells tuned at different frequencies results 
in larger bandwidth rejection, depicted in Figure 8.76(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Single-stage response 
 
(b) Three-stage response 
Figure 8.76  
Polyphase filter responses. 
 
 
8.6 SUBHARMONIC TOPOLOGIES 
 
BJT and HBT devices compete with the antiparallel diode pair (APDP) in 
subharmonic mixers. The advantage with the use of active devices is lower 
conversion loss or even conversion gain.  Examples of subharmonic mixers using 
GaAs, SiGe HBTs and conventional Si BJT follow. 
 
 
 
         1=1/R1C1 
     2=1/R2C2 
3=1/R3C3 
frequency 
Amplitude 
100
10-2
0 
Positive Frequency 
Negative Frequency 
100
10-2
104 
103 
Frequency (Hz) 
105 
Amplitude 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
581 
i = i1 +i2 
i2 
i1 
RF 
LO 
RF 
LO 
IF 
IF 
C 
8.6.1 Complimentary Approach 
 
A simple circuit proposed in reference [49], emulates the properties of the APDP 
for subharmonic conversion using bipolar transistors. The topology of the mixer is 
depicted in Figure 8.77.  It contains a diplexer to combine the LO and RF signals 
to feed a pair of complimentary NPN-PNP transistors. The emulation is possible 
because the base emitter junction of these devices have similar properties to 
simple diodes.  The currents I1 and I2 contain the same harmonic components as 
diode mixers, except that instead of conductance modulation, transconductance 
modulation is employed. Subharmonic conversion is feasible because gm is 
modulated at twice the LO frequency, as depicted in Figure 8.78. Depending on 
matching and harmonic terminations in the circuit, conversion gain can be 
obtained.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.77  
Complimentary transistor subharmonic mixer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.78  
Complimentary transistors transconductance modulation. 
 
 
In analytical terms the transconductance of both devices is given by 
(8.56). Introducing the LO modulating voltage in the equation as V=VLOcos(LOt) 
one obtains (8.57). The Fourier expansion in the next equation shows there is no 
fundamental LO component in the transconductance. 
 
 
)
(
2
1
V
V
S
m
m
m
e
e
I
g
g
g








 
 
         
       (8.56) 
 
T 
T 
V 
i 
t t 
gm = gm1+gm2 

582 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
)
cos
cosh(
2
t
V
I
g
LO
LO
S
m




                
 
      (8.57) 
 




...
)
4
cos(
)
(
2
2
cos
)
(
2
)
(
2
4
2
0




t
V
I
t
V
I
V
I
I
g
LO
LO
LO
LO
LO
S
m






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (8.58) 
 
 
A detailed circuit schematic of the IC is represented in Figure 8.79, 
where the input signal is fed to a pair of emitter followers, Q1, Q2 that provide bias 
and buffering for the mixing stage, Q3, Q4. After mixing, another emitter follower 
is employed for level shifting, and the output stage combines the currents from 
both collectors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.79 
 Schematic of  complimentary pair subharmonic mixer. 
 
 
The plots in Figure 8.80(a) show down conversion performance, for a 
fixed IF at 7 MHz, RF swept from 500 MHz to 5 GHz, and LO swept at half-RF 
frequency plus IF. LO power is +5 dBm and RF power is -10 dBm. The result was 
obtained with no filters attached nor impedance matching. Down-conversion 
performance is flat within a couple of dB over 1 to 4 GHz and peaks positively at 
2 GHz with 2 dB gain. The up-conversion gain is negative, but still comparable to 
conventional mixing with -7 to -9 dB within the same band.  The fundamental 
conversion is in the  same plot at  under  -30 dBc  suppressed. The plot in  Figure 
8.80(b) shows  the 2XLO-RF   isolation below -60 dBc at the IF port, and  below  
 -120 dBc at the RF port. The fundamental LO leaks with almost no loss at both 
RF and IF ports.  
IFout 
LOin 
RFin 
DC bias and 
Emitter follower 
R8 
Q8 
Q7 
Q6 
Q5 
Q4
Q3 
Q2 
R7 
R6 
R5 
R4 
R3 
R2 
R1 
Q1 
HPF 
LPF 
Core Cell 
Level Shifter 
Current Combining  

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
583 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
(a) 
Conversion Gain  
 
 
(b) Isolation 
Figure 8.80  
Experimental results for IC SHM. 
 
 
An alternative approach has been proposed for subharmonic conversion, 
[50], composed of: 1. frequency doubler stage to generate second harmonic of LO; 
2. RF amplifier for low noise performance; 3. addition of both signals and 
subsequent application to a single ended base mixer. The mixer in this case 
operates at its fundamental frequency which is twice the LO frequency.  
 
 
 
8.6.2 Push-Push Self-Oscillating Mixer 
 
Another interesting alternative approach is the use of a push-push oscillator-mixer 
configuration patented in 1989, [51] and displayed in Figure 8.81. The oscillator 
makes use of the fact that capacitive emitter impedance can generate negative 
resistance. The capacitor C in differential mode terminates the emitter capacitively 
and a resonator circuit R is inserted between the bases of both devices. The signal 
to be converted is applied to a buffer device T3 and to the base of current sources 
T4, T5. The collector current of those devices becomes the emitter current of T1, 
T2, generating mixing products in each device. Since the signal is applied in 
common mode, it does not "see" the capacitor C. The following mixing products 
are available at node N: 
 
 
-Fundamental LO signal and fundamental conversion are suppressed due to 
phasing. 
 
-Second LO harmonic adds constructively. 
-Harmonic converted signals are in phase and add constructively.  
 
-Fundamental LO can be tapped from the emitter of either T1 or T2  and 
delivered to a prescaler for frequency control or other application.  
 
 
The patent was developed on silicon 3 µm emitter geometry for 
applications on Direct TV operating at C-band (3.7 - 4.2 GHz). The LO 
fundamental frequency is at 2 GHz and the converted band is from 950 to 1750 
MHz. The circuit required +5V and – 2V biased with 6 mA.  

584 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
Figure 8.81 
 Push-push oscillator-mixer. 
 
  
 
8.6.3 Cross Coupled mmWave Mixer 
 
 
The exploitation of subharmonic mixing using SiGe devices operating at 60 GHz 
is reported in [52]. The circuit functions by cross coupling two devices to operate 
as a subharmonic mixer, depicted in Figure 8.82. The circuit is differential in DC 
but at mmWave the collectors are both shorted to ground via the open stub. The 
LO signal at half the frequency is applied to the base of Q2 and to the emitter of 
Q1 via coupling capacitor C4. The circuit used for RF impedance matching, C1,T1, 
can be made to short the base of Q1 at the LO frequency.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.82  
Schematic of a SiGe Subharmonic mixer. From [51]. 
 
 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
585 
-12 
  -9 
-6 
   -3 
   0 
55              55               60               65 GHz 
Conversion Gain (dB) 
-12 
  -9 
-6 
   -3 
   0 
      -3    -2     -1     0      1     2      3  GHz 
Conversion Gain (dB) 
 
 Therefore, the first device is common emitter and the second is common 
base at this frequency, generating harmonics in antiphase at the respective 
collector currents. At RF, at double the LO frequency, Q1 has its emitter shorted to 
ground by LO impedance matching circuit C4, T2. The RF signal is applied in 
common emitter to transistor Q1 and common base to transistor Q2. The 
differential IF signal is extracted from the collector of each device. Measured  
conversion loss for fIF=fRF–2fLO with fIF=500 MHz and LO power at 0 dBm is 
given in Figure 8.83.  Figure 8.83(a) is for fRF swept over 55 to 65 GHz, showing 
conversion loss between 5 and 7.8 dB.  Figure 8.83(b) shows IF bandwidth with 
fRF swept over 51.5 to 57.5 GHz, fLO fixed at 27.25 GHz, and IF varying between 
0 and 3 GHz. The IF bandwidth is roughly +/- 1 GHz for a 1 dB loss variation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)Versus RF frequency.                                                        (b) Versus IF frequency. 
Figure 8.83  
Measured conversion gain of the mmWave subharmonic SiGe mixer. From [51]. 
 
 
8.7 SUMMARY 
 
 
This chapter provided a brief summary of selected patents on the 
application of bipolar devices to mixer functions. The presentation is more or less 
chronological, with an attempt made to cover the important aspects of this 
technology. For example, while most designers avoid using transformers, there are 
instances where it still is the best choice. The transition from discrete components 
to integration into a monolithic substrate followed the same motivation that 
motivated Fairchild to develop the IC technology, cost reduction and in many 
instances improved performance. An insight into those innovations are covered in 
this chapter with examples of multifunction in a single die, containing mixer, RF 
amplifier and local oscillator. The chapter closes with examples of image reject 
and subharmonic converters where the conventional functions of transformers and 
couplers are replaced by new circuit approaches.  
 
 

586 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Irving F. Barditch et al, “Monolithic Semiconductor Mixer Apparatus with 
Positive Feedback,” US Patent 3,107,331, issued October 15, 1963. 
[2] 
Bernhard Birkenes, “Mixer Circuit for Autodyne Receiver in Which 
Untuned Coil Couples Signal to Intermediate Frequency Transformer,” US Patent 
3,165,700, issued January 12, 1965. 
[3] 
David John Carson, “Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 3,694,756, issued 
September 26, 1972. 
[4] 
Seishi Watanabe and Takashi Yoshikawa, “High Frequency Amplifier with 
Frequency Conversion,” US Patent 3,949,306, issued April 6, 1976. 
[5] 
Max W. Muterspaugh, “Transistor Mixer,” US Patent 4,850,039, issued 
July 18, 1989. 
[6] 
Jakob Zawels, “Non-Linear Semi-Conductor Signal Translating Circuits,” 
US Patent 2,890,418, issued June 9, 1959. 
[7] 
Heinz Georg Karl and Borse Mais Ingmar Roos, “Modulator Employing a 
Pair of Transistors Biased for Class AB Operation,” US Patent 3,469,212, issued 
September 23, 1969. 
[8] 
Erwin Glock, “Active Balanced Modulator Circuit,” US Patent 3,636,478, 
issued January 18, 1972. 
[9] 
F. J. Cerny, Jr., G. D. Helm, and R. G. Wesoloski, “Balanced Active Mixer 
Circuit,” US Patent 4,193,036, issued November 3, 1980. 
[10] William J. Howell, “Balanced Mixer Using Complimentary Devices,” US 
Patent 4,080,573, issued March 21, 1978. 
[11] Heinz Rinderie and Hans Sapotta, “Additive HF Mixer,” US Patent 
5,732,344, issued March 24, 1998.  
[12] Reginhard Pospischil “Double Balanced Modulator,” US Patent 3,124,767, 
issued February 27, 1962. 
[13] Toshiaki Sudoh, “Double-Balanced Modulators of the Current Switching 
Type,” US Patent 3,614,668, issued October 19, 1971. 
[14] Albert Boubouleix, “Broad-Band Passive Ring Mixer,” US Patent 
4,317,230, issued February 23, 1982. 
[15] Tokinor Kozawa, Kokubunji-Shi, “Frequency Converter Circuit,” US 
Patent 3,555,303, issued January 12, 1971. 
[16] Thomas K. Lisle, Jr. and Joseph Romanchak, “Amplitude Modulator 
Having a Transistor Controlled Bias Current,” US Patent 3,866,148, issued 
February 11, 1975. 
[17] Daniel B. Talbot, “Amplitude Modulator Having Substantially Zero 
Modulation Distortion,” US Patent 4,485,359, issued November 27, 1984. 
[18] Mitsuo Ohsawa and Wataru Yamanati, “Double Balanced Frequency 
Converter,” US Patent 4,058,771, issued November 15, 1977. 
[19] Max E. Malchow, “Frequency Converter, as for First Detector of 
Heterodyne Radio Receiver,” US Patent 4,253,196, issued February 24, 1981. 

 
Bipolar Junction Transistor Applications 
587 
[20] Kenzo Tanabe, Junji Suzuki, and Masashi Kanno, “Transistor Balanced 
Mixer,” US Patent 4,461,042, issued July 17, 1984. 
[21] Issy Kipnis and Amarpal S. Khanna, “Computer Simulation Models 
Performance of RR Converters,” Microwaves & RF, May 1989, pp. 183-192. 
[22] Christopher Trask, “Low Distortion Lossless Feedback Double Balanced 
Active Mixer Using Linearity Augmentation,” US Patent 6,242,964B1, issued 
June 5, 2001. 
[23] Howard E. Jones, “Dual Output Synchronous Detector Utilizing 
Transistorized Differential Amplifiers,” US Patent 3,241,078, issued March 15, 
1966.  
[24] Robert R. Sinusas, “Double-Balanced Modulator Circuit Readily Adaptable 
to Integrated Circuit Fabrication,” US Patent 3,550,040, issued May 31, 1968. 
[25] Barrie Gilbert, “Four Quadrant Multiplier Circuit,” US Patent 3,689,752, 
issued April 13, 1970. 
[26] Barrie Gilbert, “Double Balanced RF Mixer with Predetermined Input 
Impedance,” US Patent 5,826,182, issued October 20, 1998. 
[27] Barrie Gilbert, “The MICROMIXER: A Highly Linear Variant of the 
Gilbert Mixer Using a Bisymmetric Class-AB Input Stage,” IEEE Journal of Solid 
State Circuits, Volume 32, No. 9, September 1997, pp. 1412-1423. 
[28] Su-Tarn and John R. Long, “A Low Voltage Broadband Feedforward-
Linearized BJT Mixer,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 41, No. 9, 
September 2006, pp. 2177-2187. 
[29] Patrick A. Quinn, “A Cascode Amplifier Nonlinearity Correction 
Technique,” IEEE International Journal of Solid State Circuits Conference, 
February 1981, pp. 188. 
[30] Nhat M. Nguyen, “Low Noise Active Mixer,” US Patent 5,379,457, issued 
January 3, 1995. 
[31] G. Khoury, R. D. Beards, and J. J. Nisbet, “Linear Low Noise Mixer,” US 
Patent 5,532,637, issued June 2, 1996. 
[32] Akira Shibata and Yoshizumi Watatan, “Integrated Circuit for Frequency 
Conversion,” US Patent 4,216,431, issued August 5, 1980. 
[33] K. Tanabe, J. Suzuki, and M. Kanno, “Balanced Modulator,” US Patent 
4,344,188, issued August 10, 1982. 
[34] Rinaldo Graziadei and Michelangelo Lorusso, “Transistor Mixer and 
Amplifier Input Stage,” US Patent 4,480,337, issued October 30, 1984. 
[35] Joan Nyquist, “Circuit for Making a Differential Output Single-Ended,” US 
Patent 5,001,372, issued March 19, 1991. 
[36] Gilles Chevallier and Eduard F. Stikvoort, “Transformer Circuit, Double 
Balanced Mixer,” US Patent 5,825,231, issued October 20, 1998. 
[37] Joseph P. Heck, “Balanced Mixer Circuit with Improved Linearity,” US 
Patent 5,548,840, issued August 20, 1996. 
[38] Nader Fayyaz, “Low Voltage Mixer,” US Patent 6,335,651B1, issued 
January 1, 2002.  

588 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[39] David E. Bien, “Even Order Term Mixer,” US Patent 5,465,414, issued 
November 7, 1995. 
[40] Roger Branson, “Mixer Using Four Quadrant Multiplier with Reactive 
Feedback Elements,” US Patent 6,255,889B1, issued July 3, 2001. 
[41] J. B. Groe, “Active Radio Frequency Mixer Circuit with Feedback,” US 
Patent 6,205,325B1, issued March 20, 2001. 
[42] Russel D. Wyze, “Active Commutated Double Balanced Mixer,” US Patent 
6,230,001B1, issued May 8, 2001. 
[43] A. Jongepier, W. Kasperkovitz, “Double-Balanced Mixer Circuit,” US 
Patent 4,636,663, issued January 13, 1987. 
[44] Didier Belot and Pascal Persechini, “Class AB Differential Mixer,” US 
Patent 6,882,194B2, issued April 19, 2005. 
[45] J. Macedo, M. Copeland, and P. Schvan, “A 1.9 GHz Silicon Receiver with 
On-chip Image Filtering,” IEEE 1997 Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, pp. 
181-184. 
[46] John R. Long, “A Low Voltage 5.1-5.8 GHz Image Reject Downconverter 
RF IC,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 35, No. 9, September 2000, 
pp. 1320-1328. 
[47] Behbahani, Kishigami, Leete, Abidi, “CMOS Mixers and Polyphase Filters 
for Large Image Rejection,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 36, No. 
6, June 2001, pp. 873-887. 
[48] P. J. Mole, H. V. Vliet, and C. Babla, “Image Rejection Mixer Circuit and 
Method for Image Rejection,” US Patent 6,226,509B1, issued May 1, 2001. 
[49] Kevin Kobayashi, “Complimentary Bipolar Harmonic Mixer,” US Patent 
6,901,249, issued May 31, 2005. 
[50] T. K. Johansen, J. Vidkjaer, A. Konczykowska, M. Riet, F. Jorge, and T. 
Djushuus, “A High Conversion-gain Q-Band InP DHBT Sub-Harmonic Mixer 
Using LO Frequency Doubler,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume MTT 56, No. 3, March 2008, pp. 613-614. 
[51] N. P. Cowley, R. J.Lawton, and T. D. S. McClelland, “Frequency Doubling 
Oscillator and Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 4,810,976, issued March 7, 1989. 
[52] B. G. Perumana, et al, “A SiGe Sub-Harmonic Mixer for Millimeter Wave 
Applications,” Proceedings of the Second European Microwave Integrated 
Circuits Conference, Munich, Germany, October 2007, pp. 80-83. 
 

589 
Chapter 9 
FET Mixer Theory 
MESFETs became widely accepted and implemented into microwave/mmWave 
mixers due to their superior high frequency performance compared with silicon 
bipolar devices.  However, in recent years this distinction has diminished with the 
advent of HBTs in either SiGe or GaAs technologies. But active MESFETs and 
PHEMTs in GaAs technology are still widely used at high frequencies due to their 
simpler circuitry. With the recent advances in CMOS technology to obtain very 
small gate dimensions, the fT for CMOS FETs has become comparable to their 
GaAs counterparts, resulting in a drastic change in technologies available for 
mixers. Today CMOS mixers are the preferred choice for high volume 
applications, and their design is similar to any other type of FET. As a matter of 
fact, their I/V relationships are similar, as confirmed by (9.1a) for MOSFETs and 
(9.1b) for GaAs FETs. 
 
 


2
th
gs
ds
V
V
L
W
B
I


  
 
 
 
      (9.1a) 
 


2
th
gs
ds
V
V
I


 
 
 
 
 
      (9.1b) 
 
 
With: B = µnCox (mobility multiplied by oxide capacitance per unit area), 
         =IDSS/Vth
2 (Current at zero gate bias divided by squared threshold 
 
               voltage)  
 
 
The dimensions W and L, respectively, correspond to channel width and 
length, and Vth to threshold voltage, the gate voltage above which drain current 
starts to flow. The difference from the circuit point of view is in the values of the 
constants and the fact that MOS FETs for RF applications are usually 
enhancement devices, and GaAs FETs used in industry are both enhancement and 
depletion type devices. One of the drawbacks of MOS compared to GaAs 
MESFETs is its lower breakdown voltage for the same gate length, which limits 
the operational power level.  Any of the FET devices can also be operated in 
passive mode, allowing development of mixers with performance not attainable 

590 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
either by diodes or bipolars. Passive operation is preferred in applications 
requiring low noise figure, high linearity, and circuit simplicity.   
A simple examination of a depletion mode FET static I/V characteristic 
allows one to conclude that in spite of its widespread usage for linear 
amplification, it is a very non-linear device. Nonlinearity exists for drain current 
versus voltage in two regions: at the onset of current saturation where current is 
more a function of VGS, ID(VGS); and in the pinch-off area, where current is more a 
function of VDS, ID(VDS). Coincidently these are the areas where a device can be 
biased and driven by a large signal voltage, generating the maximum variation 
(derivative) of the parameter responsible for the frequency conversion, either 
conductance or transconductance. Depending on the topology employed, one 
parameter can dominate the other, and in most cases both participate in the 
conversion process. The options for generating distortion in the drain current for 
active mixer design are similar to those for bipolars, depending on where the LO 
is injected, as depicted in Figure 9.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (a) 
 
 
    (b)      
 
 
    (c) 
Figure 9.1  
FET mixer classification: (a) gate injection; (b) source injection; (c) drain injection. 
 
LO injection at the gate modulates the transconductance, clipping the 
drain current to generate harmonics. LO injection at the drain generates harmonics 
by modulating both transconductance and output conductance. The disadvantage 
of this approach compared to gate injection is the larger LO power required to 
modulate the current. LO injection at the source has the same effect as drain 
injection but the circuit design is more complex due to instabilities that can occur 
when reactive elements are introduced between source and ground. A special case 
of LO gate injection is the resistive mixer, with a configuration similar to drain 
injection with RF and LO generators swapped. The LO applied to the gate 
modulates the device channel resistance and mixing is generated by application of 
RF signal voltage at the drain.  
The mixer action can be achieved either by a linear multiplier or by first 
combining signals and then applying them to a non-linear element. The former 
approach requires a circuit with a high degree of complexity, while the latter can 
be obtained with the simple circuits of Figure 9.1. The calculation of the spectral 
components of the drain current from a FET for a mixer circuit is complex, 
requiring development of multiple Fourier integrals, one for each input signal 
including the LO. This task can only be handled by computer analysis. 
ID 
ID 
RIF 
VLO 
VRF 
IS 
IG 
ID 
RIF 
VLO 
VRF 
RIF 
VLO 
VRF 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
591 
Fortunately, the conventional “small-large signal” approximation where the 
signals to be converted are of much lower amplitude compared to the local 
oscillator component is applicable in linear mixing. This condition allows 
simplification of multiple Fourier integrals to a single one at the LO frequency. In 
this chapter the basic concepts of frequency conversion for the various FET 
configurations are discussed.  
 
 
9.1 GATE LO INJECTION 
 
The circuit schematic is represented in Figure 9.2, with RF and LO applied at the 
gate, and IF extracted at the drain. It is assumed the RF and image have similar 
terminations, which is true for a down-converter with low IF frequency. The IF is 
shorted to ground at the gate by the bias decoupling stub, 3. The phase angles of 
the transmission lines in the figure are defined at the RF frequency. Note the RF 
and LO generators share the same impedance, which is convenient for circuit 
simulation. A typical means to combine RF and LO is with a directional coupler, 
where RF uses the direct port and LO uses the coupled port. The gate matching 
circuit consists of an open stub, m2, and a series line, m1, designed for best 
energy transfer at the RF frequency. If the IF frequency is much lower than RF, 
then the LO generator impedance match is close to that of the RF.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.2  
Schematic for a gate mixer. 
 
 
On the drain side, an open stub, 4, which is a quarter wave long at the 
LO frequency shorts the LO voltage to ground. This stub also causes the 
impedances at the RF and image frequencies to be low, which minimizes the 
effect of output conduction non-linearity and simplifies the analysis of gate 
mixers. At IF the open-circuit drain stub is a small reactance, and drain bias is 
introduced by a large reactance inductor, Lbias. The IF output impedance usually 
ranges from 75 to 100 ohms.  The Lm, Cm elements provide the proper impedance 
match to the external load RL, and also acts as a low-pass filter to reject 
undesirable signals.   
 
+
Cm 
m2 
3 =90 
Lbias 
-
4 = 90 
VGS 
VDS 
+ 
- 
VRF 
ZS 
VLO 
m1 
Lm  
RL 

592 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
9.1.1 The Quadratic Mixer 
 
This is a popular representation for mixer study due to its simplicity and capability 
to describe the conversion effects in closed form equations. The quadratic I/V 
description in (9.3a) is found in Curtice's paper, [1] for the case n = 2,    and is 
valid for a gate voltage that is less than VP and equal to zero volts or higher. The 
total gate voltage is given by (9.2) where the LO and RF are added to the DC 
supply voltage. Note it is also assumed RF and LO voltages have the same phase.  
In some engineering texts the drain equation is described by (9.3b), which 
essentially the same as Curtice, if  is replaced by its definition, IDSS/Vth
2 and 
dropping the built in Vbi voltage from the equation defining the threshold voltage 
Vth = Vp + Vbi. The threshold voltage is measured between the gate and source and 
determines the voltage at which drain current starts to flow.  
 
 
)
cos(
)
cos(
t
V
t
V
V
V
LO
LO
RF
RF
GS
gs





 
          
        (9.2) 
 


)
tanh(
)
1(
2
ds
DS
th
gs
ds
V
V
V
V
I






, if Vgs < Vth        (9.3a) 
 
)
tanh(
)
1(
1
DS
DS
n
P
GS
DSS
d
V
V
V
V
I
I










, if Vgs < Vp     (9.3b) 
0

ds
I
, if Vgs > Vth  
 
Where,   = DC output conductance of device;  
 
 =  fitting parameter defining the drain voltage above which  
 
 
        the drain current becomes saturated.  
 
Substituting (9.2) into (9.3b), with n = 2, and developing the terms, the 
drain current components can be defined as follows: 
 
..
)
(
cos
)
(
cos
1
)
(
2
2
2
2
2


























t
V
V
t
V
V
V
V
I
t
I
LO
P
LO
RF
P
RF
P
GS
DSS
ds


 
...
)
cos(
1
2
)
cos(
1
2















t
V
V
V
V
t
V
V
V
V
LO
P
LO
P
GS
RF
P
RF
P
GS


 
)
tanh(
)
1(
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
DS
DS
LO
RF
P
RF
P
LO
V
V
t
t
V
V
V
V








                 (9.4) 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
593 
The operating point is selected to be at the middle of the gate transfer 
characteristic, ( i.e. VGS = - VP/2, IDS =IDSS/4), and drain voltage is in the middle of 
the saturation and breakdown voltages, VDS = (VB -Vsat)/2. For maximum LO 
swing at the gate, the LO generator voltage is set at VLO = VP/2. The LO voltage 
has to take into account the RF voltage that adds up at the gate. If it is assumed the 
RF voltage is of small amplitude then total gate voltage is approximately given by 
the LO voltage. The output conductance coefficient is defined by  = 1/Rd0IDSS. 
An additional assumption is made for the drain voltage swing: it is assumed that 
total voltage will be larger than the saturation voltage and lower than the 
breakdown voltage. Under these conditions the hyperbolic tangent becomes equal 
to unity. Including these assumptions, (9.4) reduces to:  
 
..)
cos(
)
(
cos
2
1
)
(
cos
2
1
)
(
2
2
2
2
2


























t
V
V
t
t
V
V
I
t
I
RF
P
RF
LO
RF
P
RF
DSS
ds



)
1
1(
)
cos(
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
1
0
DS
DSS
d
LO
RF
P
RF
LO
V
I
R
t
t
V
V
t








         (9.5) 
 
The spectrum for the current is depicted in Figure 9.3, similarly to Figure 
5.1. Only the positive frequency components were considered, i.e. f = ± nfRF + 
mfLO and m, n = 0, 1, 2, 3.  Notice that applying fLO and fRF there are two main 
signals generated, fRF - fL0 and fRF + fLO. The DC component comprises the applied 
DC and the DC generated from detection. The dotted line components are not in 
(9.5) and should not be present in an ideal unilateral model; however, they are 
present in real circuits.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.3   
Spectrum of drain current in a quadratic mixer. 
 
Retaining only the terms containing the mixing products, the drain 
current reduces to two components as follows:   
fLO 
  Ids(f) 
fRF -fLO 
0 
2fLO- fRF 
fRF 
2fLO 
fLO+ fRF 
3fLO- fRF 
fIF 
f-1 
f+1 
f-2 
f+2 

594 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 


)
1
1(
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
)
(
0
DS
DSS
d
LO
RF
LO
RF
P
RF
DSS
ds
V
I
R
t
t
V
V
I
t
I









      (9.6) 
 
The IF current circulates in the output load, generating a drain voltage, 
VDS = - RLIds(t), which can be inserted into (9.6). The down-converted signal is 
given by the frequency difference, and the up- converted by the frequency sum. 
The undesired sum signal is filtered out, with the drain voltage shorted to ground 
at that frequency. Given these conditions, (9.6) becomes:  
 
t
V
V
R
R
t
V
V
I
t
I
LO
RF
P
RF
d
L
LO
RF
P
RF
DSS
ds
)
cos(
2
1
)
cos(
2
)
(
0








 
 
 
        (9.7) 
 
The second term in the denominator of this equation will be relevant 
when Rd0 << RL and the RF signal level approaches the LO voltage amplitude. 
That would reduce the amount of available converted current in the load and there 
would be a need to reduce the LO voltage so that total gate voltage is kept within 
the limits. A trade off is then required between desirable output power and 
conversion gain. If the drain impedance is matched (Rd0 = RL), and RF level is 
small compared to VP, then the second term can be neglected.  
The power delivered to the load is provided by (9.8). The input power 
described by (9.9), is obtained assuming matched input conditions with input 
power totally absorbed by the real part of input impedance, Rin. Hence, power 
conversion gain, GC, defined by the power delivered to the load divided by the 
available power from the generator, is given by (9.10).  Notice 
gs
C
 is the gate 
source capacitance in Figure 9.4, and enters the power and gain equations as an 
average value over the LO cycle.   
 
2
2
5.0







RF
P
DSS
L
IF
V
V
I
R
P
 
 
   
           
         (9.8) 


2
5.0
gs
RF
RF
in
in
C
V
R
P


      
   
 
          
         (9.9) 
2
2
)
(
4
gs
RF
P
DSS
in
L
C
C
V
I
R
R
G


 
 
 
        
       (9.10)  
 
 
This equation assumes a quadratic current-voltage relationship for the 
FET, and the sum signal is shorted at the drain. In real circuits, the drain 
termination is not an ideal short, so there is some feedback of drain signals to the 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
595 
gate that perturbs the gate voltage, and in turn slightly changes conversion gain. 
The available LO input power is given by (9.11).   
 
 


2
5.0
gs
LO
LO
in
LO
C
V
R
P


     
 
 
       
      (9.11) 
 
 
Unfortunately, most short channel MOS or GaAs devices are not purely 
quadratic, and in general have a combination of linear, quadratic, cubic and other 
terms. In the particular case of a linear model, n=1, for the device it is obvious no 
mixing occurs if the device gate is biased within the range VP to 0 volts. The 
importance of these technology dependent properties is diminished by using the 
device in switched mode with relatively fast transition times. In practice 
maximum conversion gain occurs when the device gate is biased near pinch-off, 
where Vb = - VP, VDS > Vdsat, and the gate is switched between the on and off 
states. However, analytical problems appear when one tries to apply (9.3) to 
switched operation, due to the discontinuity of gate voltage for part of the LO 
period. The analytical solution for the drain current requires more sophisticated 
models. For example, the current can be obtained from a multiple Fourier series, 
one for each of the input frequencies, with no restriction on signal amplitude. 
Such a complex approach is not necessary if only one voltage is considered large 
(i.e., the LO voltage).  And the signals to be converted are small (i.e., the RF 
voltage). Under this condition, two alternative approaches exist to find the 
solution: use a Fourier series to represent the gate voltage, or apply a modulating 
function. An example of modeling based on the Fourier series is reported in [2], 
where the ID, VG is defined by a sum of sine and cosine functions. Overall the 
majority of solutions found in the literature make use of the same model given in 
(9.3), with the IF current defined by the product of a modulating function 
determined by the large signal, and the small signal RF voltage.  This is discussed 
further in the next section.  
 
Equation (9.11) also allows comparison between LO power requirements 
for different technologies. For example, a technology offering lower capacitance 
and lower series resistance requires lower power. The LO voltage is another 
important parameter. The LO signal must cause the gate voltage to swing between 
the threshold voltage, Vth and the forward conduction voltage, Vf. As this 
difference between threshold and conduction decreases, the required LO drive 
also decreases. Hence a depletion device with Vth = -0.5V requires less LO power 
than a device with Vth = -1V. Enhancement mode FETs are particularly attractive 
since the threshold voltage is a few tenths of a volt on the positive side.  
 
 
9.1.2  Conversion Matrix Analysis 
 
This method was introduced in Chapter 5 for a nonlinear conductance and is 
extended here to FET transistors. The concept of large-small signal was described 

596 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
in detail in [3]. It starts by considering a Taylor expansion applied to the I/V 
relation for the device, I = f(V). The expansion comprises the sum of a large 
signal, VLO and a small signal component, v. The current is then expressed by the 
equation: 
 
...
)
(
6
1
)
(
2
1
)
(
)
(
)
(
3
3
3
2
2
2









v
V
I
dV
d
v
V
I
dV
d
v
V
I
dV
d
V
I
v
V
I
LO
LO
LO
V
V
V
V
V
V
LO
LO
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
       (9.12) 
 
For small signal operation, voltage v << VLO, V2, V3, so one can ignore all 
high order components and retain only the first term. Also, v = v(t) is a function of 
time so the output current is expressed by the first derivative of I(V) with the 
device being LO pumped. The derivative is equivalent to a small signal time 
varying conductance.  
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
t
v
t
g
t
v
V
I
dV
d
t
i
LO
V
V











 
      
 
      (9.13) 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.4  
Schematic for nonlinear FET model. After [3]. 
 
The g(t) function can be extended to represent the FET's nonlinear 
parameters depicted in Figure 9.4: Cgs(t), gm(t)Vg(t), and gd(t), each designated by 
an arrow. The conversion Y-matrix for this circuit is built considering the 
corresponding conversion matrices Cgs, Gm and Gd. The four parameters are 
defined as: 
 




1
1
11
1
1







gd
gs
g
C
j
C
j
R
Y
            
 
       (9.14) 
 




1
1
21
1
(
1
1
(
1










gd
gs
g
gd
gs
gd
m
C
C
j
R
C
C
j
C
j
G
Y
   (9.15) 
Cgd 
Igs(t) 
Ids(t) 
gm(t)Vg(t) 
gd(t) 
Vds(t) 
Rg 
Vg(t) 
Cgs(t) 
Vgs(t) 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
597 
 


f
gs
g
Y
C
jR
Y
1
12
1





    
 
 
 
       (9.16) 
 
 





















1
22
1
1
1
gs
g
m
f
d
C
j
R
G
Y
G
Y
      
       (9.17)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Where the feedback effect as proposed by Maas, [3] is defined by: 
  
1
1
1
1
1
1
















gd
gs
g
f
C
j
C
j
R
Y
 
 
Two diagonal matrices are used in these equations, |1| representing the 
identity matrix, and  representing the frequency components ranging from j-n 
to jn. All other parameters are constants. The elements for the conversion matrix 
are defined by equations (9.18) and ( 9.19). Equation (9.18) defines the current Ic 
in Cgs, whose Fourier representation is the previous equation. Equation (9.19) 
represents the Fourier coefficients of either the transconductance or output 
conductance.  
 





n
t
j
gsn
gs
n
e
C
t
C

)
(
 














k
n
m
t
j
m
n
n
m
t
j
c
n
m
k
e
V
C
j
e
I



         
 
       (9.18) 
 





n
t
jn
n
n
LO
e
G
t
g

)
(
    
 
 
 
       (9.19) 
 
The nonlinear reactance of input capacitance Cgs can generate mixing 
products. However, practical data reported in the literature shows their magnitude 
is much smaller than the ones dependent on gm and gd, thus it is customary to use 
the average capacitance value over the LO cycle and disregard any other non-
linear reactive term, greatly simplifying the conversion Y matrix. For gate mixers 
the gate is biased near pinch off where the capacitance is nearly constant and 
shows significant change only when gate voltage exceeds zero. For this reason in 
most designs the capacitance is assumed to be a linear function of bias, so the 
average value coincides with the capacitance at the bias point.  
 

598 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
9.1.2.1  Conversion Matrix – Unilateral FET Model 
 
In this mode, the device model for mixer analysis is transformed into a unilateral 
model, by absorbing the feedback capacitance after Miller's theorem. The 
elements gm(t), gd(t) on the other hand are replaced by Fourier coefficients 
obtained from the respective waveforms. Their representation in matrix form is in 
(9.20). 
 










































































































































































n
n
n
n
n
n
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
d
V
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
gd
Vg
Vg
Vg
g
V
g
V
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
gm
Id
Id
Id
Id
Id
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
1
1
*
0
1
1
2
2
1
0
1
2
2
1
2
1
0
1
1
2
2
2
1
0
1
2
1
2
1
0
1
1
*
*
0
1
1
2
2
1
0
1
2
2
1
2
1
0
1
1
2
2
2
1
0
1
2
1
2
1
0
1
1
*
*
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
.
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
0
0
0
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
       (9.20) 
 
The * in the I/V parameters designates the presence of negative 
frequencies, i.e., the lower side band coefficients. The suffix 0 corresponds to the 
input frequency, fRF. The suffix -n corresponds to the frequencies nfLO - fRF, or 
lower side band, while the suffix +n corresponds to the frequencies, nfLO + fRF or 
upper side band. The conductance and trans-conductance are resistive in nature so 
that gm = gm-1 and gd = gd-1.  In order to derive simple equations for conversion 
gain this matrix is usually truncated for gm, gd above second order and only the 
voltages and currents corresponding to the RF, IM (for image) and IF frequencies 
are retained. From matrix (9.20), the resulting drain currents at the frequencies –n, 
0 and +n are as follows: 
 
1
2
0
1
1
0
1
2
0
1
1
0
1















d
d
d
d
d
d
g
m
g
m
g
m
d
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
i
       (9.21a) 
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0














d
d
d
d
d
d
g
m
g
m
g
m
d
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
i
      (9.21b) 
1
0
0
1
1
2
1
0
0
1
1
2
1















d
d
d
d
d
d
g
m
g
m
g
m
d
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
V
g
i
     (9.21c) 
 
The unilateral model for the device based on this set of equations can be 
represented by Figure 9.5. The input voltage contains only one term at the RF 
frequency, Vg0, and the other input voltage sources are zero since it is assumed 
there is no feedback in the device model. The generator Es and internal impedance 
Zs represents the Thevenin equivalent of a matched generator to the gate 
impedance. In this simplified circuit the RF gate voltage is related to the generator 
Es by a simple voltage divider. The output voltages are defined by (9.22), 
corresponding to the currents flowing to a resistive load given by mfLO + fRF. The 
value of m = -1 refers to the IF output voltage. 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
599 
 
dm
m
dm
i
R
V


  
 
 
 
           
       (9.22) 
 
 
The IF current at the output load and the conversion gain are therefore 
simply defined by the following equation. The gain assumes gate and drain 
terminals are conjugately matched.  
 
 
IF
d
m
gRF
IF
R
g
g
V
I
0
1
1

              
 
          
       (9.23) 
 
2
2
1
)
(
4
gs
RF
m
in
IF
C
C
g
R
R
G


   
 
 
           
       (9.24) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.5 
 Unilateral model for a FET mixer. 
 
 
9.1.2.2  Fourier Coefficients 
 
The classical method to determine the coefficients starts with S-parameter 
measurements in the UHF range (100 MHz to 1 GHz) for various bias points 
covering the potential areas of operation. The data is then employed in the fitting 
of gm(Vg, Vd), gd (Vg, Vd) into bi-dimensional polynomials. The polynomials are 
placed into the equivalent circuit, which is pumped by a single tone LO voltage at 
the gate and drain to determine gm(t) and gd(t), and the corresponding Fourier 
coefficients. The LO amplitude is such as to provide maximum sweeping of gate 
voltage and consequently maximum conversion efficiency. With those 
coefficients, a two port Y parameter matrix is built, indicated by (9.25), assuming 
no IM voltage exists at the input or output.   
 

















)
(
)
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
22
21
12
11
IF
d
RF
g
IF
IF
RF
IF
IF
RF
RF
IF
d
RF
g
V
V
Y
Y
Y
Y
I
I











    (9.25) 
 
   ZS 
   ES 
IRF 
IIF 
IIM 
Y0 
Vg 
Ri 
jX 
ZL 

600 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
An alternative approach in modern electrical simulators equipped with 
sophisticated models, is to build the matrix directly from harmonic balance. For 
the specific case of the gate mixer, the LO voltage is shorted at the drain, resulting 
in a small drain voltage variation and maximum current sweep. Under such 
conditions the output conductance variation is small and the trans-conductance 
depends mainly on gate voltage. 
 
Quadratic mixer coefficients 
The  Fourier coefficients for a quadratic mixer are obtained by applying 
the gate voltage from (9.26) to (9.3).  
 
)
cos(
'
t
V
V
V
LO
LO
GS
GS



 
          
 
 
      (9.26) 
 
The transconductance coefficients are then obtained by derivation of 
(9.3), resulting in two terms: gm0, gm1 defined in (9.27a,b). The second term, gm1 is 
often called the conversion trans-conductance. Both values are maximized when 
VGS = VP/2 and VLO = VP/2. 
 
P
DSS
P
GS
P
DSS
m
V
I
V
V
V
I
g









1
2
0
 
 
        
     (9.27a) 
 
LO
P
DSS
P
LO
DSS
P
m
V
V
I
V
V
I
V
g
2
1
1


   
 
                    (9.27b)
 
 
 
An example of the waveforms appears in Figure 9.6 for an idealized 
FET.  The sinusoidal waveforms indicate that only one frequency is involved in 
the Fourier analysis. Current IDS(t) is a squared sinusoidal identified by the 
asymmetry between the top and bottom peaks.  
 
                                                                               
 
    
P
DSS
V
I
2

    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 9.6  
 gm(t) for an ideal quadratic FET biased at Vg = 0.5VP. 
Vg 
Vg=V1cosωt 
0 
VGS 
VP 
IDS 
t 
t 
IDS(t) 
gm(t) 
t 
IDS 
VDS 
0 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
601 
 
The derivative of current versus gate voltage is a straight line, so the 
gm(t) shows a sinusoidal waveform and a DC value in conformity with (9.27a,b). 
The ID,VD dynamic trajectory is a vertical line corresponding to the condition of a 
shorted drain load for AC but not for DC.   
 
Linear mixer coefficients 
A linear device shows a linear relationship between current and voltage 
over most of the gate voltage range, except near pinch off, where the relationship 
is close to quadratic, Figure 9.7. This behavior has been observed in typical short 
gate GaAs FETs, and its modeling has been proposed by Statz et al. [4], Angelov 
et al., [5], and EEFET by Agilent to name a few.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.7  
 Waveform for gm(t) from a quasi-linear  FET biased at Vg = VP. 
 
  
 
The figure also shows the function gm(Vg) with dotted lines and the area 
of maximum variation indicated by its derivative gm1(Vg). The maximum variation 
relates to maximum conversion gain found experimentally. Biasing the device at 
this point, causes the ID(t) waveform to be an ideal half wave sinusoid.  The trans-
conductance will be swinging in two states, from near zero to a maximum value 
close to the maximum small signal transconductance, in a square wave type of 
modulation. If the device is truly linear, then the small signal trans-conductance 
and large signal Fourier coefficients are similar and given by the set of (9.28a,c). 
 
 
P
DSS
m
V
I
g
2
0 
 
 
 
 
 
                    (9.28a) 
P
DSS
m
V
I
g


1
 
 
 
 
 
       
     (9.28b) 
t 
IDS(t) 
gm(t) 
t 
VP 
0 
ID
Vg 
gm 
gm1 
t 
Vg=V1cosωt 

602 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
P
DSS
m
V
I
g

3
3 
 
 
 
 
 
        
     (9.28c) 
 
 
The MESFET device NE673 by Nippon Electric Company, (NEC) 
selected for simulations, approximately follows the linear law for most gate 
voltages, except near the pinch off voltage. Parameters are found in Appendix 9A 
at the end of the chapter.  The Id/Vg plot is in Figure 9.8 where the solid line 
represents the Root model, and the dotted line the Quadratic Curtice. 
 
           
-1.4
-1.2
-1.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
-1.6
0.0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.00
0.08
VGS
IDS.i, A
IDS1.i
 
Figure 9.8   
Comparing ID/VG plot from Root model (solid line) and quadratic Curtice for the device 
NE673. 
 
 
The coefficients determined from the equations and those obtained from 
harmonic balance are in Table 9.1 below, for the following bias point: VGS = -
1.0V; VDS = 3V and VLO = 1.0V. The simulation circuit consisted of two voltage 
generators at the RF and LO frequencies applied to the device gate, with the drain 
shorted to ground at those two frequencies. The coefficients were found by 
relating the output currents at the frequencies involved in the gm definition. The 
simulated coefficients resulted in nearly zero for gm2, confirming the square wave 
nature of transconductance modulation. The difference between the models shows 
a slightly higher conversion transconductance for the Curtice model. For similar 
bias, the spectrum for the current components simulated with the Root model were 
retained and shown in Figure 9.9. Notice the difference between this spectrum and 
the one from a quadratic mixer. One can find the image generated by the beating 
of (fIM = 2fLO  - fRF), the second harmonic of fIF signal, and other components. 
Moving the bias to VGS = -0.5V; VDS = 3V and VLO = -0.5V the gm1 coefficient 
employing the Curtice model shows 14 mS while the Root model shows 2 mS.  
 
 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
603 
Table 9.1 
Fourier Coefficients for Linear Device Biased at Pinch-Off   
 
 
Eq. 2.8
Curtice
Root
gm0(mS)
24
32
23
gm1(mS)
14
23
2
gm2(mS)
0.2
0.2
0.4
 
 
                   
3.5
7.0
10.5
14.0
17.5
21.0
24.5
0.0
28.0
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-80
-10
f req, GHz
dBm(I_ds.i)
IF
LO
RF
m2LO
IM
m2IF
m4
m5
DC
m3LO
m4LO
m5LO
 
Figure 9.9  
 Spectrum for the NE673 device operating as a mixer biased at pinch-off. 
 
 
The effect of a non-zero load at the drain is observed in the load line of 
Figure 9.10(a). It can be shown that depending on the device size and on Q of the 
open stub connected to the drain, the load line may move below the knee of the 
ID,VD characteristic forcing the signal to swing into the linear region. As pointed 
out by Maas, [6], this condition causes a high modulation of gd(t) with consequent 
reduction in gm(t) and compression of current and voltage peaks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)                                     (b)                                (c) 
Figure 9.10  
Non-zero load effects: (a) dynamic trajectory on the ID/VD plane; (b) saturation on the 
peak of gm(t) waveform; (c) modulation of gd(t) becomes important and cannot be 
neglected. 
 
 
 
 
 
0 
t 
VDS 
gm(t) 
gd(t) 
t 
IDS 

604 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
9.1.2.3  Conversion Matrix with Feedback 
 
A complete analysis of conversion matrix including terminations at input and 
output at the three frequencies of interest is obtained from the model described in 
Figure 9.11. The method was proposed by Pucel et al. [7], and has been popularly 
used to analyze FET mixers. It has also been applied to bipolars, detailed in 
Chapter  7. The LO ports were included for completeness but are not part of the 
small signal analysis. The circuit contains filters that are transparent at the port 
frequency and open circuit to all other frequencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
` 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.11  
Feedback model for conversion matrix generation. After [7]. 
 
The RF signal generator and terminations for RF, IM (image signal), and 
IF are connected at the gate.  And similar terminations are connected at the drain. 
In this way the physical two-port network is represented as a virtual eight-port 
network. The matrix describing this circuit is given by (9.29), valid for down-
conversion, considering only the small signal components. The approach proposed 
in the reference uses a Z matrix representation and only the first two terms of 
Fourier expansion for gm(t) are employed, which is sufficient to simulate image, 
RF, and IF signals. The matrix components are defined by the relations (9.30a, i). 
The termination impedances at each port are denoted Zk with k = 1,2,..6, and the 
elements 
d
R
 and 
gs
C
 are assumed to be the average value over the LO cycle 
and are represented by a top bar. 
 
Rd 
Vb 
1=RF 
2=IM 
3=IF 
1=RF 
2=IM 
3=IF 
ERF 
ELO 
RS 
F1 
Z1 
FG
ZGLO 
F6 
Z6 
F5 
Z5 
F2 
Z2 
F3 
Z3 
F4 
Z4
FDLO 
ZDLO 
Cgs 
Ri 
gm(t)RdVb 
rg 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
605 



































































6
5
*
4
3
2
*
1
6
66
63
62
*
61
5
55
53
52
*
4
*
44
43
*
41
36
3
33
25
2
22
14
*
*
1
*
11
*
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
I
I
I
I
I
I
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
E
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    (9.29) 
gs
k
i
S
G
C
j
R
R
R
Z
Z
Z

1
33
22
11






 with k = 1,2,3       
     (9.30a) 
d
S
R
R
Z
Z
Z




66
55
44
 
                                          
     (9.30b) 
S
R
Z
Z
Z



36
25
14
                      
                      
 
     (9.30c)
 
gs
d
m
S
C
j
R
g
R
Z
1
0
41



 
(9.30d)  
gs
d
m
C
j
R
g
Z
1
1
61



   (9.30e) 
 
gs
d
m
S
C
j
R
g
R
Z
2
0
52



 (9.90f)  
gs
d
m
C
j
R
g
Z
1
1
62



  (9.30g) 
 
gs
d
m
S
C
j
R
g
R
Z
3
0
63



 
(9.30h)      
gs
d
m
C
j
R
g
Z
Z
3
1
53
43




 (9.30i) 
 
 
 
The conversion gain is obtained by the ratio of output power at port 6 and 
the available RF input power, (9.31).  
 
 




2
1
6
1
2
1
6
2
6
4
Re
4
Re
E
I
R
R
Z
E
Z
I
G
L
g
C


  
 
                  (9.31) 
 
 
The analysis of mixers using the conversion matrix is not directly 
available in most commercial software, so dedicated software is needed to solve 
the matrix for conversion gain and impedances at the frequencies of interest. 
Similarly to what was described in Chapter 7 for BJTs, an analytical solution is 
possible by applying similar approximations to FET mixers. The conversion gain, 
assuming a unilateral device model, which is a good approximation for a gate 
mixer with a low impedance at the RF frequency connected to the drain, is given 
by (9.32).  
 

606 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
2
1
1
2
6
66
2
*
1
*
11
2
1
1
4
)
(
)
(
2


















Cgs
g
R
R
Z
Z
Z
Z
R
R
C
R
g
G
m
in
L
L
g
gs
d
m
C


   (9.32) 
 
 
 
 
9.1.2.4  Mixer Impedance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
The port impedance at any frequency of interest can be determined directly from 
matrix (9.29) by applying the corresponding terminations at the RF, IF and IM 
frequencies. However, for impedance calculations, the simplified schematic of 
Figure 9.12 provides simpler analytical expressions. Similar to the case applied 
for bipolars, the impedance is determined by proper termination at the RF, IF 
frequencies, and by replacing gm(t), Cgs, Rd by their average values.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.12  
Schematic for determining in/out FET impedance. 
 
 
The RF gate impedance was calculated from the schematic of Figure 9.12 
for two feedback conditions, series emitter feedback or parallel feedback. The 
input impedance neglecting Cgd is given by (9.33), which can be approximated by 
(9.34) if ZL  0, a typical termination in gate mixers. The source impedance, ZS, 
can represent the series source access resistance of the device or the sum of the 
device and external added resistance. It can also represent the inductance 
connecting the device to ground or to another terminal. It cannot however 
represent both a resistance and an inductance simultaneously. When the load 
impedance is high, then the input impedance is best represented with parallel 
feedback only, (9.35). The drain impedance with the gate terminated in the 
generator impedance is given by (9.36), which can be simplified to (9.37). 
 
D 
S 
IDS 
IG
S 
gd 
gm0VGS 
VGS' 
Ri 
Cgs 
Cgd 
ZS 
rg 
G 
VGS 
VDS 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
607 
 















)
(
1
1
0
1
L
d
S
gs
d
m
s
gs
i
g
RF
Z
R
Z
C
j
R
g
Z
C
j
R
r
Z


   (9.33) 
     
 











gs
m
s
gs
i
g
RF
C
j
g
Z
C
j
R
r
Z


0
1
1
1
                        (9.34) 
 


gd
L
m
gs
i
g
RF
C
Z
g
C
j
R
r
Z
)
1(
1
0
2






  
      (9.35) 
 
 













G
gs
m
S
gs
m
d
S
IF
Z
C
j
g
Z
C
j
g
R
Z
Z


1
1
0
0
 
                    (9.36) 
 


d
S
m
S
IF
R
Z
g
Z
Z
0
1


 
 
                    
      (9.37) 
 
 
The drain and source resistances with a top trace represent the average 
value over one LO cycle. In GaAs circuits Ls is small, making the input 
impedance a series RC circuit. In CMOS circuits the resistive components are 
small and the real part of the impedance is controlled by the term (Lsgm)/Cgs 
obtained by replacing ZS by an inductance LS. Notice the same argument used for 
stability in bipolar circuits is valid here; a capacitive source impedance generates a 
negative real term that can be larger than the other circuit losses and may result in 
negative resistance.  
 
 
9.1.3 Gate Mixer Properties 
 
9.1.3.1 Noise Figure 
 
The mechanism of noise generation in a mixer is different than that of an amplifier 
because the device parameters vary in time in response to the LO signal. The drain 
current becomes a function of time, and all the noise generators in the mixer that 
are a function of bias are also time dependent. One of the first studies, [8], 
considers adding the noise induced at the gate at the RF and IF frequencies to 
calculate the noise figure. In another publication, [9], the authors proposed to use 
noise figure developed for an HBT amplifier and adapt it for mixers by making 
the substitutions: ω  ωRF, gm  gm1 and Cgs  Cg0.  Another author [10], 
proposed a similar approach for a GaAs FET and the four noise parameters are 
represented next: gm1 corresponds to the conversion trans-conductance, gd0 the 
average component of the time dependent output conductance gd(t), and Cg0 the 

608 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
average component for the gate capacitance. The equations were developed in 
terms of the fitting parameters Tg and Td corresponding to the equivalent noise 
temperature associated with gate losses and drain losses, respectively. 
 
 
 
2
0
0
1
0
min
2
1
T
T
T
g
R
g
C
NF
d
g
d
in
m
g
RF



 
 
          
      (9.38) 
 
0
0
0
1
1
g
RF
d
d
in
g
g
RF
m
opRF
C
j
g
T
R
T
C
g
Z




  
  
      (9.39)
 
 
 
0
0
2
T
T
g
f
f
g
d
d
T
n







 
 
     
                     
      (9.40) 
 
 
In the equations, the parameter Tg was demonstrated to be equal to 297 
K, while Td is a larger value ranging from 4000 to 6000 K. Equation (9.39) 
represents the optimum noise impedance to be connected to the gate that will 
provide the noise figure calculated in (9.38). The parameter, gn is the equivalent 
noise conductance of the mixer. The noise figure is obtained by inserting (9.38) to 
(9.40) into (9.41), with Rn = 1/gn and Rop = Real(ZopRF); Xop = Imaginary(ZopRF). 
The circuit impedance connected to the gate is defined by Zss = Rss + jXss. 
 
 
















2
2
)
(
2
2
min
Xop
Rop
X
X
R
R
R
R
F
F
op
ss
op
ss
SS
n
  
       (9.41) 
 
 
Best accuracy is obtained by performing a source pull test of the device 
to determine the noise parameters directly. Other approaches to determine device 
noise figure of a GaAs FET are available and one of the most popular is the 
empirical Fukui's method, [11]. A similar set of equations have also been applied 
to represent noise figure of MOS FETs, [12].   
 
 
9.1.3.2 Linearity 
 
The distortion terms of interest in this section are the two-tone third order 
appearing at the frequencies: {LO ± (21 - 2)} and {LO ± (22 - 1)}, which 
fall within the IF pass band after conversion. One could argue that square law 
devices are linear so there is no third order distortion. But that statement is an 
idealization, and real FETs always show deviations from square law. The 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
609 
analytical determination of nonlinearity is quite complex, requiring the application 
of the time varying Volterra series. A simplified version using the method of 
nonlinear currents can be applied to the case of a single resistive nonlinearity, as 
follows, [13]: 
 
 The Taylor description of drain current takes the form represented in 
(9.42), where the small signal voltage Vgs(t) in this particular equation represents 
the summation of all the voltages grouped by order.  These Taylor gm values are 
different from the other gm values that are the Fourier coefficients of the pumped 
transconductance waveform. 
 
 




...
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
3
3
2
2
1




t
V
t
g
t
V
t
g
t
V
t
g
t
I
gs
m
gs
m
gs
m
ds
   (9.42) 
 
...
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
3
2
1




t
V
t
V
t
V
t
V
gs
gs
gs
gs
 
  
     (9.43a) 
)
(
)
(
2
)
(
)
(
2
1
2
1
2
t
V
t
V
t
V
t
V
gs
gs
gs
gs


 
                      
     (9.43b) 


3
1
3
)
(
)
(
t
V
t
V
gs
gs

 
 
 
  
 
     (9.43c) 
 
The individual currents are re-arranged to separate fundamental, second, 
and third order voltage components, per the set of (9.45) and represented in Figure 
9.13. The first term is linear and can be solved by zeroing the current sources. The 
second contains the second derivative component and can be obtained by zeroing 
ES and assuming the only excitation is I2.  So the higher order term is obtained 
from the lower one. The third term is calculated in two parts, one containing only 
fundamental and second order components and another containing the third order 
components.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.13 
 Nonlinear transconductance representation. 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
3
2
1
t
I
t
I
t
I
t
I
ds
ds
ds
ds



           
 
      (9.44) 
 

)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
3
2
1
1
1
t
V
g
V
t
V
g
t
I
gs
gs
gs
m
ds



    
        
     (9.45a) 
Ids 
I1=gmVg
I2=gm2Vg1
2 I3=gm3Vg1
3+2gm2Vg1Vg2 
YL 
Vg 
ZS 
ES 
Ri 
jX 

610 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
)
(
)
(
2
1
2
2
t
V
g
t
I
g
m
ds

        
 
 
         
     (9.45b) 


3
1
3
2
1
2
3
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
)
(
t
V
g
t
V
t
V
g
t
I
gs
m
g
gs
m
ds


       
         
     (9.45c) 
 
The equations show the third order current is dependent on the Fourier 
coefficients for gm2(t) and gm3(t), requiring complex matrices for their 
representation.  However, it was pointed out in  [14] the terms due to gm2 are 
created by the interaction between second order components with the fundamental 
and are of much lower magnitude than the term where there is a direct interaction 
between the third order and fundamental.  Therefore, for the particular case of the 
gate mixer the third order distortion current can be given by (9.46). The load 
impedance for both the converted signal and the distortion signal are the same due 
to the small difference in frequency between them. The ratio between third order 
and fundamental can be estimated by (9.48). 
 
)
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
1
1
11
1
t
t
V
g
t
I
LO
RF
gs
m
ds



   
 
       (9.46)                     
 
)
cos(
]
)
2
cos[(
)
(
2
1
3
1
31
3
t
t
V
g
t
I
LO
RF
RF
g
m
ds





                   (9.47) 
 
11
2
1
31
3
m
gs
m
g
V
g
IMR 
 
 
 
 
           
       (9.48) 
 
According to (9.48), the IMR3 ratio is improved if gm31 is minimum and 
gm11 is maximum. In mixer design, intermodulation can be predicted quite 
accurately by harmonic balance tools, if the model employed is capable of 
representing the device under small signal, and shows no discontinuity in the 
derivatives of ID/VG up to the third order.  The distortion levels are obtained 
directly from voltages and currents in the load. Therefore, there has been 
extensive work recorded in the literature, where investigators proposed models 
with such capabilities. The Root model found in ADS provides such derivatives as 
long as the voltages and currents are within the normal region of operation. If the 
limits are obtained by extrapolating the I/V trajectories, then the derivatives may 
not be correct. The quadratic Curtice model is poor in this regard, due to a sharp 
cut off of current resulting in a high pulse at the third derivative. An example of 
how to evaluate gm, gd to be used in simulators for the device (KGF-1284 by OKI 
Semiconductors) is available in [15]. The plot for the transconductance is in 
Figure 9.14 showing the first three derivatives of current as a function of gate 
voltage.  
Intuitively one can see that if LO voltage is allowed to swing along the 
gate axis, there are gm1, gm2, gm3… coefficients for the first derivative, gm21, gm22, 
gm23,.. coefficients for the second derivative and gm31, gm32, gm33 coefficients for 
the third derivative.  The plot also shows conversion trans-conductance, gm1, is 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
611 
maximum near the pinch off gate voltage, near the point where the third order, 
gm2, is also maximum. This indicates that maximum conversion gain and 
minimum third order distortion are not simultaneously possible and so 
compromises are needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
Figure 9.14  
Transconductance versus gate voltage. After [15]. 
 
 
9.1.3.3 Stability 
 
The same concerns regarding circuit stability covered in BJT circuits are valid in 
active FET mixers. The situation may be less critical in FETs due to lower DC 
trans-conductance, providing more stability at low frequencies; but FETs offer 
power gain at much higher frequencies so there is a higher probability of 
oscillation in a broader frequency spectrum. Classical two port linear stability 
analysis using K-factor and stability circles derived from S-parameters is 
applicable and is a tool to check if a circuit is stable when DC power is applied, 
[16]. Oscillations may be triggered by application of LO power to the circuit, 
which is a condition that is more difficult to detect. A simple test for this is to 
verify if application of a large signal to any of the ports in the mixer circuit results 
in a reflection coefficient higher than 1 at the fundamental frequency. 
Additionally, mixer conversion gain can be checked for a monotonic increase with 
LO power and/or bias within reasonable range. A jump in the conversion gain is 
an indication of potential instability, which is aggravated if the jump in gain is too 
high, for a single mixer device.  A more generic tool for stability check is a time 
domain analysis. A small perturbation voltage applied at a strategic place in the 
circuit, the gate in this case, will generate a transient response in the circuit. The 
response will either decay, for a stable circuit, or increase for an unstable circuit 
and reach a stable oscillation condition. This verification approach works well 
when the circuit can be represented by lumped elements. At higher frequencies the 
distributed nature of the circuit must be considered, and time domain analysis may 
not always work.  
gm1 
-0.4 
-1.0 
gm 
gm2 
-0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
-0.2 
-0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0 
0 
-1.5 
-2.0 
-2.5 
-3.0 
Vgs(V) 
gm(S) 
gm1(S/V) & gm2(S/V2) 

612 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The same recipe proposed for the BJT is valid: (a) the device is biased at 
an operating point and S-parameters are derived over as wide a frequency range as 
possible, then check K-factor and stability circles for potential negative resistance; 
(b) apply a dynamic LO voltage to the circuit and verify the presence of negative 
resistance; (c) increase LO power from low gate voltage up to full power and 
check conversion gain behavior; (d) check conversion gain behavior for constant 
LO power and variable gate voltage; (e) apply a small perturbation voltage to a 
point in the circuit and check if the transient response decays or builds up.  
 
 
9.1.4 Design Study: X-Band Mixer 
 
The device employed in the simulations is a low noise MESFET type NE673 by 
NEC measuring 0.3X280 µm2 applied to the schematic of Figure 9.2. The Root 
model was selected for the simulation of a mixer designed to convert 10 GHz to 
100 MHz. A minimum IF bandwidth of 20 MHz is usually required by 
communication systems and is part of the spec target. The conversion gain can be 
estimated by (9.32) employing transconductance values from Table 9.1 and using 
the average gate capacitance value. The capacitance can be obtained from the 
reverse biased Schottky gate equation. The capacitance will vary from 0.22 to 
0.38 pF in the positive cycle of LO drive voltage. If we assume this variation is 
linear, then the average value will equal the small signal value at the bias point, 
therefore: 
 
 
pF
Vbi
Vgs
C
C
C
j
gs
gs
25
.0
8.0
0.1
1
384
.0
1
)
0
(
2
/
1










 
 
 
 
 
These parameters are defined in Chapter 3. The simplified version of 
(9.32) assumes the average value of drain impedance is matched. If drain voltage 
is higher than 3.0 Volts, then the output voltage swing will mainly be within the 
saturation region where drain impedance is reasonably constant and equal to the 
small signal value determined from S-parameters. 
 
      
dB
E
E
Cgs
g
R
R
G
m
in
L
C
7.4
12
25
.0
*
9
10
2
016
.0
35
100
4
2
2
1
1


















 
 
 
 
The conversion matrix process is a good means to understand mixer 
operation but its application requires dedicated software that is not available 
commercially. However, the harmonic balance solver available in most high 
frequency electrical simulators provides conversion gain, as well as power 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
613 
compression and spurious at various mixing frequencies. If the model is adequate 
it can even predict third order distortion products. Therefore, a practical mixer 
design using a harmonic balance tool is described as follows:  
 
 
First step: Choose the appropriate means to short circuit the drain at LO 
frequencies. An open stub measuring a quarter wave long at the LO frequency was 
selected to apply a low impedance to the drain RF, LO and image signals. The 
large signal impedance was determined by applying an LO voltage of 1.5 V and 
reading the gate current, resulting in ZLO = 6.9 - j59 . 
  
Second step: Apply a small RF signal to the gate simultaneously with the 
LO signal to determine small signal RF impedance; Two voltage generators, one 
at RF and the other at LO were applied to the gate to measure the large and small 
signal impedance. The simulated small input impedance is ZRFsim = 7.0 - j47 , 
which is close to the value provided by (9.35), ZRFeq = 9 - j69 . Those values are 
close to the large signal value, which is to be expected in the case of a linear 
device.  
 
Third step: The RF and LO matching circuits are calculated and inserted 
into the circuit. The drain IF impedance is best determined in the final circuit by 
varying the IF load for maximum power transfer and then replacing the load with 
a transformer to the external load. Optimize all matching circuits for a specific 
application, either high conversion gain or maximum output power at the P1dB 
point or a trade off.  
       
Fourth step: Check stability from the MHz range up to the device fT for 
the various operating bias points.  In this step oscillations were found to be likely 
in the example, so an RC series circuit (1 Kohm, 0.5 pF) was inserted between 
drain and gate to stabilize the circuit. To further improve stability, a 50 ohm 
resistor was inserted between the gate terminal and the short circuit bias stub. 
After optimization the component values of the network in Figure 9.2 are 
described in Table 9.2. The transmission lines are ideal and circuit performance 
will change if transformed into microstrip lossy elements.  
 
Table 9.2 
Parameters for Gate Mixer Circuit 
 
θm1 
58° 
θm4 
84° 
Z01 
43 Ω 
Z04 
50 Ω 
θm2 
60° 
Lbias 
260 nH 
Z02 
65.6 Ω 
QLbias 
50 
θ3 
90° 
Cm 
23 pF 
Z03 
70 Ω 
Lm 
74 nH 
 
 
The design parameters were derived as a function of LO amplitude, 
which has to be maintained when the voltage generator is replaced by a 50  

614 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
power source and matching circuits are introduced. The LO voltage at the gate is 
monitored and LO power is adjusted to approximately obtain the same LO level.  
The conversion gain in Figure 9.15 is 5 dB for an input RF signal input 
level of -20 dBm and LO power at 3 dBm, with the device biased at VD = 3V; VG 
= -1.25 V. This value compares very favorably with the estimated 4.7 dB gain 
from (9.32). The IF frequency was swept from 80 to 120 MHz with the LO 
frequency fixed at 10 GHz. The conversion gain is nearly constant between 90 and 
110 MHz. Next, the gain compression with IF at 100 MHz was evaluated, 
resulting in 1dB compression occurring at an RF input level of +1.5 dBm.   
 
                   
8.50E7
9.00E7
9.50E7
1.00E8
1.05E8
1.10E8
1.15E8
8.00E7
1.20E8
1
3
5
7
9
-1
10
IFfreq
dBm(Vload[::,1])+20
m3
m4
m5
 
Figure 9.15  
Conversion gain plot. The center frequency marker m5 indicates a conversion gain of 
4.9 dB at an IF frequency of 100 MHz. The gain variation within the 200 MHz band 
indicated by markers m3, m4 is 0.17 dB. 
 
      
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
-30
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
10
RFpower
dBm(Vload[::,1])-RFpower
m6
m7
 
Figure 9.16  
Conversion gain versus RF power. Marker m6 indicates a drop in gain of 1 dB 
occuring at an input power level of 1.5 dBm. 
 
 
9.2  SOURCE LO INJECTION 
 
The RF signal is applied to the gate and the converted IF is extracted from the 
drain in the same way as in the gate mixer, but the LO is injected at the source. 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
615 
This is a low impedance zone that requires a high LO power to provide an 
efficient switching of current. One of the reasons this topology is not popular in 
FET circuits is that high device fT makes it difficult to control stability due to the 
capacitive reactance applied to the source. This problem can be minimized by 
introducing a driver transistor, M1 in Figure 9.17, directly to the source of the RF 
device, M2. This results in lower external LO power required to drive the mixer. 
Such an arrangement can be thought of a variation of Cascode, but in this book 
Cascode refers to LO injection at the gate of top device, M2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.17  
Topology for a source mixer. 
 
The design requires a device model capable of representing current in the 
first and third quadrant for the RF device. The transconductance variation of 
transistor M2 as a function of LO and RF voltages is represented in the plot of 
Figure 9.18, [17]. It is observed that gm is modulated by LO voltages greater than 
1V. The plot of Figure 9.18 was generated by applying LO to the source, and the 
RF signal to the gate. If LO voltage is large enough, gm varies with time at the LO 
frequency. Maximum gm is depicted by the thick line obtained by keeping M2 
within the saturation region, which requires M1 to operate in the linear region. 
Based on these conditions the authors proposed representing M1 by an impedance, 
ZS, and a conversion matrix similar to (9.29) is applicable. The termination 
conditions at the drain are similar to a gate mixer, where the terminations at LO, 
RF and image are low. The analytical representation of mixer gain is also similar 
to the gate mixer equation. The size of transistor M1 must be sufficiently large to 
modulate the drain source current from zero to IDSS. The drain filter in Figure 9.17 
is required to present a short circuit for RF and LO, while passing the IF to the 
load. The gate input match circuit is now required to short the gate to ground at 
the LO frequency. A simple LC filter from source to ground has been proposed to 
improve stability. This approach uses all three ports of a transistor, but due to the 
difficulty of controlling stability, it is seldom used.  
 
M2 
M1 
Low 
Pass 
Filter 
RF 
match 
Band 
Pass 
Filter 
RF  
IF  
LO  
LO 
match 

616 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.18  
Trajectory of M2 as a function of VLO, VRF. From [17]. 
 
 
9.3 DRAIN LO INJECTION 
 
In this mode the LO is applied to the drain, RF is applied to the gate and IF is 
extracted from the drain.  This is circuit is simply called a "drain mixer".  The 
circuit schematic for a drain mixer is in Figure 9.19, using both ideal transmission 
lines and lumped elements. Similarly to the gate mixer, in physical circuits the RF 
and image terminations share the same impedance, assuming a low IF frequency. 
The LO termination at the gate is challenging to implement with a different 
impedance than for the RF and image since the LO, RF, and image frequencies are 
similar to each other.   Fortunately, the reverse gain of the device attenuates the 
LO leakage signal appearing at the gate, minimizing its effect on input impedance. 
On the drain side the circuit is more complex due to the interactions of multiple 
signals there. Ideally, the RF and image impedances are open circuited allowing 
maximum voltage at the drain node at those frequencies. The LO impedance on 
the other hand should be matched to the LO generator impedance, whose 
impedance acts as termination for the RF and image signals and a lossy element to 
the IF signals.  This situation can be improved in a balanced circuit where some 
isolation can be obtained between LO and RF. The IF coupling from drain to the 
external IF load is relatively simple since it is far in frequency from the other 
signals. Note that for the drain mixer two non-linear elements participate in the 
conversion process, gm and gd, the first active and the second lossy. Thus there are 
two non-linear elements generating distortion so it is expected to have inferior 
linearity and noise figure compared to the gate mixer. 
 
The matching circuit on the gate side of the Figure 9.19 uses a topology 
that is similar to the one employed in the gate mixer. However, the drain circuit is 
considerably different. The LO signal is applied to the drain by means of a 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
617 
coupling capacitor at high impedance, and the IF signal is coupled by means of a 
transmission line transformer. The open stub provides impedance matching and 
rejection to the second harmonic to minimize its effect on the LO generator. The 
quarter wave long bias stub at the drain can be offset from 90 becoming inductive 
and resonating the node capacitance to ground. This increases the LO and RF 
voltage swings assuming low IF. The IF signal is extracted from the drain node 
after the bias stub, where capacitor CIF is a high impedance at the IF but a low 
impedance to ground at the RF and LO frequencies. The bias inductor, Lbias, is 
also a high impedance at the IF.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.19  
Schematic for a simple drain mixer. 
 
 
 
9.3.1 Bilinear Model for gm, gd 
 
The drain is biased at a low VDS voltage, near the onset of current saturation ( 
Vsat), so the LO voltage forces the positive cycle of drain voltage to swing in the 
saturation region and the negative into the linear region compressing the 
sinusoidal peak. Increasing the LO drive, and assuming the bias point remains 
constant, the voltage waveform approximates a half sinusoidal shape. The device 
gate can be biased at the middle of the Id = f(VG) curve, Vb = VP/2.  
The bi-linear model for gm, gd, illustrated in Figure 9.20 and proposed in 
[18], helps to explain the operation of the circuit, using typical bias for a drain 
mixer. It shows the modulation of transconductance in a solid line as an inverted 
half sinusoid, and output conductance in a dotted line as a half sinusoidal. These 
waveforms assume only the LO signal is applied to the drain. This particular 
situation occurs when the LO amplitude is forced into the triode area.  The small 
RF signal voltage applied to the gate, is superimposed onto the LO voltage at the 
drain, and mixing results from interaction with gm(t), gd (t). The output 
conductance can be considered as switching between the maximum (Rds) and 
minimum (Rdu) values in an on-off manner for VLO >> Vsat. The authors proposed 
to consider the time varying output resistance and load impedance as a single 
parameter. In saturated mode, the output resistance is equal to Rds in parallel with 
RL, and in the triode region it is equal to Rdu in parallel with RL, so the average 
value is given by (9.50a) and the fundamental component is given by (9.50b). 
VLO 
VL 
3 = 90 
m6 
m5 = 90 
ZLO 
VRF 
ZS 
4 = 90 
Vb 
+ VDS 
+ 
-
m1 
m2 
CIF 
Lbias 
RL 

618 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.20 
Drain voltage waveform assumed to be sinusoidal in the active and in the triode region.  
 
...
)
cos(
)
(
1
)
(
1
0





t
R
R
g
t
g
t
R
LO
d
d
L
d
d

   
       (9.49) 
 










L
du
du
L
ds
ds
L
d
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
2
0
 
 
       
     (9.50a) 
 
 










L
du
du
L
ds
ds
L
d
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R

2
1
 
 
       
     (9.50b) 
 
 Similar to drain conductance, the transconductance is modulated 
between two states, gm within the saturated region that is constant with drain 
voltage, and gm in the triode or linear region that varies with drain bias. The 
transconductance waveform is therefore an inverted half sinusoid. The Fourier 
series describing the gm waveform is given as: 
 
...
)
cos(
)
(
1
0



t
g
g
t
g
LO
m
m
m

 
 
       
     (9.51a) 
 
max
max
0
68
.0
1
1
m
m
m
g
g
g







 
 
        
    (9.51b) 
gd(t), gm(t) 
t 
t 
Vg=VRFcosωRFt 
gd 
gm 
VDS 
Vd=VLOcosωLOt 
t 
0 
Vx 
VP 
IDS 
Vg 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
619 
2
max
1
m
m
g
g

  
 
 
 
                  (9.51c) 
 
The output voltage based on a simplified FET model is given by the 
conventional relation (9.52). Replacing the ids(t) and Rd(t) values, the converted IF 
drain voltage is defined by (9.53). Developing the equations to obtain the drain 
voltage at IF frequency, and making Rdu→0, the result is in (9.54). 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
t
R
t
i
t
V
d
ds
ds

 
 
 
                                    (9.52) 
 
)
(
)
(
)
cos(
)
(
t
R
t
g
t
V
t
V
d
m
RF
RF
ds


 
         
 
       (9.53) 
 
t
R
g
R
g
V
V
RF
LO
d
m
d
m
RF
dIF
)
cos(
)
(
2
0
1
1
0





 
 
 
t
R
g
R
g
V
V
RF
LO
L
m
L
m
RF
dIF
)
cos(
2
2
1
2
68
.0
2
max
max












 
 
t
R
R
R
R
g
V
V
RF
LO
L
ds
ds
L
m
RF
dIF
)
cos(
4
1
36
.1
2
max













 
 
 
t
R
R
R
R
g
V
V
RF
LO
L
ds
ds
L
m
RF
dIF
)
cos(
2
68
.0
max





        
       (9.54) 
 
The output voltage at IF frequency becomes: 
 
t
R
R
R
R
g
V
V
RF
LO
L
ds
ds
L
m
RF
dIF
)
cos(
1






           
 
      (9.55) 
 
The conversion power gain is obtained by calculating the IF drain power 
at the output load, and dividing this by the power available from the generator at 
the gate. Under matched input conditions, this latter power equals the power 
absorbed by the gate circuit. Therefore: 
 
2
1
2
2
1











L
ds
ds
gs
RF
m
i
L
L
IN
IF
C
R
R
R
C
g
R
R
R
P
V
G

 
          
       (9.56) 

620 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Assuming RL is matched to Rds the conversion gain assumes a relation 
similar to gate mixer gain.  
 
2
1
4









gs
RF
m
i
L
C
C
g
R
R
G

  
 
 
         
 
       (9.57) 
 
 
A more accurate calculation of conversion gain for drain mixers can be 
obtained by using measured parameters for gm(Vg,Vd) and gd(Vg,Vd), [19], to 
calculate the Fourier coefficients as described in the gate mixer section.  
Manipulating the set of (9.21), the following equations are obtained for the RF 
and IF currents at the drain port.  
 
 
0
2
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
)
1
)(
1(
)
1(
g
RF
IF
d
IF
d
RF
d
m
IF
d
IF
d
m
RF
V
R
R
g
R
g
R
g
g
R
g
R
g
g
I












               
       (9.58) 
 
 
0
2
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
)
1
)(
1(
)
1(
g
IF
RF
d
IF
d
RF
d
m
RF
d
RF
d
m
IF
V
R
R
g
R
g
R
g
g
R
g
R
g
g
I






                         (9.59) 
 
Observing the mixer equations for (9.58) and (9.69) and assuming the 
ratio gm0/gm1 is in the order of two to three for reasonable modulation levels, it is 
concluded IRF is at least twice the IIF. The former current flows into the RF 
impedance circuitry, and the latter into the IF load. If the circuit is matched at RF 
and IF frequencies, then the conversion gain definition becomes: 
 
2
2
1
0
1
1
2
4
2
)
(
1









IF
RF
d
m
RF
d
m
gs
RF
in
IF
C
R
R
g
g
R
g
g
C
R
R
G

                   
       (9.60) 
 
 
9.3.2 Impedance Matching 
 
Contrary to the gate mixer topology, the LO cannot be shorted at the drain 
because a maximum LO voltage swing is required there for maximum conversion 
gain. But like the gate mixer, low impedances are desired at the RF and image 
frequencies. Those are not conditions that can be achieved for low IF, so for the 
sake of obtaining maximum LO voltage swing, the LO generator must be matched 
to the drain impedance at the fundamental frequency. However, to maintain the 
desired LO wave shape of half sinusoid and half clipped sinusoid, the LO 
matching circuitry should not filter out the harmonics, which is difficult to achieve 
with L,C components. In view of this complexity, harmonic balance simulation 
can facilitate the design process, which is illustrated by using the test circuit in the 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
621 
figure below to determine impedances. The drain impedance is expected to be 
higher than the LO generator impedance, so an inductance is used in shunt to 
match the LO and also facilitate bias insertion. The resulting inductive admittance 
is then resonated by a series capacitor that also provides the DC block. A voltage 
generator at the RF frequency is simultaneously applied to the gate to monitor the 
conversion trans-conductance. The RF impedance is also determined from the test 
circuit and approximately equates to the input impedance given by (9.37). Since 
the drain is not shorted, capacitive feedback becomes important and is included in 
(9.37). The IF impedance is determined by a similar process to that for gate 
mixers, namely, the drain impedance is matched to the IF load using a transformer 
and matching circuit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.21  
Schematic for impedance evaluation with current meters at gate and drain. 
 
 
9.3.3  A Note on Linearity 
 
The simple relationship between current and voltage for gate mixers given by 
(9.42) is not applicable to drain mixers because the output conductance 
nonlinearity becomes important and must be included with the trans-conductance 
nonlinearity. The increased complexity in describing drain current is evident in 
(9.61), with nine terms instead of three.  The increased difficulty solving for 
current is apparent and requires a lengthy process to measure the Taylor 
parameters, search for the Fourier coefficients for each one of the elements below, 
build a conversion matrix to finally determine the design parameters, and predict 
conversion gain and inter-modulation products. 
 
...
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(



t
V
t
g
t
V
g
t
I
ds
d
gs
m
ds
               
 
       (9.61) 
 
)...
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
2
2
2
t
V
t
V
t
g
t
V
t
g
t
V
t
g
d
g
md
d
d
g
m



 
 
)...
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
2
3
3
3
3
t
V
t
V
t
g
t
V
t
g
t
V
t
g
d
g
d
m
d
d
g
m



 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
2
t
V
t
V
t
g
d
g
md

 
Z0 
Ctune 
Ltune 
-
VLO 
VRF 
VGS 
+ VDS 
+
-
NE673 
I 
I 

622 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Similarly to gate mixers, the most important parameters for linearity are 
those that are directly generated from input voltage, gm3, gd3, and those generated 
through internal interaction between the gate and drain voltages, gm2d, gmd2. It is 
found in the literature that linearity is more sensitive to gd than gm, it improves 
with higher current, and by minimizing the dynamic I/V  trajectory near the "knee" 
area (region of Ids,Vds curve at low Vds); however, improving linearity also reduces 
conversion gain. Best linearity and maximum conversion gain are not 
simultaneously achievable, so the optimal LO power level must be found to 
achieve the best trade-off between the two.   
 
 
9.3.4 Design Study: Drain Mixer at 10 GHz 
 
The following design example uses the schematic of Figure 9.19.  The same 
device model as the previous design example, and similar frequency bands are 
used for LO, RF and IF. The plot of ID, VD and gd(VD) are in Figure 9.22 for VGS = 
-0.4V. The function gm(VD) is not shown but follows the same shape as ID, VD. 
The plot suggests the bias point where both gm, gd show high variation is around 
VD = 1.0 V. The test circuit in Figure 9.21 was used to determine the RF and LO 
impedances.  
 
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
0.0
5.0
0.016
0.032
0.048
0.064
0.000
0.080
VDS
IDS1.i
gd
 
Figure 9.22  
Drain current and output conductance versus drain voltage. 
 
 
The circuit was simulated with Ltune, Ctune, and bias being optimized, 
resulting in the maximum gm1 value of 25 mS. The RF input impedance at the gate 
was found to be ZRF = 8 - j35 .  The LO impedance at the drain was ZLO = 40 - 
j30 , which is equivalent to 62.50 ohms in parallel with 0.19 pF capacitance. 
Since the RF impedance is similar to that of the gate mixer, a similar matching 
structure was used. 
A feedback network between drain and gate, plus a 50 ohm termination 
inserted between the gate and negative supply not shown in the schematic, were 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
623 
implemented to maintain circuit stability. The drain impedance matching 
comprises two parts, LO matching with conventional low pass circuit, and IF 
matching decoupled from LO signals. The device gate sees a matched RF 
impedance whose value is close to that at the image frequency. The IF impedance 
is terminated by a 50  resistor for stability reasons. On the drain side, the drain 
impedance is matched at the LO frequency and to the IF frequency 
simultaneously. This can be accomplished without difficulty if IF frequency is 
much lower than the LO frequency. On the other hand, it is desirable to have the 
RF frequency  and image voltage signals shorted to ground at the same port which 
is not feasible with simple circuits, so a trade-off was made during optimization.  
The parallel bias stub in Figure 9.19 was shortened from 90 to 40 to 
tune the output capacitance, making the IF impedance equal to 100 Ohm. The 
component values after optimization are in Table 9.3. Note that ideal lossless 
transmission lines are assumed. A conversion gain of 3 dB was achieved for an IF 
bandwidth of 100 MHz and LO at 10 GHz as indicated in Figure 9.23(a) by 
markers m2, m3. This result is in contrast to the -2 dB gain predicted by (9.57). 
The reason for this difference is the drain voltage waveform does not have the half 
square wave shape that is assumed by the equation. The power performance is 
shown in Figure 9.23b for two LO power levels. The power at 1 dB gain 
compression is equal to –4 dBm with PLO = 10 dBm, identified by marker m4. If 
PLO = 13 dBm is applied then, marker m2 indicates a P1dB of 0 dBm. 
 
Table 9.3 
 Parameters for the Drain Mixer of Figure 9.19 
       
θm1 
65° 
θm3 
45° 
CIF 
2 pF 
Z01 
50 Ω 
Z04 
90 Ω 
Lbias 
200 nH 
θm2 
45° 
θm5 
75° 
QLIF 
50 
Z02 
61.6 Ω 
Z05 
50 Ω 
RL 
100 
θ3 
95° 
θm6 
55° 
 
 
Z03 
70 Ω 
Z06 
50 Ω 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 9.23  
Performance of drain mixer: (a) Tuned conversion gain; (b) P1dB power for PLO = 10 
and 13 dBm. 
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
-40
5
-1.8
0.4
2.6
4.8
-4.0
7.0
dBm(Vload[:: 1])
dBm(Vload[::,1])-RFpower
m2
m3
dBm(Psweep_NE673_Mixe..Vload[::,1]) RFp
m4
m5
7.0E7
9.0E7
1.1E8
1.3E8
5.0E7
1.5E8
1
2
3
4
0
5
IFfreq
dBm(Vload[::,1])+10
m2
m3

624 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
These results are inferior to the power compression exhibited by gate 
mixers. In IC design the mixing device is connected directly (DC coupled)  to an 
LO driver amplifier, as in Figure 9.24. This approach minimizes circuit parasitics, 
but the output conductance of the driver amplifier is also modulated and thus is 
part of the mixing process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.24  
Alternate topology for a drain mixer. 
 
 
9.4 RESISTIVE APPROACH 
 
The resistive mixer is sometimes called the “cold FET” or “unbiased FET” mixer 
due to the absence of applied DC bias in the channel. The resistive FET mixer 
achieves frequency translation through the use of a time-varying channel 
conductance. This effect is obtained by biasing the gate near the pinch-off voltage 
and applying a dynamic LO voltage.  
 
 
9.4.1 Channel Current Analysis 
 
A voltage applied to the gate controls the channel thickness if there is no DC bias 
applied to the drain. Specifically, the effect of LO and RF voltages on the ID,VD 
plane is depicted on Figure 9.25(a), demonstrating the channel resistance is 
modulated at the LO rate in the first and third quadrants. The symmetry of the 
channel resistance between quadrants 1 and 3 allows the applied RF voltage to 
swing positively and negatively with a high level of linearity. Thus the channel 
conductance is non-linear with respect to the LO voltage and approaches being 
linear with respect to RF voltage. Due to the linear nature of this resistor, the RF 
and IF currents are insensitive to load variations, and there is low distortion 
generated in the mixing process. This approach effect was originally reported in 
1967 [20] for JFETs and later applied to MOSFET devices, [21], where the 
inventor was investigating how to minimize spurious responses in a super-
heterodyne receiver and found the channel resistance would make a very “linear 
RF  
Low 
Pass 
Filter 
RF 
match  
LO   
LO 
match  
IF   

 
FET Mixer Theory 
625 
mixer.” The resulting drain resistance as a function of gate voltage for the 
particular device used in the patent [21] is in Figure 9.25(b), for a JFET device in 
common source. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 9.25  
(a) Channel conductance limits; (b) RDS as a function of VG for a MOSFET device. 
 
The plot shows the drain-source resistance of an unbiased FET is nearly 
an open circuit for a negative gate voltage and less than a few hundred ohms for a 
positive gate voltage. That characteristic is independent of the signal voltages 
applied to the drain-source ports, as long as they are less than the voltage required 
to saturate the FET current. A typical circuit schematic for this approach is in 
Figure 9.26, showing the LO applied to the gate. The gate impedance is matched 
to the generator impedance for maximum LO voltage on the control element.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.26   Basic schematic of the resistive mixer. 
 
The bias is near pinch-off, nearly shutting down the channel, resulting in 
a clean on-off channel modulation upon LO drive. On the drain side, a diplexer is 
employed to separate the RF and IF signals. Since no LO current flows in the 
channel, a specific termination at this frequency is not required. The RF signal is 
matched to the channel impedance with transmission lines. An example of channel 
conductance as a function of gate voltage for MESFETs [22] is depicted in Figure 
9.27. It follows a quadratic law near pinch off and becomes linear as gate voltage 
Ids 
Vds 
Vds 
-Ids 
LO 
RF 
RDS 
Signal port 
1E10
1E8
1E6
1E4
1E2
-8 
-4 
8 
4 
0
Control Voltage 
3 = 90 
VRF 
m5 
m6 
ZRF 
VLO 
ZLO 
4 = 90 
VGS 
+ 
-
 m1 
m2 
CIF 
Lshort 
VIF 
RIF 

626 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
approaches zero. If the peak gate voltage exceeds the gate turn-on voltage, then 
LO current leaks into the channel causing undesirable effects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.27  
MESFET channel conductance modulation waveform. 
 
 
9.4.2 Impedance Matching 
 
Large Signal LO.  In Figure 9.26, ZLO represents an impedance that is matched to 
the gate impedance, maximizing the voltage across capacitor Cgs. The gate 
impedance can be obtained from the device equivalent circuit represented in 
Figure 9.28.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 9.28  
Resistive mixer schematic model. From [22]. 
 
The LO generator sees the drain and source connected as shown in 
Figure 9.29(a), and can be approximated by the circuit in Figure 9.29(b). The 
input impedance is independent of channel conductance, and mainly dependent on 
the RC circuitry.  The drain termination, ZDLO, corresponds to the RF and IF 
terminations evaluated at the LO frequency.  
t 
Vx 
VP 
0 
Vg=VLOcos(ωt) 
gD(Vg) 
Vg 
t 
gD(t) 
Cgd 
Gc(Vg) 
+
Rg 
Rs 
Rd 
Cgs 
G 
D 
S 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
627 
The amount of LO power required is estimated by considering the gate 
biased near pinch off, with the LO voltage having sufficient amplitude to drive the 
gate voltage from pinch-off to zero volts. Assuming conjugate match for the LO 
generator, the LO power is approximated by (9.62). 
 










d
s
d
s
g
gd
gs
LO
LO
R
R
R
R
R
C
C
V
P
2
0
0
2
2
)
(
5.0

                 (9.62) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(a) Gate impedance including gD               (b) Gate impedance approximated without gD 
Figure 9.29  
Equivalent circuit for calculating the gate input impedance. From [22]. 
 
 
 
Small Signal RF, IF. To determine the small signal RF and IF 
impedances, the gate is terminated by the gate impedance evaluated at the RF 
frequency. The channel conductance is replaced by the time averaged value of the 
on-off variation over the LO cycle, as in the next equation. If harmonic balance 
simulation with LO is employed, a more accurate value for the conductance can 
be determined, and the bias resistances are also easily included.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               (a) Drain impedance with gate circuitry 
 
(b) Approximate drain impedance  
Figure 9.30  
Equivalent circuit for calculating the small signal drain impedance. From [22]. 
 
Rg 
D
S 
ZGLO 
ZDLO 
Cgs 
VL
Cgd 
gD(Vg) 
Rs 
Rd 
Rg 
ZDLO 
D 
S 
Rd 
ZGLO 
Cgs 
VLO 
Cgd 
Rs 
ZDRF 
R
ZGRF 
Cg
Cgs 
Rg 
Rs 
gD(VLO) 
VRF 
S 
G 
Rs 
gD (VLO) 
S 
Rd 
ZDRF 
VRF 

628 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
t
V
t
g
g
t
V
t
g
t
I
RF
RF
LO
c
c
RF
c
c


cos
)
cos
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
1
0 


            
 
 
The circuit in Figure 9.30(a) can be simplified to the circuit in Figure 
9.30(b), providing the drain impedance to facilitate calculation of conversion 
properties.  
 
 
9.4.3 Conversion Gain 
 
The model of Figure 9.30(b) is useful to determine the drain impedance and can 
also be used to calculate conversion loss. The converted current in the circuit, Ic, is 
given by (9.63), where gc(t) can be obtained from harmonic balance. It can also be 
obtained by simply considering the channel conductance waveform to be a half 
sinusoid, whose amplitude is a function of gate voltage, (9.64). 
 
 


)
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
)
(
1
0
t
V
t
g
g
t
V
t
g
t
I
RF
RF
LO
c
c
RF
c
c





        (9.63) 
 
 
)
cos(
)
(

gs
gs
KV
V
g

  for -/2< (LOt)< /2    
 
     (9.64a) 
 
 
0
)
(

gs
V
g
  for /2< (LOt)<3/2   
 
 
     (9.64b) 
 
 
Another approach is to consider the drain conductance as being switched 
on-off at the LO frequency. Neglecting the series resistances, the drain resistance, 
Rd = 1/gd, swings between two states, RON and an open circuit. The RF voltage at 
each state can be calculated after the equations: 
 
 
RF
d
V
V

max
 
 
DRF
ON
ON
RF
d
Z
R
R
V
V


min
   
 
 
 
      (9.65) 
 
 
Assuming a square waveform for the channel resistance modulation, the 
drain voltage takes the same waveform as expressed by a conventional Fourier 
series. The average value and amplitude of the switched voltage is given by the 
equation for drain voltage, (9.66); conversion gain is given by (9.68). 
 


t
t
V
V
V
V
t
V
LO
RF
LO
RF
RF
RF
FR
RF
ds
)
cos(
)
cos(
2
2
)
(
min
max
min
max












 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       (9.66) 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
629 





t
t
R
R
R
V
V
LO
RF
LO
RF
ON
DRF
DRF
RF
IF










cos
cos
2
    
       (9.67) 
 
 
2
)
(
2






ON
DRF
DRF
C
R
R
R
G

    
         
 
                     (9.68) 
 
 
9.4.4 Simulation Example 
 
One of the models found in most nonlinear simulators and capable of representing 
the channel conductance is the Cubic Curtice model, [23]. A simulation of its 
channel resistance is obtained by zeroing the trans-conductance. The device 
parameters for a 0.5x300 µm2 FET is in Table 9.4 reported in the reference.  
Results for I/V are plotted in Figure 9.31 over the first and third quadrants, 
obtained by sweeping the gate voltage from -2 to 0 volts, and the drain voltage 
from -0.5 to +0.5 V. The model is useful for impedance matching and conversion 
loss calculations. 
 
Table 9.4 
Parameters for a Curtice Cubic Model. After [23]. 
             
A0
0.3343 Rg
2.1 
Cgs0
0.191 pF
A1
0.4045 Rd
1.3  Cds0
0.140 pF
A2
0.1234 Rs
6.7 
gamma
1
A3
0.001
t
2 pS
FET = 0.5X300 µm2
 
 
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
-0.6
0.6
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
-0.06
0.06
SIM1.V
SIM1.V
SIM1.V
SIM1.V
SIM1.V
VDS
IDS.i
m1
m2
              
Figure 9.31   FET I/V plot in the first and third quadrant. 
 

630 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
            This device was employed in the design of a resistive mixer with RF signal 
at 10 GHz and IF output at 500 MHz, following the schematic in Figure 9.26. The 
simulation parameters are in Table 9.5.  
 
Table 9.5 
Resistive Mixer Circuit Parameters 
                          
θm1 
120° 
θm5 
91° 
CIF 
4.7 pF 
Z01 
50 Ω 
Z05 
90 Ω 
LIF 
15.6 nH 
θm2 
38° 
θm6 
13.7° 
RIF 
100 Ω 
Z02 
61.6 Ω 
Z06 
50 Ω 
 
 
θ3, θ4 
91° 
θm7 
35.7° 
 
 
Z03, Z04 
70 Ω 
Z07 
90 Ω 
 
 
 
 
An additional short transmission line was added in series at the output to 
improve RF match. Notice the IF impedance was selected to be 100 ohms. The 
resulting conversion gain is in Figure 9.32(a), obtained from Microwave Office, 
varying between -4.5 dB and -5.0 dB, for an LO frequency covering 9.6 to 10.2 
GHz, and a fixed IF at 500 MHz.  
 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Conversion gain  
 
     (b) Input RF impedance 
Figure 9.32   Conversion gain and input match for the example resistive mixer. 
 
 
The gate bias is at -1.0 V, and LO power is equal to + 10 dBm.  Using 
the results of Figure 9.31 where RON = 10 ohms, (9.67) gives a conversion loss of 
-5.5 dB, which matches the simulation results. The RF impedance simulated under 
LO pumped conditions is in Figure 9.32(b), which shows very good impedance 
matching. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
631 
9.4.5 Design Study: Quasi-Liner Mixer Synthesis 
 
The synthesis method described in Chapter 5 considering a mixer as a quasi-linear 
two port network, is a convenient design method when the LO is orthogonal to the 
RF and IF. It can also be applied, for example, to a gate mixer but the fact that LO 
and RF are not orthogonal at the gate port in a single ended design means the 
matching circuit will change the amount of power delivered to the gate at the LO 
frequency, changing the S-parameters originally used. Therefore, an iterative 
procedure would have to be followed which is not practical. It is however an ideal 
procedure for the resistive mixer case where LO is orthogonal to both RF and IF. 
In this methodology, the mixer is modeled as a quasi-linear time-variant two-port 
network, allowing use of the conventional two port conjugate matched networks 
normally applied to amplifier design. The difference in this case is the input and 
output ports operate at different frequencies, but the theory contained in the 
section Mixer Circuit Synthesis in Chapter 5, shows it can still be used for 
synthesizing matching impedances.  
 
In this study the objective is to design a conjugately matched converter 
with RF signal at 10.1 GHz, IF output at 100 MHz, LO fixed at 10.0 GHz (low-
side LO). An example of a resistive mixer configured as a two port down-
converter, where RF is assigned to port 1 and IF to port 2 is in Figure 9.33. The 
gate is DC biased at –1.4 V and the LO drive power is equal to +10 dBm. The 
figure shows a grounded transmission line connected to port 1, measuring a 
quarter wave long at the RF frequency, which guarantees a low impedance for IF, 
a DC return, and an open to the fundamental RF and its odd harmonics. A low 
pass filter with a capacitor connected to port 2 is sufficient to allow IF frequency 
to pass, and it shorts all high frequency components to ground.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.33  
Quasi-linear two port mixer prototype. 
 
 
A high inductance is connected from port 2 to ground for DC purposes 
and is not shown in Figure 9.33. On the LO side, the gate is biased with a quarter 
wave length line centered at LO frequency to suppress the second LO harmonic 
voltage. In a single ended design it is difficult to reject the image and LO signals 
at port 1 due to their close proximity to the RF frequency. As a result the input 
circuit is designed for the RF frequency, with the impedances at LO and image 
VLO 
V1(t) 
1 
 Two port linear network 
VGS 
V2(t) 
2 

632 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
becoming whatever the matching circuit provides.  The quasi-linear S-parameters 
are obtained by connecting a circulator at the input port and measuring the 
incident, reflected, and transmitted voltages with a nonlinear simulator to 
determine S11 and S21. The circulator is then connected to the output port and the 
procedure repeated to determine S22 and S12. The results for the device NE673 are 
summarized in Table 9.5. Both measurements are considered as having been taken 
simultaneously, which is only feasible by computer simulation.  From this set of 
S-parameters one can predict the minimum conversion loss for the circuit, 
employing the concept of maximum available gain (MAG) used in amplifier 
design.  The MAG parameter is defined by (9.69) as a function of S-parameters 
and stability factor, K, defined by (9.70), [16]. With the parameters from Table 
9.5 a maximum negative gain or conversion loss of 6.0 dB is obtained. The sign in 
(9.69) is decided by the value of B1, if positive then a negative sign is used.  
 
 


1
2
12
21



K
K
S
S
MAG
 
 
 
 
       (9.69) 
 
 
12
21
2
22
2
11
2
2
1
S
S
S
S
K





 
 
 
 
       (9.70) 
 
2
2
22
2
11
1
1





S
S
B
 
 
 
 
       (9.71) 
 
with  = S11S22-S21S12 
 
Table 9.5  
Quasi-Linear S-Parameters 
 
S11 = 0.523 -153.70° 
S22 = 0.121 94.46° 
S21 = 0.420 116.9° 
S12 = 0.301 -112.32° 
     
 
The optimum source and load impedances, calculated using  (5.137), 
(5.138), are ZS = 15.6 + j 11.0  and ZL = 39.3 – j12.9 . A simple series L, 
parallel C network is synthesized as shown in Figure 9.34.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.34 
Schematic for a conjugate matched mixer. 
C2 
Port_2 
VLO 
C1
 VGS 
LDC 
L1 
L2 
Port_1 
CS 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
633 
 
The component values are in Table 9.6, and the performance results are 
in Figure 9.35, obtained from sweeping the RF frequency from 10.05 to 10.15 
GHz with LO frequency fixed at 10 GHz. Conversion loss at the center frequency 
is 6.5 dB, which is about 0.5 dB degraded from ideal due to nonideal LO and 
image terminations. Figure 9.35 shows that at center frequency return loss is better 
than 20 dB at both ports. The return loss can be improved by fine adjusting the 
circuit parameters. 
 
 
                    
1.007E10
1.009E10
1.011E10
1.013E10
1.005E10
1.015E10
-13
-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-14
-4
-20
-15
-10
-5
-25
0
RFfreq
dB(S60)
dB(S70)
dB(S100)
     
Figure 9.35   Performance of conjugate matched resistive mixer. (      ) conversion loss; (      ) input 
return loss; (       ) output return loss. 
 
Table 9.6  
 Quasi-linear Mixer Parameters 
L1 
0.53 nH 
L2 
32.7 nH 
CS 
122.8 pF 
C1 
0.47 pF 
C2 
16.6 pF 
LDC 
300 nH 
 
 
9.4.6  Wave Analysis 
 
A treatment has been proposed using the concept of wave analysis for a resistive 
mixer [24]. The prototype is assumed to be a time varying attenuator, depicted in 
Figure 9.36 and the ratio between Vout and Vin is given by (9.72). 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                          
 
 
 
 
                                                        
 
Figure 9.36   Simplified generic schematic for a resistive mixer. 
 
  Vin 
Vout 
  VLO 
  RLO 
  RRF 

634 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
in
out
V
V


   
 
 
 
 
 
      (9.72) 
 
 
The attenuation is represented by a voltage reflection coefficient that 
switches states according to the LO pump. The attenuation waveform is 
approximated as a square wave, with minimum and average values depicted in 
Figure 9.37. A representation for the square waveform is given by (9.74).  
  
 
0
0
)
(
Z
R
Z
R
t
on
on




 
 
 
 
                     (9.73) 
 
...
3
sin
sin
)
(
2
1
0




t
t
t
LO
LO






 
                   (9.74)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.37   Waveform of channel resistance at the LO frequency. 
 
 
 The first term of (9.74), α0, affects return loss, and the fundamental term, 
α1, is responsible for frequency conversion. For simplicity the higher order terms 
are assumed insignificant. The IF to RF conversion loss is represented by (9.75):  
 
 
 
)
log(
20
1


c
G
  
 
 
 
         
      (9.75) 
 
 
 
The impedance for the RF and IF signals is given by the DC component, 
expressed in terms of a reflection coefficient. Assuming that max =1 for an open 
circuit, one obtains (9.76). 
 
 

2
/
min
max
0





 
0+1sin(LOt) (      ) 
Attenuation 
min 
0 (      ) 
 (   ) 
1.2 
1.0
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
5 
4 
3 
2 
time - nS 
0 
1

 
FET Mixer Theory 
635 
 
1
2
0
,




IF
RF
 
 
 
          
 
       (9.76) 
 
 
For matched conditions, it is required that 0 = 0.5, which is obtained by 
biasing the FET above pinch-off for 50% duty cycle. In this condition min reaches 
the minimum value. According to (9.75), this provides maximum conversion gain. 
The minimum attenuation in a system with impedance Z0 is given by (9.78).   
 
 
2
1
4
min
1





  
 
          
 
       
      (9.77) 
ON
ON
R
Z
R


0
min

 
 
 
          
 
      (9.78)
 
 
 
 
           
9.4.7 Linearity 
 
Ideally, the gate voltage modulates only the channel resistance and does not 
generate any drain current. In practice a small amount of LO current leaks from 
the gate to drain via the gate-to-drain capacitance, causing interference with the 
modulation process and adding distortion. To minimize this problem a few 
solutions have been proposed, the simplest is to resonate the feedback capacitance 
with a parallel inductor. This leakage of power can also induce a low level drain 
current rectification that can be minimized by shorting the channel to ground at 
DC. Another approach proposes application of a small bias to the drain. For 
distortion simulation, the problem is similar to the determination of linearity for a 
single gate mixer. It requires a model capable of representing the R(Vg) function 
up to the third derivative. The model is then inserted into a harmonic balance 
simulator to obtain the desired distortion current magnitude. For analytical 
purposes, the development found in [25] for a nonlinear resistance applies equally 
to a pumped nonlinear resistance. Assuming the RF signal contains two tones at 
V1cosRF1t and V2cosRF2t, the channel current at the IF is given by two 
components: 
 



t
V
V
g
R
g
R
t
I
RF
RF
LO
d
RF
d
RF
a
)
2
(
cos
1
2
3
)
(
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
3














     (9.79a) 



t
V
V
g
t
I
RF
RF
LO
d
b
)
2
(
cos
2
2
3
)
(
2
1
2
2
1
3
3






        
   (9.79b) 
)
(
)
(
)
(
3
3
3
t
I
t
I
t
I
b
a


 
 
RRF represents the RF generator impedance, and gd represents the Taylor 
coefficients for the channel conductance. Much effort has been dedicated by 

636 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
engineers to model the channel conductance accurately to simulate distortion, 
found for example in references, [26 – 28]. An example of measured coefficients 
for the NE7100 device by NEC is displayed in Figure 9.38. An interesting study, 
[26], investigated the effect of the phase angle in the equation describing the third 
order current. The results, in the plot of Figure 9.39, show the distortion voltage 
magnitude and phase from (9.78a,b). The magnitude on the left is similar for both 
terms, but the total voltage difference shows they are 180º out of phase within a 
certain range of gate voltage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.38  
Conductance coefficients for the NE7100 device. After [26]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.39  
Magnitude and phase for the current components, after [26]. (    ) total phase 
difference;  (       ) I3a magnitude; (       ) I3b magnitude. 
 
 
Therefore strong cancellation exists between the terms, resulting in low 
distortion levels, which agree with experimental verification of low inter-
modulation distortion in FET resistive mixers. 
 
 
210 
150 
90 
1E10-5 
1E10-6 
Vgs(V) 
1E10-7 
30 
-1.0 
-2.2 
-1.8 
Magnitude 
(A)
Phase difference 
-1.4 
gD3(S/V2) 
gD(S), gD2(S/V) 
0.1 
gD2 
0.04 
0.08 
gD 
gD3 
Vgs(V) 
0.2 
-0.1 
0 
-1.5 
-2.0 
-2.5 
-3.0 
-0.5 
-1.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1
2
0.1
6

 
FET Mixer Theory 
637 
9.5 CASCODE MIXER 
 
This topology was developed for linear amplifiers and also became popular for 
GaAs mixer applications, where it is assumed LO voltage is applied to the gate of 
the common gate device, and RF voltage is applied to the gate of the common 
source device. Compared to the single gate mixer, this topology offers higher 
conversion gain, and natural isolation between RF and LO ports so that an 
external coupler is not needed.  The isolation makes this the preferred topology for 
IC mixer circuits.  The cascode approach has two versions: two discrete devices in 
series as in Figure 9.40(a), or a dual gate device with both gates laid out side-by-
side at the channel as in Figure 9.40(b). The main difference between the two 
approaches is the possibility of using a matching circuit between FET1 and FET2 
in the cascode version. Otherwise, both are modeled the same way, using two 
discrete devices in series. Observing the static DC I/V curve, Figure 9.41, for the 
circuits in Figure 9.40 [29], one can conclude the best area for mixer operation: 
FET1 operating in the linear region up to the onset of saturation, and FET2 
saturated.  The LO voltage varies Vgs2, modulating the transconductance and 
output conductance of FET1. The RF applied to Vgs1 is amplified and applied to 
the drain where mixing occurs due to the interaction with LO voltage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Cascode version  
 
(b) Dual gate version 
Figure 9.40  
Topologies for cascade and dual gate mixer. After [30]. 
 
 
An alternative operating mode is to set FET1 in saturation and FET2 in 
the linear region. In this case the LO voltage is not capable of modulating the 
drain current of FET1, effectively resulting in poor mixing or no mixing at all. 
However, this condition works well if the LO is applied to FET1 and RF to FET2, 
but this condition is recognized as a source injection mixer instead of a cascode 
mixer.  
 
 
FET1 
VG1 
Vgs2 
Vgs1 
LO 
RF 
IF 
Vds2 
Vds1 
FET2 
VG2 
IF 
Match 
IF Short 
LO 
Match 
LO 
Short 
RF 
Match 

638 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.41 
 DC bi-dimensional transfer characteristic of a GaAs DGFET. After [29].  
 
 
The dual gate device corresponding to the plots has the dimensions: 
length of gate 1 = 0.8 m and length of gate 2 = 2 m length. The width is the 
same for both, W = 200 m. The gate bias of FET1 determines the gain, current 
and stability, while the gate bias of FET2 determines the drain voltage of FET1 and 
affects the trans-conductance and output conductance. The preferred bias for low 
noise mixer operation is at zone a1, sometimes called the LNM for Low noise 
mode, which gives sufficient trans-conductance modulation with low noise 
operation. In the case of the self oscillating mixer, higher power gain is required to 
meet the oscillating conditions, so zone a2, called SOM for self oscillating mode is 
preferred.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.42  
Conversion trans-conductance versus bias and LO voltage. After [29]. 
 
1.5V 
1V 
.75V 
.5V 
.2V 
9 
6 
3 
Vgs2(V) 
-2.5 
-0.5 
-1.5 
gm11(mS) 
VLO 
Vgs2 
FET1 
a1  
a2  
4[1] 
[2] 
Vg2d1 = -1 
Vg2d1 = 0 
Vgs1 = 0 
[1] 
[-1] 
[0] 
-2 
-1 
FET2 
5[0] 
3[2] 
2[3] 
1[4] 
0[5] 
20 
40 
60 
ID(mA) 
VD1S 
VDD1 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
639 
A higher level of modulation of the nonlinear element at this bias point is 
expected so conversion gain is higher but with degraded noise figure. The effect 
of the second gate voltage on the conversion trans-conductance is illustrated in 
Figure 9.42, with LO voltage driving Vgs2. 
 
 
9.5.1 Design Approach 
 
A detailed computer aided analysis procedure is proposed in [30] and an 
alternative procedure appeared in [29]. The latter approach proposes splitting the 
dual gate at the floating point into two independent devices with a proper drain 
termination for the common source FET1 and source termination for the common 
gate FET2. FET1 is analyzed as a drain mixer, and FET2 as a common gate 
amplifier for the RF and IF signals. The current generated by FET1 is fed into 
FET2 to obtain the output converted signal.  This approach also proved useful in 
studying the inter-modulation distortion. The findings in [29] suggest FET2 is a 
minor contributor to the conversion process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.43  
Simplified equivalent circuit for the cascode mixer. 
 
Based on these assumptions, the conversion gain can be determined in 
two steps. First, the IF current is obtained for the FET1 drain mixer, which equals 
the input current to FET2. The second step is to calculate the IF output drain 
voltage due to an input IF current at the source of FET2. The following 
approximations are needed to reduce the circuit complexity: (1) elimination of 
feedback capacitance jB; (2) only the RF signal is present at the gate of FET1; (3) 
the IF termination at the gate of FET2 is a short circuit. Under these assumptions, 
it is possible to calculate the output voltage at the IF frequency as a function of 
input RF voltage using (9.80). If the interface is matched at the IF frequency, then 
the conversion gain is simplified and calculated by (9.81).  
gd2(Vd2) 
IF operation 
RF to IF Conversion 
RF operation 
Rin
jB 
Z2 
gm1(Vg1) 
gd1(Vd1) 
jX2 
Vg 
gm2(Vg2) 
Rin1 
jX1 
ZRF 
VRF 
RIF2 

640 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
0
1
1
1
20
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
)
1(
)
(
)
1(
g
IF
d
m
m
d
IF
d
d
IF
d
m
V
R
g
g
g
g
R
g
g
R
g
g
V






 (9.80) 
 
 
 
2
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
)
(
1
4







m
d
m
m
gs
RF
in
IF
C
g
g
g
g
C
R
R
G

 
                
     (9.81)
 
 
   
9.5.2 Impedance Matching 
 
The design objective for matching the gate of FET1 is to optimize the conversion 
gain, which equates to maximizing the RF voltage at the terminals of Cgs1. The 
input impedance at the RF is slightly affected by the load modulation at LO. 
Therefore, for an accurate result the input impedance should be determined from 
harmonic balance simulation. The design objectives for matching to FET2 are to 
minimize losses so the maximum LO voltage transfers from gate to source, and to 
maximize the voltage swing for both LO and RF at the floating drain. A single 
tone harmonic balance analysis will provide the gate2 input impedance. The drain 
impedance at IF is also affected by LO power and the best process to optimize the 
matching is: (1) build the matching circuits for gate1 and gate2; (2) apply LO and 
RF and measure conversion gain for a specific IF load; (3) tune the load for 
maximum conversion efficiency; (4) build a circuit to transform the measured 
impedance to the external standard impedance.  
 
 
 
9.5.3 Linearity 
 
A key point for linearity of the dual gate mixer is that FET1 generates IF current, 
but also amplifies the RF current to a level more than twice that of the IF, 
contributing to distortion in FET2. The biasing of gate1 affects conversion gain and 
noise figure but its contribution to linearity is of second order, as long as FET1 is 
biased above pinch off. The biasing of gate2 determines the operating voltage 
point of FET1 and has strong effect on gain, which agrees with the I/V plot in 
Figure 9.41, with maximum gain near the knee voltage. The plots in Figure 
9.44(a) and 9.44(b) show the conversion transconductance and third order output 
conductance for the particular pHEMT device used in [30]. The bias voltage 
giving maximum gain, -0.2 V, is also the bias for maximum distortion generation. 
Fortunately, the conversion transconductance indicates reasonable gain when bias 
is shifted to -0.5 V, where the distortion coefficient is nearly zero, making that a 
good trade-off bias point.  
 
 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
641 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.44 
Plot of gm1 and gd3 as a function of Vg2S voltage. 
 
 
 
The effect of distortion added by FET1 was carefully investigated and 
summarized as follows: 
 
otherterms
I
I
I
IF
IM
IFIM
RFmix
RFmix
in
IF
IF






2
1
1
2
1
1
)
2
(


    (9.82)
 
 
 
Where, 
2
1
2
10
1
IF
IF
m
in
IF
V
g
I




, 
is 
the 
linear 
amplification 
of 
the 
inter-
 
modulation generated by FET1. 
2
1
2
11
1
RF
RF
m
RFmix
V
g
I




, Indicates first order mixing terms frequency 
 
translated from 2RF1-RF2 to 2IF1-IF2 in FET1. 
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
3
2
21
2
3
)
(
2
RF
RF
RF
RF
RF
RF
RF
RF
V
V
V
g
V
V
V
V
g
I
m
m
RFmix














 
represents the second and third order mixing terms from intermixing 
 
of RF1 and 2RF1-RF2, RF1 and RF2 generated at FET2. 
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
0
3
2
20
3
)
(
2
IF
IF
IF
IF
IRF
IF
IF
IF
V
V
V
g
V
V
V
V
g
I
m
m
IFIM














 
Indicates inter-modulation products at IF frequencies at FET2.  
 
 
In this set of equations, the transconductance is indicated as gmk, where 
 indicates the order of the Taylor coefficient and k indicates the Kth Fourier 
component of gm. These results confirm the third order distortion is generated in 
the common source FET (FET1), and the common gate FET (FET2) does not 
participate in the conversion process. FET2 does, however, contribute to overall 
distortion essentially due to the high level of RF signal contained in the drain 
current.  
 
 
 
0.0 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
gd3(S/V2) 
1 
0.5 
0 
-0.5 
-1 
Vg2S(V) 
gm1(S) 
0.00 
0.05 
0.04 
0.03 
0.02 
0.01 
1 
0.5 
0 
-0.5 
-1 
Vg2S(V) 

642 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
9.6  SINGLY BALANCED  
 
To improve linearity, the single ended mixers discussed previously can be 
combined using a transformer with 180° phase difference or a hybrid with 90° 
phase difference.  The former is sometimes referred to as opposed in phase, and 
the latter as being in quadrature.  The objectives of paralleling mixers are the same 
as for amplifiers: increased output power, increased rejection of harmonics and 
inter-modulation products, and improved impedance matching.   Combining using 
180° transformers has long been typical for diode mixers, and improves inter port 
isolation and spurious rejection by cancellation. But while going from single 
ended to singly balanced GaAs FET mixers is a natural evolutionary step, the 
trade-offs between GaAs FET and diode balanced mixers are not as clear cut. 
Diodes are simpler to implement into wideband balanced topologies, while GaAs 
FETs can provide superior linearity but tend to be more narrowband.  Balanced 
GaAs FET mixers have been realized using conventional thin film and PCB 
substrates, as well as in monolithic MMIC form.  Regardless of the technology 
used, design of the first GaAs FET mixers was difficult due to the unavailability 
of circuit simulation tools and accurate device models.  Currently, models have 
improved, and consequently the design of GaAs FET mixers also improved, so 
they are becoming competitive with diode mixers in many instances. 
 
 
9.6.1 Typical Block Diagrams 
 
The most popular single balanced mixer comprises a ratrace hybrid applied to the 
gates, with the LO using, for example, the sum (0°) port and the RF using the 
difference (180°) port, as in Figure 9.45.  The outputs at the drains are combined 
using a second ratrace hybrid that is assumed to have sufficient bandwidth to pass 
the IF to the differential port, and terminate mixing products with even RF 
harmonics at the sum port. Imperfectly matched FETs and imperfect amplitude 
and phase balance in the ratrace hybrids cause finite interport isolation and inter-
modulation rejection. 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.45 
 Block diagram for down-converter gate mixer typical topology. 
 
 IIF1,ILO1, IRF1 
IIF2,ILO2, IRF2 
RF 
LO 
IF 
(Δ) 
Rat 
Race 
Coupler 
(Σ) 
Input 
match  
Input 
match  
       (Δ) 
Rat 
Race 
Coupler 
         (Σ) 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
643 
If an output ratrace covering the band is not available, a solution is to add 
a capacitor connecting both drains. It will be transparent to the LO voltage but 
creates a virtual ground for the RF voltage. The IF signals are in counter phase at 
the drains so they are combined at the differential port. The conversion gain is 
provided by (9.10) minus the losses in the input and output combiners. If the 
impedance of RF and LO signals are not properly matched at the gate, they are 
reflected back to the driving ports. Following the same procedure applied to diode 
mixers, a quick analysis of mixer operation is determined considering only 
frequency and phase components. For the mixer in Figure 9.45, one finds that 
ideally only mixing products with even RF harmonics appear at the IF output port. 
The transconductance, gm, is assumed to comprise only LO harmonics of index n, 
and the RF voltage comprises harmonics of index m.   
 
 


t
jn
n
LO
LO
LO
e
I
I

,
1
 


t
jm
m
RF
RF
RF
e
V
V

,
1
 






m
n
nm
IF
m
t
m
n
j
m
RF
n
m
n
IF
I
e
V
g
I
RF
LO
,
,
)
(
,
,
1


 


t
jn
n
LO
LO
LO
e
I
I

,
2
 




jm
t
jm
m
RF
RF
e
e
V
V
RF
,
2
  









m
n
m
nm
IF
m
jm
t
m
n
j
m
RF
n
m
n
IF
I
e
e
V
g
I
RF
LO
,
,
)
(
,
,
2
)1
(



  
Components at the LO, IF, and RF ports:  
 
0
2
1




LO
LO
LO
I
I
I
, for any n  
 
 
     (9.83a) 


m
nm
IF
IF
IF
IF
I
I
I
I
)1
(
1
,
2
1







 
 
      
     (9.83b)   
= -2IIF,nm for m odd;   
= 0 for m even 
 
 
  


m
m
RF
RF
RF
RF
V
V
V
V
)1
(
1
,
2
1







  
 
     (9.83c) 
= -2VRF,m for m odd          
       
= 0 for m even 
 
Table 9.7 
Signals at IF Port 
m 
IF Output 
odd 
±nfLO±mfRF 
even 
0 (cancel) 
 

644 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The circuit will work equally if LO and RF ports are interchanged, but 
mixing products with even LO harmonics will instead be cancelled. If the circuit 
is employed as an up-converter, then LO is definitely applied to the sum port at 
the gates, allowing high LO rejection at the output assuming the IF output is at the 
differential port and that port also covers the LO frequency range.    
 
The up-conversion topology for a drain mixer represented in Figure 9.46, 
requires a balun to inject the low frequency RF signal differentially to the gates, 
and another balun at the drains to combine the high frequency IF up-converted 
signals that are 180° apart in phase. The LO signal is applied in phase to the drains 
by transmission lines T1 and T2. Notice the drain impedances are in parallel to the 
LO generator, and in series to the RF load. Since LO and RF are in the same phase 
indicated in Figure 9.45, the current components at the IF port will be at the same 
frequencies, so the set (9.83) applies equally.  
 
The LO and RF ports are orthogonal to each other, allowing independent 
impedance matching, which in turn provides considerably improved performance 
compared with single ended drain mixers. This topology offers the same rejection 
for mixing products with even RF harmonics as the gate mixer. As already 
discussed, the drain mixer is more non-linear than the gate mixer due to the 
modulation of both output trans-conductance and trans-conductance.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.46  
Block diagram of up-converter balanced drain mixer typical topology. 
 
In order to demonstrate the application of quadrature couplers, let's 
consider the balanced down-converter drain mixer in Figure 9.47. The coupler 
connections are different than those of balanced amplifiers (i.e. the RF and LO are 
applied at the cancelling power port of each other). The RF signal applied to the 
gates is amplified at the drain port and absorbed by the output coupler termination. 
The LO signal is directly applied to the drain in quadrature. Impedance matching 
can be used to improve power transfer for both RF and LO. The leakage LO 
power at the gates is absorbed by the RF termination. The IF converted signals at 
the drains are in phase and can therefore be directly connected. The signals at the 
FET drain ports and at the IF port are given by the following relations: 
RF 
IF 
T2 
T1 
 IIF1,ILO1, IRF1 
IIF2,ILO2, IRF2 
LO 
LO 
match 
RF 
Balun 
IF 
Balun 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
645 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.47  
Block diagram of down-converter with 90 3 dB couplers. 
 


t
jn
n
LO
LO
LO
e
I
I

,
1
 
2
,
2


jn
t
jn
n
LO
LO
e
e
I
I
LO



 


t
jn
m
RF
RF
RF
e
V
V

,
1
 



2
,
2


jm
t
jn
m
RF
RF
e
e
V
V
RF
 





m
n
nm
IF
t
m
n
j
m
RF
n
m
m
n
IF
I
e
V
g
I
RF
LO
,
,
)
(
,
,
,
1


 











m
n
m
n
nm
IF
jn
jm
t
m
n
j
m
RF
n
m
m
n
IF
j
I
e
e
e
V
g
I
RF
LO
,
)
(
,
2
2
)
(
,
,
,
2




 
 
Components at the IF output port are given by: 
 


n
n
LO
LO
LO
LO
j
I
I
I
I





1
,
2
1
    
 
 
     (9.84a) 
=ILO(1- j) for n=1,5… 
=ILO(1+ j) for n=3,7… 
= 0 for n=even 


m
m
RF
RF
RF
RF
j
I
I
I
I





1
,
2
1
    
 
 
     (9.84b) 
=IRF(1- j) for m=1,5 
=IRF(1+ j) for m=3,7 
=0 for m=even 




m
n
m
n
IF
IF
IF
IF
j
I
I
I
I






1
,
,
2
1
 
 
   
     (9.84c) 
 
= 2IIF,n,m for (n+m)=0,4,8,…; i.e., n =1, m =-1 
          
 
= 0 for (n+m)=2,6,…; i.e.,  n =1, m = 1  
IF 
RF 
LO 
IRF2 
IRF1 
ILO2 
ILO1 
Input 
match
Input 
match  
 
 

646 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Table 9.8 
               Signals at IF Port after Low Pass Filter         
 
n 
m 
IF Output 
1 
-1 
2IIF,1,-1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
2 
(1+j)IIF,1,2 
 
Table 9.8 indicates the down-converter is an image reject mixer because 
only one side band, fL-fR, is converted to IF, while the fL+fR cancels. Additionally, 
the use of 90 hybrids provides a good impedance match for the RF and LO ports, 
and the couplers provide additional LO-RF isolation.   
 
 
9.6.2  Design Study: Singly Balanced Gate Mixer 
 
The circuit schematic for a singly balanced gate mixer employing the NE673 
device is given in Figure 9.48. A ratrace hybrid is used at the input, and is 
designed to operate over the 10 - 11 GHz band. The output IF signal is combined 
using a bifilar transmission line transformer. The RF signal is applied to the 
differential port and the LO signal to the sum port of the ratrace. The input and 
output matching circuit elements are similar in value to the ones in Table 9.2. The 
parallel feedback, RFB, and a 50 Ohm resistor were added to the gate to improve 
stability. In a balanced circuit, common mode and differential mode stability 
needs to be checked; the common mode stability was improved by adding a 
resistor to the source.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.48 
 Schematic for a singly balanced gate mixer. 
 
Similarly to the other examples, all elements are assumed to be ideal in 
this simulation. The conversion gain in Figure 9.49(a) is 6.0 dB and nearly flat 
CFB  
+
Lm  
m2 
m2 
m1 
m1 
RS  
RFB  
Cm  
Cm  
LO  
LO = 90 
- VGS 
-
LO = 90 
+ VDS 
-
RIF 
VRF 
ZRF 
VLO 
ZLO 
Lm  

 
FET Mixer Theory 
647 
from 90 to 110 MHz (within the markers m2, m3), corresponding to 10.09 to 
10.11 GHz at input RF frequency.  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (a) Conversion gain at VDS = 3V           ( b) P1dB at PLO = 7, 10, 13 dBm 
Figure 9.49  
Performance plots for the singly balanced gate mixer. 
 
The gain was simulated for a 3.0 V drain voltage. The power 
compression was checked for three different LO drive levels: 7, 10 and 13 dBm 
with the results in Figure 9.49(b). It is observed the gain increases from 4.5 to 
6.25 dB, while the best P1dB of +9 dBm is at PLO = 10 dBm. The comparison 
between RF port small signal impedance (mSSRF) and the small signal 
impedance under LO pumping (mRF) is in Figure 9.50(a). The large signal LO 
impedance (mLO) is in Figure 9.50(b), which is close to the small signal 
impedance (mSSLO) at the LO frequency.  
 
      
freq (10 08GHz to 10 12GHz)
S(1,1)
mSSRF
g
mRF
Input Reflection Coefficient
       
freq (10.00GHz to 10.10GHz)
S(3,3)
mSS
g
mLO
Output Reflection Coefficient
 
    
 (a) RF port impedance                                   (b) LO port impedance 
Figure 9.50 
 Input impedance at RF and LO frequencies. 
 
 
 
 
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
-30
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
10
dBm(Vload[::,1])
dBm(Vload[::,1])-RFpower
 
9.0E7
1.0E8
1.1E8
8.0E7
1.2E8
1.25
2.50
3.75
5.00
6.25
7.50
8.75
0.00
10.00
IFfreq
dBm(Vload[::,1])+10
m2
m3
m2
IFfreq=
dBm(Vload[::,1])+10=6.117
1.100E8
m3
ind Delta=
dep Delta=-0.109
Delta Mode ON
-2.000E7
 

648 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
9.6.3 Floating Topology 
 
A single balanced topology was proposed in a 1974 patent, [31], for a single 
PMOS FET using the channel conductance as the mixing element. The goal of the 
patent was to reduce leakage from gate to drain, and gate to source, respectively, 
due to Cgd and Cgs.  This leakage disturbed the channel modulation and created 
harmonics of the RF and IF signals.  The patent proposed floating the device by 
connecting the source and drain terminals to a transformer, Figure 9.51(a), with 
the LO (carrier) signal connected single ended to the gate. If the circuit is 
symmetrical, then the center tap is a virtual ground for the LO signals and 
harmonics are rejected at the differential output terminals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         (a) Circuit with one device 
 
                (b) Circuit with two devices 
Figure 9.51  
Schematic for the floating approach.  
 
 
 
The RF signal applied through the transformer appears in counter phase 
at the drain source terminals, but some RF signal couples to the center tap due to 
circuit imperfections. The generated IF signal currents at 
RF
c
f
f 
 are in phase 
and combine at the same tap. Adding two mixers in parallel as shown in Figure 
9.51(b), the RF signals are at the same phase at both center taps, and suppressed in 
differential mode at the output terminals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 Balanced IF out  
 
             (b) Single ended IF out 
Figure 9.52  
Singly balanced floating mixer. After [32]. 
  fRF 
IIF
IIF
IRF
2 
IRF
  fc+/-fRF 
  fc 
LO 
DC 
  RF 17.5  - 2 0  GHz 
  IF 1 - 2 GHz 
0      180 
0        180 
LO 
  RF 17.5  - 2 0  GHz 
IF 1.5 GHz 
IF match 
0        180 
Bias2 
Bias1 
  fc+/-fRF 
  fc 
fRF 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
649 
 
This is an example of obtaining singly and doubly balanced circuits, 
respectively, with one and two devices. An extension of this approach using 
HEMT devices providing singly balanced performance with a single transistor 
was reported in [32]. Two examples of the proposed topologies are in Figure 9.52.  
The LO is injected at the gate, and the RF and IF are separated at the 
drain source side by filters. In addition to providing frequency selectivity, the 
band pass filters connecting the RF balun to the source and drain, must provide 
impedance matching to improve efficiency. Since LO is in common mode and RF 
in differential mode, high isolation exists between both ports. There is no isolation 
to the IF port, except that provided by the low pass filter(s). The proposal in 
Figure 9.52(b) uses a single balun at RF, while the IF is extracted single ended. 
 
 
9.6.4 Differential Amplifier Topology 
 
The differential singly balanced mixer topology is the simplest approach that can 
be implemented in a semiconductor process. It offers the benefit of a single-ended 
RF input for ease of application without an RF balun transformer. Though simple 
in design, it can provide high gain and low noise figure compared with doubly 
balanced structures. However, it is seldom found in practical IC applications, as 
doubling the circuit to obtain the doubly balanced topology adds little cost and 
provides superior spurious rejection. While the doubly balanced topology is 
preferred, the singly balanced version is important for academic purposes. The 
following analysis is for a CMOS FET device and is similarly applicable to GaAs 
FET devices. 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
)
(2
max
T
gs V
V
V




                         


T
gs
V
V
V


2
max
                                                           
 
                                                           
                                                        
 
   
                (a) Schematic 
 
 
 
(b) Transfer characteristic 
Figure 9.53  
Singly balanced differential mixer topology. 
 
M0   
RL 
RL   
Vg1 
Vg2 
I0   
I2   
I1   
M2   
M1   
Vg0  
VDD   
Vd1 
Vd2 
K
I
VL
0


 
K
I
VL
0

-VL 
VL 
1.0 
ID1/I0, ID2/I0 
0 
8VT 
-8VT 
Vin 

650 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The currents and voltages in a differential FET structure, Figure 9.53(a), 
with a fixed bias current I0, have a transfer characteristic that is similar to a BJT 
differential amplifier, Figure 9.53(b). Applying a balanced sinusoidal voltage 
between the gates of M1, M2, induces a current at the drain of each FET following 
the phase of the gate voltages. Consequently, the voltage at the drain resistor will 
develop an inverse phase since VDD is constant.  
This linear amplification is limited at high current by the drain saturation 
voltage determined by the voltage drop at the drain load. The low end of the 
current swing is limited by the FET threshold voltage, below which there is no 
drain current. Therefore, if voltage Vgs is large enough, then the transfer 
characteristic for a differential FET topology is similar to that of a differential 
bipolar configuration. 
 
 
 
9.6.4.1 Differential in Linear Mode 
 
The voltages applied to the gates of M1, M2 in Figure 9.53a, are related by the 
loop voltage (9.85). The differential input voltage Vid voltage is therefore defined 
as in (9.86), and the drain currents are related by (9.87).  
 
 
0
2
2
g
1
1




g
s
gs
g
V
V
V
V
 
 
 
                     (9.85) 
 
2
g
1
2
1
s
gs
g
g
id
V
V
V
V
V




 
 
 
                     (9.86) 
 
2
1
0
I
I
I


 
 
 
 
 
                     (9.87) 
 
 
The relationship between drain current and gate voltage within the region 
of strong inversion is quadratic for a CMOS device with long gate length. The 
transconductance is obtained by taking the derivative of (9.88) and is related to 
drain current as depicted in (9.89).  
 
 




2
2
2
2
th
gs
th
gs
D
V
V
k
V
V
L
W
B
I




   
                     (9.88) 
 


th
gs
gs
D
m
V
V
k
dV
dI
g



1
    
 
 
                     (9.89) 
 
    
with, 
L
BW
k 
 and B is the transconductance parameter defined 
by
ox
ox
n
ox
n
t
C
B





 and tox is the gate oxide thickness. The drain currents at M1, 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
651 
M2 within the active area are found by working relations (9.85) to (9.89), [33], 
which results in the following:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
4
1
2
2
4
4
2
id
id
id
id
V
I
k
kI
V
I
V
k
I
V
k
I
I






    (9.90a) 
 
 
 
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
2
4
1
2
2
4
4
2
id
id
id
id
V
I
k
kI
V
I
V
k
I
V
k
I
I






     (9.90b) 
 
 
A graphic representation of the drain equations is in Figure 9.53(b). The 
zero crossing determines the voltage VL, the limit of linear voltage and is obtained 
by simply eliminating the quadratic term in one of the equations above and setting 
the crossing to zero. In addition, by replacing Vid by VL at the crossing point, it 
can be demonstrated that linear voltage is also inversely proportional to 
transconductance, (9.91). The maximum voltage, Vmax, beyond VL is found from 
the derivative of the full current expression set to zero. Hence: 
 
 
m
L
g
I
K
I
V
0
0
2


 
 
 
 
                     (9.91) 
 
 
)
(
2
max
th
gs
L
V
V
V


    
 
          
          
 
       (9.92) 
 
 
The square root term can be replaced by the binomial expansion 
represented in the equation below. Applying the small signal condition, the 
binomial is approximated by the first term, resulting in (9.94a,b). 
 
 



3
2
2
/
1
16
1
8
1
2
1
1
x
x
x
x





     
 
                   (9.93) 
 
 
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
2
2
8
1
2
2
kI
V
I
V
I
k
kI
V
I
I
id
id
id










             (9.94a) 
 
 
0
0
2
0
0
0
2
2
2
4
1
2
2
kI
V
I
V
I
k
kI
V
I
I
id
id
id










             (9.94b) 
 

652 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The current source for the M0 device I0, has DC and small signal RF 
components. Replacing I0 by Id defined per (9.95), the current equations I1, I2 can 
be modified by simple substitution in the subsequent equations.  Notice that gm1,2 
for the M1, M2 devices are defined as 
0
2
,1
kI
gm

. 
 
 
0
0
0
g
m
d
V
g
I
I


 
 
 
 
                  (9.95)
 
 


















0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
2
1
2
2
g
m
m
id
g
m
g
m
id
g
m
V
kI
g
g
V
V
g
I
V
kI
g
kI
V
V
g
I
I
   (9.96a)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  


















0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
g
m
m
id
g
m
g
m
id
g
m
V
kI
g
g
V
V
g
I
V
kI
g
kI
V
V
g
I
I
    (9.96b)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
Applying a similar small signal approximation to the parameters within 
the square root results in an expression in terms of applied differential voltage. 
 
 
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
4
2
2
m
id
g
m
m
id
g
m
g
V
V
I
g
g
V
V
g
I
I




 
  
     (9.97a) 
 
 
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
2
4
2
2
m
id
g
m
m
id
g
m
g
V
V
I
g
g
V
V
g
I
I




  
                   (9.97b) 
 
 
The differential output current assuming gm1 = gm2 = gm, cancels the first 
term and adds the second and third. Replacing Vg0 by the input RF voltage, the 
differential output current is defined by (9.98). 
 
 


2
1
0
0
0
2
1
2
1
4
2
2
m
m
id
g
m
m
id
m
id
out
g
g
V
V
I
g
g
V
g
V
I
I
I







 
 
 
t
tV
V
I
g
g
t
V
g
I
LO
LO
RF
RF
m
m
LO
LO
m
out



cos
cos
2
cos
0
0



 
       (9.98) 
 
 
The output signal is then obtained from the voltage swing developed by 
the currents I1, I2 on the output load RL represented in Figure 9.53(a). The 
resulting converted IF voltage in differential form is given by:   
 
 

t
V
V
R
I
g
g
V
LO
RF
LO
RF
L
m
m
out





cos
4
0
0
 
 
      (9.99) 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
653 
 
Equation (9.99) shows that differential output voltage and consequently 
gain is proportional to RL. But gain and dynamic range trade-off with each other, 
since higher RL also means a smaller drain voltage swing. 
 
 
9.6.4.2 Differential in Nonlinear Mode 
 
The plot in Figure 9.53(b) shows that when the input signal exceeds +/- VL, the 
circuit operates outside the linear region, and two current conditions exist: (1) M1 
is off implying I1 = 0 and I2 = I0; (2) M2 is off implying I1 = I0 and I2 = 0. Under 
these conditions the small signal approximations are not valid and output voltage 
must be determined by a different procedure. The LO voltage at the drain of each 
FET will swing between the rail voltage and the saturation voltage that is near 
zero. The output voltage limits are then VDD/2 and VDD, assuming the drain 
voltage of transistor M0 is half the rail voltage. Instead of determining the actual 
value of the two extreme voltages, it is useful to assume normalized values of +1 
and -1 to analyze the switching properties. The output waveform is dependent on 
the LO waveform.  If it is square wave, then the output will follow the input as 
long as the parasitic capacitances do not suppress the third harmonic. If the drive 
is sinusoidal the output is also square wave if the transition time between the on-
off states is very short, otherwise it will assume a trapezoidal shape. Assuming a 
square wave function for the LO drain voltage, the switching function is defined 
by (9.100). 
      
 
...
)
3
cos(
3
2
)
cos(
2
2
1
)
(




t
t
V
S
LO
LO
LO




                  (9.100) 
 
 
This is a very important property of the differential mixer that some 
authors refer to as a switching mixer in contrast to an analog mixer. The fact the 
devices are switching on and off means distortion is minimized and is generated 
only during the transition time between conducting and nonconducting states. 
Analog multipliers, on the other hand, are continuously conducting and 
contributing to higher order distortion. Multiplying this equation by (9.95) and 
making VRF = Vg0, the converted drain current in each FET is given by  
(9.101a,b). Notice they are shown to be 180 degrees opposed in phase, so the 
differential output current is defined by (9.102).  
 
t
V
g
t
I
t
V
g
I
IF
RF
m
LO
RF
RF
m





cos
1
cos
2
cos
2
1
0
0
0
1



    (9.101a) 
t
V
g
t
I
t
V
g
I
IF
RF
m
LO
RF
RF
m





cos
1
cos
2
cos
2
1
0
0
0
2



     (9.101b) 

654 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
t
V
g
t
I
I
IF
RF
m
LO
out




cos
2
cos
4
0
0



 
                    (9.102) 
 
 
Equation (9.102) shows the desirable condition that conversion gain, 
under square wave LO drive, is not dependent on LO drive level, in contrast to 
(9.99) for sinusoidal LO.  Circuit balance cancels even LO harmonics and isolates 
the RF fundamental, reducing both LO and RF levels at the IF output.  This 
improves 1 dB gain compression and third order intercept point, providing better 
dynamic range and linearity.  An IF output voltage is developed by the converted 
drain current working against the load resistor, RL, resulting in the following 
equation for voltage conversion gain. 
 
 
L
m
cv
R
g
G
0
2


  
 
 
                    
     (9.103) 
 
 
 
The LO frequency is limited by the transition time between on and off 
switching states. This is a function of circuit capacitance and load resistance as 
described in (9.104), where C is the total capacitance of both drains, including the 
load capacitance. 
 
 
L
L
m
cv
CR
j
R
g
G


2
1
2
0


  
 
 
        
 
    (9.104) 
 
 
To reduce the transition time one can apply a larger LO drive, which will 
cause the on and off state to be reached earlier. Another possibility is to decrease 
the circuit capacitance, which equates to using a device with smaller area. 
Calculation of power gain is expressed by some authors as voltage gain squared 
multiplied with the ratio of source resistance to load resistance.  
 
 
L
S
vc
C
R
R
G
G
2

 
 
 
 
 
    
     (9.105) 
 
 
This equation assumes the external load presented to the drain of the 
differential pair is not shunted by the internal bias resistor.  Hence a large inductor 
is required for bias decoupling instead of a resistor. In addition, the internal 
impedance is assumed to be matched to the source impedance, which is only true 
if the device gate is matched. An improved expression is given below for 
conversion gain, assuming power is delivered to the load and absorbed by the RF 
device.  
 
2
1
4







gs
RF
m
in
L
c
C
g
R
R
G


 
 
 
        
 
    (9.106) 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
655 
9.6.5 Differential Noise Figure and Linearity 
 
The noise sources contributing to the total noise in a differential mixer originate 
from the trans-conductor and the switches. A first order analysis is made by 
assuming the switches are driven fully on and off, and do not generate noise. The 
trans-conductor is then the main noise generator behaving as a normal linear 
amplifier.  The spot noise figure is defined for mixers in the same way as for 
linear amplifiers, but in contrast to linear amplifiers, noise in mixers converts from 
multiple frequencies to combine at the IF.  These originate from the noise 
sidebands about the LO harmonics, and mix with those LO harmonics to convert 
to the IF as illustrated in Figure 9.54.  Two cases exist: (1) noise in the IF channel 
occurring in super-heterodyne systems; and (2) noise in the base band occurring in 
direct conversion systems [34].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.54  
Noise in the conversion process. After [34]. 
 
 
A simple approach to obtain the noise figure for a singly balanced 
differential mixer, is to multiply the transconductor noise by the mixer conversion 
loss, [34, 35]. An approximate equation valid for CMOS is given by: 
 










L
S
m
S
m
S
g
v
SSB
R
R
g
R
g
R
r
G
NF
2
2
1
1
1

 
 
     (9.107)    
     
 
This approximated expression disregards LO noise effects as well as 
switching effects. Assuming square wave switching, the parameter Gv = 2/; the 
coefficient  = 2/3 for long channel CMOS devices or  =1 for short channel 
devices; and Rs is the generator impedance. 
  
The distortion in the singly balanced mixer is mainly generated by the RF 
amplifier transconductor, assuming the switches are ideal and transition time is 
negligible. If the ideal MOS model holds and input drive is constrained to be 
within the input limits, then there is no third order distortion. In real devices there 
is always some amount of third order terms causing inter-modulation. Equation 
(9.90a,b) can defined differentially and take the form of (9.108), [36], where Vid is 
the input differential voltage.  
Power 
Noise to IF 
3LO 
  LO   RF  2LO 
IF 
 0 
Noise to base band 
3LO 
  LO, RF 
  Power 
 2LO 

656 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
2
0
4
1
1










th
GS
id
th
GS
id
d
V
V
V
V
V
V
I
I
       
  
    (9.108) 
 
 
The normalized peak drain current is obtained by dividing the drain 
current, Id, with the DC tail current, I0. The square root can be approximated by 
the series: 
 
...
16
8
2
1
1
3
2






x
x
x
x
 
 
 
                  
 
 
The first term of normalized current obtained from the power series is in 
(9.109).  It shows the current swing is expressed as a function of peak input 
differential voltage, as follows: 
 
 
)
(
8
1
)
(
3
th
GS
idp
th
GS
idp
th
GS
idp
p
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
i












       
     (9.109) 
 
 
It can be shown the IM3 level is defined by (9.110) and the IP3 by (9.111) 
as a function of simple device parameters. The equations are defined in terms of 
voltage referred to the input. 
 
  
 
2
2
3
32
3
)
(
32
3
p
th
GS
idp
i
V
V
V
IM









    
 
         
     (9.110) 
 
 
)
(
3
2
4
3
th
GS
V
V
IP


           
 
         
 
     (9.111) 
 
 
9.6.6 Subharmonic 
 
The interest in using resistive mixers for subharmonic conversion arises from the 
potential for higher power and better linearity compared to diode subharmonic 
mixers. Two FETs in a balanced configuration are capable of providing 
subharmonic mixing when connected as shown in the schematic of Figure 9.55 
[37]. The figure also displays a conductance waveform that switches twice in a 
single LO period, so the dominant conversion gain is at twice the LO frequency. 
Notice one peak of conductance is on the positive gate voltage cycle and the other 
on the negative.  

 
FET Mixer Theory 
657 
LO 
I1  I2 
IF  
RF  
IF  
Filter 
RF 
Filter 
t
V
t
g
t
g
g
I
RF
RF
LO
d
LO
d
do
d



cos
...)
2
cos
cos
(
2
1
1




   
     (9.112) 
 
t
V
t
g
t
g
g
I
RF
RF
LO
d
LO
d
do
d





cos
...]
)
2
2
cos(
)
cos(
[
2
1
2






     (9.113) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 Circuit schematic 
 
 
(b) LO and gds waveforms 
Figure 9.55  
Balanced FET subharmonic mixer. From [37]. 
 
The total current at IIF equals the sum of Id1 and Id2, so fundamental 
conversion is suppressed and second harmonic conversion dominates. A more 
generalized description is given by (9.114), which is valid for both IF and LO 
signals. The LO leakage signal in the channel is suppressed but the second 
harmonic components add constructively. Similarly the IF currents with second 
LO harmonic add constructively, and those with fundamental LO are suppressed. 
The RF signals simply add in phase, with RF to IF isolation provided by the 
filters.  
 
]
)1
(
1[
n
n
IF
I
I




 = 0 for odd n,   = -2 for even n     
    (9.114) 
 
Therefore, this arrangement is capable of emulating the properties of the 
APDP configuration but it does require an external balun. An example of such a 
circuit is found in the afore mentioned reference, providing 6.5 dB conversion loss 
with RF in the 10 to 14 GHz band, IF at 2 GHz, and fundamental LO at 6 GHz.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.56      Example of a quadrature/balanced subharmonic. 
+VLO,n 
I1     I2 
IFout 
+VRF,m 

658 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
An alternative approach is to employ a 90º coupler at the LO side so the 
LO second harmonic at the two drains are in counter phase with each other, Figure 
9.56. The fundamental LO is in quadrature and can be shorted to ground by a 90º 
open stub. The RF signal is applied in counter phase to the drain, mixing at the 
drain with 2fLO. The RF component is suppressed at the IF port due to 
orthogonality between RF and IF ports. The other frequency components at the IF 
port are given by (9.115), (9.116). Notice the fundamental LO signal appears in 
quadrature at the IF port, while the second harmonic is rejected. The desired IF 
arising from the fundamental RF mixing with the second harmonic LO adds 
constructively at the IF port.  The fundamental RF and fundamental LO mixing 
products also add at the IF port, but are suppressed by 3 dB, and must be 
eliminated using filtering. 
 


n
LO
n
LO
LO
LO
j
I
I
I
I
)
(
1
2
1





            
      
    (9.115) 
        
= InLO(1- j) for n odd,  
 
= 0 for n even 
 
]
)1
(
1[
n
m
nm
IF
j
I
I




     
 
  
      
    (9.116) 
        
 = Inm(1+j) for m =1, n=1 
         
= 2Inm for m=1, n=2 
 
 
 
Following the same principle of Figure 9.54, a X4 subharmonic mixer 
was reported in [38], by employing two singly balanced FET pairs, shifted by 90º, 
as depicted in Figure 9.57. The plot on the right shows the output conductance 
switches four times within each LO cycle, a required condition for times X4 
subharmonic mixing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  Circuit schematic 
 
 
(b)  LO and gd waveforms 
Figure 9.57 
 Dual balanced FET as a X4 subharmonic mixer. 
 
 
 
LO  
I3  I4 
I1  I2 
IF 
RF 
RF 
Filter 
IF 
Filter 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
659 
9.7  DOUBLY BALANCED 
 
Doubly balanced diode mixers comprise two singly balanced mixers combined 
with the proper phase relationships required to obtain the desired IF mixing 
products.  The same principle applies to FET mixers, resulting in the same 
advantages compared with the singly balanced topology, namely, higher power 
and better spurious rejection, while conversion loss remains largely unchanged.  
GaAs FET mixer IC technology has not embraced the doubly balanced approach. 
This is because of the increased circuit complexity that complicates layout, and 
the additional components that contribute to higher noise figure, higher current 
dissipation, and added parasitics that reduce bandwidth and gain. Also the 
difficulty with nonlinear device modeling has made engineers think twice when 
selecting circuit topology, as a small error in the device model degrades 
performance in proportion to the number of such devices used. For this reason 
considerable activity still exists in device modeling, resulting in improvements, 
and the increase in usage of doubly balanced GaAs FET mixers. In contrast, 
CMOS technology for RF applications has advanced with astonishing speed, and 
quickly taken the place of GaAs in most high volume markets. Device models for 
CMOS FETs are generally more accurate than for GaAs resulting in very good 
performance at microwave and millimeter wave frequencies in Silicon material. In 
this technology, the majority of mixers are doubly balanced using the Gilbert 
topology.  
The core cell of doubly balanced mixers is the FET quad or ring 
represented in Figure 9.58. Notice the four devices are floating, and interface to 
the three single ended ports using baluns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.58  
FET quad coupled to LO, RF and IF baluns. 
 
The FET quad operates actively or passively with LO applied to the gate, 
the RF signals applied to the drain terminals, and IF collected at the source 
terminals. This topology is symmetrical in that it operates as an up or down 
converter. The LO controls the on-off switching, and is applied so that M1, M3 are 
open and M2, M4 conduct during one half LO cycle, and the reverse occurs on the 
M3 
I3 
IF 
M4 
M2 
M1 
I1 
I4 
I2 
RF
LO 
Balun 
Balun
Balun 

660 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
other half LO cycle.  Conversion gain for the doubly balanced topology is 
essentially the same as for singly balanced. In contrast output power doubles, 
neglecting combining losses.  To determine the IF frequency components at the IF 
port let's consider the currents I1, I2, I3, I4 that are expressed in short hand without 
the double summations by: 
 











t
jm
t
jn
m
n
RF
LO
e
e
I
I
,
1
  
 







t
jm
t
jn
m
n
RF
LO e
e
I
I
,
2
 


t
jm
t
jn
m
n
RF
LO
e
e
I
I





,
3
 
 
 
t
jm
t
jn
m
n
RF
LO e
e
I
I


,
4 
 
 
The IF output current is given by: 
]
)1
(
1
][
)1
(
1
[
,
4
3
2
1
n
m
m
n
IF
I
I
I
I
I
I











    (9.117) 
 
 
= 4In,m  for n=odd, m=odd  
 
 
 
 
= 0  for n=even &/or m=even 
 
 
 
The topology, if well designed, gives high isolation between RF, LO and 
IF ports. An example application is found in [22], exhibiting - 11 dB conversion 
gain to convert 12.4 GHz signals down to 2.4 GHz, using 0.5x100 µm2 devices. 
 
 
9.7.1 Doubly Balanced Differential 
 
The analysis of a singly balanced differential mixer can be directly applied to a 
doubly balanced differential mixer, since the double balanced topology can also 
be thought of a parallel “push-pull” combination of two singly balanced mixers. 
When combined this way the drains are cross coupled, comprising a FET quad, 
which in this case operates in the active mode. This combination provides 
cancellation of LO and RF signals at the sum points, while the IF signals add 
constructively.  A direct consequence of paralleled blocks is that conversion gain 
remains the same if the circuits are well balanced. The benefit of the doubly 
balanced configuration is higher port-to-port isolation, and improved rejection of 
spurious at the output.  
The schematic in Figure 9.59(a) works well if the preceding stage is 
differential. If not, then a balun transformer for the RF signal is a possibility; 
however, it is difficult to implement in an IC chip. In some cases this transformer 
is off chip, maintaining low loss and consequently reduced noise figure. An 
alternative to eliminate the RF balun is to use the differential RF input as a single 
ended to differential converter, by adding an AC ground to one of the FETs as 
shown in Figure 9.59(b). The schematic also shows the drain contains a tuned load 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
661 
that can improve the circuit performance at the cost of reduced bandwidth. The RF 
input device operates as a common source and source follower, while the second 
FET operates as a common gate. The problem with this approach is reduced 
dynamic range due to half the input voltage swing applied at the RF port. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Transformer coupled RF 
                (b) Single ended RF input 
Figure 9.59  
Conventional double balanced differential mixers. 
 
The FET version of the micromixer, introduced by Gilbert in bipolar 
technology, is represented in Figure 9.60(a). The positive RF cycle is amplified 
linearly by device M2 while M1 is shut off. In the negative cycle the device M1 
starts conducting while M2 is shut off.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Micromixer 
 
 
      (b) CG-CS RF version 
Figure 9.60  
Variations of conventional doubly balanced differential mixers. 
IF 
+ 
-  
+ 
+Vb   
-
-  
LO   
+
RF   
LO   
IF   
Vb   
-
- 
+
+
+RF   
LO   
M2   
M1   
IF   
Vbias   
-
-
+
+
+RF   
LO   
-
- 
+
+
Vb2   
M2 
M1 
Vb1   
IF   
RF   

662 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Therefore, each device operates in complementary class B mode, with 
minimum distortion.  The input impedance is active and adjusted to 50 ohms by 
properly biasing the M1 stage. This bias arrangement limits the gain and noise 
figure, which cannot be improved unless a passive low loss matching network is 
used. Another limitation is a reduction in the maximum input signal swing that 
reduces the output voltage compression point. The circuit in Figure 9.60(b) is an 
alternative version of Figure 9.59(a). Since M1 is common gate (CG) and M2 is 
common source (CS), the drain currents of each are opposed in phase, and input 
impedance is still determined by the CG device bias. The RF signal is coupled by 
means of a capacitor that limits the low end of the bandwidth. The devices operate 
in large signal class B similar to the micromixer, reducing the level of distortion 
products. 
 
 
9.7.2 Linearity and Noise 
 
If the switches are considered ideal, then they do not introduce non-linearity in the 
conversion process, but the differential RF amplifier or transconductor does. The 
amplification is assumed linear as long as the input voltage amplitude is smaller 
than the maximum input voltage, VL, determined from the transfer characteristic, 
Figure 9.53(b). Above this point the signal will clip resulting in gain compression 
and distortion. The differential output current expressed in terms of input 
differential voltage is given by (9.118). Adding one more term to the expansion of 
current in (9.93), taken differentially, there results (9.119). The third order 
intercept point is given by (9.120), which gives the ratio of the fundamental to the 
third order components. The conversion from third order voltage intercept point to 
the third order output intercept point in dBm referenced to an impedance Z0 is 
given by (9.122).  
 
...
3
3
2
2
1




id
id
id
dout
v
a
v
a
v
a
i
                     
     (9.118) 
3
0
3
0
0
16
1
2
1
2
gs
gs
out
V
I
k
V
kI
I
I



     
 
     (9.119) 
3
1
2
3
3
4
a
a
Vip

  
 
 
 
                    (9.120) 
)
(
3
2
4
3
2
4
0
3
th
gs
ip
V
V
k
I
V



                                    
     (9.121) 
dBm
Z
V
OIP
ip
,
30
2
log
10
0
2
3
3










  
                       
     (9.122)
 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
663 
Hence, linearity is determined by bias, and the value of the input voltage 
relative to the difference (Vgs - Vth). Due to the differential action, there is no 
second order term in (9.119), indicating the absence of second order distortion. 
The coefficient for the cubic term is negative indicating power compression 
similar to what happens in amplifiers. Another point of interest in these equations 
is that the coefficient 4(2/3)0.5 for VIP3 equates to 3.3 which is nearly 10 dB in 
power, which is the classical ratio between P1dB and IP3.  
In real differential circuits a certain degree of imbalance always exists, so 
a small amount of second order distortion will exist. A development by Abidi, 
[39], assumes a small offset voltage created by circuit imbalance, results in a 
second order intercept voltage given by (9.123). The equation shows IP2 comes 
from a third order term due to an inter-modulation between an input tone and a 
"dc tone" generated by the offset. This result highlights the negative effect of DC 
offset in differential mixers, suggesting the need to block DC when cascading 
differential mixers with other components. An alternative representation of 
voltage IP2 is in (9.124), where the origin of offset has been specified, in this case 
due to a mismatch between two MOS devices expressed in terms of differences in 
the trans-conductance parameter 
Leff
W
Cox
n


, and to the load mismatch.   
 
offset
ip
ip
V
V
V
4
2
3
2 
 
                  
 
         
 
    (9.123)
 
 


L
L
th
gs
ip
R
R
V
V
V







2
2
3
8
 
 
 
       
                    (9.124) 
 
 
The noise figure for a double differential mixer is nearly twice that 
provided by a single differential amplifier, (9.105). If DSB noise figure is to be 
considered, then it is half the value given by (9.125).  
 












s
m
L
s
m
s
g
v
SSB
R
g
R
R
g
R
r
G
NF
2
2
1
2
2
1
1

        
         
     (9.125)      
   
 
9.7.3 Determining Bias Level in the Gilbert Cell  
 
A CMOS device measuring (80x1)x0.13 µm2 was selected, whose DC and RF 
parameters are in [40] and Appendix 9B. The objective is to design a CMOS 
down-converter mixer in this process with the LO signal at 10 GHz and the IF at 

664 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
100 MHz. The circuit is to be biased at 1.2V with the best conversion gain for an 
input referenced VIP3 = 250 mV. 
The circuit of Figure 9.59(a) is partially reproduced in Figure 9.61 for an 
approximate calculation of bias levels. The bias levels for the other half of the 
circuit are the same. The plot of transconductance for the device shows a high 
gain when gate voltage is biased above 0.3 V and Vth = 0.1V. The minimum drain 
voltage that allows the device to operate in the saturated region is given by 
(9.126). This is obtained by taking the derivative of drain current versus drain 
voltage in the triode area, setting it to zero output conductance and solving for 
drain voltage. To this equation one has to add the swing voltage in terms of peak-
to-peak voltage for the device M2 and M3, M4. The drain voltage at the bias device 
M1 is a virtual ground for differential AC. If VGS1 = 0.3 V, then VDS = 0.2 V, I0 = 
2mA, and gm = 20 mS.   
 


th
GS
DS
V
V
V


1
 
 
 
        
        
     (9.126) 
in
L
m
peak
V
R
g
V

2

 
 
 
 
         
     (9.127) 
 
 Assuming VDS is the same for the RF device, M2, the voltage level at the 
source of the differential amplifier M3, M4 is 0.4V. The drain voltage of M2 is 
biased at 0.4 V and will be able to handle ± 200 mV of peak voltage. The rail 
voltage, Vdd, is common to load resistor RL and the drain-source switch M3. The 
bias and load should be set to allow the maximum IF peak to peak voltage without 
distortion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.61  
Biasing half of a Gilbert cell mixer. 
 
2I0  
VDS1 
M1  
RL  
M3  
VGS3  
VGS2  
VGS1  
VDS3  
VDS2  
M4  
M2  
I0  
+Vdd   

 
FET Mixer Theory 
665 
The maximum input drive without distortion, VL, is determined from the 
third order intercept point. The VIP3 is 10 dB higher than the voltage at 1 dB gain 
compression, which is the limit for linear operation. Transforming the VIP3 into 
power and calculating the maximum input voltage it is found that Vin = 80 mV 
peak at each device. Assuming 0.4 volts at the load resistance and 0.4 volts at the 
switches M3, M4, the load resistance is: 
 






200
002
.0
8.0
2.1
0
3
I
V
V
R
DS
dd
L
 
 
Equation (9.127) provides the amount of converted voltage at M3 drain or 
M4 and corresponds to a voltage of 205 mV peak and a voltage gain of 2.55. If 
higher gain is required, then a tradeoff will have to be made among the parameters 
to allow more output voltage. These results are for a 80 um wide FET.  If current 
must be decreased, then the device size can be scaled within a certain range. The 
voltages remain largely unchanged, but current and gm will vary. If the device is 
scaled to 1/4 its original size, or 20 µm wide, then current will reduce to 0.5 mA, 
gm to 5 mS and RL to 800 Ohm. The parameter most affected will be noise figure, 
which will go from 9 dB to 15.5 dB:  
 
dB
x
x
x
NFSSB
9
02
.0
50
200
1
02
.0
50
2
50
2
1
2
2
80

















 
dB
x
x
x
NFSSB
5.
15
005
.0
50
800
1
005
.0
50
2
50
8
1
2
2
20

















 
 
The LO voltage should be greater than 0.4V peak to peak to fully switch 
the devices on-off. The converted signal must be buffered with source follower 
amplifiers to accept a low impedance external load.  
 
 
9.8 SUBHARMONIC MIXING 
 
The advantages of the subharmonic mixer in mmWave and direct conversion 
receivers have already been discussed in the section on APDP diode mixers. The 
implementation of this function into IC form with either silicon or GaAs 
transistors has flourished in recent years due to demand for radios with lower LO 
power and higher dynamic range, in addition to the conventional advantages 
including elimination of self mixing effects, simplification of filtering, and high 
isolation. A key element in differential subharmonic mixers is the use of a 
frequency doubler component, represented in Figure 9.62, consisting of two FETs 
with drains and sources connected in parallel. The application of a sinusoidal LO 

666 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
in counter phase at each gate results in suppression of the fundamental and odd 
LO harmonics at the output. It is intuitive to conclude that if the LO is a square 
wave, then the output waveform is nearly a DC level and the circuit is not useful. 
A study of different LO wave shapes was reported in the literature, [41], and the 
conclusions are in Figure 9.63 in terms of the ratio of pulse rise time to pulse 
width applied to a subharmonic mixer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.62  
Sinusoidal frequency doubler with two parallel FETs. 
 
 
If a triangular, or for that matter a sinusoidal, LO wave shape is applied, 
then conversion gain is high, but starts dropping when the ratio decreases, 
assuming a trapezoidal shape and becomes a poor converter when the wave form 
becomes square.  
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.63  
Wave shape effect on the conversion gain.  After [41]. 
 
QLT type. The quad core mixer is stacked on top of the RF structure as in 
a conventional Gilbert mixer, [42], Figure 9.64(a). The schematic in part (b) of the 
figure shows each transistor in the conventional Gilbert cell is replaced by the 
FET doubler. The basic principal is the circuit behaves as a mixer operating at 
twice the LO frequency. In the core cell, the LO fundamental is rejected at the 
drain of each paralleled pair. The second harmonic on the other hand is enhanced 
at each pair. The doubler FETs are driven in quadrature, so the second harmonics 
are in counter phase and eliminated at the junction of each doubler. The IF 
currents are indicated by solid and dashed lines, and are similar to those of a 
square 
Tr 
-10 
10 
20 
Voltage Conversion Gain (dB) 
Rise Time/Pulse Width Ratio 
0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
Trapezoid 
Triangle 
t
t
M3   
M5   
t

 
FET Mixer Theory 
667 
Gilbert mixer. The drains of the RF FETs are a virtual ground for LO signals, and 
also for the IF signals, so there is no current at those frequencies flowing into the 
transconductor. 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 (a) Block diagram. 
 
                                  (b) Schematic.  
Figure 9.64  
QLT type of subharmonic differential mixer. After [42]. 
 
DRT type. The RF quad amplifiers are on top while the FET doubler cell 
is at the bottom, [43].  As with the previous topology, the LO must also be 
balanced at each gate, and shifted by 90º between the FET doublers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(a) 
Block diagram. 
                                      (b) Schematic.  
Figure 9.65  
DRT type of subharmonic differential mixer. After [43]. 
-RF   
+90   
-90  
+90
-LO  
-LO   
+LO  
+LO   
M10   
M9   
M8   
M7   
M3   
M4   
M2   
M5   
M6   
M1   
+RF   
IF  
(+) 
LO(0)  
LO(180) 
LO(90) 
LO(270) 
IF  
(-) 
Sub -Harmonic 
 
LO _CELL 
RF _STAGE 
RF  
QLT 
IF  
(+) 
LO(0)  
LO(180) 
LO(90) 
LO(270) 
IF  
(-) 
Sub -Harmonic 
 
LO _CELL 
RF _STAGE 
RF  
DRT 
+RF   
270LO   
90LO  
-LO   
+LO   
+RF   
-RF   

668 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Fundamental LO is rejected right at the core cell, while the LO second 
harmonic is applied to the RF quad operating as a normal fundamental mixer. 
Similarly to the previous mixer, a virtual ground exists for the RF and IF signals at 
the drain of each FET doubler. Therefore, there is no RF or IF current circulating 
into the LO cell.   
 
Triple Level type. This approach was originally proposed in bipolar 
technology and was extensively covered in Chapter 8. The theory and conclusions 
apply equally to the FET version. It is desirable in direct conversion receivers to 
have low output offset voltage.  This undesired effect is caused by circuit 
imbalance, even order nonlinearities, and LO leakage to RF input. The latter 
causes self mixing that in turn generates a varying DC at baseband.   The FET 
version operated in subharmonic passive mode out performs the bipolar version in 
terms of DC offset. This is because the FET mixer is more linear than the bipolar 
version.  The input signal is applied to the differential RF amplifiers and their 
outputs are applied to the subharmonic core cell, composed of two FET quads in 
cascade, [44], Figure 9.66. The LO signal is applied to the quads in the same 
manner as before (i.e., in quadrature to the four feed ports). Not shown in the 
circuit are the DC decoupling capacitors that prevent DC current from flowing 
from M1, M2 into the FET channels. The IF outputs are in counter phase and 
combined by an active circuit or an external balun. An additional parallel cell was 
proposed in the referenced paper, with LO phase reversed at each input, so 
additional LO cancellation is present at the output load.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Block diagram. 
                                (b) Schematic.  
Figure 9.66  
Triple level subharmonic differential mixer. After [44]. 
 
 
IF  
(+) 
LO(0)  
LO(180) 
LO(90) 
LO(270) 
IF  
(-) 
Sub -Harmonic 
LO _CELL1 
LO_CELL2 
RF _STAGE 
RF  
TL 
+LO2 
+LO2   
-LO2   
+LO1 
+LO1   
-LO1   
M2   
M1   
+RF   
-RF   

 
FET Mixer Theory 
669 
9.9 DISTRIBUTED MIXERS 
 
The advancement of ultra wide band (UWB) systems drove the need for broad 
band mixers capable of very large instantaneous bandwidth. The first application 
of a distributed topology for the purpose of converting RF signals made use of the 
distributed amplifier topology, [45]. In that application the LO and RF were 
combined externally and applied to the gates, and IF was collected at the drain.  If 
the transmission lines are properly matched and the phases of the propagating 
signals correctly adjusted, then this topology can provide very wideband 
operation, limited by the cut off frequency of the transmission lines. The 
schematic of a gate distributed mixer is in Figure 9.67.  The schematic is the same 
for a drain mixer except that the LO is injected at the drain side. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 9.67  
Distributed gate mixer topology. 
In general, a closed form analytical model for conversion loss is obtained 
from a simplified unilateral model for the FET, using a simple series RC model at 
the gate and parallel RC model at the drain. The transconductance is assumed to 
be the main conversion element, with the fundamental transconductance factor, 
gm1, used in the frequency conversion analysis. Each mixer cell has an applied RF 
and LO voltage, and each generates an IF current. The artificial transmission lines 
formed with the inductors and device capacitances suggest the use of filter theory 
in the design. A common filter topology, known as constant-k, has a symmetrical 
unit cell with image impedance, which is the impedance of the synthetic line as a 
function of the cutoff frequency defined per (9.128). The expressions for the gate 
side are similar to those derived for distributed amplifiers, [46].  
 
















2
1
c
RF
gs
g
RF
C
L
Z


   
 
      
 
    (9.128) 
 Where the cutoff frequency is given by 
LC
c
/
2


 
 
The transfer function giving attenuation and phase shift that relates   
input to output voltages for each FET connection is defined by (9.129) in terms of 
Ld 
Lg 
Lg 
RF+LO  
IF 
Lg 
Lg/2 
Lg/2 
Ld 
Ld 
Ld/2 
Ld/2 

670 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
two cut-off frequencies: the artificial transmission line frequency c and the 
device gate cut-off frequency, gRF = 1/(RiCgs), where, Ri and Cgs are defined in 
Figure 9.12 for a conventional FET model.  
 







































2
2
/
1
2
/
tan
2
/
)
1
2
(
1
1
)
(
)
(
1
c
RF
gRF
RF
j
k
RF
gk
gRF
RF
RF
e
t
V
t
V







                      (9.129) 
 
The modulation of transconductance generates a conversion trans-
conductance, gm1, which is a function of how the device is modulated, and is 
defined at each cell by (9.130). The phase component refers to the LO phase at 
each tap of the line, where k is the cell order. 
  









n
k
k
t
j
m
mk
LO
LO
e
g
t
g
1
1
1
)
(


           
                 
    (9.130) 
 
The converted current at each cell is given by the product of conversion 
transconductance and the input gate RF voltage.  
 
)
(
)
(
t
V
t
g
I
gk
mk
dk 
    
 
The IF current is obtained by substituting the terms from the previous 
equations, and is given as [47]:  
 













































2
2
/
1
2
/
tan
2
/
)
1
2
(
1
1
1
1
1
c
RF
gRF
RF
j
k
t
j
RF
k
t
j
m
dk
gRF
RF
RF
RF
LO
LO
e
e
V
e
g
I










   
    (9.131) 
 
The total output current is a function of the ratio of two hyperbolic sine 
function as indicated below, obtained by adding the current of each cell. 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
671 








LO
RF
IF
RF
IF
LO
RF
IF
RF
IF
c
RF
gRF
RF
n
RF
m
IF
j
j
n
e
V
g
I
RF
IF

























































)
(
2
1
sinh
)
(
2
sinh
1
1
2
2
2
/
1
2
)
(
2
1
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   (9.132) 
 
The output power delivered to the load, PL, and the input power delivered 
to the mixer, Pin, are obtained using the power definition: 
 



















2
2
2
1
2
1
Re
2
1
c
IF
ds
d
IF
IF
IF
L
C
L
I
Z
I
P


                  
     (9.133) 
 
 



















2
2
2
1
/
2
1
Re
2
1
c
RF
gs
g
IF
RF
RF
RF
in
C
L
V
Z
Z
V
P


  
     (9.134) 
 








gs
g
c
IF
ds
d
LO
RF
IF
RF
IF
LO
RF
IF
RF
IF
c
RF
gRF
RF
n
m
c
C
L
C
L
j
j
n
e
g
n
G
RF
IF
























































2
2
2
/
1
2
)
(
2
2
1
2
1
)
(
2
1
sinh
)
(
2
sinh
1
1
16
1


















   
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
                   (9.135) 
 
 
Where,  IF = output IF frequency 
 
If losses are negligible, then the equation can be simplified to be in terms 
of sine instead of the hyperbolic sine: 
 








gs
g
ds
d
LO
RF
IF
LO
RF
IF
m
c
C
L
C
L
n
g
n
G
2
2
1
2
2
1
sin
2
sin
16











          (9.136) 
 
Maximum gain is obtained when the argument of the sinusoidal function 
is set equal to zero, resulting in the two familiar design equations for distributed 
mixers.   
 
RF
LO
IF





        
 
 
 
     
     (9.137) 

672 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
)
(
)
(
16
2
1
2
RF
g
IF
d
m
c
f
Z
f
Z
g
n
G 
         
 
  
     (9.138) 
 
The phase condition of (9.137) guarantees the IF current generated in a 
cell will add in phase with the current coming from the previous cell. A interesting 
practical condition is when the phase shift of the LO and RF lines are 
approximately the same, corresponding to a low IF frequency relative to the LO 
frequency, resulting in 
RF
LO



. This condition applies well to the circuit on 
Figure 9.67. The converted current appears simultaneously both at the output load 
and at the internal dummy load. The RF and LO signals are also amplified and 
delivered to the external load, requiring a filter to reject them.  
One of the disadvantages of the gate distributed mixer is the need to add 
LO and RF signals externally, for example with a coupler. It is also difficult to 
control the phase of LO and RF phases independently of each other, restricting the 
gate phase to be similar for LO and RF.  The drain mixer fits well into the 
distributed approach because there is no need to combine the RF and LO 
externally, and the device itself provides the isolation between both signals. In 
spite of the differences in the frequency conversion mechanism for gate and drain 
mixers, transconductance dominates both, and the previous equations are still 
valid. Another topology that fits well into the distributed format is the dual gate or 
cascode stack. The RF, IF,  and LO signals each have their own transmission 
lines. This gives a degree of freedom in selecting the phase shift of each line, and 
can be used to increase the output signal level and provide rejection at the dummy 
load over a narrow frequency range. The schematic for the cascode topology is 
essentially the same as for a dual gate device. The dual gate topology is depicted 
in Figure 9.69 to address an additional property of distributed mixers, [48]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.68  
Distributed cascode mixer topology. 
 
LO 
RF 
IF 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
673 
If the LO signals are applied in phase at each cell as depicted in Figure 
9.69, then LO = 0, and no delay is included. In this case the phase shifts for the 
RF and IF signals are the same.  Assuming a 90 deg phase shift for each cell, the 
LO signals cancel at either output port for an even number of devices. If the RF 
signal frequency is higher than the LO frequency, then the IF phase shift, , in 
each cell is positive, so the IF voltage adds positively on the forward port and 
cancels on the reverse port. In contrast, if the RF frequency is lower than the LO 
frequency, then the phase shift in each cell is now - , and the output ports are 
reversed; namely, IF appears at the reverse port and cancels at the forward port. 
The positive and negative IF phases relate to the signal and image frequencies, 
which makes this arrangement an image reject mixer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.69  
Distributed dual gate mixer topology. After [48]. 
 
The insertion of a singly balanced differential mixer into a distributed 
topology is an alternative that fits well with CMOS technology and has the 
potential to meet the wide band performance required by UWB (Ultra Wide Band) 
systems. An example of two cells is in Figure 9.70 [49], with LO applied in 
differential mode to the switching gates and RF in single ended mode to the trans-
conductor device.  
The output IF signals are available in differential form at the drain. 
Essentially the same conversion equations are applicable to the conversion 
performance estimation. Additional distributed structures are found in the 
literature; for example, a three FET doubler is applied in a distributed structure to 
form a subharmonic down-converter [50].  An additional structure involves the 
insertion of a conventional Gilbert cell mixer into a distributed topology [51]. 
 
 
 
 
IF+ 
RF 
LO 
IF- 

674 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.70  
Differential distributed mixer topologies. After [49]. 
 
 
9.10  SUMMARY 
 
The basic theory for FET based mixers was discussed in this chapter along with 
detailed analysis of several conventional circuit topologies.  The relative merits of 
each was presented to guide the reader in deciding the best circuit topology for a 
given mixer requirement. The main technologies covered were GaAs and CMOS, 
but the material is equally applied to others including LDMOS and GaN. The 
emphasis was mainly on the principle of operation, and simple equations allowing 
quick estimation of noise figure and linearity were provided whenever possible. 
Computer analyses were described in design examples to illustrate their power in 
providing performance with accuracy. It should be emphasized that CMOS 
technology is still expanding into the RF, microwave, millimeter wave world, but 
as of today one can say it is mostly applicable to very high volume production. 
For low and medium volume applications or when high performance is required, 
GaAs based technologies are a better choice.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
IF- 
LO- 
RF 
LO+ 
VDD  
IF+ 
VDD  

 
FET Mixer Theory 
675 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Walter R. Curtice, “A MESFET Model for Use in the Design of GaAs 
Integrated Circuits,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume 28, No. 5, May 1980, pp. 448-456. 
[2] 
Stephen A. Maas and David Nelson, “Modeling MESFET's for 
Intermodulation Analyis of Mixers and Amplifiers,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT 38, No. 12, December 1990, 
pp. 1964-1971. 
[3] 
Stephen A. Maas, Nonlinear Microwave and RF Circuits, Norwood, MA, 
Artech House, 2003, pp. 165-178. 
[4] 
H. Statz, P. Newman, I. W. Smith, R. A. Pucel, and H. A. Haus, “GaAs 
FET Device and Circuit Simulation in Spice,” IEEE Transactions on Electron 
Devices, Volume ED-34, No. 2, February 1987. 
[5] 
A. Angelov, H. Zirath, and N. Rorsman, “A New Empirical Nonlinear 
Model for HEMT and MESFET Devices,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave, 
Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-40, No. 12, December 1992, pp. 2258-
2266. 
[6]Stephen A. Maas, Microwave Mixers, Norwood, MA, Artech House, 1993, pp. 
317. 
[7] 
R. A. Pucel, D. Masse, and R. Bera, “Performance of GaAs MESFET 
Mixers at X Band,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume MTT-24, No. 6, June 1976, pp. 351-360. 
[8] 
G. K. Tie and C. S. Aitchison, “Noise Figure and Associated Conversion 
Gain of a Microwave MESFET Gate Mixer,” 13th European Microwave 
Conference, 1983, pp. 579-584. 
[9] 
Bernard A. Xavier and Colin S. Aitchison, “The Measured and Predicted 
Noise Figure of a GaAs Heterojunction Bipolar Transistor Mixer,” 1997 IEEE 
Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium, pp. 135-138. 
[10] F. Danneville, B. Tamen, G. Dambrine, and A. Cappy, “Design of Ultra 
Low Noise Mixer Using An Analytical Formulae of the Noise Figure,” 1999 MTT 
International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 117-120. 
[11] Hatsuaki Fukui, “Optimal Noise Figure of Microwave GaAs MESFETs,” 
IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, Volume ED-26, No. 7, July 1979, pp. 
1032-1037. 
[12] Y. Cui, G. Niu, Y. Li, S. S. Taylor, Q. Liang, and J. D. Cressler, “On the 
Excess Noise Factors and Noise Parameter Equation for RF CMOS,” 2007 
Topical Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems, pp. 40-
43. 
[13] Stephen A. Maas, Nonlinear Microwave and RF Circuits, Artech House, 
2003, pp. 254. 
[14] Jose Carlos Pedro and Nuno Borges Carvalho, Intermodulation Distortion 
in Microwave and Wireless Circuits, Norwood, MA, Artech House, 2003, pp. 380. 

676 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[15] T. M. Roh, Y. Kim, Y. Suh, and B. Kim, “A New Simple Extraction 
Method for Higher Order Components of Channel Current in GaAs MESFET,” 
27th European Microwave Conference, Volume 1, 1977, pp. 415-421. 
[16] George E. Bodway, “Two Port Power Flow Analysis Using Generalized 
Scattering Parameters,” Microwave Journal, May 1967, pp. 61-69. 
[17] D. Dubuc, T. Parra, and J. Graffeuil, “Original Topology of GaAs-PHEMT 
Mixer,” 30th European Microwave Conference, 2000, pp. 1- 4. 
[18] P. Bura and R. Dikshit, “FET Mixer with the Drain LO Injection,” 
Electronic Letters, 30th September 1976, Volume 12, No. 20, pp. 536-537. 
[19] J. Ch. Cayrou, M. Gayral, J. Graffeuil, and J. F. Sauterau, “Simple 
Expression for Conversion Gain of Drain Mixers,” Electronic Letters, 19th 
August 1993, Volume 29, No. 17, pp. 1514-1516. 
[20] W. K. Squires, “Mixer Circuit Employing Linear Resistive Elements,” US 
Patent 3,383,601, issued May 17, 1967. 
[21] Eugene A. Janning, Jr., “Orthogonal Passive Frequency Converter with 
Control Port and Signal Port,” US Patent 3,617,898, issued November 2, 1971. 
[22] Solti Peng, “A Simplified Method to Predict The Conversion Loss of FET 
Resistive Mixers,” IEEE 1997 MTT International Microwave Symposium Digest, 
pp. 857-860. 
[23] F. de Flaviis and Steve A. Maas, “X-Band Doubly Balanced Resistive 
Mixer With Very Low Intermodulation,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT 43, No. 2, February 1995, pp. 457-460. 
[24] M. T. Hutabarat, D. R. Haigh, D. Schreurs, K. van der Zanden, D. L. Edgar, 
Z. Borsosfoldi, K. Elgaid, I. G. Thayne, and A. E. Parker, “On Wafer 
Intermodulation Distortion Measurements on Resistive FET Mixers for Device 
Comparison and Model Validation,” IEEE 1999 IEEE MTT International 
Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 170-173. 
[25] Stephen A. Maas, Nonlinear Microwave and RF Circuits,   Norwood, MA, 
Artech House, 2003, pp. 262. 
[26] S. Peng, P. J. McClleer and G. I. Haddad , “Intermodulation Analysis of 
FET Resistive Mixers Using Volterra Series,” IEEE 1996 MTT International 
Microwave Symposium Digest, pp.1377-1380. 
[27] Rob Virk and Stephen Maas, “Modeling MESFETs for Intermodulation 
Analysis of Resistive Mixers,” IEEE 1995 MTT International Microwave 
Symposium Digest, pp. 1247-1250. 
[28] Stephen 
Maas 
and 
David 
Nelson, 
“Modeling 
MESFETs 
for 
Intermodulation Analysis of Mixers and Amplifiers,” IEEE 1990 MTT 
International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 1291-1294.   
[29] C. Tsironis, R. Stahlmann and R. Meyer, “Modelling and Evaluation of 
Dual Gate Mesfets as Low Noise, Self Oscillating and Image Rejection Mixers,” 
IEEE 1983MTT International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 443-445. 
[30] Junghyun Kim and Youngwoo Kwon, “Intermodulation Analysis of Dual 
Gate FET Mixers,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume MTT 50, No. 6 June 2002, pp. 1544-1555. 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
677 
[31] Edward M. Karkar and Nicolas Kovaleski, “Modulator  and Method,” US 
Patent 3,829,797, issued August 13, 1974. 
[32] K. Yhland, N. Rorsman, and H. H. G. Zirath, “Novel Single Device 
Balanced Resistive HEMT Mixers,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory 
and Techniques, Volume MTT 43, No. 12, December 1995, pp. 2863-2867. 
[33] P. R. Gray, P. J. Hurst, S. H. Lewis, and R. G. Meyer, Analysis and Design 
of Analog Integrated Circuits, New York, John Wiley 2001, pp. 219. 
[34] Keng Leong Fong and Robert G. Meyer, “Monolithic RF Active Mixer 
Design,” IEEE Tranactions on Circuits and Systems II: Analog and Digital Signal 
Processing, Volume 46, No. 3, March 1999, pp. 231- 238. 
[35] Manolis T. Terrovitis and Robert G. Meyer, “Noise in Current 
Commutating CMOS Mixers,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume  34, 
No. 6, June 1999, pp. 772-783. 
[36] Willy Sansen, “Distortion in Elementary Transistor Circuits,” IEEE 
Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Analog and Digital Signal Processing, 
Volume 46, No. 3, March 1999, pp. 315-325. 
[37] H. Zirath, “A Sub-harmonically Pumped Resistive Dual-HEMT-Mixer,” 
IEEE 1991MTT International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 875-878. 
[38]Sten E. Gunnarson, “Analysis and Design of a Novel X4 Harmonically 
Pumped Resistive HEMT Mixer,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume MTT 56, No. 4, April 2008, pp. 809-816. 
[39] A. A. Abid, “General Relations between IP2, IP3, and Offsets in 
Differential Circuits and the Effects of Feedback,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT 51, No. 5, May 2003, pp. 1610-
1612. 
[40] S. Emami, C. H. Doan, A. M. Niknejad, and R. W. Brodersen, “Large 
Signal Millimeter Wave CMOS Modeling with BSIM3,” 2004 IEEE Radio 
Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium, pp. 163-166. 
[41] M. Goldfarb, E. Balboni, and J. Cavey, “Even Harmonic Double Balanced 
Active Mixer for Use in Direct Conversion Receivers,” IEEE Journal of Solid 
State Circuits, Volume 38, No. 10, October 2003, pp. 1762-1766. 
[42] H. Chin Chen, T. Wang, and S-Shi Lu, “A 5-6 GHz 1V CMOS Direct  
Conversion Receiver with an Integrated Quadrature Coupler,” IEEE Journal of 
Solid State  Circuits, Volume 42, No. 9 September 2007, pp. 1963-1975. 
[43] P. Upadhyara, M. Rajasherkaraiah, D. Heo, and Y. J. E. Chen, “A New 5 
GHz ISM Band CMOS Doubly Balanced Sub-Harmonic Mixer for Direct 
Conversion Receiver,” European Conference on Wireless Technology, 2004 
Amsterdan, pp. 65-68. 
[44] H. C. Jen, S. C. Rose, and R. G. Meyer, “A 2.2 GHz Sub-Harmonic Mixer 
for Direct Conversion Receivers in 0.13 µm CMOS,” ISSCC 2006 International 
Solid State Circuits Conference, pp 25.5 
[45] Tang O. S. A and Aitchison C. S., “A Microwave Distributed MESET 
Mixer,” 14th European Microwave Conference, 1984, pp. 483-487. 

678 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[46] J. B. Beyer, S. N. Prasad, R. C. Becker, J. E. Nordman, and G. K. 
Hohenwarter, “MESFET Distributed Amplifier Design Guidelines,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-32, No. 3, 
March 1984, pp. 268-275. 
[47] B. Nie, J. Zhou and K. Chen, “Design and Analylsis of an Ultrawide Band 
Distributed Drain-Pumped Mixer Using 9.18 µm CMOS Technology,” 
Microelectronics & Electronics, 2009, PrimeAsia 2009, Asia Pacific Conference 
on Postgraduate Research, pp. 29-32. 
[48] W. Titus, Y. Tajima, R. A. Pucel, and W. Morris, “Distributed Monolithic 
Image Rejection Mixer,” GaAs IC Symposium, 1986, pp. 191-194. 
[49] A. Q. Safarian, A. Yazdi, and P. Heydari, “Design and Analysis of an 
Ultrawide-Band Distributed CMOS Mixer,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large 
Scale Integration Systems, Volume MTT 13, No. 5, May 2005, pp. 618-629. 
[50] C. L. Kuo, C. C. Kuo, C. H Lien, J. H. Tsai, and H. Wang, “A Novel 
Reduced Size Rat Race Broadside Coupler and Its APplication for CMOS 
Distributed Sub-Harmonic Mixer,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Letters, 
Volume 18, No. 3, March 2008, pp. 194-196. 
[51] C. R. Wu, H. H. Hsieh, and L. H. Lu, “An Ultra Wideband Distributed 
Active Mixer MMIC in 0.18 µm CMOS Technology,” IEEE  Transactions 
on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT 55, No. 4, April 2007, pp. 625-
632. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
679 
APPENDIX 9A 
 TRANSISTOR DATA SHEET NE67300 
 
 

680 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
    
 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
681 
 
 

682 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
683 
 
 

684 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
FET Mixer Theory 
685 
APPENDIX 9B 
TRANSISTOR PARAMETERS 
NMOS 0.13 µm TECHNOLOGY 
 
DC plots for a mmWave NMOS device built on 0.13 µm MOS 
technology, measuring 80x1 µm2. The I/V plot in the next figure compares the 
measured values with BSIM3 model for this device. 
 
 
 
Measured and modeled (IDS X VDS) with VGS as a parameter  
 
        
 
Measured and modeled (gm X VGS) with VDS as a parameter  

686 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The S-parameter evaluations for a set of VGS voltages from 0.04 to 65 
GHz are in the Smith Chart below. The measured and modeled values were 
obtained at VDS =1.2 V and gate voltage ranging from 0.2 to 0.4 V.  
 
                        
 
 
 
 
These parameters appeared in "A 69 GHz Down-Converting CMOS 
Single Gate Mixer" by A. Emami, C. Hy, Doan, A. M. Niknejad and R. W. 
Brodersen in the RFIC Symposium; on 2005.  
  
 

687 
Chapter 10    
Passive FET Applications 
The passive FET mixer is an important signal processing component due to its 
high linearity, simple circuitry, and relatively low LO power.  In contrast to diode 
and active mixers, the LO power required for passive FET mixers does not need to 
be much higher than the RF drive at 1 dB gain compression.  The power amplifier 
is by far the most limiting component in communication systems, but the mixer is 
next due to its unavoidable inter-modulation products.  Improved mixer linearity 
means the mixer can provide more power in the transmit chain, minimizing the 
number of amplifier stages following it.  Mixer linearity is also important on the 
receive side, by allowing higher gain in the low noise amplifier, resulting in lower 
noise figure and higher overall dynamic range.     
 
 
In this chapter a summary of selected milestones in passive mixer 
technology is presented, originating from scientific publications and public patents 
over the years. It is shown that resistive mixers have actually been proposed using 
various technologies including, JFET, MESFET and PHEMT. The JFET has 
historical relevance but is no longer in use for RF applications. GaAs MESFETs 
are still in use in the industry for mixers but they are seldom mentioned in new 
publications. GaAs PHEMT or HEMT devices show superior performance and are 
now the devices of choice for mixer applications. Devices from other technologies 
like InP and GaN have been reported to perform well as resistive mixers [1, 2]. 
However, the majority of new investigation in this area is now concentrated on Si-
CMOS for wireless microwave and mm-wave applications.  
 
 
10.1  SINGLE ENDED 
 
The single ended approach is the simplest topology, requiring only one device to 
perform the mixing. The drawback is the ensemble of output signals includes the 
RF and LO fundamental and their harmonics, plus the nLOmRF mixing 
products that include the desired IF.  In spite of these issues, if the frequencies of 

688 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the desired and undesired signals do not overlap, then fixed filters can be used to 
reject the unwanted ones at the output. 
 
 
10.1.1 JFET Technology 
 
One of the first recorded instances of modulating the channel conductance for 
mixing purposes is found in a patent, [3], from 1967. In the inventor’s words, 
“The linear resistive portion of the characteristic is switched by local oscillator 
voltage to produce a variation in channel resistance at the local oscillator 
frequency. When signal current flows in this time varying resistance, the resultant 
voltage is a linear product of the two applied time-varying functions and contains 
components at the sum and difference frequencies. That concept is still described 
in the same way in most text books.  His proposal was for a singly balanced 
configuration that is addressed later.  
 
 
10.1.2 MOSFET Technology 
 
The next instance of modulating the channel resistance for mixing purposes 
appeared in 1971, [4]. In this work the concept of an orthogonally pumped mixer 
was introduced for the passive FETs. Here, the pump and input signals are not 
superimposed across the nonlinearity, but enter the mixing element through 
orthogonal ports. This configuration was denoted by the author as orthogonal 
passive frequency converter with control port and signal port. An application of 
this device as a RF mixer is shown in the schematic of Figure 10.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.1  
Schematic of the RF orthogonal mixer. 
 
The device is mounted in common gate configuration, and RF input and 
IF output currents pass through the drain-source channel.  The RF signal is 
injected at pin 11 and coupled to the source of the FET by a parallel resonant 
circuit tuned to the RF frequency.  The resonant circuit also shorts the IF to 
LO 
IF 
RF 

 
Passive FET Applications 
689 
ground. The LO is applied to terminal 22, which is coupled to the gate by an 
impedance matching capacitor. The resonant circuit, connected from gate to 
ground, presents a low impedance to ground at all frequencies except the LO 
frequency. The IF is taken from pin 30 through another resonant circuit connected 
to the drain and tuned to the IF frequency. The IF tank circuit shorts all other 
signals to ground including the RF and LO. A negative bias is applied to the gate 
on line 32. 
 
The mixer prototype had 4 dB conversion loss and required LO power of 
10 mW at 200 MHz to operate properly. It was capable of handling input signals 
up to 0.25 W at 1dB of gain compression. All second and third order spurious 
responses in the input signal are rejected to a minimum of -80 dBc. The mixer is 
passive and contains no excess-noise generators so the noise figure is close to the 
insertion loss of a passive attenuator whose loss equals the mixer conversion loss.  
 
 
10.1.3 MESFET Technology 
 
Usage of GaAs MESFET technology for the resistive mixer was popularized by 
Maas, [5]. The prototype mixer he described employs the Avantek AT10650, a 
commercially available packaged device. The RF and IF are applied to the drain, 
separated by a diplexer comprising an edged coupled bandpass filter and a 
microstrip low pass filter, as illustrated in Figure 10.2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.2 
 Schematic diagram of a single ended FET mixer. After [5].  
 
 
The device I/V characteristic exhibits a minimum channel resistance of 
14 Ω and an open circuit with respect to Z0. According to (9.68), a conversion loss 
of 6 dB is possible with this device. The measured conversion loss plotted in 
Figure 10.3(a) was obtained with PLO = +10 dBm. Best conversion point is 6.25 
dB. The measured linearity parameters are in Figure 10.3(b) as a function of LO 
LO filter 
IF 
LO 
RF 
RF filter 
IF filter 
VG_Bias 

690 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
PIM3 - dBm 
- 60 
- 90 
- 80 
- 70 
- 50 
- 40 
PIM2 - dBm 
PIM2 
- 30 
- 40 
- 50 
- 60 
PIM3 
-1.6V 
-1.1V 
-1.1V 
-1.6V 
PLO - dBm 
5 
10 
power for two gate bias levels. The best IM3 result is obtained for PLO > 7 dBm 
and VG = - 1.6 V, and the best IM2 result is at VG = -1.1V. Designing the mixer 
with a low impedance at the drain for the LO signal voltage minimizes leakage 
from gate to channel.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Mixer conversion loss 
 
(b) Mixer IM2 and IM3 versus LO power 
Figure 10.3  
Mixer performance for PLO = 10 dBm; VG = - 2.1 V and VD = 0 V. 
 
 
An improvement in this basic circuit that minimizes LO leakage into the 
channel is found in the patent [6]. The improvement is obtained by adding an 
isolation reactance, 16, comprising a series capacitor and transmission line that 
parallel resonates the drain-gate capacitance at the LO frequency.  The reduced 
LO leakage into the drain improves linearity at high LO drive. The mixer, whose 
schematic is in Figure 10.4, was built on GaAs material, and operates over 32 to 
36 GHz.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Figure 10.4  
MMIC MESFET with  tuned Cgd. 
10 
10.0   10.1  10.2   10.3   10.4   10.5 
Conversion Loss - dB 
1.2     1.3    1.4     1.5     1.6    1.7 
8 
6 
4 
fIF - GHz 
fRF - GHz 
-Vg 
L – 641 
W - 5 L - 173 
W - 5 
RIF 
2 pF 
2 pF 
LO 
L - 167 
W - 34 
1 pF 
L - 150 
W - 72 
L - 150 
W - 72 
L - 400 
W - 45 
L - 150 
W - 72 
RF 
16 

 
Passive FET Applications 
691 
R1 
M1 
C5 
L4 
L3 
L2 
L1 
C4 
C3 
C1 
C2 
LO 
D1 
RF 
IF 
 
The source is terminated by a low pass filter that grounds the port for RF 
and LO frequencies, and IF is extracted from that port. The RF signal is injected 
to the drain and filtered from IF through the LC circuit. The LO is injected to the 
gate, which is biased through a low pass circuit. Over 32 to 36 GHz, with PLO = 15 
dBm and VG = -1.9V, the best RF to LO isolation ranged from 15 to 19 dB. The 
gate drain capacitor is resonated with an inductive line connected in series with a 
DC blocking capacitor, between the drain and gate. 
 
 
10.1.4  MESFET Self Biased Mixer 
 
The next selected patent, [7], employs a similar L1C3 resonant circuit to improve 
isolation between gate and drain, and in addition, it introduces a clamp circuit to 
generate the gate bias from the LO signal, eliminating any external supply bias.  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.5  
A MESFET single ended resistive mixer wits self biased gate. 
 
 
The gate circuit comprises a series LC circuit and a clamp diode that adds 
capacitance to the circuit. The LO generator is matched to the circuit by a parallel 
reactance, L4 and series reactance L2,C2. When matched, the gate source 
capacitance is tuned to maximize the LO amplitude. The clamp circuit prevents 
negative half-cycles from reaching the mixing device, and also avoids reverse-
breakdown of the gate source junction. The clamping voltage is approximately 
one diode drop, about 0.7V below ground. The capacitor C2 and the gate Schottky 
barrier diode provide a self-bias circuit, which charges the capacitor to the LO 
peak voltage. The diplexer connected at the drain separates the RF and IF signals. 
The LO voltage impressed at the gate must swing between pinch-off (-1 V for a 
typical 0.25 m gate FET) to a few tenths of positive gate voltage (0.5V for the 
same device). A variation on this gate self bias circuit is found in [8] that adds a 
parallel RC in series with each gate for LO pulse shaping.  It is said to reduce the 
LO rise and fall times, and thus increase linearity. 

692 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Matching 
network 
IF filter 
RF filter 
LOin 
IFout 
RFin 
Vg 
 
Another interesting improvement for single ended mixers was reported in 
[9], which makes a statistical study of drain terminations at RF and IF frequencies. 
The study was applied to a 300 µm gate GaAs FET with termination impedances 
ranging from 0 to 500 ohms for the real part, and -500 to 500 ohms for the 
reactive part. The conclusions revealed that besides the RF, IF and image 
termination, the sum fLO + fRF is equally important. This frequency is located near 
the second LO harmonic frequency in down converter mixers with small IF 
relative to LO frequency. The optimal embedding terminations for gain are: 
resistive finite impedance for RF and IF frequencies, high impedance (open) for 
the sum and image impedances.  
 
 
10.1.5  CMOS Technology 
 
A CMOS version [10], depicted in Figure 10.6, was developed by IMEC on 90 
nm CMOS technology with fT = 150 GHz for 60 GHz applications. The LO signal 
is applied to a device measuring to 2X20 µm2, with transmission line circuits for 
impedance matching and gate bias insertion.   The RF is applied directly to the 
drain with a coupled line to provide isolation to DC and IF. The reported 
performance includes 11.6 dB conversion loss at +4 dBm LO drive and - 0.45 V 
gate bias.  Conversion gain drops by 1 dB when the IF increases up to 6 GHz.  At 
this frequency the P1dB is +3 dBm and the IIP3 is +16.5 dBm. The IIP3 improved 2 
to 3 dB by applying a low drain bias on the order of 0.1 volts.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
(a) 
Circuit schematic. After [10]. 
                 (b) Photo of chip. From [10]. 
Figure 10.6  
A CMOS single ended mixer for 60 GHz operation. 
 
 
10.1.5.1  CMOS Series Configuration 
 
In another application, [11], the FET is connected in series instead of shunt to 
ground, to build a resistive mixer to operate within the 20 to 30 GHz frequency 

 
Passive FET Applications 
693 
range. The circuit was designed on 90 nm SOI CMOS technology by IBM. The 
circuit schematic in Figure 10.7 includes filters with inductance connected to 
ground, which is claimed by the author to provide higher Q, a premium parameter 
in CMOS. The circuit also provides a convenient DC ground, maintaining drain 
and source at zero volts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.7  
A CMOS series connected single ended mixer. 
 
The author addresses the theory of conversion loss by first examining 
how the drain resistance is modulated by the LO voltage in this technology, 
resulting in the waveforms of Figure 10.8. Conversion loss is evaluated using the 
first two terms of the Fourier series for the resistance waveform, Rds0 and Rds1.  
These are expressed in terms of the duty cycle,  of the waveform.   
 







)
sin(
0
1
ds
ds
R
R
    
 
 
 
 
     (10.1a) 
...
)
cos(
2
)
(
1
0



t
R
R
t
r
LO
ds
ds

  
 
 
     (10.1b) 
 
2
2
1
1
1
1











power
output
power
input
available
Lconv
       
       (10.2) 
 
Conversion loss expressed in terms of on and off resistances, according 
to Saleh is given by (10.2). The author assumed a duty cycle of 35% based on 
Figure 10.8, which gives a conversion loss of 5.9 dB. Applying the simplified 
wave theory where a square wave modulation is assumed, the minimum resistance 
of 10 Ω introduces a conversion loss of 5.5 dB. Adding the filter and other losses 
the total predicted conversion loss is in the order of 10 dB. The measured 
conversion loss ranges from 9.5 to 12 dB within the 26.5 –  30 GHz band, 
L1 = 180 pH 
L2 = 1.4  nH 
L3 = 0.35 nH 
C1 = 210 fF 
C2 = 4 pF 
C3 = 5 pF 
R = 300  
Wg = 64 µm 
C3 
L3 
IF  
(fIF = 2.5 GHz) 
L2 
L1 
C2 
LO  
(fLO = 24.5 GHz) 
Vg=0.45V 
C1 
RF  
(fRF= 27 GHz) 
R 

694 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
depicted on Figure 10.9(a). The conversion loss versus LO drive power for an 
input signal at 27 GHz and IF output at 2.5 GHz is in Figure 10.9(b).  
Additionally, measured IP3 is + 16 dBm, and noise figure is 11 dB, at +5 dBm LO 
power.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.8  
Nonlinear characteristic of Rds as a function of LO drive. From [11]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
(a) 
Lconv versus fRF 
 
 
(b) Lconv versus LO power 
Figure 10.9  
Conversion loss of a CMOS series connected single ended mixer. From [11]. 
 
 
10.1.5.2  CMOS Subharmonic X2 
 
A CMOS resistive mixer operating at 28 GHz was connected to a LO frequency 
doubler as an alternative to using a single ended subharmonic mixer [12]. The 
doubler is built with a bridge comprising two each N and P CMOS devices driven 
from a differential LO source. The bridge circuit suppresses the LO fundamental 
but generates and applies the LO second harmonic to the resistive N-channel 

 
Passive FET Applications 
695 
mixer. With RF input covering 25 to 29 GHz and IF output at 1.5 GHz, measured 
conversion loss is 11 to 12 dB, noise figure is 12 dB, and P1dB is - 2.7 dBm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.10  A CMOS mixer with a LO frequency doubler. From [12].  
 
 
10.1.6  mHEMT Subharmonic X4 
 
A times four subharmonic mixer built with mHEMT technology for operation at 
60 GHz was reported in [13]. The paper highlights contributions in the 
understanding of channel conductance in subharmonic mixers, and a comparison 
is given for performance as a fundamental, x2, and x4 mixer. The modulation of 
the device channel conductance for a fundamental mixer, fLO, a times two 
subharmonic, fLO/2 and a times four subharmonic mixer, fLO/4, are depicted in 
Figures 10.11(a) – (c). These theoretical plots show the channel is switched once 
per LO cycle in a fundamental mixer, twice in a times two, and four times in a 
times four.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.11  Channel conductance modulation for x1, x2, and x4 LO harmonics. From [13]. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

696 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The author points out the conduction waveforms are ideal, but in real 
circuits the nonzero “on” resistance and device capacitance slow the switching of 
channel conductance at mmWave frequencies, causing simultaneous conduction 
of FETs that in turn degrades the conversion loss. 
The circuit schematic for the proposed X4 subharmonic mixer is in 
Figure 10.12, illustrating the four FET switches, the RF/IF network, and the LO 
feed network. The drain circuit is simple, consisting of an RF/IF diplexer with the 
RF filter composed of an edge coupled line, and the IF low pass filter comprising 
a transmission line with two open circuit shunt stubs. The LO circuit on the other 
hand is quite complex. It includes one section of impedance matching, an LC 
quadrature splitter network and a lattice balun. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.12  Schematic of X4 mixer. From [13]. 
 
 
Figure 10.13 compares the performance of different 60 GHz mixer types: 
single ended resistive mixer, (SRM); single ended resistive mixer with a four 
times lower LO pump frequency, (X4SRM); times 2 subharmonically pumped 
resistive mixer, (X2SHPRM); and times 4 subharmonically pumped mixer, 
(X4SHPRM). All four designs use 2X50 µm2 mHEMT devices having fT equal to 
120 GHz. The IF is 200 MHz, and the best bias voltage for each design, 
respectively, was -0.75V, -1.15V, -1.0 and -1.8V. The fundamental mixer has the 
best conversion loss as expected, but conversion loss of the times two mixer 
approaches it at LO power above 10 dBm. The X4 version has conversion loss 
around 15 dB for LO power ranging from 5 to 15 dBm. 

 
Passive FET Applications 
697 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.13  Performance comparison between four mixer types. From [13]. 
 
 
10.2  FLOATING APPROACH 
 
For this class of mixers the switching devices have no common ground 
connection, and instead “float” above ground potential. The advantage is simpler 
and more compact circuits. For example, a singly balanced design usually 
comprises two FET devices with grounded sources, with RF current at each drain 
in counter phase due to transformer action. In the floating approach a single FET 
device is used with the drain and source currents in counter phase with each other. 
This way a singly balanced mixer can be built with one device and a balun. 
Floating topologies fit well with resistive mixers, but are not a good option for 
active mixers due to the difficulty in controlling circuit stability. 
 
 
10.2.1 The MESFET Sandbox 
 
A generalization of floating mixer circuits appeared in the patent literature, [14], 
advocating the application of this topology for various circuit functions to make a 
better use of the symmetrical I/V properties of FET devices. The proposal was 
made for MESFETs but it equally applies to other FET technologies. The proposal 
represented in Figure 10.14 is a kind of electronic sandbox whose functions are 
described next.   
 
10.2.1.1  Singly Balanced Mixer 
 
The circuit was simulated in ADS employing the NE673 MESFET device. The 
parameters were set to L1 = 0, C1 = 1 pF, L2 = 20 nH, C2 =100 pF, and the 

698 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
transformer ratio is 1.2. In addition the LO and RF were impedance matched with 
a series line and an open stub. With the RF signal ranging from 9.95 GHz to 10.05 
GHz, and a fixed LO frequency of 10.1 GHz, the performance results are given in 
Figure 10.15. The LO drive power is equal to + 13 dBm and the gate is biased at -
1.2 V.   
 
 
 
P1 = LO input 
 
P2 = Vg bias at pinch off 
 
 
P5 = IF out 
 
P7 = RF source 
 
 
Switches as drawn = on position 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.14  Typical sandbox circuit with a floating FET. 
 
 
The top plot indicates the conversion loss (< 6 dB) referenced to the left 
axis and the bottom indicates the L - R isolation, corresponding to better than -54 
dBc on the right axis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.15  Single balanced floating mixer conversion gain. 
C2 
L2 
C1 
L1 
S5 
S4 
S3 
S2 
S1 
P9 
P8 
P7 
P6 
P5 
P4
P3 
P2 
P1 
9.970E9
9.990E9
1.001E10
1.003E10
9.950E9
1.005E10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
-10
0
-54
-48
-42
-36
-30
-24
-18
-12
-6
-60
0
RFfreq
Gc_dB
LR_dBc

 
Passive FET Applications 
699 
10.0G
20.0G
30.0G
40.0G
50.0G
0.000
60.0G
-30
-20
-10
-40
0
freq, Hz
Spectrum
m4
m5
.
 10.2.1.2  Amplifier  
 
 
The fact that the source is now floating gives rise to instability. This problem is 
solved by shunting the gate with a 75 ohm resistor. The bias inductors are 20 nH 
each and the input/output matching circuit is similar to the one applied in the 
mixer. The resulting 5 dB gain is flat within the band 9.95 to 10.5 GHz, which is 
about 6 dB lower gain compared with conventional source grounded operation.  
 
 
P1 = RFin 
 
P6 = RFout 
 
P2 = Vg bias linear 
 
P5 = -0 V 
 
P9 = + 3V  
 
Switches all off 
 
   
 
10.2.1.3  Frequency Tripler 
 
Operation as a frequency tripler under high LO drive causes the source-gate and 
drain-gate voltages to alternate between positive and negative polarities. This 
modulates the channel conductance, causing it to have a square wave shape with a 
strong third harmonic component.  In this passive multiplier, the LO drive power 
is equal to 13 dBm and the results are in Figure 10.16. The generated third 
harmonic is - 5 dBm and the second harmonic rejection is more than 30 dB.  The 
fundamental output level is about 0 dBm and can be minimized with a simple 
filter.  
 
  
 
 
P7 = fLO  P2 = -1.3V 
 
 
P5 = 3fLO 
Switches all off 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.16   Spectrum of the floating frequency tripler. 
 
 

700 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
RFin 
IFout 
LOin 
-Vgs 
10.2.1.4  Voltage Multiplier 
 
The circuit can be operated as a voltage multiplier at low voltages, where the 
applied drain voltage is multiplied by the variable channel resistor. This fourth 
application proposed by the reference patent is obtained by making the following 
settings:  
  
 
 
P1 = Vg () 
 
P2 = Vg bias at linear 
 
 
P6 = Vd () 
 
P4 - P8 = Vab =K Vg()Vd() 
 
 
Switches all off 
 
 
 
Further development of this work is found in [15], where the output 
balun, required to cover IF and RF frequency ranges, is replaced by a modified 
balun operating at RF frequencies only. The circuit inserted in the center tap of the 
transformer’s primary winding allows extraction of IF without the use of an IF 
balun. The external gate voltage supply can be suppressed by connecting a resistor 
to ground. The LO peak voltage will be rectified through the drain ground 
connection, developing a self-biasing voltage on the resistor.  
 
 
Figure 10.17   Floating mixer with modified IF circuitry. 
 
 
10.2.2  Basic Vice Floating Circuit 
 
A series of inventions proposed by Michael W. Vice have a common basic 
diagram as illustrated in Figure 10.18. This topology has two devices connected in 
series, with the gates and sources, respectively, tied together.   The LO is applied 
across the gate and source, while the RF signal is applied across the series 
connected FETs. The following analysis demonstrates how this topology 
minimizes inter-modulation distortion.  
It is known that LO leaks into the channel through the gate-drain and 
gate-source capacitances, which are undesired effects degrading linearity. The 
voltages in the FET are given by the following equations, and the control voltage 
is applied across the gate-source terminals.  

 
Passive FET Applications 
701 
G2 
G1 
D2 
D1 
S1 
 
S2 
Vsd1 
Vsd2 
Vgs2 
Vgs1 
Load 
Vcontrol 
Vgd1 
Vgd2 
Small 
signal 
1
1
1
sd
gs
gd
V
V
V


  
 
          
 
 
       (10.3) 
2
2
2
sd
gs
gd
V
V
V


 
 
          
 
 
       (10.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.18  Basic Vice back-to-back connection of two FETs. 
 
However, symmetry requires that Vsd1 = -Vsd2, so that a voltage 
perturbation ∆Vgs equates to ∆Vgd. Therefore, a voltage perturbation applied to the 
gate can be approximated by the next equation, which gives a linear relation 
between dynamic resistance, ΔRds, and gate to drain voltage, ΔVgd.  
 
gd
ds
V
c
R



   
 
         
 
   
       (10.5) 
 
Let’s now assume the channel resistance variation ∆Rds1ds2 causes inter-
modulation. Minimum inter-modulation is obtained if this variation tends to zero, 
hence:  
0
)
(
)
(
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
1








d
s
d
s
d
g
d
g
ds
ds
V
V
c
V
V
c
R
         
       (10.6) 
 
The effect of LO leakage in the channel is suppressed for the signal 
extracted to the load, resulting in the invention of Figure 10.18, [16], in which the 
drain/source are floated.  Additionally, the circuit variation of Figure 10.19 has the 
gates floated by means of a transformer. The elements L1, C1, TL, C3 comprise a 
diplexer to separate RF and IF signals, and provide impedance matching. The TL 
transmission line element is a quarter wave long at the RF frequency. The element 
L2, helps improve impedance matching at the LO frequency. The power gain and 
compression simulation for the RF band over 10.025 to 10.175 GHz with LO 
fixed at 10 GHz is represented in Figure 10.20. The NE67300 device Root model 
available in ADS is used in the simulations.  
  
 

702 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
-30
-20
-10
0
10
-40
20
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
-10
0
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
-50
10
RFpower
Lc_dB
m2
m3
Pout_dBm
LOport 
C2 
C1 
L2 
M4 
M3 
RFpor
M2 
M1 
L1 
IFport 
C3 
C4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.19  Floating gate mixer and matching elements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
             
Figure 10.20  Power performance at 10 GHz; PLO = + 10 dBm. 
 
The circuit provided a conversion gain of 6.25 dB, output P1dB in excess 
of + 15 dBm, and L-to-R isolation of 28 dB, for a LO drive level of + 13 dBm. 
The fact the P1dB is 2.5 dB higher than the LO drive gives an indication of the high 
linearity achieved with this approach.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.21  Circuit with better LO impedance match. 
L1 = 0.33 nH 
C1 = 0.5 pF 
TL = 50 /82 
C3 = 0.2 pF 
L2 = 0.4 nH 
T = 1:1 
VG 
Lbias 
C4 
C3 
C1 
L2 
RFport
M2 
M1 
L1 
C2 
IFport
LOpor
L2 
TL 

 
Passive FET Applications 
703 
86 
81 
V3 
V2 
VDC 
V1 
84 
The author also proposed adding the devices M3, M4 to maintain the 
same capacitance seen by the LO generator in either the positive or negative 
halves of the LO cycle. The added symmetry improves LO matching but is not 
essential to the mixer linearity performance. 
 
 
10.2.2.1  MOS Technology 
 
The use of transformers for impedance matching and circuit balance in a FET 
MOS mixer is addressed in this patent [17]. The singly balanced version in Figure 
10.22 has the drain and source connected to two ends of the primary transformer 
windings, 81. The other two ends of the primary windings are connected to 
voltage source, V3. Voltages on windings 84 and 86 are opposed in phase. The 
source V2 is applied to a secondary winding that magnetically couples signals to 
the primary in counter phase. Source V1 is applied across the virtual ground of V3 
and the gate of the FET, which is approximately in the center of transformer 
primary winding, 81. Notice the sources V2 and V3 are balanced so they are 
orthogonal to V1, but they are not isolated from each other. If the impedances 
presented to the FET are low, then the voltages developed will be low, and less 
distortion will be generated. In this circuit the signal voltages V2 and V3 can 
represent RF, IF or LO sources or loads. V1 can represent an input source only, 
either LO or RF.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.22  Simplified singly balanced version, 
 
 
The circuit of Figure 10.22 is capable of performing the multiplication 
function, as shown in the following analysis. The drain current is first defined for 
the device with ungrounded source:  
 

704 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
otherterms
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
C
L
Z
I
S
S
T
G
D
D
T
G
i
eff
D







]
)
2
(
)
2
[(

        (10.7) 
 
This can be approximated as: 
 
)
)(
(
]
)
(
)
[(
S
D
T
G
i
eff
S
T
G
D
T
G
i
eff
D
V
V
V
V
C
L
Z
V
V
V
V
V
V
C
L
Z
I









        (10.8) 
 
 
The circuit is approximately symmetric with equal drain and source 
voltages that are opposed in phase. The drain and source voltages can be 
referenced to a midpoint between source and drain, VR/2. 
 
2
R
D
V
V 
 
 
 
 
    
    
       (10.9) 
2
R
S
V
V


  
 
 
 
 
    
     (10.10) 
 
Substituting (10.9) and (10.10) into (10.8), the drain current becomes:  
 
]
)
[(
R
T
G
i
eff
D
V
V
V
C
L
Z
I



 
 
         
 
     (10.11) 
 
 
In the floating circuit, there will be currents circulating between drain 
and source, and currents circulating between drain and source to ground. 
Therefore, the circuit can be considered as two FETs in parallel driven 
differentially, with the gate voltage comprising even and odd components. 
 
 
VG = VGE +/- VGO  
 
 
 
        
       (10.12) 
 
The common (even) mode drain current becomes: 
 
]
)
[(
2
R
T
GE
i
eff
DE
V
V
V
C
L
Z
I



 
 
 
       
     (10.13) 
 
For differential (odd) mode the VGE term is equal at the source and drain, 
so the differential current becomes: 
 
R
GO
i
eff
DO
V
V
C
L
Z
I

2

  
 
 
     
    (10.14) 

 
Passive FET Applications 
705 
 
A perfect multiplication function is obtained for the differential mode. If 
the substrate is not grounded, then the voltages need to be subtracted by the 
substrate voltage, VB, and similar conclusions are obtained. A doubly balanced 
configuration obtained from the singly balanced is shown in Figure 10.23. 
Windings 64 and 66 have center taps, across which a balanced signal V3 is 
applied. One end of winding 66 is connected to an end of winding 64 through the 
drain-source of FET 72, and a similar condition is found for FET 70. The signal 
source V3 is impressed in phase to the drains and in counter phase to the sources 
due to the cross connected transformer terminals. The FETs are connected in 
series at DC.  Another signal source, V2 is magnetically coupled in phase to the 
sources and in counter phase to the drains. Bias can be applied from the center tap 
to a virtual terminal within source V1. A time domain analysis shows that when 
both device conductances are similar, the signal impressed by V2 is cancelled at 
V3. If FET 70 conducts, it provides a low resistance connection from the top of 
winding 64 to the bottom of winding 66.  The opposite occurs when FET 72 
conducts. 
The impressed voltage V2 appears at V3 with a magnitude depending on 
the device conductance, and phase that shifts 180° as the polarity of signal V1 
varies. IF signals generated by the mixing of V2 and V1 are in counter phase at 
each device and therefore combine at the output V3. Similar to the singly balanced 
case, the signal at V1 is always an excitation signal, while V2 and V3 can be either 
an excitation or a load.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.23  Doubly balanced floating mixer. 
 
 
An application example of the mixer is shown in Figure 10.24, where the 
RF signal is applied at node 104 to the gate through transformer 102, and the LO 
is applied at node 105 to the drain and source through transformer 60A. The 
circuit operates as a multiplier for small signals per (10.14), and as a mixer if a 
large signal LO signal switches the FET channels on-off. The IF signal is 
64 
66 
72 
62 
60 
V3 
V2 
VDC 
V1 
70 

706 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
extracted from the center taps of transformer 60A and fed to a common gate 
differential pair presenting a low impedance to the mixer. The single ended output 
is obtained by taking the signal from one side of the differential amplifier.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.24  Mixer including LO and IF couplings. 
 
 
10.2.2.2  Single Transformer 
 
An alternative to the previous work was proposed in a patent referenced in [18], 
where the IF balun is eliminated. In this proposal, illustrated in Figure 10.25, the 
gates of both devices are connected together, so the LO signal is in phase at each 
drain. The source of the bottom device is RF, LO and DC grounded while the 
source of the top FET is grounded only at RF and LO by means of a capacitor. 
The RF is applied to the drain by means of a transformer balun, so the RF signals 
at the drains are in counter phase to each other. The IF currents at the two drains 
are opposed in phase; (e.g., leaving FET2 and entering FET1), but combine in 
phase at the source of FET1.  RF and LO signals are both grounded at the sources. 
A similar description applies to the up converter case, where the generated RF 
voltages are differential and applied to output load. The LO signals are common 
and suppressed by the differential transformer at the RF output.  The LO is 
coupled to the gates via a capacitor C1, which allows for passive self-biasing of 
the FETs if a resistor is added to ground. Capacitors C3 and C4 in the original 
invention are used for fine adjustment to balance the signals, and capacitor C6 is 
used to improve symmetry of the RF signals. 
 
 

 
Passive FET Applications 
707 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.25  Elimination of the IF balun from the FET mixer. 
10.3  SINGLY BALANCED 
A balanced resistive mixer usually refers to a pair of single ended mixers 
combined with a 180º transformer coupled to the gate of each mixer. This 
suppresses even harmonics of LO and provides high L–R isolation. In some cases 
a 90º hybrid is used instead, causing suppression of both LO and RF, but this also 
gives inferior L–R isolation. The following section first discusses mixers using 
discrete devices, and the second section discusses MMIC implementations. 
 
 
10.3.1  Hybrid Topologies 
 
10.3.1.1  JFET Technology 
 
The balanced mixer patent, [3], mentioned at the beginning of this chapter records 
one of the first instances using the channel resistance as a mixer. In this proposal, 
two JFET devices are mounted in a push-pull type of configuration using 
transformers to generate the LO in counter phase with the IF signals added in 
counter phase at the output. The schematic shown in Figure 10.26 depicts its 
application as a receiver. The ideal IF output includes only odd LO harmonics as 
shown by (10.15). 
 
mn
t
m
t
n
j
RFm
mn
I
e
V
g
I
RF
LO




)
(
1


 
n
mn
jn
t
m
t
n
j
RFm
mn
I
e
e
V
g
I
RF
LO
)1
(
)
(
2








 
]
)1
(
1[
n
nm
out
I
I



 = 0 for even n; ≠ 0 for n odd        
     (10.15) 
C6 
IF 
G1 
G2 
LO
RF 
D1 
VRF 
VRF 
S1 
S2 
D2 
C3 
C4 
C2 
C5 
C1 

708 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Thus fundamental mixing occurs and products with LO second 
harmonics are suppressed. The odd harmonics add constructively, but inclusion of 
resonant circuits further suppresses the additional undesired components. The RF 
signal incident to the antenna is coupled to the FET drain by the tuned 
transformer. Due to the balancing of IF and LO signals, the point of insertion of 
the RF signal is a virtual ground for the LO and IF, creating  L–R and I–R 
isolation. The LO signal is applied to the gate through transformer T1, which is 
part of the gate bias circuit. The DC bias is usually set close to the pinch off 
voltage.  
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.26  Singly balanced receiver with JFET. 
 
 
It is assumed both devices have matched DC and RF characteristics. 
Small imbalances can be compensated by adjusting capacitors 38 and 40.  The IF 
signals generated at the drains are combined at transformer T2 and delivered to the 
IF amplifier.  The transformer T2 is tuned at the RF frequency, so ideally there is 
no loss of RF energy.  Besides the L-R isolation provided by the circuit topology, 
the LO voltage modulates the channel resistance and there is no LO current in the 
channel, except for a low leakage level due to parasitic capacitances. The mixer 
noise figure is low, equivalent to the conversion loss of a diode mixer, which is 
around 6 dB. Consequently this circuit can be directly connected to the antenna 
circuit. It also provides a very wide dynamic range without any significant 
distortion. 
 
 
  I1 
I2 
IF out 
RF in 
LO in 

 
Passive FET Applications 
709 
10.3.1.2  DSB Modulator 
 
The same concept from the previous patent was later employed in a balanced 
configuration proposed to up-convert an audio input signal to a DSB output signal 
with high carrier suppression. The schematic of the invention, [19], is shown in 
Figure 10.27. Specifically, the modulator up-converts a base-band audio signal to 
a 450 KHz IF carrier with low inter-modulation distortion (< - 40 dBc) and high 
carrier rejection (> than 40 dBc) with minimum adjustments. Since discrete 
components were used for this invention, the FETs must have matching 
characteristics to achieve the required performance. 
The FET’s are in “push-push” for the carrier signal. That means the input 
carrier or LO signal is split into two counter phase signals through transformer 19 
and applied to the control electrode gates of FET’s 13 and 22. The output LO 
signals are cancelled by tying the drains together. The source of FET 22 is 
grounded and the source of FET 13 is AC grounded at the LO frequency through 
capacitor 15. The 450 KHz LO voltage at the transformer secondary output is 
approximately equal to 500 mV peak-to-peak. This peak gate voltage is below the 
junction voltage of silicon, so the forward conduction at the gates is negligible. 
The FET’s are in series configuration for the audio signal applied to the 
source of FET13. The audio current is first applied to the channel for FET13 and 
then to the channel for FET22, where it mixes with the carrier signal. The DC 
current in the channel flows to ground through resistor 16.  It is assumed the 
Utilizing Equipment, or next circuit, has a filter to block the audio signal. The 
carrier is applied in counter phase to each FET while the audio signal is applied in 
phase, so that (10.15) is equally valid, therefore, the up-converted currents will be 
in phase. The two sideband currents generated around the 455 KHz LO frequency 
flow to the next stage.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.27  Schematic of a JFET balanced modulator. 
 

710 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
VA 
VB 
Vout 
- 
+ 
 
VRFi
10.3.1.3  Square Wave Drive in MOSFET Technology 
 
The noise contained in the LO spectrum is transferred to IF in the conversion 
process. The process is rather complicated and the end result is an increase in the 
effective receiver noise figure. In some cases the oscillator can be filtered, but the 
best approach is to use a balanced mixer that will attenuate this effect 
proportionally to the degree of balancing. However, in wide band mixers the 
problem is aggravated by the presence of LO harmonics and their associated 
noise. In particular the effects of FM on noise from harmonics are more 
pronounced. The mixer can reject even mode effects but is useless for odd mode, 
which is the case of noise contained in the third harmonic of LOs. The objective 
of this invention, [20], is to provide a linear balanced mixer with a special LO 
waveform that reduces the third harmonic effect.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.28  Ideal swith model of a  balanced mixer. 
 
 
The balanced mixer is modeled after Figure 10.28, where the individual 
mixer is represented by ideal switches, A and B. They are driven in counter phase 
generating IF currents that are also in counter phase and require a differential 
circuit for combining constructively at the final IF signal.  
 
 
Figure 10.29  Time domain depiction of voltage waveforms VA and VB. 
 

 
Passive FET Applications 
711 
 
Each of the digital waveforms VA and VB shown in Figure 10.29, are 
periodic with a period T, equal to the reciprocal of the oscillator frequency, f. The 
oscillator waveforms are shifted by one half of the oscillator period, so they are 
180 out of phase with each other. The duration of each pulse is equal to 1/3 of the 
total oscillator period T. For a 50% duty cycle, the sinc function reveals the 
presence of fundamental and third harmonic, while the second harmonic is 
suppressed, waveform 40 in Figure 10.30. The duty cycle for the waveforms in 
Figure 10.29 are not equal, so, according to the sinc function (10.16), the third 
harmonic is suppressed. Notice the resulting waveform 30 contains, besides the 
fundamental a small content of second harmonic.   
 
)
3
(
sin
3
1
)
(
sin
)
(
0
0
n
c
T
nT
c
T
T
f
X


   
 
        
     (10.16) 
n = 1, 2, 3… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.30  Spectrum of IF signal when LO voltage waveform of  Figure 10.29 is used.  
 
But the second harmonic will be eliminated by the balanced circuit. The 
effective output waveform is the one represented by the dotted line, waveform 50 
in Figure 10.30. The full circuit is in Figure 10.31 and illustrates one way of 
digitally generating the waveforms VA and VB using an oscillator frequency 6 
times higher than the mixer LO. The circuit makes use of a synchronous 4-bit 
counter, type D flip-flops, and NAND gates. 
 
 
 
–  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.31   Schematic of linear mixer with modified LO waveform. 

712 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
10.0     10.2    10.4     10.6     10.8    11.0 
Frequency - GHz 
Conversion Loss - dB 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
LO Power - dBm 
-30 
IM3 Level - dBm 
15            10              15             20 
-50 
-70 
-90 
10.3.1.4  MESFET Technology 
 
The gate/drain capacitance of FETs used in resistive mixers is large compared to 
the capacitance of a normally biased device, where it is reverse biased across gate-
drain. This reduces the R-L isolation and allows LO signal applied to the gate to 
leak into the channel, and RF signal from the channel to leak into the gate, both 
degrading inter-modulation performance. A simple solution was disclosed in 1990 
[21], where the LO voltage at the drain, and RF voltage at the gate are shorted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.32  Singly balanced resistive MESFET mixer. 
 
The short circuits can be implemented by filters or signal balancing. The 
circuit above depicts the topology of a singly balanced MESFET mixer, where the 
RF is applied in phase to the drain of the balanced devices by means of a quarter 
wave long impedance transformer. The transformer functions as a RF power 
divider that must be interrupted at IF frequencies to avoid shorting the IF currents, 
which are 180 out of phase. Also, a small value capacitance shorts both FETs at 
the RF and LO frequencies, while providing a largely open circuit for IF signals. 
The LO is injected to the gates by means of a half wave 50 ohm microstrip balun 
between the two gates. Therefore, the LO voltages at the gates are 180 out of 
phase with each other. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Conversion Loss vs. frequency       
   (b) IM3 vs. LO power at Vg = -1.1V 
Figure 10.33  Conversion loss as a function of frequency and linearity as a function of LO power. 

 
Passive FET Applications 
713 
The LO signals leaking to the drain are also 180 out of phase, and are 
shorted by means of capacitor 12. The RF signals leak in phase to the gates, and 
are cancelled by the common mode rejection of the balun. The IF signals available 
at X and Y, in counter phase from each drain, are combined by means of a balun 
transformer, depicted in the left of Figure 10.32. Simple low pass transmission 
line filters are employed to separate IF from RF and LO signals at the drain. The 
circuit was tested at an RF frequency of 10 GHz with IF from 10 to 300 MHz. The 
conversion loss as a function of RF with IF fixed at 60 MHz is shown in Figure 
10.33(a). Effects of LO power and DC bias can be found in Figure 10.33(b), 
showing inter-modulation levels for an RF input drive of - 3.0 dBm. The best 
result at 18 dBm LO drive is obtained for a gate bias of -1.1 V.   
 
 
10.3.1.5   3-dB Hybrid Coupler 
 
The advantages of 90 couplers can also be realized in singly balanced mixers, 
[22], shown in Figure 10.34, depicting two couplers, one connected to the gates 
and the other to the drains. The RF and LO ports have good impedance match, 
with reflected energy dissipated into the 50  isolated ports. Both LO and RF are 
in quadrature in the mixing device and the IF is dependent on the circuit 
operation, (i.e., IF currents for a down-converter have different phases than for an 
up-converter). For example, let’s consider the down-converter case. The signals at 
the FET channels are given by the following relations:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.34  Down-converter with 90 3 dB couplers. 
 
)
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
t
V
t
A
t
V
RF
RF
LO
LO
A



 
      
          
     (10.17) 
)
2
cos(
)
2
cos(
)
(







t
V
t
A
t
V
RF
RF
LO
LO
B
  
                    (10.18) 

714 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Developing the equations one obtains the following IF currents at the 
drains of FETA and FETB: 
 
t
k
t
k
t
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
A
)
cos(
2
)
cos(
2
)
(








 
       
     (10.19) 
]
)
cos[(
2
]
)
cos[(
2
)
(










t
k
t
k
t
I
LO
RF
LO
RF
B
      
     (10.20) 
 
Where k is a constant representing the amplitudes of mixed signals. It is 
obvious from the equations that down-converted signals are in phase and can be 
tied as represented in the figure, while the up-converted signals cancel. A simple 
LC low pass circuit at the connection is enough to reject undesired signals at the 
IF output. These equations indicate that for the up-converting case, the drains 
cannot be connected together at the IF side.  Let’s assume (10.19) nand (10.20) 
are the same for the up-converter case, with the RF index replaced by the IF 
index. Let’s also assume IF current IB(t) is applied with a 180 hybrid.  
 
 
]
2
3
)
cos[(
2
]
2
)
cos[(
2
)
(












t
k
t
k
t
I
IF
LO
IF
LO
B
 
     (10.21) 
 
 
At the output, current IA does not have any phase shift, while current IB is 
shifted by 90. Rewriting the equations at the coupler output port, including 
coupler phase shift, the new set of equations are (10.22) and (10.23). It is now 
evident the signals are in counter phase for the difference frequency, and have the 
same phase for the sum frequency.  
 
t
k
t
k
t
I
IF
LO
IF
LO
A
)
cos(
2
)
cos(
2
)
(








                 (10.22) 
]
2
)
cos[(
2
]
)
cos[(
2
)
(












t
k
t
k
t
I
IF
LO
IF
LO
B
 (10.23) 
 
Therefore in the up-converter case the IF currents at the drain have to be 
split by a 180 hybrid. An additional solution is to extract IF from the drain of 
FETA and from the source of FETB that is grounded by capacitors. This is an 
attractive solution for lower frequencies where grounding is less critical and an IF 
balun can be eliminated.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
Passive FET Applications 
715 
10.3.1.6   Bifilar MOS Technology 
 
The next patent, [23], relates to application of MOSFET devices to bifilar 
transmission line transformers to build high intercept mixers. The transformer 
used to apply LO power to the gates of devices Q1, Q2 is a Guanella type 4:1 balun 
transformer described in Chapter 4. This causes LO voltage at the gates to be 
equal in amplitude and opposed in phase. The bifilar transformers T1, T2, T3 
connected to the drain comprise a different type of balun. The applied RF signal is 
balanced by transformer T1 , with the balanced output voltages are subsequently 
phase inverted by T2, T4 before being applied to the drain. The RF signals are 
applied to the drains in counter phase, and are multiplied by the channel resistance 
switched by the LO signal also in counter phase. Consequently the IF signals at 
each drain are in phase with each other and add constructively at the IF terminal. 
The IF signal is blocked at the RF terminal due to the high impedance that the 
differential transformer T1 offers to the common mode IF. At the input a parallel 
inductance was added to resonate the FET capacitance. The IF terminal is DC 
connected to the FETs resulting in IF response down to DC, an important feature 
in direct conversion receivers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.35  Schematic of bifilar CMOS single balanced mixer. 
 
 
10.3.1.7  Trifilar Transformer 
 
Resistive mixers can operate at very high power levels and wide bandwidths if the 
LO, RF and IF signals are coupled properly, [24]. This invention used a bifilar 
balun transformer connected to a trifilar balun transformer to apply high level RF 
signal to the FET switches.  Both transformers are formed of wire wrapped on a 
small ferrite core, and comprise a hybrid circuit as discussed in Chapter 4.     
The schematic of Figure 10.36(a) depicts the balanced LO source feeding 
the FET gates in counter phase. The blocking capacitors 52 and 53, with resistors 
34, 50 and 51, provide self bias for the FETs. The RF signal is applied to the 
trifilar transformer that provides two counter phase outputs to the FET drains. The 
IF signal is extracted from the center tap of the trifilar. The effect of switching the 

716 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
FET channel resistance is displayed in Figure 10.36(b). Waveform A is at the 
secondary of transformer, so it is floating around +/- VRF. Waveform B indicates 
the LO switching applied in counter phase to the gate of each FET.  Waveform C 
indicates the resultant waveform available at the IF output terminal of the mixer. 
This waveform includes the effect that switching has on the incoming RF signal.  
Simple filtering can be used to eliminate high frequency components. A small 
drain bias voltage can be applied to optimize the tradeoffs between distortion, 
conversion loss, and undesired leakage of LO into the RF port.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Schematic. 
 
         (b) RF, LO, and IF voltage waveforms. 
Figure 10.36  High level balanced resistive mixer. 
 
 
10.3.2 MMIC Topologies 
 
10.3.2.1  MESFET Technology 
 
A resistive mixer built in a MMIC technology using a RF amplifier appeared in 
1998, [25]. Figure 10.37(a) reveals the basic cell for this mixer consisting of a RF 
amplifier loaded with a current source, delivering signal to the mixer device, M2. 
The source of M2 is AC grounded by means of a capacitor that needs to be large 
enough to cover the low end of the IF range. The LO signal applied to the gate of 
M2 does not modulate the bias of the RF amplifier, but acts as a switched load. 
Making a few assumptions for this circuit, a simplified circuit, depicted in part (b) 
of the figure can be applied to this type of mixer topology:  
 
(1) The loading of node 1 is due only to M1, M2, and M3. Subsequent 
circuits are considered high impedance.  
 

 
Passive FET Applications 
717 
IF  
CGS 
VGS 
RL 
gd 
gmVGS 
RF 
R3 
1 
M3 
M2 
M1 
C 
RF 
VDD 
LO
(2) The mixer impedance is matched to the RF and IF impedances, which 
are equal and resistive.  
(3) The switching mixer does not change the bias point for M1, M3, so gm 
remains approximately constant.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Schematic  
 
 
(b) Equivalent circuit 
Figure 10.37  Core cell mixer. There is no bias applied to the mixing FET. 
 
The load impedance for the RF amplifier is given by the parallel 
combination of M2 switched drain-source resistance and M1, M3 drain resistances. 
The switching of M2 expressed in terms of drain source resistance, and the LO 
voltage applied to the gate, is given by (9.49) and reproduced as (10.24). The 
values for Rd0 and Rd1 are defined in (8.49a) and (8.49b).  
 
 
...
cos
)
(
1
)
(
21
20
2





t
R
R
g
t
g
t
R
LO
d
d
L
d
d

   
     
     (10.24) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The IF voltage available at the drain can be calculated from the (9.53) on 
Chapter 9 assuming gm is constant. The result in (10.25) assumes RL is given by 
the parallel combination of M1, M3 resistances and the waveform for gd(t) is a 
square wave. The effects of device capacitances are not included, so the equation 
is valid at lower frequencies. The RON value is in the order of 10 ohms for FETs 
with gate geometry equal to 0.5x100 m2. The ROFF value is high for small 
devices, but in general it is shunted by parasitic capacitances. 
 
  
t
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
g
V
V
RF
LO
L
ON
ON
L
ds
ds
L
m
GS
dIF
)
cos(
2
2












             (10.25) 
 
A value of ROFF between 200 to 300 ohms is usual for GaAs FETs. Let us 
select RL to be Rds2/2 = 100 ohms, gm = 40 mS, which gives a voltage conversion 
gain of 0.85. At high frequencies power conversion gain is more useful, obtained 
from IF power at the load and available power from the source. The following 
equation assumes a conjugately matched RF impedance.   
 

718 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
2
2
2
2
2
)
(






L
ds
ds
in
gs
L
m
avs
IF
R
R
R
R
C
R
g
P
P

    
      
 
     (10.26) 
 
This simplified approach is useful to find first order effects of 
terminations and to size the FETs in the circuit. The inventor provided balanced 
LO signals using a differential amplifier.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.38  Schematic of full differential mixer. 
 
The overall MMIC circuit is in Figure 10.38, which depicts the ground 
bypass capacitor shared by both mixers. Both FET mixers M7, M8 are DC 
connected, but since they are at the same potential no DC current flows from drain 
to source. 
 
 
10.3.2.2  PHEMT Technology 
 
A couple of PHEMT resistive mixers are described next. The first comes from a 
publication, [26], where the synthesis method introduced in Chapter 4 is applied to 
the design of subharmonic mixers. In this publication, instead of using the S-
parameter approach, they used the Y-parameter approach. The two-sets of quasi-
linear simulations are performed at a given LO level, one in up-convert mode to 
obtain Y11 and Y21 and down-convert mode to obtain Y12 and Y22 for the two port 
IF+ 
M5 
M7 
M3 
R1 
-VG2 
RF 
IF- 
R1’ 
-VG2 
RF 
C1 
VDD 
M6 
M4 
M8 
M1 
M2 
C2’ 
C2 
C5 
R5 
-VG2 
-VSS 
VDD 
VG1 
R5’ 
-VG2 
C5’ 
R2 
R2’ 
R4 
R4’ 
LO 

 
Passive FET Applications 
719 
network of Figure 10.39. The Y-matrix representing the network is described in 
(10.27).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.39  Two port representation of quasi-linear mixer. From [26]. 
 













RF
IF
RF
IF
V
V
Y
Y
Y
Y
I
I
2
1
22
21
12
11
2
1
     
 
 
         
    (10.27) 
 
From this matrix, the conversion loss is obtained from (10.28), and the IF 
and RF admittance for conjugate matched operation are obtained from (10.29) and 
(10.30).  
 


2
2
12
21
2
B
A
Y
Lc


 
 
 
 
         
    (10.28) 
 
21
12
21
12
22
11
)
Re(
2
Y
Y
Y
Y
G
G
A



 
21
12
21
12
22
11
)
Re(
2
Y
Y
Y
Y
G
G
B



 
 


2
21
12
2
21
12
22
11
11
cos
2
2
1
Y
Y
Y
Y
G
G
G
GIF




    
 
   (10.29a) 
 
22
11
12
21
21
12
2
B
G
B
G
B
G
BIF



    
 
 
 
   (10.29b) 


2
21
12
2
21
12
22
11
22
cos
2
2
1
Y
Y
Y
Y
G
G
G
GRF




    
 
   (10.30a) 
 
11
22
12
21
21
12
2
B
G
B
G
B
G
BRF



 
 
 
 
   (10.30b)
 
)
(
21
12Y
Y
Phase


 
 
To demonstrate the theory, a subharmonic mixer operating at 43 GHz 
was reported after the topology in Figure 10.40(a), containing a Lange coupler at 
the input and an IF balun at the drain side.  

720 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Block diagram  
 
 
(b) Load filter 
Figure 10.40  Quadrature/balanced FET mixer. From [26]. 
 
The signals are applied in phase to the drain, by means of a load filter 
displayed in Figure 10.40(b). It includes a low-pass filter with two open stubs at 
the fundamental LO for high rejection of signals at this frequency. The authors 
reported a conversion loss of 12 to 15 dB within the 2 to 5 GHz IF band. The P1dB 
is equal to + 15 dBm, and the 2LO-RF rejection in the linear operation is equal to 
20 dBc.  
Another application of a subharmonic mixer in pHEMT technology for 
operation at 28GHz employing a discrete balun is found in the literature, [27]. The 
schematic of the circuit is in Figure 10.41, showing the balun is closely related to 
the Marchand balun equivalent circuit, where the inductances represent the 
transmission lines and the capacitances the coupling between the lines. The balun 
reactances are equal to j70.7  at the center frequency, for equal 50  
impedances.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.41  Circuit Schematic for balun/balanced FET SHM. From [27]. 

 
Passive FET Applications 
721 
Therefore the generator impedance for each gate is half the value. The 
RF signal is applied in phase to the devices, providing in-phase IF currents at the 
drain that add constructively at this frequency with no need for an IF balun. The 
conversion loss as a function of RF frequency is in Figure 10.42(a) and the 
isolation in 10.42(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Conversion loss 
 
 
 
   (b) Isolation L-R and L-I 
Figure 10.42  Conversion loss for IF = 1 GHz. From [27]. 
 
Additional MMIC subharmonic mixer examples, [28], [29], using 0.25 
µm PHEMT are represented in Figures 10.43 and 10.44. In the former two, Lange 
couplers comprise baluns using an area of 0.8X1.4 mm2. The reported 
performance for this topology is 9.5 dB conversion loss from 34 to 40 GHz with 5 
dBm of LO drive. The latter is a quadrature mixer designed for a direct conversion 
receiver operating between 15 and 20 GHz with an IF of 200 MHz and LO power 
of +13 dBm. The fundamental LO is split in-phase and then applied to the I and Q 
channels, respectively, with phases indicated in the figure. Due to push-pull 
operation even order terms at the drain are minimized, reducing LO leakage to the 
antenna and preventing DC offset problems that are critical in direct receivers. 
The Lange couplers were meandered to minimize area, and the whole circuit fits 
into an area of 2.1X2.9 mm2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.43  Singly balanced subharmonic mixer. After [28]. 
16 
14 
12 
10 
26            27           28           29        30 
Frequency - GHz 
Conversion Loss - dB 
L - I 
L - R 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
 12.4        12.8      13.2      13.6      14.0 
Isolation - dB 
LO Frequency - GHz 
RF filter 
IF 
filter 
IF 
Vg 
RF 
LO 

722 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.44  Quadrature sub harmonic mixer. After [29]. 
 
 
The mixers were built on 0.25 µm PHEMT technology, and best 
conversion loss was 14 dB at 200 MHz IF. The plot below shows the converter is 
efficient up to nearly 500 MHz. The LO-RF isolation is better than 30 dB over the 
15 to 20 GHz band.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.45  Performance of quadrature subharmonic mixer. 
 
 
10.3.2.3  InP Technology 
 
An example application of this technology is found in the realization of an IRM 
operating in the 92 - 96 GHz band, [30]. The topology in Figure 10.46 shows the 
use of two Lange couplers, one for the IF signal at 1.5 GHz and one for the RF 
signal at 94 GHz. The LO is injected by a Wilkinson divider and the separation of 
IF, RF signals is performed by simple high pass, low pass filters. A contribution 
from this paper is the discussion relating technology parameters and mixer 
performance. The paper shows the high mobility offered by InP FETs that allows 
a much lower transition time between ON-OFF states, which is demonstrated 
next.  The drain current of a PHEMT can be defined as a function of device 
geometry and technology parameters expressed by (10.31), valid for low drain 
voltages.  
 
Conversion Gain - 
-10 
103
102
Frequency - MHz 
-20 
-30 
I 
Q 
LO 
0 
0
RF 
180 
0
180 
0

 
Passive FET Applications 
723 
ch
DS
n
DS
n
V
q
L
W
I








 
 
 
 
       
  (10.31) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.46   Image reject mixer schematic. After [30]. 
 
 
The current is directly proportional to the electron mobility, µn and to the 
sub-threshold channel electron density at the source, nch. The channel conductance 
is defined by the derivative of current with respect to drain voltage, according to 
(10.32). 
 
ch
n
DS
DS
n
q
L
W
dV
dI
Gch







 
 
 
      
    (10.32) 
 
The subthreshold density can be expressed as a function of gate voltage, 
Vg, per (10.33). The capacitance per unit area, Cg is determined from gate metal 
area and distance from GaAs channel, d, according to (10.34).   
 
)
(
th
g
g
ch
V
V
C
qn


 
 
 
 
      
     (10.33) 
WL
d
Cg


                               
 
 
 
     (10.34)      
 
The next expression demonstrates how fast the conductance changes with 
gate voltage, expressed in terms of mobility and capacitance.  Therefore, the 
device with higher mobility and lower capacitance will "transit" faster.  
 
G
n
G
ch
C
L
W
dV
dG








 
 
 
 
           
     (10.35) 
 
The ON impedance at the FET’s drain is given by (10.36), which 
considers the access series resistances, Rs, Rd and the channel conductance Rds. 
USB 
IF2 
RF 
LO 
IF1 

724 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The channel resistance is device size dependent and is in the same order of 
magnitude as Rs and Rd. The channel resistance of an FET is determined by Rds = 
L/(sW)= L/(qµnns), with ns being the free electron sheet density. The OFF 
resistance is a high value for the real part compared to a standard 50 . But the 
reactive part will shunt the resistive part and will limit the frequency of operation.  
 
ds
d
s
ON
R
R
R
Z



         
 
       
    (10.36) 
d
d
OFF
C
j
R
Z

1


                                               
   (10.37)     
 
The drain capacitance in (10.37), consists of the drain gate capacitance in 
series with a parallel combination of generator impedance and gate source 
capacitances. For an unbiased FET, Cgs is equal to Cdg, so a reasonable 
approximation is to consider Cd = Cgs/2. Therefore, the theory for resistive mixers 
in Chapter 8 is not quite valid at high frequencies when the open circuit 
assumption is no longer valid. A coefficient , relating ON and OFF impedances, 
was defined by (10.38), expressing this ratio in terms of device technology. 
 
d
n
q
L
Z
Z
s
n
OFF
ON



2


                                          
 
     (10.38)      
 
 The conversion loss for this condition is proposed in (10.39), defined by 
Saleh. The conclusion is that a minimum conversion loss is obtained when  is 
minimum, achieved with large channel conductance, (i.e., large µn, ns and small 
gate capacitance).  
 


















2
2
1
1
1
2
1


C
L
 
 
 
         
     (10.39) 
 
The output conductance and gate capacitance for a 0.1x20 µm2 device as 
a function of gate bias is shown in Figure 10.47(a, b). From these parameters, one 
can determine  and estimate LC, to be on the order of 3.2 dB at 90 GHz. Better 
accuracy was obtained from a nonlinear model based on the equation for output 
conductance, (10.40) and capacitance, (10.41).  Both expressions are similar, 
where the coefficients g0(C0), g1(C1), g2(C2) and C3 are determined by curve fitting 
procedures.  
 
]1
)
tanh[(
)
(
2
1
0



g
V
g
g
V
g
g
g
ds
 
 
                   (10.40) 

 
Passive FET Applications 
725 
]
)
tanh[(
)
(
3
2
1
0
C
C
V
C
C
V
C
g
g
gs



 
 
 
     (10.41) 
.  
 
       
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Output conductance              (b) Performance results 
Figure 10.47  Capacitance and device conductance versus VG. From [30]. 
 
The measure and simulated performance is in Figure 10.48, showing a 
low dependency on gate bias for a high LO drive power. The measured conversion 
loss is 9 dB and image rejection is in the order of 20 dB from 92 – 95 GHz.  
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Conversion loss vs. LO power and Vg          (b) Conversion loss and image rejection vs. LO power 
Figure 10.48  Mixer performance at 90 GHz. From [30]. 
 
 
 
10.4  DOUBLY BALANCED 
 
Doubly balanced mixers comprise four switching devices connected using two 
baluns, respectively, for the LO and RF.  The use of two baluns creates an 
orthogonality between the RF and LO by circuit balance.  This provides high 

726 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
isolation between LO, RF, and IF ports, and cancellation of the even LO and RF 
harmonics. In some doubly balanced configurations, the IF outputs are combined 
using a third balun allowing the mixing elements to be completely floating. 
  
 
10.4.1  Hybrid Technologies 
 
10.4.1.1 MESFET_ MIC_Technology 
 
This circuit uses cold (unbiased) FETs in a ring configuration built with discrete 
devices, [31]. The circuit schematic contained in Figure 10.49 shows the gates of 
opposing FETs are connected together, and the LO signal is applied to these two 
pairs of gates. Similarly, the drain electrodes of adjacent FETs are connected 
together and the RF signals are applied to opposing drain contacts. The LO and 
RF signals are applied to baluns 16 and 14, respectively. In this work, the LO and 
RF baluns are also employed as impedance transformers from 50 ohms to 100 
ohms. The IF signals are also generated in balanced form and can be extracted by 
another balun, or can be unbalanced as represented in the figure. The mixer was 
constructed to down-convert signals from 2 to 12 GHz within an IF band from 10 
MHz to 2GHz.  
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.49  Ring mixer with discrete FETs. 
 
The invention takes advantage of the ring topology where the RF 
connections are a virtual short to the LO connections and vice versa. The circuit 
was built with packaged devices, type NE900089 by NEC, which requires special 
care on assembling to minimize parasitics. Figure 10.50 illustrates the proposed 
assembly, where advantage is taken of the fact that both sources can be tied 
together for each pair of devices. The structure is based on a diode mixer, 
consisting of a LO balun in orthogonal planes compared to the RF balun.  
Both baluns have a taper in the ground plane from the unbalanced port 
where signal is injected, to the point where a horse-shoe shaped balun is derived. 
On the LO side one arm of the balun is twisted and connected to the gate 

 
Passive FET Applications 
727 
junctions, while the other arm is connected directly to the gates. The twist was 
necessary to maintain the phase angles at both gate junctions the same.  
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.50   Ring FET mixer with packaged devices. 
 
A similar topology is applied to the RF signal, but instead of twisting the 
transmission line, a jumper is inserted in one of the arms to bring the balanced 
signal to the drain connections. An illustration of the FETs details are in Figure 
10.51. Note the twisting of the gate connections on the top. The sources are on the 
plane of paper and are either connected as indicated in the figure or connected to a 
bifilar balun for signal extraction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.51  Cross view (3) of assembling of packaged FETs. 
 
 
A self bias for the gate or external supply voltage is required and not 
shown in the figure. The results for conversion loss indicated in Figure 10.52 
shows a value ranging from 7 to 9 dB within the RF band of 2 to 12 GHz. The 
VSWR is below 3:1 for RF frequencies below 10 GHz and rises to 6:1 over 10 to 
12 GHz. Input third order intercept (IP3) is given by curve 60 for LO at +20 dBm, 
showing input IP3 ranging from 25 to 30 dBm.  
 

728 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.52  Performance results of FET mixer. 
 
 
Curve 60’ shows that increasing LO drive to +23 dBm slightly improves 
IP3. The same IP3 performance as 60’ was achieved with LO power at +19 dBm 
by adding a small DC bias to the drain.   
 
 
10.4.1.2 MESFET Vice Mixer 
 
The patent from Michael W. Vice, [32], depicted in Figure 10.53, is similar in 
almost all aspects to the one described in the active circuits section, (Chapter 11, 
[24]), except that no external bias is applied.  It is also a balanced version of the 
mixer of Figure 10.18.  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.53  Floating DBM with self-generation of gate bias. 
 
 
The resistors R3, R4 and the capacitors C1, C2 act with rectified gate 
current to provide a small forward self-bias to the FET. An interesting 
contribution is the use of a trifilar transformer to combine RF and IF signals 
 
Input IP3 - dBm 
Conversion  Loss - 
VSWR
RF frequency - GHz 
30 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
20 
60
’
60 
15 
9
7 
5 
3 
1
2 

 
Passive FET Applications 
729 
whose equivalent circuit is in Figure 10.54.  The inventor assigned the name 
reflection transformer to this component. The FETs switch the RF signal so that it 
appears at the IF port with reversing phase with each LO cycle, which is 
equivalent to mathematical multiplication of the RF and LO signals.  
 
             
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.54  Transmission line circuit for a trifilar transformer. 
 
 
The construction details of this mixer are in Figure 10.55, where the 
trifilar transformer is identified as item 20 assembled within a TO-8 type  of 
package. The equivalent transmission lines T1, T2 have a combined impedance of 
Z0/2, which add in series with similar impedance of T4,T5, matching the RF 
impedance to 50 ohms.  
 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.55  Construction details, the trifilar balun is item 20. 
 
 
On the other hand T1, T2 are in series with respect to IF port, making a 
total impedance of 2Z0, which are paralleled with T4, T5, given a matched Z0 
impedance for the IF port as well. 

730 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
10.4.1.3 H-Mode Mixer 
 
As with the diode, the doubly balanced FET mixer can be realized as a star as well 
as a ring.  One configuration, known as the H-mode FET mixer, uses four 
FETs, with the four sources grounded, and the four drains connected through 
a hybrid-Tee to the RF and IF ports.  It is said that grounding the sources 
improves linearity by reducing the RF signal voltage appearing at gate, thus 
reducing the ability of the RF signal to perturb the switching waveform that 
ideally is controlled by the LO at the gates.  Input intercept point levels in excess 
of +50 dBm at HF frequencies have been reported using this type of circuit, [47]. 
 
10.4.2  MMIC Technologies 
 
10.4.2.1  MESFET Technology 
 
An integrated version of a ring FET mixer with an active balun is found in this 
design of a full converter on a single die, [33]. In reference to Figure 10.56(a) the 
LO input power is applied to a pair of amplifiers driving the LO ports 1,2 from the 
quad mixer. The RF signals are applied to another balun connected to ports 3,4 of 
the quad. The IF signals are delivered to ports 3,4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
(a) 
Block diagram 
 
 
          (b) Quad FET mixer 
Figure 10.56    MMIC MESFET quad converter. 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Power Splitter  
 
 (b) Power Combiners 
Figure 10.57    Active power splitter and combiner. 

 
Passive FET Applications 
731 
The FET quad comprising the mixer core is in part (b) of the figure 
showing the MESFET connections. The quad mixer employed was built with 
device sizes capable of exhibiting IP3 > +30 dBm. The baluns used in blocks 11 
and 15 were obtained by employing an integrated active power splitter followed 
by all-pass networks capable of rotating the phase +90 and -90 on each port.  
The applied power at terminal 40 is equally applied to each of the four 
gates due to circuit symmetry. Between each gate there are two drains that 
independently apply power to the output load. One grounded via exists to ground 
the sources. The gate and drains are biased by means of resistors, and resistive 
feedback networks are applied from each output to the input to improve stability 
and impedance matching. An active combiner was also employed to add the IF 
signals and is represented in Figure 10.57(b). The combiner is a common gate 
topology, with two sources where both signals are applied in phase. The drain 
current contains the sum of both currents and signal power is extracted from this 
point. Current sources are applied to each source and drain for proper device 
biasing. Transmission line 75 represents matching added to recover gain and 
power performance. All these functional blocks were incorporated onto integrated 
circuit chips on GaAs substrates to operate within the 8.5 to 10.5 GHz band for 
the RF and LO signals. The IF band is located within the frequency range of 0.5 to 
2.0 GHz. The obtained conversion gain is equal to 8 dB and the IP3 is better than 
30 dBm.  
The authors proposed an alternative to the active balun and power 
combiner, using a distributed approach, Figure 10.58. The basic active cell 
consists of a common gate and a common source device, whose low frequency S-
parameters, respectively, were defined in Chapter 4 by (4.57) and (4.58).  S21 is 
the gain from input to CS drain, and S31 is the gain from input to CG drain. The 
CS and CG output loads both equal g, and the input termination is g1. 
 




ds
gs
ds
ds
m
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
gg
g
S








2
2
1
2
1
1
1
21
      (10.42) 
 






ds
gs
ds
ds
m
ds
m
g
g
C
j
g
g
g
g
g
g
gg
g
g
S








2
2
1
2
1
1
2
31
      (10.43) 
 
These equations were developed under the assumptions that gm > gd and 
Cgs, is the only capacitance of importance in the circuit. Under these 
circumstances, the phases at each drain are different by 180 and voltage 
magnitudes are the same. With a significant increase in frequency those conditions 
are no longer valid but can be computer optimized to maintain circuit balance at 
higher frequencies. In this regard the distributed topology helps by absorbing the 
input and output capacitances into their artificial transmission lines. The top line 

732 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
collects signals from the common gate device, so are in phase with the input 
signal or 0. The bottom transmission line collects the signals from the common 
source device, phase shifted by 180. The low pass nature of the structure 
minimizes high frequency harmonics. The schematic of the balun/divider in 
Figure 10.58 can easily be transformed into a balun/combiner by reversing the 
balanced output to the input of inductors 30, 39 and by moving the single ended 
input to the output of inductor 29. 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.58  Active distributed MESFET  balun. 
 
The previous input at inductor 24 is terminated by the line characteristic 
impedance. The alternative distributed in-phase power combiner shown in Figure 
10.59 also contains three transmission lines, the distinction here is the input lines 
are connected to ports 1 and 2 and the output line is connected to the drain. The 
design of those structures follows the same approach employed in the design of 
distributed amplifiers.  
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.59  Active distributed MESFET power combiner. 
 
 
 

 
Passive FET Applications 
733 
G1 
G1-G+jB 
G1-G-jB 
G1-2G 
G2 
Transmission  
Line 
Conversion Loss - dB 
-1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2   0   .2  .4  .6   .8  1 
-14 
IF Frequency  (GHz) 
-10 
-12 
10.4.2.2 PHEMT Technology 
 
A self oscillating mixer was proposed [34], to eliminate one of the baluns required 
by conventional doubly balanced topologies. This is achieved by designing a 
balanced oscillator directly connected to a resistive quad FET, as indicated in the 
block diagram, Figure 10.60. It was designed on 0.25 µm PHEMT technology to 
operate at 25 GHz.  
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.60  Converter block diagram. From [34]. 
 
  
The oscillator is of the push-push type, where the anti-phase operation is 
locked by a transmission line connecting both gates in the manner indicated in 
Figure 10.61(a). Its length is calculated to invert the gate impedance with respect 
to the other gate creating one of the conditions for oscillation, (i.e., the sum of 
reactances equals to zero). The second condition is the generation of negative 
resistance, obtained by attaching a capacitor to the source.  The quad FET is 
represented each by a mixer block in the figure, and the overall performance 
achieved by the mixer circuit is an average conversion loss of 12 dB, with similar 
performance in the upper and lower side bands. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Oscillator topology 
 
(b) Conversion loss performance 
Figure 10.61  Oscillator detail and conversion performance. From [34]. 

734 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
fRF 
0   180     0 180 
    f1 
           f2 
10.4.2.3  CMOS Technology Circuit-1 
 
A direct conversion mixer is described that up- or down-converts RF/IF signals 
using a non-conventional approach where the RF and LO signals are not at the 
same frequency. It uses a dual conversion approach and orthogonal mixing [35], 
removing the self mixing of LO that occurs in conventional mixing. In order to 
fulfill the goal of direct conversion, only one VCO source can be used, and the 
mixing and harmonic frequencies generated must be selected so there are no 
carrier components in the converted signal.  
The schematic represented in Figure 10.62 shows the application of this 
mixing principle using a Gilbert mixer cell in a nonconventional form. The RF 
signal is converted by the first mixer, using the usual RF amplifier from a Gilbert 
cell. The second conversion is performed by the ring mixer, which is the usual LO 
mixer cell. All mixers are resistive, the LO drive is applied to the gate, and 
therefore orthogonal to the converted signals. In order to use a single VCO, the 
frequency of the first and second mixers is generated by frequency dividers or 
multipliers. The output signals are balanced and applied to differential amplifiers 
acting as detectors by rejecting the RF through the use of its common mode 
rejection. An additional op amp is required to combine the two differential 
outputs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.62  Diagram of direct conversion circuit with two LO frequencies. 
 
The frequency selection for f1 and f2 includes the fact that the final mixer 
uses an equivalent fLO equal to fRF. The output equivalent fLO is equal to the sum 
of two signals at f1 and f2, (i.e., f1 + f2). In resistive mixers the frequencies are 
related to the time varying rate of channel resistance at the f1 + f2 frequency. An 

 
Passive FET Applications 
735 
Example
fVCO 
(GHz)
Operation 
(1st step)
f1 (GHz)
Operation 
(2nd step)
f2 (GHz)
I
3
divide by 3
1
divide by 2
1.5
II
1.666
divide by 2
0.833
1:01
1.666
f1 
  0         0.5        1.0        1.5       2.0        2.5     
Time - nsec 
2 
1 
0 
1
V
2 
1 
0 
2
V
2 
1 
0 
-
-
f2 
fmix   
mix
V
example set of frequencies is shown in the Table 10.1, where in one case a 3 GHz 
VCO is divided by 3 to generate the first LO at 1.0 GHz and divided by 2 to 
generate the second LO at 1.5 GHz.  The second option uses a generator at 1.66 
GHz and a divide by two. Note that both approaches generate the equivalent LO 
of 2.5 GHz used in a conventional direct conversion mixer. Since the two LO 
signals are orthogonal in the mixing process they do not appear in the spectrum of 
the converted signal. 
 
Table 10.1 Selection of Frequencies for Direct Conversion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.63    Control voltages at frequencies f1 and f2, and FET channel modulation at fmix. 
 
In another example, the simulated signals in a mixer using MOS 
technology are shown in Figure 10.63 in terms of normalized voltages. The top 
sinusoidal signal is at 800 MHz and the middle is at 1600 MHz. The fmix is a 
function representing the FET channel conductance variation showing a dominant 
component as (f1 + f2) in the time domain.  The spectrum at the output of the first 
mixer is in Figure 10.64(a), showing the input signal at 2.4 GHz converted to 1.6 
GHz and 3.2 GHz. Since this is a resistive mixer, no voltage or current signals 
exist in the channel at the LO frequency except leakage. The input signal is 
present at each drain and fed into the second mixer along with the converted 
signals. The output spectrum of second mixer is depicted in Figure 10.64(b), 
where the input signals are rejected and only the converted signals are present. 
Only residual signals are present at 0.8 GHz, 1.6 GHz, and 3.2 GHz; only the 
generated difference and sum for first and second converted side bands exist.  The 

736 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
signals (f2 - f1) appearing at (1.6 - 0.8 = 0.8) GHz and (3.2 - 0.8 = 2.4) GHz are the 
result of mixing but not self mixing. Thus, the degrading effect of self LO mixing 
which causes a variable DC offset at baseband is greatly reduced. The pulling on 
the VCO that can occur when strong RF signals are present or when TX, RX 
isolation is not high enough in a transceiver operating at the same frequency is 
also minimized.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.64  Output spectrum: (a) first mixer with LO at 800 MHz, RF at 2.4 GHz, and converted 
signals at 1.6 and 3.2 GHz.; (b) the second mixer operates at 1.6 GHz. The input signal 
at 2.4 GHz is suppressed at the output. The outputs of the first mixer represented by 
transparent bars are also suppressed at the output of the second mixer. 
 
This concept was extended to convert signals to a complex baseband 
signal where I and Q signals are required, which is obtained by paralleling two 
mixers and phasing their LO’s as indicated in the diagram of Figure 10.65. The 
first LO signal is split into 0 and 180 by conventional active or passive circuits. 
The second LO requires differential quadrature signals, obtained by the simple 
polyphase filter indicated in Figure 10.66. To understand its operation let's first 
consider that any input signal at the left appears at the right with a phase (+45, -
45), plus the phase of the applied signal. By adding the phases of the input 
signals, it is seen that the output consists of four signals with phases 0, 90, 180, 
270. 
The same approach applied to the down-converter can be applied to up-
converters. The fact that signals are in quadrature at the output means the image 
signals, including (f2 - f1) can be eliminated. Application of this mixer in a 
(a) 
(b) 
 Frequency - GHz 
-
0       0.8     1.6      2.4     3.2     4.0     4.8      5.6     6.4 
-20 
 Amplitude - dBm 
0 
-40 
-60 
-80 
-100 
 Frequency - GHz 
0       0.8     1.6      2.4     3.2     4.0     4.8     5.6      6.4 
 Amplitude - dBm 
-20 
0 
-40 
-60 
-80 
-100 

 
Passive FET Applications 
737 
fRF 
0   180   0 180 
    f1 
      f2 
0   180  90 270 
I 
Q 
transceiver configuration as proposed by the inventors is shown in Figure 10.67. A 
single VCO generator system is used for both up and down conversion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
 
                                                                           
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.65  Conversion from RF to differential baseband in complex I – Q signal format. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.66  Generation of differential quadrature signals.  There is a -45° shift through each 
resistor, and a +45° shift through each capacitor. 
 
V0 
V180 
V’(180+45)  + V’-45  
   = V’’ -90 
V’+45  + V’-45  
   = V’’ 0 
V’+45  + V’(180-45)  
   = V’’ 90 
V’(180+45)  + V’(180-45)  
   = V’’ 180 

738 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.67  Transceiver for 2400 MHz. The balanced VCO at 1.6 GHz is applied to the first set of 
switches. The second LO at 0.8 GHz is digitally generated and applied to the second 
switch set. 
 
 
10.4.2.4  CMOS Technology Circuit 2 
 
 
A high IIP2 mixer for direct conversion receivers uses a RF amplifier, followed by 
a resistive mixer and an additional differential amplifier, shown in Figure 10.68 
[36].  A high performance system requires low noise and high IIP3 from the RF 
amplifier and a high IIP2 from the mixer. The mixer is a resistive quad FET type, 
built with CMOS FETs and driven by a square wave LO. 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.68   A low distortion front end receiver. 

 
Passive FET Applications 
739 
 Vbias 
 Vout
+ 
 Vin+ 
 RCM 
 VCM 
 VCM 
 Ibias 
 Vbias 
 Vout
- 
 
An example of a buffer amplifier is depicted in Figure 10.69, illustrating 
a cascode differential amplifier with input impedance determined by resistor RCM. 
The input RF amplifier uses capacitive feedback to improve IIP3 linearity. The RF 
output uses inductors to supply voltage to the drain instead of resistors, allowing a 
larger voltage swing at the output and consequently improves third order linearity. 
If two tones, RF2 and RF1, are applied to the amplifier, it generates low 
frequency second order distortion at RF2 - RF1, which is filtered by C1, C2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.69  Cascode RF differential amplifier. 
 
The IIP2 performance for a conventional Gilbert mixer is a function of 
symmetry in the differential topology. The author made a detailed study of 
asymmetry on second order distortion. The study started with the definition of  
and Vth for a MOS device and equated the asymmetries as: 
 
L
W
Cox


 






1
 
and     
th
th
th
V
V
V



1
 






2
  
and     
th
th
th
V
V
V



2
 
 
With a simple FET model the authors analyzed the effect of small 
differences in the RF voltages, linearizing resistors, feedback resistor,  and Vth 
on the IIP2 performance. The conclusion for a differential amplifier with minimum 
mismatch at the load and factor , (i.e. RL =  are near 0) making IIP2 very 
high in (10.44). If the mismatch from other circuit parameters are taken into 
account then (10.45) applies and it can be seen that IIP2 degrades quickly with 
parameter mismatches. 
 
 

740 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
L
L
RF
th
gs
R
R
V
V
V
V
IIP









)
(
2
)
(
2
 
 
 
  
     (10.44)  
 















2
2
)
(
1
1
)
(
2
)
(
DS
th
GS
s
DS
th
gs
V
V
V
R
V
V
V
V
IIP
 
 






s
s
DS
th
GS
s
DS
th
GS
s
f
f
DS
th
GS
s
R
R
V
V
V
R
V
V
V
R
R
R
V
V
V
R














2
)
(
1
(
)
(
1
1



           (10.45) 
 
The authors showed that adding Rs in between LNA and mixer, 
according to (10.45) increases IIP2. The inventor claims improvements in IIP2 as 
high as 20 dB or more depending on how tight the technology parameters are for 
RS in a given foundry. 
 
 
10.4.2.5  CMOS Technology P and  N Gates 
 
The block diagram in Figure 10.70 is for a communication system used in 
notebook computers, cordless telephone or other applications. If applied to meet 
the IEEE 802.11 standards at 2.45 or 5.0 GHz it must provide two-way wireless 
transfer with speeds up to 54 Mbps with high linearity.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.70   Block diagram for a digital communication system. 
 
A conventional NMOS ring mixer circuit that can be used in the system 
is depicted in Figure 10.71, illustrating the LO, LOC (complimentary), RF, and IF 

 
Passive FET Applications 
741 
RON 
Vthreshold 
VGS 
RON 
VGS 
(Baseband) access. Note that the differential pairs 102, 104 and 106, 108 are 
driven by LO signals that are 180 out of phase, so only one of the FETs of each 
pair is on at a given time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.71  Schematic of NMOS ring mixer. 
 
The mechanism of signal distortion in this mixer is observed in Figure 
10.72(a), which represents the channel resistance modulation by the control gate 
voltage, VGS. Application of a LO sinusoidal voltage will result in a variable 
resistance within the time interval between the ON and OFF conditions around 
threshold voltage, Vt. This transition introduces distortion and insertion loss in the 
conversion process. The traditional solution is to apply a very large LO voltage, so 
that transition around the threshold is very fast. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
(a) NMOS FET 
 
 
(b) N- P MOS FET combination 
Figure 10.72   RON as a function of VGS for N FET and combined N and P FET. 
 
A couple of patents have been proposed to improve this feature, [37, 38] 
consisting of paralleling each NMOS device with a PMOS one. The combination 
of both devices results in the channel conduction represented in 10.72(b). The 
circuit schematic for this combination is in Figure 10.73, showing a ring 
composed of a PFET in parallel to a NFET at each branch. Note that the NMOS 

742 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
source is connected to the PMOS drain and vice-versa for the NMOS drain. The 
LO signal is applied in phase to the gates of M1 and M4 and in counter phase to 
the gates of M2 and M3. The application of LO to the PMOS devices is in counter-
phase, (i.e., the gates of M5 and M8 are in opposite phase compared to M1, M4). 
The on and off state are now controlled at each device by: 
 
Vgs,n = VLO – VRFin for the NMOS device 
   
        
     (10.46)  
Vgs,p = VRFin – VLO for the PMOS device 
   
 
     (10.47) 
 
During the positive sinusoidal LO half cycle, the voltage applied to FETs 
M1 and M4 turn them on, so that the IF mixer output 105 is coupled to the RF 
input via FET M1 and output 107 is coupled to  FET M4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.73  NMOS + PMOS full ring mixer. 
 
At the same time, the voltage applied to the other pair, M2, M3 is in 
counter-phase so that the voltage is negative driving M2 and M3 off. Within the 
same cycle, M5 and M8 are driven by the LO complement making both devices to 
conduct simultaneously.  At this moment, M1 and M5 couples the RF signal to the 
IF mixer output and so does M4 and M8 for the complement. The voltages applied 
to the other pair of devices M2, M6 and M3, M7 are turned off, appearing as an 
open circuit.  
The mechanism of signal distortion in this type of switch can be 
understood by observing the voltage waveforms of Figure 10.74 for the circuit in 
Figure 10.71. The waveforms are the same for each individual device. The voltage 
Vgs at any time is calculated from: Vgs = VLO – VRFin. The figure represents three 
levels of conduction defined for the channel, namely: turn-on when the channel is 
shorted, turn-off when the channel is open, and a transition region where the 
channel presents a varying resistance. In general the LO voltage is much larger 
than the RF input signal. Thus, when the RF signal is low, the Vgs amplitude is 
essentially determined by the amplitude of LO and Vgs will essentially track the 
LO voltage. However, when RF signal is large the amplitude of Vgs becomes more 

 
Passive FET Applications 
743 
dependent on the RF signal. During the first positive RF half cycle the LO signal 
is positive and the RF signal turns the device on only by the end of time t1. 
 
Figure 10.74  Waveforms on NMOS ring. 
 
Similarly, during the first negative half cycle of RF signal, the LO signal 
is positive and the FET is still turned on, since Vgs = VLO –(-VRFin) > Vturn-on. The 
FET is turned on within the time interval, t2. During the second positive half cycle 
of RFin the LO is negative and the FET is partially in the transition region 
reaching the turn off state for most of t3. During the second negative cycle of RFin 
the LO is negative and the FET is only turned off for a small portion of t4 and then 
enters the transition region. Due to the dependency of Vgs on the time varying 
amplitude of the larger RF input signal, the stage prior to the passive mixer circuit 
will encounter variations in loading within each cycle. As a result the output 
baseband signal shows a larger time conducting compared to non-conducting, 
generating an asymmetrical waveform like the one represented in Figure 10.75. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.75   Baseband waveform is asymmetrical generating distortion. 
 
Let's now look into the same waveforms in Figure 10.76 for the circuit in 
Figure 10.73. The waveforms contained in Figure 10.76(a) are from a NMOS 
device with LO voltage and the one in Figure 10.76(b) for a PMOS device with 
LOC voltage. Note that during period t1 the NMOS FET is within the transition 
region for most of the period, while the PMOS FET is on. During period t2, the 
NMOS FET is on for most of period t2 while the PMOS FET is within the 
transition region for most of the period. Since there is conduction in both periods, 

744 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the output waveform, represented in figure 10.76(c), will be more symmetrical, 
therefore, lower distortion is obtained with this configuration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.76  Switching waveforms for a NMOS/PMOS mixer. 
 
Following this approach, an 8 dB improvement was reported in patent 
[37], when compared with the classical NMOS topology. The results obtained for 
both approaches are depicted in Figure 10.77. Implementation of this technique 
has a technological drawback, the mobility of P devices is lower than for N 
devices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.77  IIP3 for conventional and proposed configuration. 
 
 
So the P devices need to be of much larger size to provide the same 
equivalent resistance in order to match their characteristics. The larger PMOS 
(b) 
(a) 
(c) 

 
Passive FET Applications 
745 
device size increases the capacitance substantially, requiring a tuning inductance 
to provide a reasonable conversion efficiency.  
 
An alternative invention that also uses NMOS paralleled with PMOS is 
found in another patent [39]. The root cause for nonlinearity is the same, (i.e., 
when the RF signal becomes a significant fraction of LO voltage, according to 
(10.47) the gate source voltage decreases, which results in higher channel 
resistance at the instant in time when this occurs). To overcome this problem the 
inventor paralleled a NMOS with a PMOS device. The gates are driven by 
different paths in order to have them conducting simultaneously at each LO cycle. 
The schematic of this circuit is in Figure 10.78, illustrating the signal path for the 
first half cycle of LO. Note that FETs 327, 329 and 322, 324 are conducting. The 
other devices, 317, 319 and 332, 334 will conduct on the second LO half cycle. 
The objective of this invention is similar to the previous one, namely to decrease 
the on resistance, specifically within the transition region of open to low 
impedance. The on resistance is low for a longer part of the LO period improving 
distortion and minimizing losses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.78   Alternative way to connect NMOS and PMOS FETs in parallel. 
 
 
10.4.3 Subharmonic Topologies 
 
10.4.3.1 CMOS Technology Circuit 3 
 
An extension of the direct conversion invention from Figure 10.65 was proposed 
by the same authors, [40], applying a similar topology to subharmonic mixing, 
Figure 10.79. In this application a single LO operating at fLO is applied to drive the 
mixers.  
 
VLO(+) 
VLO(-) 
VRF(+) 
VRF(-) 
VIF(+) 
VIF(-) 

746 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
S(t) = S1(t).S2(t) 
S1(t) 
S1(t) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.79   Subharmonic mixer application with Gilbert type of circuit. 
 
 
The phase angles at each gate of the Gilbert cell are separated by /2 at 
the fundamental LO frequency resulting in  phase shift at 2fLO, as displayed in 
Figure 10.80.  The time domain visualization shows the first level switch signal 
S1(t) and second level S2(t), resulting in an equivalent second harmonic LO at 
S(t)=S1(t)S2(t). Similar to the previous circuit, the S(t) represents the channel 
resistance variation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.80   LO time domain waveforms. 
 
The generation of complex I and Q signals is similar to the previous 
proposal, illustrated in Figure 10.81(a). The difference between both inventions is 
in the generation of LO signals to drive the gates. In this configuration eight LO 
signals are needed at the same frequency, with each phase shifted by /4.  
The poly-phase filters of Figure 10.81(b) power divide the differential 
input signal to obtain the four required LO signals with the proper phases. The 
block diagram of the complete RF front-end realization using a subharmonic drive 
frequency of 1200 MHz is shown in Figure 10.82 for operation at 2.4 GHz. 
 
fRF 
0  180    90     270 

 
Passive FET Applications 
747 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   (a) Mixer block diagram 
     (b) 45 Poly phase filter schematic 
Figure 10.81  Generation of I – Q signals with subharmonic drive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.82  Transceiver using subharmonic LO for 2.4 GHz. 
 
0   180    0     180 
45  225  135   315 
I 
Q 
V0 
V180° 
V’45° 
V’315° 
V’135° 
V’225° 

748 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
10.4.3.2  CMOS Technology Circuit 4 
 
The invention proposed in [41], does not employ a balun to generate a single 
balanced resistive mixer. Instead, as depicted in Figure 10.83, the common-
source, common-gate feature of the FETs is used. The RF signal applied to input 
terminal 550 is delivered to two FETs in parallel, and the converted signal is 
extracted from terminal 570. The filters are diplexers that present the proper 
impedance to the RF and IF signals. The LO is applied at the first gate and the 
gate of the second FET is grounded for AC.   
An inductance is connected between the source and ground to isolate the 
gate from the DC bias supply. The circuit then acts as a balun transforming the 
single ended LO signal applied to the gate into a balanced signal at source and 
drain. Therefore, the LO signal pumping the gate does not interfere with the main 
line and the circuit functions as a subharmonic mixer. The capacitor connected 
between gate and source equalizes the LO voltages applied to each gate. An 
approximate version of this circuit was recreated and simulated in ADS using the 
device NE67300 with RF input centered at 10.1 GHz and LO at 5 GHz. Applying 
LO power, PLO = +13 dBm, it provided 17 dB conversion loss that compressed by 
1 dB at input RF drive level of 0 dBm.  
 
An additional alternative to this invention proposed by the same inventor, 
[42], is to ground the gate of both devices and introduce the LO signal 180 out-
of-phase through the source terminals. The source is grounded for the IF signals 
through the inductances to ground. The RF signals are grounded by means of /4 
open stubs at the RF frequency. This topology provides a good match for the LO 
generator and was found by the inventors to provide better conversion loss 
characteristics compared with the previous alternative. 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.83  Subharmonic mixer without a LO balun. 

 
Passive FET Applications 
749 
 
A close facsimile of this circuit was also modeled using the ADS 
simulator, for the same conditions as the previous circuit, and provided a 
conversion loss of 11 dB when driven with PLO = + 23 dBm. The 1 dB 
compression point occurs at PRF = + 15 dBm. A high LO power is expected from a 
source LO injection circuit. 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.84   Subharmonic mixer with balanced LO injected to the two FET sources. 
 
 
10.4.3.3  CMOS Technology Circuit 5 
 
The application of FET switches connected as a successive mixer was proposed 
by the team from Berkeley, [43] to improve flicker noise in direct conversion 
receivers. The flicker noise is converted to baseband along with the desired signal 
degrading the noise figure by 20 dB or more. The target was a direct conversion 
architecture operating at 2.4 GHz, with a subharmonic approach. The work 
concluded the flicker noise is generated at low frequencies due to two inherent 
properties of direct conversion, namely:  
 
1. Even order nonlinearities; 
2. fLO and 2fLO leakage to the RF input. 
 
This is an interesting conclusion because a subharmonic mixer inherently 
has very good properties related to the second property. The study concluded the 
circuit becomes unbalanced during the crossover causing a 2fLO signal at the 
nodes. To further suppress 2fLO the authors proposed an additional signal path 
represented at the bottom, which is identical to the top, but connected in reverse 

750 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
order. This causes the signal crossover at 4fLO, which is outside the bandwidth of 
the IF receiver, and provides further reduction of residual leakage at the summing 
point at the output compared with the conventional approach. The circuit 
schematic for this mixer implemented on 0.13 µm CMOS technology is 
represented in the figure. The differential input RF signal is applied to a LNA, 
degenerated by emitter inductance to improve matching without degrading noise 
figure. 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.85  Schematic of a successive subharmonic mixing. From [43]. 
 
Notice the drains are terminated into a reactive load that gives more 
voltage headroom for the devices and improves gain. The RF signal is coupled to 
the switches by means of capacitors to block DC, and the two outputs are DC 
connected to baseband amplifiers. The load is of the high impedance type 
resulting in large output voltage without the need for further signal amplification. 
The conversion loss for this type of mixer is obtained by multiplying the RF signal 
with an equivalent switching waveform given by (10.48).  
 

t
t
V
t
t
V
V
LO
RF
LO
RF
RF
LO
RF
RF
out
)
2
cos(
)
2
cos(
2
)
2
sin(
2
)
cos(
2













 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (10.48) 
 
The resulting fLO and 2fLO suppression are in Figure 10.86(a) showing a 
power level at -90 dBm or lower. The noise figure represented in Figure 10.84(b) 
confirms the hypotheses of the impact of 2fLO leakage. The noise figure of 11 dB 
extends down to 100 KHz with a gain of 5 dB. For the sake of comparison, the 

 
Passive FET Applications 
751 
measured noise figure from other publication reported a corner flicker noise of 10 
dB at 1 MHz, [44].  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  fLO, 2fLO rejection 
 
 
(b) Conversion gain and NF 
 
Figure 10.86 Performance results illustrating: a. fundamental and second LO harmonic rejection; b. 
conversion gain and low frequency noise figure. From [43]. 
 
 
10.5  DISTRIBUTED GaAs APPLICATIONS 
 
 
As already covered in Chapter 9, the distributed approach has some desirable 
properties, such as the realization of a balanced mixer without the need of 
couplers. The resulting mixer has very broadband operation and is attractive to 
UWB - ultra wide band communication systems. It also performs well if realized 
in MMIC technology. The resistive approach brings an additional advantage, 
which is high linearity with a low LO power. 
 
 
10.5.1 Single Gate GaAs Technology 
 
A single gate topology with three FETs is depicted in Figure 10.87, [45]. Two 
transmission lines are observed, the gate line where LO is applied to modulate the 
channel of each FET, and the drain line where RF is delivered to each one of the 
FET’s drain. Each line is terminated into its characteristic impedance, and at the 
output a diplexer (Lout, Cout in the figure) is employed to separate the IF from RF. 
Assuming IF frequency is much lower than RF, the phase of the gate line at LO, 
and the phase of the drain line at RF are same for best performance. The circuit 
was built with three mixer cells employing the Marconi F20 process. The 
conversion performance in Figure 10.88(a) shows 9.5 to 11 dB loss within the RF 
frequency range of 2 to 16 GHz. The IF is fixed at 100 MHz and LO set to + 10 
dBm. The IF band is within DC to 500 MHz, with IIP3 on the order of +25 dBm.  
 

752 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Ld/2 
Lg/2 
Lout 
Cout 
Lg 
LO  
IF 
Lg 
Lg/2 
Ld 
Ld 
Ld/2 
RF  
3.0E9
6.0E9
9.0E9
1.2E10
1.5E10
1.8E10
0.0
2.1E10
-19
-18
-17
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
-11
-20
-10
LOfreq
Gc_dB
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.87   Distributed resistive mixer providing natural isolation between RF and LO. After [45]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
Figure 10.88   Conversion loss, simulated with NE 67300. 
 
 
A simulation in ADS of the same circuit using the NE67300 device gave 
the performance illustrated in Figure 10.88(b), achieving a relatively flat 
conversion loss of 12.8 dB from 1 to 18 GHz. In this simulation, IF frequency was 
set to 100 MHz and LO and RF frequencies were swept accordingly. The LO 
power is +13 dBm, and the input gate line return loss is better than 10 dB over the 
band. The gate and drain inductances are equal to 0.6 and 0.9 nH, respectively, 
and no external capacitance was added to the circuit.  
 
The small size allows integration of a distributed mixer into a compact 
image reject converter, depicted in Figure 10.89 [46]. In this particular example, 
two cells were considered for the distributed mixer, where an artificial 
transmission line is built with lumped elements.  
 

 
Passive FET Applications 
753 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.89   Compact image reject mixer topology designed with lumped elements. From [45]. 
 
 
The mixers are interconnected by means of a conventional Lange coupler 
at the LO side and a power divider at the RF side. The circuit was built with the 
0.15 µm gate PHEMT process, and 2x33 µm2 devices were used in the mixer. The 
design was targeted for an RF band of 10 to 22 GHz and IF frequency to 1 GHz. 
 
 
10.6  SUMMARY 
 
This chapter gave a brief summary of selected patents and articles on the 
application of using the modulated FET channel resistance to obtain the mixer 
function. The contents are more or less chronological and an attempt was made to 
cover different types of devices including Si-JFETs, GaAs MESFETs, PHEMTs 
and CMOS. Most of the applications use either MIC or MMIC technology. At the 
present time the single ended applications are increasingly being inserted into 
microwave and mm-wave using CMOS for performance, cost and simplicity. No 
other approach allows an efficient and simple balanced mixer using a single 
floating device. As a matter of fact, the linearity performance competes seriously 
with any of the other available topologies. The advantages of resistive FET mixers 
in direct conversion receivers either at fundamental or subharmonic were also 
described.  

754 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
T. Kashiwa, T. Katoh, T. Ishida, Y. Kojima, Y. Yamamoto, M. Komaru, 
and Y. Mitsui, “A V-Band Monolithic InP HEMT Resistive Mixer with Low LO 
Power Requirement,” International Conference on Indium Phosphide and Related 
Materials, 1997, pp. 369-372. 
[2] 
R. Pena, J. A. Garcia, A. Brana, A. Jimenez, and E. Munoz, “Bias Selection 
for Conversion and Linearity Optimization in a GaN Resistive Mixer,” Integrated 
Nonlinear Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Circuits, 2006 International 
Workshop, January 30-31, 2006, pp 84-87.  
[3] 
W. K. Squires, “Mixer Circuit Employing Linear Resistive Elements,” US 
Patent 3,383,601, issued May 14, 1968.  
[4] 
Eugene A. Janning, Jr., “Orthogonal Passive Frequency Converter with 
Control Port and Signal Port,” US Patent 3,617,898, issued November 2, 1971. 
[5] 
Stephen Maas, “A GaAs MESFET Mixer with Very Low Inter-
modulation,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 
MTT-35, No. 4, April 1987, pp. 425-429. 
[6] 
John J. Geddes and Paul E. Bauhan, “Resonant Loop Resistive Mixer,” US 
Patent 5,263,198, issued November 16, 1993. 
[7] 
Xiaohui Li and Michael Wendell Vice, “Unbalanced FET Mixer,” US 
Patent 5,678,226, issued October 14, 1997. 
[8] 
Ulrich Rohde, Antonio Almeida, Ajay Poddar, Vaseem Ahmed, Nilolay 
Ilkov, and Klaus Schoepf, “Passive Reflection Mixer,” US Patent 7,580,693, 
issued August 25, 2009.   
[9] 
J. F. Villemaze, M. Camiade, and J. Obregon, “Design of Low Conversion 
Losses Cold FET Mixers by Statistical Optimization of High Order Sidebands 
Loading,” IEEE 1993MTT International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 1029-
1032.  
[10] Bahar M. Motlagh, Sten E. Gunnarson, Mattias Ferndahl, and Herbert 
Zirath, “Fully Integrated 60-GHz Single-Ended Resistive Mixer in 90-nm CMOS 
Technology,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, Volume 16, 
No. 1, January 2006, pp. 25-27. 
[11] Frank Ellinger, “26.5–30 GHz Resistive Mixer in 90–nm VLSI SOI CMOS 
Technology with High Linearity for WLAN,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-53, No. 8, August 2005, pp. 2559-2565. 
[12] Tsung-Yu Yang and Hwann-Kaeo Chiou, “A 28 GHz Sub-Harmonic Mixer 
Using LO Doubler in 0.18 µm CMOS Technology,” RFIC Symposium Digest 
2006. 
[13] Sten E. Gunnarsson, “Analysis and Design of a Novel X4 Subharmonically 
Pumped Resistive HEMT Mixer,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume 56, No. 4, April 2008, pp. 809-816.  
[14] Carmine F. Vasile, “Multifunction Floating FET Circuit,” US Patent   
4,705,967, issued November 10, 1987.  

 
Passive FET Applications 
755 
[15] Jean Marc Mourant and Holly A. LaFerrara, “Floating FET Mixer,” US 
Patent 5,697,092, issued December 9, 1997. 
[16] Michael W. Vice, “Totem Pole Mixer Having Grounded Serially 
Connected Stacked FET Pair,” US Patent 6,064,872, issued May 16, 2000. 
[17] Aubrey Jaffer, “High Dynamic Range Mixer,” US Patent 4,727,596, issued 
February 23, 1988. 
[18] Philip Piro and Kevin Cornman, “Passive Balun FET Mixer,” US Patent 
6,871,059B1 issued, March 22, 2005. 
[19] C. Daniel W. Stoffer, “Balanced Modulator with JFET’s Voltage 
Controlled Resistors,” US Patent 3,621,473, issued November 16, 1971.  
[20] Charles M. Puckette, “Linear Mixer with Reduced Spurious Response,” US 
Patent 4,352,210, issued September 28, 1982. 
[21] Stephen Maas, “GaAs MESFET Balanced Resistive Mixer,” US Patent 
4,949,398, issued August 14, 1990. 
[22] Dennis A. Kruger, “Dual Quadrature Frequency Converter,” US Patent 
5,006,811, issued April 9, 1991. 
[23] Doron Gamliel, “Double Balanced FET Mixer with High IP3 and IF 
Response down to DC Levels,” US Patent 6,957,055B2, issued October 18, 2005. 
[24] Pierre Dobrovolny, “High Level Wide Band RF Mixer,” US Patent 
5,027,163, issued June 25, 1991. 
[25] Pierre B. Dautriche, “Mixer Arrangement,” US Patent 4,727,597, issued 
February 23, 1988. 
[26] A. Philippon, M. Campovecchio, J. C. Nallamtaby, P. Butterworth, and R. 
Quere, “Design Method and New Architecture of Sub-Harmonic Balanced Cold 
FET Mixer for MVDS Applications,” IEEE 2006 International Workshop on 
Integrated Nonlinear Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Circuits, pp. 90-93. 
[27] P-C Yeh, W-C Liu, and H K Chiou, “Compact 28-GHz Sub harmonically 
Pumped Resistive Mixer MMIC Using a Lumped-Element High-Pass/Band-Pass 
Balun,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, Volume 15, No. 2, 
February 2005, pp. 62-64. 
[28] K. S. Ang, A. H. Baree, S. Nam, and I. D. Robertson, “A Millimeter-Wave 
Monolithic Sub-Harmonically Pumped Resistive Mixer,” IEEE 1999 MTT 
International Microwave Symposiurm Digest, pp. 222-225. 
[29] K. S. Ang, M. Chongcheawchamman, D. Kpogla, P. R. Young, I. D. 
Roberton, D-S Kim, M-C Ju, and H-C Seo, “Monolithic Ka-band Even Harmonic 
Quadrature Resistive Mixer for Direct Conversion Receivers,”  IEEE–2001 Radio 
Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium, pp. 169-172. 
[30] Eric W. Lin and Walter H. Ku, “Device Considerations and Modeling for 
the Design of an InP-Based MODFET Millimeter Wave Resistive Mixer with 
Superior Conversion Efficiency,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Volume MTT 43, No. 8, August 1995, pp. 1951-1959. 
[31] Scott M. Weiner, Donald A. Neuf and Steven J. Spohrer, “Double Balanced 
Mixing,” US Patent 4,947,062, issued August 7, 1990. 

756 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
[32] Michael W. Vice, “Balanced Reflection Transformer,” US Patent 
5,551,074, issued August 27, 1996.   
[33] Raymond M. Waugh and Mahesh Kumar, “Monolithic Double Balanced 
Mixer with High Third Order Intercept Point Employing an Active Distributed 
Balun,” US Patent 5,060,298, issued October 22, 1991. 
[34] K. S. Ang, I. D. Robertson, D-S Kim, M-C Ju, and H-C Seo, “K-band 
Monolithic Double-Balanced Resistive Mixer with Integrated Balanced 
Oscillator,” IEEE 2001 MTT International Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 
1329-1332. 
[35] Wolfram Kluge and Dietmar Eggert, “Mixer,” US Patent 6,970,687B1, 
issued November 29, 2005. 
[36] Lawrence Connell, Yan Cui, Poojan A. Wagh, Patrick L. Rakers, “High 
Linearity and Low Noise CMOS Mixer and Signal Mixing Method,” US Patent 
7,177,616 B2, issued February 13, 2007. 
[37] Sining Zhou, “Ultra-High Linearity RF Passive Mixer,” US Patent 
6,847,808B2, issued January 25, 2005.  
[38] Arya Reza Behzad, “High Linearity Passive Mixer and Associate LO 
Buffer,” US Patent 6,972,610B2, issued December 6, 2005. 
[39] Said E. Abdelli, “Passive Mixer with Improved Linearity,” US Patent 
7,113,755B2, issued September 26, 2006. 
[40] Wolfram Kluge and Dietmar Eggert, “Harmonic Mixer,” US Patent 
7,085,548 B1, issued August 1, 2006. 
[41] Antonio Romano, “Sub-Harmonic Mixer,” US Patent 20040104758 A1, 
issued June 3, 2004. 
[42] Antonio Romano, “Sub-Harmonic Mixer,” US Patent 7,084,693 B2, issued 
August 1, 2006. 
[43] H. C. Jen, S. C. Rose, and R. G. Meyer, “A 2.2 GHz Sub-Harmonic Mixer 
for Direct Conversion Receivers in 0.13 µm CMOS,” 2006 IEEE International 
Solid-State Circuits Conference, February 2006, pp. 1840-1849. 
[44] Hsiao-Chin Chen, Tao Wang, and Shey-Shi Lu, “A 5-6 GHz 1-V CMOS 
Direct-Conversion Receiver with an Integrated Quadrature Coupler.” IEEE 
Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 42, No. 9, September 2007, pp. 1963-
1974. 
[45] K. S. Ang, S. Nam, and I. D. Robertson, “A 2 to 28 GHz Monolithic 
Resistive Distributed Mixer,” 29th European Microwave Conference, 1999, pp. 
222-225. 
[46] K. Pha, K. Fujii, H. Morkner, and A. Rixon, “An Integrated Low Noise 
Amplifier and Image Rejection Mixer in a Surface Mount Package for Low Cost 
10-22 GHz Applications,” First European Microwave Integrated Circuits 
Conference, September 2006, pp. 122-125. 
[47] Pat Hawker, “G3SBI’s High Performance Mixer,” Radio Communication, 
October 1993, pp. 55-56. 

757 
Chapter 11 
Active FET Applications 
When JFETs became available, mixers were typically built using triode tubes or 
BJT devices, both having complex relations between output current and input 
voltage.  In contrast, JFETs demonstrate an almost true square law relation when 
gate voltage is between pinch-off and zero.  In spite of this ideal property, the 
technology to process JFETs was crude, and obtaining good devices in high 
volume was difficult, thus JFET technology declined in prominence. The wide 
spread use of FETs had to wait for the development of Silicon-IC CMOS 
technology driven by digital applications, and emerging Gallium Arsenide 
technology driven by RF and microwave applications.  CMOS technology 
continues to advance in the RF arena, and is generally considered the preferred 
technology for high volume low cost applications.   
 
This chapter summarizes selected active FET mixer applications found in 
scientific journals and patent reports.  Biasing in the active region allows merging 
the two functions of frequency conversion and gain in a single device, potentially 
reducing the number of required components, and in some cases providing lower 
noise figure.  Other functions including self oscillating mixers and distributed 
mixers are also described as having some surprising properties.   
 
 
 
11.1 SINGLE ENDED 
 
Single ended mixer topologies, as mentioned in the previous chapter, can provide 
isolation between mixing signals only by filtering.  There is no circuit balance to 
provide cancellation of even or odd harmonics, nor of unwanted mixing products 
falling within the desired output band. This limits applications to systems that 
require no overlap between RF, LO, IF, and image bands, and very clean 
frequency plans with little or no spurious in the output band.  However, the 
simplicity of the single ended mixer is compelling and desirable for situations 
where these deficiencies are not relevant.  Single ended mixers topologies are 
usually implemented with discrete devices and are rarely seen in IC technology. 
 

758 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
11.1.1 Single Function Topologies 
 
11.1.1.1  JFET Technology 
 
One of the first applications of a FET to down-convert RF signals is disclosed in a 
1968 patent, [1].  The schematic diagram shown in Figure 11.1 reveals a JFET 
mixer circuit with LO voltage applied to the gate, RF applied to source, and IF 
extracted from the drain. The purpose of this invention was to generate low 
spurious levels with a high conversion gain and low noise figure.  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.1  
Schematic of a JFET mixer with gate LO injection using tank circuits to couple signals 
to device terminals. 
 
A tank circuit is attached to each terminal to provide filtering and 
impedance matching. The tank circuit can be considered as a PI network with a 
parallel capacitor, series inductor and parallel inductor. By varying the inductor 
tap location, the impedance transformation ratio and the signal voltage level on 
the mixer terminals are adjusted. The resonance frequency of the source and gate 
tank circuits are adjusted simultaneously to maintain the same IF frequency.  
The author’s purpose is to maintain the mixing device operating within 
the square law region to avoid gate to source conduction, and operating below 
pinch off voltage to minimize distortion. Therefore, the maximum LO voltage 
swing corresponds to VP/2 and its magnitude can cause the conversion gain to 
vary.  The high gate impedance of the JFET allows a minimum of LO power to 
obtain a high conversion gain. The source impedance is low and the RF tank 
circuit matching trades off best noise figure with conversion gain. Resistor R1 is 
responsible for setting the bias current and for stabilizing the operating point over 
temperature and supply voltage variations. It is bypassed by a parallel capacitor to 
minimize it’s effects at RF frequencies. Since the FET exhibits manufacturing 
variations in pinch-off voltage, the bias resistor should be designed to minimize its 
effect on mixer performance. A good practice is to adjust R1 to obtain the lowest 
pinch-off voltage condition. 
R1 
LO 
Input 
IF 
Output 
Signal 
Input 
+B 

 
Active FET Applications 
759 
The tank circuit connected at the drain is tuned to IF frequency, matching 
the high IF impedance to the output load. At all other frequencies it shows low 
impedance, nearly a short to ground. For operation with weak signals, maximum 
conversion gain is obtained by conjugate matching the drain impedance at the IF 
frequency. The L – R isolation in this mixer is provided by the tank circuit 
impedance at the source side at the LO frequency. The L – I isolation is provided 
by the drain tank circuit impedance which is low at LO and RF, assuming a low IF 
frequency compared to LO and RF.  
In case higher conversion power gain is required, an alternate connection 
of the FET was proposed as shown in Figure 11.2. Here the RF and LO 
connections are interchanged, the RF signal is connected to a higher impedance, 
and the LO to a lower impedance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.2  
Schematic of a JFET with source LO injection. 
 
 The LO level can be adjusted by changing the tap point on the LO tank 
circuit. The RF tap also needs to be adjusted to accommodate different impedance 
levels. 
 
 
11.1.1.2  JFET  Dual Gate MOS1 
 
 
Metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) technology found its way into RF applications 
before the GaAs FET revolution. An example of such, [2], is a dual gate MOSFET 
used in a mixer for TV receivers, displayed in Figure 11.3. In such a circuit the RF 
and LO signals are added by two capacitors to gate 1. The IF signal, leaving the 
drain is filtered and applied to an emitter follower stage. The drain impedance at 
LO and RF are shorted to ground by a capacitor in the IF filter. The second gate is 
RF shorted to ground, and the bipolar device 30 acts as a high gain low noise 
common collector IF amplifier. Therefore, two functions are included in the 
device: mixer and IF amplifier, resulting in high conversion gain compared to a 
LO 
Input 
+B 
Signal 
Input 
R1 
IF 
Output 

760 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
single gate device. One problem found with TV receivers is the wide percentage 
bandwidth the circuit must cover from low to high frequency channels. As a 
result, it is difficult to maintain a constant LO voltage level over the band, which 
impacts conversion gain. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.3  
 Schematic of a DGFET mixer for TV receive with constant conversion gain. 
 
One reason for the LO amplitude variation is the Q factor of reactive 
elements used in the matching. In this specific work the LO voltage ranges from 
0.1 V to 0.6 V proportional to frequency. A circuit to correct this problem consists 
of a bipolar 18 current source connected in parallel to a biasing source resistor 28 
and controlled by the tuning voltage. When the tuning voltage increases, more 
current is drawn from the source so that the effective source resistor becomes 
smaller and more current is driven from the FET increasing conversion gain thus 
maintaining the IF level stable.   
 
 
11.1.1.3  JFET  Dual Gate MOS2 
 
In this patent example, [3], the dual gate is a cascode converter, where RF is 
applied to gate 1 and LO is applied to gate 2. The schematic is found in Figure 
11.4 illustrating the bias circuitry. Gate 2 is often used in amplifier applications to 
control power gain, and the same function is available here. This is a convenient 
way to build an AGC function, where conversion gain is controlled by the bias 
applied to gate 2, which is supplied by detecting the average or peak signal level 
later in the receiver chain. Note this is a dual conversion circuit for FM receiver 
applications, where the band-pass filter inserted between first and second mixer 
rejects image noise and also presents a low drain impedance for optimum mixer 
performance. 
 
 
 
 

 
Active FET Applications 
761 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.4  
Dual gate FET active mixer/combiner. 
 
 
11.1.1.4 MESFET MIC Technology 
 
A single MESFET active mixer is found in this patent [4], where transmission 
lines are used to inject the LO to the source, the RF to the gate, and to extract the 
IF signal from the drain.  The fact that only one mixing element is used means 
savings on couplers or baluns which usually add losses and complexity. The 
transmission lines act both as filters and impedance matching elements. The 
circuit proposed in Figure 11.5 has three elements that receive special attention: 
The first is the open stub dimensioned to be a quarter wavelength at the RF 
frequency, shorting the source to ground for the incoming RF signals; the second 
is a circuit short circuit stub close to a quarter wavelength at the LO frequency 
slightly detuned to resonate the first circuit; The third consists of a RF trap to 
apply a low impedance to LO and RF signals at the drain followed by an IF 
impedance matching network.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.5   FET mixer using source diplexer for LO insertion. 
 
2nd circuit 
1st circuit 
IF 
LO 
RF 
Matching 
Circuit 
Matching 
Circuit 
RF trap 

762 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
The schematics in the next figure illustrate the equivalent circuit of the 
FET at each frequency, to simplify impedance analysis. The performance results 
for a low noise 0.5 m gate length FET inserted into a ceramic package are in 
Figure 11.7, which depicts gain and noise figure. The SSB noise figure obtained at 
center band is equal to 6 dB, the associated conversion gain is 10 dB, and the 2 dB 
bandwidth ranges from 11.5 to 11. 7 GHz.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.6   Equivalent FET circuit at different frequencies. 
 
 
The final implementation of the proposed circuit is in Figure 11.8, 
displaying two versions built in MIC technology. In the first version, part (a), the 
RF matching circuit employs a capacitive impedance at the gate followed by a PI-
section of transmission line. 
 
        
 
Figure 11.7  
FET mixer performance in terms of conversion gain and noise figure. 
 
 
The DC is de-coupled through a pair of open circuit shunt stubs to the 
gate. The RF couples to the gate through a low pass filter, followed by an edge 
coupled capacitor for DC blocking.  Packaged FETs typically have two source 
connections; in this circuit one was used to DC ground the device, and the other to 
inject the LO signal. A simple open circuit shunt stub is used at the drain to trap 
the RF and pass the IF. In the second version, part (b), a semi-lumped element 
circuit is proposed where the meander line inductors and inter-digital capacitors 
are designed in a single structure to guarantee the required resonance frequency. 
 
IF 
G 
D 
S 
RF 
LO 
G 
D 
S 
G 
D 
S 

 
Active FET Applications 
763 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Distributed version 
 
(b) Lumped version 
Figure 11.8  
Mixer schematics showing microstrip layouts. 
 
 
11.1.1.5 HJFET MMIC Technology 
 
A MMIC version of the previous invention employing Hetero Junction FET, or 
HJFET, technology is found in two publications [5, 6]. The circuits were built 
using coplanar waveguide, instead of the conventional microstrip line. In the first 
report, the mixer was designed for operation within the 20 to 23 GHz band with an 
IF between 1.5 to 2.5 GHz. The up-converter exhibited maximum conversion gain 
of –6 dB for an IF at 1.9 GHz and LO drive of 10 dBm at 21.5 GHz. The isolation 
between L–I and L–R are better than 22 and 20 dB respectively. The schematic of 
this circuit is in Figure 11.9.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.9  
 MMIC upconverter operating between 20 to 23 GHz. From [5]. 
 
 
The second mixer, in Figure 11.10, was also designed for HJFET 
technology but for operation within the 60 GHz band. The conversion gain with 
+7 dBm of LO power ranges from –7 to –12 dB, depending on filter losses. 
 

764 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.10   MMIC upconverter operating at 60 GHz. From [6]. 
 
 
The stability analysis carried out by the author consisted of the reduction 
of three to two ports by terminating the LO terminal with 50 ohms. The lines 
connected to the source were then iteratively optimized by linear and nonlinear 
simulations to tradeoff electrical stability and conversion gain respectively. 
 
 
11.1.1.6 MESFET Plus BJT MIC Technology 
 
An analysis of injecting LO into a FET drain mixer is covered in this proposal, 
[7]. The schematic for the LO injection employing a transformer is shown in 
Figure 11.11 and the I/V curve describing the bias and load line for the FET is in 
Figure 11.12. The transformer couples LO voltage to the drain. Note the drain 
circuit contains two filters used to separate LO from the IF and RF signals. The 
drain electrode is biased by a power supply E0, whose load line is vertical in the 
I/V plane. The static biasing Point P, in the absence of signal, is situated at the 
intersection of the I/V curve for the gate voltage -Vg1 and the vertical line through 
Vds = E0. The LO generator impedance RL appears in the secondary multiplied by 
the transformer impedance ratio, n2RL. This is the load line for the LO signal on 
the drain side. If RF or IF signals are applied to the gate, then the straight dynamic 
load line D moves parallel to itself around quiescent point P, lines D1 and D2, as 
the amplitude of the impressed LO voltage changes. When the amplitude becomes 
large, point P sweeps along line –Vg1 from point O to PM.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Active FET Applications 
765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.11  Schematic for transformer LO coupling. 
 
Point PM is situated on a straight line DM of slope -1/n2RL. When the 
gate voltage of transistor 1 is modulated by generator ω, the dynamic trajectory on 
the I/V plane may, as the result of both signals, cover the entire zone Z1, limited 
by the three lines namely, DM, Vg =0 and Vg = VP. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.12  Dynamic trajectory on I-V plane for the circuit of Figure 11.11. 
 
The inventors proposed to replace the transformer with a silicon BJT 
device in the manner represented in Figure 11.13. The LO is applied to the BJT 
base and modulates the collector current, and therefore the FET drain current. The 
bipolar device acts as an emitter follower to the LO generator, therefore, a low 
impedance DC supply voltage is applied to the drain.  
 
 
 
 

766 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.13  LO injection with emitter follower bipolar device. 
 
The drain voltage is determined by the base voltage, VBE considering the 
junction active and the resistive divider 19, 20. The quiescent point is determined 
by the intersection of the drain voltage (VB0 - VBE) and the gate voltage –Vg1, 
given static current I0. In the absence of gate voltage the application of LO voltage 
makes the bias point move from P1 to P2. When both LO and RF are 
simultaneously applied to the FET, the trajectory can be found to be within zone 
Z2 represented in Figure 11.14. The biasing mode allows complete sweeping of 
the non-linear zone of the FET, limited along the line –Vg1 from O to PM.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.14  Dynamic trajectory for emitter follower. 
 
A third option is to use a bipolar pnp device as an amplifier to inject 
signal at the drain as depicted in Figure 11.15. The drain voltage is no longer 
determined by the BJT, but instead by the superposition of the DC characteristics 
of both devices. There are now two current controlling devices, the BJT current 
source controlled by the emitter base voltage determined by the resistive divider 
31, 32, and the current determined by the gate voltage applied to FET gate. In this 
case one of the devices will control the current and force the other to be a variable 

 
Active FET Applications 
767 
resistance. The LO load line is now dependent on the magnitude of the signal 
applied to the base that appears as a variable resistance to the FET, modulating the 
bias point from P1 to P2 in the I/V plane. When both signals are applied to the gate 
and drain, the resulting dynamic area is zone Z3, which is limited between the 
pinch-off voltage – VP, I/V and the line crossing point PM.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Schematic 
 
 
                (b) Load line 
Figure 11.15  Drain LO injection with PNP bipolar device. 
 
 
11.1.1.7 MESFET Gate MMIC Technology 
 
A low cost MMIC mixer designed for high volume requirements is described 
next. Consumer applications are usually portable where battery life is important, 
requiring MMICs to be designed for best power efficiency. Since MMIC cost is 
driven by circuit area, the selected topology must use a minimum number of 
components having small size. Circuit miniaturization calls for IC integration 
where lumped elements or active devices can replace traditional functions like 
couplers. The gate mixer disclosed in patent [8], meets this requirement and was 
developed for operation at a RF frequency of 1.9 GHz and IF of 100 MHz.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.16     Simple lumped element power combiner, for a MMIC gate mixer. 

768 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The circuit, represented in Figure 11.16, contains a lumped element 
Wilkinson combiner that also provides impedance transformation when combined 
with shunt inductor L60.  The FET is self biased near the pinch off region by the 
source resistor R70, so that transconductance is modulated. The IF signal is 
obtained at the drain of the FET by appropriate filtering through a shunt capacitor 
(4 pF), to isolate the IF from all high frequency components. In addition, by 
varying the values of the components in the power combiner, the ratio of the RF to 
LO power may be changed. For instance, by selecting inductor L48= 10.7 nH, 
resistor R50 = 150 Ohms, capacitors C52 = C54 = 0.6 pF, C58 = 0.3 pF and L60 = 5.2 
nH, the ratio of RF to LO power is 2:1 at the gate of FET, with the RF input 
terminal 46 equal to 50 Ohms and the LO input terminal 44 lower than 15 ohms, 
for a 0.25 µm gate FET.  
 
 
11.1.2  Multifunction MMIC Topologies 
 
The application of IC technology opened the way to add RF and IF amplifier 
functions on the same die, and in some cases an LO amplifier as well.  
 
11.1.2.1  MESFET Drain MMIC Technology 
 
The circuit illustrated in Figure 11.17, represents the schematic of a mixer [9], 
which successfully addresses the target specifications for a MMIC converter. The 
LO signal is applied to a common gate amplifier that delivers power to the mixer 
device, FET40. The RF signal is applied to another common gate amplifier before 
being delivered to the mixer device. Both amplifiers provide a low VSWR to the 
RF and LO signals, and high L – R isolation from the reverse gain of common 
gate amplifier. The mixer device is unique in the way the signals are injected. The 
RF and LO signals are both applied at the gate and to the source through R38. 
Without the resistor the mixer is merely a diode mixer. If the resistor is large 
compared to the channel resistance, then it behaves as an active gate mixer. If its 
value is between those extremes, it can be classified as an active gate mixer, with 
drain conductance and transconductance modulated by the LO signal. The mixer 
device also acts as a constant current device biasing both the LO and RF common 
base amplifiers. The average nonlinear resistance value of FET40 in series with R38 
varies as a ratio of VDG/I, where I is the constant current through FET40. The 
generated IF signal is applied to a linear class A source follower, FET50, which 
provides impedance transformation from the mixer to a lower value more suitable 
for IF filtering and subsequent amplification. R52 and R54 form an appropriate 
voltage divider for negative DC and RF feedback applied to the gate of FET30 to 
establish a low distortion class A operating point that is stable over temperature, 
and to compensate for normal foundry variations in capacitor and resistor values. 
The source of FET50 is attached to the junction of R52, C56 and C57. The other end 
of C56 contains the RF, LO, and the converted sum and difference frequency 

 
Active FET Applications 
769 
signals and all mixing products including the desired IF. Port 15 is used to control 
the amount of negative RF feedback applied to FET 20 from the source output of 
FET50 via R55 and coupling capacitor C57. Normally, this port is grounded, 
shorting out the gate resistor, so that no RF feedback is applied. When large signal 
operation is desired with minimum mixer output distortion, a fixed or active 
variable resistance is connected at port 15. Increased feedback significantly 
reduces inter-modulation and cross-modulation products at the cost of conversion 
gain reduction and noise figure degradation. In the preferred embodiment of this 
design, transistor 50 has twice the area of transistor 40. FETs 20 and 30 are 
identical and one half the area of FET40. Resistors R18 and R28 are equal and twice 
the value of R38. Resistor R52 is 24 times the value of R54.  The basic ratio of 
values of R18, R28 and R52 are set for best conversion gain and optimum port 
VSWR performance consistent with minimum power drain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.17  MMIC consumer FET mixer with transconductance and drain conductance modulation. 
 
The experimental results for a circuit representing a nominal 
configuration with no RF feedback and minimally sized FETs are shown in Figure 
11.18. In part a, PIF as a function of PRF is plotted for three different LO drive 
levels. RF input drive varies from  -30 dBm to -10 dBm with LO power, PLO, at 10 
dBm, 6 dBm and 0 dBm, respectively, for lines 70, 72 and 74. The lowest LO 
drive level provides linear conversion loss up to -15 dBm input drive, which is a 
good tradeoff relative to the results of higher LO drive given the need to conserve 
battery life.   Above the -15 dBm level, conversion gain decreases due to normal 
circuit saturation characteristics. In part b of the figure, conversion gain and return 
losses over the RF band are represented, respectively, by line 76, 78, 80. 
Performance is optimized over the 0.8 to 0.9 GHz band. Return loss is dependent 
upon the design values selected for the port coupling capacitors C16, C26 and C56. 
For the aforementioned frequency range, these capacitor values in the preferred 
RFin 
LOin 
IFout 

770 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
embodiment are each 0.5 pF. Maximum conversion gain occurs where the port 
return loss is minimized. Higher frequency performance is possible with smaller 
FETs. Low frequency and higher power level operation require larger area FETs. 
This MMIC FET mixer described in 1996 overcomes the problems of low DC 
efficiency, low conversion efficiency, low port-to-port isolation, high input and 
output VSWR, high inter-modulation distortion, high cross-modulation distortion, 
and large circuit area.  
 
  
   
 
(a) 
Gain compression 
         (b) Gain and return loss versus RF frequency 
Figure 11.18   Gain performance in terms of PRF versus PIF with PLO as a parameter and in terms of 
frequency.  
 
 
11.1.2.2  MESFET Drain Mixer Plus IF Amplifier 
 
An alternative important application of MMIC technology was in the development 
of components for the direct broadcast satellite (DBS) market, which imposes 
severe constraints on performance and cost. Typically, MMIC mixers for DBS 
applications contain a low noise amplifier to receive signals within the range of 11 
to 12 GHz, a down-converter mixer, and an IF amplifier operating from 950 to 
2050 MHz.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.19   Typical block diagram of a satellite receiver with a performance budget in terms of 
gain, G, noise figure, F, and third order distortion, IIP3.  
RFin 
IFout 
LNA 
Block 
Filter 
Ga1, 
F1, 
IIP31 
MMIC 
Ga2, 
F2, 
IIP32 
Ga3, 
F3, 
IIP33 
Ga4, 
F4, 
IIP34 

 
Active FET Applications 
771 
 
Since the entire IF band is converted, this type of mixer is called a “block 
down-converter”. To optimize the trade-off between performance and cost, the 
number of on-die components needs to be minimized and the specifications of 
each one needs to be properly optimized. The block diagram of a typical receiver 
is in Figure 11.19, consisting of an LNA designed with discrete low noise HEMT 
devices, an image reject band pass filter, and a down-converter MMIC. The 
specifications for each of the components in the receiver are optimized by trading 
off gain, G, input intercept point for third order distortion, IIP3, and noise figure, 
F. The equations for the cascade are given by (11.1) and (11.2), and are also 
discussed in Chapter 3.  
 
4
3
2
1
3
2
1
2
1
1
3
3
3
3
1
3
1
IIP
Ga
Ga
Ga
IIP
Ga
Ga
IIP
Ga
IIP
IIP
t




   
        
       (11.1) 
 
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
1
2
1
1
1
1
Ga
Ga
Ga
F
Ga
Ga
F
Ga
F
F
Ft







    
         
       (11.2) 
 
The down-converter MMIC, depicted in Figure 11.20 and disclosed by 
invention [10], proposes to optimize the receiver parameters at low cost. It 
contains an active drain mixer, a LO generator and an IF amplifier. The mixer is a 
single gate FET (32) receiving RF signals within the range 10.7 GHz to 11.8 GHz 
at the gate. The LO at 9.75 GHz is applied to the drain through another FET 
device (34). The applied LO power modulates the transconductance and output 
conductance of the mixer FET 32, and the output conductance of the LO driver 
FET 34.  An ensemble of frequencies, including the sum and difference of the RF 
and LO signals plus harmonics, are present at the output of the mixer. The low 
pass filter following the mixer is implemented using a series inductor and a shunt 
capacitor. All signals coming from the mixer are attenuated by this filter except 
the difference frequencies located within 950 to 2050 MHz. The IF amplifier, 
besides magnifying the IF signal, also functions as an active load for the mixer. 
The FET 62 is a common gate amplifier with an active drain load by means of 
FET 60. The capacitor grounding the gate of FET 62 also compensates the gain 
versus frequency response of the active load circuit. The drain voltage of the IF 
amplifier FET is set by means of resistive dividers. The total mixer current or 
equivalent DC load is determined by the LO drive power, but the drain voltage is 
dependent on the bias supply. Since the load is active, it will provide a wide range 
of current while keeping bias relatively insensitive to the LO power. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

772 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
RFin 
IFout 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.20 Down-converter MMIC block diagram depicting LO driving FET 34 and high 
impedance filter 46, 48. 
 
The mixer drain voltage, terminal 64, is biased at about 1 volt, 
experimentally determined to be an optimum point for mixer operation. The gate 
voltage of FET 62, VG is around 0.7 V, but the FETs are depletion mode, so the 
source voltage is higher than the gate, in this case by 0.3 volts.  
 
 
11.1.2.3  Modified Dual Gate  
 
A conventional dual gate, or cascode mixer, is depicted in Figure 11.21 where a 
LO buffer amplifier has been added. The large signal LO causes output 
conductance and transconductance modulation of M2 and M1. The resulting IF 
signal is amplified by M2, producing higher gain compared to using a single 
device. The drawback of this approach is the nonlinearity of the common gate 
amplifier that limits third order IM performance measured by output intercept 
point, OIP3. High gain and low OIP3 equates to a reduced maximum input signal 
that the receiver can sustain. This property frequently discourages usage this 
approach.  
 
Gain
IIP
OIP


3
3
 
 
 
 
     (11.3) 
                  
 
 
 

 
Active FET Applications 
773 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.21  Conventional dual gate  mixer. 
 
 
A patent that addresses these issues is found in [11]. The contribution 
here is to change the connection of the output signal from the drain of M2 to the 
connection of M1 and M2, point X in the Figure 11.22. The device is no longer a 
true dual gate, instead it becomes a drain mixer with LO injection by means of a 
source follower. The IF amplification is delivered by a separate common source 
amplifier, operating linearly over a wide range of signal power. The drain terminal 
is now directly connected to a power supply, so one can interpret this 
configuration as M1 operating as a drain mixer and M2 as an LO pump source 
follower amplifier. 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.22  Modified dual gate mixer. 
 
RFin 
LOin 
IFout 
RFin 
IFout 
LOin 

774 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
To highlight the usefulness of the preferred embodiment of the present 
invention, simulation results comparing conventional and modified circuits are 
tabulated in Table 11.1. The frequency of operation is 0.8 to 5.8 GHz. 
   
Table 11.1 
Simulation Results for New and Traditional Down Converter Mixer 
     
      _____________________________________________ 
     Modified  
Traditional  
     down-mixer  down-mixer 
 
 
     Conversion gain (dB)        9  to 11 
     7.5 
     Image band att. (dB) 
      8  to 9 
     7.8 
     Drain current (mA) 
    11 to 13 
    11.5 
     OIP3, Pin = - 40 dBm     19 to 23 
      8.6 
      IIP3, Pin = - 40 dBm     10 to 12 
      1.1 
    
      ________________________________________ 
 
 
The simulation results show that higher gain and more robust inter-
modulation distortion suppression are obtained with the new proposed topology. 
The results shown are for devices built with MESFET technology, but they are 
also equally applicable to other FET technologies.  
 
 
11.1.2.4  HEMT X4Subharmonic 
 
HEMT technology with 0.1 µm gate length was applied, [12], to the design of a 
V-band (50 – 70 GHz) subharmonic converter. The approach is to use a X4 
multiplier with a quasi cascode configuration comprising a RF buffer amplifier 
and a single ended gate mixer as depicted in Figure 11.23(a). The multiplier 
operation is described as a fundamental LO frequency applied to the gates of both 
devices M1 and M2 generating second and fourth harmonics at the drain of M2.  In 
addition to this generation from the fundamental,  one can also think of the second 
harmonic generated by M1 at high level mixing at the drain with the fundamental 
delivered by M2, resulting in third harmonic energy enriching the generation of 
the fourth LO harmonic tone.  
The signal from the multiplier and the RF amplifier are combined and 
applied to the mixer M4. The performance is in part (b) of the figure, expressed as 
conversion gain and IF output power, as a function of IF input power. The LO 
power applied to achieve the performance was 10 dBm at 14.5 GHz, and the 
converted IF carrier is at 2.4 GHz. The conversion gain is nearly 4 dB and 1 dB 
gain compression takes place at an input power of - 9 dBm.  
 
 
 
 

 
Active FET Applications 
775 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (a) Schematic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Gain and power performance.  
Figure 11.23  Quasi-cascode multiplier generates LO power to be delivered to the gate mixer M4. 
After [12]. 
 
 
11.2  SINGLY BALANCED 
 
11.2.1 Hybrid Topologies  
 
11.2.1.1 Substrate LO Injection Using JFET Technology 
 
An integrated version using JFETs as a balanced mixer where the substrate is used 
as a signal port appeared in 1973 [13]. The invention relates to a novel balanced 
mixer circuit using two JFETs built on a single die with off-chip elements to 
match impedance. The source terminals of the two transistors are tied together.  
One input signal is applied to the gate electrodes differentially, while the other 
input is applied to the substrate so it is in phase to each device.  
 
Vg1 
Vd
IF & Vd3 
M4 
M3 
M2 
M1 
/4(f0) 
LO 
RF 
Vg2 
/4(f0) 
/4(2f0) 
Vg3 
-25 
-20 
-15 
-10 
-5 
RFin (dBm) at 60.4 GHz  
Conversion gain - dB 
IF power – dBm at 2.4 GHz 
-25         -20           -15        -10            -5              0 
14 
7 
0 
-7 
-14 

776 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.24  Dual monolithic JFET mixer applying LO at the substrate. 
 
 
The load is a transformer tuned to either the difference or sum frequency, 
representing a low impedance for both f1 and f2 signals. For practical purposes 
there is no leakage into the gates. For the topology displayed in Figure 11.24, the 
channel conductance is controlled by the transverse electric field created across 
the channel between the gate and the substrate. The field is dependent on the 
reverse voltage applied to the gate, which is a reverse biased p-n junction. The 
channel is doped with high resistivity layer so the depletion region extends into 
the channel in direct proportion to the applied reverse bias.  The same effect can 
be obtained by reverse biasing the substrate-to-channel interface. Increasing the 
voltage applied across either p-n junction will increasingly constrict the channel 
until there is no more current in the channel. Therefore variations in the potentials 
applied across the gate or substrate will modulate the channel current as long as 
the total applied voltage is less than the pinch-off voltage.  
To optimize performance as an up- or down-converter, the frequency 
range of the drain transformer is set to operate over the RF or IF bands. Let’s 
initially assume up-converter operation, where the base-band signal is applied to 
the substrate gate. In this case the drain transformer is designed for RF frequency. 
The IF signal is applied to the substrate in phase to the gates and the LO signal is 
applied to the control gates of the two FETs in a push-pull manner. The 
corresponding drain currents are filtered by the output parallel resonant circuit. 
The RF signals are in counter phase and are combined by the tuned transformer. 
For down-converter operation, the drain transformer is designed for IF frequency.  
The drain currents on the two devices still follow a square law function 
regardless of whether the input signal is applied to the substrate gate or the 
diffused control gate or both. Therefore, the channel current will generate mixing 
products at the sum, fLO + fIF, and difference fLO – fIF. The mixing signals are out 
of phase at each drain but are reversed and added by the transformer action at the 
output port.  In addition either the sum or the difference frequency can be selected 
by filtering out the unwanted signals. The main advantage of this approach is the 

 
Active FET Applications 
777 
isolation between LO and RF built into the device structure. Therefore, there is no 
need for an external coupler to apply the signals to the channel.  
 
 
11.2.1.2  Complimentary MOSFET 
 
The N-channel, depletion mode MOSFET device has been widely applied to 
amplifiers and mixers. In this application, [14], complimentary enhancement 
mode symmetric FETs are employed taking advantage of CMOS technology. 
Operation in common source mode permits optimum gain to be obtained from 
both stages of the mixer, and the circuits are relatively simple and inexpensive. 
The work developed by Merle V. Hoover describes the design details of this 
complimentary MOSFET mixer/amplifier circuit. In the schematic displayed in 
Figure 11.25, the transistors PA and NA are of complimentary conductivity and are 
connected in series between a bias supply +V and ground. In operation, resistors, 
38, 42, and 44 bias the CMOS amplifier at or close to the center of its linear 
operating range. In other words, the biasing is such that transistors NA and PA both 
quiescently conduct. The signal EIN1, may be considered the LO at frequency f1 
and is applied to the gate of NA through a tuned transformer. The second signal 
EIN2 at frequency f2 maybe considered the RF signal and is applied to the gate of 
PA with a similar transformer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.25   Schematic of complimentary MOSFET mixer. 
 
The bias for the gates is derived from the voltage at the common drain 
connection of both FETs. The large signal EIN1 modulates the transconductance of 
NA and the output conductance of both NA and PA. The small signal EIN2 is 
amplified and mixed by the modulated output conductance. The output circuit of 
the mixer is a series tuned circuit at either the upper (f1 + f2) or lower (f1 – f2) 
sideband frequency. The desired IF signals are linearly amplified by the CMOS 
pair PB, NB after proper filtering.  In this circuit PB, NB are biased automatically by 

778 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the common drain voltage of the previous stage. An additional advantage of 
CMOS is the complimentary nature of the devices that can provide the proper 
180 phase shift to the signals without a balun transformer.  
 
11.2.1.3  MESFET_Technology 
 
The contribution of the following patent, [15], is to obtain a high conversion gain 
mixer using FETs biased in the active region.  The FETs are common gate for the 
AC signals, and common source for DC, as depicted in Figure 11.26. Self bias is 
employed by means of resistors 46 and 48. The combination of RF and LO signals 
are by means of wire wound transformers. The RF signal applied to the 
transformer center tap reaches the FET source in common mode. The filter 60 is 
transparent for RF due to the equal phase of both arms.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.26  Active singly balanced FET mixer. 
 
The unbalanced LO signal is transformed into differential mode and 
applied to the FETs in counter phase. The resonant circuit, 60, shorts the source 
for the IF signals avoiding dissipating IF power into the high frequency elements. 
The resonant circuit is transparent to the RF signal and introduces some loading 
on the LO signal, but it is minor if the LO and IF frequencies are sufficiently 
separated. On the drain side, the low impedance for the LO signal is obtained by 
means of capacitor 66. The RF signals in this configuration are terminated with a 
high impedance at the drain. On the other hand the capacitor 66 and inductances 
62 and 64 comprise a low pass transformer from high drain impedance to a lower 
impedance compatible with the IF impedance of the next stage. The differential IF 
signals are converted to unbalanced by means of the output transformer.  
 
 
11.2.1.4  FET Technology 
 
A floating active mixer that follows the same basic topology described in Figure 
10.18 is addressed in this patent [16]. The circuit schematic illustrated in Figure 

 
Active FET Applications 
779 
11.27 reveals that RF and IF baluns are added to the basic topology, creating a 
quasi-doubly balanced mixer. The term quasi-doubly balanced is used to describe 
a mixer that resembles a doubly balanced where both RF and IF are balanced and 
simultaneously resembles a singly balanced since RF and IF frequencies cannot 
overlap. The LO signal is applied between gate and source terminals through a 
parallel LC circuit combination and a series capacitor. The inductor resonates the 
total capacitance presenting an open circuit impedance to the LO source. The 
series DC blocking cap is used to self bias the FETs, providing a small DC 
rectification at the gate. The voltage developed is dependent on the magnitude of 
the applied LO. Distortion in resistive mixers is generated by leakage of LO signal 
into the FET channel, perturbing its conductance and creating signal distortion. 
According to (10.6) of Section 10.2.2, this effect can be minimized using the basic 
topology of Figure 10.18. In addition, by applying a low bias to the channels of 
the FETs it is possible to optimize inter-modulation. In the case of this work, a 5V 
supply is applied to the center tap of transformer T1, which connects to the drain 
through a combination of parallel LR circuits. The resistor gives an appropriate 
termination to the FETs; the inductance L bypasses the DC current and can also be 
used to resonate the drain capacitance.  
 The RF signal is applied to the drains via a transmission line balun and a 
diplexer consisting of a simple LC circuit provides isolation between RF and IF 
signals. Similarly, the IF signal is extracted from the mixer by means of diplexer 
and a discrete wire wound balun. At the drain terminals, both RF and IF signals 
are balanced, and their respective baluns reject the common mode LO signals. It is 
clear that the diplexer precludes the overlapping of RF and IF bands. 
In the time domain, signals propagating in the transmission line 
transformers are mismatched at the drain terminal. The transmission line 
impedance of 50 ohms is either much higher than the FETs on-impedance of ZON 
= 8 , or much lower than FETs off-impedance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.27  Quasi doubly balanced Vice type of mixer. 
D1 
G 
2.5 
D1 
100 
LO 
T1A 
T1A 
T1B 
T1B 
50 
T2A 
T2A 
10 
10 
10 
10 
100 
10 
85 
10 
IF 
RF 

780 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The off-resistance is high for a small size MESFET, say 1000 , but it is 
shunted by the device output capacitance. Assuming Cds = 1 pF and fRF = 1600 
MHz, then ZOFF = 1/(Cds) = 100. Therefore, a standing wave pattern appears in 
the transformers due to the impedance mismatch and incident and reflected 
signals. In the frequency domain, an equivalent average impedance appears at the 
drain terminals, which requires computer analysis for its determination. A rule of 
thumb that provides reasonable results is to average both impedances 
geometrically, so that Zeq = 28 . The IF signals generated in the channels, say at 
200 MHz, are also mismatched and equivalent impedance is higher, around 80 to 
100 ohms.  
A simplified version of this mixer was proposed by the same inventor 
[17], where the RF and IF baluns were replaced by a single one as depicted in 
Figure 11.28. The frequency range is dependent on the frequency response of 
baluns T1A, T1B. The balun employed by the inventor allows operation for IF 
frequencies from 10 to 100 MHz and RF/LO in the 2000 MHz range. Another 
simplification is in the diplexer that is now localized in the unbalanced area, so 
only one circuit is required.  The behavior of this mixer is essentially similar to the 
previous circuit with differences pertinent to the lower frequency of operation. For 
instance, at lower frequencies the off resistance is higher while the on resistance is 
approximately the same. If the RF/IF source impedance at the drain is made 
higher than 50 ohms, the circuit will operate more like an ideal switch with 
improved performance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.28  Schematic of the simplified quasi-doubly balanced mixer. 
 
The reason is the higher source impedance will make the on-resistance 
relatively closer to a short. Therefore, connecting a balun as a 4:1 transformer 
causes the RF/IF impedance to increase to 200 ohms. Simulations carried with the 
values provided by the inventor and using the NE673 device are represented in 
Figure 11.29.  The LO frequency was set at 2 GHz for an IF at 100 MHz. The 
obtained conversion loss is 5 dB for a lossless circuit. The Guanella transformers 
were modeled as ideal transformers. If losses are added, then conversion loss will 
100 
Bias 
LO 
T1A 
T1A 
T1B 
T1B 
100 
100 
100 
100 
50 
5 
RF 
IF 
100 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
6 

 
Active FET Applications 
781 
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
0
200
-56
-52
-48
-44
-40
-36
-32
-28
-24
-20
-16
-60
-14
freq, MHz
1.85E9
1.90E9
1.95E9
2.00E9
1.80E9
2.05E9
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
-10
0
RFfreq
gain
increase by at least 1 dB.  The third order suppression is in the plot on the right for 
two conditions, Vbias = 0 V and Vbias = 1V, showing an improvement of 4 dB on 
the intermodulation level and an increase in power of approximately 0.5 dB.  
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  Conversion gain  
      (b) Third order suppression at PLO = 7 dBm 
Figure 11.29  Performance of Vice mixer in terms of conversion loss and third order intercept point. 
 
 
11.2.1.5  MESFET Up Converter  
 
A GaAs FET gate up-converter for 20 GHz operation is found in the technical 
literature, [18], with the following main items: (1) method to analyze mixers; (2) 
use of slot line baluns; (3) performance. This up-converter proposal reverses the 
classical converter by making the IF signal a large signal modulating the gate 
voltage and LO a small signal voltage that is up-converted to upper and lower 
sidebands.  To avoid confusion this section refers to the LO as the carrier, and the 
IF input as being large signal. That is a convenient way to up convert, since the 
digital voltage when applied to the FET's gate can efficiently modulate the drain 
current. The transconductance modulation is assumed to be of the square wave 
type, with maximum value given by gmm.  
 
(1) Method to analyze mixers. 
The method is a simplification of the conversion matrix, and adequate for 
circuits where the parallel feedback is important and series feedback can be 
disregarded.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.30   Simplified model for a gate mixer with parallel feedback. 
ELO 
Vg 
ZS 
Ri 
jX 
jB 
IRF 
IU 
IL 
YRF,YIM 
YIF 
YO 

782 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The model is therefore transformed into the one represented in Figure 
11.30. The load comprises an open stub with low impedance at RF and an 
admittance Y0 at other frequencies. The FET used is 0.5 µm gate length, 750 µm 
gate width and the authors assumed large signal device output impedance to be 
equal to 1/Y0. The current generator comprises three components: RF, Upper, and 
Lower sidebands whose relations to gate voltage is described by the conversion 
matrix (11.4). The output conductance, Y0, is assumed constant and equal to the 
average value over the LO cycle. The matrix in (11.5) relates gate voltages to the 
collector currents, plus the excitation signal at the gate. 
 
 







































L
U
LO
mm
L
U
LO
V
V
V
j
j
j
j
g
I
I
I
2
1
0
0
2
1
2
1




 
 
 
                   (11.4) 
 

































LO
L
U
LO
L
U
LO
E
I
I
I
A
A
A
A
V
V
V
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
3
2
 
 
 
           
       (11.5) 
 
 
The coefficients A1, A2, A3, A4 have the following functions:  
 
 
A1 = admittance coefficient relating gate voltage due to output upper and 
 
        lower sideband  currents; 
 
A2 = LO admittance coefficient relating gate voltage due to LO output  
 
        current; 
 
A3 = LO dimensionless coefficient relating gate voltage to input LO  
 
        voltage. 
 
 
The coefficients for (11.5) are defined as follows: 
 
 





jB
Y
jX
Ri
Z
jX
Ri
BY
j
jB
Y
BX
A
S











0
0
0
1
2
1
2
2
                     (11.6a) 
 






jB
Y
Y
jX
Ri
Z
jX
Ri
Y
Y
jB
jB
Y
Y
BX
A
L
S
L
L














0
0
0
2
1
              (11.6b) 











jX
Ri
Z
Y
Y
jB
jB
Y
Y
Ri
jB
Y
Y
jX
Z
jB
Y
Y
jX
Z
A
S
L
L
L
S
L
S













0
0
0
0
3
1
               (11.6c) 
 
 

cot
0
jY
YL 
 
 
 
 
 
          
      (11.7) 

 
Active FET Applications 
783 
 
Once the coefficients are determined they can be entered into the matrix 
equation and solved for the output currents as a function of drive voltage. The 
output sideband currents can then be expressed as a function of circuit parameter 
and input signal drive. 
 



























































j
j
A
E
I
I
I
A
g
A
j
A
g
A
j
A
j
A
j
A
g
LO
L
U
LO
mm
mm
mm
2
1
2
1
1
0
0
2
1
1
2
1
1
3
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
                        (11.8) 
 
 
 
  
(2) Slot line baluns 
The block diagram indicated in Figure 11.31 denotes the need for two 
baluns at the gate, one for the LO carrier and the other for the large signal IF. The 
LO voltages at the drains are therefore in counter phase so that any point joining 
the drain circuits at equal distance from the drains is a virtual ground. The IF input 
is also in counter phase at the drains, so the upconverted signals are in phase and 
can be combined at the output as shown.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.31   Block diagram for the up-converter system. After [18]. 
 
 
The circuit realization of this block diagram in MIC technology is 
depicted in Figure 11.32. The figure details the input LO balun created by the slot 
line power divider. The output shows the drain lines in parallel before combining. 
Since the LO is in counter phase, the virtual ground creates a short circuit stub 
termination in the drain for the LO frequency, whose inductance is determined by 
(11.8). The virtual ground phase, or inductance to ground, is optimized by varying 
the position of bonding ribbon on the lines. The IF input signal at the drain is 
G 
LO 
Output 
180 
D 
180 
Hybrid 
IF 
G 
S 
D 
S 

784 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
shorted by the drain bias line. Decoupling of DC to the load is obtained through 
open ended parallel coupled lines.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.32   Implementation of the up-converter in MIC technology. After [18]. 
 
(3) Performance 
Conversion loss of the mixer is about 7 dB.  With a 140 MHz IF input at 
+13 dBm power, mixed with a 21 GHz LO carrier at +10 dBm, output power at 
the upper sideband is +3 dBm.  
 
 
11.2.2 Singly Balanced in IC Technology 
 
11.2.2.1  MESFET Types E and D 
 
Another converter design for satellite TV receivers is disclosed in patent [19]. The 
proposal for this work is to employ a singly balanced gate mixer built using low 
cost MESFET technology, where packaging parasitics are absorbed into the RF, 
LO matching circuitry. The RF and LO are applied to an external folded ratrace 
hybrid that adds those signals in phase for LO and counter phase for RF before 
being applied to the packaged device. The block diagram for the packaged 
receiver device in Figure 11.33 depicts an external hybrid used to combine RF and 
LO signals that in turn connect to the converter differential input. The RF and LO 
signals are delivered to both mixers.  The mixer outputs each couple to a filter, 
and then combine in a three stage differential IF amplifier that is followed by a 
two stage single-ended amplifier. A representation of the single ended mixer is 
shown in Figure 11.34. The input shows a “T” type network consisting of wire 
bond inductances, 82 and 84, and package lead inductance 80. The low impedance 
for the RF and LO frequencies on the drain side is depicted by capacitor 104. The 
association of shunt capacitor and series inductance comprises a low pass 
matching network transforming the 50 ohm load impedance to 100  at the drain 
terminal.  
DC 
gold  
ribbon 
Combiner 
IF - (0) 
IF - (180) 
LO 
slotline
180 Divider 
RF 
MN 
microstrip 
MN 
MN 
MN 

 
Active FET Applications 
785 
20.0 
0.0 
2050 
950 
15.0 
0.0 
  Frequency, MHz 
 FdB, (1.5 dB/div) 
 Gain, (2dB/div) 
PLO = 3 dBm 
VDS = 3.0 V 
IDS = 5.67 mA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.33  Block diagram of receiver concept. The mixers are built with enhancement devices and 
the amplifiers use depletion devices on the same die. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.34 Equivalent circuit for the single ended gate mixer. 
 
The mixer MESFETs are of enhancement type, measuring 0.5 X 320 µm2 
built with ion implant technology, which resulted in high transconductance 
compared to similarly built depletion devices. The IF amplifier MESFETs are of 
depletion type. The die was inserted into a miniature plastic package, having six 
leads, three on each side. The LO can be set at two discrete frequencies, say 9.5 
and 10.5 GHz to convert two RF frequency bands covering from 11 to 12 GHz.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.35  Conversion gain and noise figure. 
IF 
RF+LO 
RF+LO 
RF 
LO
Input 
 
Hybrid 
Input 
 
Zin 
Input 
 
Zin 
100
10
82
80 
84

786 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The IF frequency band is capable of covering from 900 to 2500 MHz, a 
bandwidth useful to block convert, for example, TV information having 500 MHz 
of bandwidth. A plot of conversion gain and noise figure for the balanced mixer is 
in Figure 11.35.  The effects of package parasitic on the high frequency RF and 
LO are reduced by minimizing package lead lengths.  And after down-conversion, 
the low frequency IF is much less sensitive to package parasitics. 
 
 
11.2.2.2  CMOS mmWave 
 
Application of CMOS 0.13 µm technology to build mmWave components is a 
challenge. A gate mixer having respectable performance was reported by the 
Berkeley group [20] at 60 GHz. The bias supply voltage is limited to Vds = 1.2V, 
and power is limited to 0 dBm, which means RF performance will be constrained 
to this level of power. Since this component was designed in standard digital 
process where losses are high, a coplanar structure was employed in the design to 
minimize substrate losses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
Figure 11.36  Quadrature mixer designed with microstrip lines. From [20]. 
 
The I/V characteristics of this technology and measured transconductance 
as a function of gate voltage are found in Appendix 9B.  The circuit schematic 
shows the gate of each FET connected to a branch line coupler, allowing 
application of LO and RF simultaneously, with reasonable isolation between the 
ports. This whole circuit was built on a 1.6X1.7 mm2 die.  Its performance is 
illustrated in the following two figures, the first shows conversion gain as function 
of LO drive, about – 2dB at PLO = 0 dBm; and the second shows the conversion 
gain versus RF frequency. If 3 dB is the reference gain, then the bandwidth is 54 
to 62 GHz, all obtained from a power supply of 1.2 V. 
 

 
Active FET Applications 
787 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Conversion gain versus LO drive               (b) Conversion gain versus frequency 
Figure 11.37     Quadrature mixer conversion gain. From [20]. 
 
 
11.2.2.3  CMOS Linearized and Compact  
 
A linearized RF amplifier was proposed in [21], where two CG (common gate) 
devices with different properties are paralleled. The differences are in bias or size, 
so that distortion generated by one device can be compensated by the distortion of 
the other. The plot in the figure shows the second order transconductance of each 
device biased at different voltages, and the composite, showing a reduction within 
a certain range of gate voltages, which reflects in lower third order distortion. One 
problem pointed out by the author is the feedback of second harmonic distortion 
components, demonstrated through Volterra series analysis.  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 (a) Circuit schematic. Source [21]                    ( b) Transconductance compensation 
Figure 11.38    Paralleling two devices biased at different gate voltages to compensate third order 
distortion. 
 
 
This effect is minimized by adding a RF current source or tank circuit at 
the feedback frequencies. The resulting mixer schematic in the next figure shows 

788 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
how the linearized RF current feeds the PMOS switched mixer. The IF is 
extracted from the drain in differential form. The results applied to a 900 MHz 
CDMA mixer biased at 1.2 V and 5.4 mA, gave IIP3 of +20 dBm and conversion 
gain of 7 dB. Noise figure, however, is high, on the order of 15 dB.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.39  Linearized compact mixer. From [21]. 
 
 
11.2.2.4  CMOS X2 Subharmonic 
 
A compact subharmonic mixer built in 0.13 µm CMOS technology was reported, 
[22], for operation within the 58 to 66 GHz band in the up-converter mode. The 
switching devices M3, M4 are composed of 2X36 µm2 gates. The schematic in the 
figure shows only 4 devices are used along with a 90º hybrid built with lumped 
elements. The IF input at 4 GHz is applied in single ended mode to the gate of M1.   
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.40  Schematic of X2 subharmonic converter. From [22].  
 
 
The lumped element 90 hybrid is built by broadside coupling two spiral 
inductors as illustrated in the figure.  The coupler measures only 85x75 µm2. 

 
Active FET Applications 
789 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.41  View of lumped element hybrid employed in the design. From [22]. 
 
The M1 output at 180º is applied to switch M3 and also to the M2 gate 
where an additional 180º is introduced in the IF signal before being applied to 
switch M4. Hence M3, M4 receive IF signals in differential mode. The measured 
conversion gain represented in the figure is for LO power of 5 dBm and shows 
better than 5 dB gain over the 58 to 66 GHz band. In addition, the RF input power 
saturates at –5 dBm and the L – R and 2LO – R mixing products, respectively, are 
better than 40 dB and 25 dB down. 
 
 
 
Figure 11.42  Conversion gain versus LO frequency. From [22]. 
 
 
11.2.2.5  PHEMT X3 Subharmonic 
 
A subharmonic X3 mixer was reported in [23] to provide a conversion loss 
comparable to X2 mixer. A 0.15 µm GaAs PHEMT process was employed in this 
design to translate a 29 GHz carrier to 2 GHz. The circuit schematic is in Figure 
11.43(a), containing a 90º hybrid power splitter at the LO port followed by an 
additional phase shifter to guarantee a 120º phase difference between the gates. 

790 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
LO120 
LO Band  
Reject  
LO 
VGS 
90 Hybrid 
/12@LO 
 LPF 
  HPF 
L=0.88 nH 
C=0.35 pF 
RF 
LO0 
VDS 
  HPF 
IF 
VGS 
VDS 
The third harmonic is obtained by driving the FETs with high amplitude so that 
the output conductance is nearly a square wave. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Circuit schematic. From [23]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Conversion loss versus IF frequency. After [23] 
 
Figure 11.43  Subharmonic X3 mixer schematic and conversion loss. 
 
In such a case the switching function contains a high third harmonic to 
perform the mixing, and the fundamental LO component is far enough from the 
third that it can easily be shorted to ground. The minimum conversion loss is 
around 13 dB and maximum at 16 dB at the high end of the band. Additional 
relevant performance parameters are the 3L – I isolation is better than 45 dB, and 
1 dB gain compression occurs at 6.7 dBm at the IF side. 
 
 
 
 
18 
1.0            2.0              3.0             4.0             5.0   
 IF, GHz 
Conversion Loss, dB 
Measured (          ) 
Simulated (          ) 
LO = 9 GHz @ +10.5 dBm 
16 
14 
12 
10 
8 
6 

 
Active FET Applications 
791 
11.3  DOUBLY BALANCED 
 
In this section, dual singly balanced mixers applications are described. Since this 
topology requires very similar devices, the majority of applications are in IC form, 
either for fundamental or subharmonic types. 
 
 
11.3.1  Discrete Floating MESFET 
 
A floating active double balanced mixer that follows the same basic topology 
described in Figure 10.18 is addressed in the patents, [24, 25]. In that invention, 
two FETs were assembled in back-to-back form (i.e., gates tied together, sources 
tied together, and LO is applied between gate and source, floating above ground). 
Here, two singly balanced mixers similar to the previous invention are connected 
in parallel, resulting in a doubly balanced mixer as shown in Figure 11.44. 
Therefore, four FETs, Q1-Q4 are used as the mixing elements and special baluns 
are required to provide balanced signals to the FET connections. For instance, the 
LO balun is required to deliver signal at the gates of Q1-Q2 at 180 out of phase in 
relation to the gates Q3-Q4. Bifilar wire wound on a ferrite core can provide this 
function at L – band frequencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.44  Floating active DBM with core mixer after Vice. 
 
On the RF/IF side the balun has to provide the same function for both 
channels. This is obtained by employing a special trifilar transformer, which the 
author called a reflection transformer, shown in Figure 11.45. There are six 
transmission lines T1-T6 in this transformer, T1 is composed of wires 32 and 34, 
 

792 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
T
Z
0
1
2
3
T1
Z0
0
180
0
0
T2
Z0
0
180
180
180
T3
2Z0
T4
Z0
180
0
180
180
T5
Z0
180
0
0
0
T6
2Z0
and T2 is composed of 34 and 36. The additional transmission line T3 shares wires 
32 and 36 with T1 and T2. The similar notation holds for the additional three 
linesT4-T6. The RF signal is previously balanced by balun 18 and applied to the 
RF ports of this structure that subdivides the signals additionally generating the 
four ports to connect to the FETs. The resulting impedances for each transmission 
line are listed in Table 9.2 along with the phases at each terminal.  
 
Figure 11.45  Schematic showing transmission lines of the reflection transformer. 
 
This structure behaves similarly to a center tapped transformer. The RF 
signal is applied at the “primary” lines 34, 44 inducing RF signals at the 
“secondary” lines 32, 36 and lines 42, 46. The RF signal appears at the drains on 
the top in counter phase relative to the drains at the bottom.  
 
Table 11.2 
Impedance for Each Section of Transmission Line 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Due to the phase reversal connection, the IF current returning to the 
transformer, adds up at the center tap and cancels at the primary, due to the 
opposing IF voltage phases. According to the transmission line impedances, one 
can verify the impedances presented at each terminal. The RF impedance consists 
of the parallel impedance of T1 and T2 in series with the parallel impedance of T4 
and T5, so that ZRF = Z0. The IF impedance consists of the parallel combination of 
T3 and T6, which is equal to ZIF = Z0. However, the balanced impedance seen by 
the FETs is equal to 2Z0. The bias to the devices is applied through the balun 16 

 
Active FET Applications 
793 
and the DC return is through the current sources 30, 32 of Figure 11.44. The FETs 
used as current sources have an IDSS = 23 to 30 mA and exhibit a high impedance 
over the LO frequency band when saturated. The gate bias is developed upon 
application of LO power, letting a small amount of rectified gate current flow into 
Q1, Q4, charging capacitors C1, C2. Thus the FET terminals are still floating with 
the application of bias. The supply voltage employed is 5V and the bias elements 
are R5 = 25  and C5 = 0.01 F. The resistors R3 and R4 plus capacitors C1, C2 
generate a small positive bias to the gates. The resistors R2 and R3 are equal to 100 
 and their objective is to match the gate impedance.  
 
 
11.3.2  Doubly Balanced MMIC Technology 
 
11.3.2.1  JFET IC Technology 
 
A SSB modulator in monolithic form was introduced in 1988 [26]. The circuit 
uses two differential amplifiers as shown in Figure 11.46. The devices M5 and 
M11 are the current sources for the differential devices. The LO voltage is applied 
to one of the gates of a differential amplifier and the RF or modulating signal at 
the other. Therefore, the LO injected at the gate of one device, is also applied to 
the source of the other device, acting as a common gate to the LO. The LO voltage 
at the drains of the differential pair are in counter phase and are zeroed. The RF is 
similarly applied, so that the drain current at each device contains the product of 
both LO and RF signals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.46  Schematic of the JFET MMIC mixer. 
 
The inventors proposed various ways of injecting the LO and RF. The 
case in the figure below uses a 90 coupler added to generate LO (–sine and 
M5 
M11 

794 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
cosine) signals and a simple 90 coupler on the RF to generate (sine and cosine) 
signals. The mixing products of importance are in the figure at each drain. Since 
the drains are connected together the only component that is not cancelled is the –
cos(R-A) corresponding to a single side band converted signal. By swapping the 
inputs of the RF drive the sum cos(R+A) is obtained instead, following the same 
approach as depicted in Figure 11.47(a). The LO in this case is a low frequency 
signal, 12 KHz and the RF a higher frequency, 1.6 MHz. The capacitor at the gate 
of one arm in the chip limits the frequency of operation of this chip. The bias is 
applied externally, between the drains of the differential pair to ground of current 
source. In addition to the different ways of applying RF and LO signals, the 
inventors also proposed a dual-gate version shown in part b of the figure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Signal components  
 
                (b) Dual gate version 
Figure 11.47  Schematics of proposed mixer. 
 
The rejection of carrier, sidebands, and other spurious signals is shown in 
Figure 11.48 to be more than 40 dB. The results are for a JFET IC, but the concept 
is applicable to other technologies and frequencies. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.48  Spectrum of generated SSB signal depicting sideband and carrier suppression 
 
 

 
Active FET Applications 
795 
LO 
IF Filter 
RF 
VDD 
IF 
11.3.2.2  FET Technology 
 
A patent applying FET devices to differential topology was disclosed in 1987, 
[27]. This hybrid circuit proposal contains a FET quad die connected to 
transformer baluns for the RF, LO and IF signals. The quads are biased by a 
current source also acting as an IF amplifier. In this work, represented in Figure 
11.49, the IF signals leaving the quad are transformed to single ended and applied 
to an IF amplifier input through a filter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.49  Differential type of FET mixer. 
 
The author proposes the use of a SAW filter. Signals in the mixer 
components are isolated from the IF amplifier by an RF choke and a resistive “PI” 
type of filter connected on one side to the IF amplifier drain and DC connected on 
the other to the sources of the ring-connected devices. The circuit showed 6.5 dB 
conversion gain for an IF band covering 100 to 800 MHz. 
 
 
 

796 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
11.3.2.3 MOS Technology 
 
 
In conventional FET mixers, the gate is modulated with a large signal LO to 
create the required squared characteristic at the drain. This invention, [28], 
proposes to use a nonsymmetrical differential amplifier (i.e., the devices on the 
left and on the right of a differential amplifier have different transconductance). 
With the approach the inventor demonstrated it is possible to generate a multiplier 
with good mixing properties, requiring low LO signal amplitude.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.50  Schematic of an anti-symmetrical differential mixer. 
 
 
In order to demonstrate this possibility, consider the differential amplifier 
of Figure 11.50, where the drain currents of each device are given by (11.9), 
(11.10). 
 
2
1
1
1
1
)
(
TH
GS
D
V
V
I


  
 
 
         
       (11.9) 
2
2
2
2
2
)
(
TH
GS
D
V
V
I


  
 
 
          
     (11.10) 
 
In these equations,  is the transconductance parameter defined by: 
 
L
W
Cox
n 2


,  
n = electron mobility 
Cox = gate oxide capacitance per unit area 
W/L = ratio of gate width and gate length  
 
Making the assumptions as follows 
 
LO
RF
GS
GS
V
V
V
V



2
1
  
 
 
        
     (11.11) 

 
Active FET Applications 
797 
2
1
0
D
D
I
I
I


 
 
 
 
                   (11.12) 
TH
LO
RF
V
V
V
V




 
 
     
          
     (11.13) 
 
It is possible to develop the current of each device as a function of the 
transconductance, bias voltages, and currents. The currents are divided into two 
terms to facilitate the development. 
 
B
D
A
D
D
I
I
I
1
1
1


 
B
D
A
D
D
I
I
I
2
2
2


 




2
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
0
2
1
1
1














V
I
I
A
D
 
 
          
     (11.14) 
 















2
2
1
2
1
0
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
)
(
2
V
I
V
I
B
D










 
         
     (11.15) 
 




2
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
0
2
1
2
2














V
I
I
A
D
  
         
     (11.16) 
 















2
2
1
2
1
0
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
)
(
2
V
I
V
I
B
D










 
        
     (11.17) 
 
Note the first term in (11.16) is essentially DC related. If the devices are 
equal then the first term of ID1A is equal to I0/2.  The second term contains a V2 
term which is dependent on the difference between the device transconductance 
values. If they are equal then there is no square term. Therefore, if the RF and LO 
voltages are defined by (11.18) and (11.19), then they are multiplied in the V2 
term and mixing products are generated.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
        (11.18) 
 
 
 
        (11.19) 
 
 
 
The second part of the equation ID1B essentially is proportional to the 
input voltage and does not contribute to mixing. The frequency components 
contained in the drain current can be extracted by means of voltage developed on 
)
2
cos(
t
f
V
V
RF
RF
RF


)
2
cos(
t
f
V
V
LO
LO
LO



798 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
RL.  The same principle was applied to the circuit below that contains two sets of 
dual gate devices. In this case the transconductance parameter of the device is 
proportional to the bias applied to the second gate. 
 
)
(
11
11
G
B
V
V 


 
 
 
 
         
    (11.20) 
)
(
12
12
G
V



 
 
 
 
 
         
    (11.21) 
 
Where β11, β12 are the transconductance parameters of M11 and M12, 
respectively, and are the same for the devices M14 and M13. By selecting VG and 
VB one can set the desired transconductance for the devices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.51  Topology of anti-symmetrical differential mixer with dual gate devices. 
 
 
11.3.2.4 Four Quadrant MOS Multiplier 
 
This type of multiplier was previously invented in bipolar IC technology in the 
form of a current multiplier by Gilbert. Its application in MOS technology was 
disclosed in [29] with several circuit modifications compared to the bipolar 
topology, required because of the basic differences in the technologies. The 
present invention proposes creation of a multiplier based on the equation: 
 






2
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
)
4
1
V
V
V
V
V
V
Vo





   
 
 
     (11.22) 
 
 
Such a function is expressed in terms of a block diagram represented in 
Figure 11.52, consisting of a voltage adder, followed by a squarer that provides 
the desired product. Two sets of circuits are used to add the input voltages, one in 
phase and the other in counter phase.  

 
Active FET Applications 
799 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.52   Functional block diagram of a CMOS multiplier. 
 
 
An adder can be obtained by implementing a cascode topology with a 
current to voltage converter.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.53  Simplified CMOS adder circuit. 
 
The output voltage of the circuit is a function of the following voltage 
relations: 
 
1
1
1
D
DD
DQ
I
R
V
V


 
 
 
        
     (11.23) 
3
1
GS
DQ
out
V
V
V


 
 
        
 
     (11.24) 
 
The currents in Q1 and Q2 are given, respectively, by: 
 
2
1
1
1
)
(
TH
D
V
V
I


  
  
 
 
     (11.25) 
2
2
2
2
)
(
TH
D
V
V
I


 
 
 
 
     (11.26) 
 
Vout 
VDD 
Q3 
Q2 
Q1 
R
V1 
V2 

800 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The current in device Q3 is the same as the current in device Q2, 
therefore, assuming devices Q1 and Q2 have same area, and solving for ID1 = ID2:  
 




TH
TH
TH
TH
GS
V
V
V
V
V
V
V






2
2
1
2
2
2
1
3




   
     (11.27) 
 
The output voltage is given by: 
 
3
2
1
1
1
)
(
GS
TH
DD
out
V
V
V
R
V
V





  
        
     (11.28) 
 


TH
TH
TH
DD
out
V
V
V
V
V
R
V
V






2
2
1
2
1
1
1
)
(



         
     (11.29) 


TH
TH
TH
TH
DD
out
V
V
V
V
V
V
R
V
V
V







2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
)
2
(



   (11.30) 


2
1
2
1
V
V
V
V
K
out





   
 
   
       
     (11.31) 
 
With  
TH
TH
TH
DD
K
V
V
R
V
V
V
2
1
2
1
1







  
 
 
     
 
Therefore the circuit of Figure 11.54 acts as an adder plus a constant 
term. In order to eliminate the constants, the circuit was inserted into a differential 
topology, and the output voltage now is given by: 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
1
2
4
3
2
1
2
4
1
3
2
1
GS
GS
GS
GS
GS
GS
GS
GS
o
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V












 
)
(
2
1
2
1
V
V
Vo




 
 
 
 
 
     (11.32) 
 
The next function is to obtain a circuit capable of generating the square 
of two input voltages. To implement this function, two MOS transistors with 
source and drain tied together are used as in Figure 11.55(a). In normal operation 
the currents at the drain cancels out due to the differential of two equal voltages. 
However, if the device is biased in the saturation region the currents can provide 
the multiplication function as will be demonstrated.  
 

 
Active FET Applications 
801 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.54   Full differential CMOS adder. 
 
For this circuit the following voltage equations are valid: 
 
0
1



S
GS
a
V
V
V
 
 
       
       
     (11.33) 
0
2



S
GS
b
V
V
V
 
 
 
 
     (11.34) 
)
(
2
1
0
I
I
R
V
V
DD
OUT



  
 
       
     (11.35) 






2
2
2
1
3
2
1
)
(
T
GS
T
GS
V
V
V
V
I
I






 
      
     (11.36) 
 
VS, is the voltage at the source connection of both devices. Developing 
(11.36) the sum of current is shown to be defined by (11.37), with Vi = VGS2 - 
VGS1.  
 





T
GS
T
GS
i
V
V
V
V
V
I
I





1
2
2
3
2
1
)
(
2
)
(

 
        
     (11.37) 
 





T
GS
T
GS
i
DD
OUT
V
V
V
V
V
R
V
V





1
2
2
3
0
)
(
2

         
     (11.38) 
 
2
3
0
Vi
R
V
V
DC
OUT



 
 
 
 
      
     (11.39) 
 
With 
 
2
3
0
)
(
2
T
GS
DD
DC
V
V
R
V
V




  and   
GS
GS
GS
V
V
V


2
1
is a DC term  
 

802 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (a)  
 
 
 
     (b) 
 
Figure 11.55   Simplified squarer circuits. (a) Single ended squarer. b) Differential squarer. 
 
 
 
The DC terms can be eliminated by the use of a differential 
configuration. The output voltage is then expressed as: 
 


2
2
3
0
Y
X
OD
V
V
R
V



  
 
 
 
     (11.40) 
 
With those basic functions the full four quadrant multiplier can be 
assembled as shown in Figure 11.56. The desired multiplied output voltage, V0 is 
finally given by (11.41). 
 
2
1
0
2
1
3
V
V
R
VO




 
 
 
 
      
     (11.41) 
 
 
Figure 11.56  Full IC CMOS multiplier. 

 
Active FET Applications 
803 
The drawback of the NMOS multiplier is a reduced dynamic range 
compared with the bipolar option. This is due to a series of limitations in each of 
the voltages, in particular:  
 
)
(
2
max
T
S
i
V
V
V


 
 
 
 
     (11.42) 
 
 
11.3.2.5 MOS Micromixer 
 
A FET version of the micromixer was addressed in [30], with additional 
improvements. The schematic of the FET IC is in Figure 11.57, showing two main 
parts, the active RF balun and active doubly-balanced mixer. The active balun is 
similar to the bipolar version, where a common RF input applies signal to a 
common source and a common gate amplifier simultaneously. The main 
difference here is the replacement of the current mirror by a high inductance at the 
source of the common gate device. Elimination of the current mirror requires an 
additional biasing circuit represented by “bias circuit 6” in the figure. The 
common gate voltage gain is equal to gmRL and the common source gain is 
adjusted to be the same through the feedback resistor.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.57  Schematic of a FET version of the micromixer.  

804 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
The load impedance is the composite of the impedance of the amplifier 
output matching circuitry and the mixer input. In this invention, enhancement 
mode FET (EFET), technology was used at the RF stage for its higher gm and no 
need for a negative gate voltage supply. LC elements are used in the drain to 
impedance match between the mixer and amplifier, thereby increasing conversion 
gain. The resistor 28 in the circuit balances the gain and phase response of both 
amplifiers. The active mixer uses depletion mode devices (DFET). The RF 
amplifier acts as a voltage to current converter and a biasing element. Current 
mirrors are used to bias the devices so that they can track bias over temperature 
and process variations. The FET devices present a low impedance (1/gm) to the RF 
signals, resulting in good linearity performance. The LO buffer provides a 
constant voltage drive for a wide range of LO input power. The tank circuits are 
tuned at the LO frequency (1.65 GHz in this case) and help reject out of band 
noise from adding through the conversion process. The tank circuits in parallel 
with the differential output reject the second harmonic. 
 
 
11.3.2.6 MOS Image Reject Mixer 
 
The application of 0.2 µm gate length in MOS technology to the realization of an 
image reject mixer is found in this invention, [31]. The conventional block 
diagram for an image reject mixer is given in Figure 11.58. The proposal 
considers designing both mixers and LO phase shifter on a single die, and the 
additional IF components are on a PCB. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.58  Conventional topology of an image reject mixer. 
 
The level of image rejection is a function of accuracy in the amplitude 
and phase balancing of the vectors constituting the output IF signal from each 
mixer. A metric for this degradation, given by (11.43) obtained from reference 
[31], specifies the parameter image rejection ratio (IRR), based on the amplitude 

 
Active FET Applications 
805 
and phase imbalance of the IF signals. If the two mixers have an error of 2% in the 
amplitude or about 2 error in the phase, the image rejection ratio is approximately 
40 dB; these are unbalance levels that can reasonably occur in Gilbert type of 
mixers.  



















2
2
4
1
IF
IF
IF
A
A
IRR

 
 
 
 
     (11.43) 
 
A possible circuit implementation of an IRM to improve IRR is shown in 
Figure 11.59, where two Gilbert MOS-cells have been paralleled on the same die, 
with differential application of RF signal and differential quadrature application of 
LO. The LO-I on the left represents the in-phase differential LO input, and the 
LO-Q represents the same for quadrature LO. There are two IF signals available at 
the output, the IF-I in phase and the IF-Q in quadrature, which are shifted by 90 
and added at the output.  
 
Figure 11.59  Gilbert type image reject mixer. 
 
In addition to the parallel connection, a single differential RF amplifier 
was used to drive the parallel set of quad switches, so that gain differences 
between amplifiers are minimized. On the other hand the IF becomes more 
sensitive to LO phase errors, originated by the dependency of phase on bias 
voltages. The IF phase error related to LO phase error in the circuit, obtained from 
HSPICE simulation is illustrated in Figure 11.60. The plot was obtained for a 
device technology with a gate length of Lg = 0.2 µm. For a threshold voltage of 
0.3 volts, a minimum error in IF phase and LO phase is obtained. The authors 
proposed to isolate the DC between both circuits using a pair of decoupling 

806 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
capacitors, C, so the bias for the RF amplifier and mixer cells can be adjusted 
independently to optimize IRR. The purpose of the LC circuit connecting the 
differential amplifier sources to ground is to present high impedance to the RF and 
LO signals and a short circuit at DC. The tank circuit could be replaced by high 
inductance, but the tank circuit requires lower inductance implying a smaller 
circuit area. The impedances connected at the drains of RF amplifier, ZL1 and 
mixers cells, ZL2 are both used to pass DC and isolate the signals from the rail.    
 
 
Figure 11.60  IF phase error normalized by LO phase error as a function of LO DC bias. 
 
The invention requires differential quadrature LO signals for driving the 
mixers, which are not shown in Figure 11.59. They can be obtained from 
polyphase filters described in Chapter 8 or be generated actively by simple 
differential amplifier circuits as shown in Figure 11.61(a).  
 
 
               
 
                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
Figure 11.61  Proposed active balun. (a) Schematic. (b) Dependency on ratio K. 
 
 
The authors showed the size of device M3 relative to M1 or M2 
contributes to the improvement of phase balance, illustrated in the plot of Figure 

 
Active FET Applications 
807 
11.61(b). The best performance obtained for a k = 2.2 expressed in terms of the 
ratio (Vout1+Vout2)/Vout1 is 2%. The performance is limited by losses in the tank 
circuit that affect the signal balancing. 
 
 
11.3.2.7  MOS Low Flicker Noise 
 
The objective of this invention, [32], is to modify the Gilbert cell mixer to reduce 
flicker noise in direct conversion receivers. The proposed principle is to minimize 
the circulation of DC current through the ring mixer itself, which is detailed using 
the schematic of Figure 11.62. In this figure, transistors T2 and T3 and the cell 
containing the quad T6 to T9 can be identified as the Gilbert cell. The devices T2, 
T3 are voltage to current converters acting as amplifiers for the RF voltage. The 
LO and the counter-phase LOX are applied to the control gate of the mixing FETs. 
During operation there is a common mode DC level at the input, between the 
terminals 10, 11 to ground and at the output 13, 14 there is also another common 
mode DC level. The common mode DC levels are sensed at the input by resistors 
R3, R4 and at the output by resistors R7, R8. Those voltage levels are compared and 
fed into the current sources T4, T5. By proper adjustment of the circuit parameters, 
the difference between the input DC level and output DC level is approximately 
zero, so that there is no common mode current flowing into the mixer cell.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.62  Schematic of flicker noise cancellation circuit. 
 
 
This reduction of the common mode currents, leads to a large reduction 
of the flicker noise without degrading the converter linearity. In spite of the bias 
applied to the quad it operates in near resistive mode. Additionally, the circuit 
Ib 
T1 
RF 
CM - ctrl 
T2 
T3 
T4 
T5 
T6 
T7 
T8 
T9 
T12 
T13 
T10 
T11 
21 
23 
13 
51 
R3 R4 
IF 
LOX 
LO 
14 
61 
R7 
R8 
R1 
R2 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
R5 
R6 
C5 
10 
11 
Vb2 
Vb2 
VDD 
VDD 

808 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
includes capacitors C3, C4 that suppress the generated upper sidebands. The output 
signals are delivered to an output amplifier T10, T12 and T11, T13. The output 
current is converted to voltage by means of resistors R5, R6. 
 
 
11.3.2.8   MOS Linearized gm 
 
An alternative to improve the distortion of RF amplifiers in Gilbert cells was 
proposed in [33]. The schematic of the invention is in Figure 11.63, where it is 
observed to be a modified RF amplifier.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.63  Linearized RF amplifier/mixer. 
 
The invention introduces a compensated input trans-conductor stage 
(cascode stage), consisting of two stages in parallel, one biased in the saturation 
region and the other in the triode region. The cascode 160, 170 are in parallel with 
166, 172 for the left part and similarly 162, 176 in parallel with 174, 168. The 
opposite gain characteristics of the first and second transconductor cancel each 
other providing a flat response and improving overall linearity of the 
transconductor stage. The sources of transistors 160, 162, 166, 168 are connected 
to ground. The linearization is best explained by Figure 11.64. The authors 
verified the gm for the transistors operating in saturation behaves in the manner 
shown in Figure 11.64(a). The device gm increases with gate voltage peaking at a 
specific gate voltage and shows a slight decrease when VGS = 0 V. The gm for the 
device operating in the triode region, depicted in Figure 11.64(b), increases with 
gm and peaks at VGS = 0V. Therefore, the saturated device shows gain expansion 
R3 
IF 
+
-
-
+
R2 
R1 
Iref  
VA  
VB  
VG  
210  
+VG 
160 
+VG 
166 
168 
174 
176 
172 
170 
LO  
+VA 
+VB 
162 
RF 

 
Active FET Applications 
809 
and the device in the triode region shows gain compression for a signal 
differentially applied. Since those devices are paralleled, the combined gain of 
both transistors forms a substantially flat gain response shown in Figure 11.64(c).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)  
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
  
       (c)  
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
Figure 11.64   Transconductance for (a) linear, (b) triode and (c) combined FET circuit 
 
 
As the differential input signal increases beyond the limit of linear 
amplification, VLin in Figure 11.64(a), the input transistor on one side of the triode 
pair ceases to be in the triode region and enters the saturation region. When this 
happens, the transconductance of the triode pair, which is in saturation, decreases 
as the absolute value of VLin increases. In other words, the transconductance 
characteristic of the triode pair becomes compressive. The combined 
compensation takes place within VGS = VLin and VGS = 0 V.  
 
The single cascode configuration of Figure 11.64(d), can be used to 
define the limits of operation of the compensated transconductor.  As long as the 
bottom device is in saturation (VD > VG-VT), the transconductance increases with 
VG. This is demonstrated by means of the equations below. The current at 
saturation is defined by the equation: 
 
2
1
)
(
2
T
G
D
V
V
K
I


    
 
 
 
 
     (11.44) 







L
W
C
K
ox

1
    
 
 
 
 
     (11.45) 
 

810 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Therefore, gm = K1(VG – VT) and increases proportionally to VG. On the 
other hand when M1 enters the triode region (VD < VG-VT), the trans-conductance 
decreases as a function of VG. The current equation is (11.46) and the 
transconductance is in (11.47). 
 
]
2
)
[(
2
2
D
D
T
G
D
V
V
V
V
K
I



       
 
  
     (11.46) 
 
G
D
D
T
G
G
D
D
D
m
V
V
V
V
V
K
V
dV
dV
dI
g


]
[
2




                  
     (11.47) 
 
Since 
0
)
(



D
T
G
V
V
V
 and 
0

G
D
V
V


, then gm is inversely proportional 
to VG. The cross over point occurs when VD = VG-VT. At that point one can equate 
both currents. Replacing the gate voltage by VB from figure:   
 
2
1
2
2
)
(
2
)
(
2
T
G
T
D
B
V
V
K
V
V
V
K




    
 
 
    (11.48) 
 
The external applied voltage at the initial bias is VG0 = VG and the linear 
input range is given by: VLin = VG0 -VG. Working the equations one can find the 
input linear range voltage, VLin, which is given by the equation: 
 
const
aV
K
K
K
K
IR
K
K
V
V
V
Dsat
T
G
Lin







1
2
1
2
1
2
0
1
1
              
   (11.49) 
 
Therefore, the linear input range is proportional to VDsat for the M1 device 
plus a constant. The proportionality constant "a" is a function of the relative size 
of M1, M2 and the second constant is a function of device size ratio and the 
voltage developed on the bias circuit resistor. The combined transconductance is 
kept constant if the VDsat is constant. To guarantee transistor 160 operates in the 
saturation region the following condition should be met: 
 
160
_
160
_
160
_
T
GS
DS
V
V
V


 
 
160
_
170
_
T
G
DS
A
V
V
V
V



 

 
Active FET Applications 
811 
160
_
170
_
T
DS
G
A
V
V
V
V



 
 
160
_
170
_
3
2
)
(
T
DS
ref
V
V
R
R
I



 
 
        
     (11.50) 
 
and,  
166
_
172
_
T
DS
G
B
V
V
V
V



 
166
_
172
_
2
T
DS
ref
V
V
R
I


 
 
 
 
     (11.51) 
 
 
11.3.2.9  MOS Multiswitch 
 
A modified Gilbert cell mixer, targeting a high IP2, for direct conversion 
applications, was disclosed in 1995, [34]. Among the specifications for this type 
of receiver are a low I-Q mismatch and high IIP2. The first specification relates to 
how much the vectors deviate from quadrature and the second is the sensitivity to 
second harmonic. The spurious products from second harmonic signals fall 
adjacent to the base band during conversion. Additional problems caused by the 
second harmonic include the self mixing, created by leakage of LO to the RF port 
or vice versa, generating an interfering time-variable DC component. Therefore 
the second order inter-modulation level in direct conversion is more important 
than the third order.  
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.65   Example of a single balanced version of the mixer. 
 
In the configuration depicted in Figure 11.65, the two pairs of switches 
on the left are driven by two LO signals in quadrature. Similarly, the two pairs on 

812 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
the right are driven by an additional LO pair in quadrature with respect to each 
other and shifted 180 relative to the first LO pair as indicated in the figure. The 
converted I+ and Q+ signals are added at the drain on the left and I- and Q- are 
added at drain on the right. Since I and Q are orthogonal they do not interfere with 
each other. The first improvement is the fact that fundamental I, Q signals are in 
counter phase and second harmonics are generated in phase. When passing 
through a wide band balun, the fundamental is enhanced and the second harmonic 
is rejected, improving mixer IIP2.  Paralleling two singly balanced mixers and 
employing eight LO signal sources, a doubly balanced I-Q mixer is obtained per 
Figure 11.66. The odd signals generated by the switches S1, S3, S5 and S7 are 
grouped together, as are the even ones generated by the switches S2, S4, S6 and 
S8. The resistors R1 and R2 are the I+, Q+, and I-, Q- loads, respectively. The RF 
amplifier is differential, composed of transistors QN5_1 and QN5_2, which also 
are current sources for the mixing switches.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.66   Doubly balanced I-Q mixer. 
 
 
11.3.2.10  MOS CMOS Modulator 
 
A simple mixer capable of operating at low power, low bias is the object of this 
invention, [35]. The basic operation is explained by means of Figure 11.67, 
displaying a complimentary MOS arrangement with N- and P-channel devices 
(CMOS) and a N-channel active load. A first look at this schematic reveals it is a 
cascode type where RF signal is applied to the CMOS devices and the LO is 
applied to the top NMOS source follower. Due to the complimentary connection 
of P, N devices they operate as a class AB trans-conductor. The total 

 
Active FET Applications 
813 
transconductance is obtained from the derivative of current with respect to voltage 
and is defined in (11.53). It shows the inventor’s choice was to bias Vin at Vdda/2.  
 
 


2
th
gs
dst
V
V
k
I


   
 
 
 
          
    (11.52) 
 
)
2
(
2
th
dda
mn
mp
m
V
V
K
g
g
G




           
 
       
    (11.53) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.67  Basic proposed mixer topology. 
 
 
The voltage applied to the gate of source follower also sums up to the 
Vdda voltage, so the total transconductance is modified as follows: 
 
 
)
2
(
2
T
d
dda
m
V
V
V
K
G



     
 
 
                   (11.54) 
 
 
The output current is given by (11.55), as a multiplication of Gm as a 
function of LO voltage expressed in terms of Vd, and the input voltage Vin. The 
desired multiplication property of Vin and Vd voltages is in (11.56).  
 
)
2
(
2
T
d
dda
in
in
m
out
V
V
V
KV
V
G
I




                     
       
    (11.55) 
 
d
in
in
m
out
V
KV
V
G
I


     
 
 
 
 
    (11.56) 
 
A differential version of the mixer is shown in Figure 11.68, where gate 
bias is applied by means of resistor R1 and R2, from a charge pump bias control, 
and the signals are coupled to the circuit by means of capacitors C1 and C2.  
 

814 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.68   Differential version of proposed mixer. 
 
The output current expressed in terms of the differential gain modulated 
by applied voltage Vd, is in Figure 11.69. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.69   Gain modulation property. 
 
 
11.4 SUBHARMONIC APPROACH 
 
Subharmonic mixers using the Gilbert topology and built with FETs are classified 
similarly to those built with bipolars: QLT where the quad LO is applied to the 
core cell that is stacked on top of a differential RF amplifier, and DRT where the 
differential RF amplifier is stacked on top of the core cell.  
 
 
QLT.-The first type, [36], is represented in the figure where the core cell 
is similar to a quad ring where each device has been replaced by a parallel 

 
Active FET Applications 
815 
combination of two FETs. The RF amplifier at the bottom is a modified cascode 
type amplifier where bias is applied to the joining of drain source terminals by 
means of a LC filter circuit. Besides bias insertion, this filter is a trap for LO 
improving the switching and at the same time the L - R isolation. With higher 
isolation the self mixing common in this type of mixer is minimized. This is called 
an LC folded amplifier, with the goal of a low voltage bias supply, in this case 
1.5V.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.70  Subharmonic with quad LO on top. From [36]. 
 
 
The results of this work are in Figures 11.71 and 11.72. In the first figure, 
the conversion loss and noise figure is represented as a function of LO power. The 
plots were obtained at an RF frequency of 5.2 GHz and an IF of 20 MHz. One of 
the issues in direct conversion receivers is the conversion of various type of noise 
into base band, in particular the one resulting from self-mixing is represented in 
the second figure.  
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.71  QLT Conversion gain and noise figure versus LO power. From [36]. 

816 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
                   In this work the authors claim a noise power of -110.7 dBm that is 
below kT (thermal), which allows the baseband lower cut off frequency to extend 
below 1 MHz with a reasonable noise figure.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.72  QLT base band noise figure for two conditions: STD - standard CMOS process; ICP - 
CMOS compatible process where silicon is selectively removed underneath spirals and 
transformers. From [36]. 
 
 
 
DRT - In the second type of differential subharmonic mixer, DRT, the RF 
and LO ports of a conventional mixer are interchanged, so that RF is applied to 
the top and LO at the bottom. The LO switches at the bottom are frequency 
multipliers that generate second harmonic and reject the LO fundamental.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.73  Subharmonic with RF applied to top quad. After [37]. 
LO 270  
LO 90  
LO 180  
LO 0  
M7   
M8   
M6   
M5   
M4   
M3   
M2   
rd   
rd   
rd   
rd   
+VDD   
M1   
IF 
+ 
RC   
-
-  
RF   
+

 
Active FET Applications 
817 
 
 
The circuit from [37], was built on a 0.18 µm CMOS process and 
achieved 8 dB conversion gain and -8.5 dBm IIP3 when converting a RF input at 1 
GHz to an IF at 100 MHz. To improve linearity in the quad, degeneration resistors 
were added to the source, with a penalty to the noise figure. This basic X2 mixer 
was extended by the authors to form a X4 mixer, where the multiplier is 
represented in Figure 11.74, [38]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.74   A times four multiplier circuit. After [38]. 
 
 
 
Approximating the device model for a linear ID/VG relationship for a 
short channel device, the authors made the analysis in two steps: first analyze a 
frequency doubler, then analyze the output of the first doubler applied to the 
second doubler. This process is detailed in Figure 11.75 where the bold trace 
represents the X2 generation. By superimposing this signal with another shifted in 
phase by 90, it is seen that the final waveform has a high X4 content.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.75   Waveform for X4 construction from fundamental. From [38]. 
 
 
In analytical terms the two initial sets of doubled currents are given by 
(11.57), (11.58) valid for a conduction angle between 0 and 180. Within the 
addition 180 to 360 the output current is zero. Therefore, each current contains a 
second harmonic term.  The coefficient A is the magnitude of the applied 
iT1  
 0 
 90 
 180  
 270  
L 
iT1  
L 
 0 
 90 
 180 
 270  

818 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
fundamental signal. Adding both currents in quadrature, the resulting magnitude is 
given by (11.59), which can be approximated by a Taylor series. Disregarding 
terms higher than the first, the output current is approximately given by (11.60). 
Notice the argument t actually contains second harmonic due to active current 
rectification. The fourth harmonic is therefore contained in the output current iT1. 
Inductor L connects the drain to the positive supply is to increase the magnitude of 
the multiplied signal, improving conversion efficiency. 
 
 
t
A
WE
C
i
sat
ox
n


cos
2
1
180
,0

   
 
 
 
     (11.57) 
 








2
cos
2
1
270
,
90



t
A
WE
C
i
sat
ox
n
  
 
 
     (11.58) 
 

t
t
A
WE
C
i
sat
ox
n
T



sin
cos
2
1


 
 
 
1
2
sin
sin
cos



t
t
t



 
 
 
 
    (11.59) 
 
 






0
24
)!
)(
2
1(
)!
2
(
)1
(
1
n
n
n
x
n
n
n
x
 
 
 








)
2
sin(
2
1
16
15
2
1
1
t
A
WE
C
i
sat
ox
n
T


  
     
 
    (11.60) 
 
 
  An alternative compact subharmonic mixer, [39], uses the triple level 
structure represented in Figure 11.76 in two versions, singly balanced and doubly 
balanced. The key of this contribution is the application of 4 FET switches in a 
ring topology with LO properly phased. It can be demonstrated that the 
differential output voltage is expressed by the following frequency components: 
 
...
2
cos
3
cos
3
cos
2
cos
cos
cos
4
3
2
1





t
t
k
t
k
t
t
k
t
k
V
LO
RF
LO
LO
RF
RF
BB






   (11.61) 
 
 
The term associated with k2 will perform the down converting function 
and there is no odd mixing conversion. The output contains high order frequency 
components that are filtered by conventional low pass filters. The published 
results give a conversion gain of 11.6 dB and noise figure of 12 dB for an RF 
signal at 2 GHz. For direct conversion applications this design achieved +40 dBm 
IIP2 when the gm mismatch between the devices is lower than 1%.  The DC offset 
cancellation performance due to self mixing is quantified by (11.62), where GRF is 
the conversion gain when input is at RF port, and GLO is the conversion gain when 
the input is at the LO port. 
 

 
Active FET Applications 
819 
 
LO
RF
ellation
offsetcanc
G
G
DC

  
 
 
 
 
     (11.62) 
 
 
The results contained in the reference are: GRF = 11.6 dB, LO self mixing 
= -77.07 dB therefore, DC offset cancellation is equal to 86.67 dB, obtained when 
the FET gm mismatch is about 1%. 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Singly balanced SHM.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
(b) Doubly balanced SHM. 
Figure 11.76  Triple level subharmonic mixers in singly and doubly balanced configurations. After 
[39]. 
 
 
  
+BB 
-BB 
LO90 
LO0 
RF+ 
LO180 
LO90 
LO0 
RF- 
LO270 
LO90 
LO0 
Vb 
RF+ 
RF- 
LO270 
LO180 
LO90 
LO0 
+BB 
-BB 
LO270 
LO0 
LO90 
LO180 
LO270 
LO0 

820 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
11.5  SELF-OSCILLATING FET MIXER 
 
The design of a circuit to perform this function requires trading off the objectives 
for a mixer circuit with that of an oscillator circuit. The final circuit is expected to 
give inferior performance compared to the classical solution of independent 
functions. For example, self-oscillating mixers suffer from higher cross 
modulation interference and degraded inter-modulation characteristics. In addition 
conversion loss/gain is inferior since energy is required to maintain the circuit 
under oscillation. However, from the point of view of cost, self-oscillating mixers, 
compared to separate mixer and LO, are simpler and can be implemented by a 
single active device, and thus are lower in cost.  
 
 
11.5.1  Single Ended-Gate MESFET 
 
A patent where Autodyne was used to denote a self-oscillating mixer was filed in 
1970 [40], employing a dual gate JFET device. This device type allowed the 
design of FET oscillating mixers with lower harmonics compared to bipolars. The 
design of self oscillating mixers became practical with the use of a high “Q” 
dielectric resonator coupled to a FET device to generate stable and low phase 
noise oscillations at low cost. The performance obtained was sufficient to meet the 
requirements of many microwave systems, and in particular this approach became 
popular in TVRO applications. The circuit of Figure 11.77, [41], illustrates a FET 
with a common source (or common gate) connection and a feedback path between 
output and input ports.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.77   Dielectric resonator self oscillating mixer. 
 
 
The drain termination and the feedback from drain to gate induces a 
negative resistance at the gate port to initiate oscillations. The coupling of a 
dielectric resonator to a microstrip line is equivalent to a parallel RLC circuit in 
series with the line, imposing an open circuit at the resonating frequency. At all 
other frequencies it is ideally terminated into 50 ohms, resulting in a very stable 
oscillator. The coupling point is located at the closest point between the resonator 
and the line. By appropriately selecting the distance of the dielectric resonator 
from the FET port, the phase of the open circuit is adjusted to meet the oscillation 

 
Active FET Applications 
821 
conditions at the desired frequency. The high Q of the dielectric resonator causes 
the LO to be isolated from the RF input, but allows the RF input to pass to the 
gate.   The higher the Q, the lower the leakage of LO into the RF input port. 
Employing the FET in common source configuration is very convenient since the 
DC power (heat) generated in the device is easily dissipated through the ground 
connection.  
 
 
11.5.2  Balanced FET 
 
The integration of the LO and a singly balanced FET mixer while increasing 
bandwidth is the subject of the circuit [42] shown in the figure.  Figure 11.78(a), 
represents a conventional singly balanced FET mixer, with a LO balun 
transformer to feed the gates differentially and an RF balun transformer to feed 
the drains differentially. The IF signal is extracted from the center tap of the drain 
balun transformer. The FET switches mix the RF and LO signals and deliver the 
difference frequency to the output. A self-oscillating mixer is obtained by 
inserting a LO circuit in place of the LO balun, and merging the terminal 
impedances. Since the inputs to the mixer are in counter phase it is more efficient 
to insert a differential oscillator.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.78   Conventional singly balanced FET mixer. 
 
 
The design starts with a single ended LO, similar to the one represented 
in Figure 11.79. It is essentially a Colpitts topology with the capacitive divider 
formed by the source capacitor and internal Cgs capacitance to  create a negative 
resistance at the gate. The condition of oscillation must be met at the joining point 
of the varactor tank circuit and negative resistance circuit; that is: 
 
 
 
Real(ZT) + Real(ZR) < 0 
 
 
 
     (11.63) 
Imag(ZT) + Imag(ZR) = 0  
 
 
     (11.64) 

822 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Besides the oscillation conditions it is desirable to have a negative 
resistance expressed in terms of reflection coefficient in dB on the order of 
dB(T) = 3 to 6 dB. A large signal oscillator design procedure provides 
estimates for both frequency and power. For more information on GaAs oscillator 
design see [43, 44].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.79   Single ended oscillator. 
 
The single ended circuit input is converted into a differential oscillator by 
adding two devices connected by a tank circuit containing tuning varactors as 
represented in Figure 11.80. The circuit now contains two modes of operation, the 
odd mode where the gate voltages due to the left circuit are opposed in phase to 
the gate voltages from the circuit on the right. At the center point those voltages 
add to zero, making that fictitious point a virtual ground. In the even mode of 
operation, these voltages are in phase and add constructively at the center point. 
The conditions for oscillation however are designed for only one mode, say the 
odd mode, where the oscillations are excited. The even mode does not satisfy the 
oscillation condition as its eventual oscillations are quenched after the initial 
transient.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.80   Differential oscillator, varactor tuned. 
 
ZT = -RT + jXT 
ZR = RR - jXR 
Lbias 
CS 
Cb 
RS 
LS 
Lp 
CV 
VV 
Vbias 
V- 
V+ 
CS 
Cb 
RS 
LS 
CS 
RS 
LS 

 
Active FET Applications 
823 
11.5.3 Complimentary FET 
 
Complimentary MOSFET devices were also applied to a self-oscillating mixer. 
The example found in [45], targeted operation at frequencies where the FET 
capacitances are low so that the gate shows a high impedance. In such conditions 
tank circuits can be attached to the gate without degrading their Q-factors. The N-
channel FET is operated as an oscillator, at frequency fLO, with drain-gate 
feedback given by the resonant circuit, L2, C2. The RF signal is applied through a 
tuned transformer L1 and capacitor C1 tuned at frequency fRF to the gate of an N-
channel FET that acts as a low noise amplifier.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.81  Self-oscillating MOSFET mixer. 
 
The oscillations generated by the N-channel device, modulate its drain 
current and the P-channel device current as well since they are in series. The LO 
voltage at point A is heavily distorted since the channel impedance of a saturated 
device is high. The amplified RF voltage at point A is therefore switched by the 
developed LO voltage. In this peculiar circuit, part of the oscillation voltage is 
applied to the gate of P-channel device through the connecting impedance L4, 
making this device a gate mixer. Therefore there is more than one mixing mode in 
this circuit. A tuned transformer is used to extract the fIF signal and deliver it to a 
load. 
 
 
11.5.4   SOM DGFET MOSFET 
 
One can think of a dual gate configuration as appropriate for frequencies where 
gain is not enough to sustain oscillations. Also, one of the ports can be used to 
apply feedback to generate the oscillator function, or an additional port where the 
down converted signal can be fed back to improve linearity. A general topology 
for such mixers is in Figure 11.82 [46] developed for TV receivers, which 

824 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
confirms the higher linearity of FETs compared with BJTs used for this function. 
It shows an RF input terminal, TRF, which is isolated from the oscillator function 
though inter-gate capacitances. The oscillating signal at the drain is reactively 
divided by C10 and CE10, and fed back to the gate by means of inductance LE2. The 
oscillation is determined by the PI-type of circuit, CE10, CE20, LE2, and C5. A low 
impedance, C5, is applied to the drain to improve conversion efficiency without 
shutting down the oscillator. It is also part of another PI-filter designed to extract 
the IF signal and reject all high frequency signals. Determination of the elements 
that guarantee stable oscillation can be done using standard oscillator design 
procedures, for instance found in [43, 44]. The former uses simple empirical 
equations to estimate saturated power and simple models to estimate the currents 
and voltages at the FET terminals. Then the elements of a PI- or T-network are 
determined in terms of input and output voltages on the active device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.82   Schematic of a DGFET self-oscillating mixer. 
 
 
The latter reference uses large-signal S-parameters for the FET, and solve 
the network elements that satisfy the oscillation conditions. Additional examples 
of the application of this topology found in the patent, are detailed in Figures 
11.83(a, b). The varactor has been introduced as part of CE10 in the shunt arm of 
the feedback network to control the oscillation frequency. The control voltage is 
applied at T1 and the IF output is taken from TIF. All other elements in the 
schematic are essentially for biasing the FET and the varactor. In the compact 
version, capacitor C5 was absorbed by C E1 and the IF signal is extracted by a 
similar low-pass filter. 
 
 
 

 
Active FET Applications 
825 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Varactor tuned converter 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Compact version 
Figure 11.83   Detailed schematic of DGFET self-oscillating mixer. 
 
 
  
11.5.5 Dual Gate DRO MESFETs 
 
The phrase tetrode FET was initially used for JFET devices having two gates.  
Later with the advent of planar technology, the two gates were photo engraved 
near to each other, and dual gate became the descriptor of preference for this type 
of device. Some useful circuit topologies and performance advantages are 
provided by the dual gate FET, (DGFET), which cannot be realized by other 
devices. As seen in Chapter 3, for DC analysis, dual gates can be treated as a 
cascode of two single gate devices. However, at high frequencies it is difficult to 
explain what happens within the channel when a large signal LO is impressed in 

826 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
any one of the gates and the small signal RF and IF, respectively, are injected and 
extracted. The application of a Dual Gate GaAs MESFET as a singly balanced 
frequency converter using a dielectric resonator was patented in 1987, [47]. Two 
single ended dual gate mixers were combined so that the gates are in counter 
phase and the drains are connected in phase.  
 
 
Figure 11.84   
Dual gate MESFET converter. 
 
The counter phase connection at the gate is obtained by the inductive 
coupling of dielectric resonators, whose magnetic fields are 180 out of phase at 
opposite points.  Therefore, there is no need for an LO balun. In a balanced mixer 
two out of the three signals (RF, LO, IF) must be 180 out of phase, so here either 
the RF or the IF needs to be balanced. In the case of this patent the RF signals are 
applied to both FETs in phase so that the drain circuit must be in counter phase to 
add the resulting IF currents. The drain circuit must also provide an in phase 
connection between the drains, such as a coupling capacitor, canceling the LO at 
the output port. This is a desired feature in down-converter receivers. The RF and 
LO signals are applied at different ports so that RF can be matched for noise while 
LO port can be matched for power, and the L – R isolation is solely determined by 
the device isolation. The inventors proposed manufacturing this topology in two 
substrates, the gate circuit containing the dielectric resonator in alumina substrate, 
and the FET and remaining matching circuits on a GaAs MMIC substrate. 
 
 
11.6 DISTRIBUTED APPLICATIONS 
 
11.6.1   MESFET Gate Mixer 
 
The first application of a distributed topology for the purpose of converting RF 
signals made use of distributed amplifier topology with application of LO and RF 
at the input port by means of a coupler, [48]. A basic theory was laid down in that 

 
Active FET Applications 
827 
work, and the practical application used an alumina substrate and a packaged 
NE710 MESFET device by NEC.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.85   Gate mixer MESFET schematic. After [48]. 
 
 
The schematic shows the circuit contains 5 single MESFETs and the 
output circuit contains a diplexer to absorb high frequency signals into a 50 ohm 
termination, and extract the converted IF by means of a low pass filter. This 
circuit provided 3.5 to 5.0 dB  conversion loss over the 2 to 10 GHz RF band with 
a constant IF of 1.5 GHz. The LO drive was only 6 dBm. It works well for low 
frequency IF, in which case the LO and RF are close and the phase shift of each 
cell in the distribute input line will be approximately the same for LO and RF.  
 
 
 
11.6.2   MESFET Drain Mixer 
 
A simple way to obtain LO to RF isolation is to use a drain mixer with RF applied 
to the gate and LO to the drain. The output line is shared by the RF, LO, and IF, 
with the major issue being simultaneously matching the RF and LO, since the IF 
is lower in frequency.  An example application of this approach is illustrated in 
the next figure, coming from [49]. In this design, four 2X0.15X75 um2 PHEMT 
devices were built using coplanar transmission lines to serve as the gate and drain 
lines. Their dimensions are designed to follow the phase conditions in (11.65). 
The signal is tapped into and out of the lines by means of series connecting lines. 
The gate and drain lines are terminated by a resistor DC decoupled by a capacitor.  
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
IF
drain
RF
gate
LO
drain
f
f
f





    
 
          
    (11.65) 
 
 
 
50  
Exponentially tapered 
microstrip line 
IF 
RF 
LO 
100  
50  
Cp 
Cp 
Cp 
Cp 
Cp 

828 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.86   Drain mixer MESFET schematic. From [49]. 
 
 
The load capacitor must present high impedance to IF frequencies that 
are collected by an external circuit.  The conversion loss of this circuit, depicted in 
in Figure 11.87, for the RF frequency range of 5 to 35 GHz. The applied LO 
power is +15 dBm, and the fixed IF output is at 1 GHz.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.87   Conversion loss for mmWave mixer. From [49]. 
 
 
11.6.3 Dual Gate Mixer 
 
A better solution to isolate the signals LO, RF, and IF is presented in this patent 
[50], where a dual gate solution is employed. Thus, three independent lines are 
available making it easier to fulfill the (11.65) requirement. The patent employs 

 
Active FET Applications 
829 
four dual gate devices operating over the RF band of 14 to 20 GHz, IF band of 2 
to 8 GHz, and a fixed LO frequency at 12 GHz. The input RF signal is applied to a 
gate line and the IF signal is extracted from the drain line. The LO in this 
particular invention is applied in phase to gate 2 of all dual gate devices, as in 
Figure 11.88. During operation, the input signal Vrf is coupled to gates G1a to G4a 
through capacitors C2 to C5. This capacitor along with the intrinsic gate to source 
capacitor forms a reactive voltage divider delivering a selected amplitude and 
phase to Vrf1 to Vrf4, at the gates of FET1 to FET4. The phase shift is related to the 
number of taps (or FETs) on the input traveling wave structure. The LO voltages 
are applied in similar amplitude and phase to the gates G1b to G4b, generating the 
intermediate frequency signals Vif1 to Vif4 at the drain. 
The output signals contain frequency components corresponding to the 
sum (RF + LO), the frequency difference (RF - LO) and inter-modulation 
products of the components (nRF +/- mLO). The output coupling network 
parameters allows propagation of (RF - LO) and blocks the RF, LO, and all other 
mixing products and harmonics.  
The operation of a distributed mixer is similar to an ideal distributed 
amplifier, where the signals add constructively in one direction, for RF > LO, at 
the output terminal 19b and cancel at the reverse direction, terminal 19a. The 
difference in mixers is the presence of negative frequencies that change the output 
compared with positive frequencies. For RF < LO, the signal adds at terminal 
19a and cancels at terminal 19b. The explanation for the discrimination comes 
from the traveling structure property. The transmission lines important to 
describing this effect are T3 - T5 and T8 - T10, providing phase shifts equal to rf 
and if, respectively. In this analysis it is assumed both rf and if have the same 
phase shift equal to 90 at the respective RF and IF frequencies.  
 
Case where RF >   LO  
Let’s assume Vrf1 is referenced at 0 and applied to FET1 where it is 
mixed with LO at the same phase, so Vif1 also has the same phase shift. The Vif1a 
signal appears at 19a with 0 and Vif1b appears at 19b with 3IF (reminder: only T8, 
to T10 are considered). The RF signal Vrf2 is shifted by RF and mixed with LO at 
phase 0. The intermediate signal Vif2a has a phase shift of rf relative to Vif1. The 
signal Vif2a reaches 19a with a phase shift of rf + if = 2 and the signal 
component  Vif2b reaches terminal 19b with a phase equal to rf + 2if = 3. Thus at 
terminal 19a the signals Vif1a and Vif2a are in opposite phase and are cancelled. The 
signals Vif1b and Vif2b are in phase at terminal 19b so that they are combined. The 
same effect happens for the signals Vif3 and Vif4.  
 
 
 
 
 

830 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
rf
shift
IF freq
shift
rf
shift
IF freq
shift
1
LO + IF
0
IF
0
LO - IF
0
IF
0
2
LO + IF

IF

LO - IF

IF

3
LO + IF
2
IF
2
LO - IF
2
IF
2
4
LO + IF
3
IF
3
LO - IF
3
IF
3
RF > LO
RF < LO
FET
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.88  Distributed mixer with in-phase LO. 
 
Case where RF <   LO  
In this case the phase of IF signals is negative, so that for the first signal 
we have 0 for Vif1a at 19a and - 3IF for the Vif1b at terminal 19b. For the second 
FET the Vif2a at terminal 19a is rf - if = 0, which is in phase with Vif1a so they 
add. The phase of Vif2b reaching terminal 19b is rf - 2if = - which is opposed in 
phase to the phase of Vif1b, so they cancel at terminal 19b. The inventors provided 
a table that summarizes the several phases at the IF and translated frequencies. 
 
Table 11.3 
Phases of IF Relative to LO and RF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The details of the construction on a 4 mil thick GaAs substrate are shown 
in Figure 11.89. The gate periphery of each FET is equal to 200 µm. The 
capacitors C2 – C5, and the transmission lines T3 – T5 length and impedances are 
designed to deliver equal amplitude and desired phase at each gate. The lengths 

 
Active FET Applications 
831 
and impedances of T8 – T10 are designed to provide the phase shift estimated 
above for a wide band of frequencies. Note that the output artificial transmission 
line is composed of the folded transmission line TS8 – TS10, which behaves as a 
spiral inductor and shunted by capacitors C8 – C10. They are all calculated to 
provide the IF phase shift provided by Table 11.3. RF input is located at point 13 
on the top right side. The conductor 45 is used to apply bias to gate 1 of each dual 
gate FET through a 2k ohm epi resistor. The termination resistor for the artificial 
transmission line is a thin film resistor. 
The LO circuit is located at the bottom, consisting of transmission lines 
18, which are connected to the second gate. Bias for gate 2 is applied through the 
LO line, not shown in the figure. The IF circuit is also located at the bottom, with 
two outputs, one at each side of the die.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.89   Layout of mixer on GaAs substrate. 
 
 
The distribution of voltage at the gate of each FET at different 
frequencies is in Figure 11.90(a), and the relative differential phase shift between 
succeeding adjacent FETs as a function of frequency is in Figure 11.90(b).  The 
phase difference is expressed as a lag between FETs 2 and 1, by curve 62, FETs 3 
and 2 by curve 64, and FETs 4 and 3 by curve 66.   
 
 
 
 
 

832 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Simulated input voltage for each FET        
(b) Simulated relative phase between the input    
 
 
 
 
 
of adjacent FETs  
Figure 11.90   Voltage and phase distributions versus frequency. 
 
 
The IF responses are shown in Figure 11.91, where line 68 indicates 
signal conversion at port 19b, and line 70 indicating signal rejection at port 19a.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.91   IF signals at output ports. 
 
This performance was obtained by optimizing the values of input line 
capacitance for RF signal frequency higher than the LO frequency. However, the 
input circuit could be optimized for the case of RF frequency lower than the LO 
frequency, and designed for an output signal at terminal 19a and a null at terminal 
19b.  The FET is biased in nonlinear operation to generate the desired mixing 
products. However it also generates the second harmonic of the LO signal, which 
can mix with the incoming RF signal and create the familiar distortion signals at 
(2LO - RF), (2RF - LO), the first one being the image frequency, IM. 
Generation of these signals is undesirable as it increases the conversion loss of the 
mixer.  Assuming the image and the desired signal generated by the mixer have 

 
Active FET Applications 
833 
the same phase and are of negative frequency relative to the main input signal, 
they propagate in reverse direction compared to the main signal. They are 
therefore attenuated at the output port minimizing conversion loss of the mixer 
Additionally, the mixer topology provides substantial cancellation of 
noise introduced into the IF band from the LO generator. In order to explain the 
cancellation, let’s take the spectrum of LO noise in Figure 11.92. The LO 
excitation of each FET is equal in phase and amplitude, so that the down-
converted noise to the IF band from both upper and lower side bands are also 
equal in phase and amplitude. The IF noise voltage component at the IF port is 
denoted by en(fm) where fm is the offset frequency of the noise component from 
the carrier as shown in the figure. All en signals are from same LO, so that the 
components are fully correlated and add algebraically. Taking into consideration 
the phase shift introduced by the IF circuitry, the noise voltage at a corresponding 
offset frequency fm is given at each output port by: 
 





1
)1
(
19
)
(
)
(
n
n
j
m
n
m
a
e
f
e
f
e
 





1
)
(
19
)
(
)
(
n
n
N
j
m
n
m
b
e
f
e
f
e
 
Where N is the number of devices and n=1,2,3,4 is the device order. The 
inventors propose that the noise signal at either 19a or 19b ports are e19a = e19b, 
which provides (11.66) for the noise at either port.  
 
)
2
/
sin(
)
2
/
sin(
)
(
)
(
)
(
2
/)
)
1
(
(
19
19



N
e
f
e
f
e
f
e
N
j
m
m
a
m
b




              (11.66) 
 
This valid for all frequencies around the LO carrier. Complete noise 
cancellation of the frequency noise occurs when  is chosen to satisfy the 
condition  = 2/N for (N>1). In the case of four FETs, N = 4, the required phase 
shift is 90. Therefore, the distributed approach behaves as a balanced mixer 
where down-converted LO noise is suppressed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.92   Noise spectrum of LO voltage. 
 
An alternative embodiment of the distributed mixer proposed by the 
inventors is in Figure 11.93. In this case, instead of feeding the LO in phase at 

834 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
gate 2 of each dual gate device, it is fed with a phase controlled by the 
transmission line elements T12 - T16. Several combinations are possible, and the 
90 phase shift in particular, allows cancellation of LO at the output ports.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.93  Distributed mixer with distributed LO line. 
 
An additional patent on a distributed dual gate mixer was proposed by 
Anthony Pavio, [51], where a resistor was attached to the FET sources for self 
bias operation.  
 
 
11.6.4 Differential CMOS  
 
One of the first applications [52] of a differential core mixer cell embedded into a 
distributed topology, made use of 0.18 µm CMOS technology. The mixer 
employed 5 differential cells to achieve a conversion gain of 3.8 dB over the 3 to 
22 GHz RF band, and dissipated 130 mW using a 1.2 V voltage supply. The 
schematic of the proposed mixer illustrated in Figure 11.94 represents the first and 
last of the 5 cells. The topology consists of 5 lines, the input gate line for the RF 
signal, two gate lines for the balanced LO signal, and two IF lines for the balanced 
IF output signal. The lines are terminated with a load matched to the characteristic 
impedance. 
 
The principle of operation is similar to the dual gate and is easily 
described if one considers lossless lines. The input RF voltage propagates on the 
RF line and is absorbed by the internal termination. At each tap the signal is 
rotated by the RF phase, and is converted to an output IF current, by the 
differential cell switched by the LO voltage.  
 
 
 
T16 
VLO 
T15 
T14 
T13 
T12 
T1 
T2 
T3 
T4 
T5 
T6 
T7 
T8
T9 
T1
T1
R2 
R1 
VLO1 
VLO2 
VLO3 
VLO4 
RG 
RG 
RG 
RG 
VRF 
VIF1 
VIF2 
VIF3 
VIF4 
VRF1 
VRF2 
VRF3 
VRF4 
C1 
VGG 
C2 
C3 
C4 
C5 
VIF1a   
VIF2a   
VIF3a   
VIF4a   
19a 
19a 

 
Active FET Applications 
835 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.94   Differential mixer with coplanar lines. After [53]. 
 
 
 
The output IF current travels in two directions, with positive phase shift 
IF in the direction of load and to the internal termination with reverse phase. If 
the phases obey the relation, IF= LO - RF, then the IF signals add at the external 
load and cancel at the internal termination. Another application of the same mixer 
technology for ultra wide band (UWB) receivers appeared in a paper employing 
two cells and artificial lines built with spiral inductors and parasitic capacitors of 
MOS devices, [53]. The conversion results for an IF of 528 MHz are in Figure 
11.95, for a bias setting of 1.8V and 6 mA. The RF band covered is from 3.0 to 
8.72 GHz and the IF selected at 528 MHz corresponds to a sub-band of an OFDM 
UWB transceiver. Average gain was 3 dB, obtained for an LO power set at 9 
dBm. Additional results are a noise figure of 6.8 to 7.3 dB over a 7.5 GHz wide 
band and an IIP3 of 5 dBm at 5 GHz. If the number of cells increases, then the 
losses in the artificial lines on CMOS technology cannot be neglected. That causes 
increased losses due to un-equal signals at the output ports. Also the losses in the 
LO line results in different power applied to each cell as the signal propagates 
down the line.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
VDD  
Unit cell 
VDD  
IF+  
IF-  
Unit cell 
LO+ 
LO-  
RF 

836 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.95  Conversion gain as a function of RF frequency. From [54]. 
 
 
The analytical treatment for a circuit with n cells becomes complex and 
was addressed in a recent publication, [54]. As reference, Figure 11.96 represents 
the case for n = 4, illustrating the number of spiral inductors required.  One of the 
important equations in this paper is the power conversion gain reproduced in 
(11.67), relating the transmission line impedances at IF, RF, and LO. The 
corresponding gate line and RF line cutoff frequencies are taken into account in 
(11.68). The parameters of LO line in terms of cut-off frequency and attenuation 
constant are similar to the ones from RF line, simply substituting the RF constants 
by LO constants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.96   Differential distributed on 0.18 µm CMOS. From [54]. 
 
 
LO
LO
RF
RF
IF
IF
IF
C
L
C
L
C
L
Z



    
     (11.67) 

 
Active FET Applications 
837 
 
2
/
3
2
2
)
(
2
2
2
11
1
1
1
1
4
1
2























































C
RF
RF
g
RF
n
RF
RF
C
IF
IF
IF
mLO
P
RF
mRF
RF
IF
e
C
L
C
L
g
C
g
p
G









 
     (11.68) 
 
 
Where,  
 
C = cutoff frequency of the delay lines IF, LO, RF if the LC delay lines 
 
         are identical. Otherwise a different cutoff frequency is defined at      
 
         each frequency. 
 
gRF = 1/(rgRFCgsRF), RF transistor input cutoff frequency 
 
dIF = 1/(rdsCds), drain cutoff frequency  
 
RF = input RF frequency 
 
IF = output IF frequency 
 
 



LO
LO
f
f
p
)
sin(
2
11

, is a Fourier coefficient from the time domain  
   
 
          current gain between tail and output of differential pair 
 
  =   interval of time between switching on and off of FETs. 
 
gmLO = instantaneous transconductance of the switching pair 
 
gmRF = small signal transconductance of RF transistor 
 
 


2
2
2
1
1
/
RF
gRF
C
RF
gRF
C
RF
X
X






















, RF attenuation constant of input line 
 
 
 


2
1
/
IF
C
dIF
IF
X





, IF attenuation constant of output line 
 
XRF = RF/C 
 
XIF = IF/C, with IF = 1/(rdsIFCdsIF) 
 
CP = parasitic capacitance from the floating node of the differential  
     
 
        configuration to ground 
 
n  =  number of cells 
 
 
 
 
 

838 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
11.7  SUMMARY 
 
This chapter has provided a series of examples of active FET mixers, starting from 
early designs using JFET technology up to advanced CMOS RF technology.  One 
will notice most of the chapter deals with GaAs technology including: MESFET, 
HEMT and PHEMT since those were the technologies originaly employed in the 
early microwave and mmWave mixer development. RF CMOS was also covered 
reflecting the change in technology trends for active mixers.  However, the 
topologies and ideas developed for a specific FET technology, are equally 
applicable to others since basic FET theory is similar. 
       Most of the popular topologies were covered with a brief summary, which 
will help the reader in developing new ideas and improving the results from 
original work. In certain cases additional analysis relative to the original 
publications were added to improve understanding of concepts. Besides the single 
ended, singly balanced, and doubly balanced topologies, the less well known 
approaches of self-oscillating mixers, subharmonic mixers, and the recent 
advances on distributed mixers were included.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Lawrence W. Fish, Jr., Hudson and Daniel R. von Recklinghausen, “Signal 
Mixing and Conversion Apparatus Employing Field Effect Transistor with Square 
Law Operation,” US Patent 3,348,154, issued October 17, 1967. 
[2] 
Jack K. Kreng and Sanjar Ghaem-Maghami, “Bias Optimized FET Mixer 
for Varactor Tuner,” US Patent 3,976,944, issued August 24, 1976. 
[3] 
Katsuji Kimura, “Receiver Including FET Frequency Mixer,” US Patent 
4,541,122, issued September 10, 1985. 
[4] 
Hiroshi Ohnishi and Sahahiko Yamashita, “Microwave FET Mixer 
Arranged to Receive RF Input at Gate Electrode,” US Patent 4,592,095, issued 
May 27, 1986. 
[5] 
M. Madihian, L. Desclos, K. Maruhashi, K. Onda, and M. Kuzuhara, “A 
Monolithic AlGaAs/InGaAs Upconverter IC for K-Band Wireless Networwks,” 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 12, No. 12, 
December 1995, pp. 2773-2777.  
[6] 
M. Madihian, L. Desclos, K. Maruhashi, K. Onda, and M. Kuzuhara, “60 
GHz Monolithic Down–and Up-Converters Utilizing a Source Injection Concept,”  
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 46, No. 7, 
July 1998, pp. 1003-1006.  
[7] 
A. Benussan, P. Birot, C. Ban K., and J. C. Curtinot, “Transistor Mixer for 
Ultra High Frequency Transmitters,” US Patent 4,490,854, issued December 25, 
1984.  

 
Active FET Applications 
839 
[8] 
Joel D. Kirkeland and Vijay K. Nair, “Frequency Mixing Circuit with 
Impedance Transforming Power Combiner,” US Patent 5,325,000, issued June 28, 
1984. 
[9] 
Lyle A. Fajen and Michael Dydyk, “MMIC FET Mixer and Method,” US 
Patent 5,517,668A, issued May 14, 1996. 
[10] Wayne Kennan, “MMIC Downconverter for a Direct Broadcast Satellite 
Low Noise Block Downconverter,” US Patent 5,649,312, issued July 15, 1997. 
[11] Kai Tuan Yan and Junichi Shibata, “Mixer with Higher Order Inter-
modulation Suppression and Robust Conversion Gain,” US Patent 6,351,632, 
issued February 26, 2002. 
[12] D. An, S. C. Kim, W. S. Sul, H. J. Han, H. S. Lee, W. Y. Uhm, H. M. Park, 
S. D. Kim, D. H. Shin, and J. K. Rhee, “High Conversion Gain V-Band Quadruple 
Sub-harmonic Mixer Using Cascode Structure,” IEEE 2003 MTT International 
Microwave Symposium Digest, pp. 911- 914. 
[13] Donald L. Wollensen, “Integrated Circuit Balanced Mixer Apparatus,” US 
Patent 3,727,078, issued April 1, 1973. 
[14] Merle Vincent Hoover, “Complimentary Symmetry FET Mixer Circuits,” 
US Patent 4,032,851, issued June 28, 1977. 
[15] Duane C. Rabe, “High Gain Balanced Mixer,” US Patent 4,449,245, issued 
May 15, 1984. 
[16] Michael W. Vice, “Quasi-Double Balanced Dual Transformer Dual FET 
Mixer, Which Achieves Better Isolation by Using a First and Second Diplexer, 
and a Transmission line RF Balun,” US Patent 5,732,345, issued March 24, 1998. 
[17] Michael W. Vice, “Quasi-Double Balanced Dual Transformer Dual FET 
Mixer,” US Patent 5,799,248, issued August 25, 1998. 
[18] Tetsuo Hirota and Hiroyo Ogawa, “A Novel K-Band Balanced FET Up-
Converter,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 
MTT-32, No. 7, July 1984, pp. 679-683.   
[19] Wayne Kennan and Edmar Camargo, “Single Balanced Frequency Down-
converter for Direct Broadcast Satellite Transmission and Hybrid Ring Signal 
Combiner,” US Patent 5,903,827, issued May 11, 1999. 
[20] A. Emami, C. H. Doan, A. M. Niknejad and R. W. Brodersen, “A 60-GHz 
Down-Converting CMOS Single-Gate Mixer,” 2005 IEEE RFIC Symposium, pp. 
163-166. 
[21] Tae Wook Kim, “A Common Gate Mixer with Trans-conductance 
Nonlinearity Cancellation,” 8th IEEE International Conference on ASIC, 2009 
ASICON, pp. 459-460. 
[22] P-S Wu, C-H Wang, C-S Lin, K-Y Lin, and Huei Wang, “A Compact 60 
GHz Integrated Up-Converter Using Miniature Transformer Couplers With 5 dB 
Conversion Gain,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Component Letters, Volume 
18, No. 9, September 2008, pp. 641-643.  
[23] Jin-An Hou and Yeong Her Wang, “A Ka Band Balanced Third LO-
Harmonic Mixer Using a Lumped–Elements Quadrature Hybrid,” IEEE 

840 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, Volume 18, No. 6, June 2008, pp. 
404-406. 
[24] Michael W. Vice, “Biased FET Mixer,” US Patent 5,513,390, issued April 
30, 1996. 
[25] Michael W. Vice, “Quasi-Double Balanced Passive Reflection FET 
Mixer,” US Patent 5,799,248, issued August 25, 1998. 
[26] Anthony M. Pavio, Jr. and Scott D. Thompson, “Monolithic Double 
Balanced Single Sideband Modulator,” US Patent 4,768,000, issued August 30, 
1988. 
[27] Yawata Seiji Sakashita, “Frequency Conversion Apparatus,” US Patent 
4,677,692, issued June, 30, 1987. 
[28] Katsuji Kimura, “Frequency Mixer Circuit Using FETs,” US Patent 
5,306,969, issued April 26, 1994. 
[29] Jesus S. Pena-Finol, “Quarter-Square Analog Four–Quadrant Multiplier 
Using MOS Integrated Circuit Technology,” US Patent 4,546,275, issued October 
8, 1985. 
[30] Paul R. Andrys and Philip H. Thompson, “Double Balanced Differential 
Active Mixer with Current Shared Active Input Balun,” US Patent 6,057,714, 
issued May 2, 2000. 
[31] Mamoru Ugajin and Tsuneo Tsukahara, “Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 
6,871,057B2, issued March 22, 2005. 
[32] Werner Schelmbauer and Josef Zipper, “Mixer Arrangement, Use of the 
Mixer Arrangement and Method for Frequency Conversion,” US Patent 
20070,010,228, issued January 11, 2007. 
[33] King Chun Tsai and Lawrence Tse, “Mixer Constant Linear Range Biasing 
Apparatus and Method,” US Patent 7,177,620 B1, issued February 13, 2007. 
[34] Young-Jin Kim, “Mixer Circuit for Direct Conversion Transceiver with 
Improved IP2,” US Patent 20050,170,806, issued August 4, 2005. 
[35] John B. Hughes, “Analogue Mixer,” US Patent 20060,211,397A1, issued 
September 21, 2006. 
[36] H-C Chen, T. Wang and S-S Lu, “A 5.6 GHz 1-V CMOS Direct 
Conversion Receiver with an Integrated Quadruple Coupler,” IEEE Journal of 
Solid-State Circuits, Volume 42, No. 9, September 2007, pp. 1963-1975. 
[37] Brad R. Jackson and Carlos E. Saavedra, “A CMOS Subharmonic Mixer 
with Input and Output Active Baluns,” Microwave and Optical Technology 
Letters, Volume 48, No. 12, December 2006, pp. 2472-2478. 
[38] Brad R. Jackson and Carlos E. Saavedra, “A CMOS Ku-band 4X Sub 
harmonic Mixer,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Volume 43, No. 6, June 
2008, pp. 1351-1359. 
[39] S. J. Fan, S. T. Lee, D. J. Allstot, and A. Bellaouar, “A 2 GHz CMOS Even 
Harmonic Mixer for Direct Conversion Receivers,” ISCAS 2002, IEEE 
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, Volume 4, pp. 807-810. 
[40] D. L. Wollensen, “Crystal Controlled Autodyne Converter using Field 
Effect Transistors,” US Patent 3,510,781, issued May 15, 1970. 

 
Active FET Applications 
841 
[41] Keiko Shinkawa, Hiroji Shoyama, Chuichi Sodeyama, and Mitsuhisa 
Shinagawa, “Self-Oscillating Mixer Circuit,” US Patent 4,219,779, issued August 
26, 1980. 
[42] Rakesk Sharma and Boleslaw M. Sosin, “Mixer,” US Patent 4,977,617, 
issued December 11, 1990. 
[43] Christen Rauscher, “Large-Signal Technique for Designing Single-
Frequency and Voltage-Controlled GaAs FET Oscillators,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-29, No. 4, April 1981, pp. 293-
304.  
[44] Rowan J. Gilmore and Fred J. Rosenbaum, “An Analytic Approach to 
Optimum Oscillator Design Using S-parameters,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume MTT-31, No. 8, August 1983, pp. 
633-639. 
[45] Merle V. Hoover, “Complimentary Symmetry FET Frequency Converter 
Circuits,” US Patent 4,334,324, issued June 8, 1982. 
[46] Hiroshi Miyamoto and Mitsuhisa Shinagawa, “Self Excited Mixer Circuit 
Using Field Effect Transistor,” US Patent 4,112,373, issued September 5, 1978. 
[47] A. M. Pavio and K. J. Anderson, “Single Balanced Self Oscillating Mixer,” 
US Patent 4,658,440, issued April 14, 1987. 
[48] Tang O. S. A and Aitchison, C. S., “A Microwave Distributed MESFET 
Mixer,” 14th European Microwave Conference, 1984, pp. 483-487. 
[49] C-H Chiu, K-H Liang, H-Y Chang, and Y-J Chan, “A 3-34 GHz GaAs 
PHEMT Distributed Mixer with Low DC Power Consumption,” CSIC-Compound 
Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Symposium, 2006, pp. 73-76. 
[50] Yusuke Tajima, Robert A. Pucel, and Ward S. Titus, “Frequency 
Conversion Circuits,” US Patent 4,662,000, issued April 28, 1987. 
[51] Anthony M. Pavi, “Monolithic Distributed Mixer,” US Patent 4,751,744, 
issued June 14, 1988. 
[52] Xisohua Fan and Edgar Sanchez-Sinencio, “3-22 GHz CMOS Distributed 
Single Balanced Mixer,” Proceedings of the IEEE International SOC Conference, 
2004, pp. 93-96.  
[53] P. Heydari, D. Lin, A. Shameli and A. Yazd, “Design of CMOS Distributed 
Circuits for Multiband UWB Wireless Receivers,” 2005 IEEE Radio Frequency 
Integrated Circuits Symposium, pp. 695-698. 
[54] 
A. Q. Safarian, A. Yazdi, and P. Heydari, “Design and Analysis of an 
Ultrawide Band Distributed CMOS Mixer,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large 
Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, Volume 13, No. 5, May 2005, pp. 618-629. 
 

842 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 

843 
Appendix 
Sampling Mixers 
In contrast to fundamental and subharmonic mixers, sampling mixers use high 
order LO harmonics to convert high frequency RF signals down to the IF.  They 
originated as a separate category of mixers for use in microwave instrumentation 
where the emphasis is on down-converting signals over a very wide input 
frequency range, where higher conversion loss and lower dynamic range can be 
tolerated. They are also used extensively in phase locked oscillators as sampling 
phase detectors [1], and recently they have been applied to ultra-wideband (UWB) 
receivers [2].  In addition to higher conversion losses, their pulse shaping and 
frequency conversion circuitry adds complexity and can introduce ringing and 
spurious. So, while sampling mixers use the same heterodyne process as 
conventional mixers for frequency conversion, they have not been widely used in 
communication systems.      
 
Basic sampling theory says that when a signal, f(t), of bandwidth  (Hz) 
is sampled at a rate, fLO, that is greater than or equal to twice the signal bandwidth, 
fLO ≥ 2, the information contained in the original signal is maintained.  This is 
embodied in the uniform sampling theorem, or equally in the Nyquist criterion, [3, 
4].  The output sampled signal, fs(t), is obtained by multiplying the time domain 
input signal, f(t), by the periodic sampling function s(t).  
 
 
)
(
)
(
)
(
t
s
t
f
t
fs

 
 
 
         
         
        (A.1) 
 
 
The sampling function is a series of pulses of duration,, amplitude, K-1, 
and period TLO, as depicted in Figure A.1(a).  The Fourier series of the sampling 
function is in (A.2), which gives the spectrum, S(f), plotted in Figure A.1(b).    
 
 










1
0
2
)
2
cos(
2
)
(
n
LO
n
n
t
nf
j
n
t
nf
c
c
e
c
t
s
LO


 
        (A.2)  
 
 

844 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
Where 
 
)
(
sin

LO
LO
n
nf
c
Kf
c 
,       
x
x
x
c

)
sin(
)
(
sin

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             (a) Time domain, s(t)  
   
 (b) Frequency domain, S(f) 
Figure A.1  
Representation of the switching function. After [3]. 
 
Per (A.1) the output sampled signal equals the input signal multiplied by 
the sampling function in the time domain.  This equates to convolution in the 
frequency domain.   
 
 
)
(
*
)
(
)
(
f
S
f
F
f
Fs

  
 
 
 
        (A.3) 
 
Equation (A.2) shows S(f) comprises a series of discrete frequency 
signals whose amplitude equals the Fourier coefficients.  Convolution of a signal 
with an impulse function produces a replica of the input signal that is shifted in 
frequency.  Thus the output spectrum of the sampled signal is given by (A.4).   
 
 






n
LO
n
s
nf
f
F
c
f
F
)
(
)
(
 
 
 
 
       (A.4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                 (a)   
 
 
          
         (b) 
Figure A.2  
 (a) Input signal spectrum.  (b) Output sampled signal spectrum 
 
 
The output spectrum comprises the original input spectrum, F(f), plus 
copies of it offset by nfLO , n = 1,2,… with  amplitude weighted by the Fourier 
coefficients.  For the case of the sampling mixer, a conversion matrix is involved 
Kτ-1 
-3TLO        -TLO    0    TLO          3TLO   
c3 
c1 
-4fLO        -2fLO           0            2fLO         4fLO 
τ-1 
s(t) 
t 
|S( f )| 
f 
c1 
c2 
c3 
c4 
c0 
τ 
c2 
c4 
•••
•••
fLO = 1/TLO 
-β fc β  
  f-4     f-3       f-2       f-1         fc      f1     f2        f3         f4  
|F( f )| 
f 
|Fs( f )| 
f 
fn = fc + nfLO 

 
Sampling Mixers 
845 
to include effects of varying terminations to the different mixing products, so their 
levels will deviate from the theoretical Fourier coefficients.  Usually the desired 
output signal is the IF centered closest to zero frequency.  And the sampling 
frequency, fLO, is normally much lower than the RF input center frequency, fc, so 
the baseband IF output is obtained by mixing the RF input signal with a high 
harmonic of the LO.  As depicted in Figure A.2(b), the amplitudes of the signal 
replicates generally follow the sinc function profile, resulting in increasing 
conversion loss for higher LO harmonics.  A low pass filter is applied at the 
sampling mixer output to select the baseband IF signal and reject the higher 
frequency products including the RF, LO harmonics, and spurious.   
 
The generation of periodic narrow pulses is normally achieved using 
either a step recovery diode, SRD, combined with a tank circuit, or a nonlinear 
transmission line using a series of varactor diodes.  These mechanisms also 
introduce ringing and distortion that transfer to the down converted signal.  Once 
generated, the pulse width can be further reduced using short circuit transmission 
line stubs to create an inverted wave that causes destructive interference. 
The sampling process can be modeled using the circuit of Figure A.3.  
The pulse drives the switch that gates the RF source.  The circuit comprises a RF 
voltage source, VS, its internal impedance, RS, a switch, and a hold capacitor, Ch. 
When the switch is closed, the capacitor charges to a voltage proportional to VS. 
The switch then opens and the voltage on the capacitor becomes independent of 
the transient effects of RS. While the switch is open (off), the charge on the 
capacitor is applied to the load RL. The charge in the capacitor equates to the 
integrated current, so the capacitor voltage is proportional to the average value of 
the input signal over the sampling aperture time, TS, [5].  The switch is usually 
realized using Schottky diodes in a balanced configuration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.3  
Ideal subharmonic sampling. After [5]. 
 
This process limits the ability of the capacitor to charge to the full value 
of VS depending on the amount of time the switch is closed (on).  If the on time is 
too short, then there is not enough time for the capacitor voltage to reach the 
maximum value.   This loss is called sampling efficiency [5], which is defined by:   
 
Gate 
Vsint 
RS 
Pulse 
Ch 
RL 
Buffer 

846 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
h
s
s
C
R
T
s
e
N


1
 
 
 
 
                       (A.5) 
  
 
 
An intuitive understanding of the sampling mixing principle is depicted 
in Figure A.4, where the top waveform indicates the RF signal to be down-
converted. The LO pulses in the middle waveform are multiplied by the incoming 
signal and the resulting waveform is shown at the bottom constructed from 
sampled points 30, 32, 46, 48, 50, 34, 52, and so on.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.4  
Sampling principle of operation. 
 
 
The bottom waveform is an IF with the same phase as the RF signal, and 
proportional to the RF in amplitude. Its frequency is fIFn = nfLO ± fRF, where nfLO 
represents the LO pulse repetition rate multiplied by the harmonic number n. The 
sampler architecture represented in Figure A.5, combines various functions to 
operate as a mixer, [6]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.5  
Sampling mixer architecture. After [6]. 
 
LO 
IF 
Sampling 
Gate
RF 
Matching 
IF 
Matching 
RF 
Balun
Pulse 
Generator 

 
Sampling Mixers 
847 
Pulse Generator 
The step recovery diode (SRD), is the device most commonly used to 
generate high order harmonics.  During forward conduction the SRD stores charge 
in the depletion region, causing the SRD to have a low impedance.  When reverse 
biased, the charge is quickly removed, and once it depletes conduction abruptly 
halts resulting in the SRD having a high impedance.  Thus the nonlinear 
capacitance of the SRD causes abrupt variations in impedance when driven by a 
sinusoidal waveform.  The typical C(v) for the SRD is similar to that of the 
varactor diode; the difference lies in the magnitude of low and high capacitance 
values. A typical SRD harmonic generator circuit is shown in Figure A.6, [7], 
containing an inductor, load resistor, and a bias supply. The battery E0 represents 
the contact potential of the SRD. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.6  
Step Recovery multiplier circuit. After [7]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.7  
Equivalent circuit and I/V waveforms before SRD charge is depleted. 
 
During the conduction interval, the equivalent circuit comprises the drive 
inductance, L, and the forward conducting SRD impedance that is nearly a short 
circuit. As depicted in Figure A.7, as long as the current iL is positive, the SRD 
L 
Vsint 
Rd  0 Vout 
E0 
iL 
t 
t 
 0 
0 
i0 
Vout 
0 
iL 
E0 
Vsint 
SRD
L 
RL 
Vout 

848 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
stores electric charge, illustrated by the iL(t) plot. When the applied voltage 
reverses phase, a transition state exists during which the current becomes 
negative, but the SRD impedance stays low while the charge is being removed. 
During this interval of conduction, the output voltage is constant and equal to the 
diode contact potential since the diode resistance is assumed to be zero. 
At the instant in time when the diode charge is fully depleted, the source 
and battery voltages are equal and opposite, so as depicted in Figure A.8 the 
equivalent circuit becomes the parallel combination of the inductor, L, SRD 
reverse capacitance, Crev, and the output load resistance, RL.  This forms a tank 
circuit where the energy stored in the inductor generates an impulse current i1, 
flowing through the tank circuit that oscillates until the energy is dissipated, or 
until the driving voltage reverses phase and the process repeats.  The result is that 
a voltage pulse is created every other half cycle of the driving signal, and 
depending on the values of L and Crev oscillations can accompany the pulse.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.8  
Equivalent circuit and I/V waveforms after SRD charge is depleted. 
 
 
Optimum efficiency may be achieved by using either a self biasing 
resistor or an external bias source. Self bias is preferred as it can provide 
temperature compensation, increased bandwidth operation, and feedback to reduce 
effects from variation in input drive power. The diode impedance is much lower 
than the standard 50 ohms, so the circuit of Figure A.6 is usually modified to 
include the low pass elements required for impedance matching.  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.9  
Lowpass input matching circuit for SRD. After [6]. 
i1 
L 
RL 
Vout 
Crev 
t 
i0 
0 
iL 
t 
 0 
0 
Vout 

 
Sampling Mixers 
849 
An example [8] of a circuit matched to a 50 ohm generator to provide an 
output spectrum with nearly constant amplitude up to the 10th harmonic is 
depicted in Figure A.9. The SRD has a Crev capacitance of 2 pF and provides a 
pulse width of 180 ps. The resulting “comb” spectrum is in Figure A.10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.10     Comb spectrum for input drive at 200 MHz. From [8]. 
 
 
 
Nonlinear Transmission Line (NLTL) 
 
An alternative way to generate a sharp pulse for sampling purposes is to 
employ a nonlinear transmission line, [9]. It comprises a transmission line along 
which varactor diodes are inserted at fixed or variable intervals.  Its operation 
relies on the fact that the output signal will be a distorted version of the input 
signal due to variation in the phase velocity of the line.  The phase velocity varies 
with capacitance, which in turn varies with the voltage level as the wave 
progresses along the line.  The effect is to sharpen the pulse.  The speed, or phase 
velocity, Vp, of the signal propagating on the transmission line is given by the 
equation: 
 
 
)
(
1
v
LC
Vp 
  
 
 
         
                     (A.6) 
 
 
The phase velocity is therefore inversely proportional to the square root 
of the varactor capacitance, C(v), which in turn depends on the magnitude of 
voltage at that specific location on the line. The expression for the varactor 
capacitance depends on how the junction is built, determined by the value of m, 
which is equal to two if the junction is abrupt, and greater than 1 for hyperabrupt 
junctions.  
 
m
jo
V
C
v
C








1
)
(
 
 
 
                                    (A.7) 
Frequency - MHz 
Pout  - dBm 
-60 
-50 
-40 
-30 
-20 
-10
  0 
10 
1.2 
2.4 
3.6 
4.8 
6.0 

850 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
Due to its inverse relationship with voltage, the capacitance will be high 
for low voltages and decreasing as voltage increases. Therefore, as an impressed 
signal propagates down the line, the voltage increases at each capacitor cell 
causing the capacitance to decrease, which in turn increases speed. The result after 
a number of cells is a very sharp pulse with large amplitude.  Note that as the 
pulse’s velocity increases its amplitude also increases and its width decreases.   
Figure A.11 depicts the pulse width decreasing and amplitude increasing as the 
pulse propagates along the NLTL [10].   
 
 
Figure A.11  Nonlinear transmission line. From [10]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.12   Output waveform of the NLT with 1 volt peak and 65 pS wide input pulse applied.   
From [10]. 
 
 
A NLTL was built using BiCMOS 0.18µm technology with 100 
capacitors and 100 inductors.  It was simulated with an input pulse having 1 volt 
peak amplitude and pulse width of 65 ps resulting in an output pulse as narrow as 
2.5 ps wide with 0.8 volt amplitude.  Measured results in Figure A.12 show a 
pulse rise time of 9 pS.   
 
 
 
Balanced Sampler 
A sampler that became popular for network analyzer applications is depicted in 
Figure A.13, [11]. It consists of two matched Schottky diodes, coupled in 
balanced form to the pulse generator by means of a balun. The pulses are applied 

 
Sampling Mixers 
851 
in opposing phase to the diodes with sufficient amplitude to drive them to a low 
impedance state (on). The pulse width is narrowed by launching the pulses at the 
open circuit end of two short circuited slot lines. The pulse travels along each slot 
line and reflects off the short circuit.  The reflected wave is inverted in phase and 
propagates back to the input of the slot line, where it cancels with the incident 
wave causing zero amplitude for the remainder of the pulse.  When the amplitude 
goes to zero, the diode switches immediately go to a high impedance state (off).  
The RF signal to be converted is applied to a microstrip line in parallel to the slot 
line so that while the diode switches are on, the RF signal charges capacitors C1, 
C2. When the diodes switch off the stored charge flows into the IF terminals, -V 
and +V. 
The thin film circuit is depicted in Figure A.14, with the ground plane 
side up toward the reader, and the RFin microstrip (dotted) line on the backside.  
The slot line etched into the ground plane runs parallel with, and above, the 
microstrip line.  The slot line is short circuited at the left and right ends, 
comprising two slot lines connected in parallel, the left side and the right side.  
The LO pulse input goes to a piggy back substrate mounted on top of the main 
substrate.  A ribbon connects to the piggy back substrate and jumps over the 
slotline, and its other end connects to the load resistor.   
 
 
       
 
Figure A.13     Sampler equivalent circuit. From [11]. 
 
 
The two Schottky diodes are connected in series, with the common point 
connected to the microstrip line with a plated hole through the substrate (via).  
The other two ends of the diodes connect to capacitors that in turn connect to the 
opposite sides of the slot line.  The positive and negative IF output lines also 
connect to the capacitors, whose voltage is proportional to the average signal 
voltage during the sampling interval.  Various versions of this circuit have been 
used over the years, a recent one using coplanar waveguide (CPW) is given by [2]. 
 
 

852 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.14  Approximation of sampler thin film layout. After [11].  
 
 
 
The 3 dB bandwidth obtained by a sampling device can be estimated 
from the pulse width using (A.8), [12]. If the capacitance shunting the diode 
junction and the series inductance are known, then the cut off frequency is 
determined by the familiar (A.9). The diode capacitance given in [11] is 0.1 pF 
and the lead inductance is 250 pH, which results in a maximum frequency of 
operation around 30 GHz. 
 
 
)
(
350
)
(
ps
t
GHz
BW
g

  
          
 
 
        (A.8) 
 
LC
fc

2
1

  
 
 
 
 
        (A.9) 
 
 
 
SMD Sampler 
 
Monolithic samplers are now commercially available from several 
companies.  In general they follow the schematic of Figure A.15, obtained from 
[13]. The surface mounted device (SMD) component comprises two matched 
Schottky diodes capacitively coupled to a SRD. The capacitors, 33A, 33B, besides 
AC coupling, differentiate the pulse applied to the Schottky diodes. The pulse 
forward biases diodes 34A, 34B, allowing them to conduct and creating a pulse at 
node 37 whose magnitude is proportional to the RF signal. If the LO is 
harmonically related to the RF signal at the same point in each RF cycle, then the 
IF signal becomes a DC level. As the RF frequency shifts away from equaling an 
LO harmonic, the IF frequency becomes equal to the difference between fRF and 
RL 
via 
RFin 
LOin 
RFout 
+VIF 
Ground Plane 
Left Slot Line 
-VIF 
Right Slot Line 

 
Sampling Mixers 
853 
the closest nfLO harmonic. The IF sampled voltage is available from terminals 40, 
41, which are terminated by large resistors to avoid loading the pulse.  
 
 
 
            
 
Figure A.15  Commercial sampling phase detector (SPD) module. 
 
 
The complete sampler is shown in Figure A.16, illustrating the SMD 
component, and a balun transformer connected to the LO input line 50. The RF 
signal in this particular patent is coupled to transmission line 51, and applied to 
node 37.  The resistors 42, 43 provide ground returns for the diodes and in general 
are in the order of Ks. Terminals 40, 41 should be grounded at RF to allow the 
RF signal to be completely absorbed by the Schottky diodes. Resistors at 
terminals 35, 36 are 50  to match the LO signal and minimize ringing and other 
transient signals. Other patent examples are found in the literature; for instance, in 
reference [14] a similar approach to the one from  Figure A.15 is disclosed.   
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.16  Thin film version of circuit from Figure A.15. 
51 
SMD 

854 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
NLTL Sampler 
Also a monolithic sampler using a nonlinear transmission line producing 
a narrow pulse, called a shock wave is disclosed.  The circuit is depicted in Figure 
A.17, [15]. The pulse from the shock wave turns on diodes 58, 60, allowing RF 
applied at terminal l to flow into the IF circuit. The pulses travel lines 46, 48, and 
encounter a low value resistor 50, preferably a short circuit that reverses polarities 
of the pulses and reflect them back to the non-linear transmission line, shutting 
diodes 58, 60 off. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A.17  Phase detector with commercial nonlinear transmission line pulse generator. 
 
 
 

 
Sampling Mixers 
855 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
R. A. Liman, J. L. Muraro, P. Lautier, O. Llopis, J. Graffeuil, “Noise in 
Sampling Phase Detectors for RF PLL,” Proceedings of the 39th European 
Microwave Conference, 2009, pp. 480-483.  
[2] 
J. Han, C. Nguyen, “Coupled-Slotline-Hybrid Sampling Mixer Integrated 
With Step-Recovery-Diode Pulse Generator for UWB Applications,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Volume 53, No. 6, June 
2005, pp. 1875-1882.   
[3] 
Bernard Sklar, Digital Communications Fundamentals and Applications, 
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2001.    
[4] 
Scott R. Gibson, “Gallium Arsenide Lowers Cost and Improves 
Performance of Microwave Counters,” Hewlett Packard Journal, February 1986, 
pp. 4-10. 
[5] 
Kenneth Rush and Danny J. Oldfield, “A Data Acquisition System for a 1-
GHz Digitizing Oscilloscope,” Hewlett Packard Journal, April 1986, pp. 4-11. 
[6] 
K. Madani and C. S. Aitchison, “A 1 to 20 GHz Microwave Sampler,” 20th 
European Microwave Conference, 1990, pp. 617- 622. 
[7] 
Harald T. Friis, “Analysis of Harmonic Generator Circuits for Step 
Recovery Diodes,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume 55, No. 7, July 1967, pp. 
1192-1194. 
[8] 
“Nonlinear Modeling of Step Recovery Diodes Using Verilog-A,” Agilent 
Application Note, May 2004. 
[9] 
W. C. Whiteley, W. E. Kunz, and W. J. Anklam, “50 GHz Sampler Hybrid 
Utilizing A Small Shockline and an Internal SRD,” IEEE 1991MTT International 
Microwave Symposium, pp. 895-898.  
[10] Ehsan Afshari and Ali Hajimiri, “Non-Linear Transmission Lines for Pulse 
Shaping in Silicon,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Volume 40, No. 3, 
March 2005, pp. 91-94. 
[11] J. Merkelo, “A DC to 20 GHz Thin-Film Signal Sampler for Microwave 
Instrumentation,” Hewlett Packard Journal, April 1973, No. 8, pp. 10-13. 
[12] W. M. Grove, “Sampling for Oscilloscopes and Other RF Systems DC 
Through X-Band,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Volume MTT-14, No. 12, December 1966, pp. 629- 635. 
[13] Christopher David Grondhal, “Sampling Phase Detector and Multiple 
Frequency Band Termination Circuit and Method,” US Patent 5,953,645, issued 
September 14, 1902. 
[14] Herbert Brauns, “Sampling Phase Detector,” US Patent 5,900,747, issued 
May 4, 1999. 
[15] C-Y Su, M. R. Ty Tan and W. J. Anklam, “Monolithic Sampler,” US 
Patent 4,956,568, issued September 11, 1990. 
 

856 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
 

857 
About the Authors 
Edmar Camargo received his master and Ph.D. degrees from University of 
São Paulo, Brazil, in 1976 and 1985, respectively. Within this time he took a leave 
of absence to work at the Centre National d'Études des Telecommunications 
(CNET) in Lannion France in 1977 and 1982. He was a teacher assistant and 
research engineer in the same university in Brazil, until 1993 when he emigrated 
to the U.S. He worked for Hewlett-Packard on mmWave Transceiver design and 
for Fujitsu Compound Semiconductor Inc., where he took the lead on frequency 
converter projects, in particular the patented FMM5107 for satellite receivers and 
high linearity mmwave mixer FMM5116/17. From 2000 – 2004 was director of 
engineering at Fujitsu coordinating the mm-Wave and handset developments. 
From 2005 to 2009 worked at iTerra Communication, Watkins Johnson 
Communications on power amplifiers for infrastructure applications and at RF 
Micro Devices on power amplifiers for handsets. From 2009 to 2012 was a MMIC 
design consultant in the San Francisco Bay Area, and in 2013 became a Principal 
engineer at Quinstar Technology in Torrance, California.  Edmar Camargo is a 
senior member of the IEEE-MTT Society, served on the technical symposium 
committee's from 1996 to 2008 and served as a member of the MTT-22 Signal 
Generation and Frequency Conversion from its foundation until 2007. He and his 
wife, Marcia, reside in Lomita, California, and have two sons, Marcel and Regis. 
 
Bert Henderson is a Technology Fellow with Cobham Defense Electronics in 
San Jose, California, where he has worked since 2002 on microwave and 
millimeter-wave multifunction integrated subsystems.  From 1994–2002 he 
worked on commercial millimeter-wave radios, first with Endwave Corporation 
and then with Bridgewave Communications.  From 1979-1994 he was with 
Watkins Johnson Co., where he held various design and leadership positions.  He 
received the BSEE from the University of California Davis in 1978, and MSEE 
from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1979.  While with Watkins 
Johnson Co. he designed numerous mixers including the M50, the first mixer with 
2-26 GHz RF/LO and 2-18 GHz IF coverage. He led development of the 
SMC1844, the first uniplanar mixer with 18-40 GHz RF/LO and DC-18 GHz IF 
coverage. His technical articles include “Reliably Predict Mixer IM Suppression”, 
which provides a closed form approximation for spurious suppression used in 
various commercial simulators. He has six patents for mixers and filters, and in 
2007 was a recipient of the Tyco Electronics Key Innovator Award. He has 
written various spurious and system analysis programs in C and C++. He serves 
on the IEEE MTT-22 committee for Signal Generation and Frequency 
Conversion, and was a presenter for IEEE MTT-S workshops on AM Noise in 
2005, Subharmonic Mixer Circuit Designs in 2009, and Analytic Concepts for 
Low-Noise and Low-Distortion Mixers in 2012. He and his wife, Ann, reside in 
Sunnyvale, California, and have three daughters, Katie, Kim, and Emily.   

858 
 
 
  
 

859 
 
 
Index 
 
180 Hybrid couplers 
 
Waveguide, 205 
 
Bifilar hybrid, 206 
 
Ratrace hybrid, 207 
 
Lumped ratrace, 211 
 
Coupled line , 213 
 
Broadband four port, 217 
 
Suspended microstrip, 222 
90 Hybrid Couplers 
 
Branch line, 224 
 
Lange hybrid, 225 
 
Broadside coupler, 791 
Active rectifier, 4 
Active mixer, 6 
 
Tuned transformer, 534   
 
Differential with tank 
circuit, 536 
Active 180 combiner, 199, 201. 
Active current based combiner, 202 
Active ratrace BJT modulator, 521 
Active power splitter, 730 
Alexanderson, 3 
AM detector, 6 
Angelov model, 129 
Anode, 4 
APDP, 301 
AM modulator linearized by 
 
feedback, 533 
Armstrong, 5, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 
Anti symmetrical MOS, 796 
ASK, 56 
Audion, 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Autodyne, see self-oscillating mixer 
Avalanche breakdown, 107 
Available conversion gain, 443 
AWGN, 77 
Balun structure, 156 
 
Guanella transformer, 157- 
158 
 
Ruthroff bifilar line, 160  
 
Three coupled lines, 176 
 
Tapered coupled line, 183 
 
Lumped elements, 187 
 
Microstrip, 169 
 
Asymetrical coplanar, 191 
 
Slotline, 191 
 
Active single FET, 194, 
196, 198.  
 
Active CG, CS, 196 
 
Active differential, 198  
 
Distributed, 730 
Balanced-unbalanced mixer, 560 
Unbalanced-balanced mixer, 562 
Base transit time, 116 
Baseband physical layer, 50 
Baseband signal, 55 
Beam lead diode, 106 
Beat receiver, 5 
Bessel function, 260, 303, 333, 339 
BER, 50, 64 
Bifilar line, 28, 157 
Bilinear model, 617 
Bipolar junction transistor (see BJT) 
BJT, 105, 109 

860 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
BJT cold, 120 
BJT active load to FET mixer, 764 
Boltzmann constant, 78 
BPSK, 59 
Bridge combiner, 18 
Bridge quad mixer, 406 
BSIM, 146 
Cascaded noise figure, 81 
Cascaded phase noise, 90 
Cascaded current amplifier, 548 
Cascaded voltage amplifier, 549 
Cascode 
 
Mixer amplifier, 21 
 
Transistor, 144 
 
Mixer, 458, 515, 615, 637 
 
Cascode BJT, 457, 8  
 
Linearity, 638 
 
Distributed mixer, 672 
Carson modulator, 30 
Cathode, 6 
Cellular mobile radio, 53 
Chalmers FET model, 129 
Classification of diode mixers 
 
termination (Saleh), 251 
 
configuration, 300 
Classification BJT mixers, 430 
Coherer, 2 
CMRR, 198 
Child-Langmuir equation, 4 
Chroma modulator, 556 
CMOS, 146 
Coaxial tank circuit, 20 
Coaxial mixer, 346, 347, 349, 350 
Cold FET, see resistive mixer 
Comparing MOSFET with GaAs    
FET, 589 
Complimentary BJT, 521 
 
Collector transformer 
coupled, 524, 526, 527. 
 
Emitter coupled, 526 
 
Emitter coupled output 
signal, 527, 528 
 
Complimentary 
subharmonic, 581 
Complimentary MOS, 
 
Pmos, Nmos, 776 
 
With buffer, 777 
Continuous receiver, 13 
Conversion matrix diode, 248 
 
BJT, 441 
 
FET, 596 
Conversion loss, 254 
Conversion gain, 
 
BJT, 438, 443, 444, 469, 
502 
 
FET mixer, 594, 599, 605, 
620 
 
resistive, 629, 634 
 
cascode, 640 
 
differential amplifier, 654 
Converter 
 
Single BJT, 534, 537 
 
FET, 733 
Coplanar mixer, 383 
Cross bar mixer, 359, 363, 366 
Cross coupled even order, 566 
Cross coupled mmWave MMIC, 
582 
Cross modulation, 289, 516, 769 
Curtice model, 122 
Curtice-Ettenberg model, 126 
Darlington SOM DRO resonator, 
537 
Design study, 
 
CDMA downconverter, 
453 
 
Cascode BJT, 458 
 
Wi-FI 2.45 GHz Gilbert 
mixer, 490 
 
X-band FET mixer, 612 
 
Drain mixer at 10 GHz, 
622 
 
Quasi linear mixer 
synthesis, 630 

861 
 
 
Single balanced gate mixer, 
646 
Dielectric resonator, 536, 820, 826,  
Differential  
 
Tube, 26 
 
BJT with transformer, 537, 
538 
Digital modulation, 54 
Distributed mixer, 46 
Diode  
 
Vacuum tube, 4 
 
Schottky, 105 
Direct conversion 
 
Receiver, 13, 68 
 
Subharmonic, 668 
 
Weaver receiver, 74 
 
Gilbert cell, 715, 721, 734, 
738, 745, 749, 807, 811, 
815, 818 
Distributed mixer  
 
UWB, 669 
 
Conversion gain, 671 
 
Cascode topology, 673 
 
Image reject, 753, 830 
 
Differential cell, 674, 834 
Differential mixer 
 
Linear mode, 650 
 
Non-Linear mode, 653 
 
Linearity, 655 
 
transformer coupled, 795 
Doubly balanced 
 
Star mixer, 29, 298, 320, 
387, 388, 394, 397 
 
Ring mixer, 247, 320, 386, 
391, 396, 408 
 
Quadrature, 413 
 
Differential BJT 475, 544, 
553, 556, 558, 559, 562, 
564, 565, 568, 570, 573 
 
Passive BJT ring mixer, 
529 
 
transformer coupled BJT, 
529, 535, 536, 539 
 
FET differential, 661, 726, 
728, 
Drain mixer, 616, 770 
DRO, 537, 820 
Dual conversion system, 13 
Dual IF mixer, 41 
Dual gate MESFET 
 
device, 142 
 
modified, 773 
Dual mode tube, 24 
Duty cycle, 416, 508, 635, 693, 711 
Dynamic range, 102 
Early effect, 112 
Ebers-Moll model, 112 
EEHEMT HEMT model, 137 
EVM, 67 
Exponential diode model, 107, 266 
 
Saleh, 275 
FET mixer LO injection modes, 590 
FET quadratic gate mixer, 592 
Finline, 363, 365, 366. 
Flicker noise, 72 
Floating 
 
MESFET, 648, 698, 716, 
728 
 
MOS, 701 
Friss equation, 81 
FSK, 57 
Frequency to voltage converter, 16 
Frequency translator circuit, 22 
FM demodulator, 11 
Fmax, 118 
Fourier transform, 56 
Frequency modulated transceiver, 
14 
Front end receiver, 515, 557 
fT, Transition frequency, 118 
GaAs MESFET, 121 
Gain compression 
 
exponential model, 290 
 
Switching model, 290 
Gilbert cell, 475, 483 
Guanella balun, 159 
Gummel-Poon model, 112 

862 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
H-Mixer, 271, 275 
H-mode FET mixer, 730 
Harry Houck, 42 
Harmonic balance simulation, 276 
Hartley modulator, 18, 33 
HEMT, 121 
Heterodyne, 7 
High permeability material, 164 
Ideality factor, 106 
IIP3, 75, 101, 470, 656, 663 
Image reject   
 
Circuit, 30 
 
Voltage tuned filter, 572 
 
Quasi-zero IF, 575 
 
MOS,  804 
Image noise, 68, 83 
Inter carrier sound system, 39 
Intermodulation, IM,  
 
Definition, 74, 76 
 
Cascaded, 101 
 
Exponential model, 293 
 
Switching model, 293 
 
Order, 299 
JFET, 121 
Kirk effect, 114, 472 
LAN, 54 
Lange coupler, 223 
Lecher line, 24 
Lee de Forest, 4 
Light wave link, 52 
Linearity, 
 
BJT, 451, 516 
 
BJT single ended, 449 
 
BJT singly balanced, 469, 
470 
 
BJT doubly balanced, 478, 
483, 538 
 
Gate mixer, 607, 609 
 
Drain mixer, 621 
 
Resistive, 635 
 
Dual gate, 640 
 
Differential FET, 642, 655, 
662 
Linearization, 516 
 
Emitter degeneration, 486, 
564 
 
Feedback, 532, 569 
 
Feedforward (GasComp), 
551 
 
Micromixer, 488 
 
Multi tanh, 489 
 
Transformer coupled, 539 
 
Amplifier bypass, 559 
 
Transconductance 
amplifier, 564 
 
RF amp with feedback, 568 
 
Transconductance 
compensation, 569 
 
Vice approach, 700 
 
Paralleling FET, 786, 806 
 
P, N Gates, 740 
Local Oscillator, 8 
LO AM Noise, 87 
LO chain, 97 
Low frequency mixer, 433 
LO injection  
 
On BJT, 432, 
 
On FET, 590 
 
Gate, 591 
 
 
Source, 614, 758 
 
Drain , 616 
Low noise Gilbert Mixer, 553  
Low voltage operation, BJT, 566 
Marconi, 3 
Marchand balun 
 
Definition, 164 
 
Order, 168 
 
Microstrip edge coupled, 
176 
 
Suspended microstrip, 179 
 
Broadside coupled, 183 
 
Spiral transformer, 186, 
394 
Micromixer, 
 
BJT, 488, 550 

863 
 
 
FET, 661, 803         
Morse Code, 2 
MOSFET, 121, 146 
Multiple circuits, 411 
Multiplier (BJT) Gilbert type, 479 
Multiplier CMOS, 796 
Nyquist theorem, 55 
Noise, 76 
Noise figure,  
 
Definition, 80 
 
System cascade noise 
figure, 81 
 
BJT single ended mixer, 
450 
 
BJT singly balanced, 461 
 
BJT doubly balanced, 483 
 
FET gate mixer, 607 
 
FET  differential, 662 
Noise reduction, 20 
Nonlinear conductance mixer, 248 
Nonlinear currents method, 609 
Nonlinear BJT capacitance, 448 
OIP3, 76 
Orthogonal, 688 
Paramixer, 408, 409 
Parasitic losses, 264 
P1dB, 76 
Phase noise, 
 
Definition, 91 
 
System cascaded phase 
noise, 92 
PHEMT, 121  
Point-to-point links, 51 
Point-to-multipoint, 53 
Poly-phase filters, 576 
Power combiner active 
 
Single, 730 
 
Distributed, 732 
Power splitter, 730, 732 
Pumped nonlinear conductance, 259  
Push-push 
 
Operation, 27 
 
SOM, 583, 709, 733, 821, 
826 
Push-pull modulator, 519 
QAM, 63 
QPSK, 60 
QPSK constellation, 61 
Quad transformer 
 
Emitter coupled, 570 
 
Source coupled, 659, 729 
 
Packaged FET, 726 
Quadratic diode model, 262 
Quasi doubly balanced Vice mixer, 
 
779 
Quasi static assumption, 105 
Regenerative receiver, 9, 514 
Reginald Fessenden, 3 
Resistive mixer  
 
Channel conductance, 625 
 
Cold FET, 135, 140 
 
90 couplers, 642 
 
Linearity, 640 
 
Conversion gain, 630 
 
MOS floating mixer, 648 
 
Tuned Cgd, 690 
 
Self biased, 691 
Richardson constant, 107 
RF physical layer, 50 
Root model, 139 
RS232, 50 
Saleh theory 
 
Switching model, 274 
 
Exponential, 275 
Sampling mixer with BJT, 524 
Sandbox, MESFET, 697 
Self-oscillating  
 
Single ended mixer, 514, 
531 
 
Balanced mixers, 44 
 
Converter, 13 
Singly Balanced 180, 
 
Diode, 315 
 
Diode waveguide, 359, 388 
 
BJT differential type, 461 

864 
Microwave Mixer Technology and Applications 
 
 
FET, 646 
Singly Balanced 90 
 
diode, 314, 381 
 
FET, 645 
 
resistive, 707 
Slotline mixer, 374, 376, 378 
SNR, 20 
SOM DRO resonator 
 
Bipolar, 538 
 
FET, 820 
 
Dual gate, 826 
SOM varactor tuned, 
 
FET, 821, 822 
 
FET CMOS 
complimentary, 823 
 
Dual gate, 823 
Spark gap, 2 
Spectral regrowth, 62  
Square wave LO, 278, 710 
SSB concept, 30 
Stripline, microstrip, 368 
Subharmonic mixers, 
 
Tubes, 42, 416 
 
APDP, 300, 417, 418 
 
Diode coplanar, 421 
 
Diode quadrature, 422 
 
BJT singly balanced, 473 
 
FET singly balanced, 657 
 
QLT type, 666 
 
DRT type, 667 
 
Triple Level type, 668 
 
2X Subharmonic FET, 656 
 
2X Quadrature balanced, 
657 
 
2X CMOS, 694 
 
4X subharmonic, FET, 658 
 
4X mHEMT, 695 
 
Successive mixing, 750 
Stability,  
 
BJT, 452 
 
FET, 611 
Substrate LO injection, 776 
Super Heterodyne  
 
Concept, 11 
 
Receiver, 68 
Super regenerative receiver, 10  
Synthesis 
 
Diode, 323 
 
FET Sparameters, 630 
 
FET Yparameters, 718 
Switch dual transistor transformer, 
 
528 
Switching model 
 
Simple mixer, 243 
 
Saleh, 274 
TDR, Time domain reflectometry, 
 
162 
Tesla, 3 
T-Model, 109 
Temperature stabilization in 
 
bipolars, 439 
TIM, 409 
Transcapacitance, 138 
Transconductance modulation, 444 
Transconductance parameter, 148 
Transducer gain, 254  
Tree mixer, 554 
Trifilar transformer, 715 
Triode, 5 
Triple level, BJT, 495 
Triply balanced, 
 
Diode, 322, 401 
 
Subharmonic, 421 
TV Receivers, 30 
 
Dual Gate, 760 
TVRO, 53 
Up-converter, 642 
UWB, 669 
Variable reactance tube, 15 
VSAT, 53 
Waveform analysis, 55 
 
 

