www.allitebooks.com

Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 
Financial Management
Unleash the power of financial management  
with tips, techniques, and solutions for  
Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013
Ian Grieve
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 Financial Management
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: September 2013
Production Reference: 1300813
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78217-130-0
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Aniket Sawant (aniket_sawant_photography@hotmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Ian Grieve is a Microsoft Dynamics GP and CRM certified consultant,  
specializing in the delivery of Microsoft Dynamics GP and CRM projects.  
He is a senior consultant at Perfect Image Ltd., a Microsoft Partner and VAR  
in the North East of England.
Ian has been working with Microsoft Dynamics GP since 2003. He has dealt  
with all aspects of the product life cycle from presales, to implementation, to 
technical and functional training, to post go-live support and subsequent  
upgrades, and process reviews.
Alongside his work with Microsoft Dynamics GP, in recent years he has fulfilled  
a similar role dealing with Microsoft Dynamics CRM, with special emphasis 
on project delivery and the training of end users on the management of sales, 
marketing, and services.
Ian is the co-author of Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 Cookbook, produced Microsoft 
Dynamics GP Techniques online learning course, and was the technical reviewer for 
Microsoft Dynamics CRM 2011 Applications (MB2-868) Certification Guide and Microsoft 
Dynamics CRM 2011 Cookbook.
In his spare time, Ian runs the azurecurve | Ramblings of a Dynamics GP Consultant 
(http://www.azurecurve.co.uk/) blog dedicated to Microsoft Dynamics GP and 
related products and tries, often unsuccessfully, to squeeze in extra time for the 
Dynamics CRM related blog coralcurve | A Consultant's Dabblings in Dynamics CRM 
(http://www.coralcurve.co.uk/).
www.allitebooks.com

Acknowledgement
Thanks to my parents for their support through the years and my employer,  
Perfect Image, for being open to me taking on outside projects such as this book.
I also owe thanks to all of the clients I have worked with over the years, whose  
needs and questions have prompted me to learn ever more about Microsoft 
Dynamics GP, thereby putting me in a position to write this book.
Thanks to the Technical Reviewers, Mark Polino and Jivtesh Singh, for their  
valuable feedback which helped to make the book better.
Finally, thanks to the people at Packt Publishing, who I worked with through  
the course of the project.
www.allitebooks.com

 About the Reviewers
Mark Polino, CPA is a principal consultant who has worked with Microsoft  
Dynamics GP for 15 years. He is the author or co-author of 4 books on Dynamics 
GP from Packt Publishing, and he created the successful 50 Tips in 50 Minutes for 
Dynamics GP presentation series. Mark runs the premier Dynamics GP related 
website at www.dynamicaccounting.net.
Jivtesh Singh is a Microsoft Dynamics GP MVP, and a Microsoft Dynamics 
Certified Technology Specialist for Dynamics GP. Through his blog—which is  
widely read in the Dynamics GP community—he covers Dynamics GP tips, tricks, 
and news.
Jivtesh is a Dynamics GP Consultant and Systems Implementer, and has been 
associated with the Microsoft Technologies since the launch of Microsoft .NET 
Framework. Jivtesh has over 10 years of experience in the development and 
maintenance of enterprise software using coding best practices, refactoring and 
usage of design patterns, and test-driven development. Jivtesh recently built a Kinect 
interface to control the Microsoft Dynamics GP 2010 R2 Business Analyzer with 
gestures. Later, he built a part of the GP Future demo for Convergence GP Keynote.
Jivtesh has set up a custom search engine directory for the Dynamics GP blog at  
www.gpwindow.com to help with easier access of Dynamics GP resources for the  
GP community. With MVP Mark Polino, he has set up a Dynamics GP product 
directory, www.dynamicsgpproducts.com. He has also created a blog on Dynamics 
GP, www.jivtesh.com.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to  
your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and  
ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and  
as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch  
with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a 
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt’s online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt’s entire library of books.
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Analytical Accounting	
5
Creating default records	
5
Setting up posting options	
6
Activating Analytical Accounting	
7
Assigning security roles and tasks	
8
Configuring Analytical Accounting options	
10
Configuring Assignment Setup	
11
Creating transaction dimensions and dimension codes	
12
Setting up an accounting class	
14
Granting user access to transaction dimensions	
16
Entering a transaction with Analytical Accounting information	
17
Duplicate analysis information when copying a transaction	
19
Integration of Analytical Accounting with Fixed Asset Management	
19
Creating an Analytical Accounting budget	
20
Analytical Accounting budgets in Microsoft Excel	
23
Year-end processing	
24
Activating Analytical Accounting in an existing system	
25
Analytical Accounting inquiries	
25
Transaction Dimension Relation	
26
Analytical Accounting – Journal Entry Inquiry	
26
Distribution Query Wizard	
27
Multilevel Query Wizard	
29
Analytical Accounting Budget vs Actual Inquiry	
30
Analytical Account SmartLists	
31
Summary	
32
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 2: Cash Flow Management	
33
Creating a cash flow forecast	
33
Using the Cash Flow Calendar	
35
Viewing other cash flow forecasts	
37
Launching Cash Flow Calendar from Cash Flow Explorer	
38
Printing weekly cash flow reports	
38
"What if?" transactions	
39
Summary	
41
Chapter 3: Budget Creation and Maintenance	
43
Creating a budget with Microsoft Excel	
43
Editing a budget in Microsoft Excel	
46
Importing a budget from Microsoft Excel	
46
Maintaining budgets	
48
Combining budgets	
50
Entering budget transactions	
51
Summary	
53
Chapter 4: Budget Reporting	
55
Inquiries	
55
Budget Summary Inquiry	
55
Budget vs. Actual Inquiry	
57
Budget Journal Entry Inquiry	
58
Budget Transaction Summary Inquiry	
58
Account Rollup Inquiry	
59
Detailed budget report	
62
Budgets in Management Reporter 2012	
63
Creating the row definition	
64
Creating the column definition	
65
Creating the report definition	
67
Summary	
69
Chapter 5: Purchase Order Commitments	
71
Enabling PO Commitments	
71
Entering a Purchase Order Commitment	
73
Budget vs Actual & Committed Inquiry	
75
Summary	
78
Chapter 6: Encumbrance Management	
79
Setting up Encumbrance Management	
79
Encumbrance statuses	
82
Transaction entry	
83

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Encumbrance inquiries	
84
Encumbrance Summary Inquiry	
84
Encumbrance Detail Inquiry	
85
Encumbrance PO Inquiry	
87
Encumbrance GL Inquiry	
87
Encumbrance Reports	
88
Year-end processes	
89
Summary	
90
Index	
91


Preface
Microsoft Dynamics GP is an Enterprise Resource Planning system from Microsoft.  
It is used throughout the world by organizations in many different sectors due to  
its renowned strengths in financial management. These strengths extend beyond  
the standard finance modules of the General Ledger, Fixed Asset Management,  
and the Accounts Payables and Receivables to include a number of modules,  
which add additional finance management capabilities to the core system.
These modules include Analytical Accounting (which allows for analysis of 
transactions below the account level), Cash Flow Management, and budgeting, 
as well as methods of controlling spending through purchase commitments or 
encumbering. This book introduces these modules and shows you how they  
can be used to improve financial management and reporting.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Analytical Accounting, introduces the Analytical Accounting module  
and how to configure, use, and report on transactions compared to budget values.
Chapter 2, Cash Flow Management, covers using the setup of a cash flow forecast  
and how to use the Cash Flow Calendar and Cash Flow Explorer to track in-flows/
out-flows of cash.
Chapter 3, Budget Creation and Maintenance, shows how budgets can be created, 
combined, and maintained in Microsoft Excel.
Chapter 4, Budget Reporting, looks at the methods for inquiring and reporting  
on budgets in Dynamics GP, including the use of Management Reporter 2012.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 5, Purchase Order Commitments, shows how Purchase Order Commitments 
can be used to control expenditure.
Chapter 6, Encumbrance Management, shows how encumbering transactions can be 
used to reduce over spending and keep funds available when payment becomes due.
What you need for this book
You will require the following software for this book:
•	
Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 with the Fabrikam, Inc. sample  
company deployed
•	
Management Reporter 2012 RU6 with the Fabrikam, Inc. sample  
company imported
•	
SQL Server 2012 (or SQL Server 2008 R2)
•	
Microsoft Office 2013 (or Microsoft Office 2010)
•	
Windows Server 2012 (or Windows Server 2008 R2) with a  
Domain Controller available
Who this book is for
This book is for Dynamics GP users who are looking to improve their own financial 
management, or Microsoft Dynamics GP partners who are looking to improve the 
support of their clients. This book assumes that you have a basic understanding 
of business management systems and a working knowledge of the core Microsoft 
Dynamics GP financial and purchasing series.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "Log on to Microsoft Dynamics GP  
using the sa or dynsa user accounts".
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on  
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this:  
"Click on OK or Save, and close the Posting Setup window".

Preface
[ 3 ]
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we  
can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem  
with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Analytical Accounting
Analytical Accounting is an add-on module to Microsoft Dynamics GP, which  
allows the extension of analysis of information beyond the segmental account. 
Without Analytical Accounting, additional reporting can only be accomplished by 
adding an additional segment to the chart of accounts. Analytical Accounting allows 
for this extended reporting without the need to change the chart of accounts, and 
also allows for the storage of information beyond monetary such as time (hours 
worked), space (size of room hired), or activity (such as marketing channel).
In this chapter we will take an introductory look at how to activate, configure, 
and enter transactions in Analytical Accounting. It is assumed that the Analytical 
Accounting feature has already been added to the installation of Microsoft Dynamics 
GP, and that GP Utilities has been run to update the databases.
Creating default records
Before Analytical Accounting can be used, there are several steps that must  
be completed. The first of them is to create the default records needed for  
Analytical Accounting.
To create the default records needed for Analytical Accounting, follow these steps:
1.	 Log on to Microsoft Dynamics GP using the sa or dynsa user accounts.
2.	 Open the Analytical Accounting Setup Wizard window in Dynamics  
GP by selecting Administration from the navigation pane on the left, 
and then clicking on Setup in the area page under Setup | Company | 
Analytical Accounting.

Analytical Accounting
[ 6 ]
3.	 Make sure that the Create Default Record checkbox is marked, and  
then click on Next.
4.	 A listbox will be displayed showing the tasks, which will be processed.  
Click on Finish to proceed.
5.	 Once complete, click on OK to close the Analytical Accounting Setup 
Wizard window.
6.	 Repeat steps 1 to 5 for each company database.
This setup step needs to be performed in every company where Analytical 
Accounting is to be used as it creates all the records required for Analytical 
Accounting to function.
Setting up posting options
The final step needed before activating Analytical Accounting is to ensure that  
all posting options for Create a Journal Entry Per are set to either Transaction,  
as is most common, or to Batch with Use Account Settings marked.
To change the posting options, follow these steps:
1.	 Open the Posting Setup window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Administration from the navigation pane on the left, and then  
clicking on Posting in the area page under Setup | Posting.
2.	 Check each Series/Origin combination, and ensure that Use Account 
Settings is marked, if the Create a Journal Entry Per: setting is set to Batch.

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
3.	 Click on OK or Save, once all Series/Origin combinations have  
been configured.
The Payroll module is slightly different to the other series in that there is  
an additional checkbox, Post In Detail, which must be marked for all origins  
except for Period End Reports. To enable this setting, follow these steps:
1.	 Open the Posting Setup window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Administration from the navigation pane on the left, and then  
clicking on Posting in the area page under Setup | Posting.
2.	 Set Series: to Payroll, and Origin: to All.
3.	 Mark the Post In Detail checkbox (which is located above the Use  
Account Settings checkbox, when the Series: is set to Payroll).
4.	 Click on OK or Save, and close the Posting Setup window.
Activating Analytical Accounting
Now that the posting options have been configured as required by Analytical 
Accounting, the module can now be activated for use.
To activate Analytical Accounting, follow these steps:
1.	 Ensure there is a good backup of both the system (which is usually  
called Dynamics) and company database.
2.	 Log on to Microsoft Dynamics GP using the sa or dynsa user accounts.
3.	 Open the Analytical Accounting Setup Wizard window in Dynamics  
GP by selecting Administration from the navigation pane on the left, 
and then clicking on Setup in the area page under Setup | Company | 
Analytical Accounting.
www.allitebooks.com

Analytical Accounting
[ 8 ]
4.	 Mark the Activate Analytical Accounting checkbox, and click on Next.
5.	 A listbox will be displayed showing the tasks that will be processed.  
Click on Finish to proceed.
6.	 Once complete, click on OK to close the Analytical Accounting  
Setup Wizard.
Assigning security roles and tasks
Now that Analytical Accounting has been activated, security needs to be configured, 
so that users without the POWERUSER role can use the functionality it offers. 
Analytical Accounting integrates into the standard Dynamics GP role-based security.
When installed, Analytical Accounting adds several default security roles and tasks. 
The default security tasks are:
ADMIN_AA_001*
CARD_AA_001*
RPT_AA_001*
ADMIN_AA_002*
INQ_AA_001*
TRX_AA_001*
AADEFAULTUSER*
INQ_AA_002*
The default security roles are:
AA CLERK*
AA MANAGER*
Custom roles and tasks can be created if the default ones do not meet the needs 
of your organization. Once the required roles have been created, they need to be 
assigned to the users.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
To assign the AA MANAGER* role to a user:
1.	 Open the User Security Setup window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Administration from the navigation pane on the left, and then clicking  
on User Security in the area page under Setup | System.
2.	 Enter the User: to have the role assigned, and tab from the field.
3.	 In the Roles: scrolling window, mark the checkbox next to AA MANAGER*.
4.	 Click on Save.
The AA CLERK* role (or any custom role) can be assigned to the users in exactly  
the same way.
Analytical Accounting integrates with the standard Dynamics GP security model by 
creating the required operations, tasks, and roles. This means any user who currently 
understands the process of maintaining security will be able to grant access, or create 
the appropriate security to the users.

Analytical Accounting
[ 10 ]
Configuring Analytical Accounting 
options
The next stage in configuring Analytical Accounting is to set up the options,  
which control the behavior of Analytical Accounting.
To amend the Analytical Accounting options:
1.	 Open the Analytical Accounting Options window in Dynamics GP  
by selecting Administration from the navigation pane on the left, and  
then clicking on Options in the area page under Setup | Company | 
Analytical Accounting.
2.	 Mark the checkbox next to Post through to General Ledger for Trx  
Posting to allow transaction posting to post through the GL. A batch  
is automatically created and assigned to the transaction, during the 
transaction posting process.
3.	 Mark the Include dimensions in the year end close checkbox to transfer 
analytical data to history, during the year-end close process.
4.	 Click on the User-Defined button to change the field labels for the twenty 
user defined fields, which can be used for adding more information to the 
alphanumeric transaction dimensions.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
5.	 Click on the Column Heading button to amend the column heading labels 
used on inquiries and reports.
6.	 Click on the Reporting Periods button to view the Fiscal and Calendar  
Views used in reports.
7.	 Click on the SmartList Integration button to select which SmartLists should 
be installed. To install a SmartList, mark the checkbox next to the SmartList 
folder in the scrolling window or, to install all, click on the Mark All button. 
Once all selections have been made, click on Process, then close the window.
8.	 Click on OK to close the Analytical Accounting Options window.
Configuring Assignment Setup
The Assignment Setup window allows for control over whether a module requires 
the full distribution amount to be assigned, or if a partial assignment can be 
posted. The exception to this is Bank Reconciliation, where you can post partial 
assignments, if the destination module of the posting allows partial assignments.
To amend the Assignment Setup window to allow partial assignment in the  
General Ledger module:
1.	 Open the Assignment Options window in Dynamics GP by  
selecting Administration from the navigation pane on the left,  
and then clicking on Assignment in the area page under Setup |  
Company | Analytical Accounting.
2.	 Unmark the checkbox in the Full column, next to the General  
Ledger module.
3.	 If you do not want to be warned about partial assignments when they have 
been allowed, mark the checkbox No Warning when partial Assignments 
are Allowed at the bottom of the window.
4.	 Click on OK to accept the setup.

Analytical Accounting
[ 12 ]
By default, Analytical Accounting requires that the full distribution amount be 
assigned to an analysis code, but this is not always the way users want it to work.  
The Assignment Setup window grants users the flexibility to define if the distribution 
amount should be fully distributed, or if only a partial assignment is possible.
Creating transaction dimensions and 
dimension codes
Analysis information is entered via transaction dimensions. In this recipe we will 
take a look at the types of transaction dimensions that can be created.
There are four types of transaction dimensions that can be created: alphanumeric, 
numeric, yes/no, and date. An unlimited number of each type of transaction 
dimension can be created, with alphanumeric ones having codes created and attached.
To create an alphanumeric transaction dimension, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Transaction Dimension Maintenance window in Dynamics 
 GP by selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and  
then clicking on Transaction Dimension in the area page under  
Cards | Financial | Analytical Accounting.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
2.	 Enter MARKETING in the Trx Dimension field.
3.	 Enter Marketing Channels in Description 1.
4.	 Leave Create New Codes On The Fly checked to allow users to create new 
transaction dimension codes, when entering transactions.
5.	 Mark the Consolidate balances during Year End close checkbox to transfer 
analytical data to history during the year-end close.
6.	 Click on the Codes button in the bottom-right corner.
7.	 When prompted to save changes, click on Save.
8.	 Enter ONLINEADS in the Trx Dimension Code field.
9.	 Enter Online Adverts in the Description 1 field.
10.	 Click on the lookup button next to the Linked to Node field.
11.	 Ensure that Marketing Channels is selected, and click on Select.
12.	 Click on Save.
13.	 Repeat steps 7 to 11 to create transaction dimension codes for TWITTER, 
FACEBOOK, and GOOGLE+.
14.	 Click on Save, and close the Transaction Dimension Code  
Maintenance window.
15.	 Click on Save, and close the Transaction Dimension Maintenance window.



Analytical Accounting
[ 16 ]
Granting user access to transaction 
dimensions
Now that transaction dimensions and accounting classes have been created, the final 
step needed before Analytical Accounting can be used for entering transactions and 
to grant user access to the transaction dimensions. Access can only be configured for 
alphanumeric transaction dimensions, whereas other transaction dimensions will be 
available to all users.
To grant user access, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the User Access to Trx Dimension Codes window in Dynamics 
GP by selecting Administration from the navigation pane on the left, and 
then clicking on User Access in the area page under Setup | Company | 
Analytical Accounting.
2.	 Enter MARKETING in the Trx Dimension field.
3.	 Enter ONLINEADS in the Trx Dimension Code field.
4.	 To give access to the dimensions during transaction entry, mark the checkbox 
in the Dimension column, next to the relevant users in the scrolling window.
5.	 To give access to the dimensions when making an adjustment to a posted 
transaction, mark the checkbox in the Adjust column next to the relevant 
users in the scrolling window.
6.	 Click on Save, and repeat steps 2 to 5 for all transaction dimension codes, 
which have been created.

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Once granted access, users can enter or adjust transactions. Any new user created 
in Dynamics GP will need to have access granted before they can enter or adjust 
dimension information.
As discussed earlier, Analytical Accounting integrates with the standard security 
model of Dynamics GP. But, this is only to give access to the windows themselves. 
If a user is to be able to use the alphanumeric analysis codes, then the user needs to 
have access granted through User Access to Trx Dimension Codes.
When implementing the module, it would be worth speaking to your Dynamics GP 
partner for scripts to help automate the configuration of security for new codes.
Entering a transaction with Analytical 
Accounting information
With the setup of Analytical Accounting that we have covered so far in this recipe, 
we are now able to start entering transactions, and record the additional information 
via the transaction dimensions.
To enter a payable transaction with Analytical Accounting information, perform  
the following steps:
1.	 Open the Purchase Order Entry window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Purchasing from the navigation pane on the left, and then clicking on 
Purchase Order Entry in the area page under Transactions.
2.	 Leave the Type: field as Standard, and tab through the PO Number field  
to have a purchase order number assigned.
3.	 Enter IMAGEMAK0001 in the Vendor ID field.
www.allitebooks.com

Analytical Accounting
[ 18 ]
4.	 Enter MARKETING in the Item field.
5.	 Enter Each in the U of M field.
6.	 Enter 1 in Quantity Ordered.
7.	 Enter a unit cost of $10,000 in the Unit Cost field.
8.	 Enter Online Marketing in the Description field.
9.	 Enter NORTH in Site ID.
10.	 Click on the blue expansion arrow button next to the Item field header to 
open Purchase Item Detail Entry.
11.	 Click on the Analytical Accounting button next to the Purchases Account 
field to open the Analytical Purchase Order Entry window.
12.	 Change the Assign % field to 66.67%.
13.	 Enter ONLINEADS in the Alphanumeric column of the scrolling window.
14.	 Enter Online adverts via adsense in the Reference field (this field is 
restricted to 30 characters).
15.	 Click on the Assign % column on the second row, and enter 33.33%.
16.	 Enter Sponsored tweets in the Reference field.
17.	 Enter TWITTER in the first row of the Alphanumeric column.
18.	 Click on OK to save, and close the Analytical Payables Transaction  
Entry window.
19.	 Click on Save, and close the Purchasing Item Detail Entry window.
20.	 Click on Save, and then close the Purchase Order Entry window.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Analytical Accounting transaction dimension information can be broken down on 
each distribution line by changing the Originating Amount or Assign % values 
on the Analytical Payables Transaction Entry window, and then entering an 
Originating Amount or Assign % on the next line, in the scrolling window.
Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 has seen several enhancements to the Analytical 
Accounting series such as integration to the Fixed Asset Management and the  
ability to duplicate analysis information when copying a transaction.
Duplicate analysis information when copying 
a transaction
Analysis information can be copied for three types of transactions: Purchase  
Orders, Sales Orders, and posted General Ledger transactions.
In each of the copy transaction windows, a new checkbox has been added.  
For example, in the Copy Journal Entry window, a new Copy Analytical 
Accounting Information checkbox has been added.
The same functionality has been added to the copy of Purchase and Sales Orders.
Integration of Analytical Accounting with 
Fixed Asset Management
In Dynamics GP 2013, Fixed Asset Management has been enhanced to allow the 
entry of analysis information for distribution accounts, which are linked to an 
account class. With the batch enhancements also added to Fixed Assets General 
Ledger Posting, the analysis information can be saved prior to posting the batch.

Analytical Accounting
[ 20 ]
Creating an Analytical Accounting budget
Budgets can be created and tracked for reporting purposes to ensure expenditure  
is managed. There are several steps required to create budgets for analytical 
accounting dimensions.
The first step is to create a budget tree, which contains the selected dimensions.  
To create one, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Tree Maintenance window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then clicking on Budget 
Tree in the area page under Cards.
2.	 Enter 2017 MARKETING in the Budget Tree ID field.
3.	 Enter 2017 Marketing Budget in the Description field.
4.	 In the Available Dimensions list, select 2017 Marketing Budget,  
and click the Insert>> button to move it to the Selected Dimensions list.
5.	 Click on Save, and then close the Budget Tree Maintenance window.
As many dimensions as required can be selected in the budget tree, so that a budget 
value can be assigned, and dimensions can be included in more than one budget tree.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
Once the budget tree has been created, the budget tree codes need to be assigned.  
To do this, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Assign Budget Tree Codes window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then clicking on Assign 
Budget Tree Codes in the area page under Cards.
2.	 Enter 2017 MARKETING in the Budget Tree ID field.
3.	 The From and To values will be set to <FIRST> and <LAST> respectively,  
but can be changed by either entering new values or performing a lookup.
In this example, we'll assign budgets to all codes within the Marketing 
Channels dimension, so leave them as they are, and click on the  
Assign button.
This will add the selected dimension codes to the Dimension Code Tree  
list in the lower-right corner of the window; codes can be removed or added 
using the controls to the left.
4.	 Click on the Save button, and then close the Assign Budget Tree  
Codes window.

Analytical Accounting
[ 22 ]
With the budget tree set up and dimensions assigned, the budget amounts can now 
be entered. This is done in the Analytical Accounting Budget Maintenance window. 
To add budget amounts, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Analytical Accounting Budget Maintenance window in Dynamics 
GP by selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then 
clicking on Assign Budget Tree Codes in the area page under Cards.
2.	 Enter 2017MARKETING in the Budget ID field.
3.	 Enter 2017 Marketing Channels Budget in the Description field.
4.	 Leaved Based On set to Fiscal Year, and set the Budget Year field to 2017.
5.	 Set the Budget Tree field to 2017MARKETING.
6.	 Click on the Methods button near the lower-right of the window to open the 
Budget Calculation Methods window.
7.	 Set Calculation Method to Yearly Budget Amount.
8.	 Enter $48,000.00 in the Amount field.

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
9.	 Click on Calculate to close the Budget Calculation Methods window.
10.	 The $48,000.00 budget value will be evenly distributed in the Node Budget 
Amounts list.
11.	 Change the Period4 4/1/2017 value to $2,000.00, and the Period5 5/1/2017 
value to $6,000.00.
12.	 The distributed $48,000.00 is at the top level of the budget, and  
needs to be rolled down to the dimension codes. To do this, click  
on the Node button to open the Node Budget Roll Down window.
13.	 Calculate Method can be set to either Equal Split, or left at the default of 
Percentage. Enter the following values:
°°
20.00% in Facebook
°°
10.00% in Google+
°°
40.00% in Online Adverts
°°
30.00% in Twitter
14.	 Click on the Assign button to accept the changes, and close the Node Budget 
Roll Down window.
15.	 Click on the Save button, and then close the Analytical Accounting Budget 
Maintenance window.
The budget that we have created is at dimension code level. Once a budget has  
been created and saved, it can be amended, and have more details applied to the 
budget by changing the Budget Level from Tree to Account. When this is done,  
each node in the Dimension Code Tree will need to have an account assigned.
If only a single account is required for a particular node, then this can be done  
by entering it in the Account field. If a range of nodes need to have the budget 
amount distributed, then open the Account Budget Roll Down window by  
clicking on the Account button.
Analytical Accounting budgets in  
Microsoft Excel
The Analytical Accounting Budget Maintenance window is used to create budgets 
within Microsoft Dynamics GP, but can also be used to export a budget to Microsoft 
Excel, and then import it again.

Analytical Accounting
[ 24 ]
To export a budget to Microsoft Excel, follow these steps:
1.	 Open the Analytical Accounting Budget Maintenance window in Dynamics 
GP by selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then 
clicking on Assign Budget Tree Codes in the area page under Cards.
2.	 Perform a lookup, and select 2017MARKETING in the Budget ID field.
3.	 Click on the Export button on the toolbar.
4.	 Leave the Excel Workbook type set to New workbook. Before  
clicking on OK, make sure all windows are minimized as the Microsoft  
Excel Save As dialog will often open behind the main Dynamics GP window, 
and can be difficult to access.
5.	 Enter 2017MARKETING in the File name, and then click on Open.
Year-end processing
The General Ledger Year-End Closing window performs the bulk of actions 
required for the year-end processing of the Analytical Accounting module.  
When the year-end closing is performed, the following occurs:
1.	 All the previous years' analytical data for each account is transferred  
to the history (when history is being kept).
2.	 Analytical information for marked alphanumeric transaction dimensions 
for open year balance sheet accounts are brought forward as the beginning 
balances in the new fiscal year.
3.	 Analytical information for marked alphanumeric transaction  
dimensions for open year profit and loss accounts is consolidated  
and transferred to the Retained Earnings account.
To ensure the analytical data is correct, balance brought forward transactions 
are created even if no profit and loss distributions exist for the year being 
closed and the profit and loss accounts' balances are zeroed.
4.	 Balances are brought forward for unit accounts.
5.	 The Analytical Accounting year-end closing report is printed.

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
Activating Analytical Accounting in an 
existing system
If you are activating Analytical Accounting in a Dynamics GP system which  
already had fiscal years closed, then you need to run the Transfer Transaction  
Data to History utility. This window is used to transfer analytical transaction 
information for closed years to the history and, in order to prevent duplicate brought 
forward balances, it is important that the transfer is completed before transactions 
are posted to a closed year or before closing an open year.
To transfer analysis information for closed years to history:
1.	 Open the Transfer Transaction Data to History window in Dynamics  
GP by selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then 
clicking on Move Data To History in the area page under Utilities | 
Analytical Accounting.
2.	 Select the action to perform:
°°
Transfer transaction detail to history will transfer all analysis 
information for the earliest closed year to the history.
°°
Consolidate transactions and transfer detail to history will 
consolidate transactions in the closed year based on the alphanumeric 
transaction dimensions marked for inclusion in the year-end close 
process. The analysis information will be moved to the history and 
closing balances brought forward to the next year.
°°
Print transfer preview report only allows you to print a report 
showing what the transfer will do.
3.	 After selecting one of the three options, click on the OK button.
Analytical Accounting inquiries
Analytical Accounting includes a number of inquiries, which can be used to  
view information.

Analytical Accounting
[ 26 ]
Transaction Dimension Relation
The Transaction Dimension Relation is the simplest of the inquiry windows and does 
not have any user-definable criteria. The inquiry window shows the hierarchical 
structure, if any, created for the alphanumeric dimension codes.
Analytical Accounting – Journal Entry Inquiry
The Analytical Accounting – Journal Entry Inquiry can be used to view the analysis 
information for posted transactions as well as the consolidated analysis information 
for the balances that are brought forward.
To view a posted transaction's analysis information, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Analytical Accounting – Journal Entry Inquiry window in 
Dynamics GP by selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, 
and then clicking on Journal Entry Inquiry in the area page under Inquiry | 
Analytical Accounting.
2.	 In the Budget ID field, enter or perform a lookup for a posted transaction 
with analysis information. In this example, I am using journal 3,454.
3.	 Use the navigation buttons next to the Distribution field to scroll  
through the distributions to view the analysis information in the  
window at the bottom of the window.

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
Distribution Query Wizard
The Analytical Accounting Distribution Query Wizard is used to create, execute,  
and export queries to a Microsoft Excel worksheet and allows queries to be saved  
for later reuse.
Posted analysis information for transaction dimension codes that have subsequently 
been set to inactive status can be viewed, as well as the consolidated balances that 
are brought forward when a fiscal year is closed; the beginning value of the period  
range must be 0 in the Distribution Query Wizard – Finish window in order  
to view consolidated balances.
To use the Distribution Query Wizard to run a query, follow these steps:
1.	 Open the Distribution Query Wizard window in Dynamics GP by  
selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then  
clicking on Distribution Query Wizard in the area page under  
Inquiry | Analytical Accounting.
2.	 Select Execute Ad Hoc Query, and click on Next.
3.	 On the Column Selection step, select the following items in the  
Available Columns list, and then click on the Insert>> button after  
selecting each one:
°°
Journal Entry
°°
GL Posting Date
°°
Account Number
°°
Account Description
°°
Credit Amount
°°
Debit Amount
°°
Vendor ID
°°
Item Number
°°
Trx Dimension – Alphanumeric
°°
Marketing Channels
4.	 Click on Next.
5.	 In the list, select Marketing Channels to populate the Selected Column field.
6.	 Set the Select Type to Is Between.

Analytical Accounting
[ 28 ]
7.	 Set the range to FACEBOOK and TWITTER.
8.	 Mark the Balance Sheet checkbox.
9.	 Click on Next.
10.	 Click on Next.
11.	 Click on Next to proceed without Order By Selection.
12.	 On the Completing the Options step, set Period in the From field to 1 and 
the To field to 12.
13.	 Enter 2017 Marketing Channels in the Comment field.
14.	 Click on Finish to generate the inquiry to Excel.
The preceding steps show how to create an ad hoc query, but the inquiry also  
allows queries to be saved for later by adding a couple of extra steps to them.  
To save a query, perform these steps:
1.	 Open the Distribution Query Wizard window in Dynamics GP  
by selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then  
clicking on Distribution Query Wizard in the area page under Inquiry | 
Analytical Accounting.
2.	 Select Query Maintenance and click on Next.
3.	 In the Query ID field, enter 2017MARKETING.
4.	 Enter 2017 Marketing Channels in the Description field.
5.	 Click on Next.
6.	 Use the steps from the Ad Hoc Query steps mentioned previously to create 
the query and save it for use.

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
The query can be run using the third option on Distribution Query Wizard.  
To do so, follow these steps:
1.	 Open the Distribution Query Wizard window in Dynamics GP  
by selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then  
clicking on Distribution Query Wizard in the area page under Inquiry | 
Analytical Accounting.
2.	 Select Execute Existing Query, and click on Next.
3.	 Select 2017MARKETING in Query ID, and click on Next.
4.	 Enter a Comment and click on Finish to run the query as saved, or use the < 
Back button to amend the query.
There is no limit to the number of queries that can be saved in this inquiry.
Multilevel Query Wizard
The Analytical Accounting Multilevel Query Wizard is used to create, execute, and 
export queries to a Microsoft Excel worksheet. Queries can be created to analyze the 
data based on transaction dimensions, which can include dimensions set to inactive as 
well as consolidated balances that are brought forward when a fiscal year is closed.
As with the Distribution Query Wizard, queries can be saved for reuse as well as 
being constructed and used on an ad hoc basis.
Creating and saving a Multilevel Query is the same as creating and saving  
a Distribution Query. In this example, we'll cover creating an ad hoc query.  
To create one, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Multilevel Query Wizard window in Dynamics GP by  
selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, and then  
clicking on Multilevel Query Wizard in the area page under Inquiry | 
Analytical Accounting.
2.	 Select Execute Ad Hoc Query, and click on Next.
3.	 On the Level Selection step, select the following items in the  
Available Items list, and click on the Insert>> button after selecting  
each one:
°°
Time
°°
Account Number
°°
Marketing Channels
4.	 Click on Next.

Analytical Accounting
[ 30 ]
5.	 On the Column Spreads step, click on Next.
6.	 Enter MT_ACCOUNT, or perform a lookup and select MT_ACCOUNT as  
the Tree for the Account Number level.
7.	 Enter MT_MARKETING, or perform a lookup and select MT_MARKETING  
as the Tree for the Marketing Channels level.
8.	 Click on Next.
9.	 Mark the Balance Sheet checkbox, and click on Next.
10.	 On the Column Selection step, select the following Available Columns  
and click on the Insert>> button.
°°
Net change
°°
Net change YTD
11.	 Click on Next.
12.	 Set the Period range in the From field to 4 and the To field to 4.
13.	 Click on Finish to generate the query.
14.	 In the resulting Excel spreadsheet, click on the expansion button to show  
the multilevel data.
Analytical Accounting Budget vs Actual 
Inquiry
The Analytical Accounting Budget vs Actual Inquiry window can be used to 
view the actual and budgeted amounts for a selected node along with the variance 
calculated as both an amount and a percentage. To use the inquiry, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Open the Analytical Accounting Budget vs Actual Inquiry window in 
Dynamics GP by selecting Financial from the navigation pane on the left, 
and then clicking on Budget vs Actual in the area page under Inquiry | 
Analytical Accounting.

Chapter 1
[ 31 ]
2.	 Enter 2017MARKETING in the Budget ID field.
3.	 Enter 2017 in the Year field.
4.	 In the Dimension Code Tree list, click on Online Adverts to populate the 
grid at the bottom of the window with the actual and budget values for the 
selected dimension code.
Analytical Account SmartLists
If deployed, there are a number of SmartLists available to inquire upon the 
Analytical Accounting data, which work in the same fashion as standard SmartLists.
The SmartLists can be broken down into two types: Setup and Transaction,  
with the former having a larger number of SmartLists.
Setup
Transaction
AA Accounting Classes
AA Dimension Balances
AA Distribution Queries
AA Transactions
AA Multilevel Queries
AA Trees
AA Trx Dimension Codes
AA Trx Dimensions

Analytical Accounting
[ 32 ]
Summary
In this chapter we have taken an introductory look at the Analytical Accounting 
module covering setup and transaction entry. Analytical Accounting is not a  
stand-alone module, but one which operates by adding additional functionality into 
other modules. The majority of Analytical Accounting functionality lives within the 
Financial series, but it adds functionality to modules such as Payables Management, 
Receivables Management, Inventory Management, and Fixed Assets among others.
The purpose of Analytical Accounting is to allow the recording of analysis 
information at a level below the General Ledger account. This allows deeper  
analysis of expenditure, or revenue, without overcomplicating the chart of accounts.
In the next chapter, we'll take a look at how Cash Flow Management can be used  
to oversee the management of inflows and outflows of cash.

Cash Flow Management
Cash Flow Management can be used to keep a track of cash flow within Microsoft 
Dynamics GP and also to forecast cash flow based on one or more checkbook 
balances with or without work/adjustment transactions such as deposits, payments, 
or reconciliation adjustments that are not part of the checkbook balances.
Cash Flow Management can be used to complete the following tasks:
•	
Create an unlimited number of different cash flow forecasts
•	
Create scenarios without recording transactions
•	
Summarize daily inflows and outflows of cash in the Cash Flow Calendar
•	
View the summary of any given day's cash inflow and outflow
•	
Run summary or detailed reports on weekly and monthly cash flow
Cash Flow Management is installed automatically with Microsoft Dynamics GP  
and is licensed as a part of the starter pack, and so is available to all users.
Creating a cash flow forecast
Microsoft Dynamics GP Cash Flow Management supports the creation of unlimited 
cash flow forecasts, one of which can be defined as the default.
To create a default cash flow forecast which includes transactions against all 
checkbooks from all series, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Cash Flow Forecast window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on  
Cash Flow Forecast in the area page under Setup | Financial.

Cash Flow Management
[ 34 ]
2.	 Enter DEFAULT in the Forecast ID field.
3.	 Mark the Default checkbox.
4.	 Enter Default Cash Flow Forecast in the Description field.
5.	 Mark the All checkbox in the Include Checkbook ID(s) frame.
6.	 Mark the Open and Work checkboxes for Receivables Management.
7.	 Mark the Sales Order Processing Documents checkbox.
8.	 Mark the Open and Work checkboxes for Payables Management.
9.	 Mark the Purchase Order Processing Documents checkbox.
10.	 To include "what if?" transactions mark the Cash Flow Transactions 
checkbox.
11.	 Enter 13 in the Weeks to Display field.
12.	 Click on Save, and close the Cash Flow Forecast window.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
Now that a default cash flow forecast has been created, we can progress on to using 
the Cash Flow Management module.
Cash flow forecasts are how the cash inflows and outflows are tracked within 
Dynamics GP. Each cash flow forecast created can have different bank accounts and 
options such as the opening balance, defined to allow different forecasts to be used.
Using the Cash Flow Calendar
The Cash Flow Calendar displays the inflow and outflow of cash according to the 
rules defined against the default cash flow forecast.
To view the Cash Flow Calendar, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Cash Flow Calendar window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on Cash 
Flow Calendar in the area page under Inquiry | Financial.
2.	 As the legend shows, a red entry wrapped in parentheses on the first line of 
a date shows a net daily outflow of cash, as occurred on the 4th of April; and 
a blue entry shows a net daily inflow of cash as shown on the 12th of April. 
The balance in black on the second line shows the balance to date.

Cash Flow Management
[ 36 ]
3.	 Double-clicking on a calendar cell will launch the Cash Flow Explorer 
window, where the details of the movement can be seen.
4.	 When the Cash Flow Calendar window is opened from the menu or area page, 
only the default cash flow forecast can be viewed. The Cash Flow Explorer 
window can be used to access Cash Flow Calendars of other forecasts.
5.	 The Cash Flow Calendar provides the ability to print a cash flow  
monthly report.
6.	 The cash flow monthly report is printed by clicking on the Print button  
and selecting the destination of the report.
The Cash Flow Explorer window can be used to view the details of the movement 
on each date. When the window is first opened, it will show the transactions for 
the default cash flow forecast for the user date, but this can be changed to view the 
details of other cash flow forecasts.
To use the Cash Flow Explorer, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Cash Flow Explorer window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on  
Cash Flow Explorer in the area page under Inquiry | Financial.
2.	 The details of the cash flow can now be seen; click on 4 in the Tuesday 
column to launch the Cash Flow Explorer window for the 4th of April.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
3.	 Expand the Sales node, and click on Sales Documents to see the two 
transactions, which comprise the net daily outflow for 4th April.
4.	 Double-click on STDINV2258 to open the Sales Transaction Inquiry Zoom 
window to see details of the transaction.
5.	 Close the Sales Transaction Inquiry Zoom window.
6.	 Close the Cash Flow Calendar window.
Cash Flow Explorer provides an easy-to-use interface which allows the user  
to browse through dates and see which modules have transactions, and then  
drill down to see details of the transactions.
When opened, the Cash Flow Explorer window shows the default cash flow forecast, 
which we have created at the start of this chapter. Cash Flow Management can have 
an unlimited number of cash flow forecasts created in it, and Cash Flow Explorer can 
be used to inquire upon these as well.
It can also be used to launch the Cash Flow Calendar window for any cash flow 
forecast and also to produce weekly cash flow reports.
Viewing other cash flow forecasts
To use Cash Flow Explorer to view forecasts other than the default, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Open the Cash Flow Explorer window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on  
Cash Flow Explorer in the area page under Inquiry | Financial.
2.	 Click on the Open button as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 The Forecasts window will open showing all cash flow forecasts that  
have been created; select the desired forecast.
4.	 Click on Select to close the window.
The Cash Flow Explorer window will now display the selected cash flow forecast; 
the Forecast ID and Description fields will be displayed in the windows status bar.
www.allitebooks.com

Cash Flow Management
[ 38 ]
Launching Cash Flow Calendar from Cash 
Flow Explorer
As well as being launched from the area page, the Cash Flow Calendar inquiry 
window can also be loaded from the Cash Flow Explorer window by performing  
the following steps:
1.	 Open the Cash Flow Explorer window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on  
Cash Flow Explorer in the area page under Inquiry | Financial.
2.	 Click on the Calendar button as highlighted in the following screenshot:
Once launched from Cash Flow Explorer, the Cash Flow Calendar can be used  
to browse the selected cash flow forecast.
Printing weekly cash flow reports
There are three reports available from Cash Flow Explorer: Weekly Summary, 
Weekly Summary by Source, and Weekly Detail by Source. These reports are 
printed by clicking on the print icon and selecting the relevant option.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
"What if?" transactions
Cash Flow Management is mainly used to track the inflow and outflow of cash  
in Microsoft Dynamics GP by using cash flow forecasts. As with any good forecast 
module, "what if?" transactions can be entered to either include transactions which 
are due but have not yet arrived, or to model the predicted impact of future business 
operations.
To use a "what if?" transaction, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Cash Flow Transactions window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on Cash 
Flow Transaction in the area page under Setup | Financial.
2.	 Enter 5/1/2017 in the Due Date field.
3.	 Enter Forecast Adjustment in the Description field.
4.	 Enter $15,000.00 in the Amount field.
5.	 Repeat steps 2 to 5 to enter a transaction of $13,000.00 for 8/5/2017.

Cash Flow Management
[ 40 ]
An unlimited number of cash flow transactions can be entered and removed when 
they are no longer required. These transactions will only be included in the cash flow 
forecast if the Cash Flow Transactions checkbox on the forecast has been checked.
"What if?" transactions appear in the cash flow forecast and Cash Flow Calendar, 
affecting the figures. They're used to predict the impact of expected future 
transactions without having an impact on the general ledger balances.
Once the cash flow transaction has been entered, it will be included in the Cash Flow 
Calendar and Cash Flow Explorer windows. To view the transactions, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Open the Cash Flow Calendar window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on Cash 
Flow Calendar in the area page under Inquiry | Financial.
2.	 Click on the Next Month button in the top-right of the window to change the 
calendar to May; the cells for the 1st and 8th show the $15,000 and $13,000 
transactions entered previously.
3.	 Click on the cell containing $15,000 to launch the Cash Flow  
Explorer window.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
4.	 Click on CFM Transaction to view the "what if?" transactions.
5.	 Close the Cash Flow Explorer window.
6.	 Close the Cash Flow Calendar window.
Cash flow transactions can be removed once they are no longer required for  
the forecast.
Summary
In this chapter we looked at Cash Flow Management, how to create and view 
forecasts, and how to enter "what if?" transactions to explore scenarios. The next 
chapter will cover the creation and maintenance of budgets in Dynamics GP 2013.


Budget Creation and 
Maintenance
One of the most important accounting tools for a business is the budget, which 
is generally created on an annual basis to outline the expected needs of each 
department or business area.
A major benefit of budgets is the ability to control spending on certain operations  
by restricting the funds available for spending, which can require managers and 
buyers to find new vendors or suppliers to meet budget limits.
Budgets also allow companies to plan for future growth and expansion, and allow 
the creation of a financial roadmap.
Dynamics GP provides a flexible and easy-to-use budget creation and maintenance 
utility, which allows for comparison to the previous year's actual and budget figures 
during the budget creation process.
Creating a budget with Microsoft Excel
Budgets can be created in Dynamics GP directly, but the most efficient way  
of creating a budget for use in Microsoft Dynamics GP is to create it using  
Microsoft Excel.
There are four steps to create a budget in Dynamics GP. They are as follows:
1.	 Create the budget.
2.	 Export the budget to Microsoft Excel from Dynamics GP.
3.	 Edit the budget in Microsoft Excel.
4.	 Import the budget back into Dynamics GP.

Budget Creation and Maintenance
[ 44 ]
It is strongly recommended that the budget be created in Dynamics GP and exported 
to Microsoft Excel for editing, as the import process requires the structure of the file 
to be exactly the same as the one being exported. The attempts to create the budget 
template manually can be very problematic.
To create a budget in Microsoft Excel, follow the given steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Selection window in Dynamics GP by clicking on 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on  
Budgets in the area page under Cards | Financial.
2.	 Click on the New button and then navigate to using Budget Wizard  
for Excel.
3.	 On the Welcome to the Budget Wizard for the Excel window, click on Next.
4.	 Many of the organizations I have dealt with have used multiple budgets 
throughout the year. For example, they'll create an initial budget, a half-year 
forecast, and a master budget for reporting. As such, I always recommend 
that the year be placed at the start of the Budget ID, to group them together 
in the list of budgets. Following this recommendation, enter 2017 MASTER in 
the Enter an ID for this budget field.
5.	 Enter Master Budget for 2017 in Enter a description for this budget.
6.	 Leave Select how to base this budget set to Fiscal Year and change Select 
the date range for this budget to 2017.
7.	 Click on Next to progress to the next step.

Chapter 3
[ 45 ]
8.	 Budgets can be based on one of the four calculation methods. In this example, 
click on Other Budget Percent.
9.	 Click on Next.
10.	 Set the Select a source budget ID field to BUDGET 2008.
11.	 Set Increase by to 2.50% and click on Next.
12.	 If a worksheet for actual figures is to be output to the Excel budget, check the 
relevant checkbox, otherwise click on Next.
13.	 The Account Verification step allows the selected accounts to be reviewed 
and unwanted ones to be removed. In this case, click on Next to proceed.
14.	 Accept A new workbook as the Excel workbook to use, and click on Next.
15.	 Before clicking on Finish to complete the budget creation, minimize all open 
windows other than the Budget Wizard for Excel window to prevent the 
Excel Save As dialog popping behind a window, and being inaccessible. 
Once the windows have been minimized, click on Finish.
16.	 Click on Save to save the 2017 MASTER.xlsx file to your Documents folder.

Budget Creation and Maintenance
[ 46 ]
Editing a budget in Microsoft Excel
Now that the 2017 MASTER budget has been created in Microsoft Excel by copying 
the MASTER 2008 budget, and adding 2.5 percent, the budget can be edited in Excel 
before being imported into Dynamics GP.
It is very important that the column structure and the header rows of the spreadsheet 
are not altered; if they are, the budget will not import back into Dynamics GP.
To edit the budget, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the 2017 MASTER.xlsx spreadsheet you saved to your  
Documents folder.
2.	 Change the cells D5, E5, F5, G5, H5, and I5 to 20500.00.
3.	 Click on the Save button and close Microsoft Excel (a common mistake  
is not to close Microsoft Excel which then causes the import to fail due  
to a file lock).
As many changes as required can be made to the Excel spreadsheet, and additional 
account codes can be inserted if required. The changes are only within the Excel 
spreadsheet; to apply the changes, the spreadsheet needs to be imported into 
Dynamics GP.
Importing a budget from Microsoft Excel
Now that the 2017 MASTER budget has been edited in Microsoft Excel, we now  
need to import it back to Dynamics GP.
To import the budget into Dynamics GP, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Selection window in Dynamics GP by clicking on 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Budgets  
in the area page under Cards | Financial.

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
2.	 Click on the Excel button and then click on Import from Excel which will 
launch Budget Wizard from Excel.
3.	 On the Welcome page, click on Next.
4.	 Click on An Existing Microsoft Dynamics GP budget and enter 2017 
MASTER.
5.	 Click on Next.
6.	 Click on Browse… and then click on the Excel spreadsheet 2017 MASTER.
xlsx from your Documents folder.
7.	 Click on the 2017 MASTER worksheet and click on Next.
8.	 Click on Finish to complete the import.

Budget Creation and Maintenance
[ 48 ]
Maintaining budgets
After a budget is created it tends to be dynamic, as business and budgeting needs 
change during the course of the year, resulting in budget values changing or needing 
to be moved from one account to another.
As well as being used to create budgets, Microsoft Excel can also be used to maintain 
them. This can be done in one of two ways.
•	
The Open button can be clicked and this will open the existing Microsoft 
Excel spreadsheet, which has previously been exported. This method is not 
generally recommended, as there is no guarantee that the spreadsheet on 
your PC or network share is the most up-to-date.
•	
The budget can be exported to Microsoft Excel for amendment. This method 
ensures the up-to-date budget is updated.
To amend a budget using Microsoft, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Selection window in Dynamics GP by clicking on 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Budgets  
in the area page under Cards | Financial.
2.	 Click on the 2017 MASTER budget and click on the Excel button. Then,  
click on Export to Excel which will launch the Budget Wizard from Excel.
3.	 Click on New workbook for Excel Workbook type.
4.	 Minimize the main Dynamics GP window and then click on OK.
5.	 In the Excel Save As dialog, click on Save to accept the default location  
of your Documents folder.
Once the export is finished, the spreadsheet can be updated and then imported  
back into Dynamics GP as we covered previously.
If only minor amendments are required to a budget, then using Microsoft  
Excel can be likened to using the proverbial sledgehammer to crack the equally 
proverbial walnut.

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Microsoft Dynamics GP provides an alternative method for editing and creating 
budgets, which is far quicker than using Excel when a small number of changes  
are required.
To edit a budget through Microsoft Dynamics GP, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Selection window in Dynamics GP by clicking on 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Budgets  
in the area page under Cards | Financial.
2.	 Click on the 2017 MASTER budget.
3.	 Click on the Open button and then click on using Microsoft Dynamics  
GP to open the Budget Maintenance window.
4.	 Enter 000-1100-00 in the Account field.
5.	 Decrease the Amount for Period 1 to $15,500.00.
6.	 Increase the Amount for Period 4 to $25,500.00.
7.	 Click on Save and close the Budget Maintenance window.

Budget Creation and Maintenance
[ 50 ]
Combining budgets
Until Microsoft Dynamics GP 2010, one of the features most commonly asked about 
by customers was missing. This was the ability to combine budgets together so that 
separate budgets could be created for each budget holder, and then merged together 
in Dynamics GP rather than in Microsoft Excel.
Two budgets are required for the combine function. We can use the 2017 MASTER 
budget as the one into which we will merge a second budget, but we will need to 
create this second budget first. This can be done using the steps already covered  
on creating a new budget and create a budget for the sales division (Division 
Segment = 300) called 2017 SALES.
To combine the 2017 SALES budget with the 2017 MASTER budget, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Selection window in Dynamics GP by clicking on 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Budgets in 
the area page under Cards | Financial.
2.	 Click on the 2017 MASTER budget.
3.	 Click on the Open button and then click on using Microsoft Dynamics GP  
to open the Budget Maintenance window.
4.	 Click on the Combine Budgets button to open the Combine Budgets 
window.
5.	 Leave the Master Budget ID field set to 2017 Master.
6.	 Enter 2017 SALES in the Combine with Budget ID field.
7.	 Click on Process to enact the combine of 2017 SALES into 2017 MASTER.
8.	 Click on OK to confirm the Process was successful message box.

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
One important point to remember is that the combine budgets feature merges the 
budgets together. It does not overwrite the destination budget values with those 
from the one being merged in. Combine should be used only when a value has not 
been entered or the budget of the destination is to be increased (or decreased) by the 
amount on the budget being merged in.
Entering budget transactions
Another feature introduced in Microsoft Dynamics GP 2010 is the ability to enter 
budget transactions to adjust the budgets previously created. The advantage of using 
budget transactions over updating the budget via Budget Maintenance or Excel is 
that a record can be maintained of what adjustments to the budget have been made.
There are two settings that can be reviewed before starting to use budget 
transactions. The first is the Budget Journal Entry number, which can be increased 
from the default of 1, and the other is the Maintain History checkbox for Budget 
Transactions.
To maintain these settings, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the General Ledger Settings window in Dynamics GP by clicking 
on Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on General 
Ledger in the area page under Setup | Financial.
2.	 Check the Budget Transactions checkbox under the Maintain  
History heading.
If you do not mark the Maintain History option for Budget Transactions, then no 
record of the budget adjustment is kept when the transaction is posted, which means 
you cannot see what adjustments have been made to the budget.

Budget Creation and Maintenance
[ 52 ]
To enter a budget transaction, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Transaction Entry window in Dynamics GP by clicking 
on Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Budget 
Transactions in the area page under Transactions | Financial.
2.	 Enter Adjustment to Budget in the Reference field.
3.	 Enter 2017 MASTER in the Budget ID field.
4.	 Enter $1,000.00 in the Adjustment column for Period 1 through Period 6.
5.	 Click on Post to post the budget transaction and update the budget values.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
The budget transaction updates the budget, so that any inquiry or report will show 
on the budget value plus the budget transaction. Only if the history for the budget 
transactions is being maintained, will Dynamics GP have any record that a budget 
transaction has been used.
Summary
In this chapter, we have covered the creation of budgets and their maintenance via 
both Microsoft Excel and a window in Microsoft Dynamics GP. We followed this 
up with how to combine budgets and enter budget transactions. In the next chapter, 
we will take a look at how to report on the budget figures themselves and also in 
comparison to the actuals.


Budget Reporting
In the last chapter, we took a look at creating and maintaining budgets in Dynamics 
GP. Budgets are of little use unless the information can be inquired or reported upon.
Dynamics GP provides several ways in which this can be accomplished. In this 
chapter, we will start by taking a look at the inquiries and reports available in 
Dynamics GP, before moving onto reporting in Dynamics GP and wrapping up  
with a look at budget reporting using Management Reporter 2012, which is the 
financial reporting tool for Microsoft Dynamics ERP.
Inquiries
There are a number of standard inquiries available in Dynamics GP, which can be 
used to inquire upon budget data. As with all inquiries in Dynamics GP, the ones 
available for budgets inquire upon a single piece of data.
Budget Summary Inquiry
The Budget Summary Inquiry provides a quick and easy-to-use view to see the 
budget value assigned to an account.

Budget Reporting
[ 56 ]
To use the Budget Summary Inquiry, follow the given steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Summary Inquiry window in Dynamics GP by clicking 
on Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Budget 
Summary in the area page under Inquiry | Financial.
2.	 Enter 000-1100-00 in the Account field to load the account we have  
used in previous examples.
3.	 Enter 2017 MASTER in the Budget ID field.
4.	 By default, this inquiry shows the net change of the budget, but can  
be changed to show the period balances, as shown in the following 
screenshot, by clicking on the Period Balances option under Display.
5.	 Click on Clear and then close the window.

Chapter 4
[ 57 ]
The Budget Summary Inquiry is a useful tool to give to budget holders, so they  
can review the budget values assigned to accounts without giving them access  
to the budget maintenance where they could make changes.
Budget vs. Actual Inquiry
One of the most useful inquiries that can be made available to budget holders is the 
Budget vs. Actual Inquiry. It can be used to compare the budgeted values against the 
transactions that have been entered, while showing the variance as both a functional 
currency value and percentage.
To use the Budget vs. Actual Inquiry, follow the given steps:
1.	 Open the Budget vs. Actual Inquiry window in Dynamics GP by clicking on 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Budget vs. 
Actual in the area page under Inquiry | Financial.
2.	 Enter 000-1100-00 in the Account field.
3.	 Enter 2017 MASTER in the Budget ID field.
4.	 Click on Clear and then close the window.


Chapter 4
[ 59 ]
2.	 Enter 000-1100-00 in the Account field.
3.	 Enter 2017 MASTER in the Budget ID field.
Account Rollup Inquiry
Account rollups are inquiries built to allow users to see different GP accounts  
and their budgets rolled up together, and to provide drill back capability to the 
details. Additionally, these queries can include calculations for things such as  
budget versus actual comparisons and calculations.
To an extent, Account Rollup Inquiries function as "Management Reporter Lite", 
in the way they allow users to access the same functionality of reporting on actual 
and budget figures for accounts in periods and drill down to see the same details. 
Account rollups are quicker to use as the more restricted functionality makes them 
less complicated.
To create an Account Rollup Inquiry for the 2017 SALES budget, follow the  
given steps:
1.	 Open the Account Rollup Inquiry window in Dynamics GP by clicking on 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Account 
Rollup in the area page under Inquiry | Financial.
2.	 Enter BUDGET-SALES in the Option ID field.
3.	 Tab out of Option ID and click on Yes on the Do you want to add this 
account rollup inquiry option? question.

Budget Reporting
[ 60 ]
4.	 Set Sort By to Department and change the number of columns to 3.
5.	 In the scrolling window, follow the given steps:
1.	 Change the first row's Column Heading to Actuals (2017).
2.	 Change the second row's Column Heading to Budget (2017), 
set the Type to Budget, and enter 2017 SALES into the Selection 
column.
3.	 In the third row, enter Variance in the Column heading field, 
change the Type to Calculated, and click on the blue expansion 
arrow next to the Selection heading to open the Account Rollup 
Inquiry Calculated Column window.
6.	 In the Column: field, click on Budget (2017).
7.	 Click on the >> button to insert C2 into the Expression field.
8.	 Click on the – button to insert a minus sign into the Expression field.
9.	 Change Column: to Actuals (2017) and click on the >> button to insert C1 
into the Expression field.

Chapter 4
[ 61 ]
10.	 Click on OK to accept the calculation and close the Account Rollup  
Inquiry Calculated Column window.
11.	 Enter 300 (the code used for Sales in the chart of accounts) in the  
From: and To: fields.
12.	 Click on Insert>> to insert the Restriction.
13.	 Click on Save to save the new account rollup option.
14.	 Click on Inquiry to run the BUDGET-SALES Account Rollup Inquiry.
15.	 Click on Redisplay to populate the scrolling window with the data for 
Division 300.
The column headings on the Account Rollup Inquiry are hyperlinks, which will 
open the Account Rollup Detail Inquiry Zoom window and which in turn allows 
you to drill down to either account maintenance or the detail inquiry.

Budget Reporting
[ 62 ]
Detailed budget report
Dynamics GP contains only one standard report for budgets, which is a detailed 
budget report that shows the budget accounts and period amounts.
To generate the report, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Budget Report window in Dynamics GP by clicking on Financial 
from the Navigation Pane on the left, and clicking on Budget in the area page 
under Reports | Financial.
2.	 Click on New to open the Budget Report Options window.
3.	 Enter BUDGET in the Option field.
4.	 Check the Posting checkbox next to Include:.
5.	 Enter 2017 MASTER in the From: and To: fields.
6.	 Click on the Insert>> button.
7.	 Click on the Destination button to open the Report Destination window.
8.	 Uncheck Print and check Screen.
9.	 Click on OK to close the Report Destination window.

Chapter 4
[ 63 ]
10.	 Click on Print.
11.	 Close Screen Output – Detailed Budget.
12.	 Click on Save and close the Budget Report Options window.
13.	 Close the Budget Report window.
Budgets in Management Reporter 2012
The inquiries and report in Dynamics GP for budgets are good but fairly limited in 
functionality. Fortunately, another range of Dynamics products is available for use  
to report on budgets.
This is the Management Reporter 2012 financial reporting product. With the 
Dynamics GP 2013 Starter Pack (the base licensing pack), an unlimited number  
of administrator, designer, generator, and viewer licenses are available.
Management Reporter allows for the reporting of multiple budgets for periods, 
ranges of periods, or YTD. In this section, we'll take a look at producing a fairly 
simple budget for the Sales division using the 2017 SALES budget created earlier.
Before producing the report, you will need a fully implemented installation of the 
latest version of Management Reporter 2012 (at time of writing, this is Rollup 6).  
You also need security access to Management Reporter and a basic understanding  
of the reporting product.

Budget Reporting
[ 64 ]
We are going to cover a fairly simple report in this section in three parts showing 
how to create the row definition, column definition, and then the report definition, 
which pulls the first two together into a working report.
Creating the row definition
To create the row definition, follow the given steps:
1.	 Launch Management Reporter 2012 and log into the Fabrikam, Inc.  
company as normal.
2.	 Press Ctrl + Shift + R to create a new row definition.
3.	 Click on the Edit menu and then click on Insert Rows from Dimensions.
4.	 In the Division column, perform the following steps:
1.	 Enter &&& into the Dimensions row.
2.	 Enter 300 into the Dimension Range Start and Dimension  
Range End rows.
5.	 In the Account column, change the value in Dimensions to ####.
6.	 Click on OK to close the Insert Rows from Dimensions window  
and update the row definition.

Chapter 4
[ 65 ]
7.	 Click on Save.
8.	 Enter BUDGET-SALES in the Name field.
9.	 Enter Budget – Sales in the Description field.
10.	 Click on OK and close the row definition.
This row definition is very simple in structure, and will give an overview of the 
figures for the Sales division. However, with the options on the report definition  
that we will set later, we'll be able to drill down and see more details.
Creating the column definition
To create the column definition, follow the given steps:
1.	 Launch Management Reporter 2012 and log into the Fabrikam,  
Inc. company.
2.	 Press Ctrl + Shift + C to create a new column definition.
3.	 Enter Desc in the Column Type in column A.
4.	 In column B, perform the following steps:
1.	 Double-click on the Header 1 cell and enter Sales Budget @
FiscalYear in the Column header text and enter B in Spread  
from and G in Spread to.
2.	 Click on Ok to close the Column Header window.
3.	 In Header 2 enter 1 to 3, which is the period range that the column  
will contain.

Budget Reporting
[ 66 ]
4.	 Enter FD in the Column Type row which defines this column as 
containing either actual or budget figures from the financial dimension.
5.	 Enter 2017 Sales in the Book Code / Attribute Category row to 
select the required budget.
6.	 Enter 2017 in the Fiscal Year row.
7.	 Enter 1:3 in the Period row, which will calculate the figures for 
periods 1, 2, and 3.
8.	 Enter PERIODIC in the Periods Covered row.
9.	 Enter P<=B in the Print Column row.
5.	 Repeat step 4.2 to step 4.8 for 4 to 6, 7 to 9, and 10 to 12 in Header 2; 
4:6, 7:9, and 10:12 in the Period row.
6.	 In column F, perform the following steps:
1.	 In Header 2, enter Year-to-Date.
2.	 Enter FD in the Column Type row.
3.	 Enter 2017 Sales in the Book Code / Attribute Category row.
4.	 Enter 2017 in the Fiscal Year row.
5.	 Enter BASE in the Period row.
6.	 Enter YTD in the Periods Covered row.
7.	 In column G, perform the following steps:
1.	 In Header 2 enter @FiscalYear.
2.	 Enter FD in the Column Type row.
3.	 Enter 2017 Sales in the Book Code / Attribute Category row.
4.	 Enter 2017 in the Fiscal Year row.
5.	 Enter 1:12 in the Period row.
6.	 Enter PERIODIC in the Periods Covered row.
8.	 Click on Save to save the new column definition.
9.	 Enter BUDGET-SALES-2017 in the Name field.
10.	 Enter Budget – Sales 2017 in the Description field.
11.	 Click on OK and close the column definition.

Chapter 4
[ 67 ]
Creating the report definition
To create the default records needed for analytical accounting, follow the given steps:
1.	 Launch Management Reporter 2012 and log into the Fabrikam, Inc.  
company as normal.
2.	 Press Ctrl + Shift + P to create a new report definition.
3.	 Set the Detail level: to Financial, Account, & Transaction.
4.	 Fabrikam, Inc. is operating in 2017, so change the Base Year: to 2017.
5.	 Set the Row: to BUDGET-SALES.
6.	 Set the Column: to BUDGET–SALES 2017.
7.	 Click on the Output and Distribution tab.
8.	 Enter BUDGET-SALES 2017 in the Output name: field.
9.	 Click on Save to save the new column definition.
10.	 Enter BUDGET-SALES-2017 in the Name field.
11.	 Enter Budget – Sales 2017 in the Description field.
12.	 Click on OK and close the column definition.

Budget Reporting
[ 68 ]
13.	 Click on Generate to produce the report and launch the Report Viewer.
As the base period was set to April, the print control means only the first of the 
periodic columns displays on the report. Clicking on the line will drill down to  
the account level showing the breakdown of the budget values on the accounts.
As with report created in Management Reporter, additional columns can be  
added to the column definition to include actual figures in the report as well  
as calculation fields.

Chapter 4
[ 69 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have taken a look at the inquiries and reports available within 
a standard implementation of Microsoft Dynamics GP as well as looking at how 
Management Reporter 2012 can be used to extend this reporting.
In the next chapter, we will take a look at how Purchase Order Commitments can  
be used to control expenditure.


Purchase Order 
Commitments
Purchase Order Commitments (PO Commitments) are available in Microsoft 
Dynamics GP as a part of the Purchase Order Enhancements module, which also 
includes PO Approvals within Purchase Order Processing.
A Purchase Order Commitment is a way to reserve funds when a PO is entered in 
the system to ensure that the funds remain available when the goods are received 
and invoiced. PO Commitments works by comparing the committed PO amounts 
along with the actual values for the received POs compared to the budget values  
for the period.
In this chapter we'll take a look at enabling PO Commitments, entering transactions, 
and then reporting on the commitments. By following these steps, you will learn 
how to use PO Commitments in Dynamics GP to gain control over purchasing.
Enabling PO Commitments
Before Purchase Order Commitments can be used, the function in Purchase Order 
Enhancements needs to be enabled.
To enable Purchase Order Commitments, follow these steps:
1.	 Open the PO Enhancements Setup window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Financial from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on 
Purchase Order Enhancements in the area page under Setup.

Purchase Order Commitments
[ 72 ]
2.	 Mark the Activate Commitments checkbox.
3.	 Click the Commitment Setup button to open the PO Commitments  
Setup window.
4.	 Change the Authorization Type to Period.
5.	 In the scrolling window, scroll down to 2017 and enter 2017 MASTER into the 
Budget ID field.
6.	 Mark the Authorization Variance checkbox to enable variances.


Purchase Order Commitments
[ 74 ]
2.	 Set Standard in the Type: field, and tab through the PO Number field to 
have one assigned.
3.	 Enter BEAUMONT0001 in the Vendor ID field.
4.	 Enter BUILDING WORK in the Item field.
5.	 Tab through and enter Each in the U of M field.
6.	 Enter a quantity of 1 in the Quantity Ordered field.

Chapter 5
[ 75 ]
7.	 Enter $20,000.00 in the Unit Cost field.
8.	 Enter Building work in the Description field.
9.	 Enter SOUTH in the Site ID field.
10.	 A question dialog will be displayed, if the amount being entered is for  
more than the budget for the selected account, so click on Yes to accept  
the commitment. If a password had been entered on the PO Commitments 
Setup window, the prompt would have requested the password be entered 
rather than just clicking on Yes.
11.	 Click on Save, and close the Purchase Order Entry window.
As you can see, enabling PO Commitments only adds one extra step to entering a 
purchase order, and this extra step only occurs if the budget against the commitment 
budget is exceeded.
Budget vs Actual & Committed Inquiry
Dynamics GP does not include many inquiries and has no reports for reporting on 
PO Commitments. The one inquiry it does have is actually quite a useful one. The 
Budget vs Actual & Committed Inquiry allows committed (unreceived POs) and 
actual (received POs) to be compared against budget values.

Purchase Order Commitments
[ 76 ]
To use the Budget vs Actual & Committed inquiry, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Budget vs Actual & Committed Inquiry window in Dynamics GP 
by selecting Budget vs Actual & Committed from the Navigation Pane on 
the left, and then clicking on Assignment in the area page under Inquiry.
2.	 Enter 100-6170-00 in the Account field.
3.	 The Master 2017 budget will default into the Budget ID field.

Chapter 5
[ 77 ]
4.	 After selecting a period, clicking on the Actual column heading will launch the 
standard Detail Inquiry window. Click on the Committed heading to launch 
the Committed Detail Inquiry window, which shows details of the transaction 
and allows you to drill down to the Purchase Order Entry Zoom window.
When a PO is received, the committed value is removed and added to actuals, but 
the total does not change as the posted transaction is still counted against the budget. 
This means that a PO exceeding the commitment budget will still receive the warning 
message as the system compares against the total value of committed and actuals.
www.allitebooks.com

Purchase Order Commitments
[ 78 ]
Summary
The purpose of PO Commitments is to allow an organization to control spending  
by preventing POs being raised, which exceed the specified budget. In this chapter 
we looked at enabling PO Commitments, entering POs to raise a commitment, and 
then how to report on the actual and committed versus budget amounts.
In the next chapter we will take a look at Encumbrance Management, and how it can 
be used as an alternative method to Purchase Order Commitments for managing and 
controlling expenditure.

Encumbrance Management
Encumbrance Management enables funds to be reserved from a budget when 
a purchase order is created. The creation of encumbrances reduces the risk of 
overspending and ensures that funds will be available when payments become  
due. This module is often used by non-profit organizations as a part of their  
budget and fund accounting.
Encumbrances and PO Commitments are very similar in form and function, but 
there are differences in how Dynamics GP handles them. The basic differences are:
•	
Encumbrance Management tracks history in Dynamics GP, whereas PO 
Commitments does not
•	
Encumbrance Management requires each open year to have a budget 
selected for encumbering transactions, whereas PO Commitments allow 
individual years to have a budget defined against them
•	
Encumbrance Management does not integrate with Business Portal 
Requisition Management, but PO Commitments does
In this chapter we will take a look at the setup of Encumbrance Management, 
entering purchase orders, and then reporting and enquiring on the encumbrances.
Setting up Encumbrance Management
When Encumbrance Management is being configured, it is recommended that all 
other users log out of Dynamics GP.
To set up Encumbrance Management, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Encumbrance Setup window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Purchasing from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on 
Encumbrance Management in the area page under Setup.

Encumbrance Management
[ 80 ]
2.	 Mark the Enable Encumbrance Management checkbox.
3.	 Leave Budget Type set to General Ledger Budgets. Encumbrance 
Management also allows encumbrances against Analytical Accounting  
and Grant Management budgets, but in this book we will focus on using  
the standard General Ledger budgets that we looked at in Chapter 3,  
Budget Creation and Maintenance.
4.	 Set the Tracking Method to Period so that the purchase order line amounts 
are compared to the budget and actual amounts for the period. The other 
options available for Tracking Method are:
°°
Fiscal Year, where the purchase line amount is compared to the total 
budget and actual for the fiscal year. This tracking method is not the 
one I would recommend, as it would allow a transaction in the first 
fiscal period to use the entire year's budget.
°°
Budget-to-Date is one, along with Period, which I tend to 
recommend. This method allows any unused period's budget  
amount to be used in the current period.
°°
Total Budget allows for tracking amounts against a budget, which 
does not align with a fiscal year. This method is also recommended 
for use when blanket purchase orders are being used.

Chapter 6
[ 81 ]
5.	 Click on the expansion button (blue arrow) in the Year scrolling window to 
open the Encumbrance Budget Setup window.
6.	 In the Year drop-down selector, enter or do a lookup, and select the relevant 
budget (the Description can be changed if desired).
As of Dynamics GP 2013, Encumbrance Management allows multiple 
budgets to be selected for each fiscal year; to select more than one budget, 
enter each one on a different line in the scrolling window; this is useful  
when departments are using separate budgets.
7.	 When all years have been assigned to use at least one budget, click on the  
OK button to close the Encumbrance Budget Setup window.
8.	 Under Tolerance Level, click on Percentage and enter 2.00% to allow a 
variance between the actual and budget amounts for the period.
The following table describes how positive and negative amounts work  
with each tolerance type level:
If you enter a positive value
If you enter a negative value
Amount
Purchases can exceed the budget 
amount by the currency amount 
you specify
Purchases must be under the 
budget amount by the currency 
amount you specify
Percentage
Purchases can exceed the budget 
amount by the percentage you 
specify
Purchases must be under 
the budget amount by the 
percentage you specify
Source: Microsoft Dynamics GP Not for Profit Accounting manual © Microsoft Corporation

Encumbrance Management
[ 82 ]
9.	 By default, when setting up Encumbrance Management, Enable 
Encumbrance in General Ledger will be checked; uncheck it if  
journals are to be allowed on the GL without affecting encumbrances.
°°
Clicking on the expansion button will open the Encumbrance 
Account Selection window, where codes can be removed from 
affecting encumbrances when a journal is entered.
10.	 To retain control over transactions that exceed budget limits, an 
authorization password can be entered by clicking on the expansion  
button next to the Password field in the upper-right corner of the window.
11.	 Click on the expansion button and enter ACCESS in both the New Password 
and Reenter New Password fields.
12.	 Click on OK to close the Encumbrance Password Setup window.
13.	 Click on OK to accept the setup and close the Encumbrance Setup window.
With Encumbrance Management set up for use, we can move on to  
entering transactions.
Encumbrance statuses
When Encumbrance Management setup changes are saved, all purchase orders  
and related receiving transactions are evaluated with an encumbrance; the  
pre-encumbrance or pre-budget amount will be created using the required by date.
The following table describes the statuses:
Status
Description
Encumbered
The purchase order line item is within the budget you set up (plus the 
tolerable range, if you've set up budget tolerances). Also, the status is 
encumbered if the budget has been exceeded, but the purchase has  
been authorized.
Pre-Encumbered
The purchase order line item is not within the budgeted amount  
(plus the tolerable range, if you've set up budget tolerances).
Pre-Budget
The purchase order has not been approved. This status allows 
encumbrance records to be created for the purchase order line item. 
Budgets aren't affected because the purchase order hasn't been 
approved. This status is used only if a Workflow or purchase order 
approvals in Purchase Order Enhancements is being used.
When the purchase order is approved and is within the budget, the 
status will change from pre-budget to encumbered or pre-encumbered 
based on the settings you chose in the Encumbrance Setup window.

Chapter 6
[ 83 ]
Status
Description
Invalid
The purchase order line item is missing information or information is 
not valid.
Limbo
The purchase order line item is not validated against the budget.
Source: Microsoft Dynamics GP Not for Profit Accounting manual © Microsoft Corporation
The same encumbrance statuses are applied to amounts on purchase orders as they 
are entered. If you're using blanket or drop-ship purchase orders, the control line 
will have a status of Pre-Encumbered regardless of the status amount.
Transaction entry
Encumbrances are created automatically when a purchase order is entered using the 
statuses in the preceding table. An encumbrance is automatically authorized when 
the transaction amount fits within the budget amount, which is calculated using the 
following equation:
Budget amount - Actual amount - Encumbrance amount
If the resulting value is a negative amount, the transaction will not be encumbered. 
As an example, if you have a budget amount of $20,000 and enter a transaction for 
$12,000, the remaining budget amount is $8,000. Any transaction of more than $8,000 
will exceed the budget value and not be automatically encumbered, assuming a 
tolerance has not been defined in Encumbrance Management Setup.
When the receiving transaction is posted, or a purchase order is deleted or  
canceled, the encumbrance amount is liquidated (reduced), and in the case of 
posting, the actual amount is increased by the same value so there is no difference  
in the remaining budget amount.
Encumbrance Management does not change the process of entering a purchase 
order. When PO Approvals are being used and a user who does not have approval 
authority enters a purchase order, the encumbrance needs to be reviewed 
and authorized; likewise, when a transaction exceeds the budgeted amount, 
authorization is required.

Encumbrance Management
[ 84 ]
To authorize purchase orders that are pre-encumbered, or pre-budget when  
PO Approvals is being used, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Mass Encumbrance window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Purchasing from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking  
on Mass Encumbrance in the area page under Transactions |  
Encumbrance Management.
2.	 If PO Approvals is being used, change Encumber Status to Pre-Budget, 
otherwise leave it as the default of Pre-Encumbered.
3.	 Mark the Encumber checkbox next to PO0997 and PO2071.
4.	 Click on the Encumber button on the toolbar.
5.	 If the selected transactions exceed the budgeted values, a confirmation dialog 
box will be displayed. Click on Yes and then enter the password to proceed 
with the Encumbrance.
Encumbrance inquiries
There are a number of inquiry windows available in Dynamics GP to look at 
Encumbrance Management.
Encumbrance Summary Inquiry
The Encumbrance Summary Inquiry window can be used to view a current or 
historical summary report of actual and encumbered transactions for a selected 
budget and a range of accounts. To use the inquiry, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Encumbrance Summary Inquiry window in Dynamics GP  
by selecting Purchasing from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then 
clicking on Summary in the area page under Inquiry.

Chapter 6
[ 85 ]
2.	 The Budget ID field will default to the budget selected for the fiscal year the 
user date is in.
3.	 Enter 000-1300-01 in both the From Account and To Account fields.
4.	 Click on the Redisplay button to generate the inquiry.
As is standard with Dynamics GP inquiry windows, the scrolling window has a 
number of links in the column headings, which load a window for the selected 
period. Clicking on the Actual link will load the General Ledger Detail Inquiry 
window, while clicking on any one among Pre-Budget, Pre-Encumbered, or 
Encumbered will load the Encumbrance Detail Inquiry window.
Encumbrance Detail Inquiry
The Encumbrance Detail Inquiry window can be used to see the details of 
encumbrances for a range of dates and accounts. It can also be used to filter  
the details by the encumbrance status.

Encumbrance Management
[ 86 ]
To view the encumbered transactions in the Fabrikam, Inc. company for the first 
four months of the year, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Encumbrance Detail Inquiry window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Purchasing from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on Detail 
in the area page under Inquiry.
2.	 Uncheck the Pre-Encumbered checkbox to only include  
encumbered transactions.
3.	 Click on the Date From button and enter 01312017 in the From field and 
30042017 in the To field.
4.	 Enter 000-1300-01 in both the From Account and To Account fields.
5.	 Click on Redisplay to refresh the data.

Chapter 6
[ 87 ]
Encumbrance PO Inquiry
The Encumbrance PO Inquiry window can be used to view both a summary and 
detailed view of encumbrances for a selected purchase order.
To use the inquiry, follow these steps:
1.	 Open the Encumbrance PO Inquiry window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Purchasing from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on PO 
Detail in the area page under Transactions | Encumbrance Management.
2.	 Enter PO0999 in the PO Number field and press Tab.
By default, the inquiry will show the summary information for the encumbrances; 
clicking on any of the nodes on the tree view will change the detail view to the right. 
If Detail is selected, the view will display the details of the encumbrance, including 
all status changes.
Encumbrance GL Inquiry
The GL Inquiry functions in the same way as the PO Inquiry by allowing the 
encumbrance status for each line of a general journal.

Encumbrance Management
[ 88 ]
Encumbrance Reports
In addition to the inquiries there are also some reports available for year-end 
reporting. To produce these reports, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Encumbrance Print Options window in Dynamics GP by selecting 
Purchasing from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking on Year 
End Encumbrance Management Reports in the area page under Reports.
2.	 The Budget ID for the budget the user date falls into will display by default. 
Click on Print to print the summary report.
3.	 If a detailed report is required, change Printing Report(s) to Detail.
4.	 Enter 01312017 in the Date From field, and 04302017 in the Date To field.
5.	 Click on Print to print the detailed report.
There is also an option to print both the reports at the same time by changing 
Printing Report(s) to Summary And Detail.

Chapter 6
[ 89 ]
Year-end processes
The Year End Encumbrance Transfer window can be used to transfer encumbrances 
from the previous year to the current one. The transfer process will automatically 
liquidate encumbered amounts in the previous year and update open purchase 
orders, which will be delivered in the current year. During the transfer, you can also 
decrease budget amounts for the previous fiscal year and increase the corresponding 
budget amounts for the current one.
To perform a year-end encumbrance transfer, perform the following steps:
1.	 Open the Year End Encumbrance Transfer window in Dynamics GP by 
selecting Purchasing from the Navigation Pane on the left, and then clicking 
on Year End Encumbrance Transfer in the area page under Routines.
2.	 Enter 2014 in the Year field and press Tab.
3.	 If desired, mark the Include corresponding budget amounts checkbox,  
and then click on Transfer to perform the year-end process.
The Decrease budget amounts for previous fiscal year checkbox is only enabled 
when the selected budget has an end date after the end of the fiscal year.

Encumbrance Management
[ 90 ]
Summary
In this chapter we have introduced the Encumbrance Management module of 
Dynamics GP, which allows funds to be reserved when a purchase order is entered, 
thereby reducing the risk of overspending by ensuring that the funds are available 
when payment becomes due.
As we have discussed at the start of the chapter, Encumbrance Management  
and PO Commitments are very similar, so a review of requirements should be 
conducted before one of them is enabled to ensure the required functionality is 
available to users.

Index
A
accounting class
about  14
creating  14, 15
Account Rollup Inquiry
about  59
creating, for 2017 SALES budget  59-61
ad hoc query
creating  29, 30
alphanumeric transaction dimension
creating, steps  12, 13
Analytical Accounting
about  5
activating  7
activating, in Dynamics GP system  25
budgets, exporting to Microsoft Excel  24
default records, creating for  5, 6
inquiries  25
integrating, with Fixed Asset  
Management  19
options, amending  10, 11
transaction, entering with  
information  17-19
vs, Actual Inquiry  30
Analytical Account SmartLists  31
Assignment Setup window
amending  11, 12
B
budget
about  43
amending, Microsoft used  48
benefits  43
creating, in Dynamics GP  43
creating, in Microsoft Excel  44, 45
editing, in Microsoft Excel  46
editing, through Microsoft Dynamics GP  49
importing, from Microsoft Excel  46, 47
maintaining  48
budget amounts
entering  22, 23
Budget Journal Entry Inquiry  58
budget reporting, Management  
Reporter 2012
about  63
column definition, creating  65, 66
report definition, creating  67, 68
row definition, creating  64, 65
budgets
combining  50, 51
Budget Summary Inquiry
about  55
using, steps  56, 57
budget transactions
about  51
entering  52, 53
Budget Transaction Summary Inquiry
about  58
using, steps  58
budget tree
creating  20
codes, assigning  21
Budget vs Actual & Committed inquiry
using, steps  76, 77
Budget vs Actual Inquiry
about  57, 30
using, steps  57

[ 92 ]
C
Cash Flow Calendar
about  35
launching, from Cash Flow Explorer  38
viewing, steps  35, 36
Cash Flow Explorer
Cash Flow Calendar, launching from  38
using, steps  36, 37
cash flow forecast
creating  33, 34
viewing  37
Cash Flow Management
about  33
tasks  33
D
default records
creating, for Analytical Accounting  5, 6
detailed budget report
about  62
generating  62, 63
Distribution Query Wizard
about  27
using  27-29
duplicate analysis information  19
Dynamics GP
budget, creating  43
E
Encumbrance Detail Inquiry  85, 86
Encumbrance GL Inquiry  87
Encumbrance inquiries
about  84
Encumbrance Detail Inquiry  85, 86
Encumbrance GL Inquiry  87
Encumbrance PO Inquiry  87
Encumbrance Summary Inquiry  84, 85
Encumbrance Management
about  79
setting up, steps  79-82
transaction entry  83, 84
versus PO Commitments  79
Encumbrance PO Inquiry  87
Encumbrance Reports
about  88
producing, steps  88
Encumbrance statuses
about  82
Encumbered  82
Invalid  83
Limbo  83
Pre-budget  82
Pre-Encumbered  82
Encumbrance Summary Inquiry
using, steps  84, 85
F
Fixed Asset Management
Analytical Accounting, integrating with  19
I
inquiries, Dynamics GP
about  55
Budget Journal Entry Inquiry  58
Budget Summary Inquiry  55-57
Budget Transaction Summary Inquiry  58
Budget vs. Actual Inquiry  57
inquries, Analytical Accounting
Analytical Accounting Budget vs  
Actual Inquiry  30
Distribution Query Wizard  27-29
Journal Entry Inquiry  26
Multilevel Query Wizard  29, 30
Transaction Dimension Relation  26
J
Journal Entry Inquiry  26
M
Management Reporter 2012
budget reporting  63
Microsoft
used, for amending budget  48
Microsoft Dynamics GP
budget, editing through  49

[ 93 ]
Microsoft Excel
budget, creating  44, 45
budget, editing  46
budget, importing from  46, 47
budgets, exporting to  24
Multilevel Query Wizard  29
O
options, Analytical Accounting
amending  10, 11
P
PO Commitments
about  71
enabling, steps  71-73
entering, steps  73-75
versus Encumbrance Management  79
posted budget transaction
viewing, steps  58
posting options
setting up  6, 7
Purchase Order Commitments. See  PO 
Commitments
S
security roles
assigning, to users  8, 9
T
tasks
assigning  8, 9
transaction
entering, with Analytical Accounting  
information  17-19
Transaction Dimension Relation  26
transaction dimensions
types  12
user access, granting to  16, 17
transaction entry, Encumbrance  
Management  83, 84
U
user access
granting, to transaction dimensions  16, 17
users
security role, assigning to  8, 9
W
weekly cash flow reports
printing  38
what if transaction
using, steps  39-41
Y
year-end closing
performing  24
year-end encumbrance transfer
performing, steps  89


 
Thank you for buying  
Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013  
Financial Management
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For more 
information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to 
books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Developing Microsoft Dynamics 
GP Business Applications
ISBN: 978-1-84968-026-4             Paperback: 590 pages
Build dynamic, mission critical applications with this 
hands-on guide
1.	
Make your business more efficient with  
fully customizable applications
2.	
Develop mission critical applications with 
Microsoft Dynamics GP
3.	
Learn how to enhance your application  
with sanScript
Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 
Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-938-0             Paperback: 348 pages
Over 110 immediately usable and effective recipes to 
solve real-world Dynamics GP problems
1.	
Understand the various tips and tricks to 
master Dynamics GP, and improve your 
system's stability in order to enable you  
to get work done faster
2.	
Discover how to solve real world problems  
in Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 with  
easy-to-understand and practical recipes
3.	
Access proven and effective Dynamics GP 
techniques from authors with vast and rich 
experience in Dynamics GP
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Building Dashboards with 
Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013  
and Excel 2013
ISBN: 978-1-84968-906-9             Paperback: 286 pages
Easily build powerful dashboards with Microsoft 
Dynamics GP 2013 and Excel
1.	
Build a dashboard using Excel 2013 with 
information from Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013
2.	
Make Excel a true business intelligence tool  
with charts, sparklines, slicers, and more
3.	
Utilize PowerPivot’s full potential to create  
even more complex dashboards
.
Microsoft Dynamics GP 2010 
Implementation
ISBN: 978-1-84968-032-5            Paperback: 376  pages
A step-by-step guide to implementing Microsoft 
Dynamics GP 2010
1.	
Master how to implement Microsoft Dynamics 
GP 2010 with real world examples and 
guidance from a Microsoft Dynamics GP MVP
2.	
Understand how to install Microsoft Dynamics 
GP 2010 and related applications, following 
detailed, step-by-step instructions
3.	
Learn how to set-up the core Microsoft 
Dynamics GP modules effectively
 
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
www.allitebooks.com

