www.allitebooks.com

Microsoft Dynamics  
AX 2012 R3 Financial 
Management
Boost your accounting and financial skills with  
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3
Mohamed Aamer
P U B L I S H I N G
professional expertise distilled
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-2 ]
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 Financial Management
Copyright © 2015 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: November 2013
Second edition: February 2015
Production reference: 1090215
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78439-098-3
www.packtpub.com
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-3 ]
Credits
Author
Mohamed Aamer
Reviewers
Marco Carvalho
János Molnár
Wendy Rijners
Syed Muhammad Sajid
Commissioning Editor
Usha Iyer
Acquisition Editor
Subho Gupta
Content Development Editor
Ritika Singh
Technical Editors
Krishnaveni Nair
Rikita Poojari
Humera Shaikh
Copy Editors
Shivangi Chaturvedi
Deepa Nambiar
Vikrant Phadke
Project Coordinator
Judie Jose
Proofreaders
Simran Bhogal
Ameesha Green
Paul Hindle
Joanna McMahon
Indexer
Monica Ajmera Mehta
Graphics
Sheetal Aute
Production Coordinator
Conidon Miranda
Cover Work
Conidon Miranda
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-4 ]
About the Author
Mohamed Aamer is a Microsoft Dynamics AX Support Engineer for the EMEA 
region with Microsoft, Egypt. In 2013, he was awarded Microsoft Dynamics AX 
MVP, and he was the first AX MVP in the Middle East and Africa. His main focus 
is on implementing Microsoft Dynamics AX to fit customers' needs. He uses his 
time to help and support Microsoft partners to answer their complex questions 
and tackle obstacles they might face; he understands customer business cycles and 
solves customer business problems through a combination of business process 
reengineering and utilization of Microsoft Dynamics AX functionalities. He is a 
Microsoft Certified Professional (MCP) specialized in financial management and 
supply chain management. In addition to this, he has been a Microsoft Certified 
Trainer (MCT) for 5 years.
Mohamed has varied consultation experience in dealing with Microsoft Golden 
Partners and Microsoft customers. He has worked as a consultant in many 
industries, such as retail fashion, retail electronics, cement manufacturing, trading, 
and ready mix. He has carried out multiple implementations of Microsoft Dynamics 
Retail Management System and Microsoft Dynamics AX in numerous capacities, 
such as project manager, solutions architect, and lead consultant. His consulting 
skills are complemented by his business, management, and interpersonal skills.
He is also a columnist of AX Excellence at the MSDynamicsWorld.com community, 
an official blogger at Microsoft Dynamics Community, and has his own blog (www.
blog.mohamedaamer.com). He delivers evangelizing sessions to Microsoft Student 
Partners (MSPs) to introduce Microsoft Dynamics AX and Microsoft Dynamics 
Sure Step to them. He has been ranked in the top 100 influential people at www.
dynamicsworld.co.uk for 2 consecutive years. He has obtained other badges 
from Microsoft, such as Microsoft Community Contributor (MCC) and Microsoft 
Dynamics Community Expert.
Mohamed authored Microsoft Dynamics 2012 Financial Management and reviewed 
Customer Success with Microsoft Dynamics Sure Step, both by Packt Publishing.
When not working on complex business processes, he attends live Sufi shows and 
music concerts.
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-5 ]
Acknowledgments
My sincere thanks go to all people who directly/indirectly taught, guided, supported, 
and advised me to build my personal profile; I am doing my best to improve myself. 
The following acknowledgments are for people who had a massive impact on my 
career; I'd like to thank all of them, though I cannot thank them enough.
I dedicate this book to the memory of my father and my Uncle, Hamza; both of 
them invested seed of concepts and beliefs in my brother and me, and now we 
are harvesting the fruits of this. My father always told me, "I believe in you; when 
you say you can do, you achieve more than what you target. Just focus." My uncle, 
Hamza, told me after my graduation, "You just met your lifetime teacher who will 
guide you through your entire life."
My older brother, Ramy, who inspired me, gave me more than his time, efforts, 
tons of daily advice, coaching, and led me to the right path. He always supports 
and encourages me. He is my mentor; Ramy put me on the Information Technology 
track and gave me the chance to choose the right field to pursue. He helped me finish 
college and convinced me to attend the first e-commerce seminar in the Middle East; 
this was the first spark. I consider Ramy as my source of energy.
I would like to thank my mother for her support and prayers.
I would also like to thank my wife, who has given up so much of our personal life 
during the development of my career; I cannot thank her enough for that.
Thanks to Dr. Salah ElKashef, who is a training and e-learning consultant and 
founder of ElKashef E-Learning University. Salah is my first instructor who 
introduced e-commerce to me in 2002 and helped me to become a certified 
e-commerce consultant before my graduation. He helped me by directing my  
career to Information Technology management.
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-6 ]
I would like to thank Shaimaa Farid, who is an IT administrator at the Alexandria 
Trust. I have worked with Shaimaa as an application consultant for Microsoft 
Dynamics RMS; she is the one who provided me with information about the 
Microsoft Dynamics AX scholarship in 2008. Shaimaa has given me a lot of support 
and encouragement to focus on my career as a consultant. She is one of the best 
customer-oriented people I have worked with.
Thanks to Mohamed Samy, who works as a solution architect. He is the one who 
introduced me to the community as a speaker for Cairo Code Camp; I used to 
deliver sessions with him as a copresenter, evangelizing Microsoft Dynamics AX 
and Microsoft Dynamics Sure Step to the Egyptian community. He predicted that I 
will become an AX MVP. Mohamed is a very talented IT geek with unique creative 
solutions; I enjoy our community activities together.
I would also like to thank Ahmed Kazem, cofounder and CTO of Lamartica. Ahmed 
is an artistic developer; he can learn any technology in a very short time. He develops, 
maintains, and supports my blog technically. I have never met a smart and gifted 
developer like him.
Thanks to Ahmed Aboulmagd, who is a technical evangelist at Windows Phone 
Microsoft. Ahmed used to manage and schedule the Microsoft Dynamics AX and 
Microsoft Dynamics Sure Step sessions with Microsoft Student Partner (MSPs); I 
believe we did a good job, especially when we saw some students joining that field.
Thanks to Dr. Nezar Samy, Director at Information Systems Department, Nile 
University. Nezar was my instructor for Information Technology Management 
Professional Certificate at American University in Cairo: he taught me the role of IT 
as a business enabler and gave me a chance to improve my presentation skills.
I would also like to thank Chandru Shankar, Manufacturing Industry Director at 
EMEA MBS Microsoft. Chandru has given me a lot of motivation and support in my 
career; he is always available to give advice and share ideas; I am very proud to have 
met a person like him and have him as a family friend. Chandru is my role model.
Thanks to Jason Gumpert, who works as an editor at MSDynamicsWorld.com.  
I have been working with Jason since 2012 as an author for a feature column for  
the MSDynamicsWorld community. Jason gave me a chance to develop my writing 
techniques and style from blogs to articles; I believe my pieces reached more people 
through his community. He is an open-minded person, who is always open to  
new initiatives.
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-7 ]
I would also like to thank Ashraf Abusen, Group Chief Financial Officer at ASEC 
Cement. I consider Abusen as my coach who taught me to utilize logical thinking 
and understand how to build up a practical solution for complex business 
requirements and streamline this solution with all business divisions. Abusen is a 
charismatic leader; he has the best skills to build the road map of the ERP solution.
Thanks to Ashraf Aly, Senior Global ERP Director at Ascom. Ashraf is a talented 
manager who can manage and drive complex ERP implementation; he spotted  
my skills and gave me the opportunity to utilize my abilities. Ashraf has unique, 
flexible techniques to deal with stakeholders of any project and achieve the  
objectives of that project.
Thanks to Julie Gale, who works as a project manager with Microsoft. She helped 
me learn more about Microsoft Dynamics Sure Step. She also supported me in 
community activities.
I would also like to thank Microsoft EMEA Global Business Support (GBS). I am 
very proud to be part of this world-class team; they have always given me a lot of 
support. I cannot thank them enough for their ongoing support and guidance from 
management and colleagues. Special thanks to Eva Del Pino Ramirez, Dynamics AX 
Support Manager at Microsoft, for her continuous encouragement and feedback, 
which helped me develop my abilities.
Thanks to Microsoft Dynamics Academic Alliance Team and Lyndsey Creamer, 
program manager/project manager of the Microsoft Dynamics Academic Alliance 
Team at Microsoft, Jane Birkegaard, senior program manager at Microsoft Dynamics, 
and Ashley Pecoraro, former program manager for Academic Alliance Team at 
Microsoft; Lyndsey, Jane, and Ashley  gave me a lot of support to be involved in 
DynnA activities to share my knowledge and experience with DynnA members. 
They are very open to new ideas and they are willing to help as much as they can.
I would also like to thank Microsoft Dynamics Community Team and Nick Hoban, 
Sr. Release Manager ECIT at Microsoft; Nick guided me in the right direction to help 
me share my blog posts with the Dynamics Community.
Thanks to Microsoft Dynamics AX MVPs. They enrich the community with 
their experience and knowledge on Microsoft Dynamics AX. Special thanks to 
Brandon George, Microsoft MVP and Director of Business Intelligence at Sunrise 
Technologies; Antonio Gilabert, Microsoft Dynamics AX MVP and founder of 
AX3; and former AX MVPs, Fred Chen, technical architect at Microsoft, and Arijit 
Basu, senior solution architect at Microsoft. They give me a lot of support and 
encouragement as an AX MVP.
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-8 ]
About the Reviewers
Marco Carvalho has been programming since the age of 12. He has a lot of 
experience working in different industries, ranging from private investments  
to security and management consulting. He has been architecting and  
developing solutions with a mindset that "anything is possible."
Currently, Marco is a consulting manager at Junction Solutions and is a Gold Partner 
who specializes in multichannel retail as well as food and beverage industry, where 
he serves as a technical lead on projects.
He is the author of Microsoft Dynamics AX 2009 Administration and reviewer of 
Implementing Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 with Sure Step 2012, both by Packt Publishing.
I would like to thank my fellow authors and Packt for considering 
me. I look forward to many more publications!
János Molnár is an experienced Dynamics AX senior developer from Hungary. 
János has gained a wide angle of expertise through many international AX 2012 
implementation projects in the heavy equipment Caterpillar business at a Hungarian 
Microsoft Gold Partner DAX developer company. He was involved in projects in 
USA, Australia, Singapore, India, and New Zealand, where he took roles as an onsite 
development coordinator working with Microsoft directly on the implementations. 
This time, as a lead developer, János gained experience in technical leadership and 
gained deeper understanding of business and functional processes. He is a Microsoft 
Certified Professional for AX and BI.
I would like to thank the author and Packt Publishing for letting me 
be a reviewer for this book. The review process helped me match my 
technical skills with my functional knowledge.
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-9 ]
Wendy Rijners is a consultant at Abecon. Over the past few years, Wendy has 
worked for several customers who use Dynamics ERP solutions. Since 2011, she has 
been focusing on retail in combination with Dynamics AX and has been involved 
in a Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R2 + POS implementation. Wendy is part of the 
Product Management Retail team that provides customer's needs to the Abecon 
Retail standard to make sure that every retailer can cover their processes in AX.
Syed Muhammad Sajid is a respected and self-motivated professional with  
more than 12 years of experience in the software industry.
He has more than 4 years of experience as a software quality assurance engineer/lead  
and years of experience in project management with Microsoft on AX 2012 and other 
client projects. He is currently working as project manager and senior functional 
consultant on AX 2012 R2 and R3 with different clients, managing multiple projects 
simultaneously. He has extensive experience in managing large-scale projects with a 
large team from the requirement-gathering phase to completion. He is highly skilled 
in tracking details, communicating deadlines, and following up with internal and 
external partners to ensure on-time completion within budget.
He has experience in different domain applications such as the public sector,  
health care, education, retail, mortgage, real estate, and online shopping malls  
(B2B and B2C).
He also worked with the Microsoft Dynamics AX Global Development team.  
He has worked as a test manager in the development of Financials, HRM, Payroll, 
and Budgeting modules of Microsoft Dynamics AX.
He was part of the successfully completed Microsoft Dynamics AX 5.0, which 
was released by Microsoft in 2008. He was also part of the successfully completed 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 6.0, which was released by Microsoft in 2011, with public 
sector functionalities (US).
www.allitebooks.com

[ FM-10 ]
www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, 
and more
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.com.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print 
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a 
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
TM
https://www2.packtpub.com/books/subscription/packtlib
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via a web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view 9 entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant updates on new Packt books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012	
5
Understanding the ERP characteristics	
6
Discovering the implementation team	
6
Responsibilities and motivation of an ERP consultant	
7
Exploring key intentions of ERP implementations	
8
Understanding the ERP module's integration	
10
Accounts payable	
11
Product receipt	
11
Invoice	
12
Payment	
12
Settlement	
12
Accounts receivable	
12
Packing slip	
13
Invoice	
13
Collection	
13
Settlement	
13
Exploring ERP and reporting	
13
Posting types in Microsoft Dynamics AX	
15
Exploring the common terms in ERP implementations	
16
Exploring Microsoft Dynamics Implementation  
Methodology – Sure Step	
17
Exploring Microsoft Dynamics Lifecycle Services	
19
Looking at Microsoft Dynamics AX user Interface 	
19
Summary	
32

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 2: Understanding the General Ledger	
33
Understanding the chart of accounts	
33
Classifying main accounts	
34
Using transactional accounts	
36
Using nontransactional accounts	
37
Main account categories	
39
Controlling main accounts	
40
Debit/Credit controls	
40
Using account administration	
44
Using posting validation	
47
Understanding shared financial data	
51
Exploring the sales tax mechanism	
52
Withholding tax	
58
Understanding financial management in action	
59
Opening balance	
59
Best practices of uploading opening balances	
60
Planning and designing	
60
Validation	
63
Performing daily transactions	
63
The account alias	
64
Recurring entries	
65
Saving a voucher	
67
Closing procedure	
68
Summary	
71
Chapter 3: Understanding Cash and Bank Management	
73
Understanding cash and bank integration	
73
Controlling cash and bank management	
74
Credit limit	
75
Date activation	
77
Status activation	
78
General ledger reconciliation	
80
Transaction currency	
80
Exploring cash and bank management in action	
82
Bank account reconciliation	
82
Bank facility – letter of guarantee	
90
Summary	
101
Chapter 4: Understanding Accounts Payable	
103
Understanding accounts payable integration with  
other modules	
103
Exploring vendor master data characteristics	
108
The General fast tab	
108

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
The Purchasing demographics fast tab	
109
Invoice and delivery fast tab	
109
The Invoice field group	
110
The Sales tax field group	
110
The Withholding tax field group	
111
The Discount field group	
111
Vendor price/discount groups	
112
The Payment fast tab	
114
Terms of payment	
115
Method of payment	
116
Payment schedule	
117
Cash discount	
118
Exploring accounts payable controls	
121
Vendor hold activities	
121
Invoice matching controls	
125
Invoice matching	
125
Price tolerance	
129
The invoice number	
137
The Posting profile	
138
Exploring accounts payable transactions	
139
The purchase order invoice	
140
The prepayment invoice	
147
Vendor settlement	
160
The vendor settlement mechanism in Microsoft Dynamics AX	
161
Summary	
162
Chapter 5: Understanding Accounts Receivable	
163
Understanding the Accounts receivable module's integration  
with other modules	
163
Exploring customer master data characteristics	
168
The Sales order defaults fast tab	
170
The Discount field group	
170
Customer price or discount groups	
170
The Payment fast tab	
173
Terms of payment	
174
Method of payment	
175
Payment specification	
176
Payment schedule	
176
Cash discount	
177
The Invoice and delivery fast tab	
180
The Invoice field group	
180
The Sales tax field group	
180

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Exploring Accounts receivable controls	
181
Customer hold activities	
181
Customer credit limit management	
182
Exploring Accounts receivable transactions	
191
Sales order invoice	
192
Free text invoice	
198
Free text correction	
199
Customer settlement	
202
Customer settlement mechanism – Dynamics AX	
203
Summary	
204
Chapter 6: Exploring Fixed Assets	
205
Understanding fixed assets integration with other modules	
205
Exploring fixed assets master data characteristics	
207
The depreciation profile	
207
The depreciation method	
208
Constant fields	
209
Dynamic fields	
209
The value model	
210
Fixed asset groups	
212
Fixed assets	
213
Exploring fixed assets transactions	
216
Fixed asset disposal sale	
223
Summary	
225
Chapter 7: Functioning of Cash Flow Management	
227
Understanding cash flow integration with other modules	
228
Cash flow forecast configuration	
229
Accounts payable	
230
Accounts receivable	
234
Budget	
238
General ledger	
238
Cash flow transactions	
239
Purchase order cash flow forecast	
240
Cash flow forecast by currency requirement	
241
Main account cash flow forecast	
244
Summary	
244
Chapter 8: Working with Cost Management	
245
Understanding the business costing model	
246
Configuring inventory costing	
247
Item model group	
247
Product dimension groups	
250

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Storage dimension groups	
250
Tracking dimension groups	
251
Item groups	
251
Exploring the inventory costing background	
253
Physical and financial updates	
253
Physical update	
254
Financial update	
254
Understanding inventory recalculation and closing	
255
Working with inventory marking	
256
Exploring inventory reconciliation	
258
Inventory value report setup	
259
Inventory value report generation	
262
Summary	
263
Chapter 9: Exploring Financial Dimensions	
265
Understanding the concept of financial dimensions	
265
Understanding the ledger account segmentation	
269
Segmented ledger accounts	
269
Financial dimensions entry	
270
Creating financial dimensions	
271
Configuring the account structure	
275
Advanced rules structure	
278
Fixed dimension	
281
Posting types in Microsoft Dynamics AX	
282
The posting profile concept	
282
Journal posting	
284
Exploring dimension reporting	
285
Financial dimension sets	
285
Summary	
292
Chapter 10: Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis	
293
Planning reporting needs for ERP	
293
Understanding the information technology value chain	
296
Infrastructure	
296
Database management	
297
Business processes	
297
Business Intelligence	
298
Frontend	
298
Understanding Microsoft Dynamics AX information  
source blocks	
298
Detailed transactions block	
299
Business Intelligence block	
299
Executive decisions block	
301

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Discovering Microsoft Dynamics AX reporting	
301
Reporting options	
301
Inquiry forms	
302
SSRS reports	
305
Reporting currency	
311
Autoreports	
311
Microsoft Dynamics Management Reporter	
316
Summary	
321
Index	
323

Preface
The essential foundation of the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) implementation 
is the financial part that is considered as the backbone of the implementation. The 
implementation team from the partner side and customer side should ensure that  
the financial module is well structured and designed. This book provides a broad 
guide to Microsoft Dynamics AX Financial Management fundamentals for parties 
involved in the implementation project, with considerations of the business rationale 
behind functions, basic setups, configurations, transactions in action, and examples 
of real-life scenarios.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012, explains the ERP  
concept, integration of modules, the financial posting mechanisms in Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012 R3, the role of consultant in implementation team, Microsoft 
Dynamics Sure Step implementation methodology, Microsoft Dynamics Lifecycle 
Service, and the Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 user interface.
Chapter 2, Understanding the General Ledger, explains the usage of main accounts, 
control points, and the Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 shared financial data 
concept. It also gives you a practical insight on opening balance tips and  
month-end closing procedures.
Chapter 3, Understanding Cash and Bank Management, will help you understand the 
cash and bank management module integration, controls, the bank reconciliation 
process, and then cover the bank facility function.
Chapter 4, Understanding Accounts Payable, focuses on integrating Accounts payable 
with other modules, the vendor transactions, invoices, payment, and prepayment,  
in addition to vendor controls and basic master data.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 5, Understanding Accounts Receivable, focuses on integrating Accounts 
receivable with other modules, the customer transactions, sales invoices, free text 
invoices and its correction, in addition to customer controls and basic master data.
Chapter 6, Exploring Fixed Assets, focuses on the integration of fixed assets with other 
modules and their transactions.
Chapter 7, Functioning of Cash Flow Management, focuses on the integration points 
between cash flow management and other modules in Microsoft Dynamics AX, 
provided with basic setups, configuration, and cash flow transaction.
Chapter 8, Working with Cost Management, covers the inventory costing model in 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 and provides information about inventory cost setups 
and configuration, inventory reconciliation with general ledger, recalculation,  
and closing.
Chapter 9, Exploring Financial Dimensions, focuses on financial dimensions model in 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012, its practical utilization, and its reporting.
Chapter 10, Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis, will help you to find out the 
reporting needs at early stages of the implementation project and what sides you 
should consider during the project's life cycle. It also explores Microsoft Dynamics 
AX inquiry forms and SQL Reporting Services (SSRS) reports.
What you need for this book
All examples were performed using a virtual machine of Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 R3 Image from the Microsoft partner/customer source.
Who this book is for
This book is intended for application consultants, controllers, CFOs, and other 
professionals who are involved in the Microsoft Dynamics AX implementation 
project. Basic knowledge of financial terms, concepts, and Microsoft Dynamics AX 
terminology is required.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of text styles that distinguish between different 
kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles and an explanation of 
their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows:  
"In the voucher line, select the Account type value as Vendor, select the vendor ID, 
enter 1000 in the Credit side amount, and select the Offset account value."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, for example, in menus or dialog boxes, appear in the text like this: "The user 
can arrange the order of modules by clicking on the Navigation Pane Options…."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or disliked. Reader feedback is important for us as it helps 
us develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, and 
mention the book's title in the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you could report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form 
link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your 
submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website or added 
to any list of existing errata under the Errata section of that title.
To view the previously submitted errata, go to https://www.packtpub.com/books/
content/support and enter the name of the book in the search field. The required 
information will appear under the Errata section.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, you can contact us at 
questions@packtpub.com, and we will do our best to address the problem.

Getting Started with Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012
The Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) application is a must for companies 
irrespective of whether it is a small or big enterprise; it is a tool that gives visibility to 
management regarding the enterprise's performance on all levels. People should be 
familiar with the ERP concept irrespective of who implements the solution or uses it 
(definitely, the level of detail varies between the user and the consultant, but the core 
is common). This chapter covers the following topics:
•	
Understanding the ERP characteristics
•	
Discovering the ERP implementation team
•	
Exploring the key intentions of ERP implementations
•	
Understanding the ERP module's integrations
•	
Exploring ERP and reporting
•	
Posting types in Microsoft Dynamics AX
•	
Exploring the common terms used in ERP implementations
•	
Exploring Microsoft Dynamics Implementation Methodology – Sure Step
•	
Exploring Microsoft Dynamics Lifecycle Services (LCS)
•	
Looking at the Microsoft Dynamics AX user interface

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 6 ]
Understanding the ERP characteristics
The ERP is a mission-critical application for the business, as the day-to-day 
activities rely on this application where the end users enter the transactions, and the 
management is able to monitor the business performance on a daily basis and take 
decisions within a proper time period. The main characteristic that differentiates the 
ERP from other applications, as mentioned in the Wikipedia definition of the ERP, is 
as follows:
"A business management software—usually a suite of integrated applications—
that a company can use to collect, store, manage, and interpret data from many 
business activities."
From this definition, the ERP is an integrated application. In the past, each business area 
had its own application, and this lead to creating isolated islands for each department 
in the same organization, which cost organizations a lot of time, effort, and money. 
This leads to lack of accurate information which directly affects management decision 
making, because of unavailability or redundancy of information; for example, the 
customer account in accounts receivable is different from the customer code in the 
sales department, so the management could not identify the balance of this customer. 
With the ERP, the data is unified, controlled, and classified. This gives the company the 
ability to transform this data into information that helps in the decision-making process.
Discovering the implementation team
It is important for companies that want to implement the ERP to understand that 
its implementation is not an easy task and it requires a professional partner. For 
example, Value Added Reseller (VAR), which has a consulting team experienced 
in implementing the ERP, preferably has a partner that is an expert in the customer 
industry. There is a high level of engagement between customers’ top management, 
key users, and end users in the implementation life cycle. The implementation team 
is considered as the key success factor for the ERP implementation.
The following diagram illustrates the ERP implementation team that consists of 
Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) and key users from customer- and partner-side 
applications, and technical consultants. This team works together closely during the 
implementation, where the customer representatives (SMEs and Key users) deliver 
the business requirements (that is, what they are expecting from the ERP), with the 
consulting team that bridges the gap between the business requirements and the 
implemented application. The implementation deliverables comes through several 
workshops from analysis, design, development, and testing.

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
Executives
Reporting and end results
SMEs
Key users
Implementation Team
Application/
technical consultants
Policies and procedures
End users
The implementation team should focus on two types of internal clients: business 
executives and end users. Each client has a different perspective of the ERP 
implementation, and the implementation team should consider their requirements 
during the implementation lifecycle. The executives' management focuses on reporting 
and end results, and the implementation team delivers policies and procedures to end 
users who then operate the final product, which is the ERP application.
Responsibilities and motivation of an ERP 
consultant
Application consultant, Functional consultant—the job title differs from one 
company to another, but whatever the title is, the application consultant is 
considered as a middle man between the ERP and the customer,  where the 
application consultant is specialized in the ERP application and is able to understand 
the business requirements and adopt it to the ERP software. The application 
consultant can start their career after graduating from university; they can major in 
business administration, finance, or information systems, if it covers subjects related 
to business.
Alternatively, the application consultant can start working in other fields. Some 
people start out as an accountant, procurement agent, commercial agent, or even 
sales representative. I do not consider it a career shift; I consider it as an advance in 
one's career path. In other words, it is capitalizing on previous experiences.

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 8 ]
Traditionally, consulting skills are divided into two main areas: the business side, 
which is known as a functional consultant, and the technical side, which is known as 
a technical consultant. Then, there is a more general soft skills set that all application 
consultants need, as they spend most of their time in discussions, workshops, and 
training, related to business.
Some of the key skills a company should look for in an application consultant are  
highlighted in the following diagram:
Business side
Technical side
Business knowledge in business domains
Vertical or Horizontal
Understanding business process cycles
Understanding business integration
Understanding application flow of
information
Understanding ERP integration
Understanding ERP implementation life
cycle
Soft skills
Communication skills
Presentation skills
Business writing skills
Leadership skills
Project management skills
Technical writing skills
The application consultants have a very important role in the implementation of 
the project, as they are involved in implementation tasks and activities. Microsoft 
Dynamics Sure Step has defined the application consultant role during implementation 
phases. It is a long and broad list of tasks, and this range of tasks is what I believe 
keeps most application consultants motivated and satisfied with their jobs. The 
challenges are always changing and the career path offers many opportunities to 
develop new skills.
Exploring key intentions of ERP 
implementations
Enterprises that intend to implement Microsoft Dynamics AX ERP pursue a variety of 
common benefits from the ERP, but in most of the projects, there wasn't any well-defined 
benefits that the organization's management agreed on, and no roadmap to help them 
accomplish those intentions. It is vital to plan the ERP implementation carefully. In the 
sections that follow, we will take the key objectives of ERP implementation.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
The organization can have a legacy system and manual business processes, and  
they need to be unified by one single integrated application to manage, operate,  
and control the business areas and deliver reports to management, as shown in  
the following diagram:
ERP Implementation
Reporting
Sales and
marketing
Finance
Quotation, sales
orders,
GL, banks, FA
AP,AR..
Inventory
management
Procurement
PR, RFQ, PO,
vendors,
Reception,
transfers,...
Business process automation
Legacy system
Manual process
Enterprises that have decided to implement ERP should be coordinating together 
with a consulting partner specialized in Microsoft Dynamics AX. The customer and 
partner should plainly outline the objectives of the ERP solution as early as possible 
in the diagnostic phase. They can replace the legacy system and reduce manual 
business processes by automating the business processes using the ERP solution in the 
organization's departments. Samples of ERP implementation intentions are as follows:
•	
Business process: This comprises the following:
°°
Business process automation
°°
Streamlined business process in cross-function operations
°°
Unified business process across holding and subsidiaries
°°
Single point of contact for reducing the redundant data within 
departments
•	
Controlling: This comprises the following:
°°
Segregation of duties and data access privileges
°°
Advanced workflow and managerial approval matrix and its ceiling 
of expenditure amounts
°°
Tracking the actual costs against budgeted
°°
Inventory tracking and cost control

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 10 ]
•	
Decision support: This comprises the following:
°°
Real-time and ad hoc reports for all organization levels
°°
Dynamic and dimensional reports
°°
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and indicators dashboard
Understanding the ERP module's 
integration
The core objective of running a business is to make a profit, which requires making 
revenue that cover the costs and adding the margin to secure the profit. This is 
the core role of management to achieve this profit; the ERP application gives the 
management the necessary business insights to monitor the business performance.
Microsoft Dynamics AX manages and controls day-to-day transactions that occur 
in the company; these transactions are transformed into financial information that 
represents the key component of the financial statements (balance sheet and income 
statement), which are expenditure and income; in other words, cash out and cash in. 
All these are shown in the following diagram:
Financial Management
Chart of accounts, cash and bank, and fixed assets
Accounts payable
Vendor invoices
Vendors payments
Settlements
Procurement cycle
(PR, FRQ)
Purchasing PO
Procure to pay
Bank reconciliation
Inventory management
Inventory, costing control
Accounts receivable
Collections
Settlement
Order to cash
Quotations
Sales orders,
Customer invoicing
Goods
receptions
Goods
delivery
The cash-to-cash cycle entails the core two cycles, which are commonly known by 
Procure to pay and Order to cash. The first cycle covers the expenditure part (cash 
out), that is, every aspect related to vendor management, procurement management, 
purchasing management, product reception, and vendor invoices, payment, and 
settlement. The second cycle covers the revenue part (cash in), that is, every aspect 
related to customer management, sales management, product delivery, customer 
invoices, collection, and settlement.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Microsoft Dynamics AX enables the module's integration that relates transactions to 
each other, and can automatically inherit information from one and pass it to another 
after adding additional information, along with generating automatic financial 
entries in the general ledger and control points to monitor the transactions. There is 
integration between Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 modules, where production 
modules are integrated with the warehouse management module and sales and 
marketing module, in addition to the procurement and sourcing module.
The project module is integrated with the inventory module, sales and marketing 
module, Accounts receivable modules, procurement and sourcing modules, and 
Accounts payable module. This book focuses on the integration of the financial 
module.
Accounts payable
The Procure to Pay cycle linked the following business functions that are accountable 
for company expenditure:
•	
Operations
•	
Procurement
•	
Purchasing
•	
Warehousing Product Reception
•	
Financial
°°
Accounts payable 
°°
Bank management
The Procure to Pay cycle manages and controls the business processes of procuring 
the needed materials, receiving them, and paying to the vendor. There are specific 
documents to handle these business processes.
The related financial transactions to this cycle are the product receipt, vendor 
invoice, payment, and settlement.
Product receipt
The product receipt represents the physical reception of products in the company 
warehouse. This increases the physical quantities in the inventory and reduces 
the quantity of the remainder in the purchase order, in addition to changes in the 
inventory value according to the inventory valuation method.

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 12 ]
Invoice
The vendor sends the purchase order invoice either along with product reception 
or after product reception. Recoding the vendor invoice to reflect the company's 
liabilities to the vendor results in an increase in the open vendor balance. Microsoft 
Dynamics AX supports a company's internal control in vendor invoices by matching 
the invoice with the purchase order and the invoice amount.
It can be a three-way match for a product when comparing the purchase order 
quantity against the product receipt, and the purchase order invoice against the 
invoice amount. It is a two-way match for services when comparing the purchase 
order amount against the invoice amount. For the service invoices that are not 
related to purchase order, such as cleaning services, just issue an invoice to the 
vendor against delivered services. This reflects the company liabilities to the vendor.
Payment
The vendor payment processing reduces the company liability to vendors. The 
payment can be an advanced one, attached to a specific purchase order and 
independent of other purchase orders; it is usually the responsibility of the accounts 
payable section in the finance department.
Settlement
The settlement processing involves settling the open invoices against payments. 
This process affects vendor statements by decreasing open vendor invoices and, 
increasing closed vendor invoices.
Accounts receivable
The Order to cash cycle joined the following business functions that are accountable 
for a company's revenues:
•	
Sales
•	
Warehousing Product Issuance
•	
Finance
°°
Accounts receivable
°°
Bank management

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
This cycle manages and controls the business processes of sales activities, customer 
orders, delivering goods, and collection from the customer. There are specific 
documents to handle these business processes, which are sales order, issuing process 
by packing slip, and finally the invoice document.
The related financial transactions to this cycle are packing slip, invoice, collection, 
and settlement.
Packing slip
The packing slip represents the physical issuance of products from the company 
warehouse. This decreases the physical quantities in the inventory and reduces the 
quantities remaining in the sales order.
Invoice
After the delivery of goods or services to the customer, the sales team issues a 
customer invoice, increasing the customer open invoices. This affects the customer 
statement and customer aging, in addition to the revenue recognition and the cost of 
goods sold.
Collection
The customer collection process represents the transaction of the required amount of 
money from the customer whether it is against an open invoice or advanced collection.
Settlement
The settlement process settles the open invoices against collection. This process 
affects the customer statement, reducing the number of open customer invoices and 
increasing the number of closed customer invoices and aging.
Exploring ERP and reporting
The main principles of reporting are reliability of business information and the 
ability to produce the right information at the right time for the right person. Reports 
that analyze the ERP data in a meaningful way represent the output of the ERP 
implementation; it is considered as the cream of the implementation, the next level 
of value that the solution owners should aim for. This ideal outcome results from 
building all reports based on a single information source, the ERP solution where the 
business is recording all transactions on a daily basis.
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 14 ]
As shown in the following diagram, the organizational reporting levels are divided 
into the following three main layers:
•	
Operational management
•	
Middle management
•	
Senior management
Each level has a different perspective of report usage, irrespective of whether it is 
tactical/short-term usage or strategic/long-term usage, and a different opinion on a 
report's complexity.
Broad scope
Interactive
General
Focused
Specific
Scheduled
Narrow
Specified
Detailed
Unstructured
Semi
structured
Structured
Senior
management
Middle management
Operational management
Individual employee and teams
The dimensional characteristic of information is divided into two dimensions; the 
first is scope of information and the second is types of decision making.
The scope of information defines the required level of detail for each managerial 
level. Typically, the scope can be described as follows:
•	
Narrow, specified, and detailed: This is the first layer of the information 
scope for operational management level. Managers in this level, typically, 
receive information relevant to their particular subunit. They require narrow 
scope of reports, with details to the lowest level of information (transactional 
level) and specific to the daily operational work.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
•	
Focused, specific, and scheduled: This is the second layer of the information 
scope for managerial level. Managers in this level, typically, receive 
summarized information. They require the reports with a scope focused on 
aggregate and summarized transactional information. These reports cover 
specific periods: weekly, monthly, quarterly, half yearly, and yearly.
•	
Broad, interactive, and general: This is the third layer of the information 
scope and is the highest level for top management. They require reports 
with a broader scope to get more comparisons, actual versus budget, period 
comparisons, and KPIs, in addition to the aggregated reports that cover 
specific monthly, quarterly, half yearly, and yearly performance.
The type of decision making used by an organization is another dimension of 
reporting analysis. Typically, decision-making styles can be described as follows:
•	
Structured: This is a repetitive and routine decision-making style and is best 
used in the operational layer. This style requires reports that are considered 
as static.
•	
Semi-structured: This is a mix between the structured and unstructured 
decision-making style and is best used in the middle management layer.  
This style requires reports that are considered as static or dynamic.
•	
Unstructured: This style is used by the decision makers at the executive level, 
who must provide judgment, evaluation, and business insight to evaluate the 
overall business performance. This style requires reports that are considered 
as dynamic.
Posting types in Microsoft Dynamics AX
In Microsoft Dynamics AX, there are two ways to post transactions to general 
ledger accounts. The first type is through the posting profile that represents the 
integration point between general ledger and subledgers, and it generates the entries 
automatically according to the posting profile setup. The second type is journal 
entries that post directly to ledger accounts. The two ways are explained in detail  
as follows:
•	
Posting profile: This is the integration point between the subledgers (fixed 
assets, payables, inventory, banks, receivables, project, and production) and 
the general ledger. It is a set of ledger accounts that are used in generating 
the automatic ledger entry in which a transaction occurred. It is possible 
to select different ledger accounts for each type of subledger transaction. 
Microsoft Dynamics AX offers flexibility in posting profile setups.

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 16 ]
•	
Journal posting: The journal model in Microsoft Dynamics AX is a journal 
header that contains voucher lines, in which the default data in the journal 
name (header) is copied into voucher lines such as currency and sales tax, 
which can be changed in the voucher line. Every subledger has its own 
journal name based on the transaction type.
The voucher line can be a ledger account, vendor account, customer account, fixed 
asset, bank, or project. If the selected account is an option other than the ledger 
account, the subledger posting profile will directly post to the ledger account.
Exploring the common terms in ERP 
implementations
There are some common terms that are used in all the phases of the ERP 
implementation. These terms describe a specific task or activity during the 
implementation lifecycle, and they are as follows:
•	
Installation: This process is the first step to have the application on 
your server and client machines. This process examines the installation 
prerequisites and makes the application ready to be used.
•	
Configuration: This process identifies which options will be activated 
(checked) according to customer requirements and this will be followed in 
the day-to-day business (module parameters).
•	
Setup: This process sets up the data within the application, identifying how 
to group the data according to customer requirements, vendors, items, and 
chart of accounts.
Microsoft Dynamics AX gives flexibility to be adopted into business needs by 
personalizing the application, modifying it, or customizing it. This is described  
as follows:
•	
Personalization: The personalization or enhancements are small changes that 
occur in the application to fit customer requirements, such as rearrangement 
of form fields, or it can be company-wide enhancements or can be user based 
on preferences. The purpose of enhancements delivers more usability to 
operational data entry users.

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
•	
Modification: The modifications are  medium to large changes that occur 
in the application to fit customer requirements, such as changing a field's 
property to make it mandatory, setting a default value for a checkbox in 
a transaction form instead of making the user select it every time, and 
developing file validations. It can also be company-wide modifications. The 
purpose of these modifications is to have more control on application options 
and behavior rather than modules' parameters.
•	
Customization: The customizations are the largest changes occurring in the 
application to fit customer requirements, such as changes in an application's 
business logic and calculations, changes in modules integration concepts 
and posting profile, and developing new module that are not covered in the 
standard application modules. Although customization is not recommended 
in ERP implementation, the purpose of customization is to cover a critical 
business need to be handled by the application.
Exploring Microsoft Dynamics 
Implementation Methodology – Sure Step
Veteran ERP consultants understand how to execute an implementation project. 
They can call on their years of experience to design a new project that will have a 
good chance at success. When the next generation of consultants joins the team, these 
practices will be passed along, even if there is no process in place to manage the 
knowledge transfer. Many implementation consultants can probably recall their own 
experience learning as the way it was always done in their previous jobs.
Consulting companies can apply their own implementation methodology based on 
previous projects, and there is no problem with this as long as the company achieves 
its objectives and satisfies its customers. The company should also be committed to 
continuously improving its own methodology and building on it by experience.
However, there is a range of problems with an implementation methodology based 
on transferring the senior consultant's knowledge and experience to the next class of 
junior consultants. Such informal or small-scale approaches will lead to variances in 
implementation approach between different consultants, even in the same company, 
and it can create differences from one project to another, even for the same consultant. 
To add to the risk, a consulting firm that depends on consultants to provide an 
implementation methodology is exposed to a loss creditability with their customers  
if the consultant is changed and the new consultant will follow his own approach in 
the implementation methodology, which is different from his colleague.

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 18 ]
Alternatively, there is an implementation methodology built up by an experienced 
organization where information and data have been gathered from a range of 
experienced implementers, based on the best practices from a broad range of 
previous projects and experiences, across a range of business domains and client 
types. That organization is, of course, Microsoft, and the methodology is Microsoft 
Dynamics Sure Step.
Microsoft brought Sure Step to the Microsoft Dynamics market in 2007 and they 
have recently launched its online version. The common question from implementers 
is: why do we need a standard implementation methodology for ERP when we have 
our own?
At a high level, there are common phases of an ERP implementation project, but the 
depth and complexity of each phase depends on the nature of the project itself. The 
procedure to execute the project will depend on the consulting firm and its approach 
in project execution, as well was its style in managing customers. The phases are 
diagnostic, analysis, design, development, deployment, and operation. The key 
characteristics of the Microsoft Dynamics Sure Step methodology are as follows:
•	
It covers the main implementation project phases, activities, tasks, document 
templates, and output.
•	
It minimizes consultant effort to stop reinventing the documentation  
and templates.
•	
It not only covers the implementation phases (analysis, design, development, 
deployment, and operation), but also takes into consideration the sales and 
presales activities in the diagnostic phase.
•	
It is aligned with other Microsoft methodologies such as Microsoft Delivery 
Methodology (SDM), Microsoft Solution Selling Sales (MSSP), and 
Microsoft Solution Framework (MSF). This gives it a variety of guidance 
built on Microsoft methodologies.
•	
It is designed especially for Microsoft Dynamics products (such as AX, NAV, 
SL, GP, and CRM).
•	
It complies with Project Management Institute (PMI) methodologies (scope 
management, time management, cost management, resource management, 
risk management, quality management, and procurement management).
•	
It includes a huge collection of templates and documents according to phase 
activity, and shows the integration between phases and activities.
•	
It contains implementation project types customization (Enterprise, Standard, 
Rapid, Agile, and Upgrade).

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Exploring Microsoft Dynamics Lifecycle 
Services
Microsoft has announced the Lifecycle Services (LCS) tools to help partner and 
customer to be more engaged in the Microsoft Dynamics AX implementation project. 
LCS is a cloud-based solution that provides the required tools to let a customer 
collaborate with a partner and Microsoft in planning, managing, and operating the 
implementation project.
The Microsoft Dynamics LCS offers an assortment of services as follows:
•	
Business process modeling
•	
Infrastructure sizing
•	
Rapid configuration
•	
Customization analysis
•	
System diagnosis
•	
Issue search
•	
Upgrade analysis
Looking at Microsoft Dynamics AX user 
Interface 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 revealed significant changes in the user interface, 
making it more user friendly and easy to use for complex business transactions,  
in addition to the richness in accessing the application by the client whether via a 
tablet or mobile.
The Microsoft Dynamics AX application is considered as a single sign-in application, 
where the active directory is the base of logging in AX. The user logs in to Windows 
using the username and password chosen at the time of joining the domain on the 
active directory. In order to add a user to AX, they should be registered on the active 
directory first.
Rich client is the most commonly used interface accessed by users from their PC or 
laptop. The Microsoft Dynamics AX workspace is the main screen when starting the 
rich client.

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 20 ]
The Microsoft Dynamics AX workspace is shown in the following screenshot:
The main workspace is divided into the following sections:
•	
The address bar: The address bar or breadcrumb that provides access to 
Microsoft Dynamics AX companies and or modules is as follows:
The user could navigate to the company by pressing on the arrow icon as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
The user can navigate to the module by clicking on the arrow icon, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 22 ]
The user can navigate to the company modules' component by pressing on 
the arrow icon, as shown in the following screenshot:
•	
The jewel menu: The second part of the Microsoft Dynamics AX workspace 
is the jewel menu that contains the basic AX commands under the File menu, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Under File, there are commonly known commands such as New, Open, and 
Save, and other specific Microsoft Dynamics AX commands such as Export 
to Microsoft Excel, Tools (session date, calculator, and so on), and View, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
The jewel menu also contains the Help icon on the right-hand side, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
The jewel menu also contains the View icon on the right-hand side to modify 
the workspace setting, as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 24 ]
The jewel bar also contains the Windows icon on the right-hand side, to 
switch between open forms, as shown in the following screenshot:
•	
The Favorites menu: The third part of the Microsoft Dynamics AX 
workspace is the Favorites menu, which is the upper part of the Navigation 
Pane. The Favorites menu contains the commonly used submenus, and it is 
personalized per user. Each user can add or arrange the favorites as per his/
their needs. It is similar to the Windows explorer where a user can make a 
tree of folders and subfolders, as shown in the following screenshot:
In order to add menus to Favorites, go to the content pane and navigate to 
General Ledger| Journals. Right-click on Journals and then select Add to 
favorites, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
Then, move to the Favorites menu, right-click on Favorites, and select 
Organize favorites, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the Organize favorites form, the user can manage their favorites and 
arrange the menu according to their needs by adding folders and subfolders, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 26 ]
•	
The Navigation Pane option: The Navigation Pane option in Microsoft 
Dynamics AX is the workspace where the user can access the modules, 
forms, and list pages, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
The Chevron icon shows the other modules. The user can arrange the order 
of modules by clicking on the Navigation Pane Options…. In the Navigation 
pane options window, use the up and down buttons to order the modules, 
and it is personalized per user, as shown in the following screenshot:
•	
The Status bar option: This is located at the bottom of the Microsoft 
Dynamics AX workspace. The Status bar option contains several types of 
information, as shown in the following screenshot:
°°
The Status bar option has the following information:
Document handling
Help text
Notifications
Currency

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 28 ]
Application object model
Application object layer
Current company
CapsLock status
NumLock status
Current user
Session date
Session time
Application object server name
Operation progress indicator
Database activity
°°
The user can manage the information on Status bar from the user 
options, by navigating to File | Tools | Options | Status bar, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
•	
The content pane: The center of the Microsoft Dynamics AX workspace is 
the content pane, where the user can access forms, list pages, reports, and 
setup. As shown in the following screenshot, the content pane contains the 
following main sections:
°°
Common: This represents access to commonly used list pages for 
master data or transactions, for example, in accounts receivable, 
access to customer details and sales orders.
°°
Journals: This represents access to module journals to create and post 
journal transactions.
°°
Inquiries: This represents access to modules reporting in the  
form style.
°°
Reports: This represents access to printable reports that can be  
shown on screen or printed in hard copy.
°°
Periodic: This represents access to periodic jobs that are being run  
on a monthly or weekly basis.
°°
Setup: This represents access to module setups and configuration.

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 30 ]
•	
The list page: The list page, as shown in the following screenshot (all 
vendors), shows the vendor list. The user can create a new record from the 
list page by pressing Ctrl + N, editing an existing record, and/or posting 
daily transactions.
°°
The list page has the following characteristics:
The action pane: The action pane consists of the action buttons 
to execute a specific task or activity, as shown in the following 
screenshot. This is similar to the Microsoft Office ribbon.
The filter pane: The filter pane is a quick filtration on the list page, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 31 ]
The search can be executed from the search text, filter by selection, filter by 
grid, and advanced filter or sort.
Grid checkboxes: The grid checkboxes are used for multiple 
selections of records, as shown in the following screenshot:
•	
The fact box: The fact box is a new component that has been introduced in 
AX 2012 to display summarized information about the selected record, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
•	
The preview pane: This displays more detailed information about the 
selected record, as shown in the following screenshot:

Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
[ 32 ]
•	
The fast tab: This consists of a group of fields. The fast tab replaces the 
regular tabs on the form and also displays some summary fields, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the introduction of ERP and its main characteristics 
of modules integration, with general ledger (it will be covered in detail in the next 
chapters), and then discussed posting types in Microsoft Dynamics AX. We also 
explored the ERP implementation team and the role of the application consultant in 
the implementation project. Then, we covered ERP reporting levels and needs, after 
which we moved on to Microsoft Dynamics Implementation Methodology Sure Step 
and LCS, and explored the interface of Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012.
In the next chapter, we will cover the general ledger, the types of main accounts, 
classifications, and control points. We will also explore the practices in the financial 
implementations of Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012.

Understanding the  
General Ledger
The chart of accounts (COA) is the backbone of Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP). It is part of the financial module, which is the foundational module of ERP. 
It is a list of categorized ledger accounts (known as main accounts in Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012 R3) that is used by the organization to record all financial 
transactions, and it depends on the nature of the organization's business. The COA  
of manufacturing companies differs from trading companies, service companies,  
and so on. This chapter covers the following topics:
•	
Understanding the chart of accounts
•	
Classifying main accounts
•	
Controlling main accounts
•	
Understanding shared financial data
•	
Understanding financial management in action
•	
Opening balance
•	
Performing daily transactions
•	
Closing procedure
Understanding the chart of accounts
The classified skeleton of a main account is the responsibility of the controller from 
the customer side and the application consultant from the partner side, who bridges 
the application capabilities to the customers' requirements. This activity is designed 
in the analysis and design phases, and deployed in the deployment phase.
www.allitebooks.com

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 34 ]
Main accounts are at the core of financial reporting and include the trial balance, 
balance sheet, income statement, working capital, and cash flow. The starting point 
in building COAs is identifying the financial reporting requirements to ensure that 
all classification levels and categories are captured in Microsoft Dynamics AX.
Classifying main accounts
The first classification of main accounts in Microsoft Dynamics AX is the type, which 
represents the nature of the ledger account, that is, is it a balance sheet account or a 
profit and loss account? The following figure shows an example of a balance sheet 
and an income statement that contains the profit and loss account:

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
Microsoft Dynamics AX classifies main account types into two main groups. The 
first group is Transactional accounts, where all financial transactions are recorded. 
The second group is Reporting accounts, which is used to report and classify caption 
totals, as shown in the following figure:
Microsoft Dynamics AX Main account types
Balance accounts
Balance sheet
Asset
Liability
Equity
Profit and loss
Expense
Revenue
Total
Header
Page header
Totals
Reporting
Empty header
Profit and loss
accounts
Reporting
Income
statement
Balance
sheet
Main account types
Nontransactional accounts
Transactional accounts
The transactional accounts that carry posted transactions on the application 
maintain a record of all the data related to the transaction. This includes the main 
account number, amount, transaction side (debit/credit), currency, transaction text, 
transaction type, in addition to original documents (that generate this entry), and 
who posted the transaction.

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 36 ]
These classifications help at the reporting level and are considered the first 
classification layer for main accounts.
In order to view all the main account types, navigate to General ledger | Setup 
| Chart of accounts | Chart of accounts. You can double-click on Main account 
or click on Edit, go to the General fast tab, and then go to the Main account type 
combobox. Another option is to navigate to General ledger | Common | Main 
accounts. You can also double-click on Main account or click on Edit, go to the 
General fast tab, and then go to the Main account type combobox.
Using transactional accounts
Transactional accounts represent the primary classification of the main accounts.  
They are divided into two main groups: balance accounts, and profit and loss accounts.
Balance accounts
The first classification type of transactional accounts is balance accounts, which 
represent the balance sheet report components.
The balance in a balance account is calculated from the account 
opening day till the date of reporting. In the year-end transaction, the 
closing voucher is transferred to the opening balance of the account.
Balance accounts have the following three classifications that represent their nature:
•	
Assets: This represents the resources that are owned by the organization and 
are used to carry out business activities such as producing a product
•	
Liabilities: This represents the claims against assets; for example, the 
obligations of borrowing money to acquire machines, or products
•	
Equity: This represents the claim on total assets; it is equal to total assets 
minus total liabilities
Profit and loss accounts
The second classification of transactional accounts is profit and loss accounts,  
which represents the Income statement report components.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
The balance of profit and loss accounts are reset to 0 each year. In 
the year-end transaction, the balances are rolled up in the retained 
earnings account.
Profit and loss accounts have two classifications that represent the nature of 
accounts: expense and revenue. The expense accounts represent the costs of assets 
that are consumed in the process of generating revenue; it is the actual or expected 
cash outflow. The revenue accounts represent the results from sales.
The following screenshot illustrates the main account type. To access this form, 
navigate to General ledger | Common | Main accounts. You can also double-click 
on Main account or click on Edit and then on the General fast tab.
Using nontransactional accounts
Nontransactional accounts represent the financial reporting presentation, which 
is divided into two main types: totals and reporting. None of the transactions are 
allowed to be posted on these accounts.

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 38 ]
Totals
Totals are used to sum up the caption or subcaption range of main accounts to give 
a quick overview of the account's balance; the following screenshot illustrates the 
setup of the total account type:
The total of accounts is managed through an account interval 
form in order to identify the range of total.
If there are subtotal accounts, they are neglected in the 
grand total. Do not worry—there are no duplications in the 
calculation of totals.
Reporting
The Reporting type dropdown is used to manage the presentation of financial 
reporting. The available options are Header, Empty header, and Page header,  
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Main account categories
Main account categories represent a second level of classification and are used 
as a grouping layer for the main accounts. The main account category is used for 
reporting and in cubes for business intelligence.
More than 50 ledger account categories are provided by default.
In order to view all the main account categories, navigate to General ledger | Setup 
| Chart of accounts | Main account categories. The following screenshot shows the 
Main account category screen:

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 40 ]
If the Closed checkbox is checked, that particular Reference ID value 
cannot be selected in the main account form. It is better to serialize the 
reference IDs in the logical order of reporting levels so that they can 
be used as a sorting identifier.
The following screenshot illustrates the main account; you can see the Main account 
category field under the Ledger fast tab:
Controlling main accounts
As seen in the following figure, Microsoft Dynamics AX offers three main groups  
of controls over the main accounts. The first is specific to debit and credit controls, 
the second to account administration, and the third to posting validation.
Microsoft Dynamics AX Main account controls
Debit/credit controls
Debit/credit
proposal
Debit/credit
requirements
Balance
control
Account administration
Do not allow
manual entry
Activation
dates
Suspend
Posting validation
Currency
control
User
control
Posting
type
Debit/Credit controls
The Debit/Credit controls group is divided into three subgroups: the first is  
Debit/Credit Proposal, the second is Debit/Credit requirements, and the third  
is Balance control.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Debit/Credit Proposal
Every main account has a normal accounting side, be it debit or credit. The financial 
controller might prefer to have Microsoft Dynamics AX suggest to accountants the 
side of account (whether it is debit or credit) as a proposal and give the user the 
option to move to the other side according to the transaction.
For example, the customer account is proposed to be on the credit side. This is 
recommended for accountants with experience, as they can decide whether it is 
required to change the side of the account.
During the processing of a transaction, the cursor moves to the side that is 
configured in the debit/credit proposal (when the Tab key is pressed), as shown 
in the following screenshot. You can access it by navigating to General ledger | 
Journals | General journal and clicking on Lines.

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 42 ]
Debit/Credit Requirements
Every main account has a normal accounting balance, be it debit or credit, and 
this main account is debited or credited. The financial controller can prefer to get 
Microsoft Dynamics AX to control specific main accounts in order to prevent end 
users from shifting the entry side of the main account. For example, the rent account 
should always be debited against the bank account.
The following screenshot shows the debit/credit requirements of a main account:
The main account configuration is Debit. The accountant attempts to enter 
transactions in the credit side, as you can see in the following screenshot. You can 
access it by navigating to General ledger | Journals | General journal and clicking 
on Lines, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Balance Control
Every main account has a normal accounting side, be it debit or credit. If the balance 
contradicts this norm, it indicates a concern and should be outlined. The financial 
controller can have preferences to get Microsoft Dynamics AX to control a specific 
main account's balance in order to prevent any balance issues. For example, bank 
accounts should always be on the debit side. If they are on the credit side, this 
indicates an issue. As shown in the following screenshot, Balance control prevents 
this from happening:
If the balance control is broken during the processing of a transaction, an Infolog 
window will pop up displaying the A requirement for credit balance is selected  
for account #####, but this is violated by voucher #.## message.
The main account's configuration in balance control is Credit. The current balance  
of the main account is credit -1,000. The current transaction credits the main account 
by -1,001.

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 44 ]
While posting the entry, Microsoft Dynamics AX certifies the main account's  
balance control configuration and then calculates the current balance. The difference 
is shown in an Infolog window, as shown in the following screenshot. You can 
access it by navigating to General ledger | Journals | General journal and clicking 
on Lines.
Using account administration
The main account administration is divided into three main groups. The first group 
is Do not allow manual entry, the second is Activation dates, and the third is 
Accounts suspension.
Do not allow manual entry
The integrity between the general ledger and subledger is an essential factor in 
ERP. It is characterized in the main accounts and subledgers. The subledger should 
guarantee that all posted transactions to the general ledger are from the submodules' 
end. Microsoft Dynamics AX controls the main accounts; this does not allow any 
direct transactions to be posted to the main account. This means that any transaction 
affecting a main account must be posted throughout the submodules posting the 
profile. This checkbox is Do not allow manual entry, which was known as Locked 
in Journal in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2009.

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
On the other hand, there are other accounts that does not need this control since it is 
not related to subledger posting profile, and it is okay to post transactions directly to 
these accounts.
During the processing of a transaction, if an accountant wants to select a main 
account and this account is configured as Do not allow manual entry, an Infolog 
window will pop up that will display Value (account #####) is not allowed for 
manual entry. Enter another value. In other words, this means "select another 
account"; this is shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 46 ]
Activation date
The activation date is commonly used for newly created accounts (which will be active 
for operations at a future date) and in another scenario for main accounts (which can 
be deactivated after a specific period), as shown in the following screenshot:
If an accountant wants to work with a main account, but it has not been a day since 
its activation, an Infolog window will pop up during the processing of a transaction 
that will display Main account ###### is not active, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
Suspending account
The suspending account is used in case there is an account that requires to be stopped 
from an operation, as it will not be used any more. As shown in the following 
screenshot, there is a control to suspend an account from operational posting:

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
During the processing of a transaction, if an accountant selects a main account that is 
suspended, an Infolog window will pop up that will display Main account ###### 
is closed, as shown in the following screenshot:
Using posting validation
Posting validation is divided into three main groups. The first group is currency 
control, the second is user control, and the third is posting type control.
Currency control
The financial controller can prefer to get Microsoft Dynamics AX to control specific 
currencies in order to stop transactions in other currencies in the main account.
For example, the controller requires the Egyptian bank main account to only accept 
transactions in Egyptian pounds (EGP) and prevents the transaction from posting if 
the transaction has a different currency, as shown in the following screenshot:
The Currency code validation options are as follows:
•	
Optional: This field is not authenticated at the time of posting. This is the 
default setting
•	
To be filled in: This field (provided by Microsoft Dynamics AX) checks 
whether the field is filled in for posting

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 48 ]
•	
Table: This field (provided by Microsoft Dynamics AX) examines whether 
the field is completed for posting and that the value matches the value 
specified in the main account
•	
List: This field verifies that the field is filled in with one of the values that  
are defined on the Validation list button
Currency code validation is only activated if the selected 
validation is a list.
During the processing of a transaction, if an accountant changes the currency, 
an Infolog window will pop up that will display The currency must be EGP for 
account ######, as shown in the following screenshot:
User control
Every main account might have a posting constraint per user. The financial controller 
can prefer to get Microsoft Dynamics AX to control specific accounts for certain end 
users who are permitted to post transactions on these main accounts, by navigating 
to General ledger | Common | Main accounts. You can also double-click on Main 
account or click on Edit and then go to the Setup fast tab.

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
User validation is only activated if the selected validation is a list.
During the processing of a transaction,  if an unauthorized accountant tries to post 
a transaction on the main account, an Infolog window will pop up that will display 
You are not authorized to use account #####, as shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 50 ]
Posting type
The Posting type validation is a control that is used to stop posting on a specific  
type of transaction of the main account, as shown in the following screenshot:
During the processing of a transaction, if a transaction breaks the posting type of the 
main account, an Infolog window will pop up that will display The posting type for 
account ##### is not valid, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
Understanding shared financial data
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 introduced a new concept called shared financial 
data, which reduces the effort and time of deployment in a multiple-company 
environment and operational maintenance as well. A group of companies can share 
the same chart of accounts, currencies, and dimensions; this decreases the operation 
time. For example, a new main account will be available to all companies. The 
following figure explains the concept of shared financial data in detail:
Microsoft Dynamics AX shared financial data
Chart of accounts
Main accounts
Account structure
Dimensions
Hierarchy
Fiscal calendar
Fiscal year
Periods
Currency
Exchange rate type
Exchange rate
Ledger
Chart of accounts
Account structure
Fiscal year
Currency
Exchange rate type
Shared data
Legal entity (company)
The financial data that will be shared between companies is as follows:
•	
Chart of accounts: This contains the main account
•	
Account structure: This contains the applicable dimensions of the main 
accounts
•	
Fiscal year: This contains the start date and end date of the fiscal year and the 
period's management
•	
Currencies: This represents the default currency and reporting currency
•	
Exchange rate type: This sets the monthly exchange rate for foreign 
currencies and the default budget exchange rate

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 52 ]
To access the ledger window, navigate to General ledger | Setup | Ledger. The 
following screenshot shows the Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 ledger:
Exploring the sales tax mechanism
In this section, we will explore the sales tax mechanism in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
R3. The sales tax is registered on both the vendor/customer level and the item level 
to cope with international suppliers that reflect different tax rates for the same item. 
The system must recognize the same tax rate in the vendor/customer and item levels 
to process the transaction. The calculated reflection of the sales tax on the finance 
module is shown in the following figure:

Chapter 2
[ 53 ]
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012
sales tax
–
Sales
tax
group
(vendor/
customer)
Sales
tax
code
Item sales
tax group
Calculated sales tax
In order to define sales tax in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3, you have to create tax 
authority, period settlement, ledger posting group, sales tax code, sales tax group, 
and item sales tax group.
In order to create sales tax authority, navigate to General Ledger | Setup | Sales tax 
| Sales tax authorities. Link the tax authority with the vendor ID, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 54 ]
In order to create period settlement, navigate to General Ledger | Setup | Sales 
tax | Sales tax settlement periods. The Authority field is mandatory, and Period 
interval is the field with which the tax will be settled, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
In order to create a sales tax posting group, navigate to General Ledger | Setup | 
Sales tax | Ledger posting groups. Identify the Sales tax payable, Use tax payable, 
and Settlement account fields, as shown in the following screenshot:
The tax receivable will be available dynamically if the Apply use US tax 
checkbox is checked in the General Ledger parameters.

Chapter 2
[ 55 ]
In order to create the sales tax code, navigate to General Ledger | Setup | Sales tax 
| Sales tax codes. In the General fast tab, assign the Settlement period and Ledger 
posting group. In the Calculation fast tab, assign the following parameters:
•	
Origin: This is the field that represents the origin from the which sales tax  
is calculated
•	
Marginal base: This represents the basis of tax limits
•	
Calculation method: This represents whether the sales tax is calculated for 
the entire amount or for an interval
These parameters are shown in the following screenshot:
To identify the sales tax percentage, go to Values. Enter a value in the Value field, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 56 ]
The sales tax can be changed based on the government regulation. To 
apply the changes in sales tax based on the government regulation, 
add a new line and enter the starting date to apply the new tax rate.
In order to create a sales tax group, navigate to General Ledger | Setup | Sales tax | 
Sales tax group. Under the Setup fast tab, add the Sales tax code value, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
In order to create an item sales tax group, navigate to General Ledger | Setup | 
Sales tax | Item sales tax group. Under the Setup fast tab, click on Add and enter 
the Sales tax code value, as shown in the following screenshot:
In order to apply the sales tax in a general ledger transaction, navigate to General 
Ledger | Journals | General Journal, create a new journal, and then move to lines.

Chapter 2
[ 57 ]
In the voucher line, select the Account type value as Vendor, select the vendor ID, 
enter 1000 in the Credit side amount, and select the Offset account value. Then, 
select the Sales tax group and Item sales tax group fields; the system will calculate 
the sales tax amount, as shown in the following screenshot:
There is an effect on the price based on the sales tax rule, whether the price includes  
or excludes the sales tax can be defined as follows:
•	
Price includes sales tax: For a 10 percent sales tax and a $100 price, the 
system will allocate $90 to the undocumented liabilities account and $10  
to the VAT account
•	
Price excludes sales tax: For a 10 percent sales tax and a $100 price, the 
system will allocate $100 to the undocumented liabilities account and $10  
to the VAT account

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 58 ]
Please note that price including sales tax rule is configured from the 
following paths:
•	
General Ledger | Setup | General ledger parameters and then 
go to the Sales tax tab. Check the Amounts include sales tax 
checkbox.
•	
The vendor master data form can be accessed by navigating to 
the Accounts Payable | Common | Vendors | All vendors | 
Invoice and delivery fast tab. Check the Price included sales tax 
checkbox.
•	
The customer master data form can be accessed by navigating 
to the Accounts Receivable | Common | Customers | All 
customers | Invoice and deliver fast tab. Check the Price 
included sales tax checkbox.
•	
On transaction journals, under the Setup tab, check the Price 
included sales tax checkbox.
•	
On the sales order and purchase order headers, in the Setup fast 
tab, check the Price included sales tax checkbox.
Withholding tax
The withholding tax is calculated and executed on the vendor payment process. The 
calculated reflection of the withholding tax on the finance module will be as follows:
•	
Price includes sales tax: For a 5 percent withholding tax, 10 percent sales tax, 
and a $100 price include the tax, $90 price exclude the tax, and this amount 
is the base of withholding tax (90 * 5%). The system will allocate $4.5 to the 
withholding tax payable account, and $95.5 will be allocated to the payables 
account.
•	
Price excludes sales tax: For a 5 percent withholding tax, 10 percent sales 
tax, and a $100 price exclude the sales tax. This will be the base of the 
withholding tax calculation (100 * 5%), and the amount including sales tax is 
$110. The system will allocate $5 to the withholding tax payable account and 
$105 will be allocated to the payables account.
The Withholding tax checkbox on the vendor master data form must 
be checked in order to let AX calculate the withholding tax during the 
payment process. In the vendor master data form, navigate to Accounts 
Payable | Common | Vendors | All vendors | Invoice and delivery 
fast tab and click on the Calculate withholding tax fast tab.

Chapter 2
[ 59 ]
Understanding financial management in 
action
Here, we will understand the process of financial management through the opening 
balance and various daily transactions.
Opening balance
When a company migrates from a legacy ERP solution to Microsoft Dynamics AX, 
one of the important data migration tasks is creating opening balances in the new 
Dynamics AX system based on the closing balances of the previous closed period 
(often the fiscal year) from the legacy system.
In order to ensure the accuracy of your Dynamics AX's opening balances, it is 
important to take a systematic approach to the process of planning, designing, and 
executing the migration of data for trial balances and subledgers, as well as validation 
and reconciliation of these elements along with the general ledger, subledger, and 
financial dimensions. In this section, we will lay out the process and elements involved 
in creating new opening balances in Microsoft Dynamics AX from a legacy system.
Elements of opening balances are as follows:
•	
Trial balance report: This consists of data about balance accounts that move 
their balances from one year to another, and profit and loss accounts that 
represent the income statement results and do not move to another year.
•	
Subledger: This consists of data about fixed assets, banks, vendors, 
customers, and items. Subledgers are linked to the chart of accounts through 
the posting profile setup.
•	
Validation and reconciliation: This validates the balances between the 
subledgers (fixed assets, banks, vendors, customers, and items) and general 
ledger accounts which are known as trial balance accounts, taking into 
consideration the balance financial dimensions (business units, department, 
and purpose). The controllership and financial consultants should finalize 
and validate the design and deployment of financial dimensions or 
dimension rules.

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 60 ]
Data integrity between the general ledger, subledger, and financial dimension is one of 
the main objectives of ERP. It must be considered from day 1 of the opening balances, 
as the opening balance transactions can affect daily transactions after going live.
Implementation execution
opening balances
–
Year end
close
process
Opening balances
Trial
balance
report
General ledger
Balance
accounts
P and L
accounts
Subledger
Fixed assets
Items
Vendors
Customer
Banks
Posting profile
Acquisition Depreciation
Best practices of uploading opening balances
After various attempts to upload opening balances to Microsoft Dynamics AX, the 
commonly followed approach is to separate the upload of ledger accounts (trial 
balance) and subledgers (vendors, customers, bank, inventory, and fixed assets).  
This is by using an error account in the subledger entries of the debit and credit  
sides only in order to balance the subledger:
•	
The Dr. Error account
•	
The Cr. Error account
This approach took a lot of time and effort in order to ensure that the general ledger's 
accounts and subledgers are reconciled and that the balance of error account is 0. 
Also, the opening balance methodology must be aligned with the financial controller.
Planning and designing
The master data and opening balance transaction upload is handled through 
Data Import Export Framework (DIXF), which is newly introduced in Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012. This functionality helps consultants to gather the data that will 
be uploaded in Excel files, upload it to a staging table, validate the uploaded data, 
and then move it to the target tables.

Chapter 2
[ 61 ]
The following steps should be followed in the planning and designing phases:
•	
Prepare and upload the master data into Microsoft Dynamics AX (chart of 
accounts, banks, fixed assets, financial dimensions, vendors, customers, and 
inventory items).
•	
Maintain a high level of coordination between the controllership and 
application financial consultants in the design phase, including the 
finalization of mapping between the old chart of accounts (legacy system) 
and the new one.
•	
The application financial consultants should ensure the setup of the required 
fields in the data-collection template that they will use in order to upload the 
opening balance.
•	
The accountant who will fill in the opening balance data collection sheet 
must understand the fields and how they will fill them in.
•	
Create a separate journal name under the general ledger journal and voucher 
number sequence for easier tracking.
•	
Create separate journal names under Inventory Management (the movement 
journal) and voucher number sequence for easier tracking.
•	
If adjustments are needed for the opening balance, use the same journal 
name and voucher number.
•	
The opening balances of the general ledger and subledger are uploaded 
together. Avoid separating the general ledger's upload and the subledger's 
upload as far as you can.
•	
The subledger's (vendors and customers) posting profiles should be assigned 
to the opening balance.
•	
Create the necessary fiscal periods for fixed assets acquisitions in old periods.
Execution
The opening balance will be executed in three waves: the acquisition and 
depreciation of fixed assets, items, and trial balance with subledger. The following 
are the methods we utilize to ensure correct execution:
•	
Wave one is fixed assets. The following are the methods to be used in  
wave one:

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 62 ]
°°
Fixed assets acquisition will be executed through a fixed assets 
acquisition proposal. The acquisition for the assets will be in its  
actual date; this is to keep the system calculation away from  
manual intervention. The posting profile setup will generate the 
following entry:
Dr. Fixed Assets Acquisition Accounts (Balance)
Cr. Error Account
If there are fixed assets that are acquired in a foreign currency, 
modify the acquisition entry with the currency's exchange rate.
°°
Fixed assets depreciation will be executed through a fixed assets 
depreciation proposal. The posting profile setup will generate the 
following entry:
Dr. Error Account
Cr. Accumulated Depreciation Accounts
•	
Wave two is inventory items. The following is the method to be used in  
wave two:
°°
The inventory opening balance will be uploaded from the movement 
journal (the inventory subledger). The posting profile setup will 
generate the following entry:
Dr. Inventory Accounts (Balance)
Cr. Error Account
•	
Wave three is the trial balance with subledger. The following are the methods  
in wave three:
°°
Identify the general ledger main account balances that are not 
affected by the subledger's posting profiles
°°
General ledger accounts that are affected by subledgers will 
be broken down by their relevant subledgers (banks, vendors, 
and customers) and the accounts will be affected directly by the 
subledger's posting profile
°°
Make sure that the assigned posting profile is the proper posting 
profile for each customer/vendor; this is for two reasons:

Chapter 2
[ 63 ]
First, this will make sure that the customers' or vendors' 
opening balance hits the right account, whether it is an advances 
account or general payable/receivable account.
Second, this will ensure that the entries occurred during the 
settlement process (during the year's operations) will hit the 
right accounts.
°°
Replace the fixed assets accounts with an error account in order 
to close the amount in the error account, which resulted from 
acquisition transactions
°°
Replace the depreciation account with an error account in order 
to close the amount in the error account, which resulted from 
depreciation transactions
°°
If there are balances in a foreign currency, upload the opening 
balance entry with the currency's exchange rate
Validation
Validation performs the following tasks:
•	
Closing vouchers to transfer all profit and loss balances to the retained 
earnings account
•	
Printing the trial balance report with the closing balance criteria
Performing daily transactions
This section covers the functionalities that help end users with their daily work, 
which facilitates the entry process and thereby saves time and effort.
As seen in the following figure, there are three main functionalities, Account 
alias (which is a new functionality delivered in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3), 
Recurring entries, and Save voucher:
Microsoft Dynamics AX daily transactions
Account alias
Recurring entries
Save voucher

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 64 ]
The account alias
The main account alias is a function that can be utilized for nonfinancial users who 
are not aware of the structure of a chart of accounts and the requirements to input 
data for a financial transaction. The main account aliases give the option to enter a 
predefined code for every combination of main accounts along with the financial 
dimensions. It is an alternative, manually selecting an individual dimension 
combination for every transaction. This is a usability function.
To access the account alias window, navigate to General ledger | Setup | Chart of 
accounts | Ledger account alias, as shown in the following screenshot:
1.	 To access the general journal window, navigate to General ledger | Journals 
| General journal | Lines. In the Account column, enter the defined main 
account alias and click on the combobox; it filters to the entered alias and 
shows the account's structure as well.
2.	 Then, select the alias description and it is populated in the Account column 
with the account structure combination. The mouse cursor will be on a 
segment that has been specified in the Initial focus field in the setup form.

Chapter 2
[ 65 ]
Recurring entries
Recurring entries are generally used for frequent transaction entries such as rentals 
and subscriptions. The accountant is able to create a periodic journal and generate an 
entry based on the transaction periods that are already set up.
In order to create a recurring entry (for example, for rent), you have to create a 
periodic journal name. For this, navigate to General Ledger | Setup | Journals | 
Journal names and create a journal name with the Journal type field as Periodic. The 
following screenshot shows Periodic in the Journal type field:
Then, as shown in the following screenshot, set the periodic journals for rent to be 
posted every month. For this, navigate to General Ledger | Periodic | Journals 
| Post journals; here, the periodic journal form opens up. Create a new journal 
entry by pressing Ctrl + N, and then click on Lines. In the lines form, enter the date, 
account type, account, debit or credit side, and offset account.
The Unit (whether days, months, years) and Number of units fields set the recurring 
times of the transaction. For the rent example, select Vendor in Account type and 
the vendor ID and enter the amount in the credit side. Set the suitable offset main 
account. The Unit field is Monthly and Number of units is 1, which means it will 
recur every month, as shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 66 ]
To execute a recurring transaction, navigate to General Ledger | Journals | General 
journal and create a new journal by pressing Ctrl + N. Then, click on Lines. In the 
journal voucher form, go to the Periodic journal menu and select Retrieve journal. 
In the open dialog box, enter End date as 1/31/2014 and select a periodic journal 
name, as shown in the following screenshot:
•	
Copy: The periodic transaction will be kept in the 
periodic journal, where it can be used in the future
•	
Move: The periodic transaction will be removed from the 
periodic journal
The result of this process retrieves the periodic transaction in the journal line, as 
shown in the following screenshot. It also shows the next usage for the period 
journal, which will be in 2/1/2014 in our example.

Chapter 2
[ 67 ]
Saving a voucher
Saving a posted voucher and retrieving it in a new voucher is generally used for  
a long transaction entry.
Select a posted transaction to be saved. The options for saving are in percentages  
or amount.
To access the Save voucher window, navigate to General ledger | Journals | 
General journal | Posted | Lines | Functions | Save voucher template, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 68 ]
In order to create a new voucher in a newly created journal, click on Functions and 
then click on Select voucher template, as shown in the following screenshot:
Microsoft Dynamics AX will show all the saved vouchers in headers and lines, 
displaying both sides of the transaction. A particular voucher will create a new 
unposted voucher.
Closing procedure
The closing procedure is a common practice at organizations to finalize the monthly 
transactions and report the monthly financial reporting. The procedure varies from 
one company to another, but it has common steps between company departments.
The finance controllership department is responsible for the closing procedure, 
where accountants follow up with the operations department to confirm that they 
have posted the monthly transactions in the ERP. The following figure explains the 
closing procedure in detail:

Chapter 2
[ 69 ]
Microsoft Dynamics AX closing procedure
Operations
Finance
Human resources
Payroll entry
Procurement and sourcing
Purchase orders
Product receipts
Warehousing and
inventory management
Packing slip
Sales orders
Sales invoices
Sales and marketing
AX administration
General ledger accountant
Post recurring
entries
Exchange rate adjustment job
Accounts payable accountant
Accounts receivables accountant
Customer collection
Settlement
Costing accountant
Run inventory
recalculation
Run exchange
rate general
ledger
Run exchange rate AP
Run exchange rate AR
Bank accountant
Payments
Deposits
Bank reconciliation
Stop period for operations
Stop period
Post service invoices
Post PO-invoices
Settlement
Post
payroll entry
Post
depreciation
All the departments in a company are involved in the monthly closing process. The 
Human resources department calculates the payroll and generates the payroll entry 
to be validated and posted by the general ledger's accountant.
The Procurement department ensures that they have confirmed all purchase orders 
to be received at the warehouse and the warehouse keeper confirms receiving them 
as it affects the inventory quantities and values. On the other side, the accounts 
payable accountants match and post purchase order invoices as well as service 
invoices. They then execute payments of due invoices that are related to the closing 
month.
The Sales department verifies that they have confirmed all sales orders to be 
delivered to the customer and issue sales invoices accordingly, which generates the 
revenue and cost of goods sold. In the Finance department, the accounts receivable 
accountant posts the customers' collections and settlements.
During this time, the fiscal period is stopped for all operations to prevent any further 
operational entries in that month and only the financial team is allowed to post the 
financial adjustment entries.
The general ledger's accountant posts the recurring entries such as rental and 
accruals. So, first run the fixed assets depreciation and exchange rate adjustment for 
subledgers (accounts payable and accounts receivable) and then run the exchange 
rate adjustments for the general ledger.

Understanding the General Ledger
[ 70 ]
The costing accountant runs the inventory recalculation to adjust the average cost 
of inventory items and adjusts the sold quantities by the proper cost. They stop the 
fiscal period after finalizing the inventory calculation.
The management of financial periods is an administrative task. There are three stages 
for the period status.
To access the Period status window, navigate to General ledger | Setup | Ledger, 
then click on the Ledger calendar button, and go to the Periods fast tab, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
All transactions that are executed have the Open status in the Period status drop-
down list.
After ensuring that all departments have entered and posted their transactions 
(relevant to the current month) as well as the financial post (the month-end 
adjustment transactions), the financial period status drop-down list is set to Open for 
a specific user group and modules.
In order to access the modules' access level path, navigate to General ledger | Setup 
| Ledger, then click on the Ledger calendar button, and go to the Modules access 
level fast tab.

Chapter 2
[ 71 ]
After dealing with the details of the financial department, make all the required 
adjustments for the current month. The financial Period status drop-down list is set 
to On Hold (formerly known as Stopped in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2009), which 
prevents any entry being posted in that period; but it can be reopened after that.
There is another possible scenario: changing Period status to Closed. However,  
this status cannot be reopened again.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the practices in the financial implementations of 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012. We focused on the general ledger, covering the types 
of main accounts, classifications, and control points. We also explained shared 
financial data, which is a new function introduced in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 
R3. We also learned  about opening balance best practices, daily transactions, and  
the monthly closing procedure.
In the next chapter, we will cover bank management basic configurations, controls, 
and integrations with other modules (general ledger, accounts payable, and accounts 
receivable), and we will also perform a bank reconciliation.


Understanding Cash and 
Bank Management
The cash and bank module is the place where a company's bank account, current, 
and deposit accounts are listed. In this module, a company can monitor and control 
their bank transactions. The financial controller and chief financial officer will be able 
to assess the cash position and bank reconciliation accuracy. This chapter covers the 
following topics:
•	
Understanding cash and bank integration
•	
Controlling cash and bank management
•	
Exploring cash and bank management in action
•	
Bank account reconciliation
•	
Bank facility – letter of guarantee
Understanding cash and bank integration
The modules' transactions represent the customer's deposits in the company's bank 
accounts, either by cash or by check, and also payments to vendors through cash or 
check. Bank reconciliation is an important procedure performed weekly or monthly 
(according to the number of transactions and the customers' business needs). This 
process should be performed once a month before the closing period to ensure that 
bank transactions (bank statements) are matched with book transactions, which are 
recorded in Microsoft Dynamics AX.

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 74 ]
The following diagram shows the integration of cash and bank management:
The cash and bank module is a shared module between the Accounts payable 
module and the Accounts receivable module (as seen in the preceding diagram), 
where the vendors' payments are executed by a check or cash that can be printed 
through Microsoft Dynamics AX. The customers' collections are deposited into the 
bank's account. The key factor here is the method of payment, which is assigned to a 
transaction level that may recall a specific bank account ID, require a check number, 
fire payment steps for the check process, and so on.
Controlling cash and bank management
Microsoft Dynamics AX offers five main controls over bank and cash management. 
It is one of the key objectives of ERP that it controls in order to make the most 
of having an ERP application in place. These control functionalities should be 
highlighted to the process owners to be utilized efficiently.
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 emphasizes control as well as new business 
functionalities. Some of these controls were newly introduced in Microsoft  
Dynamics AX 2012.
Some of the Microsoft Dynamics AX cash and bank controls are shown in the 
following diagram:

Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
The controls shown in the preceding diagram are defined as follows:
•	
Credit limit: This allows for credit limit control on the bank account. This is a 
new feature introduced in the cash and bank management module.
•	
Date activation: This detects activation dates control. This is also a new 
feature in the cash and bank management module.
•	
Status activation: This detects the activation status on bank transactions. It's 
a new feature added in the cash and bank management module.
•	
General ledger reconciliation: This assigns one ledger account to more than 
one bank account.
•	
Transaction currency: This allows multiple currency transactions to be 
executed on the bank account.
Credit limit
The credit limit control stops posting transactions if it exceeds the credit limit that the 
bank can propose. To access the cash and bank credit limit tolerance window, navigate 
to Cash and bank management | Setup | Cash and bank management parameters | 
General. The following screenshot explains the credit limit tolerance control:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 76 ]
The Credit limit tolerance field must be activated under Cash and bank management 
parameters, where it gives a warning or an error, or it is deactivated. The credit limit 
amount is defined for every bank account under general information. The amount 
must be negative; if it is not, you will receive this message: Credit limit must be in 
negative, as you can see in the following screenshot. For cash and bank credit limit 
tolerance, navigate to Cash and bank management | Common | Bank accounts. 
Click on Edit or double-click to open the bank form under the General fast tab.
In the course of transaction processing, if an accountant validates or posts a credited 
amount that surpasses the bank's credit limit, an Infolog window will pop up 
showing a message that says, You cannot post the journal because the bank's  
credit limit has been exceeded, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 77 ]
Date activation
Date activation of the bank account recognizes the activation range for every bank 
account. To access the cash and bank date activation window, navigate to Cash and 
bank management | Common | Bank accounts. Click on Edit or double-click to 
open the bank form under the General fast tab, as shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 78 ]
In the course of transaction processing, if an accountant posts or validates a transaction 
date that is not in the active date range, an Infolog window will pop up showing this 
message: You cannot use the company bank account 'HSBC – CU' for this transaction 
because that bank account is not active, as shown in the following screenshot:
Status activation
As you can see in the following screenshot, status activation has three options: 
Active for all transactions, Inactive for new transactions, and Inactive for all 
transactions. To access the cash and bank status activation window, navigate to Cash 
and bank management | Common | Bank accounts. Click on Edit or double-click 
to open the bank form under the General fast tab.

Chapter 3
[ 79 ]
The three options of status activation are explained in detail as follows:
•	
Active for all transactions: This means that a bank account is active and 
available for all transactions.
•	
Inactive for new transactions: This means that no new transactions can 
be posted for a bank account. The existing transactions that have not been 
finalized yet, such as pending payments, will still take place as they were 
originally posted.
•	
Inactive for all transactions: This means no transactions, either new or 
existing, can be processed for a bank account.

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 80 ]
General ledger reconciliation
The creation process of a new bank account must be assigned to a main account. 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 gives a warning message to say that this account is 
already assigned to another bank's main account, and that should be considered 
during the reconciliation process with the general ledger's main accounts. As seen 
in the following screenshot, the warning message that appears is: Main account 
##### is already used by bank account USA OPER. If you associate multiple bank 
accounts with a main account, the General Ledger Bank Reconciliation report will 
contain information from multiple bank accounts.
Transaction currency
The transaction currency for bank accounts could be one currency or multiple 
currencies; it is suggested to assign a single currency for every bank account. You 
have to navigate to the Cash and bank management | Common | Bank accounts | 
Currency management fast tab, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 81 ]
In the course of transaction processing, if an accountant tries to post an entry in a 
bank account that does not permit multiple currencies, an Infolog window will pop 
up showing this message: Currency EUR not allowed for account HSBC - CU, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 82 ]
Exploring cash and bank management in 
action
The following section will explore cash and bank management in daily transactions. 
It will focus on bank account reconciliation, which is a key process to ensure that all 
recorded transactions match the bank statement; and the bank facility will focus on 
the letter of guarantee.
Bank account reconciliation
Bank account reconciliation is a validation process of the bank's account statement, 
and recorded transactions in the cash and bank management module through 
customer deposits and vendor payments.
There are two reconciliation mechanisms that you can apply for each bank account: 
the first one is the manual reconciliation mechanism, and the second one is newly 
introduced in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R2, the automatic import of bank 
statements. You have to navigate to Cash and bank management | Common | 
Bank accounts | Select bank account. In the Bank account ribbon, click on Account 
reconciliation, as shown in the following screenshot:
The procedure begins when the company receives the bank account statement from 
the bank. Under Cash and bank management | Common | Bank accounts, select 
Bank account | Bank account ribbon | Account reconciliation. In the account 
reconciliation form, enter the reconciliation date, statement number, and statement 
ending balance, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 83 ]
Under reconciliation transactions, only the booked transactions through Microsoft 
Dynamics AX modules are listed. If it matches the bank statement, mark it as 
Cleared, as you can see in the following screenshot:
www.allitebooks.com

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 84 ]
After marking all transactions, click on Reconcile account to confirm the 
reconciliation process. If the reconciliation is successful, an Infolog window will  
pop up displaying this message: Account has been reconciled. This is shown in  
the following screenshot:
To automatically import bank statements, you must activate the Advanced bank 
reconciliation option. In order to activate the Advanced bank reconciliation 
option, navigate to Cash and bank management | Common | Bank accounts 
| Edit | Reconciliation. The following screenshot displays the Advanced bank 
reconciliation option under the Reconciliation fast tab:
As you can see in the following screenshot, the advanced bank reconciliation option 
cannot be turned off after activation:

Chapter 3
[ 85 ]
The following screenshot shows the Generate Bank Documents window:
The manual process of importing bank statements starts by selecting Bank 
account and then by clicking on Bank statements, as you can see in the following 
screenshot. In order to go to the Bank statements section, navigate to Cash and bank 
management | Common | Bank accounts. Select a bank account, and then go to the 
Bank account ribbon and select Bank statements.

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 86 ]
In the Bank statement screen, a journal line has been created with a status of 
Open. To import the bank statement, click on Import statement. To go to the Bank 
statement section, navigate to Cash and bank management | Common | Bank 
statement. The Bank statement screen is shown in the following screenshot:
A dialog box will pop up to select the file to be imported. Choose a bank account, 
locate the file path, and then click on OK. In order to go to the Import bank 
statements section, you have to navigate to Cash and bank management | Common 
| Bank statement. In the Bank statement ribbon, select Import statement. The 
Import bank statements window is shown in the following screenshot:
The Bank statement form contains the transaction lines of the imported bank 
transactions, in addition to the opening balance, ending balance, and net amount 
details. Click on Validate to validate the imported bank statement. If there is an 
error with the opening or ending balance, the validation process will stop. In order 
to edit the bank statement, you have to navigate to Cash and bank management 
| Common | Bank statement | Edit. The Bank statement screen is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 87 ]
As you can see in the following screenshot, an Infolog window will pop up to 
confirm that the statement passes the validation process:
In order to match the bank transactions with the bank statement, go to the Bank 
reconciliation journal by navigating to Cash and bank management | Journals | 
Bank reconciliation, as shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 88 ]
To create a new journal line, select Bank account and then click on Lines, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
The bank reconciliation worksheet contains the following fields:
•	
Open statement lines: This represents the imported transactions of the  
bank statement
•	
Open bank documents: This represents the bank transactions posted on 
Microsoft Dynamics AX
•	
Matched statement lines: This represents the matched line in the statement 
with posted transactions
•	
Matched bank documents: This represents the matched bank document  
in the statement with posted transactions
While checking a bank statement line with a posted transaction, click on Match.  
As you can see in the following screenshot, the matched lines move to the Matched 
documents tab:

Chapter 3
[ 89 ]
After matching all transactions against the bank statement, click on Reconcile, as 
shown in the following screenshot, in order to reconcile this statement and close it:
As you can see in the following screenshot, an Infolog window will pop up 
indicating that the reconciliation process is finished:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 90 ]
Bank facility – letter of guarantee
A letter of guarantee is an agreement by a bank (the guarantor) to pay a set amount 
of money to another person (the beneficiary) if the bank's customer (the principal) 
defaults on a payment or an obligation to the beneficiary. Letters of guarantee are not 
transferable, and apply only to the beneficiary named in the guarantee agreement. 
The principal can request an increase or decrease in the value of a letter of guarantee, 
subject to the terms of the agreement.
The following diagram illustrates the required configuration and setups in order 
to utilize the letter of guarantee function. The Letter of Guarantee - LG function 
configuration should be activated, in addition to the basic setups including Bank 
documents posting profile, Bank facility agreements, and Bank facility.
The first step in configuration is to activate the letter of guarantee checkbox on cash 
and bank management parameters, and assign the journal name that will be used 
to post the issuance commission and margin transaction. In order to perform this 
function, navigate to the Cash and bank management | Setup | Cash and bank 
management parameter | Bank document fast tab. The activation screen is shown  
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 91 ]
The journal name type is daily.
Create the bank facilities records by navigating to Cash and bank management | 
Setup | Bank documents | Bank facilities. As shown in the following screenshot, 
go to the Facility groups fast tab, create a new record by clicking on New or by 
pressing Ctrl + N. Enter the Facility group code and the Description value.
Then move to the Facility types fast tab, and create a new record by clicking on New 
or by pressing Ctrl + N. Enter the Facility type code and the Description value, select 
Facility group and Facility nature (whether it is Letter of credit, Import collection, 
or Letter of guarantee). The Facility types fast tab is shown in the following 
screenshot:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 92 ]
Create the bank facility agreements by navigating to Cash and bank management 
| Setup | Bank documents | Bank facility agreements on the General fast tab. 
Identify the start and end date of the facility agreement, in addition to the amount of 
facility limit and used amount. In the Letter of guarantee fast tab, identify the Cash 
margin, Issuance commission, Extension commission, Increase value commission, 
and Decrease value commission. The facility agreements are shown in the following 
screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 93 ]
Create the bank documents posting profile by navigating to Cash and bank 
management | Setup | Bank documents | Bank documents posting profile where 
you can identify the accounts: Settle account, Charges account, Margin account, and 
Liquidation account. The posting profile could be distinguished by the bank facility 
type, facility group, and so on. The Bank documents posting profile window is 
shown in the following screenshot:
The letter of guarantee is used in sales activities where the customer provides the 
guarantee to deliver goods or services against this guarantee. In the following 
section, we will explore a sales order transaction with the letter of guarantee.
Navigate to Sales and marketing | Common | Sales orders | All sales orders. The 
sales order menu is shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 94 ]
Create a new record by pressing Ctrl + N, select customer account, and then move  
to the General fast tab. In the Bank document type field, select Letter of guarantee. 
The sales order creation window is shown in the following screenshot:
In the sales order form, select the item ID (such as sold, quantity, price, site, and 
warehouse) of the product. Then move to the Manage ribbon, and then select Letter 
of guarantee. The sales order form line is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 95 ]
In the letter of guarantee form, click on Request to create a letter of guarantee 
request, select values for the Type, Value, and Expiration date fields. The letter of 
guarantee request is shown in the following screenshot:
Then move to the letter of guarantee process. This process is executed from the cash 
and bank management module by navigating to Cash and bank management | 
Common | Letters of guarantee. The Letters of guarantee menu is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 96 ]
The first step in the letter of guarantee process is submitting the letter of guarantee 
to the bank. The current Status value is Request, and the Facility status value is 
Requested. The letter of guarantee, status, and other related information is shown  
in the following screenshot:
Click on Submit to bank, select the Bank account and Facility type values, and then 
click on OK. The submit to bank process is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 97 ]
The Status field is updated to be Submitted to bank, and the Facility status field 
remains as Requested. The financial details are updated with the bank submission 
information. Status updates and updated submission information are shown in the 
following screenshot:
The company receives a confirmation from the bank and the system automatically 
calculates the Margin and Expense. A confirmation received from the bank function 
is shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 98 ]
The system generates and posts a general journal transaction; the Infolog window 
pops up displaying the message indicating that the journal has been posted, as 
shown in following screenshot:
In order to check the posted transaction, you have to navigate to General Ledger 
| Journals | General journal | Posted and filter on the letter of guarantee journal 
name. The posted journals are shown in the following screenshot:
The letter of guarantee document's Status field is updated to be Received from bank 
and the Facility status field is updated to be Open. The letter of guarantee status 
update is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 99 ]
Then you should navigate back to Sales and marketing | Common | Sales orders 
| All sales orders and filter to the previously created sales order, and on the ribbon 
move to Manage and select Letter of guarantee, in order to request the letter of 
guarantee to the customer. The request of giving the letter of guarantee to the 
beneficiary is shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding Cash and Bank Management
[ 100 ]
The Status field is updated to be Request give to beneficiary and the bank  
Facility status field remains as Open. The status update is shown in the  
following screenshot:
Then navigate to Cash and bank management | Common | Letters of guarantee  
to give the letter of guarantee to the beneficiary. The following screenshot shows  
the action of giving the letter of guarantee to the beneficiary:

Chapter 3
[ 101 ]
The Status field is updated to be Given to beneficiary and the Facility status field 
remains as Open. The letter of guarantee is shown in the following screenshot:
There are other options that could be performed after this stage; they are  
as follows:
•	
Increase or decrease the letter of guarantee
•	
Cancel or extend it
•	
Liquidate the letter of guarantee
Summary
This chapter covers the integration of the cash and bank modules with Accounts 
payable, Accounts receivable, and the general ledger. We discussed the controls 
offered by Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012. We also explored the bank reconciliation 
transactions that are executed at the end of each month. Then we explored the  
letter of guarantee as the bank facility option.
In the next chapter, we will cover accounts payable integration with another  
module, vendors' master data, and controls. We will then move to accounts  
payable transactions, invoicing, payment, and settlement.


Understanding Accounts 
Payable
The accounts payable cycles are vendor invoicing and payment. These business 
processes manage and control the execution of vendor expenditure processes. These 
processes are based on procurement, purchasing, and product reception cycles in the 
procurement and sourcing processes. This cycle is known as the procure to pay cycle. 
This chapter covers the following topics:
•	
Understanding accounts payable integration with other modules
•	
Exploring vendor master data characteristics
•	
Exploring accounts payable controls
•	
Exploring accounts payable transactions
Understanding accounts payable 
integration with other modules
The Accounts payable module manages and controls vendor transactions from the 
accounting point of view, where it records vendor master information and the basic 
transactions related to vendor invoicing, payment, and settlement. The accounts 
payable function is integrated with other business functions.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 104 ]
The first integration point with the procurement and sourcing business functions is 
procuring goods and services to the company, the second integration is invoicing 
the purchase order based on the received goods in the warehousing, and the third 
integration with cash and bank management business functions is performing 
vendor payment and settlement against invoices. The full cycle of procure to pay is 
shown in the following diagram:
Procurement
Finance
Purchase
requisition
Approval
Request for
quotation
Quotation
replies
Approval
Purchase order
PO-invoice
matching
Vendor
payment
Advance
invoice
Financial entry
Bank management
Financial entry
Current account
Bank
reconciliation
PO-
invoice
Financial entry
Service
invoice
Financial entry
Settlement
Financial entry
Financial entry
Warehousing and inventory
Item arrival
Receipt list
Quality order
Product receipt
Inventory (+)
Purchase
order
Purchasing
Accounts payable
Microsoft Dynamics AX procure to pay
The normal practice of enterprise organizations is that no purchase orders are 
created directly. This can lead to creating purchase orders that are not needed and 
exposing the company to uncontrolled expenditures. This business process must 
be controlled, as it is the source point of company expenditure. On the other hand, 
it can significantly impact the inventory cost, which will be reflected in the cost of 
production for a manufacturing environment along with the cost of sales, and this 
affects the company's profitability accordingly.

Chapter 4
[ 105 ]
The purchasing process of items typically goes through specific internal procedures to 
replenish items known as finished goods for a distribution environment/raw materials 
for a manufacturing environment from the procurement department. The procurement 
process begins by either automatic planned order from operations for specific items 
based on sales consumption against on-hand inventory, or entering the purchase 
requisition manually.
The purchase requisition goes through a workflow approval cycle that gives the 
necessary control to operations management to examine the requested quantities 
and might require top management approval according to the organization's internal 
policies. In some projects or business scenarios, the purchase requisition cycle is not 
utilized; in such cases, a sole vendor supplies specific materials and the workflow 
can be utilized on the purchase order itself through the change management 
functionality that was newly introduced in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012.
The approved purchase requisition is passed to the procurement agent (buyer) to 
execute the request for the quotation process, where it records the vendors who 
will potentially supply the required items. A request for a quotation is then sent 
to them. When the vendor sends back their replies, the procurement agent (buyer) 
records their replies and identifies the awarded vendor who will supply the required 
items. The approved purchase requisition can then be transformed into a purchase 
order if the item is supplied from a sole vendor, which is defined in the workflow 
configuration. The purchase order can then go through the approval workflow cycle 
and be confirmed.
The following are the purchase order types:
•	
Purchase order: This is a commitment document sent to a vendor to supply 
the required goods/services.
•	
Journal: This is a draft/template document that does not accept any further 
transactions, nor does it affect inventory or finance.
•	
Returned order: This is a credit note document used to reverse a purchase 
order invoice.
•	
Purchase agreement: This is a commitment document that is sent to a vendor 
to supply goods/services over specific time periods and prices. This is a new 
function introduced in AX 2012, and it replaces blanket order in AX 2009.
The following are the purchase order statuses:
•	
Open Order: This indicates that the purchase order has either been newly 
created, not totally received, or not totally invoiced
•	
Received: This indicates that the purchase order is fully received

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 106 ]
•	
Invoiced: This indicates that the purchase order is fully invoiced
•	
Canceled: This indicates that the ordered quantities in the purchase order 
have been totally canceled
The following are the purchase order approval statuses:
•	
Draft: This indicates that the purchase order is a draft that has not been 
submitted for approval in the purchase order workflow.
•	
In review: This indicates that the purchase order was submitted for approval 
in the purchase order workflow and the approval is pending.
•	
Rejected: This indicates that the purchase order was rejected during the 
approval process.
•	
Approved: This indicates that the purchase order is approved.
•	
Confirmed: This indicates that the purchase order is confirmed; a purchase 
order cannot be confirmed until it has been approved.
•	
Finalized: This indicates that the purchase order is made final. It is 
financially closed and can no longer be changed.
The following are the purchase order document statuses:
•	
None: This indicates that the purchase order is created and no further 
documents have been posted
•	
Purchase Order: This indicates that the purchase order has been confirmed
•	
Receipt List: This indicates that the receipt list document has been posted on 
the purchase order
•	
Product Receipt: This indicates that the product receipt document has been 
posted on the purchase order
•	
Invoice: This indicates that the purchase order invoice has been posted
The product reception process occurred in two steps. The preliminary reception 
(receipt list) assigns inventory dimensions such as serial number and batch number, 
in addition to the quality inspection if required. The product receipt increases the 
physical quantities in the inventory and reduces the quantity remaining in the 
purchase order.
The product receipt transactions do not reflect any transactions 
on the vendor.

Chapter 4
[ 107 ]
The vendor invoice is the document that represents the company's liability to 
vendors who deliver goods or services to the company. Afterwards, the payment 
process is executed based on the vendor invoices. The normal practice in enterprise 
organizations is that the vendor payments will have two different scenarios: 
payment after receiving the goods/service invoice or advance payment before 
rendering any reception process. The advanced payment can be assigned to a specific 
purchase order. Each payment transaction is settled against a vendor invoice. This 
affects company liabilities and projection of future vendor payments. The payment 
transactions are executed by several methods of payments; the most commonly 
used method is from bank accounts. The following diagram shows the document 
integration between invoices, payment, and settlement:
Invoice, payment, and settlement document integration
Purchase order invoice
Purchase
order
Product
receipt
Purchase
order invoice
Service invoice
Manually created
Service
invoice
Vendor payment
Not assigned
to purchase
order
Advanced
payment
assigned to
purchase
order
Settlement
Vendor
payment
Manually created
Manually created
There are service and purchase order invoices, the payments transaction that  
can be an advance payment that is assigned to a particular purchase order or  
not related to a purchase order, and the settlement transactions that settle the 
payments against invoices.
Each transaction is represented in a document type in Microsoft Dynamics AX, 
with the document that contains the details of the transaction. The transaction data, 
irrespective of whether it is inherited from the master data, entered manually, and/
or automatically inherited from another transaction, is linked to a specific reference. 
The integration between invoice and payment transaction documents gives visibility 
to trace the original purchase order and the reception document, which is related  
to the invoice, together with who approves the invoice and payment.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 108 ]
Exploring vendor master data 
characteristics
The vendor record has essential information that directly affects accounts payable 
transactions. In section, we will cover the basic information that should be 
considered when creating a new vendor record.
In order to create a new vendor record, the user should navigate to Accounts 
Payable | Common | Vendors | All vendors, as shown in the following screenshot:
On the vendor list page, press Ctrl + N to create a new vendor 
record, or through the ribbon, click on New vendor.
The General fast tab
As shown in the following screenshot, when the vendor form is opened, under  
the General fast tab, the mandatory fields are Vendor account and Group:

Chapter 4
[ 109 ]
Vendor account can be assigned manually or automatically through the  
number sequence.
Group is a mandatory field that represents the vendor group that this particular 
vendor belongs to, and this is considered as the integration point between accounts 
payable and general ledger through the posting profile; however, the posting profile 
can be on the level of the vendor code. The vendor grouping is a joint effort between 
the procurement department and the financial department, as the procurement 
perspective is grouping the vendor from the operational point of view and reporting. 
On the other hand, the financial grouping as per the relevant account will get the 
financial posting when the operational action occurs.
The Purchasing demographics fast tab
In the Purchasing demographics fast tab shown in the following screenshot, the 
Currency field is mandatory. This represents the default currency for this particular 
vendor transaction; however, it can be changed at the transaction level as per the 
business case.
Invoice and delivery fast tab
Switching to the Invoice and delivery fast tab in this section, we will cover three 
field groups: Invoice, Sales tax, and Withholding tax.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 110 ]
The Invoice field group
In the Invoice field group, the Invoice account field represents the account used in 
the invoicing process (the default invoice account is the vendor code), but Microsoft 
Dynamics AX gives flexibility to point invoice posting to another vendor. Assuming 
that there are two different vendors supplying goods, the invoice will be issued to 
one of the two vendors.
The relation between vendor code and invoice account, where the vendor invoice  
can be linked to one vendor code or multiple vendor codes, is shown in the  
following diagram:
Vendor invoice account
Vendor code 01
Invoice account 01
Vendor code 02
Vendor code 03
Invoice account 02
The Sales tax field group
The Sales tax field group represents the tax treatment that will be applied to this 
vendor. It can be the sales tax, prices including or excluding sales tax, and the tax 
exempt number if there is any. An explanation of each field of the Sales tax field 
group is as follows:
•	
Sales tax group: This field represents the sales tax group assigned to 
this particular vendor, and this record will be the default value for all 
transactions that will be inherited from the vendor master data
•	
Price include sales tax: This field indicates that the invoice amounts  
should include or exclude sales tax
•	
Tax exempt number: This field is used for reporting and statistical 
extractions

Chapter 4
[ 111 ]
Sales tax group can be set as the default at the vendor group level; just 
navigate to Accounts Payable | Setup | Vendors | Vendor group. 
Also, it can be overridden by the user on the vendor form.
Setting sales tax at the vendor group level will cascade down to newly 
created vendors in this group. This ensures that the sales tax will be 
filled in automatically. On the other hand, it can be overridden on 
the vendor form or at the transaction level for exceptional cases. It is 
recommended not to leave the overwrite permission with the end users 
to avoid issues in the posted sales tax.
The Withholding tax field group
The Withholding tax field is activated at the vendor level by marking the Calculate 
withholding tax field, and this will activate the withholding tax code field to assign 
the withholding tax code that will be applied during the payment process.
Let's switch to the Purchase order default fast tab. In this section, we will explore  
the Discount field group.
The Discount field group
The Discount field group represents the discount and pricing options that can be 
applied on this particular vendor. As shown in the following screenshot, the Discount 
field group consists of discount and pricing groups that this vendor belongs to:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 112 ]
Vendor price/discount groups
The Vendor price/discount groups consist of the four pricing groups shown in the 
following diagram:
Vendor price/discount groups
Price
group
Line discount
group
Multiline discount
group
Total discount
group
From the preceding diagram, we can see:
•	
Price group: This represents the vendor's price group used for price  
proposal upon purchase; this price group is attached to the vendor master
•	
Line discount group: This represents the purchase line discount used for 
purchase; this is attached to the vendor master
•	
Multi line discount group: This represents the multi-line discount group 
used to control discounts across several purchase lines; this is attached to  
the vendor master
•	
Total discount group: This represents the total discount that attaches the 
vendor master data to a total discount group
In order to create vendor price/discount groups, you need to navigate to Inventory 
management | Setup | Price/discount | Vendor price/discount groups; this is 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 113 ]
The Vendor price/discount groups form shows the Price/discount options and helps 
create groups for each Price/discount option, as shown in the following screenshot:
The Price/discount option must be activated by navigating to 
Procurement and sourcing | Setup | Price/discount | Activate 
price/discount.
In the Domestic value created for the price group, navigate to Trade agreements | 
Create trade agreements, as shown in the following screenshot:
The trade agreement journal will pop up; create a new journal by pressing  
Ctrl + N, select the journal name, and then click on Lines. The prices defined  
in the trade agreement represents a combination between vendor and item;  
this combination has flexibility with the following options:
•	
All: Any transaction occurring for any vendor will inherit the price that  
is assigned to all vendors
•	
Group: Any transaction for a particular vendor price group inherits the  
price that is assigned to the price group
•	
Table: Any transaction that occurs for a vendor will inherit the price that  
is assigned to this particular vendor

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 114 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, select Price (purch.). Now, select Account 
code as Table to make this price correspond to a particular vendor; in Item relation, 
select Table to make this price correspond to a particular item when it is purchased 
from the mentioned vendor and from a specific warehouse.
As shown in the following screenshot, the reflection of this setup is to recall  
the purchase price on the purchase line automatically from the posted trade 
agreements journal:
The Payment fast tab
In the Payment fast tab, under the Payment field group, the information needed 
for vendor payment arrangements is shown (see the following screenshot). The 
available fields are Terms of payment, Method of payment, Payment type, Payment 
specification, and Cash discount.

Chapter 4
[ 115 ]
Terms of payment
The Terms of payment field represents the calculated due date to pay the vendor. The 
terms of payment creation form is shown in the following screenshot. In order to access 
this form, navigate to Accounts Payable | Setup | Payment | Terms of payment.
Identify the due date base in the Payment method combobox that contains six 
options. Assume that the vendor invoice is posted on January 1, 2014 and the 
number of days is 20; the due date will be changed based on the selected payment 
method option, as shown in the following diagram:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 116 ]
From the preceding diagram, we can see:
•	
Net: The due date will be calculated from the invoice posting (1st Jan + 20 
days), which is 21st Jan 2014
•	
Current week: The due date will be calculated from the end of the week that 
the invoice was posted in (4th Jan + 20 days), that is, 24th Jan 2014
•	
Current month: The due date will be calculated from the end of the month 
that the invoice was posted in (31st Jan + 20 days), in this case 20th Feb 2014
•	
Current quarter: The due date will be calculated from the end of the quarter 
that the invoice was posted in (31st March + 20 days), which in this case is 
20th April 2014
•	
Current year: The due date will be calculated from the end of the year that 
the invoice was posted in (31st December + 20 days); here it will be 20th Jan 
2015
•	
Cash on delivery (COD): This represents the cash payment upon delivery; 
with this option, a ledger account must be specified that will be used while 
posting a purchase order invoice
Method of payment
A payment method refers to the way the vendor is paid whether by check, bank 
transfer, or cash. In order to access the method of payment form, navigate to 
Accounts Payable | Setup | Payment | Method of payment, as shown in the 
following screenshot. Setting the required controls will be applied on the transaction 
if it is using this particular method of payment, in addition to the file formats of 
checked printouts.

Chapter 4
[ 117 ]
Payment schedule
The Payment schedule field represents the installment that will be used after 
invoicing. In order to access the payment schedule form, navigate to Accounts 
Payable | Setup | Payment | Payment schedule. This is shown in the following 
screenshot; our main aim is to identify the type of installment, that is, whether it  
is over a fixed number of months or has a fixed amount:
Assume that the purchase order invoice is posted on January 1, 2014, its amount 
is 5000 USD, and it is assigned a payment schedule of 5 months, with the terms of 
payment set as net 30 days. Navigate to Accounts Payable | Common | Purchase 
orders | All purchase orders; then, on the purchase order form, navigate to Header 
view | Price and discount and assign the payment schedule.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 118 ]
In order to check payment installment dates, in the ribbon, navigate to Invoice | 
Bill | Payment schedule. The payment schedule form will pop up. Then, go to the 
Payment lines tab; the following screenshot shows the payment schedules where  
the payment is divided into five installments for five months:
Cash discount
The Cash discount field represents the discount that will be applied during the 
vendor payment if it is paid before the due date; it has the flexibility to assign the 
next cash discount. In order to create the cash discount record, navigate to Accounts 
Payable | Setup | Payment | Cash discount, as shown in the following screenshot. 
The Setup fast tab identifies the discount percentage, number of months, and 
number of days. It is important to assign the main account for the vendor discount  
in order to apply the discounted amount to a particular main account.

Chapter 4
[ 119 ]
Assuming that an invoice has been posted on January 1, the cash discount is 4% if 
the invoice is paid within 10 days and the terms of payment is net 20 days.
As shown in the following screenshot of the vendor invoice journal, the cash 
discount date is January 11 and its amount is -40:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 120 ]
When we go to create a payment transaction and settle it against the posted invoice 
on January 10, as shown in the following screenshot, the payment amount is 1020 
(1060 - 40 = 1020). To access the payment amount, navigate to Accounts Payable 
| Common | Journal | Payments | Payment journal | Lines | Functions | 
Settlement.
In order to apply the cash discount, the user should choose Always or Normal under 
Use cash discount:
•	
Normal: The cash discount is used only if the invoice is settled by the date 
that is defined for the cash discount.
•	
Always: The last available cash discount is used if the invoice is settled after 
the cash discount date. If the invoice is settled by the date that is defined 
for the cash discount, the cash discount amount is the same as if you select 
Normal.
•	
Never: No cash discount is applied even if the invoice is settled on or before 
the discount date.
In the following screenshot, we changed the payment day to January 19 and the cash 
discount goes to the next cash discount code, that is, 2 percent for 30 days:

Chapter 4
[ 121 ]
In this section, we explored vendor master data, purchasing demographics,  
and vendor sales tax treatment, in addition to withholding tax. Then, we  
explored the price and discount options, in addition to alternatives of payments, 
terms of payment, and methods of payment.
Exploring accounts payable controls
The accounts payable controls are an essential task to be discussed during the 
analysis and design phases and assessed in the operation phase for enhancements. 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 addresses the required procedures for accounts 
payable controls. It is significant to the business in order to control the execution of 
accounts payable processes, as it directly affects the company's liabilities; this is why 
it should be controlled and monitored. In the upcoming sections, we will explore the 
vendor hold activities, invoicing controls, and posting profiles.
Vendor hold activities
In daily business operations in accounts payable, the accounting manager might 
need to stop transactions on a specific vendor; the on hold function for vendors 
in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 is located at the vendor level. To access this 
function, navigate to Accounts Payable | Common | Vendors | All vendors | 
Maintain. In the ribbon, click on On hold.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 122 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, the On hold function has several options 
based on the vendor transaction type, that is, Invoice, Payment, Requisition, Never, 
All, and No, which is the default value. These options can be used to control vendors 
from executing particular transactions, or to stop a vendor altogether.
The On hold options for the vendor transaction types are as follows:
•	
No: This represents that the vendor is allowed for all transaction 
types, but if the vendor is inactive, it will be set on hold 
automatically when running the vendor inactivity job
•	
Invoice: This represents that the vendor is prevented from 
executing invoice transactions only
•	
All: This represents that the vendor is prevented from executing 
any transaction
•	
Payment: This represents that the vendor is prevented from 
executing payment transactions only
•	
Requisition: This represents that the vendor is prevented from 
executing purchase requisition transactions only
•	
Never: This represents that the vendor is allowed for all 
transaction types, but the vendor will be excluded when running 
the vendor inactivity job and will not set on hold automatically
To automatically put a vendor who was recently inactive, the On hold 
function automatically runs the Vendor inactivation job by navigating to 
Procurement and sourcing | Periodic | Vendors | Vendor inactivation.
As shown in the following screenshot, when we set the On hold value as All for 
example, the system shows an Infolog window to indicate that the vendor has been 
set on hold:

Chapter 4
[ 123 ]
If an end user tries to select a vendor with the On hold status as All, the system  
will prevent creating any transaction if the vendor status is on hold, as shown in  
the following screenshot, where the user tried to create a purchase order:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 124 ]
There are other options for On hold, where the accounting manager can plan the 
future release date of the vendor from the On hold status for a particular transaction. 
In the On hold selection, set the Vendor hold release date field; this will be 
considered as the last day of putting the vendor on hold.
As shown in the following screenshot, we will set the vendor on hold for a particular 
transaction and set the release date; here, the release date is August 30, 2014:
If a user tries to create a transaction for this vendor on August 29, the system 
will prevent the transaction from being created, and as shown in the following 
screenshot, an error message will pop up:

Chapter 4
[ 125 ]
The vendor hold release date is based on the computer (machine) date.
Invoice matching controls
There are several options for invoice matching controls in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 R3; in the following section, we will explore the invoicing matching policies  
and options. The following diagram illustrates the invoice matching options:
Invoice matching controls in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3
Invoice
matching
Company invoice
policy
Invoice total
tolerance
Charges
tolerance
Invoice matching
The vendor invoice matching process is a control point that is concerned with the 
invoices received from the vendors before recording the invoice as a liability on the 
company. There are two types of invoice matching, and they are as follows:
•	
Three-way matching: This is normally used with inventory items, where 
three documents are compared: the vendor invoice against the purchase 
order document and the product receipt document.
•	
Two-way matching: This is normally used with service items, where two 
documents are compared: the vendor invoice against the purchase order. 
This requires manual approval to pass these transactions.
The following diagram illustrates vendor invoice matching:
Vendor invoice matching
Three-way
matching
Two-way
matching
Vendor invoice
Purchase order
Product
receipt
Purchase
order
Vendor invoice

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 126 ]
The basic document in three-way matching is Vendor Invoice, where it compares the 
price and quantities in the vendor invoice document against the price in the purchase 
order, which was already agreed upon, and the actual received quantities in the 
reception process. This is important for processing payments only to vendors on the 
agreed prices and the actual delivered quantities in the warehouses.
The following diagram illustrates the three-way matching concept:
Three-way matching
Three-way
matching
Vendor invoice
Price
Quantity
Price
Purchase
order
Product
receipt
Quantity
The basic document in two-way matching is also Vendor Invoice, where it compares 
the price of the vendor invoice against the price in the purchase order; as this is  
for inventory items, there is no need to compare quantities. It is a new feature 
delivered in AX 2012 where we differentiate the matching process of inventory and 
noninventory items. The following diagram illustrates the two-way matching concept:
Two-way matching
Two-way
matching
Vendor invoice
Price
Price
Purchase
order
There are numerous layers of vendor invoice matching in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 R3 that give you the flexibility to apply matching controls, of which all are 
required in real-life business. The invoice matching control must be activated on the 
legal entity level:

Chapter 4
[ 127 ]
•	
The first layer is the company layer where we identify a matching policy 
(whether it is two-way, three-way, or not required); this policy will be 
cascaded down to all vendors and items on this particular legal entity. The 
acceptable price tolerance is the base of comparison between the vendor 
invoice and the purchase order price. The price tolerances can be for all 
vendors and items, or for a specific vendor or item, and finally for a specific 
combination of vendors and items. On this layer, we configure the matching 
policy for total invoice tolerance and charge tolerance.
•	
The second layer matches the policy level, where we identify the exceptions 
from the company-wide configuration; this exception can be applied on the 
matching policy for a specific vendor, an item, or a combination of vendors 
and items, where we can modify the default company-wide parameters. If 
the company's matching policy is three-way matching for all vendors, and 
the controller decided to exclude the service vendors from this policy and 
apply two-way matching on these services vendors, then the controller could 
exclude the trusted vendors  from the matching policy at all. The exception 
could be done on the invoice total level, or miscellaneous charge code level.
•	
The third layer is vendor invoice policies where configuring a precise 
combination on a purchase order header or purchase order line has to be 
approved before posting. This can be applied for risky purchases where the 
purchase amount exceeds a certain amount.
The following diagram illustrates the vendor invoice matching layers in Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012 R3:
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3
vendor invoice matching

Enable invoice matching on company level
Price
tolerances
Companywide matching parameters
Invoice total
tolerance level
Charges
tolerance level
Company policy
Item and vendor
Matching policy levels
Company-specific vendor invoice policies
Exceptions
Allow with warning
Three-way
matching
Two-way
matching
Not
required
Invoice total
tolerance
Charges
matching
Charge code
Vendor
Item
Vendor
Item and
vendor
Item
Vendor
Not required
Two-way matching
Three-way matching
Required approval

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 128 ]
In order to activate the invoice matching validation on Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012 R3, navigate to Accounts Payable | Setup | 
Accounts payable parameters | Invoice validation.
As shown in the following screenshot of the Accounts payable parameters, mark the 
Enable invoice matching validation checkbox and set the procedure that will be 
applied if there are matching discrepancies, that is, whether it should be Allow with 
warning or Require approval. The first option allows posting a transaction with 
a matching discrepancy, and the second option prevents from posting an invoice 
transaction with a matching discrepancy.
In the Price and quantity matching field group, set whether or not the company-wide 
matching policy is required, and if it is, whether it is two-way matching or three-way 
matching. Identify the matching policy override, that is, whether it is Higher than 
company policy or Lower than company policy. Set the Display unit price match 
icon field as If greater than tolerance or If greater than or less than company policy. 
Set the Match price totals field as None, Percentage, Amount, or Percentage and 
price.
This is a company-wide configuration on a legal-entity level. This can be overridden 
by the matching policy.

Chapter 4
[ 129 ]
The following screenshot shows the Price and quantity matching field group:
Price tolerance
The path to access the price tolerance is shown in the following screenshot; go to 
Accounts Payable | Setup | Invoice matching | Price tolerances.
In the Price tolerances form, set the acceptable unit price tolerance percentage; this 
indicates the relation between the vendor and supplied items. It is flexible because 
we can set a different price tolerance for each vendor or each item. Otherwise, it can 
be set to a combination of vendors and items. Remember that Group dominates over 
All, and Table dominates over Group and All.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 130 ]
In order to configure the exceptions on the matching-policy level, that is, whether it 
is on vendors, items, or a combination of a vendor and an item, navigate to Accounts 
Payable | Setup | Invoice matching | Matching policy. As shown in the following 
screenshot of Matching policy, this illustrates the company-wide configuration of 
the line matching policy. In the Matching policy level combobox, select Vendor, 
Item, or Item and vendor. Assign the line matching policy for each vendor, item, 
or item and vendor, where we will be able to keep the default company-wide 
parameters as Company policy. Otherwise, assign a different matching policy 
according to organization needs (whether it should be two-way matching, three-way 
matching, or not required at all).
The following screenshot displays the execution of a purchase order invoice with 
difference in price and quantity with three-way matching that has a line matching 
policy assigned.

Chapter 4
[ 131 ]
There is a prerequisite for this scenario; create a purchase order by navigating to 
Accounts Payable | Common | Purchase order | All purchase orders. Now, create 
a new order and select vendor ID.
Create a purchase line and then add the required fields: item ID, site, warehouse, 
quantity 1, and price, which in this case is 1000 USD. Then, post the product receipt 
by navigating to Receive | Product Receipt; enter the product receipt number and 
click on OK. As shown in the following screenshot, which shows the purchase 
order's Line fast tab, expand Line details | Setup | Matching policy:
Matching policy automatically inherits from a configured matching policy 
and can be changed on the purchase order line. It works in one direction 
from lowest to highest if the change is from the not required matching 
policy to two-way or three-way matching policy, but not vice versa.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 132 ]
Go to the Invoice ribbon and enter the invoice number assuming that the invoice has 
a difference in price, which is 1050.01 USD; the price tolerance is 5 percent, which 
means 1050.00 USD, so the invoice price is greater than the acceptable tolerance 
by 0.01 USD. Also, quantity difference from the product receipt is by 2 pieces. The 
following screenshot shows the purchase order invoice with matching variance with 
quantity and price. In order to check the details of variance, go to the Review ribbon 
and select Matching details.
The preceding screenshot depicts the invoice matching details form. The header 
shows the exclamation mark, which indicates that there are differences in quantity 
and price.

Chapter 4
[ 133 ]
In the details level, the comparison between the purchase order and invoice prices is 
shown. This is in addition to the comparison between the product receipt quantity 
and vendor invoice quantity.
The invoice control can be extended to check the total purchase order amount, in 
addition to the total invoice amount.
In the following example, the total purchase order amount of a purchase order has 
two-way matching, where we compare the purchase order invoice price against 
the purchase order price. The purchase order price is 1000 USD and the purchase 
order invoice price is also 1000 USD. During the matching process, the user adds an 
additional piece of data (for example, change quantity to be 2) and the purchase price 
is with the acceptable tolerance, so the purchase order total amount is 2000 USD. 
The configured acceptable tolerance for the purchase price total is 15 percent, which 
means 1150 USD.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 134 ]
The invoice matching form indicates Unmatched purchase order total, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
In the preceding example, assume that the invoice quantities are equal to the 
purchase order quantity, but we're adding additional service items on the vendor 
invoice by 100.01 USD. The invoice matching form indicates the Invoice amount 
discrepancy, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the following screenshot, the Invoice totals matching details is illustrated, 
showing the invoice total tolerance percentage, actual invoice total, expected  
invoice totals, and variance percentage:

Chapter 4
[ 135 ]
In the preceding example, assume that the purchase order line has assigned charges 
with 100 USD, and the invoice quantities are equal to purchase order quantity, but 
the purchase order invoice lines charges have been modified to 125.01 USD and the 
acceptable charges tolerance is 25 percent.
The selected charges should be added to the vendor invoice, which only has Customer/
Vendor on the credit side. In order to create a charges code, navigate to Accounts 
Payable | Setup | Charges | Charges code. As shown in the following screenshot, the 
charges form illustrates the setup for the charges, and it is important to let Microsoft 
Dynamics AX consider the charges during the invoice-matching process; for this, the 
Compare purchase order and invoice value checkbox must be checked:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 136 ]
In the preceding screenshot:
•	
Debit: This represents the debit side, which will be affected by the added 
charges.
•	
Credit: This represents the credit side, which will be affected by the added 
charges.
•	
Type: This represents the different types, which are Item, Ledger, and/or 
Customer/vendor. They are explained as follows:
°°
Item: This represents the charges that will be posted on the item; this 
is only applicable for the debit side
°°
Ledger: This represents the charges that will be posted on a particular 
ledger account and must have a posting type and account number
°°
Customer/Vendor: This represents the charges that will be posted on 
the customer/vendor on the purchase order or sales order
As shown in the following screenshot, the invoice matching form indicates a 
discrepancy in the compared charge:
In the following screenshot, we illustrate the compare charges values, and show 
the actual total calculated amount, expected calculated amount, variance amount, 
variance percentage, and tolerance percentage:

Chapter 4
[ 137 ]
The invoice number
The invoice document represents the vendor invoice recording in company accounts 
(liability). The invoice has a reference number (invoice number) based on the vendor 
serial number and the accounts payable accountant records the invoice number, 
which can be used in the reconciliation process with the vendor; it is used in the 
payment process as well. In Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3, the invoice number 
is a mandatory field and can be controlled to be a unique value. This uniqueness 
is considered per vendor and can be within the fiscal year. In order to access the 
invoice number control, navigate to Accounts Payable | Setup | Accounts payable 
parameters | Invoice and go to the Check the invoice number used section.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 138 ]
The following screenshot illustrates the available options of the invoice number 
control:
The Check the invoice number used field has the following options:
•	
Reject duplicate: This option will forbid using the same invoice number 
from the same vendor. For example, if vendor A has the invoice number 
INV-001, this value cannot be used with the same vendor, but can be used 
with vendor B.
•	
Reject duplicates within fiscal year: This is the same as the previous option, 
in addition to the validation that will be executed during the fiscal year.
•	
Accept duplicates: This option accepts duplicates.
•	
Warn in case of duplicates: This option gives a warning message if the value 
has been used before.
The Posting profile
The posting profile represents the integration point between the general ledger 
and subledger, and it generates the financial entries automatically according to the 
posting profile's setup. The Accounts payable posting profiles are assigned to the 
module parameters; navigate to Accounts Payable | Setup | Accounts payable 
parameters | Ledger and sales tax, and go through the following process:
•	
In the Posting fast tab, assign the posting profile for general accounts payable 
transactions; in other words, this represents the accounts payable account
•	
In the Prepayment journal voucher fast tab, assign the posting profile for 
advance payment transactions; in other words, this represents the advances 
from the vendor account
•	
In the Prepayment fast tab, assign the posting profile for prepayment invoices

Chapter 4
[ 139 ]
These options can be seen in the following screenshot:
 
Exploring accounts payable transactions
This section will explore the transactions of the Accounts payable module; 
transactions are divided into two main categories, invoicing and payment:
•	
Invoicing: This is divided into purchase-order-related invoices and 
nonpurchase-order-related invoices:
°°
The purchase-order-related invoices: These invoices represent 
the invoices that are normally attached to a purchase order(s). 
Invoices related to a purchase order can be the final invoice of the 
purchase order, which is received after delivering the goods, or the 
prepayment invoice, which is recorded before delivering the goods. 
The attached prepayment invoice to a particular purchase order is a 
new functionality released in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012.
°°
The nonpurchase-order-related invoices: These invoices represent 
the vendor liabilities for services rendered to the company; there are 
two types of recording service invoices. The first is noninventory 
invoices, which are related to nonstockable items and are commonly 
used by the company departments to record their expenses. The other 
type is the invoice journal for services, which is posted directly to the 
expense account; it is commonly used by accountants.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 140 ]
•	
Payment: The second category is the vendor payment. There are two 
types. The first is a prepayment transaction, which is considered as vendor 
advances. This can be assigned to a particular purchase order, or need not be 
assigned to a purchase order. The second type is the vendor payment, which 
is settled against the vendor invoice.
The categories are summed up in the following diagram:
Purchase order
related
Non-purchase order
related
Pre-payment
invoice
Purchase
order invoice
Non-
inventory
invoice
Service
invoice
Pre-payment
Vendor
payment
Payment
Invoicing
Vendor settlement
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3
Accounts payable transactions

The purchase order invoice
The purchase order invoice document can be posted from two different forms;  
the first form is the purchase order form, and the second form is the vendor  
open invoices.
Open the vendor invoices form. This is a new function in Microsoft Dynamics  
AX 2012. This form is used also for nonpurchase order invoices.
In order to post a purchase order invoice from the purchase order form, navigate 
to Accounts Payable | Common | Purchase orders | All purchase orders after 
choosing the required purchase order, then go to the Invoice ribbon and navigate  
to Generate | Invoice. The following screenshot illustrates the Purchase order 
invoice menu:

Chapter 4
[ 141 ]
In the vendor invoice form, the purchase order and product receipts are retrieved 
automatically; then, enter the invoice number and description. Click on Post to 
generate the invoice transaction. The following screenshot shows the vendor  
invoice form:
The vendor invoice form is the nonpurchase order invoice when 
accessed from Accounts Payable | Common | Vendor invoices | 
Open vendor invoices. Also, it is a shared form.
The relation between the vendor invoice, product receipt, and purchase order is that 
the purchase order has more than one product receipt and the invoice can cover 
one purchase order with more than one product receipt. In some business cases, the 
vendor invoices cover receptions that occur on more than one purchase order.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 142 ]
The following diagram illustrates the relation between the purchase order, product 
receipt, and invoice:
This business scenario can be managed on Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 in several 
ways. The following section illustrates the most common functionalities to post an 
invoice that covers more than one product receipt or purchase order.
Navigate to Account Payable | Periodic | Maintain vendor invoices on the vendor 
invoice form under the Vendor invoice ribbon; there are two options there, whether 
to retrieve the product receipts or the purchase order, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
The first option, From purchase order, opens the filtration query, as shown in the 
following screenshot. The user can retrieve information based on values on the 
query; this can be a product receipt, vendor ID, and so on.

Chapter 4
[ 143 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, two lines have been retrieved according to the 
entered query, that is, two purchase orders with two different product receipts. This 
represents two different invoices for each line.
In order to consolidate the two invoices in one invoice document, go to the Maintain 
ribbon and select Consolidate invoice. Now, select Consolidate invoices. The 
following screenshot illustrates the consolidate option:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 144 ]
The Summary update dropdown has four options, as follows:
None: There are no summary updates.
Invoice account: Summary update all selected orders according to the 
criteria set in the Accounts payable parameters or Summary update 
parameters form.
Order: Summary update a selected range of orders into, for example, one 
invoice. The orders will be summary updated according to the criteria set in 
the Accounts payable parameters or Summary update parameters form.
Automatic summary: Summary update all selected orders automatically 
according to the criteria set in the Accounts payable parameters or 
Summary update parameters form.
The second option, From product receipt, lists all product receipts and their lines. 
As represented in the following screenshot, the marked product receipts will be 
included in the vendor invoice. In order to go to the Product receipt form, navigate 
to Accounts Payable | Periodic | Maintain vendor invoice | New ribbon | From 
product receipt.

Chapter 4
[ 145 ]
There is another functionality that can be used to post one vendor invoice for 
multiple purchase orders or product receipts. Navigate to Accounts Payable | 
Common | Vendor Invoices | Open vendor invoices, create a new record, and 
enter the invoice number and description. Then, go to Retrieve purchase orders 
under the ribbon.
 
As shown in the following screenshot, a list of purchase orders with their product 
receipts is shown in this form. The user can mark which product receipts will be 
included in the invoice.
This invoice is already consolidated into one invoice.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 146 ]
The following screenshot shows that the invoice-related documents are multiple and 
are on the lines of the relation between the purchase order and product receipt:
In order to inquire about the vendor balance, navigate to Accounts Payable | 
Common | Vendors | All Vendors and click on the Balance ribbon. As shown in 
the following screenshot, the balance form shows the current vendor balance:

Chapter 4
[ 147 ]
The purchase order invoice automatically generates the liability financial entry based 
on the vendor posting and inventory posting profiles. The inventory posting profile 
must be carefully structured during the design phase where the controller should 
understand the mechanism of invoice posting well.
The generated invoice entry is divided into four lines; two entries represent the 
produce receipt entry reversal, and the other two entries represent the vendor 
liability entry:
•	
The financial entry of a product receipt is enhanced in Microsoft Dynamics 
AX 2012 R3 to be a two-liner entry as follows:
°°
Dr. Product receipt account
°°
Cr. Vendor accrual account
•	
The other two entries represent the vendor liability as follows:
°°
Dr. Vendor accrual account
°°
Cr. Product receipt account
°°
Dr. Purchase inventory receipt
°°
Cr. Vendor balance
The inventory posting profile access path is Inventory 
Management | Setup | Posting | Posting | Purchase order.
The prepayment invoice
The prepayment invoice function is not covered in the previous versions of Microsoft 
Dynamics AX. The vendor prepayment function gives a company's controller the 
ability to minimize the risk by applying the segregation of duties between company 
departments and control prepayment process, where accounts payable does not 
perform the prepayment transaction without assigning the prepayment linked to 
the purchase order and harmonizing the business process between procurement and 
accounts payable. Assume that the company has agreed with a vendor to supply 
goods to the company and the vendor has a condition to receive a prepayment before 
executing the goods delivery, and this is a normal practice in the daily business.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 148 ]
The vendor prepayment cycle is executed among the procurement agent, accounts 
payable, and bank accountants. The following diagram illustrates the business 
process of the prepayment:
Pre-payment invoice process in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3
Purchasing agent
Purchase order
Vendor
Warehouse keeper
Receives the
order
Sends the goods
Product receipt
Assign
pre-payment
PO-
confirmation
Accounts payables Purchase order invoice
Apply pre-payment
Settlement
Payment
Bank management
Payment
Settlement
Pre-payment invoice
From the preceding diagram, we can see that:
•	
The procurement agent creates a purchase order
•	
The procurement agent assigns the prepayment to a purchase order  
as per the agreement with the vendor; here, the prepayment is a fixed 
amount or a percentage from the total purchases of the PO
•	
The procurement agent confirms the purchase order
•	
The vendor issues a prepayment invoice
•	
The Accounts payable accountant posts the prepayment invoice,  
and the prepayment invoice amount is inherited from the previous 
prepayment assignment
•	
Bank accountants have open invoices that need to be paid and settled  
against the payment
•	
After the warehouse keeper receives the goods in the warehouse,  
the vendor sends the final invoice
•	
The accounts payable accountant applies the prepayment to the final  
invoice and posts the PO invoice. If the AP accountant does not apply  
the prepayment invoice to the PO invoice, they can apply it later on

Chapter 4
[ 149 ]
•	
The bank accountant opens the invoice with a vendor residual balance that 
needs to be paid and settled against the payment
In order to assign a prepayment invoice on a created purchase order, navigate to 
Accounts Payable | Common | Purchase orders | All purchase orders. Navigate  
to Purchase | Prepayment, as shown in the following screenshot:
The prepayment form will pop up as shown in the following screenshot; enter the 
prepayment description, select whether the prepayment will be Fixed or Percentage 
from the purchase cost, and select the procurement category:
The purchase order must be confirmed in order to generate the 
prepayment.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 150 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, navigate to Invoice and select Prepayment 
invoice in the purchase order form:
The prepayment account must be selected in the inventory posting 
profile under the Purchase order tab.
Navigate to Inventory and Management | Setup | Posting | Purchase 
order.
Then, post the prepayment invoice from the vendor invoice form, as shown in the 
following screenshot, and enter the invoice number and description:
The financial entry is automatically generated based on the inventory posting profile 
as follows:
•	
Dr. Prepayment
•	
Cr. Vendor balance

Chapter 4
[ 151 ]
At this point, there is a liability on this particular vendor with the prepayment amount, 
and this liability appears in the open transactions, which are not settled yet. This form 
is Settle open transactions; in order to access this form, navigate to Accounts Payable 
| Common | Vendors | All vendors, select a particular vendor, then go to the Invoice 
ribbon and select Settle open transactions, as shown in the following screenshot:
The prepayment invoice is ready to be paid; in order to perform a vendor payment 
transaction, navigate to Accounts Payable | Journals | Payments | Payment 
journals, create a new journal number, and then go to Lines. Select the vendor code 
and then go to Functions | Settlement. The following screenshot illustrates the 
journal and its line along with the settlement access path:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 152 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, in the Settle open transactions form, mark the 
invoice that will be paid and close the form:
 
The amount will be automatically populated on the voucher line on the debit side; 
validate and post the payment transactions. In this transaction, the vendor invoice 
has been settled against payment transactions and moved to closed transactions,  
as shown in the following screenshot:
The financial entry is automatically generated as follows:
•	
Dr. Vendor balance
•	
Cr. Bank account
In order to access closed transactions, navigate to Accounts Payable | Common | 
Vendors | All vendors; select a particular vendor and then navigate to Invoice | 
Closed transaction editing. The following screenshot shows the payment and the 
settled invoice against it:

Chapter 4
[ 153 ]
The settled transactions can be reversed from the closed transactions 
editing form.
Then, post the purchase order invoice and consider the prepayment amount by 
applying the prepayment on the final vendor invoice in order to get the realistic 
vendor liability; there are two scenarios here: apply the prepayment before a  
post-purchase order invoice or after posting the vendor invoice.
The prepayment has a transaction type as payment.
The following screenshot illustrates the prepayment application process before 
posting the purchase order invoice; navigate to Accounts Payable | Common | 
Purchase Orders | All purchase orders, select the purchase order that needs to  
be invoiced, go to the Invoice ribbon, and select Invoice:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 154 ]
The vendor invoice form will open up as shown in the following screenshot; enter 
the invoice number and invoice description. To do this, go to Apply prepayment.
The applied prepayment amount appears in the invoice line with a negative sign; 
this will lead to the net invoice amount (total invoice amount - prepayment amount).  
As shown in the following screenshot, the total invoice (1000) minus the prepayment 
amount (300) equals 700, so the net invoice amount is 700:

Chapter 4
[ 155 ]
The invoice financial entry for a purchase order invoice that has a prepayment 
applied is generated; the entry consists of four lines; two lines for the prepayment 
application and the other two lines for the liability entry, as follows:
•	
Dr. Vendor balance (the prepayment amount)
•	
Cr. Prepayment (the prepayment amount)
•	
Dr. Purchase inventory receipt (the total purchase order amount)
•	
Cr. Vendor balance (the total purchase order amount)
The nonpurchase order invoices can be service invoices recorded by the accounting 
team recording the invoice through Invoice Journal, or the invoices recorded by the 
concerned departments, where each department will record their expenses invoices 
through the new vendor invoice form that has been newly introduced in Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 156 ]
The invoice journal is accessed by navigating to Accounts Payable | Journals | 
Invoices | Invoice journal, as shown in the following screenshot. We can see the 
invoice journal lines; select the vendor ID and enter the invoice number, the amount 
in the credit side, and the ledger offset account. The posted Invoice journal generates 
a vendor liability and ledger entry as well.
The invoice journal can go through a process of recording through 
Invoice register and then Invoice approval journal.
The noninventory invoices are mainly used with nonstocked items, where each 
service item is represented as a specific expense type. This concept is more familiar 
for departments rather than selecting ledger accounts, as the concerned department 
that entered the expense invoice does not have experience in accounting, and 
descriptive expense service items are more familiar with data entry.

Chapter 4
[ 157 ]
In order to access the Open vendor invoice form, navigate to Accounts Payable | 
Vendor invoices | Open vendor invoices.
In order to create a new invoice record, navigate to the Invoice ribbon and select 
Vendor invoice, as shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 158 ]
In the vendor invoice form, select the vendor ID and enter the invoice number, 
description, item number, and then the amount, as shown in the following screenshot:
An advance payment is a regular business scenario where vendors are required 
to pay some amount of money as a down payment regardless of whether there is 
a purchase order; this might occur with a partner with whom they have regular 
business. In order to perform an advance payment transaction on Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012, navigate to Accounts Payable | Common | Payments | 
Payment journal and create a new journal; then move to Lines, enter the vendor 
ID, and enter the amount, then switch to the Payment tab and check the Mark 
prepayment journal voucher checkbox.

Chapter 4
[ 159 ]
After this, the default posting profile value to the prepayment posting profile will be 
changed, as shown in the following screenshot:
The prepayment posting profile is created under Accounts payable posting profile. 
Under Accounts payable parameters | Ledger and sales tax, assign the prepayment 
posting profile.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 160 ]
Vendor settlement
A settlement is an accounting transaction that occurs on accounts payable, accounts 
receivables, and general ledger. This transaction is used mainly to settle vendor 
invoices against vendor payments or advance payments.
Invoice
Posting profile A
Open transaction
Settlement
Closed transaction
Generate settlement
transaction
Payment
Posting profile B
Open transaction
It is necessary to classify posting profiles of the vendor and customer in the opening 
balance as it will affect the settlement process.
The settlement transaction affects vendor and customer balances, and it is reported 
in the vendor or customer statement report that identifies the following:
•	
The vendor
•	
The open (unsettled) invoice and payments
•	
The closed (settled) invoice and payments
•	
The vendor balance
A settlement transaction can occur during a payment or collection transaction if the 
accountant marks the invoice that will be paid or collected. On the other hand, the 
settlement can be performed at the vendor or customer level, and these transactions 
can be unsettled.
The settlement transaction should take into consideration the currency as it can 
be performed in the company's home currency by an equivalent amount, which 
is calculated based on the currency exchange rate, or it can be settled in the same 
currency of the invoice by identifying the currency in the payment process.

Chapter 4
[ 161 ]
The vendor settlement mechanism in 
Microsoft Dynamics AX
A vendor settlement in Microsoft Dynamics AX is a transaction that occurs to  
settle vendor advance payments against vendor invoices on a monthly basis.
Vendor settlements have the following effects:
•	
The first one is at the vendor level, which occurs when the vendor  
transaction closes
•	
The second is the financial entry, which occurs only if the posting profile  
of the advance payment and invoice are different
Here, I will illustrate the mechanism of vendor advance payment, invoices,  
and vendor settlement financial entries:
•	
The vendor advance payment posting profile is advanced, and the  
financial entry will be:
°°
Dr. Advances to vendor 1200 EGP
°°
Cr. Bank 1200 EGP
°°
Open transactions: 1200 EGP advance payment
•	
The vendor invoice posting profile is General, and the financial entry is:
°°
Dr. Expense 1000 EGP
°°
Cr. Payables 1000 EGP
°°
Open transactions: 1200 EGP advance payment and 1000 EGP  
vendor invoice
•	
The vendor settlement is as follows:
°°
Dr. Payables 1000 EGP
°°
Cr. Advances to vendor 1000 EGP
°°
Open transactions: 200 EGP advance payment
°°
Closed transactions: 1000 EGP advance payment and 1000 EGP 
vendor invoice
If the posting profiles of the advance payment and invoicing are different, a 
settlement financial entry will be created.

Understanding Accounts Payable
[ 162 ]
Summary
This chapter covered the Accounts payable module in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 R3, its integration with other modules, procurement, and inventory, and then 
looked into exploring the vendor master data and the characteristics that affect 
vendor transactions. We also learned about the controls for invoice matching, three-
way matching for products and two-way matching for services, putting vendors on 
hold, and invoice numbering. Then, we moved on to exploring the accounts payable 
transactions vendor invoice, the prepayment invoice and its processing, advance 
payments, and the settlement mechanism.
In the next chapter, we will discuss accounts receivable master data, control,  
and transactions.

Understanding Accounts 
Receivable
The Accounts receivable module is the module that represents a customer's data 
and their transactions. The Accounts receivable cycles are customer invoicing, 
customer payment, and settlement. These business processes manage and control the 
execution of customer sales processes. These processes are based on sales activities 
and product delivery cycles in the sales and marketing processes, which manage and 
control the execution of the Order to cash business processes.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Understanding the Accounts receivable module's integration with  
other modules
•	
Exploring customer master data characteristics
•	
Exploring Accounts receivable controls
•	
Exploring Accounts receivable transactions
Understanding the Accounts receivable 
module's integration with other modules
The Accounts receivable module manages and controls customer transactions from 
the accounting point of view, where recording customer master information and the 
basic transactions related to customer invoicing, payment, and settlement happen. 
The Accounts receivable function is integrated with other business functions.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 164 ]
The integration points with Accounts receivable are as follows:
•	
Sales and marketing module: This is where goods and services are quoted to 
the customer, and then the sales order is created
•	
Inventory and warehousing module: This is where goods are delivered 
to customers, and invoicing is based on the delivered goods from the 
warehousing module
•	
Cash and bank management: This is where customer payment and 
settlement against invoices are done
The full life cycle of the Order to Cash is shown in the following diagram:

Chapter 5
[ 165 ]
The normal practice of enterprise organizations is that no sales orders are created 
directly. This can lead to creating unnecessary sales orders and exposing the 
company to uncontrolled open orders. This business process must be controlled 
since it is the source point of company revenues. On the other hand, the unnecessary 
sales order can significantly impact the cost of goods sold and customer balances, in 
addition to the company's profitability.
The selling process typically goes through specific internal procedures to deliver 
items or services from the sales department. The sales process begins either by 
automatic orders of sales based on a sales quotation for a specific customer, or by 
entering the sales order manually.
The Sales Quotation is a document representing the company's offer to 
the customer, and indicates the item or service, price, receipt date, and 
other information. The quotation is sent to the customer to evaluate the 
company's offer. The customer then replies to the sales agent by either 
confirmation or rejection. The confirmed sales quotation is a document 
that is ready to be converted to a sales order document.
The following are the Sales Quotation statuses:
•	
Created: The sales quotation has been created, but has not been sent to the 
customer. The sales quotation can be modified if its status is Created.
•	
Sent: The sales quotation status is updated once the sales quotation 
document is sent to the customer.
•	
Confirmed: This status shows when the sales quotation has been confirmed 
by the customer.
•	
Lost: This status will be displayed once the sales quotation has been refused 
by the customer.
•	
Canceled: This status will be displayed once the sales quotation and all sales 
quotation lines have been canceled.
The sales order has several types in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3. They are listed 
as follows:
•	
Sales order: This is a commitment document sent to a customer to deliver the 
required goods or services to them.
•	
Journal: This is a draft document that does not accept any further 
transactions nor affects inventory or finance.
•	
Subscription: This is a recurring sales order to supply the same item, 
quantity, and price. The system recreates the sales order after invoicing.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 166 ]
•	
Returned order: This document represents the Returned Material 
Authorization (RMA) and handles quantity returns and the customer  
credit note.
•	
Item requirements: This is a type of the sales order, which relates the sales 
order to project requirements.
•	
Sales agreement: A sales agreement is a document that is sent to a customer 
to deliver goods or services over a specific time period and includes prices. 
This is a new function introduced in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 and it 
replaces Blanket Order in AX 2009.
The following are the types of sales order statuses:
•	
Open Order: This indicates that the sales order is at one of the following 
stages: newly created, not totally received, or not totally invoiced
•	
Delivered: This indicates that the sales order is fully delivered
•	
Invoiced: This indicates that the sales order is fully invoiced
•	
Canceled: This indicates that the ordered quantities in the sales order have 
been canceled
The following are the types of sales order document statuses:
•	
None: This indicates that the sales order is created and no further documents 
have been posted
•	
Confirmation: This indicates that the sales order has been confirmed
•	
Picking list: This indicates that the picking list document has been posted  
on the sales order
•	
Packing slip: This indicates that the packing slip document has been posted 
on the sales order
•	
Invoice: This indicates that the sales order invoice has been posted
The delivery of goods from the company warehouse occurs by the following two 
steps:
•	
The preliminary step is the picking list that assigns inventory dimensions 
such as serial number and batch number, in addition to the quality inspection 
if required. The preliminary step of the picking list does not affect the 
on-hand inventory. The packing slip transaction decreases the physical 
quantities in the on-hand inventory.
•	
The final step in a sales order is posting the invoice that represents the 
revenue recognition of the sales order, or in other words, the cost of goods 
sold (COGS).

Chapter 5
[ 167 ]
The packing slip document does not reflect any transactions on the 
customer balance.
The customer payment is the document that represents that the company is receiving 
an amount of money from the customer who receives goods or services from 
the company. The customer payment process is executed based on the customer 
invoices. The normal practice in enterprise organizations is that the customer 
collection will have two different scenarios: collection after issuing the sales order 
invoice, or advanced collection before creating a sales order.
The advanced collection can be assigned to a specific sales order. Each collection 
transaction is settled against a customer invoice. This affects the company's cash 
position and cash projection of future customer collection. The customer pays the 
amount of money after issuing the sales invoice. Then the Accounts receivable 
accountant records the collection transactions and settles them against an invoice. 
The invoice could be settled automatically if the advanced collection is linked to a 
sales order.
The bank accountant executes the check collection process and bank reconciliation 
accordingly, as shown in the following diagram, which illustrates the customer 
collection, invoice, and settlement document integration:
Payment and settlement document integration
Sales order invoice
Sales order
Packing slip
Sales order
invoice
Free text invoice
Manually created
Free text
invoice
Customer collection
Not assigned
to sales
order
Assigned to
sales
order
Settlement
Customer
collection
Manually created
Manually created

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 168 ]
Each transaction is represented in a document type in Microsoft Dynamics AX, 
with the document containing the details of the transaction. The transactions data, 
whether inherited from the master data, entered manually, and/or automatically 
inherited from another transaction, is linked with a specific reference. The integration 
between the collection and other customer transaction documents gives us visibility 
to trace what the original sales order and packing slip that are related to the invoice 
are, together with who confirms the sales order.
Exploring customer master data 
characteristics
The customer record has essential information that directly affects Accounts 
receivable transactions. In the following section, we will cover the basic information 
that should be considered when creating a new customer record.
In order to create a new customer record, you should navigate to Accounts 
Receivable | Common | Customers | All customers, as shown in this screenshot:
On the customer list page, press Ctrl + N to create a new customer record.
As shown in the following screenshot, the mandatory fields are Customer account, 
Name, Customer group, and Country/region. You can either save the entered 
information and complete it afterwards, or go directly to a Customer form or 
transaction form, whether Sales quotation, Project quotation, and/or Sales order.

Chapter 5
[ 169 ]
We can see the following in the preceding screenshot:
•	
The Customer account, whether assigned manually or automatically through 
the number sequence.
•	
Group is a mandatory field that represents the customer group that the 
particular customer belongs to, and this is considered as the integration  
point between Accounts receivable and the general ledger through the 
posting profile. However, the posting profile could be on the level of the 
customer code.
•	
Country/region represents the country that this customer belongs to.
•	
The Currency field is mandatory, and it represents the default currency for 
the particular customer transaction. However, it could be changed on the 
transaction level as per the business case.
Click on Save and open, and then select Customer. This will open the customer 
master data form.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 170 ]
The Sales order defaults fast tab
In the customer creation form, go to the Sales order defaults fast tab. In this section, 
we will explore the Discount field group.
The Discount field group
The Discount field group represents the discount and pricing options that could be 
applied on the particular customer. The Discount field group consists of the discount 
and pricing groups to which the customer belongs, as shown in this screenshot:
Customer price or discount groups
The customer price and discount groups consist of four pricing groups, as shown in 
the following diagram:
Customer price/discount groups
Price
group
Line discount
group
Multi line discount
group
Total discount
group
In order to create the customer price or discount groups, the user shall navigate 
to Inventory management | Setup | Price/discount | Customer price/discount 
groups, as shown in this screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 171 ]
The Customer price/discount groups form shows the Price/discount options,  
and should be able to create groups for each Price/discount options.
The price or discount must be activated by navigating to Sales and 
marketing | Setup | Price/discount | Activate price/discount.
The following screenshot shows the definition of the price discount group options:
•	
Price group: This represents the customer's price group used for price 
proposals upon sales, and this price group is attached to the customer  
master data.
•	
Line discount group: This represents the sales line discount used for sales, 
which is attached to the customer master data.
•	
Multiline discount group: This represents the multiline discount group used 
to control discounts across several sales lines. It is attached to the customer 
master data.
•	
Total discount group: This represents that the total discount group is 
attached to the customer master data in a field called total discount group.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 172 ]
In the created Major accounts value for Price group, navigate to Trade agreements | 
Create trade agreements, as shown in the following screenshot:
The Trade agreements journal will pop up. Create a new journal by pressing Ctrl + 
N, selecting a journal name, and then clicking on Lines. As shown in the following 
screenshot, we will create a journal line (or lines) by selecting under Relation the 
Price (sales) value. Then we select the Account code field as Table. To make this 
price related to a particular customer, on item relation, select Table to make this 
price correspond to a particular item when sold to a mentioned customer from a 
specific warehouse.
As shown in the next screenshot, the purpose of this setup is to recall the sales price 
on the sales line automatically from the posted trade agreements journal:

Chapter 5
[ 173 ]
The Payment fast tab
In an opened customer form, move to the Payment fast tab, and under the payment 
field group, there is some required information for customer payment arrangements. 
The available options are as follows:
•	
Terms of payment
•	
Method of payment
•	
Payment specification
•	
Payment schedule
•	
Payment day
•	
Cash discount
The preceding options are displayed like this:

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 174 ]
Terms of payment
The Terms of payment field represents the calculated due date to pay to the 
customer. In order to access the terms of payment creation form, go to Accounts 
Receivable | Setup | Payments | Terms of payment, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
Identify the due date base in the Payment method combo box, which contains six 
options. Assume that the customer invoice is posted on January 1, 2015, and the 
number of days is 20, the due date will be changed based on the selected payment 
method option, as shown in the following diagram:

Chapter 5
[ 175 ]
We can see the following in the preceding diagram:
•	
Net: The due date will be calculated from the invoice posting  
(January 1 + 20 days = 21st Jan).
•	
Current week: The due date will be calculated from the end of the week in 
which the invoice was posted (January 4 + 20 days = 24th Jan).
•	
Current month: The due date will be calculated from the end of the month  
in which the invoice was posted (January 31 + 20 days = 24th Feb).
•	
Current quarter: The due date will be calculated from the end of the quarter 
in which the invoice was posted (March 31 + 20 days = 20th April).
•	
Current year: The due date will be calculated from the end of the year in 
which the invoice was posted (December 31 + 20 days = 20th Jan).
•	
Cash on delivery: This represents the cash payment upon delivery. With this 
option, a ledger account must be specified, which will be used when posting 
the sales order invoice.
Method of payment
The method payment represents the way of receiving payment from the customer by 
check, bank transfer, credit card, or cash. In order to access the Method of payment 
form, navigate to Accounts Receivable | Setup | Payment | Terms of payment. 
As shown in the following screenshot of the method of payment form, the required 
controls will be applied on the transaction. In this case, the CASH method of 
payment is used.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 176 ]
Payment specification
The payment specification represents the codes according to the agreement with the 
bank that is specified for the selected method of payment. The payment specification 
is tied with the method of payment.
Payment schedule
The payment schedule represents the installment that will be used after invoicing. 
To access the Payment schedule form, navigate to Accounts Receivable | Setup | 
Payment | Payment schedule. We can identify an installment with a fixed number 
of months or a fixed amount, as shown in this screenshot:
Assume that the sales order invoice is posted on January 1, 2014, its amount is $5,000, 
and it is assigned a payment schedule for 5 months, with the terms of payment as 
net 30 days. Navigate to Accounts Receivable | Common | Sales orders | All sales 
orders. Then open a sales order by navigating to Header view, and under the Price 
discount fast tab, assign a payment schedule. It can be automatically inherited from 
the customer master data and can be modified on the sales order header.

Chapter 5
[ 177 ]
In order to check the payment installment dates, from the ribbon, navigate to Invoice 
| Bill | Payment schedule. The Payment schedule form will pop up. Then go to the 
Payment lines tab. The following screenshot shows the payment schedules, which 
are divided into five installments for five months:
Cash discount
Cash discount represents the discount that will be applied during customer payment 
if the payment is made before the due date. This encourages the customer to pay 
before the due date. Cash discount has the flexibility to assign the next cash discount, 
which could be a deal with the customer. In order to create the cash discount record, 
navigate to Accounts Receivable | Setup | Payment | Cash discount.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 178 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, which represents the Cash discount form, the 
Setup fast tab identifies the discount percentage, number of months, and number of 
days. It is important to assign the main account for customer discounts.
Assume that an invoice has been posted on January 1, the cash discount is 4 percent 
if the invoice is paid within 10 days, and the terms of payment are net 20 days. The 
invoice amount is $1,000. The sales tax is 6 percent, which becomes equal to $60 
(invoice amount * sales tax) (1000 * 6%).
The total invoice amount is $1,060 (invoice amount + sales tax) (1000 + 60).
The cash discount is 4 percent of the invoice amount "before sales tax" $ 40 is the 
discount amount, which is calculated based on the invoice amount which is $1000, 
and note that the  invoice amount is excluded the sales tax (invoice amount * cash 
discount) (1000 * 4%).
The invoice amount after the cash discount is $960 (invoice amount – cash discount 
amount) (1000 - 40).
The total invoice amount to be paid is $1,020 (invoice amount after cash discount + sales 
tax amount) (960 + 60).
The cash discount date of the customer free text invoice is January 11, and its amount  
is -40.
We then go to the Create payment transaction section and settle it against the posted 
invoice on January 1. As shown in this screenshot, the payment amount is 1020:

Chapter 5
[ 179 ]
In order to apply the cash discount, the user should choose Always or 
Normal under the Use cash discount field.
In the following screenshot, the changed payment date, January 19, is visible and the 
cash discount goes to the next cash discount code. It is 2 percent during 30 days.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 180 ]
The Invoice and delivery fast tab
In this section, we will cover the Invoice and delivery and Sales tax field groups,  
as shown in this screenshot:
The Invoice field group
In the Invoice field group, the Invoice account field represents the account used 
in the invoicing process. The default invoice account is the customer code, but 
Microsoft Dynamics AX gives flexibility to point invoice posting to another 
customer. Assume that the company sends goods to two different customers,  
then the invoice  will be issued to one particular customer out of the two.
The relation between the customer code and invoice account, where the customer 
invoice could be linked to one customer code or multiple customer codes, is shown 
in the following diagram:
Customer invoice account
Customer code 01
Invoice account 01
Customer code 02
Customer code 03
Invoice account 02
The Sales tax field group
The Sales tax field group represents the tax treatment that will be applied on the 
customer, which includes the sales tax, prices including sales tax or excluding, and 
tax exempt number if any. Each field can be explained as follows:
•	
Sales tax group: The Sales tax group section represents the assigned sales 
tax group to a particular customer. This record will be a default value on all 
transactions that will be inherited from the customer master data.
•	
Price include sales tax: The Price include sales tax field indicates whether 
the invoice amount includes sales tax or excludes it.

Chapter 5
[ 181 ]
•	
Tax exempt number: The Tax exempt number field is used for reporting  
and statistical extractions.
The Sales tax group could be set as default on the customer group 
level. Simply navigate to Accounts Receivable | Setup | Customer | 
Customer group. It can also be overridden by a user in the customer 
form.
Exploring Accounts receivable controls
The Accounts receivable module's controls are an essential task to be discussed 
during the analysis and design phases, in addition to being assessed on the 
operation phase for enhancements. Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 addresses the 
required basic business procedures for this module's controls. It is significant to the 
business to control the execution of Accounts receivable processes, since it directly 
affects company revenues. Therefore, it should be controlled and monitored. In the 
following section, we will explore:
•	
Customer hold activities
•	
Customer credit limit management
Customer hold activities
In the daily business operations in Accounts receivable, the accounting manager 
may need to stop transactions on a specific customer. The on-hold function for 
customers in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 is located at the customer level. To access 
this function, navigate to Accounts Receivable | Common | Customers | All 
Customers, select a customer, and go to the Credit and collection fast tab.
As shown in the following screenshot, the on hold function has several options based 
on customer transaction type, whether it is Invoice, All, Payment, Requisition, 
Never, or No (No is the default value). These options are used to prevent the 
customers from executing particular transactions or to stop the customers entirely.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 182 ]
The customer on hold stats has the following options for customer 
transactions:
•	
No: This option means that the customer is allowed to execute all 
transaction types
•	
Invoice: This option means that the customer is prevented from 
executing invoices transactions only
•	
All: This means that the customer is prevented from executing any 
transaction
•	
The other options Payment, Requisition, and Never are related to 
the Accounts payable module
If an end user tries to select a customer with an on-hold status, the system will 
prevent the transaction from proceeding to the creation step. This is shown in  
the following screenshot, where a user tried to create a sales order:
Customer credit limit management
There is a common practice in some business domains where the sales are only on 
a cash basis. The customer pays an amount of money up front, and this payment 
creates a balance in the customer account. This account is allowed to receive only 
those goods that are covered by this amount of money. Then the settle sales invoices 
are calculated against advanced collections.

Chapter 5
[ 183 ]
Microsoft Dynamics AX manages the customer credit limit on the customer level, 
and there are two ways that affect customer balance additions, partly where there is 
an increase in the customer balance, which consists of a cash transaction (customer 
advanced collection) and a non-cash transaction credit limit. The second way is a 
transaction that deducts the customer balance. Here is a diagram that illustrates the 
customer balance elements:
Customer balance
Sales order
Payment
transaction
Customer
advanced
payment
Customer credit
limit
Credit limit
(Manual)
Customer balance
Sales order
Packing slip
Sales invoice
Free text invoice
Customer free
text invoice
(-)
(+)
(-)
(+)
In order to activate and configure the credit limit, navigate to Accounts Receivable | 
Setup | Accounts receivable parameters | Credit Rating. The following screenshot 
denotes the credit rating options:

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 184 ]
In the Credit rating section, identify whether the message to be displayed when the 
credit limit is exceeded is just a warning message or an error message. The difference 
in both of them is as follows:
•	
The warning message will not stop the transaction
•	
The error message will prevent the transaction from being executed
The Credit limit type field has four different options that represent the base of credit 
limit calculation; the options are listed as follows:
•	
None: The credit limit check is not activated on the module level, and could 
be overridden on the customer level
•	
Balance: The credit limit is checked against the customer balance
•	
Balance + packing slip or product receipt: The credit limit is checked against 
the customer balance and the deliveries 
•	
Customer balance + all: The credit limit is checked, considering the open 
orders and delivered orders in it
On the customer master information, navigate to Accounts receivable | Common 
| Customers | All customers | Credit and collections, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
The Credit field group has the activation checkbox and the Credit limit amount on 
the customer level. These are explained as follows:
•	
Mandatory credit limit: If this is checked, the credit limit control will be 
applied on the customer. Otherwise, it will not be applied.
•	
Credit limit: This specifies the credit limit amount, and the customer cannot 
let this amount exceed. If the amount is zero, the customer should deposit  
the amount through payment transactions.

Chapter 5
[ 185 ]
The sales order amount created during the sales order transaction by navigating to 
Accounts Receivable | Common | Sales order | All sales orders is $1,000 for the 
CUST003 customer ID. Then navigate to Manage | Check credit limit. Microsoft 
Dynamics AX displays the Infolog window to indicate that the credit limit has been 
exceeded. The credit limit could be an automatic action as well.
Now we can see the following information:
•	
Open balance: 0.00: This shows the current customer balance from customer 
advanced collections and open sales orders
•	
Current order: 1,000.00: This is the current sales order amount
•	
New balance: 1,000.00
•	
Credit limit: 0.00: This is the non-cash credit limit that is assigned to the 
customer
•	
Credit excess: 1,000.00: This is the amount that exceeds the customer balance

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 186 ]
Credit limit equations
The following are the credit limit equations:
•	
Open balance = – customer advanced collection + open sales 
order amount
•	
New balance = Open balance + current order
•	
Credit excess = New balance – credit limit
Then post a prepayment transaction with $250, which affects the customer balance 
by $250. Check the same sales order balance; it will give the upcoming results.
In order to post the prepayment transaction, navigate to Accounts receivable | 
Journals | Payments | Payment journal. Create a new journal by pressing Ctrl + N. 
Then go to the lines. Select the customer and enter 250 in the credit side, as shown in 
this screenshot:
Then move to the Payment tab and select the Prepayment journal voucher 
checkbox. The posting profile will be automatically updated to be the PRE posting 
profile, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 187 ]
Go to the sales order in order to check the credit limit by navigating to Accounts 
Receivable | Common | Sales order | All sales orders, and then go to the Manage 
ribbon and select the Check credit limit option, as shown in the following screenshot:

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 188 ]
We can see the following results:
•	
Open balance: -250.00: This is the current customer balance from the 
customer advanced collections and open sales orders
•	
Current order: 1,000.00: This is the current sales order amount
•	
New balance: 750.00
•	
Credit limit: 0.00: This is the non-cash credit limit that is assigned to the 
customer
•	
Credit excess: 750.00: This is the amount that has exceeded the customer 
balance
Assume that a credit limit of $150 has been added to a customer, the current balance 
is $400, and the remaining is $600.
In case the credit limit is added to the customer master data, it will 
be recalculated automatically.
As shown in the following screenshot, navigate to Accounts Receivable | Common | 
All customers | Customers. Then navigate to Customer | Balance from the ribbon.

Chapter 5
[ 189 ]
While checking the sales order credit limit, we get the Infolog window, like this:
We can see the following results:
•	
Open balance: -250: This is the current customer balance from the customer 
advanced collections and open sales orders
•	
Current order: 1,000.00: This is the current sales order amount
•	
New balance: 750.00
•	
Credit limit: 150.00: This is the non-cash credit limit that is assigned  
to the customer
•	
Credit excess: 600.00: This is the amount that has exceeded the  
customer balance

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 190 ]
Assume that there is another sales order of $1,000 created, and then check the sales 
order credit limit, as shown in the following screenshot:
We can see the following results:
•	
Open balance: 750.00: This is the current customer balance from the 
customer advanced collections and open sales orders
•	
Current order: 1,000.00: This is the current sales order amount
•	
New balance: 1750.00
•	
Credit limit: 150.00: This is the non-cash credit limit that is assigned  
to the customer
•	
Credit excess: 1600.00: This is the amount that has exceeded the customer 
balance posting profile

Chapter 5
[ 191 ]
Posting represents the integration point between the general ledger and subledger, 
and it automatically generates the financial entries according to the posting profile's 
setup. The Accounts receivable posting profiles are assigned on the module 
parameters. Navigate to Accounts Receivable | Setup | Accounts receivable 
parameters | Ledger and sales tax. Then perform the following steps:
1.	 In the General fast tab, select a Posting profile value for the general 
Accounts receivable transactions. In other words, this represents the 
Accounts receivable ledger account.
2.	 In the Prepayment journal voucher field group, select a Posting profile  
with prepayment journal voucher value. In other words, this represents  
the advances from the customer ledger account.
The Accounts Receivable module posting profile are assigned in the accounts 
receivable parameters, as shown in the following screenshot:
Exploring Accounts receivable 
transactions
The following section will explore the types of transactions of the Accounts 
receivable module. The transactions are divided into the following main categories:
•	
Invoicing: The invoicing is divided into sales order-related and free text 
invoices. The Sales Order Invoice represents the invoices that are normally 
attached to a sales order (or sales orders). The sales order invoice could be 
the final invoice of the sales order. In that case, it is issued after delivering the 
goods. The free text invoice correction function is a newly introduced feature 
in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 192 ]
•	
Payment: The second category is payment. This category consist of two 
types. The first type is prepayment transactions, which are considered as 
customer advances from clients of which could be assigned to sales order. 
The second type is customer payment, which is settled against customer 
invoice.
The following diagram will make things clearer:
Sales order
invoice
Free text invoice
Pre-payment
Customer
payment
Payment
Invoicing
Customer settlement
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3
Account receivable transactions
–
Free text invoice correction
Sales order invoice
The sales order invoice document represents revenue recognition. This document is 
posted from the sales order form. It could be related to one sales order or multiple 
sales orders.
In order to post a sales order invoice from the sales order form, navigate to Accounts 
Receivable | Common | Sales order | All sales orders. After choosing a particular 
sales order, go to the Invoice ribbon and then navigate to General | Invoice. The 
following screenshot illustrates the sales order invoice menu:

Chapter 5
[ 193 ]
On the customer invoice form, the sales order and packing are retrieved 
automatically. Click on OK to generate the invoice transaction. Here is a screenshot 
showing the customer invoice form:

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 194 ]
The preceding screenshot depicts the relation between the customer invoice, packing 
slip, and sales order. The sales order has more than one packing slip, and the invoice 
may cover one sales order with more than one packing slip. In some business cases, 
the customer invoices cover packing slips occurring on more than one sales order. 
The following diagram illustrates the relation between the sales order, packing slip, 
and invoice:
This business scenario shows which invoice covers more than the packing slip and 
sales order. This can be managed on Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 by navigating 
to Accounts receivable | Periodic | Sales update | Invoice.

Chapter 5
[ 195 ]
This opens the filtration query, as shown in the following screenshot. The user can 
retrieve information based on values on the query (this could be a packing slip, 
customer ID, and so on). Assume that a company invoices its customers on a weekly 
basis for delivered goods, and this requires identifying the delivered packing slips 
within the specific period to be invoiced.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 196 ]
As shown in the next screenshot, there are two lines that have been retrieved 
according to the entered query—two sales orders with two different packing slips. 
The following posting invoice form represents two different invoices for each line.
In order to consolidate the multiple invoices in one invoice document, go to Arrange. 
The following screenshot illustrates the consolidate option:

Chapter 5
[ 197 ]
In order to activate the Arrange function, the Summary update should be identified 
by navigating to Accounts receivable | Setup | Accounts receivable parameters 
| Summary update. The Default value for summary update field can have None, 
Invoice account, Order, or Automatic summary values, as shown in this screenshot:

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 198 ]
Alternatively, you can go to the Other tab on the posting invoice form, select 
Summary update for, and select one option among None, Invoice account, Order, 
and Automatic summary.
The generated sales order invoice mainly consists of the following entries: reversal of 
packing slip entry, cost of goods sold entry, and revenue entry. The financial entry of 
the packing slip is as follows:
•	
Dr. Accounts Receivable – not invoiced
•	
Cr. Customer accrued account
The next two entries represent the customer revenue, and they are as follows:
•	
Dr. Customer accrued account
•	
Cr. Accounts Receivable – not invoiced
•	
Dr. Customer balance
•	
Cr. Sales revenue
•	
Dr. Cost of goods sold (COGS)
•	
Cr. Inventory
To access the inventory posting profile navigate to Inventory 
management | Setup | Posting. Then go to the Sales order tab.
Free text invoice
The free text invoice represents the service invoices that are issued to the customer 
and are not related to inventory items or sales orders. The free text invoice is not 
attached to a sales order. It consists of a header and lines for the ledger main account. 
The free text invoice document could be used for services such as training fees.
In order to access the free text invoice navigate to Accounts receivable | Common | 
Free text invoice | All free text invoices, as shown in this screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 199 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, in the free text invoice form, we will select a 
customer account. In the invoice lines, we will select the offset main account, sales 
tax, and amount. The line view is the default view. To switch to the header view, 
click on Header view in the ribbon. The header view shows information regarding 
the customer such as terms of payment, method of payment, and posting profile.
Free text correction
The free text invoice correction is a new functionality introduced in Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012. It represents a business process used to correct posted free text 
invoices, assuming that after issuing a training service invoice, the customer has 
realized that there is an error in the issued invoice and it needs to be corrected.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 200 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, to access the free text invoice correction, 
navigate to Account Receivable | Common | Free text invoices | All free text 
invoices | Correct invoice. In the Correct Invoice ribbon, select the Reason code 
value and enter a value in the Canceling invoice date field:
As shown in the next screenshot, the free text invoice correction form will pop up. 
There is an indication that this invoice form is for correction (You are correcting a 
free text invoice). Edit the amount and post the entry.
In order to post the free text invoice correction, go to the ribbon and click on Post. 
Behind the scenes, Microsoft Dynamics AX posts both the canceled transaction and 
the corrected transaction. The following screenshot shows the Infolog window with 
the posted transactions:

Chapter 5
[ 201 ]
In the next screenshot, we can see the free text invoice. Navigate to Accounts 
Receivable | Common | Free text invoices | All free text invoices.

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 202 ]
This screenshot shows the following transactions:
•	
Original: This represents the original transaction
•	
Canceling: This represents the reversal of the original transaction
•	
Corrected: This represents the corrected invoice after editing the amount
Customer settlement
Settlement is an accounting transaction that occurs on Accounts payable, Accounts 
receivable, and the general ledger. This transaction is mainly used to settle customer 
invoices against customer payments or advanced payments. As shown in the 
following diagram, if the invoice has different posting profile than the payment,  
the settlement will generate a transaction:
Invoice
Posting profile A
Open transaction
Settlement
Closed transaction
Generate settlement
transaction
Payment
Posting profile B
Open transaction
It is necessary to classify the posting profiles of the customer in the opening balance, 
as it will affect the settlement process.
The settlement transaction affects customer balances, and it is reported in the 
customer statement report, which identifies the following:
•	
Customer
•	
The open (unsettled) invoice and collections
•	
The closed (settled) invoice and collections
•	
Customer balance
A settlement transaction could occur during a payment or collection transaction 
if the accountant marks the invoice that will be paid or collected. On other hand, 
the settlement could be performed on the vendor or customer level, and these 
transactions could be unsettled.

Chapter 5
[ 203 ]
The settlement transaction should take into consideration the currency because it 
could be performed in the company's home currency by an equivalent amount that 
is calculated based on the currency exchange rate, or it could be settled in the same 
currency as that of the invoice by identifying the currency in the payment process.
Customer settlement mechanism –  
Dynamics AX
In Microsoft Dynamics AX, customer settlement is a transaction used to settle 
customer advanced collections or collections against customer invoices, and this 
function is done on a monthly basis.
Customer settlement has the following effects:
•	
The first effect is at the customer level. It closes the customer transaction.
•	
The second effect is on the financial entry, which occurs in case the posting 
profiles of the advanced collection and invoice are different.
Next, I will illustrate the mechanism of the customer advanced collection, invoices, 
and customer settlement financial entries as follows:
•	
The customer advanced collection posting profile is Prepayments, and the 
financial entry will be as follows:
°°
Dr. Banks: 1200 EGP
°°
Cr. Customer deposits: 1200 EGP
°°
Open transactions: 1200 EGP Advanced collection
•	
The customer invoice posting profile is General, and the financial entry is this:
°°
Dr. Receivables: 1000 EGP
°°
Cr. Sales revenue: 1000 EGP
°°
Open transactions: 1200 EGP Advanced collection, and 1000 EGP 
sales invoice
•	
The customer settlement's entry is as follows:
°°
Dr. Customer deposits: 1000 EGP
°°
Cr. Receivables: 1000 EGP
°°
Open transactions: 200 EGP Advanced collection
°°
Closed transactions: 1000 EGP advanced collection, and 1000 EGP 
sales invoice

Understanding Accounts Receivable
[ 204 ]
In case the posting profiles of advanced payment and invoicing are different, a 
settlement financial entry will be created.
Summary
This chapter covered the Accounts receivable module in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 R3 and its integration with other modules. We then explored the customer 
master data, the controls for customer credit limits, and the on-hold function. We 
looked at the Accounts receivable transactions customer invoice, free text invoice, 
and its processing and settlement mechanism.
In the next chapter, we will discuss fixed assets master data and transactions.

Exploring Fixed Assets
The fixed assets module represents the tangible assets, intangible assets, and 
equipments. This module manages and controls the execution of fixed assets 
transactions. These transactions are based on fixed assets journals, or through  
other modules such as Procurement and sourcing, and Accounts receivable.  
This chapter will cover the following topics:
•	
Understanding fixed assets integration with other modules
•	
Exploring fixed assets master data characteristics
•	
Exploring fixed assets transactions
Understanding fixed assets integration 
with other modules
The fixed assets module manages and controls fixed assets transactions that records 
fixed assets master information and the basic transactions related to fixed assets 
acquisition, depreciation, and disposal. The fixed assets function is integrated 
with other business functions. The first integration point is with the Procurement 
and sourcing business functions that executes assets acquisition through normal 
procurement and purchase order processing, then the reception, and finally, the 
invoice. The second integration is with Accounts receivable that executes fixed assets 
disposal sales. There is a transaction document that moves an inventory item to be a 
fixed asset.

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 206 ]
The integration of fixed assets document integration is as shown in the  
following diagram:
 
Fixed assets document integration
Procurement and sourcing
Purchase
order
Product
reception
Invoice
Service invoice
Manually created
Free text
invoice
Fixed assets
Depreciation
Fixed assets
acquisition
Disposal
sales
Manually created
Inventory to
fixed assets
Inventory and
warehouse
management
Manually created
Each transaction is represented in a document type in Microsoft Dynamics AX with 
the document that contains the details of the transaction. The transaction data, whether 
inherited from the master data, entered manually, and/or automatically inherited from 
another transaction, is linked with a specific reference. The integration between fixed 
assets and other transaction documents gives visibility for tracing what are the original 
documents that are related to the asset transactions and who posted it.
There is a list of fixed assets transactions besides the basic transactions of acquisition, 
depreciation, and disposal sale or scrap. The following screenshot shows fixed assets 
transactions in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3. This can be accessed from the fixed 
assets posting profile under Fixed assets | Setup | Fixed assets posting profiles.

Chapter 6
[ 207 ]
Exploring fixed assets master data 
characteristics
The fixed assets master data records have essential information that directly affects 
the asset transactions. The following section will cover the basic information that 
should be considered when creating a new fixed asset record. The following diagram 
shows the basic characteristics of fixed assets. There are more generic and higher 
levels of assets master data, depreciation profile, value model, and the asset group 
that represents the logical grouping of assets. The fixed asset record is the lowest 
level that represents the asset itself.
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3
fixed assets master data
–
Depreciation profile
Depreciation
method
Depreciation
year
Period
frequency
Value model
Allow net book value higher than acquisition price
Allow negative net book value
Fixed asset groups
Service life
Depreciation periods
Fixed asset
Posting profile
The depreciation profile
The depreciation profiles in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 represent the rules 
that manage the depreciation principles that will be applied on the fixed assets. For 
example, the straight line depreciation method or the reducing balance depreciation 
method. The depreciation profile rules contain the depreciation method, depreciation 
year, and period frequency. In order to access the depreciation profile, go to Fixed 
assets | Setup | Depreciation | Depreciation profiles.

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 208 ]
The depreciation method
The depreciation method represents the method that can be applied for depreciation 
calculation. The following screenshot shows the supported depreciation methods in 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3:
The depreciation method is an accounting principle that identifies the calculation 
method of distributing the cost of the fixed assets over the service line of the asset. 
The depreciation method is normally decided based on business requirements that 
might be built on law. It is important to understand the business requirements 
during the analysis and design phases. This requires a close cooperation between 
the implementation team and financial controller to ensure the proper design 
deployment and operation of fixed assets. The most common depreciation method  
is the straight line service life. Consider the following example.
Let's assume that a company acquired a car as a fixed asset at 20,000 USD and the 
service life for this car is 5 years. The depreciation calculation will be as follows.
Depreciation months are 60, that is, 5 years multiplied by 12 months.
The depreciation for each month will be equal to allocation, that is, 20,000 USD 
divided by 60 months, which is equal to 333.333 USD per month.

Chapter 6
[ 209 ]
The form contains two types of fields based on the selected depreciation method.  
The first type is constant fields, which are shared with all the methods, and the 
second type is dynamic fields, which are activated based on the depreciation  
method selection.
Constant fields
Constant fields refer to depreciation year and period frequency. These fields are 
interrelated, which means that the values in period frequency are based on the 
depreciation year. The depreciation year represents the basis of calculation of 
depreciation whether calendar or fiscal.
The period frequency represents the ledger accruals during the calendar year,  
as follows:
•	
In case the selected depreciation year is a calendar year, Microsoft Dynamics 
AX 2012 R3 considers the calendar year starting from January. The available 
values are yearly, monthly, quarterly, and half-yearly.
•	
In case the selected depreciation year is year, Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 
R3 considers the fiscal year setup that might start at July. The available 
values are yearly and fiscal period.
Dynamic fields
Dynamic fields are activated based on the selection of the depreciation method:
•	
Percentage: It represents the percentage of depreciation calculation
•	
Full Depreciation: It represents that the fixed asset will be fully depreciated 
when the remaining service life reaches zero
•	
Factor: It represents the percentage value of origin that constitutes  
the depreciation
•	
Interval: It represents the interval to run the depreciation. This field will be 
active if the selected depreciation method is factored.

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 210 ]
The value model
The value models represent the financial value of the fixed asset that belongs to the 
value model, and it can be the integration point between fixed assets and the general 
ledger in the posting profile. In order to access the value model, go to Fixed assets | 
Setup | Value models. The following screenshot shows the value model form:
The depreciation profile is attached to the value model, and it identifies whether the 
assets that belong to this value model will be depreciated or not. The depreciation 
can be overridden on a fixed asset level.
The value model identifies the control point on the assets belonging to a value model 
and checks whether to allow the net book value to go higher than the acquisition 
cost. Assume that there is a fixed asset with an acquisition price of 1250 USD and the 
depreciation amount is 187 USD. In case the user is going to reverse a depreciation 
transaction and modify the amount to be 300 USD, the system will throw an info log 
message indicating that the net book value will be higher than the acquisition cost,  
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 211 ]
The second control point on the value model denotes whether to allow a negative net 
book value for assets that belong to this value model. Assume that there is a fixed 
asset with an acquisition price of 1250 USD and the depreciation amount is 187 USD. 
In case the user is going to post a depreciation transaction and modify the amount to 
be 1251 USD, the system will throw an info log message to indicate that the net book 
value will be in negative, as shown in the following screenshot. In case we allow a 
negative net book value, the net book value will be equal to -1251.

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 212 ]
Fixed asset groups
The fixed asset group has three purposes. The first is a logical grouping of fixed 
assets that is mainly used for reporting and analysis. The second purpose is 
considered as another integration point between the general ledger and the fixed 
asset module. The third purpose identifies the asset service life and depreciation 
periods. In order to access fixed asset groups, go to Fixed assets | Setup | Fixed 
asset groups. The following screenshot shows the fixed asset group form:
On the fixed asset groups form, identify the asset type and major type, in addition 
to identifying the auto-numbering of fixed assets, and attach the number sequence 
that will be used. The capitalization threshold represents the minimum amount of 
acquisition cost that will be depreciated. In case a fixed asset acquired has an amount 
less than the capitalization threshold, it will not be depreciated.
In order to identify the depreciation period and services life, on the Fixed asset 
group form, click on Value models. The Fixed asset group/value model form will 
open; here you have to enter the depreciation period in months and services life in 
years, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 213 ]
Fixed assets
Fixed assets can be equipments, cars, and/or buildings. They represent the lowest 
level of assets master data, which contains the fixed asset record, the unique ID, 
description, grouping, and specific characteristics for fixed assets. In order to create 
a fixed asset record, there are two ways. You can either create a record manually or 
automatically through purchase order posting. The method of creation differentiates 
the acquisition document. The following diagram shows the creation methods and 
acquisition documents:
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3
assets creation and acquisition
–
Fixed asset
record
Creation method
Manually
created
Automatically
created
Acquisition document
Purchase
order
Acquisition
journal
Fixed asset
acquisition
 

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 214 ]
In order to create a new record of fixed assets, go to Fixed assets | Common | Fixed 
assets | Fixed assets, as shown in the following screenshot:
 
Press Ctrl + N to create a new record. Here, the Fixed asset group and Number fields 
are the mandatory fields. When the user selects the Fixed asset group value, the 
number is automatically created. Enter the Name and Search name of fixed assets 
under Description, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 215 ]
Under Value models, there are two types of data. The first type of data is populated 
automatically, which represents the value model assigned to the fixed asset group. 
These fields contains depreciation, service life, and depreciation periods. This is 
shown in the following screenshot:
The second type of field can be identified manually. For this, navigate to the General 
tab to identify acquisition date and price. This is shown in the following screenshot:

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 216 ]
Exploring fixed assets transactions
In this section, we will explore fixed assets transactions starting from acquisition 
transactions by acquisition journal, acquisition through purchase order, depreciation, 
disposal scrap, and fixed assets reversal transactions.
In order to record and post an acquisition journal, as shown in the following 
screenshot, go to Fixed assets | Journals | Fixed assets. Create a new journal by 
pressing Ctrl + N on the journal line, go to Proposal and select Acquisition proposal, 
and then go to select a query to identify the asset number, which will be acquired.
Note that if the acquisition price is not identified, the acquisition proposal will not 
populate the asset.

Chapter 6
[ 217 ]
In order to acquire fixed assets through a purchase order, a parameter must be 
activated first. This gives the company the control to acquire the assets through the 
procurement department and enables it to apply the segregation of duties between 
the procurement, reception, invoicing, and payment process. As shown in the 
following screenshot, go to Fixed assets | Setup | Fixed assets and then click  
on Purchase orders:
The following options are available under the Purchase order tab:
•	
Allow asset acquisition from purchasing
•	
Restrict asset acquisition posting to a user group
•	
Create asset during product receipt or invoice posting
•	
Check for fixed assets creation during line entry

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 218 ]
In the course of the execution of a fixed asset acquisition through a purchase order, 
go to Procurement and sourcing | Common | Purchase order | All purchase order. 
Then, create a new record by pressing Ctrl + N, select vendor, go to purchase lines, 
select service item, and then enter warehouse and price details. Now, go to the Fixed 
assets tab, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 219 ]
If the fixed asset is new, check the New fixed asset checkbox and select a Fixed asset 
group. If this transaction is to capitalize on already created fixed assets, uncheck the 
New fixed asset checkbox, select Fixed asset group and Fixed asset number, and 
identify the Transaction type whether it is Acquisition or Acquisition adjustment. 
The Value model field is populated automatically. The process of the purchase 
order normally goes from confirmation to product receipt to invoice. After posting 
the purchase order invoice, the fixed asset record will be created and the asset 
acquisition transaction will be posted.
An acquisition entry has the following:
•	
Dr. Fixed assets
•	
Cr. Vendor balance
As shown in the following screenshot, select the purchase order line after posting the 
invoice, then go to the asset value model by right-clicking on the asset number and 
then click on View details. Now, click on the value model in the fixed asset form.
The status changing from Not acquired yet to Open represents 
the acquired fixed assets, and this asset will be included in the 
next depreciation run.

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 220 ]
As shown in the following screenshot, in order to run fixed assets depreciation, go 
to Fixed assets | Journals | Fixed assets, create a new record and go to Lines. Then, 
go to Proposals and select Depreciation proposal. Now, identify the depreciation 
date, find the asset number by clicking on the Select button, and decide whether to 
summarize the depreciation in one line or for separate lines for each month.
Assume that the acquired fixed assets price is 2500 USD, the acquisition date is 
January 1, 2014, and the depreciation period is 60 months. The depreciation for each 
month is calculated as 2500 USD divided by 60 months, which is equal to 41.67 USD. 
The depreciation will run on till September 30, 2014.

Chapter 6
[ 221 ]
The following screenshot illustrates the depreciation for each month:
In case the Summarize depreciation checkbox is checked, the depreciation will be 
created in one line on September 30, 2014 as 375.03 USD.
The depreciation entry has the following:
•	
Dr. Depreciation expense
•	
Cr. Accumulated depreciation
The posted transaction of fixed assets are located on the value model, and in order 
to inquire about the posted transaction, go to Fixed asset, select a particular asset 
ID, go to the Value model ribbon, and then click on Transactions. As shown in the 
following screenshot, updates have occurred on the Date when depreciation was 
last run field, and the Depreciation periods remaining field that represents the 
equation, depreciation periods minus ran depreciation periods, that is 60 minus 9, 
which equals 51.

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 222 ]
The Transactions button shows the posted transactions on the asset depending on 
whether it is acquisition or depreciation.
As shown in the following screenshot, the inquiry illustrates the acquisition price, 
depreciation, and net book value. The net book value represents the equation 
acquisition price minus depreciation, that is, 2500 minus 375.03, which equals 2124.97.

Chapter 6
[ 223 ]
Fixed asset disposal sale
Assume that the disposal sale transaction occurred in a company that decided to sell 
a car, which is a fixed asset. This transaction that took place of selling a fixed asset 
occurred through the free text invoice in Accounts receivable. The posting profile of  
a disposal sale considers the following:
•	
Depreciation (prior years): The total depreciations of prior years will be 
reversed; the ledger account is the accumulated depreciation account,  
and the offset account is the fixed assets gain/loss account.
•	
Depreciation (this year): The total depreciations of the current year will  
be reversed; the ledger account is the accumulated depreciation account,  
and the offset account is the fixed assets gain/loss account.
•	
Acquisition value: The acquisition value will be reversed; the ledger  
account is the fixed assets account, and the offset account is the fixed  
assets gain/loss account.
•	
Net book value: The ledger account is the fixed assets gain/loss account,  
and the offset account is also the fixed assets gain/loss account.
In order to set up a fixed assets posting profile, go to Fixed assets | Setup | Fixed 
assets and select Disposal | Sale, as shown in the following screenshot:
The generated entry will be as follows:
•	
Dr. Accumulated depreciation account
•	
Dr. Fixed assets gain/loss account
•	
Dr. Accounts receivable
•	
Cr. Fixed assets gain/loss account
•	
Cr. Fixed assets gain/loss account
•	
Cr. Fixed assets account

Exploring Fixed Assets
[ 224 ]
There are some scenarios in daily business that require reversing fixed asset 
transactions. This can be executed from the fixed asset journal, as shown in 
the following screenshot. Now, go to Function and select Retrieve fixed asset 
transactions. Then, select New voucher number per transaction in order to  
generate a new voucher number, and check Invert sign to invert the transaction  
sign from the original one. To select a particular fixed asset, click on the Select  
button and add the asset number.
The following screenshot illustrates the retrieved fixed asset transaction with an 
invert sign. You can see a minus sign on the debit side, which means it is a credit, 
and a minus sign on the credit side a means debit.

Chapter 6
[ 225 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we covered the fixed assets module in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 R3. We explored the fixed asset characteristics and its integration with other 
modules. We then explored the fixed assets master data and the required data 
to acquire, depreciate, and dispose an asset. Next, we explored the fixed asset 
transactions acquisition, whether through an acquisition proposal journal or  
through the purchase order, monthly depreciation, disposal sales, and fixed asset 
transaction reversals.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the cash flow management integration concept, 
basic configurations, and transactions.


Functioning of Cash  
Flow Management
Cash flow management is a tool that predicts a company's future cash requirements. 
Cash flow management mainly covers the cash out and cash in events. Cash out is 
generated from the company's expenditure against the goods or services purchased, 
whereas cash in is generated from the company's revenue against the sale of goods 
or services. It gives the company's management a vision of the cash position in order 
to efficiently manage vendor payments in a specific period, and also the customer 
collections during the same period to protect the company's cash situation. In this 
chapter, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Understanding cash flow integration with other modules
•	
Exploring cash flow forecast configuration
•	
Working with cash flow transactions
•	
Forecasting cash flow by currency requirements
•	
Forecasting the main account's cash flow

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 228 ]
Understanding cash flow integration with 
other modules
The integrated modules of cash flow management are Accounts payable, Accounts 
receivable, and General ledger. The Accounts payable module manages the vendor 
payments process, the Accounts receivable module manages the customer collections 
process, and the General ledger module identifies the cash and cash-equivalent 
accounts. The following figure shows the integration of the cash flow modules:
The modules that are integrated in cash flow forecast management are divided into 
the following groups:
•	
Vendor expenditure management has the following elements:
°°
Accounts payable: This identifies the vendors' terms of payment, 
settlement periods, vendors' posting profiles, accounts used for 
vendor settlement, and vendor invoice transaction execution
°°
Procurement and sourcing: This identifies the transactional execution 
of vendor purchase orders and receptions
•	
Customer collections management has the following components:
°°
Accounts receivable: This identifies the customers' terms of payment, 
settlement periods, customers' posting profiles, accounts used for 
customer settlement, and customer invoice transaction execution
°°
Sales and marketing: This identifies the transactional execution of 
customer sales orders, issuances, and invoicing

Chapter 7
[ 229 ]
•	
Budgeting: This identifies the budget distributions based on specific time 
intervals (years, months, and days)
•	
General ledger: This identifies the cash and cash-equivalent accounts that 
represent the liquidity account
•	
Cash flow forecast: This represents the cash flow position for purchase and 
sales order transactions
With the Microsoft Dynamics AX consultant, the implementation of cash flow 
forecast management is a mutual effort between the controller, accounting manager, 
treasury, budgeting, procurement, and sales.
Cash flow forecast configuration
The cash flow forecast configuration and setups are combined with the integrated 
modules of cash flow management. The following figure explains the cash flow 
forecast configuration in detail:

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 230 ]
The main configuration and setup of cash flow forecast in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
are performed in the following modules:
•	
Accounts payable
•	
Accounts receivable
•	
Budget
•	
General ledger
Accounts payable
The Accounts payable module is further subdivided as follows:
•	
Parameters: This identifies the company-wide parameters for Accounts 
payable. For the parameters of Accounts payable, navigate to Accounts 
payable | Setup | Accounts payable parameters. Now go to Ledger and sales 
tax and click on Cash flow forecast, as shown in the following screenshot:
•	
Period between delivery and invoicing: This identifies the period between 
the product's receipt and invoice.
•	
Invoicing period: This identifies the period of receiving the vendor invoice.

Chapter 7
[ 231 ]
•	
Terms of payment: This identifies the period between the vendor invoice 
posting and the due date.
•	
Settle account: This represents the liquidity account.
•	
Allocation key: This represents the allocation key used for budget reduction 
with regards to purchase level.
•	
Settle period: This identifies the period between the vendor payment due 
date and the date of payment execution. The terms of payment values are 
commonly used in the Accounts payable's cash flow forecast, where we can 
set the number of days or months that identify the payment due date. To see 
the Accounts payable's terms of payment, navigate to Accounts payable | 
Setup | Payment | Terms of payment, as shown in the following screenshot:

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 232 ]
•	
Vendor posting profiles: This is an integration point between the Accounts 
payable sub ledger and general ledger, where identifying a particular ledger 
account will be used while posting a transaction for a specific vendor. The 
Settle account column in the following screenshot represents the liquidity 
accounts that are used for vendor payments. For the Accounts payable posting 
profiles, navigate to Accounts payable | Setup | Vendor posting profiles. The 
following screenshot displays the Vendor posting profiles page in detail:
The Settle account column in Vendor posting profile overrides the 
Settle account column under module parameters.
•	
Vendor groups: This represents the vendor's classification and the posting 
profile assigned to a specific vendor group in order to identify the Settle 
period column that is used in cash flow management logic. To see the 
Accounts payable vendor groups profile, navigate to Accounts Payable 
| Setup | Vendor | Vendor groups. The following screenshot shows the 
Vendor groups screen as an example:

Chapter 7
[ 233 ]
The Settle period column in vendor groups overrides the 
Settle period column under module parameters.
•	
Vendor master: In the Vendor master data information, which is captured 
and recorded during the creation of vendors and has an effect on the vendor's 
aging and cash flow forecast as well, the terms of payment under the payment 
section is considered as a default value. It is proposed when the vendor is 
selected in transaction, and can be changed on a transactional level without 
modifying the master data record. For the Accounts payable vendor master 
data, navigate to Accounts payable | Common | Vendors | All vendors,  
then press Edit on a particular vendor and go to the Payment fast tab:

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 234 ]
Accounts receivable
The Accounts receivable module is subdivided as follows:
•	
Parameters: This identifies the company-wide parameters for Accounts 
receivable. For Accounts receivable parameters, navigate to Accounts 
receivable | Setup | Accounts receivable parameters, then go to Ledger 
and sales tax, and click on Cash flow forecast. The following screenshot 
shows Ledger and sales tax in detail:
•	
Period between delivery and invoicing: This identifies the period between 
the product's issuance and invoicing.
•	
Invoicing period: This identifies the period of issuing the customer invoice.
•	
Terms of payment: This identifies the period between the customer invoice 
posting and due date.
•	
Settle account: This represents the liquidity account for settling payments.
•	
Allocation key: This represents the allocation key used for budget reduction 
with regard to the volume of orders.

Chapter 7
[ 235 ]
•	
Settle period: This identifies the period between the customer payment due 
date and payment execution. The terms of payment values are commonly 
used in the Accounts receivable module's cash flow forecast, where we can 
set the number of days or months that identify the payment due date. To see 
the terms of payment, navigate to Accounts receivable | Setup | Payment | 
Terms of payment, as shown in the following screenshot:

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 236 ]
•	
Customer posting profiles: This is an integration point between Accounts 
receivable and General ledger, where identifying the ledger account will 
be used when posting a transaction on a customer attached to a particular 
posting profile. The Settle account column in the following screenshot 
represents the liquidity accounts that are used for customer payments.  
To see the posting profiles, navigate to Accounts receivable | Setup | 
Customer posting profiles.
The Settle account column in Customer posting profile dominates 
the Settle account column under module parameters.
•	
Customer groups: This represents the customer classification and the 
posting profile assigned to a specific customer group. You can also see the 
Settle period column in the following screenshot. It is used in the cash flow 
management logic. In order to see the customer groups, navigate to Accounts 
receivable | Setup | Customers | Customer groups.

Chapter 7
[ 237 ]
•	
Customer master: In the customer master's data information, which is 
captured and recorded during the creation of a customer and has an effect 
on customer aging and cash flow forecast as well, in terms of payment under 
payment section in customer master data. This terms of payment is considered 
as a default value proposed when the customer is selected in a transaction,  
and the value could be changed on a transactional level without modifying  
the master data record. For this, navigate to Accounts receivable | Common 
| Customers | Customers | All customers, select a particular customer and 
press Edit, then move to the Payment default fast tab:

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 238 ]
Budget
The core concept in the Budget module is the allocation key. This distributes the 
budgets for a specific period by a weight of allocation percentage, which could be 
days, months, and or years. To access the budget allocation key window, navigate to 
General ledger | Setup | Periods | Periods allocation categories. Click on Lines to 
enter an allocation percentage for each period.
General ledger
The general ledger is subdivided as follows:
•	
Main accounts: The Set up cash flow forecasts screen, which is shown in the 
following screenshot, represents the dependency of other accounts that will 
affect the company's cash flow, for example, sales tax payment. To see the main 
account's cash flow, navigate to General ledger | Setup | Chart of accounts | 
Chart of accounts, and select Main account. Then select Companies in Select 
the level of main account to display. Now click on Cash flow forecast under 
the Setup tab, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 239 ]
•	
Liquidity accounts: This lists the cash and cash-equivalent accounts that 
are used to calculate the cash flow forecast. In order to access the following 
screenshot, which illustrates the liquidity accounts form, navigate to  
General Ledger | Setup | Posting | Liquidity:
Cash flow transactions
The transactions that affect the cash flow forecast are purchase and sales orders. 
The cash flow transactions also depend on the configuration of the company-wide 
parameters and the master data setup.

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 240 ]
Purchase order cash flow forecast
This section illustrates the cash flow forecast transaction for a purchase order (PO). The 
order's data is as follows:
•	
Configuration of the Accounts payable module's parameters:
°°
Period between delivery and invoicing: 5 days
°°
Invoice period: 7 days
°°
Settle period: 3 days
•	
Vendor master data:
°°
Terms of payment: 15 days
•	
Purchase order data:
°°
Purchase order date: January 1
°°
Purchase order quantity: 1 Piece
°°
Currency: EGP
°°
Default currency: USD
°°
Exchange rate: 1 USD = 5 EGP
°°
Purchase price: 5,000 EGP = 1,000 USD
The purchase order was created on January 1. Based on the setup of the period 
between delivery and invoice, which is 5 days, the date will be January 6 (by adding 
5 days to the PO line date). Based on the setup of the invoicing period, which is  
7 days, the date will be January 13 (PO line date plus 5 days plus 7 days). Then, 
based on the setup of the terms of payment, which is 15 days, the date will be 
January 28 (PO line date plus 5 days plus 7 days plus 15 days). Finally, based on  
the setup of the settle period, which is 3 days, the date will be January 31 (PO line 
date plus 5 days plus 7 days plus 15 days plus 3 days).
The following figure represents the cash flow forecast transaction in detail:

Chapter 7
[ 241 ]
The Cash flow forecasts tab can be viewed under Purchase order. In the ribbon, 
navigate to the Invoice section, go to the Bill group, and select Cash flow forecasts, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
The invoice entry date is calculated based on the Period between delivery and 
invoicing and Invoice period (5 days plus 7 days). Then the invoice entry date will 
be January 13. The payment entry date is calculated based on the number of days 
in Terms of payment, Settle period, and Invoice date (13 days plus 15 days plus 3 
days). Thus, the payment entry date will be January 31.
Cash flow forecast by currency requirement
Microsoft Dynamics AX has a function that fulfills the currency requirement. This 
function is the Currency requirement inquiry form. For cash flow forecast currency 
requirements, navigate to General ledger | Periodic | Currency requirement | 
Currency requirement. The following screenshot shows the Currency  
requirement screen:

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 242 ]
In some cases, the Cash flow forecast requirements are not 
calculated properly, thereby requiring you to run a Cash flow 
forecast job. This job can be run manually or an automatic 
batch job can be set up to do it.
The Requirement per currency tab represents Cash flow forecasts for a specific 
currency code for a specific period. With reference to the previous transactions, select 
the EGP currency code, and the cash flow will be illustrated in a graph, as shown in 
the next screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 243 ]
The Overview tab, which is shown in the following screenshot, represents the cash 
flow requirements per period:
In the Currency requirement form, the Total currency requirement button 
represents the cash flow forecast requirements by company, and the default  
currency is USD. This gives a clear vision for the projection of cash in and cash  
out for a specific period.

Functioning of Cash Flow Management
[ 244 ]
Main account cash flow forecast
Main account, which has a setup for cash flow forecast, shows the cash flow of 
forecasts that are related to the main account.
Navigate to General ledger | Setup | Chart of accounts | Chart of accounts 
under the General tab, and then click on View cash flow forecast, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Summary
In this chapter, we covered the basics of cash flow forecast configurations and setups 
in Microsoft Dynamics AX, and the integration points between modules used to 
facilitate cash flow functions. We also showed a practical example of a cash flow 
transaction and inquiries, in addition to a forecast by currency and main account.
In the next chapter, we will discuss cost management from the inventory  
perspective, as it is the most significant cost for an organization, and requires  
control and monitoring.

Working with Cost 
Management
The costing function is one of the most critical subjects in the ERP implementation, 
specifically inventory costing. In the competitive and emerging markets of today, we 
aim at getting the best usage from the current company resources in order to ensure 
that they are translated into company profitability and more potential cash flow. On 
the other hand, the inventory cost affects the company reporting in the balance sheet 
and income statement along with the cost of goods sold and cost of production. This 
function requires intensive workshops during the implementation life cycle to contest 
the business costing model and how it will be mapped to Microsoft Dynamics AX.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Understanding the business costing model
•	
Configuring inventory costing
•	
Exploring the inventory costing background (physical and financial update)
•	
Understanding inventory recalculation and closing
•	
Working with inventory marking
•	
Exploring inventory reconciliation

Working with Cost Management
[ 246 ]
Understanding the business costing 
model
The highest significant cost of organizations is encumbered in the inventory costing. 
In this sense, one of the main objectives of ERP implementation is to manage, reduce, 
and control inventory costing. The inventory significantly affects the company's 
bottom line and profitability as well. The companies that carry inventory as a raw 
material for production bear the cost of inventory, which in turn affects the cost 
of production in addition to the goods in the process and the cost of goods sold 
(COGS) accordingly. The companies that carry inventory as stock for sales bear the 
inventory cost, which in turn affects the cost of goods sold.
The main driver of inventory cost is the purchase cost from the vendor in addition to 
all the costs that are paid until the goods are received into the company's warehouse, 
such as freight, customs duties, and loading. All these are known as miscellaneous 
charges, which is a function name in Microsoft Dynamics AX.
The company's profitability is directly impacted by the inventory cost. Therefore, 
it is essential for the organization to effectively manage the procurement activities 
and financial cost control that monitors inventory costs. The following figure shows 
Microsoft Dynamics AX inventory costing:
The implementation team ascertains the inventory costing strategy for the company. It 
is a joint effort between the financial controller, inventory and warehousing manager, 
and application consultant during the analysis phase of the implementation. The 
financial controller sets the inventory valuation method and inventory posting profiles. 
The inventory and warehousing manager sets the inventory item coding structure 
and item groups for inventory classifications. The application consultant maps the 
controller as well as the inventory and warehousing manager's requirements to 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012.

Chapter 8
[ 247 ]
Configuring inventory costing
The configuration and setup of inventory costing are combined between the 
integrated modules of inventory and warehousing management, product 
information management, and financial controls. A collection of all types of  
setup is shown in the product master form, depicted in the following figure:
The blocks in the preceding figure are defined as follows:
•	
Item model group: This identifies the inventory valuation method
•	
Product dimension groups: This identifies the product's attributes
•	
Product storage dimension groups: This identifies the product's location
•	
Product tracking groups: This identifies the product's tracking information
Item model group
The main configuration and setup of inventory costing in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
is in Item model group, where we identify the inventory costing valuation method. 
For inventory model group, navigate to Inventory and warehouse management | 
Setup | Inventory | Item model group. Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 supports 
the following inventory valuation methods:
•	
FIFO: This is first-in, first-out
•	
LIFO: This is last-in, first-out
•	
LIFO date: This is the last-in, first-out date
•	
Weighted avg.: This is the weighted average
•	
Weighted avg. date: This is the weighted average date

Working with Cost Management
[ 248 ]
•	
Standard cost: This is the standard cost
•	
Moving average: This is the moving average cost
The following screenshot shows all the inventory valuation methods:
In the following section, we will highlight some of the item module group 
configurations:
•	
Inventory policy: This indicates whether the item or the service is stockable 
or nonstockable. Stockability indicates that the item will be tracked in 
the inventory transaction, and included in the inventory costing and its 
calculation.
•	
Physical negative inventory: This is a control point that prevents the 
inventory quantities to be issued from the warehouse if there is no available 
quantity. If the business requires issuing quantities more than the quantity 
available in the warehouse, this should be coordinated with the controller 
and the stock manager, as the inventory balance will be in negative.
•	
Financial negative inventory: This is allowed, by default, to issue quantities 
that are not financially updated yet. This is a control point that can prevent 
issuing inventory quantities from the warehouse without a financial update, 
which means the final cost must be known before issuing the items.

Chapter 8
[ 249 ]
•	
Post physical inventory: This option posts the physical inventory to the 
General ledger module, and this requires a configuration on Accounts 
payable parameters and Accounts receivable parameters by checking the 
Post product receipt in ledger checkbox. If the Post physical inventory 
checkbox is unchecked, the physical transactions will not be posted in the 
ledger, regardless of the configuration in the AP/AR parameter setup forms.
•	
Post financial inventory: This option posts the financial inventory update to 
the General ledger module if this checkbox is checked. The posting will be  
as follows:
°°
Purchase order invoice update: If this checkbox is checked, the 
amount of the items is posted to the inventory receipt account; 
otherwise, the amount of the items is posted to the purchase 
expenditure for product account.
°°
Sales order invoice update: If this checkbox is checked, the amount 
of the items is posted to the inventory issue and the consumption 
accounts; otherwise, no posting occurs in the item consumption 
account or the issue account.
These fields are shown in the following screenshot:

Working with Cost Management
[ 250 ]
Product dimension groups
Product dimension groups represent the items' characteristics that identify the key 
differences of the item. For example, a polo shirt item has two dimensions, namely, 
size and color. The size and color can be small and blue or medium and blue. The 
following screenshot shows a product dimension group screen that represents the 
item attributes Configuration, Size, Color, and Style:
For product dimension groups, navigate to Product information management | 
Setup | Dimension groups | Product dimension groups.
Storage dimension groups
As you can see in the following screenshot, the storage dimension groups screen 
sorts the required stock, keeping a note of the location, whether it is Site, Warehouse, 
Location, or Pallet ID. This assists in the reporting of inventory quantities and cost.
To access the storage dimension window, navigate to Product information 
management | Setup | Dimension groups | Storage dimension groups.

Chapter 8
[ 251 ]
Tracking dimension groups
The tracking dimension is a lower-level assortment of products, irrespective  
of whether it is a serial number for electronic inventory items or a batch number.  
For tracking dimension groups, navigate to Product information management 
| Setup | Dimension groups | Tracking dimension groups, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Item groups
As you can see in the following screenshot, Item groups is the product classification 
for inventory items, and it is the integration point between the inventory and 
financial modules. The classification of Item groups should be a joint effort between 
the stock manager and the controller. In order to access Item groups, go to Inventory 
and warehouse management | Setup | Inventory | Item groups.

Working with Cost Management
[ 252 ]
The inventory posting profile consists of the following possible inventory 
transactions:
•	
Sales order: This is a sales and marketing module transaction
•	
Purchase order: This is a procurement and sourcing module transaction
•	
Inventory: This is an inventory and warehousing management  
module transaction
•	
Production: This is a production management module transaction
The posting profiles are the integration point between the subledgers and the general 
ledger. It is a set of ledger accounts that are used to generate the automatic ledger 
entry in which a transaction occurs. It is possible to select different ledger accounts 
for each type of subledger transaction. Microsoft Dynamics AX offers flexibility in 
the setup of posting profiles. The posting can be on four different levels, as shown in 
the following figure:
The posting domination levels are All, Group, Category, and Table. The preceding 
figure can be explained as follows:
•	
Group B dominates over All
•	
Category dominates over Group B and All
•	
Table dominates over Category, Group, and All

Chapter 8
[ 253 ]
If the posting profile is for All and there are some groups that have been identified 
for a specific main account, then these will be excluded from the All setup. At 
the same time, if there is a category relation selected for a specific main account, 
then these categories will be excluded from the All and Group posting profiles. If 
there is a table relation selected for a specific main account, it will apply the Table 
posting profile. In order to access the inventory posting profile, go to Inventory and 
warehouse management | Setup | Inventory | Posting | Posting. The following 
screenshot illustrates an example of all of these posting domination levels:
Exploring the inventory costing 
background
For highlighting the inventory costing model in Microsoft Dynamics AX in order 
to understand the inventory valuation methods, there are three main concepts— 
physical and financial update, inventory recalculation and closing, and marking.
Physical and financial updates
The physical and financial update considers real-life business scenarios where 
there is a difference between the reception costs and invoices. It works in uncertain 
business environments.

Working with Cost Management
[ 254 ]
Physical update
The physical update represents the inventory transaction, whether it is a product 
receipt for a purchase order or a packing slip for a sales order. The reception price 
inherits from the item purchase price in the purchase order and identifies the item 
cost price in the warehouse. The cost of goods sold is retrieved from the inventory 
cost price and the physical issuance that occurred from the sales order. The  
following figure shows the physical and financial updates:
Financial update
The financial update represents the invoice posting either for a purchase order or a 
sales order. The sales order invoice only has an effect on sales revenue and cost of 
goods sold. While on the other hand, the purchase order invoice affects the inventory 
cost if there are changes in purchase price, be it an increase or a decrease.
If your business requires considering the miscellaneous charges in the 
event of product reception, there is the Inventory II solution offered by 
FSB Development (http://www.fsbdev.com/).
The default mechanism of the financial update for purchase orders in Microsoft 
Dynamics AX is that the financial update dominates the physical update in order 
to allocate the final item addition cost that will be reflected in the inventory. The 
physical update can be considered as an estimated cost, and the final cost is reflected 
in the purchase order invoice that will affect inventory cost in the warehouse 
submodule and main account in the chart of accounts as well.

Chapter 8
[ 255 ]
Understanding inventory recalculation 
and closing
The inventory recalculation is a normal procedure in the Microsoft Dynamics AX 
environment that calculates the inventory cost in the warehouse and adjusts the 
inventory issuances according to the inventory value model (the valuation method).
The inventory cost in Microsoft Dynamics AX is a running average cost. In order to 
apply the valuation method, the recalculation process should be run. The normal 
mechanism of the inventory cost calculation applies the inventory valuation method 
that is attached to the product master by running the recalculation function. The 
recalculation function mainly affects two areas: the item cost in the warehouse and 
the inventory adjustment entries for product issuances from the inventory that 
generates the inventory financial transaction entries.
The inventory adjustment entries are generated when the issuance 
cost of the item is different from the current cost of the inventory 
items in the warehouse, according to the inventory model group  
(the valuation method). The entries are generated based on the 
original issuance transactions.
For example, if COGS of the sales order is 100 EGP and the current 
cost in the warehouse is 110 EGP, the recalculation process generates 
an entry by 10 EGP (Dr. COGS 10, Cr. Inventory 10).
The commonly applied valuation method is Weighted Average Cost, where the 
inventory issuances are valuated at the average cost of the items that are received 
during that period and also the on-hand inventory.
The formula for weighted average is Weighted average = (Received 
quantity * Received cost) + (On-hand quantity * On-hand cost) / 
(Received quantity + On-hand quantity)

Working with Cost Management
[ 256 ]
The inventory cost is also considered as a tentative cost. The inventory issuances 
carry the current running average cost. The actual cost is applied after the 
recalculation process is done and is based on the inventory valuation method that 
is configured in Item model group. The adjustment transactions represent the 
difference between the running average cost and the configured costing valuation 
method. To access the inventory closing window, navigate to Inventory and 
warehouse management | Periodic | Closing and adjustment. The following figure 
explains the inventory recalculation and closing concept:
Working with inventory marking
During daily business in inventory management, there are some transactions that 
need to be returned to the inventory at the same cost at which they were issued. Each 
inventory transaction is associated to a unique Lot ID. Any inventory transaction 
is assigned to a Lot ID with a unique identification that helps in inventory cost and 
inventory transaction tracking; this is used to specify the transaction's cost. The 
marking function can be used with Sales order to specify the cost of goods sold for 
the marked line in the Sales order lines, and it can be used in the issuance return 
(inventory addition) from the movement journal, production order, and/or bill of 
material (BOM) journal. The following diagram shows the relation of the inventory 
marking between inventory issuance and receptions:

Chapter 8
[ 257 ]
To access the marking function window, navigate to Sales and marketing | 
Common | All sales orders | Sales order. Then, go to Sales order lines, click on 
Inventory, and select Marking. This can be seen in the following screenshot:

Working with Cost Management
[ 258 ]
The Marking form lists all the relevant transactions for the inventory item, which 
will be set to mark on. As you can see in the following screenshot, the Set mark now 
checkbox is checked, and the users should click on Apply to confirm that the cost 
will be assigned to the transaction:
Exploring inventory reconciliation
The inventory reconciliation is a key task that proves system integrity between the 
general ledger and inventory subledger. This task occurs on a monthly basis as a 
check point after month close to ensure that everything is properly reconciled with 
this contentment routine.
In Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3, a set of reports are concerned with inventory and 
general ledger reconciliation. In the following section, we will explore the inventory 
value report.

Chapter 8
[ 259 ]
Inventory value report setup
The inventory value report setup gives the option to have versions of the report 
based on the purpose of the report focus. The report can concentrate on the 
reconciliation between inventory and inventory account, work in progress (WIP) 
account, deferred cost of goods sold (deferred COGS) account, and cost of goods 
sold (COGS) account, in addition to report design for columns and rows.
As shown in the following screenshot, to access inventory value report setup, go to 
Inventory management | Setup | Costing | Inventory value reports:
The following screenshot shows the inventory value report setup form. In order to 
create an inventory report, click on New or press Ctrl + N and enter the report ID 
and report description. On the General tab, you can predefine the date interval for 
the report as this is considered as a proposed value when generating the report in  
the second stage, and the user can select other date intervals as per their needs.

Working with Cost Management
[ 260 ]
To set up date intervals, go to General ledger | Setup | Periods | Date intervals.
Now, identify the report date under the Range combobox, whether it is based on 
Posting date or Transaction time. Now, identify Dimension set that will be used in 
the report.
To set up a dimension set, navigate to General ledger | Setup | Financial 
dimensions | Financial dimensions sets.
When designing report columns in the Columns tab, the first part is Financial 
position that represents the inventory submodel values for Inventory, WIP, 
Deferred COGS, COGS, and/or Profit and loss, which will be showed in the report.
The second part is Compare on-hand inventory value to cumulative accounting 
values, which represents the ledger account for Inventory, WIP, Deferred COGS, 
and/or COGS.
The account type must be total account.
The third part is Inventory dimension, which is the inventory breakdown by 
inventory dimensions and storage dimensions.
The other parts represent summarization of the report, including transactions not 
posted to ledger, calculate average cost price, and/or total quantity and value.

Chapter 8
[ 261 ]
The following screenshot shows the Columns tab:
The Rows tab, where report rows can be designed, represents the cost elements  
that are required to be shown in the report row and also shows whether the level  
is Totals or Transaction, as shown in the following screenshot:

Working with Cost Management
[ 262 ]
Inventory value report generation
To generate an inventory value report, go to Inventory management | Reports | 
Status | Inventory value | Inventory value. This is shown in the following screenshot:
The inventory value report form, where we can select the required selection criteria 
and filtration, is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 263 ]
As shown in the following screenshot (which denotes the report print out), the report 
is divided into two sections—the first section represents the inventory submodule 
values, and the second section denotes the ledger account amount and the difference, 
if any:
Summary
In this chapter, we covered the business model of inventory costing based on the 
business domain, the required configuration, and setup of Microsoft Dynamics AX 
in the inventory management module, as well as the integration concepts with the 
general ledger to map business requirements. The difference between the physical 
and financial updates model of Microsoft Dynamics AX is the inventory transaction 
with marking functions, in addition to recalculations and closing processes. We also 
covered the inventory value report, its setup, and generation.
In the next chapter, we will cover financial dimensions and practice practical 
reporting in Microsoft Dynamics AX.


Exploring Financial 
Dimensions
One of the major objectives of an ERP implementation is to provide clear business 
insights that can provide support for the organization's top management in the 
decision-making process. This requires analyzing the numbers, understanding 
them clearly, and then being able to examine the same numbers from different 
perspectives. Hence, a detailed structure is required to decide how an organization 
wants to analyze their numbers.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Understanding the concept of financial dimensions
•	
Understanding the ledger account segmentation
•	
Posting types in Microsoft Dynamics AX
•	
Exploring dimension reporting
Understanding the concept of financial 
dimensions
The main source of financial reporting is the main accounts. The components of 
financial reporting are a balance sheet, income statement, trial balance, cash flow, 
and so on. The normal scenario is that the main account's balances do not mean 
much when it comes to analysis. This is because the balance sheet account is a total 
of the posted transactions' amounts, and it is required to be able to dig into this total 
breakdown. In other words, it provides us with information on how this amount is 
allocated, for example, among business units and departments. This allocation gives 
the lowest level of analysis to break down the same balance for a main account by 
more than one dimensional perspective.

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 266 ]
The following diagram shows the financial dimension allocation for the Main Account:
Financial Dimension
Cost center
Division
Profit center
Department
Business unit
Sub ledger (Fixed assets, Banks)
Main account
Sub ledger (Customer/Vendor,..)
Branch
Financial dimensions provide us with a deeper analysis of the transactions posted 
on the general ledger accounts, where the financial dimension gives the controller 
an analytical view of the transactions that occurred on the expenses account. For 
example, one can analyze the account balance according to the financial dimensions 
assigned to the main account.
The Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 financial dimension allows an organization to 
reach the lowest level of breakdown and analysis. There are three main standpoints 
to consider while discussing the financial dimension:
•	
The first standpoint is the required breakdown analysis for each main 
account in the chart of accounts in order for it to be utilized at the  
reporting level.
•	
The second standpoint is the controls and validations while doing the data 
entry in order to certify that the keyed-in transactions are allocated to the 
required dimensions before the transaction is posted. This directly affects the 
accuracy of reporting.
•	
The third standpoint is the reconciliation between the subledger and the 
general ledger, and the ability to break down the balance using the subledger 
(customers, vendors, items, banks, and so on).

Chapter 9
[ 267 ]
These standpoints are shown in the following diagram:
Financial Dimension Standpoints
Reporting and analysis
Data entry controls and
validation
Sub ledger - General ledger
reconciliation
The role of the Microsoft Dynamics AX consultant is to clarify the best usage of 
financial dimensions to the concerned parties. The key process owners who ascertain 
the financial dimensions' requirements are the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and 
the financial controller. The three main standpoints of financial dimension can be 
summarized as follows:
•	
Reporting and analysis: This is used to identify reporting needs and  
data entry results
•	
Data entry controls and validations: This is used for data entry filtration
•	
Subledger and general ledger reconciliation: This is used for reconciliation 
of transactions between the subledger and the general ledger
The implementation team ascertains the financial dimensions' requirements during 
the analysis phase to understand what the business needs are at the reporting and 
analysis stage, and then identifies the required number of financial dimensions and 
how to utilize these dimensions.
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 supports an unlimited number 
of financial dimensions.
According to the business domain, every business needs to build the structure of 
their chart of accounts and financial dimensions. They also need to identify which 
subledger should be tracked at the general ledger level. To build the structure of the 
chart of accounts and financial dimensions, follow the ensuing steps:
•	
Classify the required dimensions for each main account, whether it is 
mandatory or optional.

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 268 ]
•	
Categorize the financial dimensions that are interrelated and are dependent 
on each other to filter dimensions based on the previously selected value.
•	
Categorize the intra-related dimensions. These are not dependent on the 
previously selected dimension.
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 supports the use of the existing subledger master 
data to define financial dimensions. The following diagram illustrates the usage of 
financial dimensions in reporting and analysis, in addition to reconciliation:
Inter related dimension
Intra related dimension
Dimension I
(Accounts receivable)
Dimension II
(Accounts payable)
Dimension III
(Fixed assets)
Dimension IV
(Banks)
Chart of
accounts
Reconciliation
Sub ledger
(Accounts receivable)
Sub ledger
(Accounts payable)
Sub ledger
(Fixed assets)
Sub ledger
(Banks)
Posting
Profile
Reporting and analysis
Microsoft Dynamics AX Financial Dimension
The heart of a financial dimension is the chart of accounts, as shown in the previous 
diagram. It should be carefully structured and set to the required dimension 
validation of each main account. It is important to consider this structure of the 
chart of accounts and dimensions' validation in the opening balance upload, as it 
will affect reporting and analysis in addition to an automatic transaction, such as the 
exchange rate adjustment.
Changing the financial dimension's structure and validation during 
operations should be wisely planned, evaluated, and executed as it may 
affect some historical transactions and some automatic transactions 
(for example, exchange rate adjustment, inventory adjustment, and 
settlement). It is recommended that you apply it at the beginning of a 
month when all historical transactions, along with the old structure and 
validation, are closed.

Chapter 9
[ 269 ]
Understanding the ledger account 
segmentation
The following section covers the newly introduced segmented ledger account entry 
in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 and the financial dimensions' assignment in a one-
line voucher entry.
Segmented ledger accounts
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 introduced the segmented ledger account where the 
main account and the financial dimension are combined in a single line. This gives 
more flexibility and control to the data that is entered than the previous versions.
The data entries are considered as the major sources of information quality. During 
the analysis phase, the implementation team exploring the reporting requirements 
as well as the process owners and top management require reliable information, 
and this information is generated by the data entry. It is required to control the data 
entry to ensure that the entered data is formatted in the correct way. The application 
consultant can fulfill these requirements to ensure the quality of data entry by 
performing the following tasks: by defaulting some values from the master data  
that are automatically populated in the transaction, by changing fields to be 
mandatory for reporting, and by identifying the required financial dimensions to  
the transaction level.
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 offers a very powerful entry mechanism that is built on 
the account structure. The segmented entry control is a function that simplifies the data 
entry and controls the complex combination of accounts and financial dimensions.
It is a simple cheat sheet window that gives the user hints on which segment should 
be entered, in addition to the lookup for that segment.

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 270 ]
To access the general journal, navigate to General ledger | Journal | General 
journal lines. The following screenshot shows the simple cheat sheet in detail:
Financial dimensions entry
In this section, we will explore the further enhancement of segmented entries that 
gives more flexibility to Microsoft AX 2012 to accommodate the one-line entry to 
allocate the segments. This was followed in previous versions of Microsoft Dynamics 
AX, where the default application assigned dimensions to both the sides (debit 
and credit), enforcing the end users to use the double-line entries to have different 
financial dimensions for each side.
Microsoft AX 2012 covers this point completely. If an entry is created in a one-line 
style, the voucher created is that of a debit (vendor) or credit (bank) and requires 
the assigning of different segments. Here is a new feature where we will be able to 
assign different financial dimensions for Account and Offset account. Navigate to 
General ledger | Journals | General Journal, and then go to Lines. In the general 
journal form, click on the Financial Dimension button. There are two options here, 
Account and Offset account, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 271 ]
Creating financial dimensions
There was an obstacle facing the implementation team in assigning master data to 
financial dimensions such as vendors, customers, fixed assets, items, and banks, and 
the best-case scenario to tackle this is an automatic (online) assignment in order to 
keep consistency of assigning the default financial dimension to the master data. 
The solution for this requirement is that it will either be maintained manually or by 
an automatic trigger (customization). Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 has bridged this 
gap. Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 has two types of financial dimensions, as shown  
in the following diagram:

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 272 ]
The first type is the user-defined dimension, which was used in Microsoft Dynamics 
AX 2009 to allow users to add an unlimited number of dimensions (business unit, 
cost center, purpose, profit center, and so on) as per the outcome of the analysis. The 
second type is the system-defined dimension. It helps in assigning the master data to 
newly created dimensions such as vendors, customers, fixed assets, and items.
The steps to create a new dimension are as follows:
1.	 Navigate to General ledger | Setup | Financial dimensions as shown in the 
following screenshot:
2.	 Within Financial dimensions, navigate to Financial dimensions, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
3.	 Create a new financial dimension by clicking on New in the Financial 
dimensions window, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 273 ]
4.	 Select the dimension type.
5.	 If you want to add a user-defined dimension, select <Custom dimension>,  
as shown in this screenshot:

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 274 ]
6.	 Enter the user-defined dimension list and configure the dimension value  
by its dates of activation and/or suspension by filling in the Active from, 
Active to, and Suspended fields, as shown in the following screenshot:
7.	 Select the subledger values, for example, Customers. Then select the financial 
values called from the customer's master data and configure the dimension 
value by its dates of activation and/or suspension. The Financial statement 
formatting and Cost accounting fields only show when the level of 
dimension display is selected at company level instead of shared level.

Chapter 9
[ 275 ]
Configuring the account structure
The account structure's configuration identifies the required dimensions for the main 
account. The account structure is attached to the company's ledger setup (refer to 
Chapter 1, Getting Started with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012). As you can see in the 
following diagram, an account structure is a combination of the main account and 
financial dimensions:
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 provides flexibility to add the account structure for the 
main accounts with any combination of financial dimensions.
Navigate to General ledger | Setup | Chart of accounts | Configure account 
structures to configure the account structures. As you can see in the following 
screenshot, Configure account structures should be in the edit mode to be edited:

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 276 ]
Add a segment (financial dimension) to the account structure that is already defined 
(regardless of whether it has user-defined or system-defined dimensions) by clicking 
on the Add segment option, as shown in the following screenshot:
The green tick shown in the preceding screenshot needs 
to be checked in order to activate the proper segment.
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 provides an option to identify the main account by 
identifying one specific account and/or a part of the main accounts. This is done by 
selecting Specify which values are allowed, as shown in the following screenshot. 
This provides the availability to use the filtration option.

Chapter 9
[ 277 ]
As you can see in the following screenshot, it is possible to arrange the order of the 
dimensions by moving the segments to the left or right, or by right-clicking to  
move the segment:

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 278 ]
Accepting a blank (null) value in the dimension is possible. The feature of accepting 
a value or keeping it blank is introduced in Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012, and it is 
allowed for users to leave the dimension blank, as shown in the following screenshot:
To apply the account structure configuration, it must be activated as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Advanced rules structure
There is a limitation in the account structure—you can have only ten dimensions, 
but more dimensions may be required. The Advanced Rules Structure can add an 
unlimited number of dimensions. The concept of the advanced rules structure is 
to create an advanced rule structure record, add the required segments to it, and 
activate it. This also involves attaching it to the account structure. The following 
diagram illustrates the concept of advanced rules structure:

Chapter 9
[ 279 ]
In order to create an advanced rules structure, navigate to General Ledger | Setup | 
Chart of accounts | Advanced rules structure, as shown in the following screenshot. 
Click on the New button to create a new record. Now, in the right-hand corner of  
the window, click on Add segment to add dimension segments, and then click  
on Activate.
In order to attach the advanced rule structure to the account structure, navigate 
to General ledger | Setup | Chart of accounts | Configure account structure on 
the account structure form. Ensure that it is in the edit mode, and then click on 
Advanced rule in the ribbon. Create a new record by clicking on the New button. 

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 280 ]
After entering the ID and description in the right-hand corner under the Advanced 
rule structures tab, click on Add and select the Advanced rule structure value. Then 
make sure you activate the account structure configuration.
This allows the system to add extra dimensions based on the advanced rule 
structure. If you navigate to General Ledger | Journals | General journal in the 
voucher line, you'll see the Customer dimension, which is defined in the advanced 
rule structure:

Chapter 9
[ 281 ]
Fixed dimension
In some cases, there is a business requirement to fix a particular dimension on a 
specific main account. A fixed dimension is on a company level. In order to activate the 
fixed financial dimension, the account should be specified for a particular company.
In order to set up a financial dimension on the main account, navigate to General 
ledger | Setup | Chart of accounts, and then select the account structure. Then click 
on Edit. This will open the main accounts in the edit mode. As shown in following 
screenshot, select a specific account, then select Companies in Select the level of 
main account to display, and then select the company ID in the Companies field. 
This will show the Financial dimension tab.
Here the dimension could be Not fixed, which means the dimension value will be as 
proposed, or Fixed value, which means the dimension value will be always used for 
this main account. When we select a fixed value, a dialog box will always pop up.

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 282 ]
The result of this setup when we create and post the general journal looks like what 
is shown in the following screenshot. Navigate to General Ledger | Journals | 
General Journal, but do not select the Department value with the 110180 account. 
Now post the journal. Under the voucher inquiry, the system fixes the Department 
dimension value on the account as per the main account setup.
Posting types in Microsoft Dynamics AX
In Microsoft Dynamics AX, there are two ways to post transactions to the main 
account. The first type is through the posting profile, which represents the 
integration point between the general ledger and subledger, and generates the 
financial entries automatically according to the posting profile's setup. The second 
type is the journal entries, which post directly to the ledger accounts.
The posting profile concept
Posting profiles are the point of integration between the subledger (fixed assets, 
accounts payable, inventory, banks, accounts receivable, project, and production) 
and the general ledger. The posting profile is a set of main accounts that are used to 
generate the automatic ledger entry in which a transaction has occurred. It is possible 
to select different main accounts for each type of subledger transactions. Microsoft 
Dynamics AX offers flexibility in setting up posting profiles. Posting could be on  
three different levels:

Chapter 9
[ 283 ]
•	
All: Any transaction occurring on any subledger such as customers, vendors, 
and/or items will be redirected to the main account, which is assigned to all 
the customers, vendors, and/or items
•	
Group B: Any transaction for a particular customer, vendor, and/or item 
inherits the posting profile of the customer, vendor, and/or item group to 
which they are assigned
•	
Table: Any transaction that occurs for a subledger, vendor, and/or item will 
be directed to the ledger account, which is assigned to the posting profile
The common question during the design phase is which level out of All, Group B, 
and Table will prevail over the other levels. Customers can be assigned to a specific 
group, but in some exceptions, the customer should be directed to another ledger 
account. The lowest level of all is Table, which specifies the customer ID and will 
prevail over Group B and All.
To access the posting profile, navigate to the following paths:
•	
For the Accounts payable posting profiles, navigate to Accounts payable | 
Setup | Vendor posting profiles
•	
For the Accounts receivable posting profiles, navigate to Accounts receivable 
| Setup | Customer posting profiles
•	
For the inventory posting profile, navigate to Inventory and warehouse 
management | Setup | Posting | Posting
The ledger accounts specified in the posting profile must not allow a 
manual entry to be created in the general ledger, in order to preserve 
the integrity between the general ledger and subledger.

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 284 ]
Journal posting
The journal model in Microsoft Dynamics AX is a journal header that contains 
voucher lines. Here, the default data in the journal name (header), such as currency 
and sales taxes, is copied to the voucher lines. This data can also be changed in the 
voucher lines. Every subledger has its own journal name based on the transaction 
type. Navigate to General ledger | Setup | Journals | Journal names to access the 
journal names.
The voucher line can be a ledger account, vendor account, customer account, fixed 
asset, bank, or project. If the selected account is an option other than the ledger 
account, the subledger posting profile will direct the posting to the ledger account.
The journal posting elements are the information listed as follows:
•	
Journal posting controls: The journal posting controls consist of embedded 
controls that cannot be changed or avoided. The voucher balance and other 
controls form the basic setup for each journal name that can be applied at any 
time. This can be explained as follows:
°°
Voucher balance and journal balance: The basic accounting 
principle, which is a financial entry, must be balanced so that the 
debit side is equal to the credit side. Microsoft Dynamics AX prevents 
posting any transaction if there are any discrepancies between the 
transactions sides (debit or credit). This validation occurs on the 
voucher line as well as the journal.
°°
Transaction date: The balance voucher must be posted on the same 
date as the transaction sides (debit and credit). Microsoft Dynamics 
AX applies the concept of one-line voucher entry and two-line 
entries. This control is validated if the entry appears on two lines.
°°
Offset account: Fixing an offset account on a specific journal will 
prevent users from changing or modifying the offset account on 
the voucher line. It can be a proposal and it may be changed at the 
transaction level.
•	
Blocking the journal name: During the daily operations on the journal 
entries in Microsoft Dynamics AX, whether these journals are related to the 
general ledger, fixed assets, accounts payable, accounts receivable, inventory 
journals movement, transfer journals, or BOM, it is normal to have more than 
one journal name under the same journal type. Each journal name serves a 
specific business transaction based on the business requirements gathered 
in the analysis phase. Microsoft Dynamics AX gives this control to a private 
user group in the journal name configuration. This allows the use of that 
journal only for the appropriate user group.

Chapter 9
[ 285 ]
•	
Journal approvals: Approval controls on the general ledger journals are 
divided into two levels. The first level is the one-step approval, and the 
second level is the workflow approval. The workflow approval requires an 
automatic batch job to run at a specific interval in order to ensure that the 
approvers receive the documents that require approval. The two levels of 
approval can be explained as follows:
°°
One-step approval: This is considered as a simple configuration for 
the journal's approvals, as it assigns a user group to be the approval 
group for a specific journal name.
°°
Workflow approval: This approval needs to configure a workflow 
approval step. This gives you the flexibility to add a complex 
approval matrix that will be triggered if the condition, which is 
configured in the workflow occurs on the journal. Thus, the  
workflow approval offers more control on journal posting.
Exploring dimension reporting
Overall, this chapter covers the financial dimension model from business and 
application angles. The required configuration for main accounts and the account 
structure directly affect the accuracy of the data entered, by controlling the 
dimensions' selection and validation.
The following section will explore the financial dimensions' reporting capabilities  
in a trial balance and dimension statement.
Financial dimension sets
Financial dimension sets are the result of reporting the transactions based on financial 
dimensions. They can be a combination of more than one financial dimension. 
Financial dimension sets are initially designed, along with the designing of financial 
dimensions in the design phase, to accommodate the reporting perspective, and they 
can be extended during the operations.

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 286 ]
As you can see in the following diagram, the financial dimension set is used as a 
focal point in reporting, where it will be able to analyze numbers by one dimension 
focus or more than one focus:
Identify the financial dimension set by selecting one or more dimensions from 
Available financial dimensions. The selected financial dimensions are used for 
analysis. The analysis could be, for example, Main account + Department or Main 
account + Department + Cost Center, as shown in the following screenshot:
To access the financial dimension sets, navigate to General ledger | Setup | 
Financial dimension | Financial dimension sets.
Trial balance is one of the major financial reports where the trial balance report will 
be able to generate a transaction's trial balance for all the main accounts. In Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012, this report is converted to a form.

Chapter 9
[ 287 ]
To access Trial balance, navigate to General ledger | Common | Trial balance, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
Identify the reporting date of the trial balance by entering the following dates:
•	
From date: In this field, enter the start date of the report date range
•	
To date: In this field, enter the end date of the report date range
The date range of Trial balance should be within one fiscal year. Thus, 
the info log message should be displayed in the following format: From 
date is in fiscal year 20XX. To date is in fiscal year 20XX. Dates must be  
in the same fiscal year.
For example, From date is in fiscal year 2010. To date is in fiscal year 2010. 
Dates must be in the same fiscal year.

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 288 ]
Identify Financial dimension set as a focus option, as shown in this screenshot:
Trial balance is broken down by the selected Financial dimension set, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
Trial balance contains the following information:
•	
Ledger account: This shows the main account or the account  
structure dimension.
•	
Opening balance: This shows the opening balance amount after closing  
the fiscal year.
•	
Debit: This shows the transaction of the amount debited on that  
account (monthly movement).

Chapter 9
[ 289 ]
•	
Credit: This shows the transaction of the amount credited on that  
account (monthly movement).
•	
Closing balance: This shows the closing balance for that account at the  
end of the fiscal period. The date range is calculated as the sum of the  
net difference and the opening balance.
As you can see in the following screenshot, the Dimension statement is the 
most commonly generated report by the controller to examine the main balance, 
along with the dimensions' allocation. Navigate to General ledger | Reports | 
Transactions | Dimension statement to access the dimension statement.
The financial dimensions' report filtration identifies the following parameters:
Parameter
Description
Primary financial 
dimension set
This is used to select the primary financial dimension set 
for the report.
Secondary financial 
dimension set
This is used to select the secondary financial dimension 
set for the report.
Date interval
This is used to select the current date interval for the 
report.
From date
This is used to enter or select the start of the date range to 
print transactions for.
To date
This is used to enter or select the end of the date range to 
print transactions for.

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 290 ]
Parameter
Description
New page
Select this checkbox to insert a page break between  
each account.
Posting layer
This is used to select how the posting layer or 
combination of posting layers should be included for the 
selected column such as the following:
•	 Current: This column will contain transactions that 
are included in the current posting layer
•	 Operations: This column will contain transactions 
that are included in the current posting layer or the 
operations posting layer
•	 Tax: This column will contain transactions that are 
included in the tax posting layer
•	 Operations minus tax: This column will contain 
the net transactions from the operations posting 
layer minus the tax posting layer
•	 Only operations: This column will contain 
transactions that are included in the operations 
posting layer
•	 Only tax: This column will contain transactions 
that are included in the tax posting layer
•	 Operations plus tax: This column will contain 
transactions that are included in the operations 
posting layer or the tax posting layer
•	 Total: This column will contain transactions 
that are included in the current posting layer, 
operations posting layer, or tax posting layer
Include the opening 
transaction amounts in 
detail
Select this checkbox to include the opening transactions 
from the line of the report that lists the opening balance. 
Opening transactions are displayed in the report details.
Closing transactions
Select this checkbox to display the closing transactions. 
Clear this checkbox to display the closing transactions  
in the closing balance in the summary form.

Chapter 9
[ 291 ]
The following screenshot shows the Statement by dimensions report query:

Exploring Financial Dimensions
[ 292 ]
As you can see in the next screenshot, the dimension statement breaks down the 
account balance by department:
Summary
In this chapter, we covered the business concept of financial dimensions and 
segmentation of ledger accounts. We also covered Microsoft Dynamics AX posting 
profile types, journal posting and its controls, and financial dimensions reporting.
In the next chapter, we will explore financial reporting and analysis, planning 
reporting needs, information source blocks, and discovering Microsoft  
Dynamics AX reporting options.

Exploring Financial Reporting 
and Analysis
The main principles of reporting are the reliability of business information and the 
ability to get the right information at the right time for the right person. Reports 
that analyze ERP data in an expressive way represent the output of the ERP 
implementation. Reporting is considered as the cream of the implementation and 
the next level of value that the solution stakeholders should aim for. This ultimate 
outcome results from building all reports based on a single point of information.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
•	
Planning reporting needs for ERP
•	
Understanding the information technology value chain
•	
Understanding Microsoft Dynamics AX information source blocks
•	
Discovering Microsoft Dynamics AX reporting
•	
Reporting options
•	
Reporting currency
Planning reporting needs for ERP
The Microsoft Dynamics AX implementation teamwork should challenge the 
management's reporting needs in the analysis phase of the implementation with 
a particular focus on exploring the data required to build reports. These data 
requirements should then be cross-checked with the real data entry activities that 
end users will execute to ensure that business users will get vital information from 
the reports.

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 294 ]
On several projects, there are no well-defined reports except the financial reports 
(trial balance, income statement, and balance sheet) that are in place during analysis. 
Later, for live operations on such projects, the implementation team determines the 
need for more data and starts chasing the required information inside the application 
by completing the missing information and fields, and/or redesigning the data entry 
process. This may lead to an increase in the data entry time due to additional steps 
for data validations and the surprise discovery that there are not enough end user 
resources to execute the updated requirements. Hence, there should be a balance 
between the sum of required data entry values that directly affect the reporting quality, 
and the total number of end user resources that perform the data entry process.
Another word of caution is that the solution architect may recognize during the 
operation that some transactions are performed by one end user, but typically, these 
transactions are performed by two or three end users to attain the segregation of duties 
and control. For example, in the procurement cycle, there is one user who creates the 
inventory item, purchase order, and reception, but these transactions are normally 
performed by three different users. In this kind of resource-constrained situation, 
the segregation of duties and control concepts are breached, and the ERP solution is 
negatively impacted for the end users and key users. In these situations, the root cause 
of the concern is not the functionalities of ERP but the lack of allocated resources.
The two other important models of reporting are as follows:
•	
Pulling reports: Pulling of reports refers to the active requesting of  
reports by operational managers for the lowest transactional level such  
as purchasing, warehousing, sales, marketing, and financial entries. 
The middle management layer will pull reports to serve procurement, 
commercial/sales, and controllership.
•	
Pushing reports: Pushing of reports refers to the Business Intelligence (BI) 
capabilities that serve the top management, such as offering KPIs, balance 
score cards, and analytics/comparison views.

Chapter 10
[ 295 ]
The various reporting levels of Microsoft Dynamics AX are shown in the  
following diagram:
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 and the supporting Microsoft technology stack offer 
a diversity of reporting capabilities, including ad hoc reports for the transactional 
level, developed by Microsoft Excel 2013, Excel Services, and Microsoft SQL Server 
Analysis Services (SSAS). The Microsoft Dynamics Management Reporter offers 
the controllership in the middle management the ability to create and run financial 
reports. For the BI solutions built for Microsoft Dynamics AX, customers should 
begin with Excel Power View, SSAS, and PerformancePoint Services in SharePoint. 
The different levels of management are as follows:
•	
Operational management: The operational managers are involved in 
monitoring the performance of each business unit and managing employees
•	
Middle management: The middle managers are focused on the internal 
firm's performance, including revenues and costing management, resource 
allocation, and the development of short-term plans
•	
Top management: The top managers are focused on strategic business 
decisions that affect long-term plans, future performance, and the firm's 
overall objectives

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 296 ]
Understanding the information 
technology value chain
In this section, we will explore reporting and data management in ERP from the 
management's information system perspective, with its dependent layers.
The model of a management information system is most applicable to the Information 
Technology (IT) manager or Chief Information Officer (CIO) of a business. Business 
owners likely don't care as much about the specifics as long as these aspects of the 
solution deliver the required results. The information technology value chain is shown 
in the following diagram:
ERP implementations in enterprises have multiple components for successful project 
delivery. The most common element is addressing business requirements at all 
enterprise levels from basic IT infrastructure to user interface technology.
Infrastructure
Infrastructure is vital and ensures the reliability of the solution, assuring the 
availability of daily business operations. It must also be able to sustain an agreed 
level of uptime.

Chapter 10
[ 297 ]
Hardware sizing depends on elements as well as a number of transactions, users, 
locations, and the available connectivity for each location. The infrastructure must 
also meet the architectural requirements of the servers that will ride the application, 
database, and reporting.
Beyond the live production planning environment, each company should consider 
building at least three different environments, as follows:
•	
The first is a development environment for testing customizations and the 
new functionalities.
•	
The second is a training environment that is a replication of the live 
environment and can accept tested updates from the development 
environment.
•	
The third is a live production environment for live transactions. It is similarly 
important to consider clustering and load balancing.
Having a single reporting server improves the reporting performance with SQL 
Server Business Intelligence reporting or SQL Server Reporting Services (SSRS). 
Furthermore, there are automatic batch jobs for notifications, alerts, and running 
special processes that set more load on the application server. Therefore, assigning 
these batch jobs to a separate server is favored. Depending on the industry, 
external access to Microsoft Dynamics AX can have an important impact on server 
performance. For example, for external access from customers and vendors, a 
retail business should consider an integrated e-commerce solution with Microsoft 
Dynamics AX.
Database management
The relational database (Microsoft SQL Server) that stores all the ERP-related 
transactions is known as Online Transactional Processing (OLTP). For BI reporting 
with a SQL Server, SSAS can store the aggregations, measures, and dimensions. This 
results in a higher performance in querying reports. It is also important to consider 
backup and restore strategies.
Reports from Microsoft Dynamics AX are based on the SSRS approach that has been 
standardized with Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012.
Business processes
The comprehensive business processes will reflect the data requirements. The design 
of a business process should identify the data owner, and where and when the data 
was captured.

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 298 ]
Business processes are transformed into business functions in Microsoft Dynamics 
AX. The applied access rights for users' security ensure the segregation of duties, 
data ownership, and accuracy of data validation. Similarly, the approval matrix in a 
workflow will define the control mechanisms in the business processes such as the 
required management approvals.
Business Intelligence
It is often useful to analyze and measure a company's business results against 
industry benchmarks and best practices as a technique to develop the most valuable 
indicators and reports.
The richness of Power View and Excel Services gives the Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 Enterprise Portal significant power to perform analysis and increase business 
insights more than any earlier release could.
Frontend
The frontend pinpoints the devices that the organization will need to access 
the applications that are being used. The most commonly used device in many 
organizations is still the laptop. More widespread access from numerous locations 
over the Internet may require more planning for mobile devices (cellular phones, 
handheld devices, and tablets). For example, Microsoft has introduced Microsoft 
Business Analyzer for Windows 8 that gives access to the high-level reports of charts 
for Microsoft Dynamics AX.
Understanding Microsoft Dynamics AX 
information source blocks
In this section, we will explore the information sources that eventually determine the 
strategic value of BI reporting and analytics. These are divided into three blocks. The 
first block is the detailed transaction level, the second is BI, and the third is executive 
decisions. These three blocks are explained in the following sections.

Chapter 10
[ 299 ]
Detailed transactions block
At its roots, BI depends on capturing accurate transactional data from business 
processes at the first level of detail and transforming these processes into a regular 
flow of meaningful entries in an ERP solution such as Microsoft Dynamics AX. 
Application consultants should consider the reports that are required by the 
customers and certify that the required data points are captured through the 
recording process for daily transactions. Whenever possible, the application 
consultant has a responsibility to also challenge the business process owners about 
the process, as it relates to using the data to make changes to optimize the business. 
The following diagram shows the detailed transactions block:
In some projects, consultants split their attention between business process 
workshops during business requirement gathering in the analysis phase, and the 
establishment of the data structure in forms during the design phase. It is vital to 
document the business process including the start point, end point, comprehensive 
steps of the process (if needed), the data path in each step, and exceptional cases 
for each process. On the other hand, the forms are a transformation of the business 
processes into the real work activities of employees (fields, grids, buttons, multiple 
selection, and so on).
The main processes that should be addressed in a typical ERP implementation 
include banks, fixed assets, procure to pay, cash to sell, costing, and budgeting,  
with the general ledger integration for each.
Business Intelligence block
BI is the second block in the information hierarchy that uses the raw data of 
transactions to provide valuable information to different levels of the organization. 
BI adds a layer of aggregation on transactions and makes it possible to create a 
comparative analysis for key measures such as actual versus budget comparisons.
The consultant should identify the measures needed and how they will be utilized 
from the transactional level. These measures are raw numbers aggregated from specific 
fields that result from a definite process or a combination of business processes.

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 300 ]
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 is delivered with 14 cubes covering the following areas:
•	
General ledger
•	
Accounts payable
•	
Accounts receivable
•	
Sales
•	
Production
•	
Purchases
•	
Project accounting
•	
Expense management
•	
Environment sustainability
•	
Customer Relationship Management
•	
Workflow analysis
•	
Budget control
•	
Inventory valuation
•	
Retail
Measures need to be informative, not just as raw numbers, but as a source for 
analysis at the management level. The consultant should identify the analytic 
dimensions as well as the dimensions needed by the process owner to analyze 
numbers. The most common example is sales revenue, which can be analyzed by 
dimensions such as customer segmentations, geographical locations, warehouses, 
and customer demographics. The following diagram shows the BI block:
Now that we have seen the importance of the structure of reporting blocks based on 
the business processes and daily transaction data, it is worth exploring the common 
scenarios that consultants may face when the reporting requirements cannot be  
met by the data that is being captured. This missing data would lead a consultant  
to revisit the business process that includes the entry of daily transactions, and 
identify a need for the cleansing of historical data, which may lead to the loss of  
some information.

Chapter 10
[ 301 ]
Executive decisions block
The third block in the information source is the executive decision support, where 
all of the information is summarized and numbers are transformed into KPIs, 
indicators, analytic views, and dashboards. The following diagram shows the 
executive decisions block:
Executives do not have the luxury of time to drill down to all the comprehensive 
reports. They need a bird's-eye view of the overall enterprise performance to support 
them in taking critical business decisions. With the right low-level data, the ERP 
solution should be demonstrating its worth as a true decision support system that 
offers this visibility.
The conclusion is that when implementing a Microsoft Dynamics AX solution, there 
is no reliable information for executives without a solid BI platform that is based on a 
well-defined ERP. The ERP absorbs business processes, such as the daily transactions 
entered by workers with a high level of clarity.
Discovering Microsoft Dynamics AX 
reporting
The following section covers the Microsoft Dynamics AX reporting options.  
The reporting options are inquiry forms and SSRS reports.
Reporting options
Reporting in Microsoft Dynamics AX can be generated through two approaches, 
namely inquiry forms and predesigned standard reports, as shown in the  
following diagram:

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 302 ]
Inquiry forms
Inquiry forms are used for fast and easy reporting of transactions where the 
transactions are listed. Advanced filtration gives the facility to reduce the inquiry 
results to a number of specific results. If it is required that you show all the 
transactions, don't identify any filter.
As you can see in the following screenshot of the inquiry form, the advanced 
filtration and sorting capabilities can be accessed from all Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 screens by pressing Ctrl + F3:
As you can see in the next screenshot, you can save a query by clicking on the 
Modify button. Now select Save as and add new tables to a data source in the 
inquiry filtration form by right-clicking on the Tables section. The two relations  
here are as follows:
•	
1:n: This represents the relation of one-to-many
•	
n:1: This represents the relation of many-to-one

Chapter 10
[ 303 ]
Under the Range tab, we will be able to add tables that are available in the data 
source, as shown in the following screenshot:

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 304 ]
As you can see in the next screenshot, the Field column will be used for filtration, 
and the Criteria column will be used to identify values that would be the base for  
the filtration:
The inquiry will result in a standard Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 form, and you can 
use the quick information on the transaction by moving the mouse over the required 
transaction, in addition to the personalization options, as shown in the following 
screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 305 ]
After the form generation, we can use wild character filtration by pressing Ctrl + G, 
and we see something like what is shown in the next screenshot:
The wild characters used for filtration in grids are as follows:
•	
*: This character matches any character
•	
?: This is used to check the must-have character
•	
..: This specifies the “from” and “to” range
•	
!: This verifies that the grid does not have the character
•	
!A*: This verifies that the grid does not begin with the given 
character
•	
>/<: This checks for greater than and less than values
•	
,: This checks the record we are looking for and another record
•	
D: This specifies the system date
•	
T: This specifies today's date.
•	
“”: This is used to find a blank value
SSRS reports
SSRS reports are used to generate reports in the document format to be printed for 
filing, which are used as official supporting documents in the company's template 
or as external official documents. The normal advanced filtration is the base of SSRS 
report generation, and can sort report results. We can use the tables that are in the 
data source. We can also specify the fields that will be the base of the sorting and the 
available sorting option, either Ascending or Descending.

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 306 ]
For the ledger transaction list, navigate to General ledger | Reports | Transactions 
| Ledger transaction list, and something that looks like this screenshot appears:
After completing the selection criteria, click on the Select button and navigate to the 
Sorting tab to identify the report sorting, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 307 ]
On the ledger transaction form, click on the Destination button to access the Print 
destination settings. Now identify the location of report printing, that is, Print 
archive, Screen, Printer, File, or E-mail. Also select File format from the drop-down 
list, which can be Microsoft Excel, HTML, PDF, CSV, and so on, as shown in the 
next screenshot:
As you can see in the following screenshot, the generated report is based on SSRS, 
which gives more flexibility to the report layout:

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 308 ]
The report can be exported after report generation by the export function, as shown 
in this screenshot:
There are three major preferences for financial reporting that Microsoft Dynamics  
AX users should be familiar with: original transaction, original document,  
and audit trail.
The original transaction
The Transaction origin function fetches the transaction entries that are posted to  
the general ledger and their effect on the subledgers. In addition to that, this function 
can be performed to fetch any transaction entry. It is commonly used when you need 
to identify the subledger affected by that entry.
For voucher transactions, navigate to General ledger | Inquiries | Voucher 
transactions. Firstly, you will get an inquiry screen. Here, you do not have to  
give any criteria, so click on OK to see the voucher transactions, as shown in  
this screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 309 ]
The Original document function
The Original document function fetches the transaction entries posted in the general 
ledger and reaches the original document that generated those entries.
As shown in the following screenshot, the Original document function in the 
voucher transaction inquiry form gives the ability to reach the original transaction 
document regardless of whether it is a general ledger entry, sales order, purchase 
order, or anything else:

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 310 ]
Audit trail
The Audit trail function in the voucher transaction inquiry form fetches the 
transaction entries posted in the general ledger and reports. It gives the facility to 
show who posted the transaction, when, and from which document type. Here is a 
screenshot that shows the Audit trail option of Microsoft Dynamics AX:
There is a creation date and time that represents the actual date when 
the transaction was posted. However, this is not the financial posting 
date, which may be different from the creation date and time.
The main source of the transactions is transaction database. The transactions are 
replicated to cube database or database warehouse at every midnight. The report 
information is pulled out from cube DB and DB warehouse. If we are on July 1, the 
report will get information till the end of July. Assume that on July 1 a user posts  
a transaction dated on June 30. 
If we run the report again on July 1 which pulls information from cube DB,  
it will not consider the posted transaction on June 30 since it is not considered  
in the replication. It will be included with effect from the next replication,  
which will take place on July 2 at midnight.

Chapter 10
[ 311 ]
Reporting currency
Companies report their transactions in a specific currency that is known as accounting 
currency or local currency. It is normal to post transactions in a different currency, and 
this amount of money is translated to the home currency using the current exchange 
rate. This is a business need in enterprises that operate in a multinational environment. 
Each subsidiary has its local reporting currency, and at the same time, there should 
be a specific secondary reporting currency. All the transactions are translated into the 
reporting currency using the exchange rate.
To access the reporting currency, navigate to General ledger | Setup | Ledger and 
then you will see something like this:
Autoreports
The Autoreport wizard is a user-friendly tool. The end user can easily generate a 
report starting from every form in Microsoft Dynamics AX. This wizard helps the 
user to create a report based on the information in the form and save the report.

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 312 ]
In this example, we will create an autoreport for vendor details as follows:
1.	 Open the All vendors list by navigating to Accounts payable | Common | 
Vendors | All vendors, as shown in this screenshot:
2.	 Navigate to File | Print | Print... Ctrl + P, as shown in the following 
screenshot:
As you can see in the next screenshot, the Autoreport dialog box will pop up, 
and you can load a saved report or create a new report here:

Chapter 10
[ 313 ]
3.	 To create a new report, click on Modify and select New, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 The autoreport wizard will pop up. Now click on Next, as shown in this 
screenshot:

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 314 ]
5.	 Enter the report name under the Name field, and click on Next.
6.	 Select the report fields from the Available fields section using the left and 
right arrow buttons, and arrange the fields through the Selected fields 
section using the Up (b) and Down buttons. Finally, click on Next.

Chapter 10
[ 315 ]
7.	 Select the numerical fields from the Available fields section, which contains 
total values, using the left and right arrow buttons. Then arrange the fields 
through the Selected fields section using the Left and Right buttons,  
as shown in the following screenshot, and click on Next:
8.	 Specify the report template by selecting Report layout template and Table 
style template.

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 316 ]
9.	 Click on Finish to close Autoreport wizard. You should be able to run the 
report after this step.
10.	 To generate the saved report, navigate to File | Print | Print, select the 
report name, and click on Ok.
Microsoft Dynamics Management Reporter
Microsoft has introduced Microsoft Dynamics Management Reporter as a financial 
reporting tool. It gives flexibility and insights to represent an organization's financial 
situation with high-level integration with the ERP. Microsoft Dynamics Management 
Reporter 2012 empowers financial decision makers by a set of 14 default reports. 
They are delivered as out-of-the-box reports. Here is the list of these reports:
•	
12 Month Rolling Single Column Income Statement - Default
•	
12 Month Trend Income Statement - Default

Chapter 10
[ 317 ]
•	
Balance List - Default
•	
Balance Sheet - Default
•	
Cash Flow - Default
•	
Detailed Trial Balance - Default
•	
Expense Three Year Quarterly Trend - Default
•	
Income Statement - Default
•	
Ledger Transaction List - Default
•	
Ratios - Default
•	
Rolling 12 Month Expense - Default
•	
Rolling Quarter Income Statement - Default
•	
Summary Trial Balance - Default
•	
Weekly Sales and Discounts - Default
In addition to the designing tool used to build financial reports as per company 
requirements, the Management Reporter is considered the consolidation tool for 
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 where you can report the consolidated company 
financial reports from the management reports.
In Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3, users can access the Management Reporter from 
general ledger financial reports menus. For this, you have to navigate to General 
Ledger | Reports | Management Reporter, as shown in this screenshot:
 

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 318 ]
On the Report Definition screen, select the report the user wants to generate. Then 
click on Generate as shown in the following screenshot:
Microsoft Internet Explorer will open with the report. Here is a screenshot that 
represents the balance sheet as a summarized report:

Chapter 10
[ 319 ]
Microsoft Dynamics Management Reporter provides a drill-down capability to reach 
the lowest level of transaction and open the ledger entry on the Microsoft Dynamics 
AX 2012 client. In the following example, generate the Expenses Three Year 
Quarterly Trend - Default report title. When we mouse over on an amount, we can 
drill down to the details of that amount.

Exploring Financial Reporting and Analysis
[ 320 ]
In the drilled-down transactions, mouse over on the amount and click on Open in 
Microsoft Dynamics.
The Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R3 client will open with the voucher transaction 
form, as shown in the following screenshot:
In the lower pane on the report are the function buttons, as shown here:
The function buttons can be summarized as follows:
•	
The first button is Go to. This represents a shortcut to reach a specific item  
on the report.
•	
The second button is Show. This shows the report in a summarized mode,  
or detailed mode, and shows the charts and comments pane.
•	
The third button is Currency. This represents a function used to convert the 
report to the selected currency.

Chapter 10
[ 321 ]
•	
The forth button is Zoom. This presents the users with the zoom-in and 
zoom-out options for the report.
•	
The fifth button is Download. This represents the download option of the 
report, whether XPS format, Microsoft Office Excel, or Microsoft Dynamics 
Management Reporter Viewer.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered financial reporting from planning to consideration of 
reporting levels, where we ensured to gather the reporting requirements in the early 
stages of the implementation, and considered the differences of reporting in the 
different managerial levels.
We covered important points that affect reporting quality by considering the reporting 
value chain, which consists of infrastructure, database management, business 
processes, business intelligence, and the frontend. We also discussed the information 
source blocks, which consist of the detailed transactions block, business intelligence 
block, and executive decisions block.
Then we learned about the reporting possibilities in Microsoft Dynamics AX such as 
inquiry forms and SSRS reports, autoreport capabilities in Microsoft Dynamics AX 
2012 R3, and Microsoft Dynamics Management Reporter.


Index
A
accounting currency  311
accounts payable controls
about  121
invoice matching  125-129
invoice matching controls  125
invoice number  137
posting profile  138, 139
price tolerance  129-136
vendor hold activities  121-124
Accounts payable module
about  228-233
integrating, with other modules  103-105
accounts payable transactions
about  139
invoicing  139
payment  140
prepayment invoice  147-159
purchase order invoice  140-147
vendor settlement  160
vendor settlement, in Microsoft  
Dynamics AX  161
Accounts receivable controls
about  181
customer credit limit management  182-191
customer hold activities  181
Accounts receivable module  
about  163, 228, 234-237
integrating, with other modules  163-168
Accounts receivable transactions
customer settlement  202, 203
free text correction  199-202
free text invoice  198, 199
invoicing  191
payment  192
sales order invoice  192-198
account structure  51
advanced rules structure
about  278
creating  279, 280
application consultant
about  7
key skills  8
Audit trail function, SSRS reports  310
Autoreport
about  311
creating  312-316
B
balance accounts
about  36
assets  36
equity  36
liabilities  36
bank
and cash, integration  73, 74
bank account reconciliation  82-89
Bank documents posting  90
Bank facility
agreements  90
letter of guarantee  90-101
bill of material (BOM)  256
budget module  229, 238
business costing model  246
Business Intelligence  298
Business Intelligence block  299, 300
business processes  297

[ 324 ]
C
cash and bank management
about  164
bank account reconciliation  82-89
bank facility, letter of guarantee  90-101
controlling  74, 75
credit limit  75, 76
date activation  77, 78
exploring  82
general ledger reconciliation  80
status activation  78, 79
transaction currency  80, 81
cash discount
about  118-121, 177-179
Invoice and delivery fast tab  180
Invoice field group  180
Sales tax field group  180
cash flow
budgeting  229
customer collections management  228
forecast  229
general ledger  229
integrating, with other modules  228, 229
vendor expenditure management  228
cash flow forecast, configuration
about  229
Accounts payable module  230-233
Accounts receivable module  234-237
budget module  238
by currency requirement  241-243
general ledger  238, 239
cash flow, transactions
about  239
cash flow forecast, by currency  
requirement  241-243
main account cash flow forecast  244
purchase order cash flow forecast  240, 241
chart of accounts. See  COA
Check the invoice number used field
Accept duplicates option  138
Reject duplicate option  138
Reject duplicates within fiscal year  
option  138
Warn in case of duplicates option  138
Chief Information Officer (CIO)  296
closing procedure
about  68-71
Finance department  69
Human resources department  69
Procurement department  69
Sales department  69
COA
about  33, 34, 51
main account categories  39
main accounts, classifying  34, 35
main accounts, controlling  40
nontransactional accounts, using  37
transactional accounts, using  36
configuration, inventory costing
about  247
Item groups  251, 252
Item model group  247-249
Product dimension groups  250
Storage dimension groups  250
Tracking dimension groups  251
configuration process  16
constant fields  209
controls, cash and bank management
credit limit  75
date activation  75
general ledger reconciliation  75
status activation  75
transaction currency  75
cost of goods sold (COGS)  166, 246, 259
credit limit  75, 76
currencies  51
Currency code validation option
list  48
optional  47
table  48
to be filled in  47
customer collections management, cash flow
accounts receivable  228
sales and marketing  228
customer credit limit management  182-191
customer hold activities  181
customer master data, characteristics
cash discount  177-179
customer price/discount groups  170-172
exploring  168, 169
payment methods  175
Sales order defaults fast tab  170

[ 325 ]
customer payment  167
customer price/discount groups
about  170-172
Payment fast tab  173
Terms of payment field  174, 175
customer settlement  202, 203
D
daily transactions
account alias  64
performing  63
recurring entries  65, 66
voucher, saving  67, 68
database management  297
Data Import Export Framework (DIXF)  60
date activation  77, 78
Debit/Credit Controls group
about  40
Balance Control  43, 44
Debit/Credit Proposal  41
Debit/Credit Requirements  42
decision making, ERP reporting
semi-structured  15
structured  15
unstructured  15
deferred cost of goods sold  
(deferred COGS)  259
depreciation method  208
depreciation profile  207
detailed transactions block  299
discount group, vendor master data
about  111, 112, 170
line discount group  112
multi line discount group  112
price group  112
total discount group  112
dynamic fields  209
E
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
about  5, 33
application consultant  7, 8
characteristics  6
common terms  16
consultant, responsibilities  7, 8
implementation team, discovering  6, 7
module integration  10
reporting  13
reporting needs, planning for  293, 294
ERP implementations, terms
configuration  16
customization  17
installation  16
modification  17
personalization  16
setup  16
ERP implementation intentions, samples
business process  9
controlling  9
decision support  10
Excel Power View  295
exchange rate type  51
executive decisions block  301
F
fields, bank reconciliation
Matched bank documents  88
Matched statement lines  88
Open bank documents  88
Open statement lines  88
finance controllership department
about  68
Human resources department  69
Finance department  69
financial dimension reporting
about  285
financial dimension sets  285-292
financial dimensions
about  265, 266
chart structure, building  267, 268
considerations  266
report filtration, parameters  289, 290
system-defined dimension  272
user-defined dimension  272
financial dimension sets
about  285
accessing  286-292
financial dimensions, standpoints
data entry controls and validations  267
reporting and analysis  267
subledger and general ledger  
reconciliation  267

[ 326 ]
financial management
about  59
closing procedure  68
opening balances  59
financial update, inventory costing  254
fiscal year  51
fixed asset group  212
fixed assets  213-215
fixed assets integration
defining, with modules  205, 206
fixed assets master data, characteristics
constant fields  209
depreciation method  208
depreciation profile  207
dynamic fields  209
exploring  207
fixed asset group  212
fixed assets  213-215
value model  210, 211
fixed assets transactions
exploring  216-224
fixed dimension  281, 282
free text invoice  198, 199
free text invoice correction  199-202
frontend  298
FSB Development
URL  254
G
general fast tab, vendor master data  108, 109
general ledger
about  229, 238, 239
reconciliation  80
H
Human resources department  69
I
Income statement report components  36
information source blocks, Microsoft  
Dynamics AX
about  298
Business Intelligence block  299, 300
detailed transactions block  299
executive decisions block  301
information technology value chain
about  296
Business Intelligence  298
business processes  297
database management  297
frontend  298
infrastructure  296, 297
infrastructure  296, 297
inquiry forms  302-305
installation process  16
integration points, Accounts  
receivable module
cash and bank management  164
Inventory and Warehousing module  164
sales and marketing module  164
Inventory and Warehousing module  164
inventory closing  255
inventory costing
configuring  247
exploring  253
inventory costing, valuation methods
financial update  254
physical update  254
inventory marking
working with  256-258
inventory recalculation  255
inventory reconciliation
about  258
inventory value report, generating  262, 263
inventory value report, setting up  259-261
inventory value report
generating  262, 263
setting up  259-261
Invoice and delivery fast tab, cash  
discount  180
invoice and delivery fast tab, vendor  
master data  109
Invoice field group, cash discount  180
invoice field group, vendor master data  110
invoice matching, accounts payable controls
about  125-128
controls  125
three-way matching  125
two-way matching  125
invoice number, accounts payable  
controls  137, 138
Check the invoice number used field  138

[ 327 ]
invoicing  191
invoicing, accounts payable transactions
about  139
nonpurchase order invoices  139
purchase order related invoices  139
Item groups, inventory costing  
configuration  251, 252
Item model group, inventory costing  
configuration  247-249
J
journal posting
about  284
journal approvals  285
journal name, blocking  284
journal posting controls  284
K
key skills, application consultant
Business Side  8
Soft Skills  8
Technical Side  8
key users  6
L
LCS
about  19
assortment of services  19
life cycle, Order to Cash  164
Lifecycle Services. See  LCS
list page, Microsoft Dynamics AX  
workspace
action pane  30
filter pane  30
grid checkboxes  31
local currency  311
Lot ID  256
M
main account administration
about  44
Activation dates group  46
Do not allow manual entry group  44
suspending account  46, 47
main account cash flow forecast  244
main accounts
account administration  44
controlling  40
Debit/Credit Controls group  40
posting validation  47
Microsoft Dynamics AX
Autoreport wizard  311-316
information source blocks  298
posting types  15
reporting currency  311
reporting levels  295
reporting options  301
user interface  19
Microsoft Dynamics AX workspace
address bar  20-22
content pane  29
diagrammatic representation  20
fact box  31
fast tab  32
Favorites menu  24, 25
jewel menu  22, 23
list page  30
Navigation Pane option  26, 27
preview pane  31
Status bar option  27, 28
Microsoft Dynamics Lifecycle Services
exploring  19
Microsoft Dynamics Management Reporter
about  295, 316-321
Middle Management  295
Operational Management  295
Top Management  295
Microsoft Dynamics Sure Step methodology
exploring  17, 18
key characteristics  18
Middle Management  295
models, reporting
reports, pulling  294
reports, pushing  294
modification  17
module integration, ERP
about  10, 11
accounts payable  11
accounts receivable  12
Order to Cash cycle  12
Procure to Pay cycle  11

[ 328 ]
modules
fixed assets integration, defining  
with  205, 206
N
nontransactional accounts
about  37
Reporting  38
Totals  38
O
On hold options  122
Online Transactional Processing  
(OLTP)  297
opening balances
about  59
best practices of uploading  60
designing phase  61
elements  59
executing  61-63
planning phase  61
subledger  59
trial balance report  59
validation  63
validation and reconciliation  59
Operational Management  295
options, status activation
Active for all transactions  79
Inactive for all transactions  79
Inactive for new transactions  79
Order to Cash cycle
about  13, 164
collection  13
invoice  13
packing slip  13
settlement  13
organizational reporting levels
about  14
Middle Management  14
Operational Management  14
Senior Management  14
Original document function, SSRS  
reports  309
original transaction, SSRS reports  308
P
payment  192
payment, accounts payable transactions  140
payment fast tab, customer price or  
discount groups  173
payment fast tab, vendor master data  114
payment methods
about  116, 175
payment schedule  176
payment specification  176
payment schedule  117, 176
payment specification  176
PerformancePoint Services  295
personalization  16
physical update, inventory costing  254
posting profile
about  139, 223, 282
accessing  283
levels  282
posting types
journal posting  16, 282
profile posting  15, 282
posting validation
currency control  47, 48
Posting type validation  50
user control  48, 49
using  47
prepayment invoice, accounts payable  
transactions  147-159
price tolerance, accounts payable  
controls  129-136
Procurement department  69
Procure to Pay cycle
about  11
invoice  12
payment  12
product receipt  11
settlement  12
Product dimension groups, inventory  
costing configuration  250
profit and loss accounts  36, 37
Project Management Institute (PMI)  18
purchase order approval statuses,  
Accounts payable module
Approved  106
Confirmed  106

[ 329 ]
Draft  106
Finalized  106
In review  106
Rejected  106
purchase order document statuses,  
Accounts payable module
Invoice  106
None  106
Product Receipt  106
Purchase Order  106
Receipt List  106
purchase order invoice, accounts payable 
transactions  107, 140-147
purchase order (PO)  240, 241
purchase order statuses, Accounts  
payable module
Canceled  106
Invoiced  106
Open Order  105
Received  105
purchase order types, Accounts  
payable module
Journal  105
Purchase agreement  105
Purchase order  105
Returned order  105
purchasing demographics fast tab,  
vendor master data  109
R
reporting accounts  35
reporting currency
accessing  311
reporting, ERP
decision making  15
exploring  13
models  294
organizational reporting levels  14
scope of information  14
reporting levels, Microsoft  
Dynamics AX  295
reporting options, Microsoft Dynamics AX
about  301
inquiry forms  302-305
SSRS reports  305-308
Returned Material Authorization  
(RMA)  166
S
sales and marketing module  164
Sales department  69
Sales order defaults fast tab
about  170
Discount field group  170
sales order document statuses
Confirmation  166
Invoice  166
None  166
Packing Slip  166
Picking List  166
sales order invoice  191-198
sales order statuses
Canceled  166
Delivered  166
Invoiced  166
Open Order  166
sales order types
item requirements  166
journal  165
returned order  166
sales agreement  166
sales order  165
subscription  165
Sales Quotation statuses
Canceled  165
Confirmed  165
Created  165
Lost  165
Sent  165
Sales tax field group, cash discount
about  180
Price include sales tax field  180
Sales tax group section  180
Tax exempt number field  181
sales tax field group, vendor master data
about  110
Price include sales tax field  110
Sales tax group field  110
Tax exempt number field  110

[ 330 ]
sales tax mechanism
exploring  52
item sales tax group, creating  56
period settlement, creating  54
price excludes sales tax rule  57
price includes sales tax rule  57
sales tax, applying  56
sales tax authority, creating  53
sales tax code, creating  55
sales tax group, creating  56
sales tax percentage, identifying  55
sales tax posting group, creating  54
withholding tax  58
scope of information, ERP reporting
broad, interactive, and general  15
focused, specific, and scheduled  15
narrow, specified, and detailed  14
segmented ledger account
about  269
account structure, configuring  275-278
financial dimensions, creating  271-274
financial dimensions entry  270
service invoice  107
setup process  16
shared financial data  51, 52
SQL Server Business Intelligence  297
SQL Server Reporting Services (SSRS)  297
SSAS  295
SSRS reports
about  305-308
Audit trail function  310
Original document function  309
Transaction origin function  308
status activation  78, 79
Storage dimension groups, inventory  
costing configuration  250
Subject Matter Experts (SMEs)  6
subledger  59
system-defined dimension  272
T
Terms of payment field  115, 116, 174, 175
Top Management  295
Tracking dimension groups, inventory  
costing configuration  251
transactional accounts
about  35
balance accounts  36
profit and loss accounts  36
using  36
transaction currency  80, 81
trial balance report  59
U
user-defined dimension  272
V
Value Added Reseller (VAR)  6
value model  210, 211
vendor expenditure management, cash flow
accounts payable  228
procurement and sourcing  228
vendor hold activities, accounts payable 
controls  121-124
vendor invoice  107, 126
vendor master data
about  108
cash discount field  118-121
discount field group  111
general fast tab  108, 109
invoice and delivery fast tab  109
invoice field group  110
payment fast tab  114
payment method  116
payment schedule  117, 118
purchasing demographics fast tab  109
sales tax field group  110
terms of payment field  115, 116
vendor price/discount groups  112-114
withholding tax field group  111
vendor price. See  discount group,  
vendor master data
vendor settlement, accounts payable  
transactions
about  160
in Microsoft Dynamics AX  161
vendor transaction
On hold options  122

[ 331 ]
W
withholding tax
about  58, 111
price excludes sales tax rule  58
price includes sales tax rule  58
work in progress (WIP)  259

