
Microsoft Visio 2016 Step by Step
Scott A. Helmers

PUBLISHED BY
Microsoft Press
A division of Microsoft Corporation
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, Washington 98052-6399
Copyright © 2015 by Scott A. Helmers
All rights reserved. No part of the contents of this book may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means without the written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015936021
ISBN: 978-0-7356-9780-5
Printed and bound in the United States of America.
First Printing
Microsoft Press books are available through booksellers and distributors worldwide. If
you need support related to this book, email Microsoft Press Support at
mspinput@microsoft.com. Please tell us what you think of this book at
http://aka.ms/tellpress.
This book is provided “as-is” and expresses the author’s views and opinions. The views,
opinions, and information expressed in this book, including URL and other Internet
website references, may change without notice.
Some examples depicted herein are provided for illustration only and are fictitious. No
real association or connection is intended or should be inferred.
Microsoft and the trademarks listed at www.microsoft.com on the “Trademarks” webpage
are trademarks of the Microsoft group of companies. All other marks are property of their
respective owners.
Acquisitions and Developmental Editor: Rosemary Caperton
Editorial Production: Online Training Solutions, Inc. (OTSI)
Technical Reviewer: John Marshall
Copyeditor: Jaime Odell (OTSI)
Indexer: Susie Carr (OTSI)
Cover: Twist Creative • Seattle

Contents
Introduction
Who this book is for
The Step by Step approach
Sidebar: Adapt procedure steps
Download the practice files
Ebook edition
Get support and give feedback
Errata and support
We want to hear from you
Stay in touch
Part 1: Create Visio diagrams
1 Get started with Visio 2016
Identify the editions of Visio 2016
Discover new features in Visio 2016
Get started in Visio 2016
Sidebar: Understand shapes, masters, stencils, and templates
Explore the Backstage view
The Info page
The New page
The Open page
The Save command
The Save As page
The Print page
The Share page
The Export page
The Close command
The Account page
The Visio Options dialog box
Understand tool tabs and add-in tabs
Use tool tabs

Use add-in tabs
Begin quickly by using starter diagrams
Explore the drawing window
Sidebar: How do I scroll through page name tabs?
Manage the Shapes window
Pan and zoom in the drawing window
Skills review
Practice tasks
2 Create diagrams
Place shapes by using the Dynamic Grid
Select shapes
Copy, paste, and duplicate shapes
Position shapes by using rulers and guides
Use rulers to align and size shapes
Use guides to align and size shapes
Resize, reposition, and reorient shapes
Use control handles
Use the Size & Position window
Connect shapes by using lines
Sidebar: Create 2-D shapes by using the line tools
Connect shapes by using dynamic connectors
Connect to shapes that contain connection points
Connect to shapes that do not contain connection points
Change connector style and segmentation
Sidebar: Identifying 1-D shapes and types of glue
Use AutoConnect and Quick Shapes
Use AutoAdd and AutoDelete
Use AutoAdd
Use AutoDelete
Skills review
Practice tasks
3 Manage text, shapes, and pages

Manage shape text
Add text to shapes
Reposition and resize shape text
Orient shape text
Create and format text boxes
Add ScreenTips and comments
Insert pictures
Replace shapes
Group shapes
Understand and use layers
Manage pages
Work with foreground pages
Configure foreground pages
Manage Auto Size
Work with background pages and borders
Skills review
Practice tasks
4 Create business process diagrams
Select a flowchart template
Visio Standard
Visio Professional
Sidebar: Vertical or horizontal?
Create flowcharts
Sidebar: Dynamic or static glue?
Understand swimlane diagrams
Sidebar: Add-in tabs
Build swimlane diagrams
Understand BPMN
Design BPMN diagrams
Create subprocesses
Skills review
Practice tasks

5 Create organization charts
Understand organization charts
Review new features
Use org chart templates
Build organization charts manually
Use existing data to create an organization chart
Use the Organization Chart Wizard with new data
Alter layout and appearance
Change the layout
Arrange shapes
Change shape appearance
Sidebar: The names keep changing!
Work with pictures
Apply themes
Import photographs as you create organization charts
Skills review
Practice tasks
6 Add style, color, and themes
Align and space shapes
Align shapes
Sidebar: What’s in front?
Space and orient shapes
Align and space shapes automatically
Understand theme concepts
Sidebar: Hand-drawn themes
Apply themes and variants
Choose themes and variants
Customize themes and variants
Use effects and Quick Styles
Highlight shapes by using effects
Embellish shapes by using Quick Styles
Apply solid, gradient, and pattern fills

Apply line colors and patterns
Use the Format Painter
Skills review
Practice tasks
7 Create network and datacenter diagrams
Build basic network diagrams
Build detailed network diagrams
Use 3-D equipment shapes
Sidebar: Where can I find more network shapes?
Create rack diagrams
Sidebar: What is a scaled drawing?
Change the drawing scale
Sidebar: Enhance your network diagrams
Run computer and network reports
Skills review
Practice tasks
Part 2: Add data to your diagrams
8 Work with shape data
Understand shape data
View shape data
Sidebar: Another way to view shape data
Sidebar: Finding the Shape Data window
Edit shape data
Modify shape data field attributes
View shape data field attributes
Change shape data field attributes
Define shape data fields
Insert fields
Run predefined reports
Create or modify reports
Skills review
Practice tasks

9 Visualize your data
Enhance diagram effectiveness
View network and datacenter performance
Improve processes
Manage casino operations
Manage employee performance
Assess risks
Create data graphics
Apply data graphics
Edit data graphics
Create data graphic legends
Skills review
Practice tasks
10 Link to external data
Understand data linking
Use Quick Import
Use Custom Import
Link your diagram to data
Link data to your shapes
Manage linked data
Identify links
Change column settings
Unlink data from shapes and diagrams
Use data graphic options for linked data
Refresh linked data
Skills review
Practice tasks
Part 3: Enhance and share diagrams
11 Add and use hyperlinks
Follow hyperlinks
Enhance diagrams by adding hyperlinks
Open the Hyperlinks dialog box

Link to another Visio page
Sidebar: What is a shape name? Where do I find it?
Link to a website
Link to a document
Link to a specific location in a document
Edit and delete existing hyperlinks
Add multiple hyperlinks
Understand relative and absolute hyperlinks
Set the hyperlink base
Skills review
Practice tasks
12 Print, reuse, and share diagrams
Preview and print drawings
Remove personal information
Sidebar: What is Information Rights Management?
Create graphics
Save drawings in other file formats
Create templates
Sidebar: Where do I store custom templates?
Share diagrams by using the Visio Viewer
Publish diagrams to the web
View web-published diagrams
Set publishing options
Sidebar: What’s in a Visio-generated website and where is it stored?
Skills review
Practice tasks
13 Add structure to your diagrams
Understand containers, lists, and callouts
Compare groups and containers
Organize shapes by using containers
Use containers
Format containers

Sidebar: On the border
Organize shapes by using lists
Add shapes to lists
Format and size lists
Find containers and lists in Visio
Explore swimlanes
Build wireframes
Insert data graphic legends
Annotate shapes by using callouts
Skills review
Practice tasks
14 Validate diagrams
Understand Visio rules
Validate flowcharts and swimlane diagrams
Validate flowcharts
Validate swimlane diagrams
Validate BPMN diagrams
Reuse existing validation rule sets
List the rules in a rule set
Create new validation rules
Skills review
Practice tasks
15 Collaborate and publish diagrams
Understand Visio Services in SharePoint
Store diagrams in SharePoint
View diagrams by using a web browser
Refresh diagrams saved in SharePoint
Collaborate on diagrams
Comment on diagrams
Coauthor diagrams
Skills review
Practice tasks

Appendix A: Look behind the curtain
Appendix B: Keyboard shortcuts for Visio
Glossary
Index
About the author
 Give us feedback
Tell us what you think of this book and help Microsoft improve our products for
you. Thank you! http://aka.ms/tellpress

Introduction
Welcome! This Step by Step book has been designed so you can read it from the beginning
to learn about Microsoft Visio 2016 and then build your skills as you learn to perform
increasingly specialized procedures. Or, if you prefer, you can jump in wherever you need
ready guidance for performing tasks. The how-to steps are delivered crisply and concisely
—just the facts. You’ll also find informative, full-color graphics that support the
instructional content.
Who this book is for
Microsoft Visio 2016 Step by Step is designed for use as a learning and reference resource
by home and business users of Microsoft Office programs who want to use Visio to create
a variety of diagrams for business and personal use. The content of the book is designed to
be useful for people who have previously used earlier versions of Visio and for people
who are discovering Visio for the first time.
The Step by Step approach
The book’s coverage is divided into parts representing general Visio skill sets. Each part is
divided into chapters representing skill set areas, and each chapter is divided into topics
that group related skills. Each topic includes expository information followed by generic
procedures. At the end of the chapter, you’ll find a series of practice tasks you can
complete on your own by using the skills taught in the chapter. You can use the practice
files that are available from this book’s website to work through the practice tasks, or you
can use your own files.
Adapt procedure steps
This book contains many images of user interface elements (such as the ribbon and
the app windows) that you’ll work with while performing tasks in Visio on a
Windows computer. Depending on your screen resolution or app window width, the
Visio ribbon on your screen might look different from that shown in this book. (If
you turn on Touch mode, the ribbon displays significantly fewer commands than in
Mouse mode.) As a result, procedural instructions that involve the ribbon might
require a little adaptation.
Simple procedural instructions use this format:
1. On the Insert tab, in the Illustrations group, click the Pictures button.
If the command is in a list, our instructions use this format:
1. On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Layers arrow and then, in the
Layers list, click Layer Properties.
If differences between your display settings and ours cause a button to appear
differently on your screen than it does in this book, you can easily adapt the steps to
locate the command. First click the specified tab, and then locate the specified
group. If a group has been collapsed into a group list or under a group button, click

the list or button to display the group’s commands. If you can’t immediately
identify the button you want, point to likely candidates to display their names in
ScreenTips.
Multistep procedural instructions use this format:
1. Display the Backstage view.
2. In the left pane of the Backstage view, click New.
3. On the New page, click Categories, click the Business thumbnail, and then
double-click the Organization Chart template.
On subsequent instances of instructions that require you to follow the same process,
the instructions might be simplified in this format because the working location has
already been established:
1. On the New page of the Backstage view, click Categories, click the Business
thumbnail, and then double-click the Organization Chart template.
The instructions in this book assume that you’re interacting with on-screen
elements on your computer by clicking (with a mouse, touchpad, or other hardware
device). If you’re using a different method—for example, if your computer has a
touchscreen interface and you’re tapping the screen (with your finger or a stylus)—
substitute the applicable tapping action when you interact with a user interface
element.
Instructions in this book refer to Visio user interface elements that you click or tap
on the screen as buttons, and to physical buttons that you press on a keyboard as
keys, to conform to the standard terminology used in documentation for these
products.
When the instructions tell you to enter information, you can do so by typing on an
external keyboard, tapping an on-screen keyboard, or even speaking aloud,
depending on your computer setup and your personal preferences.
Download the practice files
Before you can complete the practice tasks in this book, you need to download the book’s
practice files to your computer from http://aka.ms/Visio2016sbs/downloads. Follow the
instructions on the webpage.
 Important
Visio 2016 is not available from the book’s website. You should install that app
before working through the procedures and practice tasks in this book.
You can open the files that are supplied for the practice tasks and save the finished
versions of each file. If you later want to repeat practice tasks, you can download the
original practice files again.

The following table lists the practice files for this book.


Ebook edition
If you’re reading the ebook edition of this book, you can do the following:
 Search the full text
 Print
 Copy and paste
You can purchase and download the ebook edition from the Microsoft Press Store at
http://aka.ms/Visio2016sbs/details.
Get support and give feedback
This topic provides information about getting help with this book and contacting us to
provide feedback or report errors.

Errata and support
We’ve made every effort to ensure the accuracy of this book and its companion content. If
you discover an error, please submit it to us at http://aka.ms/Visio2016sbs/errata.
If you need to contact the Microsoft Press Support team, please send an email message to
mspinput@microsoft.com.
For help with Microsoft software and hardware, go to http://support.microsoft.com.
We want to hear from you
At Microsoft Press, your satisfaction is our top priority, and your feedback our most
valuable asset. Please tell us what you think of this book at http://aka.ms/tellpress.
The survey is short, and we read every one of your comments and ideas. Thanks in
advance for your input!
Stay in touch
Let’s keep the conversation going! We’re on Twitter at http://twitter.com/MicrosoftPress.

Part 1: Create Visio diagrams
CHAPTER 1 Get started with Visio 2016
CHAPTER 2 Create diagrams
CHAPTER 3 Manage text, shapes, and pages
CHAPTER 4 Create business process diagrams
CHAPTER 5 Create organization charts
CHAPTER 6 Add style, color, and themes
CHAPTER 7 Create network and datacenter diagrams

1. Get started with Visio 2016
In this chapter
 Identify the editions of Visio 2016
 Discover new features in Visio 2016
 Get started in Visio 2016
 Explore the Backstage view
 Understand tool tabs and add-in tabs
 Begin quickly by using starter diagrams
 Explore the drawing window
 Manage the Shapes window
 Pan and zoom in the drawing window
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch01 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
Microsoft Visio is the premiere application for creating business diagrams of all types,
ranging from flowcharts, process maps and organization charts, to datacenter layouts, floor
plans, and brainstorming diagrams.
Much more than just a diagramming app, Visio makes it easy to connect diagrams to live
data sources, and then publish the results to Microsoft SharePoint to create near-real-time
dashboards. On top of all that, you can use Visio to create a pattern for a quilt or to design
a new kitchen for your house!
Visio 2016 includes many new features, including one that eliminates the curse of the
blank page when you’re starting a new diagram. Between that feature and the techniques
you will discover in this chapter, you’ll be off to a running start with Visio.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to getting started in Visio 2016,
exploring the Backstage view, beginning quickly by using starter diagrams, exploring the
drawing window, managing the Shapes window, and panning and zooming in the drawing
window.
Identify the editions of Visio 2016
Visio 2016 is available in three editions. The first two editions use the traditional desktop
purchase and installation model and mirror the two editions that were offered in most prior
Visio releases. The third edition is part of the Microsoft Office 365 suite of subscription-
based applications.
 Visio Standard 2016 This is the starter edition of Visio. It provides significant
capability for creating business diagrams and includes 26 templates that are divided
into six categories.

 Visio Professional 2016 This edition expands on the Standard edition by offering
more than four dozen additional templates, for a total of 76 across eight categories.
In addition, Visio Pro offers the ability to link diagrams to a wide variety of data
sources, and includes a diagram validation capability that is especially well suited
for the expanded set of business process diagrams it supports.
 Visio Pro for Office 365 This edition of Visio provides the identical features and
templates as Visio Professional 2016. The key differences in this edition are in
packaging and delivery. As part of Office 365, there is no up-front license fee.
Instead, you pay a monthly subscription fee and can install the software on up to five
computers.
Discover new features in Visio 2016
Visio 2016 is sleek-looking, colorful, connected, portable, collaborative, and helps protect
your document content.
The following list describes key new capabilities of Visio 2016:
 Starter diagrams Creating a diagram from a blank page can be daunting, especially
if you’re working with a new diagram type. Visio 2016 helps you get started more
quickly by providing dozens of starter diagrams.
 See Also
For more information about starter diagrams, see “Begin quickly by using starter
diagrams” later in this chapter.
 Modernized shapes Dozens of Visio shapes received makeovers for Visio 2016.
The updated shapes look modern, as shown in the comparison of Visio 2013
furniture shapes, on the left in Figure 1-1, with the equivalent shapes from Visio
2016 on the right. In addition to changes in appearance, some new shapes exhibit
smart behavior. For example, if you increase the length or width of the Visio 2016
table in Figure 1-1, additional chairs appear!
Figure 1-1 Many Visio 2016 shapes have a fresh, new look
You will find updated masters in stencils associated with templates for office
layouts, site plans, floor plans, home plans, and electrical diagrams.
 Tell Me The Microsoft Office Tell Me feature makes finding any one of the 800
commands in Visio as easy as entering a word or phrase. Tell Visio what you want to

do, and it responds with a list of executable commands.
Some commands in the response list might be dimmed (unavailable) because the
Tell Me feature is context-aware. For example, if you start entering the word
container when a container is not selected, most commands are unavailable, as
shown on the left in Figure 1-2. However, if a container is selected, additional
commands are available, as shown on the right.
Figure 1-2 Tell Me provides instant access to relevant commands
 Information Rights Management (IRM) In Visio 2016, you can assign access
rights so only authorized people can read or modify your diagram.
 See Also
For more information about IRM, see the sidebar “What is Information Rights
Management?” in Chapter 12, “Print, reuse, and share diagrams.”
 High-resolution device support All buttons, menus, and features of Visio 2016
now operate properly on high-resolution displays like the Microsoft Surface.
 Support for standards Three types of diagrams included with Visio Professional
2016 have been updated to comply with the latest versions of the relevant
international standards.
• The Basic Electrical template in the Engineering template group complies with
standards from the Institute for Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE).
• The BPMN Diagram template (available only in Visio Professional) in the
Flowchart template group conforms to Business Process Model and Notation
(BPMN) 2.0.
 See Also
For more information about BPMN, see Chapter 4, “Create business process
diagrams.”
• The six UML templates in the Software and Database template group comply with
Unified Modeling Language (UML) 2.4.
 Quick Import The new Quick Import wizard (available only in Visio Professional)

links a diagram to external data, links data to individual shapes, and then applies a
data graphic to each shape—all in a single, seamless operation.
 See Also
For more information about Quick Import, see Chapter 10, “Link to external data.”
Get started in Visio 2016
The Visio Start screen is shown in Figure 1-3. In addition to a list of recently opened
diagrams, the Start screen displays thumbnails of available templates.
Figure 1-3 Featured templates appear by default, but you can view template categories
 Tip
The New page of the Backstage view, which is shown in Figure 1-12 in the
following topic, presents the same template options as the Start screen. When you
first start Visio, you can create a diagram from the Start screen. If Visio is already
running, you can create one from the New page.

 Important
The Start screen always displays featured templates first. It’s easy to overlook the
Categories button that presents a more traditional view of templates organized into
logical groups.
Understand shapes, masters, stencils, and templates
Before you explore the rest of Visio, it’s helpful to understand a number of
commonly used terms:
 Shape An object on a Visio drawing page.
A shape can be very simple, such as a line, a polygon, or an image. A shape can
also be a sophisticated object that changes appearance or behavior as data values
change, as its position on the page changes, or as properties of another shape
change—the possibilities are endless.
Usually, you create shapes by dragging a master from a stencil to the drawing
page; however, you can create shapes in other ways. You will learn more about
shapes in Chapter 2, “Create diagrams,” and throughout this book.
 Master An object in a Visio stencil.
Most people who create diagrams by using Visio use either the masters that ship
with Visio or masters that they download from the Internet. You can also create
your own masters, and you’ll find enough information to get started in Appendix
A, “Look behind the curtain.”
 Stencil A collection of masters.
Visio includes both metric and US unit versions of more than two hundred
stencils. Each stencil contains several, or several dozen, related masters.
Examples include stencils named Furniture, Transportation Shapes, Workflow
Shapes, Network Locations, and Timeline Shapes. Appendix A, “Look behind
the curtain,” describes how to create a custom stencil.
 Template A Visio document that includes one or more drawing pages with
preset dimensions and measurement units.
A template generally contains one or more stencils, and it might include
background pages, themes, shapes, or text. A template can include special
software that only operates in that template.
 Workspace A collection of Visio windows and window settings.
At minimum, the workspace consists of the drawing window and the zoom
settings for the pages in the drawing. Frequently, it includes a Shapes window
containing one or more stencils. The workspace can also include the Shape
Data, Size & Position, and Pan & Zoom windows, in addition to template-
specific windows.

Unless you change the default action, Visio saves the on-screen workspace
whenever you save a document. Consequently, the next time you open the
document, Visio restores the workspace.
Tip
Despite the distinction made in this list between a master and a shape, many people
refer to an object in a stencil as a shape. Indeed, when you think about it, the
window that displays stencils is called the Shapes window! Consequently, unless
the distinction is important in a specific context, the text in this book will usually
refer to objects in stencils and on the drawing page the same way—as shapes.
To begin a diagram based on an existing template, you can do any of the following:
 Search online for templates by entering keywords or by clicking any word in the
Suggested Searches list.
 Important
Searching with a keyword will not produce the same result as selecting a template
category that matches the keyword. For example, clicking the Flowchart search
term yields some of the same templates that you find in the template category
named Flowchart. However, it also returns a list of several—or several hundred—
templates that is likely to include both Visio templates and templates for other apps
in the Office suite.
 Use a template in the Featured section. The presentation of thumbnails in this
section is dynamic: the templates you use most frequently rise to the top.
 Tip
The Blank Drawing template shown in Figure 1-3 opens the drawing page but does
not open any stencils.
 Use the Categories view to locate templates that are organized into groups. Visio
Standard displays six categories: Business, Flowchart, General, Maps and Floor
Plans, Network, and Schedule. Visio Professional adds two categories: Engineering,
and Software and Database.
At the end of the template categories list is an additional entry called New From Existing,
as shown in Figure 1-4. When you click this thumbnail, you can select any existing Visio
diagram. Visio then opens a copy of the diagram as a new document and leaves the
original untouched.

Figure 1-4 The New From Existing button helps protect your diagram
Clicking any template category displays thumbnails for the templates in that category.
Figure 1-5 shows several of the templates in the Maps And Floor Plans category.
Figure 1-5 Sample template thumbnails
If you click once on a diagram thumbnail, Visio displays information about that template,
as shown in Figure 1-6. If you double-click a diagram thumbnail, Visio launches a new
diagram.

Figure 1-6 The template information panel includes a description of the template
 Important
Many Visio templates include starter diagrams that provide additional options for
creating diagrams. See “Begin quickly by using starter diagrams” later in this
chapter for more information.
 Tip
When you create a new diagram, Visio names it Drawingn, where n is a sequence
number that is incremented for each new drawing created within one Visio session.
Closing and restarting Visio always resets the sequence number to 1.
Visio templates are provided in two sets of measurement units:
 Metric Metric drawings are based on paper sizes specified by the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO); the default size is usually A4. Metric
templates also include other ISO drawing and paper sizes. All measurements are in
millimeters or other metric measurement units.
 US Units Diagrams created with US Units use the 8.5-by-11-inch, letter-sized paper
that is common in the United States and parts of Canada and Mexico. Templates
created for US Units also include additional drawing and paper sizes that are
common in those countries/regions. The default measurement units are inches and
feet.
Depending on your system configuration, you might be offered a choice between the two,
as shown in Figure 1-6.

 See Also
Microsoft provides a Quick Start guide for Visio 2013 (and other Office 2013 apps)
at office.microsoft.com/en-us/support/office-2013-quick-start-guides-
HA103673669.aspx. As of this writing, there is no Visio 2016 guide; however, the
majority of the Visio 2013 guide is correct for Visio 2016.
To open a recently used diagram
1. In the Recent column on the Start screen of the Backstage view, click the name of
the diagram you want to open.
To open a diagram that is not on the Recent list
1. In the Recent column, click Open Other Diagrams.
2. On the Open page of the Backstage view, click the location, and then open the
diagram you want.
To use a Featured template
1. If the Featured tab is not already active, click the Featured button above the
thumbnails on the Start screen.
2. Do either of the following:
• Double-click a template thumbnail.
• Click the thumbnail for the template you want, and then click the Create button.
To use template categories
1. If the Categories tab is not already active, click the Categories button above the
thumbnails on the Start screen.
2. Click the thumbnail for the category you want.
3. Do either of the following:
• Double-click a template thumbnail.
• Click the thumbnail for the template you want, and then click the Create button.
To search for a template
1. On the Start screen, do either of the following:
• Enter keywords in the Search for online templates box, and then press the Enter
key.
• Click one of the keywords in the Suggested searches list.
To use an existing diagram as a template
1. If the Categories tab is not already active, click the Categories button above the

thumbnails on the Start screen.
2. Do either of the following:
• Double-click the New from existing thumbnail.
• Click the New from existing thumbnail, and then click the Create button.
3. In the New From Existing Drawing dialog box, navigate to, and then open the
diagram you want.
Explore the Backstage view
The Backstage view is the central location for managing files and setting the options that
control how Visio 2016 operates. You access the Backstage view by clicking the File tab
on the left end of the ribbon in the Visio window.
Of the 11 commands in the left pane of the Backstage view, only four—New, Open,
Account, and Options—are available if you do not have a diagram open. The remaining
seven appear when you open a diagram.
 Tip
If you are in the Backstage view and have a diagram open, you can return to the
diagram by clicking the left-pointing arrow in the upper-left corner of the Visio
window. If you don’t have a diagram open, clicking the arrow will return you to the
Start screen.
Most of the commands and accompanying pages in the Backstage view will be familiar if
you have used other apps in the Office suite. In this topic, you will explore the Backstage
view, with an emphasis on features that are unique to Visio.
The Info page
When you have a diagram open and click the File tab, Visio presents the Info page shown
in Figure 1-7.

Figure 1-7 You use the Info page to view and change document attributes
The center section of the page includes five buttons:
 Protect Diagram You will explore this button in the sidebar “What is Information
Rights Management?” in Chapter 12, “Print, reuse, and share diagrams.”
 Remove Personal Information You will learn about this button in Chapter 12,
“Print, reuse, and share diagrams.”
 Reduce File Size You can click this button if document size is a major consideration
and you want to create a smaller file.
 Check Compatibility This button identifies features in the current diagram that are
not compatible with previous versions of Visio.
 Publish Options You will learn about the SharePoint publishing settings behind this
button in Chapter 15, “Collaborate and publish diagrams.”
The right side of the page provides information about the open document, along with a
Properties list that you can use to view and set document attributes. You will work with
the Properties list in several places in this book, including Chapter 11, “Add and use
hyperlinks,” and Chapter 12, “Print, reuse, and share diagrams.”
The Info page can contain additional buttons, such as the following:
 If you open a document in read-only mode, the Save As button, shown in Figure 1-

8, will appear at the top of the Info page.
Figure 1-8 Altered read-only documents must be saved as new documents
 If you open a file created in Visio 2010 or earlier, it will open in compatibility mode,
and the Convert button, shown in Figure 1-9, will appear at the top of the Info page.
Figure 1-9 You can upgrade older diagrams to the Visio 2016 format
 See Also
For more information about current and former Visio file formats, see “Understand
the Visio 2016 file formats” in Appendix A, “Look behind the curtain.”
 When a document is stored in SharePoint or OneDrive, the Check Out and View
Version History buttons, shown in Figure 1-10 and Figure 1-11, will appear.
Figure 1-10 You can protect documents from simultaneous edits by other authors
Figure 1-11 SharePoint can track each time a document is saved
As the description next to the button shown in Figure 1-10 suggests, you use the
Check Out button to prevent others from making changes to a document you are
editing. When you click the Check Out button, it is replaced by a Check In button
that you use to mark the document as available.
You use the View Version History button to view and manage the current and
previous versions of a document.

The New page
The New page, the upper part of which appears in Figure 1-12, is very similar to the Start
screen shown in Figure 1-3 in the preceding topic. On the New page, you have access to
the same featured templates, template categories, and online template search options that
were described for the Start screen.
Figure 1-12 The New page shows both featured and categorized templates
 Important
The New page always displays featured templates first. It’s easy to overlook the
Categories button that presents a more traditional view of templates organized into
logical groups.
The Open page
As it does throughout the Microsoft Office suite, the Open page, shown in Figure 1-13,
displays a list of both online and local locations where documents can be stored. You can
click any location in the left column to see recently used diagrams stored in that location.
You can also add more online locations to the list, or browse to locate the diagram you
want.

Figure 1-13 Opening online documents is as easy as opening local documents
The Save command
Clicking Save for an unsaved diagram displays the Save As page that is described in the
following topic. Clicking Save for a previously saved diagram saves the changes.
The Save As page
On the Save As page, shown in Figure 1-14, you can choose a local or online location and
then select a recent folder or click the Browse button to navigate to the location you want.

Figure 1-14 You can save locally or to OneDrive and SharePoint sites
 See Also
For information about storing Visio diagrams in other formats, see Chapter 12,
“Print, reuse, and share diagrams” and Chapter 15, “Collaborate and publish
diagrams.”
The Print page
The Print page provides a print preview and printing options. You will explore print
options in Chapter 12, “Print, reuse, and share diagrams.”
The Share page
You can share your diagram two ways by using the Share page.
You can click Share With People to send people a link to your diagram via email. Your
diagram must be stored in SharePoint or OneDrive to use the share function. If it is not,
you will be asked to save it in one of those locations first, as shown in Figure 1-15.

Figure 1-15 Sharing diagrams with other people requires two steps
After the diagram is available online, you can use the form shown in Figure 1-16 to send
links to one or more people.
Figure 1-16 You can enter one or more email addresses to share a diagram
You can click the Email button to share your diagram using any of the options listed on
the right side of the page shown in Figure 1-17.

Figure 1-17 One option for sharing by email automatically creates a PDF of your
diagram
 Tip
Send A Link is available only if your diagram is stored online or in a shared folder.
The Export page
You can use the Export page to create a PDF or XPS document and to save in a variety of
other file formats. You will explore other file formats in Chapter 12, “Print, reuse, and
share diagrams” and Chapter 15, “Collaborate and publish diagrams.”
The Close command
Clicking Close closes the active diagram but does not exit Visio.
The Account page
The Account page, shown in Figure 1-18, summarizes information about the Microsoft
Account that you have linked to Visio. You can click the links in the User Information area
to change your Microsoft Account details and to switch to another Microsoft Account if
you have more than one.

Figure 1-18 Both user profile and application-level settings are on the Account page
The same area provides lists you can use to alter the Office Background and Office Theme
used for Visio and all other Office applications.
In the Connected Services area is a list of OneDrive and SharePoint sites to which you are
currently connected. You can click the Add A Service button to link to additional
OneDrive and SharePoint sites.
Clicking the About Visio button in the Product Information area opens the About
Microsoft Visio dialog box (see Figure 1-19), which displays version information and your
product ID.
Figure 1-19 The About Microsoft Visio dialog box displays important information

 Tip
The About Microsoft Visio dialog box does not indicate whether you are running
Visio Standard or Visio Professional; that information is located below the Product
Activated heading in the Product Information area.
The Visio Options dialog box
The Options button opens the Visio Options dialog box, which contains dozens of settings
you can use to customize the operation of Visio. Many people use Visio without ever
needing to change any of these options, but it’s a good idea to examine the option
categories shown in Figure 1-20 for potential future use.
Figure 1-20 There are dozens of ways to customize Visio
You can use the options in the Visio Options dialog box to perform many actions, a few of
which are mentioned in the following list:
 General Enter your user name and initials, and set various global options, including
Live Preview and color choices for all Office apps.
 Proofing Set autocorrect, spelling, and grammar options.
 Save Enable AutoRecover, set the default Visio save format from among three
choices (Visio Document, Visio Macro-Enabled Document, and Visio 2003-2010
Document), and set a personal templates location.
 Language Set editing, display, help, and ScreenTip language parameters.
 Advanced Set dozens of options in five categories: Editing, Display, Save/Open,

Shape Search, and General.
 Customize Ribbon Add and rearrange commands on built-in ribbon tabs; create
new tabs and commands.
 Quick Access Toolbar Add and remove command buttons for the Quick Access
Toolbar.
 See Also
For more information about customizing the Quick Access Toolbar, see Appendix
A, “Look behind the curtain.”
 Add-ins View, add, and delete Visio add-ins.
 Trust Center View and edit macro settings and other trust-related options.
To display the Backstage view
1. Click the File tab.
Understand tool tabs and add-in tabs
Most tabs on the Visio ribbon are visible 100 percent of the time. However, two types of
tabs appear only when necessary.
 See Also
For information about the Developer tab, which might not be visible in your copy
of Visio, see Appendix A, “Look behind the curtain.”
Use tool tabs
A tool tab group appears only in a particular drawing context, usually when a specific type
of shape is selected on the drawing page. Tool tab groups usually appear to the right of the
View tab and are not always activated automatically when they appear; that is, you might
need to click the tab to view its contents. A tool tab group includes a colored header and
might contain one or more tool tabs under the header.
For example, the Picture Tools tab group, shown in Figure 1-21, appears whenever you
insert or select a graphic on a Visio drawing page. The green Picture Tools tab contains a
Format tool tab that includes buttons to crop, rotate, and otherwise modify a picture.

Figure 1-21 You can use the Format tool tab in the Picture Tools tab group to edit
images
Another example, the Container Tools tab group, shown in Figure 1-22, appears whenever
you insert or select a Visio container. The orange Container Tools tab group contains a
Format tool tab, which includes buttons to size and style containers, and to control
container membership.
Figure 1-22 You can use the Format tool tab in the Container Tools tab group to
customize containers
 See Also
For more information about containers, see Chapter 13, “Add structure to your
diagrams.”
Use add-in tabs
Add-in tabs are associated with software that adds capabilities to Visio. Some add-ins are
packaged with Visio by Microsoft, and others are sold by third-party software vendors.
Unlike tool tabs, add-in tabs look and behave exactly like permanent Visio tabs, with one
exception: they appear when an add-in application is active and disappear when it is not.
For example, the Org Chart add-in is included with Visio and is activated whenever you
create or edit a drawing that uses either of the Visio organization chart templates. The Org
Chart add-in tab is shown in Figure 1-23.
Figure 1-23 You can change the look and layout of an organization chart by using the
options on the Org Chart tab

 See Also
For more information about organization charts, see Chapter 5, “Create
organization charts.”
An example of a third-party add-in is TaskMap, which provides easy-to-use process
mapping, analysis, and improvement functions. TaskMap can be used with either Visio
Standard or Visio Professional. The TaskMap add-in tab is shown in Figure 1-24.
Figure 1-24 The TaskMap add-in tab includes functions that integrate Visio with
Microsoft Excel, Project, and PowerPoint
 See Also
For more information about the TaskMap add-in, go to www.taskmap.com.
Begin quickly by using starter diagrams
Visio templates have always included stencils full of shapes that you can use to build a
new diagram. However, even when you use a template to create a diagram, the new
drawing page is blank and it can be difficult to know how to begin.
Visio 2016 significantly reduces the challenge by providing several dozen starter
diagrams, each of which includes a properly arranged and formatted set of shapes along
with a set of tips.
Figure 1-25 shows an example of the starter diagrams that are provided with the Timeline
template in the Schedule template group. You can click any of the starter diagram
thumbnails to read a description of that sample diagram and the circumstances in which it
might be useful.

Figure 1-25 Starter diagram thumbnails provide an accurate preview of diagram
content
In all cases, the blank page option is still available by selecting the thumbnail in the upper-
left corner.
Selecting one of the thumbnails opens a one-page document that includes the starter
diagram. Figure 1-26 shows the Expanded Block Timeline diagram.

Figure 1-26 The first page of the Expanded Block Timeline starter diagram
In addition to the diagram itself, every starter diagram includes a tip pane that contains
both general and domain-specific tips. When you are finished using the tips pane, you can
delete it from the page.
Starter diagrams are available for these Visio Standard templates:
 Audit diagram
 Basic Flowchart
 Basic Network Diagram
 Cross-Functional Flowchart
 Gantt Chart
 Organization Chart Wizard
 Timeline
 Work Flow Diagram
In addition to those templates, the Professional edition of Visio includes starter drawings
in these templates:
 BPMN Diagram
 Detailed Network Diagram
 Microsoft SharePoint 2016 Workflow

 UML Class
 UML Sequence
 UML Use Case
 Value Stream Map
To use a starter diagram
1. Click the thumbnail for any template.
2. In the template information panel, do either of the following:
• Double-click the thumbnail of the starter diagram you want.
• Click the thumbnail for the starter diagram you want, and then click the Create
button.
To remove the tips pane from a starter diagram
1. Do either of the following:
• Click anywhere inside the tips pane, and then press the Delete key.
• Right-click the tips pane, and then click Cut.
Explore the drawing window
When you open a document in Visio, two windows normally appear below the ribbon, as
shown in Figure 1-27.

Figure 1-27 A typical view of Visio includes the ribbon, the Shapes window, and the
drawing window
The Shapes window contains one or more stencils, each represented by a header bar
containing the name of the stencil. Depending on the number of open stencils in the
Shapes window, a scroll bar might appear at the right of the headers when you move the
pointer into the Shapes window. You will investigate the Shapes window in the next topic.
 Tip
The width of the Shapes window is adjustable. Consequently, the Shapes windows
on your computer might be narrower or wider than those that appear in this book.
The larger window on the right is called the drawing window because it contains the
drawing page. The drawing window is bounded on the top and left by rulers that display
inches, millimeters, or whatever units you’ve selected (or your template has selected) for
measuring page dimensions. The gray area between the drawing page and the rulers is
referred to as the canvas; shapes on the canvas are visible in the drawing window but do
not print.

 Tip
All versions of Visio prior to Visio 2013 displayed an alignment grid on the
drawing page by default. In Visio 2016, the opposite is true. To make the grid
visible, select the Grid check box in the Show group on the View tab.
At the lower left of the drawing window is a set of page controls, as shown in Figure 1-28.
Figure 1-28 Page controls are located at the bottom of the drawing window
These controls provide the following functions:
 Page Name tabs These display the name of each page; the name of the active page
is displayed in a different color. Click any tab to switch to that page. Right-click any
page name tab to access page management functions, including the Duplicate Page
function.
 All Pages button Click this button to display a list of all pages in the diagram. The
name of the active page is highlighted in the list.
 Insert Page (+) button Click this button to add a new page.
Below the Shapes and drawing windows is a status bar that contains a variety of
indicators, buttons, and controls. The buttons and indicators on the left end of the status
bar are context sensitive, so they show different information depending on the state of the
drawing.
If nothing is selected on the drawing page, the left end of the status bar looks like the
image shown in Figure 1-29.
Figure 1-29 The left end of the Visio status bar when no shape is selected
These areas of the status bar provide the following functions:
 Page Number This shows which page is active and displays the total number of
pages in the current drawing. Click this button to open the Page dialog box.
 Language This area displays the language of the current drawing. The drawing
language is normally derived from Windows or Visio language settings.
 Macros Click this button to start the macro recorder.
If you have selected a shape on the drawing page, the left end of the status bar appears as
shown in Figure 1-30.
Figure 1-30 The left end of the Visio status bar when a shape is selected
The Width and Height buttons display the dimensions of the selected shape. The Angle
button displays its angle of rotation. Clicking any of these three buttons opens the Size &

Position window.
 See Also
For information about using the Size & Position window, see Chapter 3, “Manage
text, shapes, and pages.”
The right end of the status bar, shown in Figure 1-31, contains buttons and controls that
affect the view of your diagram.
Figure 1-31 Zoom and window control functions are located on the status bar
 Presentation Mode button Click this to view the active diagram in full-screen
presentation mode.
 Zoom slider Move this to zoom in or out.
 Zoom Level button This displays the current zoom percentage. Click it to open the
Zoom dialog box.
 Fit Page To Current Window button Click this to resize the drawing page so the
entire page is visible in the drawing window.
 Switch Windows button Click this to switch to another Visio window.
 Tip
Most Office applications require the use of a button on the View tab of the ribbon to
switch among multiple open windows. The Visio development team had the
foresight to include the Switch Windows button on the status bar where it is much
more convenient.
If you right-click anywhere in the status bar, the Customize Status Bar menu appears. You
can use this menu to turn on or off the display of any of the buttons and controls on the
status bar.
To view a list of all pages in a diagram
1. Do either of the following:
• To the right of the last visible page name tab, click the All Pages button.
• At the left end of the status bar, click the Page Number button.
To view a different page
1. Do either of the following:
• Click the page name tab for the page you want.
• Open the list of all pages, and then select the name of the page you want.

To switch windows
1. Do either of the following:
• On the right end of the status bar, click the Switch Windows button.
• On the View tab, in the Window group, click the Switch Windows button, and
then click the name of the window you want.
How do I scroll through page name tabs?
Versions of Visio prior to Visio 2013 included four page navigation buttons in the
lower-left corner of the drawing window that you could use to scroll through the
pages in your diagram. Two of the buttons scrolled page name tabs left and right,
and two jumped to the first or last page. The navigation buttons were especially
helpful when the number of pages or the length of the page names meant that some
page names were not visible.
Although those controls are not present in Visio 2016, there is an invisible button
that you can use to scroll pages from left to right—to use it, click in the space
immediately to the left of the first visible page name tab. You can scroll pages in the
opposite direction by clicking the right-most visible page name tab.
Unfortunately, there are no buttons you can use to jump to the first or last page with
a single click. However, you can jump to any specific page, whether or not its name
tab is visible, by using the techniques described in the procedures at the end of the
preceding topic. As an example, clicking the All Pages button results in a clickable
list of page names, as shown in Figure 1-32.
Figure 1-32 The color of the current page name is different from all other page names
Two keyboard shortcuts are very helpful for moving from page to page:
 Ctrl+Page Down Move one page to the right.
 Ctrl+Page Up Move one page to the left.

Manage the Shapes window
The upper part of the Shapes window contains the title bars of all open stencils, and the
lower part displays the shapes from the currently selected stencil, as shown in Figure 1-27
in the preceding topic. You can switch to any open stencil by clicking its title bar. When
you click the title bar of any stencil, the title bars remain stationary, and the stencil always
opens in the same place, below all title bars. This is a significant improvement in behavior
over versions of Visio prior to Visio 2010.
By default, the Shapes window is docked to the left of the drawing window, and it usually
displays one or two columns of masters. However, you might find that you want to adjust
or reposition the Shapes window, depending on the diagram you are creating or editing.
You can minimize or expand the Shapes window by using arrow buttons. The minimize
button is shown on the left in Figure 1-33, and the expand button is shown in the image on
the right. The minimized view of the Shapes window is most useful when the icons
depicting the masters in the stencil are easily recognizable.
Figure 1-33 You can view as little or as much of the Shapes window as you want
You can undock and float the Shapes window at any time if you would like it to be in a
different position within the main Visio window. You can also close the Shapes window
entirely, as shown in Figure 1-34.

Figure 1-34 The Shapes window has been hidden
You can adjust the width of the Shapes window one column at a time by dragging the right
edge of the window. However, it’s not as easy to locate the right edge as it used to be. A
user interface change introduced in Visio 2013 causes window edges to fade into the
background so they don’t interfere visually with the content of the drawing. Consequently,
when the Shapes window is docked on the left, the right edge is not visible unless the
pointer is positioned directly above it.
Making the boundary visible typically requires moving the pointer slowly across the right
side of the window until the pointer changes to a window resize tool. The resize tool is
visible in the image on the left in Figure 1-33.
This same user interface change means that scroll bars in smaller windows only appear
when the pointer is inside the window. This creates a challenge in the Shapes window
because you can’t determine whether additional masters are below the bottom edge of the
window without pointing to the window. In the image on the left in Figure 1-35, for
example, you can’t tell that there are additional furniture shapes available. The scroll bar
makes their presence known when the pointer is inside the window, as shown in the image
on the right.
Figure 1-35 The pointer must be inside a window for scroll bars to appear
You are not restricted to working with the default set of stencils that opens in any

particular template. You can open one or more additional stencils at any time, as shown in
Figure 1-36.
Figure 1-36 Cascading menus offer access to all Visio stencils
To minimize the Shapes window
1. Click the Minimize the Shapes Window button.
To expand the Shapes window
1. Click the Expand the Shapes Window button.
To adjust the width of the Shapes window
1. Move the pointer in the right side of the Shapes window until it changes to a
window resize tool.
2. Drag the window edge to the left or right.
To undock the Shapes window
1. Drag the header of the window onto the drawing page.
To dock the Shapes window
1. Drag the header of the window to one of the four edges of the main Visio window.
To open or close the Shapes window

1. On the View tab, in the Show group, click the Task Panes button, and then click
Shapes.
 Tip
The various subwindows that can be opened or closed within the main Visio
window are sometimes referred to as task panes.
To open additional stencils
1. In the Shapes window, click More Shapes.
2. In the list of template category names, point to the name of the template you want.
3. In the list of stencil names, click the name of the stencil you want.
 Tip
The stencil opens in the Shape window as soon as you click its name.
4. (Optional) Click additional stencil names, within either the same template category
or a different one.
5. Click anywhere outside the template and stencil lists to close the cascading menus.
Pan and zoom in the drawing window
As you work with Visio diagrams, you frequently need to zoom in and out and pan—move
left-right and up-down—within the drawing window. Both can be accomplished by using
a variety of techniques, some that rely on your mouse, some that use a special Pan &
Zoom window, and others that entail keyboard shortcuts.
The pan and zoom examples in this topic all use the furniture diagram shown in Figure 1-
37.

Figure 1-37 Four furniture shapes in a full-page view
One of the fastest techniques to view exactly the part of the page you want involves
drawing a bounding box while holding down the Ctrl and Shift keys. While you draw the
bounding box, Visio displays what’s shown in Figure 1-38.

Figure 1-38 The magnifying glass pointer indicates that this bounding box will zoom
the diagram
The result of the zoom operation is shown in Figure 1-39. The selected shapes are
centered in the drawing window.
Figure 1-39 Zoomed image as a result of the bounding box zoom technique

As an alternative, you can draw a rectangle in the Pan & Zoom window that is shown in
Figure 1-40. By dragging or resizing the rectangle in the Pan & Zoom window, you can
pan or zoom, respectively.
Figure 1-40 The Pan & Zoom window controls which part of the drawing page is
visible
 Tip
For many drawings, the Pan & Zoom window isn’t necessary and might even be in
the way. However, it is extremely helpful when your drawing page is very large,
which might be the case when you are working on engineering drawings, floor
plans, or office layouts.
 Tip
The need to zoom in and out while working with a diagram is so frequent that there
are probably more techniques and keyboard and mouse shortcuts for this operation
than for any other action in Visio.
To open or close the Pan & Zoom window
1. On the View tab, in the Show group, click the Task Panes button, and then click
Pan & Zoom.
To zoom in
1. Do any of the following:
• While holding down the Shift and Ctrl keys, click the left mouse button.

• While holding down the Shift and Ctrl keys, roll the mouse wheel forward.
• Press Alt+F6.
• On the status bar, drag the handle of the Zoom slider.
• On the status bar, click the Zoom level button, and then set a specific zoom level.
• On the View tab, in the Zoom group, click the Zoom button, and then set a
specific zoom level.
• In the Pan & Zoom window, drag to draw a rectangle that is smaller than the
current rectangle (if any).
• In the Pan & Zoom window, drag the edges or corners of the selection rectangle
to make it smaller.
To zoom out
1. Do any of the following:
• While holding down the Shift and Ctrl keys, click the right mouse button.
• While holding down the Shift and Ctrl keys, roll the mouse wheel backward.
• Press Shift+Alt+F6.
• On the status bar, drag the handle of the Zoom slider.
• On the status bar, click the Zoom level button, and then set a specific zoom level.
• On the View tab, in the Zoom group, click the Zoom button, and then set a
specific zoom level.
• In the Pan & Zoom window, drag to draw a rectangle that is larger than the
current rectangle (if any).
• In the Pan & Zoom window, drag the edges or corners of the selection rectangle
to make it larger.
To fit the drawing page to the current window
1. Do either of the following:
• On the status bar, click the Fit page to current window button.
• On the View tab, in the Zoom group, click the Fit to Window button.
To pan the diagram
1. Do any of the following:
• Roll the mouse wheel (pans up and down).
• While holding down the Shift key, roll the mouse wheel (pans left and right).
• While holding down the Shift and Ctrl keys, click the right mouse button, and
drag.
• In the Pan & Zoom window, drag the selection rectangle.

Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Identify the editions of Visio 2016
 Discover new features in Visio 2016
 Get started in Visio 2016
 Explore the Backstage view
 Understand tool tabs and add-in tabs
 Begin quickly by using starter diagrams
 Explore the drawing window
 Manage the Shapes window
 Pan and zoom in the drawing window
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch01 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Identify the editions of Visio 2016
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Discover new features in Visio 2016
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Get started in Visio 2016
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks. At the conclusion of each task, return to
the Start page.
1. Open the GetStarted diagram in the Visio2016SBS\Ch01 folder.
2. Close the GetStarted diagram without exiting Visio.
3. In the Featured section, click the thumbnail for any template you want.
4. In the category section, click the Business category thumbnail, and then create a
diagram from the Brainstorming Diagram template.
5. Enter a keyword to search online for templates.
6. Click a Suggested searches keyword to search online for templates.
7. Create a diagram by using the GetStarted diagram as a template.

Explore the Backstage view
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Open any diagram.
2. Display the Backstage view and explore the various pages.
Understand tool tabs and add-in tabs
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Begin quickly by using starter diagrams
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Open the template information panel for the Basic Flowchart template.
2. Create a diagram from the Decision Branches Flowchart template.
3. After reviewing the tips pane, delete it from the diagram.
Explore the drawing window
Open the ExploreDrawing diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. View several pages in the diagram.
2. Display the list of all diagram pages.
3. In the same instance of Visio, open the GetStarted diagram located in the
Visio2016SBS\Ch01 folder.
4. Switch between the two open diagrams.
Manage the Shapes window
Open the ManageShapesWindow diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Minimize and then expand the Shapes window.
2. Make the Shapes window wider or narrower.
3. Dock the Shapes window at the top of the drawing page, and then float it over the
drawing page.
4. Dock the Shapes window in its original location.
5. Hide the Shapes window, and then make it visible again.
6. Open several additional stencils.
Pan and zoom in the drawing window
Open the PanAndZoom diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Open the Pan & Zoom window.
2. Zoom in and out on several parts of the diagram.

3. Zoom to 200%, and then pan to the right side of the page.
4. Pan to the lower-left corner of the page.
5. Use the Pan & Zoom window to zoom out and view the center of the page.
6. Fit the diagram to the window.

2. Create diagrams
In this chapter
 Place shapes by using the Dynamic Grid
 Select, copy, paste, and duplicate shapes
 Position shapes by using rulers and guides
 Resize, reposition, and reorient shapes
 Connect shapes by using lines
 Connect shapes by using dynamic connectors
 Use AutoConnect and Quick Shapes
 Use AutoAdd and AutoDelete
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch02 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
Creating a diagram from scratch can be daunting. Consequently, Visio 2016 provides
dozens of templates for a variety of diagram types. Two dozen templates are grouped into
six template categories in the Standard edition and more than 70 templates in eight
categories in the Professional edition.
Each template includes one or more stencils, and each stencil contains a collection of
shapes that are suitable for the specific diagram type. Some of the shapes are very simple,
whereas others contain formulas that give them surprisingly sophisticated behavior. You
will examine examples of both simple shapes and smart shapes as you explore various
templates in this and subsequent chapters. Regardless of which template you use, you
should understand how to position and manipulate shapes.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to aligning, positioning, and resizing
shapes by using the Dynamic Grid; selecting, copying, pasting, and duplicating shapes;
positioning shapes by using rulers and guides; resizing, repositioning, and reorienting
shapes; connecting shapes by using lines and dynamic connectors; using AutoConnect and
Quick Shapes; and using AutoAdd and AutoDelete.
Place shapes by using the Dynamic Grid
The purpose of the Dynamic Grid is to help you position or size a shape with greater
accuracy as you drop it on the page or when you relocate it, thereby eliminating much of
the need to drag and nudge the shape after you’ve placed it. Visio 2016 and Visio 2013
both feature an enhanced Dynamic Grid that provides even more visual feedback than
earlier versions of the software.

 Tip
Unless otherwise indicated, the shapes shown in the figures in this chapter are from
the Basic Shapes stencil that opens when you use the Basic Diagram template that
is located in the General template group.
The Dynamic Grid displays horizontal or vertical dashed lines to assist with shape
alignment. In the three parts of Figure 2-1, the Dynamic Grid indicates when the circle is
aligned with the top, middle, and bottom of the rectangle.
Figure 2-1 Dynamic Grid guidelines appear while aligning shapes
The Dynamic Grid also displays double-headed arrows of different lengths to assist with
shape spacing and sizing. Double-headed arrows appear when:
 The interval between shapes matches the default spacing interval for the page. Refer
to the vertical arrow to the right of the space between the rectangle and octagon in
Figure 2-2.
Figure 2-2 Dynamic Grid guidelines appear while spacing and aligning shapes
 The space between your new shape and an existing shape matches the space between
the existing shape and another shape on the page, as shown by the horizontal arrows
below the spaces between the rectangle, circle, and square in Figure 2-2.
 You are resizing a shape and its dimensions match those of one or more existing
shapes on the page, as shown in Figure 2-3. (The ellipse is being resized in this
figure.)

Figure 2-3 Dynamic Grid guidelines appear while resizing shapes
 Tip
When two shapes that you are positioning are the same width or height, Visio
displays three Dynamic Grid lines for the pair of shapes: at the left, center, and
right, or at the top, middle, and bottom. See the dashed grid lines between and along
the sides of the rectangle and octagon in Figure 2-2 for an example.
Because some double-headed arrows reflect the default spacing for a page, it is useful to
know that you can change the default inter-shape spacing for any page. You can do so in
the Spacing Options dialog box shown in Figure 2-4.
Figure 2-4 The Spacing Options dialog box, in which you can change the vertical and
horizontal spacing intervals for a page
The default options in this dialog box set the vertical interval to match the horizontal
interval. You can change the vertical interval separately by clearing the Use Same Spacing
For Both check box.
Figure 2-1 through Figure 2-3 were created by dragging shapes from the Basic Shapes
stencil that opens when you use the Basic Diagram template to create a diagram. However,
the Dynamic Grid functions equally well with shapes you create by using the drawing

tools that are in the Tools group on the Home tab. To make it more convenient to create
new shapes in Visio 2016, the drawing tools were added to a button in the upper-left
corner of the mini toolbar, as shown in Figure 2-5.
Figure 2-5 The drawing tools button has been added to the Visio 2016 mini toolbar
Though the Dynamic Grid was helpful before Visio 2013, it’s even more useful now
because it reacts more quickly to pointer movement and shape locations, and because it
provides a greater variety of visual feedback. In addition, the Dynamic Grid is more vital
for aligning shapes in Visio 2016 and Visio 2013 because the background page grid is
turned off by default in these versions.
 Tip
If the Dynamic Grid lines don’t appear as you move shapes near others already on
the page, it is probably because the feature is turned off for this drawing. To
activate the Dynamic Grid, select the Dynamic Grid check box in the Visual Aids
group on the View tab.
To place shapes on a page
1. Drag a shape from a stencil and drop it on the drawing page.
To align shapes by using the Dynamic Grid
1. Drag a shape to either side of, above, or below an existing shape, and then pause
until Dynamic Grid lines appear.
To align shapes on both axes by using the Dynamic Grid
1. Drag a shape so it is above or below at least one shape, and at the same time is also
left or right of a different shape. Note that both horizontal and vertical Dynamic Grid
lines appear.
To space shapes by using the Dynamic Grid
1. Do either of the following:
• Drag a shape to the right or left of another shape and slowly move it left and right
until a double-headed arrow appears.

• Drag a shape above or below another shape and slowly move it up and down until
a double-headed arrow appears.
To change the default inter-shape spacing for a page
1. On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click Position, and then click Spacing
Options to open the Spacing Options dialog box.
2. If you want to set different intervals for Horizontal and Vertical spacing, in the
Spacing Options dialog box, clear the Use same spacing for both check box.
3. Set either the Horizontal interval, or both the Horizontal and Vertical intervals, to
the spacing you want, and then click OK.
To resize a shape to match the width or height of existing shapes
1. Drag any resize handle on one shape and note the appearance of the double-headed
arrows.
To create shapes by using the drawing tools
1. Right-click anywhere on the drawing page, click the Drawing Tools button on the
mini toolbar, and then click one of the tools.
Or
On the Home tab, in the Tools group, click the drawing tools button, and then click
one of the tools.
2. Drag to create a shape.
To create a square by using the drawing tools
1. Select the Rectangle tool.
2. Hold down the Shift key while dragging.
To create a circle by using the drawing tools
1. Select the Ellipse tool.
2. Hold down the Shift key while dragging.
 Tip
You can constrain the Rectangle and Ellipse tools so they draw only squares or
circles by holding down the Shift key while dragging.
To align and size shapes created by using the drawing tools
1. Reposition and resize shapes in the same way you would for shapes created from a
stencil.

Select shapes
You can use several techniques for selecting shapes in Visio, including clicking one or
more shapes, using Area Select, and using Lasso Select. You can also select all shapes on
a page at once, and you can remove shapes from an existing selection.
Area selection is the default behavior in Visio when you click the drawing page and drag.
Only shapes that are fully surrounded by the gray bounding box are selected, unless you
change the Visio selection default. For example, in the left half of Figure 2-6, the rectangle
and octagon will be selected when you release the mouse button. In the right half of the
figure, no shapes will be selected.
Figure 2-6 A bounding box used to select shapes
Lasso Select is a less common technique but provides greater flexibility by allowing you
to surround the shapes you want with a freeform line. As with a bounding box, the default
behavior in Visio is to select only fully enclosed shapes when you release the mouse
button. The lasso on the left side of Figure 2-7 will produce the selection on the right, in
which only the octagon and circle are selected.
Figure 2-7 A lasso used to select shapes
 Tip
To ensure that you select the shapes you want while using Lasso Select, be sure to
release the mouse button very close to the beginning of the “rope.” You aren’t
required to end at exactly the same place, and in some cases, a partially closed loop
will still select some shapes, but it is best to end very near where you started.

 Tip
You can change selection behavior in Visio so it will select shapes that are partially
enclosed by a bounding box or lasso. Click the File tab to display the Backstage
view, click Options in the left pane, and click Advanced. Then click the Select
Shapes Partially Within Area check box.
 Tip
You can combine either area or lasso selection with click selection to produce the
result you want.
To select one shape
1. Click on the shape once.
To select multiple shapes by clicking
1. Click once to select the first shape.
2. Hold down either the Shift key or the Ctrl key while clicking additional shapes.
To select one or more shapes by using Area Select
1. Click once on the drawing page and drag to create a bounding box around the shape
or shapes you want.
To change from Area Select to Lasso Select
1. On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Select button, and then click
Lasso Select.
To create a lasso selection
1. Hold down the mouse button and drag a lasso around the shape or shapes you want,
being certain to end the lasso near its beginning.
To revert to using bounding boxes
1. Click the Select button, and then click Area Select.
To combine area or lasso selection with click selection
1. Do either of the following:
• Select one or more shapes by clicking them, and then add additional shapes by
holding down Shift or Ctrl while drawing a bounding box or lasso loop.
• Start with a bounding box or lasso selection, and then add additional shapes by
holding down Shift or Ctrl as you click the shapes you want.

To remove shapes from a selection
1. Hold down the Shift key or the Ctrl key while clicking shapes.
To select all shapes on a page
1. Press Ctrl+A.
Copy, paste, and duplicate shapes
Prior to the 2010 version, Visio always pasted shapes into the center of the drawing
window. Occasionally, this was what you wanted, but as often as not, this placement
required additional dragging and nudging. Visio 2016, like its two immediate
predecessors, works more logically. If you copy one or more shapes from Page-1 and then
paste them onto Page-2, Visio will paste them into the same position on Page-2 that they
occupied on Page-1, even if that part of the page is not visible when you paste.
Pasting shapes to the same page from which they were copied works slightly differently:
 If the copied shapes are visible in the drawing window when you paste, the pasted
shapes will be located at a small offset below and to the right of the original shapes.
 If the copied shapes are not visible in the drawing window when you paste, Visio
will paste the shapes into the center of the drawing window.
You can paste shapes to a specific location, whether on the page from which they were
copied or another page, and you can duplicate shapes as an alternative to copying and
pasting. Duplicated shapes are placed at a small offset below and to the right of the
original shapes, as shown in Figure 2-8.
Figure 2-8 Two shapes that have been duplicated three times

 Tip
You can both duplicate shapes and constrain how they are positioned by combining
two keyboard-mouse shortcuts. Pressing Shift while dragging constrains movement
to either vertical or horizontal so that shapes remain aligned on one axis. Pressing
Ctrl and Shift while dragging duplicates selected shapes and keeps them aligned
with the originals.
Duplicating shapes offers one advantage over copying: it doesn’t use the Clipboard.
Consequently, if you have shapes or data on the Clipboard that you want to preserve, but
you also want to clone one or more shapes, the original data will remain on the Clipboard
if you duplicate the shapes rather than copy them.
To copy shapes
1. Select the shapes you want to copy, and then press Ctrl+C.
To paste shapes onto the same page and let Visio choose the placement
1. Do either of the following:
• Copy two or more shapes, and then press Ctrl+V to paste the shapes onto the
same page. Note that Visio places the pasted shapes at a small offset from the
original shapes.
• Scroll until the original shapes are no longer on the screen, and then press Ctrl+V
to paste the shapes. Notice that Visio pastes them in the center of the drawing
window.
Notice, also, that if the drawing page is not large enough to contain the pasted
shapes, Visio either expands the size of the page if Auto Size is on, or places them
on the canvas if it is not.
 See Also
For information about the Auto Size function that automatically expands and
contracts Visio pages, see Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes, and pages.”
To paste shapes onto a different page and let Visio choose the placement
1. Copy two or more shapes.
2. At the bottom of the drawing window, click a page name tab to switch to a different
page.
Or
Click the Insert Page button (the + sign) to add a page to the diagram.
3. Press Ctrl+V to paste the copied shapes onto the page. Notice that Visio places
them in the same location on the new page that they occupied on the original page.

To paste shapes to a specific location on a page
1. Right-click the place on the page where you would like the copied shapes to appear,
and then click Paste.
To duplicate one or more selected shapes
1. Do either of the following:
• Press Ctrl+D.
• Drag the shapes while holding down the Ctrl key, and then release the mouse
button at the target location.
Position shapes by using rulers and guides
As described earlier in this chapter, you can align shapes by using the Dynamic Grid
feature of Visio 2016. However, the Dynamic Grid doesn’t always do what you need. For
example, if there are shapes between the two you are trying to align, the Dynamic Grid
doesn’t help. In other cases, you might want to align shapes in ways that the Dynamic
Grid can’t.
Use rulers to align and size shapes
The Visio ruler provides valuable assistance for shape positioning and sizing. One ruler
appears on the left edge of the drawing window, and another is located across the top. If
you create a diagram by using a US Units template, which is the selected template type in
Figure 2-9, the ruler will be delineated in feet and inches. If you click Metric Units, shown
in Figure 2-9, the ruler will be marked in meters, centimeters, or millimeters.

Figure 2-9 The description of the Basic Flowchart template includes a choice between
Metric Units and US Units
 Tip
If the ruler is not visible, or if it is and you would like to hide it, on the View tab, in
the Show group, select or clear the Ruler check box.
As you drag shapes on the drawing page, Visio provides visual location information on the
ruler in the form of dashed lines. The lines on the top ruler in Figure 2-10 mark the left,
center, and right of the octagon; the lines on the side ruler denote the top, middle, and
bottom of the shape.

Figure 2-10 Dashed lines on the left and top rulers show the position of a shape
You can use the lines on the rulers to position shapes as you move them.
When you drag a side handle to resize a shape in either the horizontal or vertical
dimension, a single dashed line will appear on the corresponding ruler. If you drag a
corner handle to resize a shape in both dimensions, a single line will appear on each ruler.
To position shapes by using the ruler
1. While dragging the shape in any direction, use the dashed position indicator lines on
the vertical and horizontal rulers to position the shape exactly where you want it.
Use guides to align and size shapes
A guide is a tool for aligning shapes, but it also allows you to move shapes as a unit after
you have aligned them. You create guides by clicking a ruler and then dragging to the
drawing page. You can add as many horizontal or vertical guides to the page as you want.
Guides are useful in many circumstances, but they are especially helpful in a situation like
the one depicted in Figure 2-11. The two stars in this diagram cannot be aligned by using
the Dynamic Grid because of the intervening horizontal rectangle. Consequently, a vertical
guide has been dragged onto the page.

Figure 2-11 A vertical guide can be used to align two shapes
 Tip
If you can’t see the guides on a page, or if they are visible but you would like to
hide them, on the View tab, in the Show group, select or clear the Guides check
box.
You can glue a shape to a guide at the shape’s edges or center by dragging it toward the
guide, as shown in Figure 2-12.
Figure 2-12 Gluing a shape to a guide
In Figure 2-13, the two stars are now precisely aligned at their centers, despite the
intervening shape.

Figure 2-13 Two stars glued at their centers to a vertical guide
It’s important to realize that the stars are actually glued to the guide. If you move the
guide, the stars will move also. However, if you no longer need the guide, perhaps because
you don’t need to move the aligned shapes as a unit, you can delete the guide as you
would any other shape.
 Tip
Guides appear on the drawing page but do not print.
To align shapes by using a guide
1. Place two shapes on the drawing page.
2. Click either ruler, and then drag a guide onto the page.
3. Drag the first shape to the guide and glue it at the center or an edge.
4. Drag the second shape to the guide and glue it the same way that you glued the first
shape.
To move shapes that are glued to a guide
1. Glue two or more shapes to a guide as described in the preceding procedure.
2. Drag the guide to a new location and note that all aligned shapes move with the
guide.
To delete a guide
1. Click to select the guide, and then press the Delete key.

Resize, reposition, and reorient shapes
After you’ve placed shapes onto the drawing page, you might need to move or resize some
of them. Visio provides a variety of techniques for doing so. You can alter shapes by using
your mouse or keyboard, or a combination of the two. You can also use the Size &
Position window.
 Tip
The shapes shown in the figures in this topic are from the Basic Flowchart Shapes
stencil that opens when you use the Basic Flowchart template located in the
Flowchart template group.
Use control handles
When you select a shape, a set of white squares appear. These squares are referred to as
selection handles, resize handles, or just handles. Pictured on shapes A and B in Figure 2-
14, the handles allow you to alter a shape in the following ways:
Figure 2-14 Comparison of shapes with locked attributes and unlocked attributes
 Dragging the square handles in the center of each edge alters the width or height of
the shape.
 Dragging the square handles on the corners adjusts the width and height
proportionally.
Occasionally, you might notice that you are unable to drag one or more handles on a
shape. This is usually an indication that the shape designer has locked one or more
attributes of the shape. Shape B, on the right side of Figure 2-14, displays diagonal slashes
through the top and bottom handles, indicating that the height of the shape is locked. Note,
too, that there are slashes through the corner handles: if you can’t adjust the height, you
can’t change both dimensions at the same time by using a corner handle.
 Tip
Previous versions of Visio displayed locked handles with a different color than
unlocked handles. In Visio 2016, the distinction is more subtle and relies on the
diagonal lines described in conjunction with Figure 2-14.
In addition to the side and corner handles, a circular arrow appears at the top center of
most selected shapes. This is the rotation handle and it is visible above shape B on the
right side of Figure 2-14. (Shape A does not display a rotation handle on the left side of
Figure 2-14 because rotation has been locked for that shape.) Clicking and dragging the

rotation handle rotates the shape around its pin position.
 Tip
You can control the precision of shape rotation by moving the pointer farther from,
or closer to, the rotation handle. For example, if the pointer is near the rotation
handle, the shape will rotate in 15-degree increments. If you move the pointer out,
the shape will rotate in increasingly smaller increments until you are rotating it
fractions of a degree at a time. As you rotate a shape, you can view the incremental
change in rotation angle in the Size & Position window.
 See Also
For information about how to view the angle of a shape in the Size & Position
window, see “Use the Size & Position window” later in this chapter.
In addition to resize and rotation handles, you might encounter a yellow control handle on
some Visio shapes. Control handles allow shape designers to give the user control of
various shape properties. You will find control handles that adjust the location of interior
or exterior lines, the position of text on the shape, the size of the shape, or any number of
other shape attributes. As an example, you can use the control handle on shape D in Figure
2-15 to move the interior vertical lines within the shape, as shown in the left and right
views of shape D.
Figure 2-15 A control handle that adjusts interior line position in a shape
 Tip
Yellow control handles appear on a variety of the shapes in Visio stencils.
Whenever you select a shape and notice a yellow handle, it’s worth experimenting
with it to learn how you can use it to alter the shape’s appearance. If you make a
change that you don’t like, simply press Ctrl+Z to undo the modification.
To adjust shape height and width
1. Select a shape, and then drag any of the side or corner handles to resize the shape.

 Tip
As you drag a resize handle to adjust shape width or height, look for a dashed line
on the corresponding ruler at the side of the drawing window. The dashed line
identifies the location of the edge of the shape.
To rotate a shape
1. Select a shape, and then drag the rotation handle.
2. Move the pointer closer to, and then farther away from, the shape as you drag across
the screen to observe the differences in rotation increment.
Use the Size & Position window
The Size & Position window serves two purposes in Visio: you can use it to view the
values of six shape attributes—X coordinate, Y coordinate, width, height, angle, and pin
position—for a two-dimensional shape, and you can use it to change those same six
values.
For example, if the Size & Position window shows that a shape is 2 inches wide, like the
shape on the left in Figure 2-16, and you enter 3.5 in the Width cell, the shape width will
change immediately. Similarly, if the Y position of a shape on a page is 50 mm and you
enter 125 in the Y cell, the shape will move up the page to the new position.
Figure 2-16 The Size & Position window shows values for selected shapes
One-dimensional Visio shapes display properties that are appropriate for a line, including
the beginning and ending coordinates and the length, in the Size & Position window, as
shown on the right in Figure 2-16.
If you enter a value into a cell in the Size & Position window and do not include units,
Visio will default to using whatever units were displayed for that cell before you made the
change. However, you can specify units when you enter values. For example, if the Y
value is 60 mm and you enter either 12 cm or 12 centimeters, Visio will convert and apply
the value; in this case the result will display as 120 mm.
Visio will even convert across measurement systems. Continuing the example in the
previous paragraph, if you enter either 3 in or 3 inches, Visio will move the shape and then

display the result as 76.2 mm.
The purpose of the first five rows in the Size & Position window for two-dimensional
shapes is reasonably obvious, but the sixth row requires additional explanation. Pin Pos,
short for pin position, is the center of rotation for a shape. The default Pin Pos for most
shapes is Center-Center, as shown for the shape in Figure 2-16, which means that the
shape will rotate around its center.
 Tip
To envision the purpose of the pin position, imagine that a shape is a piece of paper
you’ve stuck on your wall with a pin. If you rotate the piece of paper, it will rotate
around the pin.
You can change the Pin Pos to rotate the shape around a different point. In Figure 2-17,
shape E is being rotated around its lower-left corner.
Figure 2-17 A shape being rotated around its lower-left corner
 Tip
When you change the Pin Pos for a shape, the location of the shape on the page will
change. This is because the X and Y coordinates of the shape actually specify the
location of the pin and not the coordinates of the center of the shape. Because you
have moved the pin within the shape, the location of the shape on the page will
change.
You can also view three attributes of a two-dimensional shape, or two attributes of a line,
without opening the Size & Position window. Visio displays either two or three attributes
of a selected shape on the status bar at the bottom of the Visio window, as shown in Figure
2-18. The image on the bottom is for a two-dimensional shape; the one on the top is for a
line.

Figure 2-18 Status bar display of shape properties for a two-dimensional shape on the
bottom and a line on the top
 Tip
Clicking the Length, Width, Height, or Angle buttons on the Visio status bar opens
the Size & Position window.
To open the Size & Position window
1. Do either of the following:
• On the View tab, in the Show group, click Task Panes, and then click Size &
Position.
• With a shape selected, click either the Length, Width, Height, or Angle button
on the status bar at the bottom of the Visio window.
To view changes to shape attributes
1. Select a shape.
2. Open the Size & Position window (optional).
3. Drag the shape to a new location on the page.
Or
Use the resize handles to change the shape’s width or height.
Or
Use the rotation handle to rotate the shape.
4. While making any of the changes in the preceding step, note the new values that are
displayed on the Visio status bar or in the Size & Position window.
To adjust shape properties by using the Size & Position window
1. Select a shape, and then open the Size & Position window.
2. Enter a new value for any shape attribute and note the change in the shape.

Connect shapes by using lines
Visio shapes are either one-dimensional (1-D) or two-dimensional (2-D). 1-D shapes act
like lines with endpoints that can be attached to other shapes. 2-D shapes behave like
polygons with edges and an interior. However, appearances can be deceiving, because
some shapes that appear to be two-dimensional might actually be 1-D shapes in Visio;
there’s an example in the topic titled, “Add equipment to rack diagrams” in Chapter 7,
“Create network and datacenter diagrams.” The reverse can also be true.
This topic describes a category of 1-D shapes referred to as lines. The topic “Connect
shapes by using dynamic connectors” later in this chapter describes a special type of 1-D
shape known as a dynamic connector.
One way to create a line in Visio is to use the Line tool. The Line tool is one of six tools
available from the drawing tools button, which is immediately to the right of the Pointer
Tool in the Tools group on the Home tab. On the left side of Figure 2-19, the pointer is on
top of the drawing tools button, and the ScreenTip describes the active drawing tool.
Figure 2-19 The Rectangle and Line tools on the Home tab
If you want to use the Line tool but it isn’t visible, click the arrow next to whichever tool
is displayed on the button, and then select the tool you want. The result of selecting the
Line tool appears on the right side of Figure 2-19.
 Tip
You can also access the drawing tools on the mini toolbar, as shown in Figure 2-4.
When you select the Line tool by using this technique, as soon as you’ve drawn one
line, the pointer reverts to the Pointer Tool.
When the Line tool is active, the cursor changes to a plus sign with a diagonal line to its
lower right, as shown in the left graphic in Figure 2-20. In that same graphic on the left,
there are multiple dark gray squares, known as connection points. Connection points on a
shape are normally invisible in Visio 2016, but they appear whenever you move the Line
tool near the shape.

Figure 2-20 The Line tool interacting with nearby shapes
 Important
Not all shapes contain connection points. If you don’t see gray squares anywhere on
a shape when you approach it with the Line tool, the shape might not include any
connection points.
There is one other possibility: the shape might contain connection points, but the
global option setting to view connection points might be turned off. To verify
whether connection point viewing is on or off, examine the Connection Points
check box in the Visual Aids group on the View tab.
When you move the Line tool close enough to a specific connection point, a green square
surrounds the connection point, as shown in the graphic on the right in Figure 2-20.
Clicking the connection point glues the line to the shape.
The image on the left in Figure 2-21 shows a line that has been glued at both ends and that
the line is still selected. Notice that the left end of the line, which was the first to be glued,
displays a green circle. The originating end of a line is often referred to as the “from” end.
The destination end of the line, also known as the “to” end, displays a white circle with a
green dot in the center.
Figure 2-21 Shapes connected by a line and a line that is not glued to any shapes
In the image on the right in Figure 2-21, a line above the rectangle has not been glued to
any shapes. This line displays a white square on the “from” end and a gray square on the
“to” end.
The color distinction between the glued and unglued line ends in Figure 2-21 is an
important one in Visio. Although the difference is quite obvious in Figure 2-21 because
you can see exactly what is connected where, the paragraphs that follow include an
example in which the color of the line end is very helpful in determining connectedness.
If you attempt to glue one end of a line to shape that doesn’t contain connection points,
you will be able to drop the end of the line inside or on the edge of the shape; however, it
will not be glued. The left side of Figure 2-22 is an example of this situation; note that the
“from” end of the line is glued to the center of the octagon, but you can tell from the gray
square that the “to” end is unglued even though it is sitting on the edge of the long

rectangle.
Figure 2-22 A line drawn from an octagon to a rectangle but not glued to the latter
shape
You can prove to yourself that the line is not glued simply by relocating the rectangle. On
the right side of Figure 2-22, the rectangle has been shifted to the right and the line is no
longer connected.
Four different tools are available for drawing lines:
 Line tool Draws straight lines
 Arc tool Draws arcs
 Freeform tool Draws lines that have as many bends as you want
 Pencil tool Draws curved and straight lines, but can also be used to deform or
reshape existing 1-D and 2-D shapes
Figure 2-23 includes an arc between the rectangle and the circle, and a freeform line from
the center of the circle to the edge of the square.
Figure 2-23 An arc and a freeform line
 Tip
Blue circles are at the key points of curvature along the freeform line in Figure 2-
23. These circles are actually handles that you can drag to reshape the line.
The blue circles are only visible if you select the shape with one of the line tools
(Line, Freeform, Arc, or Pencil). If you select it with the Pointer Tool or the
Rectangle or Ellipse tool, only the endpoints will be visible.
An important feature of all four line types is that they retain their form when you move the

shapes to which they are glued. If a line begins as a straight line, it will always be a
straight line; if it starts as a squiggly line, it will always look that way. This behavior is in
marked contrast to the dynamic connector that is described in the topic that follows.
To use the Line, Arc, Freeform, or Pencil tool
1. On the Home tab, in the Tools group, click the drawing tools button, and then select
the tool you want.
Or
Right-click the drawing page, click the Drawing Tools button in the upper-left
corner of the mini toolbar, and then select the tool you want.
2. Drag to create a line.
To glue a line to a shape
1. Select the line tool you want.
2. Move the pointer near a shape until the connection points appear.
3. Click a connection point, and then drag the other end of the line onto a connection
point on the same or another shape.
To return to the Pointer Tool after selecting one of the line tools from the
Home tab
1. Do either of the following:
• In the Tools group, click the Pointer Tool button.
• Press Ctrl+1.
Create 2-D shapes by using the line tools
The various line drawing tools are not limited to creating 1-D shapes. You can
create a 2-D shape simply by finishing where you start; that is, either draw a set of
connected segments or draw a continuous line that ends where it begins. The
amoeba-like shape in Figure 2-24 was created by using the Freeform tool.
Figure 2-24 2-D shape drawn by using the Freeform tool

Connect shapes by using dynamic connectors
The 1-D shapes described in the preceding topic can contain bends, curves, or corners, but
only if you place them there or you use a tool specifically designed for that purpose. A
dynamic connector, also referred to simply as a connector, is a 1-D shape to which Visio
automatically adds and removes corners or bends based on the relative positions of the
shapes to which it’s glued.
As a result, dynamic connectors are an essential component of many connected diagrams
—flowcharts, organization charts, and network diagrams, for example—because you can
use them to concentrate on positioning the 2-D shapes while Visio takes care of organizing
the 1-D shapes. There will, of course, be situations in which you will need to override the
choices made by Visio, or even change the settings that control Visio choices. Much of the
time, however, letting Visio position and route dynamic connectors works just fine.
You can elect to use a dynamic connector in several ways, just as was true for the various
line tools:
 Click the Connector tool in the Tools group on the Home tab. When you use this
technique, the Connector tool remains active until you select a different tool.
 Right-click the drawing page or a shape, and then click the Add One Connector To
The Page button. Just as the name suggests, using the mini toolbar technique draws
exactly one connector, and then the pointer reverts to the Pointer Tool.
 Use the AutoConnect feature that is described in the topic “Use AutoConnect and
Quick Shapes” later in this chapter.
Connect to shapes that contain connection points
When the Connector tool is active, the pointer changes to a black arrow; beneath it is an
arrow that has two right-angle bends. Both parts of Figure 2-25 include an active
Connector tool.
Figure 2-25 The Connector tool interacting with nearby shapes
As was true with the line tools described in the preceding topic, when you move the
Connector tool close enough to a specific connection point, a green square surrounds the
connection point. See the right side of Figure 2-25 for an example.
Clicking a connection point glues the line to the connection point. When you then drag to
a different connection point and release the mouse button, you create static glue between
the two connection points. Regardless where you move the glued shapes, the connector
will always be attached at the same two points.

 Tip
Visio uses the same circle symbols to identify glued dynamic connectors that were
used to identify glued lines.
In the graphic on the left in Figure 2-26, notice that the “to” end of the connector includes
an arrowhead. Although the arrowhead is largely obscured by the green handle in this
image, when the dynamic connector is deselected, as it is in the right side of Figure 2-26,
the arrowhead is visible. Although you can add arrowheads and other types of line ends to
any 1-D shape, dynamic connectors typically include them by default.
Figure 2-26 Shapes linked with a connector and a connector that is not glued to any
shapes
 Tip
Arrowheads are just one type of format that can be applied to either a line or a
connector. Line formatting is described in “Apply colors and patterns” in Chapter 6,
“Add style, color, and themes.”
In the image on the right in Figure 2-26 is a connector above the rectangle that has not
been glued to any shapes. This connector displays a white square on the “from” end and a
gray square on the “to” end. Even if you try to draw the connector as a straight line, notice
that it appears to have a mind of its own. This will turn out to be one of the most useful
characteristics of a dynamic connector, as you will discover in the remainder of this topic.
To use the Connector tool
1. On the Home tab, in the Tools group, click the Connector tool to select a persistent
tool.
Or
Right-click the drawing page, and then click the Add One Connector to the Page
button in the lower-left corner of the mini toolbar to select a one-time-use
Connector tool.
2. Drag to create a dynamic connector.
To glue a dynamic connector to a connection point (static glue)
1. Select the persistent Connector tool.
Or

Select the one-time-use Connector tool.
2. Click a connection point, and then drag to another connection point.
Connect to shapes that do not contain connection points
When you drag an unglued dynamic connector end toward a shape that does not contain
connection points, the reaction is very different from dragging a line end to the same
shape.
On the left side of Figure 2-27, the “from” end of a connector is glued to a connection
point in the center of the octagon. When you drag the other end of the connector toward
the wide rectangle, which does not contain any connection points, the border of the shape
lights up in bright green.
Figure 2-27 Interaction between a dynamic connector and a shape without connection
points
Note the location of the pointer (marked by a plus sign) inside the wide rectangle on the
left side of Figure 2-27; you will notice in the image on the right that the “to” end of the
arrow has been attached at a different location. In fact, Visio has established dynamic glue
to the rectangle and it has chosen a contact point that is directly below the center of the
octagon.
 Tip
It’s important to note that shapes with connection points react in the same way to an
approaching dynamic connector as shapes without connection points. Consequently,
you have two choices for attaching a connector to a shape with connection points.
You can create static glue to a specific connection point, or you can establish
dynamic glue to the shape as a whole simply by pointing to a part of the shape
without connection points before releasing the mouse button.
To see the real power of the dynamic connector, move a shape at one end and watch how
Visio adds and removes corners or bends.
It’s also important to appreciate the difference in behavior between the reactions of a
dynamic connector that is statically glued versus one that is dynamically glued.
Figure 2-28 illustrates how Visio adjusts a dynamically glued connector to accommodate

changes in the position of one or both shapes at its ends.
Figure 2-28 Differing attachment points of a connector that has been glued
dynamically on the “to” end
 On the left side of the figure, the rectangle is moved to the right from its position in
Figure 2-27 and the connector now touches the rectangle at a different place.
 On the right side of Figure 2-28, the rectangle is moved to a position above the
octagon, and the connector is now attached at the bottom of the rectangle.
Through both of these changes, the connector remains in the center of the octagon because
it is statically glued there.
Figure 2-29 demonstrates a case in which both ends of a connector use static glue.
Regardless of the relative position of the rectangle and circle, the connector always exits
the rectangle at the middle of the right edge and it enters the circle at the middle of the left
side.
Figure 2-29 Statically glued connectors remain attached at fixed points
To glue a dynamic connector to a shape (dynamic glue)
1. Select the persistent Connector tool.
Or
Select the one-time-use Connector tool.
2. Click any part of a shape where there is not a connection point, and then drag to any
part of another shape where there is not a connection point.

Change connector style and segmentation
By default, dynamic connectors use right-angle bends, as shown in Figure 2-29. You can
change the appearance of a dynamic connector by right-clicking it and selecting one of the
upper three options shown in Figure 2-30.
Figure 2-30 Lower portion of the shortcut menu that appears after right-clicking a
dynamic connector
As you move shapes that are linked by dynamic connectors, Visio adjusts the connector
segments. In addition, you can manually adjust individual connector segments by dragging
the blue control handles that appear at each bend and in the middle of each segment when
you select a connector. The adjustment handles are visible in several previous figures but
are especially apparent in Figure 2-31.
Figure 2-31 Adjustment handles appear at intervals along a selected dynamic
connector
As you move shapes that are linked by dynamic connectors, Visio adjusts the connector
segments. In addition, you can manually adjust individual connector segments by dragging
the blue control handles that appear at each bend and in the middle of each segment when
you select a connector. The adjustment handles are visible in several previous figures but
are especially apparent in Figure 2-31.
If at any point a dynamic connector has too many bends or becomes too convoluted, you
can right-click it and then click Reset Connector (see Figure 2-30). Visio redraws the
connector by using the minimum number of bends and segments to fit in the required
space.
As a final illustration of the difference in behavior between a dynamic connector and a
line, Figure 2-32 revisits the shapes from Figure 2-21.

Figure 2-32 Fixed connection points as a result of static glue
In contrast to the dynamic connector behavior in Figure 2-29, the rectangle and circle in
Figure 2-32 are linked with static glue on both ends of a line. Regardless of the shapes’
positions relative to each other, the line remains glued at the same points.
To create bends in a dynamic connector
1. Select a shape at one end of a dynamic connector.
2. Drag the shape to a new location on the page.
To move segments of a dynamic connector
1. Select a dynamic connector that contains at least one bend.
2. Drag one of the blue adjustment handles on the dynamic connector.
To change the style of a dynamic connector
1. Select a dynamic connector that contains at least one bend.
2. Right-click the connector and select Right-Angle Connector, Straight Connector,
or Curved Connector.
To restore a dynamic connector to its simplest form
1. Right-click the dynamic connector, and then click Reset Connector.

Identifying 1-D shapes and types of glue
In the preceding topics, you learned about several types of 1-D shapes and two
forms of glue. This sidebar summarizes the behavior of 1-D shapes and identifies
the visual cues Visio uses to differentiate glued and unglued endpoints of 1-D
shapes.
 A 1-D shape drawn with any of the line tools (Line, Freeform, Arc, or Pencil)
retains its original form when the shapes at the ends are moved.
 A 1-D shape created by using the Connector tool adds or removes bends in the
line to accommodate shape movements.
 A line or dynamic connector attached to a connection point forms static glue;
the 1-D shape remains attached at that fixed point on the 2-D shape no matter
how the 2-D shape is moved.
 A dynamic connector attached to a shape but not to a connection point forms
dynamic glue; as the 2-D shape moves, the point at which the dynamic
connector attaches to the shape changes.
 A 1-D shape whose endpoints are not glued appears with square control handles
that are white on the “from” end and gray on the “to” end, as shown in Figure 2-
33.
Figure 2-33 Unglued dynamic connector
 A 1-D shape whose endpoints are glued appears with round control handles; the
“from” end is a green circle and the “to” end shows a green dot inside a white
circle, as shown in Figure 2-34.
Figure 2-34 Glued dynamic connector
Tip
In previous versions of Visio, the endpoints of 1-D shapes that were attached by
using static glue looked different than endpoints that were attached by using
dynamic glue. Visio 2016 no longer provides a visual distinction between the two.

Use AutoConnect and Quick Shapes
AutoConnect was introduced in Visio 2007 and provides a fast means to link shapes by
using dynamic connectors. Quick Shapes were introduced in Visio 2010 and build on
AutoConnect so you can create drawings even more quickly.
For many diagrams, using the Dynamic Grid is sufficient for aligning and spacing shapes
as you add them to the page. However, the combination of AutoConnect and Quick
Shapes in Visio 2016 is an even better choice for certain diagram types.
 Tip
The shapes shown in the figures in this topic are from the Basic Flowchart Shapes
stencil in the Basic Flowchart template located in the Flowchart template group.
Flowcharts provide an excellent example. If you drag a set of flowchart shapes onto the
page in a configuration like the one shown in Figure 2-35, you can use AutoConnect to
add dynamic connectors simply by pointing and clicking.
Figure 2-35 The start of a flowchart, with no dynamic connectors
AutoConnect arrows appear as four small blue triangles when you point to any shape on
the drawing page, as shown in Figure 2-36.
Figure 2-36 Three flowchart shapes that have the pointer on top, causing AutoConnect
arrows to appear

 Important
If the AutoConnect arrows don’t appear when you point to a shape, it’s probably
because AutoConnect is turned off for this drawing. To activate AutoConnect,
select the AutoConnect check box in the Visual Aids group on the View tab.
There is also an application-level setting for AutoConnect. Consequently, if the
arrows still don’t appear after changing the document setting, you have another
recourse. In the Backstage view, click Options. In the Visio Options dialog box,
click Advanced, and then verify that the Enable AutoConnect check box is selected.
Clicking one of the arrows fires a dynamic connector across the gap and glues the ends
dynamically to both shapes. With just three clicks, the sample diagram looks like Figure 2-
37.
Figure 2-37 Partially completed flowchart
It’s clear that AutoConnect makes short work of adding dynamic connectors to existing
shapes. Each AutoConnect arrow seeks out a neighboring shape in the direction that the
arrow points.
But what if you want to link a shape to one that is not directly in line with any of the four
AutoConnect arrows? It turns out that AutoConnect also solves this problem easily:
simply drag an AutoConnect arrow to any other shape.
For example, in Figure 2-37, you might want to link the decision diamond with the
process shape in the lower-right corner. To do so, click the AutoConnect arrow on the
right side of the diamond, and then drag it onto the process rectangle.
As you drag, the screen will look like the graphic on the left in Figure 2-38. When you
release the mouse button on top of the process box, the shapes will be connected, as
shown on the right.

Figure 2-38 An AutoConnect arrow used to manually link to a shape
 Tip
When you’re using AutoConnect arrows, you might notice that they seem to appear
more quickly sometimes than others. That’s because Visio wants them to be
available to you but only when you want them. If you’ve used AutoConnect
recently, the arrows appear much more quickly when you pause on a shape.
However, if you haven’t used them recently, there is a delay before they appear so
they don’t get in your way.
 Tip
On occasion, you might notice that AutoConnect arrows appear on some sides of a
shape but not on all sides. This is because the arrows only appear on the sides that
are not yet connected to a nearby shape.
As you use AutoConnect, you’ll notice that if you point to an AutoConnect arrow for a
moment before clicking, a live preview gives you a look at the result, as shown in Figure
2-39. In addition, a mini toolbar that contains four shapes appears. Although the Quick
Shapes mini toolbar is of limited value when you are using AutoConnect to link existing
shapes, it is of significant value for adding shapes to the page, as you will discover in the
remainder of this topic.
Figure 2-39 A live preview and the Quick Shapes mini toolbar
Figure 2-40 contains one shape—a start/end shape—on the drawing page. Pointing to the
AutoConnect arrow on the right of the start/end shape reveals the Quick Shapes mini
toolbar. If you leave the pointer over the AutoConnect arrow, a live preview shows a
preview of the shape that is currently selected in the stencil.

Figure 2-40 A selected master in the stencil and the Quick Shapes mini toolbar on the
drawing page
If you want to add another start/end shape to the current drawing, a single click will
accomplish that and the new shape will be automatically spaced at the default interval for
this page.
However, if you want to add a different shape, Quick Shapes provide an instant solution.
Every open stencil in Visio 2016 includes a Quick Shapes section at the top of the stencil
window pane, and most stencils include preselected Quick Shapes. If you look closely at
the Basic Flowchart Shapes in the Shapes window, you’ll notice a fine gray line between
the Document/Data shapes and the Database/External Data shapes.
The shapes that appear in the mini toolbar are the first four shapes in the Quick Shapes
section. If you want different shapes to appear on the Quick Shapes mini toolbar, simply
drag them to be among the first four shapes in the Quick Shapes section of the stencil.
 Tip
You can change the order of appearance of masters in either the Quick Shapes
section or in the main part of a stencil merely by dragging a master to a new
location.
Point to any of the shapes in the Quick Shapes mini toolbar and notice that the live
preview changes to reflect that shape, as illustrated in Figure 2-41.
Figure 2-41 Quick Shapes with a live preview
Starting with a single shape on the page, as shown in Figure 2-40, three clicks on the
Quick Shapes mini toolbar will build the diagram shown in Figure 2-42.

Figure 2-42 Diagram completed with Quick Shapes
 Tip
When you “shoot” shapes onto the drawing page by using AutoConnect by itself or
in conjunction with Quick Shapes, new shapes are positioned by using the default
spacing interval for the page. For information about changing the default spacing
intervals, see Figure 2-4.
 See Also
For more information about creating flowcharts, see the “Visio Blog,” written by
the Visio product team at Microsoft, which contains two posts that were written for
Visio 2010 but still apply to Visio 2016:
blogs.msdn.com/b/visio/archive/2009/09/22/autoconnect-in-visio-2010.aspx and
blogs.msdn.com/b/visio/archive/2010/12/08/flowcharts-in-under-a-minute.aspx.
 Tip
AutoConnect and Quick Shapes are fabulous tools—when you want them. There
are times, however, when they get in the way. Remember that you can turn
AutoConnect off by clearing the AutoConnect check box in the Visual Aids group
on the View tab.
To use AutoConnect to link adjacent shapes
1. With two shapes positioned side-by-side on the drawing page but not connected to
each other, point to one of the shapes until the AutoConnect arrows appear.
2. Click the AutoConnect arrow that points to the second shape.
To use AutoConnect to link non-adjacent shapes
1. With two shapes positioned anywhere on the drawing page but not connected to
each other, point to one of the shapes until the AutoConnect arrows appear.
2. Drag one of the AutoConnect arrows on top of the other shape.
To use AutoConnect to add a shape from the stencil to the page.

1. In the stencil, select the next shape you want.
2. Click one of the AutoConnect arrows on any shape that is already on the drawing
page.
To use AutoConnect and Quick Shapes to add a shape to the page
1. Point to a shape on the page until the AutoConnect arrows appear.
2. Point to one of the AutoConnect arrows until the Quick Shapes mini toolbar
appears.
3. Click any shape on the mini toolbar to add that shape to the page.
To change which masters appear on the Quick Shapes mini toolbar
1. Open a stencil that contains more than four masters.
2. Drag any master so it is one of the top four shapes above the Quick Shapes line at
the top of the stencil.
3. Verify that the Quick Shapes mini toolbar includes your master.
Use AutoAdd and AutoDelete
Visio 2016 offers easy ways to for you to add and delete shapes in a connected drawing
and then have Visio perform the work of rearranging the diagram to accommodate the new
or removed shapes.
 When you add a shape by using AutoAdd, Visio rearranges the existing drawing to
make the new shape fit. Sometimes the changes it makes are minor; other times they
are more significant.
 When you delete a shape that is linked to another shape with a dynamic connector,
AutoDelete automatically removes the now superfluous connector. In addition, if
you delete a shape that is between two other shapes, Visio will delete one dynamic
connector and reconnect the remaining one to both surviving shapes.
 Tip
The shapes shown in the figures in this topic are from the Basic Flowchart Shapes
stencil that opens when you use the Basic Flowchart template located in the
Flowchart template group.
Use AutoAdd
To take advantage of AutoAdd, you simply drop a shape onto an existing dynamic
connector. When you move the new shape into position over a dynamic connector prior to
dropping it, Visio notifies you that AutoAdd is active by adding solid green squares at
both ends of the connector, as shown in both parts of Figure 2-43.

Figure 2-43 Visual feedback alerts you to AutoAdd
Figure 2-44 shows a sample diagram that will be modified by AutoAdd and AutoDelete in
the following paragraphs. Note the position of the unconnected shape in the upper-right
corner.
Figure 2-44 Flowchart sample diagram
Figure 2-45 shows the result of dropping a subprocess shape on the connector below the
decision diamond.
Figure 2-45 AutoAdd moves a shape down the page
Figure 2-46 shows a more substantial rearrangement after dropping a subprocess shape on
the connector between the start/end shape and the adjacent process shape. In order to
maintain the position of the unconnected process shape in the upper-right corner, Visio
moved multiple shapes down and to the right.

Figure 2-46 AutoAdd moves shapes down and to the right
To use AutoAdd
1. Connect two shapes by using a dynamic connector.
2. Drag a shape from a stencil onto the dynamic connector.
Use AutoDelete
You can use AutoDelete simply by deleting a connected shape. For example, if you delete
the bottom process shape in Figure 2-46, Visio also deletes the dynamic connector that
was between the shapes, producing the result in Figure 2-47.
Figure 2-47 AutoDelete has removed a dynamic connector
If you then delete the subprocess shape in the upper-left corner of Figure 2-47, Visio
“heals” the now broken links, as shown in Figure 2-48.

Figure 2-48 AutoDelete has healed a broken pair of connectors
 Tip
If you don’t like the results of an AutoAdd or AutoDelete operation, a single Undo
command will reset all changes made by the shape addition or deletion.
To use AutoDelete
1. Delete a shape that is linked to two other shapes and note that Visio combines the
connectors that are left behind into a single connector.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Place shapes by using the Dynamic Grid
 Select, copy, paste, and duplicate shapes
 Position shapes by using rulers and guides
 Resize, reposition, and reorient shapes
 Connect shapes by using lines
 Connect shapes by using dynamic connectors
 Use AutoConnect and Quick Shapes
 Use AutoAdd and AutoDelete
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch02 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.

Place shapes by using the Dynamic Grid
Start Visio, click the General template category thumbnail, double-click the Basic
Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag several shapes from the stencil onto the drawing page, and then use the
Dynamic Grid to align two shapes either horizontally or vertically.
2. Add one or more additional shapes to the page, and use the Dynamic Grid to align
one shape with two other shapes, one horizontally and one vertically, at the same
time.
3. Use the Dynamic Grid to set several shapes at the default spacing interval for the
page.
4. Change the inter-space shape defaults for the current page, and then reposition
several shapes to match the new interval.
5. Change the widths and heights of several shapes on the page so they have various
values, and then use the resize handles on one shape to see how you can easily
match the width and/or the height of other shapes on the page by using the Dynamic
Grid.
6. Use the drawing tools to add additional shapes to the page, and then reposition and
resize them by using the Dynamic Grid.
Select shapes
Open the SelectShapes diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Create a selection that consists of shapes A and E by clicking them.
2. Click the drawing page to deselect all shapes.
3. Select shapes A and D by using a bounding box.
4. Use Lasso Select to create a selection consisting of shapes A, C, and E.
5. Change the selection tool back to Area Select.
6. Select shape D by clicking it.
7. Add shapes A and B to the selection by using a bounding box.
8. Deselect all shapes.
9. Select all shapes at once.
Copy, paste, and duplicate shapes
On the New page in Visio, click the General template category thumbnail, double-click the
Basic Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag a circle, triangle, octagon, and square from the stencil onto the drawing page.
2. Copy the triangle and octagon, and then paste them to a different page; notice that
Visio places them in the same relative position on the destination page as they were

on the source page.
3. Return to the source page, and then paste the shapes. Notice that they are offset
from the originals.
4. Copy the circle and square, and then create three sets of duplicates.
5. Select the octagon. While holding down the Ctrl key, drag the shape to the lower-
right corner of the page, and then release the mouse button to duplicate it.
Position shapes by using rulers and guides
Open the PositionShapes diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag shape D up so the middle is aligned at 3 inches.
2. Drag shape C above shape A and use the Dynamic Grid to align it at the left end of
shape A.
3. Drag a vertical guide onto the page and position it somewhere in the right half of
shape A.
4. Drag shape C to the right and glue its center to the guide.
5. Align the center of shape E with the center of shape C by gluing its center to the
guide.
6. Drag the guide to the left so the centers of shapes C and E are aligned with the left
edge of shape A.
Resize, reposition, and reorient shapes
Open the ResizeShapes diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag the right edge of shape B until the Dynamic Grid shows that it is the same
width as shape A.
2. Try to increase the height of shape B.
3. Drag one of the top corner handles until the top of shape D is located at 3 inches
according to the ruler. Note that both the width and height change as you drag the
corner handle.
4. Open the Size & Position window.
5. Rotate shape E 90 degrees to the left; note the changing angle displayed on the
status bar and in the Size & Position window.
6. While dragging the handle on the right edge of shape A to the left, note that the
changing width of the shape is displayed on the status bar and in the Size & Position
window.
7. Use the Size & Position window to relocate shape A so that the pin is 2 inches from
the left and 5 inches from the bottom of the page.

Connect shapes by using lines
Open the UseLines diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Use the Line tool to draw a line from the right edge of the upper rectangle to the left
edge of the adjacent circle.
2. Revert to the Pointer Tool.
3. Drag the circle upward and note that the line remains connected and is always a
straight line.
4. Select the Line tool from the mini toolbar.
5. Draw a line from the center of the octagon to the center of the wide rectangle,
noting that connection points do not appear on the rectangle as you approach it with
the Line tool.
6. Drag the rectangle downward and note that the line is not glued to the rectangle.
7. Select the Freeform tool.
8. Draw a freeform line from a connection point on the circle to one on the square.
9. Move either the circle or the square and observe the behavior of the line.
Connect shapes by using dynamic connectors
Open the UseDynamicConnectors diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Select the Connector tool.
2. Create static glue by drawing a dynamic connector from the connection point on the
right edge of the upper rectangle to the connection point on the left edge of the
adjacent circle.
3. Revert to the Pointer Tool by using a different method than you used in the
previous set of tasks.
4. Drag the circle to various locations on the page and note the changes in the
appearance of the connector.
5. Select the Connector tool.
6. Create a combination of static and dynamic glue by drawing a connector from the
connection point at the center of the octagon to the center of the wide rectangle.
Note that the border of the rectangle lights up in green as you approach it with the
Connector tool.
7. Drag the rectangle to various locations on the page and note the changes in
appearance of the connector.
8. Select any dynamic connector.
9. Drag various adjustment handles on the connector to add, rearrange, or remove
segments.
10. Change the style of the connector to Curved Connector, and then experiment with

the adjustment handles.
11. Restore the dynamic connector to its simplest form.
Use AutoConnect and Quick Shapes
Open the UseAutoConnect diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Point to the start/end shape until the AutoConnect arrows appear.
2. Click the right-facing AutoConnect arrow to link the start/end shape to the adjacent
process shape.
3. Use AutoConnect to link the process shape from step 2 to the decision diamond, and
the decision diamond to the process shape below it.
4. Point to the process shape to the right of the decision diamond.
5. Drag the right-facing AutoConnect arrow and drop it on the process shape in the
lower-right corner.
6. Add a page to the diagram.
7. Drag a start/end shape onto the drawing page.
8. Point to the start/end shape, and then to the right-facing AutoConnect arrow until
the Quick Shapes mini toolbar appears.
9. Click any shape on the Quick Shapes mini toolbar to add that shape to the page.
10. Drag the Database master up in the stencil until it is one of the first four shapes.
11. Point to any AutoConnect arrow on the page to see that the Database master is
included on the Quick Shapes mini toolbar.
12. Optional: Drag the Database master back to its original position between the Data
and External Data masters.
Use AutoAdd and AutoDelete
Open the UseAutoAddAutoDelete diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag a Subprocess master from the stencil and drop it on the vertical connector
below the decision diamond shape.
2. Drag a Subprocess master from the stencil and drop it on the horizontal connector
between the start/end shape and the adjacent process shape.
3. Delete the process shape at the bottom of the diagram. Note that the connector that
led to it is also deleted.
4. Delete the subprocess shape in the upper-left part of the diagram and note that the
two remaining connectors become a single connector.

3. Manage text, shapes, and pages
In this chapter
 Manage shape text
 Create and format text boxes
 Add ScreenTips and comments
 Insert pictures
 Replace shapes
 Group shapes
 Understand and use layers
 Manage pages
Practice files
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
In the first two chapters, you explored the Visio user interface and discovered several
methods for adding shapes to a drawing. For many diagrams, a logical next step is to add
text to the shapes. Having done that, you might need to change the way text is displayed
on certain shapes by moving, rotating, or enhancing it. In addition, many diagrams call for
text-only shapes, comments, or ScreenTips.
In other situations, you might discover that a different shape would be preferable to one on
the page. Replacing one shape with another is easy in Visio 2016, unlike in earlier
versions of the product. You might also find times when it’s convenient or necessary to
make a change to multiple shapes at once—a good reason to know more about groups and
layers.
Finally, it’s often helpful to display certain graphics or words on multiple pages. Rather
than copy and paste the same text boxes and shapes to every page, you can create
background pages to contain the repeated content, and then assign those background pages
to foreground pages to achieve the result you want.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to managing shape text, creating and
formatting text boxes, annotating shapes with ScreenTips and comments, inserting
pictures, replacing and grouping shapes, understanding and using layers, and managing
pages.
Manage shape text
Many Visio shapes serve their purpose without annotation, but sometimes you need to add
text to a shape in order to complete a diagram. In Visio, you can add text to a shape so it
becomes part of the shape, or you can create a text-only shape. You will explore the
former in this topic and discover the latter approach in “Create and format text boxes,”
later in this chapter.

Add text to shapes
Most shapes are designed so you can add text to the shape in any of the three ways that are
listed in the procedures at the end of this section.
The text you add to a shape usually appears in the center, but it can appear anywhere, as
shown in Figure 3-1. The differences in text location are either the result of a decision
made by a shape designer or an action taken by a Visio user. (You will learn about
repositioning the text on a shape in the section that follows.)
Figure 3-1 Text positioned in different ways on shapes created by using the drawing
tools and on shapes from Visio stencils
Just as shape designers can choose where to position text on a shape, they can also choose
to prevent text entry or edits—you might encounter these types of shapes as you explore
Visio diagrams. Unfortunately, a shape’s appearance doesn’t indicate whether its text has
been locked. For example, the squares in Figure 3-2 look similar but have one important
difference: the square on the right displays an error message when you attempt to add text.
Figure 3-2 The square on the left accepts text entry, but the one on the right is locked
Although one of the topics in Appendix A, “Look behind the curtain,” discusses how to
unlock the text edit attribute, you should always be careful when altering a shape you
didn’t design—there might be unintended consequences.
 Important
The techniques that follow work with most shapes. However, because shapes can be
locked to prevent the addition of text, you might encounter a few shapes on which
these procedures will not work.
To add text to shapes
1. Do any of the following:
• Click a shape, and then enter text.
• Double-click a shape, and then enter text.
• Click a shape, press F2 to enter edit mode, and then enter text.

To exit text entry mode
1. Do any of the following:
• Click anywhere outside the shape being edited.
• Press the Esc key.
• Press F2.
Or
1. Enable use of the Enter key to terminate text entry by doing the following:
a. Display the Backstage view.
b. Click Options to open the Visio Options dialog box.
c. In the Visio Options dialog box, click Advanced, and then select the Pressing
ENTER commits shape text check box. Note that selecting this option requires
that you press Shift+Enter to enter multiline text within a shape.
Reposition and resize shape text
The text on a Visio shape is located in a separate object known as a text block. Visio
provides a Text Block tool so you can move and resize the text block independently from
its parent shape. In addition, you can use several buttons on the Home tab to reposition
text within a text block.
The independence of the text block is apparent in Figure 3-3. If you click the city shape by
using the Pointer Tool, you will see the result shown on the left—a selection rectangle
appears around the city icon. However, if you click the city shape by using the Text Block
tool, you will see the result shown on the right—the selection rectangle, accompanied by
all of the usual control handles, appears around the shape’s text block.
Figure 3-3 A selection rectangle around a shape and around its text block
You can drag a text block’s resize handles to change the size of the block, or you can drag
the entire text block to a different location, as shown in Figure 3-4.
Figure 3-4 Three city shapes with text in different locations
You can use the buttons in the Font and Paragraph groups on the Home tab to change just
about any characteristic of the text in a shape. Most relevant to this section are the six text

alignment buttons in the Paragraph group that you can use to set the text position within a
text block. Figure 3-5 illustrates three of the nine preset text position options available on
the ribbon.
Figure 3-5 Three squares with varying internal text alignment
 Tip
To use the text alignment buttons, you can select a shape by using either the Pointer
Tool or the Text Block tool.
To activate the Text Block tool
1. On the Home tab, in the Tools group, click the Text Block tool.
To move the text block on a shape
1. Select the shape by using the Text Block tool, and then drag the text block to a new
location.
To change the size of the text block on a shape
1. Select the shape by using the Text Block tool, and then drag any resize handle.
To change text alignment within the text block
1. On the Home tab, in the Paragraph group, click any of the text alignment buttons.
Or
1. Right-click a shape.
2. On the mini toolbar, click the Align Text button, and then click one of the nine
alignment buttons.
Orient shape text
The orientation of the text in a Visio shape can match the orientation of the shape, or it can
be quite different. The difference is based on the design of the shape and the formulas
embedded within it. (It is also possible for code running in a Visio add-in to alter text
orientation; however, that possibility is not considered in the examples that follow.)
Generally, when you rotate a shape, the text in the shape rotates along with it, which is
probably what you would expect to happen. Indeed, this is the default behavior for text in
a Visio shape; Figure 3-6 shows an example.

Figure 3-6 An inverted shape whose text is also upside down
When you select more than one shape and rotate the entire selection, the text on the
selected shapes might not all behave the same way. In Figure 3-7, the group of shapes on
the left shows upright text on the selected shapes, one of which is a dynamic connector
arrow pointing to the right. In the other two groups, the text in the circle and square is
rotated with the respective shapes, whereas the connector text remains right side up. This
is an example of a shape that contains formulas that cause shape text to behave differently.
Figure 3-7 The text on a dynamic connector does not rotate when the connector and
adjacent shapes are rotated
Other text behaviors are possible, too. For example, the Right Arrow shape shown in
Figure 3-8 is from the Blocks Raised stencil in the Block Diagram template. Its text
neither follows the orientation of the shape nor is always upright. Instead, a formula in the
shape maintains the text at multiples of 45 degrees.
Figure 3-8 Comparing shape rotation with text rotation when the latter is controlled by
a formula in the shape
In addition to controlling text angle with embedded formulas, you can also control the
orientation of the text in a shape from the Visio user interface. The arrow shown in Figure
3-9 is the 2-D Single arrow from the Blocks stencil in the Basic Shapes template. The text
on the arrow rotates with the arrow unless you take direct control by using the Text Block
tool that was introduced in the preceding topic; the results of rotating just the text block
are shown in Figure 3-9.

Figure 3-9 The text can rotate while the shape remains fixed
Remember that you can combine several text block alterations to achieve the effect you
want. The two computer monitors shown on the left side of Figure 3-10 show one
possibility. The text on the left monitor is in the default position; the text on the right
monitor is raised and rotated to create a different effect. In the city icon, the text is rotated
and styled to produce a more dramatic view.
Figure 3-10 Text blocks can be repositioned and rotated
To rotate a shape
1. Do one of the following:
• Select the shape, and then drag the rotation handle.
• Select the shape, open the Size & Position window, and then enter a new value
for Angle.
• On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click the Position button, point to
Rotate Shapes, and then click one of the Rotate or Flip menu items.
To rotate multiple shapes
1. Select two or more shapes, and then do one of the following:
• Drag the rotation handle.
• Click the Position button, point to Rotate Shapes, and then click one of the
Rotate or Flip menu items,
To rotate only the text on a shape but not the shape
1. On the Home tab, in the Tools group, click the Text Block button.
2. Click the shape whose text you want to rotate, and then drag the rotation handle.
Create and format text boxes
In addition to adding text to shapes, you can create text-only shapes by using the Text tool.
When you first add a text box to the page, it inherits the default font and paragraph
formatting and other settings, as shown on the left in Figure 3-11.

Figure 3-11 Text boxes can be simple or elaborate, depending on the style of your
diagram
After the text box is on the page, however, it is just another Visio shape. Consequently,
you can change its text properties, but you can also apply themes, variants, effects, or any
other shape formatting attributes. The image on the right in Figure 3-11 shows the same
text box but with dramatically different styling.
 See Also
For information about themes, variants, and effects, see Chapter 6, “Add style,
color, and themes.”
 Important
Both novice and experienced Visio users who need to add a label to a shape often
make the same mistake: they create a text box, enter text, and then position the text
box on top of or near the shape.
Although this approach does place text near the shape, it does not make the text part
of the shape. This presents two significant disadvantages: moving the shape does
not automatically move the text, and it isn’t possible to run a report that summarizes
the text that is associated with each shape. The consequence of the latter may not be
apparent yet, but will become clearer in Chapter 8, “Work with shape data.”
If your goal is to add a text label to a shape, it is almost always better to enter the
text directly into the shape, as described in “Manage shape text” earlier in this
chapter, rather than to position a text box nearby.
To create a text box
 Tip
The first two options in step 1 activate a persistent Text tool; you need to select a
different tool (for example, the Pointer Tool) to do anything other than create more
text boxes. The third option activates a one-time-use Text tool.
1. On the Home tab, in the Tools group, click the Text button.
Or
Press Ctrl+2.

Or
Right-click the drawing page, click the Drawing Tools button on the mini toolbar,
and then click either Horizontal Text Box or Vertical Text Box.
2. Drag to create a text box.
Add ScreenTips and comments
You can include ScreenTips and comments in your diagrams to provide readers with
supplemental, on-demand information. Although these serve similar purposes, they have
very different characteristics:
 ScreenTips These display pop-up text when you point to a shape, but they are
otherwise invisible. In fact, there is no way to know that a ScreenTip exists unless
you point to a shape containing one and a ScreenTip appears.
 Important
ScreenTips are part of a shape. Consequently, they move with a shape and are
deleted when you delete a shape.
 Comments These indicate their presence with a special icon but require that you
click the icon in order to view the comment text. Each comment shows the name of
the comment author and the date when it was created. Beginning with Visio 2013,
one comment shape can contain threaded comments from multiple authors;
individual entries are displayed in chronological order.
 Important
If you select exactly one shape and add a comment, the comment will be attached to
that shape. If you select two or more shapes and then add a comment, the comment
will be attached to the anchor shape. (Anchor shapes are explained in Chapter 6,
“Add style, color, and themes.”) If you add a comment when no shapes are selected,
the comment will be attached to the drawing page.
 Tip
Prior to Visio 2013, comments were always attached to a page and never to a shape.
If you have an older version of Visio and move a shape that happens to have a
comment near it, you will successfully move the shape, but the comment will not
move. For more information about commenting, see Chapter 15, “Collaborate and
publish diagrams.”
When deciding whether to use ScreenTips or comments, consider the following:
 Use ScreenTips to provide useful but noncritical information about a shape;

however, understand that readers might not discover the existence of a ScreenTip.
 Use comments when it’s important for readers to see that a comment exists, when
you expect multiple people to exchange ideas as threaded comments, and when it’s
helpful to know the author, date, and time for each annotation.
 Tip
Callouts provide a third, and more visible, method for adding annotations to shapes.
You will work with callouts in Chapter 13, “Add structure to your diagrams.”
An example of a ScreenTip and a comment is shown in Figure 3-12. The ScreenTip
appears across the chair shape because the pointer is positioned on the chair shape. A
comment balloon above the upper-right corner of the sofa shape indicates the presence of
a comment; the word Comments appears because the pointer is located near the comment
indicator.
Figure 3-12 ScreenTips and comments appear in different ways
Clicking a comment indicator displays the text of the most recent comments, as shown in
Figure 3-13.
Figure 3-13 In addition to comment text, a comment box displays the author’s name
and the time when the comment was entered
 Tip
You can delete individual comments by clicking the stylized letter X located to the
right of the first comment and any other comment to which you point.
Comments added by a different author are clearly marked, as shown in Figure 3-14. When

a shape contains multiple comments, you can collapse individual comments, as shown for
the first comment in Figure 3-14.
Figure 3-14 Threaded comments make it easy to follow a conversation
 Tip
In addition to adding comments to shapes, you can also add comments to a page. If
you do, Visio places a comment indicator in the upper-left corner of the page.
If you would like to see all comments in a document in one place, Visio provides a
Comments pane, as shown in Figure 3-15. Clicking a comment in the pane highlights the
shape containing the comment. If you click a comment for a shape on the current page,
Visio will move the shape into view (if it wasn’t already), and then highlight the comment
indicator in blue. If you click a comment for a shape on a different page, Visio will switch
to that page to make the commented shape visible.

Figure 3-15 All comments in a diagram are accessible in the Comments pane
 Tip
In Visio 2016, comments can be entered by Visio users or by people who do not
have Visio. Consequently, Visio users and non-users can collaborate on the same
diagram. This feature, which requires Microsoft SharePoint and Visio Services, is
described in Chapter 15, “Collaborate and publish diagrams.”
To add a ScreenTip
1. Select a shape, and then on the Insert tab, in the Text group, click the ScreenTip
button to open the Shape ScreenTip dialog box.
2. In the Shape ScreenTip dialog box, enter text, and then click OK.
To open or close the Comments pane
1. On the Review tab, in the Comments group, click the upper half of the Comments
Pane button.
To add a comment to a shape
1. Select a shape, and then on the Review tab, in the Comments group, click the New
Comment button.
Or
Select a shape, and then in the Comments pane, click the New Comment button.

Or
Right-click a shape, and then click Add Comment.
2. Enter text, and then click outside the comment box.
To add a comment to a page
1. Ensure that nothing is selected, and then on the Review tab, in the Comments
group, click the New Comment button.
Or
Right-click a blank area of a page, and then click Add Comment.
2. Enter text, and then click outside the comment box.
To reply to a comment
1. If the Comment pane is closed, click the comment indicator on a shape or a page,
and then click Reply.
Or
If the Comment pane is open, locate the comment you want, and then click Reply.
2. Enter your reply text, and then click outside the comment box.
To show or hide comment indicators
1. On the Review tab, in the Comments group, click the Comments Pane arrow (not
its button), and then click Reveal Tags.
Insert pictures
In Chapter 2, “Create diagrams,” and earlier in this chapter, you explored techniques for
creating a shape by dragging a master from a stencil and by creating a text box. At times,
however, you might want to create a shape by using an image.
Fortunately, Visio makes that easy to accomplish. You can import a photograph or an
image in any common file format from a computer, and you can search for pictures from
various online sources. Figure 3-16 shows available sources for the author’s computer.

Figure 3-16 Pictures can be inserted from multiple online locations
Figure 3-17 combines a photograph, a clip art icon, and a flag image retrieved by
searching the Internet.

Figure 3-17 You can combine a variety of image types in a single graphic
To insert an image from a computer or network drive
1. On the Insert tab, in the Illustrations group, click the Picture button.
2. Browse to the location you want, select the image file, and then click Open.
To insert an image from an online search
1. On the Insert tab, in the Illustrations group, click the Online Pictures button.
2. Enter search terms in the Bing Image Search text box.
Or
Click OneDrive or another image source.
3. Select the image you want, and then click Insert.
Replace shapes
Since the early days of Visio, users have wanted to be able to replace a shape on the
drawing page with an entirely different shape, and yet retain the key attributes of the
original shape. That capability finally arrived with Visio 2013 and is an important feature
to know about in Visio 2016.

Figure 3-18 provides a good first example to understand the power of the replace shape
feature. The diagram in Figure 3-18 was created by using the Directional Map template
(not the Directional Map 3D template) in the Maps And Floor Plans template category.
Figure 3-18 A representation of an intersection in a map drawn with Visio
By using the replace shape feature, you can do something straightforward like swap the
barn for a stadium, or perform a more complex swap, such as replacing the four-way
intersection with a full-scale, highway cloverleaf (both shown in Figure 3-19). Although
both changes required just a single click from the user, the new intersection involved more
sophisticated changes behind the scenes. The cloverleaf retains the color of the previous
intersection shape, and despite being quite a bit larger than the old intersection, it is still
glued to all four road segments.
Figure 3-19 Visio automatically adjusted the lengths of the road segments to fit the new
shape

 Tip
If you replace shapes that contain data, text, comments, and other customizations,
most are preserved in the new shapes. See Chapter 8, “Work with shape data,” for
more information about data in shapes.
When you click the Change Shape button, Visio presents the shapes in the currently active
stencil. However, Visio also provides a menu from which you can select shapes from any
other open stencil. Figure 3-20 shows the Landmark Shapes from the currently active
stencil, in addition to the names of additional stencils.
Figure 3-20 You can access shapes from multiple stencils on one menu when you have
multiple stencils open
If the shape you want is not in one of the open stencils, simply open the stencil you want
before clicking the Change Shape button. As a result, you can replace a shape in a drawing
with any of tens of thousands of other shapes.
 Tip
If you select multiple shapes before clicking Change Shape, you can replace all of
them at once.
To replace shapes
1. Select one or more shapes, and then on the Home tab, in the Editing group, click
the Change Shape button.
Or
Right-click a shape, and then on the mini toolbar, click the Change Shape button.
2. Click the replacement shape you want.
To replace shapes by using a master from a different stencil

1. (Optional) If the stencil you want isn’t open, in the Shapes window, click the More
Shapes button, and then click the name of the stencil you want to open.
2. Click the Change Shape button.
3. Click the down arrow to the right of the name of the active stencil.
4. Click the name of the stencil you want, to display a gallery of its shapes.
5. Click the replacement shape you want.
Group shapes
So far, you have primarily learned about working with simple, individual shapes.
However, sets of shapes that have been grouped together are very common in Visio for a
variety of reasons, such as the following:
 It’s easier to move or perform an operation on a set of shapes in a group than it is to
do the same thing with multiple, discrete shapes.
 Shape designers need to create a more sophisticated appearance or behavior for a
variety of reasons, such as:
• To display text in multiple places on the shape.
• To display different colors on different parts of the grouped shape.
• To allow different parts of the shape to respond differently to external changes.
• To protect the alignment of subshapes within the group.
The first case is illustrated in Figure 3-21, which shows four shapes from the Department
stencil in the Work Flow Diagram template, that have been grouped on the drawing page.
The four out-of-the-box shapes are on the left side of the diagram. In the center, the fill
color of all four shapes has been changed with a single click. On the right, the color has
been changed with another click, and all four shapes have been resized by dragging one
handle on the group. Similarly, you can move, copy and paste, or delete all four shapes
simply by performing those operations on the group shape.
Figure 3-21 You can change properties of multiple shapes at one time when they have
been grouped

 Tip
Like the individual shapes that comprise it, a group is also a shape. You can apply
borders or fills, add fields and text, and add shape data—in short, you can do
anything with a group shape that you can with any other shape.
 Tip
Selecting a shape within a group requires two clicks; the default behavior in Visio is
that the first click selects the group.
Evidence of using groups to create more-sophisticated shapes is shown in Figure 3-21;
some of the department shapes are groups themselves. The designers of those shapes
created them by combining multiple objects or images.
Figure 3-22 provides another example of sophisticated shape design. The shapes on the
left are from the Furniture stencil (the Maps And Floor Plans template group); the shapes
on the right are from the Compliance Shapes stencil (the Business template group). Like
these seven shapes, many of the masters in Visio stencils consist of grouped shapes.
Figure 3-22 Examples of grouped shapes from Visio stencils, including some new
shapes in Visio 2016
 Important
You should be cautious if you are thinking about ungrouping a shape that you didn’t
design. The reason? In many grouped shapes, the attributes of the subshapes are
derived from properties of the group. For example, the size, color, or position of a
subshape might depend on a value in the group. When you ungroup a shape, all of
its properties—shape geometry, shape data, everything—disappears. Consequently,
ungrouping can be destructive unless you know what you’re doing.
Organizing collections of shapes into groups has many advantages, but also has some
disadvantages. You will learn more about both in the topic, “Compare containers and

groups,” in Chapter 13, “Add structure to your diagrams.”
To group a selection of shapes
1. Do one of the following:
• On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click the Group button, and then click
Group.
• Right-click any of the selected shapes, click Group, and then click Group.
• Press Ctrl+G.
• Press Ctrl+Shift+G.
To ungroup a selection of shapes
1. Do one of the following:
• On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click the Group button, and then click
Ungroup.
• Right-click any of the selected shapes, click Group, and then click Ungroup.
• Press Ctrl+Shift+U.
To select a shape within a group
1. Click the group shape to select the group.
2. Click the shape you want.
Understand and use layers
You can put Visio shapes on layers to organize and control various properties of the set of
shapes. Unlike some drawing programs, Visio layers are not “in front of” or “behind”
other layers. Instead, shapes are assigned to layers to give you control over things like
whether layer members are printable, visible on the drawing page, or selectable.
In a floor plan, for example, you might put furniture on one layer, walls and building
infrastructure on another layer, and electrical wiring on a third layer. You could then use
layer properties to perform tasks like the following:
 Lock the infrastructure and wiring layers as you rearrange the furniture.
 Hide the layer containing furniture when you want to view the full, open space.
 Leave the electrical wiring visible on the screen but set the properties of its layer so
the wiring doesn’t print.
 Select all shapes on a specific layer or layers.
Using layers can be extremely helpful because they provide considerable flexibility in
managing the components of a sophisticated drawing. However, you might want to plan
your layer scheme ahead of time because of the potential complexity: a drawing page can
have multiple layers; each layer has seven properties; and a shape can reside on multiple
layers, one layer, or none.

 Tip
Every layer belongs to exactly one page. If you use the same layer name on two or
more pages, each of those layers is unrelated to the others.
The seven properties of a layer are shown in Figure 3-23 and are described in the
following text.
Figure 3-23 You can control properties of multiple shapes at once when the shapes are
on layers
Many Visio templates include predefined layers, and shapes from the corresponding
stencils are added to those layers automatically. The layers in Figure 3-23 were added to
the diagram simply by dragging shapes from the Furniture stencil in the Maps And Floor
Plans group. Similar, predefined layers are available in the Flowchart and Engineering
templates, among others.
The seven properties in the Layer Properties dialog box are:
 Visible Controls whether the shapes on a layer are visible on the drawing page.
 Print Includes or excludes the members of a layer from printing.
 Tip
Because the Visible and Print check boxes are separate, you can create a drawing in
which members of a layer are visible in the drawing but do not print, and vice
versa.
 Active Causes all new shapes added to the page to be added to the layer. More than

one layer can be active at once, in which case new shapes are added to all active
layers.
 Lock Prevents you from selecting, moving, or editing any shapes on the layer. In
addition, you cannot add shapes to a locked layer.
 Snap and Glue Allows and disallows snapping or gluing other shapes to the shapes
on this layer.
 Color Temporarily overrides the colors of all objects on a layer; clearing this option
returns layer members to their original colors. When you select the Color property
for a layer, the Layer Color and Transparency settings in the lower right of the dialog
box are activated.
 Tip
You can use both groups and layers to organize collections of shapes, but it’s
important to understand that they serve different purposes and have different
behaviors. For example, when you select a group and then move it or resize it, the
changes affect all of the shapes in the group. However, if you select and then move
or resize a shape on a layer, your action has no effect on any other shapes. By using
a layer, on the other hand, you can lock, hide, and otherwise affect all shapes on the
layer in ways that you cannot with a group.
It’s also important to realize that groups and layers are not mutually exclusive—there are
often good reasons to use both in the same drawing.
To create a layer on a page
1. On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Layers button, and then click
Layer Properties.
2. In the Layer Properties dialog box, click the New button.
3. In the New Layer dialog box, enter a layer name, and then click OK twice.
Or
1. Select a shape.
2. On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Layers button, and then click
Assign to Layer.
3. In the Layer dialog box, click the New button.
4. In the New Layer dialog box, enter a layer name, and then click OK twice.
Or
1. Copy a shape that is assigned to a layer on one page, and then paste it to another
page. (If a layer of the same name already exists on that page, the copied shape will
be added to the existing layer.)
Or

1. Drag a shape onto the drawing page from one of the stencils in the Basic Flowchart
template, or another template that contains built-in layers.
To remove a layer from a page
1. On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Layers button, and then click
Layer Properties.
2. In the Layer Properties dialog box, select the name of the layer you want to delete.
3. Click the Delete button, and then respond to the warning message shown in Figure
3-24.
Figure 3-24 Deleting a layer might delete all shapes on the layer
 Tip
The warning message shown in Figure 3-24 can be misleading. If a shape is a
member of the layer you are deleting but is also a member of another layer, the
shape will not be deleted.
4. Click OK to close the Layer Properties dialog box.
To change layer properties
1. Open the Layer Properties dialog box, select or clear the layer properties you want
to change, and then click OK.
To assign a shape to a layer
1. On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Layers button, and then click
Assign to Layer.
2. In the Layer dialog box, select the layer or layers to which you want to assign the
shape, and then click OK.
Or
1. Drag a shape onto the drawing page from one of the stencils in the Basic Flowchart
template, or another template with built-in layers.
To remove a shape from a layer
1. On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Layers button, and then click
Assign to Layer.
2. In the Layer dialog box, clear the check box in front of the layer or layers from

which you want to remove the shape, and then click OK.
To select all shapes on a layer
1. On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Select button, and then click
Select by Type.
2. In the Select by Type dialog box, click Layer, select the check box for the layer
you want, and then click OK.
Manage pages
Pages in a Visio drawing are independent of each other, so any one page can have
dimensions, measurement units, and other characteristics that are different from any other
page. Consequently, you can mix larger and smaller pages, and even portrait and
landscape pages, within the same diagram.
Within any one page, Visio maintains separate settings for the on-screen drawing page and
the physical page on which it will print. You can take advantage of this difference to do
things such as the following:
 Compress a large drawing to fit on a smaller sheet of paper.
 Print a drawing on a large sheet of paper.
 Print a drawing across multiple sheets of paper.
At a high level, Visio pages fall into two categories:
 Foreground pages These contain the active drawing content and are typically the
pages that are printed or published in some form.
 Background pages These contain shapes and page elements that can be configured
to appear on one or more pages. However, objects located on background pages
cannot be selected or edited unless the background page is the active page.
Background pages are valuable because you can link other pages to them. When you have
done that, all text and graphics on the background pages appear on the linked pages.
A common scenario is to place a border, a page number, a page name, and possibly a
watermark or other design element on a background page so all of those appear
automatically on every foreground page in a consistent location.
Another common use case is to populate a background page with the company logo, a
legal notice, and any other graphic or text you want to have appear on multiple pages.
As you plan a new diagram, especially if it will have multiple pages, remember that a
diagram can also have multiple background pages. Consequently, some foreground pages
might exhibit content from one background page, whereas other pages might use different
background pages and look entirely different.

 Tip
Although linking a foreground page to a background page is the most common
scenario, you can also link background pages to each other, creating a hierarchy of
page content that can be shared across multiple foreground pages in creative and
effective ways.
Work with foreground pages
The key to working with foreground pages is the set of page name tabs at the bottom of
the drawing window. You can right-click an existing page name tab to perform any of the
tasks in the shortcut menu shown in Figure 3-25.
Figure 3-25 You can add, remove, and alter page properties from the page tab shortcut
menu
When you add a foreground page to a diagram, Visio uses the properties of the current,
active page to set the attributes for the new page. For example, if Page-3 has a landscape
orientation with metric measurement units and is linked to a background page, your new
page will inherit those attributes, including the link to the background page.
If all of the pages in your diagram are configured the same way, then adding a new page is
straightforward. However, if your diagram contains foreground pages with differing
orientations, measurement units, background pages, or printer paper settings, you should
select the current page that is most like the page you want to add, before you click Insert.
In addition to copying the attributes of a page, Visio can duplicate the contents of a page.
First introduced with Visio 2013, the duplicate page feature satisfies a long-standing
request from Visio users.
To add a foreground page immediately after the current foreground page
1. Right-click the page name tab, and then click Insert.
2. In the Page Setup dialog box, on the Page Setup tab, click Foreground if it’s not
already selected.
3. Change the name of the page, if you want.
4. Click OK.

To add a foreground page after all current foreground pages
1. Do one of the following:
• Click the Insert Page (+) button.
• On the Insert tab, in the Pages group, click the New Page button (not its arrow).
• On the Insert tab, in the Pages group, click the New Page arrow, and then click
Blank Page.
To rename a page
1. Double-click the page name tab you want to change, and then enter a new name.
2. Press Enter.
Or
Click anywhere outside the page name tab.
Or
1. Right-click a page name tab, and then click Page Setup.
2. In the Page Setup dialog box, enter a new name in the Name box, and then click
OK.
To move a page
1. Drag a page name tab left or right to a new location.
 Tip
Dragging page name tabs is an easy way to resequence pages when the destination
tab location for your page is visible at the bottom of the drawing window. However,
if your diagram contains many pages and the destination tab is not visible, the
following method might be easier to use.
Or
1. Right-click a page name tab, and then click Reorder Pages.
2. In the Reorder Pages dialog box, shown in Figure 3-26, click the name of the page
you want to move, and then click either the Move Up or Move Down button until
the page is in the location you want.

Figure 3-26 Moving pages in a large diagram is easier by using the Reorder Pages
dialog box
3. Click OK.
To duplicate a page
1. Do one of the following:
• Right-click a page name tab, and then click Duplicate.
• On the Insert tab, in the Pages group, click the New Page arrow, and then click
Duplicate This Page.
To delete a page
1. Right-click a page name tab, and then click Delete.
Configure foreground pages
Most page configuration functions are located on one of five tabs in the Page Setup dialog
box. When you open the Page Setup dialog box, the Page Properties tab is displayed, as
shown in Figure 3-27.

Figure 3-27 You set key properties of a foreground page by using settings on the Page
Properties tab
On the Page Setup tab, you can change the page type, enter a different page name, select a
background page, or change the measurement units for the page. Be sure to notice the
scroll bar in the Measurement Units menu—you have 20 choices. If you change the
measurement units, the result is visible in the rulers on the top and left of the drawing
page.
You use the options on the Print Setup tab, shown in Figure 3-28, primarily to affect the
size and layout of the physical page on which you will print.
Figure 3-28 Printer paper settings are distinct from drawing page settings

On the Print Setup tab, you can change settings for the following:
 Printer paper Choose the paper size for your printer. Most US Units templates
default to letter-sized paper, as shown in Figure 3-28. Metric templates typically
default to A4. Regardless of the default, there is a long list of alternate, predefined
paper sizes available. You can also select Portrait or Landscape orientation.
 Print zoom The default zoom for many templates defaults to Adjust To 100%, but
you can select a different zoom level if you want your drawing to print larger or
smaller than normal. Choose a zoom setting greater than 100% in order to split your
drawing across multiple sheets of paper; choose a setting less than 100% to scale
your diagram down to fit onto a portion of the printer paper.
 Fit to Use this setting as an alternative method to scale your drawing for printing.
 Print The single setting in this section includes or excludes gridlines from printed
output. The default in most templates is to exclude gridlines.
The preview pane on the right side of the Print Setup tab changes dynamically to reflect
your current print settings and displays them in both visual and text form.
On the Page Size tab, shown in Figure 3-29, you can change attributes of the drawing
page; changes you make on this tab do not directly affect the printed page.
Figure 3-29 Drawing paper settings can mimic those of the printer paper, or can be set
independently
The Page Size tab includes two configuration sections plus a preview pane:
 Page size The first option in this section enables dynamic Auto Size behavior. As an
alternative, you can use the second and third options to set a fixed page size, either
from a list of preset sizes or by entering specific dimensions.
 Page orientation The options in this section are active only if you choose Pre-

Defined Size or Custom Size in the Page Size section. You can use these options to
set a different orientation for the physical page than the one that is set for the
drawing page.
 See Also
For information about the Drawing Scale tab, see “Change the drawing scale,” in
Chapter 7, “Create network and data center diagrams.”
To configure printer paper settings
1. Right-click a page name tab, and then click Page Setup.
2. In the Page Setup dialog box, click the Print Setup tab.
3. Make the changes you want, and then click OK.
To change page orientation
1. Do one of the following:
• On the Design tab, in the Page Setup group, click the Orientation button, and
then click either Portrait or Landscape.
• Open the Page Setup dialog box, click the Print Setup tab, click either Portrait
or Landscape, and then click OK.
To change the drawing page size
1. In the Page Setup group, click the Size button, and then click the page size you
want.
Or
1. Open the Page Setup dialog box, and then click the Page Size tab.
2. Click Pre-defined size, choose one of the standard paper sizes, and then click OK.
Or
Click Custom size, enter a page width and height in the appropriate boxes, and then
click OK.
Manage Auto Size
Auto Size is a page configuration setting that can be either helpful or annoying. The
purpose of Auto Size is to extend the size of the drawing page automatically if you drag a
shape on the canvas beyond the current page boundaries. In Figure 3-30, a circle is being
dragged off the page to the right. Its former location is shown as a selected shape, and its
current location is under the pointer. Visio is in the process of adding a new page,
identifiable by the white page-sized rectangle against the gray canvas. When you place the
circle on the new page, Visio will complete the addition of the page.

Figure 3-30 Auto Size is extending the drawing page to the right
The reverse is also true: when you delete or drag the last shape from an extended section
of the drawing page, Visio will remove the extended page.
 Tip
Auto Size works both horizontally and vertically: if you add or drag shapes above
or below the current page, Visio will add the required pages there also.
As shown in Figure 3-31, when Auto Size is off, Visio does not extend the drawing page.
Auto Size is turned on in some templates but is off in others. However, you can change the
Auto Size setting.
Figure 3-31 Auto Size is off, so the dragged shape resides on the canvas
 Tip
The Auto Size option is applied per page. Consequently, changing the setting for
the current page does not affect other pages.
To turn Auto Size on or off
1. On the Design tab, in the Page Setup group, click the Auto Size button.

Or
1. Right-click a page name tab, and then click Page Setup.
2. In the Page Setup dialog box, click the Page Size tab.
3. Click Let Visio expand the page as needed or one of the other Page size options,
and then click OK.
Work with background pages and borders
Several of the features discussed in this section create background pages for you
automatically. You can also create background pages manually. In either case, background
pages exist so you can consolidate text and graphics that need to appear on multiple pages.
Apply backgrounds and borders automatically
Two buttons in the Backgrounds group on the Design tab, shown in Figure 3-32, are the
key to automatic creation of background pages:
 Backgrounds This button provides a gallery of images that can be used on
background pages.
 Borders & Titles This button includes a gallery of border designs that are
accompanied by a text block for a title; most also include a page number and some
include a date.
Figure 3-32 The Backgrounds group of the Design tab includes two buttons for creating
background pages
When you click a button in either gallery, Visio does three things:
 Adds a background page with a name in the format of VBackground-1
 Inserts the selected border and title or image onto the background page
 Links the background page to the currently active foreground page
The result of adding the Flow background image to a foreground page containing three
square shapes is shown in Figure 3-33.

Figure 3-33 A foreground page with content from an assigned background page
 See Also
For information about using themes, see Chapter 6, “Add style, color, and themes.”
 Tip
Backgrounds and borders are not mutually exclusive. You can include both on the
same background page.
In Figure 3-34, the background image has been replaced by the Civic border and title
background page. Unrelated to the new border and title, Variant 2 of the Gemstone theme
has also been applied to Figure 3-34 to provide additional visual enhancement.

Figure 3-34 The Civic border and title background page applied to a foreground page
 Important
To change the title in a title block on a background page, you must browse to the
background page. Although you can see the word Title in Figure 3-34, you cannot
edit it because you are viewing the foreground page; background page elements are
read-only when viewed on foreground pages.
To create and apply a background page automatically
1. Do either of the following:
• On the Design tab, in the Backgrounds group, click the Backgrounds button,
and then click one of the background images in the gallery.
• On the Design tab, in the Backgrounds group, click the Borders & Titles button,
and then click one of the border/title combinations in the gallery.
To delete an automatically assigned background page from a diagram
1. Do either of the following:
• Click the Backgrounds button, and then click the None thumbnail at the top of
the gallery.
• Click the Borders & Titles button, and then click the None thumbnail at the top
of the gallery.
To remove an automatically assigned background page from a foreground
page

1. Right-click a page name tab, and then click Page Setup.
2. On the Page Setup tab of the Page Setup dialog box, in the Background list, select
None, and then click OK.
Apply background pages manually
You can add a background page manually in the same way that you add foreground pages;
however, you must be certain to set the page type to background at the appropriate time.
When you create a manual background page, Visio assigns a page name in the format
Background-1.
 Tip
You can distinguish automatically created background pages from manually created
background pages by their names. Visio begins each automatically generated page
name with the letter V, whereas manually created background pages do not contain
the V.
Figure 3-35 shows the top part of a newly created background page with two elements. In
a real diagram, the text box might contain a company name, a legal notice, an author’s
name, or any other text you want to be visible on foreground pages. The sun icon
represents a company logo or other important graphic element.
Figure 3-35 An example of a manually created background page
Having created a background page, you can then assign it to one or more existing pages.
Note that you can link a background page to only one page at a time.
 Tip
All page attributes, including background page assignments, are copied when you
insert a new page. If you want to assign the same background page to multiple new
pages, assign it to one page first, and then use that as the active page when you
insert additional pages.
Figure 3-36 shows the top part of a foreground page containing a set of triangles. The page
has been linked to the background page shown in the preceding figure.

Figure 3-36 An example foreground page with content from the background page
shown in the previous figure
To create a background page manually
1. Right-click any page name tab, click Insert, and on the Page Setup tab in the Page
Setup dialog box, click Background.
Or
On the Insert tab, in the Pages group, click the New Page arrow (not its button),
and then click Background Page.
2. Change the name of the background page, if you want.
3. Click OK.
To assign a background page manually
1. Activate the foreground page that you want to assign a background to, and then
open the Page Setup dialog box to the Page Setup tab.
2. Select a page from the Background list, and then click OK.
To remove a manually assigned background page from a foreground page
1. In the Page Setup dialog box, on the Page Setup tab, select None from the
Background list, and then click OK.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Manage shape text
 Create and format text boxes
 Add ScreenTips and comments
 Insert pictures
 Replace shapes
 Group shapes
 Understand and use layers
 Manage pages

 Practice tasks
There are no practice files for this chapter.
Manage shape text
Start Visio, click the General template category thumbnail, double-click the Basic
Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag six shapes to the drawing page.
2. Add text to all six shapes.
3. Move the text block for the first shape so the text is centered above the shape.
4. Decrease the size of the text block on another shape so the text block is smaller than
the shape.
5. Align the text in a third shape to the upper-left corner.
6. Rotate the text in the fourth shape 180 degrees.
7. Select the fourth and fifth shapes, and then rotate them clockwise by 90 degrees.
8. Rotate the text block in shape six so it is at a 45-degree angle to the shape.
9. Leave the diagram open if you’re continuing to the next practice task.
Create and format text boxes
Continue working with the diagram from the preceding practice task or create a new
diagram from the Basic Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Activate the Text tool, draw a rectangle, and then enter text into the text box.
2. Change the font and font size.
3. Rotate the text box by 45 degrees in either direction.
4. Leave the diagram open if you’re continuing to the next practice task.
Add ScreenTips and comments
Continue working with the diagram from the preceding practice task or create a new
diagram from the Basic Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Use an existing shape or add several new shapes to the page.
2. Add a ScreenTip to a shape, and then enter This is an example of ScreenTip text.
3. Point to the shape until the ScreenTip appears.
4. Select a different shape and enter a comment.
5. Click the comment indicator to see the text of the comment.

6. Reply to the comment with additional text.
7. Open the Comments pane to see how the comments appear there.
8. Ensure that no shapes are selected, and then add a comment to the page.
9. Hide the comment indicators, and then show them again.
10. Leave the diagram open if you’re continuing to the next practice task.
Insert pictures
Continue working with the diagram from the preceding practice task or create a new
diagram from the Basic Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Import a picture from your hard drive or a network drive.
2. Import an online image by searching Bing.
3. Leave the diagram open if you’re continuing to the next practice task.
Replace shapes
Continue working with the diagram from the preceding practice task or create a new
diagram from the Basic Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Use existing shapes or add several new shapes to the page.
2. Select any shape and replace it with another shape from an open stencil.
3. Select any shape and replace it with a shape from the Workflow Objects stencil in
the Flowcharts group.
4. Leave the diagram open if you’re continuing to the next practice task.
Group shapes
Continue working with the diagram from the preceding practice task or create a new
diagram from the Basic Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Select several shapes and group them.
2. Click outside the group to deselect it, and then select one of the shapes inside the
group.
3. Ungroup the group.
Understand and use layers
Create a new diagram from the Basic Flowchart template, and then perform the following
tasks:
1. Add several flowchart shapes to the page.
2. Add a new layer named Step by Step to the page.
3. Use the drawing tools to add a rectangle and a circle to the page.

4. Add the rectangle and circle to the Step by Step layer.
5. Hide all shapes on the Step by Step layer.
6. Remove the circle from the Step by Step layer.
7. Delete the Step by Step layer.
8. Select all shapes on the Flowchart layer, and then lock the layer.
9. Leave the diagram open if you’re continuing to the next practice task.
Manage pages
Continue working with the diagram from the preceding practice task or create a new
diagram from the Basic Flowchart template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Add multiple foreground pages to the diagram by using several techniques.
2. Rename one of the pages to Special.
3. Move the Special page to a new location.
4. Add several shapes to the Special page, and then duplicate the page.
5. Change the Special page settings to use a different printer paper size.
6. Change the page orientation for the Special page.
7. If Auto Size is on, drag or add a shape to extend the drawing page size; if Auto Size
is off, turn it on, and do the same.
8. Delete or move the shape back to the original page to remove the extra page or
pages.
9. Increase the size of the drawing page by selecting a standard size or by entering a
custom size.
10. Add the World background to the Special page.
11. Add the Blocks border and title to the Special page.
12. Create your own background page and add several shapes or text boxes to it.
13. Assign your background page to any foreground page in the diagram.
14. Remove the World background from the Special page.
15. Delete the Special page.

4. Create business process diagrams
In this chapter
 Select a flowchart template
 Create flowcharts
 Understand swimlane diagrams
 Build swimlane diagrams
 Understand BPMN
 Design BPMN diagrams
 Create subprocesses
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice file from the Visio2016SBS\Ch04 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
The first three chapters described many of the basic capabilities of Visio. This is the first
of several chapters in which you’ll apply that knowledge to creating real-world diagrams.
Using a flowchart template to create a business process diagram is a logical place to start,
because Microsoft estimates that nearly one-third of all Visio diagrams are created by
using a template in the Flowchart category. In this chapter, you will create three types of
business process diagrams by using the most common templates: a flowchart, a swimlane
diagram, and a Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) diagram.
If your goal is not to document a business process but to draw the logic of a software
module instead, the diagram creation techniques that follow will still apply.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to selecting a flowchart template,
creating flowcharts, understanding and building swimlane diagrams, understanding and
designing BPMN diagrams, and creating subprocesses.
 Tip
All of the flowchart and BPMN shapes used in this chapter contain data fields.
Although you will not explore shape data in this chapter, it is an essential part of the
shapes used in business process diagrams and is covered in Chapter 8, “Work with
shape data.”
Select a flowchart template
The Standard edition of Visio provides a set of basic flowchart templates, and the
Professional edition includes more than twice as many.

Visio Standard
In this chapter, you will work with two of the four templates that are included in the
Flowchart template group in Visio Standard 2016: Basic Flowchart and Cross-Functional
Flowchart. The Flowchart group, shown in Figure 4-1, also includes the Work Flow
Diagram and Work Flow Diagram – 3D templates. The former is a theme-compatible
diagram type that was introduced in Visio 2013 for mapping workflows; its stencils
include updated, modern shapes. The latter is available if you prefer the older style of
workflow diagrams that was bundled with previous versions of Visio.
Figure 4-1 Four flowchart templates are available in Visio Standard
Visio Professional
The Professional edition of Visio 2016 includes the four templates that are part of the
Standard edition, plus five additional templates, shown in Figure 4-2: BPMN, IDEF0,
SDL, and two variations of Microsoft SharePoint Workflow, one for SharePoint 2010 and
one for SharePoint 2016.

Figure 4-2 Nine flowchart templates are available in Visio Professional
 See Also
For information about IDEF0, go to en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IDEF0. For information
about SDL, go to en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Specification_and_Description_Language.

 Tip
The default font size on flowchart shapes is 8 pt. To improve the readability of the
figures in this chapter, the shapes in most screen shots use a larger font size.
Consequently, the text in the shapes on your drawing page might appear smaller
than in the figures in this chapter.
Vertical or horizontal?
People who create flowcharts have debated for years whether flowcharts should be
drawn with a vertical (portrait) or horizontal (landscape) orientation. Advocates of
the vertical approach like the top-to-bottom layout, whereas horizontal devotees
find the left-to-right (or right-to-left) approach to be easier to read.
You can create either style of flowchart in Visio, but the default layout is landscape,
most likely because most modern monitors are widescreen. Prior to Visio 2010, the
flowchart default was portrait orientation.
Create flowcharts
This topic explores the techniques for building a diagram from the Basic Flowchart
template. With the information and procedures presented in this topic, you can create
flowcharts such as the human resources recruiting process shown in Figure 4-8.
 Tip
The flowchart in this topic was formatted by using variant 2 of the Gemstone
theme. For information about themes and variants, see Chapter 6, “Add style, color,
and themes.”
One of the things you will discover very quickly when you work with flowcharts is that
they are perfect candidates for using the AutoConnect and Quick Shapes features that
were described in Chapter 2, “Create diagrams.” Although those features are helpful in a
variety of diagram types, they are particularly well suited for flowcharts.
You start a flowchart by using a start/end shape. From the Quick Shapes menu, you can
quickly add process shapes like those shown in Figure 4-3. Each process box represents
one step in the overall process.
Figure 4-3 The first row of a flowchart
Figure 4-4 shows how easy it is to position the first shape in the second row of a flowchart
by using the Dynamic Grid to align the new shape with an existing process shape.

Figure 4-4 The Dynamic Grid lines that connect the lower process shape with the
upper one emphasize that the two shapes are aligned and are the same width
Completing the second row, shown in Figure 4-5, is just as easy as the first, by using the
Quick Shapes mini toolbar to place shapes onto the page. The second row includes a
decision diamond, in addition to a second start/end shape that concludes the process flow.
Figure 4-5 Two rows of flowchart shapes that represent multiple tasks and one decision
Figure 4-6 shows an interesting alternative for adding a document shape. Clicking the
AutoConnect arrow beneath a shape causes Visio to place onto the page a copy of
whichever master is selected in the stencil.

Figure 4-6 You can place a shape onto the page by selecting a master in the stencil
Prior to clicking the AutoConnect arrow, Visio displays a live preview to show you a
semitransparent view of the shape that will be added to the diagram, as shown in Figure 4-
6.
Figure 4-7 shows the state of the flowchart after adding the document shape.
Figure 4-7 A document shape has been added beneath one process shape to indicate
that supporting documentation exists for that step
To complete a flowchart, follow these guidelines:
 If your flowchart has more than one row, link the last shape in the upper row with
the first shape in the lower row.
 Add a second outcome path to any decision diamonds you include. (You can add
additional outcomes if a decision has more than two potential results.)
 Add text to each shape.
In the final version of the flowchart shown in Figure 4-8, the dynamic connector from
upper right to lower left was attached to both shapes by using static glue for reasons
described in the “Dynamic or static glue?” sidebar on the next page. You can use either
dynamic or static glue to draw the second decision outcome at the bottom of the page.

Adding text to shapes is simply a matter of selecting shapes and typing.
Figure 4-8 A completed human resources recruiting process flowchart
To build a flowchart quickly
1. Drag a Start/End shape onto the page.
2. Use AutoConnect arrows to add additional shapes in the same row.
3. Drag a shape onto the page to begin the lower row and use the Dynamic Grid to
position it below a shape in the upper row.
4. Use AutoConnect arrows to add additional shapes in the second row.
Dynamic or static glue?
When you need to link two shapes with a connector, your choice of static versus
dynamic glue might depend partly on the positions of the two shapes on the page.
Using Figure 4-7 as an example, you could use one of the techniques that produce
dynamic glue to link the process box in the upper right with the one in the lower
left. Although the result in Figure 4-9 is a perfectly valid flowchart, it is better to
avoid overlapping connectors if there is a reasonable alternative.

Figure 4-9 A dynamically glued connector from below the upper-right shape to the
lower-left shape takes a less than optimal path
Using static glue from the connection point on the right side of the upper-right
shape to the connection point on the left side of the lower-left shape produces a
more satisfactory result, as seen in Figure 4-10.
Figure 4-10 A statically glued connector from the upper-right shape to the lower-left
shape takes the desired path
Tip
Most flowchart shapes are preconfigured with connection points in the middle of
the top, bottom, left, and right edges.
In contrast, either dynamic glue or static glue will suffice for the second decision
outcome that has been added to the bottom of the diagram in Figure 4-11.

Figure 4-11 A second decision outcome path has been added because every decision
should have at least two outcomes
To add shapes to a flowchart
1. Use any combination of the following:
• Drag a shape from the Basic Flowchart Shapes stencil.
• Use AutoConnect to place the selected master in the Basic Flowchart Shapes
stencil onto the page. The new shape connects to the preceding shape
automatically.
• Use the Quick Shapes mini toolbar to add a shape. The new shape connects to the
preceding shape automatically.
• Click the Connector tool, and then drag a shape from the Basic Flowchart
Shapes stencil. The new shape connects to the preceding shape automatically.
To connect existing shapes in a flowchart by using dynamic connectors
1. Use any combination of the following:
• Click the Connector tool, and then drag from the interior of one shape to the
interior of another, thereby creating dynamic glue.
• Click the Connector tool, and then drag from a connection point on one shape to
a connection point on another, thereby creating static glue.
• Drag an AutoConnect arrow from one shape either to the interior (dynamic glue)
or to a connection point (static glue) of another shape.
To add text to flowchart shapes
1. Do any of the following:
• Click a shape, and then enter text.
• Double-click a shape, and then enter text.
• Click a shape, press F2 to switch to edit mode, and then enter text.

To exit text entry mode
1. Do any of the following:
• Click anywhere outside the shape being edited.
• Press the Esc key.
• Press F2.
Understand swimlane diagrams
One drawback of a flowchart is that it doesn’t show who is responsible for each of the
tasks and decisions in a process. You will discover in Chapter 8, “Work with shape data,”
that flowchart shapes contain data fields that can be used to store this information.
However, there is nothing about the layout or appearance of a flowchart that identifies the
responsible parties.
A closely related alternative to a flowchart, called a swimlane diagram, solves this
problem. Each process step in a swimlane diagram is placed into a specific lane, and each
lane represents one role, function, or department. For example, a swimlane diagram with a
focus on roles might include lanes marked Flight Attendant, Pilot, and Baggage Handler.
Similarly, a department-focused chart might show lanes labeled Flight Operations,
Maintenance, and Catering.
A swimlane diagram is also known as a cross-functional flowchart because it shows work
steps as they cross the functional boundaries in an organization. In this context, each
swimlane is usually referred to as a functional band.
Add-in tabs
Some Visio templates require additional software to provide their unique features.
This is true for add-ins like the cross-functional flowchart template that is included
with Visio. It is also true for TaskMap (www.taskmap.com) and other third-party
add-ins that you acquire separately.
Like many add-ins, regardless of source, cross-functional flowcharts present a
custom tab on the ribbon, as shown in Figure 4-12.
Figure 4-12 The add-in tab for cross-functional flowcharts
The Cross-functional Flowchart tab includes three groups. From the Insert group,
you can add a swimlane, a separator, or a new page. In the Arrange group, you
change the orientation, direction, and margins of swimlanes. The Design group
includes a selection of styles, an option to rotate swimlane labels, and check boxes
that you can select to display the title bar and swimlane separators.

Swimlane diagrams can be drawn with either horizontal or vertical lanes. You choose the
orientation you prefer at the time you start a new diagram by using the Cross-functional
Flowchart dialog box shown in Figure 4-13. Note that this dialog box appears only the
first time you create a swimlane diagram; your selection in this dialog box becomes the
default for future diagrams.
Figure 4-13 You can choose between horizontal and vertical orientation for a swimlane
diagram in the Cross-functional Flowchart dialog box
If you later want to change the orientation for a specific diagram, or change the default for
future diagrams, you can do so from the Orientation menu on the Cross-functional
Flowchart add-in tab, shown in Figure 4-14.
Figure 4-14 The Orientation button on the Cross-functional Flowchart add-in tab
To change swimlane diagram orientation
1. On the Cross-functional Flowchart tab, in the Arrange group, click the
Orientation button. Notice that the currently selected orientation is preceded by a
check mark.
2. Click either Horizontal or Vertical.
To change the default orientation for future diagrams
1. Click the Orientation button, and then click Set Default.
2. In the Cross-functional flowchart dialog box, click either Horizontal or Vertical,
and then click OK.

Build swimlane diagrams
The sample flowchart of a human resources recruiting process in the previous topic does
not indicate who is responsible for each task. In this topic, you will examine a cross-
functional flowchart of the same process to see how this diagram format organizes the
work steps into role-based lanes so the responsibilities are clear.
If you select horizontal orientation for a new process map, your initial swimlane diagram
page will look like the diagram shown in Figure 4-15.
Figure 4-15 The initial state of a swimlane diagram
 Tip
The swimlane diagram in this topic was formatted by using variant 4 of the Shade
theme. For information about themes and variants, see Chapter 6, “Add style, color,
and themes.
The sample swimlane diagram for this topic will distribute the recruiting tasks across four
roles, so two additional swimlanes are required. In addition, the swimlanes should be
labeled with the appropriate role names. You can accomplish both tasks easily by using
familiar techniques, because even though a swimlane is a type of Visio shape with special
properties, it’s really just another shape.
For example, one easy way to add a lane is to drag one from a stencil, just as you would
any other shape. (In this particular case, because of the added intelligence in the swimlane
diagram framework, dragging a new swimlane onto the page causes the existing lanes to
shift up or down, or side to side, to accommodate the new lane.)
You can add text to the lanes, or to the swimlane structure as a whole, by clicking the
header and then typing. Figure 4-16 shows the result of adding two more lanes to the
example shown in Figure 4-15.

Figure 4-16 Labeled title bar and swimlanes
 See Also
For information about the unique properties of swimlanes and the swimlane
framework, see “Find containers and lists in Visio” in Chapter 13, “Add structure to
your diagrams.”
 Tip
You’ve probably already figured this out, but swimlane diagrams are so named
because they resemble a swimming pool viewed from above.
To add flowchart shapes to the diagram, you can use any combination of the techniques
that were described in the “Create flowcharts” topic earlier in this chapter. It’s useful to
know that all of the methods that add dynamic connectors, including AutoConnect and
Quick Shapes, work both within one lane and across swimlane boundaries.
As you add shapes, Dynamic Grid guidelines still appear, even across lanes. Figure 4-17
shows some familiar guidelines—a double-headed arrow showing spacing, and both
vertical and horizontal dashed lines showing alignment—in addition to one new guideline.
The dashed line that stretches the full width of the swimlane indicates that the shape being
positioned in the Recruiter lane is centered vertically within the lane.

Figure 4-17 Dynamic Grid feedback within and across swimlanes
 Tip
The green border around the entire Recruiter swimlane is a fourth visual aid that is
explained in “Find containers and lists in Visio” in Chapter 13, “Add structure to
your diagrams.”
There isn’t one correct way to build the swimlane version of the flowchart in the previous
topic, but Figure 4-18 shows one example of how the shapes might be arranged in relevant
lanes.
Figure 4-18 A completed human resources recruiting process swimlane diagram

 Tip
Swimlane diagrams in Visio 2016 look very much like those in previous versions of
Visio. However, the underlying structure is very different from pre–Visio 2013
diagrams. Current swimlanes are built on key components of Visio 2016 structured
diagrams, which are described in Chapter 13, “Add structure to your diagrams.”
To add a swimlane to a diagram
1. Use any combination of the following:
• On the Cross-functional Flowchart tab, in the Insert group, click the Swimlane
button.
• Right-click the header of an existing lane, and then click either Insert ‘Swimlane’
Before or Insert ‘Swimlane’ After.
• Drag a Swimlane shape from the Cross-functional Flowchart Shapes stencil
onto the boundary between existing lanes.
• Point to the boundary between a pair of lanes with the cursor just outside the
swimlane structure, and then click the blue insertion triangle.
 See Also
For information about this method for inserting rows, see “Find containers and lists
in Visio” in Chapter 13, “Add structure to your diagrams.”
To label a swimlane diagram
1. Click the header that is above or beside the set of swimlanes, and then enter the text
you want.
To label a swimlane
1. Click the header that is at one end of the swimlane, and then enter the text you want.
To add and connect shapes in a cross-functional flowchart
1. Use any of the techniques in the procedures at the end of the “Create flowcharts”
topic earlier in this chapter.
Understand BPMN
 Important
The information in this topic applies only to the Professional edition of Visio 2016.
Business process experts from around the world created the Business Process Model and

Notation (BPMN) standard so that a process diagram could convey more details about a
process than is possible in a flowchart or a swimlane diagram. A key goal for BPMN is to
improve communication about a process across all parts of an organization.
Although BPMN diagrams can improve knowledge transfer about manual processes, they
can be particularly effective in enhancing communication about automated processes.
Traditional flowcharts seldom contain enough detail about a process for an IT department
to build systems to support the work of the business group. BPMN attempts to close that
gap.
The creators of BPMN chose to use the customary flowchart shapes so that a BPMN
diagram will look familiar. But they enhanced those shapes by creating multiple variations
of each in order to provide additional context and meaning. For example, as shown in the
figures that accompany both this topic and the following topic, most BPMN shapes can
display one or more icons within the shape. The additional icons provide the reader with
key details about a process step.
The BPMN templates in Visio 2016 and Visio 2013 conform to the 2.0 version of the
BPMN standard. Visio 2010, which was the first version of Visio to include a BPMN
template, supports BPMN 1.2.
 See Also
For more information about the specific BPMN 2.0 features that are included with,
or excluded from, the Visio 2016 and Visio 2013 BPMN template, go to
blogs.office.com/b/visio/archive/2012/11/19/introducing-bpmn-2-0-in-visio.aspx.
BPMN uses four core shape types: Events, Activities, Gateways, and Connecting Objects,
and there are multiple variations of each. Visio smart shapes are ideal for presenting shape
variations visually.
The BPMN 2.0 symbol set includes the following:
 Three types of events Start, Intermediate, and End events appear as circles with
different borders, as shown in the upper row of Figure 4-19.
Figure 4-19 BPMN event shapes
The lower row of Figure 4-19 shows one of the variations of each event type; from
left to right these three images represent a timed start event, a message-based
intermediate event, and an end event that results from an error.

 Tip
The six event shapes shown in Figure 4-19, in addition to the several dozen
variations that are not shown, are actually all the same shape in Visio. The “Design
BPMN diagrams” topic, later in this chapter, demonstrates a simple technique that
you can use to change the shape among its many different incarnations. In drawing
apps that do not have the flexibility of Visio, representing dozens of visual
variations like this would require dozens of different shapes.
 Two activity types Task and Sub-Process activities (shown in Figure 4-20) are both
configured from the same Visio shape and each has multiple variations.
Figure 4-20 An activity type with a plus sign represents a Sub-Process activity
 Six gateway types Gateways are used to represent decisions, in addition to points
where process paths split or join. All gateways are variations of the diamond shape
shown in Figure 4-21.
Figure 4-21 The BPMN gateway shape
 Three connector types Sequence Flow, Message Flow, and Association connectors
between shapes (shown left to right in Figure 4-22), all include multiple variants.
Figure 4-22 BPMN connector shapes
The following topic provides an example of one type of BPMN diagram, but one example
cannot begin to convey the full range of BPMN capabilities. Refer to the website and
books in the following list or search the web for additional information about BPMN.
 Object Management Group/Business Process Management Initiative:
www.bpmn.org.
 Silver, Bruce. 2011. BPMN Method and Style, Second Edition, with BPMN
Implementer’s Guide. Cody-Cassidy Press.
 White, Stephen A., and Derek Miers. 2008. BPMN Modeling and Reference Guide.
Future Strategies Inc.

Design BPMN diagrams
 Important
The information in this topic applies only to the Professional edition of Visio 2016.
The BPMN Basic Shapes template includes the 16 shapes shown in Figure 4-23. However,
as described in the preceding topic, most shapes offer one or more shortcut menu options.
Consequently, you can use this limited stencil to produce several hundred variations of
these basic shapes.
Figure 4-23 BPMN basic shapes
 Tip
Note the presence of the Pool / Lane shape in Figure 4-23. BPMN diagrams can
incorporate swimlanes.
This topic describes the techniques you use for building a BPMN diagram. The example in
this topic shows how to create a theater ticketing process, shown in Figure 4-24. Along the
way, you’ll discover that this is an outdated ticketing process that needs to be brought into
this century—and that’s exactly what happens in the “Create subprocesses” topic that
follows.

Figure 4-24 A completed BPMN theater ticketing process
 Tip
The BPMN diagram in this topic was formatted by using variant 1 of the Gemstone
theme. In addition, the Circle bevel effect was applied to the process shapes. For
information about themes, variants, and effects, see Chapter 6, “Add style, color,
and themes.” The diagram also uses the Verve background page and the Alphabet
border and title. For information about background pages and borders and titles, see
“Work with background pages and borders” in Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes,
and pages.”
After you start a diagram by using the BPMN template, the fundamental work of building
the process map is no different from the techniques you explored with flowcharts and
swimlane diagrams earlier in this chapter. The differences arise when you begin
interacting with the shapes to set and take advantage of their BPMN-specific properties.
Whether you choose to use AutoConnect arrows and the Quick Shapes mini toolbar or
another technique, after a few minutes, your diagram might look similar to Figure 4-25; or
if you’ve chosen to apply themes and effects, it might look similar to Figure 4-26.

Figure 4-25 The initial stages of a BPMN diagram
Figure 4-26 The initial stages of a BPMN diagram to which a theme has been applied
 Tip
If you start a BPMN diagram by dragging a Start Event onto the page, you might
find that the AutoConnect arrows don’t appear when you point to the shape. If you
zoom in and then try again, you should see the AutoConnect arrows.
You enter text on BPMN shapes by using any of the same methods you employed for
flowchart shapes. You can enter text for shapes, and labels to outcome paths, as shown in
Figure 4-26, the same as described in the flowchart topic earlier in this chapter.
 Tip
The text block on a dynamic connector has a white background that is normally
invisible when your drawing page also has a white background. However, in a
diagram like Figure 4-26 and those that follow, the page has a colored background.
Consequently, you might want to remove the background from the text block. The
technique for doing so is a bit obscure; the easiest way is to take advantage of the
Visio 2016 Tell Me feature: select one or more connectors, and in the Tell Me box,
enter format, and then select Format Text. In the resulting Text dialog box, on the
Text Block tab, click None in the Text Background section, and then click OK.
Most BPMN shapes include a set of shortcut menu options that you use to indicate
additional details about the shape. Setting these values causes icons to appear on the
shapes, making it possible for the map reader to know more about each step in the process
at a glance.
For example, you might want to indicate that the arrival of a message triggers the start of

this process. Right-clicking the Start Event shape reveals cascading menus from which
you can select Message, as shown in Figure 4-27.
Figure 4-27 You can use options on cascading shortcut menus to set the trigger or
result for a BPMN shape
For the theater ticketing process diagram, you can use similar shortcut menus to set the
task type to User for the Check Seat Inventory process step, to Service for the Print
Tickets process step, and to User for the Send Or Hold Tickets process step.
Offer Alternate Seats is an example of a looping task, so it actually requires two
configuration settings: Task Type is User; Loop is Standard.
Some BPMN shapes are further annotated by attaching a callout shape. The callout has the
name Text Annotation and is located in the BPMN Basic Shapes stencil. When you drag a
Text Annotation shape onto the page, notice that it has both a text area and a tail; use the
tail to glue the callout to the shape that requires annotation.
The completed sample BPMN diagram, shown in Figure 4-28, includes annotations for the
Start and End events, in addition to the Offer Alternate Seats loop shape. The Start and
End annotations simply describe what launches and concludes the process. The comment
attached to the loop indicates the conditions under which the loop ends.
Figure 4-28 Close-up view of the completed BPMN ticketing process diagram

 Tip
The BPMN Text Annotation shape is a special type of Visio shape known as a
callout. Among the special behaviors associated with a callout is visual feedback
when you associate the callout with a specific shape by dragging the tail of the
callout onto a shape: the border of the shape illuminates in green. You will explore
Visio callouts in Chapter 13, “Add structure to your diagrams.”
The outdated nature of this diagram should now be apparent: this process only provides
for printing tickets and then sending them or holding them at the box office. In the next
topic, you will discover how to create a subprocess to bring the map up to date.
To set the activity type
1. Right-click a task shape, click Task Type, and then click an entry from the flyout
menu.
To set the loop type
1. Right-click a task shape, click Loop, and then click an entry from the flyout menu.
To set the gateway type
1. Right-click a gateway shape, click Gateway Type, and then click an entry from the
flyout menu.
To set the event type and trigger/result
1. Right-click an event shape, click Event Type, and then click an entry from the
flyout menu.
2. Right-click an event shape, click Trigger/Result, and then click an entry from the
flyout menu.
To add a text annotation to a BPMN shape
1. Drag a Text Annotation shape onto the page.
2. Drag the yellow control handle at the tail of the text annotation shape to the target
BPMN shape.
To adjust the size of a Text Annotation shape
1. With the callout selected, drag any of the eight resize handles.
To adjust the position of a Text Annotation shape
1. Drag the interior of the text annotation shape. The tail remains attached to the
associated shape.

Create subprocesses
 Important
The information in this topic applies only to the Professional edition of Visio 2016.
When you are working with a business process, it is very likely that at least one of several
things will happen over time:
 You will identify portions of the process that need to be defined in greater detail.
 You will identify groups of tasks that are referred to from multiple places within the
process.
 Parts of your process will become outdated.
 Your map will become unwieldy and difficult to read and maintain.
A common solution for all of these situations is to select a group of related process steps
and replace them with a single subprocess symbol. You then move the selected steps to
another page where you have room to spread them out in order to better define that section
of the overall process.
You can add a new page and then cut and paste shapes manually; however, Visio
Professional 2016 includes three buttons on the Process tab that automate much of the
work of creating subprocesses.
 Important
You must select a shape (usually a subprocess shape) prior to clicking the Create
New or Link To Existing buttons. You must select two or more shapes prior to
clicking the Create From Selection button.
 Create New Visio creates a new page, names it by using the text from the selected
shape, and then creates a hyperlink to the new page.
 Link To Existing Visio links the selected shape to an existing page that you select.
The target page can be in either the current drawing or a different drawing.
 Create From Selection Visio deletes the selected shapes and replaces them with a
subprocess shape, adds a new page to the diagram, pastes the deleted shapes onto the
new page, and then adds a hyperlink from the subprocess shape to the new page.
To see how the Create From Selection button can be helpful, consider the theater ticketing
process defined in Figure 4-28 in the previous topic. The pair of tasks that defines printing
tickets and then sending or holding them is clearly outdated because it doesn’t offer an
electronic ticketing option. You can start the redefinition of that part of the process by
selecting those shapes and then clicking the Create From Selection button. The updated
page of the process map includes a subprocess shape, as shown in Figure 4-29.

Figure 4-29 A BPMN subprocess symbol has replaced two tasks
 Tip
The new subprocess shape does not look identical to the other shapes on the page
because new shapes inherit themes, but do not inherit effects. You can manually
apply the same bevel effect to the new shape or you can use the Format Painter to
copy it from one of the preexisting shapes.
As with any other shape, you can click the subprocess shape and enter text; in this case
you might label the new subprocess Fulfill order.
In addition to the modifications on the main process page, the theater ticketing diagram
now contains a new page, the upper portion of which looks like Figure 4-30.
Figure 4-30 Shapes on a new subprocess page
Visio does the hard work of rearranging key diagram elements, leaving you to flesh out
the remainder of new processes. In our sample process, you might add an eticketing option
in a manner similar to that shown in Figure 4-31.

Figure 4-31 A completed order fulfillment subprocess
 Tip
Automatic subprocess creation is not restricted to BPMN diagrams. You can take
advantage of this feature in flowcharts and cross-functional flowcharts, too.
To create a new subprocess
1. Select a subprocess shape, and then on the Process tab, in the Subprocess group,
click the Create New button.
To link to an existing subprocess
1. Select a subprocess shape, and then click the Link to Existing button.
2. Select the page you want from the menu.
To create a subprocess from existing shapes
1. Select at least two shapes, and then click the Create from Selection button.
2. Enter the text you want on the new subprocess shape.
3. Go to the new subprocess page and complete the definition of the subprocess.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Select a flowchart template
 Create flowcharts
 Understand swimlane diagrams
 Build swimlane diagrams

 Understand BPMN
 Design BPMN diagrams
 Create subprocesses
 Practice tasks
The practice file for these tasks is located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch04 folder. You can save
the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Select a flowchart template
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Create flowcharts
Start Visio, click the Flowcharts template category thumbnail, double-click the Basic
Flowchart template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag a Start/End shape onto the page.
2. Drag additional shapes onto the page and use either the Connector tool or
AutoConnect arrows to link them to existing shapes.
Or
Use AutoConnect arrows and the Quick Shapes mini toolbar to add additional
shapes and links to your flowchart.
3. Add text to each flowchart shape to describe its purpose within the process.
4. Add a description to each decision path outcome.
Understand swimlane diagrams
Start Visio, click the Flowcharts template category thumbnail, double-click the Cross-
functional Flowchart template, and then perform the following tasks:
 Tip
If this is the first time you’ve used the Cross-functional Flowchart template, select
either Horizontal or Vertical orientation in the Cross-functional Flowchart dialog
box, and then click OK.
1. Build a horizontal swimlane diagram, changing the default orientation if necessary.

Build swimlane diagrams
Create a diagram from the Cross-functional Flowchart template, and then perform the
following tasks:
1. Click the heading of the swimlane structure to give the process a name.
2. Add two additional swimlanes.
3. Click the heading of each swimlane to identify the role, function, or department
associated with the lane.
4. Drag a Start/End shape into one of the swimlanes.
5. Drag additional shapes onto the page and use either the Connector tool or
AutoConnect arrows to link them to existing shapes.
Or
Use AutoConnect arrows and the Quick Shapes mini toolbar to add additional
shapes and links to your flowchart.
6. Add text to each shape to describe its purpose within the process.
7. Add a description to each decision path outcome.
Understand BPMN
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Design BPMN diagrams
 Important
The tasks in this topic can be completed only by using the Professional edition of
Visio 2016.
Start Visio, click the Flowcharts template category thumbnail, double-click the BPMN
Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Add shapes and connectors to the page to lay out your process map.
2. Add a text description to each activity (task) and gateway (decision) shape.
3. Right-click each shape and select the activity, gateway, or event type, as required.
4. Right-click each task shape that represents a loop, and then set the loop type.
5. Add a Text Annotation to each Start Event and End Event, and to each Task
shape that represents a loop.
6. Adjust the size and position of each text annotation.
7. Add a description to each decision path outcome.

Create subprocesses
 Important
The tasks in this topic can be completed only by using the Professional edition of
Visio 2016.
Open the CreateSubprocesses diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Select the Log hiring request, Prepare job description and screening questions,
and Advertise open job shapes.
2. Create a subprocess from the selected shapes. Notice that when you create a
subprocess in a swimlane diagram, Visio reproduces the swimlane structure on the
new page.

5. Create organization charts
In this chapter
 Understand organization charts
 Build organization charts manually
 Use existing data to create an organization chart
 Use the Organization Chart Wizard with new data
 Alter layout and appearance
 Import photographs as you create organization charts
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch05 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
Chapter 4, “Create business process diagrams,” introduced you to a practical, real-world
application for Visio. This chapter focuses on a second common use for Visio:
representing the structure of an organization in a chart that contains data about people; the
chart might also contain their photographs.
In an organization chart, commonly known as an org chart, you can define reporting
relationships manually by dragging smart org chart shapes onto a page and then letting
Visio do the work of arranging them. Alternatively, you can point the Organization Chart
Wizard at a set of data and let Visio do everything.
Regardless of the approach you take to create an org chart, Visio provides you with a
multitude of options for changing the style, layout, themes, and colors of your chart.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to understanding and building
organization charts, using existing data to create an organization chart, using the
Organization Chart Wizard with new data, altering the layout and appearance of an org
chart, and importing photographs.
Understand organization charts
Visio org charts are well suited for the most common type of organization, in which each
person has one boss. Although some organizations use matrix or other non-hierarchical
structures, Visio org charts are designed for the majority of cases.
Review new features
Visio 2013 introduced a set of bold visual changes to the decade-old org chart solution,
and those changes have been carried forward into Visio 2016. The most obvious visual
change to org charts is the introduction of styles. Visio provides 10 styles, each of which
includes six specially designed chart shapes. You will undoubtedly find that some styles
are more appropriate than others are for portraying your organization’s employees. With
Visio, it’s easy to try multiple options: you can change styles with one click.

Two other features that carried forward from Visio 2013 enhance the visual appeal of
Visio org charts. Those features include the following:
 The styled shapes use themes and shape embellishments.
 See Also
For more information about using themes, see Chapter 6, “Add style, color, and
themes.”
 The org chart shapes support a long-standing need for the option to import
photographs automatically.
 See Also
For more information about importing photographs, see “Work with pictures” and
“Import photographs as you create organization charts” later in this chapter.
As mentioned about cross-functional flowcharts in Chapter 4, “Create business process
diagrams,” some of the magic of org charts comes from add-in software. (Also like cross-
functional flowcharts, the add-in software is packaged with Visio.) The presence of the org
chart add-in is visible in the same way that most add-ins are visible: by the appearance of
a tab on the Visio ribbon, as shown in Figure 5-1.
Figure 5-1 The Org Chart tab
 See Also
For more information about add-in tabs, see “Understand tool tabs and add-in tabs”
in Chapter 1, “Get started with Visio 2016.”
The Org Chart tab retains many frequently used buttons from previous versions of Visio,
including buttons to arrange, lay out, and space shapes. In Visio 2016, the tab includes
buttons you can use to take advantage of styles and to import and manage pictures.
Use org chart templates
Visio 2016 provides two org chart templates in the Business category. Both templates
include identical stencils and capabilities—with one difference: Organization Chart opens
to a blank page so you can create an org chart manually; Organization Chart Wizard opens
to the same blank page but also presents you with the first page of a wizard that steps you
through the creation of a chart.
If you happen to select the Organization Chart Wizard by mistake, there’s no problem: just

cancel the wizard and continue without it. Similarly, if you selected the manual template
but really wanted to use the wizard, it’s available by clicking the Import button on the Org
Chart tab.
Build organization charts manually
Although you will explore the Organization Chart Wizard in subsequent topics, it’s useful
to know how easy it is to create org charts manually. The good news is that even when you
create an org chart by hand, Visio still does a significant percentage of the work.
For example, after you drag an Executive shape to the top of the page, you can create a
view of the reporting structure simply by dragging other shapes, such as managers,
employees, assistants, consultants, and vacancies, on top of the first shape. A diagram that
starts with a single shape quickly becomes what is shown in Figure 5-2.
Figure 5-2 An org chart that contains five shapes
 Tip
If you decide after dragging a shape onto the page that it should be a different shape
type, you don’t need to delete and replace the shape. You can change the type by
using several techniques that are included in the procedures at the end of this topic.
 Tip
The Organization Chart Shapes stencil contains a special shape named Three
Positions that makes it easy to add three employees to a chart at once.
The stencil also includes a shape called Multiple Shapes. Dragging this shape onto
an existing org chart shape prompts you to select a shape type and then to specify
how many shapes of that type you’d like to add to the chart.
Adding titles and names to the chart is as easy as entering them in two places on the shape.
Click anywhere on the shape to enter the title; click the name box to enter the relevant
name.
You can continue to build the chart by dragging additional shapes on top of existing

shapes to show the required reporting relationships, perhaps producing a chart like the one
shown in Figure 5-3.
Figure 5-3 Org chart shapes displaying names and titles
Figure 5-3 contains at least one of each of the six primary org chart shapes. Four of the
shape types are easy to identify because of their visual differences: the executive shape has
a white background; manager shapes have darker backgrounds; and the vacancy shape,
shown in the lower right of Figure 5-3, looks different from any other shape type.
However, the default org chart shape style (Belt) that was used in Figure 5-3 does not
differentiate among assistants, positions (non-managerial employees), and consultants.
Assistants like Deedee Spiros and Jason Robinson are differentiated by their physical
location (offset to the right under their respective managers) but the shapes themselves
look the same as those for positions and consultants.
The lack of visual distinction is merely a function of the Belt style. In the section “Change
shape appearance,” later in this chapter, you will discover that other styles do provide a
unique appearance for each of the six shape types.
 Tip
The vacancy shape is the only org chart shape that does not include a placeholder
for a photograph.
To create an org chart manually

1. Display the Backstage view.
2. In the left pane of the Backstage view, click New.
3. On the New page, click Categories, click the Business thumbnail, and then double-
click the Organization Chart template (not the Organization Chart Wizard
template).
4. Drag a shape that represents the top level of your organization, such as an
Executive Belt or a Manager Belt shape, onto the page.
5. Drag other shapes that represent the next tier of your organization onto the top-level
shape.
6. Drag additional shapes onto each tier until your organization is represented.
7. Enter names and/or titles onto the shapes.
To add three position shapes at a time
1. Drag the Three positions shape onto an existing executive or manager shape.
To add multiple shapes of any type
1. Drag the Multiple shapes shape onto an existing executive or manager shape, or
onto an unused part of the drawing page to open the Add Multiple Shapes dialog
box, shown in Figure 5-4.
Figure 5-4 The Add Multiple Shapes dialog box
2. In the Add Multiple Shapes dialog box, enter or select a number to specify how
many shapes you want to add.
3. In the Shape section of the Add Multiple Shapes dialog box, select a shape type,
and then click OK.
To change the position type for a shape on the drawing page
1. Right-click any org chart shape, click Change Position Type, and then click the
name of the position you want.

Or
1. Select a shape.
2. On the Org Chart tab, in the Shapes group, click the Change Position Type button
to open the Change Position Type dialog box, shown in Figure 5-5.
Figure 5-5 The Change Position Type dialog box
3. In the Change Position Type dialog box, click the name of the position you want,
and then click OK.
Or
1. Use either technique described in “Replace shapes” in Chapter 3, “Manage text,
shapes, and pages.”
Use existing data to create an organization chart
If the data about your organization already exists in electronic form, Visio 2016 provides a
wizard that will build the org chart for you. You can begin with data that resides in any of
the following repositories:
 A Microsoft Excel workbook
 A database such as Microsoft Access, Microsoft SQL Server, or other database
systems
 A Microsoft Exchange Server directory
 A system that can export personnel information by generating a text file or an Excel
workbook
When you build an org chart from existing data, such as the Excel data shown in Figure 5-
6, you need only two key pieces of data about each employee: the employee’s name and
the name of the person to whom the employee reports. You can include additional data, as
shown in the figure. What you include beyond the required data depends on what you
would like to have available in the chart.

Figure 5-6 Excel worksheet data can be used to create an org chart
 Tip
In Figure 5-6, note that Art Helmers does not report to anyone. Although another
technique is described later in this topic, listing one employee without a boss is an
easy way to tell the Organization Chart Wizard who is in charge.
On the first page of the Organization Chart Wizard, shown in Figure 5-7, you indicate
whether you want to build a chart from existing data or from data that you enter by using
the wizard. The remainder of this topic displays the wizard pages that result from using
existing data.
Figure 5-7 Indicate whether data already exists
You use the second wizard page, shown in Figure 5-8, to select the type of data source that

contains your data.
Figure 5-8 Specify the type of data source you want to use
If you select A Text, Org Plus (*.txt), Or Excel File as your data source, you then specify
the location of the file in the next wizard page, shown in Figure 5-9.
Figure 5-9 The wizard page used to specify the location of the data source

 Tip
If you select either of the other two data source types, you will use different wizard
pages to specify the location and access rights for the data.
After the wizard opens the data source, it displays the page shown in Figure 5-10. On this
page, you map one field from your data to the org chart Name field, and another to the
Reports To field. You can optionally specify whether your data has a separate field for
employees’ first names.
Figure 5-10 Identify key data field names
On the fifth page of the wizard, shown in Figure 5-11, you indicate which fields from your
data you would like Visio to display on each org chart shape.

Figure 5-11 Specify which data fields should appear on org chart shapes
The wizard page shown in Figure 5-12 looks a lot like the previous page, but its purpose is
different and unrelated. On this page, you select the fields from your data source that you
would like to store as shape data in each org chart shape. By storing data inside shapes,
you can run reports and use the data for other purposes without needing to revert to the
original data source.
Figure 5-12 Specify which data fields should be stored in shape data

 See Also
For more information about shape data and reports, see Chapter 8, “Work with
shape data.” For information about data visualization, see Chapter 9, “Visualize
your data.”
The penultimate wizard page, shown in Figure 5-13, was introduced in Visio 2013. On this
page, you indicate whether you want to import photographs as part of the org chart. If you
do, you specify the location of the photos and tell the wizard how to match photo files
with employees.
Figure 5-13 Indicate whether you want to import pictures
 See Also
For more information about incorporating photographs in your org charts, see
“Work with pictures” and “Import photographs as you create organization charts”
later in this chapter.
On the last page of the wizard, shown in Figure 5-14, you need to decide the following:
 Whether you or Visio will determine how much content to display on each page
If you choose to do it yourself, a page on which you can specify page contents
appears.
If you let Visio create the pages, you can tell the program where to start by
identifying the top shape on the first page. The <Top Executive> option tells Visio to
select the person who doesn’t report to anyone else as the top shape. Alternatively,

you can select a specific person by clicking the arrow to choose anyone in your list.
 Whether to hyperlink employee shapes across pages
If a manager’s direct reports won’t fit on the page with the manager, the wizard will
leave the manager shape on the original page, and will also place it and the
manager’s direct reports on a subsequent page. If you select this option, Visio adds a
hyperlink between the duplicated manager shapes.
 Whether to synchronize employee shapes across pages
If manager shapes have been duplicated as described in the preceding bullet point,
you select this check box to instruct Visio to update one shape if you make changes
to the other.
Figure 5-14 You can provide org chart layout details on the last page of the wizard
Using the Organization Chart Wizard saves a tremendous amount of time and work.
However, the default layout and styles might not suit your needs, such as the example
shown in Figure 5-15, which was created by using the wizard. You can use the techniques
described in the section “Change shape appearance” later in this chapter to recast the
organization chart in a variety of ways.

Figure 5-15 This tall, vertical format created by using the wizard might not be ideal
 Tip
Building an org chart from existing data is not the same as linking a diagram to
external data. (You will explore data linking in Chapter 10, “Link to external data.”)
Org charts that you build from existing data are not connected to that data in any
way; your org chart does not change automatically when your data does.
You can use the techniques in Chapter 10 to link an org chart to your data source
after using the Organization Chart Wizard. However, there are limits on what kinds
of updates can be applied to the diagram automatically. For example, adding new
positions or deleting employees in the data will not cause corresponding changes in
your org chart. You will need to rerun the wizard to rebuild your org chart each time
this type of data changes.
To start the Organization Chart Wizard
1. Do one of the following:
• On the New page, click Categories, click Business, and then double-click the
Organization Chart Wizard thumbnail.

• With an organization chart open, on the Org Chart tab, in the Organization Data
group, click the Import button.
Use the Organization Chart Wizard with new data
If your organization data is not in a format that Visio can read, but you would like to use
the wizard, you’re still in luck. The Organization Chart Wizard can help by creating a file
into which you can paste or enter your data; for example, the wizard can either create an
Excel workbook (Figure 5-16) or a comma-separated values (CSV) text file (Figure 5-17).
Figure 5-16 An Excel workbook created by the Organization Chart Wizard
Figure 5-17 A text file created by the Organization Chart Wizard
After creating the workbook or text file, the Organization Chart Wizard pauses until you
close the file before it continues. If you don’t close the file, the wizard displays a dialog
box, shown in Figure 5-18, listing either excel.exe or notepad.exe, as appropriate.
Figure 5-18 This dialog box appears until you close the data entry file

 Important
If you use Excel, you must close the Excel application, not just the workbook.
After you close Excel or Notepad, the wizard resumes by presenting the photo import page
shown in Figure 5-13 in the preceding topic.
To create an organization data chart from data that you enter
1. Start the Organization Chart Wizard, and then on the first page (shown in Figure
5-7 in the preceding topic), click Information that I enter using the wizard.
2. On the wizard page shown in Figure 5-19, click Excel or Delimited text.
Figure 5-19 The wizard page used to select the data file type you want to use
3. On the same wizard page, enter or browse to where you want to store the data file.
4. Click Next.
A dialog box appears and instructs you to type your data over the sample data.
5. Finish entering your data, click OK to close the dialog box, and then complete the
remaining pages of the Organization Chart Wizard so Visio can build your org
chart.
Or
Click OK to close the dialog box, cancel the wizard, complete your data entry,
restart the wizard, and then point it to your now-completed data file.

Alter layout and appearance
You can alter the look of your organization chart in many ways by using a broad set of
enhancements that were introduced in Visio 2013. In addition, the Org Chart tab has been
redesigned in Visio 2016 to make org chart customization tools more accessible.
This topic describes the functions in four of the five groups on the Org Chart tab: Layout,
Arrange, Shapes, and Picture. The topic also demonstrates how Visio 2016 themes affect
organization charts.
 Important
If you use the techniques described in this topic to reformat an org chart you created
by using the Organization Chart Wizard, you should know this: if you subsequently
import your data again with the intent of updating your org chart, all formatting will
be lost. Visio creates a new org chart every time you run the wizard.
Change the layout
You use the Layout group on the Org Chart tab, shown in Figure 5-20, to adjust shape
positioning on the page.
Figure 5-20 The Layout group on the Org Chart tab
You can make significant changes to the look of an org chart by changing to any one of 18
predefined layouts. Each layout changes the spacing and relative positions of shapes
within the chart. A gallery of layout choices, shown in Figure 5-21, is displayed on a menu
when you click the Layout button.

Figure 5-21 The Layout menu
 Tip
When you select the Apply Automatic Layouts To Shape Styles check box at the
bottom of the Layout menu, Visio refreshes the org chart layout every time you
apply a style. You can retain your current layout when you change styles by
clearing this check box. You will explore shape styles in the section, “Change shape
appearance,” later in the “Alter layout and appearance” topic.
If you’ve manually altered the size or position of any org chart shapes, your diagram
might contain gaps or overlapping shapes. The org chart add-in provides a simple answer:
click the Re-Layout button to restore appropriate spacing.
Another convenience feature in the Layout group is the Best Fit To Page button. Clicking
this button relocates the entire org chart to fit better on the current page.
To change the layout of an org chart page
1. On the Org Chart tab, in the Layout group, click the Layout button.
2. Click the Horizontal, Vertical, or Side by Side button.
To change the layout of all, or part of, an org chart page
1. Right-click any shape that has subordinates, click Subordinates, and then click
Arrange Subordinates.
2. In the Arrange Subordinates dialog box (shown in Figure 5-22), click one of the
Horizontal, Vertical, or Side-by-side buttons, and then click OK.

Figure 5-22 The Arrange Subordinates dialog box
To correct the spacing and positioning of all shapes in an org chart
1. On the Org Chart tab, in the Layout group, click the Re-Layout button.
To center an org chart on the page
1. In the Layout group, click the Best Fit to Page button.
Arrange shapes
You can use the Spacing and Move buttons in the Arrange group (Figure 5-23) to alter the
vertical spacing and the location of shapes in your org chart. Note that the Spacing buttons
affect every shape on the page, whereas the Move buttons operate more locally: if you
select a shape that doesn’t have subordinates, clicking either Move button moves only that
shape; however, if you select a manager or an executive shape, that person and all
subordinates will move.
Figure 5-23 The Arrange group on the Org Chart tab
You can also hide portions of the organization chart that are below a manager or
executive. If you do, the manager or executive shape that has hidden subordinates displays
an icon in the lower-right corner of the shape to indicate the presence of hidden
subordinates, as shown in Figure 5-24.

Figure 5-24 A manager shape with a collapsed subordinates icon
To change the vertical spacing between shapes
1. On the Org Chart tab, in the Arrange group, click the Increase the Spacing (+) or
Reduce the Spacing (-) button.
To move one shape
1. Select a shape that has no subordinates.
2. Click the Move Left/Up (
) or Move Right/Down (
) button.
 Tip
In vertical layouts, the left and right arrows actually move shapes up and down.
To move a set of shapes
1. Select a shape that has subordinates.
2. Click the 
 or 
 button.
To show or hide subordinates
1. Select a shape that has subordinates.
2. Click the Show/Hide Subordinates button.
Or
1. Right-click a shape that has subordinates, click Subordinates, and then click either
Hide Subordinates or Show Subordinates.
Change shape appearance
You can use the buttons in the Shapes group, shown in Figure 5-25, to change the
appearance of your organization chart. The most dramatic changes occur when you click
one of the 10 org chart style buttons, each of which includes not only a different shape
design, but also different layout rules. Because style changes are so easy to accomplish,
you can experiment with looks that range from corporate to fanciful.

Figure 5-25 The Shapes group on the Org Chart tab
For example, with one click, the org chart shown in Figure 5-3 earlier in this chapter can
look like Figure 5-26.
Figure 5-26 An org chart with the Pip style applied
 Tip
Figure 5-3 doesn’t offer any visual differentiation for position, consultant, and
assistant shapes, but each of the following three figures does. Differences in chart
styles are sometimes subtle, but they contain changes in geometry, adornments, or
color.
With another click, the chart can look like Figure 5-27.

Figure 5-27 An org chart with the Stone style applied
As noted at the beginning of this topic, and as shown in Figure 5-26 and Figure 5-27,
when you change to a different org chart style, Visio often changes the layout of the
shapes. If this isn’t what you want, perhaps because you have already spent time arranging
the layout to your liking, you can instruct Visio to swap the shapes but leave the layout
alone.

The names keep changing!
In the Organization Chart Shapes stencil, each of the six primary shape names
includes the name of the currently active org chart style. Consequently, the shapes
might have different names than the last time you worked on an org chart.
The name of the default style is Belt; consequently, when you begin a new org
chart, the upper portion of the stencil looks like Figure 5-28. The word Belt appears
both in the stencil name bar and in each shape name.
Figure 5-28 The Organization Chart Shapes stencil showing the Belt style
When you click a different style icon in the Shapes group, the names of the stencil
and the shapes change, as shown in Figure 5-29.
Figure 5-29 The Organization Chart Shapes stencil showing the Notch style
The Shapes group also provides buttons to change the height and width of org chart
shapes, either to accomodate the display of more data on a shape or to reduce unneeded
space. Figure 5-30 shows the results of reducing both the width and height of three org
chart shapes.
Figure 5-30 Original and reduced size versions of the same three org chart shapes

 Tip
You can change the width and height of all org chart shapes on all pages from the
Option tab in the Options dialog box. Click the Shapes dialog box launcher on the
Org Chart tab to open the Options dialog box.
Finally, you can use the Change Position Type button to convert a shape from one
organizational role to another, as described in “Understand organization charts” earlier in
this chapter.
To change the style of an org chart
1. On the Org Chart tab, in the Shapes group, click one of the 10 style icons.
Or
1. If the style you want is not visible, click the More button at the lower-right corner
of the style section to display a gallery on the Styles menu.
2. Click one of the 10 style icons.
To change the style but not the layout of an org chart
1. Click a style button to change both style and layout, and then click the Undo button
or press Ctrl+Z. (This works because Visio makes the changes in two separate
blocks. Undoing once reverts the layout; undoing again reverts the style change.)
Or
1. At the bottom of the Styles menu, clear the Apply Automatic Layouts to Shape
Styles check box.
2. Click one of the 10 style icons.
Or
1. In the Layout group, click the Layout button, and then clear the Apply Automatic
Layouts to Shape Styles check box.
2. Click one of the 10 style icons.
To change the height or width of one or more shapes
1. Select one or more shapes.
2. In the Shapes group, click the Increase the Height or Increase the Width (+)
button, or the Decrease the Height or Decrease the Width (-) button.
 Tip
If you don’t select any shapes prior to clicking the height or width buttons, Visio
will adjust all shapes on the page.

Work with pictures
You can add photos to an org chart when you create it, as you will discover in “Import
photographs as you create organization charts” later in this chapter. You can also add
either one or multiple photos to an existing organization chart by using the Insert button in
the Picture group, shown in Figure 5-31.
Figure 5-31 The Picture group on the Org Chart tab
 See Also
For more information about the types of images you can use in an org chart, see
“Import photographs as you create organization charts” later in this chapter.
The Change and Delete buttons in the Picture group provide a means to replace or remove
photographs.
The Show/Hide button makes either photographs or the picture placeholders appear or
disappear. The Hide function is very convenient if you don’t have photos because the
default display for all 10 org chart styles is to include a picture placeholder. One click of
the Show/Hide button turns the image on the left in Figure 5-32 into the cleaner-looking
image on the right.
Figure 5-32 Org chart shapes with and without picture placeholders
To add photographs to an existing org chart
1. Select one or more org chart shapes.
2. On the Org Chart tab, in the Picture group, click the Insert button, and then click
either Picture to insert a single image, or click Multiple Pictures to insert more
than one.

 Tip
Clicking Multiple Pictures attempts to match images to org chart shapes based on
file names and people’s names.
To replace a photo in an org chart shape
1. Select one shape.
2. In the Picture group, click the Change button.
3. Select an image file, and then click Open.
To delete photos or photo placeholders
1. Select one or more shapes.
2. On the Org Chart tab, in the Picture group, click the Delete button.
 Important
Clicking a Delete button on any other tab or pressing the Delete key deletes the
entire shape, not just the photo.
To show or hide photos or photo placeholders
1. Select one or more shapes, and then click the Show/Hide button.
Apply themes
Besides modifying org charts by using buttons on the Org Chart tab, you can also use
Visio 2016 themes, which are located on the Design tab. You can use themes to apply a
wide array of colors, effects, and embellishments to create the look you want.
The three examples in Figure 5-33 use, from top to bottom, the Bound style with the
Whisp theme; the Pip style with the Sequence theme; and the Coin style with the Organic
theme.
Figure 5-33 Three combinations of themes and styles applied to the same org chart
shapes

Import photographs as you create organization charts
Visio 2013 was the first Visio version in which you could import multiple photographs at
once. That feature is carried forward to Visio 2016. In previous versions, you were
restricted to importing one picture at a time.
If you build an org chart by using data in Excel or a database, you can import photos from
a folder on your computer or a server. If you create your org chart by using data in
Microsoft Exchange Server, you can import the same photos that people use in their
Microsoft Outlook profiles.
The key to automatically adding photos as you generate an org chart is on one page in the
Organization Chart Wizard. When you select Locate The Folder That Contains Your
Organization Pictures on the wizard page shown in Figure 5-34, you can then browse to
select the folder that contains your photos.
Figure 5-34 You can indicate on this page that pictures should be imported
 Tip
You can import photographs in a variety of common image formats, including
.jpeg, .png, .gif, and .tif.
You also need to tell the wizard which data field to use to match image files with org chart
shapes. Either accept the default of Name or select a different field in the Match Pictures
Based On list.

 Important
The file names of the pictures you want to import are critical. They must be in the
specific format shown in the note in the lower half of the wizard page shown in
Figure 5-34. When you use Name as the match field, the file name can include
spaces; both “FirstnameLastname” and “Firstname Lastname” are acceptable.
Including pictures when the wizard builds your organization chart doesn’t change the
likelihood that you might want to rearrange the chart. Figure 5-35 is the top portion of an
automatically generated org chart with photos. In Figure 5-36, the chart has been styled
(Panel), themed (Ion), and laid out for distribution to the organization’s employees.
Figure 5-35 An automatically generated org chart with photographs

Figure 5-36 An org chart with photos, a style, and a theme
When you import photographs into an org chart, Visio crops and positions each image in a
way it considers to be the best fit for the picture frame in the org chart shape. In most
cases, the positioning done by Visio should be suitable. However, you might find that you
want to reposition, resize, or otherwise edit a photo.
You can do so by selecting the photo and then using the tools on the Picture Tools Format
tool tab. As an example, Figure 5-37 shows how to crop a photo. A preview of the entire
image is displayed, and the portions that are outside the photo frame have a gray overlay.
You can drag the picture to position it the way you want it.
Figure 5-37 Pictures in org chart shapes can be cropped and edited

 See Also
For information about adding pictures to an existing organization chart, see “Work
with pictures” in “Alter layout and appearance,” earlier in this chapter.
To include photos when you generate an org chart by using the wizard
1. Prepare the folder of photographs by giving each file a name that matches one of the
fields in your data.
2. Start the Organization Chart Wizard.
3. On the pictures page of the wizard, click Locate the folder that contains your
organization pictures, and then browse to the folder that contains the pictures.
4. Either leave Name selected in the Match pictures based on list, or select a
different match field from the list.
5. Finish the wizard.
To crop or edit a photo in an org chart
1. Click the shape containing the photo, and then click the photo.
2. On the Picture Tools Format tab, select the appropriate tool, and then edit the
photo.
3. Click anywhere outside the image to exit edit mode.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Understand organization charts
 Build organization charts manually
 Use existing data to create an organization chart
 Use the Organization Chart Wizard with new data
 Alter layout and appearance
 Import photographs as you create organization charts
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch05 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.

Understand organization charts
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Build organization charts manually
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Start a new diagram by using the Organization Chart template. (Do not use the
Organization Chart Wizard template.)
2. Drag an executive, at least one manager, and a combination of position, consultant,
vacancy, and assistant shapes onto the page.
3. Drag at least one Three positions shape onto the page.
4. Drag at least one Multiple shapes shape onto the page.
5. Change the type of one of the position shapes to Manager.
6. Add names and titles to several shapes.
Use existing data to create an organization chart
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Start the Organization Chart Wizard.
2. Select Excel as the data source type, and then browse to the OrgChartData
worksheet in the Visio2016SBS\Ch05 folder.
3. Add Extension to the Displayed fields section.
4. Add Extension and Employee Number to the Shape Data fields section.
5. Do not include pictures in your org chart.
6. Finish the wizard to create an org chart that uses the data in Excel.
7. Save the file as MyOrgChart for use in the “Alter layout and appearance” task.
Use the Organization Chart Wizard with new data
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Start the Organization Chart Wizard.
2. Indicate that you want the wizard to create an Excel workbook for you, and then
provide a path and file name.
3. Enter data in the Excel workbook, and then close Excel.
4. Finish the wizard to create an org chart.
Alter layout and appearance
Use the file you created in the “Use existing data to create an organization chart” task, or
open the AlterLayout diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:

1. Change the style of the org chart shapes several times to observe the effects on the
diagram.
2. Clear the Apply Automatic Layouts to Shape Styles setting, and then change the
style several times again. Notice that the layout does not change.
3. Change the layout of the entire organization chart so more of it is visible on your
monitor.
4. Change the layout of the subordinates of one manager on the chart, but leave the
rest of the org chart as is.
5. Randomly move shapes or groups of shapes around on the page, and then lay out
the diagram again.
6. Fit the diagram to the page.
7. Adjust the vertical spacing between shapes in the chart, and move shapes or groups
of shapes.
8. Hide the subordinates of at least one manager.
9. Adjust the height and width of one or more shapes.
10. Add one or several photos to the page by using the images in the Photos subfolder
in the Visio2016SBS\Ch05 folder.
11. Delete or hide the photos or photo placeholders on several shapes.
Import photographs as you create organization charts
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Start the Organization Chart Wizard.
2. Select Excel as the data source type, and then browse to the OrgChartData
worksheet.
3. Select fields to add to the Displayed fields and to the Shape Data fields sections.
4. Include pictures in your org chart by using the images in the Photos folder.
5. Finish the wizard to create an org chart that uses the data in Excel.
6. Crop one photograph, and then adjust the brightness or contrast of another photo.

6. Add style, color, and themes
In this chapter
 Align and space shapes
 Understand theme concepts
 Apply themes and variants
 Use effects and Quick Styles
 Apply solid, gradient, and pattern fills
 Apply line colors and patterns
 Use the Format Painter
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch06 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
Some Visio diagrams are simple and straightforward; they exist solely to convey a
mechanical or functional illustration. However, the purpose of many diagrams is to
communicate information and, perhaps, to tell a story.
Regardless which description applies to your diagram, you can use many techniques to
enhance its appearance and deliver information more effectively. A common way to start
is by adding color to the interiors of shapes and to the lines in a diagram. However,
choosing a striking, yet complementary, set of colors isn’t easy, which is why Visio
themes and Quick Styles were created. They offer professionally designed color palettes,
and include variations on the main theme for those occasions when you need something
just a little bit different. Whether you decide to use Visio themes or design your own
palette, you can always apply specific colors, gradients, and patterns to individual shapes.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to aligning and spacing shapes;
applying predefined themes and variants to pages or entire diagrams; using effects and
Quick Styles; applying solid, gradient, and pattern fills; applying colors and patterns to
specific shapes; and using the Format Painter.
Align and space shapes
Part of creating a good Visio diagram is making it easy for the reader to understand and
learn from the content of the diagram. You can provide significant assistance to your
reader by removing distractions like lines that cross unnecessarily and shapes that are
almost, but not quite, aligned.
You know from some of the preceding chapters that the Dynamic Grid, AutoConnect,
rulers, and guides can help you build a neat diagram. You also know that you can nudge
and move shapes manually to arrange them more precisely.
In this topic, you will explore a variety of features that you can use to position and align
multiple shapes with just a click. Most of the features are located in the Arrange group on

the Home tab; many are also accessible on the mini toolbar.
Align shapes
You can use the Visio align functions to move multiple shapes into position at the same
time. Whether you need to arrange two shapes or dozens of shapes, you can accomplish
the task with a single click.
Figure 6-1 shows four shapes that will serve as examples for the align functions.
Figure 6-1 Visio shapes in need of alignment
 Tip
The two orange dots in Figure 6-1 through Figure 6-4 are included to provide visual
reference points. They are positioned at the center and middle of the orange
rectangle and remain in fixed positions on the page while the other shapes are
moved.

What’s in front?
Although Visio is a two-dimensional drawing tool, understanding that there is a
third dimension at work in every drawing is critical to using the tools described in
this topic.
When you drop shapes onto a Visio drawing page, their horizontal and vertical
positions on the X-axis and Y-axis, respectively, are obvious. Less obvious is that
each shape is also positioned on the Z-axis. Think of a shape’s Z-axis position as its
distance out from the back of the page.
You see evidence of a shape’s relative position on the Z-axis, known as the shape’s
Z-order, when shapes on a page overlap each other: some shapes appear to be “in
front of” or “behind” other shapes.
Even when shapes are not on top of each other, however, Visio keeps track of each
shape’s position on the Z-axis. By default, the first shape you drop on a page is at
the back, and every subsequent shape you add is one step in front of the previous
one.
If you’re in doubt, try the following experiment:
1. Drop three shapes in separate parts of the drawing page so no shapes are
touching.
2. Drag the second shape you dropped so it partially overlaps the third. Notice that
it appears behind the third shape.
3. Drag the first shape so it overlaps part of the second and part of the third. The
first shape maintains its Z-order and appears behind the other two.
You can alter the Z-order of any shape or set of shapes by using the Bring To Front
or Send To Back button.
Tip
The buttons on both the Home tab and the mini toolbar move shapes the full
distance in one direction. However, the buttons also have menus that include Bring
Forward and Send Backward commands to move shapes one step at a time.

 Important
The orange rectangle with the bolder outline on the left in Figure 6-1 is the shape
Visio uses as the anchor shape for alignment operations. Just as its name suggests,
the anchor shape stays in place—the other shapes move relative to it.
The role of the anchor shape is apparent in Figure 6-2: the other shapes are aligned
to the left, center, and right of the orange rectangle. Similarly, a comparison of
Figure 6-3 with Figure 6-1 shows that the yellow, blue, and green shapes are
aligned with the middle of the orange rectangle.
Figure 6-2 Visio shapes that are aligned left, center, and right
Prior to aligning shapes, it’s important to notice which shape is the anchor, because
alignment results can vary greatly with different anchor shapes. It’s also important
to know how Visio chooses the anchor and how to change that selection.
Visio usually selects the anchor based on Z-order. If you use a bounding box to
select multiple shapes, the anchor is usually the shape that is farthest to the back. If
you select all shapes by using Ctrl+A, the anchor shape is usually the shape that is
at the front. In either case, you can permanently change which shape is the anchor
for a particular selection by using the Send Backward or Send Forward command to
alter the Z-order.
You can also override the Z-order temporarily and pick a specific shape to be the
anchor by first selecting the shape you want to be the anchor, and then selecting the
remainder of the shapes.
If you select all four rectangles, the left, center, and right alignment operations produce the
results shown in Figure 6-2.
Similarly, the Align Top, Align Middle, and Align Bottom functions align shapes by
moving them vertically. Figure 6-3 shows one example.

Figure 6-3 Four rectangles that are aligned at the middle of the orange rectangle
 Tip
The Live Preview feature is extremely helpful when aligning shapes because it
shows the results of an alignment operation before you commit to it.
To align shapes to the left, center, or right of the anchor shape
1. On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click the Align button, and then click
either Align Left, Align Center, or Align Right.
To align shapes to the top, middle, or bottom of the anchor shape
1. Click the Align button, and then click either Align Top, Align Middle, or Align
Bottom.
Space and orient shapes
Adjusting the space between shapes is another effective way to make a diagram more
presentable. Although you can use rulers, guides, and even the Dynamic Grid to assist, in
many cases, you can accomplish everything you need by using the Position button.
For example, the distribute functions ensure that the inter-shape spacing is the same for a
set of shapes, on either the horizontal or the vertical axis. If you select the shapes shown in
Figure 6-3, and then click Distribute Horizontally on the Position menu, you will see the
result shown in Figure 6-4.
Figure 6-4 Four aligned rectangles with equal spacing between each pair

 Tip
You can adjust the amount of space that Visio places between distributed shapes by
clicking the Position button and then clicking Spacing Options.
 Tip
When you select multiple shapes and then use either type of distribute function,
Visio does not move the outermost shapes. Consequently, you should position the
outer shapes where you want them before you click the appropriate distribute
button.
The Position button also includes options to rotate and flip selected shapes or the diagram
as a whole.
In a diagram where the drawing page spans multiple printer pages, you can use the options
on the Position menu to move shapes away from page breaks or to instruct Visio to avoid
placing shapes on page breaks. Both options help you to avoid splitting shapes if you plan
to print your diagram on multiple sheets of paper.
To distribute shapes
1. Select at least three shapes.
2. On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click the Position button, and then click
either Distribute Horizontally or Distribute Vertically.
Or
Click the Position button, click More Distribute Options, and then in the
Distribute Shapes dialog box, shown in Figure 6-5, choose a different distribution
style.
Figure 6-5 Use the options in the Distribute Shapes dialog box for custom spacing
To rotate or flip shapes

1. Click the Position button, point to Rotate Shapes, and then click one of the Rotate
options or the Flip options.
To move shapes off a page break
1. Click the Position button, and then click Move off Page Breaks.
Align and space shapes automatically
As useful as the align and space functions described in the preceding sections can be,
Visio provides an even more powerful set of automatic alignment and spacing functions
that can rework an entire page with two clicks.
 Tip
Live Preview is extremely helpful for viewing Auto Align & Space results before
you commit.
To provide an example of this power, examine the poorly laid out flowchart shown in
Figure 6-6 and then compare it to the flowchart shown in Figure 6-7.
Figure 6-6 A flowchart that needs help

Figure 6-7 A dramatically improved flowchart
In only two clicks, the flowchart shown in Figure 6-6 turns into what you see in Figure 6-
7. The result in Figure 6-7 is not perfect: the End shape should be moved to a different
location. However, Visio did all of the hard work.
 Important
The results you achieve by using Auto Align & Space are closely tied to the
location of each shape on the page before you click the button. Sometimes, moving
just one shape a short distance before clicking Auto Align & Space will produce
entirely different results. This observation leads to an important recommendation: if
you aren’t satisfied with your Auto Align & Space results, undo the operation,
move a shape or two, and then try again.
To automatically align shapes
1. On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click the Align button, and then click
Auto Align.
To automatically space shapes
1. On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click the Position button, and then click
Auto Space.
To automatically align and space shapes
1. Click the Align button, and then click Auto Align & Space button.

Understand theme concepts
You can use themes and several related Visio features to change the entire look of a
diagram. Some themes employ simple shape designs with minimal ornamentation and
color; others feature bold, colorful designs and adorn shapes with shadows, glows,
reflections, and other special effects.
One of the best things about themes is that they are so easy to use. Simply point to any
theme in the gallery to see a live preview, and then when you find one you like, click its
thumbnail to apply it.
As varied as themes are, they are not your only resource when it comes to enhancing the
appearance of your diagram. The Visio diagram design hierarchy incorporates the
following four levels:
 Themes Coordinated sets of colors, shape geometries, fonts, and effects
 Variants Sets of four variations on a theme, each of which maintains the overall
character of the theme while providing distinctive color schemes and shape designs
 Effects Visual embellishments that can include shadows, reflections, glows, soft
edges, bevels, and 3-D rotation
 Quick Styles Sets of color and style combinations, ranging from subtle to intense,
that can be applied to individual shapes while still maintaining the essential nature of
the theme and variant you’ve selected
 Tip
Themes and variants can be applied to all shapes on a page or to all pages in a
diagram. Effects and Quick Styles affect only the currently selected shape or
shapes.
Among its properties, each theme consists of a color palette that includes base colors and
accent colors. You will explore the color palette, along with a set of standard Visio colors,
in “Apply solid, gradient, and pattern fills” later in this chapter.
Hundreds of Visio masters have been redesigned to take advantage of the Visio 2016
theming concepts. Many of the redesigned masters consist of multiple subshapes that take
on different accent colors within a theme. When you apply themes that are primarily
monochromatic, such shapes have a uniform appearance. But when you select themes that
employ varied accent colors, you can create diagrams with interesting visual highlights.
The Themes gallery on the Design tab presents 26 themes plus a No Theme button.
Themes are organized into four categories: Professional, Modern, Trendy, and Hand
Drawn, as shown in Figure 6-8. In addition, the bottom row of the gallery shows
thumbnails of themes that are active in the current drawing.

Figure 6-8 Use the Themes gallery to apply predefined combinations of colors, styles,
fonts, and effects to a diagram
 Tip
The Apply Theme To New Shapes option at the bottom of the Themes gallery
causes the active theme to be applied to all new shapes that you drop on the page.
Apply Theme To New Shapes is selected by default when you install Visio, but you
can click it to change this setting for the current drawing and all future drawings.

Hand-drawn themes
Have you ever wanted to show a diagram to an audience to get their feedback, and
you didn’t want the diagram to look too polished or complete? Visio 2016 offers an
intriguing set of themes you can use so your audience immediately understands that
the drawing is a work in progress.
Compare the flowcharts in the pair of images in Figure 6-9. The image on the left
uses the Whisp theme and appears to be a well-thought-out depiction of a
company’s workflow. In contrast, the one on the right begs viewers to help sketch
out and refine the process, largely because it employs the Marker theme from the
Hand Drawn section of the Themes gallery.
Figure 6-9 The same flowchart with a finished look and a work-in-progress look
Similarly, contrast the professional, finished-looking diagram on the left in Figure
6-10 with the “help me finish the network layout” diagram on the right.
Figure 6-10 A network diagram showing the effects of two themes
Apply themes and variants
The figures in the following sections feature office furniture shapes that are among many
redesigned shapes for Visio 2016. The furniture shapes feature significant visual variety
even without themes, as illustrated in Figure 6-11.

Figure 6-11 An office layout created by using shapes redesigned for Visio 2016
 Tip
Some of the redesigned furniture shapes contain intelligent behavior in addition to
enhanced appearance. All of the conference tables that include chairs, for example,
automatically add and remove chairs as you resize the tables.
The following sections provide you with examples of how changing the theme or variant
can affect the look of your diagrams.
Choose themes and variants
In the upper-left image in Figure 6-12, the Shade theme is applied, which provides a
monochromatic look. Compare it to the Whisp theme in the upper right, which features
more prominent accent colors on many shapes.

Figure 6-12 The effects of themes and variants on office furniture and office plan
shapes
 Tip
At the time of this writing, a known issue causes the Sofa shape from the Office
Furniture stencil to remain brown, no matter what theme or variant is applied. This
problem will most likely be fixed in a future update.
Introducing variants adds more visual differentiation. Compare the two office plan images
on the left in Figure 6-12. Both use the Shade theme, but Variant 2 has been applied in the
lower image. The chairs retain a similar color but the walls, door, tables, and plants all
display contrasting colors. Similarly, the images on the right share a common theme, but
Variant 4 in the lower right uses a completely different color palette.
To apply a theme
1. On the Design tab, in the Themes group, do any of the following:
• Click the thumbnail for the theme you want.
• Click the up or down arrow at the right end of the gallery to scroll through

available themes, and then click the theme you want.
• Click the More button to display the Themes gallery, and then click the theme you
want.
 Tip
Themes are applied only to the active page by default, which means that you can
assign different themes to different pages. However, you can apply the same theme
to all pages at once, as described in the next procedure.
To apply themes to all pages in a diagram
1. Right-click the thumbnail of the theme you want, and then click Apply to All
Pages.
 Important
From this moment forward, every time you select a different theme, it will be
applied to all pages unless you reset the apply themes option.
To revert to applying themes to the current page
1. Right-click the thumbnail of the theme you want, and then click Apply to Current
Page.
 Important
From this moment forward, every time you select a different theme, it will be
applied to only the current page unless you change the apply themes option.
To apply a variant
1. On the Design tab, in the Variants group, click the variant you want.
To remove the theme from the current page
1. Click the More button to display the Themes gallery, and then at the end of the
Professional section, click the No Theme thumbnail.
To remove themes from selected shapes
1. On the Home tab, in the Shape Styles group, click the More button, and then clear
the Allow Themes check mark.
To disallow the use of themes for all future shapes
1. Click the More button to display the Themes gallery, and then clear the Apply
Theme to New Shapes check mark.

Customize themes and variants
Your exploration of themes doesn’t have to end simply because you applied one to your
diagram. You can customize any theme/variant combination to create your own color and
design scheme, as follows:
 Colors You can choose a predefined color set, or design your own palette by
clicking Create New Theme Colors at the bottom of the Colors gallery.
If you choose to create your own set of colors, Visio presents a dialog box, shown in
Figure 6-13, in which you select accent colors, colors for text on light and dark fills,
and an overall background color.
Figure 6-13 You can customize individual theme colors by using the New Theme Colors
dialog box
 Tip
Creating a custom color set disables variants, and they will appear dimmed
(unavailable) in the Variants gallery.
When you create custom theme colors, Visio adds your color set to the Custom
section of the Colors gallery, a portion of which is shown in Figure 6-14. The same
figure also shows examples of predesigned color sets that you can select.

Figure 6-14 You can select an alternate color scheme for any theme
 Tip
You cannot delete the built-in colors, effects, or themes. However, you can delete
custom colors sets. To do so, display the Colors gallery for themes, right-click the
custom color set, and then click Delete.
 Effects You can select one of 26 built-in theme effects.
 Important
Customizing the colors and effects of a variant is not the same as setting custom
colors or effects on a shape. You will explore the latter in “Use effects and Quick
Styles” and “Apply solid, gradient, and pattern fills” later in this chapter.
 Connectors You can apply one of 26 styles to a dynamic connector.
 Tip
The style you apply to dynamic connectors is also applied to other 1-D lines on the
page. However, the style is not applied to the lines that comprise shape borders.
 Embellishment You can change the embellishment level. Note that not all shapes
use embellishments, so you might not see a difference after modifying the
embellishment setting.

 Tip
If you want to copy a customized theme from one Visio drawing to another, copy a
shape containing the theme from the first drawing and paste it into the second one.
You can then delete the shape; the theme will remain behind. Your copied theme
will not appear in the Themes gallery but any custom color sets will appear under
the Custom section in the Colors gallery.
 See Also
For detailed information about themes from a developer’s perspective, see the
theme-related posts in Visio MVP John Goldsmith’s blog at
visualsignals.typepad.co.uk/vislog/archive.html.
To customize variant colors
1. On the Design tab, in the Variants group, click the More button to display the
Variants gallery, and then point to Colors.
2. Click the color set you want.
Or
Click Create New Theme Colors, select the colors you want in the New Theme
Colors dialog box, enter a color set name, and then click OK.
To customize effects
1. Display the Variants gallery, point to Effects, and then click the effect you want.
To change the connector style
1. Display the Variants gallery, point to Connectors, and then click the connector
style you want.
To change the embellishment level
1. Display the Variants gallery, point to Embellishment, and then click the
embellishment level you want.
Use effects and Quick Styles
After you’ve used themes and variants to give your diagram the overall look that you
want, you can use effects and Quick Styles to add sophistication or provide emphasis to
one or more selected shapes within your drawing.

Highlight shapes by using effects
Visio includes six types of effects: shadows, reflections, glows, soft edges, bevels, and 3-D
rotation. If you have used effects in Microsoft PowerPoint, you might recognize this list
because Visio and PowerPoint share the same set of effects. In all six cases, you can
choose from predefined effects, or you can customize specific features of each effect.
The flowchart example shown in several preceding chapters is enhanced in Figure 6-15
with three effects:
 The flowchart shapes—but not the dynamic connectors—have a reflection.
Figure 6-15 Multiple effects applied to a flowchart
 Tip
Selecting flowchart shapes, but not connectors, is easy because flowchart shapes are
automatically placed on a special layer. For a refresher on selecting shapes by using
layers, refer to “Understand and use layers” in Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes, and
pages.” To review other techniques for selecting multiple shapes, see “Select
shapes” in Chapter 2, “Create diagrams.”
 The flowchart shapes have a bevel.
 The shape on the left end of the bottom row has a yellow glow.
You can apply effects in two ways, but there is an important difference between the two
techniques. Clicking the Effects button in the Shape Styles group on the Home tab
displays a menu that only gives you access to predefined effects, whereas the Format
Shape task pane gives you precise control over the properties of each effect. As an
example, the image on the left of Figure 6-16 shows the glow options available from the
Glow submenu of the Effects menu, and on the right are the equivalent options from the
Format Shape task pane.

Figure 6-16 You can apply a glow from the gallery or the Format Shape task pane
 Important
The Bevel option on the Effects menu has a different name in the Format Shape
task pane, where it is called 3-D Format.
 See Also
For an example that uses multiple effects to create replicas of Olympic medals, see
the article by Visio MVP David Parker at blog.orbussoftware.com/data-graphics-
text-calllouts-visio-2013/.
 Tip
Each section of the Format Shape task pane includes a Presets button that displays
the same galleries as the Effects button. However, there is one important difference:
accessing the galleries from the Format Shape task pane does not provide a live
preview.
To display the Effects page of the Format Shape task pane
1. Select one or more shapes, and then do any of the following:
• On the Home tab, in the Shape Styles group, click the dialog box launcher to
display the Format Shape task pane. At the top of the task pane, click the Effects
button.

• On the Home tab, in the Shape Styles group, click the Effects button, point to
any of the six types of effects, and then click the Options button at the bottom of
the menu.
 Tip
To see an example, refer to the Glow Options button shown on the left in Figure 6-
16.
To apply an effect
1. Select one or more shapes, and then do either of the following:
• In the Shape Styles group, click the Effects button, point to any of the six types
of effects, and then click the effect you want.
• On the Effects page of the Format Shape task pane, click the name of the effect
you want, and then set the values you want.
Or
1. Right-click the shape you want to enhance.
Or
Select multiple shapes, and then right-click any of the selected shapes.
2. On the mini toolbar, click the Styles button, point to the Effects button, point to any
of the six types of effects, and then click the effect you want.
To change an effect on a shape
1. On the Effects page of the Format Shape task pane, click the name of the effect
you want to change, and then make the changes you want.
To remove an effect from a shape
1. In the Shape Styles group, click the Effects button, point to any of the six types of
effects, and then click the No <effect name> button, where <effect name> is the
name of the effect you want to remove.
 Tip
To see an example, refer to the No Glow button shown on the left in Figure 6-16.
Embellish shapes by using Quick Styles
Similar to the way that themes provide a coordinated set of design options for an entire
page, Quick Styles offer predesigned collections of visual effects for a set of shapes that
you have selected.

 Important
There is one important difference between themes and Quick Styles: you can
remove a theme by clicking the No Theme thumbnail in the Themes gallery. There
is no equivalent way to remove all of the changes made by a Quick Style.
Visio provides two versions of the Quick Styles gallery, and you can use either of them to
achieve the same result. The image on the left in Figure 6-17 on the following page shows
the gallery when displayed from the Shape Styles group on the Home tab. The image on
the right shows the gallery that appears when you use the mini toolbar. The gallery on the
right appears in a shorter pane that includes a scroll bar; it’s easy to miss the scroll bar and
not realize that all of the same choices are available.
Figure 6-17 Two views of the Quick Styles gallery
The Quick Styles gallery includes two sections that present the following options:
 Four variant styles
 A six-by-seven matrix of theme styles that provide theme-appropriate color and style
alternatives. From top to bottom, the rows of the matrix offer style changes that
range from subtle to intense; the columns offer variations numbered from one to
seven.
The gallery that appears when you use the mini toolbar also presents Fill, Line, Font
Color, and Effects buttons. These are also available on the Home tab.

 Tip
Although the color differences across the columns in the Theme Styles section of
the gallery in Figure 6-17 are readily identifiable, realize that each row incorporates
differences in gradients, bevels, and other effects that are less visible in the
thumbnails.
 Tip
Based on choices made by the shape designer, you will find that some shapes do not
change when you attempt to apply a Quick Style.
To apply a Quick Style to one or more shapes
1. Do either of the following:
• On the Home tab, in the Shape Styles group, click the More button, and then
click a thumbnail in either the Variant Styles or the Theme Styles section of the
Quick Styles gallery.
• Right-click the selected shape or shapes. On the mini toolbar, click the Styles
button, and then click a thumbnail in either the Variant Styles or the Theme
Styles section of the gallery.
 Tip
Remember to use the scroll bar to reveal additional rows of theme styles.
To change a Quick Style
1. Display the Quick Styles gallery, and then click a different thumbnail.
Apply solid, gradient, and pattern fills
Despite the incredible range of design options provided by themes, variants, and effects,
sometimes you just need the basics, such as applying a color or pattern to a shape.
In Visio, you accomplish these tasks in familiar ways by choosing from the color picker,
shown in Figure 6-18. Even here, however, themes and variants are part of your color
selection decision because individual color choices are grouped into four sections: Theme
Colors, Variant Colors, Standard Colors, and Recent Colors.

Figure 6-18 Use the color picker to view and select colors and tints
When you choose from the Theme Colors or Variant Colors section, the fill in your shape
will change color each time you apply a different theme. However, if you pick from the
Standard Colors or Recent Colors section, or click More Colors, you have locked the color
of your shape; it will no longer be affected by themes.
If you choose to work with the colors in the Theme Colors section, it’s helpful to
understand the structure behind this section of the color picker.
 Columns From left to right, the columns in the Theme Colors section are White,
Black, Light, Dark, and then six accent colors named Accent 1 to Accent 6. (Light
and Dark are used for light-colored text on a dark background, and dark-colored text
on a light background, respectively.)
 Rows The top row represents the base color for each column. The next five rows
display three lighter tints and two darker tints of each color.
A ScreenTip appears when you point to any color selection, as shown in Figure 6-18.
Clicking More Colors below the color picker opens the Colors dialog box, which you can
use when the color you want is not available in the color picker. The Standard tab of the
Colors dialog box includes dozens of color choices, or you can use the color selector and
tint slider on the Custom tab to create virtually any color. For a third alternative, also on
the Custom tab, you can type specific values in order to create colors that use the Red-
Green-Blue (RGB) or Hue-Saturation-Lightness (HSL) color scheme. Regardless of the
technique you use, selecting a color from the Colors dialog box adds it to the Recent
Colors section of the color picker.
In addition to solid color fills, you can apply fill patterns, transparency, and gradient fills.
The easiest way to work with pattern and gradient fills is to use the Format Shape task
pane. Figure 6-19 shows the details of the Format Shape task pane for a gradient fill on the
left, and a pattern fill on the right.

Figure 6-19 The Gradient Fill and Pattern Fill settings in the Format Shape task pane
 Tip
You can fine-tune multiple options for each of the fill types shown in Figure 6-19.
It’s worth spending some time exploring the choices so you’ll be aware of the many
alternatives.
To display the color picker
1. Do either of the following:
• On the Home tab, in the Shape Styles group, click the Fill button.
• Right-click a shape. On the mini toolbar, click the Styles button, and then point to
Fill.
To display the Format Shape pane
1. Do either of the following:
• Display the color picker, and then click Fill Options.
• Right-click a shape, and then click Format Shape.
To open the Colors dialog box
1. Display the color picker, and then click More Colors.
To apply a solid fill color
1. Do any of the following:
• Display the color picker, and then click a color button in the Theme Colors,

Variant Colors, Standard Colors, or Recent Colors section.
• Open the Colors dialog box, click the Standard tab, and then click the color you
want.
• Open the Colors dialog box, click the Custom tab, and then in the Colors pane,
slide the tint slider to the color you want.
• Open the Colors dialog box, click the Custom tab, click RGB or HSL in the
Color model list, and then enter values to specify the color you want.
• In the Format Shape task pane, click Solid fill, click the Fill Color button, and
then use any of the preceding techniques.
2. (Optional) Set a Transparency value.
To apply a gradient fill
1. In the Format Shape task pane, click Gradient fill, click the Preset gradients
button, and then click the gradient you want.
2. (Optional) Set Type, Direction, Angle, or Gradient stops values.
To apply a pattern fill
1. In the Format Shape task pane, click Pattern fill, click the Pattern button, and
then click a pattern.
2. (Optional) Set Foreground, Background, or Transparency values.
To remove a shape fill
1. Do either of the following:
• In the color picker, click No Fill.
• In the Format Shape task pane, click No fill.
Apply line colors and patterns
Many theme and variant combinations include styles and colors for lines. In addition, just
as you can apply specific colors and patterns to two-dimensional shapes, you can also
customize lines and dynamic connectors.
With few exceptions, most changes you make to lines affect both the lines you draw
between shapes and the border lines around two-dimensional shapes. (One exception was
noted in the “Customize themes and variants” section earlier in this chapter.) The
techniques you use to change the appearance of lines are very similar to those described
for fills in the preceding topic.
The color picker for lines includes additional options that are not on the menu for fills:
you can set Weight, Dashes, and Arrows, as shown in Figure 6-20.

Figure 6-20 In addition to color choices, the color picker for lines includes several line
style options
 Tip
Visio MVP John Marshall suggests that “Line Patterns” would be a better name
than “Dashes” because many line patterns have nothing to do with dots and dashes.
In addition, you can create custom line patterns; for examples, refer to an article
from an earlier version of Visio when line patterns actually were called line
patterns: msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa200997(v=office.10).asp.
In a more recent view of the subject, Visio MVP John Goldsmith wrote a two-part
series beginning with this article at
visualsignals.typepad.co.uk/vislog/2008/03/creating-random.html.
The Line Options entry at the end of the color picker menu opens the Line section of the
Format Shape task pane, which includes even more options for fine-tuning the appearance
of both solid and gradient lines. In addition to customizing the lines themselves, you can
tailor properties like the caps (line ends), corners, and arrows.
Figure 6-21 illustrates the variety of line types that you can configure by using the Format
Shape task pane.

Figure 6-21 Examples of highly varied line types you can create
To open the color picker for lines
1. Do either of the following:
• On the Home tab, in the Shape Styles group, click the Line button.
• Right-click a shape. On the mini toolbar, click the Styles button, and then point to
Line.
To open the Format Shape pane to the Line section
1. Do either of the following:
• Open the color picker, click Line Options, and then click Line.
• Right-click a shape; click Format Shape, and then click Line.
To apply a solid line color
1. Do any of the following:
• Open the color picker, and then click a color button in the Theme Colors,
Variant Colors, Standard Colors, or Recent Colors section.
• Open the Colors dialog box, click the Standard tab, and then click the color you
want.
• Open the Colors dialog box, click the Custom tab, and then in the Colors pane,
use the tint slider to create the color you want.
• Open the Colors dialog box, click the Custom tab, click RGB or HSL in the
Color model list, and then enter values to specify the color you want.
• In the Format Shape task pane, click Solid line, click the Fill Color button, and
then use any of the preceding techniques.
2. (Optional) Set additional line values.
To change line appearance
1. Open the color picker, and then do any of the following:
• Point to Weight, and then click a line weight.
• Point to Dashes, and then click a line pattern.
• Point to Arrows, and then click an arrow type.

Or
1. Open the Format Shape task pane to the Line section, and then use the available
options to change line attributes.
To apply a gradient line
1. In the Format Shape task pane, click Gradient line, click the Preset gradients
button, and then click the gradient you want.
2. (Optional) Set Type, Direction, Angle, Gradient stops, and any additional line
options you want.
Use the Format Painter
The Visio Format Painter operates very similarly to the way it does in other applications in
the Microsoft Office suite. You can use it to copy simple formatting or more sophisticated
themes, variants, effects, and Quick Styles.
To copy formatting to one shape
1. Select the shape from which to copy formatting, and then on the Home tab, in the
Clipboard group, click the Format Painter button.
Or
Right-click a shape. On the mini toolbar, click the Format Painter button.
2. Click the shape to which you want to transfer the formatting.
To copy formatting to multiple shapes
1. Select the shape from which to copy formatting, and then on the Home tab, in the
Clipboard group, double-click the Format Painter button.
Or
Right-click a shape. On the mini toolbar, double-click the Format Painter button.
2. Click the shapes to which you want to transfer the formatting.
3. On the Home tab, in the Tools group, click the Pointer Tool button.
Or
Press Ctrl+1.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Align and space shapes
 Understand theme concepts
 Apply themes and variants
 Use effects and Quick Styles

 Apply solid, gradient, and pattern fills
 Apply line colors and patterns
 Use the Format Painter
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch06 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Align and space shapes
Open the AlignSpaceShapes diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Use a bounding box to select at least three shapes of different sizes, and then align
them on their left edges, centers, and right edges.
2. Use the Live Preview feature to see how the shapes would look if you aligned them
at the top and bottom.
3. Choose an anchor shape, and then align the selected shapes at the middle.
4. Undo the alignment from the previous step, click a shape that was NOT previously
the anchor shape, and then align the shapes to its middle, noting the difference in
placement.
5. Using the same shapes, distribute them either horizontally or vertically so that the
spacing between all pairs of shapes is equal.
6. Click the orange triangle, and then experiment with rotating and flipping it.
7. Drag any shape to the edge of the page so that Visio expands the page.
8. Use the Position button to move the shape off the page break.
9. On Page-2 of the diagram, experiment with the Auto Align, Auto Space, and Auto
Align & Space functions.
Understand theme concepts
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Apply themes and variants
Start Visio, choose any template you want to use, add shapes of various types to several
pages, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Apply various themes, including at least one hand-drawn theme, to a page.
2. Choose a theme and apply it to all pages in the diagram.
3. Revert to applying themes to a single page.

4. Experiment with variants of one or two themes.
5. Customize variant colors.
6. Apply your choice of effects to the page.
7. Customize connector styles.
8. Set a different embellishment level for several shapes.
9. Remove the theme from one page.
10. Save the drawing as ThemesVariantsEffects for use with the next tasks.
Use effects and Quick Styles
Open the ThemesVariantsEffects diagram that you created in the previous practice task,
and then perform the following tasks:
1. Apply a glow, reflection, and bevel to one or more shapes.
2. Change one glow to be larger or smaller, or to be a different color, and then alter
one of the bevels you previously applied.
3. Select two shapes, and then remove all effects from those shapes.
4. Select several shapes, and then apply a Quick Style.
5. Select one of the shapes with a Quick Style applied, and then apply a different one.
Apply solid, gradient, and pattern fills
Continue using the diagram from the previous task, or create a new diagram, and then
perform the following tasks:
1. Add 10 to 12 shapes to the page, select one or more shapes, and then apply a new
solid fill color.
2. Apply a gradient fill to several shapes.
3. Experiment with changing the gradient fill settings for Type and Direction.
4. Adjust the Gradient stop settings.
5. Apply a fill pattern to one or more shapes.
6. Remove the fill from one shape.
Apply line colors and patterns
Continue using the diagram from the previous tasks, or create a new diagram, and then
perform the following tasks:
1. Add several lines and dynamic connectors to the page. If there aren’t any 2-D
shapes on the page, add several.
2. Apply a solid color to one line, one dynamic connector, and one 2-D shape.
3. Change the line weight, line pattern, and several other characteristics.

4. Apply a gradient to one line, one dynamic connector, and one 2-D shape.
5. Adjust various aspects of the line gradient.
6. Save the drawing as ColorsPatterns for use with the next tasks.
Use the Format Painter
Open the ColorsPatterns diagram that you created in the previous practice task, and then
perform the following tasks:
1. Copy the formatting from one line to another.
2. Copy the formatting from one 2-D shape to another.
3. Copy the formatting from one shape to three other shapes.

7. Create network and datacenter diagrams
In this chapter
 Build basic network diagrams
 Build detailed network diagrams
 Use 3-D equipment shapes
 Create rack diagrams
 Change the drawing scale
 Run computer and network reports
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch07 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
Creating network diagrams is among the most common uses for Visio. Whether your goal
is to create simple, stylized representations of network connectivity or create photo-
realistic rack diagrams that show real-time equipment status, you can accomplish your
goal with Visio.
The Standard edition of Visio 2016 includes two main templates: Basic Network Diagram
and Basic Network Diagram – 3D. The former incorporates modern-looking, two-
dimensional (2-D) shapes that are compatible with Visio 2016 themes. The latter includes
three-dimensional (3-D) shapes that are identical to the shapes used in Visio 2010 and
earlier.
The Professional edition includes both Standard-edition templates plus a more
sophisticated version of each, called Detailed Network Diagram and Detailed Network
Diagram – 3D. Visio Professional also includes Rack Diagram, Active Directory, and
LDAP Directory templates.
 Tip
Both the Basic Network Diagram and Detailed Network Diagram templates feature
starter diagrams. See Chapter 1, “Get started with Visio 2016,” for information
about starter diagrams.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to building basic and detailed network
diagrams, using 2-D or 3-D equipment shapes, creating rack diagrams, changing the
drawing scale, and running computer and network reports.

Build basic network diagrams
A key component of many networks is an Ethernet network. The Visio Ethernet shape is a
smart shape whose appearance belies its sophistication. When you drag an Ethernet shape
onto the drawing page, it looks as shown on the left side of Figure 7-1.
Figure 7-1 An Ethernet shape offers 64 movable connection points
Based on the five lines with dots at the ends, you might assume you can connect only five
network devices to one Ethernet segment. However, you can actually connect up to 64
devices to one segment.
The secret lies in the yellow control handles that appear when you select the shape (see the
image on the right side of Figure 7-1). In addition to the control handles at the ends of the
five lines, what appears to be a pair of control handles in the middle of the shape is
actually two stacks of control handles. As you drag one of the control handles out of the
middle, another appears until you reach the total of 64. Figure 7-2 shows seven connected
devices and eight available connection points, and there are still two control handles in the
middle of the Ethernet segment.
Figure 7-2 An Ethernet shape can be lengthened by dragging the resize handles, and
you can add text to the shape
 Important
If you drag a connection point before selecting the Ethernet shape, you will drag the
entire shape and not just the connector. Be sure to select the Ethernet shape first.
The two-dimensional computer and network shapes accept all of the themes and effects
you learned about in Chapter 6, “Add style, color, and themes.” For example, Figure 7-3
uses Variant 4 of the Zephyr theme. In addition, the Art Deco bevel effect is applied to the
computer shapes, and the Dark Red, 8 pt, Accent Color 6 glow effect is added to the two
network segments.

Figure 7-3 You can create stylish network diagrams by using themes and effects
Most of the shapes in the Basic Network Diagram stencils are computers and network
components that are used inside buildings. Most of the wide area network components are
in stencils that are part of the Detailed Network Diagram template described in the
following topic.
 Tip
If you end up with unneeded control handles outside the Ethernet segment shape,
don’t try to delete them—you’ll end up deleting the entire Ethernet segment.
Instead, you can hide unused connections by dragging those control handles back
into the interior of the Ethernet shape where they will only be visible if you select
the network segment.
 Tip
Don’t forget that you can use the Dynamic Grid to align the new shapes with each
other and with the Ethernet segment.
To diagram an Ethernet network
1. Drag an Ethernet shape onto the page.
2. Drag various computer and network device shapes onto the page.
3. Select the Ethernet shape, and then drag and glue a yellow control handle to each
computer or network shape.
To add more than five devices to an Ethernet shape
1. Drag a yellow control out from the center of the Ethernet shape.

To adjust the length or width of an Ethernet segment
1. Select the Ethernet shape, and then drag one of the white resize handles.
Build detailed network diagrams
 Important
The information in this topic applies only to the Professional edition of Visio 2016.
Visio Professional 2016 includes an advanced network diagram template that offers
additional stencils you can use to create diagrams that are more sophisticated.
The primary differences between the Basic Network Diagram and Detailed Network
Diagram templates are visible in the two versions of the Shapes window shown in Figure
7-4. The Basic Network Diagram template (shown on the left) includes only two stencils.
The Detailed Network Diagram template (shown on the right) includes the same two, plus
five additional stencils.
Figure 7-4 Additional network stencils are available in Visio Professional
 Important
If a scroll bar appears when you move the pointer into the upper part of the Shapes
window when you are using the Detailed Network Diagram template, drag the
separator between the title bar section and the shapes section down to reveal all of
the stencil titles.
The Servers stencil contains 17 shapes that you can use to represent specific server types
to create a realistic depiction of your network. The Rack Mounted Servers stencil contains
a corresponding set of 17 rack-mounted server shapes. The remaining stencils provide
dozens of symbols for network equipment and locations. Figure 7-5 shows an example of
the type of enterprise diagram you can create by incorporating shapes from multiple
stencils.

Figure 7-5 A representation of an enterprise network
 Tip
For network and computer shapes with a light-hearted, work-in-progress look, see
the Crayon Network Shapes on the Visio Guy blog at
www.visguy.com/2011/08/16/crayon-visio-network-shapes-revisited/.
 Tip
The local area network (LAN) shapes on the left and right sides of Figure 7-5 are
enclosed in containers. You will explore the use of containers in Chapter 13, “Add
structure to your diagrams.”
 Tip
Early versions of Visio—Visio 2000 and before—included a network discovery and
auto-mapping capability. In essence, you could point those early versions of Visio
at a network and it would discover what was on the network and then build a map
for you. Although that capability no longer exists in Visio, several vendors provide
Visio add-ins that have this capability.

 See Also
For information about storing and using data in network shapes, see Chapter 8,
“Work with shape data,” and “Run computer and network reports” later in this
chapter.
To diagram an enterprise network
1. Drag local and wide area network shapes and computer shapes onto the page.
2. Connect device shapes to local area network shapes as described in the preceding
topic.
3. Connect wide area network device shapes by using dynamic connectors or the
Comm-link shape in the Network and Peripherals stencil.
Use 3-D equipment shapes
The preceding topics featured the modern, two-dimensional network and computer shapes
that were introduced with Visio 2013. Remember, however, that the traditional three-
dimensional shapes are still available in the Basic Network Shapes - 3D and Detailed
Network Shapes - 3D (Professional edition only) stencils.
Figure 7-6 provides a good comparison of the two shape styles. The network in the upper
half of the diagram uses the 2-D shapes, and the network in the lower half consists of the
identical network components represented with 3-D shapes. Neither style is right or wrong
—both are available so you can choose how you’d like your diagram to look.

Figure 7-6 Modern, two-dimensional network shapes contrast sharply with traditional,
three-dimensional shapes
When you select the appropriate style for your diagrams, two additional considerations
might affect your decision:
 Many of the stencils and shapes provided by equipment vendors are drawn in the 3-
D style. (See the “Where can I find more network shapes?” sidebar later in this
chapter.)
 The 2-D network shapes were designed specifically for Visio 2016 themes.
Although these shapes look more basic than the 3-D shapes when no theme is
applied, as shown in Figure 7-6, they are much more attractive than the older shapes
when you use themes.

Where can I find more network shapes?
The network shapes that are included with Visio might look something like your
servers, routers, and other equipment, but they can’t match exactly because they are
generic shapes.
If you want to create diagrams that are more realistic, thousands of downloadable
Visio stencils and shapes are available from three main sources:
 Network and computer equipment vendors often provide shapes, usually photo-
realistic shapes, for their equipment. For vendor-specific shapes, browse or
search a vendor’s website.
 Some companies design and sell both product-specific and generic Visio
shapes.
 Individuals have created network and computer equipment shapes. Many
provide them for free; some charge for their artwork.
For Microsoft-specific shapes, try the following:
 The “Microsoft Azure, Cloud and Enterprise Symbol / Icon Set” download
includes Visio stencils and .png images. Details and the download are available
at www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=41937.
 Microsoft created a collection of server and network shapes for use in wall
posters that depict product deployment scenarios. You might not need to create
posters, but the free, downloadable stencils offer an alternative to traditional
Visio shapes. You can download the shapes from www.microsoft.com/en-
us/download/details.aspx?id=21480.
If you want to customize the 3-D server shapes that are delivered with Visio, the
Visio Guy blog includes an article and a tool at www.visguy.com/2009/09/11/visio-
server-shape-icon-customization-tool/.
For large collections of links to various stencil sources (most are free), go to the
following sites:
 www.visiocafe.com
 visio.mvps.org/3rdParty/default.html
You can also try these commercial stencil vendors:
 www.visiostencils.com
 www.shapesource.com

Create rack diagrams
 Important
The information in this topic applies only to the Professional edition of Visio 2016.
The diagrams in the preceding topics all contain equipment that is generally located
outside the wiring closet or datacenter. To create diagrams of equipment in those
backroom areas, you use some of the shapes from the computer and network stencils.
However, you also need additional stencils that are provided with Visio Professional. This
topic explores the special behavior of a key backroom component—the shapes you use to
build rack diagrams.
Figure 7-7 on the following page shows three of the equipment room and rack-related
stencils.
Figure 7-7 You can build realistic representations of wiring closets and datacenters by
using rack shapes

 Important
A rack diagram is an example of a scaled drawing, one in which the size of the
shapes on the page is dependent on the size and scale of the page itself.
The pages in the Rack Diagram template are preset with a scale factor; however,
you can add scaled drawing pages to any diagram. For more information about
scaled drawings, see the sidebar “What is a scaled drawing?” and the topic “Change
the drawing scale,” both later in this chapter.
When you drag a rack shape onto the drawing page, it appears like the one shown in
Figure 7-8, with a measurement of “42 U” displayed above the rack. U is the abbreviation
for one rack unit, which is 1.75 inches or 44.45 mm.
Figure 7-8 A 42 U–high equipment rack
 Tip
The rack shape was designed to be included in a scaled drawing. Consequently, if
you drop a rack shape onto a page with no drawing scale, it behaves very differently
—the entire rack will be only 1 U high.
In addition to the rack shape displaying its height, each piece of equipment you drag into a
rack displays its height in rack units, as shown in several subsequent figures.
Figure 7-9 shows a 2 U Power Supply/UPS shape being placed into a rack. Based on what
you learned about connection points in Chapter 2, “Create diagrams,” three items in the

figure would lead you to think that the rack and the equipment shape have active
connection points despite the lack of obvious one-dimensional (1-D) shapes:
 There are green squares at the lower corners of the Power Supply/UPS shape.
 The words Glue to Connection Point appear in a ScreenTip.
 There are gray squares along the edges of the rack that appear only when you move
a rack-mounted shape near the rack.
Figure 7-9 Dragging equipment into a rack activates glue at connection points that are
spaced at 1 U intervals
What you are observing in this figure is a unique feature of rack equipment shapes and a
few other Visio shapes: they look like 2-D shapes, yet they behave like lines, dynamic
connectors, and other one-dimensional shapes. The result of the 2-D/1-D combination for
rack diagrams is a set of shapes that look like the physical equipment they represent, but
can be glued to precise locations on the edges of a rack.
 Tip
The gray squares representing connection points on both edges of the rack are
located precisely at 1 U intervals, allowing U-sized shapes to be positioned in
exactly the same way as their real-world counterparts.
Many rack shapes, like the Server shape shown in both parts of Figure 7-10, are
adjustable. When you drag a server into a rack, its default height is 8 U, as shown on the
left side of the figure. However, because the server exhibits two-dimensional properties
and resize handles, you can change its height, as shown on the right. The intent of the
shape’s design is to let your network diagram mimic the real world as closely as possible.
Figure 7-10 A rack-mounted server shape changes appearance as you adjust its height

 Tip
While you drag the resize handle on a server shape like the one in Figure 7-10, the
appearance of the shape changes. At 7 U, 6 U, and 5 U, the lower half of the shape
remains unchanged and the upper half of the shape gets smaller. However, at 4 U
and below, the lower part of the shape begins to adjust too. Even a seemingly
simple Visio shape can have reasonably sophisticated behavior.
Figure 7-11 shows what a completed rack might look like. On the left side of the figure,
the U dimensions of all shapes are visible. On the right, display of the dimensions has
been disabled.
Figure 7-11 The U height of rack components can be visible or hidden
 Tip
The Show U Size and Hide U Size commands affect all shapes on the page.
Each rack in Figure 7-11 contains five servers and a router, which is the same equipment
configuration in the datacenter portion of the stylized network diagram in Figure 7-5.
Many network administrators include both views in their network maps. They also include
a hyperlink on each server in the high-level view that leads to that server’s location in the
rack diagram, making it easy for map users to view any level of detail they want. You will
explore using hyperlinks to add “drill-down” capabilities like this to your Visio diagrams
in Chapter 11, “Add and use hyperlinks.”
To create a rack diagram
1. Drag a Rack or Cabinet shape onto the page.

2. Drag shapes from the Rack-mounted Equipment and Free-standing Rack
Equipment stencils onto the page, and then glue them to the rack.
To show or hide the U height for racks and rack-mounted equipment
shapes
1. Right-click the rack or a shape in a rack, and then do either of the following:
• Click Show U sizes.
• Click Hide U sizes.
To adjust the height of rack-mounted equipment shapes
1. Select the shape, and then use the shape’s resize handles.
 Tip
Not all rack-mounted equipment shapes can be resized.
To add a rack diagram page to an existing network diagram
1. Add a page to the diagram.
 See Also
For information about the drawing scale for Visio pages, see “Change the drawing
scale” later in this chapter.
2. Set the scale factor on the new page to 1:20 for a Metric Units diagram or 1” =
1’0” for a U.S. Units diagram.
3. Drag a rack and rack equipment shapes to the page.
What is a scaled drawing?
Visio rack diagrams are examples of scaled drawings. The rack shapes were created
so that their size on the page is proportional to the drawing scale of the page. At a
page-to-rack ratio of 1:1, each shape would be “life sized”; that is, each shape
would take as much space on the page as the real object does in a rack. By setting
the scale to 1:10, each unit of measurement in your drawing represents 10 units in
the real world.
A metric drawing might be created with a 1:10 scale so that 1 mm on the page
represents 1 cm in the real world. For US units, a ratio of 1”=1’0” means that each
inch on the page represents one foot in the real world.
Visio floor plans are also scaled diagrams and typically use a smaller scale in order
for each page to depict a larger space. A typical metric floor plan might be a page
scale of 1:25, whereas a floor plan drawn in US units might use a ½” or ¼” to 1-

foot scale.
The scale for a drawing is shown on the Drawing Scale tab in the Page Setup dialog
box. Figure 7-12 shows three examples of the Drawing Scale section of the dialog
box. The image on the left shows the four predefined scale types; the center image
displays part of the list of Architectural scale factors that are in US units; the image
on the right image shows part of the list of metric scale factors.
Figure 7-12 Visio diagrams include many predefined scale factors that are grouped into
four categories
You can also click Custom Scale and enter numbers and units to create a custom
ratio for your diagram, as shown in Figure 7-13.

Figure 7-13 You can create a Custom Scale for your diagram
Notice that the lower-left corner of the Drawing Scale tab shows the size of the
drawing page expressed in measurement units at the current page scale. In Figure 7-
13, the custom scale, when used on 11-by-8.5-inch printer paper (refer to the
dimensions under the thumbnail image on the right side of the dialog box),
represents a real-world space that is 8’ 9.6” by 6’ 9.6”.
Tip
Unscaled drawings use the No Scale (1:1) option at the top of the dialog box shown
in Figure 7-13.
Change the drawing scale
A real-world scenario: You’ve created a rack diagram that includes three racks, and you
need to add several more. However, there isn’t room to fit another rack onto the drawing
page. Are you forced to start over with a new diagram? The answer is no, because scaled
drawings easily accommodate this type of change. You simply adjust the scaling factor,
and Visio does the rest.
For example, if you have the drawing shown in Figure 7-14 and you want to add three
more racks, it’s clear that you need more space on the page. The Drawing Scale tab in the
Page Setup dialog box indicates that the scale in this metric drawing is currently 1:10.

Figure 7-14 Three full-height racks fit comfortably on an A4-sized page when the
Metric scale is set to 1:10
Doubling the scale to 1:20 produces the result shown in Figure 7-15. Clearly, you have
more space to work with but it might be more than you need. In addition, at this scale,
each rack is rather small.

Figure 7-15 Equipment racks are small when the metric page scale is set to 1:20
The list of predefined scales does not include an entry between 1:10 and 1:20, but you can
create a custom scale of 1:15 that results in what’s shown in Figure 7-16.

Figure 7-16 The scale factor for this page is suitable for the three existing equipment
racks and provides additional room for more
 Tip
The screen shots in Figure 7-14 through Figure 7-16 include the ruler at the top of
the drawing page. You can confirm that changing the scale from 1:10 to 1:20
doubled the available space by noticing that the amount of wall space represented
by each diagram changed from 3 meters to 6 meters. Similarly, 1:15 yields a wall
measurement that is halfway in between.
 Important
Although this topic describes how to adjust the scale factors for a rack diagram, you
can use the steps in these procedures to adjust the scale in any scaled drawing.
To display the Drawing Scale tab of the Page Setup dialog box
1. Right-click a page name tab, and then click Drawing Scale.
To change the drawing scale for an Architectural diagram

1. Display the Drawing Scale tab.
2. Click Pre-defined scale, click the arrow, and then click Architectural.
3. Click the scale factor arrow, and then click a factor from 3/32” = 1’ 0” to 1’ = 1’ 0”.
Or
Click Custom Scale, and then enter numbers, with or without unit abbreviations,
into the boxes on either side of the equal (=) sign.
To change the drawing scale for a Civil Engineering diagram
1. Display the Drawing Scale tab.
2. Click Pre-defined scale, click the arrow, and then click Civil Engineering.
3. Click the scale factor arrow, and then click a factor from 1” = 1” to 1” = 100’ 0”.
Or
Click Custom Scale, and then enter numbers, with or without unit abbreviations,
into the boxes on either side of the equal (=) sign.
To change the drawing scale for a Metric diagram
1. Display the Drawing Scale tab.
2. Click Pre-defined scale, click the arrow, and then click Metric.
3. Click the scale factor arrow, and then click a factor from 1:1000 to 50:1.
Or
Click Custom Scale, and then enter numbers, with or without unit abbreviations,
into the boxes on either side of the equal (=) sign.
To change the drawing scale for a Mechanical Engineering diagram
1. Display the Drawing Scale tab.
2. Click Pre-defined scale, click the arrow, and then click Mechanical Engineering.
3. Click the scale factor arrow, and then click a factor from 1/32:1 to 10:1.
Or
Click Custom Scale, and then enter numbers, with or without unit abbreviations,
into the boxes on either side of the equal (=) sign.
To change the drawing to unscaled
1. Display the Drawing Scale tab, and then click No scale (1:1).

Enhance your network diagrams
What can you do to further enhance a network drawing or rack diagram like those
you’ve explored throughout this chapter? Consider these ideas:
 Use data linking (Chapter 10, “Link to external data”) to link the equipment in
your diagram to a worksheet or database containing asset IDs, serial numbers,
and other inventory information.
 Link your equipment to a real-time or near-real-time data source and employ
data graphics (Chapter 9, “Visualize your data”) so the equipment shows live
status information.
 Add a patch panel and network cabling. Consider putting the cabling on a
separate layer (Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes, and pages”) so you can easily
show or hide it.
 Add data to each rack shape so their locations and other key data are part of
your network inventory reports.
 Add hyperlinks (Chapter 11, “Add and use hyperlinks”) to a rack and/or the
equipment in a rack and link to photographs of the actual wiring closet or
equipment.
 Publish your diagrams to the web (Chapter 12, “Print, reuse, and share
diagrams”) or to Microsoft SharePoint (Chapter 15, “Collaborate and publish
diagrams”) so users without Visio can view and even collaborate with you on
the diagrams.
Run computer and network reports
You will explore the many uses of shape data in the next chapter, including the capability
to run reports that summarize key data attributes of the shapes on a drawing page.
As a preview, this topic displays three of the predefined reports that are included with
Visio 2016 network diagrams. For example, Figure 7-17 shows data about network
devices.
Figure 7-17 The Network Device report is included with the network templates

If you need additional data about the equipment in your network, the report in Figure 7-18
should provide what you need.
Figure 7-18 The Network Equipment report provides extensive detail on network and
computer equipment
 Tip
Only part of the Network Equipment report is shown in Figure 7-18; additional
fields exist to the right of the Product Description column.
Visio provides the report shown in Figure 7-19 for those times when you need data about
PCs rather than network equipment.
Figure 7-19 The PC Report
 Important
The PC Report shown in Figure 7-19 runs correctly with the network shapes in the
Basic Network Diagram – 3D and Detailed Network Diagram – 3D templates.
However, the new shapes in the Visio 2016 Basic Network Diagram and Detailed
Network Diagram templates contain an error that prevents the PC Report from
running. As a workaround, the author has posted a modified PC Report definition
on his website at
www.visiostepbystep.com/downloads/2016/Visio_2016_Modified_PC_Report.vrd.

Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Build basic network diagrams
 Build detailed network diagrams
 Use 3-D equipment shapes
 Create rack diagrams
 Change the drawing scale
 Run computer and network reports
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch07 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Build basic network diagrams
Start Visio, click the Network template category thumbnail, double-click the Basic
Network Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag an Ethernet shape to the page, and then extend it so it occupies about two-
thirds of the page width.
2. Drag six or eight shapes from the Computers and Monitors and Network and
Peripherals stencils onto the page, and then glue them to the network.
3. Click the Ethernet shape and label it Branch Office Network.
Build detailed network diagrams
 Important
The tasks in this topic can be completed only by using the Professional edition of
Visio 2016.
Start Visio, click the Network template category thumbnail, double-click the Detailed
Network Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag shapes from various network and computer stencils onto the page.
2. Link network shapes to each other to represent the connectivity of your network.
3. If you are using 2-D shapes, select a theme and variant.

Use 3-D equipment shapes
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Create rack diagrams
 Important
The tasks in this topic can be completed only by using the Professional edition of
Visio 2016.
Start Visio, click the Network template category thumbnail, double-click the Rack
Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Build a rack that contains server shapes and other rack-mounted equipment shapes.
2. Adjust the height of one or more server shapes.
3. Turn off the display of U height for the page.
 Tip
You will work with a different diagram in the remaining steps of this task.
4. Open the CreateRacks diagram.
5. Add a rack diagram page to the existing network diagram and set a scale that is
appropriate for this U.S. Units diagram.
6. On the new page, build a rack that represents the equipment in the Data Center
network on the left side of the page.
Change the drawing scale
Open the ChangeDrawingScale diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Change the drawing scale to 1:20 for this Metric diagram.
2. Experiment with other scale factors to see the effect on the diagram.
Run computer and network reports
There are no practice tasks for this topic.

Part 2: Add data to your diagrams
CHAPTER 8 Work with shape data
CHAPTER 9 Visualize your data
CHAPTER 10 Link to external data

8. Work with shape data
In this chapter
 Understand shape data
 View shape data
 Edit shape data
 Modify shape data field attributes
 Define shape data fields
 Insert fields
 Run predefined reports
 Create or modify reports
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch08 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
You can use many diagramming apps to create useful and attractive drawings. The place
where most apps fall short, however, is where Visio excels: in addition to putting shapes
on a page, you can store data in the shapes. You can then use that data for many purposes,
including affecting the behavior and appearance of almost any aspect of the diagram. A
data-driven Visio diagram becomes a powerful tool for communicating ideas and facts by
displaying and reacting to data values.
All three chapters in Part 2 of this book focus on data. This chapter covers the basics of
viewing and working with data. Chapter 9, “Visualize your data,” explores techniques for
building dynamic dashboards by using icons and graphics to represent your data values. In
Chapter 10, “Link to external data,” you will discover how easy it is to connect a diagram
to a database or other external data source.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to viewing and editing shape data;
viewing, changing, and defining shape data fields and attributes; inserting fields; and
creating, editing, and running reports.
Understand shape data
The data fields that any Visio shape can contain are referred to collectively as shape data.
Some shape data fields merely store data for subsequent reporting or display. The values
in other data fields control the appearance or behavior of shapes and can serve many other
purposes.
The following list describes what can be stored in each of the eight shape data field types
in Visio 2016 and how users enter data values.
 String Free-form text; users enter any characters.
 Number Any numeric data; users enter numbers.

 Fixed List A list from which users must make a selection.
 Variable List A list from which users can make a selection; in addition, users can
add values to the list by entering them in the data field.
 Duration A time value expressed in one of five time units supported by Visio:
seconds (es.), minutes (em.), hours (eh.), days (ed.), weeks (ew.); users enter a
number followed by one of these time unit abbreviations.
 Date Calendar date; users can either enter a date or select a date from a calendar.
 Currency Monetary value expressed in currency units that are based on the user’s
region and language settings in Windows; users enter numbers.
 Boolean True or False; users select a value from a list.
 Tip
The data fields that are called shape data in Visio 2016 were called custom
properties in Visio 2003 and earlier.
 Tip
Although this chapter focuses on data fields that are contained in shapes, it’s useful
to know that pages and even the Visio document itself can contain shape data fields.
Although the average Visio user isn’t likely to take advantage of this capability
directly, developers of Visio add-ins frequently store data in some combination of
shapes, pages, and the document.
View shape data
The primary means for viewing shape data is the Shape Data window. You can position
the Shape Data window so it floats in any location over the drawing page, as is the case in
Figure 8-1, and you can resize the window to show as many or as few fields as you need.
Figure 8-1 Data from a representative shape, a Pump/Motor 1, floating over the
drawing page

 Tip
The master for the Pump/Motor 1 shape is located in the Fluid Power – Equipment
stencil that opens when you select the Fluid Power template in the Engineering
template category. The Fluid Power template is included only with the Professional
edition of Visio.
You can also dock the window in a fixed position by dragging it to any edge of the
drawing window. When the window is docked, you can use the pushpin button in the
window header to turn AutoHide on or off, as shown in Figure 8-2. If you turn AutoHide
on, the window “rolls up” into the header when you’re not using it.
Figure 8-2 A docked Shape Data window is open on the left and hidden on the right
Data is so integral in Visio that the shapes in most stencils include predefined data fields.
This is true for many of the shapes used in previous chapters. For example:
 In Chapter 4, “Create business process diagrams,” you worked with flowchart
shapes in both flowcharts and swimlane diagrams. That chapter didn’t discuss the
data inside the shapes; however, all of the standard flowchart shapes include the set
of predefined data fields shown in Figure 8-3.
Figure 8-3 Shape data fields in a decision diamond flowchart shape
 The org chart shapes that you worked with in Chapter 5, “Create organization
charts,” also contain a set of predefined data fields, as shown on the left in Figure 8-
4. In addition, you can import custom fields when you run the Organization Chart
Wizard. The results of a Wizard import are shown on the right. As you can see, the
import accomplished three things:

• It replaced data in existing fields.
• It created new fields and added data to them.
• It generated new fields even though they contain no data.
Figure 8-4 Default and customized org chart shape data fields
 Tip
It might seem odd at first that the org chart shape data fields on the left in Figure 8-
4 contain text values that match the field names. Those text values are present
because the org chart shapes were designed to display the contents of certain data
fields. By including the field names as text values, the designers of the org chart
shapes convey to you at a glance what will appear on the shape when you enter real
data.
 The network shapes in Chapter 7, “Create network and datacenter diagrams,” also
include shape data. The default data fields vary depending on what piece of
equipment a shape represents. Figure 8-5 shows the fields for a router.

Figure 8-5 Computer and network shape data fields
 The Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) shapes you explored in Chapter
4, “Create business process diagrams,” include a variety of shape data fields, as
shown in Figure 8-11 later in this chapter.

Another way to view shape data
Some Visio shapes, especially older shapes, provide an alternative method for
viewing shape data. When you right-click some shapes, the shortcut menu displays
a Properties option. For certain shapes, clicking Properties opens the same Shape
Data window as the Data submenu technique. However, for other shapes, it opens
the Shape Data dialog box instead. Although the dialog box and the window look a
bit different, you can view and edit data in either.
Tip
When it is present, the Properties entry is usually at the bottom of the shortcut
menu.
For example, the Shape Data dialog box for the Fluid Power Pump/Motor 1 shape
shown in Figure 8-6 was opened by clicking Properties on the shortcut menu;
compare it with the corresponding Shape Data window in Figure 8-1.
Figure 8-6 The Shape Data dialog box
Important
The Shape Data dialog box is limited to displaying 20 shape data fields. The Shape
Data window does not have this limitation and will display scroll bars whenever
there are fields that do not fit in the window at its current height.
To open the Shape Data window
1. Right-click a shape, point to Data, and then click Shape Data.
Or
1. (Professional edition only) On the Data tab, in the Show/Hide group, select the
Shape Data Window check box.

To position the Shape Data window over the drawing page
1. Drag the header of the Shape Data window until the window is away from the edge
of the drawing window.
To dock the Shape Data window
1. Do either of the following:
• Drag the header of the Shape Data window until it is near an edge of the drawing
window to dock it within the drawing window.
• Drag the header of the Shape Data window past an edge of the drawing window
to dock it as a separate window.
To close the Shape Data window
1. Do any of the following:
• Click the Close button (X) in the corner of the Shape Data window.
• Right-click anywhere inside the Shape Data window, and then click Close.
• (Professional edition only) On the Data tab, in the Show/Hide group, clear the
Shape Data Window check box.

Finding the Shape Data window
The Shape Data window normally opens within the main Visio window in the same
position it occupied the last time it was opened. However, two conditions might
cause you to wonder why the window didn’t open:
 On a computer with multiple monitors, the Shape Data window might open on a
different monitor than the one displaying the Visio window.
 If the Shape Data window is already open when you click Data and then Shape
Data on the shortcut menu, Visio will close it. This might not be what you
expect, especially if you didn’t notice that the window was already open and you
can’t figure out why it didn’t appear.
This behavior occurs because Shape Data on the submenu shown in Figure 8-7
is actually a toggle. The icon in front of the words “Shape Data” is subtly
different depending on whether the Shape Data window is currently open or
closed.
Figure 8-7 Submenu to open or close the Shape Data window
Edit shape data
In addition to viewing data in the Shape Data window, you can use the window to change
data values. When you do, you’ll notice that some shape data fields behave differently
than others because Visio enforces various rules based on the data type and formatting
applied to each shape data field.
 See Also
For a list of the shape data types supported by Visio, see “Understand shape data”
earlier in this chapter.
For example, Visio will not accept text in a numeric or currency field, as demonstrated by
the error message shown in Figure 8-8. Similarly, you cannot enter anything other than a
number and one of the five valid time unit abbreviations in a duration field.

Figure 8-8 An error dialog box appears after a user attempts to enter a text value into
a currency field
 Tip
Because the copy of Windows on which these graphics were captured uses United
States Region and Language settings, currencies appear in dollars and dates appear
in US format. Your computer will display these values based on your
country/regional settings.
The data type for each field also dictates the methods by which you can enter data. For
most field types, you can simply enter text or numbers, but some field types provide
additional options. For example:
 Date fields provide the user with a calendar from which to select a date, as shown in
the image on the left in Figure 8-9. The image on the right shows the formatted
result of either typing or selecting a date.

Figure 8-9 Entering and viewing date fields
 The Status field in Figure 8-10 displays a list when you click the arrow at the right
end of the field.
Figure 8-10 The Status field list
 Tip
Visio supports two types of list fields: fixed lists and variable lists. In a fixed list
field, you must select an entry from the list. In a variable list field, you can select
one of the list entries or enter your own text in the field. If you enter your own text,
it’s added to the bottom of the list.
In Chapter 4, “Create business process diagrams,” you used right-click actions to set
specific icons on BPMN shapes. In reality, those right-click actions set a shape data value,
and formulas inside the shape react to the data changes by changing icons on the shapes.
To prove that point, Figure 8-11 shows a fixed list for the TaskType shape for a BPMN

task. In the image on the left, the User value causes a head-and-shoulders icon to appear in
the upper-left corner of a task shape. In the image on the right, the data value is changed to
Manual and the TaskType shape is now a hand.
Figure 8-11 Values in the Shape Data window control the appearance of the BPMN
task shape
Note that the LoopType field works the same way: it contains a list of values that control
the loop symbol in the lower-center of the task shape.
 Tip
Although it is not advertised in an obvious way, you can edit data for more than one
shape at a time. If you select multiple shapes, the Shape Data window will display
those fields that are common to all selected shapes. If any data values appear in the
Shape Data window, they are from the anchor shape in your selection.
With multiple shapes selected, any changes you make are applied to all selected
shapes. This feature can be very powerful or very destructive, so it is important to
be cautious.
Note that if you select multiple shapes but they have no common fields, Visio
displays No Common Data Fields in the Shape Data window.
To enter data in a text field
1. Do any of the following:
• String Click in the field and enter any characters you want.
• Number Click in the field and enter numbers only.
• Fixed List Click the arrow at the right end of the field, and then select a value.
• Variable List Do either of the following:
• Click the arrow, and then select a value.
• Enter a value.

• Duration Enter a number followed by one of the five time unit abbreviations: es.,
em., eh., ed., ew.
• Date Do either of the following:
• Click in the field and enter a valid date according to regional date format rules.
• Click the arrow, and then click the date you want from the calendar.
• Currency Enter a number with or without a currency separator.
• Boolean Click the arrow, and then click True or False.
To exit a field in the Shape Data window after entering data
1. Do one of the following:
• Press Tab.
• Press Enter.
• Click anywhere outside the field.
Modify shape data field attributes
You can examine and change the attributes of existing shape data fields or create new
shape data fields by using the Define Shape Data dialog box.
View shape data field attributes
The Define Shape Data dialog box shown on the left in Figure 8-12 appears for most Visio
users. The one on the right appears if you are running Visio in developer mode, and offers
several additional options.
Figure 8-12 The options available in the Define Shape Data dialog box depend on how
it’s accessed

 See Also
For information about developer mode, refer to Appendix A, “Look behind the
curtain.”
In both variations of the dialog box, each data field has the following attributes:
 Label Field name
 Type One of the eight types described in “Understand shape data” earlier in the
chapter
 Format Determines how data entered by the user is presented (different field types
have different format options)
 Value The data value entered when a shape is defined or that is entered by the user
 Prompt A ScreenTip that appears when the user points to the shape’s name in the
Shape Data window
When you operate in developer mode, Visio displays the additional attributes described in
the following list. Although some of them are primarily for use by programmers or Visio
solution developers, one or two might be of value to power users.
 Name This is an internal name used by Visio developers; it can be the same as Label
except that you cannot use spaces or most special characters in the Name field
(underscore characters are acceptable).
 Sort key Visio uses the alphanumeric value in this field to determine the sequence
in which fields will be presented in the Shape Data window.
 Important
Visio treats the contents of the Sort Key field as text even if you enter a number,
which means that it arranges fields based on alphabetic sequence rather than
numeric sequence. For example, if field A has a sort key of 1, field B has a sort key
of 2, and field C has a sort key of 10, Visio will place them in the Shape Data
window in the sequence A, C, B, because the first character “1” in field C is less
than the “2” in field B.
 Add on drop If selected, Visio opens the Shape Data dialog box whenever the user
either drags a shape containing this field onto a page, or duplicates an existing shape
containing this field.
 Hidden If selected, Visio hides this field; that is, the field does not appear in either
the Shape Data window or the Shape Data dialog box. A Visio solution developer
might set the value of the hidden attribute by using a formula based on other data
values, thereby showing or hiding a field under different conditions.

 Tip
As with the Shape Data window, you can create, edit, or delete shape data fields for
more than one shape at a time. When you select multiple shapes before opening the
Define Shape Data window, the changes you make are applied to all selected
shapes. This feature also can be very powerful or very destructive.
To open the Define Shape Data dialog box
1. Do one of the following:
• Right-click a shape, point to Data, and then click Define Shape Data.
• Right-click in the Shape Data window, and then click Define Shape Data.
To view the attributes of a different shape data field
1. In the lower portion of the Define Shape Data dialog box, scroll up or down to the
field you want, and then click the field name.
To close the Define Shape Data dialog box
1. Do any of the following:
• Click OK.
• Click Cancel.
• Click the Close button in the upper-right corner of the dialog box.
Change shape data field attributes
To truly appreciate the power and flexibility of the data features in Visio, it’s helpful to
know how to change the attributes of existing data fields and how to create new data
fields. You will explore the former in this section and the latter in the following topic.
You can change nearly any property of a field by using the Define Shape Data dialog box
that was described in the preceding section. For example, for the Currency field shown in
Figure 8-13, you can change the display format for the currency value by selecting an
entry from the list. The available choices in the Format list depend on the country and
region settings for your edition of Windows.

Figure 8-13 The currency field settings on the left produce the Cost field results on the
right
 Tip
For Currency fields, it often makes sense to leave the format set to System Setting,
the default, so Visio uses the currency format setting from Windows.
Entering characters in the Value box causes your entry to appear as the default value the
next time you open the Shape Data window. You can always change the value by using the
Shape Data window, but entering a value here sets the default.
 Tip
If you enter a value for a shape data field and then create a new master from the
shape, all future instances of the master will also show the default value. For
information about creating custom stencils, see “Create custom shapes and stencils”
in Appendix A, “Look behind the curtain.”
You can enter text into the Prompt box to provide ScreenTip text to users who point to a
field name in the Shape Data window. For example, the Prompt entry shown on the left in
Figure 8-13 produces the ScreenTip shown on the right.
To provide the user with a drop-down list of values, you set the Type to either Variable
List or Fixed List, and then enter a set of values in the Format box. Figure 8-14 shows part
of the contents of the Format box on the left. The full set of values is as follows:
;Not Started;In Progress;Completed;Deferred;Waiting on Input

Figure 8-14 The semicolon-separated list of values in the Format box on the left
creates the variable list in the Shape Data window on the right
This produces the list on the right in Figure 8-14.
 Important
The semicolon at the beginning of the Format field creates a null (blank) entry at
the top of the list. If you do not include a null entry, the user will not be able to
leave the field blank after clicking an entry in the list. Both options might be
appropriate in different situations.
To change shape data field attributes
1. Open the Define Shape Data dialog box.
2. In the lower part of the Define Shape Data dialog box, scroll to the field you want,
and then click the field name.
3. Enter a new value.
Or
Select a value from the list.
Define shape data fields
You can add data fields to shapes that you create or to shapes that originated in Visio
stencils. You do both by clicking the New button in the Define Shape Data dialog box that
you worked with in the preceding topic.
At a minimum, you must provide a label for the new field and select a data type (see

“Understand shape data” earlier in the chapter). You can also choose a type-specific
format, enter a default value, and provide prompting text. If you are running Visio in
developer mode, you can specify an internal shape name and a sort key value.
Insert fields
One common way to use shape data is to display data values on a shape. You might have
noticed that the org chart shapes shown in Figure 8-4 include data from several shape data
fields. In this topic, you will learn a simple technique to display data on any shape.
You begin by instructing Visio to insert a field, and then you select a specific field from
the Field dialog box, shown in Figure 8-15. In the Category section on the left side of the
dialog box, the top entry is Shape Data. When you select that entry, Visio displays a
scrollable list of all shape data fields.
Figure 8-15 Shape data field names reflect the chosen category
In the example shown in Figure 8-16, selecting the Location field causes 3rd Floor/HR to
appear in the shape’s text box.
Figure 8-16 The contents of a shape data field displayed below a shape
Notice in Figure 8-15 that there are seven data categories in addition to Shape Data in the

Category section of the Field dialog box. Each category offers multiple data values from
other parts of the diagram that can be inserted and displayed. As examples, you can do any
of the following:
 Insert the document author or the most recent edit data in a title block on a
background page.
 Insert shape width or other geometry information so the exact values are always
visible on the shape.
 Insert a custom formula to display a calculated result on a shape.
 See Also
For information about additional uses for fields, see “Insert fields: Advanced
topics,” in Appendix A, “Look behind the curtain.”
To insert the value from a shape data field onto a shape
1. Select a shape.
Or
Select multiple shapes.
2. On the Insert tab, in the Text group, click the Field button.
3. In the Category section of the Field dialog box, click Shape Data.
4. In the Field name section, click the name of the field whose contents you want to
display.
5. Click OK. Text appears in the text box for your shape or shapes.
To insert a document property onto a shape
1. Draw a shape.
2. Open the Field dialog box, click Document Info, and then click a field to insert.
3. Click OK.
Run predefined reports
After you have data in your Visio diagram, how can you take advantage of it to gain
additional value? One of the simplest ways is to use the reporting feature that is provided
with Visio. You can run the predefined reports that are included with Visio templates, and
you can also design your own reports. You will explore the former in this topic, and the
latter in the topic that follows.
Most Visio diagrams include an Inventory report that has a simple purpose: to provide a
count of the number of shapes in a diagram that are derived from each master in a stencil.
Figure 8-17 includes two examples of inventory reports, one for a process diagram and
one for a network diagram.

Figure 8-17 Sample Inventory reports
In addition to the generic inventory report, many templates include context-specific
reports. For example, the org chart template includes Count Positions and Organization
Chart reports; the network diagram template provides Network Device and Network
Equipment reports; and the floor plan template includes the reports shown in Figure 8-18.
Many templates from third-party vendors also include predefined reports.
Figure 8-18 Predefined reports are included with many Visio templates
 Tip
When the Show Only Drawing-Specific Reports check box in the lower-left corner
of the Reports dialog box is selected, only reports related to the specific shapes in
the current diagram appear. Clearing the check box displays dozens of additional
reports, although most are unlikely to be useful with the current diagram.
You have four output choices when you run a Visio report.
 Excel Visio creates a Microsoft Excel workbook and opens Excel to display the

formatted report output, as shown in Figure 8-19. You can then edit the report data if
you want.
Figure 8-19 A Flowchart Report viewed in Excel
 HTML Visio creates an HTML page, and you view the report output in a web
browser (Figure 8-20). This report format is read-only.

Figure 8-20 A Flowchart Report viewed in Internet Explorer
 Visio shape Visio creates a new Visio shape that contains the report data and places
it on the current page, as shown in Figure 8-21. (For the technically inclined, this
shape is actually an embedded Excel object, so you can double-click the report
shape and edit the data as though you were using Excel.)

Figure 8-21 A Flowchart Report viewed in a Visio shape
 XML Visio creates an XML file containing the formatted report. The report data can
be imported into an XML-aware application, or it can be edited.
You receive one capability with the Visio shape output format that you don’t with the
other three: if you add or remove shapes, or change the values of data in the shapes, you
can update the report in place, without needing to delete it and add it again. The shortcut
menu that displays this option is shown in Figure 8-22.
Figure 8-22 You can update and rerun a Visio shape report from the shortcut menu
 Tip
Click Run Report to update the report shape on the drawing page. If you want to
change the definition of the report, click Update Report, which starts the Report
Definition Wizard that is described in the following topic.
To run a report that is stored in a drawing
1. On the Review tab, in the Reports group, click the Shape Reports button.
2. In the Reports dialog box, click the name of the report you want, and then click
Run to open the Run Report dialog box, shown in Figure 8-23.

Figure 8-23 The Run Report dialog box
3. In the Run Report dialog box, click the output format you want, and then click
OK.
To run a report that is not stored in a drawing
1. Open the Reports dialog box, and then click the Browse button.
2. Browse to the report definition file you want to run, and then click Open.
3. In the Reports dialog box, click Run.
4. In the Run Report dialog box, click the output format you want, and then click
OK.
To update a report displayed as a Visio shape
1. Right-click the report shape, and then click Run Report.
Create or modify reports
You use the Report Definition Wizard to define new reports and to modify existing
reports. Start the wizard by clicking either the New or Modify button in the Reports dialog
box shown in Figure 8-18 in the previous topic.
On the first page of the wizard, shown in Figure 8-24, you specify the location of the
shapes on which you want to report.

Figure 8-24 The first page of the Report Definition Wizard
You can use the Advanced button on this page to be more selective about the shapes that
should be included in the report. For example, Figure 8-25 on the following page shows a
report that does not use Advanced settings. Consequently, the report includes every shape,
and because many shapes do not contain data, the report has many blank and incomplete
lines.
Figure 8-25 A report with multiple blank rows because of insufficient selection criteria
Using the same process map as an example, the setting in the Advanced dialog box shown

in Figure 8-26 causes shapes to be included only if the Process Number field exists and
contains a value greater than zero.
Figure 8-26 The Advanced criteria selection dialog box
The result of the additional selection criteria is shown in Figure 8-27.
Figure 8-27 A more concise HR Report as a result of using advanced selection criteria
You use the second page of the Report Definition Wizard to select specific properties for
display in your report. The list of available properties includes shape data fields, in
addition to many other shape properties. You can see a portion of the list of properties in
Figure 8-28.

Figure 8-28 The field selection page of the Report Definition Wizard
 Tip
Each property you select is displayed in a separate column in the report.
If you are looking for less frequently used properties to include in your report, you can
select the Show All Properties check box at the bottom of the page.
On the third page of the wizard, shown in Figure 8-29, you enter the title that will appear
at the top of your report, and you can set options for totaling and grouping, sorting, and
formatting.
Figure 8-29 The third page of the Report Definition Wizard

For example, if you click Sort, you can use the Sort dialog box (shown in Figure 8-30) to
change the sequence of columns in the report output, and select up to three fields on which
to sort.
Figure 8-30 Column sequence and sort selection dialog box
On the final page of the wizard, shown in Figure 8-31, you enter a name for the report
definition, optionally enter a description, and then indicate where you would like to store
the report definition. You can save the report definition in the current Visio drawing,
which is the default, or you can save it to an external file.
Figure 8-31 The final page of the Report Definition Wizard

 Tip
Save the report definition to an external file if you think you’ll want to use it with
multiple drawings. If you do, you can retrieve the report definition by clicking the
Browse button in the Reports dialog box shown in Figure 8-32.
Figure 8-32 The Reports dialog box showing the Custom HR Report
When you finish defining your report, the name you assigned on the last wizard page
appears the next time you open the Reports dialog box. Figure 8-32 shows an example.
To create a report definition
1. On the Review tab, in the Reports group, click the Shape Reports button.
2. In the Reports dialog box, click the New button.
3. Provide the required information on the pages of the Report Definition Wizard.
To modify an existing report definition.
1. Open the Reports dialog box, click the name of the report you want to edit, and
then click the Modify button.
2. Make the required changes on the pages of the Report Definition Wizard.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Understand shape data
 View shape data

 Edit shape data
 Modify shape data field attributes
 Define shape data fields
 Insert fields
 Run predefined reports
 Create or modify reports
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch08 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Understand shape data
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
View shape data
Start Visio, click the Network template category thumbnail, double-click the Basic
Network Diagram template, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag a Server shape onto the drawing page.
2. Open the Shape Data window.
3. Drag a Router shape onto the page, and then compare its shape data fields with
those of the server.
4. Create diagrams from several other templates, and then examine the shape data
fields in various shapes.
Edit shape data
Open the EditShapeData diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Open the Shape Data window and dock it on either side of the drawing window.
2. Select the Log hiring request shape.
3. Enter a number in both the Cost and Process Number fields.
4. Enter text in the Start Date field, and then exit the field. Notice the error message.
5. Click OK to clear the error message.
6. Enter a valid date in the Start Date field or use the calendar to select a date.
7. Change the Status from In Progress to Deferred.

Modify shape data field attributes
Open the ModifyDataAttributes diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Select the Advertise open job and Interview candidate shapes, and then open the
Define Shape Data dialog box.
2. Select the Cost field, and then choose a different display format.
3. Select the Status field, and then in the Prompt property box, enter Select a status
for this task.
4. In the Format property box, add ;Waiting Approval at the very end of the text that
is already in the box. (Be sure to include the semicolon.)
5. Click OK to close the Define Shape Data dialog box.
6. Open the Shape Data window to verify that the changes you’ve made have been
applied to both of the selected shapes but not to any other shapes.
Define shape data fields
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Insert fields
Open the InsertFields diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Select both the server and printer shapes.
2. Insert the shape data field named Network Name. A network name should appear
below both shapes.
3. Add a text box or rectangle to the page, and then insert the document author’s name.
Run predefined reports
Open the RunReports diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Run the Inventory report by using Excel output.
2. Run the Space Report by using HTML output.
3. Run the Window Schedule report by using Visio shape output.
4. Change the dimensions of several windows in the floor plan, and then rerun the
report.
5. Browse to the Vegetation Report located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch08 folder, and
run it using any output format you want.
6. Open any Visio diagram you previously recreated, and then run one or more of the
built-in reports it contains.
Create or modify reports
Open the CreateModifyReports diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:

1. Create a report that includes three columns, in this order:
• Product Description
• Manufacturer
• Asset Number
2. Save the report definition in the drawing.
3. Run the new report.
4. Modify the report you just created to sort the output by Manufacturer.
5. Modify the built-in Network Equipment report to make two changes:
• Delete the Part Number and Serial Number columns.
• Sort the report by Network Name, and then Product Description.
6. Save the modified report in a file.
7. Run the modified report.

9. Visualize your data
In this chapter
 Enhance diagram effectiveness
 Create data graphics
 Apply data graphics
 Edit data graphics
 Create data graphic legends
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch09 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
In Chapter 8, “Work with shape data,” you viewed and reported on data stored in Visio
shapes. Although those techniques are useful in many circumstances, Visio provides an
even more effective way to take advantage of data: you can create data graphics that
enhance shapes by adding text callouts and icons based on the data contained in the
shapes. Even better, data graphics are dynamic, so when the data in a shape changes, Visio
refreshes the graphics automatically.
In the next chapter, you will take data graphics to another level by visualizing data stored
in an external location. In this chapter, you will work with data graphics by using data that
is stored in the diagram and discover the amazing ways you can visualize data by using
Visio 2016.
 Important
The information in this chapter applies only to the Professional edition of Visio
2016.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to enhancing diagram effectiveness,
creating and applying data graphics, editing data graphics, and creating data graphic
legends.
Enhance diagram effectiveness
A person using a Visio diagram that you created can learn a lot about the subject of the
diagram based on your choice of shapes, their positions on the page, the way they are
connected, and many additional visual cues. The five sections in this topic demonstrate the
power of data visualization to tell even more of the story.

View network and datacenter performance
Chapter 7, “Create network and datacenter diagrams” contains several hints about the data
available in computer, network, and rack diagram shapes. This section explores techniques
you can use to capitalize on the data that is included in the Visio network shapes.
The diagrams in this section might be used in a scenario such as the following:
 You are a datacenter manager and have created rack diagrams for each rack in your
computer room.
 You’ve populated your diagrams with data.
 Each rack-mounted server includes the data fields shown in Figure 9-1. (The values
shown in this figure will be visualized in the next two figures.)
Figure 9-1 Sample server data
You can visualize data like that shown in Figure 9-1 by using Visio data graphics to turn
an ordinary rack diagram into a powerful means to understand server attributes. In Figure
9-2, several data graphics are applied to the servers in an equipment rack to highlight the
following:
 Server name and type (left)
 Server status (center)
 CPU and memory configuration (right)

Figure 9-2 A rack diagram showing server status and vital statistics
Figure 9-3 shows the same equipment rack, but it uses different data graphics to highlight
different information. In this version of the rack diagram, you find the following:
 Server name and IP address (left)
 Server status (center) shown by applying a fill color to the servers instead of
attaching a status icon.
 Operating system name (right)
Figure 9-3 Alternate visualizations provide different information
Part of the appeal of data graphics is represented by these two examples—you can apply
different graphics at different times depending on what you need to know.
Improve processes
In this example, data graphics are applied to process steps in a swimlane diagram for two
reasons: to number each process step (the number appears above the upper-right corner of
each shape), and to show several process quality measurements. The information in Figure
9-4 includes the following:
 The average duration of each step, in days, is shown in a progress bar across the

bottom of each task shape.
 A warning icon appears in the lower-left corner of a shape if a step is taking 5 to 9
days or 10 or more days.
 The shape color indicates whether a step is improving or being investigated.
Figure 9-4 A process diagram that displays data-driven graphics
The symbolism used for each of these metrics is explained in the data graphic legend that
appears in the upper-right corner of the page. You will learn more about legends in
“Create data graphic legends” later in this chapter.
Manage casino operations
Figure 9-5 illustrates the types of near-real-time information that a casino manager might
view in Visio, with a goal of monitoring critical operations. In all likelihood, your job
doesn’t involve managing a casino, but you can probably think of important operations
that you do need to monitor.

Figure 9-5 A casino manager’s view of a blackjack table
In the graphic, text callouts highlight each bettor’s recent history, including current dollar
standing, average bet, and number of blackjacks. In addition, a red or green arrow
represents how each player is trending.
 Tip
The real-time nature of the graphics in this example are significantly enhanced
when the diagram is linked to a live, external data source. You will explore this
topic in Chapter 10, “Link to external data.”
Manage employee performance
The organization chart in Figure 9-6 looks like those you explored in Chapter 5, “Create
organization charts,” with one notable exception: Trey Research has turned this org chart
into more than just a picture of who reports to whom by including two key performance
measures:
 Each employee’s progress toward their annual training goal is depicted by an icon
containing a combination of blue and gray squares.
 The three red manager shapes include a bar graph displaying quarterly performance
numbers. Note that the bar graph is a single graphic item that contrasts data from
four different shape data fields.

Figure 9-6 An org chart enhanced with employee performance data
The legend in the upper-right corner of the page is automatically generated by Visio;
however, you can customize the text and other aspects of the legend. In this example, the
descriptions were customized and the font color was changed.
 Tip
You can apply only one data graphic to a shape at any given moment. However, as
Figure 9-6 shows, one data graphic can contain multiple visual elements. In
addition, you can apply different graphics to different shapes on the same page.
Assess risks
In the example shown in Figure 9-7, you are viewing part of a process map that was
created by using a Visio add-in called TaskMap (www.taskmap.com).

Figure 9-7 A TaskMap process map used to convey risk and time threshold data
This portion of the TaskMap shows three tasks in the middle of a sales proposal process,
and data graphics depict the following two aspects of risk management:
 Yellow triangles and green diamonds identify risks and controls, respectively. The
number in each risk triangle relates to an entry in a master list of risks. The number
in each diamond identifies the control that the organization has put in place to
mitigate the risk. (An organization might maintain the master list of risks and
controls in something as simple as a worksheet, or they might employ a formal risk
management system.)
In a task like the one in the center, the organization has identified a risk but not a
control, so the risk is more significant.
 The red arrows highlight tasks that exceed a defined time threshold—30 minutes in
the case of this example.
Figure 9-7 also includes a third data graphic: two of the three tasks display a red diamond
to indicate that they are decision points in the process.
 Tip
If you would like to look at the full page from which Figure 9-7 was taken, open the
RiskManagementTaskMap PDF in the Visio2016SBS\Ch09 folder. In addition, a
web-published version of this TaskMap that includes hyperlinks to Microsoft Word
and Excel documents is available at
www.visiostepbystep.com/downloads/2016/RiskManagementTaskMap.htm.
The examples in this section highlight the importance of the data behind a diagram and
suggest a variety of creative ways you can add value to diagrams that contain data.
Create data graphics
In Chapter 10, “Link to external data,” you will discover a simple technique for applying
data graphics to shapes that are linked to data in an external file or database. However,
linking to external data is not a requirement for using data graphics. Even if you’ve
manually entered data into your shapes, you can still represent that data visually.
Each data graphic you create can contain one or more graphic items. Each graphic item is

associated with a data field and presents data by using one of the following formats:
 Callout A formatted text box, sometimes accompanied by an icon, that is used to
display text
 Tip
In some places in the Visio user interface, the name of this category is shown as
Text Callout or just Text.
 Icon Set A collection of up to five icons that are used to represent specific values or
ranges of values
 Data Bar One of a set of progress bars, star ratings, pie charts, graphs, or other
graphics used to represent numeric values
 Color by Value A technique for setting the color of a shape based on the value of a
data field in the shape
You create and apply data graphics by using options on the Data tab. Portions of the Data
tab—the Data Graphics gallery and several buttons—will be dimmed (unavailable) if you
have not linked your diagram to external data; these portions are omitted from the images
of the Data tab shown in Figure 9-8. However, the Advanced Data Graphics button on the
right end of the tab is always available, and that’s the button you use to create data
graphics in an unlinked diagram.
Figure 9-8 The Visio Professional Data tab
Clicking the Advanced Data Graphics button opens the Data Graphics gallery, which
includes a Create New Data Graphic button. The first step in creating a data graphic is to
create a graphic item, and the first step in doing that is to select a data field.
The list of available data fields varies depending on which shapes are selected when you
click the Create New Data Graphic button. If no shapes are selected, or if the selected
shapes have one or more data fields in common, a list like the one shown in the upper half
of Figure 9-9 is displayed. If a set of shapes with no common fields is selected, an
abbreviated list such as the one shown in the lower half of Figure 9-9 is displayed.

Figure 9-9 New data graphics can be based on shape data fields or data that resides
elsewhere in a diagram
In either case, you can use the More Fields entry shown in both parts of Figure 9-9 to
create more sophisticated data graphics. For example, instead of creating a graphic based
on a shape data field, you can create a graphic based on a document or page property, or
based on a calculated result.
After selecting a data field, your next choice is which of the four graphic item types you
want to use. The first three graphic types provide a list of choices, as shown from left to
right in Figure 9-10 for the Text, Data Bar, and Icon Set lists.
Figure 9-10 Data graphics offer an impressive range of colorful choices for
representing data

Choosing an icon set requires you to specify which value, or range of values, applies to
each icon. Figure 9-11 shows the settings for a data graphic you will apply in the
following topic. Although this figure designates a specific value for each icon, you have
considerable flexibility in defining the conditions for each flag. You can:
 Use the list in the center column to create a range of values for each icon and to set
other conditions.
 Use the list on the right to enter more sophisticated values than simply typing a
number or text into the field.
The fourth data graphic type, Color By Value, extracts data values from the selected field
and matches each with a color, as shown in Figure 9-12.
Figure 9-11 The options for configuring icon set graphics are flexible

Figure 9-12 Visio identifies existing data values and selects colors when you create a
color-by-value data graphic
 Tip
The colors selected by Visio in Figure 9-12 are suitable for some purposes but
might be too bold for other purposes. In the latter case, you can display the Fill
Color list for any field and change the color setting. You can also leave the text
color of affected shapes at the default setting (as shown in the figure) or you can
manually change it.
 Important
Notice the Insert and Delete buttons to the right of the Color Assignments section in
Figure 9-12. You can delete any combination of value and color, or you can add
new ones, depending on what you want to highlight in the drawing. For example, if
you don’t want to apply a fill color when the selected field has a blank value, delete
the row in which the value box is blank.
To select a field to create a data graphic
1. Open the New Data Graphic dialog box by doing either of the following:

• On the Data tab, in the Advanced Data Linking group, click Advanced Data
Graphics, and then click Create New Data Graphic.
• Right-click any shape that does not contain a data graphic, click Data, and then
click Edit Data Graphic.
2. Click the New Item button.
3. In the New Item dialog box, click the Data field arrow, and then click the name of
the field you want to visualize.
 Important
You can add more than one graphic item to any data graphic as you create it. To do
so in each of the next four procedures, click the New Item button again before
clicking OK to close the New Data Graphic dialog box.
To create a Text data graphic
1. Select a field to visualize, click the Displayed as arrow, and then click Text.
2. Click the Style arrow, and then click the name of the text callout you want.
3. (Optional) Change configuration values in the Details section.
4. (Optional) Either select the Use default position check box, or use the Horizontal
and Vertical lists to select a specific position for your data graphic.
5. Click OK to close the New Item dialog box, and then click OK to close the New
Data Graphic dialog box.
To create a Data Bar data graphic
1. Select a field to visualize, click the Displayed as arrow, and then click Data Bar.
2. Click the Style arrow, and then click the name of the data bar you want.
3. (Optional) Change Minimum Value, Maximum Value, or other configuration
values in the Details section.
4. (Optional) Either select the Use default position check box, or select an option
from the Horizontal and Vertical lists to select a specific position.
5. Click OK to close the New Item dialog box, and then click OK to close the New
Data Graphic dialog box.
To create an Icon Set data graphic
1. Select a field to visualize, click the Displayed as arrow, and then click Icon Set.
2. Click the Style arrow, and then click the icon set you want.
3. Click the appropriate condition from the list in the center column of the Rules for
showing each icon section, and then enter values in the right column in the same
section.

4. (Optional) Either select the Use default position check box, or select an option
from the Horizontal and Vertical lists to select a specific position.
5. Click OK to close the New Item dialog box, and then click OK to close the New
Data Graphic dialog box.
To create a Color By Value data graphic
1. Select a field to visualize, click the Displayed as arrow, and then click Color by
Value.
2. (Optional) Click the Coloring Method arrow, and then click either Each color
represents a unique value or Each color represents a range of values.
3. Either leave the entries in the Value, Fill Color, and Text Color fields in the Color
assignments section as is, or make the changes you want.
4. Click OK to close the New Item dialog box, and then click OK to close the New
Data Graphic dialog box.
Apply data graphics
You must select one or more shapes before opening the Data Graphics gallery because you
can apply or remove data graphics only on preselected shapes. After selecting shapes, you
can point to the options in the Available Data Graphics section of the gallery, shown in
Figure 9-13, to provide a live preview so you can sample various graphics before choosing
one.
Figure 9-13 Thumbnails of three data graphics appear in a data graphics gallery
The examples shown in the next two figures use shape data fields called Risk and Owner.
The Risk field was added to the shapes in this diagram, whereas Owner is a predefined
field in all Visio flowchart shapes.
Figure 9-14 shows the result of assigning two different data graphics to the same set of
process steps. The upper section of the figure uses an icon set to represent the level of risk
associated with each step. The lower section employs a color-by-value graphic that is
based on the Owner data field, essentially creating a map that is color-coded to show who

does what within the process.
Figure 9-14 The same set of flowchart shapes can impart dramatically different
information by using different data graphics
 Tip
Visio data graphics are automatically assigned to a special layer in a diagram. (See
“Understand and use layers” in Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes, and pages.”) If
you want to hide data graphics without removing them, you can change the view
properties for the data graphics layer.
You can assign only one data graphic at a time to any given shape. However, you can
include multiple graphic items within one data graphic. The diagram in Figure 9-15
features a single data graphic that includes both of the graphic items that are shown
separately in Figure 9-14.
Figure 9-15 You can create data graphics that have multiple graphic items

 Tip
Data graphics are applied to a single page at a time. If you want to apply the same
data graphic to multiple pages, you must either apply it to each page separately, or
write a Visio macro to do that for you.
If you want to apply the same data graphic automatically to a shape regardless of
the page on which the shape resides, you can apply the data graphic to the shape
and save the shape as a master in a custom stencil. Then, whenever you drag the
master onto the drawing page, it will automatically display the data graphic. You
will learn about macros and creating custom stencils in Appendix A, “Look behind
the curtain.”
To apply a data graphic to one or more selected shapes
1. On the Data tab, in the Advanced Data Linking group, click the Advanced Data
Graphics button to display a gallery of data graphic options and thumbnails.
2. In the Advanced Data Graphics gallery, click the thumbnail for the data graphic
you want to apply.
To remove a data graphic from one or more selected shapes
1. Display the Advanced Data Graphics gallery, and then click the None thumbnail
in the No Data Graphic section.
 Tip
In Chapter 10, “Link to external data,” you will discover additional techniques for
applying data graphics in diagrams that have been linked to external data sources.
Edit data graphics
The placement and appearance of data graphics are controlled by an editable set of
parameters. Although you can’t control every attribute of a data graphic without resorting
to writing code, the Visio 2016 user interface provides tools to implement a surprising
number of changes by using the Edit Data Graphic dialog box, shown in Figure 9-16.

Figure 9-16 Data graphics can contain multiple graphic items of different types
The upper half of the Edit Data Graphic dialog box lists all of the graphic items that are
part of the selected data graphic. You can add, edit, or delete each graphic item. In the
lower half of the dialog box, you can modify the characteristics of the data graphic as a
whole.
 Important
You establish the default position for a data graphic by selecting from the
Horizontal and Vertical lists in the Default Position of the Edit Data Graphic dialog
box. (Both the horizontal and vertical positions are relative to the shape to which
the graphic will be attached.) Data graphic items in the upper half of the dialog box
whose Position is set to Default will appear at this location.
You use the Edit Item dialog box to change display properties. The specific properties in
the dialog box vary based on the selected graphic item.
For the Thermometer graphic shown in Figure 9-17, you can specify the minimum and
maximum values so Visio can properly scale the height of the red inside the thermometer.
You can also adjust labels and other icon attributes.

Figure 9-17 You can accept default values in many situations but can customize data
graphics as needed
 Important
The Minimum Value and Maximum Value fields are critical for all Data Bar graphic
items, not just the Thermometer icon. If these values are set incorrectly, the height
or width, depending on the graphic item, will be incorrect.
In the upper-right corner of the dialog box, you can select the check box to position a
graphic item at the default position for the data graphic that contains it. You can also clear
that check box and select from the options in the Horizontal and Vertical lists to set your
own location relative to the underlying shape.
To edit a data graphic
1. Display the Advanced Data Graphics gallery, right-click the thumbnail of the data
graphic you want to change, and then click Edit.
Or
Right-click any shape that contains the data graphic you want to change, click Data,
and then click Edit Data Graphic.
2. In the Edit Data Graphic dialog box, click the graphic item you want to edit, and
then click the Edit Item button.

Or
Double-click the graphic item you want to edit.
3. Make your changes in the Edit Item dialog box, and then click OK.
4. (Optional) Change the settings in the Default position, Display options, or Apply
changes to sections of the Edit Data Graphic dialog box.
 Tip
The next step is useful if you are still experimenting with how you want the data
graphic to look on the page.
5. (Optional) Click the Apply button to see the changes in the diagram without closing
the Edit Data Graphic dialog box.
6. Click OK.
To rename a data graphic
1. Display the Advanced Data Graphics gallery, right-click the thumbnail of the data
graphic you want to rename, and then click Rename.
2. Enter a new name, and then click OK.
To duplicate a data graphic
1. Display the Advanced Data Graphics gallery, right-click the thumbnail of the data
graphic you want to duplicate, and then click Duplicate.
To select all shapes that use a particular data graphic
1. Display the Advanced Data Graphics gallery, right-click the thumbnail of a data
graphic, and then click Select Shapes that use this Graphic.
To delete a data graphic
1. Display the Advanced Data Graphics gallery, right-click the thumbnail of the data
graphic you want to delete, and then click Delete.
 Tip
In Chapter 10, “Link to external data,” you will discover additional techniques for
editing data graphics in diagrams that have been linked to external data sources.
Create data graphic legends
Data graphics like the one shown in Figure 9-15 earlier in this chapter are easier to use and
understand with a key. With Visio 2016, a data graphic legend is just a click away. You
can create either a vertical legend, or, as shown in Figure 9-18, a horizontal legend.

Figure 9-18 Visio creates legends automatically, but you can customize them
 Tip
Visio always places the legend in the upper-right corner of the page.
After Visio creates the legend, you can edit the elements within the legend. For example,
the legend on the left in Figure 9-18 is the original version. In the legend on the right, the
descriptions for the flag icons have been changed to be more meaningful for users of the
diagram.
 Important
After placing a data graphic legend on the page, Visio never updates it.
Consequently, if you add or delete a data graphic or change the attributes of a
graphic in a way that affects the legend, you must delete the existing legend and
insert a new one.
 Tip
Visio constructs data graphic legends from a combination of containers and lists.
For details about containers and lists, see Chapter 13, “Add structure to your
diagrams.”
To insert a data graphic legend
1. On the Data tab, in the Display Data group, click the Insert Legend button.
2. Click either Horizontal or Vertical.
To edit a data graphic legend
1. Click an entry inside the legend and enter new text.
2. Click an entry inside the legend and drag it to a new location.

To move a data graphic legend
1. Click the word Legend in the header of the data graphic legend, and then drag the
legend to a new location.
To delete a data graphic legend
1. Do any of the following:
• Click the word Legend in the header of the data graphic legend, and then press
the Delete key.
• Right-click the word Legend, and then click Cut on the shortcut menu.
• Right-click the word Legend, and then on the Home tab, in the Clipboard group,
click Cut.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Enhance diagram effectiveness
 Create data graphics
 Apply data graphics
 Edit data graphics
 Create data graphic legends
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch09 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Enhance diagram effectiveness
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Create data graphics
Open the CreateDataGraphics diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Create a Text data graphic with the following characteristics:

2. Create a Data Bar graphic for the Cost field with the following characteristics:
Located at the default position
3. Create an Icon Set data graphic for the Status field and apply the settings shown in
Figure 9-11.
4. Create a Color by Value data graphic for the Owner field, ensuring that there is not
a color assigned to a blank value.
5. Save the diagram as DataGraphicsFlowchart for use in the next tasks.
Apply data graphics
Open the DataGraphicsFlowchart diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Apply the Text data graphic to all process steps except Start and End.
2. Apply the Data Bar data graphic to all process steps except Start and End. Change
the Cost value in several shapes and observe the results.
3. Apply the Icon Set data graphic to all process steps except Start and End. Change
the Status value in several shapes and observe the results.
4. Apply the Color by Value data graphic to all process steps except Start and End.
Change the Owner value in several shapes and observe the results.
5. Save your changes, and leave the diagram open if you’ll be continuing to the next
tasks.
Edit data graphics
Open the DataGraphicsFlowchart diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Apply the Data Bar (Thermometer) data graphic to the process shapes in the top
row, and then edit the data graphic by changing the Vertical position to Top Edge,
and Value Position and Label Position to Not Shown.
2. Apply the Icon Set data graphic to any three-process steps, and then edit the data
graphic by selecting a different set of icons.
3. Assign the Color by Value data graphic to the process steps in the lower row, and
then edit the data graphic by assigning different fill colors and text colors to one or
more data values.
4. Assign a more meaningful name to the data bar data graphic.
5. Create a duplicate copy of the Icon Set data graphic, and then change the
visualization type to Color by Value.
6. Assign the duplicated data graphic to some of the process steps.
7. Select all shapes that currently use the Data Bar graphic and assign the duplicated
data graphic to them.

8. Delete the duplicated data graphic.
9. Save your changes, and leave the diagram open if you’ll be continuing to the next
tasks.
Create data graphic legends
Open the DataGraphicsFlowchart diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Apply the Icon Set data graphic to all process steps in the upper row.
2. Apply the Data Bar data graphic to all process steps in the lower row.
3. Add a Vertical legend to the page.
4. Move the legend to a new location.
5. Delete the legend, and then insert a Horizontal legend.
6. Change the text of one or more explanations in the Status column of the legend.

10. Link to external data
In this chapter
 Understand data linking
 Use Quick Import
 Use Custom Import
 Manage linked data
 Use data graphic options for linked data
 Refresh linked data
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch10 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
You explored shape data in Chapter 8, “Work with shape data,” and in Chapter 9,
“Visualize your data.” In both chapters, you entered data manually into shape data fields.
Although this works, you might prefer to populate your drawings automatically by linking
them to data in a Microsoft Excel workbook, a database, or another external source.
You might also want to turn your Visio diagrams into dashboards by linking them to data
and then visualizing key data attributes. Whether you need to display the status of the
servers and printers in a network, show weekly attendance for all employees in an
organization chart, or provide an up-to-the-minute office layout showing who is in or out
today—you can do all this and more when you combine data linking and data graphics.
Visio 2016 introduces a feature called Quick Import that automates the process of linking
to data in Excel and then applying data graphics. When Quick Import doesn’t meet your
needs, you can use the Custom Import wizard to link to virtually any data source.
 Important
The information in this chapter applies only to the Professional edition of Visio
2016.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to using Quick Import and Custom
Import, managing linked data, using data graphic options for linked data, and refreshing
linked data.
Understand data linking
Linking a diagram to data and then visualizing that data requires four steps:
1. Link the diagram to a data source.
2. Link data records to individual shapes.

3. Create a suitable data graphic.
4. Apply the data graphic.
Quick Import, which you will explore in the following topic, does all four steps
automatically. If you don’t use Quick Import, you are required to perform each step
yourself; however, Visio provides wizards to assist with the first two tasks.
Regardless of the technique you choose for creating a link to external data, you create a
dynamic link. You can refresh the diagram, which in turn updates shape data fields and
any applied data graphics. Consequently, your Visio diagram can become the primary
window into your data.
Either method of data linking displays data in the External Data window, which is shown
in Figure 10-1. Visio explicitly opens the External Data window when you use Custom
Import, but does not always open it when you use Quick Import. However, you can open
(and close) the window yourself by selecting or clearing the External Data Window check
box located in the Show/Hide group on the Data tab.
Figure 10-1 The External Data window provides a view into a database or other data
source
Use Quick Import
If your data resides in Excel, Quick Import is the fastest way to link your shapes to
external data.
To appreciate how easy it is to use the Quick Import wizard, see Figure 10-2, which
contains part of an organization chart for Blue Yonder Airlines. The Shape Data window is
open and displays the standard fields for a Visio organization chart. Four of the shape data
fields contain default values, but the Name field identifies that the selected shape
represents Carole Poland.

Figure 10-2 The Name field is the only one that contains a user-entered value
The data to which the diagram will be linked is shown in Figure 10-3.
Figure 10-3 An Excel workbook that will be linked to an organization chart
When you start the Quick Import wizard and point it to your Excel data file, it does the
rest, as shown in Figure 10-4.
Figure 10-4 All four Quick Import steps were successful

 Tip
You can link to an Excel workbook that is stored on your computer, on a network
server, or in Excel Services in Microsoft SharePoint.
The result is shown in Figure 10-5. Quick Import matched the data to the shapes based on
employee name, added new data fields, filled in the shape data fields from the linked
Excel workbook, and applied data graphics.
Figure 10-5 All org chart shapes, including the Carole Poland shape, contain imported
data
 Important
A single undo command will reverse all actions performed by Quick Import.

 Important
If Quick Import does not apply data graphics to your shapes, it is probably for one
of two reasons: either your shapes already contained data graphics (Quick Import
will not replace them), or the Apply After Linking Data To Shapes option is not
selected. This setting is located at the bottom of both the Data Graphics gallery and
the Advanced Data Graphics gallery.
It’s important to understand that Quick Import is choosing and applying data graphics
based on its analysis of the shape data fields. It might choose appropriate fields and
relevant data graphics, or it might not. If you want to know how to change the applied
graphics, see “Use data graphic options for linked data” later in this chapter.
To understand how the diagram and its data graphics can be refreshed when the Excel data
changes, see “Refresh linked data” later in this chapter.
Although it isn’t shown in Figure 10-5, Visio opens the Data Graphic Fields task pane
each time you use Quick Import. This task pane will be explained in “Use data graphic
options for linked data” later in this chapter.
To use Quick Import
1. Do either of the following:
• On the Data tab, in the External Data group, click Quick Import.
• If the External Data window is open and there are no linked data sources, click
Quick Link Data to Shapes.
2. In the Data Selector dialog box, click the Browse button to select an Excel
workbook, and then click Done.
3. In the Quick Import Excel Data to Visio dialog box, click Done.
To undo Quick Import actions
1. Do either of the following:
• On the Quick Access Toolbar, click the Undo button.
• Press Ctrl+Z.
Use Custom Import
Whereas Quick Import performs all four data linking and data visualization steps
described in “Understand data linking” earlier in this chapter, sometimes you will want to
link to a data source yourself. One obvious case is if your data resides anywhere other than
in Excel. However, even if your data is in Excel, you might want to link manually to have
more control over the linking and visualization.
When you use Custom Import, you can link to data in any of the following repositories:
 Microsoft Excel workbook

 Microsoft Access database
 Microsoft SharePoint Foundation list
 Microsoft SQL Server database
 A repository that can be accessed via OLE DB or ODBC
Link your diagram to data
After telling the Data Selector wizard where your data is located, you have the option to
refine your selection of data from that source.
Figure 10-6 shows the first of several selection pages for data in Excel. You can select
from the What Worksheet Or Range Do You Want To Use? list to narrow the source to a
specific worksheet or named range. Clicking the Select Custom Range button opens your
workbook in Excel so you can choose the range you want. You can use the wizard page
following the one shown in Figure 10-6 to exclude specific columns and rows.
Figure 10-6 Data source options for an Excel workbook
Figure 10-7 shows the first selection page for data in a SharePoint list.

Figure 10-7 A selection of SharePoint lists and the option to select a list by name or
select a view of a list
Other data source types provide similar filtering and selection options.
As a final step for some data source types, you can identify which field, or combination of
fields, uniquely identifies each data record. Establishing a unique identifier in your data is
valuable if you later want your diagram to reflect subsequent changes to data in the data
repository.
Figure 10-8 shows that Visio analyzes your data and selects what appears to be a unique
identifier. The software generally makes a good choice, but you can change its
recommended option by selecting or clearing the check boxes shown in the figure.

Figure 10-8 Name is the unique identifier recommended by Visio
If your data does not contain a unique value for each row, you can click the option at the
bottom of wizard page shown in Figure 10-8, enabling Visio to use the sequence of the
rows to identify them. Although this choice works for reasonably stable data sets, be
aware that using this option has potentially serious consequences if you later reorder, add,
or delete rows in the source data.
When the linking operation completes, the linked data appears in the External Data
window. Figure 10-1, in the “Understand data linking” topic earlier in this chapter, shows
the External Data window after linking an organization chart to data in Excel.
 Tip
You can link a single diagram to more than one data source, even if the data sources
are of different types. If you do link to more than one source, multiple name tabs
will appear at the bottom of the External Data window.
To link a diagram to data by using Custom Import
1. Do either of the following:
• On the Data tab, in the External Data group, click Custom Import.
• Right-click anywhere inside the External Data window, click Data Source, and
then click Add.
2. On the first page of the Data Selector wizard, click the type of data source to which
you want to connect, and then click Next.
3. Complete the remaining pages of the Data Selector wizard (the specific pages will
vary based on the data source type). When the wizard finishes, the External Data

window will open if it wasn’t open already, and a data tab will display the newly
linked data.
Link data to your shapes
You can select any combination of three methods to connect data rows in the External
Data window with shapes on the drawing page. You can:
 Drag data to an existing shape.
 Automatically link data to shapes.
 Use data to create a shape.
Whichever technique you use, the result is usually a one-to-one relationship between data
rows and shapes. However, it’s possible to create one-to-many relationships. For example,
you can connect:
 One shape to multiple data sources. You might link some fields to values in a
SharePoint list, and connect other fields in the same shape to data in a SQL database.
 One data row to multiple shapes. Fields from the same data row can be linked to
multiple shapes on the same or different pages.
The External Data window, shown in Figure 10-1, presents data fields in the sequence it
found them in the data source. In addition, each field has a name and a data type derived
from the data source.
 Tip
The default behavior for all three linking methods is to analyze your data fields
during the linking operation, and then apply one or more data graphics. Sometimes
the attempts to visualize your data are good; other times, such as the example in
Figure 10-5 where the orange progress bar represents Employee Number, they are
not very useful.
If you do not like the automatically applied data graphics, you can remove them or
change them. You can also prevent Visio from automatically applying data graphics
in the first place. To do so, before you run the Automatic Link wizard, clear the
Apply After Linking Data To Shapes check box at the bottom of either the Data
Graphics gallery or the Advanced Data Graphics gallery.
 Tip
You can change the sequence of fields, the field names, the data type of each field,
and which fields appear in the window. Making these changes before using any of
the linking techniques described in the following sections ensures that the data in
your shapes meets your needs.

Drag data to an existing shape
Dragging a row of data onto an existing shape:
 Populates identically named fields in the shape with data.
 Adds unmatched field names to the shape.
When you drag a data row, notice that the pointer appears to be dragging a translucent
version of a shape across the page, as shown on the left in Figure 10-9. The pointer is
accompanied by a plus sign (+), which is how Visio informs you that you will be creating
a copy of the translucent shape if you place it on an unused part of the page (see “Use data
to create a shape” later in this topic).
Figure 10-9 Adding external data to an existing shape
When you’ve dragged the pointer far enough that it is located on top of an existing shape,
the pointer is accompanied by a link symbol. In addition, the shape displays a thicker
border, indicating that if you place the data row there, it will be assigned to the shape. (See
the image on the right in Figure 10-9.)
 Tip
If you are dragging a data row onto a shape that is already on the page, it doesn’t
matter whether the shape under the pointer matches the target shape. Visio adds the
data to the existing shape.
To link data to an existing shape
1. In the External Data window, click a data row, and then drag it to a shape.
Automatically link data to shapes
When your rows of data and your existing shapes contain a matching data value, the Link
Data wizard matches data to your shapes automatically.
Figure 10-10 shows a diagram before automatic linking. The shape data window contains
the standard fields for a Visio organization chart. Four of the fields contain their default
values, but the Name field identifies that this shape represents Fabien Hernoux.

Figure 10-10 An organization chart has been linked to external data and is ready for
data to be linked to shapes
In the External Data window, the highlighted row includes a field that contains the value
Fabien Hernoux and several additional fields. (As you will discover in Figure 10-12,
additional data fields are located to the right of the Employee Number field.)
The remaining shapes in this organization chart also contain a value for Name and have
matching data rows in the External Data window.
You use the Automatic Link wizard page shown in Figure 10-11 to tell Visio which
External Data column and which Shape Data field contain matching data values. In this
example, the field names happen to be the same but that is not required—only the data
values they contain need to match.

Figure 10-11 The Data Column called Name will be matched with the Shape Data field
called Name
Figure 10-12 shows the same diagram after automatic linking. Notice several changes:
 In the Shape Data window, the Department, Telephone, Title, and E-Mail fields have
new values (three of the four are now blank).
 Eight new fields appear after E-Mail; Visio created these fields for you because they
existed in the external data but not in the shape data.
 Each row in the External Data window is preceded by a linking symbol.
 Tip
To determine which rows are linked to which shapes, and vice versa, see “Manage
linked data” later in this chapter.
 Two data graphics were automatically applied to every shape: an icon set pennant is
located at the upper-right corner, and a data bar labeled Employee Number is below
the pennant.

Figure 10-12 An organization chart after automatic linking of data to shapes
 Tip
The Automatic Link wizard can link data to shapes only one page at a time.
To link data to shapes automatically
1. On the Data tab, in the Advanced Data Linking group, click Link Data.
2. On the first page of the Automatic Link wizard, click Selected shapes or All
shapes on this page, and then click Next.
3. Click a column name from the list in the Data Column section, click a field name
in the Shape Field section, and then click Next.
4. Click Finish.
Use data to create a shape
You can drag a data row onto an open section of the drawing page to create a new shape
and populate it with data. When you use this method, be sure to select the master you want
Visio to use to create the new shape before dragging the data row.
For example, the left side of Figure 10-13 shows the result of selecting the Executive Belt
master in the Organization Chart Shapes stencil before dragging a data row onto the page.
The right side of the figure shows the resulting shape after it has been dropped and
automatically populated with data.

Figure 10-13 An org chart shape created by dragging a data row onto the page
 See Also
For more information about organization chart shapes and styles, see Chapter 5,
“Create organization charts.”
After dropping the shape shown in Figure 10-13, one row in the External Data window
displays a link symbol, as shown in Figure 10-14.
Figure 10-14 Data for Christian Hess is linked to a shape
To create a shape from data
1. If it is not already selected, click the master in the Shape Data window from which
you want to create a new shape.
2. Click a data row in the External Data window, and then drag it to an open area of
the drawing page.
 Tip
You can create multiple shapes at one time by dragging multiple rows from the
External Data window.
Manage linked data
Whether you use Quick Import or Custom Import, there are several maintenance and
management functions that you should know about.

Identify links
After shapes are linked to external data, sometimes you need to find out which rows and
shapes are linked to each other.
To identify the shapes to which a data row is linked
1. Right-click the row in the External Data window, and then click Linked Shapes.
To identify the rows to which a shape is linked
1. Right-click the shape, click Data, and then click Show Linked Row.
Change column settings
For other than the simplest of data imports, you might find that you want to change the
way that data is linked to shapes:
 Your data source might contain more columns than you need to have available in
your diagram.
 The sequence of columns in the data source might be different than the sequence of
shape data fields you want in your diagram.
 The imported data might not be the correct type—a date field that is imported as
text, for example.
Visio provides techniques for all of these circumstances.
 Important
You must change column settings before linking data to shapes.
To change column settings before linking
1. Right-click in the External Data window, and then click Column Settings.
2. Use the Column Settings dialog box to change column sequence, rename columns,
add and remove fields from view, or change the data type for a column, and then
click OK.
Unlink data from shapes and diagrams
You might need to unlink shapes from data, or even unlink a diagram from a data source.
To unlink a shape from data
1. Right-click a shape, click Data, and then click Unlink from Row.

 Tip
You can unlink multiple shapes at once by selecting multiple shapes before using
this procedure.
To unlink a data row from shapes
1. Right-click a row in the External Data window, and then click Unlink.
 Tip
You can unlink multiple rows at once by selecting multiple rows before using this
procedure.
To unlink a diagram from a data source
1. Do either of the following:
• Right-click the tab in the External Data window that contains the data you want
to unlink, and then click Remove.
• Right-click anywhere inside the External Data window, click Data Source, and
then click Remove.
Use data graphic options for linked data
In Chapter 9, “Visualize your data,” you used text callouts, icons, and colors to visualize
data that resided inside shapes on the drawing page. In this chapter you’ve learned how to
make your diagrams more dynamic by linking them to external data sources. The
combination of the two is so powerful that Visio 2016 includes additional visualization
features specifically for linked data.
The extra features are visible in the Data Graphics group of the Data tab. Compare the
link-enabled version shown in Figure 10-15 with the non-linked version shown in Figure
9-8 in Chapter 9, “Visualize your data.”
Figure 10-15 Linking to external data enables the Data Graphics gallery, the Position
button, and the Configuration button
The Data Graphic Fields task pane, shown in Figure 10-16, is new in Visio 2016. It
becomes active as soon as you link one data row to a shape, whether you’ve done it
manually or via the Quick Import feature.

Figure 10-16 Organization chart shapes display a data graphic for the percentage of
Annual Training completed
You can use the Data Graphic Fields task pane to apply one or more data graphics. If you
don’t select any shapes on the drawing page when you click a field name in the Data
Graphic Fields task pane, Visio will apply a data graphic to all shapes on the page. If you
select shapes, Visio will apply the graphic only to those shapes. In either case, Visio
chooses a data graphic based on its analysis of your data.
You can use the Position and Configuration buttons and the Data Graphics gallery to
change the automatically applied data graphic.
 If you like the graphic that Visio has applied but want to adjust it, use the Position
and Configuration buttons to fine tune its appearance.
 If you would prefer to use an entirely different data graphic, use the Data Graphics
gallery, shown in Figure 10-17, to select a new graphic.

Figure 10-17 The Data Graphics gallery
 Tip
The Data Graphics gallery and the Position and Configuration buttons are enabled
only when at least one field name is selected in the Data Graphic Fields task pane.
 Tip
The Data Graphics gallery shown in Figure 10-17 contains some of the most
frequently used data graphics; however, it does not offer every option. You need to
display the Advanced Data Graphics gallery that is located on the right end of the
Data tab to see every data graphic. You also need the Advanced Data Graphics
gallery to create and edit data graphics that contain multiple graphic items.
To show or hide the Data Graphic Fields task pane
1. Do any of the following:
• On the Data tab, in the Show/Hide group, select the Data Graphic Fields check
box.
• Right-click any shape, click Data, and then click Data Graphic Fields.
• Right-click anywhere in the External Data window, and then click Data Graphic
Fields.
To remove a data graphic by using the Data Graphic Fields task pane

1. Click a field name that is currently selected.
To apply a data graphic by using the Data Graphic Fields task pane
1. Click a field name that is not currently selected.
To change to a different data graphic
1. In the Data Graphic Fields task pane, click a field name that is selected, and then
in the Data Graphics gallery, click the thumbnail of the data graphic you want to
apply.
To change the position of an existing data graphic
1. In the Data Graphic Fields task pane, click a field name.
2. On the Data tab, in the Data Graphics group, click Position.
3. Do either of the following:
• Click one of the predefined positions on the menu.
• Click either Horizontal or Vertical, and then click the position you want.
To edit an existing data graphic
1. In the Data Graphic Fields task pane, click a field name.
2. On the Data tab, in the Data Graphics group, do either of the following:
• Click Configuration.
• Display the Data Graphics gallery, and then click More Data Graphics.
3. Make the required change in the Edit Item dialog box, and then click OK.
 Tip
For more information about the Edit Item dialog box, see “Edit data graphics” in
Chapter 9, “Visualize your data.”
Refresh linked data
After you’ve linked a diagram to data and added data graphics, your diagram becomes a
window into your data. Best of all, both the link to the data and the data graphics are
dynamic; when the data changes, the graphics in the diagram change.
You can refresh diagram data manually, on a time schedule, or via code. The programming
option is outside the scope of this book, but the first two options are described here:
 Manual refresh If your diagram is linked to more than one data source, you can
choose whether to refresh a specific source or all sources when you click the Refresh
All button.
 Automatic refresh You use the settings in the Configure Refresh dialog box, shown

in Figure 10-18, to set up automatic refresh. After doing so, whenever your diagram
is open, Visio refreshes the data from the specified data source at the time interval
that you specify.
Figure 10-18 The data in your diagram can be automatically refreshed as frequently as
once per minute
 See Also
For information about writing code to refresh data graphics, see Visualizing
Information with Microsoft Office Visio 2007: Smart Diagrams for Business Users,
by David Parker (McGraw-Hill Osborne Media, 2007), or wait for David’s new
book, Mastering Data Visualization with Microsoft Visio Professional 2016 (Packt
Publishing), in the middle of 2016.
To refresh data manually for all linked sources
1. On the Data tab, in the External Data group, click the Refresh All button.
2. In the Refresh Data dialog box, click Close.
To refresh data manually for one linked source
1. On the Data tab, in the External Data group, click the Refresh All arrow, and then
click Refresh Data.
2. In the Refresh Data dialog box, click the source you want to refresh, click Refresh,
and then click Close.

Or
1. In the External Data window, click the tab for the source you want to refresh.
2. Right-click anywhere in the External Data window, and then click Refresh Data.
3. In the Refresh Data dialog box, click Close.
To refresh data automatically for one linked source
1. In the External Data window, click the tab for the source you want to refresh.
2. Right-click anywhere in the External Data window, and then click Configure
Refresh.
3. In the Configure Refresh dialog box, select the Refresh every check box, enter a
number in the minutes box, and then click OK.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Understand data linking
 Use Quick Import
 Use Custom Import
 Manage linked data
 Use data graphic options for linked data
 Refresh linked data
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch10 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Understand data linking
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Use Quick Import
Open the UseQuickImport diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Data Selector dialog box by using Quick Import.
2. On the Data Selector page, browse to the OrgChartData workbook located in the
Visio2016SBS\Ch10 folder, and then complete the Quick Import wizard.
3. (Optional) Undo the Quick Import actions.

Use Custom Import
Open the UseCustomImport diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Data Selector wizard by using Custom Import.
2. Browse to the OrgChartData workbook located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch10 folder,
and then complete the Custom Import wizard.
3. Repeat tasks 1 and 2 but link to the OrgChartData_Supplement1 workbook.
 Tip
Notice that the tab names in the External Data window are the same as the tab
names of the Excel workbooks to which the diagram was linked.
4. Click the Sheet1 tab, and then drag each row of data onto the corresponding shape.
Notice that one row has no corresponding shape. Notice, also, that none of the
shapes includes a department name or telephone number.
5. Click the Telephone List tab, and then use the Link Data wizard to automatically
link all rows with matching shapes. Again, notice that there is one unlinked data
row. Also notice that all shapes now have department names and telephone numbers.
6. Click the Position Stone master in the Stone - Organization Chart Shapes stencil,
and then drag the Oleg Anashkin row to a blank place on the page.
7. Drag the Oleg Anashkin shape on top of the Carole Poland shape. (The
Organization Chart add-in will place the shape with Carole Poland’s other
employees.)
 See Also
For information about the Organization Chart add-in, see Chapter 5, “Create
organization charts.”
8. Click the Sheet1 tab, and then drag the Oleg Anashkin row to the Oleg Anashkin
shape.
9. Bonus points: Add a photograph to the Oleg Anashkin shape from the Photos
folder located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch10 folder.
10. Save your diagram as LinkedOrgChart.
Manage linked data
Open the LinkedOrgChart diagram you created in the “Use Custom Import” practice task,
and then perform the following tasks:
1. Determine which row of data the Jamie Reding shape is linked to.
2. Determine which shape the Fernando Caro row is linked to.

 Tip
The result of the first two tasks is obvious in this diagram. These tasks are more
useful when the key that links rows and shapes is less obvious than a name.
3. Click the Sheet1 tab, and then change the name of the Department column by
entering Department Name.
4. Hide the Reports To column.
5. Unlink the Ty Carlson shape from its data rows.
6. Unlink the Jesper Herp data row from its shape.
7. Remove the Telephone List data source from the diagram.
8. Close the file but do not save changes.
Use data graphic options for linked data
Open the LinkedOrgChart diagram you created in the “Use Custom Import” practice task,
and then perform the following tasks:
1. Open the Data Graphic Fields task pane if it is not already open.
2. Remove data graphics from all shapes.
3. Apply a data graphic for the Annual Training field.
4. Change the Annual Training field data graphic to the Boxes graphic that is
available in the Icon Set section of the Data Graphics gallery.
5. Change the position of the Annual Training data graphic to Left (Horizontal) and
Middle (Vertical).
6. Change the configuration of the Annual Training data graphic so the box with four
squares appears only when the data value equals 100, and the box with three squares
appears when the data value is between 60 and 100.
7. Save the diagram as LinkedDataGraphic.
Refresh linked data
Open the LinkedDataGraphic diagram you created in the “Use data graphic options for
linked data” practice task, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Zoom to Carole Poland and her direct reports.
2. Open the OrgChartData workbook, located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch10 folder, in
Excel, and change the percentage values in the Annual Training field for Fernando
Caro, Carole Poland, and Filip Rehorik.

 Tip
Change the values by at least 20 points so the differences will be more obvious in
the subsequent tasks.
3. Refresh data manually and notice the changes to the Annual Training data graphic.
4. Configure data refresh by setting a two-minute timer.
5. Change the Annual Training value for Carole Poland, and then wait two minutes
to observe the change in the diagram.

Part 3: Enhance and share diagrams
CHAPTER 11 Add and use hyperlinks
CHAPTER 12 Print, reuse, and share diagrams
CHAPTER 13 Add structure to your diagrams
CHAPTER 14 Validate diagrams
CHAPTER 15 Collaborate and publish diagrams

11. Add and use hyperlinks
In this chapter
 Follow hyperlinks
 Enhance diagrams by adding hyperlinks
 Understand relative and absolute hyperlinks
 Set the hyperlink base
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch11 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
Linking from shapes in a Visio drawing to external resources is one of the most
meaningful ways to enhance the value of a Visio diagram. As you create or edit a drawing,
try to anticipate what resources your readers will require. Then use those ideas to build in
the links that will enhance the viewer’s experience with your diagram.
A simple form of hyperlink might lead to a website or to another page in the same Visio
drawing. A more sophisticated hyperlink might take the viewer to a Microsoft Excel
workbook—and not just to the workbook, but to a specific set of cells on a particular
worksheet. A similar link might lead the reader to a particular phrase in a Microsoft Word
document that provides supporting information about a section of the diagram.
The documents that are the targets of your hyperlinks can be on a shared network drive, in
Microsoft SharePoint, or in Microsoft OneDrive or another cloud storage service. In short,
you can link to virtually any electronic object, regardless of where it resides.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to using existing hyperlinks; adding,
editing, and deleting hyperlinks; and setting the hyperlink base.
Follow hyperlinks
Before you explore how to create hyperlinks, it’s worth knowing how to find and take
advantage of them in a Visio diagram.
If you point to a shape that has a hyperlink, two things occur, both of which are shown in
the image on the left in Figure 11-1:
 A hyperlink symbol appears in the lower-right corner of the pointer.
 A ScreenTip appears that contains a description of the hyperlink and instructions for
following the link.

Figure 11-1 Hyperlinks are visible when pointing to a shape and on the shape’s
shortcut menu
If you right-click a shape containing a hyperlink, the shortcut menu, shown on the right in
Figure 11-1, includes an entry you can use to follow the link.
 Tip
One challenge for getting readers of your Visio diagrams to use embedded
hyperlinks is that the hyperlinks are not normally visible. There is no way to know
that a hyperlink exists unless you point to a shape containing one.
To follow a hyperlink
1. Do either of the following:
• Hold down the Ctrl key, and then click a shape containing a hyperlink.
• Right-click a shape containing a hyperlink, and then click the description of the
hyperlink on the shortcut menu.
Enhance diagrams by adding hyperlinks
Any Visio diagram can be enhanced by adding hyperlinks. For example:
 A process box in a flowchart can be linked to a policy manual or other
documentation about that step, or to an online form or IT system used to complete
the task represented by the process box.
 Each person in an organization chart can be hyperlinked to detailed contact
information on the company intranet.
 Each piece of equipment in a data center map can be connected to purchase records,
warranty information, or service manuals.
 Each cubicle in an office floor plan can be linked to an equipment inventory
worksheet or a computer configuration worksheet for an employee.
Open the Hyperlinks dialog box
Adding hyperlinks in Visio begins with the Hyperlinks dialog box, shown in Figure 11-2.
You use the fields in the upper portion of the dialog box to specify the hyperlink target.
The lower portion of the dialog box lists the existing hyperlinks, if any, on a shape.

Figure 11-2 You use the Hyperlinks dialog box to enter hyperlinks of all types
 See Also
For information about including more than one hyperlink on a shape, see “Add
multiple hyperlinks” later in this topic.
 Important
You can add the same hyperlink to multiple shapes at once as easily as you can add
the link to a single shape—just select more than one shape before opening the
Hyperlinks dialog box. However, because it’s so easy to do, be careful that you
don’t apply a link to multiple shapes by mistake.
To open the Hyperlinks dialog box
1. Do any of the following:
• On the Insert tab, in the Links group, click the Hyperlink button.
• Right-click a shape, and then click Hyperlink.
• Press Ctrl+K.
Link to another Visio page
A hyperlink that leads from a shape on one drawing page to another page can be useful for
several reasons. You might add hyperlinks to:
 Simplify navigation from page to page within a diagram.
 Enable navigation among pages in several related diagrams.
 Implement a drilldown capability to enable the reader to click a shape in a higher-
level view and be taken to the next lower-level view. (You can continue this practice

for as many levels as required.)
The page-to-page hyperlinks you create can move the reader to a page, or you can
hyperlink to a specific shape on the target page. The latter is particularly helpful when you
include a zoom-level setting as part of your hyperlink; the combination allows you to
focus the reader’s attention on a selected part of the page when they follow the hyperlink.
 Important
Linking to a specific shape on another page requires that you know the internal
name of the target shape. Unfortunately, the Hyperlink dialog box does not provide
any means to determine the internal name while the dialog box is open. You need to
find the target shape’s name before you create the hyperlink. The sidebar, “What is
a shape name? Where do I find it?” later in this chapter contains several techniques
for determining the name of a shape.
To link to a page in the current Visio diagram
1. Open the Hyperlinks dialog box.
 Important
To link to another page in the Visio drawing you are currently editing, you must
leave the Address field blank. If you do not leave this field blank and later decide to
publish this map as a webpage, your hyperlink might not work.
2. Click the Sub-address field, and then enter the target page name.
Or
Do all of the following:
• Click the Browse button to the right of the Sub-address field.
• In the Hyperlink dialog box, in the Page list, select the name of the target page,
and then click OK.
3. (Optional) Enter text in the Description field.
 Tip
If you enter text in the Description field, your text will appear in a ScreenTip when
a user points to the hyperlinked object. If you leave the Description field blank, the
ScreenTip will display the page name for links to the current document, or it will
display the file name for links to a different Visio document.
4. Click OK.
To link to a page in a different Visio diagram

1. In the Hyperlinks dialog box, click the Browse button to the right of the Address
field, and then click Local File.
 Tip
“Local File” is misleading terminology. You can link to a file in any local or
networked location.
2. Select the Visio diagram to which you want to link, and then click Open.
3. Follow the instructions in the previous procedure for linking to a page in a Visio
diagram.
What is a shape name? Where do I find it?
Every shape in a Visio drawing is referred to internally as a sheet, and Visio ensures
that every shape has a unique identifier. Consequently, every Visio shape has an
internal name in the form Sheet or Sheet.n, where n is a number representing the
internal ID of the shape.
Shapes can have additional names related to the name of the master from which
they were created. For example, you will come across shapes with names like
Process or Process.12.
One way to determine the name of a shape is to run Visio in developer mode.
Follow these steps to determine a shape’s name:
1. Turn on developer mode, and then select the target shape.
See Also
For information about how to turn on developer mode, see Appendix A, “Look
behind the curtain.”
2. On the Developer tab, in the Shape Design group, click the Shape Name button
to open the Shape Name dialog box, shown in Figure 11-3.

Figure 11-3 Shape properties are displayed in the Shape Name dialog box
3. Make note of, or copy, the text to the right of the Name box, and then close the
Shape Name dialog box.
Tip
You can also refer to the shape called Process.24 in Figure 11-3 as Sheet.24.
The Shape Data window, which is described in the “View shape data” topic in
Chapter 8, “Work with shape data,” provides another method for determining the
name of a shape. You can see the shape name, Process.24, in the title bar of the
Shape Data window shown in Figure 11-4.
Figure 11-4 The title bar of the Shape Data window displays the shape name
To link to a specific shape on a page
1. In the Hyperlinks dialog box, either leave the Address field blank to link to the
current diagram or select a different Visio diagram.
2. Click the Browse button to the right of the Sub-address field.
3. In the Hyperlink dialog box, in the Page list, select the name of the target page.
4. Enter the target shape name in the Shape field.

 See Also
For information about finding and using Visio shape names, see the sidebar titled
“What is a shape name? Where do I find it?” earlier in this chapter.
5. (Optional) In the Zoom list, select the zoom level you want, and then click OK.
 Tip
The Zoom setting ensures that whenever someone follows your hyperlink, the target
page will always appear with the same zoom setting. Select Page to show a full-
page view, Width to show the full width of the page regardless of its height, and a
percentage value to zoom in to that level of detail. If you don’t select a zoom level,
the target page will always be displayed at its most recent zoom level.
6. (Optional) Enter text in the Description field.
7. Click OK.
Link to a website
You can link from a Visio shape to a page on your organization’s intranet or to a page on
the public World Wide Web.
 Tip
If your target webpage contains HTML bookmarks, you can include a bookmark in
the address for the page. Clicking this type of hyperlink will take the user directly
to the place on the page where the bookmark is located.
In addition to creating links to websites, you can also create hyperlinks to email
addresses by prefixing the email address with mailto: when you enter or paste it in
the Address text box.
To link to a webpage
1. Open the Hyperlinks dialog box.
2. Enter or paste the URL of the webpage you want.
Or
Do all of the following:
• Click the Browse button to the right of the Address field, and then click Internet
Address. Visio opens your web browser.
• Browse to the webpage you want, and then switch the focus back to Visio. The
address of the webpage will now be in the Address field and the website title will

be in the Description field, as shown in Figure 11-5.
Figure 11-5 The address and title for a hyperlink to a website
3. (Optional) Enter text or edit existing text in the Description field.
4. Click OK.
Link to a document
If a picture is worth a thousand words, yours can be worth a lot more than that when you
link it to the documents—Word, Excel, Portable Document Format (PDF), and more—that
are important in the context of the diagram.
To say that another way, regardless what you are diagramming in Visio, adding hyperlinks
can turn your diagram into the visual starting point that people use to find everything they
need to do their work.
To link to a document
1. Open the Hyperlinks dialog box.
2. Click the Browse button to the right of the Address field, and then click Local File.
 Tip
“Local File” is misleading terminology. You can link to a file in any local or
networked location.
 Important
When you open the Link To File dialog box, Visio displays the names of Visio files
only. Consequently, you must change the file type filter or you won’t see the files
you want.
3. Click the file type arrow in the lower-right corner of the Link to File dialog box to
display the list of file types, as shown in Figure 11-6.

Figure 11-6 Visio always assumes you want to link to a Visio document, so you need to
select a different file type in all other cases
 Tip
Use the All Files entry in file type list to link to PDF documents and other non-
Office documents.
4. Click Office Files or another file type.
5. Select the file you want to link to, and then click Open. The Hyperlinks dialog box
now contains the path to the target document and uses the file name as the default
description, as shown in Figure 11-7.
Figure 11-7 The relative path to a Word document in a subfolder

 See Also
For information about relative hyperlink addresses, like those shown in the Address
field in Figure 11-7, see “Understand relative and absolute hyperlinks” later in this
chapter.
6. (Optional) The Description field generally contains the name of the selected file,
but you can enter different text if you want to.
7. Click OK.
Link to a specific location in a document
If you think that linking to a document is a powerful capability, you might be surprised to
know that it gets better: You can create a hyperlink to a specific location inside a
document.
Imagine a process map that refers to the same budget workbook at 13 different steps in the
process. Imagine also that the budget workbook contains five worksheets, each with
different data. If each of the 13 hyperlinks opens the workbook by using a generic
hyperlink to the document, the reader will be left to guess where the data relevant to that
step in the process resides.
Now imagine that instead of just opening the workbook, each of the 13 hyperlinks
presents the reader with a specific cell or set of cells!
The secret to accomplishing scenarios like this is knowing that you can create links to
named locations in Excel worksheets, Word documents, and PowerPoint presentations.
 In Excel, you can assign names to individual cells or to cell ranges. In either case, a
hyperlink to a named cell or range will open the appropriate worksheet and highlight
the target cell or cells.
 In Word, you can create named bookmarks in two ways:
• You can assign a name to the location of the insertion point.
• You can assign a name to a range of text—anything from one character to multiple
paragraphs.
If you create a bookmark by using the first method, your Visio hyperlink will jump
to the part of the page containing the bookmark; if you create the second type of
bookmark, your hyperlink will jump to and highlight the selected text.
 In PowerPoint, you can’t assign names to specific locations, but you can refer to
slides either by number or slide title.
To link to a specific location in an Office document
1. Open the Hyperlinks dialog box.
2. Click the Browse button to the right of the Address field, and then click Local File.

 Tip
“Local File” is misleading terminology. You can link to a file in any local or
networked location.
3. In the Link to File dialog box, click the file type arrow in the lower-right corner to
display the list of file types, as shown in Figure 11-6.
4. Click Office Files, select the file you want to link to, and then click Open.
5. In the Sub-address box, enter the following information pertaining to the Office
document you selected:
• Excel The name of a cell or cell range
• Word The name of a bookmark
• PowerPoint A slide number or a unique slide title
6. (Optional) Although the Description field generally contains the name of the
selected file, you can enter different text if you want to.
7. Click OK.
Edit and delete existing hyperlinks
You can both edit and delete existing hyperlinks.
To open the Hyperlinks dialog box when a shape already contains a
hyperlink
1. Do any of the following:
• On the Insert tab, in the Links group, click the Hyperlink button.
• Right-click a shape, and then click Edit Hyperlinks.
• Press Ctrl+K.
To edit a hyperlink
1. Open the Hyperlinks dialog box.
2. Select the hyperlink you want to change if it is not already selected. After it’s
selected, the hyperlink’s details will appear in the appropriate boxes at the top of the
Hyperlinks dialog box.
3. Change the Address, Sub-address, or Description information by using the
techniques described in any of the sections earlier in this topic, and then click OK.
To delete a hyperlink
1. Open the Hyperlinks dialog box.
2. Select the hyperlink you want to delete if it is not already selected.

3. Click Delete, and then click OK.
Add multiple hyperlinks
You can provide the readers of your diagrams with a choice of destinations by adding
multiple hyperlinks to a Visio shape. The set of hyperlinks on a shape can include any
combination of documents, websites, Visio pages, or other link types.
Visio signals the presence of multiple hyperlinks in three ways, two of which are shown in
Figure 11-8.
 Pointing to a shape generates a ScreenTip that displays the text Multiple Hyperlinks.
 The right-click shortcut menu lists all available links.
 The lower section of the Hyperlinks dialog box, which is visible in Figure 11-2,
displays the descriptions of all existing links.
Figure 11-8 The presence of multiple hyperlinks appears in two ways
To add additional hyperlinks
1. Open the Hyperlinks dialog box, and then click the New button.
2. Use any of the techniques described earlier in this topic to add a hyperlink, and then
click OK.
Understand relative and absolute hyperlinks
You have probably noticed a Use Relative Path For Hyperlink check box in the Hyperlinks
dialog box. If you’re very observant, you might also have noticed that this check box is
unavailable if you haven’t yet saved your drawing, but is available and selected by default
if your current drawing has been saved. What’s this all about?
With Visio, you can build two types of links:
 Relative link This type of link provides a path to a target by assuming a known
starting location.
As an analogy in the physical world, let’s say you need to attend a meeting in Room
216 at Lucerne Publishing. If you’re standing at the reception desk in the lobby of
the company’s office and ask where the meeting is located, the receptionist might

say, “Go up to the second floor. It’s the second door on the right.” Based on the
known starting location you share with the receptionist—the lobby—that
information is sufficient to get you to the intended location.
Relative links in a Visio drawing work in a similar way. The folder containing the
Visio drawing serves as the lobby, and hyperlink targets on the same disk drive are
located relative to that starting point.
For Visio drawings, relative links work nicely when the relationship between the
starting point and the hyperlink targets remains fixed. Problems can arise, however,
if you need to move the Visio drawing file to another computer or even to another
location on the same computer. In this case, you must preserve the relative
relationships from the new location of the Visio file to the target folders and files.
One way you can accomplish this is by copying the entire directory structure
containing the Visio drawing and its hyperlink targets.
 Absolute link This type of link contains all of the information required to locate a
linked resource, regardless of the starting point.
Returning to our meeting analogy, if you’re at home and need directions to the
conference room at Lucerne Publishing, you need a lot more information to arrive at
your destination. An absolute address for the meeting room would look more like
the following:
Lucerne Publishing, 3456 Elm St., Room 216, San Francisco, CA 94117 USA
Armed with an absolute address, you can get to the meeting from your home, or for
that matter, from any starting location in the world.
For Visio hyperlinks, absolute links work regardless of where your Visio drawing is
located. You can move the drawing to a different computer and the links will
continue to function without requiring any other changes.
 Tip
Relative and absolute hyperlinks are not mutually exclusive within a single
drawing.
What does all of this have to do with the check box in the Visio Hyperlinks dialog box?
For a saved drawing, Visio assumes that the path to the target of a hyperlink begins in the
same folder that contains the Visio diagram. Thus, the default behavior in Visio is to create
a relative hyperlink by using the location of your Visio drawing as the starting point for
the path. When someone clicks your hyperlink, Windows figures out where the target
object is by navigating from the location of the Visio drawing.
Just knowing this much explains why the Use Relative Path For Hyperlink check box is
unavailable if you haven’t yet saved your drawing—Visio can’t create a relative link yet
because there is no known starting point for the Visio drawing. Consequently, the only
option in this situation is to use an absolute path that contains all of the information
Windows will need to track down the target object.

Although there are no firm guidelines on when to use relative links rather than absolute
links, it’s a good idea to think about your environment and the nature of your document
collection before creating very many links in Visio. If all of your target documents are in
their final resting place—on a network server or in a SharePoint repository, for example—
then absolute links probably make the most sense. However, if your environment is more
volatile, or you know in advance that you’ll be moving your Visio drawing and its
hyperlink targets to another computer or to a CD or DVD, then carefully constructed
relative links are a good choice.
The following examples should help to make the alternatives clearer. In the examples,
assume that the HR Process Maps Visio diagram is saved in C:\Human Resources\Process
Maps\ and that the hyperlink target is one of the Word documents shown in the directory
listing in Figure 11-9. The file name of each Word document includes a parenthetical note
to indicate its relative position compared to HR Process Maps. Consequently, the file
names of the Word documents include notations like (above), (below), and (same).
Figure 11-9 The directory structure for the hyperlink examples that follow
Based on the file structure shown in Figure 11-9, each of the following examples describes
the action Visio takes in response to the user selecting a target document. In each case,
Visio fills in the Address field and sets the Use Relative Path For Hyperlink check box
based on the locations of the Visio drawing and the target document.
 When the target document is in the same folder as HR Process Maps.vsdx, Visio
creates a relative hyperlink with the Address field result shown in Figure 11-10.
Figure 11-10 A relative address to a Word document located in the same directory as
the Visio document containing the hyperlink
If you now clear the Use Relative Path For Hyperlink check box, the link becomes
an absolute link that begins at the root of drive C. The Address field displays the full
path to the document:
C:\Human Resources\Process Maps\MyDocument (same).docx

The first part of the absolute path is visible in the Address field in Figure 11-11.
Figure 11-11 An absolute address to a Word document located on drive C
 When you link to a document located in C:\Human Resources\Process
Maps\Recruiting\, which is a subfolder of the one containing the Visio drawing,
Visio creates a relative hyperlink and the Address field contains the text shown in
Figure 11-12, indicating that the target document is in a subfolder called Recruiting.
Figure 11-12 A relative address to a Word document located in a subdirectory of the
folder containing the Visio document that includes the hyperlink
 When the target document is located in C:\Human Resources\, which is a parent
folder of the one containing the Visio document, Visio creates a relative hyperlink.
The Address text is shown in Figure 11-13.
Figure 11-13 A relative address to a Word document located in a directory above the
folder containing the Visio document that includes the hyperlink

 Tip
“..\” is syntax that predates Windows. It means “go up one directory level.”
 When the target document is located on any drive other than the one containing the
Visio document, for example, drive D, drive K, or a network share such as
\MyServer\Human Resources\FY2016\, Visio always creates an absolute link and
the Address field contains something like one of the following entries:
K:\HR Folder\MyDocument.docx
or
\MyServer\Human Resources\FY2016\MyDocument.docx
The Address field in Figure 11-14 shows the first part of the path to a target
document on drive N.
Figure 11-14 An absolute address to a Word document located on a different drive than
the one containing the Visio document that includes the hyperlink
One final note: Visio always creates an absolute link if you begin your address with a
server name, drive letter, or web protocol. All of the following will create absolute links
regardless of the location of the Visio drawing:
 C:\SomeFolder\MyWorkbook.xlsx
 \MyServer\Presentations\MySlideShow.pptx
 http://www.contoso.com/Somepage.html
Set the hyperlink base
Visio includes a document-level property called the hyperlink base, which you can use to
shift all relative hyperlinks in a document from one location to another. If you enter a
value in the hyperlink base field, Visio will prepend all relative links with that value.
For example, if you create a hyperlink base of http://OurIntranet/Finance/ and create a
relative hyperlink of AuditInfo.html, Visio will combine the two to create a link that
consists of the following string of characters:
http://OurIntranet/Finance/AuditInfo.html

 Important
There is only one hyperlink base per Visio document. If you create a directory path
hyperlink base or a web-based hyperlink base, Visio will use it for all relative links
in your document. You must be extremely careful when establishing a hyperlink
base in a diagram.
As a rule, you should create a hyperlink base only if all relative links in the diagram
are of the same type; that is, all relative links consist of URLs to web locations or
all lead to files on a disk.
To edit the hyperlink base
1. In the Backstage view, display the Info page, and then click the Properties button
that is located on the right side of the screen. The button is easy to overlook; you can
see the pointer resting on top of it in Figure 11-15.
Figure 11-15 The Properties button might not be obvious unless the pointer is on top of
it
2. On the menu that appears, click Advanced Properties.
3. In the Properties dialog box, enter text in the Hyperlink base field. Figure 11-16
shows two examples: a disk-based example on the left and a web-based example on
the right.

Figure 11-16 The Properties dialog box with two Hyperlink Base examples
4. Click OK.
To remove the hyperlink base
1. Open the Properties dialog box.
2. Delete the text from the Hyperlink base field, and then click OK.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Follow hyperlinks
 Enhance diagrams by adding hyperlinks
 Understand relative and absolute hyperlinks
 Set the hyperlink base
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch11 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Follow hyperlinks
Open the FollowHyperlinks diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Follow the hyperlink on the HR Policy Manual shape. Notice that the Word
document opens to the Interviewing page.

2. Follow the hyperlink on the Advertise open job shape.
Enhance diagrams by adding hyperlinks
Open the EnhanceDiagrams diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
 Important
After each of the tasks listed below, follow the hyperlink you’ve created to ensure
that it works.
1. Link the shape on Page-1 to Page-3.
2. Link the first triangle on Page-3 to the second triangle on Page-2, and set the Zoom
level to 200%.
3. Link the second triangle on Page-3 to Page-1 of FollowHyperlinks.vsdx in the
Visio2016SBS\Ch11 folder.
4. Link the third triangle on Page-3 to any website you want.
5. Link the first star on Page-4 to Human Resources Policy Manual.docx in the
Visio2016SBS\Ch11 folder. Close the Word document after following the hyperlink.
6. Link the second star on Page-4 to an Excel workbook.
7. Link the third star on Page-4 to a PDF document.
8. Edit the hyperlink on the first star on Page-4 so it links to a bookmark in the same
document by entering Recruiting in the Sub-address box.
9. Delete the bookmark from the second star on Page-4.
10. Add a second hyperlink of any type to the third star on Page-4.
11. Bonus points: Add a mailto URL to the fourth star on Page-4 so it sends email to
Scott@VisioStepByStep.com.
12. Save the diagram to use it in the next tasks.
Understand relative and absolute hyperlinks
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Set the hyperlink base
Open the EnhanceDiagrams diagram that you edited in the previous practice task, and then
perform the following tasks:
1. Test the Word document hyperlink on the first star on Page-4 to ensure that the
target Word document opens.
2. Close Word.
3. Set the hyperlink base in the Visio diagram to X:\Another folder\.

4. Test the Word document hyperlink on the first star on Page-4 again and notice the
path Visio tried to follow that is displayed in the error message.
5. Remove the hyperlink base from the document.

12. Print, reuse, and share diagrams
In this chapter
 Preview and print drawings
 Remove personal information
 Create graphics
 Save drawings in other file formats
 Create templates
 Share diagrams by using the Visio Viewer
 Publish diagrams to the web
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch12 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
When you create a Visio diagram, chances are good that you will want to share it with
other people. If you want to share a paper copy, Visio offers flexible printing options.
In many cases, however, you will want to share all or part of your diagram in electronic
form, often with people who don’t have Visio. When that need arises, you can turn your
diagram into a Visio template, save it as a PDF document, or create multiple types of
images. You can even save your diagram as a fully functional website that is tailored to the
needs of your audience.
 See Also
For other ways to share a diagram, see “The Share page” section in Chapter 1, “Get
started with Visio 2016.”
Because Visio diagrams can contain private information, it’s important to understand the
Visio features that are available to remove private content before sharing a file. You can
also use the Microsoft Office Information Rights Management (IRM) capabilities to help
protect your document.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to previewing and printing drawings,
removing personal information from Visio diagrams, creating graphics, saving diagrams in
other file formats, creating templates, sharing diagrams by using the Visio Viewer, and
publishing diagrams to the web.

Preview and print drawings
The Visio 2016 print preview pane displays page images so you can easily determine how
your diagram will print. Figure 12-1 shows a network diagram that will require four sheets
of paper to print based on the diagram size and the current printer and drawing page size
settings.
Figure 12-1 In addition to the visible controls, you can drag to pan the print preview
image
 Tip
The diagram in Figure 12-1 is one of the starter diagrams included with the
Detailed Network Diagram template in Visio Professional 2016. For information
about starter diagrams, see Chapter 1, “Get started with Visio 2016.”
The preview pane on the Print page always opens to the active page in your diagram. If
your diagram contains more than one page, you can use the page selector in the lower
center of the Print page to preview other diagram pages (look for 1 Of 2 with a pair of
arrows in the lower center of Figure 12-1). You can also zoom in and out on the preview
image by using the slider in the lower-right corner.

 Tip
Print preview images are displayed in either grayscale or color depending on your
printer capabilities and settings.
Notice that a portion of the router shape in the center of the diagram in Figure 12-1 will
print on each of the four printer pages. You can use the Move Off Page Breaks feature,
which is new in Visio 2016, to have Visio assist in shifting shapes so the diagram will
print more effectively. Figure 12-2 shows the result for the center portion of the print
preview. You might still want to nudge the router farther to the right to eliminate the last
bit of shape residue.
Figure 12-2 A close-up of the center of the preview pane
 Tip
When you move the cursor into the preview pane on the Print page, the pointer
changes to a hand. You can click anywhere on the preview image and drag to
reposition the preview.
The network diagram in the preceding two figures was created in US units and both the
drawing pages and printer paper are set to 8.5-by-11 inches. Because there are network
shapes beyond the 11-inch width and 8.5-inch height, Visio expanded the drawing page,
which is why four printer pages are required to accommodate the large diagram.
If you change the printer paper dimensions to a size that contains all four drawing pages,
the print preview reflects the change, as shown in Figure 12-3.

Figure 12-3 A large printer-paper size can contain the entire network diagram on one
sheet
 See Also
For information about setting drawing page and printer paper sizes, see “Manage
pages” in Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes, and pages.”
The left pane of the Print page contains the Printer menu and the Settings menus that are
common to all Microsoft Office applications.
You use the first menu in the Settings section, shaded in blue in Figure 12-3, to select the
range of pages or parts of the current page to be printed, just as you do for other Office
applications. However, two additional print options are available at the bottom of the
menu for this button in Visio:
 No Background Switches between inclusion and exclusion of the page background
from the print preview and printed output.
 High Quality Switches between inclusion and exclusion of certain effects, such as
reflections, from the print preview and printed output.
At the end of the Settings section is an Edit Header & Footer link. In Visio, headers and
footers print information on the top and bottom of each printer page and are independent
of the drawing page. Consequently, you might use headers and footers for Visio diagrams
in which the drawing page is spread across multiple printer pages.
However, the majority of Visio documents are configured to print each drawing page on a
single sheet of paper. If you have text or graphics that you want to appear on every printed
page, it’s better practice to put that content on a background page.

 See Also
For information about background pages, see the section “Work with background
pages and borders” in Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes, and pages.”
To display a print preview
1. Do any of the following:
• In the left pane of the Backstage view, click Print.
• Press Ctrl+P.
• Press Alt+F, P.
• Press Alt+F, V (to maintain compatibility with Visio 2007 and earlier).
To print a diagram
1. On the Print page of the Backstage view, click Print.
To add or edit the header and footer
1. On the Print page of the Backstage view, click Edit Header & Footer, make the
required change, and then click OK.
To move shapes off page breaks
1. On the Home tab, in the Arrange group, click the Move off Page Breaks button.
Remove personal information
Every Visio document contains a collection of metadata about the document itself. The
contents of some of the data fields are supplied by Visio, including the name of the
document author; some are prefilled based on the template from which you create a
document; some are blank unless you enter values.
You can view and change metadata fields in the Properties section on the right side of the
Info page in the Backstage view, as shown in Figure 12-4.

Figure 12-4 The Info page includes document properties and a button to remove
personal information
You can also view or update metadata in the document’s Properties dialog box, as shown
in Figure 12-5.

Figure 12-5 The Properties dialog box displays the author’s name, manager’s name,
and company name
If you plan to post your diagram in a public place or simply want to ensure that personal
information, reviewer’s marks, and other potentially private content are deleted, use the
Remove Hidden Information dialog box shown in Figure 12-6.

Figure 12-6 You can select which types of hidden data to remove from your diagram
The Remove Hidden Information dialog box offers three check boxes:
 Remove these items from the document Removes editing and validation markup
and data that appears in the document’s Properties section
 Warn me if I try to reinsert this information Helps to protect you if you
inadvertently add personal details back to the document after removing them
 Remove data from external sources stored in the document Removes private
information from data sources to which this diagram has been linked
 See Also
For information about linking diagrams to external data, see Chapter 10, “Link to
external data.”
Not all of the items you can remove are visible in the document properties, but if you
compare Figure 12-7 with either Figure 12-4 or Figure 12-5, you’ll see a number of
important differences.

Figure 12-7 Personal content has been removed from this diagram
 Important
Information Rights Management (IRM) is another means for helping to protect your
Visio diagrams. See the “What is Information Rights Management?” sidebar
following this topic for information about IRM.
To view or edit document properties
1. Display the Info page of the Backstage view.
2. (Optional) Click the current value of the field you want to change, and then enter
the required information.
Or
1. On the Info page of the Backstage view, click the Properties button, and then click
the Advanced Properties button.
2. (Optional) Enter data into the appropriate fields.
3. Click OK.
To remove personal information
1. On the Info page of the Backstage view, click Remove Personal Information.
2. In the Remove Hidden Information dialog box, click the options you want, and
then click OK.

What is Information Rights Management?
Visio 2016 provides the added security and control of Information Rights
Management (IRM). You can help to protect the content in your Visio diagram by
specifying who can view and who can edit your diagrams.
Important
Before you can use IRM in a Visio document, an administrator must have activated
the rights management service within your organization’s Office 365 or internal
network.
In a Visio diagram, enabling IRM begins by clicking the Protect Document button
on the Info page of the Backstage view to display the Restrict Access menu, as
shown in Figure 12-8.
Figure 12-8 You can choose an IRM protection template from the Restrict Access menu
If you choose Restricted Access, you can configure the settings in the Permission
dialog box, shown in Figure 12-9, to identify specific people who can read or
change your diagram. The people you specify can be located both inside and
outside your organization.

Figure 12-9 You control who can read or change your diagram
If you want to restrict access solely to people within your organization, you can
select either of the Confidential options shown on the Restrict Access menu. Both
Confidential entries shown in Figure 12-8 include the words Visio Step by Step,
because that is the organization name for the author’s Office 365 account. If you are
connected to an organizational network when you display the Restricted Access
menu, the name of your organization will be displayed.
When a Visio user opens a restricted document, the software displays an
appropriate warning or error, depending on who the user is and what rights he or
she has for the document. For example, the message in Figure 12-10 appears at the
top of the drawing window when a user within my organization has been authorized
to read, but not change, a document.
Figure 12-10 A user has insufficient permission to edit this document
Create graphics
A handy feature in Visio is the ability to create image files from some or all of the
elements on a drawing page. The most frequently used image formats are located in the
Graphic File Types section of the Export page in the Backstage view, as shown in Figure
12-11.

Figure 12-11 The Export page is often the easiest way to create images from shapes in
Visio diagrams
The full range of graphical file types is available on the Save As menu, as noted by the
boxed areas in Figure 12-12. The remaining file types shown in the figure are described in
the following topic.

Figure 12-12 All available file types are displayed in the Save As dialog box
 Tip
If you need a detailed description of any of these file formats, you can find plenty
of information on the Internet. For example, a Wikipedia article describes most of
the formats in the preceding list: www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image_file_formats.
Most image types provide a dialog box you can use to configure the image format details.
Figure 12-13 shows the PNG Output Options dialog box as an example.

Figure 12-13 PNG image options are representative of the customizations you can
make when you create image files
 Tip
If you need to manipulate a photo or other image and don’t have image editing
software, you can often use Visio to accomplish what you need. Either insert the
image or paste it onto a Visio drawing page, and then use the buttons on the Picture
Tools tab that appears when an image is selected. See Chapter 1, “Get started with
Visio 2016” for more information about tool tabs.
In general, creating images in Visio is a shape-oriented, not a page-oriented, operation. To
say that another way, Visio does not provide a built-in method to create an image of an
entire page because it always creates images of shapes.
Figure 12-14 shows an entire Visio drawing page; it will serve as an example for the
remainder of this section.

Figure 12-14 The floor plan of an office occupying only the upper part of the drawing
page
If you select several shapes before exporting to an image file, the image will display just
those shapes. To create Figure 12-15, only the desk and chair were selected.
Figure 12-15 A close-up of a desk and chair
However, if no shapes are selected when you export, Visio will create an image that is
only as big as the rectangle surrounding the shapes on the page. White space between that
rectangle and the page boundaries will not be included. For example, Figure 12-16 was
created when no shapes were selected; compare this image with the one in Figure 12-14.

Figure 12-16 The “full page” image includes shapes but not the surrounding white
space
 Tip
If you want to create an image of an entire Visio drawing page, you must place one
or more shapes at the page boundaries to force Visio to capture the entire page. The
easiest techniques for accomplishing this are to: 1) draw a rectangle with no fill at
the page margins, effectively creating a border around the page; or 2) place a pair of
very small shapes in opposite corners of the page.
If you use the first technique, you can make the line nearly invisible by making it
very thin and giving it a color that is almost the same as the page background. If
you use the second method, you can make the small shapes nearly invisible by
making them very, very tiny or by making their fill color nearly the same as the
page background, or both. In either case, do not use a color that is the same as the
page background. If your shapes and the background are the same color, Visio will
not detect your shapes and will exclude them from the exported image.
To save selected shapes as an image
1. On the Export page of the Backstage view, click Change File Type.
2. In the Graphic File Types section, do either of the following:
• Click the image type you want, and then click Save As.
• Double-click the image type you want.
3. In the Save As dialog box, navigate to the location you want, and then click Save.

4. Accept or change the image-type-specific Output Options, and then click OK.
Or
1. On the Save As page of the Backstage view, click the storage location you want.
2. In the Save As dialog box, click the Save as type arrow, and then click the file type
you want.
3. Enter the file name you want, and then click Save.
4. Accept or change the image-type-specific Output Options, and then click OK.
To save all shapes on the page as an image
1. Do either of the following:
• Select all shapes on the page.
• Click the page background to deselect all shapes.
2. Follow the instructions in the “To save selected shapes as an image” procedure to
save selected shapes.
Save drawings in other file formats
In addition to creating multiple types of graphics files for shapes located on a single page,
with Visio, you can save your entire drawing in more than a dozen formats shown in Table
12-1 and Table 12-2.

Table 12-1 Visio file types

Table 12-2 Non-Visio (and non-image) file types
 Important
The standard file formats for Visio 2016 and Visio 2013 drawings, stencils, and
templates cannot contain macros. In Table 12-1, notice that a separate, macro-
enabled file format exists for each of those three file types for situations in which
you need to include macros with the file.
 Tip
Visio 2016 can create files that are compatible with Visio versions back to Visio
2003 but cannot create files that are compatible with Visio 2002 or earlier.
All of the entries in Table 12-1 and the first two entries in Table 12-2 always save the
entire Visio drawing in the new format. However, the last three entries in Table 12-2—
PDF, XPS, and Web Page—give you the choice of saving a subset of your pages into the
format you want. Each offers an options dialog box, similar to the one for PDF documents
shown in Figure 12-17.

Figure 12-17 You can select a page range along with other format-specific options in
the Options dialog box
To save a diagram as a PDF
1. On the Export page of the Backstage view, click Create PDF/XPS.
2. Navigate to the location you want, and then click Publish.
Or
1. On the Save As page of the Backstage view, click the storage location you want.
2. In the Save As dialog box, click the Save as type arrow, and then click PDF
(*.pdf).
3. Enter the file name you want, and then click Save.
To customize PDF output
1. Open the Save As dialog box, and then click the Options button.
2. Change the options that you want to be different, click OK, and then click Publish.
To save a diagram in another file format
1. On the Export page of the Backstage view, click Change File Type.
2. Do either of the following:
• In either the Drawing File Types section or the Other File Types section, click
the file type you want, and then click Save As.

• In the Graphic File Types section, double-click the image type you want.
3. Navigate to the location you want, and then click Save.
4. Accept or change the image-type-specific Output Options, and then click OK.
Or
1. On the Save As page of the Backstage view, click the storage location you want.
2. In the Save As dialog box, click the Save as type arrow, and then click the file type
you want.
3. Enter the file name you want, and then click Save.
Create templates
Technically, saving a diagram as a Visio template is no different than saving it in any of
the other file formats described in the preceding topic. Despite the ease of creating them,
templates are described separately in this topic because of their potential importance.
Why would you want to save a diagram as a template? Because despite the dozens of
templates provided with Visio, Microsoft can’t possibly envision every type of diagram
you will want to create.
In addition, although you can open a diagram and reuse it as is, a key advantage of a
template is that the template document is never modified by accident. This is especially
valuable if you share your template with other people; just like the templates that are
packaged with Visio, whenever a user selects your template, Visio creates a new diagram
and leaves the template untouched.
You might create a custom template simply by enhancing one of the standard Visio
templates with a background page that displays your organization’s logo on every page. Or
you might create a very elaborate template that includes your own stencils and shapes,
multiple foreground and background pages, preset shapes on certain pages, and a legal
notice on the bottom of every page. There are no limitations on the contents of a template;
you can include anything that will make creating a new diagram easier.
To save a diagram as a template
1. Follow the steps in the “To save a Visio diagram in another file format” procedure at
the end of the preceding topic, choosing Template (*.vstx) or Visio Template
(*.vstx) as the file type.
Where do I store custom templates?
You can store custom templates in any location you want—for example, on your
own computer if only you will use them, or on a server to share them with other
people.
You can use a template by double-clicking its file name in File Explorer, but you
can make custom templates more accessible by configuring Visio to include them
on the New page in the Backstage view.

The following example uses a folder called Trey Research Templates that contains
three custom templates. To inform Visio of the location for your template folder:
1. On the Options page of the Backstage view, click Advanced.
2. Scroll to the bottom of the Advanced settings, and then click the File Locations
button.
3. In the Templates field of the File Locations dialog box, enter the path to the
folder that contains the Trey Research Templates folder.
Important
Note the wording in the preceding sentence: “enter the path to the folder that
contains the Trey Research Templates folder.” In other words, do not include the
target folder in the template path—stop one folder above that folder. This ensures
that your folder name appears in the Template Categories pane along with the
Visio-supplied template categories. For example, in Figure 12-18, the Trey
Research Templates folder is located within the Documents folder, so the words
Trey Research Templates are not included in the path.
Figure 12-18 In addition to templates, you can set custom locations for drawings,
stencils, and add-ons
4. After you enter the template path, click OK twice. When you restart Visio, the
Template Categories section of the New page should look similar to Figure 12-
19.

Figure 12-19 Your custom templates can be available on the New page
5. Double-click Trey Research Templates to display the templates in that folder,
as shown in Figure 12-20.
Figure 12-20 Custom templates for office layouts, org charts, and timelines
Share diagrams by using the Visio Viewer
Microsoft Office 2016 includes the Visio Viewer as a default installation option.
Consequently, if your system includes Office but not Visio, you can still view any Visio
diagram.
The Visio Viewer runs as an add-on to Internet Explorer, which displays Visio diagrams in
the browser, as shown in Figure 12-21.

Figure 12-21 A high-quality view of a Visio diagram on a device that does not have
Visio
 Important
The first time you use the Visio Viewer, you might be required to grant permission
for Internet Explorer to load the Visio Viewer add-on.
The upper-left corner of the Internet Explorer window includes buttons for zooming,
displaying shape data, viewing and controlling layers, and viewing comments. The lower-
left edge offers page navigation buttons along with page name tabs in a multipage
diagram.
 Important
On a device that includes both Office and Visio, Visio drawings always open in
Visio.

Publish diagrams to the web
Visio 2016 retains a long-time feature that automatically builds a website from any
diagram. You can use this capability to share diagrams with people who might not have
Visio installed on their computers.
A Visio-generated website includes all foreground pages, provides a table of contents, and
preserves both page-to-page and external hyperlinks. Although the website will be
viewable with almost any web browser, the results are enhanced by using Internet
Explorer because it provides the following additional features:
 A pan-and-zoom pane, which you can click and drag to zoom and navigate around
any page
 A details window to present shape data
 Full-text search for all text in the drawing
Whether you want to share drawings with colleagues by using your intranet site, or
publish drawings on the public World Wide Web, the Save As Web Page feature can make
your diagrams more accessible.
View web-published diagrams
Figure 12-22 shows a network diagram that has been published to the web by using
default options.
Figure 12-22 A network diagram rendered as a webpage

 Important
Depending on where your Visio-generated webpages are stored, a warning might
appear when you attempt to view the pages. To proceed, click Allow Blocked
Content.
 Important
The four left-panel navigation panes shown in Figure 12-22 are special features that
require Internet Explorer and Microsoft Silverlight. If you have not previously
installed Silverlight when you view a Visio-generated website, a button will appear
in Internet Explorer that you can click to install it. Information about Silverlight is
available at www.microsoft.com/silverlight.
You can use the navigation panes on the left side of the browser window to do the
following:
 Go To Page Select from the list of all pages in the current diagram, as shown in
Figure 12-23.
Figure 12-23 The diagram in the web browser contains three pages
 Pan And Zoom Set the zoom level and pan position for the viewing pane, as shown
in Figure 12-24.

Figure 12-24 You can set pan and zoom by dragging in the pane or by using the buttons
on the right
 Tip
You can’t control the shape of the box you draw in the Pan And Zoom pane. It will
maintain the same aspect ratio as the viewing pane to the right.
 Details View shape data, as shown in Figure 12-25.
Figure 12-25 Shape data details are available in the webpage version of a Visio
diagram
 Search Pages View results of full-text search, as shown in Figure 12-26.

Figure 12-26 Clicking a result highlights the target shape
 Tip
The full-text search feature creates a hyperlinked list of search results. Clicking any
result presents the page containing the selected shape and highlights the target
shape with an orange arrow for two or three seconds.
 Tip
The default behavior for full-text search is to examine the shape name, shape text,
and all shape data fields. You can alter that behavior by clicking Advanced below
the search box.
When you point to a shape containing a hyperlink, a ScreenTip appears with up to three
entries, as shown in Figure 12-27. The first entry is the shape text and will not be present
if the shape does not contain text. The second entry provides instructions that result in the
display of shape data in the Details pane, as shown in Figure 12-25. The third entry
describes standard web behavior—click to follow a link.
Figure 12-27 The Sales File Server is hyperlinked to another page in the diagram
If you view the Visio-generated website without Silverlight, or in a browser that does not
support Silverlight, the main content—the webpages—will appear. However, the left panel
is reduced to a hyperlinked list displaying each of the page names in the Visio diagram;

you can click a page name to view that page, as shown in Figure 12-28.
Figure 12-28 Part of a web-rendered network diagram with a limited-function
navigation pane
To create a website from a diagram
1. On the Export page of the Backstage view, click Change File Type.
2. In the Other File Types section, click Web Page (*.htm), and then click Save As.
3. In the Save As dialog box, navigate to the location you want, and then click Save.
Or
1. On the Save As page of the Backstage view, click the storage location you want.
2. In the Save As dialog box, click the Save as type arrow, click Web Page (*.htm;
*.html), and then click Save.
To view a different page
1. In the Go to Page pane, click the down-arrow, and then click the page name you
want.
2. Do either of the following:
• Press Enter.
• Click the green Go to selected page button.
To change the zoom setting
1. Do any of the following in the Pan and Zoom pane:
• Click the webpage thumbnail and draw a bounding box around the area of
interest.
• If there is a red-bordered rectangle on the webpage thumbnail, drag any edge of
the rectangle.

• Click the Zoom in (+) or Zoom out (-) button.
• Click any of the Zoom to x% buttons.
• Click the Zoom page to 100% button.
To pan the webpage
1. If there is not a red-bordered rectangle on the webpage thumbnail in the Pan and
Zoom pane, drag to create one.
2. Drag the red-bordered rectangle to a new location.
To view shape data
1. Hold down the Ctrl key while clicking the shape whose data you want to view.
To search for text
1. In the Search Pages text box, enter the text you want to locate.
2. Click any of the search results to view the shape containing your search text.
To follow a hyperlink
1. Click the shape containing the hyperlink you want to follow.
Set publishing options
Web-published Visio drawings include full support for embedded hyperlinks along with
rich navigation and search capabilities, as you discovered in the preceding section.
However, you don’t necessarily need all of those capabilities in every Visio-generated
website, so it is convenient to be able to change the publishing options.
In addition, you might want to change the format in which Visio creates your website. By
default, Visio 2016 creates webpages by using the Extensible Application Markup
Language (XAML). XAML is responsible for the left-pane navigation features and
requires Silverlight. If you prefer a webpage format that doesn’t require Silverlight, you
can select one of the five alternatives described later in this section.
The key to customizing Visio webpages is a pair of buttons in the lower portion of the
Save As dialog box (shown in Figure 12-29):
 You can click the Change Title button to modify the text that will be displayed in the
title bar of the web browser.
 The Publish button opens the Save As Web Page dialog box, which includes both
General and Advanced tabs.

Figure 12-29 You use the Change Title and Publish buttons to customize your Visio-
generated website
Use the settings on the General tab
The General tab of the Save As Web Page dialog box, shown in Figure 12-30, includes
one note-worthy feature that is easy to miss: you can include report output along with the
pages of your diagram. The list in the Publishing Options section includes both navigation
panes and reports.
Figure 12-30 When you create a website, you can change what content it will contain
The General tab is divided into three sections:
 Pages to publish You can select a subset of the diagram’s pages to include in the

web-published output.
 Publishing options You can select which navigation pane options and which
reports, if any, should be included in your website.
 Important
The only way to view reports in your web-published drawing is via the Go To Page
navigation pane. Consequently, if you include reports as part of your website, you
must leave the Go To Page check box selected.
 Tip
Visio remembers the settings for the navigation pane options you select; the same
settings will appear the next time you save a drawing as a webpage. However, Visio
does not remember the settings for the reports you choose; none of the report check
boxes will be selected the next time you save a drawing as a webpage.
 Additional options This section contains three options:
• Each time you create a website, Visio opens it in your browser. You can clear the
Automatically Open Web Page In Browser check box to prevent this from
occurring.
• Visio normally creates a subfolder to store the majority of website files. You can
clear the Organize Supporting Files In A Folder check box to instruct Visio to
store all website files in a single folder.
 See Also
For information about the files created by the Save As Web Page function, see the
“What’s in a Visio-generated website and where is it stored?” sidebar later in this
section.
• You can enter a different title in the Page Title text box as an alternative to using
the Change Title button shown in Figure 12-29.
Figure 12-31 provides one example of customizing webpage output. The webpage appears
with only the Go To Page and Pan And Zoom navigation panes.

Figure 12-31 A website with only two navigation panes
Figure 12-32 shows that the customized website includes three Visio diagram pages plus
the Milestones By Start Date report.
Figure 12-32 A report name appears with diagram page names
A portion of the Milestones By Start Date report is shown in Figure 12-33.

Figure 12-33 A milestone report shows task names and start dates
Use the settings on the Advanced tab
Figure 12-34 shows the Advanced tab of the Save As Web Page dialog box.
Figure 12-34 XAML is the default, but you can select other output formats
You can use the Output Formats list to select any of the following instead of XAML:
 VML is the webpage format used by Visio 2007 and earlier versions of Visio. The
features of VML websites are very similar to websites created with XAML but
require Internet Explorer.
 SVG is a specialized format that is supported by some but not all browsers. Like the
three image formats described in the following bullet point, SVG websites display

fixed-size pages with no Pan And Zoom pane.
 GIF, JPG, and PNG provide fewer capabilities than either VML or XAML. For
example, the viewing window for these formats is a fixed size and does not include
the Pan And Zoom pane in the left navigation pane. However, websites produced in
these formats retain all hyperlinks and are likely to be compatible with a wider range
of web browsers. (Note that you can have the best of both worlds—full navigation
functions in Internet Explorer and support for older browsers; refer to the following
paragraph.)
If you select XAML, VML, or SVG as the output format, Visio defaults to selecting the
Provide Alternate Format For Older Browsers check box, as shown in Figure 12-35. You
can use the list under this heading to select GIF, JPG, or PNG output as a backup to your
primary choice.
Figure 12-35 PNG is one of three alternate output formats
In the Display Options section, you can use the Target Monitor, Host In Web Page, and
Style Sheet settings to further customize your webpages. The second and third settings, in
particular, are intended to help you integrate a Visio-generated website with another
existing website.
To change the title of a Visio-generated website
1. Open the Save As dialog box, and then click the Change Title button.
2. In the Enter Text dialog box, enter a title, click OK, and then click Save.
To customize the appearance of a Visio-generated website
1. Open the Save As dialog box, and then click the Publish button.
2. In the Save as Web Page dialog box, change the items you want to customize, and
then click OK.
To customize the format of a Visio-generated website
1. Open the Save As dialog box, and then click the Publish button.
2. In the Output formats section of the Save as Web Page dialog box, click the name

of the format you want.
3. (Optional) Click the name of an alternate format in the Provide Alternate Format
For Older Browsers list.
4. (Optional) Change the Display options.
5. Click OK.
What’s in a Visio-generated website and where is it stored?
When you use the Save As Web Page feature, Visio creates a home page for the
website. It also creates a supporting files folder that contains graphics and
webpages for each page in the drawing, in addition to JavaScript, XML, and other
files that comprise the website.
By default, Visio places the home page in the same Windows folder that contains
your Visio drawing, and gives it the same name as the drawing plus an .htm file
extension. For English versions of Visio, the name of the supporting files folder is
the same as the drawing name but appended with _files.
For example, if you use an English-language version of Visio and create a website
for a diagram called Timeline diagram.vsdx, the folder that houses the Visio
diagram also contains the following:
 A file called Timeline diagram.htm
 A folder called Timeline diagram_files
If you want to copy or move your new website, it’s important to copy or move both
the .htm file and the supporting files folder to the new location. You can copy your
website to a shared drive, to your organization’s intranet, or to any web server to
provide access to your Visio diagram.
Important
The default name for the companion subfolder varies based on the language version
of Office that is installed on your computer. For a complete list of default names for
various language versions, go to support.office.com/en-us/article/Save-all-or-part-
of-a-workbook-to-a-static-Web-page-5AD26DEE-8739-4D80-B9D9-
CF0530AB1968. Even though the article applies to Microsoft Excel, the list is also
correct for the Visio 2016 website folder.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Preview and print drawings
 Remove personal information
 Create graphics

 Save drawings in other file formats
 Create templates
 Share diagrams by using the Visio Viewer
 Publish diagrams to the web
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch12 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Preview and print drawings
Open the PreviewDrawings diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Display the Print page of the Backstage view to preview the diagram.
2. (Optional) Print the diagram.
3. Add a header and footer. Notice that the change is visible in the print preview.
4. Move shapes off the page breaks to improve the printed output.
Remove personal information
Open the PreviewDrawings diagram you used in the “Preview and print drawings”
practice task, and then perform the following tasks:
1. View the document properties, and then change the name of the company.
2. Remove personal information from the diagram.
Create graphics
Open the CreateGraphics diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Create a PNG image of the round table and two adjacent chairs.
2. Create a JPEG image of the plant and green desk chair.
3. Create any type of image of all shapes on the page.
4. Create any type of image of the entire printable area of the page. (See the tip
following Figure 12-16 for assistance with this task.)
Save drawings in other file formats
Open the SaveInFormats diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Create a PDF of all pages in the diagram.
2. Create a PDF that includes only pages 1 and 2.

3. Save the diagram as a macro-enabled document.
4. Save the diagram as a Visio 2003-2010 diagram.
Create templates
Open the CreateTemplates diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Save the diagram as a template.
2. Create a diagram from the new template.
Share diagrams by using the Visio Viewer
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Publish diagrams to the web
Open the PublishToWeb diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Create a website.
2. View the Hospital Visits page.
3. Return to the Project Schedule page.
4. Zoom in on the expanded timeline below the main timeline.
5. Pan up to the main timeline.
6. View the shape data for the main timeline.
7. Search for FDA, and then click FDA Approval Process.
8. Follow the hyperlink on the FDA Approval Process milestone located on the left
end of the main timeline.
9. Republish the website with a new title, omit the Pan and Zoom pane, and include
the Milestone Summary report.
10. Republish the website in VML format.

13. Add structure to your diagrams
In this chapter
 Understand containers, lists, and callouts
 Compare groups and containers
 Organize shapes by using containers
 Organize shapes by using lists
 Find containers and lists in Visio
 Annotate shapes by using callouts
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch13 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
In many types of Visio diagrams, it’s useful to create visual or logical relationships among
a set of shapes. The traditional technique for doing this in Visio has been to use
background shapes and groups. However, Visio 2016 offers three special shape types—
containers, lists, and callouts—that can be even more effective when you want to establish
relationships and add structure to your diagrams.
Structured diagram shapes are so useful that Visio itself relies on them for a growing
number of templates and special uses. For example, you will find lists and containers in
swimlane diagrams, wireframes, and data graphic legends; and you will encounter callouts
in the Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) template (Visio Professional only).
This chapter guides you through procedures related to organizing shapes by using
containers or lists, finding containers and lists in Visio, and annotating shapes by using
callouts.
Understand containers, lists, and callouts
Visio 2010 introduced three structured diagram shape types:
 Containers A container provides a visual boundary around a set of objects, but it
also establishes a logical relationship between the container and the objects within it
—shapes know when they are members of a container and containers know which
shapes they contain.
The key advantage of a container is that while you can move, copy, or delete it and
its members as a unit, each contained shape maintains its independence. Unlike
grouped shapes, selecting an object inside a container only requires one click, which
makes it simple to access the shape data and other properties of a container member.

 Tip
A container can contain shapes, other containers, and lists.
 Lists A list is a special type of container that maintains an ordered relationship
among its members. Each object in a list knows its ordinal position, and new objects
are not merely added to a list but are added to a specific position in a list.
 Tip
A list can contain shapes and containers but cannot contain other lists.
 Callouts In previous versions of Visio, a callout was merely a shape that you glued
to another shape to add a comment. A Visio 2016–style callout still provides a way
to add annotation to a shape, but the callout knows the shape to which it is attached,
and the shape can identify any attached callouts.
What is the value to you if shapes know where they live and containers and lists know
what they contain? Think about a shape that automatically knows whether it’s first,
second, or third in a list and displays that data (explained in the section “Add shapes to
lists” in the “Organize shapes by using lists” topic later in this chapter). Or think about the
potential uses for a shape that displays data from its parent container—and the data
changes automatically if you move the shape to a different container (covered in the
“Explore swimlanes” section in the “Find containers and lists in Visio” topic later in this
chapter).
Although it’s true that containers, lists, and callouts are just Visio shapes, each includes
unique properties and formulas that give it special capabilities.
Compare groups and containers
You can use either groups or containers to visually connect a set of shapes. However, the
two have key behavioral differences that are likely to lead you in one direction or the
other. The diagrams in this topic contain two sets of shapes that will serve to illustrate the
similarities and differences. The green shapes on the left in the diagrams are part of a
group; the gold shapes on the right are located inside a container.
In the image on the left in Figure 13-1, the arrows and square are grouped with a gold
rectangle by using the traditional Visio technique:
1. Draw a rectangle (or other shape).
2. Send the new shape to the back of the Z-order.
3. Select the rectangle and the shapes you want in the group.
4. Group the selected shapes.

Figure 13-1 Shapes are grouped or contained
 Tip
For information about creating and using groups, see Chapter 3, “Manage text,
shapes, and pages.” The same chapter also describes moving shapes backward and
forward in the Z-order of a page.
Prior to the introduction of containers in Visio 2010, this was the only technique for
creating a visual association among a set of shapes.
In contrast, the shapes on the right in Figure 13-1 were placed into a container. One
difference is immediately apparent: containers are not just plain rectangles; they include
both a main section and a heading.
Three additional differences that are not easily captured in a screenshot become obvious
when you work with groups and containers in Visio:
 If you click a shape that is located in a group, you select the group and not the
shape. However, if you click a shape in a container, the first click selects the shape.
In essence, a group stands between you and its shapes, but a container is invisible as
you select shapes.
 Tip
If you run Visio in developer mode, you can alter the selection characteristics of a
group. For more information about developer mode, see Appendix A, “Look behind
the curtain.”
 To select a container and not a member of the container, you must click the heading
or an edge of the container.
 As a result of the click behavior described in the preceding bullets, using a bounding
box to select interior shapes in a container is easy—just click inside or outside the
container, and then drag. However, to select shapes in a group by using a bounding
box, you must start the bounding box outside of the group or you will inadvertently
drag the group.
Groups and containers share several behaviors. For example, if you move either one, you
move all shapes. If you delete either one, you delete everything. Similarly, you can copy

and paste either as a unit.
One difference arises when you want to label the collection, however. When you click a
group and start entering text, the text appears in the center of the group shape by default.
Sometimes this placement is fine, but other times it’s not. The usefulness of the text in a
group also depends on the color and style defaults of the theme you’re using.
In the group shown on the left in Figure 13-2, for example, the text is illegible because its
default color is too similar to the color of the background shape. You can, of course, use
the Text Block tool you worked with in Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes, and pages,” to
move the text, or you can change its color, but that requires extra steps.
Figure 13-2 Text in a group can be obscured by the default font color or by the shapes
in the group
Clicking a container and entering text, on the other hand, automatically places the text in
the heading, as shown on the right in Figure 13-2.
If you drag a shape out of a group, is it still part of the group? What if you drag a shape
out of a container?
The upper half of Figure 13-3 shows a double-headed arrow that has been dragged out of
the group on the left and another that has been removed from the container on the right. In
the lower half of the figure, the group and container have been moved to the right.

Figure 13-3 The effects of dragging a shape out of a group and a container
Notice the following:
 The green arrow moved with the group.
 The gold arrow remained in a fixed location.
From these observations, you can conclude the following:
 Dragging a shape from a group does not remove it from the group.
 Dragging a shape from a container removes it from the container.
Attempting to add shapes exposes a similar difference. In the upper half of Figure 13-4, a
circle has been placed on top of the group on the left and the container on the right. In the
lower half of the figure, the group and the container have been moved to the right.

Figure 13-4 The effects of placing a shape on top of a group and a container
Here are the conclusions you can draw from this:
 Placing a shape on top of a group does not add it to the group.
 Tip
If you run Visio in developer mode, you can change the behavior of a group so it
will accept dropped shapes. For more information about developer mode, see
Appendix A, “Look behind the curtain.”
 Placing a shape on top of a container adds it to the container.
The primary lesson from Figure 13-3 and Figure 13-4 is that unlike groups, Visio
containers behave like physical containers: if you put an object in, it becomes part of the
container; if you remove an object, it is no longer associated with the container.
Figure 13-5 illustrates a final behavior difference: resizing groups and containers produces
strikingly different results. In the figure, both the group and the container were stretched
by dragging the bottom resize handle downward.

Figure 13-5 Resizing a group resizes all subshapes; resizing a container does not affect
member shapes
 Tip
If you run Visio in developer mode, you can change the behavior of a group so the
interior shapes do not resize. For more information about developer mode, see
Appendix A, “Look behind the curtain.”
The following table summarizes the key differences between groups and containers.

 Tip
Containers, lists, and callouts were introduced in Visio 2010 and were described by
the Visio development team in a series of blog posts that are summarized at
blogs.msdn.com/b/visio/archive/2010/09/02/new-structured-diagrams-whitepaper-
for-visio-2010.aspx.
Visio 2013 included additional containers and callouts and upgraded the style and
appearance of both, as described in a blog post at
blogs.office.com/2012/11/05/containers-and-callouts-in-visio/.
For the technically inclined, the following article provides details about the inner
workings of containers, lists, and callouts and is still relevant for Visio 2016
structured diagrams: msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ff959245.aspx.
Organize shapes by using containers
Grouped shapes are still valuable for many purposes, including holding collections of
subshapes that are unlikely to change. However, Visio containers offer numerous
advantages, especially for dynamically grouping, moving, and managing a set of related
shapes.
One regular ribbon tab and one tool tab are vital for working with containers. The Insert
tab, shown in Figure 13-6, is home to the Container gallery, which you use to add
containers to a page.
Figure 13-6 The Container gallery offers 14 container styles
You use various functions on the Format tool tab in the Container Tools tab group, shown
in Figure 13-7, to manage containers in ways you will explore in the sections of this topic.

Figure 13-7 The Format tool tab appears only when you select a container
Use containers
You can create an empty container and add shapes to it later, or you can create a container
around existing shapes. In either case, your containers can appear in a variety of styles.
Figure 13-8 shows the same set of network shapes in five different containers to illustrate
the range of choices.
Figure 13-8 Examples of diverse container styles from simple to highly stylized
Containers provide visual feedback while you interact with them. As shown on the left in
Figure 13-9, dragging a shape into a container causes the border of the container to “light
up” in green. This type of feedback is a way to distinguish a container from a group or an
ordinary shape.
Figure 13-9 Adding or selecting shapes highlights the surrounding container
The container border also lights up when you select any contained shape, as shown on the
right in Figure 13-9. This behavior is evidence of the relationship between containers and
members that was described in “Understand containers, lists, and callouts” earlier in this
chapter.
Because containers were designed to remain connected to their members, it’s easy to copy
or delete both as a unit by selecting the container. The only trick when selecting the
container is to remember that the body of a container is invisible to mouse clicks. You
must click the header or one of the edges to select it.

If you want to copy or delete just the members but not the container, that’s also easy
because there are several techniques for selecting all members of a container—then you
can just copy or delete the shapes in the usual way.
To delete the container but leave its contents behind, you could drag the contents out and
then delete the container. However, Visio provides a Disband Container command for this
purpose.
 Tip
You can lock a container to prevent shapes from being added or deleted. If you
attempt to add a shape to a locked container, the border does not light up as you
drag the shape onto the container and the new shape sits on top of the container. If
you attempt to delete a contained shape, you receive an error message.
To place an empty container on the page
1. On the Insert tab, in the Diagram Parts group, click Container.
2. In the Container gallery, click the thumbnail of the container type you want.
To contain existing shapes
1. Select one or more existing shapes, and then do one of the following:
• Display the Container gallery, and then click the thumbnail of the container type
you want.
• Right-click one of the selected shapes, and then click Add to New Container.
• If the shapes are on top of, but are not members of, a container, right-click one of
the selected shapes, and then click Add to Underlying Container.
To add shapes to a container
1. Drag one or more shapes into the container.
Or
1. Do either of the following:
• Resize a container until it covers the shapes you want to add.
• Drag a container until it’s on top of the shapes you want to add.
2. Right-click one of the shapes, and then click Add to Underlying Container.
To select a container
1. Do either of the following:
• Click the heading section of the container.
• Click any edge of the container.

To select all contained shapes
1. Do either of the following:
• Select the container, and then on the Format tool tab, in the Membership group,
click the Select Contents button.
• Right-click any edge of the container, point to Container, and then click Select
Contents.
To remove shapes from a container
1. Drag the shape you want to remove until it is outside the container.
To delete a container but leave contained shapes
1. Do either of the following:
• Select the container, and then on the Format tool tab, in the Membership group,
click the Disband Container button.
• Right-click any edge of the container, point to Container, and then click Disband
Container.
To lock or unlock a container
1. Do either of the following:
• Select the container, and then on the Format tool tab, in the Membership group,
click the Lock Container button.
• Right-click any edge of the container, point to Container, and then click Lock
Container.
Format containers
When you drag a container onto the page, it includes a set of predefined style attributes.
You can change some of the most visible container attributes by using the commands on
the Format tool tab that is shown in Figure 13-7. You can alter other container
characteristics by using buttons on the other Visio tabs.
Container attributes you can alter include the following:
 You can switch to another of the 14 container styles.
 You can choose alternate heading styles; Visio offers either two or four heading
styles per container type. You can also hide the heading.
 You can select different themes, variants, and effects. Because containers respond to
those changes, the appearance of the containers on your drawing page (and their
thumbnails in the gallery) can be very different from one diagram to the next.
 You can change the fill, line, and shadow attributes of a container as you would any
other Visio shape.
To choose a different container style

1. Do any of the following:
• On the Format tool tab, in the Container Styles group, display the Container
Styles gallery.
• On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Change Shape button.
• Right-click the heading or edge of the container, and then on the mini toolbar,
click the Change Shape button.
2. Click the container style you want.
To choose a different heading style
1. On the Format tool tab, in the Container Styles group, click the Heading Style
button.
2. In the Heading Styles gallery, click the thumbnail of the heading style you want.
To hide the heading
1. Display the Heading Styles gallery, and then in the No Heading section, click the
No Heading thumbnail.
On the border
When you drag a shape into a container, a green outline appears on the border of
the container. This is true even when you drag a shape most of the way, but not
fully into the container. In Figure 13-10, the wireless access point is being dragged
into a container and will be added to the container when it is released, even though
it is not fully within the borders of the container. (Depending on the resize options
described just after this sidebar, the container might expand to encompass the new
shape.)
Figure 13-10 The majority of the wireless access point is within the container
The pair of images in Figure 13-11 shows a different container behavior that can be
useful in some diagrams. In the image on the left, the wireless access point has not

been dragged quite as far into the container as it was in Figure 13-10. The container
signals the difference by displaying a green outline only on the top border and not
all the way around.
Figure 13-11 A wireless access point is added to the border because it was dropped on
the edge
When you release the wireless access point in this situation, it becomes a member
of the container, but it remains attached to the edge. If you expand the size of this
container upwards, the border shape will move along with the top of the container,
as shown in the image on the right.
Another example of a shape on the border of a container is included in the “Build
wireframes” section of the “Find containers and lists in Visio” topic later in this
chapter.
Control container size
Visio containers expand automatically when you add shapes near the edge of the
container. You can change this default behavior by using the Automatic Resize button
located in the Size group on the Format tool tab. Clicking the Automatic Resize button,
which is shown in Figure 13-7, reveals three mutually exclusive options:
 No Automatic Resize The container does not expand when you drag shapes near
the edge.
 Expand as Needed The container expands when you drop shapes near the edge.
Note that the opposite is not true—the container does not shrink when you remove
shapes.
 Always Fit to Contents The container expands and contracts automatically when
you add or remove shapes.

You can also affect container size by using the other buttons in the Size group:
 Margins Sets the spacing between the edges of the container and the contained
shapes
 Fit to Contents Sets the container size to the minimum required for the contained
shapes plus the margin
 Tip
You can also resize a container to fit its contents by opening the container’s shortcut
menu and then choosing from the options on the Container submenu.
Organize shapes by using lists
A list is a special type of container that maintains its members in ordered sequence. When
you drag an object into a list, it takes a specific place before, between, or after existing
members. Each list member knows its relative position in the list.
Visio doesn’t provide a list gallery on the Insert tab in the same way that it offers a
Container gallery. Consequently, creating a list either requires reusing an existing list
shape or having enough technical knowledge to make changes to the ShapeSheet.
 See Also
For information about modifying the ShapeSheet and creating custom list shapes,
see Appendix A, “Look behind the curtain.”
This topic explores adding shapes to a list and reordering shapes within a list. The list
shape for this hypothetical scenario is called My New PC, to which will be added
rectangular shapes that represent the software to load onto the PC. The starting point is
shown in Figure 13-12, with the list in the center and the software shapes on either side.
Figure 13-12 A list shape surrounded by candidate members
The software shapes for this example were created with two special attributes:
 Each shape displays the name of a software product that is stored as shape data. The
shape data value is displayed by using a Visio field.

 See Also
For more information about Visio fields, see Chapter 8, “Work with shape data.”
 Each shape displays its relative position in the list when it is in a list. When the
shape is not in a list, it doesn’t display any number. Display of the list position for
each shape was accomplished by using two ShapeSheet formulas.
The goal for the example in this topic is to create a list that shows the installation sequence
for a new PC. Although you are unlikely to use a Visio list for this specific purpose, this
example might stimulate you to think of your own applications for position-aware shapes.
Add shapes to lists
Dragging a shape into a list triggers the same response shown for a container earlier in this
chapter: the list is surrounded by a green rectangle, as shown on the left in Figure 13-13.
Also like a container, the list displays the green border when any member shape is
selected, as shown on the right.
Figure 13-13 List borders illuminate when shapes are being added or are contained
In the real world, it isn’t possible to install Visio without installing Windows first, so
Figure 13-14 shows the Windows 10 shape being dragged into the list. On the left, as the
Windows rectangle first approaches the list, there are three visual responses:
 The list border turns green.
 A ScreenTip appears, displaying the words Insert Shape.
 A horizontal, orange insertion bar appears below the Visio 2016 shape.
Figure 13-14 New shapes are added to a list in specific positions
The insertion bar is Visio’s way of telling you that the new shape will be added to the list
at that specific location.
The image in the center shows the Windows shape positioned partially above the Visio
shape, with the result that the insertion bar is now located above the Visio rectangle.
The result of dragging the Windows rectangle above the Visio shape is shown on the right.

Notice that the label Windows 10 is now preceded by the number 1 and the digit in front of
Visio 2016 has changed from a 1 to a 2.
You can insert new shapes between existing list shapes. In Figure 13-15, the Office 2016
shape is being added before Visio 2016 and after Windows 10.
Figure 13-15 You can insert a shape between existing list shapes
 Tip
Although the blue triangle that appears at the left end of the orange insertion bar in
the image on the left in Figure 13-15 might appear when you drag a shape into a
list, it is primarily useful when you are not dragging a shape.
If you pause when pointing to the edge of a list between existing shapes, the Insert
Shape triangle appears. Clicking the triangle causes Visio to insert a shape at that
location in the list. If the shape designer specified a default list shape, then that
shape is inserted. If there isn’t a default list shape, the shape adjacent to the
insertion bar is added to the list. “Find containers and lists in Visio” later in this
chapter includes an example of shape insertion.
The preceding figures illustrate a key behavior difference between Visio lists and
containers: container members can be located anywhere within a container, but list
members are always in fixed positions.
Figure 13-16 illustrates another important difference: unlike shapes in a container, list
members cannot reside on the border of the list. On the left, the Visio Add-In shape is
positioned on the border of the list. Only a small percentage of the rectangle is actually
touching the list, and yet releasing the shape at this point causes it to “fly” into the list.

Figure 13-16 Lists do not allow border shapes
Not only can shapes be inserted into specific positions in a list, they can be rearranged
within the list. On the left in Figure 13-17, the Visio 2016 shape is being relocated so it
will appear above the Visio add-in shape. Notice that each shape is renumbered
automatically based on its new list position.
Figure 13-17 List shapes can be dragged to new locations
The example in this section uses a vertical list in which shapes are automatically placed
from top to bottom. A Visio list can be either vertical or horizontal and can sequence
shapes in either direction within the list. These attributes are controlled by parameters and
don’t require writing code, but you can’t change them from the Visio ribbon; you must
make changes in the ShapeSheet for the list.
To add shapes to a list
1. Do either of the following:
• Drag one or more shapes into the list.
• Use the Insert Shape arrow to position a shape where you want it.
 See Also
For procedures related to selecting a list, selecting all members of a list, locking or
unlocking a list, deleting a list, or disbanding a list, see the procedures in the “Use
containers” section of the “Organize shapes by using containers” topic earlier in this
chapter.

Format and size lists
You can adjust most of the same format and size options for a list that you can for a
container, with one notable exception: you cannot change the size of a Visio list shape.
Visio controls the size by expanding and contracting a list so it is the exact size of its
member shapes plus the margin around the shapes.
The Format tool tab described earlier in this chapter provides the following list-related
groups and the functions within them:
 Size group You can use the Margins button to adjust the spacing between the edges
of the list and the contained shapes. Because Visio controls the size of a list shape,
Fit To Container and Automatic Resize are dimmed.
 Container Styles group You cannot change the style of a Visio 2016 list. However,
you can change the style of a list created in Visio 2010 by using the Container Styles
gallery. This is true even if the Visio 2010 list is located in a Visio 2016 diagram.
You can use the Heading Style gallery to choose alternate heading placement and
style options.
 Membership group The Lock Container, Select Contents, and Disband Container
buttons provide the same functions for lists that they do for containers.
Find containers and lists in Visio
Several Visio 2016 templates take advantage of the properties of containers and lists to
enhance ease of use and to add valuable features. In this section, you will discover three
examples.
Explore swimlanes
Cross-functional flowcharts, also known as swimlane diagrams, provide one of the most
prominent examples of list and container usage in Visio.
 See Also
For more information about swimlane diagrams, see Chapter 4, “Create business
process diagrams.”
The swimlane add-in was completely redesigned when lists and containers were
introduced in Visio 2010. The net effect of the redesign is that a cross-functional flowchart
(CFF) is a list of containers: the framework that holds swimlanes is a list, and each
swimlane is a container.

 Important
Swimlane diagrams created in Visio 2016, Visio 2013, or Visio 2010 will open
directly in Visio 2016 because they share the same underlying container and list
structure. However, swimlane diagrams created in earlier versions of Visio must be
converted to the new swimlane structure, and, once converted, they can no longer
be edited with the older software. To warn about the impending conversion when
you open an older diagram, Visio displays a dialog box that gives you an
opportunity to save the older version of the diagram before converting it.
Evidence of containers and lists appears as soon as you drag a shape into a swimlane—a
green border appears around the lane, as shown in Figure 13-18.
Figure 13-18 The combination of container feedback and the Dynamic Grid simplify
positioning of new shapes in a swimlane
 Tip
Notice that two Dynamic Grid feedback elements also appear inside the swimlane,
informing you that the new shape is at the left margin of the lane and is centered
vertically within the lane. For more information about the Dynamic Grid, see
Chapter 2, “Create diagrams.”
Because the overall swimlane structure is a list, it includes a heading. Similarly, each
swimlane has a heading. You can change the text of either, which was done in the image
shown in Figure 13-18, by selecting the swimlane structure or a swimlane and then
entering text.
Further evidence that the swimlane structure is a list is shown in Figure 13-19. With the
pointer at the left end of the lanes and positioned on the boundary between two lanes, the
Insert Shape triangle appears.

Figure 13-19 Adding new lanes to a diagram is easy because of the list structure
 Tip
If you compare the Insert Shape triangle in Figure 13-19 with the one shown in
Figure 13-12, you’ll notice that the one in Figure 13-19 includes the name of a
specific shape. The name appears because the swimlane list was preconfigured to
insert a specific shape.
Clicking the Insert Shape triangle produces the result shown in Figure 13-20. Notice that
Visio extends dynamic connectors, as required, to accommodate the new lane.
Figure 13-20 Visio rearranges existing lanes when you add or remove lanes
Because swimlanes reside in a list, you can rearrange the sequence of swimlanes by
dragging the heading of a lane up or down.
Swimlane diagrams derive another benefit from being built by using containers: shapes in
a container know where they are contained. To find evidence of this, examine the Function
field in the shape data for any flowchart shape in a swimlane.
As an example, data for the process shape in the upper left of Figure 13-20 is shown in the

image on the left in Figure 13-21, and the data for the decision diamond is shown on the
right. In both cases, the value in the Function field is derived dynamically from the
swimlane heading. If you change the value of the swimlane title, the Function field will be
updated for all contained shapes. If you move a shape to a new lane, the Function field
will reflect the heading of the new lane.
Figure 13-21 The Function field automatically displays the name of the swimlane that
contains each flowchart shape
Build wireframes
 Important
The information in this topic applies only to the Professional edition of Visio 2016.
Visio 2016 includes a revamped set of user interface (UI) design shapes that were initially
introduced in Visio 2010. For this topic, the key point of interest about the redesigned
shapes is that many of them are either containers or lists.
Software designers use wireframe shapes to create mockups of dialog boxes and other
visual elements that will be displayed by their applications. When you use Visio 2016 to
create a mockup of a dialog box, you will find that the Dialog Form shape is a container.
Consequently, as you add buttons and controls to your dialog box, those buttons and
controls become container members. If you move, copy, or delete your dialog box, all of
the contained shapes are automatically included. If you have ever created a UI mockup by
using Visio 2007 or earlier, it won’t take more than a moment or two of experimentation to
realize how significant an improvement this is.
Some Visio 2016 UI shapes are lists, including, not surprisingly, the List Box control.
When you drag one into a Dialog Form container, the list is prepopulated with three list
members. You can add, delete, and resequence list members by dragging them, as
described in “Add shapes to lists” earlier in this chapter.
 Tip
As a shape designer, you can configure a list to automatically add one or more
member shapes when the list is added to a page. Creating a shape with that feature
is outside the scope of this book, but you can find information on this subject at
msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ff959245.aspx.

The following three figures highlight some of the containers and lists in the wireframe
template.
Adding a button control to a Dialog Form container lights up the border of the dialog box
shape, as shown in Figure 13-22.
Figure 13-22 The Dialog Form shape is a container
On the left in Figure 13-23, a panel is added to the dialog box container. Because the panel
shape is, itself, a container, adding a tab to the top edge of the panel causes the top panel
border to illuminate.
Figure 13-23 Multiple containers comprise the wireframe shapes
 See Also
For information about border shapes, see the “On the border” sidebar earlier in this
chapter.
 Tip
Because the panel shape is a container but doesn’t have a visible heading, you can
select it only by clicking its edges.
The list box control exhibits standard list behavior when adding new list elements, as
shown in Figure 13-24.

Figure 13-24 A list inside a container inside a container
The wireframe shapes provide further evidence that nested containers and lists are
practical solutions for creating Visio diagrams.
Insert data graphic legends
 Important
The information in this topic applies only to the Professional edition of Visio 2016.
In Chapter 9, “Visualize your data,” you worked with data graphics and then added an
automatically generated legend to your diagram. A data graphic legend is actually a
structure consisting of an outer list, one or more containers as list members, and lists
within those containers.
For example, the same legend is shown in both images in Figure 13-25. The structure is
loosely visible on the left. However, after selecting the entire legend, the telltale green
borders are apparent on the right. You can identify three containers—Legend, Owner, and
Risk—and two vertical lists, one in each of the Owner and Risk containers.
Figure 13-25 Data graphic legends are created from lists and containers
When you work with data graphic legends, you will discover that you can add, delete,
rename, edit, and move legend components, just as you can with the headings and
members of any unlocked containers and lists.

Annotate shapes by using callouts
Many generations of Visio have included more than three dozen callouts that you can use
to add comments to any shape on the drawing page. Those callouts still exist in Visio
2016. Figure 13-26 shows some examples.
Figure 13-26 Six classic callout examples
 Tip
To locate the classic callouts, in the Shapes window, click More Shapes, click Visio
Extras, and then click Callouts.
However, using classic callouts is often a challenge because fundamentally they are just
ordinary shapes. For example, all of the following are common annoyances of the classic
callouts:
 Deleting the shape to which a callout is attached does not delete the callout, which
can leave orphan callouts throughout your diagram.
 Moving the shape to which a callout is attached does not move the callout.
 Moving a callout disconnects the callout from the shape to which it’s attached unless
you know exactly which control handle to drag.
Visio 2016 structured callouts behave more logically, primarily because, like containers
and their members, there is an active association between a callout and the shape to which
it’s attached.
Just as there is a Container gallery, there is also a Callout gallery, as shown in Figure 13-
27.

Figure 13-27 The Callout gallery features 14 callout styles
Figure 13-28 illustrates the following ways that structured callouts appear and behave
more logically than groups:
 In the image on the left, selecting a callout highlights the shape to which it’s
attached by using a familiar green border. Note that the opposite is not true: selecting
the attached shape does not highlight the callout.
Figure 13-28 Structured callouts are associated with the attached shape and remain
attached even when you move them
 Tip
The callout in this image is connected to the shape by a visible tail, which might
make the green highlight seem redundant. Not all callout styles have visible tails,
however. Consequently, this feature is particularly valuable for those styles.
 In the center image, moving a callout by dragging it appears to disconnect it.
However, when you release the connector it is still attached, as shown on the right.
Unlike containers and lists, callouts do not have a tool tab that you can use to switch
styles. However, you can take advantage of the Change Shapes feature in Visio to replace

any callout style with a different one. Figure 13-29 uses Live Preview and the mini toolbar
to show how the callout from Figure 13-28 can be changed to the Word Balloon style.
Figure 13-29 Alternate callout styles are available via the Change Shapes feature
The following list summarizes the behavior of new style callouts:
 If you delete a callout, it doesn’t affect the shape to which it was attached. However,
if you delete the shape, the callout is also deleted.
 If you copy a shape that has a callout attached, both the shape and the callout are
copied.
 You can attach more than one callout to a shape.
 If you do not have any shapes selected when you insert a callout, Visio inserts the
callout in the center of the drawing window.
 If you select more than one shape before inserting a callout, Visio attaches a callout
to each selected shape.
 Callouts respond to themes and variants, so their appearance on the page remains
consistent with the rest of your diagram.
 See Also
For information about configuring callouts to read and display shape data from the
shape to which they are attached, go to blog.bvisual.net/2014/04/08/adding-
configure-callout-functionality-to-visio-callouts/. For more information about
callouts, visit the Visio development team blog at
blogs.office.com/b/visio/archive/2012/11/05/containers-and-callouts-in-visio.aspx.
To attach a callout to a selected shape
1. On the Insert tab, in the Diagram Parts group, click the Callout button, and then
click the callout style you want.
To change a callout to a different style
1. Do one of the following:
• On the Home tab, in the Editing group, click the Change Shape button, and then

click the callout style you want.
• Right-click the callout, and on the mini toolbar, click the Change Shape button,
and then click the callout style you want.
To relocate a callout
1. Click anywhere on the callout or its tail, and then do one of the following:
• Drag the callout to a new location.
• Move the callout by using the arrow keys.
Or
1. Relocate the shape to which the callout is attached.
To detach a callout
1. Select the callout, and then drag the yellow control from the center of the attached
shape to anywhere outside the attached shape.
To delete a callout
1. Do one of the following:
• Click the callout, and then delete it.
• Click the shape to which the callout is attached, and then delete the attached
shape.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Understand containers, lists, and callouts
 Compare groups and containers
 Organize shapes by using containers
 Organize shapes by using lists
 Find containers and lists in Visio
 Annotate shapes by using callouts
 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch13 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Understand containers, lists, and callouts
There are no practice tasks for this topic.

Compare groups and containers
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Organize shapes by using containers
Open the OrganizeByContainers diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Place an empty container on the page, and then label the container Datacenter.
2. Place the Branch Office 1 shapes into a container, and then label the container
Chicago.
3. Add several new shapes from the Servers stencil to the empty container.
4. Add several new shapes from the Servers stencil to the Chicago container.
5. Enlarge the Chicago container, select all shapes in the Datacenter container, and
then move them to the Chicago container.
6. Drag two network shapes from the Chicago container to the Datacenter container,
and then lock the Chicago container.
7. Disband the Datacenter container.
8. Place all of the Branch Office 2 shapes into a new container.
9. Change the style of the Branch Office 2 container, and then move the heading to a
new location.
Organize shapes by using lists
Open the OrganizeByLists diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Drag various software shapes into the My New PC list, being sure to add shapes at
the top and bottom of the list and between existing list members.
2. Move a shape from the middle of the list to the top.
3. Make a copy of the My New PC list, and then lock the copied list.
4. Drag shapes from the Rack Mounted Servers stencil to the Store Shelf list. Notice
that the list grows from left to right and not from top to bottom.
5. Move the Store Shelf list to another part of the page.
Find containers and lists in Visio
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Annotate shapes by using callouts
Open the AnnotateShapes diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Attach a callout to the park shape, and then assign a name to the park.
2. Attach a different style of callout to the airport shape.

3. Move the airport shape and observe the change in its callout.
4. Change the location of the callout attached to the park.
5. Detach the callout from the airport and attach it to the city instead.
6. Delete the city.
7. Delete the callout that is attached to the park.

14. Validate diagrams
In this chapter
 Understand Visio rules
 Validate flowcharts and swimlane diagrams
 Validate BPMN diagrams
 Reuse existing validation rule sets
 List the rules in a rule set
 Create new validation rules
Practice files
For this chapter, use the practice files from the Visio2016SBS\Ch14 folder. For
practice file download instructions, see the introduction.
Is your diagram correct? Are all of the shapes linked as they should be? Did you complete
all of the requirements for a diagram of this type?
The Check Diagram feature in Visio Professional 2016 can help you answer these and
many other questions. You will find predefined validation rules built into selected Visio
templates, which is a good place to begin exploring this powerful tool. You can also create
custom rules to check the validity of your own diagrams.
 Important
The information in this chapter applies only to the Professional edition of Visio
2016.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to validating flowchart, swimlane, and
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) diagrams, and reusing existing validation
rule sets. It also provides references to learn how to list the rules in a rule set and create
new validation rules.
Understand Visio rules
It’s possible to create a validation rule to check virtually any aspect of a Visio diagram,
from a single condition to a sophisticated set of interrelated conditions. Multiple rules are
then grouped into a rule set for use by Visio.
For example, a rule developer might create a rule to answer any of the following
questions:
 Are there any shapes on the page with one connection but not two?
 Are there any unconnected shapes on the page?
 Are there any shapes derived from the “widget” master that are located on the

bottom half of the page?
 Are there more than three blue shapes on any one page or more than five red shapes
in the entire diagram?
 Are there any containers with fewer than three or more than seven shapes?
 Are there any shapes of type X, containing a field named Y with a value of Z?
Although a few of these examples might be a bit fanciful, they are intended to demonstrate
the flexibility of the validation capability in Visio.
Six Visio 2016 templates include predefined business rule sets:
 Basic Flowchart
 Cross-Functional Flowchart
 Six Sigma Diagram
 BPMN Diagram (Professional only)
 Microsoft SharePoint 2010 Workflow (Professional only)
 Microsoft SharePoint 2016 Workflow (Professional only)
It’s also possible to create your own custom rule sets for validating any kind of Visio
diagram. Although the specific techniques for editing or creating custom rule sets are
beyond the scope of this book, links to appropriate resources are in the “Reuse existing
validation rule sets” and “Create new validation rules” topics later in this chapter.
Validate flowcharts and swimlane diagrams
Despite their visual differences, flowcharts and swimlane diagrams use the same flowchart
shapes and share a common validation rule set, as you’ll discover in the following
sections.
The same rule set is used to validate Six Sigma Diagrams, although this chapter does not
include a Six Sigma example.
Validate flowcharts
A good way to get started with the Check Diagram feature is to validate a familiar
diagram. In this section, you will experiment with rules by applying them to a flowchart
you worked with in Chapter 4, “Create business process diagrams.” There is one important
difference in the version used in this section: it contains deliberate errors.
If validation issues exist when you check a diagram, they appear in the Issues window, as
shown in Figure 14-1. Clicking a rule name in the Issues window typically highlights the
corresponding shape in the drawing window. In Figure 14-1, the pointer is resting on
Decision Shape Should Have More Than One Outgoing Connector. As a result, the
Candidate Accepts? shape is selected.

Figure 14-1 Selecting almost any rule in the Issues window selects the offending shape
 Tip
Clicking a rule does not always result in a selected shape; some rules, by their
nature, don’t apply to a specific shape. One example: when a rule reports that a
shape is missing, there is nothing to select.
 Tip
You can click any column header to sort issues into a different sequence. You can
also right-click anywhere inside the Issues window and then click Arrange By to
select a different sequence.
The fact that Visio selects a shape when you click a rule in the Issues window is even
more valuable when the violation applies to a very small shape or to an obscure violation.
For example, you can’t tell by looking at the top row of the flowchart in Figure 14-1, but
one of the dynamic connectors is unglued at one end. However, the offending connector

becomes obvious when you click Connector Is Not Glued At Both Ends., as shown in
Figure 14-2.
Figure 14-2 Some issues would be very difficult to locate without the Check Diagram
feature
 Tip
If the gap is so small that you can’t see an unglued connection, why does it matter?
For many diagrams it won’t, but it might in certain circumstances. For example, a
workflow based on a flowchart could be halted by an unconnected link, or a custom
report that creates a bill of materials from an engineering drawing might be
incomplete if a connection is missing.
The unconnected shape in Figure 14-2 is a good example of a violation that generates
more than one issue. The selected issue and shape in Figure 14-3 are actually the result of
the same underlying error. Gluing the connector to the Advertise Open Job shape will
remove both errors from the Issues window the next time you validate the diagram.
Figure 14-3 Some types of errors generate more than one issue

 Tip
You can click the Check Diagram button in the Diagram Validation group on the
Process tab at any time to refresh the Issues window.
Not all issues need to be corrected, so you can tell Visio to ignore any violation. The issue
highlighted in Figure 14-4 is a good example. Although the message is correct—the
document shape does not have any outgoing connectors—that’s acceptable for this shape
because a document isn’t a process step. It’s simply a representation of a process artifact
and does not need an outgoing connector.
Figure 14-4 Some issues can be ignored
 Tip
If your diagram has more than one page and there are issues on multiple pages, the
Issues window will include a Page column.
When you ignore an issue, Visio removes it from the Issues window but doesn’t lose track
of it. For example, ignoring the issue for the document shape in Figure 14-4 causes Visio
to update the count of ignored issues in the status line at the bottom of the Issues window,
as shown in Figure 14-5.

Figure 14-5 Visio tracks ignored issues and displays a count on the status bar below
the Issues window
 Tip
Right-clicking in the Issues window provides options besides Ignore This Issue and
Ignore Rule. You can also reverse your choice to ignore issues and rules, make
ignored issues visible in the Issues window, and change the sort sequence of
displayed issues.
 Important
Although you can safely ignore the issue described in Figure 14-4, other violations
of the same rule should not be ignored, which is why Visio provides two options for
ignoring an issue: Ignore This Issue and Ignore Rule. The distinction between the
two is critical—the former ignores a single issue, whereas the latter ignores all
issues created by a rule. You should use Ignore Rule very carefully, or you might
inadvertently hide important issues.
To validate a flowchart
1. On the Process tab, in the Diagram Validation group, click the Check Diagram
button.
To highlight a shape that violates a rule
1. Click the rule name in the Issues window.
To ignore an issue
1. Do either of the following:
• Right-click the name of the rule, and then click Ignore This Issue.
• On the Process tab, in the Diagram Validation group, click the Ignore This
Issue button.
To ignore all issues that result from a rule

1. Do either of the following:
• Right-click the name of the rule, and then click Ignore Rule.
• In the Diagram Validation group, click the Ignore This Issue arrow (not its
button), and then click Ignore Rule.
To show or hide ignored issues
1. Do either of the following:
• Right-click in the Issues window, and then click Show Ignored Issues.
• In the Diagram Validation group, click the Ignore This Issue arrow, and then
click Show Ignored Issues.
To stop ignoring an issue or a rule
1. With ignored issues visible, right-click the name of an ignored issue, and then do
either of the following:
• Click Stop Ignoring This Issue.
• Click Stop Ignoring Rule.
Or
1. With ignored issues visible, click the name of an ignored issue.
2. In the Diagram Validation group, click the Ignore This Issue arrow, and then do
one of the following:
• Click Stop Ignoring This Issue
• Click Stop Ignoring Rule
To close the Issues window
1. Do either of the following:
• Click the Close button (X) in the corner of the Issues window.
• In the Diagram Validation group, clear the Issues Window check box.
Validate swimlane diagrams
Swimlane diagrams are validated by using the same rule set that you worked with in the
preceding section. However, the flowchart rule set includes a few rules that apply only to
swimlanes. Figure 14-6 shows an example of this type of rule.

Figure 14-6 The flowchart rule set includes special rules for swimlane diagrams
After you resolve all active issues and no ignored issues remain, Visio displays the
message shown in Figure 14-7.
Figure 14-7 A message confirming that no active nor ignored issues remain
If there are no active issues but the diagram still contains ignored issues, the Issues
window displays the message shown in Figure 14-8.
Figure 14-8 A message noting that the diagram contains ignored issues but no active
issues
To validate a swimlane diagram
1. On the Process tab, in the Diagram Validation group, click the Check Diagram
button.

Validate BPMN diagrams
You worked with BPMN diagrams in Chapter 4, “Create business process diagrams.” The
BPMN validation rule set includes a few rules that are similar to those used with
flowcharts and swimlane diagrams, but the complex nature of BPMN means that its rule
set also contains many unique rules. By way of comparison, the flowchart rule set includes
11 rules, but BPMN includes 76 rules.
Figure 14-9 shows an example in which the wrong connector type between the Start and
Check Seat Inventory shapes causes three issues.
Figure 14-9 BPMN diagrams include many rules that are more sophisticated
 Tip
Because of the potential complexity of BPMN diagrams, the text of many BPMN
rule descriptions is longer than the width of the Issues window. However, if you
position the pointer over any item in the Issues window, Visio displays the full text
in a ScreenTip, as shown in Figure 14-9.
To validate a BPMN diagram
1. On the Process tab, in the Diagram Validation group, click the Check Diagram
button.
Reuse existing validation rule sets
You can import a rule set into any diagram. For example, if you have a flowchart that was
created prior to Visio 2010, which was when validation rules were introduced, you can
add rules to the diagram.

Figure 14-10 shows the dialog box that appears if you attempt to validate a diagram that
does not contain any rules. Note that the dialog box provides specific instructions for
adding rules.
Figure 14-10 Older diagrams might not contain rule sets
Clicking Rules To Check, shown in Figure 14-11, confirms that the diagram contains no
rules.
Figure 14-11 There are no validation rules in the current document
To import a rule set
1. On the Process tab, in the Diagram Validation group, click the Check Diagram
arrow, and then click Import Rules From.
2. Click the name of the rule set you want to import.
 Tip
The flowchart rule set is available to import into any diagram. In addition, if you
have other diagrams open that contain rule sets, you will find them listed and can
import their rules.
List the rules in a rule set
The Visio 2016 user interface does not provide a way to list the rules in a rule set.
However, an experienced Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) programmer can
write a short program to list all of the rules in a set. Even better, Visio MVP David Parker
has already done the work for you by including code samples for this and other diagram
validation purposes in an article he wrote for MSDN. Although he wrote the article about
the 2010 release of Visio, it applies equally to Visio 2016.

 See Also
For detailed information about rules, see David Parker’s article, “Introduction to
Validation Rules in Visio Premium 2010” at msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/ff847470.aspx.
Although not used in the practice tasks, you will find listings of all of the rules in each of
the five Visio 2016 rule sets in the Visio2016SBS\Ch14 practice files folder. Look for the
five .html files whose names start with the word RuleSets. The listings were produced by
using David Parker’s Rules Tools, which are described in the next topic.
Create new validation rules
Having seen the value that rules add to business process diagrams, you might be
imagining ways that you would like to validate other diagram types. Perhaps you want to
do one of the following:
 Verify connectivity in a network diagram.
 Ensure that the number of links on each network device doesn’t exceed the
maximum allowable for that brand and model of equipment.
 Confirm that each piece of furniture in an office floor plan was selected from an
approved list and meets budget guidelines.
 Verify that all parts of an electrical schematic meet minimum and maximum power
thresholds.
 Ensure that a building plan conforms to local building codes.
The good news is that you can both edit existing rules and create new rules. The bad news
is that Visio does not provide an easy means to accomplish either task.
One resource for learning about custom rule development is a brief article written by the
Visio development team. Although it was written for Visio 2010, the article still applies to
Visio 2016 and can be found at blogs.msdn.com/b/visio/archive/2009/09/10/creating-
custom-validation-rules-for-visio-2010.aspx.
The most complete resource for learning more about editing and designing validation rules
is a book written by David Parker. His book, Microsoft Visio 2013 Business Process
Diagramming and Validation (Packt Publishing, 2013), provides extensive, technical
coverage of validation, in addition to details about many parts of Visio that touch, or are
touched by, diagram validation. The validation features of Visio 2016 are largely
unchanged from Visio 2013, so David’s book is still relevant.
David also filled a significant gap left by Microsoft: he wrote a Visio add-in called Rules
Tools that provides a user interface for exploring and working with validation rules. If you
install David’s Rules Tools and run Visio in developer mode, you’ll find an additional
group of buttons on the right end of the Process tab, as shown in Figure 14-12.

Figure 14-12 The Rules Tools group on the Process tab provides rule management
functions
 See Also
For information about running Visio in developer mode, see Appendix A, “Look
behind the curtain.”
 See Also
For information about David Parker’s book and about Rules Tools, go to
www.visiorules.com.
After you create a custom rule set, you can import it into any diagram. It’s also useful to
know that one diagram can contain multiple rule sets, as shown in Figure 14-13.
Figure 14-13 The current diagram contains two rule sets
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Understand Visio rules
 Validate flowcharts and swimlane diagrams
 Validate BPMN diagrams
 Reuse existing validation rule sets
 List the rules in a rule set
 Create new validation rules

 Practice tasks
The practice files for these tasks are located in the Visio2016SBS\Ch14 folder. You can
save the results of the tasks in the same folder.
Understand Visio rules
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Validate flowcharts and swimlane diagrams
Open the ValidateFlowcharts and ValidateSwimlanes diagrams in Visio, and then perform
the following tasks:
1. Validate the flowchart diagram.
2. Resolve or ignore the Flowchart shape has no text label issue.
3. Ignore the Flowchart shape has no outgoing connectors and is not a Start/End
shape issue for the two document shapes. Do not ignore the rule.
4. Resolve the Flowchart shape has no outgoing connectors and is not a Start/End
shape issue for the Hire candidate shape.
5. Resolve the Connector is not glued at both ends issue.
6. Rerun the validation, and then resolve any remaining issues.
7. Rerun the validation.
8. Show the issues that you previously ignored.
9. Validate the swimlane diagram.
10. Resolve all open issues, and then rerun the validation.
Validate BPMN diagrams
Open the ValidateBPMN diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Validate the diagram.
2. Resolve any open issues.
Reuse existing validation rule sets
Open the ReuseRules diagram in Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Import the Flowchart Rule Set.
2. Validate the flowchart.
3. Resolve any open issues.

List the rules in a rule set
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Create new validation rules
There are no practice tasks for this topic.

15. Collaborate and publish diagrams
In this chapter
 Understand Visio Services in SharePoint
 Store diagrams in SharePoint
 View diagrams by using a web browser
 Refresh diagrams saved in SharePoint
 Collaborate on diagrams
 Comment on diagrams
 Coauthor diagrams
Practice files
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
Chapter 12, “Print, reuse, and share diagrams,” described techniques for sharing Visio
diagrams in a variety of formats, including as collections of webpages. All of the
techniques described in that chapter are valuable, but sometimes you need more, such as
dynamic updates to web-published diagrams, threaded comments among team members,
or even live, simultaneous coauthoring of a diagram in progress.
The combination of Visio and the Visio Services component of Microsoft SharePoint 2016
provides all of these capabilities. Even better, two of those three features can be used by
people who do not have Visio, further extending the power and reach of the diagrams you
create.
 Important
The information in this chapter applies only to the Professional edition of Visio
2016.
This chapter guides you through procedures related to storing, viewing, and refreshing
Visio diagrams in SharePoint, and collaborating by commenting on and coauthoring Visio
diagrams.
Understand Visio Services in SharePoint
Visio Services is a Microsoft SharePoint Server 2016 feature you can use to share
diagrams with people who don’t have Visio. There are four key advantages to sharing
diagrams via Visio Services instead of publishing static webpages as described in Chapter
12, “Print, reuse, and share diagrams”:
 The Visio Web Access browser view is dynamic and reflects nearly all diagram
changes. The web view can be updated either automatically by a program or timer,
or manually by the user.

Data-connected Visio diagrams that use data graphics provide particularly
impressive results when published to SharePoint, because whenever the source data
changes, the data graphics on the webpage change.
 Visio Services supports interactive commenting on diagrams by multiple people,
regardless of whether they are using the Visio client or a web browser.
 You can incorporate Visio diagrams into SharePoint apps in the following ways:
• You can embed a Visio web drawing in a SharePoint Web Part.
• You can create dynamic connections between Web Parts that contain Visio web
drawings, and between the drawings and other types of Web Parts.
• You can use the Visio Services Mash-up API to program dynamic changes in the
browser as the user navigates around a drawing or takes other actions on a
SharePoint page.
 Tip
Creating SharePoint Web Parts and apps is outside the scope of this book.
 The Visio client and Visio Services use the same .vsdx file format. Consequently,
either you can save directly to SharePoint from the Visio client or you can copy a
Visio diagram file to SharePoint after creating or editing it locally.
 See Also
For information about the Visio .vsdx file format, see Appendix A, “Look behind
the curtain.”
In addition to the preceding advantages, the user experience in the web browser is
enhanced in the following ways in Visio web drawings when compared to Visio websites:
 Pan and zoom are provided by click-and-drag techniques and by rolling the mouse
wheel, respectively. (Other techniques are also available.)
 Shape data is easier to view via a floating properties window.
 The properties window that displays shape data also lists the hyperlinks, if any, that
are attached to the selected shape.
 Microsoft Silverlight is not required.
 Tip
One key feature is missing from Visio web drawings: full-text search. It is an
important part of Visio-created webpages but is not available in diagrams saved to
Visio Services.

As you plan the best way to use data-linked diagrams in conjunction with Visio Services,
keep in mind one important limitation, which is that connections in a diagram published to
SharePoint are refreshable only if you link your diagram to one of the following data
sources:
 Microsoft Excel workbooks that are stored on the SharePoint site
 SharePoint lists
 Microsoft SQL Server tables and views
 Databases accessed via OLE DB or ODBC drivers
 Tip
Linking to SQL Server and OLE DB/ODBC databases is not supported for
SharePoint Online in Microsoft Office 365.
Visio has always been good for building data-driven, visual representations of processes,
networks, organizations, or other entities. When you add the capability to create
dynamically updateable webpages via SharePoint, Visio becomes a key contender for
building business intelligence solutions in almost any work domain.
 Tip
For detailed reasons to use Visio as part of a business intelligence solution,
including numerous examples, refer to Chapter 9, “Visio and Visio Services,” in
Business Intelligence in Microsoft SharePoint 2013 by Norm Warren, Mariano
Neto, Stacia Misner, Ivan Sanders, and Scott Helmers (Microsoft Press, 2013).
Store diagrams in SharePoint
 Tip
The diagram used in this topic was created by using the Business Process Model
and Notation (BPMN) 2.0 template that is packaged with Visio Professional 2016.
For more information about BPMN, refer to Chapter 4, “Create business process
diagrams.”
As noted in the preceding topic, Visio 2016 files can be saved directly to a SharePoint
server. Visio 2016 makes this easy to do by including SharePoint servers on the Save As
page of the Backstage view, as shown in Figure 15-1. You can save directly to a recently
used folder or browse to locate a different folder on any previously configured SharePoint
server.

Figure 15-1 You can save directly to folders on SharePoint servers
You can also save to a SharePoint site that isn’t listed by using either of two techniques:
 You can make an ad hoc selection by clicking the Browse button and then locating
the server you want.
 You can add a server to the Save As menu by clicking the Add A Place button.
 Tip
Often the easiest way to select the folder you want on the correct SharePoint site is
to navigate to it first in your web browser. After locating the correct folder, copy
and paste its URL into the address bar at the top of the Save As dialog box.
 Tip
Visio Services operates the same way on both in-house SharePoint servers and
Office 365 SharePoint servers.
Regardless of which technique you use to select a server, the Save As dialog box, shown
in Figure 15-2, opens so you can complete the action.

Figure 15-2 The Save As dialog box can display contents of either local folders or
folders on SharePoint
The Save As dialog box includes an Options button in the lower section that you can use
to refine how your document is saved. Clicking the Options button displays the Publish
Settings dialog box shown in Figure 15-3.
Figure 15-3 You can control which pages or data refresh options are available in the
web browser view of a Visio document
In the Pages area on the left, you can select a subset of the diagram’s pages if there are
some you don’t want to include in your web-published drawing.
If your diagram is linked to one or more data sources, you can use the Data Sources area
on the right to allow or disallow refreshing from specific sources.

 See Also
For information about linking diagrams to data, see Chapter 10, “Link to external
data.”
 Important
Note the comment at the top of the Publish Settings dialog box: clearing the check
box for pages or data sources in this dialog box eliminates them from the browser
view of the drawing. However, the unselected pages and sources are still available
to anyone who opens the diagram in Visio.
To save a diagram to SharePoint
1. In the Backstage view, click Save or Save As.
2. Click the name of an existing SharePoint site in the left side of the Save As page,
and then do either of the following:
• Click a folder on the right side.
• Click the Browse button.
Or
Click Browse.
3. In the Save As dialog box, navigate to the SharePoint site and folder where you
want to save the file, and then enter a file name.
4. (Optional) Click Options, and then in the Publish Settings dialog box, select a
subset of pages and data sources to make available in the web-rendered view of the
diagram, and click OK.
5. Click Save.
View diagrams by using a web browser
With your document saved in Visio Services on SharePoint, you can click the file name in
any web browser to open the Visio Web Access view shown in Figure 15-4. Notice that
this view can include the Shape Info pane.

Figure 15-4 The high-fidelity rendering of a Visio diagram that is available via a web
browser can include additional shape details
If your diagram is linked to a data source, the message shown in Figure 15-5 might appear
in your browser. You can click the Allow Refresh button to proceed.
Figure 15-5 Visio Web Access notifies you if a diagram is linked to a data source
The Visio Web Access pane provides buttons and controls in both upper corners and in the
lower-right corner so you can manipulate the viewed image and open other viewing panes
or the Visio application.
To view a diagram stored in SharePoint
1. Open the SharePoint site in a web browser.
2. Navigate to the folder that contains the diagram you want to view, and then click the
file name.

To zoom in and out
1. Do any of the following by using the controls in the lower-right corner of the
browser window:
• Click the Zoom Out (-) or Zoom In (+) button to decrease or increase the zoom
level.
• Use the zoom slider.
• Click the displayed percentage and enter a new percentage.
• Click the Zoom To Fit Page To View button to view the entire Visio page in the
browser window.
Or
Roll the mouse wheel.
To pan the diagram
1. Click and drag anywhere within the viewing pane.
To view a different page
1. In the upper-right corner, click the arrow next to the current page name, and then
click the name of the page you want to view.
To view shape data
1. If the Shape Info pane is not visible, in the upper-left corner, click Shape Info.
2. Click the shape whose data you want to view.
To close the Shape Info pane
1. Do either of the following:
• Click Shape Info.
• Click the Close button (X) in the upper-right corner of the Shape Info pane.
To show or hide the comments pane
1. In the upper-left corner, click Comments.
To open the diagram in Visio
1. In the upper-left corner, click Open in Visio.
Refresh diagrams saved in SharePoint
Now that you can save diagrams in SharePoint, the next step is to make changes to the
diagram or its linked data source to discover how that affects the web view.
For example, you can apply data graphics to the diagram shown in Figure 15-4, save the
changes, and refresh the Visio Web Access pane to produce the view shown in Figure 15-
6.

Figure 15-6 The web view displays the results of a color-by-value data graphic
When you save changes to a diagram that is stored in SharePoint, Visio displays two
messages in the status bar at the bottom of the Visio window while the save is in progress.
The message in the upper half of Figure 15-7 appears first, followed by the message in the
lower half.
Figure 15-7 Visio keeps you informed about the save status of your diagram
The Theater Ticketing Process diagram is linked to an Excel workbook that is also stored
in SharePoint and has the data values shown in Figure 15-8. You can compare the data
values in this figure to the shape colors and legend in Figure 15-6.

Figure 15-8 Excel data displayed by Excel Online
 Important
In order for Visio Services to have access to data in an Excel workbook, the
workbook must be stored in SharePoint prior to linking to it from your Visio
drawing.
Changing the values for the Status field to those shown in Figure 15-9, and then refreshing
the browser view of the Visio diagram results in the view shown in Figure 15-10.
Figure 15-9 Updated process status data

Figure 15-10 The color-by-value data graphic in the web view of a Visio diagram
reflects changes in the linked data
 Tip
The refresh interval for data and diagrams stored in SharePoint is managed by
SharePoint administrators. If you use in-house servers, diagram refresh might
happen immediately or after a short interval. If you use SharePoint Online in Office
365, refresh might be immediate, but even if you never click the refresh button, the
diagram will update in a maximum of five minutes.
Diagram refresh is not limited to updating data graphics. For example, the second page of
the ticketing diagram consists of the fulfillment process shown in Figure 15-11.

Figure 15-11 The Print And Fulfill page of the Theater Ticketing Process
You might decide to change the look of the page and update the process to accommodate
eTickets. To do so, you open the diagram in Visio and perform the following actions:
 Add an eTickets? decision shape with two outcome paths.
 Shift existing shapes to the right to accommodate the new shape.
 Apply a new border style.
 Change the text on the existing decision diamond.
 Save the changes.
After you refresh the diagram, the browser view is updated automatically and might look
like Figure 15-12.

Figure 15-12 A shape has been added to the Print And Fulfill page
The example in this topic uses a diagram linked to an Excel workbook, but remember that
your Visio diagram can be linked to a variety of data sources and even to multiple data
sources at once.
Picture a more elaborate scenario in which:
 A web-rendered diagram is linked to several data sources.
 Some data sources are updated by people, but some are updated by IT systems.
 Various data graphics are attached to the shapes and change color, size, shape, or
text labels as the underlying data changes.
You can create powerful dashboards and visual renderings of day-to-day operations in any
organization by using Visio and SharePoint. Best of all, you already know everything that
is required to make it work: you can create a diagram, link it to data, add data graphics,
save it in SharePoint, and automatically or manually refresh it when the data changes.
 See Also
For information about creating and using data graphics, see Chapter 9, “Visualize
your data.” For information about creating and linking to data, see Chapter 10,
“Link to external data.”
As a final note, you can create even more sophisticated views in SharePoint by using Web
Part pages. In this scenario, each Web Part can contain different items. For example, one
or more Web Parts might contain Visio diagrams, while other Web Parts display
supporting data that might reside in Excel, a SharePoint list, or another data source. It’s
also possible to link Web Parts to each other so that an action in one Web Part updates the

view in one or more of the other Web Parts on the page.
Although building Web Part pages is outside the scope of this book, resources are
available online, including these two:
 “Visio Services in SharePoint 2013” at msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/office/jj164027.aspx
 “Connect a Visio Web drawing to another Web part” at support.office.com/en-
us/article/Connect-a-Visio-Web-drawing-to-another-Web-part-D04356A5-0E1E-
46E3-9EF6-814D8CB554BF
 Important
Both of the articles cited apply to Visio 2013 and SharePoint 2013. At the time of
this writing, comparable resources for the 2016 versions are not yet available, but
they might be by the time you are reading this.
To refresh the diagram view
1. Do either of the following:
• In the upper-left corner of the Visio Web Access pane, click Refresh.
• Wait until the update interval for your diagram expires.
Collaborate on diagrams
The collaboration capabilities in Visio 2016 take two principal forms: commenting and
coauthoring. Both capabilities recognize the growing importance of collaboration among
geographically dispersed workers and are implemented by using Visio Services, either via
SharePoint within an enterprise or SharePoint Online through an Office 365 subscription.
Coauthoring capabilities are also supported when a diagram is stored in OneDrive.
The “Comment on diagrams” topic that follows explores a scenario in which two people
read and write comments in a Visio drawing, even though one of them does not use Visio.
The “Coauthor diagrams” topic later in this chapter examines the simultaneous editing
capabilities of Visio.
Both topics use the diagram shown in Figure 15-13, which was created from the
Brainstorming Diagram template that is located in the Business template category.

Figure 15-13 A brainstorming diagram summarizing the commenting and coauthoring
features of Visio 2016
 Tip
The content of the diagram used in the remainder of this chapter is a convenient
summary of the collaboration capabilities of Visio 2016.
Comment on diagrams
Commenting in Visio 2016 is flexible and includes the following features:
 You can read and write comments from either the Visio client or a web browser; the
latter requires storing the Visio diagram on a SharePoint server or in SharePoint
Online in Office 365.
 You can attach comments to shapes and to the drawing page.
 A comment indicator appears in the upper right of a shape or the upper left of a page
that contains a comment.
 When you move or copy and paste a shape containing a comment, the comment
travels with the shape.

 You can view all comments at once by opening the Comments pane.
 See Also
For additional information about comments, see Chapter 3, “Manage text, shapes,
and pages.”
Figure 15-13 is a full-page view of a brainstorming diagram that contains two comment
balloons, one in the upper-left corner that is attached to the page, and one near the center
that is attached to the brainstorming shape labeled Commenting.
In the scenario for this topic, two people are collaborating on the diagram. Scott Helmers
is using Visio 2016 on his computer, and Rebecca Laszlo is using Internet Explorer on her
computer.
When Scott clicks a comment indicator, Visio opens the comment on the drawing page, as
shown in Figure 15-14.
Figure 15-14 Clicking a comment balloon in Visio displays the text of the comment
Figure 15-15 was captured on Rebecca’s computer. When she uses Internet Explorer to
open the Visio diagram, it appears in the Visio Web Access pane. Then, when she clicks
the Comments button in the upper left, she sees Scott’s comments.

Figure 15-15 Comments displayed in the web view of a Visio diagram
 Tip
The default view in the Visio Web Access pane hides comment indicators unless the
Comments pane is open. However, the default presentation for comments in Visio is
the opposite: comment balloons are visible regardless of the state of the Comments
pane.
In Figure 15-15, Rebecca clicked the comment balloon attached to the upper-left corner of
the page. Consequently, both the comment balloon and the frame around the
corresponding comment in the Comments pane are blue.
Rebecca responds to Scott’s comments by entering text in the Reply box beneath each
comment.
 Tip
When you enter a comment via a web browser, an explicit save is not required.
When you click anywhere outside the Reply box, Visio immediately saves the
changes to the diagram.
Meanwhile, back in Visio on Scott’s PC, he notices that the text Updates Available has
appeared in the lower-right section of the status bar, as shown in Figure 15-16.

Figure 15-16 A notification appears on the Visio status bar when diagram updates are
available from the SharePoint server
Scott clicks the words Updates Available, and Visio applies the changes to his view of the
diagram. When Scott opens the Comments pane, both of Rebecca’s replies are visible, as
shown in Figure 15-17.
Figure 15-17 The Comments pane in Visio shows threaded comments
At the conclusion of this commenting scenario, the diagram contains only four comments.
In a diagram that includes a large number of comments, you can navigate through the
comments by using the Previous and Next buttons at the top of the Comments pane
(shown on the left in Figure 15-18). You can also select subsets of comments based on
location, timing, author, and whether the comments in the diagram are expanded or
collapsed, by using the Filter By list (shown on the right in Figure 15-18).

Figure 15-18 Comment pane viewing controls
The Visio commenting feature makes it easy to connect in other ways with another person
who has entered comments. If you point to the commenter’s name or photograph, either in
the Comments pane or in a comment displayed on the drawing page, a mini contact card
displays the contact’s photo and up to four ways to connect. The mini contact card is
similar to the one shown in Figure 15-24 in the topic that follows this one.
The connection options include telephone, video, email, and live chat if both parties are
online at the same time. Clicking the arrow in the lower-right corner of the ScreenTip
opens a contact card for this person.
The specific communication options that appear on the ScreenTip, and which details
appear on the full-sized contact card, depend on the user’s software, connectivity, and
privacy settings. Generally, if both users run Skype for Business and are within the same
organization, all four options should be available.
To show or hide the Comments pane in the Visio client
1. On the Review tab, in the Comments group, click the Comments button.
To show or hide the Comments pane in a web browser
1. In the upper left of the Visio Web Access pane, click Comments.
To add a comment in the Visio client
1. Right-click a shape or a blank place on the page, and then click Add Comment.
Or
1. Click a shape or a blank place on the page.
2. Do either of the following:
• On the Review tab, in the Comments group, click the New Comment button.

• Open the Comments pane, and then click New Comment.
To add a comment in a web browser
1. Open the Comments pane.
2. Click a shape or a blank place on the page, and then in the Comments pane, click
New.
To filter the comments in the Comments pane in the Visio client
1. In the Comments pane, click the Filter by arrow, and then click the filter type that
you want.
To show or hide comment indicators in the Visio client
1. On the Review tab, in the Comments group, click the Comments arrow, and then
click Reveal Tags.
To apply diagram updates in the Visio client
1. On the status bar, click Updates Available.
To apply diagram updates in a web browser
1. In the upper left of the Visio Web Access pane, click Refresh.
To view a comment in the Visio client or web browser
1. Click the comment indicator.
To edit a comment in the Visio client or web browser
1. Click the text of the comment, enter changes, and then click outside the text of the
comment.
To reply to a comment in the Visio client or web browser
1. Click the Reply box beneath the comment to which you want to respond.
To delete a comment or a reply in the Visio client or web browser
1. Click the Close button (X) in the corner of the comment or reply.
Coauthor diagrams
Coauthoring in Visio 2016 means that multiple people can edit the same diagram
simultaneously when the diagram is stored on OneDrive, SharePoint, or SharePoint
Online. Nothing else is required other than opening the drawing—coauthoring is
automatic.
In the Visio 2016 implementation, shapes and pages are not locked during a coauthoring
session. The assumption is that there are so many possible things to change in a Visio
diagram that it’s unlikely two people will be changing exactly the same thing at the same
time. On the rare occasion that does occur, the last change wins.

To prevent possible conflicts and to help everyone working on a diagram understand what
is happening, Visio provides several markers in the upper-right corner of a shape during
coauthoring sessions. The markers indicate when another user is editing some aspect of a
shape (the left image in Figure 15-19), when changes to a shape have been synchronized
among authors (center), and when another author has deleted a shape (right).
Figure 15-19 Coauthoring indicators appear on the upper right of a Visio shape
 Tip
Clicking the change indicators shown on the left and right in Figure 15-19 tells you
which author is making that change.
 Important
Normally, if one coauthor deletes a shape and then saves changes, the shape will
disappear from other authors’ diagrams when they apply updates. There is an
important exception: the shape is retained and marked as shown on the right in
Figure 15-19 if one of the coauthors made what Visio determines to be significant
changes to the shape. If that author then saves the diagram, Visio reinstates the
shape for all authors and adds a different indicator icon.
It is possible for more than one marker icon to appear at the same time. In addition, under
certain circumstances, Visio might add a comment like the one shown in Figure 15-20.
Figure 15-20 Visio warns you of potential overlap conditions
The status line at the bottom of the Visio window also shows important coauthoring
information, such as the following:
 Toward the left end of the status bar, an icon indicates that other users are editing the
diagram and displays how many are doing so. Pointing to or clicking the icon can
provide additional details.
• Each time a new coauthor opens the diagram, he or she is announced in a text

balloon, as shown in Figure 15-21.
Figure 15-21 New coauthors are announced when they open a diagram
• At any time after the announcement box has disappeared, pointing to the icon
prompts you to click for details, as shown in Figure 15-22.
Figure 15-22 ScreenTip text describes how to view a list of coauthors
• Clicking the icon produces a list of coauthors with green presence indicators, as
shown in Figure 15-23.
Figure 15-23 Photos, if available, are displayed with the names of coauthors
Pointing to one of the coauthor’s names produces the short form contact card
shown in Figure 15-24; the card indicates how the person can be contacted via a
series of icons. The number of illuminated icons depends on the connectivity
available for the authors and whether both are using Skype for Business.
Figure 15-24 A mini contact card for Scott Helmers
Clicking the arrow in the lower-right corner yields a full contact card that displays
as much information about the coauthor as that person has chosen to make
available.
 Toward the right end of the status bar, you will sometimes find several transient
messages that were shown earlier in this chapter in Figure 15-7 and Figure 15-16.

 Important
Unlike commenting, coauthoring is not possible via a web browser. All authors
must use the Visio client, via either a desktop software license or a Visio Pro for
Office 365 subscription.
The commenting scenario from the preceding topic continues here; the opening state of
the diagram is shown in Figure 15-13 earlier in this chapter. After exchanging comments,
Scott and Rebecca decide to work together on editing part of the diagram.
Rebecca starts Visio and opens the diagram from the SharePoint site. Her first action is to
add text to the shape that describes the role of SharePoint in coauthoring. She wants to
clarify that coauthoring applies to corporate (on-premises) SharePoint installations and to
SharePoint Online. Consequently, she makes the change shown in Figure 15-25.
Figure 15-25 Rebecca edited text on one shape
In his copy of Visio, Scott receives the text changes along with a notification marker that
is attached to the altered shape, as shown in Figure 15-26.

Figure 15-26 Scott sees evidence of Rebecca’s changes.
Meanwhile, Rebecca decides to delete the OneDrive shape. When she does so, Visio also
removes the arrow leading to it. Both changes are shown in Figure 15-27.
Figure 15-27 Rebecca deleted the OneDrive shape
Not knowing yet that Rebecca is deleting a shape, Scott decides he likes the change she

made to the SharePoint shape, and chooses to make the following edits:
 He takes advantage of a brainstorming template feature to change the shape type by
right-clicking the shape and selecting the Cloud symbol.
 He changes the text on the OneDrive shape to OneDrive for Business.
 He increases the height of both the OneDrive for Business and the SharePoint
(Corporate) cloud shapes.
When Rebecca saves her changes that include removing a shape, Scott is notified by the
shape-deleted symbols that appear on the OneDrive For Business shape and the arrow
pointing to it, as shown in Figure 15-28.
Figure 15-28 Scott notices shape deleted indicators
Scott immediately saves his changes, which preserves the shape Rebecca deleted. In
addition, the next time Rebecca applies updates to her diagram, the OneDrive for Business
shape will reappear.
 Important
If Scott had not previously made changes to the same shape Rebecca deleted, the
shape would have been deleted from his diagram also.
Finally, when both Scott and Rebecca have saved changes, the diagram appears in final
form, as shown in Figure 15-29.

Figure 15-29 The final, jointly edited document
To begin coauthoring
1. Open a diagram located in either OneDrive for Business or SharePoint.
To determine who else is editing the same diagram
1. Click the Authors editing this document indicator on the Visio status bar to reveal
a list of all coauthors.
To find contact information for a coauthor
1. Click the name of the coauthor after opening the list of coauthors.
To apply updates made by a coauthor
1. Click the Updates Required button on the right side of the Visio status bar.
Skills review
In this chapter, you learned how to:
 Understand Visio Services in SharePoint
 Store diagrams in SharePoint
 View diagrams by using a web browser
 Refresh diagrams saved in SharePoint
 Collaborate on diagrams
 Comment on diagrams
 Coauthor diagrams

 Practice tasks
No practice files are necessary to complete the practice tasks in this chapter.
 Important
The tasks for all topics in this chapter require access to Visio Services on a
SharePoint 2016 server. Visio Services are available with a SharePoint Server 2016
Enterprise Client Access License (ECAL) or by using SharePoint Online in Office
365.
Understand Visio Services in SharePoint
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Store diagrams in SharePoint
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Do either of the following:
• Create a diagram by using any of the Visio 2016 templates.
• Open an existing Visio 2016 diagram.
2. Save the diagram to SharePoint.
Or
1. Copy a Visio diagram to a folder on a SharePoint site.
View diagrams by using a web browser
Start a web browser, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Click the name of a Visio diagram located in a SharePoint site.
2. Zoom in and out on the diagram.
3. Pan the viewing area of the diagram.
4. If the diagram has multiple pages, view a different page.
5. Open the Shape Info pane and view data for one or more shapes.
6. Close the Shape Info pane.
7. Open the Comments pane.
8. Open the diagram in Visio.

Refresh diagrams saved in SharePoint
Start a web browser, and then perform the following tasks:
1. View a Visio diagram that is stored on SharePoint and is linked to data.
2. Make changes to data values in the data source.
3. Make changes to the shapes on one or more pages in the diagram.
4. Refresh the browser view.
Collaborate on diagrams
There are no practice tasks for this topic.
Comment on diagrams
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Do either of the following:
• Open an existing Visio 2016 diagram that is stored in SharePoint.
• Either create a diagram by using any of the Visio 2016 templates or open an
existing Visio 2016 diagram, and then save the diagram to SharePoint.
2. Have a colleague view the same diagram in a web browser, and then open the
Comments pane.
3. Enter several comments by using Visio.
4. Enter several comments by using the web browser.
5. Reply to the other person’s comments.
6. Delete a comment.
Coauthor diagrams
Start Visio, and then perform the following tasks:
1. Do either of the following:
• Open an existing Visio 2016 diagram that is stored in SharePoint.
• Either create a diagram by using any of the Visio 2016 templates or open an
existing Visio 2016 diagram, and then save the diagram to SharePoint.
2. Have a colleague open the same diagram in Visio.
3. Determine the name of the colleague who is coauthoring with you.
4. Locate contact information for your colleague.
5. Make changes to the diagram and have your colleague do the same, and then save
changes.
6. Apply updates made by your colleague.

Appendix A. Look behind the curtain
Visio 2016 serves two distinct communities that sometimes overlap. On one hand, there
are people who create diagrams by using just the tools in the standard user interface. The
diagrams they create might be simple or sophisticated, but this group of people completes
their diagrams without needing to look “behind the curtain.” The second group of people
loves to push Visio beyond its off-the-shelf capabilities by exploring and modifying the
ShapeSheet or by writing code to drive the behavior of Visio.
The purpose of this appendix is not to turn members of the first group into coders and
ShapeSheet developers. However, you can accomplish so much more with Visio if you
have just a little bit of extra knowledge. Consequently, the goal for this appendix is to
equip you with a few extra tips, techniques, and tools so you can customize Visio and
create even more interesting, attractive, and functional diagrams.
Customize the Visio user interface
Visio 2016 employs the familiar and easily customizable ribbon and Quick Access Toolbar
user interface.
Customize the ribbon
You can alter the built-in tabs on the ribbon by adding or removing buttons (although not
all buttons can be removed). You can also design your own tabs to hold your most
frequently used buttons.
You begin by opening the Visio Options dialog box, which you can do in either of two
ways:
 Right-click an unused area of the ribbon, and then click Customize The Ribbon.
 Click the File tab to display the Backstage view, click Options, and then click
Customize Ribbon.
The left side of the Visio Options dialog box presents all possible Visio commands and
functions, organized into eight groups in the list named Choose Commands From. One of
the groups is All Commands, and as the name suggests, it provides a full list of all
possible Visio commands, including those that are not configured to appear on the ribbon.
If you point to any command in this section, a ScreenTip indicates its location on the
ribbon. For example, the pointer in Figure A-1 is resting on Automatic Resize, a command
that is on the Format tab in the Container Tools tab group. If you point to a command that
is not on the ribbon, the ScreenTip begins with the words Commands Not In The Ribbon.

Figure A-1 Creating a custom tab on the Visio ribbon
The right side of the Visio Options dialog box controls the sequence and names of tabs,
groups, and buttons. Each tab and group can be expanded or collapsed by clicking the plus
or minus sign in front of the name. In addition, tabs can be included or excluded from the
ribbon by selecting or clearing the appropriate check box.
To create your own tab, click the New Tab button located in the lower-right side of the
dialog box, and then add and arrange buttons from those available on the left. You can
create groups by clicking the New Group button, and then rename tabs or groups by
clicking the Rename button. Finally, you can change the position of your new tab relative
to the other tabs on the ribbon by using the Move Up and Move Down arrows located on
the right side of the Main Tabs area.
 Tip
You can restore the Quick Access Toolbar and the ribbon to a clean starting state by
clicking the Reset button that is located in the lower-right corner of the Visio
Options dialog box.
Figure A-1 shows the settings for a tab named My Tab to which several buttons have been
added in a group named My Favorite Buttons.
Because it is located below the Developer entry on the right in Figure A-1, the new tab is
positioned to the right of the Developer tab, as shown in Figure A-2.

Figure A-2 A tab with user-selected buttons
If you create a combination of tabs and buttons that you like and want to use them on
another computer or share them with colleagues, use the Import and Export buttons in the
lower-right corner of the dialog box in Figure A-1.
 See Also
For more information about customizing ribbon tabs, go to office.microsoft.com/en-
ca/visio-help/customize-the-ribbon-HA010355697.aspx.
Customize the Quick Access Toolbar
The Quick Access Toolbar resides in the upper-left corner of the Visio window and
provides easy access to commonly used functions. Visio provides a default set of buttons,
but you can add buttons. One technique is to right-click any button on the ribbon, such as
the New Comment button shown in Figure A-3, and then click Add To Quick Access
Toolbar. The result of adding the New Comment button is visible in Figure A-4.
Figure A-3 Customizing the Quick Access Toolbar

Figure A-4 Select any options on this menu to add them to the Quick Access Toolbar
The pointer in Figure A-4 is resting on the arrow at the right end of the Quick Access
Toolbar that provides a list of common functions you can add to or remove from the
toolbar with a click. If you want to add buttons that are not on the shortcut menu, click
More Commands to display the Quick Access Toolbar page of the Visio Options dialog
box. You can use the Quick Access Toolbar page to add, remove, or rearrange toolbar
buttons, just as described for the ribbon in the preceding section. (You can also display the
toolbar configuration page by clicking Options in the Backstage view, and then, in the
Visio Options dialog box, clicking Quick Access Toolbar.)
Figure A-5 shows one convenient combination of file and window management functions
that you can add to the Quick Access Toolbar. It includes, from left to right, Open, Open
Recent File, Save, Save As, Publish As PDF Or XPS, Undo, Redo, Switch Windows, and
Touch/Mouse Mode.
Figure A-5 A highly customized Quick Access Toolbar
Although the Quick Access Toolbar usually shows file and window management
functions, don’t restrict your thinking to those categories. Do you use a certain fill color
regularly? Do you frequently open and close the Shape Data window? Do you frequently
use the Check Diagram button? You can add those and almost any other button to the
Quick Access Toolbar.
Create custom shapes and stencils
Several chapters in this book describe techniques for creating and altering Visio shapes.
When you create shapes you would like to reuse, you can drag them into any open stencil.
You can also create a custom stencil: in the Shapes window, click More Shapes, and then
click either New Stencil (US Units) or New Stencil (Metric). A new stencil header appears
in the Shapes window and displays a red asterisk on the right end to indicate that the

stencil is open, as shown in Figure A-6.
Figure A-6 A user-created stencil is open in the Shapes window
Like all Visio 2016 stencils, the new stencil is divided into two parts by a horizontal gray
line. In Figure A-6, the line is visible below the words Drop Quick Shapes here. If you
position a master so it is one of the first four above the gray line, it will appear on the
Quick Shapes menu. If you position it below the line, it will be in the stencil but will not
be one of the Quick Shapes.
When you drag a shape into an open stencil, Visio assigns a preview image and a name in
the form of Master.n, where n is an integer. In addition, the red asterisk changes to a
diskette icon, indicating that the stencil contains at least one unsaved change.
At this point, you can drag your new master onto the drawing page to create a shape. If
you want to make the master more useful in the future, you can give it a more meaningful
name by using one of the following techniques:
 Right-click the new master, and then click Rename Master.
 Double-click the current master name (do not double-click the icon).
 Select the master, and then press F2.
Regardless of which technique you use, enter a name, and then press Enter.
 Important
If you want to create new masters from several shapes, you must drag the shapes
into the stencil one at a time. If you drag multiple shapes into the stencil at the same
time, Visio will group the shapes and create a single master.
To save your stencil, right-click the stencil header, and then click Save. By default, the
Save As dialog box opens to a special folder named My Stencils that is located in your
Windows Documents folder. When you enter a name and click Save, your new stencil
name appears on the stencil header.
The new stencil is available for use in any Visio diagram. To open it, point to More

Shapes, and then point to My Shapes. A menu containing a list of any stencils you’ve
saved in the My Shapes folder appears. As shown in Figure A-7, three stencils and a
folder named Custom Network Shapes contain additional stencils. As is true for the
stencils that come with Visio, you can click a stencil name to open it in the Shapes
window.
Figure A-7 Custom stencils are easily accessed when stored in the My Shapes folder
 See Also
To learn more about the interactions among stencils, masters, and shapes, refer to
“Visio Stencils, Masters and Shapes: How are they related?” written by Scott A.
Helmers and published by Experts Exchange at rdsrc.us/VXpJrB.
Run in developer mode
When you decide to step beyond the ranks of ordinary Visio users, one of the first things
you should do is run Visio in developer mode. Don’t let the name frighten you—there are
no programming or hardcore technical requirements for running Visio in this mode.
The primary advantage of developer mode is easy access to several useful features. In
developer mode, you can perform the following functions:
 Create and run macros to automate Visio functions.
 Manage add-in programs.
 Add custom controls to Visio shapes.
 Design new shapes and alter the look and behavior of existing shapes.
 Create new stencils.
 View “behind the scenes” parts of Visio documents, most notably, the ShapeSheet.

 See Also
For more information about the ShapeSheet, see “View and modify the
ShapeSheet” later in this appendix.
 Open and close the Drawing Explorer pane. You can use the Drawing Explorer to
navigate to and examine many diagram components, including pages, shapes,
masters, themes, and data graphics.
The Developer tab is always available in Visio but is inactive by default. To activate
developer mode, click Options in the Backstage view. Then on the left side of the Visio
Options dialog box, click Customize Ribbon. On the right side of the dialog box, select the
Developer check box, as shown in Figure A-8.
Figure A-8 Activating the Developer tab in the Visio Options dialog box
After you activate developer mode, the most obvious difference is the appearance of the
Developer tab on the ribbon, as shown in Figure A-9.
Figure A-9 The Developer tab on the ribbon
Developer mode also adds the Show ShapeSheet entry to the shortcut menu for every

Visio object, as shown in Figure A-10.
Figure A-10 In developer mode, the shortcut menu for a shape includes a link to open
the ShapeSheet
 Tip
There is no downside to running Visio in developer mode, even if you don’t
regularly use the features it provides.
 See Also
For more information about running in developer mode, go to
www.visguy.com/2015/06/19/how-to-show-the-developer-ribbon-tab-and-why.
Control shape properties and behavior
The Shape Design group on the Developer tab includes three buttons you can use to view
and set selected shape properties:
 Shape Name This button displays a dialog box in which you can view key shape
attributes such as the name of the shape and the name of the master from which it
was derived.
 Behavior You can use the dialog box that opens when you click this button to adjust
properties of both shapes and groups. Examples of the settings include Resize
Behavior, Group Behavior, Double-Click behavior, and shape routing and
placement.
 Protection You can use the dialog box that opens when you click this button to lock
almost 20 shape attributes, including Width, Height, X Position, Y Position, and
Text. You can also prevent a shape from being deleted or formatted.
View and modify the ShapeSheet
 Important
You must be running Visio in developer mode to access the ShapeSheet.

The following three elements combine to give Visio its power and versatility:
 Visio engine This is the preprogrammed heart of Visio.
 Add-in programs These typically extend Visio by providing features that the Visio
engine does not. They are created by Microsoft, other software companies, or
individuals.
 ShapeSheet This is a spreadsheet-like data store that exists behind every object in
Visio. Every two-dimensional shape, every line, every container, every page, and
even the document itself, has a ShapeSheet. The values and formulas in the
ShapeSheet, in conjunction with the Visio engine and add-in code, control every
aspect of the appearance and behavior of Visio objects.
 Tip
For the technically inclined, you might prefer to think of the ShapeSheet as a
window into parts of the Visio object model.
To view the ShapeSheet for any shape on the drawing page, select the shape, and then on
the Developer tab, in the Shape Design group, click the Show ShapeSheet button. To view
the ShapeSheet for the page or the document, click the Show ShapeSheet arrow (not the
button) and choose a menu entry.
There is a quick alternative method for opening the ShapeSheet for each of the three
primary types of Visio objects:
 Shape Right-click the shape, and then click Show ShapeSheet.
 Page Right-click the page background, and then click Show ShapeSheet.
 Document Right-click the page background, hold down the Shift key, and then click
Show ShapeSheet.
The cells in the ShapeSheet are organized into sections and each section has a specific
format. In Figure A-11, some sections are open and visible, such as Shape Transform, and
some are closed, such as Protection. You can open or close any section by clicking the
blue section header.

Figure A-11 The Design tool tab provides ShapeSheet-specific functions whenever the
ShapeSheet is open
The Shape Data section, not shown in this figure, is the home for the attributes and values
for all shape data fields. Visio developers often store data there in addition to the User-
Defined Cells section, the header of which is visible in Figure A-11.
You can use ShapeSheet cells for two purposes: to observe the current attributes of a Visio
object or to change the object’s appearance or behavior. You do the latter by entering
either a constant or a formula into a ShapeSheet cell. Examples of both appear in Figure
A-11, which shows part of a ShapeSheet for a rectangular shape.
The Width cell in the Shape Transform section for the rectangle has a value of one inch, so
the shape on the page is exactly one inch wide. If you drag either the left or right resize
handle on the shape, the value in the Width cell will change to reflect the new width.
Conversely, if you enter a different value into the Width cell, the shape on the page will
react accordingly.
In contrast to that cell is the formula Width*2 in the Height cell. This formula ensures that
the height of the rectangle will always be two times its width. If you change the width of
the shape by dragging a resize handle or by entering a new number into the Width cell, the

height of the shape will adjust automatically.
Just as manually changing the width of the rectangle overwrites the value in the Width
cell, the same is true for the formula in the Height cell. If you drag the resize handles to
change the height of the shape, Width*2 will be overwritten by the new height value.
It’s important to recognize that the ramifications of overwriting a formula can be more
significant than overwriting a value—by overwriting a formula, you are changing the
behavior of the shape. In our example, the height of the rectangle will no longer change in
response to changes in the width.
 Tip
One way to prevent a formula from being overwritten is by using a ShapeSheet
function named GUARD(). Information about ShapeSheet functions is in the
Software Developer’s Kit that is cited in the list at the end of this topic.
Width*2 is obviously a simple formula. Many Visio shapes employ much more complex
formulas. In addition, there are dozens of ShapeSheet functions that can be part of a
formula and can take actions such as reading data from other cells in this ShapeSheet,
reading data from the ShapeSheets of other objects in the document, performing
sophisticated calculations, setting a value based on an “if” condition, triggering actions in
the drawing, and responding to events.
The formula in the LineColor cell in the Line Format section shown in Figure A-11
provides an example. The THEME() function retrieves the default line color used in the
current theme and applies it to the line on this shape. If a user applies a different theme to
the diagram, the line color for this shape automatically changes to the line color in the new
theme.
 See Also
For information about Visio themes, see Chapter 6, “Add style, color, and themes.”
As a second example, look at the formula for LinePattern in the Line Format section. The
IF() function in that cell is interpreted this way: if the height of the shape is less than or
equal to 2 inches, set the line around the shape to pattern number 1; if the height is greater
than 2 inches, set the line pattern to 4. The results of this formula are apparent in the two
shapes shown in Figure A-12, and are as follows:
 For the rectangle on the left, the width is 1 inch, which means the height is 2 inches;
as a result, the line pattern is set to 1 (a solid line).
 For the rectangle on the right, the width is 1.25 inches, so the height now exceeds 2
inches, and the line pattern has changed.

Figure A-12 Shape appearance changed as a result of a ShapeSheet formula
 Tip
If you would like to experiment with a rectangle configured like the one just
described, open the ViewShapeSheet diagram located in the Visio2016SBS\AppA
practice file folder.
The preceding example is a simple one, but it should help you to understand the central
role played by the ShapeSheet. It should also help you realize that one section in an
appendix to a book like this can barely scratch the surface of the uses and functions of the
ShapeSheet. Use the following references to continue your exploration of the Visio
ShapeSheet:
 UK-based Visio Most Valuable Professional (MVP) John Goldsmith started his
Visio blog in 2007 with a concise, nicely organized tutorial on the ShapeSheet,
which can be found at visualsignals.typepad.co.uk/vislog/2007/10/just-for-
starte.html. Be sure to check out other posts on John’s blog for additional
ShapeSheet-related examples.
 Two other Visio MVPs blog regularly about a broad array of topics and frequently
describe clever manipulations of the ShapeSheet:
• Chris Roth, also known as The Visio Guy, at www.visguy.com
• David Parker at blog.bvisual.net
 The aforementioned David Parker wrote a book on diagram validation that is cited
in Chapter 14, “Validate diagrams.” Chapter 3 of David’s book is available at
msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/gg144579.aspx; the first third of the chapter is an
excellent ShapeSheet overview.
 The ultimate reference for the ShapeSheet is contained in the Visio Software
Development Kit (SDK). As of this writing, the 2016 SDK is not available, but the
2013 version is still valid. You can view it at msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/ff768297.aspx or download it from www.microsoft.com/en-
us/download/details.aspx?id=36825.

Record and run macros
As with most of the programs in the Microsoft Office suite, you can record and run
macros in Visio. A macro is a stored set of instructions. Macros are a great way to perform
repetitive actions: you record a set of actions once and can replay it as many times as
you’d like. To start recording a macro, click the Macro button that is located to the right of
the Language section of the Visio status bar. The button is shown on the left in Figure A-
13.
Figure A-13 The appearance of the macro button changes when a macro is running
In the Record Macro dialog box that opens, click OK to begin recording. Note that the
appearance of the button changes to a square stop button, as shown on the right in Figure
A-13. When you complete the steps you want to capture, click the same button again.
 Important
The macro recorder does not record mouse movements or specific keystrokes.
Instead, it records the instructions that produce the result of your actions.
To run a macro that you’ve recorded, on the View tab, in the Macros group, click the
Macro button. Select the appropriate macro in the Macros dialog box, and then click Run.
Although you are not required to be in developer mode to record and run macros, you can
do both things very easily by using buttons in the Code group on the Developer tab.
 See Also
For information about the Developer tab, see “Run in developer mode” earlier in
this appendix.
Macro security in Visio
The default security setting for macro code is Disable All Macros With
Notification. This means that Visio opens any diagram containing macros in
protected mode and displays a security warning bar above the drawing page, as
shown in Figure A-14.

Figure A-14 Visio displays a warning when you open a diagram that contains a macro
If you ignore the warning, you will be able to edit the drawing but not run macros.
If you click Enable Content, the drawing will close and reopen with macros
enabled.
To change macro security settings, click Options in the Backstage view. In the left
pane of the Visio Options dialog box, click Trust Center, and then click the Trust
Center Settings button on the far right. When the Trust Center dialog box opens, as
shown in Figure A-15, click Macro Settings if it’s not already selected.
Figure A-15 The Macro Settings page of the Trust Center
In the Macro Settings section of the dialog box, click whichever setting meets your
needs, and then click OK.
Tip
If you are running Visio in developer mode, you can view the Macro settings with a
single click: on the Developer tab, in the Code group, click Macro Security.
Program Visio by using Visual Basic for Applications
Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) is the built-in programming language that
accompanies most Microsoft Office applications. With VBA, you can extend or change
the way that an Office application functions. In Visio, for example, you can automate
tasks, add new features, or integrate Visio with other members of the Office suite.
Using VBA to integrate one Office application with another can yield very interesting

results. For example, you might write Visio VBA code that creates a Microsoft Excel
workbook and writes data to it, or you might write code to save all drawing pages as
images and create a Microsoft PowerPoint presentation from them. These are just two
examples among many other possibilities.
 Tip
To read an article and view sample code for creating a PowerPoint presentation
from a Visio diagram, refer to “How to Create PowerPoint Slides from a Visio
Drawing” by Scott Helmers, published by Experts Exchange at rdsrc.us/rRxZnU.
To write a VBA program, you need to open the Visual Basic Editor (VBE) by pressing
Alt+F11. Alternatively, on the Developer tab, in the Code group, click Visual Basic. This
book will not teach you how to write VBA programs, but many books and online tutorials
are available, including the following:
 “Getting Started with VBA in Office 2010” at msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/ee814735.aspx is still useful, despite the fact that Visio was omitted from
the “Applies to” list of products on the page.
 The Visio page in the Office Dev Center at msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/fp161226.aspx includes links to a number of helpful pages, including the
following:
• “Visio VBA reference” at msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/office/ee861526.aspx
• “Welcome to the Visio ShapeSheet reference” at msdn.microsoft.com/EN-
US/library/office/ff768297.aspx
 If you’ve programmed Visio prior to Visio 2013, “New in Visio for developers” at
msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ff767103.aspx should be helpful for understanding
what has changed since Visio 2010.
 The Visio SDK at www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=36825
contains dozens of code samples that are excellent starting points for writing
programs.
If you’ve never created a macro or written a VBA program, you might be wondering about
the difference between the two because they sound similar. The answer is that a Visio
macro is nothing more than a VBA program created for you by Visio. To discover this for
yourself, record a macro by using the instructions in the preceding topic, and then open the
Visual Basic Editor window. The module named NewMacros contains the macro code.
Because VBA and macros are closely related, recording macros is one of the best ways to
learn how to write VBA programs. Let Visio generate the code for a task that you want to
perform, examine the code, and then incorporate it into your VBA program. Although this
is an excellent strategy, you should be aware that automatically generated macro code
tends to be very verbose and is specific to the situation in which it was recorded. Over
time, you will learn which parts of the macro code you need, which parts you don’t need,
and which parts you need to modify.

Create containers and lists
In Chapter 13, “Add structure to your diagrams,” you learned about containers, lists, and
callouts. You learned how to insert preformatted containers from the Container gallery,
and how to add callouts from the Callout gallery. You also learned that there isn’t a
corresponding list gallery, which means that you can’t create a list by using the Visio user
interface.
So how do you create a list? The answer is surprisingly simple: you add one entry to the
ShapeSheet for any shape and it becomes a structured diagram component.
 See Also
If you’re not familiar with modifying the ShapeSheet, see “View and modify the
ShapeSheet” earlier in this appendix.
 Important
You must be running in developer mode to access the ShapeSheet. See “Run in
developer mode” earlier in this appendix.
To create a list, follow these steps:
1. On the Home tab, in the Tools group, click the Rectangle Tool and draw a
rectangle.
2. Right-click the rectangle, and then select Show ShapeSheet.
3. Right-click anywhere in the ShapeSheet window, and then click Insert Section.
4. In the Insert Section dialog box, select User-defined cells, and then click OK. The
result should look like the cells shown in Figure A-16.
Figure A-16 A new row in the User-Defined Cells section of the ShapeSheet
5. Click User.Row_1, enter msvStructureType, and then press Enter.
6. Click the Value cell, enter “List” (include the quotation marks), and then press
Enter. The result will look like the image in Figure A-17.
Figure A-17 The only required entry in the ShapeSheet to turn a shape into a list
You’ve just created a list! It isn’t fancy and doesn’t have any of the niceties like margins, a
header, color, or style, but it is a list.
To test your new list, close the ShapeSheet window, and then drag several shapes into the
list. As you add each shape, you’ll find that your rectangle behaves exactly like the lists

you worked with in Chapter 13, “Add structure to your diagrams.”
Creating a container is as easy as creating a list: simply enter Container in the Value cell
for msvStructureType. Creating a callout requires a few extra steps but can also be done
fairly easily.
 Tip
If you would like to enhance the appearance and behavior of your list, container, or
callout, you will need to add additional rows to the User-Defined Cells section of
the ShapeSheet. For an excellent summary of the user-defined rows and values
required for structured diagram components, go to
blogs.msdn.com/b/visio/archive/2010/01/12/custom-containers-lists-and-callouts-
in-visio-2010.aspx. For additional technical details, including sample code for
working with structured diagram components in VBA, go to
msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ff959245.aspx.
Insert fields: advanced topics
In Chapter 8, “Work with shape data,” you learned how to display the value of a shape
data field on a shape. Although that action is very helpful, you can do so much more than
that with the Field dialog box.
To open the Field dialog box, select a shape, and then on the Insert tab, in the Text group,
click the Field button. The first thing to notice about the Field dialog box, which is shown
in Figure A-18, is that the Category section includes seven entries below Shape Data.
Each of these categories contains multiple data fields. The Date/Time category, for
example, shows four types of dates.
Figure A-18 You can insert dates into a field
Other categories display data about the document (shown in Figure A-19), the page, or
detailed attributes of the selected shape.

Figure A-19 You can insert document properties into a field
Finally, you can insert just about anything you’d like by selecting the Custom Formula
category, shown selected in Figure A-20. A custom formula can include math and text
functions, references to any of the data elements in the other seven field categories, and
almost any ShapeSheet cell or function.
Figure A-20 You can insert a custom formula into a field
As one example, the custom formula shown in Figure A-20 consists of two parts: a text
label, Purchased on, concatenated with a value stored in the PurchaseDate shape data
field. The result, inserted on a conference table shape from the Office Layout template, is
shown in Figure A-21.
Figure A-21 A shape displaying a combination of text and shape data
The Field dialog box offers a rich set of options for making the data in your document
visible to users of your diagrams.

Understand the Visio 2016 file formats
All versions of Visio before the 2013 release used a proprietary file format. With the 2013
release, Visio joined most other members of the Office product family in using the XML-
based Open Packaging Convention file format. The change won’t be particularly
noticeable to most Visio users, with the exception of encountering new file extensions;
however, the new file format offers multiple advantages, such as the following:
 Most diagram files are significantly smaller than they were in the previous file
format.
 Diagrams can be saved to, and then opened and read by, Visio Services on Microsoft
SharePoint. Neither a file conversion nor a special file format is required.
 Diagrams can be opened directly in SharePoint Designer for editing and preparation
for SharePoint Workflow. An intermediate file format is not required.
 Software developers can read and manipulate the XML files outside of Visio.
The Visio files for drawings, templates, and stencils each have two variations in the new
file format, one that prohibits macros and one that allows macros:
 Macro-free drawings, templates, and stencils use .vsdx, .vstx, and .vssx,
respectively.
 Macro-enabled drawings, templates, and stencils use .vsdm, .vstm, and .vssm,
respectively.
The following notes relate to opening files from previous versions of Visio:
 Visio 2016 can open all files created in Visio 2010 through Visio 2003 and can save
files in most 2010-2003 formats. See Chapter 12, “Print, reuse, and share diagrams,”
for details about saving Visio diagrams in other formats.
 Visio 2016 can open .vsd and .vdx files from Visio 2002 but cannot save in either of
those formats.
 When you open a file from an earlier version of Visio, the words Compatibility
Mode appear after the file name in the Windows title bar. The compatibility marker
indicates that some newer features, including themes, variants, styles, and
coauthoring, have been disabled.
 Opening a file created in an older version of Visio and then saving it into the Visio
2016 file format is not sufficient to enable Visio 2016 features. To upgrade a file you
have opened in compatibility mode, you must click the Convert button on the Info
page in the Backstage view.
The following resources are available for developers interested in learning how to work
with the new XML file formats:
 “Welcome to the Visio file format reference” at msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/office/jj684209.aspx includes links to multiple articles.
 Former Visio MVP, Al Edlund, created a set of utilities for investigating and
manipulating Visio files, which can be found at

pkgvisio.codeplex.com/documentation.

Appendix B. Keyboard shortcuts for Visio
The keyboard shortcuts described in this appendix refer to the US keyboard layout.
 Tip
Shortcuts styled as italic are among the author’s favorites.
Zoom, pan, and navigate
Moving around within a Visio diagram can be significantly more efficient when you use
keyboard or keyboard-plus-mouse shortcuts.
Zoom
The need to zoom in and out occurs so frequently that multiple techniques are available.
Pan

Move around in the drawing window
Move around in full-screen view
Use these keyboard shortcuts to move between pages when you are in full-screen view.

Move around a webpage
Use these keyboard shortcuts to move around within a Visio-generated webpage or a
drawing viewed in a Visio Web Access page.
Navigate the Ribbon
1. Press Alt.
As shown in Figure B-1, the KeyTips are displayed over each feature that is
available in the current view.
Figure B-1 KeyTips are displayed as numbers or letters
2. Press the letter shown in the KeyTip over the feature that you want to use.
3. Depending on which letter you press, you might be shown additional KeyTips. For
example, if the Home tab is active and you press N, the Insert tab is displayed, along
with the KeyTips for the groups and features on that tab.
4. Continue pressing letters until you press the letter of the command or control that
you want to use. In some cases, you must first press the letter of the group that
contains the command. For example, if the Home tab is active, pressing Alt+H, F, S
will take you to the Size list box in the Font group.
 Tip
To cancel the action that you are taking and hide the KeyTips, press Alt.
Visio shapes and windows
Use these shortcuts to organize and arrange shapes and windows in a Visio diagram.

Edit shape text
Use the Snap & Glue features
Move, group, rotate, and flip shapes

Arrange drawing windows
Visio-specific toolbars
These keyboard shortcuts save considerable mouse movement and time when you are
creating and editing Visio shapes.
Select tools
Select the drawing tools
Visio masters and stencils
These shortcuts are useful when you are creating masters and saving them in a stencil.

 See Also
For information about creating masters and stencils, see Appendix A, “Look behind
the curtain.”
Work with masters in a stencil
Work with stencils in edit mode

Text
Your hands are already on the keyboard when you’re working with text, so it only makes
sense to use keyboard shortcuts in that situation.
Edit text

Format text
Align text
The Help window
The Help window provides access to all Office Help content. The Help window displays
topics and other Help content.


Glossary
1-D shape A Visio shape that has two endpoints and behaves like a line, sometimes in
spite of its physical appearance. 1-D is an abbreviation for one-dimensional.
2-D shape A Visio shape that has a border and an interior and behaves like a polygon. 2-D
is an abbreviation for two-dimensional.
absolute link A type of hyperlink that contains all of the information required to locate the
linked object—such as D:\MyFolder\MyDocument.docx or
http://www.taskmap.com/Downloads.html. See also relative link.
action tag Visio shapes can be designed to display a special icon when you point to the
shape. Clicking an action tag displays a menu that contains one or more items. Prior to
Visio 2010, action tags were called smart tags.
active page The drawing page that has the focus within the drawing window.
active window Of the windows inside the Visio window, this is the one that has the focus;
most often the active window is the drawing window.
Activity (BPMN) One of a set of rectangle shapes that represents a step in a BPMN
diagram. See also Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN).
Activity (General) A task or step in a work process.
add-in Software written by Microsoft, other companies, or individuals that adds features
and capabilities to Visio.
add-in tab A tab on the Visio ribbon that is present only when a Visio add-in is running—
for example, the Org Chart tab for the Organization Chart add-in. See also ShapeSheet;
Visio engine.
anchor shape The primary shape when multiple shapes are selected. If you select multiple
shapes at one time by using a bounding box, the anchor shape is the one farthest to the
back (see Z-order). If you select multiple shapes one at a time, the anchor shape is the first
one you select. The anchor shape affects the results of alignment, spacing, and numbering
operations.
Area Select A Visio tool used to select multiple shapes within a rectangular area. See also
bounding box; Lasso Select.
Auto Size A Visio option that automatically expands or contracts the drawing page as you
move shapes across page boundaries. Introduced in Visio 2010.
AutoAdd Occurs when you drop a shape onto an existing dynamic connector that is glued
to two shapes. Visio disconnects the dynamic connector from the second shape, glues it to
the shape you dropped, and automatically adds a new dynamic connector, which it then
glues to the new shape and to the second shape. See also AutoDelete.
AutoConnect A Visio feature that glues a dynamic connector from one shape to another
with a single click; AutoConnect arrows are small blue triangles that appear when you
point to a shape.

AutoDelete Occurs when you delete a shape that is connected to two other shapes with
dynamic connectors. Visio removes the deleted shape, deletes the dynamic connector
glued to the second shape, and then glues the remaining dynamic connector to the second
shape. See also AutoAdd.
background An area of the drawing page that does not contain any shapes.
background page A Visio page that can be attached both to foreground pages and to other
background pages. Shapes on a background page appear on other pages to which the
background page is attached; however, the shapes can be selected or altered only when the
background page is the active page.
Backstage view A full-page UI view that exposes file-level functionality in Office
applications. This is a companion feature to the Office ribbon and helps users discover and
use the features that fall outside of the authoring features on the ribbon.
bounding box A temporary rectangular shape created by clicking the background of a
page and dragging to select one or more shapes. By default, Visio selects all shapes that
are fully contained within the area of the bounding box. See also Area Select; Lasso
Select.
BPMN See Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN).
business process A collection of tasks and activities that leads to a desired result; also
known as a work process, or just a process. See also process map.
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) A standard for graphically representing
business processes. Visio 2016 conforms to the 2.0 version of the standard. See also
Activity (BPMN); Connecting Object; Events; Gateway.
callout A shape you use to annotate other shapes in a drawing. Visio 2016 callouts exhibit
more intelligent behavior because they maintain a logical association with the shapes to
which they are connected.
canvas See drawing canvas.
Change Shape A feature introduced in Visio 2013 that you can use to substitute a
different shape for a shape already on the drawing page; shape data and most other shape
attributes are preserved after the swap.
Check Diagram A Visio Professional feature that validates a diagram against a predefined
set of rules. See also rule; rule set.
color by value A type of data graphic that applies color to shapes based on data values
within the shapes. See also data graphic.
collaboration As it applies to Visio 2016, two new features: the capability for multiple
authors to edit a diagram simultaneously, and the facility for multiple people to enter
comments in a diagram by using either Visio or a web browser.
comma-separated value (CSV) A data file consisting of fields and records, stored as text,
in which the fields are separated from each other by commas.
comment A Visio annotation object that can be attached to a shape or to the drawing page.
See also ScreenTip.

Connecting Object One of a set of arrow shapes that links other shapes in a BPMN
diagram. See also Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN).
connection point A location on a Visio shape to which other shapes can be glued;
represented by a small dark square that appears when you point to a shape.
connector Any one-dimensional (1-D) shape that can be glued between two shapes in a
drawing to connect the shapes.
Connector tool A Visio tool that you use to add dynamic connectors to a drawing by
dragging from one shape to another or from one connection point to another.
container A structured diagram shape that can contain other shapes. Containers know
which shapes are members; member shapes know the identity of their container.
Introduced in Visio 2010.
control handle A yellow square or diamond that you use to alter the appearance or
function of a shape. Most shapes do not have control handles; when they do exist, they
appear when you select a shape. See also resize handle; rotation handle; selection handle.
cross-functional flowchart A type of flowchart in which each process step is placed into
a horizontal or vertical lane based on which person, department, or function is responsible
for that step. Commonly referred to as a swimlane diagram.
CSV See comma-separated value.
Custom Import A Visio feature you can use to connect a diagram to an external data
source. The Custom Import wizard quides you through identifying and configuring the
connection to the data source. See also data linking; Quick Import.
custom property A data value that is stored inside a Visio shape. Starting with Visio
2007, custom properties are known as shape data.
data graphic A Visio feature that you use to annotate a shape by using icons and text
callouts based on data in the shape. A data graphic contains one or more graphic items.
data graphic legend A key to the data graphics used on a Visio drawing page.
data linking The act of building a dynamic connection between a Visio diagram and an
external data source; the data in the diagram can be refreshed manually or automatically
whenever the linked data changes. See also Custom Import; Quick Import.
developer mode A special Visio operating mode that provides additional features and
tools beyond the normal user interface. When you turn on developer mode, Visio activates
a Developer tab on the ribbon.
diagram See drawing.
drawing A Visio document that contains a drawing window and can contain other open
windows. Also referred to as a diagram. Visio drawings use the .vsd, .vsdx, or .vsdm file
extension.
drawing canvas The space in the drawing window that is outside the Visio drawing page.
If Auto Size is turned on when you place a shape on the drawing canvas, Visio
automatically expands the page size to include the shape. If Auto Size is turned off, you

can store shapes on the canvas; they are saved with the drawing but do not print. See also
drawing page.
Drawing Explorer A window that shows a hierarchical view of a document and updates it
to reflect the current drawing hierarchy as items (such as shapes or pages) are added or
deleted.
drawing page The printable drawing surface within the drawing window. In some
templates, the drawing page displays a grid to aid in positioning and aligning shapes. See
also drawing canvas; drawing window.
drawing scale A ratio that expresses the size of an object in a drawing compared to its
counterpart in the real world. In a metric drawing, 1:10 means that 1 cm on the page
represents 10 cm in the real world. In a US units drawing, 1”:1’ means that 1 inch in the
drawing represents 1 foot in the real world.
drawing tools A set of six tools—Rectangle, Ellipse, Line, Freeform, Arc, and Pencil—
that enables the creation or alteration of shapes.
drawing window The Visio window that contains the drawing page. See also drawing
page.
Duplicate Page A feature in Visio 2013 and later that you can use to copy both a page and
its contents.
dynamic connector A special type of line that adds and removes bends as the shapes to
which it is glued are moved or resized. Each end of a dynamic connector can be glued to
another shape.
dynamic glue The result of attaching a dynamic connector to the body of a shape. When
you move dynamically glued shapes, the point of attachment of the connector can change.
See also glue; static glue.
Dynamic Grid A Visio feature that provides visual alignment and positioning feedback
when you move shapes near other shapes or near the page margins. Visio 2016 also
provides dynamic feedback as you resize shapes.
effect A coordinated set of fonts, fill patterns, gradients, shadows, and line styles. See also
theme.
embellishment An extension of the theme concept that helps set the overall tone of a
diagram by altering the geometry of selected shapes. Each theme has a default
embellishment level, but you can choose a different level.
Events One of a set of circle shapes that mark start, intermediate, and end events in a
BPMN diagram. See also Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN).
Extensible Application Markup Language See XAML.
Extensible Markup Language See XML.
fixed list A type of shape data list from which users must select an entry. See also variable
list.
flowchart A diagram that illustrates the activities, decisions, and events that occur in a

work process or the logic of a program.
foreground page A Visio drawing page. A foreground page can have a background page
attached to it.
functional band A vertical or horizontal rectangle in a cross-functional flowchart that
contains process steps. Also known as a swimlane.
Gateway One of a set of diamond shapes that identify divergence and convergence in a
BPMN diagram. Gateways often represent decisions. See also Business Process Model
and Notation (BPMN).
GIF See Graphics Interchange Format.
glue A property of a Visio shape that lets it remain attached to another shape. See also
dynamic glue; static glue.
graphic item One graphic element within a data graphic. A graphic item represents one
data field in a specific way. See also data graphic.
Graphics Interchange Format (.gif) A digital image file format developed by
CompuServe that is used for transmitting raster images on the Internet. An image in this
format can contain up to 256 colors, including a transparent color. The size of the file
depends on the number of colors actually used.
gravity In Visio, a mathematical function that creates the appearance of gravity. For
example, if the text angle in a shape is set by using the gravity function, the text remains
upright when you rotate the shape.
grid The background pattern of intersecting, perpendicular lines on a drawing page. By
default, shapes on a Visio drawing page snap to the gridlines as you move the shapes
across the page.
group In a drawing program, to transform a number of objects into a group. A group also
relates to a labeled collection of commands and controls that are grouped together on a
ribbon tab.
guide A Visio shape you create by dragging either the horizontal or vertical ruler onto the
drawing page; used to align other shapes.
handle See selection handle.
htm/html A file extension for webpages; short for Hypertext Markup Language.
Hue-Saturation-Lightness (HSL) A color model in which hue is the color itself as placed
on a color wheel, where 0° is red, 60° is yellow, 120° is green, 180° is cyan, 240° is blue,
and 300° is magenta; saturation is the percentage of the specified hue in the color; and
lightness is the percentage of white in the color. See also Red-Green-Blue (RGB).
hyperlink base The starting point for determining the path to a hyperlink target; Visio
documents include a hyperlink base field, which is blank by default.
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) A text markup language used to create
documents for the web. HTML defines the structure and layout of a web document by
using a variety of tags and attributes.

Information Rights Management (IRM) A policy tool that gives authors control over
how recipients use the documents and emails they send.
insertion bar An orange horizontal or vertical line that appears when you drag a shape
near the edge of a shape that is already in a Visio list. The insertion bar indicates where the
shape you are dragging will be inserted. See also list.
JavaScript An object-oriented scripting language used by Visio to implement some
navigation functions for websites created by using Save As Web Page.
JPG/JPEG A digital image file format designed by the Joint Photographic Experts Group
for compressing either full-color or grayscale still images. It works well on photographs,
naturalistic artwork, and similar material. Images saved in this format have .jpg or .jpeg
file extensions.
Lasso Select A Visio tool used to select multiple shapes within a freeform area drawn by
the user. See also Area Select; bounding box.
layer A means for organizing sets of shapes in a drawing; layers have properties that
affect all shapes in the layer at once. For example, with one or two clicks, you can show or
hide all shapes on a layer, prevent shapes on a certain layer from printing, and recolor all
shapes on a layer.
Line tool One of six drawing tools; used to create straight lines or combinations of
multiple straight lines.
list A structured diagram shape that can contain other shapes. A list maintains its member
shapes in ordered sequence; member shapes know their ordinal position within the list.
Introduced in Visio 2010. See also insertion bar.
Live Preview An Office feature that shows the results of many operations before you
implement the change. Used in Visio for many font, size, color, alignment, theme, and
data graphic operations.
local area network (LAN) A network of computers, printers, and other devices located
within a relatively limited area (for example, a building). A LAN enables any connected
device to interact with any other on the network.
macro A stored set of instructions. In Visio, you can record a macro and play it back to
repeat a set of actions.
master An object in a Visio stencil. Dragging a master from a stencil onto the drawing
page creates a shape. See also shape; stencil.
metric A system of measurement used in Visio drawings and templates in most
countries/regions outside North America. See also US Units.
mini toolbar A floating toolbar accessed by right-clicking either a shape or the drawing
page. It contains the drawing tools and Connector tool, alignment and send to front/back
buttons, font and text enhancement buttons, the Format Painter, and access to shape styles.
Object Linking and Embedding Database (OLE DB) A component database
architecture that provides efficient network and Internet access to many types of data
sources, including relational data, mail files, flat files, and spreadsheets. OLE DB

comprises a specialized set of COM interfaces that expose data from a variety of data
stores, both relational and nonrelational.
Open Database Connectivity (ODBC) In the Microsoft WOSA (Windows Open System
Architecture) structure, an interface providing a common language for Windows
applications to gain access to a database on a network.
org charts See organization chart.
organization chart A diagram that represents the structure of an organization.
page controls A collection of buttons and tabs at the bottom of the Visio drawing window
that you can use to navigate from one page to another within the drawing.
page name tab A tab at the bottom of the Visio drawing window that displays the name of
a page. Right-clicking the tab provides access to page management functions.
pan To change which part of a drawing is visible by moving the page horizontally,
vertically, or both.
pin The center of rotation for a shape. See also pin position.
pin position The location of the pin for a shape. See also pin.
PNG See Portable Network Graphic.
Pointer Tool A Visio tool you can use to select shapes on the drawing page.
Portable Network Graphic (.png) A digital image file format that uses lossless
compression (compression that doesn’t lose data) and was created as a patent-free
alternative to the .gif file format.
print tile The portion of the drawing page that is the size of a piece of printer paper; tiles
are marked by dashed lines in print preview mode and on the drawing page if the Page
Breaks check box is selected in the Show group on the View tab.
process See business process.
process map A diagram that shows the tasks and activities that comprise a business
process. See also business process.
Quick Access Toolbar A customizable collection of buttons for frequently used functions
that appears in the title bar of the Visio window and is always visible.
Quick Import A Visio feature you can use to connect a diagram to data in a Microsoft
Excel workbook. After you select the workbook, Quick Import links to the workbook,
links data rows to shapes on the drawing page, and applies one or more data graphics. See
also Custom Import; data linking.
Quick Shape One of up to four masters that appear on a mini toolbar when you point to
the AutoConnect arrow for a shape on the drawing page. Click on a Quick Shape to add it
to the drawing page.
Quick Styles A set of predefined colors and styles that can be applied to one or more
shapes. Each theme has its own set of Quick Styles, ensuring that you can apply styles
while maintaining the overall look of the theme.

rack unit A unit of measure for the space occupied by equipment mounted in a network or
data center equipment rack. Each rack unit, or U, equals 1.75 inches (44.45 mm);
equipment height is described as a multiple of rack units, for example, 3U or 5U.
Red-Green-Blue (RGB) A color model that describes color information in terms of the
red (R), green (G), and blue (B) intensities that make up the color. See also Hue-
Saturation-Lightness (HSL).
relative link A type of hyperlink that contains only part of the information required to
locate the linked object. The remainder of the required information is derived from the
location of the document containing the hyperlink or from the document’s hyperlink base
—for example: MyFolder2\MyDocument.docx or Downloads.html. See also absolute link.
replace shape See Change Shape.
report A Visio feature that you can use to generate a summary of the data on one or more
pages in a drawing. A report can be exported in .html, Excel, or XML format or can be
dropped on the drawing page as a Visio shape.
resize handle One of up to eight small squares that appear on the edge of a shape when
you select the shape; two handles adjust the width; two adjust the height; the four corner
handles adjust both dimensions proportionally. See also control handle; rotation handle;
selection handle.
ribbon An area in a window in which commands and other controls are displayed in
functionally related groups. A ribbon can be divided into multiple views, known as tabs,
and every tab can contain multiple groups of controls. Typically, a ribbon appears at the
top of a window.
rotation handle A circle that appears when you select a shape by using the Pointer Tool or
the Text tool; dragging the handle rotates the shape or text. See also control handle; resize
handle; selection handle.
rule A condition to be validated in a Visio drawing by using the Check Diagram feature.
For example, a Visio validation rule might specify that all 1-D shapes must be connected
on both ends. See also Check Diagram; rule set.
rule set A collection of Visio validation rules—for example, the flowchart rule set or the
BPMN rule set. See also Check Diagram; rule.
ruler An on-screen scale marked off in inches or other units of measure and used to show
line widths, tab settings, paragraph indents, and so on.
scaled drawing A diagram in which both the drawing page and objects on the page have
been expanded or reduced proportionally from their size in the real world. Scale is
expressed as a ratio—for example, a scale of 1:5 means that an object that occupies 1 unit
of space in the diagram occupies 5 units of space in the real world.
ScreenTip A text annotation that can be added to a shape. The ScreenTip appears when
you point to the shape on the drawing page. See also comment.
selection handle Small circles, diamonds, or squares that appear when you select a shape;
used to resize or adjust the appearance of a shape. See also control handle; resize handle;

rotation handle.
selection rectangle A rectangle with sizing handles that surrounds a selected object or
objects.
shape An object on a Visio drawing page. You create shapes in three ways: 1) using tools
from the Tools group on the Home tab to draw them; 2) dragging masters from stencils; or
3) pasting objects from the Clipboard. Alternatively, a program can create shapes for you.
See also master; stencil.
shape data A data value stored inside a Visio shape; known as a custom property prior to
Visio 2007. See custom property.
Shape Data window A window that displays shape data names and values for a selected
shape. See shape data.
shape name The internal name of a Visio shape.
shape text Text that is part of a shape and is usually visible on or near the shape.
Shapes window A Visio window that contains one or more stencils.
ShapeSheet A spreadsheet-like data store that exists behind every object in Visio: every 1-
D or 2-D shape, every container, every page, even the document itself. The values and
formulas in the ShapeSheet, in conjunction with the Visio engine and add-in code, control
every aspect of the appearance and behavior of Visio objects. See also add-in; smart
shape; Visio engine.
sheet An internal Visio term for a shape.
smart shape A Visio shape whose appearance, behavior, or other attributes changes in
response to events or to alterations within or outside the shape. Most smart features are
implemented by placing formulas into the ShapeSheet of the smart shape. See also
ShapeSheet.
static glue The result of attaching a dynamic connector or a line to a connection point on a
shape. When you move statically glued shapes, the point of attachment for the connector
remains fixed. See also dynamic glue; glue.
status bar An area at the bottom of the Visio window that displays information about the
drawing page and selected shapes; also contains buttons and controls to adjust the page
and selected shapes.
stencil A Visio document that contains a collection of masters. Stencils use a .vss, .vssx,
or .vssm file extension. See also master; shape.
subnet A section of a network.
subprocess A subset of a process. In Visio, a subprocess shape on one page represents a
collection of process steps that are typically located on another page; the subprocess shape
is usually hyperlinked to the other page.
SVG Short for Scalable Vector Graphics; an XML-based format for describing and
rendering vector graphics.
swimlane A vertical or horizontal rectangle in a swimlane diagram that contains process

steps.
swimlane diagram A type of flowchart in which each process step is placed into a
horizontal or vertical lane based on which person, department, or function is responsible
for that step. Sometimes known as a cross-functional flowchart.
tab On the Visio ribbon, a set of buttons that provide related functions.
task pane A fixed pane that appears on one side of an app window and contains options
related to the completion of a specific task.
task A step or activity in a process map.
template A Visio document that includes one or more drawing pages with preset
dimensions and measurement units. A template can also include one or more stencils; it
can include background pages and designs; its pages can contain shapes or text. A
template can also include special software that operates only in that template. Templates
use a .vst, .vstx, or .vstm file extension.
text block The part of a shape that contains text.
Text tool A Visio tool you can use to manipulate shape text when you use the tool to select
a shape. You can also use it to create a text-only shape by dragging across the background
of the drawing page.
theme A coordinated set of colors and effects designed to enhance the presentation of a
Visio diagram. See also effect.
tile See print tile.
tool tab A tab on the Visio ribbon that appears only when you select an object for which it
is relevant. Tool tabs are organized into tool tab groups.
tool tab group A collection of one or more tool tabs that appears only when you select an
object for which it is relevant; for example, the Container Tools tab group appears when
you select a container or a list.
U See rack unit.
URL Short for Uniform Resource Locator. URLs are used to identify the location of a
document or other electronic object.
US Units A system of measurement used in Visio drawings and templates in the United
States and parts of Canada and Mexico. See also metric.
user-defined cells Data names and values that can be stored in the User section of the
ShapeSheet for a Visio shape, page, or document.
validation A Visio Professional feature that you can use to verify that a drawing meets
certain predefined requirements. See also rule; rule set.
variable list A type of shape data list from which users can select an entry or can enter a
new value. See also fixed list.
variant One of four variations on a theme that includes alternate colors and shape designs
so you can add your own flair to a drawing while retaining the overall look of the theme.

VBA See Visual Basic for Applications.
VBE See Visual Basic Editor.
.vdw File extension for a Visio 2010 web drawing; not used in Visio 2013 and later. See
also Visio web drawing.
Visio engine The core software that provides Visio features and functions. See also add-
in; ShapeSheet.
Visio Services A service provided by SharePoint Server, which you can use to publish
dynamically updateable Visio drawings so they can be viewed by people without Visio.
Visio web drawing A Visio 2010 file format that you can use to publish Visio drawings to
SharePoint sites by using Visio Services. Visio web drawings can be viewed by anyone
with Internet Explorer. Web drawings can be dynamically updated when the data in the
Visio drawing changes. Uses a .vdw file extension. No longer used in Visio 2013 and later.
Visio Workflow Interchange A Visio 2010 file format that you can use to exchange Visio
SharePoint Workflow drawings with SharePoint Designer. Uses a .vwi file extension. No
longer used in Visio 2016.
Visual Basic Editor (VBE) An environment in which you write new and edit existing
Visual Basic for Applications code and procedures. The Visual Basic Editor contains a
complete debugging toolset for finding syntax, run-time, and logic problems in your code.
Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) A programming language built into many
Microsoft Office products.
VML Short for Vector Markup Language. A markup language used to define and render
webpages created by using Save As Web Page. VML was the primary Save As Web Page
output format in versions of Visio before Visio 2010; it is still available in Visio 2010 and
later versions as an alternate output format.
.vsdx The file extension introduced with Visio 2013. Uses Open Packaging Conventions
to store Visio diagrams in a standards-based XML format.
.vwi See Visio Workflow Interchange.
work process See business process.
workflow A set of process steps, some or all of which have been automated. For the
automated parts of a workflow, documents and files are stored and moved electronically,
according to a set of predefined rules, so that they are available to participants as required.
workspace A collection of Visio windows and window settings. At minimum, the
workspace consists of the drawing window and the zoom settings for the pages in the
drawing; frequently, it also includes a Shapes window containing one or more stencils.
X-coordinate Defines the horizontal position of a shape on the drawing page.
XAML Short for Extensible Application Markup Language. A markup language based on
XML that was created by Microsoft. Used by many Microsoft products. Visio creates
XAML documents when you use the Save As Web Page function.
XML Short for Extensible Markup Language. A markup language for describing and

exchanging structured data in a format that is independent of operating systems and
applications. XML is a World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) specification and is a subset
of Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML).
Y-coordinate Defines the vertical position of a shape on the drawing page.
zoom To magnify (zoom in) or shrink (zoom out) the display of a drawing.
Z-order Defines the relative front-to-back position of a shape on the drawing page. The
first shape you add to a page is at the back and each subsequent shape is in front of all
previous shapes. You can change the Z-order by using the Send Forward/Send Backward
or Send To Front/Send To Back buttons.

Index
Symbols
1-D shapes 65, 76, 525
2-D shapes 65, 245, 525
3-D equipment shapes 244
3-D rotation effects 222
A
absolute links 366–370, 525
Account page (Backstage view) 20–21
action tags 525
active pages 525
active windows 525
Activity (BPMN) shapes 525
Activity (General) 525
add-in tab 525
add-ins 24–25, 150, 525
Add on drop data field attribute 280
Advanced Data Graphics button 308
Advanced Data Graphics gallery 334, 342
aligning
shapes, automatically 211–213
shapes, manually 206–209
text 523
anchor shapes 525
attaching comments 104
designating 208
angles of rotation 30
annotating shapes 440–443
annotations
adding to shapes 96–97
callouts 105

comments 104–105
ScreenTips 104–105
Arc tool 68
Area Select tool 52, 525
Auto Size 128–129, 525
AutoAdd 83–85, 525
AutoCAD 392
AutoConnect 525
activating 78
adding shapes 81, 82
connecting shapes 79
flowcharts 78, 144
linking shapes 82
live preview 80
turning off 82
autocorrect options 22
AutoDelete 86–87, 526
Automatically Open Web Page In Browser option 406
B
background pages 526
applying 132, 134–136
assigning to existing pages 133
automatic vs. manual 132
changing titles in title blocks 132
creating automatically 132
creating manually 134
deleting from diagrams 132
linking to foreground pages 121, 130
removing from foreground pages 132, 134
value of 121
backgrounds 378, 526
Backstage view 7, 13, 526

accessing 13
Account page 20–21
commands 13
Export page 20
Info page 14–16
New page 16
Open page 17
Print page 18
returning to diagrams from 13
Saving/Save As page 17–18
Share page 18–20
viewing metadata 380
Visio Options 22
Basic Electrical template 6
Basic Flowchart validation rule set 448
Basic Network Diagram stencils 240
Basic Network Diagram template 242
bevel effects 222–223
Blank Drawing template 9
Boolean shape data field 268, 278
borders
containers 428–429
inserting on background pages 130
bounding boxes 37, 51–52, 526
selecting shapes in containers 418, 422
selecting shapes in groups 422
BPMN (Business Process Model and Notation) 526
BPMN Diagram template 6
BPMN Diagram validation rule set 448, 456
BPMN diagrams
See also diagrams
Activity shapes 525

activity types 157
adding text annotations 163
annotating shapes 162
basic shapes 158
callout shapes 162
connector types 157
core shape sets 156
creating subprocesses 164–167
designing 158–163
event types 156
Gateway shapes 528
gateway types 157
setting activity types 163
setting gateway types 163
setting loop types 163
symbol set 156
uses for 155–156
validating 456
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) 526
business validation rule sets 448
C
callout shapes 162
callouts 308, 416
attaching to shapes 443
changing styles 443
deleting 443
detaching 443
gluing to shapes 162
locating 440
relocating 443
using 440–442
canvas 29

categories 10, 12
Change Shape 526
charts See organization charts
Check Diagram 449, 526
Civil Engineering diagrams 258
coauthoring 483–484, 489
collaborating 105, 526
Color By Value graphics 308, 310–311, 313, 526
color palette 214
color picker 227, 229–230, 232
color schemes 213, 220
color selector 228
colors
applying solid fills 229
applying to lines 232
changing for icon sets 310
choosing 219
creating 228
customizing 219, 221
deleting custom sets 220
hue 529
Hue-Saturation-Lightness (HSL) 529
locking for shapes 227
saturation 529
specific values 228
comma-separated value (CSV) 526
comment indicators
balloons 105
hiding/showing 109
comments 526
added by different authors 106
adding 481–482

adding to diagrams 104
adding to pages 106, 108
adding to shapes 104, 108
attaching to anchor shapes 104
balloons 105
collapsing 106
deleting 482
deleting individual 106
displaying 105
drawing pages 477
editing 482
indicators 105, 109, 477, 482
interactive 464
order of display 104
replying to 108, 482
vs. ScreenTips 105
threaded 104, 106
viewing 482
viewing all 107
via web browsers 479
Comments pane 478
filtering comments 481–482
opening/closing 108, 471
Compatibility Mode 15, 513
Configuration button 342
Connecting Object shape 526
connecting shapes
using dynamic connectors 70–76
using lines 65–69
connection points 66, 526
See also lines
connecting shapes containing 70–72

Ethernet shapes 240
rack shapes 249
static glue 71–72
connector segments, adjusting 75
Connector tool 72, 527
connectors 526
See also dynamic connectors
changing styles 221
types 157
unglued 450
containers 416–419, 527
adding shapes 420, 425
borders 428–429
bounding boxes 418
choosing styles 427
creating 509–511
deleting 425
dragging shapes out of 422
dropping shapes into 422
entering text 422
formatting 426–427
vs. groups 417–422
hiding headings 427
locking/unlocking 425–426
organizing shapes 423–424
placing on pages 425
removing shapes 426
resizing contents 422
selecting 418, 424
selecting shapes 418, 422, 424, 426
sizing 429
styles 424

and swimlanes 435
using 424–426
control handles 527, 531
hiding 241
locked 61
moving interior vertical lines 61
reshaping lines 68
rotation handles 61
shape size, adjusting 62
yellow handles 62
copying shapes 53–54
cropping photos 201
cross-functional flowchart diagrams See swimlane diagrams
Cross-Functional Flowchart validation rule set 448
CSV (comma-separated value) 526
Currency shape data field 268, 278
Custom Import 326, 527
linking diagrams to data 333
using 330
custom properties 527
custom templates, storing 395–396
D
Data Bar graphics 308, 312, 317
data fields 268, 308–309
attributes 279–280
changing attributes 281–283
changing properties 281
creating new 281–283
labeling 283
predefined 270
rules 276
Data Graphic Fields task pane 343

data graphic legends 306, 319–320, 527
data graphics 527
See also shapes
applying 343
applying during data linking 334
applying multiple to process steps 314
applying to multiple pages 315
applying to shapes 313–316, 342
assessing risk using 306–307
based on shape data fields 309
callouts 308
capturing near-real-time information 305
changing 342–343
changing display properties 317
changing positions 343
Color By Value 308, 310–311, 313, 526
creating 308–313
creating based on calculated results 309
creating based on document properties 309
creating based on page properties 309
creating Data Bar graphics 312
creating Icon Set graphics 313
creating in unlinked diagrams 308
creating Text graphics 312
Data Bar graphics 308, 312, 317
deleting 319
duplicating 318
editing 316–319
enhancing rack diagrams 302–305
graphic items in 309
hiding 315
Icon Set graphics 308

improving swimlane diagrams 304
inserting legends 439
modifying characteristics 316
multiple graphic items within 315
options for linked data 341–342
organization charts 305–306
positioning 342
previewing 313
removing 343
removing from shapes 313, 315–316
renaming 318
selecting fields for creating 312
selecting shapes using 318
setting conditions 310
setting default positions 316
setting values 317
Data Graphics gallery 308, 313, 342
data linking 527
See also linked data
applying data graphics 334
changing column settings 340
Custom Import 330, 333
data sources 330
dragging data to existing shapes 334–335
dynamic links 326
to Excel data 327
to external data 327
linking automatically 335–337
linking manually 330
linking to SharePoint lists 330
network diagrams 259
process 326

Quick Import 326
to shapes 333–339
unique identifiers 331–332
unlinking data rows from shapes 340
unlinking diagrams from data sources 340
unlinking shapes 340
data rows linked to shapes 339
data values
entering 268
inserting on shapes 284–285
Date shape data field 268, 276, 278
Define Shape Data dialog box 281
Detailed Network Diagram template 240, 242
Details navigation pane 400
developer mode 499–501, 527
diagramming
enterprise networks 244
Ethernet networks 242
racks 251
diagrams
See also BPMN diagrams; flowcharts; network diagrams; shapes; swimlane diagrams
adding comments 104
adding ScreenTips 104–107
adding shapes 83–85
adding swimlanes 154–155
adding value using data graphics 302–305
applying themes to all pages 218
AutoAdd 83–85
AutoConnect 78–84
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) 155–163
Check Diagram 526
closing 20

coauthoring 483–489
collaborating 476–477, 526
commenting 477–482
creating from existing 10, 13
creating from templates 9–10
creating from template thumbnails 10
creating websites from 402
deleting background pages 132
deleting shapes 86–87
effects 213
enhancing effectiveness 302–305
flowcharts 140–148
hidden data 381–383
identifying risks and controls 306–307
importing validation rule sets 457
incorporating into SharePoint apps 464
linking pages 357
linking to data 326, 330–333
linking to data using Custom Import 333
linking to multiple data sources 332
near-real-time data graphics 305
opening 12
orientation 142
and pages 120–121
panning 37–39, 41
panning in web browsers 470
presentation mode 30
previewing 376–379
printing 379
publishing to the web 398–409
Quick Shapes 81–83
refreshing linked data 344

refreshing on SharePoint 474–479
removing tips pane 28
restricting access 384–385
saving as PDFs 393
saving as templates 394
saving in other formats 390–394
saving to SharePoint 468–469
sharing 18–20
sharing using Visio Viewer 397
stencils 45
swimlanes 149–155
TaskMap add-in 306–307
templates 45
themes 213
unlinked, creating data graphics in 308
unlinking from data sources 340
updating 482
using starters 25–28
validation issues 449
variants 213
viewing all comments 107
viewing different pages 31
viewing in Office 397
viewing in SharePoint 470
viewing in web browsers 469–471
viewing list of all pages 31
viewing network performance 302–304
viewing published 398–403
zooming 37–39
document properties 382–383
documents
checking out 15

linking to 361–362
opening ShapeSheet 502
restricting access 384–385
version history 15–16
drawing canvas 527
Drawing Explorer window 527
drawing pages
Auto Size 128, 525
canvas 29
Change Shape 526
changing attributes 127
changing sizes 128
creating images of 389
fit to window 31, 40
grid 528
placing empty containers 425
print tile 530
drawing scale, 527
changing 255–257
changing Civil Engineering diagrams 258
changing Mechanical Engineering diagrams 258
changing Metric diagrams 258
creating custom 253
predefined types 253
Drawing Scale tab, displaying 257
drawing tools 520
See also shapes
aligning shapes 50
creating shapes 48, 50
displaying 66
lines 65, 68
sizing shapes 50

drawing windows 28–29, 528
arranging 519
moving around in 516
page controls 29
page name tab 530
pan and zoom 37
status bar 29–31
zooming in/out 37
drawings 527
AutoCAD 392
changing to unscaled 258
language 30
page numbers 30
previewing 376–379
running reports stored in 290
saving in other file formats 390–394
Duplicate Page 528
duplicating shapes 55
Duration shape data field 268, 278
.dwg file extension 392
.dxf file extension 392
dynamic connectors 65, 70, 528
See also connectors; diagrams; shapes
applying styles 220
AutoAdd 525
AutoConnect 77–83, 525
AutoDelete 526
changing styles 74–76
connecting shapes 148
connection points 71
dynamic glue 74
gluing to connection points 72, 79

gluing to shapes 74
line bends, creating 76
moving segments 76
moving shapes 75
removing text block backgrounds 161
resetting 75–76
segmentation, changing 74–76
static glue 72, 74
dynamic glue 74, 77, 528, 146–147
Dynamic Grid 528
activating 49
aligning shapes 46, 49
drawing tools 48
guidelines 46, 153
spacing shapes 46, 49
vertical spacing of shapes 48
dynamic links 326
E
effects 213, 528
3-D rotations 222
applying 222–224
bevels 222–223
changing 224
controlling properties 223
customizing 221
glows 222
reflections 222
removing 224
selecting 220
shadows 222
soft edges 222
types 222

email addresses, hyperlinks to 360
embellishments 528
endpoints See connection points
enterprise networks, diagramming 244
errata, submitting xix
Ethernet networks, diagramming 242
Ethernet shapes
adding devices to 242
network diagrams 240–241
event types 163
Events shapes 528
Excel
displaying report output in 287
linking to cells 363
Export page (Backstage view) 20
Extensible Application Markup Language (XAML) 404, 534
Extensible Markup Language (XML) 534
External Data window 326
F
Featured templates 9, 12
feedback, submitting xix
fields
in data graphics 312
inserting 511–512
file extensions 391–392
file formats
graphics 386–388
macros 391
previous Visio versions 391
XML-based Open Packaging Convention 513
file types 392
files

opening from previous versions 513
opening in compatibility mode 15
saving to SharePoint 466–467
fill colors 229
fill patterns 228
fills, removing 230
fit to window 515
Fixed List shape data field 268, 278
fixed lists 276–277, 528
flipping shapes 519
flowcharts 528
See also diagrams
adding shapes 148
adding text to shapes 148
building quickly 145
connecting shapes 78, 148
creating 142–145
cross-functional 527
default font size 142
exiting text entry mode 149
guidelines 145
ignoring validation issues and rules 453
live preview 144
orientation 142
templates 140–141
validating 449–454
footers, printing 378–379
foreground pages 528
adding after existing 123
autosizing 127
choosing paper size 126
configuring 125–128

definition 121
including/excluding gridlines 126
linking to background pages 121
managing properties 122
orientation 127
page name tabs 122
previewing 126
removing background pages 132, 134
scaling for printing 126
setting zoom level 126
Format data field attribute 279
Format Painter 233
formatting
text 523
text boxes 102
formulas, overwriting 504
Freeform tool 68
full-screen view, moving around in 517
functional bands 528
G
Gateway shapes 528
.gif (Graphics Interchange Format) 528
GIF webpage format 408
glow effects 222
glue 528
glued lines 67
gluing shapes on layers 118
Go to Page navigation pane 399, 405
gradient fills 228
applying to lines 233
applying to shapes 229
grammar options 22

graphic items 308, 528
creating 309
editing 316
graphics, file formats 386–388
Graphics Interchange Format (.gif) 528
gravity 528
grid 528
gridlines on foreground pages 126
grouping shapes 417, 519
changing properties 115
reasons for 114
selections 116
groups 528
adding shapes 420
vs. containers 417–422
dragging shapes out of 422
dropping shapes into 422
entering text 422
vs. layers 118
resizing contents 422
selecting interior shapes 422
selecting shapes using bounding boxes 422
selecting shapes within 116, 418
guides 529
aligning shapes 57–61
deleting 59
displaying 57
gluing shapes to 58
hiding 57
moving glued shapes 59
sizing shapes 57–61
vertical 58

H
Hand Drawn theme 214–215
handles See control handles
headers, printing 378–379
Help window 524
Hidden data field attribute 280
hidden data, removing 381–383
Hide U Size command 250
hiding comment indicators 121
horizontal axis 209
HSL (Hue-Saturation-Lightness) 529
.htm/.html file extension 392, 529
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) 288, 529
hue 529
Hue-Saturation-Lightness (HSL) 529
hyperlink base 370–372, 529
hyperlinks 401
See also linking
absolute 366–370
adding 365
adding to multiple shapes at once 356
deleting 364
displaying descriptions 365
editing 364
email addresses 360
following 354
opening Hyperlinks dialog box 355
relative 366–370
relative paths 362
specifying target 355
symbol on shapes 354
to Visio pages 356

Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) 288, 529
I
Icon Set graphics 308
icon sets 310–311
ignoring validation rules 453
images
creating from shapes 386–390
creating shapes using 109
file formats 386–389
inserting 110
using as backgrounds 130
Info page (Backstage view) 14–16, 380–383
Information Rights Management (IRM) 6, 384–385, 529
insertion bar 529
IRM (Information Rights Management) 6, 384–385, 529
Issues window 450, 454
J
JavaScript 529
JPG/JPEG 529
JPG webpage format 408
K
keyboard shortcuts 515–524
KeyTips 517
L
Label data field attribute 279
labels, adding to shapes 103
lanes See swimlanes
languages
drawings 30
parameters 22
LAN (local area network) 529

Lasso Select tool 51, 529
layers 529
adding new shapes 118
assigning shapes to 120
benefits of using 117
changing properties 120
controlling visibility of shapes 118
creating on pages 118–119
gluing shapes 118
locking shapes 118
managing object colors 118
predefined 117
printing 118
properties 116, 118
removing from pages 119
removing shapes 120
selecting all shapes 120
snapping shapes 118
vs. groups 118
legends, data graphics 306, 319–320, 439, 527
Line tool 68, 529
lines
See also connection points; shapes
applying gradients 233
applying solid colors 232
arcs 68
changing arrow types 232
changing patterns 232
changing weights 232
color picker 230, 232
connecting shapes 65–70
connection points 66, 71

create 2-D shapes using 69
creating 65
customizing 231
drawing tools 68
formatting 71
freeform 68
glued/unglued 67
gluing to shapes 69, 71
static glue 71, 74
tailoring properties 231
linked data
See also data linking
changing column settings 339
data graphic options 341
identifying links 339
managing 339–340
refreshing 344–345
using data graphic options 341–344
linking
See also hyperlinks
adjacent shapes 82
background pages to foreground pages 130
to documents 361–362
to Excel cells 363
foreground pages to background pages 121
non-adjacent shapes 82
to OneDrive 21
to pages in different diagrams 357
to pages within diagrams 357
to PowerPoint slides 363
shapes using AutoConnect 77–83
to SharePoint sites 21

to specific locations in Office documents 362–364
to specific shapes 356, 359
to Visio pages 356
to websites 360
to Word bookmarks 363
list fields 276–277
lists 416, 430, 529
adding shapes 431–434
creating 509–511
formatting 434
and swimlanes 435
Live Preview 529
local area network (LAN) 529
LoopType data field 277
M
macro recorder 30
macros 391–392, 529
recording 506
running 506
security settings 507
vs. VBA 509
Marker theme 215
masters 8, 529–531
Maximum Value field 317
measurement units 11
Mechanical Engineering diagrams 258
metadata 380–384
metric 530
Metric diagrams 258
metric templates 11
Microsoft Press contact information xix
Microsoft Press Store xviii

Microsoft SharePoint 2010 Workflow validation rule set 448
Microsoft SharePoint 2016 Workflow validation rule set 448
Microsoft Silverlight 399, 404
Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) 508–509
Minimum Value field 317
mini toolbar 530
Modern theme 214
N
Name data field attribute 280
network diagrams
See also diagrams
2-D shapes 245
adding network cabling 259
adding rack diagram pages 252
building basic 240–242
building detailed 242–244
choosing shape styles 245
data linking 259
enhancing 259
Ethernet networks 242
Ethernet shapes 240–241
finding shapes 246
predefined reports 260
real-time 259
stencils 242
network performance 302–304
networks 244
New page (Backstage view) 16
null entries 282
Number shape data field 268, 278
O

Object Linking and Embedding Database (OLE DB) 530
objects
managing on layers 118
masters 8
shapes 8
ODBC (Open Database Connectivity) 530
OLE DB (Object Linking and Embedding Database) 530
one-dimensional shapes
identifying 76
lines 65
OneDrive, linking to 21
Open Database Connectivity (ODBC) 530
Open page (Backstage view) 17
Organization Chart Wizard
creating data charts 185–186
including photos 201
using with existing data 178–184
organization charts 530
add-in tabs 172
adding multiple shapes 176
adding names 174
adding photographs 196
adding titles 174
applying styles 188
applying themes 197
arranging shapes 189
building from existing data 177–184
building manually 173–177
building with Organization Chart Wizard 178–184
centering on pages 189
changing layouts 187–189
changing shape appearance 191–195

changing shape positions 176–177
changing style 194
correcting shape positions 189
correcting shape spacing 189
creating data charts 186
cropping photos 201
data source types 177
default style 193
deleting photos 197
editing photos 201
enhancing with data graphics 305–306
hiding sections 189
hyperlinking employee shapes 183
importing photos 198–200
layouts 187
moving shapes 189–190
replacing photos in shapes 196
restoring shape spacing 188
showing/hiding photos 197
showing/hiding subordinates 190
specifying page contents 182
synchronizing employee shapes 183
undoing changes 194–195
using templates 173
vertical spacing 189–190
Organize Supporting Files In A Folder option 406
orientation
changing for pages 128
flowcharts 142
of shape text 99
swimlanes 150, 151
P

page breaks, moving shapes off 211
page controls 530
page name tabs 122, 124, 530
pages
adding comments 106, 108
assigning background pages 133
backgrounds 121
changing orientation 128
copying attributes 122
creating from selections 164
creating layers 118–119
creating new 164
deleting 125
duplicating 124
duplicating contents 122
foregrounds 121
linking to shapes 164
moving 124
on-screen drawing settings 121
opening ShapeSheet 502
physical page settings 121
previewing 376
removing layers 119
renaming 123
resequencing 124
scrolling 32
viewing on web 398
Pan and Zoom navigation pane 400
Pan & Zoom window 37–39
panning 516, 530
diagrams 37–39, 41, 470
print preview images 376

webpages 400, 403
pasting shapes 53–55
pattern fills 230
PDF (Adobe Portable Document Format) 392–393
Pencil tool 68
personal information, removing 381, 383
photos
adding to organization charts 196
cropping 201
deleting from shapes 197
deleting placeholders 197
editing 200–201
importing into organization charts 198
showing/hiding placeholders 197
pictures, creating shapes using 109
Pin Pos See pin position
pin position 61, 63, 530
.png (Portable Network Graphic) 530
PNG webpage format 408
Pointer Tool 530
Portable Network Graphic (.png) 530
Position button 342
positioning shapes 207, 209–211
practice files xvi–xviii
predefined reports, running 286–290
presentation mode 30
previewing
data graphics 313
diagrams 376–379
drawings 376–379
printer paper dimensions 377
Print page (Backstage view) 18

print preview 376–379
print tile 530
printers, choosing paper size 126
printing 376–378
backgrounds 378
changing page orientation 128
configuring page settings 127
diagrams 210, 379
footers 378–379
headers 378–379
image quality settings 378
layers 118
Move Off Page Breaks 377
moving shapes off page breaks 379
page ranges 378
scaling foreground pages 126
process map 530
Professional theme 214
Prompt data field attribute 280
properties
changing for layers 120
foreground pages 122
layers 118
publishing diagrams 398–403
different formats 404
setting options 404–409
Q
Quick Access Toolbar 23, 496–497, 530
Quick Import 326–330, 530
Quick Import wizard 6
Quick Shapes 77, 530
adding shapes 83

changing order of masters 81
live preview 81
masters 83
Quick Start guide 12
Quick Styles 213, 225–226, 530
R
rack diagrams 247
adding to network diagrams 252
changing drawing scale 255–256
creating 251
enhancing with data graphics 302–306
publishing 259
scaled drawings 252
shape heights 250
stencils 247–248
Rack Mounted Servers stencils 242
rack shapes
adding data to 259
adjusting 250, 252
connection points 249
displaying heights 249
gluing on racks 249
and scaled drawings 249
showing/hiding U heights 251
rack units 249, 531
racks
adding hyperlinks 259
gluing shapes 249
U heights 251
Red-Green-Blue (RGB) 531
reflection effects 222
relative links 366–370, 531

relative path 362
Remove Hidden Information 380–383
Report Definition Wizard 291
reports 531
creating 291–296
displaying in Excel 287
displaying in shapes 288
displaying in web browsers 288
displaying in XML 289
modifying 291–295
modifying definitions 296
network diagrams 260
output choices 287
predefined 286
running 290
saving definitions 295
updating 289–290
resize handles See control handles
resizing
Ethernet segments 242
Ethernet shapes 241
Server shapes 250
shapes 56, 242, 252
restricting access 384–385
reviewer’s marks, removing 381
RGB (Red-Green-Blue) 531
ribbon 531
add-in tabs 24–25
customizing 23, 493–496
KeyTips 517
navigating 517–518
tabs 532

tool tab groups 533
tool tabs 23–24
rotating
shapes 100, 102
text independent of shape 102
text in shapes 100–101
rotation angles
displaying 30
rotation handles 61–62, 531
rule sets See validation rules
rulers 531
aligning shapes 56
displaying/hiding 56
positioning shapes 56, 57
sizing shapes 56
rules 531
templates 448
validation 448–449
S
saturation 529
saving
diagrams as PDFs 393
options 22
Save/Save As pages (Backstage view) 17–18
to SharePoint 466–469
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) 532
scaled drawings 531
adjusting scaling factors 255, 257
creating custom ratios 253
definition 252
predefined scales 256
rack shapes 249

scale types 253
ScreenTips 104, 280, 365, 531
adding to diagrams 104
vs. comments 105
scroll bars in Shapes window 34
scrolling pages 32
Search Pages navigation pane 401
searching
full-text 401, 465
for templates 9, 13
webpages 401
security, macros 507
selection handles See control handles
selection rectangles 531
selection tools 520, 525
Server shapes 250
Servers stencil 242
shadow effects 222
Shape & Position window 63
shape data 532
See also shapes
data fields 268, 275
editing 275–278
entering data values 268
entering in text fields 278
exiting fields 278
formatting 275
list fields 276–277
viewing 269–274, 471
shape data fields 268
allowing blanks 282
changing attributes 281, 283

changing default value 281–282
creating drop-down lists 282
defining 283
labeling 283
specifying internal name 283
specifying sort key value 283
types 268
viewing attributes 279–281
working with multiple shapes 280
Shape Data window 532
changing data values in 275–278
closing 273
docking 269, 273
hiding 269
locating 274
opening 273
positioning 273
resizing 269
setting default value 281
shape names 532
shapes 8–9
See also data graphics; diagrams; drawing tools; dynamic connectors; lines; shape data
2-D, creating with lines 69
2-D network 245
3-D equipment 244
action tags 525
Activity (BPMN) 525
activity types 157
adding comments 108
adding data fields 283
adding from stencils 82
adding hyperlinks 356, 365

adding labels 103
adding photos 196
adding ScreenTips 107
adding text 96–97, 148
adding to containers 425
adding to flowcharts 148
adding to layers 118
adding to lists 431–434
adding to organization charts 176–177
adding to swimlane diagrams 153
adding with AutoAdd 84–86
adding with Quick Shapes 83
adjacent, linking 82
adjusting heights 252
adjusting sizes 163
adjusting spacing 209
adjusting with control handles 62
aligning 49–50, 206–209, 211, 213
aligning on axes 49
aligning using Dynamic Grid 241
aligning using guides 57–61
aligning using rulers 56
anchors 208, 525
annotating 96, 162, 163
annotating using callouts 440–443
applying data graphics 306, 313, 315, 342
applying effects 222–225
applying gradient fills 229
applying pattern fills 230
applying Quick Styles 226
applying solid fills 229
applying themes 214

area selection 51–52
assigning to layers 120
attaching callouts 443
attributes 62–65
AutoAdd 83–85
AutoDelete 86
automatically applying data graphics 315
basic 158
behavior 501, 504
bounding boxes 51–52
bringing to front 207
callouts 162, 440–443
canvas 29
changing data graphics 342
changing effects 224
changing height/width 195
changing vertical spacing 190
circles 50
coauthoring 483
collapsing comments 106
commenting 477
Connecting Object 526
connecting using dynamic connectors 70–76
connecting using lines 65–70
connecting without connection points 72–74
connection points 66
connector types 157
control handles 60–65
controlling visibility on layers 118
coordinates 62–64
copying 53–54
copying formatting 233

creating custom 497–499
creating from data 338–339
creating images from 386–390
creating multiple 339
creating new pages from 164
creating text-only 102
creating using drawing tools 48, 50
creating using images 109
data fields 309
deleting 86
deleting photos 197
determining names 358–359
disallowing themes 219
displaying dimensions 30
displaying report output 288
displaying rotation angles 30
displaying text in multiple places 114
distributing 209–210
dragging data to existing 334–335
dragging onto racks 249
duplicating 54–55
Dynamic Grid 46–51
editing text 518
embellishing 220–221
Ethernet 240–242
Events 528
event triggers 163
event types 156, 163
exiting text entry mode 97
finding 246
flipping 211, 519
formulas 504

gateway types 157, 163
glue 528
glued to guides, moving 59
gluing callouts 162
gluing lines 69
gluing on layers 118
gluing to guides 58
grid lines 48
grouping 114, 116, 519
guidelines 47
guides 57–59
horizontal axis 209
horizontal position 207
hyperlink symbol 354
hyperlinks 401
inserting data values 284–285
inserting document properties 285
inserting fields 284, 511–512
interior vertical lines, moving 61
lasso selection 51–52
lines 65–70
linking data one page at a time 337–338
linking to data 333–339
linking to data automatically 335–337
linking to external data 327
linking to multiple data sources 333
linking to pages 164
linking using AutoConnect 77–84
listing links 365
live preview 223
locked 60
locked text 96

locking 118
locking colors 227
loop types 163
Microsoft-specific 246
moving 189–190, 516, 519
moving off page breaks 211
moving text blocks 99
Multiple Shapes 174
names 358, 532
non-adjacent, linking 82
one-dimensional 62
opening ShapeSheet 502
organizing using containers 423–424
orienting text 99
pasting 53–55
pin position 63
placing on pages 49
positioning 48, 55–59, 207, 209–211
positions on axes 207
properties 65, 501
protection 501
Quick Shapes 81–83
Quick Styles 225
rack 249
removing data graphics 313, 315–316
removing effects 224
removing fills 230
removing from containers 426
removing from layers 120
removing from selection 53
removing themes 219
replacing 111–113

replacing photos 196
repositioning 163
repositioning text 98–99
resizing 50, 56, 60, 163, 242
resizing text 98–99
resizing text blocks 99–100
restoring spacing 188
retaining alignment 54
rotating 61–63, 100, 102, 211, 519
rulers, using 56–57
running reports stored in 290
saving as masters 315
saving in custom stencils 315
selecting 51–53, 516, 525
selecting all on layers 120
selecting all that use data graphics 318
selecting from stencils 112
selecting multiple 52
selecting within groups 116
selection types 52–53
sending backwards 207
sheets 358
showing/hiding U heights 251
Size & Position window 62–65
size using guides 57–61
sizing 46–47, 50
smart shapes 532
snapping on layers 118
spacing 46–50, 209–211, 213
squares 50
subshapes, protecting alignment 114
text 532

text position 96
Three Positions 174
two-dimensional 62
ungrouping 115–116
unlinking from data 340
using different data graphics 314
values 63
vertical axis 209
vertical positions 207
wireframes 437–439
X-axis 207
Y-axis 207
Z-axis 207
Shapes window 28, 532
adjusting width 34, 36
docking 36
expanding/minimizing 33, 36
floating 34
opening/closing 34, 36
opening stencils 36
scroll bars 34
status bar 29–31
switching to open stencils 33
undocking/floating 34, 36
ShapeSheet 430, 433, 502–505, 532
Share page (Backstage view) 18–20
SharePoint
incorporating diagrams 464
linking to 21
refreshing diagrams 471–476
refresh intervals 474
saving diagrams to 468–469

saving files to 466–467
viewing diagrams 470
Visio Services 464–465
sharing diagrams 18–20, 464
sheets 358, 532
Show U Size command 250
Six Sigma Diagram validation rule set 448
Size & Position window 62–65
smart shapes 532
Snap & Glue 518
soft edges effects 222
Sort key data field attribute 280
spacing shapes 46–50
automatically 213
manually 209–211
spelling options 22
starter diagrams 25–28
static glue 71, 74, 77, 532
vs. dynamic glue 146–147
status bar 29–31, 532
Status shape data field 276
stencils 8, 521, 532
add shapes using AutoConnect 82
Basic Network Diagram 240, 242
creating custom 497–499
Detailed Network Diagram 242
diagrams 45
finding 247
network diagrams 242
Quick Shapes 81
Rack Mounted Servers 242
saving shapes in 315

selecting shapes from 112–113
Servers 242
shapes 45, 48
templates 45
titles, revealing 242
String shape data field 268, 278
subnet 532
subprocesses 164–166, 532
subshapes 114–115
SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) 532
SVG webpage format 408
swimlane diagrams 532
See also diagrams
adding flowchart shapes 153
adding lanes 152, 154–155
add-ins 150
building 152–154
functional bands 149
improving process steps with data graphics 304
labeling 155
lane orientation 150–151
numbering process steps 304
uses for 149
validating 454–455
swimlanes 532
adding to diagrams 154
and containers 435
labeling 155
and lists 435
rearranging sequence 436
T
tabs 532

task panes 532
TaskMap add-in 25, 306–307
tasks 532
Tell Me 5
templates 8, 532
Basic Electrical 6
Basic Network Diagram 242
Blank Drawing 9
BPMN Diagram 6
business rule sets 448
categories 10, 12
creating 394
custom 395–396
Detailed Network Diagram 240, 242
displaying information about 10
featured 12
flowcharts 140–141
frequently used 9
measurement units 11
metric 11
predefined layers 117
saving diagrams as 394
searching for 9, 13
starter diagrams 27
stencils 8
Unified Modeling Language (UML) 6
using existing diagrams 13
US Units 11
viewing from Start screen 7
wireframes 438–439
text
adding to containers 422

adding to groups 422
adding to shapes 96–97, 148
aligning 523
aligning in shapes 98
aligning in text blocks 99
annotations 163
controlling angle with formulas 101
editing 522
formatting 523
locking on shapes 96
orientation in shapes 99–101
position on shapes 96
preset positions 98
removing backgrounds 161
repositioning on shapes 98
resizing on shapes 98
rotating independent of shape 101–102
rotating on shapes 101
rotating with shapes 100
Text Block tool 98–99
text blocks 98–99, 532
text boxes 102–103
text fields, entering data 278
Text graphics 312
Text tool 102, 533
Theme gallery 214
themes 533
applying 214, 216–218
categories 214
choosing colors 219
color palettes 214
customizing 219–221

diagrams 213
disallowing for future shapes 219
effects 213
Hand Drawn 214
Marker 215
Modern 214
organization charts 197
Professional 214
Quick Styles 213
removing 225
removing from current page 218
removing from selected shapes 219
selecting alternate color schemes 220
selecting effects 220
Trendy 214
variants 213, 217, 533
Thermometer graphics 317
threaded comments 104, 106
tint slider 228
tips pane, removing 28
title blocks in background pages 132
toolbars 520
tool tab group 533
tool tabs 23–24
transparency 228
Trendy theme 214
Trust Center 23
Twitter address for Microsoft Press xix
two-dimensional shapes 65, 245
Type date field attribute 279
U
U heights 251

unglued lines 67
ungrouping shapes 116
Unified Modeling Language (UML) templates 6
Uniform Resource Locator (URL) 533
unique identifiers 331–332
unscaling drawings 258
upgrading from previous Visio versions 15
URL (Uniform Resource Locator) 533
user-defined cells 533
US Units templates 11
V
validating
BPMN diagrams 456
flowcharts 449–454
swimlane diagrams 454–455
validation 533
validation issues
highlighting shapes 453
ignoring 453–454
Issues window 450–451, 454
showing/hiding 454–455
sorting 450
validation rules 448–449
adding 457
creating new 458–460
editing 459
ignoring 452–454
importing into diagrams 457
Issues window 450–451
listing 458
selecting 450
Value data field attribute 280

Variable List shape data field 268, 278
variable lists 276, 533
variants 533
applying 218
changing connector styles 221
changing embellishment levels 221
customizing 219–221
VBA (Visual Basic for Applications) 508–509, 533
VBE (Visual Basic Editor) 508, 533
.vdw extension 533
Vector Markup Language (VML) 533
vertical axis 209
views
fit to window 515
full-screen 517
Visio 2003-2010 Drawing 391
Visio 2003-2010 Stencil 391
Visio 2003-2010 Template 391
Visio 2016
add-ins 23
editions of 4
file formats 512–514
file types 391
new features 4–6
product ID 21
programming with VBA 508–509
Quick Start guide 12
scrolling pages 32
Start screen 7
switching windows 31
toolbars 520
user interface (UI) design shapes 437

version information 21
Visio Drawing 391
Visio Macro-Enabled Drawing 391
Visio Macro-Enabled Stencil 391
Visio Macro-Enabled Template 391
Visio engine 533
Visio Options (Backstage view) 22
Visio Professional 2016 4, 439
Quick Import wizard 6
starter diagrams 27
Visio Pro for Office 365 4
Visio Services 464–465, 533
collaborating on diagrams 476–477
data-linked diagrams 465
Visio Stencil 391
Visio Template 391
Visio Viewer 397
Visio Web Access 464, 470–471
Visio web drawing 533
Visio Workflow Interchange 533
Visual Basic Editor (VBE) 508, 533
Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) 533
VML (Vector Markup Language) 533
VML webpage format 408
.vsd file extension 391
.vsdm file extension 391
.vsdx extension 534
.vsdx file extension 391
.vss file extension 391
.vssm file extension 391
.vssx file extension 391
.vst file extension 391

.vstm file extension 391
.vstx file extension 391
W
web browsers
Comments pane 481–482
filtering comments 482
reading/writing comments 477, 479, 482
updating diagrams 482
viewing diagrams in 469–471
Web Page format 392
Web Parts 475–476
webpages, moving around in 517
web-published diagrams
allowing/disallowing specific sources 468
navigating 398–403
setting options 404–409
websites, linking to 360
websites, Visio-generated
advanced settings 408–410
automatically opening in browsers 406
changing titles 404–405, 409
contents 410
copying 410
creating from diagrams 402
customizing 404–409
folder location 410
general settings 404–407
home pages 410
moving 410
navigation panes 399, 405
output formats 408
pan position 400

panning 403
publishing diagrams 398
publishing in different formats 404
searching for text 403
setting publishing options 404
specifying included content 405
storing pages 406
viewing different pages 403
viewing shape data 403
viewing specific pages 399
viewing using Internet Explorer 399–401
zoom level 400
windows
drawing 528
Drawing Explorer 527
Help 524
Shape Data 532
Shapes 532
switching 31
wireframe shapes 437–439
Word, linking to bookmarks 363
workflow 534
workspace 9, 534
X
XAML (Extensible Application Markup Language) 404, 534
X-axis 207
X-coordinate 534
XML-based Open Packaging Convention file format 513
XML, displaying report output 289
XML (Extensible Markup Language) 534
XML Paper Specification 392
.xps file extension 392

XPS Document 392
Y
Y-axis 207
Y-coordinate 534
Z
Z-axis 207
zoom 534
zoom level
displaying current percentage 31
setting for foreground pages 126
webpages 400
zoom settings, changing 403
zoom slider 376
zooming 515
diagrams 37–40, 376
diagrams in web browsers 470
Internet Explorer 397
zoom slider 30
Z-order 207, 534

About the author
Scott A. Helmers is a Microsoft Most Valuable Professional (MVP) for Microsoft Visio
and is the primary Visio expert at Experts-Exchange.com. He has helped companies create
custom Visio add-ins to enhance organizational efficiency and employee productivity, and
has taught thousands of people how to use technology more effectively.
He is Vice President of Product Planning and Support at the Harvard Computing Group, a
software and consulting firm that helps clients understand and implement business process
solutions. Scott is a co-inventor of TaskMap (www.taskmap.com), a Visio add-in that
anyone can use to document and improve all of the important aspects of any business
process.
Scott has worked with clients in Afghanistan, Egypt, India, Ireland, Jordan, Malaysia,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Canada, and the United States on projects involving knowledge
management, specification of new IT systems, process mapping and redesign, and
technology training. In addition, he has been an Adjunct Professor at both Northeastern
University and Boston University.
Scott is the author of three previous books: Microsoft Visio 2013 Step by Step (Microsoft
Press, 2013), Microsoft Visio 2010 Step by Step (Microsoft Press, 2011), and Data
Communications: A Beginner’s Guide to Concepts and Technology (Prentice-Hall, 1989).
He also contributed Chapter 9, “Visio and Visio Services,” to Business Intelligence in
Microsoft SharePoint 2013 by Norm Warren, Mariano Neto, Stacia Misner, Ivan Sanders,
and Scott Helmers (Microsoft Press, 2013). Information about Scott’s books is available at
www.VisioStepByStep.com.
When not working or spending time with his family in Andover, Massachusetts, Scott can
usually be found on his bicycle or working with a local community theater company.



