Lecture Notes in Production Engineering 
Micro Metal 
Forming
Frank Vollertsen Editor

Lecture Notes in Production Engineering
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/10642

Frank Vollertsen
Editor
Micro Metal Forming
123

Editor
Frank Vollertsen
Bremen
Germany
ISSN 2194-0525
ISSN 2194-0533
(electronic)
ISBN 978-3-642-30915-1
ISBN 978-3-642-30916-8
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8
Springer Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013932856
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief
excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the
work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of
the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always
be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright
Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science?Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface
Currently, our life is characterized by a continuous densiﬁcation in all aspects and
parts. Communication is faster thanks to smartphones, enabling one-to-one video,
and audio contact nearly at any time and location. Smartphones have a large
number of functions, which were realized before by nearly a dozen of aggregates.
Comfort and safety in cars is increased by a steadily growing number of safety and
assist systems, controlling not only the status of the car functions itself, but also
the agility of the driver and the actions of the trafﬁc around the car. Also, health
care components comprise numerous functions in aggregates of reduced size. All
those developments are the drivers for miniaturization of parts and components
which have to be produced in large lot sizes at low costs. As metals are still
excellent multi-functional materials, the methods of metal forming could be a
means of covering these demands, if those processes could be used for the pro-
duction of miniature components.
A ﬁrst hot spot of micro metal forming in Germany was developed by Prof.
Engel and Geiger, starting in the 1990s in Erlangen. Discussion of the scientiﬁc
advances, achieved also in other countries like Japan and USA was held (not
limited to but also) in The International Academy for Production Engineering
(CIRP), documenting the milestones in numerous papers and two keynote papers.
These keynote papers (‘Microforming’, issued in 2001, and ‘Size effects in
manufacturing of metallic components’, issued in 2009) are key documents on the
development of micro metal forming. The relevance of size effects is due to the
fact that those effects are the reason why knowledge from (macro) metal forming
cannot be transferred easily to the micro range. The effects have been the topic of a
priority program funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in the
period from 2002 to 2008. In 2007, a Collaborative Research Center (CRC, SFB
747) was started in Bremen, funded by the DFG and the University Bremen.
Within this CRC are about 50 scientists’ work on topics relevant for the further
development of micro metal forming. Taking advantage of the structure of a
University, lectures on micro metal forming are introduced and held continuously
by the CRC-scientists. The knowledge gathered and produced in the CRC is
condensed in the hand book. It is compiled to help those people who start to work
v

in this special ﬁeld of micro metal forming. It is not only for students, doing their
Bachelor or Master thesis, but also for engineers working in research and devel-
opment in institutes and industry. Basic knowledge of physics, mathematics, and
the principles of metal forming are required to use this book.
The aim of this book is to present the most important basic knowledge, the
current state-of-the-art, and research results useful for future application of micro
metal forming. Hence, the book is composed from three blocks, each comprising
some chapters:
The ﬁrst block (Chaps. 1–3) describes the basics in metal forming like tribol-
ogy, formability, and mechanical strength. A special emphasis is laid on the
questions which arise when reducing the size to the micro range. Therefore, size
effects are also described which should help to understand the principle differences
in micro forming besides the small size and weight of the workpieces.
Information on processes of bulk and sheet forming is given in the second block
(Chaps. 4–6). Besides the effects in micro metal forming using the common
processes, special processes which make use of size effects are explained in
Chap. 6. The processes are only feasible in micro processing and demonstrate the
positive nature of size effects. The facts explained in the ﬁrst block are helpful to
understand the nature and limits of those methods.
Tools in the broader sense, which are used for micro metal forming, are
addressed in the third block. Not only the forming tools, e.g., the components
which transfer forces on the workpiece during the forming process are meant, but
also means for their production and other aggregates like forming machines,
methods for quality assurance, and simulation tools. These topics are described in
Chaps. 7–10.
All the authors of the 10 chapters and sections are working in the relevant ﬁelds
of the CRC. They are directors or staff members of the following institutes, listed
in alphabetical order together with the most important research areas covered
within the CRC. The names of the directors are given in brackets:
BIAS—Bremer Institut für angewandte Strahltechnik: Laser material processing,
sheet and bulk metal micro forming (Prof. Dr.-Ing. Frank Vollertsen); optical
metrology (Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Ralf Bergmann)
BIBA—Bremer Institut für Produktion und Logistik: Logistics and simultaneous
engineering (Prof. Dr.-Ing. Bernd Scholz-Reiter)
BIMAQ—Bremer Institut für Messtechnik, Automatisierung Qualitätswissens-
chaft: Process control including metrology, quality assurance (Prof. Dr.-Ing.
Gert Goch)
bime—Bremer Institut für Strukturmechanik und Produktionsanlagen: Bulk metal
forming including machine development (Prof. Dr.-Ing. Bernd Kuhfuß; process
chain layout and automatization (Prof. Dr.-Ing. Kirsten Tracht)
IfS—Institut für Statistik: Monte Carlo-simulation and statistics (Prof. Dr. Mag.
rer. nat. Werner Brannath)
IWT—Stiftung Institut für Werkstofftechnik: Physical vapour deposition, heat
treatment, and mechanical testing (Prof. Dr.-Ing. Hans-Werner Zoch)
vi
Preface

LFM—Laboratory for Precision Machining: Cutting, machining, and polishing
(Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ekkard Brinksmeier)
ZeTeM—Zentrum für Technomathematik: Industrial mathematics (Prof. Dr. Peter
Maaß), simulation systems (Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Alfred Schmidt)
The interdisciplinary cooperation between production engineering, mathemat-
ics, and physics is an excellent basis for research in the demanding ﬁeld of micro
metal forming. A prerequisite for successful cooperation is the funding of man-
power and equipment, which was granted by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(SFB 747 Mikrokaltumformen) and University Bremen. The authors gratefully
acknowledge this support. Further thanks are expressed to Dr. Sybille Friedrich for
coordinating the work within the CRC including the preparation of this book.
Bremen, October 2012
Prof. Dr.-Ing. F. Vollertsen
Preface
vii

Authors
Dipl.-Ing. Roland von Bargen, IWT
Dipl.-Ing. Gerrit Behrens, BIAS
Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Ralf B. Bergmann, BIAS
Dr. Pavel Bobrov, IfS
Dr. rer. nat. Hubert Bomas, IWT
Dr. Christina Brandt, ZeTeM
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ekkard Brinksmeier, LFM
Dipl.-Ing. Heiko Brüning, BIAS
Dipl.-Ing. Helge Decho, IWT
Dr. rer. nat. Helgi Diehl, BIAS
Dipl.-Ing. Hendrik Flosky, BIAS
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Gert Goch, BIMAQ
Dr.-Ing. Martin Hunkel, IWT
Dr. rer. nat. Bernd Köhler, IWT
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Bernd Kuhfuss, bime
Dipl.-Ing. Timo Kühnle, BIAS
Dipl.-Ing. Karsten Lübke, BIMAQ
M. Sc. Michael Lütjen, BIBA
Prof. Dr. Peter Maaß ZeTeM
Dipl.-Ing. Salar Mehrafsun, BIAS
ix

Dr.-Ing. Jonathan Montalvo-Urquizo, ZeTeM
Dipl.-Ing. Eric Moumi, bime
Dr.-Ing. Knut Partes, BIAS
Dr. rer. nat. Iwona Piotrowska-Kurczewski, ZeTeM
Dr.-Ing. Oltmann Riemer, LFM
Dipl.-Inf. Daniel Rippel, BIBA
Dipl.-Ing. Christian Robert, LFM
Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Alfred Schmidt, ZeTeM
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Bernd Scholz-Reiter, BIBA
Dr.-Ing. Alwin Schulz, IWT
Dr.-Ing. Hendrik Schulze Niehoff, Volkswagen AG, former BIAS
Dipl.-Phys. Michael Schwander, BIAS
Dr. rer. nat. Heinz-Rolf Stock, IWT
Dipl-Inf. Hendrik Thamer, BIBA
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Kirsten Tracht, bime
Dipl.-Ing. Sven Twardy, LFM
Dr.-Ing. Volker Piwek, bime
M. Sc. Volker Renken, BIMAQ
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Frank Vollertsen, BIAS
Dr.-Ing. Axel von Hehl, IWT
Dr. rer. nat. Christoph von Kopylow, BIAS
Dipl.-Wi.-Ing. Florian Weikert, bime
M. Eng. Daniel Weimer, BIBA
Prof. Dr. Mag. rer. nat. Werner Brannath, IfS
Dr.-Ing. Hanna Wielage, BIAS
Dipl.-Ing. Peiran Zhang, BIMAQ
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Hans-Werner Zoch, IWT
x
Authors

Contents
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Frank Vollertsen
2
Basic Aspects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Frank Vollertsen
3
Mechanical Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Hans-Werner Zoch
4
Bulk Metal Forming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
Bernd Kuhfuss
5
Sheet Metal Forming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135
Frank Vollertsen
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
177
Heinz-Rolf Stock
7
Tool Making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
201
Ekkard Brinksmeier
8
Machines and Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
311
Bernd Kuhfuss
9
Simulation Technologies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
345
Peter Maaß
xi

10 Quality Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
381
Ralf B. Bergmann
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
431
xii
Contents

Global Variables
Latin
Variable
Explanation
A
Area (mm2)
a
Distance (mm)
b
Width (mm)
d
Diameter (mm)
E
Modulus of elasticity (GPa)
F
Force (N)
h
Height (mm)
HK
Knoop hardness
HM
Martens hardness (N/mm2)
kf
Flow stress (MPa)
l
Length (mm)
p
Pressure (N/mm2)
r
Radius (mm)
R
Roughness (lm)
s
Sheet thickness/layer thickness/material thickness (lm)
S
Surface roughness (nm)
t
Time (s)
T
Temperature (K)
u
Upset ratio
v
Velocity (mm/s)
V
Volume (m3)
_V
Volume material removal rate (m3/s)
xiii

Global list of subscripts (These subscripts are used globally)
Subscript
Explanation
0
Initial condition
1,2
Condition 1, 2
a
Arithmetic
ax
Axial
BLH
Blank holder
e
Elastic
f
Yield/feed
fr
Friction
F
(de)formation
G
Grain/gravity
la
Laser
max
Maximal
min
Minimal
M
Melting/tensile strength
n
Normal
N
Rated…
pl
Plastic
P
Punch
r
Radius, radial
t
Tangential
Greek
Variable
Explanation
d
Deﬂection (lm)
D
Difference (lm)
e
Strain (=Dl/lo)
_e
Strain rate (s-1)
q
Density (kg/m3)
u
Logarithmic degree of deformation (=ln(l/l0))
l
Friction coefﬁcient
k
Wavelength (m)
m
Kinematic viscosity (m2/s)
q
Density (kg/m3)
r
Normal stress (MPa)
rM
Ultimate tensile strength (MPa)
rN
Nominal stress (MPa)
rpl
Yield strength/elastic limit (MPa)
rpl 0.2
Yield strength with 0.2 % plastic deformation (N/mm2)
s
Shear stress (MPa)
w
Potential (V)
xiv
Global Variables

Chapter 1
Introduction
Frank Vollertsen
Micro metal forming is a part of the wide ﬁeld of metal forming. This class of
production technology is characterized by:
1. The shape of the workpiece is obtained by the plastic deformation of (pre-
dominantly) metallic materials.
2. In most cases the forces on the workpiece are induced by the coordinated action
of at least two tool segments.
3. The tools may contain 0–100 % of the desired shape as analogous memory. If
the shape is not stored in the tools, the relative motion of the tools has to be
controlled to derive a kinematic generation of the desired shape.
4. By deﬁnition, there is no material loss in metal forming. In practice however,
the preparation of the raw part and ﬁnalization of the shape of a workpiece
makes some cutting operations necessary, typically incurring material loss of
20–50 %.
The speciﬁc aspects of micro metal forming may be seen from a deﬁnition by
Geiger et al. [1]. In this deﬁnition micro metal forming is the production of parts
and structures with at least two dimensions in the sub-millimeter range by metal
forming. Processes for semi-ﬁnished products like wire drawing or rolling of foils
are not part of micro metal forming (mmf) by this deﬁnition, while those processes
might entail some of the typical challenges of mmf. To illustrate this deﬁnition, it
is said that a part made by mmf should ﬁt with a strictly linear motion through a
circular hole of diameter of 1 mm. It is obvious that this deﬁnition is just a
restriction in the size of the parts. Therefore, one may wonder why the well-known
processes of (macro) metal forming could not be applied to mmf by just reducing
the billet, blank and tool sizes. Speciﬁc features of mmf and related products are:
F. Vollertsen (&)
BIAS GmbH, Klagenfurter Str. 2 D-28359 Bremen, Germany
e-mail: vollertsen@bias.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_1,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
1

1. The size or at least one of the dimensions of the produced parts is comparable
with the grain size of the material used, resulting in hard to control material
behavior.
2. The very small volume of the parts changes the failure behavior due to different
probability of the occurrence of a defect in a particular workpiece, if homo-
geneous defects with low density exist in the raw material.
3. The very low weight (typically between 100 lg and 10 mg) of the (raw) parts
make handling difﬁcult due to, for example, adhesion effects. As precise han-
dling is necessary for joining operations, joining is less desirable. Therefore
parts should integrate multiple functions to reduce the number of components
in an assembly and to minimize the number of handling and joining operations.
This results in turn in a more complex design of at least the intermediate stages
of the product. As an example, interconnected multiple parts are manufactured
as one workpiece, which are separated after assembly to achieve independent
electrical functions. On the other hand, the small weight might allow the use of
more expensive materials. This is also true for micro forming tools, which may
be manufactured from a single crystalline diamond.
4. Quality assurance becomes more difﬁcult compared to macro parts, as many
methods usually employed cannot be used for the measurement of micro part
dimensions. Also the (scaled down) tolerances interfere greatly with the pre-
cision of the metrology, making the use of methods like statistical process
control (SPC) impossible.
As the parts are smaller than a grain of rice, there is reference to silicon
technology and the question arises whether this technology can deliver the same
parts as micro metal forming. A closer look at silicon technology shows differ-
ences in at least the following four features:
1. Mmf parts are often larger than those of silicon technology.
2. The variety of materials is much greater in mmf, as many metals can be
processed.
3. Parts produced by silicon technology are almost always 2  D, e.g. they have a
constant cross-section along a (limited) height (so-called prismatic structures).
4. Mmf may also be economically successful for small lot sizes.
All in all, mmf and silicon technologies should be understood as being com-
plimentary rather than competing technologies.
Mmf is already in use for the production of a few parts for the electronic
industry, such as shafts for micro motors or end-caps for SMD-resistors, see
Fig. 1.1. The processes which are in use for the production of these parts
demanded great efforts for their (mostly empiric) development, making the pro-
cesses only economically viable for very large lot sizes of some millions or even
billions of parts per year. A wider use of the mmf technology class could be
achieved, if the production was better planned, processes were more stable and
sound control was implemented. This book is intended to be a kind of techno-
logical guidance for mmf. There is continuous growth in mmf knowledge by the
2
F. Vollertsen

further development of parts and processes. Related processes are macro metal
forming, silicon technology and high-precision cutting technology, which are
already described in detail. This current description should help both the new and
the experienced user of mmf decide on the part and process layout for the prompt
start of a stable production process.
Reference
1. Geiger, M., Kleiner, M., Eckstein, R., Tiesler, N., Engel, U.: Microforming CIRP Ann. 50(2),
445–462 (2001)
Fig. 1.1 a Deep-drawn shaft of a micro motor (18 drawing steps), courtesy of U. Engel. b Deep-
drawn end caps for resistors, courtesy of Stüken GmbH & Co
1
Introduction
3

Chapter 2
Basic Aspects
Frank Vollertsen
Latin
A
Area (mm2)
A0
Initial area (mm2)
Al
Liquid contact area (mm2)
As
Solid contact area (mm2)
a
Distance (mm)
b
Width (mm)
d
Diameter (mm)
d0
Initial diameter (mm)
d1
Major diameter after deformation (mm)
d2
Minor diameter after deformation (mm)
dp
Punch diameter (mm)
E
Modulus of elasticity (GPa)
F
Force (N)
FBLH
Blank holder force (N)
FE
Electrostatic force (N)
Ffr
Frictional force (N)
FG
Gravitation (N)
Fn
Normal force (N)
FvW
Van der Waal’s force (N)
Fc
Force induced by surface tension (N)
h
Height (mm)
h0
Initial height (mm)
k
Yield stress in shear (MPa)
kf
Flow stress (MPa)
kfs
Flow stress at the surface (MPa)
kfv
Flow stress in the volume (MPa)
F. Vollertsen (&)
Bremer Institut für angewandte Strahltechnik GmbH, Bremen , Germany
e-mail: vollertsen@bias.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_2,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
5

l
Length (mm)
l0
Original length (mm)
l1
Length during deformation (mm)
lG
Grain size (mm)
lNa
Length nakajima test
m
Friction factor
p
Pressure (N/mm2)
pl
Closed pocket pressure (N/mm2)
q
Wear rate (m3  (Nm)-1)
s0
Initial material thickness (mm)
T
Temperature (K)
t
Time (s)
v
Velocity (mm/s)
V
Volume (m3)
w
Path (mm)
Greek
D
Difference (lm)
e
Strain
u
Logarithmic degree of deformation = ln(l/l0)
_u
Deformation velocity (s-1)
u1
Major strain
u2
Minor strain
K
Scaling factor
g
Dynamic viscosity (N s/m2)
j
Grain number
l
Friction coefﬁcient
m
Kinematic viscosity (m2/s)
r
Normal stress (MPa)
rM
Ultimate tensile strength (MPa)
rpl
Yield strength (MPa)
s
Frictional shear stress (MPa)
sSC
Shear stress for a single crystal (MPa)
6
F. Vollertsen

2.1 Size Effects
Frank Vollertsen
2.1.1 Deﬁnition and Categories
The term ‘size effect’ is often used when experiments with samples of different size,
e.g. different sheet thicknesses in tensile tests, present non-uniform behavior. More
than once in the past different behavior has been wrongly referred to as size effect.
In one example, tensile stress in foils with thicknesses of 200 and 50 lm was called
a size effect, despite the fact that the authors of those papers were aware of the fact
that the 50 lm foil showed a stronger strain hardening than the 200 lm foil. This in
turn was due to rolling without intermediate annealing. Therefore, one should be
aware that not every difference observed in samples of different sizes is a size effect.
A general description of size effects as understood in the scientiﬁc context is
strongly linked to the theory of similarity. This theory (see e.g. [38] for a detailed
explanation) has the central hypothesis that systems will behave similarly if
scaling, i.e. changing the size, is carried out according to the rules of similarity. All
relevant features like speed, weight, size and so forth must be changed in a ﬁxed
relation, e.g. by a constant factor which is called scaling factor K. As an example,
let us consider a simple upsetting test with the plastic compression of a cylinder of
initial height h0 to the ﬁnal height h. In order to keep the example simple no
friction should occur. The velocity v
v ¼ Dh=Dt ¼
h0  h
ð
Þ=Dt
ð2:1Þ
is the punch velocity and
_u ¼ du=dt ¼ Du=Dt
ð2:2Þ
is the deformation velocity, where u is the logarithmic strain
u ¼ ln h=h0
ð
Þ
ð2:3Þ
In the case that h0 is changed from size 1 to size 2, a similar material behavior
(in terms of ﬂow stress kf) is expected for similar deformation speeds (and iden-
tical material, i.e. grain size, predeformation, temperature and so on), e.g.
kf1 ¼ kf2
ð2:4Þ
for
_u1 ¼ _u2
ð2:5Þ
For identical strain Eq. (2.5) yields when using Eq. (2.2)
Dt1 ¼ Dt2
ð2:6Þ
2
Basic Aspects
7

As Dh1 is not equal to Dh2, v1 is not equal to v2. Deﬁning
h0;1 ¼ Kh0;2
ð2:7Þ
the relation of punch velocities from Eq. (2.1)
v1=v2 ¼ h0;1  h1


=Dt1= h0;2  h2


=Dt2
ð2:8Þ
will together with Eqs. (2.6) and (2.7) yield
v1=v2 ¼ ðKh0;2  Kh2Þ= h0;2  h2


¼ K
ð2:9Þ
Therefore, if the height h0,1 is K = 10 times the height h0,2, the punch velocity
has also to be increased by a factor of 10 to obtain similar material behavior—at
least according to the theory of similarity. In fact this identical material behavior is
not observed in small samples, where the grain size is in the order of the sample
diameter. Such deviations from the expected behavior are called size effects,
which are visible under conditions where the rules of similarity are obeyed.
Size effects are deﬁned as follows [51]: Size effects are deviations from
intensive or proportional extrapolated extensive values of a process which occur,
when scaling the geometrical dimensions. By this deﬁnition, size effects are
deﬁned as the deviation from the normal, e.g. expected behaviour, of a system. The
scaling is further conﬁned to geometrical scaling, which is probably the most
important especially for micro technology. Intensive values are—according to the
common deﬁnition in physical chemistry—system parameters like temperature or
pressure and material parameters like density; they do not change with the volume
of the sample. Extensive values are volume-dependent parameters like mass. The
change in extensive value, e.g. the mass of a sphere, with changing size has to be
considered when calculating the size effects. A proportional extrapolation simply
means that one has to consider that an increase of a factor of 10 of the radius r of a
sphere will increase the mass by a factor of 1,000, as the volume (and the mass,
constant density provided) is proportional to r
3. The deﬁnition also implies that a
size effect can be quantiﬁed as a ratio (even a difference could be used) between
the value x1 and x2.
A systematic approach towards size effects was developed and introduced [50].
This system is based on three main categories of size effect, which in turn are
subdivided in subgroups. Having such a system can help analyze existing effects in
order to determine which mechanisms are behind a particular behavior.
In Fig. 2.1, the three main categories of size effects are shown. The name of the
groups are given by the feature that is held constant during scaling and which is
also responsible for the occurrence of the size effect. This method of addressing
the different groups of size effects already shows that the scaling process will not
change all parameters, since some will be held constant.
At ﬁrst glance it might appear surprising that a constant density should be the
source of a size effect. The common basic principle of those effects is based on the
fact that a constant density of features (e.g. voids) also means a constant distance
8
F. Vollertsen

between them. If the sample size is large compared to that distance, the probability
of the existence of such a feature in a volume element of the sample will be high.
On the other hand, if the sample size is of an order of magnitude equal to the mean
feature distance, there may be samples showing no such characteristic feature,
which in turn results in the different behavior of the part.
The second category of size effects are characterized by having a constant
shape, which addresses the effects produced by the ratio between surface and
volume. Many effects used in nano technology are based on the shape size effects,
as the relative surface area increases strongly with decreasing size. Consider a
catalyst which enables chemical reactions through intermediate reaction phases at
its surface. A sphere of 1 mm in diameter has a total surface area of 3.14 mm2. As
the surface to volume ratio scales with a factor of 1/r, the total surface of the
spheres with the same total volume but a size of 10 nm will increase by a factor of
105 to 314,000 mm2. The common principle of shape effects is that there are
volume related values (in our example: the number of parts) and surface related
values (in the example the total surface area) which determine the observed value.
The relation between these different components changes with size, which leads to
a dominance of either one or the other effect.
The size effects summarized in the third group show a certain similarity to the
ﬁrst category, the density effects. The common source of the structure effects is
also the relation between the sample size and the length, this length not being a
mean distance between evenly distributed features but a discretely localized
F
F
Ffr
Workpiece
Lubricant
tool
tool
Workpiece
Ffr
FAdhesion
FAdhesion
FGravity > FAdhesion
FGravity < FAdhesion
Category
Density
Shape
Structure
Downscaling
Upscaling
BIAS ID 121979
Fig. 2.1 Main categories of size effects, according to [51]
2
Basic Aspects
9

distance deﬁned by the atomistic or engineering structure of the workpiece. Again,
the size of this characteristic length is held constant, which gives rise to size effects
when the sample size approaches the size of the characteristic length.
Returning to the subject of essential mechanisms for the occurrence of size
effects, one can conclude that the main source of size effects is the fact that it is not
possible to keep the relation between all relevant parameters constant when
reducing the size of the parts. As an example, imagine the scaling down of a sheet
metal forming process. If one reduces the sheet thickness the relation of grain size
to sheet thickness will increase. To scale down every factor, the grain size could be
reduced. While this would keep the relation between grain size and sheet thickness
constant, the strength of the material would increase according to the Hall–Petch-
relationship. The higher strength will have an impact on the elastic deformation of
the tools among other effects. Therefore, the correct scaling of all relevant
parameters is not possible, and size effects are inevitable. This also leads to a
deﬁnition of a general mechanism of size effects; this is based on the fact that
different subprocesses or force components will have a different relative impor-
tance at different sizes. The nature of the processes is that all subprocesses and
forces exist in all realizations of different sizes, but depending on the size certain
aspects are dominant.
In order to show size effects, experiments with samples of different sizes are
necessary. This results in the need for a nomenclature or deﬁnition for the size.
There is a straightforward designation for size derived from the theory of simi-
larity. To address a speciﬁc size of a part, a value called a ‘scaling factor’ (often k
is used as a variable, here K is used) with no dimension is taken. If we take K as
the value, K = 1 would designate the ‘normal’ size of the part, e.g. a sheet
thickness of 1 mm, while K = 0.1 would refer to a sheet of 100 lm in thickness,
as it is intended that the ‘actual value = K times normal value’. This method to
designate the absolute size of a realization has the advantage that K can be used as
a variable (independent from features like length, surface area, volume or time) in
formulas and graphs, if trends with variation of the size are shown. On the other
hand, some information is lost using such relative values. One always needs
calibration with respect to the ‘normal value’. In the given example the infor-
mation ‘K = 1 means sheet thickness = 1 mm’ describes this normal value.
Without this information about the normal value it is difﬁcult or impossible to
know in which case size effects occur. Due to this, throughout this book the
nomenclature introduced in [53] of ‘size\nn[’ will be used, where ‘\nn[’ is the
initial sheet thickness or the rod diameter in lm. As an example, ‘size20’ desig-
nates a sheet with a thickness of 20 lm or a wire with a diameter of 20 lm. The
example given above (a realization of K = 0.1 with a standard value of 1 mm)
would be identiﬁed by ‘size100’. Using ‘size\nn[’ for designating a workpiece
realization always contains the information that samples are produced by correct
scaling, e.g. reducing as far as possible all relevant features by the same factor.
As the material behavior under plastic deformation is essential for micro
forming (and also for the explanation of size effects), the grain size, and especially
its dimension relative to the sample thickness, plays an important role. Due to that,
10
F. Vollertsen

a variable j, which is called ‘grain number’ is introduced. The grain number j is
deﬁned as the (average) number of grains (having a grain size of lG) along the
thickness s0 of the sample, e.g. the initial sheet thickness:
j ¼ s0=lG
ð2:10Þ
So, for a grain size of 10 lm and a sheet thickness of 50 lm a grain number of
5 is obtained. The grain number can become also less than 1, if the grain size,
measured in the sheet plane, is bigger than the sheet thickness. A sheet micro-
structure with a grain number less than 1 is also called a ‘Tiffany structure’.
Very often it is argued that size effects are detrimental and must be avoided. This
is not true, as will be shown by the examples in Chap. 6 where processes are
discussed which are enabled by size effects. The use of size effects can also be seen
from the strength measurement of materials. This also demonstrates the large variety
of size effects. Figure 2.2 is a summary of different work on size effects affecting the
strength of materials. On the x-axis the absolute size of the parts or the relevant area
covered by the measurement principle is given. Essentially for larger samples this is
the rod diameter or sheet thickness of the samples. In small dimensions, this size in
given by the indentation depth, as strength measurements on samples in the nano-
meter dimension are often made by indentation hardness measurements. It is worth
noting that size effects appear in a wide range of sample sizes, covering 6 orders of
magnitude. On the y-axis a more complex value is used. It is called effect strength
and deﬁned (see [50]) to demonstrate the signiﬁcance of the size effect, e.g. how
strong the effect changes the observed value. Essentially, the effect strength is the
ratio between the change in the value (here the strength of the material) with change
in the size, while per deﬁnition the effect strength is always a positive value. In some
cases, ‘smaller is stronger’ is true, but there are also cases in which ‘smaller is
weaker’ applies. In both cases the effect strength is positive. It is obvious that size
effects concerning the strength of materials which occur in very small parts are much
stronger than those occurring in large parts. This emphasizes the importance of the
consideration of such effects in mmf.
M1: dislocation starvation
M2: passivation layer
M3: strain gradient
M4: composite
M5: friction
M6: texture
M7: defect strength
S1: surface grain
D1: hard zone
D2: Weibull
Categories
M: microstructure effect
S: shape effect
D: density effect
S1
M5
M7
S1
S1
S1
M6
M6
10nm 100nm 1μm
10μm 100μm
1mm 10mm
Characteristic size
1.25
1.0
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
Effect strength
BIAS ID 121980
Fig. 2.2 Effect strength of different size effects affecting the ﬂow stress, according to [51]
2
Basic Aspects
11

In order to demonstrate what size effects mean to the strength, some values
from experiments using whiskers are replotted in Fig. 2.3. It demonstrates the
strong increase in the strength of pure copper, normally known as a very soft
material, up to values far above the strength of modern high strength steels. The
effect is due to the fact that the sample diameter falls below the average distance
between dislocations. Due to that the strength is not determined by the dislocation
movement, but by the theoretical strength deﬁned by the cohesion of the atoms
within the lattice.
2.1.2 Density Effects
A density effect is a size effect which occurs during scaling when keeping the
density of a feature constant. In particular, density effects will occur when the
actual part size approaches the mean distance between the features. The density
effects are subdivided by the three categories of the possible appearance of
(microstructural) features. Those can appear as points (e.g. pores), lines (e.g.
dislocation lines) or areas (e.g. grain boundaries). In the case of known size effects,
there is a homogeneous distribution of such features though the volume of the part,
while it cannot be excluded that a distribution of such features at the surface could
also lead to density size effects.
The ﬁrst possible feature shape shown in Fig. 2.4 is the point feature resulting
in the point density effect. Those point elements can be pores in brittle ceramics or
metallic welds, but also foreign atoms in a matrix lattice. The best known example
of a point density effect is the so-called Weibull effect, which describes the size
dependence of samples with low but not vanishing porosity. In large samples,
pores near the surface give rise to stress concentrations and therefore they deter-
mine the strength of the part. Smaller samples may show no pores in the highly
loaded region, because the density and therefore the distance between the pores is
kept constant. Due to that, the probability of ﬁnding no pores within the critical
region is increased, this results in the higher strength of smaller samples made
from identical material.
0
10
20
30
μm
50
Diameter
0
1
2
3
5
GPa
Strength
BIAS ID 121981
Fig. 2.3 Strength of copper
whiskers, according to [51],
data from [34]
12
F. Vollertsen

The line density effect can be observed in the case of copper whiskers, see
Fig. 2.3. The line density is given by the initial dislocation density of the samples,
which is typically 106–108/cm2, corresponding to a mean distance of 1–10 lm of
the dislocations. Crystals with a diameter below 10 lm tend to have no (mobile)
dislocations, resulting in a transition from deformation via dislocation movements
to other mechanisms, which are dominated by the interatomic forces. This results
in a very strong increase in the strength.
The third subgroup of the density effects in Fig. 2.4 is that of area density
effects. The density of interfaces can be kept constant by maintaining a constant
grain size. Sometimes the area density effects are determined by another layout of
the experiments. Instead of decreasing the size of the samples at a constant grain
size, the grain size is changed while the size of the samples is held constant. One
should bear in mind that this is not the same. Despite the fact that the grain number
can be changed by a layout such as the one in the experiments, the grain boundary
density is not held constant, giving rise to additional effects like changes in
strength according to the Hall–Petch-relationship. This must be accounted for if
any forces or elongation limits due to plastic deformation are relevant. In some
cases, experiments from such a layout can give interesting information. An
example can be seen in Fig. 2.5 for extruded parts, with an initial grain number of
24 and 4. If only a few crystals exist along the cross-sections of the samples
(j = 4), the individual orientation has a strong impact on the local ﬂow stress and
in turn on the ﬂow velocity. Those differences in the material ﬂow are the source
for the heavy distortion of the micro samples, which does not occur at a larger
grain number (j = 24).
A macro
kf = kf
Fmacro
F
d micro
micro
dmacro
Fmicro
A micro
kf = kf
Area density
Line density
BIAS ID 121982
Fmacro
Fmacro
Point density
Fig. 2.4 Subcategories of density effects
2
Basic Aspects
13

2.1.3 Shape Effects
Shape effects are such effects that occur if a process, assembly or part is carried out
in a bigger or smaller realization with the same shape but different size. The easiest
example is two spheres of different diameter. All these effects are based on the
change in the surface to volume-ratio, which occurs during this kind of scaling.
According to the general layout of the categorization of size effects, the reason for
the size effects must be linked to the particular feature. Of course, in the experi-
ments for density or structure effects the ratio of surface to volume will also
change, but it is not essential for the observed size effect in these cases. On the
other hand it cannot be excluded that density effects (and/or structure effects) and
shape effects occur in parallel and sum up or eliminate each other. Experiments on
size effects have to be checked carefully for such biasing effects.
Shape effects are also a very good example for the general size mechanism
effects which are given above. This is due to the fact that shape size effects usually
occur when the relation between surface and volume determined effects change, as
the relative amount of the surface increases with decreasing size. Consider a cube
with edge length l, then the volume V will be
V ¼ l3
ð2:11Þ
while the total surface area A is
A ¼ 6 l2
ð2:12Þ
The surface to volume ratio is
A=V ¼ 6=l
ð2:13Þ
mm
32 μm grain size
211 μm grain size
BIAS ID 121983
Fig. 2.5 Workpiece
distortion as a result of
density effects [30]
14
F. Vollertsen

e.g. it will increase 1/l with decreasing size.
Effects, forces or features which are dominated by the volume are the:
1. Mass of the part and all features which depend on it, such as
(a) heat content
(b) weight
(c) acceleration forces
(d) distances inside the volume, e.g. relevant for heat transfer by conduction
2. Amount of features in the particular volume, like
(a) number of grains
(b) number of pores
(c) amount of absorbed material
On the other hand, the surface is relevant for
1. Surface tension
2. Heat transfer (e.g. heat loss) by convection and radiation
3. Friction effects
4. Number of features at the surface, like
(a) grains with one boundary at the free surface
(b) amount of a adsorbed material
(c) electrical surface charge by electrons
(d) number of atoms, e.g. relevant for van der Waals forces.
Therefore, typically extensive variables are sources of shape size effects, while
intensive variables might be the affected value. As an example, one could consider
a hot forming process using raw parts heated to a homogeneous temperature in an
oven. During the transport the parts will cool down by heat loss due to convection
and radiation. The ﬁnal temperature (an intensive variable) of the part just before
the forming process will be determined by the heat content (one volume deter-
mined extensive variable) and the heat loss (surface determined extensive vari-
ables). With decreasing size the heat loss will become more and more signiﬁcant,
making the control of hot forming for micro parts very difﬁcult.
Shape size effects, caused by a dominant volume or surface effect, might be the
result either of concurrent or competing sub-processes. If the sub-processes
principally point towards the same direction, e.g. they are concurrent, shape sum
effects might occur. One of the most important shape sum effects for micro
forming is the change in ﬂow stress with changing size due to the inﬂuence of so-
called surface grains [36]. As shown in Fig. 2.6, all grains of the microstructure
will cause a positive contribution to the macroscopic measured ﬂow stress. If we
consider homogeneous grains with respect to chemistry and structure, the contri-
bution will depend on the orientation of the individual grain relative to the loading
direction and on the restrictions against deformation of the individual grain. This
restriction is high at boundaries with other grains, while it is very low at free
2
Basic Aspects
15

surfaces. The effects of the orientation may average out (if not the increase in
scatter is a density effect, as the number of grains, not the surface to volume ratio,
is relevant to that), while the inﬂuence of the softer surface grains will lead to a
softer behavior of smaller samples, as the relative amount of the surface grains is
proportional to the surface to volume ratio.
Shape size effects, where at least two forces or features act against each other,
are called shape balance effects. The most prominent example of a shape balance
effect is the problem of workpiece adhesion at grippers, which means some new
strategies are necessary for part handling.
Figure 2.7 addresses that problem using a sphere as an example. There are three
force components which hold the part at a gripper, while the gravitational forces
act as the detaching force. The gravitational force is dependent on the mass of the
part and is therefore a volume dependent force. The adhesion force, the van der
Waals force and the electrostatic forces are dependent on the surface area and help
keep the part on the gripper. While for large parts (far greater than 1 mm in the
example shown in Fig. 2.7) the gravitational force is dominant, a decreasing size
will lead to adhesion, increasing the necessary relative forces for detachment with
decreasing size. If the size drops below 10 lm, even the small electrostatic forces
can inhibit the detachment induced by gravitational forces. The role of adhesion is
FY
FG
FY
FG
kfs = kf
kf = x kfs + (1-x) kfv
Shape sum
Shape balance
BIAS ID 121984
Fig. 2.6 Subcategories of shape effects
16
F. Vollertsen

very strong in the given example, as the existence of a liquid ﬁlm between the
gripper and part is assumed. In the case without a liquid layer, the adhesion forces
will be much smaller.
2.1.4 Structure Effects
Within this context the term ‘structure’ summarizes the geometrical structure, e.g.
the surface roughness or the geometry of a cutting edge on a cutting tool and the
(atomistic) micro structure of the materials, e.g. the dislocation pile-up at a
boundary or the texture of the grain orientation. Structure effects are those size
effects which typically occur if the structure is held constant and a characteristic
value of the part (e.g. sample thickness) approaches the characteristic length of the
structure (e.g. length of a dislocation pile-up).
The ﬁrst subcategory of structure effects is the characteristic length. A charac-
teristic length is deﬁned by the microstructure of the material, e.g. the length of the
pile-up at a grain boundary, the width of a stress ﬁeld around a precipitation (deﬁned
by a threshold value for the stress). The characteristic length in the strain gradient
plasticity is also a characteristic value. For the example shown on the left hand side
0.001
0.01
mm
1
1E -13
1E -9
N
1E -1
Radius r
Force F
surface tension - FY
van der Waal‘s - FvW
electrostatic - FE
gravitation - FG
FG
FE
FvW
FY
r
BIAS ID 121985
Fig. 2.7 Adhesion problem as a result of shape balance effects
2
Basic Aspects
17

in Fig. 2.8, the length of the pile-up necessary to break through a hard surface layer is
the relevant value. If the sheet thickness approaches this length of the pile-up, which
happens at sheet thicknesses of some lm, the dislocation motion of any dislocation
will be inﬂuenced by this layer, increasing the necessary stress for the movement of
dislocations. This is measured macroscopically as an increase in ﬂow stress. If the
sheet thickness is increased, there will be areas in the sample which are outside the
reach of the surface coating; e.g. the dislocation will move without any effect of the
pile-ups at the surface layer, the sample appears to be softer.
It should be noted at this stage that, if one tends to argue that the Hall–Petch
effect is also a structure size effect as it is also based on the consideration of
dislocation pile-ups at grain boundaries, one should keep in mind that the Hall–
Petch relation essentially describes the changes in strength with changing grain
size for samples of constant size. Therefore, the Hall–Petch effect is not a size
effect at all within the general deﬁnition of size effects, as the change in the
macroscopic size of the workpiece is not necessary to obey the Hall–Petch-effect.
Despite of this, experiments must be designed very carefully to avoid biasing
effects from Hall–Petch effects in experiments on size effects. The latter is espe-
cially true for experiments where the grain size plays an important role and which
are often analyzed using different grain numbers and constant thicknesses as
explained at the end of Sect. 2.1.2.
Effects of the characteristic length cannot be avoided, as there is no possibility
to change the characteristic length by the experimental set up. This is the case
because the characteristic length is ﬁxed by the nature of the material. In mi-
crogeometry effects this is not the case at ﬁrst glance. Microgeometry effects are
Thick
Macro
Micro
Thin
Thickness variation
Grain size variation
Aliquid
Asolid
Microgeometry 
Secondary artefact
A solid
BIAS ID 121986
Characteristic length 
Fig. 2.8 Subcategories of structure effects
18
F. Vollertsen

also based on a constant feature size, but this feature is part of the (micro)
geometry of the sample or the tool, e.g. the cutting edge radius of a cutting tool or
the diameter and depth of a dimple on a sheet surface which is intentionally
produced to improve lubrication during sheet metal forming. Principally, one
could change the size of such features proportional to the size of the workpiece.
Due to different reasons this is not done, e.g. as very sharp cutting edges are not
stable and therefore not practicable for industrial use. In sheet forming the amount
of lubricant is usually deﬁned by amount per surface area, e.g. a smaller part
automatically gets a smaller amount, in proportion to its surface. If the dimples,
where the lubricant is stored, are also reduced, the excess amount of lubricant not
stored in the dimples will increase. Due to this conﬂict it seems to be straight-
forward to keep the surface structure constant. Therefore, the same can happen as
in characteristic length effects: If a characteristic size approaches the size of the
microgeometric feature, size effects might be visible. One example for such a
microgeometry effect is given in Fig. 2.8: Friction in lubricated (cold sheet) metal
forming is determined by the efﬁciency of the lubricant. This can be increased by
dimples, serving as reservoirs which carry the lubricant into the highly loaded
contact zones. The characteristic size of the contact zone is size dependent, while
the surface structure is held constant, which gives rise to a size effect. That size
effect is used to explain the frictional behavior and its changes in micro forming.
The third subgroup of the structure effects is that of secondary artifacts. The
deﬁnition or integration of the effects tries to include those that might be at the
limit of ‘natural’ effects, but that occur in experiments which are linked with
scaling effects. Effects, which cause a deviation from the expected behavior when
scaling the size of the samples and which might be avoided by another experi-
mental path, but are based on size dependent mechanisms, are taken as secondary
artifacts. The term ‘secondary’ should express that it is not the direct link between
two values in the experiment (like grain size and typical length of the part), which
causes that effect, but that a longer chain of interconnected values is responsible
for the effect. The best way to explain the nature of secondary artifacts may be an
example. The result and the alternative of such a typical case are given in Fig. 2.9.
The intention of the experiments for the results shown in Fig. 2.9 was to answer
the question: what will happen if the grain size not only approaches the sheet
thickness, but exceeds it? According to the theory of surface grains, a shape sum
effect, the strength of a sheet metal decreases when the sheet thickness is reduced
at constant grain size, e.g. reducing the grain number. As shown in [47], the
strength should become constant at the moment when the sample is of a single
crystalline nature, e.g. below a grain number much lower than 1. Instead of the
reduction in the sample thickness at constant grain size, some authors conducted
experiments where they decreased the grain number by an increase in the grain
size (at constant sheet thickness), derived by recrystallization and further
annealing into larger grains. For j [ 1, e.g. there is more than one grain across the
sheet thickness, the experiment showed qualitatively the same behavior as derived
from experiments with a constant grain size and decreasing sheet thickness. That
was one argument to accept it as a scaling experiment, despite the fact that the size
2
Basic Aspects
19

of the samples was kept unchanged. Surprisingly, samples with j \ 1 showed an
increasing strength despite the fact that the Hall–Petch relation predicts a further
decrease due to increasing grain size. The effect might be explained by a con-
tinuous change in the texture due to long recrystallization annealing. By that
annealing a texture due to ternary recrystallization is developed, which has a ‘hard’
orientation of the grains towards the loading direction. As also shown in Fig. 2.9
this effect is avoided, if the sheet thickness is reduced at constant grain size. On the
other hand, the effect might occur in a processing chain. Due to its indirect
mechanism it is called a secondary artifact.
2.2 Tribology
2.2.1 Friction
Gerrit Behrens
2.2.1.1 Tribological System
In metal forming there is always an interaction between the workpiece and
forming tool, caused by direct physical contact and relative motion. The result of
this physical interaction is friction and wear. The science of interacting surfaces,
which is related to friction, wear and lubrication, is called ‘‘tribology’’.
120
MPa
 80
 60
 40
 20
0
0.01
0.1 
1 
10
100
Strength
grain size variation
thickness variation
thick
thin
Material 
Aluminium
Lorenzo 2003 σpl
Lorenzo 2003 σM
Raulea 1999 σpl
Gau 2007 σpl
BIAS ID 121987
Fig. 2.9 Secondary artifacts in size effects on ﬂow stress from various scaled experiments, data
from [8, 12, 40], according to [51]
20
F. Vollertsen

The schematic diagram in Fig. 2.10 shows a two-body tribological system,
which consists of the base body, counter body, intermediate material and ambient
medium. The complete description includes the load spectrum as input values for
the system, and the system response by means of wear and friction coefﬁcients. In
micro metal forming the base body is represented by the forming tool, the counter
body is the workpiece and the intermediate material is the lubricant. Within a
common manufacturing environment the ambient medium is air.
2.2.1.2 Characteristics of Friction
Friction is the force that resists relative motion between two bodies in contact. It is
one of the most important forces in metal forming. The result of friction can, for
example, be damage to the dies caused by wear, or the surface quality of the
formed workpiece can be adversely affected. However, depending on the appli-
cation, friction may also be beneﬁcial. In metal forming in particular there are
processes, such as rolling, where a certain amount of friction is essential for the
correct operation of the process.
In sheet metal forming the resistance to tangential motion is usually described
by the friction coefﬁcient law, also known as the Amonton’s law of friction. In this
model the coefﬁcient of friction l is the proportionality factor, which describes the
ratio of the frictional force Ffr between two bodies and the normal force Fn
pressing them together.
load spectrum 
(surface pressure, relative velocity, temperature)
ambient 
medium 
(air)
tribological system 
(manufacturing process)
intermediate material 
(lubricant)
base body 
(tool)
wear values:
- how the wear manifests  
  itself (surface changes)
- wear value (e.g. wear rate)
- frictional power
- heat generation
input
output
system
frictional values:
counter body 
(workpiece)
system border
BIAS ID 121988
Fig. 2.10 Constitution of a tribological system [29]
2
Basic Aspects
21

Ffr ¼ lFn
ð2:14Þ
The locally effective frictional shear stress is deﬁned as followed, where rn is
the local normal stress:
sfr ¼ lrn
ð2:15Þ
The tribological conditions in sheet metal forming are characterized by large
contact areas and much lower surface pressures compared to bulk metal forming.
If high normal stresses occur during forming, for example during bulk metal
forming processes, the usage of the friction coefﬁcient law is no longer valid. This
is the case if the mean normal stress component is higher than the ﬂow stress of the
workpiece material. In that case the friction factor law is used instead. This
approach connects the frictional shear stress with the yield stress in shear k using
the friction factor m to describe the frictional behavior.
sfr ¼ mk
ð2:16Þ
This model is best suited to characterize sticking friction or solid friction with
an intermediate layer. The friction coefﬁcient law is better suited for the boundary
lubrication range, mixed lubrication, which is the most common case in metal
forming, or hydrodynamic lubrication. Neither the friction coefﬁcient law nor the
friction factor law are therefore able to provide a correct description of friction in
all cases. But the friction coefﬁcient law alone is capable of describing the rhe-
ological behavior of a lubricant [31].
2.2.1.3 Testing Methods
There are many different testing methods for the determination of frictional
characteristics, and the choice of a test method depends on its suitability for a
given application. They can be divided into methods for sheet metal forming and
bulk metal forming. While in sheet metal forming a biaxial stress state prevails,
bulk metal forming is characterized by its triaxial stress state and much higher
hydrostatic pressure. Since all testing methods and analytical friction laws are just
simpliﬁcations of the real process, careful selection is necessary to prevent over-
simpliﬁcation or improper modeling. Sheet metal forming testing methods are
mostly based on different kinds of stripe drawing tests or wedge drawing tests. In
bulk metal forming the ring compression test is a common test procedure to
determine the coefﬁcient of friction l or friction factor m. However, just a few of
these tests have been used in micro scale experiments.
Most test procedures, such as the Duncan-Shabel test, require the use of special
equipment and therefore a large number of very small devices. The resulting high
costs prevent the application of many friction tests. This is why nearly all scaled
experiments are based on the numerical identiﬁcation of l or m [51]. The ring
compression test [2] or the double cup extrusion test [13] are the tests most
22
F. Vollertsen

frequently used to acquire baseline data in micro bulk metal forming. Due to the
necessity of numerical support these methods are indirect test methods. A possi-
bility for the direct friction measurement in bulk metal forming is given by a
compression sliding test [37]. For sheet metal forming, Hu determined the coef-
ﬁcient of friction for deep drawing from the maximum punch force. A further
approach was based on an analytical model for a double deﬂection stripe drawing
test [22]. FEM simulation was essential for all these investigations. Short
descriptions of the mentioned test procedures are given below.
Ring Compression Test
In this test, circular specimens with ﬂat ends are compressed axially between two
upsetting plates. Depending on the level of friction at the interface, the internal
diameter of the ring may increase in the case of low friction or decrease if there is
high friction. This change of inner diameter depends quite sensitively on friction,
and the friction factor m can be easily determined from the change in the speci-
men’s dimensions [2] (Fig. 2.11).
Double Cup Extrusion Test
The double cup extrusion test was applied as a friction test for the ﬁrst time by [3].
For this test a cylindrical specimen is positioned in a die between two identical
punches, one ﬁxed and one movable. The downwards movement of the upper
punch then forms the specimen material into two cups. The theoretical case of zero
friction would yield two cups of identical height. With increasing friction the
forming of the lower cup is prevented. Thus, small changes in friction can be
detected by a signiﬁcant change in cup heights, and the ratio of upper cup height to
lower cup height is a sensitive measure for changes in friction [9]. However, if
absolute values are required, these have to be identiﬁed numerically (Fig. 2.12).
The advantage of the double cup extrusion test compared to the ring com-
pression test is the more realistic modeling of a typical extrusion process by
applying larger strains and higher pressure between die and specimen. This best
represents the actual situation in forward extrusion [13]. Because of the high
low friction
high friction
BIAS ID 121989
Fig. 2.11 Schematic ring
compression test
2
Basic Aspects
23

pressures and high normal stresses, the friction factor m is usually used as a
characteristic parameter for the frictional conditions in this process.
Compression Sliding Test
In [37] a Micro-Tribo-Tester is presented allowing direct friction and lubrication
tests in micro forming. This test is based on the symmetric upsetting of two
workpieces against an intermediate sliding tool. First the specimens, which can be
of different sizes and shapes, are upset to a preset reduction. This step is followed
by the drawing of the sliding tool a predeﬁned distance. Meanwhile the friction
force is detected by a force transducer. The advantages compared to the double cup
extrusion test [11] are the easy inspection of tool and workpiece surfaces caused by
an open die geometry, and the continuous measurement of the friction coefﬁcient
over the complete sliding length and not just an averaged friction value for the
whole sliding movement. However, this testing method is further removed from
the realistic upsetting process conditions and is just a simulative not a process test
(Fig. 2.13).
Double Deﬂection Stripe Drawing Test
Since friction is one of the most important inﬂuences on a deep drawing process it
is essential to have available a reliable determination method for frictional
behavior. The main advantage of the double deﬂection stripe-drawing test is its
scalability, and it may therefore be applicable even for very small process
dimensions [48]. In order to avoid excessive tangential pressure in the blank,
which occurs in deep the drawing of circular blanks, the test procedure instead
employs a rectangular blank. This allows the simpliﬁcation of experimental and
analytical procedures and additionally enables the calculation of friction
moving punch
die
stationary 
punch
h0
5 mm
hu
hl
d0
z
m=1 m=0
BIAS ID 121990
Fig. 2.12 a Setup of the double cup extrusion test and friction-dependent material ﬂow.
b Double cup extrusion specimen cut in half [9] (reprinted with permission from Elsevier)
24
F. Vollertsen

coefﬁcients. The principle of this friction test in shown in Fig. 2.14a, while drawn
stripes in different process dimensions are shown in Fig. 2.14b.
While a stripe is drawn into the die the punch force is measured and the punch
force versus punch travel can be obtained. The punch force consists of different
bending forces and a friction force. Within a certain limited area of the process the
bending forces can be theoretically calculated, so that the share of the friction
force can be determined. Because the friction is dependent on the normal pressure,
which varies in a great range during deep drawing, the friction force and the
friction coefﬁcient can be identiﬁed independently of the contact pressure by using
a calculation model developed in [20]. The result is a contact pressure dependent
friction function (see Fig. 2.15). Using this test method, and by comparing the
friction functions from experiments in different dimensions, the inﬂuence of
dimension on the tribology can be investigated. The determined friction functions
0
10
Fn
Fp,v
Fn
s0
b
s0: 2 mm
s0: 1 mm
s0: 0.4 mm
BIAS ID 121992
20 mm
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.14 a Principle of double deﬂection stripe drawing test. b Drawn stripes in different
process dimensions [48]
Work piece
Work piece
P
P
F
Friction force
Transducer Ffr
Normal force
Transducer Fn
Actuator for 
sliding
Actuator for 
positioning
Actuator for 
upsetting
Sliding tool
BIAS ID 121991
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.13 a Micro-Tribo-Tester. b Schematic compression sliding test (both [37])
2
Basic Aspects
25

can also be implemented in FEM-simulations to realize an improve model and
taking the size dependency of the friction into account.
Due to the omission of tangential forces the double deﬂection stripe drawing
test is just a simpliﬁcation of the deep drawing process. A possibility to get
information about friction in real deep drawing is presented in [49]. Here, the
theory of Stroroschew is used to detect an effective average friction coefﬁcient
from the maximum punch force in micro deep drawing. This effective friction
coefﬁcient is not suitable to describe the frictional behavior for the whole process,
but gives information about trends for changing friction when deep drawing
process parameters are changed.
In Table 2.1 an exemplary overview over friction properties for different
forming and testing methods is presented. It should be noted that the testing and
forming conditions are completely different, which makes a direct comparison
with each other very difﬁcult.
2.2.1.4 Effects of Miniaturization on Friction
Many investigations in recent decades have shown a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of
scaling on friction in metal forming when lubricant was used. One of the ﬁrst
investigations of scaling effects in bulk metal forming, conducted by Pawelski,
showed a reduction in the coefﬁcient of friction with increasing dimensions.
Independent of the testing procedure this trend could be shown for scaled ring
compression test investigations by [10] as well as for studies carried out with the
double cup extrusion test mentioned, conducted by [46]. Here the numerical
Friction coefficient µ
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0
4
8
N/mm2
16
Pressure p
Punch diameter
Lubricant
Initial blank holder pressure
1 mm
HBO 947/ 11
1 N/mm 2
Material
Amount of Lubricant
Al99. 5
4 g/ m2
Limit 1
Friction function
Limit 2
BIAS ID 121993
Fig. 2.15 Friction function based on friction coefﬁcients calculated from experimental punch
force versus travel curves [48]
26
F. Vollertsen

identiﬁcation of the double cup extrusion results yields a friction factor of
m = 0.01
for
specimen
diameters
of
4 mm
and
a
drastic
increase
of
m = 0.04–0.06 for diameters of 2–1 mm respectively, when the surface structure
was held constant.
But not just in bulk metal forming is such a tendency of increasing friction with
decreasing size observed. Results from double deﬂection stripe drawing tests by
[48] show an increase in the coefﬁcient of friction by a factor of 2.4 when scaling
the process dimensions by 100 (see Fig. 2.16). In this investigation four different
punch diameters of 100, 50, 20 and 1 mm were used. All geometrical parameters
of the tools and necessary parameters of the specimens were scaled, according to
the theory of similarity, by the same scaling factor. For instance the thickness and
the length of the stripes had the same ratio to punch diameter in each experiment.
Nevertheless, friction increased with decreasing punch diameter.
In further investigations the same trend observed for stripe drawing tests was
reported for deep drawing [21]. Using the above-mentioned identiﬁcation of the
coefﬁcient of friction from the maximum punch force, the average friction coef-
ﬁcient for scaled deep drawing processes could be achieved for punch diameters
from 50 to 1 mm. While large diameters resulted in a coefﬁcient of friction of
Table 2.1 Exemplary friction properties for different forming and testing methods
Forming
type
Test method
Geometry
Material
Lubrication Friction
Reference
Bulk
Double cup
extrusion
d = 4 mm
E-Cu57
Extrusion
oil
m = 0.01
[46]
Bulk
Double cup
extrusion
d = 1–2 mm E-Cu57
Extrusion
oil
m = 0.04–0.06 [46]
Bulk
Double cup
extrusion
d = 4 mm
CuZn15
Extrusion
oil
m = 0.02
[45]
Bulk
Double cup
extrusion
d = 2 mm
CuZn15
Extrusion
oil
m = 0.06
[45]
Bulk
Double cup
extrusion
d = 4 mm
CuZn15
Extrusion
oil
m = up to 0.4
[45]
Bulk
Cylindrical
upsetting
d = 4.8 mm
CuZn15
Dry
m = 0.13
[35]
Bulk
Cylindrical
upsetting
d = 1 mm
CuZn15
Dry
m = 0.16
[35]
Sheet
Strip drawing
s0 = 20 lm
Phosphor
bronze
Dry
l = 0.19
[42]
Sheet
Strip drawing
s0 = 20 lm
Phosphor
bronze
Dry
l = 0.22
[42]
Sheet
Strip drawing
s0 = 20 lm
Phosphor
bronze
Dry
l = 0.25
[42]
Sheet
Deep drawing
(max. FP)
d = 50 mm
Al99.5
Mineral oil l = 0.05
[21]
Sheet
Deep drawing
(max. FP)
d = 1 mm
Al99.5
Mineral oil l = 0.13
[21]
2
Basic Aspects
27

l = 0.05 the deep drawing process with smallest punch diameter exhibited a
signiﬁcant increase up to 0.13. Independent of forming technology, a tribological
size effect, showing an increase in friction with decreasing scale dimension, is
observable whenever lubricated friction is used. The model of open and closed
lubricant pockets is the only fundamental model available for the explanation of
this size effect.
In the case of dry friction, such a signiﬁcant tendency has not yet been shown.
There were investigations into bulk metal forming as well as sheet metal forming,
but while some ﬁnd no size effects [35] others present increasing [15] or
decreasing trends [42] for frictional behavior. The reasons for this behavior appear
to be manifold and dependent on the actual individual case. There might be
different explanations for the individual results, but it seems to be very doubtful
that a general model explaining the differences in the coefﬁcient of friction can be
found. Therefore, a general size effect, as described for lubricated friction, does not
exist for dry friction [51].
2.2.1.5 Lubricant Pocket Model
The lubricant pocket model is the only one well-established model to describe the
general trend of increasing friction with decreasing dimensions in lubricated
friction. It is based on the principle that lubricant is entrapped in asperities between
the forming tool and workpiece. In so-called closed lubricant pockets the lubricant
cannot escape as the pressure caused by the forming load increases. As a conse-
quence a hydrostatic pressure develops and the lubricant bears part of the external
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
4
8
N/mm2
16
Friction coeficient f µ
dp: 1 mm
dp: 20 mm
dp: 50 mm
dp: 100 mm
Pressure p
dp
Material
Lubricant
Amount of lubricant
Initial blank holder pressure
Punch diameter
Al99.5
HBO 947/11
4g/m2
1 N/mm2
BIAS ID 121994
Fig. 2.16 Changing friction
coefﬁcients determined by a
double deﬂection stripe
drawing test [48]
28
F. Vollertsen

load which results in lower friction. This occurs when the pockets are fully sealed
by the surrounding uninterrupted direct contact of the die and workpiece surface.
Roughness valleys that are connected to the edge of the surface are not closed and
cannot retain the lubricant. Therefore, the lubricant can pour out of the pockets and
will not bear any load. These open lubricant pockets are not able to support the
transmission of a load. The result is an increase in the normal pressure on the
asperities and a higher surface ﬂattening and therefore higher friction (see
Fig. 2.17).
The area where open lubricant pockets exist is not restricted to the edge of the
workpiece surface. Because the asperities are interconnected, the connections to
the edge can reach far within the surface. Under the assumption of a constant
surface topography the distance from the edge where open lubricant pockets can be
found should remain the same, even when the process is scaled down. The con-
sequence is an increasing share of open lubricant pockets when the process scale is
decreasing [46]. If the dimensions are small enough no closed lubricant pockets
will exist, which results in an increase in surface ﬂattening and therefore higher
friction. This assumption was conﬁrmed by roughness measurements by [46].
A qualitative description of the lubricant pocket model is given by [13], and a
quantitative explanation can be found in [9].
If it is true that the tribological size effect can be explained by the loss of
lubricant in the open pockets, the size effect should not be visible if solid lubricant,
which would be unable to ﬂow and escape from open lubricant pockets, is used
instead. This is conﬁrmed by [14], where two extrusion tests with identical setups,
using oil and MoS2 as the solid lubricant, were carried out. While the results with
oil clearly showed increasing friction with decreasing size such a trend could not
be seen when using the solid lubricant (see Fig. 2.18).
solid contact area As
liquid contact area Al
tool
workpiece
WP
tool
pressure  
0
A0
As
open pocket
closed pocket
pressure pl
pressure   0
Macro
Micro
BIAS ID 121995
Fig. 2.17 Lubricant pocket theory for the coefﬁcient of friction [53]
2
Basic Aspects
29

It can be summarized that the lubricant pocket model is valid for explaining the
tribological size effect appearing in bulk and sheet metal forming whenever
lubricant is used. The occurrence of this effect is due to the fact that the structure
of the surface is held constant during scaling [53].
2.2.1.6 Velocity Dependence of Friction
Investigations into the tribological size effect in deep drawing with different punch
velocities show the same tendency towards higher friction with decreasing size
(see Fig. 2.19a), as predicted by the lubricant pocket model. However, this model
implies that the coefﬁcients of friction for macro and micro deep drawing should
lie on the same Stribeck curve. This is not the case (see Fig. 2.19b) using a
constant viscosity of the lubricant (g = const.). Nevertheless, it is known that the
viscosity of lubricants is very strongly inﬂuenced by temperature.
There is good evidence that the temperature of the lubricant is higher during
micro scale forming compared to macro scale forming. This is due to the fact that
with increasing miniaturization less lubricant is kept in the micro tribological
contact zone because more open lubricant pockets appear and the lubricant escapes
from the asperities. Therefore, the temperature will increase when the same
amount of heat per area is generated. Furthermore, frictional heat is generated as
heat per area. Thicker sheet material, as used in macro deep drawing, acts more
effectively as a heat sink than the thin blank material in micro deep drawing, and
MPa
1200
1400
1000
 800
0
1
2
3
mm
5
Specimen diameter
Max. related punch force
1800
liquid lubricant (extrusion oil)
solid lubricant (MoS2)
Messing CuZn15
forward extrusion
material
process
BIAS ID 121996
Fig. 2.18 Size dependency
of friction with different
lubricants in forward
extrusion (according to [14])
30
F. Vollertsen

therefore the heating of the lubricant is expected to be higher in a small scale
process. The probably strongest effect might be the larger local contact pressure in
micro range caused by the aforementioned reduced ability of the lubricant to
support the transmission of the process forces. In conclusion, there is strong evi-
dence that there is a signiﬁcant difference in the temperature of the lubricant
between a macro and micro forming process. However, a quantitative measure of
the temperature increase is very difﬁcult to obtain. So in Fig. 2.19b a qualitative
estimate of 30 K is used, which is equivalent to a difference in viscosity of the
factor of 10 (g = f(T)). Taking the temperature dependence of the viscosity of the
lubricant into account, the values for the Stribeck number result in a singular
Stribeck curve for both macro and micro deep drawing [53].
size20
size100
Effective friction coefficiemt µ
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1
mm/s
100
Punch velocity v
0.2
0.1
0
Stribeck number v  /p
Stribeck number v  /p
0
10
1
100
1000
10000
0.4
0.3
size20
size100
  = const.
  = f(T)
Blank material
Initial blank holder pressure
Al99. 5
0.5 N/mm 2
Lubricant
Amount of lubricant
HB O
4 g/ m2
BIAS ID 121997
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.19 a Change in coefﬁcient of friction in deep drawing with different punch velocities and
different scaling factors. b Structured size effect based on lubricant pocket model extended by a
consideration of the temperature dependent viscosity of the lubricant (both [53])
2
Basic Aspects
31

2.2.2 Tool Wear
Timo Kühnle
The Encyclopedia of Tribology gives a general deﬁnition for wear [26]: Wear is an
undesirable continuous loss of material from one or both of the surfaces of mating
tribological elements due to relative motion of the surfaces. Hence wear may be
interpreted as the dissipation of mass and surface structure in contradiction to
friction, which is related to the dissipation of energy.
The loss of material or surface structure can be attributed to four different wear
mechanisms: adhesion, abrasion, surface fatigue and tribochemical reactions.
These wear mechanisms are the result of the contact mechanics at the actual points
of contact between the bodies at micro scale. A macroscopic way of looking at the
surfaces is not suitable to describe these wear mechanisms, because even a mac-
roscopically ﬂat surface has many irregularities on microscopic examination. Each
machining or forming operation leaves marks on the bodies’ surface, e.g. grooves,
scratches or furrows. Figure 2.20 illustrates the geometric properties of a surface
topography with micro asperities.
The height of the asperities in the 3D-view is exaggerated to enable a clear
visualization. From this point of view it is obvious that the imagination of a full-
area contact between base- and counter-body does not reﬂect reality. Only a
fraction of the bodies’ total surfaces are in contact with each other. This portion is
called the real contact area. Between the remaining surface portions there is no
direct contact. For a given surface topography, the real contact area is a function of
the contact pressure. The higher the contact pressure the greater the penetration
depth a into the topography, the greater the real contact area. A cross-section
through the topography reveals for a given penetration depth the real contact area
[9]. The surface roughness is the reason for an inhomogeneous contact pressure
distribution between the base and counter body at micro scale.
Via the in situ monitoring of the real contact area during the ﬂattening of a
single ideal asperity it is possible to quantify the relationship between the real
contact area ratio and the contact pressure [54]. The sketch in Fig. 2.21a shows the
ideal asperity with the geometry of a square–based pyramid before, during and
after ﬂattening. The corresponding graph in Fig. 2.21b shows the evolution of the
ratio between the real contact area (RCA) and apparent contact area (ACA) with
cross-
section
base body
no contact
a
surface topography
real contact area
BIAS ID 121998
Fig. 2.20 3D-analysis of the
surface topography and
estimation of the real contact
area
32
F. Vollertsen

respect to the normalized pressure. In this example, the ACA is equal to the base
area of the pyramid, which is 120 9 120 lm2. The truncated pyramid in
Fig. 2.21c is the result of the forming process under the boundary lubrication
condition (BLC), whereby the RCA is enclosed with the dashed line. The BLC of a
single asperity indicates the fact that initially there are no closed lubrication
pockets in the contact zone. Nevertheless, the type of liquid lubricant has a sig-
niﬁcant impact on the evolution of the RCA ratio, even though there are no closed
lubrication pockets. The reason for this behavior is connected with the formation
of 2nd order closed lubrication pockets at high loads due to the roughening of the
pyramid ﬂanks. At low loads, the supporting effect is connected with a change in
the lubricant properties. In general a small RCA ratio favors low friction and
therefore is desirable for most forming processes.
In Fig. 2.22, the four basic wear mechanisms at the contact between micro-
scopically rough bodies are shown. Abrasion and surface fatigue are mechanical
dominated wear mechanisms. Adhesion and tribochemical reactions are driven by
chemical–mechanical interaction within the tribological system.
Abrasive wear is characterized by the indentation of a hard counter body into
the soft base body. The penetration with simultaneous relative motion leads to so-
called micro plowing, micro cutting and micro cracking. During ideal micro-
plowing the material is not removed from the base body but displaced to the sides
of the groove. Therefore, the resulting wear volume is zero. Micro cutting is
0.4
0
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.8
0
0.6
0.4
0.2
1.0
1.2
(b)
(a)
(c)
real 
contact 
area
flank
grain 
boundary
surrounding 
base material
real contact area
RCA
F
F
before flattening
after flattening
ideal asperity
die
normalized pressure 
0/kf
RCA/ACA 
lubricant B,
ν=560 mm2/s
w/o lubricant 
lubricant A,
ν=300 mm2/s
lubricant C,
ν=6000 mm2/s
BIAS ID 121999
Fig. 2.21 a Flattening behavior of an ideal asperity. b Evolution of the ratio between RCA and
ACA with respect to the normalized pressure. c Top view of the ideal asperity after ﬂattening [54]
with kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media
2
Basic Aspects
33

characterized by the generation of a small chip, which is removed from the base
body. In this case, the wear volume is equal to the groove volume. Micro cracking
means that mechanical load in the contact zone results in cracks in the surrounding
area of the groove. The consequence is the formation of debris and the wear
volume is greater than the theoretical groove volume. A good protection against
abrasive wear is a high hardness of the base material, because a greater material
hardness is associated with a decreasing depth of penetration of the counter body.
Surface fatigue leads to cracking beneath the surface of the base body during
continuous operation and cyclic loading. The event of crack formation is followed
by the phase of crack growth. The damage occurs suddenly when the critical crack
length is reached after a certain number of cycles. The result is the delamination of
the damaged boundary layer. Surface fatigue mainly occurs when there is a rolling
contact between the base body and counter body. A good example of classic
surface fatigue is the pitting of ball bearings or gear wheels.
Another wear-mode, which has a strong relationship with the delamination of
boundary layers, is the so-called ‘‘eggshell-effect’’ or ‘‘thin ice-effect’’ of thin ﬁlm
coatings on tools. The effect occurs when a thin and hard but brittle layer on a
yieldable base body is overloaded. In this case, the supporting effect of the sub-
strate is too small. Once the yield stress of the brittle coating is exceeded, a crack
perpendicular to the surface results from the bending stress in the layer. Different
to classic surface fatigue, the crack initiation event is not related to cyclic loading.
However, the similar crack growth mechanisms and debris formation mode due to
delamination justiﬁes the assignment of the eggshell effect in this category of wear
mechanism.
Adhesive wear of metals is related to the formation of adhesive junctions
between the base- and counter body. The forming mechanisms of these junctions
counter body
base body
abrasion
surface fatigue
adhesion
tribochemical
reaction
Fn
Fn
Fn
cracks
Fn
cracks
Fn
zone of 
fracture
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
BIAS ID 122000
Fig. 2.22 Basic wear mechanisms from a microscopic point of view [5] with kind permission
from Springer Science and Business Media
34
F. Vollertsen

are comparable with the cold welding or sticking of material at micro scale. The
separation of the connected asperities due to the relative motion of the surfaces
indicates the actual adhesive wear event. In general, the material separation occurs
not in the original contact area. Instead, a small proportion of the weaker material
is transferred to the opposing body. According to [44] the formation of adhesive
wear is subdivided into the following steps:
1. Deformation of surface asperities.
2. Removal of surface ﬁlms (e.g. oxide layers).
3. Formation of the adhesive junction.
4. Failure of the junction and transfer of the material from the weaker body to the
stronger body.
5. Modiﬁcation of the transferred fragments.
6. Removal of the transferred fragments from the surface and formation of loose
wear particles.
Direct contact between the base- and counter body is the precondition for
adhesive wear. Therefore, the best prevention against adhesive wear is the sepa-
ration of the sliding bodies with a lubricant. If direct contact is unavoidable, a
weak tendency to build an adhesive junction reduces adhesive wear mechanisms.
The tendency for the formation of adhesive junctions and their strength depends on
the material combination within the tribological system. It is reasonable to dis-
tinguish between similar and dissimilar material combinations.
In the case of similar material combinations strong adhesion can occur. An
example is the metal forming of iron base alloys, where both the tool and the
workpiece are made of materials with similar chemical characteristics. The
adhesive properties of similar material combinations are related to the lattice
structure of the material. An experimental investigation in [43] reveals that metals
with hexagonal closed packed lattices show less adhesion than metals with face-
centered cubic lattices. It is believed that the reason for this behavior is connected
with the different number of slip systems in the corresponding lattices. The ﬁrst
step during adhesive wear is the plastic deformation of surface asperities, which is
attended by an increase in the RCA. Therefore, a metal with fewer slip systems is
more brittle and the RCA is smaller in comparison to a ductile lattice with many
slip systems. The result is a low tendency to adhesive wear.
A method to avoid adhesive wear is the application of dissimilar material
combinations. The chemical bonding character of the materials is crucial for
adhesive wear, especially for the formation and strength of adhesive junctions. To
avoid adhesion with a metallic workpiece, the surface of the tool should not have
the same bonding character as the workpiece material [19]. Anti-stick layers or
coatings with ionic or covalent bonding characters reduce the tendency to adhesive
wear with materials which have metallic bonds. An example for a coating with
ionic bonding character is ZrO2. A practical example for the application of
coatings with covalent bonding character is a diamond like carbon (DLC) layer on
a deep drawing tool [24]. In comparison with an uncoated die with lubricant,
2
Basic Aspects
35

a DLC-coated die without lubricant reduces the punch force during forming.
According to Hu, dry friction between a blank and coated tool is smaller than the
friction of the uncoated tool with lubricant. Furthermore, no damage of the DLC-
coatings due to eggshell effect, cracks or spalling was observed. These results
show that a tool with DLC-coating have a great application potential for forming
without lubricant.
Wear due to tribochemical reaction describes the phenomenon of chemical
reactions between the base- or counter body with the intermediate material or the
ambient medium. The reaction with oxygen of the ambient atmosphere is often
observed and connected with term oxidational wear. The tribochemical wear
mechanism is driven by the interaction of the micro asperities. These micro contact
zones are subject to a severe temperature load due to the plastic deformation and
the friction stresses in general. The high temperature increases the reactivity of the
materials. Furthermore, the constantly repeated deformation removes already
existing reaction inhibiting layers. In this way, constantly new reactive surface
zones are generated. The effect of the tribochemical reaction on wear rate depends
on the properties of the newly formed oxide layer. Initially the reaction products
remain on the surface, but the thickness of the tribochemical reaction layer grows
over the course of time. On the one hand, the brittle oxide products may be
separated from the surface and form loose debris after reaching a critical layer
thickness. In this case new debris will constantly be generated, which means a
constant wear rate. On the other hand, the growth of the oxide layer will eventually
stop if the reaction layer is permanently adhered to the surface. The result is a
stable oxide interlayer and due to the permanent separation of the base- and
counter body and further oxidation wear can be prevented.
There are various test setups to assess the impact of the input parameters of a
tribological system on the wear rate or wear mechanism. The most important
mechanical input values for a given tribological system are the contact pressure p
and relative velocity v between the workpiece and tool. The result of a wear test is
a wear rate diagram of so-called wear mechanism maps for the corresponding
tribological system. For example, the wear rate diagram in Fig. 2.23a shows the
0.025
0.015
0.010
0.005
0
V/mm3
0.12
V/mm3
0.04
0
140
220
180
p/MPa
300
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5 w/km
3.5
(a)
(b)
9 cm/s
15 cm/s
25 cm/s
BIAS ID 120613
Fig. 2.23 a Inﬂuence of sliding speed and contact pressure on wear volume V at constant sliding
distance w = 300 m. b Inﬂuence of sliding distance w on wear volume at constant velocity
v = 15 cm/s and contact pressure p = 260 MPa [4] reprinted with permission from Elsevier
36
F. Vollertsen

impact of sliding velocity and contact pressure on the wear volume V at a constant
sliding distance of 300 m [4]. Within this narrow parameter range it is possible to
conclude that the greater the contact pressure or sliding velocity, the higher the
absolute wear volume. However, it should be noted that there is no linear rela-
tionship between the wear rate and contact pressure or sliding velocity. In contrast,
the relationship between wear volume and sliding distance in Fig. 2.23b shows a
linear behavior, which can be described by Shawn’s wear law
V ¼ q  w  Fn
ð2:17Þ
where q is the wear rate, w is the sliding distance and Fn is the normal force [41].
With wear mechanism maps it is possible to show the transition of different
wear mechanisms as a function of the input parameters of the tribological system.
In contrast to the wear rate map in Fig. 2.23a, for wear mechanism maps it is
necessary to vary the normalized input parameters over several orders of magni-
tude. Figure 2.24a shows a wear mechanism map for steel [32]. This map
describes the unlubricated wear behavior of steel on steel in a pin on disk con-
ﬁguration. The map labels the dominant wear mechanism in the corresponding
pressure–velocity regime. Furthermore, the predicted normalized wear rates q* are
superimposed over these ﬁelds. The transition from one wear mechanism to
another is connected with a volatile variation of the wear rate. The 3-dimensional
plot of the normalized wear rate in Fig. 2.24b illustrates the relation between wear
mechanism and the corresponding wear rate [39].
BIAS ID 122002
(a)
(b)
Seizure
Delamination wear
Ultra 
mild wear
Oxidational wear
Mild
Severe
Melt wear
10-4
10-5
10-8
10-9
10-10
10-9
10-9
10-2
10-7
10-6
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-5
10-4
10-3
p*
p*
q*
v*
v*
10-2
10-1
1
10-2
10-2
10-10
10-5
10-4
104
10-2
102
1
1 
1 
102
10
1
4
10-6...10-8
Fig. 2.24 a Lim and Ashby’s wear mechanism map [32]. b 3-dimensional plot of the wear map
[39] reprinted with permission from Elsevier
2
Basic Aspects
37

2.3 Formability
Hendrik Flosky
2.3.1 Measures for Formability
Formability is a critical factor in metal forming processes. It depends on the
chemical composition of the material, its crystalline structure, the temperature, and
on the heat treatment. Also, size effects have an inﬂuence on formability (see
Sect. 2.1). Formability can be measured with, e.g., a tensile or a compressive test
(see Sect. 3.3.1). For formability, the strain is especially relevant, since the
material needs to elongate uniformly without undergoing necking or fracture
during the forming process. The strain is deﬁned by
de ¼ dl
l0
) e ¼
Zl1
l0
dl
l0
¼ l1  l0
l0
) e ¼ Dl
l0
;
ð2:18Þ
where lo denotes the specimen’s original length, the length during the deformation
is l1, and the length variation is dl. To calculate the technical strain e, the right-
hand side
dl
l0
 
of the equation has to be integrated over the deforming path. The
plastic deformation can also be shown in a ﬂow curve (see Sect. 3.3), where the
strain is deﬁned as the logarithmic degree of deformation u. It can be explained,
e.g., with the uniaxial tensile or compression test (see Sects. 3.3.1 and 4.2). The
tensile test stripe has an initial length of lo, and li is its length after elongation.
During the deformation, the length variation is dl and the momentary length l. In
order to obtain u, the right hand side
dl
l
 
of the equation has to be integrated over
the deforming path:
du ¼ dl
l ) u ¼
Zl1
l0
dl
l ¼ ln l1  ln l0 ) u ¼ ln l1
l0
:
ð2:19Þ
In a parallel way, the formability for bulk metal forming can be measured with
the upsetting process, where the initial height is ho and h1 is the height after
compression:
uh ¼ ln h1
h0
:
ð2:20Þ
However, the specimen has to remain cylindrical without getting convex con-
tours during the upsetting process to calculate the formability in the right way.
This can be done with the right lubricant and the right specimen geometry (see
Sect. 4.2).
38
F. Vollertsen

Thin sheets and foils tend to undergo necking and fracture during the forming
process because of high local strains in the material. Therefore, it is necessary to
measure the formability of the material, including the points of necking and
fracturing. Most industrial processes require parts without any necking, hence the
point of necking is the most meaningful criterion of failure. A relevant approach in
the research ﬁeld of local strains in sheet metal forming was made by Keeler [27]
and Goodwin [16]. Hasek joined their researches into a forming limit diagram
(FLD), as shown in Fig. 2.25.
Formability can be visualized by different mechanical stresses: deep drawing
(u1 = -u2), uniaxial tension (u1 = -2u2), plane strain (u2 = 0) and stretch
draw (u1 = u2), shown in Fig. 2.25 as the deformation of the circle. The forming
limit curve divides the forming limit diagram into two parts. Above the curve, the
material necks or fractures and below, the material elongates uniformly. Hasek
measured the deformation using circles, deﬁning the major strain u1 (x-axis) and
minor strain p2 (y-axis) to visualize the deformation of the circle by
u1 ¼ ln l1
d0
resp: u2 ¼ ln l2
d0
ð2:21Þ
These strains can be calculated using the starting diameter d0 (before defor-
mation) and the ellipse diameters l1, respectively, l2 (after deformation). The
deformation depends on the mechanical stress. For example, in deep drawing
(u1 = -u2), the circle turns into an ellipse, and in stretch drawing (u1 = u2), it
turns into a larger circle. Another aspect of the formability analysis on thin metal
sheets is that the two-dimensional stress state can be used to describe the stress of
the small circles and it can be only used to measure linear strain paths.
A line net system is normally used to measure the deformation of the FLD and
its points. These lines form circles, which are used to measure the deformation and
are printed on the materials surface with, e.g., a photochemical process or laser
polishing. However, the mechanical properties of thin metal sheets and foils are
inﬂuenced by these processes. To avoid any inﬂuence on the mechanical proper-
ties, one solution is to apply a stochastic pattern, by spraying on the foil surface
[6]. The foil with a stochastic pattern, also called a speckle pattern, is measured
minor strain 
2
major strain 
1
1=-
2
2=0
1=-2
2
1=
2
0
d0
I1
I2
Forming 
limit curve
BIAS ID 122003
Fig. 2.25 Forming limit curve in a forming limit diagram according to [17]
2
Basic Aspects
39

with a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera system. Two CCD cameras record
and analyze the deformation process, allowing a 3-D measurement. In Sect. 5.2.1,
the result of such a 3-D measurement is shown. Figure 2.26 shows the bulge test
including the CCD camera system.
During a bulge test, which can also be used to measure the ﬂow curve, a sheet or
a foil is deformed until it fractures. The left part (1) of the schematic depicts the
specimen before and the right part (2) during the deformation. The pressure needed
in the bulge test can be generated either by a liquid (hydraulic) or a gas (pneumatic).
In [7], both systems are compared and in [52], only the pneumatic bulge test is used.
Hoffmann compared in [18] the ﬂow curves of Aero-Bulgetest, which is similar to a
pneumatic bulge test, with the ﬂow curves of a tensile test. The material used was
pure copper (99.5 %) with thicknesses from 10 to 100 lm. He indicates that the
advantage of the Aero-Bulgetest over the tensile test is the possibility of measuring
the biaxial stress state of the ﬂow stress and its reduced processing errors in cal-
culating the ﬂow stress with a higher precision. The minor strain of the bulge test
can be varied by using dies with different elliptical aspect ratios. Every elliptical
aspect creates a point in the forming limit diagram. A disadvantage of the bulge test
is that only positive major strains can be measured. Hence it covers only the right
side of the forming limit diagram, the biaxial tension.
On the other hand, the so called Nakajima test covers the whole forming limit
diagram. The Nakajima test uses a rigid punch for deformation instead of
hydraulic or pneumatic pressure, and different sample geometries are tested suc-
cessively. Every specimen generates a point in the forming limit curve of the
forming limit diagram. This allows different specimen widths, as shown in
Fig. 2.26 (right). With this variation, the minor strain of the forming limit diagram
can be controlled. The Nakajima test is used in [6] to measure the forming limit of
thin foils (Al 99.5 and SE-Cu58).
CCD cameras
drawing die
specimen
pressure
1/2 FBLH
1/2 FBLH
2 
1 
lNa
lNa
50 mm
60 mm
70 mm
80 mm
100 mm
125 mm
BIAS ID 122004
Fig. 2.26 The bulge test (left) and Nakajima sample geometry (right) according to [7]
40
F. Vollertsen

By using different measurement methods, it becomes difﬁcult to compare the
results. Hasek [17] was the ﬁrst to attempt a formability comparison with thin
sheets. There are differences in the relation between the principal strains and the
friction conditions between the methods. For example, the bulge test is frictionless
and needs no lubricant. If the Nakajima test is carried out without a lubricant (or
with an unsuitable lubricant), the results are incorrect and the comparison is more
complicated [7]. In Fig. 2.27, three testing methods (pneumatic bulge, hydraulic
bulge, and Nakajima) are compared using the forming limit diagram. The speci-
mens material used is pure aluminum (Al 99.5) with thicknesses of 100 and 50 lm.
The results from the hydraulic and the pneumatic bulge test are similar. By
comparing the results regarding the Nakajima test and both the hydraulic and the
pneumatic bulge test (right side of the forming limit diagram), there is a higher
variation between the values than the comparison between the pneumatic and the
hydraulic bulge test.
2.3.2 Formability in Micro Metal Forming
In order to understand formability in micro metal forming, it is necessary to
comprehend the structure of the materials, since this has a great inﬂuence on the
micro structural size effect (see Sect. 2.1). The material’s crystal structure is
normally classiﬁed as either single crystalline or polycrystalline, as shown in
Fig. 2.28 on the right side. A polycrystalline structure consists of many grains in
every dimension, which leads to a uniform deformation and a high formability.
A single crystal consists, as its name suggests, of only one crystal, and has a
relatively low forming potential. An interesting and important aspect in micro
metal forming is the behavior of a material which is in between polycrystalline and
single crystalline.
Armstrong [1] was the ﬁrst to describe the transformation from polycrystalline
to single crystalline. A polycrystalline material can be described as a homogeneous
continum, and it’s material strength can be found by using the Hall-Petch relation
minor strain 
2
Nakajima
Al 99.5
50 µm
100 µm
pneumatic
hydraulic
major strain 
1
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.2
0
0.1
BIAS ID 122005
Fig. 2.27 The hydraulic and
pneumatic bulge test and the
Nakajima test, sheet thickness
50 and 100 lm with
permisson from Springerlink
[7]
2
Basic Aspects
41

(see Sect. 3.3.4). As shown in Fig. 2.28, when the inverse grain size 1/Lg and/or
the sample thickness decreases, the material behavior changes from polycrystalline
(pc) to single crystalline (sc). Between these states, the material behaves like a
poly crystal with size effects (pc/sc), where the ﬂow stress drops to a lower level.
In addition, the change from polycrystalline to single crystalline includes an
increase of the ﬂow stress scattering.
There are different opinions in the literature about how many grains are in the
cross section when the transition starts, e.g., [1] estimated the start to be at less
than 20 grains. But Justinger demonstrated in [25] that the grains in the cross
section of the deformed volume should be 50 or higher. The model also includes
the scatter of the material strength. If the grain number is less than 50, the scatter
increases.
Beside poly- and single crystalline, three other structures can be deﬁned: Oligo
crystalline (a), bamboo (b), and the Tiffany structure (c). The oligo structure has
few grains, but more than one in the cross section and many grains within the
plane. The bamboo structure is deﬁned as having only one grain across
the diameter, but many along the length. It has the shape of a bamboo rod, because
the area where two grain boundaries are in contact deforms less than the area with
only surface grain boundaries during the deformation.
The Tiffany structure, ﬁrst mentioned in [53], has (like the oligo structure)
many grains within the plane, but only one grain in the cross section, as shown in
Fig. 2.29d. Figure 2.29d, e shows where the name Tiffany structure comes from.
The surface of an etched specimen looks like Tiffany glass and has also only one
grain in the cross section, as shown in Fig. 2.29f.
The different orientations of the grains are evidenced by the various grain
colors, and these orientations have an inﬂuence on the mechanical properties.
Single grains behave differently depending on their orientation and loading
Inverse grain size 1/lG
lG = const.
d = const.
d/lG = const.
lG >> d
1
2
M
pc/se
pc
Hall-Petch
Single crystal
Thickness/diameter
of specimen d
sc
pc: 
poly-crystalline
pc/se: 
poly-crystalline with size effects
sc: 
single crystal
Reative yield stress kt/τsc
single crystal
Single crystal
cry
S
iameter
d
scc
iam
ia
d
pc
Hall-Petch
poly crystal
transition
BIAS ID 122006
Fig. 2.28 Transition from poly- to single-crystalline structure [47]
42
F. Vollertsen

direction. As shown in Fig. 2.30, the strain of the foil (52.5 lm) during laser shock
forming (see Sect. 5.2.2) has an inhomogeneous behavior. By comparing the real
strain and the expected one, it is clearly seen that the strain differs not only in one
direction. This conﬁrms the Tiffany structure’s characteristic, where differently
oriented grains have various loading directions and different strains.
(a)
(c) 
(d) 
© Gerhard Metzger/ PIXELIO
(www.pixelio.de)
(e)
(f) 
(b)
BIAS ID 122007
Fig. 2.29 Material structures. a Oligocrystal (bulk). b Bamboo(rod). c Tiffanystructure (sheet).
d Tiffany glass. e Etched structure(top view). f Etched structure(cross section 20 lm)
0
1
2
3
4
mm
6
thickness strain
5
%
-5
-20
-10
-15
position x
Material
Sheet thickness
Blank diameter
Drawing radius
Al99. 5
52.5 µ m
6 mm
0.4 mm
Drawing ratio
TEA  CO2 -Laser
Number of pulses
Pulse energy
1.5 mm
120
600 mJ
BIAS ID 122008
Fig. 2.30 Behavior of the strain in a laser shock forming specimen after [55]
2
Basic Aspects
43

Various copper foils with thicknesses from 10 up to 100 lm are depicted in a
forming limit diagram (Fig. 2.31). It can be seen that the thinner the foil, the lower
the major strain and the lower the forming limit.
Another important aspect, which is not shown in Fig. 2.31, is that the forming
limit curve cannot be generated as simply as in macro forming, since the variation
of the values is much greater [23]. This is caused by the growing inﬂuence of the
surface grains when the foil is thinner (see Sect. 2.1), until a Tiffany structure is
reached. In [33], it was estimated that the elastic component varies more in thinner
foils, which can also be explained by the growing inﬂuence of the surface grains
(see Sect. 5.3).
The different grain orientations and the greater inﬂuence of the surface grains
make formability prediction more difﬁcult. But even in micro metal forming, a good
prediction is essential because of the maximum sample size of only 1 mm in two
dimensions, which means even a minor deviation could make the sample useless.
To visualize the inﬂuence of the Tiffany structure, Fig. 2.32 depicts its etched
micrographs. Each picture shows a part of the fractured Al 99.5 specimens. As
100 µm 
100 µm 
100 µm 
BIAS ID 122010
Fig. 2.32 Micro structures of stretch drawn parts (Al99.5) with different thicknesses a (size100),
b (size50) and c (size20) [23]
-0.2
-0.1
Material
Method
Copper
pneumatic Bulgetest, 
        uniaxial tensile test
Major strain 
1
Minor strain 
2
size100
size50
size35
size10
BIAS ID 122009
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Fig. 2.31 The pneumatic
bulge test tensile test, sheet
thickness 10, 35, 50 and
100 lm [28]
44
F. Vollertsen

explained before, the different grain colors are due to the different orientations.
The micrographs show how the foil thickness decreases. In Fig. 2.32c, the foil is
thinner than the grain diameter. In the red circle, it can be clearly seen that the foil
becomes thinner, because of the different grain orientation. Another critical aspect,
which is similar to the sheet thickness, is the proportion between the grain size and
the specimen thickness (see Sect. 2.1).
Hu carried out the same test using copper (E-Cu58) with size20 and size50,
obtaining the same results as with aluminum. The variation of the values is large;
the thinner the foil, the lower the forming limit. In [6], experiments were carried
out with the bulge test and the Nakajima test: the formability decreases and the
result variation increases when using thinner foils, as shown in Fig. 2.27.
Reference
1. Amstrong, R.W.: On size effects in polycrystal plasticity. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 9 196–199
(1961) doi:10.1016/0022-5096(61)90018-7
2. Behrens, B.A., Doege, E., Hundertmark, A.: Modelling of size-effects in bulk metal forming
processes. Strahltechnik 24 49–56 (2003) BIAS-Verlag, Bremen
3. Buschhausen, A., Weinmann, K., Lee, J., Altan, T.: Evaluation of lubrication and friction in
cold forging using a double backward-extrusion process. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 33,
95–108 (1992)
4. Cao, J., Zhou, R., Wanga, Q., Xia, Z.C.: Strip-on-cylinder test apparatus for die wear
characterization. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 58 251–254 (2009) Reprinted with permission
from Elsevier
5. Czichos, H., Habig, K.H.: Tribologie Handbuch. Vieweg Wiesbaden 118 (2003) With kind
permission from Springer Science and Business Media
6. Diehl, A., Staud, D., Engel, U.: Mechanical characterization of metal foils by hydraulic bulge
test. In: Steel Research International 79, Special Edition Metal Forming Conference,
Düsseldorf, Deutschland, Verlag Stahleisen GmbH, pp. 332–339 (2008)
7. Diehl, A., Vierzigmann, U., Engel, U.: Characterization of the mechanical behavior and the
forming limits of metal foils using a pneumatic bulge test. Int. J. Mater. Form 2(1) 605–608
(2009) doi:10.1007/s12289-009-0608-4
8. Di Lorenzo, R., Beccari, S., Micari, F.: An experimental investigation on micro sheet
forming. In: Proceedings of the 1st international CIRP seminar on micro and nano
technology, Copenhagen, pp. 73–76 (2003)
9. Engel, U.: Tribology in microforming. Wear 260, 265–273 (2006)
10. Engel, U., Messner, A., Tiesler, N.: Cold forging of microparts—effect of miniaturization on
friction. In: Chenot, J. et al. (eds.) Proceedings of the First ESAFORM Conference on
Materials Forming, Sophia Antipolis, France, pp. 77–80 (1998)
11. Eriksen, R.S., Calaon, M., Arentoft, M., Bay, N.: Benchmarking of direct and indirect friction
tests in micro forming. In: Merklein, M., Hagenah, H. (eds.) Key Engineering Materials,
Material Forming ESAFORM 2012, pp. 581–586. Trans Tech Publications, Switzerland
(2012)
12. Gau, J.-T., Principe, C., Wang, J.: An experimental study on size effects on ﬂow stress and
formability of aluminum and brass for microforming. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 184(1–3),
42–46 (2007)
13. Geiger, M., Kleiner, M., Eckstein, R., Tiesler, N., Engel, U.: Microforming. Ann. CIRP 50
445–462 (2001)
2
Basic Aspects
45

14. Geiger, M., Tiesler, N., Engel, U.: Cold forging of microparts. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. 10(1),
19–22 (2003)
15. Geiger, M., Messner, A., Engel, U.: Production of microparts—size effects in bulk metal
forming. Similarity theory. Prod. Eng. IV/1 55–58 (1997)
16. Goodwin, G.,M.: Application of strain analysis to sheet metal forming problems in the press
shop. Soc. Automot. Eng. 680093 380–387 (1968) doi:10.4271/680093
17. Hasek, V.,V.: Untersuchung und theoretische Beschreibung wichtiger Einﬂußgrößen auf das
Grenzformänderungsschaubild. Bleche Rohre Proﬁle 25 pp. 213–220, 285–292, 493–499,
619–627 (1978)
18. Hoffmann, H., Hong, S.: Tensile test of very thin sheet metal and determination of ﬂow stress
considering the scaling effect. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 55 263–266 (2006)
19. Holleck, H., Schier, V.: Multilayer PVD coating for wear protection. Surf. Coat. Technol.
76–77, 328–336 (1995)
20. Hu, Z., Schulze Niehoff, H., Vollertsen, F.: Determination of the friction coefﬁcient in deep
drawing. In: Vollertsen, F., Hollmann, F. (eds.) Proceeding of the 1st Colloquium of DFG
Priority Program Process Scaling, BIAS Verlag, Bremen 27–34 (2003)
21. Hu, Z., Schulze Niehoff, H., Vollertsen, F.: Tribological size effects in deep drawing. In:
Vollertsen, F., Yuan, S. (eds.) Proceeding of the 2nd International Conference on New
Forming Technology, BIAS Verlag, Bremen 573–582 (2007)
22. Hu, Z., Vollertsen, F.: Effect of size and velocity dependent friction in deep drawing on the
process window. In: Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Tribology in
Manufacturing Processes (ICTMP2010), 583–592
23. Hu, Z., Wielage, H., Vollertsen, F.: Forming behavior of thin foils. Key Eng. Mater. 473
1008–1015 (2011) doi:10.4028/www.scientiﬁc.net/KEM.473.1008
24. Hu, Z.; Schubnov, A., Vollertsen, F.:Tribological behaviour of DLC-ﬁlms and their
application in micro deep drawing.Journal of Materials processing Technology 212/3 (2012)
647–652
25. Justinger, H.: Experimentelle und numerische Untersuchung von Miniaturisierungseinﬂüssen
bei Umformprozessen am Beispiel Mikro-Tiefziehen. (2009) ISBN: 9783832281526
26. Kajdas, C., Harvey, S.S.K., Wilusz, E.: Encyclopedia of tribology. Tribology Series 15. p 371
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (1990)
27. Keeler, S.P.: Determination of Forming Limits in Automotive Stampings. SAE Technical
Paper 650535, 1965, doi:10.4271/650535
28. Kim J., Hoffmann, H., Golle, M., Golle, R.: Untersuchungen zum Werkstoffverhalten von
sehr dünnen Kupferblechen. In:Vollertsen, F. (ed.) Größeneinﬂüsse bei Fertigungsprozessen,
BIAS-Verlag, Bremen 267–286 (2009)
29. Klocke, F., Maßmann, T., Gerschwiler, K.: Combination of PVD tool coatings and
biodegradable lubricants in metal forming and machining. Wear 259 1197–1206 (2005)
Reprinted with permission from Elsevier
30. Krishnan, N., Cao, J., Dohda K.: Study of the size effect on friction conditions in micro-
extrusion: part 1—micro-extrusion experiments and analysis ASME J. Manuf. Sci. Eng.
129(4) 669–676 (2007)
31. Lange, K.: Umformtechnik. Band 1: Grundlagen, pp 240–260. Springer, Berlin, (1984)
32. Lim, S.C., Ashby, M.F.: Wear-mechanism maps. Acta Metall. 35 1–24 (1987) Reprinted with
permission from Elsevier
33. Liu, J.G., Fu, M.W., Lu, J., Chan, W.L.: Inﬂuence of size effect on the spring back of sheet
metal foils in micro-bending. Comput. Mater. Sci. 50(9), 2604–2614 (2011) doi:10.1016/
j.commatsci.2011.04.002
34. Manika, I., Maniks, J.: Size effects in micro- and nanoscale indentation. Acta Mater. 54(8),
2049–2056 (2006)
35. Messner, A., Engel, R., Kals, R., Vollertsen, F.: Size effect in the FE-simulation of micro-
forming processes. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 45, 371–376 (1994)
36. Meßner,
A.:
Kaltmassivumformen
metallischer
Kleinstteile—Werkstoffverhalten,
Wirkﬂächenreibung, Prozeßauslegung, Dissertation, Meisenbach Verlag Bamberg (1998)
46
F. Vollertsen

37. Nielsen, P.S., Paldan, N.A., Calaon, M., Bay, N.: Direct testing of scale effects in metal
forming friction and lubrication. In: Felder, E., Montmitonnet, P. (eds.) Proceedings of the
International Conference on Tribology in Manufacturing Processes (ICTMP 2010), 497–506
(2010)
38. Pawelski, O.: Ähnlichkeitstheorie in der Umformtechnik. In Dahl, W., Kopp, R., Pawelski,
O., Pankert, R. (eds.) Umformtechnik Plastomechanik und Werkstoffkunde, pp. 158–176.
Verlag Stahleisen (1993)
39. Podra, P., Andersson, S.: Simulating sliding wear with ﬁnite element method. Tribol. Int. 32
71–81 (1999) Reprinted with permission from Elsevier
40. Raulea, L.V., Goijaets, A.M., Govaert, L.E., Baaijens, F.P.T.: Size effects in the processing of
thin metal sheets. In: Proceedings of the SheMet099, 521–528 (1999)
41. Shaw, M.C.: Dimensional analysis for wear systems. Wear 43, 263–266 (1977)
42. Shimizu, T., Iwaoka, S., Yang, M., Manabe, K.: Scale dependence of dry friction in micro
sheet metal forming. In: Hirt, G., Tekkaya, A. (eds.) 10th International Conference on
Technology of Plasticity (ICTP2011), pp. 979–984. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co KGaA,
Weinheim (2011)
43. Sikorski, M.E.: Correlation of the coefﬁcient of adhesion with various physical and
mechanical properties of metals. Trans. ASME Ser. D J. Basic Eng. 85, 279–285 (1963)
44. Stolarski, A.: Tribology in machine design, p. 19. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford (1990)
45. Tiesler, N.: Microforming—size effects in friction and their inﬂuence on extrusion processes.
Wire 52, 34–38 (2002)
46. Tiesler, N., Engel, U., Geiger, M.: Forming of microparts—effects of miniaturization on
friction. Adv. Technol. Plast. 2, 889–894 (1999)
47. Vollertsen, F.: Metal forming: Microparts encyclopaedia of materials: Science and
technology. In: Buschow, J., Kopp, R. et al. (eds.) pp. 5424–5427. Elsevier, Amsterdam
(2001)
48. Vollertsen, F., Hu, Z.: Tribological size effects in sheet metal forming measured by a strip
drawing test. Ann. CIRP 55, 291–294 (2009)
49. Vollertsen, F., Hu, Z.: On the drawing limit in micro deep drawing. J. Technol. Plast.
1–2(32), 1–11 (2007)
50. Vollertsen, F.: Categories of size effects. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. 2(4), 377–383 (2008)
51. Vollertsen, F., Biermann, D., Hansen, H.N., Jawahir, I.S., Kuzman, K.: Size effects in
manufacturing of metallic components. CIRP Ann. 58(2), 566–587 (2009)
52. Vollertsen, F. et al. Fracture limits of metal foils in micro forming. In: Proceedings of the
36th International MATADOR Conference, 2–8 (2010) doi:10.1007/978-1-84996-432-6
53. Vollertsen, F.: Size effects in micro forming. In: Duﬂou, J.R., Clarke, R., Merklein, M.,
Micari, F., Shirvani, B., Kellens, K. (eds.) 14th International Conference on Sheet Metal
(Sheet Metal 2011), Trans Tech Publications, Zürich-Durnten 3–12 (2011)
54. Weidel, S., Engel, U., Merklein, M., Geiger, M.: Basic investigations on boundary lubrication
in metal forming processes by in situ observation of the real contact area. Prod. Eng. Res.
Dev. 4 107–114 (2010) With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media
55. Wielage, H., Vollertsen, F.: Investigations of forming behavior in laser shock deep drawing.
Steel Res. Int. 80, 323–328 (2009). doi:10.2374/SRI08SP148
2
Basic Aspects
47

Chapter 3
Mechanical Properties
Hans-Werner Zoch
Latin
A
Area (mm2)
AG
Grain area (mm2)
bv
Absolute value of the Burger’s vector (nm)
Cth
Thermal material resistance (MPa)
CDF
Cumulative distribution function
CDFe
Cumulative distribution function of the endurance limit
cfa
Concentration of foreign atoms (at.%)
d
Diameter (mm)
dG
Grain diameter (mm)
E
Young’s modulus (GPa)
fDebye
Debye frequency (s-1)
F
Force (N)
G
Shear modulus (GPa)
GBR
Grain boundary resistance MPa
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
mm
p
GFE
Gibbs free enthalpy (J)
HM
Martens hardness (MPa)
K
Prefactor (MPa s)
KB
Boltzmann constant (J/K)
Kf
Fatigue notch factor
Kt
Stress concentration factor
l
Length (mm)
L
Gliding path (nm)
L
Mean distance between short-range obstacles (nm)
mth nth
Exponents
mf
Strain rate sensitivity
H.-W. Zoch (&)
IWT, Bremen, Germany
e-mail: zoch@iwt-bremen.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_3,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
49

mof
Orientation factor
mSachs
Sachs’ factor
mTaylor
Taylor’s factor
mWeibull
Shape parameter
N
Number of cycles
Nf
Number of cycles to failure
Pr
Probability
Prf
Probability of failure
Q
Activation energy (kJ/(mol K))
R
Gas constant (kJ/mol)
Rr
Stress ratio
Ra
Arithmetic roughness (lm)
Rt
Maximum height of proﬁle parameter (lm)
Ry
Maximum peak to valley height (lm)
Rz
10-point height parameter (lm)
s
Sheet thickness/layer thickness/material thickness (lm)
t
Drop-down time (s)
T
Temperature (K or C)
TR
Recrystallisation temperature (K)
TM
Melting temperature (K)
tD
Delay time of a glide dislocation in front of an obstacle (s)
tL
Running time of a glide dislocation (s)
Greek
a
Heat transfer coefﬁcient (W/(m2 K))
aSG
Amount of surface grains
ci
Shear of the ith slip system (MPa)
e
Strain
_e
Strain rate (s-1)
efr
Elongation after fracture
eg
Elongation at maximum load
h
Volume fraction of the border grains
U%
Thickness reduction due to cold forming (%)
qdis
Dislocation density (1/m3)
qgd
Gliding dislocation density (1/m3)
r
Normal stress (MPa)
r0
Scale parameter of the endurance limit
ra
Stress amplitude
re
endurance limit
re0
endurance limit of a smooth specimen
ren
endurance limit of a notched specimen
rmax
Maximum stress
rM
Ultimate tensile strength (MPa)
rN
Apparent stress (MPa)
50
H.-W. Zoch

rN,en
Nominal endurance limit of a notched specimen (MPa)
rpl
Yield strength/elastic limit (MPa)
rpl0.2
0.2 %-yield strength (MPa)
s
Transverse strain (MPa)
sN
Overall shear (MPa)
sSC
Single crystal critical resolved shear stress (MPa)
u
Logarithmic degree of deformation [= ln (l/l0)]
3.1 Development of Microstructure
Martin Hunkel
3.1.1 Microstructural Size Effects
The plastic behavior of metals depends strongly on microstructural features such
as dislocations, grain boundaries or precipitations. Some of these microstructural
features show size effects depending not only on the size of the feature, but also on
the size of the specimen. The inﬂuence of the microstructure on size effects can be
roughly classiﬁed into four cases [11]:
• Microstructural or intrinsic size effects.
Dislocations interact with intrinsic crystallographic defects, like grain bound-
aries or precipitations.
• Statistical size effects.
In small sized samples, only a few grains exist across the thickness. Thus some
single grain orientations can inﬂuence the whole plastic deformation.
• Lattice curvature and strain gradients.
Geometrically necessary dislocations are needed to compensate lattice curvature
(bending) very strongly in thin sized specimens.
• Surface and interfacial constraints.
The surfaces themselves have an inﬂuence on grain boundary orientation and
surface grain deformation, and interact with dislocations.
Besides the inﬂuence of the microstructure on size effects, the development of
the microstructure (grains, dislocations) is size dependent in the case of interac-
tions with the surfaces.
3.1.2 Grain Structure
In general, sheets have to be recrystallized after rolling for further forming processes
due to high work hardening which comes with a high dislocation density. The
3
Mechanical Properties
51

recrystallization is related to the change in grain size, grain shape, and texture. In the
ﬁrst stage, recovery and primary recrystallization occur in the same way as in bulk
materials. Afterwards, normal grain growth can differ due to the free surface. Sec-
ondary recrystallization occurs in the presence of dissolving precipitations. In thin
sheets, due to orientation effects, additional tertiary recrystallization (often also
referred to as secondary recrystallization) leads to a pronounced texture.
If the typical length of the microstructure is very small compared to the size of
the smallest dimension of a sheet or a wire, the behavior can be described as bulk.
But if the length of the microstructure is comparable to the smallest dimension of a
part, size effects occur due to the microstructure. For example, in the case of grains
in sheets, the sheet can be described as bulk as long as the grain size dG is small
compared to the sheet thickness s. Hence, for a given sheet thickness, the smaller
are the grains, the smaller are the size effects.
3.1.2.1 Grain Structures in Thin Sheets
Often, the surface grains differ in strength and shape from interior grains. For this
purpose, the amount of surface grains of thin sheets is given by
aSG ¼ 2dG
s
ð3:1Þ
It is obvious that nearly all grains are surface grains if dG = s/2. With this deﬁ-
nition, a material can be described as bulk if aSG  0:
Figure 3.1 shows micrographs of two sheets of austenitic steel X5CrNi18-10
(SAE 304) with thicknesses of 20 and 50 lm, respectively, and almost similar
grain sizes. While in the 20 lm sheet there are only two to three grains across the
thickness and aSG ¼ 0:8; in the 50 lm sheet about ten grains exist across the sheet
thickness and aSG ¼ 0:3.
In cases of very large grains (much larger than the sheet thickness), they have a
more two-dimensional grain structure with columnar grains (Tiffany structure, see
Fig. 3.1 Grain boundary
structures of a 20 lm (top)
and a 50 lm (bottom) thick
steel sheet of X5CrNi18-10
(SAE 304)
52
H.-W. Zoch

Fig. 3.2). Grain boundaries are all perpendicular to the free surfaces. Naturally, in
a two-dimensional grain structure, the grain shape is anisotropic: The grain size in
the sheet thickness is much smaller than the grain size within the plane of the
sheet. Consequently, the grain size dG within the plane of the sheet should be
deﬁned. Similar to a Tiffany structure in sheets, in wires there is a one-dimensional
grain structure called the Bamboo structure. In a Bamboo structure no intersection
between three grains exits. Finally, the extreme case is a single crystal where no
grain boundary exists.
3.1.2.2 Normal Grain Growth
After recovery and primary recrystallization, a ﬁne grained material with a high
amount of grain boundaries exists. The driving force of normal grain growth is the
reduction in the grain boundary energy, which is equivalent to the reduction in the
grain boundary area. In bulk materials, the mean grain size dG, dependent on time
and temperature, can be described by
dm  dm
0 ¼ c0eQ=RT  t
ð3:2Þ
with the growth exponent m  2: Typically, the grain sizes during normal grain
growth are distributed log-normally. The grain growth velocity lowers signiﬁ-
cantly when the grain size reaches the size of the sheet thickness. In the case where
aSG ! 1; the characteristic of the grain growth changes from three-dimensional to
two-dimensional. While for bulk material the grain boundaries move in all three
directions, the further motion of the grain boundaries in thin ﬁlms lies in the plane
of the sheet. This reduced dimensionality reduces the growth velocity signiﬁcantly
[49]. Additionally, thermal etching leads to grooves at the intersection of the
grains with the surface. Especially, the growth exponent m can be signiﬁcantly
larger in thin ﬁlms than in bulk materials (m up to 10 [14]).
In single phase alloys, the equilibrium condition leads to an angle of 120 at the
edges of three grains and 109 at the corners of four grains. Due to this difference in
angles at the edges and corners, grain growth always occurs in bulk material. If a
grain boundary encounters a ﬂat surface, the preferred angle is 90. For the Tiffany
structure, shown in Fig. 3.2, no corners with four grains exist. All grain boundary
angles are 120. Thus there is almost no driving force for further grain growth. Of
course, the grain boundary energy has not attained its absolute minimum (grain
boundaries still exist) but locally the driving force is very small and other effects
have to contribute to a driving force for further grain growth. Such an effect is the
orientation-related grain growth (tertiary recrystallization) described below.
Fig. 3.2 Two dimensional
grain structure within a sheet
(Tiffany structure)
3
Mechanical Properties
53

It is well-known that grain boundaries can be pinned very effectively at pre-
cipitations. At a free surface another pinning effect can occur. Recrystallization
takes place at higher temperatures (T [ 0.4 TM). Therefore, thermal etching can
lead to grooves, see Fig. 3.3. These grooves pin the grain boundaries very effec-
tively and, therefore, the grain growth reduces signiﬁcantly [39].
3.1.2.3 Orientation-Related Recrystallization (Tertiary
Recrystallization)
Sometimes, after a stage of normal grain growth, abnormal grain growth occurs.
During abnormal grain growth a few grains grow signiﬁcantly faster than the other
grains. The resulting distribution of the grain sizes is no longer a log-normal
distribution but a bimodal distribution. In some materials, a pronounced texture is
found due to abnormal grain growth. This orientation-related recrystallization is an
important feature in thin iron–silicon- (Fe–Si-) sheets for electrical applications
[52], where texture has a strong inﬂuence on magnetic properties. In thin Fe-3 %
Si ﬁlms, orientation-related recrystallization leads to a pronounced and very sharp
(110) [100] Goss texture.
The underlying reason for orientation-related grain growth is still under debate.
Theories exist for orientation-related recrystallization, such as selective nucleation
or selective grain growth [55]. The stagnation of normal grain growth seems to be a
requirement. As described above, in Tiffany-like structures the driving force for
further grain growth due to grain boundary reduction is very small. Another pos-
sibility for the stagnation of further grain growth is the pinning of grain boundaries
at precipitations or grooves. In the case of the stagnation of normal grain growth,
other energy reduction effects can lead to further grain growth, which is suppressed
due to the much smaller energy reward during normal grain growth. Reasons for the
selective growth of grains with speciﬁc orientations have been discussed. The local
energy of a free surface depends strongly on the crystallographic orientation of the
grain with respect to the free surface. Grains with a preferred orientation can grow
at the expense of less preferred grains. Another theory is that grain boundaries with
a misorientation angle of 20–45 have high mobility. Goss grains often have such
boundaries and the growth of these grains is preferable.
3.1.3 Dislocations
The deformation of parts during forming is due to the generation and movement of
dislocations. The movement of the dislocations is restricted to active glide
Fig. 3.3 Grain boundary
encountering a free surface
without (left) and with (right)
thermal etching
54
H.-W. Zoch

systems. In bulk materials, among others, grain boundaries act as a barrier for
further dislocation movement. The piling-up of dislocations at the grain bound-
aries leads to a yield strength increase proportionally inverse to the square root of
the grain diameter (Hall-Petch relation).
3.1.3.1 Dislocations at Free Surfaces
The relation changes in the presence of a surface and especially according to the
nature of the surface. There are two extremes in the nature of a surface. A layer on
the surface, like an oxide-layer, can block the dislocations. On the other hand, a
totally free surface can act as a source or sink for dislocations. In thin sheets not
only does pile up of the dislocations at grain boundaries occur, but also pile up of
dislocations at passivated surfaces. Consequently, sheets with passivated surfaces
have a higher work hardening effect than sheets with unpassivated surfaces [54].
Grains with free surfaces consist of a softer central region and a harder region near
grain boundaries (Fig. 3.4). In the softer inner region, the dislocations can move on
the active slip systems to the surfaces and disappear if the surface is unpassivated
[20]. Therefore, this region has a signiﬁcantly lower dislocation density and is
signiﬁcantly softer than the core of the grain in bulk materials. Dislocations near
grain boundaries pile up at the grain boundaries and these regions are harder.
Typically during plastic deformation, dislocations pile up at grain boundaries as
well as at passivated surfaces, and Orowan loops occur around precipitations.
After applying a reverse loading, these dislocations can move easily in the reverse
direction and signiﬁcant lower yield strength occurs than without a pre-straining.
This effect is called the Bauschinger effect. If layered surfaces act as a barrier for
dislocations, then they pile up at the surface during loading. Afterwards, during
unloading, a pronounced Bauschinger effect occurs. On the other hand, for un-
layered surfaces, the dislocations leave the material and a lesser Bauschinger effect
occurs.
3.1.3.2 Geometrically Necessary Dislocations
Single crystals under uniaxial stress can deform without the generation of inner
dislocations. For torsion or bending, plastic strain gradients exist. These plastic strain
gradients have to be compensated by additional dislocations, generally called geo-
metrically necessary dislocations (GNDs). Also, plastic strain gradients are needed
to compensate the different strain behaviors of grains in polycrystals. GNDs lead like
Fig. 3.4 Softer (white) and harder (grey) regions within a sheet with a Tiffany structure
3
Mechanical Properties
55

other dislocations to an additional hardening effect. Furthermore, the GND ﬁeld is
strongly dependent on the size of the specimens, as the plastic inhomogeneities
between the grain boundaries and the cores have to be accommodated by the GND
ﬁeld within a varying distance for the different sample sizes. Therefore, thin sheets
have higher hardening during bending than thick sheets [44, 46].
3.2 Heat Treatment
Roland von Bargen, Axel von Hehl and Hans-Werner Zoch
3.2.1 Annealing Processes
During cold forming the formability of the metal decreases with increasing
forming ratio due to the rising number of dislocations that hinder further plastic
deformation. On the one hand, the local stress ﬁelds of the dislocations interact and
increase the macroscopic stress, which has to be induced to achieve further
deformation. On the other hand, the dislocations accumulate at the grain bound-
aries and by this the free run length on the deformation planes that can be used by
following dislocations decreases [8].
To regain formability for further cold forming operations, heat treatment pro-
cesses like recrystallization annealing can be performed. This works for steel as
well as for aluminum alloys. Different recrystallization mechanisms can be dis-
tinguished: primary recrystallization, strain induced grain boundary movement,
general grain growth and secondary (/ternary) recrystallization [8].
Primary recrystallization requires a sufﬁcient amount of cold forming (critical
forming ratio) before heating above the recrystallization temperature TR. An
approximation of this temperature can be calculated based on the melting tem-
perature TM in Kelvin using the formula:
TR ¼ 0:4  TM
ð3:3Þ
During recrystallization, new grains start growing homogeneously from preferred
nucleation sites, like triple points of the former grain boundaries. The new grains
grow further, mostly globularly shaped, and consume the old anisotropically
deformed ones. Parallel to this the dislocations generated by cold forming are
eliminated by annihilation due to diffusion-driven atom movement at elevated
temperatures. The energy that was consumed by the material during forming is the
driving force for the grain growth and dislocation movement [8]. Primary
recrystallization is a very fast process compared to the others where only grain
growth is occurring. The resulting grain size mainly depends on the deformation
56
H.-W. Zoch

degree. With increasing forming ratio the resulting new grain size decreases. Other
process parameters like recrystallization temperature, the heating rate or the grain
size before forming have a negligible effect compared to the deformation degree
[8]. The critical deformation degree is different for each material. Soft steels for
example require 5–10 % deformation, aluminum alloys sometimes only 2 up to
15 % [23].
If the deformation degree is not sufﬁcient for primary recrystallization the
existing grain boundaries can move, local grain growth will occur and the effects
induced during forming will be reversed (e.g. by dislocation annihilation). The
grain growth will start at grains with lower local deformation and grains that saw
higher deformation will be consumed. Therefore this mechanism is called strain
induced grain boundary movement [8].
After the new grain structure has been developed by one of the above-men-
tioned mechanisms further grain growth can occur. Because the energy induced by
the plastic deformation is already utilized, other driving forces like the grain
boundary or the surface energy are necessary. Compared to the deformation
energy these forces are very low, but the grain boundary energy in some cases is
sufﬁcient to enable the ongoing movement of the grain boundaries. If many grains
increase nearly equally in size while consuming only some grains the mechanism
is called general grain growth. In some cases only a small amount of grains
increase (signiﬁcantly) in size, which is called secondary recrystallization. For
surface grains another mechanism called ternary recrystallization can occur. The
driving force is the surface energy of the grains. If a grain has a lower surface
energy compared to its neighbors because of its orientation, it will grow and
consume its surrounding grains with the higher surface energy. This effect often
occurs within thin sheets where there is only one huge grain stretching over the
material’s thickness [13]. Focusing on very thin micro metallic components the
latter mentioned mechanism could result in inhomogeneous grain structures with
anisotropic or even very locally controlled material properties. Figure 3.5 gives an
overview of some of these mechanisms in correlation to the degree of deformation.
A typical microstructure resulting after recrystallization annealing is shown in
Fig. 3.6. In this case mainly primary recrystallization took place. The short term
annealing process leads to a very ﬁne and homogeneous grain structure due to the
very high reduction in diameter by prior cold forming.
3.2.2 Final Heat Treatment
3.2.2.1 Martensitic Hardening of Steels
Martensitic hardening is the most important and most effective strengthening
mechanism for hardenable steels. These steels undergo a required phase trans-
formation from ferrite/pearlite to austenite during heating from room temperature
up to the austenitization temperature, which is around 800–950 C depending on
3
Mechanical Properties
57

the steel composition. Therefore austenite stabilized corrosion resistant steels like
X5CrNi18-10 (SAE 304) that show no phase transformation between the tem-
peratures mentioned cannot be hardened by forming martensite. The holding time
at austenitization temperature has to be sufﬁciently long to bring all the carbon out
of carbides in solution that can be dissolved in the austenite lattice at that
104
mm2
102
10
1
10-1
10-2
10-3
Grain size 
0
3 6
10 20 30 40
50 60 70 80
% 100
300
350
400
500
600
°C
450
550
650
Thickness reduction due to cold rolling
Temperature
Fig. 3.5 Recrystallization diagram: grain size of EN AW-Al99.6 (EN AW-1060) depending on
thickness reduction and recrystallization temperature, annealing time 2 h; 1 coarse grains due to
primary recrystallization near the critical deformation degree, 2 area of small and medium grains
due to primary recrystallization, 3 coarse grains due to secondary recrystallization according to
Kammer [23]
25 µm
25 µm
Fig. 3.6 X5CrNi18-10 steel wire: left rotary swaged from [ 2 mm down to [ 0.4 mm, right
recrystallization annealed in a drop-down tube furnace at 1,300 C for 3.4 s
58
H.-W. Zoch

temperature [8]. Furthermore a homogeneous distribution of the alloying elements
should be accomplished. Information about necessary austenitization times can be
taken from time temperature austenitization diagrams (TTA). For micro compo-
nents the heat treatment times should ideally be short to match the high production
rate of the components. Special furnace concepts can be used, which are described
in Sect. 3.2.3.3, but allow only very short austenitization times. Therefore the
homogeneity of the base material has a crucial inﬂuence on the resulting material
properties because the higher it is the shorter the duration to achieve a homoge-
neous austenite. During cooling different phases, like carbides, ferrite, pearlite,
bainite, can be formed by diffusion processes depending on the cooling rate [8].
The resulting composition and hardness can be estimated for example with con-
tinuous-cooling transformation (CCT) diagrams that are available for most steels
from databases. If the material is quenched (cooled very fast) no diffusion based
phase transformation is possible and diffusion-less martensitic transformation
takes place. During this transformation the face-centered cubic austenite lattice
shears into the tetragonal body-centered martensite lattice [8], as Fig. 3.7 illus-
trates. For micro components the cooling rate generally is very high due to the
small volume to surface ratio. Therefore the quenching media, for example
ambient air or water at room temperature-both without agitation-has no signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the resulting microstructure and its mechanical properties as shown
by Fig. 3.8. Depending on the austenite grain size of the micro component, a
martensitic microstructure will develop. Small austenite grains will lead to a
martensitic microstructure consisting of ﬁne needles, lathes or plates. Whereas
bigger grains enable larger areas with the same crystallographic orientation to
shear at once, which can result in a coarser martensitic microstructure.
The resulting martensitic microstructure of the steel after hardening is signiﬁ-
cantly inﬂuenced by the carbon content. Regarding the martensite start (start of the
austenite into martensite transformation) and the martensite ﬁnish (complete
transformation of austenite into martensite) temperature, Fig. 3.9 shows that with
an increasing carbon content both temperatures are shifted to lower temperatures.
Steel with 0.5 mass % carbon reaches the martensite ﬁnish temperature at
approximately 20 C. For higher carbon contents the austenite into martensite
transformation at room temperature is incomplete (Fig. 3.9) and retained austenite
remains [8]. This retained austenite can possibly transform into martensite under
the inﬂuence of strain or temperature, for example when the component is in use.
The hardness of the martensitic microstructure increases ﬁrst with increasing
carbon content (Fig. 3.9). At some point an increase in carbon content after full
austenitization results in a decrease in hardness, which is due to the higher retained
austenite volume fraction with its lower hardness. Therefore for this type of steels
the hardening temperature is mainly chosen in the two-phase region austenite-
carbide to prevent excessive retained austenite [8]. Figure 3.10 illustrates the two
main types of martensitic microstructure: lath and plate-shaped martensite in
relation to the carbon content of some exemplary steels.
3
Mechanical Properties
59

aA
cM*
{111}A
{110}M
<110>A
<111>M
aM*
open space in octahedra Fe-atom
Fig. 3.7 Transformation
from austenite (top) to
martensite (center) by lattice
shearing according to
Macherauch and Zoch [32]
0
2000
4000
N/mm2
8000
HM 0.5/5.0/1.0
800
900
1000
1100
1200
°C
1400
Temperature
water quenched
air quenched
cold formed
Fig. 3.8 Hardness of micro
cold-formed cups (diameter
4 mm, sheet thickness
50 lm) made out of plain
carbon steel C100 and quench
hardened in a drop-down tube
furnace with different
quenching media
60
H.-W. Zoch

3.2.2.2 Precipitation Hardening of Aluminum Alloys
Aluminum alloys are generally divided into two groups: wrought and cast alloys.
Each group is sub-divided into alloys that can only be strengthened by cold
forming and age hardenable alloys, which can be signiﬁcantly strengthened
by heat treatment. An alloy that is age hardenable has to fulﬁll three main
prerequisites [42]:
Residual austenite [Vol.]
0
%
50
Martensite [Vol.]
Temperature
800
°C
400
200
0
-200
0
0.5
%
1.5
100
%
50 0
0.5
%
1.5
Dissolved carbon content [mass %]
0
0.4
0.8
2.0
1.2
%
Carbon content [mass %]
50
40
30
20
70
60
Hardness [HRC]
Carbon content [mass %]
MS
Mf
196°C
20°C
Fig. 3.9 Inﬂuence of carbon content on the martensite start / ﬁnish temperatures, the retained
austenite volume fraction and the resulting hardness according to Macherauch and Zoch [32]
10 µm
10 µm
10 µm
Fig. 3.10 Martensitic microstructure of unalloyed steels (left to right): lath martensite (Ck 15),
mixed martensite (Cf 53), plate martensite (125 Cr 2) according to Macherauch and Zoch [32]
3
Mechanical Properties
61

1. Decreasing solubility of the alloying elements in the matrix lattice with
decreasing temperature.
2. Existence of an intermetallic phase at room temperature in the phase diagram.
3. Vacant lattice positions that allow diffusion processes at room or elevated
temperature.
The heat treatment process of age hardening, or in other words precipitation
hardening, consists of three major steps: solution annealing, quenching and aging.
Solution annealing is performed at temperatures around 470–560 C depending
on the speciﬁc alloy. The goal is to dissolve the alloying elements atoms in the
aluminum a matrix lattice [42]. For hypoeutectic alloys, which are most of the
wrought alloys, (nearly) all alloying elements can be dissolved. Hypereutectic
alloys, like most cast alloys, only allow the eutectic concentration of the alloying
elements atoms to be dissolved, see Fig. 3.11.
Another important effect during solution annealing is the increasing vacancy
density due to the high temperature. Regarding process control it is important to
keep the solution annealing temperature below the eutectic temperature, otherwise
partial melting of segregated areas with higher alloying element saturation is
possible. These areas are most often located at the grain boundaries [42]. If partial
melting occurs a signiﬁcant decrease in the structural strength will be the conse-
quence, most likely making the component unusable.
After the component is solution annealed it has to be quenched to room temper-
ature. During quenching it is important to cool the component as fast as necessary to
force all the dissolved alloying element atoms to remain in solid solution, but as
slowly as possible to avoid distortion of the component. The material state after
quenching is called supersaturated solid solution, which is an unstable non-equi-
librium condition. If the quenching is not fast enough, intermetallic precipitates of
the equilibrium phase will form that have no strengthening effect but bind alloying
element atoms, which are no longer available for hardening precipitates in sub-
sequent aging treatments [42]. Furthermore if the quenching is fast enough the high
vacancy density can be maintained, which facilitates diffusion processes. Quenching
of aluminum alloys is in most cases carried out with water or polymer solutions.
Alloys that do not require fast quenching to maintainthe supersaturated solid solution
can be quenched by (high pressure) gas quenching or by liquid–gas sprays.
S
Weight.-% alloying element
Wrought-
Cast alloys
 + 
 + S
Temperature
Fig. 3.11 Schematic eutectic
phase diagram of aluminum
alloys and typical solution
annealing temperature range
for wrought and cast alloys (a
aluminum matrix, S melt, b
intermetallic phase of the
speciﬁc alloying system)
62
H.-W. Zoch

The ﬁnal step of the age hardening process is the aging treatment. Aging can be
performed as natural aging at room temperature or as so-called artiﬁcial aging at
elevated temperatures between 120 and 200 C. During aging the dissolved
alloying elements precipitate along one or more precipitation sequences that are
speciﬁc for each alloying system [42]. First of all the alloying element atoms begin
to cluster in the matrix lattice. These clusters become more and more organized
and unstable coherent precipitates form, for most alloys called Guinier–Preston-
zones (GP-zones). Depending on the alloy these GP-zones are sometimes sepa-
rated in GP–I- and GP–II-zones, which have a higher grade of organization and
complexity. By natural aging only these precipitates can be formed. Therefore the
increase in hardness is mainly caused by coherency strain. During an artiﬁcial
aging treatment the GP-zones dissolve or transform into metastable semi-coherent
precipitates that are precursors of the equilibrium phase. Finally the stable inco-
herent equilibrium phase of the precipitation sequence forms. Sometimes an
alloying system allows more than one precipitation sequence during artiﬁcial aging
treatments. The equilibrium phase and sometimes its precursor cause a decrease in
material strength, which is called overaging. Generally the precipitate size and the
mean distance between them increase with longer periods of aging [42]. The
strengthening effect of an aged material mainly depends on two mechanisms that
dislocations can use to pass precipitates. Small coherent precipitates can be
sheared, described as the Kelly-Fine mechanism. Larger, incoherent ones are
passed by the bending of the dislocation, which is described by the Orowan
mechanism, leaving behind dislocation circles around the particles. The maximum
hardness respective to the strength of the material is reached, if both mechanisms
are equally likely to be used by dislocations as Fig. 3.12 indicates. At this point the
optimal precipitate diameter and mean distance is obtained [42].
For most alloys, the maximum hardness reached by artiﬁcial aging will surpass
the one after natural aging. Furthermore the process time can be signiﬁcantly
reduced by artiﬁcial aging due to the higher diffusion speed. Nevertheless it has to
be mentioned that the higher the artiﬁcial aging temperature is, the faster the
bending stress
max.
strength
under-aged
over-aged
shearing stress
supersaturated solid solution
0.2 % yield strenght
GP -1- zones
GP -2- zones
solid solution hardening 
coherence
‘
stresses
aging time at 150°C
130 MPa 
1 
10 
h
0 
100
200
300
500
MPa
1000
Fig. 3.12 Development of
strength during artiﬁcial
aging of the aluminum alloy
EN AW-AlCu4 according to
Keßler [24]
3
Mechanical Properties
63

maximum strength that is reached, but at the same time the maximum strength is
reduced [42].
As well as for martensitic hardening of steel, the heat treatment times for micro
components made from aluminum should be as short as possible to match the fast
production rates of the cold forming processes. Heat treatment facilities, like the
drop-down tube furnace (Sect. 3.2.3.3) enable short processes, but require special
material characteristics. Conventional aluminum alloys could hardly be precipi-
tation hardened in such a facility, because the solution annealing required as well
as the aging times are too long for most of them. For example, the drop duration of
an aluminum cup in the drop-down tube furnace is around 7 s. A typical high
strength wrought alloy Al-4.5Zn-1 Mg (EN AW-7020) has a solution annealing
time of around 20 min, which is two orders of magnitude higher. Therefore alloys
that are suitable for age hardening in for example a drop-down tube furnace should
already be in solution-annealed condition after metallurgical fabrication. This can
be achieved by PVD processes (Sect. 6.1) or to some extent by spray forming,
which allows faster cooling rates than casting processes.
3.2.3 Furnace Concepts
3.2.3.1 Quenching Methods: Liquid Quenching
Liquid quenching is in most cases the fastest technique to cool metallic compo-
nents from elevated temperatures, because the highest heat transfer rates can be
achieved [31]. Therefore steel parts are very often quenched in oil and aluminum
parts in water or water-based polymer solutions. The main differences between the
liquid quenching media mentioned are their boiling points, with oils having the
highest, water the lowest and polymer solutions lying in-between. A huge issue
when quenching with liquid media is the Leidenfrost phenomena [31]. This
describes the effect that occurs when a hot component is dipped into a quenching
bath with its temperature above the ﬂuid’s boiling point. In this case the ﬂuid
evaporates immediately and forms a closed vapor ﬁlm around the component. The
heat transfer coefﬁcient is very low in this phase as the vapor ﬁlm insulates the part
from the liquid. At edges or thin cross-sections of the component running ahead in
cooling, the vapor ﬁlm starts to break up and the nucleate boiling phase begins in
these areas, hereafter covering the entire surface. In this phase the heat transfer is
several times higher than in the vapor ﬁlm phase, and the component cools rapidly.
When the temperature has dropped below the boiling temperature only convection
cooling takes place and the heat transfer coefﬁcient decreases again, but is still
higher than in the vapor ﬁlm phase [31]. All together the cooling of a complex
component in an evaporable liquid is always inhomogeneous due to the vapor ﬁlm
that breaks up locally. This results in the distortion of the component, or even
damage like microcracks is possible.
64
H.-W. Zoch

Another disadvantage of some liquid quenching media, like oils or polymer
solutions, is that costly cleaning treatment has to be performed after quenching to
remove the oil or polymer residues. Both disadvantages mentioned have even a
greater impact on very small components, because distortion is harder to correct
and cleaning is much more difﬁcult due to capillary effects.
3.2.3.2 Quenching Methods: Gas Quenching
Gas quenching offers a great potential to overcome the disadvantages of liquid
quenching media mentioned. Unfortunately the achievable heat transfer coefﬁcient
is much lower than for liquid quenching media as Table 3.1 indicates.
Advantages however are very homogeneous quenching in all positions of the
component (no Leidenfrost phenomena can occur) and the fact that no cleaning
step is necessary. Gas quenching is in most cases performed as a high-pressure gas
quenching treatment, where the components are cooled down in the heating
chamber or are transferred into a cooling chamber, and in both cases purged with a
gas stream. Generally gases are used that are inert to the component material, like
nitrogen or helium [31].
Very small components also have the beneﬁt that their surface to volume ratio
is in most cases fairly high, which makes gas quenching even more effective.
A special solution for these small components can be a cone-shaped quench
chamber in which the components drop, are caught in a reverse gas stream and
cool down while tumbling in the chamber [45]. Due to the cone-shaped chamber
the gas velocity decreases from the bottom to the top. Therefore the components
cannot be thrown out again or hit the bottom of the chamber.
3.2.3.3 Furnace Concepts: Drop-Down Tube Furnace
One of the challenges for micro components is the method of handling and
charging the small and sensitive components. The conventional ways of charging
for example on racks is unsuitable for small micro components because of the size
and the high mounting effort. Baskets—generally used for components with a size
of some millimeters—are also inappropriate, because an extremely tight mesh
Table 3.1 Liquid and gas quenching media and their heat transfer coefﬁcients according to
Köhler et al. [31]
Quenching media
Circulation
Heat transfer coefﬁcient [W/(k 9 m2)]
Nitrogen (at 1,000 hPa)
Yes
100–150
Nitrogen (at 5,000 hPa)
Yes, strong
300–400
Oil (20–80 C)
No
1,000–1,500
Oil (20–80 C)
Yes
1,800–2,200
Water (15–25 C)
No
3,000–3,500
3
Mechanical Properties
65

would be necessary to hold the micro components. Besides, due to the intense
mechanical interaction between the sensitive parts at high temperatures the
deformation probability would be very high. Furthermore, as a result of contact,
diffusion as a threat of welding effects for the components would also be high. To
avoid these effects a new heat treatment process was developed by which micro
components are dropped through a vertical tube furnace and for example are
austenitized and ﬁnally hardened by quenching, leaving the tube at the bottom. To
realize the idea of a heat treatment during falling in an applicable manner, an
adequate facility is necessary. Requirements are a great height to have a long drop
duration which correlates for example with the austenitizing time and a high
maximum heating temperature in order to realize excess temperatures and accel-
erate the desired structural effects like the dissolution of precipitates or grain
recrystallization. An example of a heat treatment device fulﬁlling both require-
ments is described below. It is a 6.5 m tall vertical drop-down tube furnace with a
tube length of 5.5 m in total and an electric heating power of 34 kW (Fig. 3.13).
From the one end to the other the furnace is divided into six separately controllable
Fig. 3.13 Drop-down tube
furnace for heat treatment
during falling
66
H.-W. Zoch

heating zones with a maximum temperature of 1,300 C and a total heated length
of 5 m. The inner tube diameter is 54 mm.
To feed in the components that should be heat treated, a component feed is
necessary, which is one of the most critical and important devices of the drop-
down tube furnace. It includes several functions that are pointed out below. For
ﬁrst experiences with such a device a manually working solution is suitable,
allowing later automation to be integrated within the whole production chain. One
of the main functions of the feeding device is to seal up the furnace at the upper
end to avoid the stack effect that may hinder the components from falling due to
the ascending hot atmosphere. The component feed designed is based on a
retaining device for the components (Fig. 3.14). By turning the retaining device
the component leaves the component feed and starts to drop along the central axis
of the furnace. A diffusor mounted on top of the furnace enables rinsing with purge
gas. The diffusor is necessary to achieve an almost laminar ﬂow in the tube furnace
that keeps the sensitive components away from the tube’s inner surface. Fur-
thermore, it is necessary to use an inert gas in order to avoid the destruction of the
components due to oxidation. It has to be mentioned that molecular nitrogen
dissociates above 1,050 C and would react with steel components. In combination
with hydrogen the critical temperature is reduced to 750 C [9].
The gas ﬂow characteristics can be varied in a wide area. For the furnace
described with a volume of around 14 l a gas ﬂow was realized with argon and an
average velocity of 0.003 m/s, which correlates to a ﬂow rate of 25 l/h. This was
sufﬁcient to avoid oxidation during heat treatment.
To achieve repeatable heat treatment results in conventional heat treatment
facilities it is necessary to keep process times constant. Regarding the different
shapes and ﬂow characteristics of complex components this seems to be a critical
requirement for processes in the drop-down tube furnace. Measuring the drop
duration is therefore very important to ensure the comparability of results. One
purging gas stream 
diffusor
micro component
component
feed
retaining 
device
furnace tube 
(inner- ø 54 mm)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.14 a Component supply with attached diffusor. b Schematic drawing
3
Mechanical Properties
67

possibility for measuring is a real laser light barriers that have a short pulse length,
to detect the fast falling components, and which offers a high sensitivity regarding
the difference between sent and incoming light that is caused by parts below 1 mm
in diameter. Attached to the described drop-down tube furnace is a measuring
system, which is activated by a contact switch, integrated in the component feed
when the component drops out of the retaining device. At the bottom of the
furnace the detection of the components is carried out by the areal laser light
barriers mentioned, with a pulse length of 3.5 ls, which cover the complete width
of the tube and can detect objects down to 0.3 mm in diameter.
Drop duration measurements of steel cups with a diameter of 1 mm show that
the effect of different possible orientations during falling only inﬂuences the heat
treatment time by ±14 % (Fig. 3.15).
3.2.3.4 Furnace Concepts: Belt Furnace and Pusher Tray Furnaces
Belt furnaces are often used for components within a size range of 1–10 mm in all
three spatial directions, like bolts, nuts, springs, balls, rollers or chain segments
[30]. The components are placed as bulk material on a heat resistant conveyor belt
and then move slowly through the horizontal furnace. The furnace itself is purged
with an inert protective gas to avoid the oxidation of the components [5]. Some-
times the components drop directly in a quenching bath at the exit of the furnace.
For components smaller than 1 mm or thin foils below 100 lm in thickness this
furnace concept is inadequate due to several reasons already mentioned in Sect.
3.2.3.3.
Pusher tray furnaces also often are used for smaller bulk components, similar to
belt furnaces. However the homogeneity of heating and prevention of distortion
make this furnace type unsuitable for micro components.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Count
2.0
2.4
2.8
3.2
s
4.0
Drop time
Fig. 3.15 Drop duration
measurements of C100 steel
cups at 20 C furnace
temperature; geometry of the
cups: diameter 1 mm, height
0.5 mm, material thickness
20 lm
68
H.-W. Zoch

3.3 Flow Stress
Bernd Köhler and Hubert Bomas
This section is headed ‘‘ﬂow stress’’, which is often used in connection with
forming. Flow stress means the stress along one axis at a given value of strain that
is in general required to produce plastic deformation. In contrast with this, in this
section the term ‘‘yield strength’’ is used simultaneously. Yield strength means
‘‘the engineering stress at which, by convention, it is considered that plastic
elongation of the material has commenced’’ [35]. This stress is usually speciﬁed in
terms of a speciﬁed deviation from the linear stress–strain relationship. For
example, the common 0.2 % yield strength rpl0.2 is deﬁned as the stress where
0.2 % plastic strain occurs.
3.3.1 Tensile and Compression Tests
3.3.1.1 Tensile Tests
Tensile tests are used to characterize the elastic properties and the resistance
against plastic deformation, as well as against fracture at positive deformation
rates. In this, the specimen will be drawn at a constant strain rate until failure
occurs, while the required force is measured. The dog bone-design of a tension test
ﬂat specimen with a thickness of less than 1 mm is in principal aligned on the ISO
6892-1 standard for tensile testing of metallic materials, and is shown in
Fig. 3.16a. To ensure that failure takes place within the gauge length, the heads of
the specimen are broader than the central area and the transition is shaped as a
radius. Moreover, at the testing of very thin sheets special attention has to be given
to the quality of the sample’s edges, which have to be smooth and without micro
notches resulting from the cutting process. Another important parameter for the
tensile test of a thin sheet is to minimize the eccentricity of the specimen in the
driving direction, which if it is too big may cause wrinkling and early failure [18].
To avoid these failures it is helpful to use an appropriate mechanical adjustment
instrument. Generally, the handling of samples with thicknesses in the sub-milli-
meter range requires the utmost care, using adequate equipment like special for-
ceps such as vacuum tweezers. It is also possible to protect mechanically sensitive
specimens by using special carriers or support frames, which are not removed until
the specimen is installed in the testing machine [18].
Figure 3.16b shows an engineering stress–strain diagram, which means a plot
of the apparent stress rN = F/A0 versus the strain e, at which F is the currently
required force and A0 is the specimen’s cross-sectional area at the beginning of the
test. At the start of deformation, between points A and B, the material behaves
completely elastically obeying Hooke’s law (rN = Ee), in which the elastic
3
Mechanical Properties
69

behavior is characterized by the slope E of the straight, called Young’s modulus.
At point B the curve deviates from linear behavior with respect to the start of
plastic deformation. The corresponding stress rpl is called the elastic limit, which
is of great importance for all kinds of forming processes. This stress is difﬁcult to
determine, since at ﬁrst plastic behavior takes place gradually. To avoid the
uncertainties of small plastic strains a yield strength measurement is carried out,
usually measuring the stress at 0.2 % plastic strain (point C), called the 0.2 %
yield strength rpl0.2. Afterwards the apparent stress rN constantly increases until
point D, called the ultimate tensile strength rm where the maximum apparent stress
is achieved. The plastic strain corresponding to rm is called the elongation at
maximum load eg (Fig. 3.16b). With further deformation necking appears, which
means a local reduction of the cross-section corresponding with a decrease in the
apparent stress until failure occurs at point E. The appropriate plastic strain efr is
termed elongation after fracture.
3.3.1.2 Compression Tests
A second basic experiment with well-known stress and strain conditions is the
uniaxial compression or upsetting test, according to DIN standard 50106 which
covers the macro-range. Compression tests usually are performed between two
coplanar, ground disks, which upset a cylindrical sample at a constant rate with the
simultaneous measurement of the upsetting and required forces. The upset mea-
surement can take place in a non-contact manner with capacitive or inductive
displacement sensors, while the force is usually measured by a load cell. In the
A
B
C
D
E
r = 7
5
65
15
10
(a)
(b)
apparent stress 
N
yield strength 
pl0.2
0.2 %
g
fr
strain 
ultimate tensile strength 
m
Fig. 3.16 Tensile ﬂat specimen and schematic stress–strain diagram (not to scale)
70
H.-W. Zoch

micro range, standard cylindrical specimens exhibit a length to diameter ratio l0/d0
of 0.5 to 2, as in the macro range, however they are smaller. Typical diameters for
micro upsetting specimens are within the range of 1–10 mm [36].
An important precondition for valid results is that the specimen remains
cylindrical during the test. Otherwise it is nearly impossible to determine the
logarithmic degree of deformation u = ln(l/l0) in the correct manner. To ensure
such homogenous forming it is necessary to have proper lubrication between the
dies and the front surfaces of the specimen (Fig. 3.17). This applies all the more
the smaller the sample. Furthermore, parallelism deviation of the sample’s front
surfaces leads to an inhomogeneous stress–strain distribution and a ﬂattening of
the scope in the material’s stress–strain response [16].
Figure 3.17 shows a schematic stress-compression diagram with the 0.2 %
compression yield strength rpl0.2, which is determined along the lines of rpl0.2 in
the tensile test. The apparent stress rN = F/A0 is in reference to the specimen’s
front surface area A0 at the beginning of the test. In fact, with respect to forming it
is more adequate to use the ﬂow stress rf = F/A where A ¼ A0  l0=l ¼
A0= 1 þ l  l0
ð
Þ=l0
ð
Þ is the specimen’s real front surface area during the
experiment.
d0
d
l0
0.2 %
apparent stress 
N
compression yield
strength 
pl0.2
compression 
(a)
(b)
(c)
l
Fig. 3.17 Schematic stress–compression diagram (not to scale) and effect of lubrication on the
upset test: a prior to the test, b optimal lubrication: specimen remains cylindrical, c insufﬁcient
lubrication: specimen obtains convex contours
3
Mechanical Properties
71

3.3.2 Classes of Size Effects Related to Yield Strength
With respect to the inﬂuence of size effects on the yield strength, three main areas
can be identiﬁed:
The ﬁrst and strongest inﬂuence is caused by mechanisms which inhibit dis-
location movement. This effect typically occurs in specimen sizes between 1 and
10 lm. It is due to a lack of dislocation sources or drains or due to a surface layer,
which suppresses the dislocation annihilation giving rise to very effective dislo-
cation pile ups accompanying an increase in yield strength.
The second area concerns strain gradient plasticity effects. A corresponding
model has been developed primarily from indentation hardness experiments. As a
basic approach a strain gradient model differentiates between two types of dislo-
cation, statistically stored dislocations (SSD) and geometrically necessary dislo-
cations (GND). SSD are those dislocations which are created during plastic
deformation and are statistically homogenously distributed within the crystal. In
contrast, GND are additionally incorporated dislocations to compensate for
inherent strain gradients in the lattice and are distributed accordingly. The inter-
action width between a GND and mobile dislocations are described using length
scales, which are ﬁrst of all determined by the material but are also inﬂuenced by
the respective underlying theory. Those length scales are reported to be in the
order of magnitude between 10 nm and 100 lm. On the basis of these charac-
teristic length scales and the fact that mobile dislocations interact with SSD and
GND in a similar way, plastic deformation in materials containing strain gradients
can be described in a satisfactory manner [51].
The third area is the surface grain model which is a typical shape sum effect: the
measured yield strength is represented as the sum of a portion from the core grains
and from the surface grains. The latter contribute less to strain hardening, since
they are only sparsely integrated in the crystal structure. Typical sample sizes are
between 10 and 100 lm, respectively, less than about 20 times the typical grain
size. The yield strength decreases with a decreasing number of grains per cross-
section, because the portion of surface grains increases in return [22].
3.3.3 Yield Strength Models
Plasticity is due to dislocation movement on slip planes and inﬂuenced by different
kinds of obstacle, which are either acting travel path limiting or can be overcome.
The correlations between deformation mechanisms and yield strengths are well
explained by Macherauch and Vöhringer [33]: In principal the yield strength rf
can be divided into an athermal and a thermal contribution:
rf ¼ rath structure
ð
Þ þ rth T; _e; structure
ð
Þ
ð3:4Þ
72
H.-W. Zoch

Both contributions are affected by the metallic microstructure, while the thermal
part rth is additionally dependent on temperature T and strain rate _e.
The athermal contribution rath is a result of four shares of Dri
ath and their
corresponding mechanisms:
1. Dislocation hardening, which is based on the movement of glide dislocations
within internal stress ﬁelds induced by other dislocations. The appropriate share
to rath is
Dr1
ath ¼ rdis ¼ adis  G  bv 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
qdis
p
ð3:5Þ
with a constant adis, the shear modulus G, the absolute value of the Burgers
vector bv and the dislocation density qdis.
2. Grain boundary hardening, which is caused by glide dislocations accumulating
at grain boundaries and twin boundaries. This contribution is strongly shaped
by the grain size dG and is known as the Hall–Petch relationship [15]:
Dr2
ath ¼ rGb ¼ GBR=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
dG
p
ð3:6Þ
At this, GBR is a material dependent parameter with the signiﬁcance of grain
boundary resistance.
3. Solid solution hardening appears with respect to solved impurity atoms. It is
based on elastic interaction between glide dislocations and foreign atoms,
which are taken up in the crystal lattice in the direct neighborhood of the glide
planes. At a foreign atom concentration cfa (at.%) this leads to a portion
Dr3
ath ¼ rss ¼ ass  G  cfan
ð3:7Þ
Thereby ass is a constant, G is the shear modulus and n an exponent, ranging
between 0.5 and 1.
4. The contribution of all kinds of particle hardening is included in Dr4
ath ¼ rp:
Particle hardening comprises interactions between glide dislocations, coherent
and incoherent precipitations or dispersions acting as obstacles. Examples for
particle hardening are the Orowan mechanism and the Kelly-Fine mechanism.
Similar to grain boundary hardening, the presence of a grainy, hard second
phase leads to an increase in yield strength.
If different hardening mechanisms are active at the same time, the yield strength
can be estimated, using the additivity of rath:
rath ¼
X
4
i¼1
ri
ath ¼ rdis þ rGb þ rss þ rp
ð3:8Þ
The contribution of material temperature and strain rate is included in the second
term of Eq. (3.4), whereby the temperature dependence of rth is much greater than
that of the strain rate. In contrast to body-centered cubic (bcc) metals, which show
a pronounced temperature inﬂuence on yield strength, face-centered cubic (fcc)
3
Mechanical Properties
73

metals do not do so. On the other hand, in fcc metals the hardening behavior is
strongly temperature dependent as compared to bcc metals.
To quantify the effect of temperature T and strain rate _e on the thermal con-
tribution rth, the following relation is used:
_e ¼
1
mTaylor
 qgd  bv  dL
dt
ð3:9Þ
whereat the strain rate _e is determined by the mean gliding path dL within the time
interval dt, the absolute value of the Burgers vector bv and the density of glide
dislocations qgd. The grain accommodation factor mTaylor provides the link
between macroscopic and microscopic deformations of the polycrystal’s grains
(see also Sect. 3.3.4). The time interval dt comprises the running time of a glide
dislocation between the short-range obstacles tL on the one hand and a proportion
of delay time tD on the other hand, whereby it applies that tD [ [ tL If dL is now
substituted by the mean distance between the short-range obstacles L it follows
from Eq. (3.9) that
dt ¼ tL þ tD ¼ qgd  bv  L
mTaylor  _e
ð3:10Þ
The mean delay time tD is determined by the probability of a local incidence of a
sufﬁcient ﬂuctuation of the activation enthalpy DGFE which is known from sta-
tistical mechanics as
tD ¼
1
fDebye
 exp  DGFE
KB  T


ð3:11Þ
Thereby fDebye is the Debye frequency, KBthe Boltzmann constant and T the absolute
temperature. Using tD [ [ tL it can be concluded from Eqs. (3.10) and (3.11) that
_e ¼ _e0 exp  DGFE
KB  T


ð3:12Þ
with a strain rate constant _e0 ¼ qgd  bv  L  fDebye

mTaylor:
The vivid meaning of DGFE is reﬂected in Fig. 3.18. Force-distance curves are
depicted of a short–range dislocation obstacle during material loading at different
temperatures. In each case the force or, alternatively, the stress required for local
dislocation movement is drawn schematically in dependence of the distance. At
T = 0 K the force Fth;0 or the corresponding stress rth;0 have to be applied to
overcome the obstacle Cth,0, since there are no thermal ﬂuctuations at the absolute
zero point. Micro metal forming normally takes place at ambient temperature,
being in qualitative accordance with the temperatures T1 or T2 in Fig. 3.18. At
these temperatures ﬁnite values of thermal energy DGFE1 and DGFE2 are avail-
able to overcome the obstacle, at which DGFE2 [ DGFE1, because T2 [ T1. The
corresponding free enthalpies are marked as hatched areas in Fig. 3.18. It is
obvious that the overcoming of the same obstacle resistances is requires that the
74
H.-W. Zoch

larger the forces Fth or stresses rth, the lower the temperatures. Moreover one sees
immediately that on reaching the temperature T0, the whole work necessary to
overcome the obstacle is deposited thermally. Hence, the whole thermal material
resistance Cth = 0 and consequently Fth = 0 and rth = 0. The required activation
enthalpy is called DGFE0 and is characteristic of the present type of obstacle.
It becomes obvious from Fig. 3.18 that DGFE is determined by Fth or rth. For
many metals DGFE(rth) can be approximated by a power law of the form
DGFE ¼ DGFE0 1 
rth
rth;0

1=mth
"
#1=nth
ð3:13Þ
Typical exponents for metals are e.g. mth = nth = 1 for pure aluminum and some
hexagonal metals, mth = 1/2 and nth = 1 for titanium alloys, mth = 2 and nth = 1
for pure iron, mth = 4 and nth = 1 for carbon steels as well as mth = 2 and
nth = 2/3 for copper alloys.
Substitution of Eq. (3.13) into Eq. (3.12) and solving the equation for the
thermal ﬂow stress contribution for temperatures T \ T0 leads to
rth ¼ rth;0 1 
T
T0

nth

mth
ð3:14Þ
with
T0 ¼ DGFE0
KB  ln _e0
_e
ð3:15Þ
As a result, the inﬂuence of temperature and strain rate on the thermal ﬂow stress is
quantitatively determined and the summarization of Eqs. (3.4), (3.8) and (3.14)
gives the ﬂow stress as the sum of the thermal and athermal contributions:
Fth;
th
GFE1
GFE2
GFE0
Fth,0;
th,0
Fth,1;
th,1
Fth,2;
th,2
distance x
T = 0 K 
T1
(T1 > 0 K)
T2
(T2 > T1)
T0
(T0 > T2)
0
Δ
Δ
Δ
Fig. 3.18 Force-distance curves of a dislocation obstacle during material loading at different
temperatures: micro cold forming usually takes place at ambient temperature being in qualitative
accordance with the condition at T1 or T2, according to Macherauch and Vöhringer [33],
reproduced with permission from Wiley–VCH
3
Mechanical Properties
75

rf ¼ rdis þ rGb þ rss þ rp
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
rath
þ rth;0 structure
ð
Þ 1 
T
T0

nth

mth
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
rth
ð3:16Þ
If the ﬂow stress is calculated for different strain rates depending on temperature,
schematically the curved shapes depicted in Fig. 3.19 result. The ﬂow stresses
continuously decrease with increasing temperature and are discharging earlier into
rth the lower the strain rate.
Micro metal forming processes are usually carried out at low homologous
temperatures T* = T/Tm with Tm = melting temperature, where deformation can
be described on the basis of stress and strain. Every point on the strain hardening
curve therefore equates to the ﬂow stress rf of the instantaneous deformation state.
Obviously time-dependent processes play no signiﬁcant role at low temperatures.
A fact which expresses itself in the dependence of the yield strength rpl0.2 on the
strain rate _e which can be described by the strain rate sensitivity mf:
mf ¼ d ln rpl0:2
d ln _e
ð3:17Þ
For example, typical values for the strain rate sensitivity of fcc metals are
approximately mf % 1/100 as can be seen in the example for size 100 Al-sheets
depicted in Fig. 3.20. Therefore rf is nearly independent of the strain rate. The
deﬁnition of strain rate sensitivity mf in Eq. (3.17) has been chosen because the
dependency rpl0.2 _eð Þ can usually be described approximately by a power law
rpl0.2 ¼ K  _em
ð3:18Þ
where K = K(e).
1
2
3
3
2
1
T0
(1)
T0
(2)
T 0
(3)
temperature  T [K] 
flow stress f
th,0
ath
ath
th
0
Fig. 3.19 Inﬂuence of strain
rate and temperature on the
yield strength of polycrystals
according to Macherauch and
Vöhringer [33], reproduced
with permission from Wiley–
VCH
76
H.-W. Zoch

3.3.4 Size Effects on Yield Strength
Material structures are basically subdivided into polycrystalline and single crys-
talline materials. While the plastic behavior of a single crystal is signiﬁcantly
determined by its orientation to the tensile direction, its active slip systems and the
critical shear stress. A polycrystal with many grains within the cross-section of a
specimen shows a plastic behavior, which is also characterized by the averaged
properties of all grains and their interaction among each other. Against this back-
ground, in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century several efforts were taken in an attempt to
deduce the laws of plasticity of polycrystalline materials from the well-known
plastic behavior of single crystals. During this two size effects came to light,
increasing the ﬂow stress of a polycrystal: a ‘‘specimen size’’ and a ‘‘grain size’’
effect [2]. Both are signiﬁcantly dependent on the number of grains per cross-section.
If specimens with an increasing number of grains are considered, coming from
a single crystal, primarily the ‘‘specimen size’’ effect appears which increases the
ﬂow stress rf for two reasons: on the one hand the critical shear stress now has to
be reached in all the grains contributing to plastic ﬂow within the cross-section,
and on the other hand strain continuity at the grain boundaries has to be ensured. In
ﬁelds of less than about 20 grains per cross-section, it has been concluded that
2  ssc
 rf  mor  ssc
ð3:19Þ
whereby the ﬂow stress may vary between two times the single crystal critical
shear stress ssc, for a structure containing at least one grain within the specimen’s
cross-section, to mor times the single crystal strength, at which the lower and upper
levels of mor are determined by Sachs’ or Taylor’s polycrystalline models,
respectively [43, 48].
20
40
60
MPa
100
yield strength 
pl0.2       
10-4
10-3
10-2
s-1
1
 strain rate .
Al 99.5
size100-sheet
mf=   
= 0.021
dln
pl0.2
.
dln
Fig. 3.20 Inﬂuence of strain
rate _e on yield strength rpl0.2
described by the strain rate
sensitivity mf on the example
of size 100 Al-sheets
3
Mechanical Properties
77

Sachs introduces an average crystal orientation factor mSachs = 2.238, which
has been calculated under the assumptions that the axes of grains are orientated
randomly, no interaction between adjacent grains takes place and that each crystal
grain is subjected to sufﬁcient uniaxial stress in the direction of the macroscopic
stress to make it yield. His model represents a lower estimate for mor, because
frictional effects between the grains have not been considered.
Taylor’s approach of calculating an upper limit for mor is based on the principle
of virtual work. From in total 12 slip systems of a fcc crystal system, ﬁve are
always independent, leading to 384 possible combinations of ﬁve independent slip
systems, each of them approving arbitrary deformation. Based on the simpliﬁed
hypothesis that those slip systems are always chosen, whose overall shear
sN ¼
X
5
i¼1
ci
j j
ð3:20Þ
is smallest, Taylor determines the work-hardening behavior of polycrystals.
Assuming a random distribution of grain orientations, he calculates an upper
bound mTaylor = 3.06 for the grain accommodation factor mor.
The ‘‘grain size’’ effect occurs if a sufﬁcient number of grain boundaries is
present in the polycrystal, roughly counting more than about 20 grains in the cross-
section. These grain boundaries act as obstacles to the initiation of bulk yielding,
and extra internal stress concentrations are required to induce a general yielding of
the specimen. The ‘‘grain size’’ effect has a direct dependence on the grain size dG
and increases the yield strength, superimposing the ‘‘specimen size’’ contribution
leading to Eq. (3.21), which is known as the Hall–Petch relation, with the ‘‘friction
stress’’ ri and the ‘‘grain boundary resistance’’ GBR (see also Sect. 3.3.3):
rf ¼ mor  ssc þ GBR
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
dG
p
¼ ri þ GBR
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
dG
p
ð3:21Þ
The Hall–Petch equation well describes the relation between grain size and ﬂow
stress for conventional specimens, but it does not hold true for small ones, such as
the size50-sheet of steel DC01 shown in Fig. 3.21: The measured ﬂow stress rpl0.2
of these sheets is about 45 % lower than would be expected on the basis of the
Hall–Petch relation for normal sized specimens [19]. At the same time the
investigated sheets have a median grain size of 17 lm leading to a thickness to
grain size ratio s/dG of 2.9. As a consequence, about 75 % of the grains are in
direct contact with the surface of the sheet.
An extended Hall–Petch relationship accommodating this derivation, by
introducing two parameters mor
a and b, is given by Kim et al. [26]:
rf ¼ m
a
or  ssc þ GBR
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
dG
p
 b
ð3:22Þ
At this mor is the crystal orientation factor within the meaning of Eq. (3.19) and a
and b are size-dependent parameters. The one limiting case, having a single
78
H.-W. Zoch

crystal, leads to the lower bound conditions m
a
or  2 due to Eq. (3.19) and b ¼ 0;
since there are no inner grain boundaries responsible for a stress increase. The
other limiting case, having a polycrystal, leads to the upper boundary condition
a = b = 1 transforming Eq. (3.22) into Eq. (3.21). As an example, the orientation
factor mor for the fcc structure of aluminum and copper has been determined
experimentally to approximately mor = 2.6, about halfway between the values
reported by the Sachs and Taylor models [26]. The validity of the extended Hall-
Petch relation could be proven experimentally for a large range, from fully
polycrystal specimens down to parts that are only contain several grains.
The limited validity of the conventional Hall-Petch relationship [Eq. (3.21)] in
the sub-millimeter range is due to the shape sum effect, a size effect where the
observed value is depicted as a sum of core-dominated and surface-dominated
subvalues, while the relative amounts of the two change due to scaling [50]. An
example of a shape sum effect is the surface grain model. It is shown that neither
the absolute grain size nor the absolute sample size are the determining quantities,
but rather the ratio of grain size to cross-section, or in other words the volume ratio
of surface grains to core grains. Figure 3.22 depicts the increase in the share of
0
5
10
1/ mm
20
0
100
200
300
MPa
500
flow stress f
1/ dG
s
rolling direction
pl0.2 values of a
steel DC01
size50-sheet
s/dG = 2.9
Hall - Petch:
f = 
i +
     with 
i = 56 MPa
GBR = 22MPa mm
GBR
  dG
Fig. 3.21 Hall-Petch relation
for conventional sized
specimens compared with
experimental data of a size50-
sheet of steel DC01
specimen size
core grain
share of surface grains
surface grains
Fig. 3.22 Correlation
between specimen size and
share of surface grains
according to Kals et al. [22]
3
Mechanical Properties
79

surface grains when the specimen size decreases while the grain size stays the
same.
The grains lying at the surface make a smaller contribution to strain hardening
than do the core grains, since the latter are completely integrated in the crystal
structure. From the view of hardening mechanisms the dislocation movement in
surface grains is less obstructed than it is in core grains, because dislocations moving
through the grains during deformation pile up at grain boundaries, but not at the free
surface, where no extra internal stress concentrations are required to overcome grain
boundaries [12]. Against this background, it is obvious to differentiate model-like
between the surface zone and a core zone, attributing a different behavior with
various elastic and plastic shares to each of them (Fig. 3.23) and, as a result,
assigning a ﬂow stress rsurface
f
adding the lower part of the surface and a ﬂow stress
rcore
f
contributing to the higher ones for the core of the sample. Within this model the
measured ﬂow stress rf can be represented as a linear combination of the form
rf ¼ h  rsurface
f
þ 1  h
ð
Þ  rcore
f
ð3:23Þ
with the volume fractions h and 1 - h of the surface or the core, respectively. If in
particular only surface grains are present (h = 1) and the specimen size will be
reduced further, the ﬂow stress no longer decreases [22]. Associated therewith, the
orientations of single grains become more important and the scatter of ﬂow stress
of different samples increases.
Thus the observed deviations from yield strength can be well explained due to
the surface grain model as a shape sum effect which becomes increasing signiﬁcant
the larger the volume fraction of the surface zone becomes.
Fig. 3.23 Schematic drawing of stress and strain behavior within the surface zones and the core
zone
80
H.-W. Zoch

3.3.5 Requirements for Testing Equipment
The mechanical characterization, tensile or compression tests, of e g. specimens
with sub-millimeter dimensions necessitates testing equipment capable of meeting
speciﬁc requirements: The testing system has to allow low forces within the range
of a few Newton and adequate piston strokes to be set and controlled with sufﬁ-
cient accuracy. Figure 3.24 shows such a testing system which covers the low
force range from 0 to ±1,000 N and also permits static and cyclic tests.
Especially within the low force range, environmental issues such as vibrations
or footsteps can thwart the measurement. Therefore it is advisable to decouple the
testing system mechanically from its environment using an adequate vibration
isolation system, for example a ﬂoating laboratory bench.
Moreover, for specimens with dimensions in the sub-millimeter range contact
strain sensors are unsuitable because their interaction with the sample is not
negligible. Instead of that the strain has to be detected with non-contact methods
such as capacitive or inductive displacement sensors or by means of optical strain
measurement methods, like grey-scale correlation, and laser- or video extensom-
eters [18]. Such a video extensometer is exemplarily shown in Fig. 3.25: Two dots
(c) are applied as markers within the gauge length on the front side of a tensile test
specimen which is lit with polarized, monochromatic light by the illumination unit
(a). The video camera (b) detects and follows the balance points of the markers.
(c)
(b)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(f)
Fig. 3.24 Electrodynamic
testing system. a load cell,
b piston, c clamping device,
d video extensometer,
e illumination unit, f ﬂoating
bench
3
Mechanical Properties
81

3.3.6 Flow Stress Atlas
The following is an exemplary collection of ﬂow stress and stress–strain data from
different investigations which give an overview and orientation to how specimen
and grain size inﬂuence the ﬂow stresses of some relevant materials Fig. 3.26 +
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3.25 Non-contact strain measurement with a video extensometer: The video camera
(b) detects and follows the two markers (c) applied to the front side of the specimen
0
5
10
15
20
25
%
35
 strain 
size250
size125
size50
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
MPa
40
apparent stress 
N
Aluminum (99.999%, rolled and heat treated)
Fig. 3.26 Aluminum
(99.999 %, rolled and heat
treated). Stress–strain curves
of Al foils with varying
thickness according to Klein
et al. [27]. Reprinted from
Klein et al. [27] with
permission from Elsevier
82
H.-W. Zoch

Tables 3.2; Fig. 3.27 + Table 3.3; Fig. 3.28 + Table 3.4; Fig. 3.29 + Table 3.5;
Fig. 3.30 + Table 3.6; Fig. 3.31 + Table 3.7; Fig. 3.32 + Table 3.8; Fig. 3.33
(without Table).
0
20
40
60
80
100
380
MPa
420
apparent stress 
N
size20
macroscopic
 own investigations
 Zhang et al.
size200
size15
size105
size55
size22
0
5
10
15
20
%
30
 strain 
Aluminum (99.5%)
Fig. 3.27 Stress–strain
curves of Al (99.5 %) foils
with varying thickness
according to own
investigations and Zhang
et al. [56]. Reprinted from
Zhang et al. [56] with
permission from Elsevier
size9
size19
size50
size125
size250
size125
size100
size250macroscopic
size35
size78
0
50
100
150
MPa
250
apparent stress 
N
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
%
40
strain 
  Klein et al.
Weiss et al.
  Fujiwara and Abiko
Copper (99.95%)
Fig. 3.28 Stress–strain
curves of Cu (99.95 %) foils
with varying thickness and of
a macroscopic specimen for
comparison according to
Fujiwara and Abiko [10],
Klein et al. [27], Weiss et al.
[53]. Reprinted from Klein
et al. [27] with permission
from Elsevier. Reprinted
from Weiss et al. [53] with
permission from Elsevier.
Reprinted from Fujiwara and
Abiko [10] with permission
from Journal de Physique
(http://
www.journaldephysique.org)
3
Mechanical Properties
83

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
%
40
strain 
  Klein et al.
Akiniwa et al.
  Fujiwara and Abiko.
size20
macroscopic
size105
size8
size35
0
50
100
150
200
MPa
300
apparent stress 
N
Copper (99.95 / 99.99 %, electro deposited)
Fig. 3.29 Stress–strain curves of electrodeposited Cu (Klein et al. [27] used copper with
99.95 % purity, Akiniwa et al. [1] utilized a sample with 99.99 % purity), foils with varying
thickness and of a macroscopic specimen for comparison according to Akiniwa et al. [1], Klein
et al. [27], Fujiwara and Abiko [12]. Reprinted from Klein et al. [27] with permission from
Elsevier, Reprinted from Akiniwa et al. [1] with permission from Trans Tech Publications and Y.
Akiniwa, Reprinted from Fujiwara and Abiko [10] with permission from Journal de Physique
(http://www.journaldephysique.org)
0
100
200
300
MPa
500
apparent stress 
N
size50, cold worked
size50, annealed
  macroscopic specimen
850 °C / 240 min
850 °C / 60 min
850 °C / 30 min
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
%
18
strain 
Low carbon steel (DC01)
Fig. 3.30 Stress–strain
curves of low carbon steel
DC01: size50 specimens in
different annealing conditions
according to Köhler et al.
[29] (Reprinted from Köhler
et al. [29] with permission
from Elsevier) and a
macroscopic specimen for
comparison according to
Boller and Seeger [3].
Reprinted from Boller and
Seeger [3] with permission
from Elsevier and T. Seeger
84
H.-W. Zoch

d0 = 4.8 mm
l0 = 7.2 mm
= 0.42
= 0.21
= 0.10
0
100
200
300
400
MPa
600
flow stress kf
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
true strain |
| 
l =
l0
· 
d = d0
·
0
Brass (CuZn15) under compression
Fig. 3.31 Stress–
deformation curves
determined by the upsetting
of geometrically similar
cylindrical specimens of
CuZn15 according to Meßner
and Engel [37]. Reprinted
from Meßner and Engel [37]
with permission from U.
Engel
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
MPa
800
apparent stress 
N
macroscopic
size51
size24
0
10
20
30
%
50
strain
Steel X4CrNi18-10 (1.4301)
Fig. 3.32 Stress–strain
curves of steel 1.4301 foils
with varying thickness (own
investigations)
0
800
850
MPa
950
flow stress kf
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
scaling factor 
degree of deformation  = 0.34
grain size dG:
20 µm
38 µm
79 µm
d = d
d0 = 5.0 mm
.
Fig. 3.33 Inﬂuence of the
specimen size on the ﬂow
stress kf for the steel 1.4301
determined by tensile tests,
reprinted from Meßner and
Engel [37] with permission
from U. Engel
3
Mechanical Properties
85

Table 3.2 Microstructural parameters and material properties
Condition
Young’s
modulus E
(GPa)
Thickness
s (lm)
Grain size
d a
G (lm)
s/dG rm
(MPa)
efr
(%)
Source
Rolled and heat treated
(550 C/2 h)
69.1
50
140
0.36 23
4.2 [27]
70.5
125
213
0.59 27
17.6
69.4
250
218
1.17 28
28.5
a The grain sizes have been determined by the linear intercept method
Table 3.3 Microstructural parameters and material properties
Condition
Thickness s
(lm)
Grain size
dG
(lm)
s/dG
HV
0.01
rpl0.2
(MPa)
rm
(MPa)
efr
(%)
Source
Rolled
15
–
–
46
50
82
3.2
Own
investigations
22
25
0.8
35
44
66
3.8
55
25
2.0
48
29
72
9.8
105
25
4.0
68
29
73
13.8
200
–
–
52
31
77
29.0
PVD sheet
20
2a
10.0
189
385
401
0.8
Diameter d
(lm)
d/dG
Annealed, 360 C
1/2 h
9,900
62
159.7 –
84
99
3.0 [56]
a Typical PVD sheets are composed of columnar crystals perpendicular to the sheet surface. Within this
context the diameter of the columnar crystals has been assumed as dG
Table 3.4 Microstructural parameters and material properties of rolled copper
Condition
Young’s modulus
E (GPa)
Thickness s
(lm)
Grain size
dG (lm)
s/dG
rm
(MPa)
efr
(%)
Source
Rolled and annealed
(600 C/2 h)
112
9
25
0.4
92
7.5
[27]
82
19
15
1.3
124
10.5
132
35
20
1.8
157
12
106
78
30
2.6
180
23
112
100
35
2.9
192
22.5
99
125
40
3.1
178
26
104
250
45
5.56
204
27
90
50
45
1.1
161
15
[53]
95
125
40
3.1
184
27
105
250
45
5.6
199
36
Diameter
d (lm)
d/dG
Cold swaged and
annealed
(300 C/ h)
130
3,000
30
100
222
33
[10]
86
H.-W. Zoch

Table 3.5 Microstructural parameters and material properties of electrodeposited copper
Condition
Young’s
modulus E (GPa)
Thickness
s (lm)
Grain size
dG (lm)
s/dG
rm
(MPa)
efr
(%)
Source
Electro-deposited 92
35
2–5
7–17.5
238
26
[27]
102
105
7–10
10.5–15 255
8
–
8
3
2.67
289
14
[1]
–
20
10
2
282
26.5
Diameter
d (lm)
d/dG
Cold swaged and
annealed
(300 C/ h)
130
3,000
30
100
222
33
[10]
Table 3.6 Microstructural parameters and material properties of low carbon steel DC01
Condition
Thickness s
(lm)
Grain size dG
(lm)
s/
dG
HV
0.01
rpl0.2
(MPa)
rm
(MPa)
efr
(%)
Source
Cold worked
50
7.6
6.6 251
504
509
1
[29]
Annealed
850 C
30 min
50
17.8
2.8 146
124
264
14
60 min
50
15.4
3.2 143
138
264
12
240 min
50
17.3
2.9 154
177
246
8
Diameter d
(lm)
d/
dG
Hot rolled
6,000
–
–
–
207
359
–
[3]
Table 3.7 Microstructural parameters
Condition Scaling
factor k
Initial length l
(lm)
Initial diameter d
(lm)
Grain size dG
(lm)
d/
dG
Source
Annealed
1
7,200
4,800
80
60
[37]
0.42
3,000
2,016
80
25.2
0.21
1,500
1,008
80
12.6
0.10
750
480
80
6
Explanatory note The upsetting experiments were performed using PTFE foils to minimize the
interface friction between the lapped dies and the end surfaces of the specimens
3
Mechanical Properties
87

Table 3.8 Microstructural parameters and material properties
Condition Thickness s
(lm)
Grain
size d a
G
(lm)
s/dG
HV
0.01
rpl0.2
(MPa)
rm
(MPa)
efr
(%)
Source
Rolled
24
14.4
1.7
332
309
643
27
Own
investigations
51
6.4
8.0
336
380
736
45
Diameter d
(lm)
d/dG
Hot
rolled
10,000
63.3
160.0 468
576
775
34
Own
investigations
a The grain sizes have been determined by the area enumeration method
log 
a
fatigue limit
endurance limit
log Nf
Fig. 3.34 Schematic S–
N curves with endurance and
fatigue limit
2.00 mm
Fig. 3.35 Structure of a
cardiovascular stent
(Medtronic S7) after
deployment, reprinted from
Conolly et al. [6] with
permission from Wiley–VCH
88
H.-W. Zoch

3.4 Endurance Limit
Hubert Bomas and Bernd Köhler
3.4.1 Deﬁnition
Metals show a speciﬁc reaction to repeated mechanical loading, this phenomenon
is known as fatigue. Laboratory fatigue tests are most commonly conducted with
constant load amplitudes which, on exceeding a certain value, may after a number
of load cycles induce crack initiation, crack propagation and ﬁnal fracture. The
number of cycles until fracture is usually termed Nf. The fatigue regime depends
on the lifetime divided roughly into three areas:
1. low-cycle fatigue (LCF), Nf B 104
2. high-cycle fatigue (HCF), 104 \ Nf \ 107, and
3. very high-cycle fatigue (VHCF), 107 B Nf
In the LCF regime the load in laboratory tests is usually applied as a strain
amplitude, whereas in the other regimes it is applied as a stress amplitude. This
chapter concentrates on the HCF regime and the loads that are applied as stresses.
The results of tests with constant stress amplitudes are often presented as S–N or
Woehler curves. Figure 3.34 shows two S–N curves ending in a fatigue limit and in
an endurance limit, respectively. The fatigue limit is combined with distinct
material behavior and thought to be the stress amplitude that is the border between
the damaging and the non-damaging stress amplitudes at an inﬁnite number of
cycles [38]. The endurance limit describes another material behavior and is
thought to be the stress amplitude that is the border between the damaging and the
non-damaging stress amplitudes at a ﬁxed large number of cycles. It must be
mentioned that many authors use these deﬁnitions the other way round [40]. Both
104
105
106
107
108
109
number of cycles to failure Nf
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
MPa
700
stress amplitude 
a
endurance limit
stress amplitude
best fit trendline
Fig. 3.36 S–N diagram for
125 lm diameter wire
specimens of L-605 cobalt-
chromium alloy, tested in
rotary bending at Rr = -1 in
37 C 0.9 % saline solution at
60 Hz. Every point with a
coordinate N \ 4 9 108
cycles represents a failed
specimen. The other four
points represent unfailed
specimens, reprinted from
Marrey et al. [34] with
permission from Elsevier
3
Mechanical Properties
89

values are in a mathematical sense random variables, meaning that the curves in
Fig. 3.34 have to be interpreted as locations with a failure probability of 50 %.
Endurance limit and fatigue limit are not always separated in the literature. In
many cases discrimination is not possible; Fig. 3.35 shows the structure of a
cardiovascular stent made from wires by a process which includes the cold
forming processes of crimping and deployment [6]. Figure 3.36 shows an S–
N curve of cobalt-chromium wires which are used for stents tested in saline
solution. Every point represents one specimen. An enormous scatter of lifetimes is
visible. The authors assume theses wires have a fatigue limit. Statistical analysis
under this assumption proves it to be 207 MPa [34].
3.4.2 Measuring Techniques
Fatigue tests for the determination of the endurance limit are constant-amplitude
tests which are also used for lifetime testing. The result of a constant-amplitude
test is the lifetime Nf of the tested specimen, or the information that the specimen
did not fail before reaching the limiting number of cycles, but gives no value for
the endurance limit. A repetition of the test with other specimens at the same stress
amplitude ra gives the ratio between the number of failed specimens and the
number of tested specimens. This ratio serves as estimator for the failure proba-
bility Prf(ra), which is identical to the cumulative distribution function CDFe of
the endurance limit:
CDFeðraÞ ¼ Prðendurance limit  raÞ ¼ PrfðraÞ
ð3:24Þ
Though constant-amplitude tests are a non-economic procedure to obtain the
endurance limit, these tests are state of the art due to the extreme sensitivity of
metal fatigue to load history. The distribution function of the endurance limit is
often described by a three- or two-parametric Weibull distribution or by a log-
normal distribution. The following equation gives an example for a two-parame-
teric Weibull distribution with scale parameter r0 and shape parameter mWeibull:
30
10
8
0.25
0.05
Fig. 3.37 Fatigue specimen
for axial loads made from a
thin sheet with afﬁxed heads
90
H.-W. Zoch

CDFeðraÞ ¼ 1  exp  ra
r0

mWeibull


ð3:25Þ
The scale parameter characterizes the 63 % quantile and depends on the material,
the tested geometry, the type of loading, and the environment. The shape
parameter characterizes the scatter of the endurance limit. A typical value for
metals is mWeibull = 20.
In order to determine the endurance limit, the applied testing machine should
reach the necessary number of cycles in a reasonable time, meaning the load fre-
quency should be about 20 s-1 or higher. Since the fatigue of metals can be a very
selective process, which not only concerns the pure material but also the surface,
Fig. 3.38 Notched bending-
fatigue specimen machined
from Ni–P by focused ion
beam technique, reprinted
from Takashima and Higo
[47] with permission from
Wiley–VCH
SG1
SG1
SG2
foil
F
F
SG3
slot depth: 0.5 mm
1.2 mm
20 mm
8 mm
Fig. 3.39 Fatigue-testing device for a thin foil glued to a bar with a slot, SG: strain gauge,
according to Klein et al. [27] with permission from Elsevier
3
Mechanical Properties
91

size and preparation of the specimens, some care has to be taken with regard to
specimen design and preparation. The mounting of a specimen on the testing
machine usually induces stress concentrations in the specimen in the neighborhood
of the specimen holder and can be reduced by the specimen geometry. Specimens
that are to be axially loaded usually have heads to reduce the stress concentration
(Fig. 3.37). This is not necessary if the stress concentration due to clamping falls in a
region of low load stress or if the specimen has a notch (Fig. 3.38).
Another technique for handling thin foils is to glue them to a holder.
Figure 3.39 shows such a device that has been applied to aluminum and copper
foils. The foil is glued on a bar with a slot. The latter is situated underneath the foil
and induces a strain increase in the part of the foil that bridges the slot. The right
part of the ﬁgure indicates that crack initiation will be in this highly strained
region.
3.4.3 Inﬂuences on the Endurance Limit
The inﬂuences on the endurance limit can be divided into four classes. These are
inﬂuences from
1. the material,
2. the geometry,
3. the type of loading, and
4. the environment.
3.4.3.1 Material
Concerning the material, it is usually said that a high endurance limit requires a
hard and tough material. Unfortunately, hardness measurement in micro-sized
specimens is a task which requires some effort which is why most fatigue results of
micro parts in the literature do not include the hardness of the materials. The
0.0
200
300
MPa
500
e
0
20
40
%
80
reduction in area  A
0
20
40
%
80
0.0
reduction in area  A
0.2
0.4
0.6
e/
m
Fig. 3.40 Left: endurance limit at 30 million cycles of 2 mm wires of austenitic steel under
rotating bending depending on the reduction in area due to hard-drawing, right: fatigue ratio re/
rm depending on the reduction in area. The surfaces of the wires are machined in the case of 0 %
reduction or as-drawn, reprinted from Coquillet et al. [7] with permission from Wiley–VCH
92
H.-W. Zoch

absence of this information makes is difﬁcult to compare fatigue results from
different authors that have been obtained with the same type of material.
Cyclic loading seems to seek the weakest point in the material, which is the
basis of the weakest-link idea. Nevertheless, the fatigue behavior of a metal is
often characterized by the fatigue ratio re/rm which describes the ratio between the
push–pull endurance limit and the tensile strength. In most cases this value ranges
between 0.2 and 0.5 (Fig. 3.40, right side). Lower values are observed in hard and
brittle metals, whereas the larger ones are observed in soft and ductile metals. In
general, material inﬂuences on the endurance limit can be very different and
speciﬁc so that an all-embracing description would go beyond the scope of this
chapter.
One exception shall be made with respect to micro metal forming. Metal forming
below the recrystallization temperature has a considerable inﬂuence on the material
state; it increases its dislocation density and it stretches the grains. Additionally, it
may inﬂuence the surface roughness and the residual stress state. As an example, the
results of Coquillet et al. observed in austenitic stainless steel wires with a diameter
of 2 mm are presented in Fig. 3.40 [7]. The wires have been produced by cold
drawing, starting from different input diameters to a ﬁnal diameter of 2 mm. Thus
different degrees of deformation have been achieved and are quantiﬁed by the
reduction in the wires’ cross-section. It was found that tensile strength increases
steadily with an increasing degree of deformation. The endurance limit seems to have
a maximum at a 30 % reduction of area. Coquillet et al. argue that the endurance limit
is not only inﬂuenced by the static strength but also by a simultaneous effect of
increasing sensitivity against surface defects with increasing static strength, an
argument that is consistent with the statements in the previous paragraph.
3.4.3.2 Geometry
The geometry aspect covers items such as size, notches and surface topography.
Since size is very important in the context of micro metal forming there will be a
speciﬁc chapter on this topic. Notches are described with a stress concentration
factor Kt which is deﬁned as the ratio between the maximum local stress rmax in
the notch root and the nominal stress rN:
Kt ¼ rmax
rN
ð3:26Þ
The fatigue notch factor describes the ratio between the nominal endurance limits
of a smooth specimen and a notched specimen:
Kf ¼
re0
rN, en
ð3:27Þ
3
Mechanical Properties
93

Introducing the stress concentration factor Kt and the local endurance limit ren in
the notch root in this equation leads to
ren ¼ Kt
Kf
 re0
ð3:28Þ
It is always observed that the local endurance limit in the notch root expressed as a
local stress is larger than the endurance limit of a smooth specimen: ren [ re0 and
Kt [ Kf. This is often explained as a size effect, since the highly stressed volume
and surface in the notched specimen is smaller than those of the smooth specimen.
Soft materials usually fail due to surface crack initiation. If there are no distinct
surface ﬂaws, the surface roughness is important for the endurance limit. The most
important parameters for describing surface roughness are
• the arithmetic average height parameter Ra, also known as the center line
average,
• the 10-point height parameter Rz deﬁned as the average summation of the ﬁve
highest peaks and the ﬁve lowest valleys,
• the maximum peak to valley height Ry, and
• the maximum height of proﬁle parameter Rt deﬁned as the distance measured
between the highest peak and the lowest valley.
Novovic et al. [41] performed a literature review on the effect of machined
surface topography and integrity on fatigue life, and examined different roughness
parameters. They concluded that Rt and Rz are better used in determining fatigue
performance than Ra, because these parameters represent the worst defects in the
surface [Nov05].
3.4.3.3 Type of Loading
The type of loading includes mean stresses, residual stresses, multiaxial stresses
and stress gradients. The different stress types are considered by fatigue criteria
from which equivalent stress amplitudes are derived. An equivalent stress
amplitude describes a push-pull amplitude which has the same effect as the
regarded complex cyclic load. Today, there is a lack of experiments on micro parts
that investigate the inﬂuence of the stress state on the endurance limit. Conse-
quently, no recommendations exist regarding which fatigue criteria can be applied
successfully in the micro regime.
Stress gradients due to loading concentrate the local stress in a component or
specimen in a small volume, as do notches. Typical load situations with stress
gradients are bending or torsion. The effect on the endurance limit is the same as
that of a notch and has already been described.
94
H.-W. Zoch

3.4.3.4 Environment
Environment summarizes the effects from surrounding media and temperatures on
the endurance limit which may be very complex.
3.4.4 Size Effects on the Endurance Limit
The endurance limit of parts with conventional sizes decreases with an increasing
size of the stressed volume or the stressed surface. This can be called a negative size
effect. The reasons are classically divided into geometrical, statistical and techno-
logical size effects [28]. The geometrical size effect refers to the inﬂuence of the
stress gradient on the endurance limit. The statistical size effect is based on the idea
that the material contains defects and that in the case of high-cycle fatigue a crack
would initiate at the most serious defect. With increasing size of the highly stressed
volume the probability of including a critical defect will also increase. This is the
basic idea of the weakest-link concept. The technological size effect summarizes
different technological reasons that make a large specimen or component more
susceptible to damage from cyclic loads than a smaller one. For wrought materials,
one of these reasons, and in many cases the most important, is the degree of
deformation during hot or cold processing, which usually increases with decreasing
size. The inﬂuence of the degree of deformation is also present in cold-formed micro
parts but is often concealed by other effects, as will be shown in the following.
In production engineering different categories of size effects have been estab-
lished which seem to take more account of metal parts with dimensions that range
in the region of sizes of microstructural material features, for example inclusions,
dislocations or grains [50]. These are the density, shape, and micro structure size
effects which have been characterized in detail in Chap. 2.
3.4.4.1 Density Size Effect
The density or statistical size effect is of great importance for normal-sized parts,
but seems to lose its signiﬁcance in the case of micro parts. This is due to the
greater importance of surface effects or processes that are active in grains which
have contact with the surface. The following paragraphs give some examples for
cold-formed and recrystallized materials.
3.4.4.2 Shape Size Effect
Figure 3.41 shows an example for the shape size effect; Judelewicz et al. produced
recrystallized sheets of high-purity copper with thicknesses of 20 and 100 lm and
3
Mechanical Properties
95

prepared fatigue specimens from them [21]. The grain size was in the order of
100 lm, meaning that almost all grains had contact with the surface and that in the
case of the thin specimens a Tiffany grain structure was at hand. After a certain
number of cycles the thicker specimens contained a large number of slip bands
with, in some cases, well-developed extrusions which are responsible for fatigue
crack initiation. The thinner specimens only contained slip bands in a small
number of grains. It is concluded that the short migration path to the surface and
the possibility of dislocation annihilation in the thinner specimens was responsible
for this occurrence. Overall, this example shows the negative inﬂuence of size
which is also known from larger parts, but the observed mechanism is only rel-
evant in very thin specimens.
It is interesting to see that conditions, which at ﬁrst glance seem to be very
similar to the example before, lead to a positive inﬂuence of size; Fig. 3.42 shows
the S–N curves of annealed copper wires with equal grain-size-to-thickness ratios
thickness   20 µm
 thickness 100 µm
   stress ratio R  = 0
103
104
105
106
107
number of cycles to failure Nf
30
40
50
60
70
80
MPa
100
stress amplitude 
a
Fig. 3.41 S–N curves of
recrystallized high-purity
copper sheets under repeated
tension with foil thicknesses
of 20 and 100 lm, Rr = 0,
reprinted from Judelevic et al.
[21] with permission from
Elsevier
104
105
106
107
108
109
reversals to failure Nf
d = 50 µm, coarse grained (dG = 25 - 50 µm )
d = 122 µm, coarse grained (dG = 60 - 122 µm )
R  = -1
2x10-4
3x10-4
4x10-4
5x10-4
6x10-4
7x10-4
strain amplitude a
Fig. 3.42 S–N curves of
annealed copper wires with
different diameters d under
tension–compression,
dG = grain size, reprinted
from Weiss et al. [53] with
permission from Elsevier
96
H.-W. Zoch

where the thicker wire exhibits a better endurance limit. The authors assume a
reduced number of gliding systems in the thinner wire to be responsible for the
reduced fatigue strength [53]. Compared with the example before, it seems to be of
importance that the grains are smaller than the diameter of the wires, so that the
effect of unimpeded movement of dislocations to the surface and the following
annihilation is suppressed.
Another example in this sequence, which seems to have more similarity with
the example given in Fig. 3.41, was produced by Khabiti et al., also on high-purity
copper wires [25]. The wires had diameters from 20 to 125 lm and had been
annealed in order to produce a bamboo grain structure that is similar to the Tiffany
grain structure of sheets. The testing was carried out on a piezo-electric system
with a stress ratio Rr = -1 and a frequency of 20,000 s-1.
Figure 3.43a shows the lifetime of the specimens depending on their thickness
and the overall strain amplitude in the gauge length. Since there has been strain
localization, Fig. 3.43b shows the results depending on the maximum local strain
20 µm
50 µm
10 µm
125 µm
104
105
106
107
108
109
number of loading cycles Nf
1x10-4
2x10-4
3x10-4
5x10-4
strain amplitude a
4x10-4
2x10-4
4x10-4
6x10-4
8x10-4
1x10-3
strain amplitude a
50 µm
10 µm
125 µm
104
105
106
107
108
109
number of loading cycles Nf
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.43 Lifetime of copper
wires depending on the strain
amplitude applied and their
diameter, a integral strain,
b local strain, reprinted from
Khatibi et al. [25] with
permission from Elsevier
3
Mechanical Properties
97

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
MPa
200
stress amplitude 
a
longitudinal
transverse
R = 0
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
number of cycles to failure N f
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
MPa
200
stress amplitude 
a
longitudinal
transverse
R = 0
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
number of cycles to failure Nf
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.44 S–N diagrams of
as-rolled high-purity copper
sheets under repeated tension
tested along and across the
rolling direction, a sheet
thickness = 100 lm, b sheet
thickness = 20 lm, reprinted
from Judelevic et al. [21]
with permission from
Elsevier
0
20
40
60
80
100
µm
140
as-rolled
transverse
sheet thickness s
annealed
as-rolled
longitudinal
surface imprints
surface-near dislocations
annealed
as-rolled
longitudinal
rolling texture ? 
as-rolled
transverse
0
10
20
30
40
50
MPa
70
endurance limit at 106 cycles
Fig. 3.45 Endurance limits
of high-purity copper sheets
according to the data of
Judelewicz et al. [21]
depending on sheet thickness
under varying material
conditions and testing
directions, Rr = 0
98
H.-W. Zoch

amplitude in the test length. Looking at the diagram with the local strain amplitude
there seems to be a minimum endurance limit for a wire diameter of 50 lm. The
authors discuss the dislocation structure in the wires and pay attention to a thin oxide
layer at the surface of the wires which they believe impedes fatigue crack initiation.
3.4.4.3 Microstructure Size Effect
An example of the microstructure size effect is given by Hildebrand et al. They
tested wires of the Ni–Co alloy MP35N with diameters between 127 and 229 lm in
the LCF regime and found that fatigue strength increases with increasing diameter
[17]. The reason for this effect has been determined by other authors as the presence
of primary TiN particles of about 10 lm in size that do not change during the
processing of the material [4]. In the case of the thin wires, these particles are often
very near to the surface and their negative impact on fatigue behavior increases.
Another example has been published by Judelewicz et al. [21]. Figure 3.44
shows S–N diagrams of as-rolled sheets of high-purity copper. Figure 3.44a shows
the results for a sheet thickness of 100 lm, and Fig. 3.44b shows them for a
thickness of 20 lm. Both sheet types have rolling imprints of the same depth and
direction. The result from the thicker sheet is explained by the rolling texture
which produces a high number of glide systems with high Schmid factors if the
stress is applied in the rolling direction. This leads to the relatively poor fatigue
strength of the ‘‘longitudinal’’ specimens. In case of the thin specimens the
‘‘transverse’’ ones present poorer fatigue properties. This is due to the rolling
imprints which are of the same size and direction as in the thicker specimens but
cover a relatively larger area of the thin sheets’ cross-section.
The proceeding examples show that a size effect in the micro-regime may have
different origins and directions. The experiments of Judelewicz et al. [21] cover an
interesting range of conditions, and the measured endurance limits are worth being
summarized in an extra ﬁgure (Fig. 3.45). It appears that further experiments and
explanations are still necessary to determine the origins and understand the phe-
nomena of size inﬂuence on fatigue behavior.
References
1. Akiniwa, Y., Suzuki, T., Tanaka, K.: Evaluation of deformation behavior in Cu thin ﬁlm
under tensile and fatigue loading by X-ray method. Mater. Sci. Forum 524–525, 807–812
(2006)
2. Armstrong, R.W.: On size effects in polycrystal plasticity. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 9, 196–199
(1961)
3. Boller, C., Seeger, T.: Materials data for cyclic load, Part A: Unalloyed steels. Elsevier,
Amsterdam (1987)
4. Bradley, D., Kay, L.: Optimizing fatigue resistance of medical wire. Medical Device
Technology, 7(15), 10–11 (2004)
3
Mechanical Properties
99

5. Brunklaus, J.H., Stepanek, F.J.: Industrieöfen—Bau und betrieb. Vulkan-Verlag, Essen
(1994)
6. Conolly, T., McHugh, P.E., Bruzzi, M.: A review of deformation and fatigue of metals at
small size scales. Fatigue Fract. Eng. Mater. Struct. 28, 1119–1152 (2005)
7. Coquillet, B., Vicent, L., Guiraldenq, P.: Inﬂuence of cold working on fatigue behavior of
stainless steels used for prothesis: application to the study of wires with small sections.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 13, 657–668 (1979)
8. Eckstein, H.-J.: Wärmebehandlung von Stahl—Metallkundliche Grundlagen. VEB Deutscher
Verlag für Grundstofﬁndustrie, Leipzig (1969)
9. Fast, J.D.: Interaction of Metals and Gases. Philips Technical Library, Eindhoven (1965)
10. Fujiwara, S., Abiko, K.: Ductility of ultra high purity copper. J. Phys. IV 5, 295–300 (1995)
11. Geers, M.G.D., Brekelmans, W.A.M., Janssen, P.J.M.: Size effects in minitiaturized
polycrystalline FCC samples. Int. J. Solids Struct. 43, 7304–7321 (2006)
12. Geiger, M., Engel, U., Vollertsen, F., Kals, R., Meßner, A.: Metal forming of micro parts for
electronics. Prod. Eng. Res. Devel. II(1), 15–18 (1994)
13. Gottstein, G.: Physikalische Grundlagen der Materialkunde. Springer, Berlin (1998)
14. Grey, H., Higgins, G.T.: Solute limited grain boundary migration: A rationalization of grain
growth. Acta Metall. 21, 309–321 (1973)
15. Hall, E.O.: The deformation of ageing of mild steel: III Discussion of results. Proc. Phys. Soc.
B 67, 747 (1951)
16. Herzig, N., Meyer, L.W.: Material characterization at high strain rates with special emphasis
on miniaturization and size dependencies. In: Kleiner M., Tekkaya E. (eds.) Proceedings of
the International Conference on High Speed Forming (2nd ICHSF), Dortmund, pp 13–22.
(2006)
17. Hildebrand, L.B., Schmidt, J.A., Prentice, J.K., Stotts, L.J.: Quantitative, low cycle, crack
initiation fatigue testing of ﬁne wires and CENELEC standard pacing coil. J. Biomed. Mater.
Res. 48, 251–257 (1999)
18. Hong, S., Hoffmann, H.: Study of scaling effect on mechanical properties for milli-forming of
sheet metal—Tensile test of a very thin sheet. 1st Colloquium Process scaling, BIAS Verlag,
Bremen, pp 145–151. (2003)
19. Hutchison, M.M.: The temperature dependence of the yield stress of polycrystalline iron.
Phil. Mag. 85(8), 121–127 (1963)
20. Janssen, P.J.M., de Keijseer, ThH, Geers, M.G.D.: An experimental assessment of grain size
effects in the uniaxial straining of thin Al sheet with a few grains across the thickness. Mater.
Sci. Eng., A 419, 238–248 (2006)
21. Judelevic, M., Künzi, H.U., Merk, N., Ilschner, B.: Microstructural development of copper
foils 20–100 lm thick. Mater. Sci. Eng. A186, 135–142 (1994)
22. Kals, R., Vollertsen, F., Geiger, M.: Scaling effects in sheet metal forming. In: Kals H.J.J.,
Shirvani B., Singh U.P., Geiger M. (eds.) 4th International Conference on Sheet Metal,
pp 65–75. University of Twenty Enschede, Enschede (1996)
23. Kammer, C.: Aluminium Taschenbuch Band 1. Aluminium-Verlag, Düsseldorf (2002)
24. Keßler, O.: Precipitation hardening of aluminum alloys. Heat Treat. Mark. 3, 5–8 (2001)
25. Khatibi, G., Betzwar-Kotas, A., Gröger, V., Weiss, B.: A study of the mechanical and fatigue
properties of metallic microwires. Fatigue Fract. Eng. Mater. Struct. 28, 723–733 (2005)
26. Kim, G.-Y., Koc, M., Ni, J.: Modeling of the size effects on the behavior of metals in
microscale deformation processes. J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 129, 470–476 (2007)
27. Klein, M., Hadrboletz, A., Weiss, B., Khatibi, G.: The ‘size effect’ on the stress–strain,
fatigue and fracture properties of thin metallic foils. Mater. Sci. Eng. A319–321, 924–928
(2001)
28. Kloos,
K.H.:
Einﬂuß
des
Oberﬂächenzustandes
und
der
Probengröße
auf
die
Schwingfestigkeitseigenschaften. VDI-Bericht 268, VDI-Verlag, Düsseldorf (1976)
29. Köhler, B., Bomas, H., Hunkel, M., Lütjens, J., Zoch, H.-W.: Yield strength behaviour of
carbon steel microsheets after cold forming and after annealing. Scr. Mater. 62, 548–551
(2010)
100
H.-W. Zoch

30. Krebs, J.P.: Turboumwälzung der Atmosphäre in Förderband-Durchlauföfen für die
Wärmebehandlung von Massenteilen. Blech Rohre Proﬁle 36, 734–737 (1989)
31. Liscic, B., Tensi, H.M., Luty, W.: Theory and Technology of Quenching. Springer, Berlin
(1992)
32. Macherauch, E., Zoch, H.-W.: Praktikum in Werkstoffkunde. Vieweg+Teubner, Wiesbaden
(2011)
33. Macherauch, E., Vöhringer, O.: Das Verhalten metallischer Werkstoffe unter mechanischer
Beanspruchung. Zeitschrift für Werkstofftechnik 9, 370–391 (1978)
34. Marrey, R.V., Burgermeister, R., Grishaber, R.B., Ritchie, R.O.: Fatigue and life prediction
for cobalt-chromium stents: A fracture mechanics analysis. Biomaterials 27, 1988–2000
(2006)
35. Mayer, V.A. (ed.): ASTM dictionary of engineering science and technology, p. 694. ASTM
International, West Conshohocken (2005)
36. Meßner, A., Engel, U., Kals, R., Vollertsen, F.: Size effect in the FE-simulation of micro-
forming processes. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 45, 371–376 (1994)
37. Meßner, A., Engel, U.: Das Werkstoffverhalten beim Umformen von Kleinteilen. Draht 1,
30–35 (1997)
38. Miller, K.J., O’Donnell, W.J.: The fatigue limit and its elimination. Fatigue Fract. Eng.
Mater. Struct. 22, 545–557 (1999)
39. Mullins, W.W.: The effect of thermal grooving on grain boundary motion. Acta Metall. 6,
414–427 (1958)
40. Nicholas, T.: High Cycle Fatigue. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2006)
41. Novovic, D., Dewes, R.C., Aspinwall, D.K., Voice, W., Bowen, P.: The effect of machined
topography and integrity on fatigue life. Int. J. Mach. Tool. Manuf. 44, 125–134 (2004)
42. Ostermann, F.: Anwendungstechnologie Aluminium. Springer, Berlin (2007)
43. Sachs, G.: Zur Ableitung einer Fließbedingung. Z. Ver. Dtsch. Ing. 72, 734–736 (1928)
44. Stölken, J.S., Evans, A.G.: A microbend method for measuring the plasticity length scale.
Acta Mater. 46, 5109–5115 (1998)
45. Stratton, P.: Gas quenching small components. Proc. 14th IFHTSE Congr. Trans. Mater. Heat
Treat. 25(5), 494–497 (2004)
46. Suzuki, K., Matsuki, Y., Masaki, K., Sato, M., Kuroda, M.: Tensile and microbend tests of
pure aluminum foils with different thicknesses. Mater. Sci. Eng., A 513–514, 77–82 (2009)
47. Takashima, K., Higo, Y.: Fatigue and fracture of a Ni–P amorphous alloy thin ﬁlm on the
micrometer scale. Fatigue Fract. Eng. Mater. Struct. 28, 703–710 (2005)
48. Taylor, G.I.: Strain in crystalline aggregates. Proceedings of the Colloquium on Deformation
and Flow of Solids, Madrid, 1955, pp 3–12. Springer, Berlin (1956)
49. Thompson, C.V.: Grain growth in thin ﬁlms. Ann. Rev. Mater. Sci. 20, 245–268 (1990)
50. Vollertsen, F.: Categories of size effects. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. 2(4), 377–383 (2008)
51. Vollertsen, F., Biermann, D., Hansen, H.N., Jawahir, I.S., Kuzman, K.: Size effects in
manufacturing of metallic components. CIRP Ann. Manufact. Technol. 58(2), 566–587
(2009)
52. Walter, J.L., Dunn, C.G.: Tertiary recrystallization in silicon iron. Trans. AIME 215,
465–471 (1959)
53. Weiss, B., Gröger, V., Khatibi, G., Kotas, A., Zimprich, P., Stickler, R., Zagar, B.:
Characterization of mechanical and thermal properties of thin Cu foils and wires. Sens.
Actuators, A 99, 172–182 (2002)
54. Xiang, Y., Vlassak, J.J.: Bauschinger effect in thin metal ﬁlms. Scr. Mater. 53, 177–182
(2005)
55. Zaefferer, S., Chan, N.: The Goss texture formation in silicon steels—growth selection or
oriented nucleation? Solid State Phenom. 105, 29–36 (2005)
56. Zhang, J., Zhang, K., Wu, H., Yu, M.: Experimental and numerical investigation on pure
aluminum by ECAP. Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China 19, 1303–1311 (2009)
3
Mechanical Properties
101

Chapter 4
Bulk Metal Forming
Bernd Kuhfuss
Latin
A
Area (mm2)
A1/A0
Cross section before and after the forming (mm2)
d
Diameter (mm)
F
Force (N)
Fp
Punch force (N)
fst
Stroke frequency (s-1)
g
Gap width (mm)
h
Height (mm)
hp
Punch stroke (mm)
hT
Effective tool stroke (mm)
I
Moment of inertia (mm4)
kf
Flow stress (MPa)
kfm
Medium ﬂow stress (MPa)
lG
Grain size (lm)
NS
Neutral surface
r
Radius (mm)
u
Upset ratio
V
Formed volume (mm3)
Wid
Ideal work (J)
Wp
Machine work (J)
B. Kuhfuss (&)
University of Bremen, Badgasteiner str. 1, 28359 Bremen, Germany
e-mail: kuhfuss@bime.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_4,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
103

Wpl
Work of plunger (J)
Dx
Buckling (mm)
Greek
gF
Efﬁciency of deformation
u
Deformation degree
Duv
Variance in the effective strain
4.1 Incremental Forming
Bernd Kuhfuss and Eric Moumi
4.1.1 Deﬁnition and Technologies
A common deﬁnition of incremental forming is given by Groche et al. [10, 11] in
which an incremental forming process is characterized by regions of the workpiece
experiencing more than one loading and unloading cycle due to the action of one
set of tools within one production stage.
Incremental processes are divided into sheet metal and bulk metal forming.
Well-established incremental bulk forming processes are open die forging, rotary
swaging, ﬂow forming and rolling processes (Fig. 4.1). In the following, only bulk
metal forming with a focus on cold forming—namely rotary swaging—will be
addressed.
Parts that are produced by rotary swaging are used as macro scale products in
different applications. An important area of application are components for the
automotive industry, like axes, steering spindles and gear shafts, in particular those
made from tubular blanks with the purpose of weight saving.
Basic research on rotary swaging started in the 1960s, and has continued since
then on macro scale components. In the last few years the focus of scientiﬁc
interest was extended to micro components [15, 16]. Fields of application for
swaged micro parts are seen in e.g. medical mechatronic systems (minimal
invasive diagnostics and surgery) and the automotive industry (miniature pumps
and valves).
In order to get a better understanding of the relevant effects during micro
forming, the process is in general considered as a system consisting of the com-
ponents process, tools, material and machine respectively equipment [6]. In par-
ticular, the process characteristics and material conditions are referred to in the
following sections. Special features of micro rotary swaging machines and tool
design are addressed in 8.1.
104
B. Kuhfuss

4.1.2 Process and Tooling
According to DIN 8583, rotary swaging belongs to the processes of open die
forging. The forming of the workpiece takes place in the swaging head in small
steps by the radial oscillating movement of the tools (Fig. 4.2).
The radial movement of the forming tools (die segments) (1) is generated by the
rotation of the driven shaft (2) and the sine-shaped cam on top of the base jaws (3).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Fig. 4.1 Incremental forming processes according to [11]. a Open die forging, b rotary swaging,
c ﬂow forming, d orbital rolling, e ring rolling, f cross rolling, g skewed rolling, h proﬁle rolling,
i planetary rolling
4
Bulk Metal Forming
105

With every pass of the cams along one of the cylinder rollers (4) the base jaws, and
thereby the forming dies, are forced radially inwards producing an impact on the
work (5). The rotation of the main shaft in relation to the workpiece leads to
uniform forming over the circumference.
Rotary swaging can be sub-divided into two process variants with respect to the
direction of feed. Figure 4.3 shows schematically the infeed swaging (left) and the
plunge swaging (right) processes.
In infeed swaging the workpiece (1) is axially fed into the swaging head and
reduction takes place over the whole feed length in the reducing zone of the dies (2).
In plunge swaging the oscillating movement of the dies is superimposed by a radial
d1
2
3
plunge swaging
d1
infeed swaging
d0
1
d0
Fig. 4.3 Process variations of rotary swaging
1 
4 
3 
5 
2
rotation
Fig. 4.2 Swaging head for the infeed process
106
B. Kuhfuss

feed rate due to the axial movement of additional wedges (3), so that a local
reduction in the workpiece occurs according to the die geometry. The components
undergo a 2-dimensional pressure stress state in the reducing zone. This acts
favorably on the formability, especially in micro forming.
Due to the geometrical scaling effect, i.e. ratio surface/volume increasing with
smaller components, the vulnerability to tensile load also increases, see also 4.3.3.
An example is given in Fig. 4.4 (top) showing a swaged sample of spray-formed
AlSi10Zn13Cu4 without any detectable defects. The material cannot be formed by
drawing due to cracking. Figure 4.4 (bottom) demonstrates the forming capabili-
ties of rotary swaging. The component is a prototype for a micro valve housing
formed over a mandrel. With this a calibrated inner diameter can be achieved,
which would require an additional machining operation for other forming tech-
nologies like cold forging (extrusion).
Important parameters that inﬂuence rotary swaging are the total and incre-
mental deformation degrees, the forces acting on the system and the kinematics of
the process that indicate the productivity. Figure 4.5 shows the geometrical
relationships.
The deformation degree in the radial direction is described as follows (4.1):
u ¼ ln d2
1
d2
0
ð4:1Þ
material
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Fig. 4.4 Swaged micro components
4
Bulk Metal Forming
107

The incremental deformation degree due to each stroke can be deﬁned as:
ust ¼ ln d0  2hst
d0

2
ð4:2Þ
hst is the effective stroke:
hst ¼ vf
fst
tan aT
ð4:3Þ
with vf being the axial feed rate, aT the die angle, and fst the stroke frequency.
The maximum axial feed rate is obtained from the kinematics as:
Vf;max ¼
hT
tcy  t0


tan aT
ð4:4Þ
with tcy being the period (=1/fst) and t0 the time segments with dies closed, and hT
the stroke of the base jaws.
Equation (4.4) gives an estimate for the processing time tpr and thus the pro-
ductivity. Calculating tpr for the micro valve part of Fig. 4.4 would give 50 ms, the
achievable production rate in practice is lowered due to handling times and the
reduced feed rates because of process limits.
Figure 4.6 illustrates the forces during infeed swaging. Additionally 3 different
sections are marked within the dies: reducing zone (I), calibration zone (II) and die
outlet (III). The total radial forming force FF is divided into components in zones I
and II, and the related friction components are given as FRI and FRII. The axial
forces are characterized by Ff and Frej (rejection force). The neutral surface NS
separates the material ﬂow in and against the feed direction.
The rejection force widely inﬂuences the process window for rotary swaging.
In macro swaging technologies the reducing zone I is roughened by hardfacing.
In micro rotary swaging rejection limits the achievable axial feed rate, see Fig. 4.7.
The maximum applicable feed rates that were experimentally found for wire
material are about 10 % of the theoretical value given by Eq. (4.4). The ﬁndings
 axial feed
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Fig. 4.5 Geometrical
conditions on the workpiece
during infeed rotary swaging
108
B. Kuhfuss

indicate a strong dependency on the Young’s modulus E, which is true for all
degrees of deformation. Considering the ratio of part diameter to part length,
which is less compared to the macro range, the limiting factor in infeed swaging is
Euler buckling.
The buckling force FK with the axial forces of Fig. 4.5 during the closing time
of the dies is (Fig. 4.8):
FK ¼ Ff þ Frej ¼ 2p2 EI
l2
a
ð Þ
FK ¼ Ff þ Frej ¼ 4p2 EI
l2
b
ð Þ
ð4:5Þ
 axial feed rate
 lubricant Esso Fanox 38 AN
material AlSi
Al99
initial
angle
Fig. 4.7 Maximum feed rate in infeed swaging
l
l ll
ll
ll
l
lll
l
ll
l
l
ll
ll
ll
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Fig. 4.6 Process forces in infeed swaging
4
Bulk Metal Forming
109

The smallest producible part diameter is limited by the osculation ratio of the
tools and workpiece, the opening stroke of the tools during forming and the yield
point of the material. The osculation ratio directly affects the achievable ﬁnal
geometry (diameter and roundness) and is difﬁcult to predict analytically. The
relation of working stroke to the ﬁnal diameter is limited. Beyond this limit the
workpiece can enter the gap between the tools (Fig. 4.9).
In a 4-segmented swaging head the gap g between the dies in the completely
open status is 1.4 times the radial stroke. Design and process-related measures can
be taken for the enlargement of the stroke with respect to the work diameter, see
also Sect. 8.1.
 macro components
g
tools closed
tools open
 micro components
hT
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.9 Contact relationship between tool and workpiece
Ff
Frej
Ff
Frej
E, I
Ff 
feed force 
Frej axial rejecting force
l
length of wire 
E
modulus of elasticity 
L
moment of inertia
(b)
(a)
l
Fig. 4.8 Euler buckling of micro parts
110
B. Kuhfuss

The smallest stroke under which plastic deformation will occur is determined
by the yield point. The remaining elastic deformation (spring back) is considered
by a smaller contour in the dies than the ﬁnal work diameter desired.
Besides buckling due to the minor relative axial stiffness of micro parts, other
process failures like surface defects, torsion and so-called wing forming (material
ﬂow into the gaps of the dies when opened) limit the applicable process windows [15].
4.1.3 Material Effects
The material inﬂuence on the result is both similar and different to some aspects in
comparison with the macro range.
Figure 4.10 illustrates the part diameter over part length when varying the feed
rate. Measurements begin at the initially formed part end.
At the swaged end, a cone-like shape is formed backward to the forming
direction, it seems like material ﬂows over the core or the core is less deformed.
The smallest diameter is found in this area. As can be seen, the ﬁnal diameter
steadily increases in the ﬁrst 25 mm of swaged parts from 1.4301. This indicates
that near this edge the missing supporting effect of adjacent material reduces the
forming resistance. Another effect is obvious, i.e. the ﬁnal diameter increases with
feed rate. This can be explained by the declining number of impacts per volume
element and an increase in spring back.
The Martens hardness distribution on steel 1.4301 and aluminum Al 99.5 is
shown in Figs. 4.11 and 4.12 respectively.
As expected, hardness after cold forming was higher than in the initial mate-
rials, where the hardness is relatively homogenous, with values between 2,400 and
2,750 N/mm2. Feed rates of wire have no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the absolute
value of hardness, e.g. hardness values are similar at feed rates of 1.34 and
process infeed rotary swaging
material 1.4301
lubricant Esso Fanox 38 AN
stroke hT
0.2 mm
die angle αT
10°
frequency fst
102 s-1
initial diameter d0 1.0 mm
0
20
40
60
80
final diameter
part length
2.69 mm/s
2.02 mm/s
1.34 mm/s
0.67 mm/s
mm
mm
0.43
0.42
0.41
0.40
0.39
Fig. 4.10 Final diameters
over part length for 1.4301
4
Bulk Metal Forming
111

10.75 mm/s. The only difference is that the distribution is more homogenous at
higher feed rates. An increase in hardness with deformation degree is obvious
(Fig. 4.11). For deformation degrees of 1.8 and 2.4 the hardness is lower near the
2000
3000
4000
6000
-500
-300
-100
100
500
Martens hadness
after forming
before forming
= 1.4
N/mm²
µm
d0
d1
after 
forming
before 
forming
micro -
indentation 
hardness 
testing 
2000
3000
4000
6000
-500
-300
-100
100
500
Martens hardness
after forming
= 1.8
N/mm²
µm
2000
3000
4000
6000
-500
-300
-100
100
500
Martens hardness
distance from center line
after forming
= 2.4
N/mm²
µm
process infeed rotary swaging
material 1.4301
stroke hT
0.2 mm
die angle αT
10°
frequency fst
102 s-1
initial diameter d0 1.0 mm
lubricant Esso Fanox 38 AN
Fig. 4.11 Hardness
distributions of 1.4301 steel
112
B. Kuhfuss

surface and becomes higher beneath it. An explanation for this characteristic is the
Bauschinger effect, namely the consideration of friction acting on the surface.
Material Al 99.5 shows a different behavior. At the studied deformation degree
there is also a noticeable increase in hardness from the blank status (420 N/mm2).
The increase reaches it maximum values at the surface or very close to it.
4.2 Upsetting
Heiko Brüning
4.2.1 Basics in Upsetting
Upsetting is one of the most important forming techniques belonging to the group
of bulk metal forming processes [3]. As stated in DIN 8583, upsetting is a sub-
category of free forming and is further divided into ﬂat coining and partial
upsetting. This paragraph is addressed to (partial) upsetting as this is the process
which is more often applied and has greater practical relevance.
The workpiece is placed between two coplanar surfaces, called tools, which
move toward each other reducing their relative distance, thus forming the work-
piece and decrementing its height. Due to constant density of the workpiece
material, the width of the workpiece increases so that the total volume remains
constant. Figure 4.13 schematically shows an upsetting process with friction
coefﬁcient l [ 0 between the tools and workpiece.
Depending on the value of friction coefﬁcient l different behavior of formability
is observed. If upsetting is carried out with no or negligible friction between the
workpiece and tools, the shape of the workpiece remains as is, that means that the
lateral surface stays ﬂat. This can be achieved by either using surfaces well-
lubricated with parafﬁn [18] or by using specially-formed specimens with concave
before forming 
after forming 
stroke hT                0.2 mm 
die angle 
T           10 ° 
frequency fst          102 s-1
initial diameter d0  1.0 mm 
300
400
500
600
800
-500
-300
-100
100
500
Martens hardness
distance from center line
= 1.4 
N/mm²
µm 
process infeed rotary swaging 
material Al99.5 
lubricant Esso Fanox 38 AN 
α
Fig. 4.12 Hardness
distributions of Al 99.5
4
Bulk Metal Forming
113

surfaces, as proposed by [26]. In this case, a homogeneous strain of the workpiece
and its grain structure is assured thus leading to a uniform allocation of hardness.
For friction coefﬁcients l [ 0 between the workpiece and tools, the lateral sur-
face adopts a convex shape so that the strain is inhomogeneous. In this case the
workpiece does not have the same overall hardness, if the hardness is dependent on
the absolute value of strain such as for work hardening materials. Figure 4.14
shows a schematical cross-sectional view of a cylindrical specimen which has been
processed by upsetting.
The upsetting process is relevant for both theoretical investigations and prac-
tical applications. On the one hand, upsetting is a model process to carry out
compression tests (see 3.3.1.) in order to determine ﬂow curves, and on the other
II
µ=0
homogeneous
µ>0
inhomogeneous
II
I
III
BIAS ID 122012
Fig. 4.14 Effect of upsetting of work hardening material on hardness. Area I largest strain,
highest hardness. Area II medium strain, medium hardness. Area III lowest strain, lowest
hardness
workpiece
tool
µ≠0
d0
d1
d
h0
h1
Δh1
h
BIAS ID 122011
Fig. 4.13 Upsetting of workpiece with l 6¼ 0
114
B. Kuhfuss

hand upsetting is used daily a multitude of times in many process chains to
produce screws, nuts, bolts, rivets and nails. In contrast with machining operations,
upsetting beneﬁts from the economic utilization of materials, low cycle times and,
one factor which is very important, a homogeneous grain structure making goods
mechanically more resistant [3].
There are two main parameters to characterize an upsetting process and its limits:
1. The maximum natural strain u: This value reaches its maximum, called major
strain, parallel to the tool movement direction:
umax ¼ uh ¼ ln h1
h0
:
ð4:6Þ
As soon as a certain value of u is exceeded, the limit of formability of the
workpiece is reached and cracks start to develop.
2. The upset ratio u as a limit for buckling. Buckling will occur when upset ratios
greater than umax are processed
u ¼ h0
d0
:
ð4:7Þ
Exact values determined by experiments for both u and u can be found in
paragraphs 4.2.2 and 4.2.3.
Cold forming of metallic materials generally does not lead to a signiﬁcant
change in density. In conjunction with the fact that material cohesion is not
reduced by forming operations, the volume of the workpiece stays constant. This
relation can be stated as follows:
uh þ ur þ ut ¼ 0
ð4:8Þ
which describes that the sum of the strains in each main direction necessarily
equals zero. Among others, such as for compression tests, axially symmetrical
cylindrical specimens are used with the consequence that, with equal boundary
conditions applied, radial strain equals tangential strain so that:
ur ¼ uh
and
uh þ 2ur ¼ 0:
ð4:9Þ
A constant strain is achieved as soon as the stress r in one direction reaches the
ﬂow stress kf : The maximum strain is realized parallel to the direction of the tool
movement so that the stress state reaches its major value in the z-direction, called
rz; at the contact areas between the tool and workpiece. rz is dependent on ﬂow
stress kf ; the radial distance r to the neutral surface, the upset ratio u of the
workpiece and the friction coefﬁcient l between the workpiece and tools [3]. If a
homogeneous grain structure is assumed and the average grain size LK is much
4
Bulk Metal Forming
115

smaller than the workpiece diameter, rz can be calculated analytically by an
exponential function [27] as follows:
rz ¼ kf  exp 2l
h
d
2  r




:
ð4:10Þ
For practical applications a simpliﬁcation of 4.5 is often used. The exponential
fraction can be approximated by a series expansion, neglecting terms of higher
order as shown in (4.11).
rz ¼ kf 1 þ 2l
h
d
2  r




:
ð4:11Þ
Calculating the maximum tension using (4.10) or (4.11), it is obvious that
rz ¼ kf is constant and independent of r if the friction coefﬁcient l ¼ 0:
Figure 4.15 shows all three stress states: upsetting without friction, simpliﬁed
model with friction, and analytical model with friction.
The required punch force Fz can be calculated by the integration of (4.11)
across the surface A of the workpiece. For cylindrical workpieces Fz results in:
Fz ¼ A  kf 1 þ 1
3 l d
h


:
ð4:12Þ
4.2.2 Buckling in the Upsetting Process
Buckling is one sort of defect that might occur during the upsetting process.
As soon as buckling appears the grain structure is defective, which is highly visible
no friction µ=0
d
r
z
z
z
r
r
simplified model
h
analytical model
BIAS ID 122013
Fig. 4.15 Models of stress curve during upsetting
116
B. Kuhfuss

in cross-sectional polishes with the result that mechanical properties are shortened.
Experiments have been carried out by Messner [19] with specimens in the micro
range as well as macro range to determine the characteristics of the buckling effect
in workpieces with major dimensions smaller than 1 mm. Specimens of brass
(CuZn15) as well as an austenitic chromium stainless steel (X4CrNi18-10) have
been used. The grain size LK is adjusted by heat treatment so that its effect on
buckling could also be determined. It is to be stated that there is an increasing
inﬂuence of grain size on the evenness of the lateral surface after the upsetting
process for decreasing ratios of sample diameter to grain size d0=LK: Specimens
with an initial diameter of d0 ¼ 0:5 mm and a grain size LK ¼ 65 lm showed an
inhomogeneous lateral surface after the upsetting process, because some crystal
grains extruded the surface. Inhomogeneities are not only limited to grains cor-
responding to the surface but also within the specimen. There are areas whose
deformation is larger than others, even though friction between the workpiece and
tools is close to zero. The strength of this effect increases with the decreasing
dimensions of the workpiece.
Buckling of the specimen occurs as soon as an asymmetrical movement of the
material ﬂow perpendicular to the tool movement direction is observed. The value
of buckling Dx is measured as shown in Fig. 4.16.
The size of relative buckling Dx/d0 is investigated by means of the size of the
specimen, the upset ratio and the grain size. As shown in Fig. 4.17, a decreasing size
of specimen inevitably leads to an increase in relative buckling, for example an upset
ratio u = 2.4 for specimens d0 = 4.8 mm causes a relative buckling of 0.05 whereas,
specimens with d0 = 0.5 mm experience relative buckling of 0.25. Figure 4.17 only
shows these effects for an absolute value of natural strain u
j j ¼ 0:8; but it is to be
noted that similar tendencies are recognized for u
j j ¼ 0:2 and u
j j ¼ 0:4: Overall
there is no inﬂuence of the grain size LK on relative buckling, not even if the
cross-section of the specimen consists of an average ofﬁve grains. This effect is valid
for both the macro and micro range, and is supported by ﬁnite element simulations by
Mori et al. [21] for specimens with conventional dimensions. Vollertsen [28] states
that the statistical spread increases with decreasing sample size. This can also be seen
in Fig. 4.17, as the spread in size of relative buckling is larger for samples with
d0 ¼ 0:5 mm compared to samples with d0 ¼ 4:8 mm:
As the micro structure, represented by the grain size, has no signiﬁcant inﬂu-
ence on relative buckling, this size effect can only be based on the shape inac-
curacy of specimens due to the machining process. This means that buckling only
occurs if the cylindrical specimen or the tool has at least minor deviations in shape
compared to its ideal geometry, or if the tool movement is not exactly perpen-
dicular to the workpiece surface. In Fig. 4.18 possible causes for buckling while
upsetting are shown. Due to the fact that impurities in the ambient atmosphere
such as dust belong to the same order of magnitude as the specimens being upset, it
is advisable to carry out micro cold forming operations such as upsetting in clean
room conditions.
In the macro range a limit of upset ratio u ¼ 2:3 is generally recognized [18].
Due to the fact that the value of relative buckling is a steady function of upset ratio,
4
Bulk Metal Forming
117

it is also clear that for ratios u \ 2:3 upsetting operations lead to buckling and thus
to deviations in the shape of specimens. The value of this deviation is accepted for
industrial applications. If the value of relative buckling in the macro range is also
applied in the micro range, the maximum upset ratio u is smaller, because relative
buckling increases with decreasing sample diameter for constant upset ratios. Thus
in the micro range the tolerable upset ratio u is far below 2 [19].
4.2.3 Formability in the Upsetting Process
Formability is a value given to describe the capability of enduring the true strain of
a workpiece. The limit of formability is reached as soon as parts of the workpiece
d0
Δx
BIAS ID 122014
Fig. 4.16 Measurement method for buckling Dx
 Relative buckling
l
BIAS ID
l
l
l
l
Fig. 4.17 Inﬂuence of upset ratio u on relative buckling during the non-lubricated upsetting of
cylindrical specimens CuZn15 according to [19]
118
B. Kuhfuss

lose their cohesion. An indication of this is the appearance of cracks, which can
either occur along the outer surface of the workpiece or inside. Cracks inside the
workpiece are easily detectable by analyzing cross-sectional polishes, but also
during the upsetting process a discontinuous increase in punch force can be an
indication of material failure due to excess formability [12].
In meso and macro scale, upsetting without any externally detectable defects is
possible up to absolute values of natural strain of u
j j ¼ 2:0 [19]. This value is
independent of sample diameter to grain size ratios for at least d0=LK  70:
Nevertheless, a correlation between grain size, surface roughness and natural strain
has been reported: surface roughness increases with both increasing absolute
values of natural strain and grain size. As shown in Fig. 4.14, the shape of the
cylindrical specimen is dependent on the friction coefﬁcient l between the tool and
workpiece surface. As soon as the friction coefﬁcient l [ 0 is obtained, barreling
of the specimen takes place. In the macro range, plastic material ﬂow forces grains
which used to form the lateral surface of the specimen to move radially and
axially, thus forming the top and bottom surface and coming in direct contact with
the tool surface.
caused by
workpiece
caused by tools 
or machines
caused by
surroundings
BIAS ID 122016
Fig. 4.18 Causes for buckling during the upsetting process
4
Bulk Metal Forming
119

In the micro range different behavior of specimens with regard to formability is
reported. Upsetting is only possible up to u
j j ¼ 2:0 if d0=LK  30 or above,
which means that a ﬁne microstructure is required. But also in this case, the ﬁllet
from the bottom and top surfaces to the lateral surface is very rough, leading to
stress peaks. The fact that still no cracks appear indicates that the stress peaks are
diminished by locally extended plastic material ﬂow. If the ratio of the sample
diameter to grain size d0=LK decreases, the maximum natural strain until no cracks
appear also decreases. For d0=LK  8 and a sample diameter d0 ¼ 0:5 mm; at the
lateral surface as well as at the bottom and top surface cracks tend to partially
develop, starting at u
j j ¼ 1:5: As soon as u
j j  1:7 is reached only defective
workpieces with cracks mainly located at the top and bottom surfaces can be
produced by upsetting. These cracks are oriented tangentially, leading to the
conclusion that the maximum formability of the material is exceeded, because
neither at the bottom nor at the top surface do radially tensile stresses occur if
l [ 0: A further difference between upsetting in the macro and micro range is the
fact that the movement of grains which formed the lateral surface before the
upsetting operation only come in contact with the tools for larger values of
absolute natural strain compared to the macro range.
4.2.4 Inﬂuence of Miniaturization on Friction Coefﬁcient
in the Upsetting Process
The upsetting process reduces the height of the workpiece. Due to its constant
volume the width increases so that there is relative movement between the tools
and workpiece perpendicular to the tool movement direction. The value of relative
movement is mainly inﬂuenced by the friction coefﬁcient l between the tools and
workpiece, as friction elevates the resistance against relative movement [29].
Figure 4.19 shows a schematic cross-sectional view of a specimen and the
τ
neutral surface
τ
τ
τ
τ
BIAS ID 122017
Fig. 4.19 Schematic cross-
sectional view of specimen
with applied load and
resulting stress state
120
B. Kuhfuss

resulting stress state under applied load. The compression stress rn is caused by
the punch force. The relative movement between the top surface of the specimen
and tool surface is restricted in the radial direction by friction, thus leading to
tangential stresses sF so that a multiaxial stress state exists. The force available for
reducing the height of the specimen is reduced because a fraction is needed to
transcend friction. So the greater the friction coefﬁcient l, the greater are both the
barreling effect and punch force.
When a forming operation is carried out with rigid tools, the surface defor-
mation of tools can be assumed to be neglected as the surface of the tools has a
greater hardness than the workpiece. Due to the fact that the friction coefﬁcient is a
consequence of the coaction of the topography of the interacting surfaces, the
friction coefﬁcient changes with the increasing strain of the workpiece and its
surface [29]. The surface roughness decreases with increasing absolute values of
natural strain, because a ﬂattening effect takes place which minimizes the size of
the peaks on the surface.
The amount of friction can be inﬂuenced by lubricating the interacting surfaces.
This can either be achieved by applying suitable ﬂuent lubricant such as oil or
parafﬁn or by coating the tool surfaces with e.g. PTFE, as proposed by [19].
For non-lubricated surfaces there is no size effect reported for the upsetting of
work hardening steel X4-CrNi18-10 concerning the size of the specimen or grain
size LK, which means that neither the grain size nor the absolute size of the
specimen has an inﬂuence on the average value of friction coefﬁcient. But, as also
stated by [19], the mean variation in friction coefﬁcient increases with decreasing
sample size. For other materials these inﬂuences are still under investigation, and
inconsistent results are reported. For upsetting with lubricated interacting surfaces,
the inﬂuence of grain size on friction coefﬁcient is also at the most very small.
In contrast with dry surfaces, a correlation between sample size and friction
coefﬁcient exists: the smaller the specimen, the larger the friction coefﬁcient. This
phenomenon is based on the fact that with decreasing sample size the fraction of
closed lubricant pockets is lowered (see 2.2.1), thus increasing the total true
contact area between the tool and surface of the specimen, so that the contact
forces grow.
One possibility to decrease both the friction coefﬁcient l and ﬂow stress kf ; is to
apply high-frequency vibration to the specimen. The ﬂow stress is lowered by
acoustic softening and stress superposition. The advantages are that on the one
hand there are lower mechanical forces on the tools and on the other hand there is
an improvement in surface quality of the surface of the workpiece into which the
vibration is conveyed [31]. In this case the very top of the surface is heated due to
friction by the incremental longitudinal movement of the punch, thus enabling a
plastic deformation of the roughness peaks so that the surface quality signiﬁcantly
increases.
4
Bulk Metal Forming
121

4.3 Cold Forging
Volker Piwek
4.3.1 Methods of Cold Forging
Cold forging is a process which is not assisted by any heat from the outside, and
characterized by the fact that the process starts at room temperature (20 C) [13].
All methods of cold forging are characterized by high productivity and are
therefore suitable for bulk production. Among upsetting and tube drawing, a large
area of cold forging is covered by the various extrusion processes where the
material is formed due to a relative movement between the punch and the extru-
sion tool (sleeve) [17]. Figure 4.20 shows the classiﬁcation of the different variants
of extrusion methods with respect to the speciﬁc material ﬂow.
The movement of the punch and the material ﬂow by direct extrusion are
generally oriented in the same direction. In contrast, in backward extrusion the
material is usually deﬂected by 180. With the lateral extrusion process the
material ﬂow performs a change of direction of around 90. The 3 methods
described are based on a direct transmission of the punch movement to the face of
the workpiece blank. With hydrostatic forward extrusion processes however there
is no direct contact between the punch and the workpiece. The workpiece is
partially embedded in a ﬂuid which is also used for force transmission. In Fig. 4.21
the characteristic geometries for extruded parts are presented according to the
above-described process variants respective of their combinations or different
process chains [24].
Basically, all ductile materials are formable by extrusion. The main advantages
of this resource-efﬁcient process are:
• optimum use of material with uninterrupted grain ﬂow,
• very high productivity and short cycle times,
• high dimensional and shape accuracy,
• high surface quality,
• process-speciﬁc cold work hardening.
The convenient material ﬂow (see also Fig. 4.22) and process-speciﬁc cold
work hardening offers a sufﬁcient strength and stiffness of the extruded workpiece.
A near net-shape geometry is very important because of the complicated handling
of micro parts. Thus a ﬁnishing operation in following process steps can hardly be
realized. Here cold extrusion conforms to the high requirements in view of the
shape accuracy and surface quality, and is very cost-effective due to its short cycle
times. On the other hand, it has to be considered that distortion can occur due to
the inﬂuence of the friction conditions and the applied material characteristics (e.g.
grain structure). Furthermore, the design of the micro extrusion tools has a sig-
niﬁcant inﬂuence on process stability.
122
B. Kuhfuss

4.3.1.1 Fundamentals of Extrusion
Basically forging processes can be stationary or transient. Due to the coincidence
of ﬂow lines and trajectories, extrusion processes can be determined as stationary
(Fig. 4.22). For a stationary process the machine work Wm is the product of the
punch force Fp and the punch stroke hp.
Wm ¼
Zsp
0
Fpds  Fp  hp
ð4:13Þ
extrusion
with
rigid tools
with active
fluid medium
lateral 
extrusion 
hydrostatic 
forward extrusion
forward 
extrusion
direct
hollow
cup
backward 
extrusion
movement of
the punch
flow of material
Fig. 4.20 Classiﬁcation of extrusion processes
4
Bulk Metal Forming
123

The medium ﬂow stress kfm can be obtained by the integration over the
deformation degree u in the limits from the start (Index 0) to the end of the process
(Index 1).
kfm ¼ 1
u
Zu1
u0
kf du
ð4:14Þ
For ideal work Wid, considering only the formed volume V of the material and
the variance in the effective strain Duv; follows:
Wid ¼ kfm  Duv  V
ð4:15Þ
In practice, the provided punch force Fp has to exceed the ideal work Wid due to
friction and shift work. These additional losses during the deformation process are
detectedbythe efﬁciencyofdeformation gF. For the required work of the plunger Wpl:
Wpl ¼ 1
gF
 Wid
ð4:16Þ
Substituting Eq. 4.15 into Eq. 4.16 and equating this term with Eq. 4.13
results in:
direct-forward
direct-backward 
direct-forward 
cup- backward 
hollow-forward 
cup-backward 
cup-backward 
cup-backward
cup-forward 
cup-backward
direct-forward 
cup-backward
Fig. 4.21 Examples of producible geometries and process combinations
124
B. Kuhfuss

Fp ¼ 1
gF
kfm  Duv  V  1
hp
¼ 1
gF
kfm  Duv  A1
ð4:17Þ
In this expression, A1 is the cross-sectional area after forming (A0 before
forming). The forming forces Fp are increasing with a higher deformation degree
u = ln (A1/A0) with respect to the opening angle 2a of the extrusion tool and with a
higher material strength and hardness. Figure 4.22 shows schematically the steady
ﬂow of material and the process parameters for direct-forward extrusion.
4.3.1.2 Technology for Cold Forging of Micro Parts
The previously mentioned basic principles and relationships are generally inde-
pendent of workpiece size. The extrusionprocess is applied for the bulk production of
high quality products in the domains of automotive and machine parts, especially for
connecting elements, and in electrical industries [8]. Due to the increasing minia-
turization of microelectronic and mechatronic assemblies and the complicated
application of other manufacturing methods, e.g. metal cutting at once the require-
ment to realize even those micro components by extrusion operations is given. While
the masses of workpieces in the macro scale vary from a few grams to several
kilograms, micro parts have only up to some 100 mg of material that has to be shaped.
With the manufacture of micro parts by extrusion, the friction effects due to the
small workpiece dimensions (surface-volume ratio) and the grain size and its
distribution exert a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the entire forming process [6]. The
extrusion 
die 
workpiece 
material flow
(stationary) 
Fp
α
A0
A1
hp
Vp
Fig. 4.22 Flow of material (left) and schematic diagram of a direct-forward extrusion process
(right)
4
Bulk Metal Forming
125

friction can be up to 20 times higher than in the macro area [4]. On the one hand
this inﬂuence is reﬂected in a decreasing efﬁciency of deformation gF and on the
other an enlarged deviation of the formed part’s geometry appears [7]. The most
important test for detecting friction conditions during extrusion is the Double-Cup-
Extrusion-Test (DCE), wherein a cup is formed in the forward direction whist at
the same time being generated in the reverse direction (Fig. 4.23).
In this test, the ratio of upper to lower cup height hu/hl is a measure of friction
during the forming process. For the ideal situation, without any friction (m = 0),
two cups of equal height (hu = hl) will result, while at maximum friction (m = 1)
only a cup geometry in the reverse direction of the punch feed will be formed.
Therefore the analysis of the tribological effects of design processes for extruding
metallic micro parts has a signiﬁcant relevance [9].
Experimental results of the DCE-Test on CuZn15 specimens with diameters
from 4 mm down to 0.5 mm show a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the specimen size on
the friction coefﬁcient [5]. Furthermore, there are other important methods to
determine the friction conditions within the ﬁeld of micro forming. The micro-
ring-compression-test, for example was used, by [2] to determine the friction on
aluminum alloy 6061 specimens in a diameter range between 2 and 3 mm.
Diameter dimensions below 2 mm down to less than 1 mm were explored for
copper alloy CuZn30 by [14] using the pin-length-test. In addition to the experi-
mental investigations, analytical or numerical methods, e.g. ﬁnite element method
(FEM), can also be applied to determine the friction coefﬁcient. Here the deter-
mination of the forming forces is based on the Upper-Bound-Method and the slice-
model. The displayed results of a FE-analysis are based on a coarse grained
structured material with an average grain size of 211 lm. The determined friction
coefﬁcients by the different methods and size ranges of the specimen are arranged
in Fig. 4.24. Generally the tendency can be recognized that friction increases with
the smaller dimensions of the formed test piece.
extrusion 
tool 
stationary 
mandrel
Vp, sp
m = 0
relocatable 
punch
m = 1
hu
hl
specimen of different sizes 
(initial diameter 0.5 to 4mm)
reference :
LFT-Erlangen
Fp
Fig. 4.23 Schematic diagram of the Double-Cup-Extrusion-Test (left), and various sizes of
specimen [6] (right)
126
B. Kuhfuss

On the one hand, the FE approach shows similar results to the Double-Cup-
Extrusion-Test in that the length of the formed workpiece section decreases with
increasing friction. On the other hand it was found that the friction coefﬁcient
again decreases with an increasing workpiece diameter, but distortion effects
become signiﬁcant [20]. These effects can be primarily explained with the grain
size effect in the material and not with the friction conditions between the contact
surface of the punch and the surface of the specimen. Generally, to reduce friction
the use of lubricants is suitable. Furthermore, coatings of the tool surfaces made of
silicon-based Diamond-Like Carbon(DLC), chromium nitride (CrN) and titanium
nitride (TiN) can be considered.
4.3.1.3 Component Applications in the Micro Range
Figure 4.25 shows examples of extruded metallic micro parts for industrial
applications (a, c) and the ﬁeld of research (b).
Workpieces (a) are produced by direct-forward cup extrusion on an industrial
extruding press. Component (b) has geometry similar to the shaft of a micro motor
and was manufactured by direct-forward in combination with cup-backward
extrusion with a shaft diameter of 0.5 mm and a wall thickness of 50 lm. Copper
Fig. 4.24 Determined friction coefﬁcients by different methods
4
Bulk Metal Forming
127

pin (c) was manufactured by the same process combination with a shaft of 0.5 mm
and a nominal inner cup diameter of about 1 mm.
4.3.2 Materials: Process Windows and Limits
Steel as well as nonferrous metals are formable by extrusion. While primarily
unalloyed and low alloyed steels are used for macro components, such as screws,
(a) micro parts
produced by 
extrusion 
(reference: Wafios 
GmbH) 
(b) direct forward /
backward cup 
extrusion 
(reference: LFT) 
(c) direct forward / backward cup extruded copper pin
(reference: Wafios GmbH)
300µm
Fig. 4.25 Examples of extruded metallic micro parts
128
B. Kuhfuss

piston pins and piston rods [23], aluminum and copper are in particular applied in
the production of micro components in the ﬁeld of electrical engineering. The most
important aluminum material for extrusion forming operations is pure aluminum
Al 99.5 and for higher strength requirements self-hardening (thermosetting) alloys,
e.g. AlMg5, AlMgSi and AlCuMg. Furthermore, titanium-based light metals
alloys, especially titanium-aluminum, are suitable for the extrusion process. Pure
copper is mainly used in the electrical industry, such as E-Cu, Cu and Se-Sf-Cu, in
the production of contact pins for example. In the group of copper alloys, brass
materials (a  brass) with a tin content of 28 % up to a maximum of 37 %
(CuZn28 … CuZn37) are particularly suitable. Also bronze materials, especially
tin- and silicon-bronzes, e.g. SnBz1 and SnBz2Mn, are used.
For forming operations in the macro range, guidelines for accessible material-
related deformation degrees are available. Due to the signiﬁcant increase in the
friction conditions in the micro range, the relevance of these values is limited.
From the macro range it is known that the highest deformation degrees can be
reached for direct-forward extrusion of pure aluminum with values up to 4. This is
also applicable with some restrictions to hollow-forward extrusion. The defor-
mation degrees for copper and bronze materials range from 1.2 to 1.6. However,
with heat treatable or stainless steels, in general only deformation degrees of less
than 1 can be realized.
Especially for micro forming, the achievable shape accuracy is inﬂuenced by
the grain size and its distribution (anisotropy) in the blank that is to be extruded,
and the friction conditions between the contact surfaces of the workpiece and tools
[4]. Extended investigations have shown that the occurring distortion of extruded
micro parts is caused by irrational local deformation, spring back effects and
interfacial friction stress [2]. These features are size-dependent so that reduced
shape accuracy is expected with a decreasing size of specimen. Research on
extruded brass pins indicated an inﬂuence of the grain size on the distortion
achieved. Thus, a material with coarse grains shows a signiﬁcant straightness
deviation, while a ﬁne-grained structure is less affected [14].
4.3.3 Extrusion Tools for Micro Forming
Figure 4.26 illustrates the basic design of a tool for a direct-forward extrusion
process with special features for micro forming. The tool consists of an upper,
vertically movable section, where the punch is supported on the upper base plate
and can be adjusted in the vertical direction by a set screw.
The geometry of the workpiece is produced by the extrusion tool that consists of
an inner sleeve, which is strengthened by ring reinforcement. In the vertical
direction, the tool is supported by the lower base plate, in which the ejector is also
linearly mounted. This element works against the punch direction and enables the
detachment of the workpiece after the forming operation. In extrusion tools for
micro forming the matrices have correspondingly small holes in a comparatively
4
Bulk Metal Forming
129

large sleeve, which is generally not limited in its external dimensions. The punches,
or mandrels, are usually very slim structures, where buckling resistance is one of
the fundamental design criteria. Due to this requirement in the micro range, the
demand for wear resistance for the stationary as well as the relocatable tool com-
ponents in compression molding increases signiﬁcantly. The general requirements
on extrusion tools are e.g.
• conical design of the interfaces between several parts
• axis symmetrical design of the parts to balance out non-coaxialities.
For design in the micro range there are speciﬁed guidelines, such as
• a minimum number of tool elements to minimize the tolerances of the entire tool
assembly
• ﬂoating respectively self-adjusting positioning of punch and pin in the hori-
zontal direction
• adjustable punching tool respectively reinforcement.
The axially symmetrical and self-adjusting designs of the extrusion sleeve and a
coaxial alignment to the punch are both important to fulﬁll the requirements of
close ﬁttings, especially for micro extrusion processes. The conical design of the
interfaces eliminates the clearance that is needed for mounting. Furthermore, there
upper
base plate
self adjustable
lower base 
plate
punch
prestressable 
ring reinforcing
ejector
conical 
interface
sleeve
piezo actors for prestess of 
the ring reinforcing 
set screw 
for punch
adjust-
ment
Fig. 4.26 Tool for a direct-forward extrusion process
130
B. Kuhfuss

are approaches to optimize the accuracy and the ejection process of the workpiece,
which is complicated by the narrow clearances in the micro range, by using a
piezo-driven prestress and expandable punching tool [25].
In addition to the basic requirements of high shape accuracy and durability of
the tools, in the micro range there are approaches for ﬂexible tool systems to cover
an enlarged spectrum of workpiece geometries [30]. The goal of such systems is to
provide tools with modular-like structures for the various methods of extrusion or
combination thereof [22]. There are essentially three types of tool component:
basic-, process- and workpiece-speciﬁc components. To reduce the time for
changing of the tool (machine setup time), quick-change tooling systems can be
used, such as a clip device for the attachment of the punch. Furthermore, the
opportunity is given to separately renew or exchange speciﬁc areas with increased
tool wear due to friction.
Another important feature of the tools is the material used. A suitable material
for an extrusion tool has to fulﬁll on the one hand the requirements of its own
manufacturing process as well as for its subsequent application in forming oper-
ations. Figure 4.27 shows the main requirements of such materials divided in two
groups with focus on the tool manufacturing and the forming process [13].
Generally hardened and tempered tool steels and carbide metals are used, which
provide hardness from 50 up to 67 HRC and a bending and burst strength from
2.400 to 2.800 MPa and 3.000 to 4.100 MPa respectively. Furthermore, powder
metallurgical steel is used to achieve a high material homogeneity and a ﬁne
carbide grain structure (grain size from 2 to 6 lm), while in conventional tool steel
demands on the tool materials
related to the tool 
manufacturing
applicated in the 
forming process
- shape retention
- high wear resistance
- resistance against 
oxidation 
and corrosion
- resistance against hot 
cracking and thermal 
shock
- high temperature 
strength and toughness
- isotropy of the 
microstructure
- minimum distortion 
during hardening 
and tempering
- adequate temper 
resistance
Fig. 4.27 General demands on the materials for extrusion tools
4
Bulk Metal Forming
131

the carbide size is between 30 and 50 lm [1]. In particular, a high bending strength
is necessary for punching of micro extrusion tools to achieve a sufﬁcient buckling
resistance, due to the small dimensions and the thickness ratio required.
References
1. Arenoft, M., Solmer Ericsen, R., Norgaard Hansen, H.: Micro-bulk-forming. In: Qin, Y. (ed.)
Micro-Manufacturing Engineering and Technology, pp. 114–129, Elsevier Ltd. (2010)
2. Chan, W.L., Fu, M.W., Lu, J.: The size effect on micro deformation behavior in micro-scale
plastic deformation. Mater. Des. 32, 198–206 (2011)
3. Doege,
E.,
Behrens,
B.-A.:
Handbuch
Umformtechnik:
Grundlagen,
Technologien,
Maschinen. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg (2007)
4. Engel, U., Eckstein, R.: Microforming—from basic research to its realization. J. Mater.
Process. Technol. 125–126, 35–44 (2002)
5. Engel, U.: Tribology in microforming. Wear 260, 265–273 (2005)
6. Geiger, M., Kleiner, M., Eckstein, R., Tiesler, N., Engel, U.: Microforming. CIRP Ann.
Manufact. Technol. 50(2), 445–462 (2001)
7. Geiger, M., Tiesler, N., Engel, U.: Cold forging of microparts. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. (WGP)
10(1), 19–22 (2003)
8. Geiger, M., Engel, U., Vollertsen, F., Kals, R., Meßner, A.: Metal forming of microparts for
electronics. Prod. Eng. 2(1), 15–18 (1994)
9. Geiger, M., Meßner, A., Engel, U., Kals, R., Vollertsen, F.: Design of micro-forming
processes—fundamentals, material data and friction behavior. In: Standring, P. (ed.) Chipless
2000—Advancing Chipless Component Manufacture. Proceedings of the 9th International
Cold Forging Congress, Solihull, England, May 1995, Redhill, pp. 155–164. UK FMJ
International Publications Ltd. (1995)
10. Groche, P., Fritsche, D., Tekkaya, E.A., Allwood, J.M., Hirt, G., Neugebauer, R.: Incremental
bulk metal forming. CIRP Ann. Manufact. Technol. 56(2), 635–656 (2007)
11. Groche, P., Abress, A., Fritsche D.: Efﬁcient algorithms for the simulation of incremental
forming processes. In: Hirt, G. (ed.) Modelling of Incremental Forming Processes: Final
Report of the DFG-Priority Programme SPP 1146, pp. 147–172. Shaker, Aachen (2010)
12. Herzig, N.: Erfassung und Beschreibung des skalierten Fließ-, Verfestigungs- und
Versagensverhaltens ausgewählter metallischer Werkstoffe. Eigenverlag TU-Chemnitz
(2008)
13. Klocke, F., König, W.: Fertigungsverfahren - Umformtechnik. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg
(2006)
14. Krishian, N., Cao, J., Dohda, K.: Study on size effects on friction conditions on micro
extrusion–part 1: Microextrusion experiments and analysis. Transactions of the ASME.
J. Manufact. Sci. 129(4):669–679 (2007)
15. Kuhfuss, B., Moumi, E., Piwek, V.: Micro rotary swaging: Process limitations and attempts
to their extension. Microsyst. Technol. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg (2008). ISSN 0946-7076
(print) 1432-1858 (online)
16. Kuhfuss, B., Moumi, E., Tracht, K., Weikert, F., Stephen, A.: Process chains in microforming
technology using scaling effects. In: AIP Conference Proceedings, 14th International
ESAFORM Conference on Material Forming (ESAFORM 2011) 1353(1):535–540 (2011)
17. Lange, K., Kammerer, M., Pöhlandt, K., Schöck, J.: Fließpressen. Springer, Berlin
Heidelberg (2008)
18. Lange, K.: Umformtechnik, Band 2: Massivumformung. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg (1988)
19. Meßner,
A.:
Kaltmassivumformung
metallischer
Kleinstteile:
Werkstoffverhalten,
Wirkﬂächenreibung, Prozessauslegung. Meisenbach, Bamberg (1998)
132
B. Kuhfuss

20. Mori, F.L., Krishnan, N., Cao, J., Espinosa, G.D.: Study on size effects on friction conditions
on microextrusion-part 2: Size effect in dynamic friction brass-steel pairs. Transactions of the
ASME. J. Manufact. Sci. 129(4):677–689 (2007)
21. Mori, K., Osakada, K, Kodohata, S.: Finite element simulation of three-dimensional buckling
in upsetting and heading of cylindrical billet. 4th International Conference on Technology of
Plasticity, pp. 1047–1052. Beijing (1993)
22. Nielsen, L.S., Lassen, S., Andersen, C.B., Groenbaek, J., Bay, N.: Development of a ﬂexible
tool system for small quantity production in cold forging. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 71,
36–42 (1997)
23. VDI-Richtlinie 3138—Blatt 1—Kaltmassivumformen von Stählen und NE-Metallen—
Grundlagen für das Kaltﬂießpressen. VDI-Handbuch Betriebstechnik Teil 2, Düsseldorf
(1998)
24. VDI-Richtlinie
3138—Blatt
2—Kaltmassivumformen
von
Stählen—Anwendungen,
Arbeitsbereiche, Wirtschaftlichkeitsbetrachtung für das Kaltﬂießpressen. VDI-Handbuch
Betriebstechnik Teil 2, Düsseldorf (1998)
25. Paldan, N.A., Arentoft, M., Eriksen, R.S., Mangeot, C.: Piezo driven prestressing of die-
system for microforming of metal components. In: Proceedings of the 11th ESAFORM
Conference on Material Forming, Lyon, France, 23–25 April 2008, Springer (2008)
26. Rastagaev, M.V.: Neue Methode der homogenen Stauchung von Proben zur Bestimmung der
Fließspannung und des Koefﬁzienten der inneren Reibung (russ.), p. 354. Zavod. Lab (1940)
27. Siebel, E.: Die Formgebung im bildsamen Zustande: Theoretische Grundlagen der
technischen Formgebungsverfahren. Stahleisen Düsseldorf (1932)
28. Vollertsen, F.: Metal forming: microparts. encyclopedia of materials. Science and
Technology, pp. 5424–5427 (2001)
29. Weißbach, W.: Werkstoffkunde—Strukturen, Eigenschaften, Prüfung. Vieweg und Teubner
Wiesbaden (2010)
30. Withen, C.P., Marstrand, J.R., Arentoft, M., Paldan N.A.: Flexible tool system for cold
forging of micro components. Multi-material Micro Manufacture, Elsevier Ltd. (2008)
31. Yao, Z. et al.: Effects of superimposed high-frequency vibration on deformation of aluminum
in micro/meso-scale upsetting. J. Mater. Process. Technol. pp. 640–646 (2012)
4
Bulk Metal Forming
133

Chapter 5
Sheet Metal Forming
Frank Vollertsen
Latin
d0
pre-hole diameter (mm)
dP
punch diameter (mm)
FP
punch force (N)
FBLH
blankholder force (N)
g
drawn clearence (mm)
I
Inertia moment (kg 9 m2)
K
spring back ratio
kf
ﬂow stress (N/mm2)
rD
die radius (lm)
s0
initial sheet thickness (lm)
s1
ﬁnal sheet thickness (lm)
Greek
b
drawing ratio
bmax
Limit drawing ratio
u
logarithmic degree of deformation
rpl 0.2
yield strength (N/mm2)
rt
tangential stress (N/mm2)
rr
radial stress (N/mm2)
rax
axial stress (N/mm2)
F. Vollertsen (&)
Bremer Institut für angewandte Strahltechnik, Klagenfurter Straße 2,
28359 Bremen, Germany
e-mail: vollertsen@bias.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_5,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
135

5.1 Deep Drawing
Gerrit Behrens
5.1.1 Single Step Deep Drawing Processes
5.1.1.1 Deep Drawing Basics
Deep drawing is one of the most important processes in sheet metal forming and
has a great application potential for manufacturing parts with complex shapes,
even those with very small dimensions. Examples of single step deep drawing
parts are shown in Fig. 5.1.
According to the deﬁnition in DIN 8584, deep drawing is classiﬁed as the
tensile compressive forming of a sheet or a foil to a hollow body, open on one side,
without an intentional change in sheet thickness. As the blank is drawn into the die
cavity by the punch, a three dimensional shape is generated (see Fig. 5.2). The
drawing force, necessary for the forming, is transmitted from the punch to the
workpiece bottom and afterwards into the forming zone in the ﬂange. Caused by
the decrease in the blank diameter during the deep drawing process, tangential
stresses lead to a compression of material in the ﬂange area. These tangential
stresses may cause wrinkling of the blank material, which is why in most deep
drawing processes a blank holder is used to exert a normal force on the ﬂange
material and press the blank ﬁrmly onto the drawing ring. Consequently, the
formation of wrinkles is prevented. The stress due to the blank holder pressure is
small compared to the radial and tangential stresses of the process.
Since in micro deep drawing very small blank holder forces are obtained, the
measurement and control of these forces during the process is highly complex. In
order to avoid this effort and the resulting costs, several applications do not use a
force controlled blank holder. Instead, the blank holder is set to a ﬁxed position
with a gap between the blank and the blank holder. For instance [33] used a gap of
Fig. 5.1 Single step deep drawing parts. a BIAS GmbH. b Hubert Stüken GmbH & Co. KG
136
F. Vollertsen

1/3 of the foil thickness. The gap can be changed using thin plates. Due to this, no
precise adjustment of the blank holder force during the process is necessary.
However, for every change of a relevant process parameter such as tool or foil
geometry, a change of tool set is necessary. In [24] a double-axis micro forming
press developed at BIAS is presented, which allows the very precise control of the
blank holder force even in the micro range. Therefore, high accuracy force- and
stroke-measurement and two independent machine axes, driven by electrical linear
motors, are used. If this type of machine is used, optimized for the increased
requirements of micro scale manufacturing, a very ﬂexible reaction to changes in
process is possible. Changes in tool geometry or foil thickness can easily be
adjusted.
The process limits in deep drawing depend on the properties of the sheet
material, on the lubrication conditions, on the tool geometry and the forming
parameters. In sheet metal forming, the forming behavior is described using two
characteristic diagrams. One is the forming limit diagram which is described in
detail in Sect. 2.3. The second is the deep drawing diagram, shown in Fig. 5.3.
Herein, the initial blank holder pressure is plotted over the drawing ratio. The
die
blankholder
punch
workpiece 
workpiece bottom 
FBLH= blankholder force
FP = punch force
FBLH/2
FP
F
BLH/2
flange
BIAS ID 122019
Fig. 5.2 Schematic of the
deep drawing process
clamping limit
drawing
limit
wrinkling limit
max
processing
window
drawing ratio 
blankholder pressure pB
200 µm
200 µm
wrinkling
bottom fracture
BIAS ID 122020
(b)
(a)
Fig. 5.3 a Schematic deep drawing diagram. b Failures in micro deep drawing: wrinkles (left)
and bottom fracture (right) [24]
5
Sheet Metal Forming
137

drawing ratio is the ratio between initial blank diameter and punch diameter, it
being desirable to achieve high ratio values.
The upper process limit is characterized by component failure at the beginning
of the process and is named clamping limit. Above this limit, the part is just stretch
formed and fails before the blank can be drawn into the die cavity. Therefore the
cup height achieved is very small and a hole is punched through the sheet material.
If the values for the initial blank holder pressure are selected below the wrinkling
limit, workpieces with wrinkles are obtained (Fig. 5.3b). Only within a certain
range will sound parts be acquired. This area is limited to its right side by the
drawing limit; exceedance of this drawing ratio results in bottom fractures caused
by too strong material hardening in the ﬂange area (Fig. 5.3b). A single value can
occur instead of a limit line, and this intersection between the clamping limit and
wrinkling limit deﬁnes the limiting drawing ratio. This is the maximum value
which can be achieved under the given process conditions and is denoted bmax.
The limiting drawing ratio is a characterizing indicator for the deep drawing
process, and shows how much the workpiece can be deformed during the process.
Higher values of bmax indicate improved formability of the material and a better
application in industry.
5.1.1.2 Inﬂuence of Miniaturization on Deep Drawing
Different investigations into micro deep drawing uniformly revealed a signiﬁcantly
smaller process window and a decreased limiting drawing ratio in comparison with
a conventional deep drawing process. For example in [58], deep drawing with
punch diameters of 1 and 50 mm were carried out to investigate the size effect on
the limiting drawing ratio. The workpiece material was Al99.5 and mineral oil was
used as the lubricant. Under the same forming conditions and scaled tool geom-
etry, a limiting drawing ratio of more than 1.8 could be reached in macro deep
drawing by the use of the 50 mm punch. In the miniaturized process a limiting
drawing ratio of only 1.5 was acquired. A similar study was done by Hu and
Vollertsen [24] where a reduction of the punch diameter from 5 to 1 mm resulted
in a decrease in the limiting drawing ratio from 2.0 to 1.8 when using the same
material (see Fig. 5.4). In [25] the validity of this tendency was also demonstrated
for copper blank material.
There are several explanations for decreased drawability in micro deep draw-
ing. One explanation discusses the contribution of the number of grains in the
direction of the sheet thickness. If the process is scaled down, the sheet thickness
decreases. If the grain size remains constant, the number of grains in the cross-
section of the sheet also decreases. Fewer grains mean less grain boundaries,
which can result in lower work hardening during forming. In thick sheets which
have a polycrystalline structure, the ﬁrst strained grains will stop straining due to
this hardening, while concurrently some grains somewhere else, which are not
hardened, begin to strain. This procedure causes a straining of all grains within the
forming area. In thin foils, where only one grain covers the sheet thickness, a
138
F. Vollertsen

Tiffany structure exists (see Sect. 2.3). The orientation of the individual grain
determines in which grains the straining starts, and the probability for any existing
neighboring grains with similar orientations to continue the straining decreases.
Therefore some local grains are strained until the fracture strain is reached and
failure of the workpiece occurs. According to that, the ampliﬁcation of the
localized strain in very thin foils leads to less formability and a smaller limiting
drawing ratio [25].
Figure 5.5 shows schematically what occurs: At the beginning of a deep
drawing process the material is stretched when the punch contacts the blank, as
long as the static friction between the sheet and the blank holder and drawing ring
has not been overcome. The critical part is the stretch drawn area at position A,
which is located between the punch and the drawing ring. According to the weaker
deformation behavior of Tiffany structures, the forming limit line is shifted to
lower strains in the forming limit diagram as we decrease the size. Due to this, the
forming limit in the stretch drawn area at position A is exhausted locally and a
fracture sets in earlier than expected compared to experiences in the macro range.
So the change in the limiting drawing ratio due to miniaturization can be explained
by a density size effect, which leads to a Tiffany structure and corresponding
material behavior [59]. The tendency towards decreasing formability, when
decreasing the foil thickness, is also shown in Sect. 2.3.2 (Fig. 5.7).
Another reason for a smaller limiting drawing ratio in micro deep drawing is
assumed to be the increased relative geometrical deviation in the manufacturing of
1 mm
200 µm
Blank material           Al99.5
Blank thickness       0.1 mm
Punch diameter          5 mm
Drawn clearance   0.14 mm
Drawing radius        0.6 mm
Punch radius           0.5 mm
Lubricant  mineral oil (HBO)
Punch velocity         1 mm/s
Blank material           Al99.5
Blank thickness     0.02 mm
Punch diameter          1 mm
Drawn clearance 0.028 mm
Drawing radius      0.12 mm
Punch radius           0.1 mm
Lubricant  mineral oil (HBO)
Punch velocity         1 mm/s
Micro: 
max= 1.
M
8
acro: 
max= 2.0
BIAS ID 122021
Fig. 5.4 Reduced limiting drawing ratio in micro deep drawing [24]
5
Sheet Metal Forming
139

the tools. As Hu [22] showed, this can result in an increased punch force of more
than 10 %, which signiﬁcantly reduces the limiting drawing ratio.
One of the major factors affecting the deep drawing process is friction at the
ﬂange and the radius of the die. Friction is also affected by size effects when
transferring the forming technology from macro to micro forming. As shown in
Sect. 2.2.1 there is a signiﬁcant inﬂuence of scaling on friction in metal forming
when lubricant is used. Generally, an increase in the coefﬁcient of friction with
decreasing process dimensions occurs. An explanation for this behavior is given by
the lubricant pocket model. As a consequence of increased friction, higher punch
forces are reached for micro deep drawing and the limiting drawing ratio becomes
smaller. To investigate the tribological size effect for the integration of the real
frictional conditions into more realistic models of a micro deep drawing process,
e.g. in FEM-simulation, specialized measurement methods for the coefﬁcient of
friction in scaled deep drawing have been developed. Further information about
these testing procedures and about the cause and effects of the tribological size
effect are given in Sect. 2.2.1.
5.1.1.3 Deep Drawing Without Lubricant
Even though the occurrence of the tribological size effect complicates the
understanding and determination of the micro forming process, the use of lubri-
cants is dominant in micro deep drawing. This is problematic, since adhesion has a
greater inﬂuence when downscaling the process and the handling of workpieces
becomes more difﬁcult. As micro forming technologies are supposed to be used in
mass production processes, it is not desirable to have fabricated parts sticking
together. Due to their size the cleaning of products is more complex. Moreover, the
Fig. 5.5 Schematic limiting drawing diagram with size100 material showing continuum
behavior and size20 showing Tiffany structure behavior [59]
140
F. Vollertsen

saving of lubricant might help limit harmful effects on the environment and
establish healthier working conditions. It is therefore advantageous if the use of
lubricants in micro forming is reduced or even avoided.
Since the thin workpiece material in micro forming usually has a lower
formability, which leads to a more sensitive dependence of the forming limit on
friction between the workpiece and forming tools, it is highly desirable to precisely
control the friction conditions. One promising possibility to enable lubricant-free
forming is the use of special coatings on the forming tools. This measure is not
only aimed at reducing friction, but also to increase the wear resistance of the tools
to improve tool life.
Investigations on amorphous DLC coatings as well as on TiN-coatings were
carried out in micro deep drawing experiments. Reference [19] investigated the
inﬂuence of lubrication conditions on the limiting drawing ratio in micro deep
drawing using DLC-coatings for blank holder and die. The results show a strong
increase of limiting drawing ratio from 1.8 for uncoated tools without lubricant to
2.1 for DLC-coated tools. Lubrication with castor oil has been able to improve the
limiting drawing ratio only insigniﬁcantly to a value of 1.9. Similar investigations
by Hu [26] conducted with DLC and TiN-coatings on dies revealed a signiﬁcant
reduction in the deep drawing punch force for DLC-coatings compared to con-
ventional lubrication with mineral oil (see Fig. 5.6). The TiN-coating did not show
such a clear tendency, but might be interesting for dry micro forming because of its
low wear factor. Both investigations indicate that coating of the tools shows
advantages in micro deep drawing and a great application potential in lubricant-
free micro forming.
Uncoated, lubricant: HBO
DLC-coated, without lubricant
0
0. 2m
m
0. 6
60
N
20
0
Punch stroke
Punch force
Punch diameter
Drawing radius
Drawn clearence
Punch velocity
Drawing ratio
1 mm
0.12 mm
0.03 mm
1 mm/s
1.8
Blank thickness
Blank material
Tool material
Initial blank holder
pressure
0.025 mm
X5CrNi18.10
X153CrMoV12
1 N/mm2
BIAS ID 122024
(b)
(a)
Fig. 5.6 a Comparison of punch versus stroke curves of micro deep drawing with DLC-coated
and uncoated forming tools [26]. b Sound part of lubricant-free micro deep drawing [26]
5
Sheet Metal Forming
141

5.1.1.4 Inﬂuence of Punch Velocity
The potential application for micro deep drawing is in the manufacturing of
products in industrial mass production. Therefore high punch velocities are
required. Conventional micro deep drawing investigations are carried out under
laboratory conditions with relatively low punch velocities, like 1 mm/s. Process
scaling into the micro range has the advantage of having less moving mass. The
reduced weight of the forming tools allows higher cycle rates and punch velocities
in micro forming. This is why a good understanding of the process under raised
velocity conditions is necessary. Investigations into micro deep drawing with
increased punch velocities show an upward shift in the clamping limit in the
process window with increasing processing speed for the blank material Al99.5
[24]. This trend is shown in Fig. 5.7 for punch velocities of 1 and 100 mm/s. Thus,
the danger of fractures caused by too high a blank holder pressure decreases and
the process becomes more stable. However, no changes in the limiting drawing
ratio bmax could be found for higher punch velocities.
The trend in the enlargement of the process window to higher blank holder
pressures can be explained by the dependence of the friction coefﬁcient on the
velocity. This behavior is usually described by a Stribeck curve. According to
which the area of boundary friction decreases and the area of hydrodynamic
friction increases when higher relative speeds occur in lubricated friction. This
results in decreased friction between the workpiece and forming tools. Therefore, a
higher external load can be transmitted to the workpiece until the fracture limit is
reached. Further investigations qualitatively revealed the same tendency towards
enlargement of the process window for macro deep drawing processes, though
more pronounced than in the micro range. This can be explained by the lubricant
pocket model, described in Sect. 2.2.1. Since hydrodynamic friction mainly exists
in closed lubricant pockets and their amount decreases with miniaturization, there
is less hydrodynamic friction in the micro forming process and consequently the
effect is not quite as pronounced. Changes in material behavior as an explanation
for the elevated clamping limit with increased velocity should be excluded, since
Upper limit
Drawing ratio
Drawing ratio
Upper limit
wrinkles
sound parts
fratures
wrinkles
sound parts
fratures
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
12
N/mm2
4
0
0
4
N/mm2
2
8
Initial blankholder
Initial blankholder
Blank material
Blank thickness
Punch diameter
Drawn clearence
Al99.5
0.02 mm
1 mm
0.028 mm
Drawing radius
Punch radius
Lubricant
Punch velocity
0.23 mm
0.2 mm
mineral oil (HBO)
1 mm/s
Blank material
Blank thickness
Punch diameter
Drawn clearence
Al99.5
0.02 mm
1 mm
0.028 mm
Drawing radius
Punch radius
Lubricant
Punch velocity
0.23 mm
0.2 mm
mineral oil (HBO)
1 mm/s
pressure
pressure
Punch velocity 1 mm/s
Punch velocity 100 mm/s
Fig. 5.7 Inﬂuence of punch velocity on the deep drawing process window [24]
142
F. Vollertsen

the maximum strain rate is lower than 150 s-1 and at a speed below 200 s-1 no
change in the ﬂow stress is expected [59].
However, the changing frictional conditions due to velocity variations do not
inﬂuence the drawing limit. This phenomenon could be explained by the fact that
the blank material Al99.5 showed no inﬂuence of the strain rate on the forming limit
[23]. Therefore, the strain condition is independent of the forming velocity. When
the tool geometry and the blank material properties are kept constant, just the
drawing ratio determines the occurring maximum strain in the deep drawing pro-
cess. The change in frictional behavior due to different punch velocities can change
the punch force during the process, but it does not inﬂuence the forming limit. Thus
the processing speed shows no inﬂuence on the limiting drawing ratio [23].
Another investigation focusing on the inﬂuence of the process speed on the
micro deep drawing process was conducted by Justinger [33]. The punch velocity
was varied from 0.01 to 100 mm/s using CuZn37 foils. For comparison, the wall
thickness distributions on the produced cups were measured using a microscope.
The experiments show that the punch velocity only has a small effect on the cup
geometry. The cup geometry seems to be more affected by the microstructure.
5.1.1.5 Deep Drawing of Rectangular Parts
In contrast to a deep drawing process of circular blanks, the process of drawing
rectangular parts is more complex. The ambition is, to realize a forming process
for deep drawing components without residual ﬂange to save additional manu-
facturing steps. This is even more important for micro deep drawing since the size
of the products complicate subsequent processing, such as trimming. In order to
achieve parts with a net shape many blank shape optimizations were carried out in
the macro range. As demonstrated in previous chapters, size effects due to mini-
aturization occur which prevent the unadjusted transfer of this optimizations to the
micro deep drawing process. For instance, the friction coefﬁcient increases sig-
niﬁcantly with decreasing process dimensions. The changes in friction and
material behavior fundamentally affect the ﬁnal geometry of the micro deep
drawing parts. Hu [27] showed that by consideration of the actual friction coef-
ﬁcients and usage of the foil speciﬁc material properties in a size-dependent FEM-
simulation, it was accordingly possible to optimize the blank geometry for rect-
angular deep drawn parts (see Fig. 5.8). Therewith the residual ﬂange was mini-
mized. In this connection, the material characteristics were identiﬁed as a more
important factor than friction. Experimental investigations show good agreement
with results from FEM-simulation and proove the ﬂange-free drawability for
rectangular parts down to a size of 1.5 9 0.75 mm2 for Al99.5. Further investi-
gations conﬁrm the transferability of these results to materials of E-Cu58 and
1.4301 [28]. It is also revealed that the blank holder force signiﬁcantly affects the
geometry of rectangular drawn micro parts.
5
Sheet Metal Forming
143

5.1.2 Multi-Stage Deep Drawing
In multi-stage deep drawing, a pre-drawn hollow shape is redrawn again, using
several processing steps, to form parts with a smaller cross-section but with a
larger drawing depth (see Fig. 5.9). This way it is possible to produce deep drawn
parts with higher drawing ratios than realizable with a single step deep drawing
process. The total drawing ratio is calculated as the product of the ratio of every
single step. To achieve high values of the total drawing ratio an optimized
incrementation, dependent on the process parameters, is necessary.
In Fig. 5.10 some examples of multi-stage micro deep drawing in industrial
applications, contributed by Hubert Stueken GmbH & Co. KG, are presented.
Exemplary components can be cathode cups for products such as LCD displays
manufactured from 100 lm Ni-foils or electrodes for passenger cars brake lights,
with an inner diameter of 1 mm and a total height of 9 mm. These examples show
A
B
blank shapes
drawn parts
Software: ABAQUS 6.9.3 
b
a
a
b
c
A
B
200 µm
r=0.96 mm
lb =1.92 mm
la=0.88 mm
Punch                                     2 x 1 mm2
Blank material                            E-Cu58
Sheet thickness                        0.02 mm
Initial blank holder pressure     2 N/mm2
Lubricant                             HBO 947/11
BIAS ID 122025
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.8 a Optimization of blank shapes by FEM-simulation. b Rectangular deep drawn part
with optimized blank shape
FP = punch force
workpiece bottom 
workpiece 
punch 
FP 
die
BIAS ID 122026
Fig. 5.9 Schematic of multi-
stage deep drawing
144
F. Vollertsen

that the fabrication of high aspect ratios is technologically and economically
feasible even in the micro range.
5.1.3 Scatter of the Punch Force
A further phenomenon that is frequently observed is an increase in scattering
results with decreasing dimensions. This particularly concerns the determination of
the material properties, such as the ﬂow stress. In deep drawing similar discoveries
are made for the scatter of the punch force. Reference [21] obtained deviations of
about 20 % to the averaged punch force in micro deep drawing experiments using
a 1 mm punch. In contrast, punch diameters of 5 and 10 mm only showed devi-
ations of about 3 %. Reference [58] revealed a deviation of 37 % for deep drawing
with a punch diameter of 1 mm and a drastic decrease in scattering punch force for
a diameter of 5 mm down to deviations of 4 % (see Fig. 5.11).
Generally it is assumed that the increase in scattering with decreasing process
dimensions is caused by the random orientation and size of each single grain
leading to inhomogeneous material behavior and therefore to higher differences in
the results [17]. But investigations by Justinger et al. showed that the scatter of the
punch force cannot be explained by the orientation of the single grains. In [34], a
model estimating the inﬂuence of the single grain orientations on the ﬂow stress is
presented. As a quantity for the variation in ﬂow stress the Taylor-Factor was used.
A statistical study analyzing the variance of the averaged Taylor-Factor,
depending on the number of grains inside a unit volume, leads to the conclusion
that signiﬁcant scatter of the ﬂow stress due to grain orientation is expected if less
than 50 grains are inside the volume considered. The considered deformed volume
electrodes for passenger car brake lights
inner diameter                   1 mm
total height                      9.0 mm
material            FeNiCr 0.15 mm
cathode cups for LCD displays
inner diameter          1.5 mm 
total height               4.5 mm 
material             Ni 0.10 mm 
BIAS ID 122026
Fig. 5.10 Exemplary components from multi-stage micro deep drawing manufactured by Hubert
Stueken GmbH & Co. KG
5
Sheet Metal Forming
145

is for example the cross-section of a tensile specimen or a ring element of a
circular blank for deep drawing multiplied by the sheet thickness. It is shown that
such a ring volume generally contains at least several hundred grains in the rel-
evant forming zone, even in micro forming. In addition, there are multiple forming
zones occurring simultaneously in deep drawing. The punch force averages the
stresses from all these different forming zones, and therefore it can be concluded
that the scatter of the punch force is statistically not inﬂuenced by grain orienta-
tions and must have other sources. At the moment there is no generally valid
explanation for the increased scatter in punch force with decreasing size. It cannot
be excluded that the explanation might be found in the individual experimental
conditions. For example, uncertainty in the punch force measurement would result
in a higher relative measurement error for very small forces and might therefore be
one possible explanation.
5.2 Stretch Drawing
Hanna Wielage
5.2.1 Mechanical Stretch Drawing
At mechanical stretch drawing a punch drives in a blank, similarly to mechanical
deep drawing, and leads to the formation of a hollow body. Compared to
mechanical deep drawing no ﬂow out of the ﬂange area is allowed. This condition
can be the consequence of the tool geometry. Figure 5.12 shows two basic
3
N
1
0
60
N
20
0
0
0.51
mm
2
2
2
Material
Al99.5
Sheep thickness                        100 µm
Drawing ratio                                    1.5
Drawing radius                           0.6 mm
Initial blank holder Pressure   0.5 N/mm
Lubrication                                  4 g/m
Material
Al99.5
Sheep thickness                         20 µm
Drawing ratio                                   1.5
Drawing radius                       0.12 mm
Initial blank holder Pressure 0.5 N/mm
Lubrication                                  4 g/m
2
2
BIAS ID 122028
0.4
mm
0.2
0.1
0
Punch force
Punch force
Stroke
Stroke
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.11 a Deviation in punch force in deep drawing with 1 mm punch diameter. b Deviation in
punch force in deep drawing with 5 mm punch diameter (both [58])
146
F. Vollertsen

processes of the mechanical stretch drawing of sheets. In the case of elementary
stretch drawing (Fig. 5.12, left) the tool is ﬁxed at supports at the end of the
workpiece and is formed by the moving punch. This leads to a strong friction
constraint of the sliding movement between the punch and tool, and ﬁnally to a
non-uniform strain distribution in the workpiece and early failure. These disad-
vantages can be avoided by tangential mechanical stretch drawing (Fig. 5.12,
right), where the workpiece is pre-loaded and laid on the tool without any sig-
niﬁcant sliding movement. Thus the process is divided into tensile forming and
bending.
Yamaguchi et al. used dies with different diameters in mechanical bulging tests
in order to investigate the effect of thickness on the restoration of bulged speci-
mens [64]. They performed experiments with sheets of different materials of
thicknesses between 0.2 and 2 mm. Thereby it has been ascertained that the
thinner the sheet metal, the greater is effect of buckling on the formation of
wrinkles.
work piece
initial shape of
the work piece
final shape of
the work piece
punch
chuck
tool
work piece
chuck
BIAS ID 122029
Fig. 5.12 Elementary stretch drawing (left) and tangential mechanical stretch drawing (right)
5
Sheet Metal Forming
147

The deformation of mechanical stretch drawn parts with homogeneous micro-
structures is expected from FEM simulations to be rotational symmetric. Alumi-
num samples with a thickness of 20 lm show that stretch drawn parts do not
deform with a rotational symmetric pattern as expected. The uneven strain dis-
tribution is also maintained for different drawing speeds [23]. The strain does not
distribute uniformly, and mainly exists within the contact area between the punch
and blank. Even within the contact area, the strain distribution is not uniform,
especially at a relative deeper punch position, see Fig. 5.13b. As the punch moves
into the die, the contact area as well as the strain of the specimen becomes larger.
Some local strain maxima appear. These are starting points of the cracks that will
appear later. No cracks show the same major and minor strains. Metallographic
analysis has shown that samples with a thickness of 100 lm with a polycrystalline
structure have a better forming behavior (according to the forming limit diagram)
than samples with a thickness of 20 lm with a Tiffany structure [25]. The Tiffany
structure ampliﬁes the localization of strain and early failure (bottom fracture)
occurs due to the excessive straining of single grains (Sect. 2.3). The forming limit
diagram for Al99.5 with a thickness of 20 lm for 4 different punch velocities
(from 0.01 to 1.8 mm/s) (Fig. 5.14) shows that there is no inﬂuence of punch
velocity on the forming limit diagram.
With higher punch velocities the height of the stretch drawn parts increases
[23]. In Fig. 5.15 the ﬁnal frames of specimens before cracks under different punch
velocities are displayed. For all punch velocities, the strain maxima are nearly the
same while the strain distributions differ from each other. At the lowest punch
velocity (Fig. 5.15a) the strain mainly exists within the contact area between the
punch and blank. As the punch velocity increases, there is more and more strain
outside this contact area. This means that more material is involved in forming
when the punch velocity is increased, respectively, the strain rate. Therefore a
larger height of parts can be obtained with increasing the punch velocity.
(a)
(b) 
[%] 
10
[%] 
10
6 
4 
0 
8
8
6
4
2
2
0
BIAS ID 122030
Fig. 5.13 Sample of stretch drawn part with punch velocity of 0.01 mm/s under different punch
positions x: a x = 0.39 mm, b x = 0.78 mm, material: aluminum with thickness 20 lm
148
F. Vollertsen

5.2.2 High Speed Stretch Forming by Shock Waves
The ﬁrst veriﬁcation of the possibilities to generate laser-induced shock waves in
laser material processing was carried out by White at the beginning of the 1960s
[61]. The ﬁrst use of shock waves was in laser shock peening, what was in one row
with sharpening, mechanical shot peening, water-jet hardening and hardening by
cavitation bubbles, which also works with induced shock waves for the local
hardening of the material. Basic investigations into material process technologies
by laser-induced shock waves with the aim of building up residual stresses were
conducted between 1968 and 1981 at the Battelle Institute in Columbus, Ohio,
USA. Since 1986, numerous studies have been performed in France with the help
of the automobile industry in the ﬁeld of laser material processing by laser-induced
shock waves in order to increase the lifetime of highly stressed metallic compo-
nents by inducing residual stresses and thus developing an effective process [46].
Blank material
Blank thickness
Punch radius
Die radius
Lubricant
Al99.5
20 µm
3 mm
0.8 mm
Mineral oil
Minor strain
0.01 mm/s
0.4 mm/s
1 mm/s
1.8 mm/s
Punch velocity
Major strain
0.15
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.20
BIAS ID 122031
Fig. 5.14 Forming limit diagram of Al99.5 with a thickness of 20 lm for different punch
velocities
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
10
10
10
10
8
8
8
8
6
6
6
6
4
4
4
4
2
2
2 
2 
0
0 
0 
0 
BIAS ID 122032
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
Fig. 5.15 Inﬂuence of punch velocity on the strain distribution of stretch drawn parts before
cracking: a vP = 0.01 mm/s, b vP = 0.4 mm/s, c vP = 1 mm/s, d vP = 1.8 mm/s, material:
aluminum with a thickness of 20 lm
5
Sheet Metal Forming
149

Other areas of application of laser-induced shock waves include preloading of
lm-thick components [10] or micro-perforating [4].
In forming technologies laser-induced shock waves were already used for
research purposes. Gao et al. presented the new process of Micro Scale Dynamic
Forming (lLDF) for the production of complex 3D-shapes in thin metal foils [16].
By using q-switched Nd:YAG-laser-induced shock waves, copper foils with
thicknesses between 3 and 15 lm they formed cuboids with dimensions of 50
times 30 lm with a depth of 17 lm. Liu et al. produced micro channels in 10 lm
thick copper foils with dimensions of 260 lm times 50 lm with one laser shock
pulse. On 15 lm thick aluminum foils they only produced components with
fractures and ablated surfaces [41]. Sagisaki used a femtosecond-Ti:Saphir-laser
for the forming of 50 lm thick aluminum foils. He produced pyramids with a
width of 30–75 lm and a depth of a few micrometers with 120 laser shock pulses.
All these processes work with a sacriﬁcial layer.
Shock waves used in laser material processing are usually initiated by Nd:glass-
and Nd:YAG-lasers. Thus, the laser beam hits the workpiece surface and the laser
pulse energy is absorbed by the material. Thereby ablation occurs as well as a
metallic vapor cloud, which is ionized by the laser radiation [1]. In order to avoid
damage to the surface by free ablation a sacriﬁcial layer is used, which is com-
pletely ablated by the laser treatment. The coupling of laser radiation occurs by a
transparent layer (glass or water) [44]. Both layers contribute to a 4- to 10-fold
increase in shock wave pressure (depending on the laser pulse intensity) in
comparison to laser plasma initiated in a vacuum [14]. The application of sepa-
rated layers is especially necessary for the treatment of visible surfaces, and for the
insertion of residual stresses. The undesirable effect of material removal with
the initiation of shock waves by lasers can be avoided by a signiﬁcant increase in
the wavelength and a process-speciﬁc increase in laser pulse intensity [30].
Vollertsen et al. show this by means of a comparison of surfaces, treated by
different types of laser radiation: In comparison to the use of an excimer-laser
(k = 248 nm) with the use of a TEA-CO2-laser (k = 10.6 lm) the ablation of
aluminum can be avoided [51]. Also Bergmann and Hügel focused on the ablation
behavior on surfaces by plasma induced by different laser systems. Thereby they
detected that by using a TEA-CO2-laser (pulse duration: 120 ns, laser pulse energy:
\10 J, focus diameter: 1–10 mm) in air with laser pulse intensities [108 W/cm2
there was no change in surface quality on aluminum surfaces [5]. The inverse
bremsstrahlung increases with the square of the wavelength, so that the longer
wavelength of the CO2-laser is nearly completely absorbed by the plasma. This
kind of shock wave formation has been known since the 1970s, e.g. Barchukov
et al. [3]. Experiments on forming processes by CO2-laser induced shock waves
are only known by Vollertsen et al. This forming process will be explained in
detail in the following.
First of all, the initiation of plasma requires the existence of free electrons in the
optical ﬁeld of the short pulse laser. Thereby free electrons are generated out of the
surface by thermo or ﬁeld emission through laser treatment [30]. The number of
free electrons depends on the focus area, laser pulse intensity and surface material
150
F. Vollertsen

[43]. These free electrons absorb energy by inverse bremsstrahlung absorption and
can produce further ions and electrons by impact processes until it comes to an
optical breakdown and thus plasma formation [50]. In this case, the ignition point
of the plasma is above the workpiece (*5 mm [2]). With a higher laser pulse
intensity ([107 GW/cm2) the power of the shock wave ahead is large enough to
heat up the environmental gas in that manner, so that further laser radiation is
absorbed [laser-supported detonation wave (LSD-waves)] [29]. If the energy
density of the laser pulse exceeds a certain threshold, the fast expansion of the
plasma propagates a shock wave [45]. This shock wave moves spherically [60] and
with it so does the heat, which is dissipated by the plasma [2]. If the shock wave
initiated pressure lays over the ﬂow stress of the material, the shock wave pressure
leads to a plastic forming of the surface, e.g. [66]. As a threshold value for the
ignition of the plasma Maher determined in 1973 with a Marx Bank laser, a laser
pulse intensity of 1.2 9 107 W/cm2 for aluminum is considered.
In Fig. 5.16, the principle of the forming process by laser-induced shock waves,
in the following referred to as laser shock forming, is outlined for laser shock
stretch forming. The principle experimental set-up for laser deep drawing is
described in the following. A laser cut circular sheet metal is placed on a die. The
blank holder is placed onto the blank with a deﬁned blank holder force over the
clamping force. In a next step, one or several short laser pulses of a TEA-CO2-
laser (wavelength 10.6 lm, pulse length 100 ns, pulse energy 5.6 J) irradiate the
specimen with the focus located on the blank surface. The formation of the shock
wave takes place as already described previously for the high laser pulse intensity.
This shock wave leads to a forming of the surface [52]. Depending on the material
the surfaces show different inﬂuences of laser treatment. While with aluminum the
surfaces show no inﬂuence on the surface, copper surfaces show a little discol-
oring. But even after 300 pulses no melting of the surface is observed. On au-
stenitic steel, stronger discoloration is observed. Such discoloration results from
N–Fe-bondings and oxides, which are built by the laser pulse treatment. In ambient
air and argon atmospheres this discoloration can be reduced.
In Fig. 5.17 images of samples of stainless steel with thicknesses of 20 and
50 lm and in Fig. 5.18 images of samples of copper and aluminum with a
thickness of 50 lm are shown. The samples are treated with similar parameters.
The sample of stainless steel with a 20 lm thickness (Fig. 5.17a) shows min-
imal deformation of 100 lm in cup height. The sample with 50 lm thickness
(Fig. 5.17b) shows no visible deformation after being subjected to 700 pulses.
After 700 pulses, high damage to the material is noticeable, but still no defor-
mation occurs. In contrast, the 50 lm copper sheet can be formed, as well as can
aluminum (Fig. 5.18a). With the same parameters, copper shows a 1.5 times
smaller cup height than aluminum (Fig. 5.18b), which is due to the higher ﬂow
stresses of the material. However, high forming degrees up to the forming limit can
also be reached with copper by the use of more pulses.
Since the yield stress of copper is comparatively low, the forming of copper is
much easier to achieve. The higher ductility of copper in comparison to aluminum
results in a smaller elongation ratio, but with a later crack formation than
5
Sheet Metal Forming
151

aluminum. This shows the further potential for the use of copper in laser shock
forming. Thus the application of laser shock forming with copper makes the
process especially interesting for electronic industries.
The laser pulse energy that is spent in the forming process ranges from 3 to 6 J.
In combination with the forming degree of the samples reached, the question of the
efﬁciency-beneﬁt-ratio arises. Assuming a full stretch-forming process the efﬁ-
ciency g is the ratio of forming energy EF to laser pulse energy EL:
Placing of
the sample
Application 
of  FN
Laserpulse
Plasma 
formation
Shock-wave 
formation
Sampling
point
Formed
cup
Blank holder
AI-sample
Die
Blank holder-
          force
Plasma
Shock wave
Laser beam
BIAS ID 122033
Fig. 5.16 Principle of the laser shock forming process
Laser                 TEA-CO2
Wavelength       10600 nm
Pulse energy                3 J
Material                  1.4301
Blank holder force       4 N
a) Thickness           20 µm
    # pulses                    25
b) Thickness           50 µm
    # pulses                  700
BIAS ID 122034
1mm
1mm
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.17 Stainless steel samples with different numbers of pulses
152
F. Vollertsen

g ¼ EF
EL
ð5:1Þ
where the total deformation energy for full stretch-forming achieved is:
EF ¼ V  kf  u
ð5:2Þ
The forming degree u can be calculated from of data of achieved stretch-
formed workpieces, with s0 and s1 as the sheet thicknesses before and after pulse
application, A0 as the area of the sample before pulse application and A1 as the
generated surface of the formed cup after pulse application:
u ¼ ln s1
s0

 ¼ ln s1
s0
 s0  A0
s1  A1

 ¼ ln A0
A1


ð5:3Þ
With a die diameter of 4 mm with an achieved calotte height of 0.73 mm for a
laser pulse energy of 3.5 J and 0.79 mm for a laser pulse energy of 5.7 J, the
forming degrees are 0.12 and 0.14 respectively.
This method yields an average value for the true strain u, which is useful to
calculate the total deformation energy EF. Assuming pure stretch drawing with
forming degrees from formula (5.3) with a workpiece volume V of 1.26 mm3 and
the ﬂow stress kf for aluminum (s0 = 100 lm) of 27 MPa, the forming energy EF
for the laser pulse energy of 3.5 J is 4.1 mJ and for 5.7 J it is 4.8 mJ.
By the use of formula (5.1), efﬁciency can be calculated as 11.6 9 10-4 for a
laser pulse energy of 3.5 J and to 8.4 9 10-4 for a laser pulse energy of 5.7 J.
Taking into account the achieved drawing depth after one laser shock pulse, it is
obvious that an increase in laser pulse energy leads to a decrease in the efﬁciency
of stretch drawing. The inﬂuence of the material on efﬁciency will be clear when
the efﬁciency for copper is determined. Pure stretch drawing efﬁciencies for copper
with a thickness of 50 lm of 6.2 9 10-4 for a laser pulse energy of 3.5 J (with an
(a)
(b)
Laser                   TEA-CO2
Wavelength         10600 nm
Pulse energy                  3 J
Thickness                 50 µm
a) Material                SE-Cu
    Blank holder
    force                     4.56 N
    # pulses                        9
    Cup height        0.66 mm
b) Material                Al99.5
Blank holder
    force                       4.1 N
    # pulses                        9
    Cup height             1 mm
1 mm
1 mm
BIAS ID 122035
Fig. 5.18 Copper (a), and aluminum (b) samples with the same parameters
5
Sheet Metal Forming
153

achieved conical workpiece height of 0.73 mm), and 4.7 9 10-4 for a laser pulse
energy of 5.7 J (with an achieved conical workpiece height of 0.81 mm), could be
determined.
It can be seen that the decrease in efﬁciency with increasing laser pulse energy
for aluminum and copper is nearly the same. The efﬁciency is 1.3 times smaller
than the efﬁciency of aluminum. On the one hand this can be explained by
the increase in energy, which is necessary in order to hit the electrons out of the
surface, and on the other hand a larger share is reﬂected instead of absorbed in
the case of copper than in the case of aluminum. The latter leads to a higher energy
loss in copper compared to aluminum, which in beneﬁt turns to a lower energy loss
effectively for copper [62].
Signiﬁcant characteristic values of the laser shock forming process are the
workpiece velocity and the strain rate. With a maximum laser pulse energy of 5.5 J
and a workpiece velocity of 40 m/s, strain rates of 3 9 103 s-1 can be achieved.
A further important characteristic value is the shock wave pressure. Here, pressure
maxima of 8–20 MPa can be achieved [62, p. 105]. By the use of a conical blank
holder, which limits the spreading of the shock wave, the pressure can be increased,
since there is a dependency of the reachable workpiece shape and the blank holder
shape. The reason for the dependency mainly lies in the dependency of the accel-
eration to the workpiece center. With longer pressure contact time material is taken
from the sides and a spherical shape is built. Thus next to the pressure maximum,
further parameters have to be considered for a maximum forming depth. Due to the
constant pressure for defocusing above 0 mm, a correction of the focal position
0.0
0.1
0.2
Minor strain
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Major strain
0.01 mm/s
1 mm/s
1.8 mm/s
Laser shock formed
5 J
200 mm
1
ca. 14 MPa
12 mm
8 mm
6.4 mm
Al99.5
50 µm
Pulse energy
Focal length 
Pulse# 
Shock wave-
pressure 
Blank holder height
Blank diameter 
Die diameter 
Material
sheet thickness
Punch velocity
BIAS ID 122036
Fig. 5.19 Forming limit diagram for laser shock forming in comparison to mechanical stretch
drawing with different punch velocities for Al99.5, s0 = 50 lm
154
F. Vollertsen

during stretch drawing with multiple pulses is not necessary. Also, the adjustment of
the focal position does not play an essential part.
A further process property applies to the formability behavior. In [62] it could
be shown that in comparison to mechanical stretch drawing with different punch
velocities, higher minor and major strains could be achieved by laser shock
forming (Fig. 5.19). The main process parameters of the high speed forming
process of laser shock forming are displayed in Table 5.1.
5.3 Bending
Hanna Wielage
The process of bending is often used in the production of micro system technol-
ogies (MST) or micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), i.e. for clamps or
connectors, Fig. 5.20.
Table 5.1 Process parameter and forming behavior characteristics in laser shock forming [62]
Workpiece
velocity for
bending
Strain rate
for bending
Pressure
raise time
Forming behavior
Laser shock
forming
40 m/s
102–103 s-1
4 ls
Higher max. strains achievable
than by quasi-static forming
Fig. 5.20 Micro bending
element (spring element from
Fa. Harting GmbH & Co,
Germany)
5
Sheet Metal Forming
155

Forming by bending is deﬁned as the forming of a solid body, where angular or
ring-shaped workpieces are produced. In this case the state of plasticity is mainly
induced by a bending load. The most important bending processes are air bending
and free bending (Fig. 5.21). Air bending can be either produced by a rigid
clamping of one of the bending legs or by the bending of a sheet over a mid-point
loading, which is placed on two supports. If the workpiece is completely rigid and
clamped, a bended sheet occurs, which has an even leg and a material-dependent
curved leg. Free bending starts with air bending. It relates to free bending as far as
the workpiece has more contact with the tool than the 3 initial contact points.
Stresses under loading are in equilibrium with the external forces, whereas
removing external forces results in spring back, and thus in a change in stress
FB
s0
rp
b/2
x
B(x)
MB
rD
h
F
SB
B
BIAS ID 122037
Fig. 5.21 Geometry, forces
and moments of air bending
(upper) and free bending
(lower)
156
F. Vollertsen

condition. This change leads to elastic spring back, which means a reduction of the
bending angle after load removal compared to the bending angle under loading.
The order of this spring back can be speciﬁed by the spring back ratio K, which
relates the ratio of bending angle after load removal aR to the bending angle under
load a:
K ¼ aR
a
ð5:4Þ
The spring back ratio greatly depends on the material behavior and the ratio of
bending radius to sheet thickness. Variations in sheet thickness and material
properties lead to a remaining variation in the bending angle after load removal.
An estimation of the elastic spring back angle can be carried out with the
material data based on 0.2 % yield strength rpl0.2 and the E-modulus, the tool
geometry data based on the die radius rD and bending angle aB as well as the
material thickness s0 using the following formula (see [55]):
aSB ¼ 3  rpl0:2
E
 rD
s0
 aB
ð5:5Þ
The acting bending force FB, marking the beginning of the plastic ﬂow at the
outer layers, can be calculated by theoretical considerations. In air bending the
maximum bending moment MB acting during the purely elastic deformation at the
center of the die can be approximately determined by:
MB ¼ 1
4  FB  b
ð5:6Þ
where FB is the bending force and b the initial die width. The corresponding
stresses rx in the outer ﬁbers at the upper and lower sides of a workpiece are:
rx ¼  MB  s0
2  IZ
ð5:7Þ
where IZ is the inertia moment around the z-axis. With formulas (5.6) and (5.7),
the acting bending force FB,pl marking the beginning of the plastic ﬂow at the outer
layers can be calculated with rx = kf:
FB;pl ¼ 8  kf  lz
b  s0
ð5:8Þ
Although these formulas enable an approximation of the acting bending force,
approaches for the precise prediction of the acting bending force marking the
beginning of plastic ﬂow have not been successful [35]. With decreasing material
thickness, the difference between the simulation and experimental results grows
[8]. It is impossible to develop a universally applicable FEM model, although
signiﬁcant work has subsequently been undertaken on this subject [17]. These
aberrations in the prediction of the bending force were explained by the different
behaviors within the surface zones and the core zone, which is discussed in detail
5
Sheet Metal Forming
157

in Sect. 3.3.4. Thus for a more speciﬁc calculation it is necessary to consider the
different ﬂow stresses of the grains on the surface and the inner grains in the
calculation, see formula 3.23.
Figure 5.22 shows schematically the stress distribution during bending in one
half of the workpiece’s cross-section for both cases [35]. Table 5.2 gives an
overview of the acting bending forces FB normalized over the effective width b for
thin foils for different materials.
plastic region,
surface grains
plastic region,
internal grains
elastic region
y = s0 / 2
dy
y
y
L
x(y)
el, y(y)
yy
x
x
BIAS ID 122038
Fig. 5.22 Stress-strain
distribution during bending
considering the deviating
ﬂow behavior of the surface
and internal grains, according
to [35]
Table 5.2 Acting bending forces normalized on the effective width FB/b in micro range for
brass, copper and aluminum foils
Normalized bending forces FB/b
Bending
Air bending
Free bending
Free bending
Material
Brass foil C2680
(annealed) [54]
Al99.5 foil
(coarse grain) [9]
SE-Cu58 foil
(coarse grain) [9]
s0
25 lm
–
0.4 N/mm
1.48 N/mm
40 lm
0.04 N/mm
–
–
50 lm
–
0.50 N/mm
1.25 N/mm
60 lm
0.10 N/mm
–
–
80 lm
0.20 N/mm
–
–
100 lm
0.24 N/mm
1.10 N/mm
2.98 N/mm
200 lm
–
1.96 N/mm
6.08 N/mm
158
F. Vollertsen

In addition to difﬁculties in the precise prediction of the bending force, the
prediction of the resulting bending angle, and thus elastic spring back angle, is one
of the great challenges. Two main effects can be observed. Firstly, the order of the
spring back angle behaves differently than in the macro range: the thinner the
material the larger the spring back of aluminum. For copper foils the spring back
angle increases with material thickness (Fig. 5.23) [9]. Two size effects related to
bending processes are responsible. The ﬁrst is caused by an increasing share of
surface grains in the overall volume within thinner foils. The resulting effect is a
decrease in material strength, because of the shape sum effect (Sect. 2.1.3), and
thus a decrease in spring back angle. The second size effect is caused by large
strain gradients appearing when the foil thickness is decreased, which results in a
larger spring back. For aluminum the effect of strain gradient is predominant and
leads to a constant increase in spring back with decreasing foil thickness. For
copper, the effect of the share of surface grains dominates down to a scaling factor
of 0.2. For thinner foils the inﬂuence of strain gradient is stronger, leading to an
increase in spring back angle and bending moment (Fig. 5.23) [9].
The second effect in bending processes is that with decreasing material thick-
ness the scatter of the spring back angle and thus of the scatter of the bending angle
increases. Liu et al. give as a reason for this behavior the elastic anisotropy of the
surface grain due to differences in grain orientation. The order of spring back
strongly depends on grain orientation. In [42] they determined the spring back
angle of foils with a thickness of 100 lm and a grain size of 50 lm with different
grain orientations. The results show that the spring back angle of a foil with [1 0 0]
grain orientation is 25 % larger than that of a foil with [1 1 1] grain orientation.
Furthermore, they could observe an increasing scatter of spring back angle with
decreasing foil thickness. The low amount of grains in combination with a strong
difference in the orientation of the different grains results in an increase in scat-
tering with a decrease in foil thickness.
With much higher workpiece velocities a further aspect can be observed in
spring back behavior. High speed workpiece velocities can be realized by laser
shock forming (Sect. 5.2.2) with which bending is also possible (Fig. 5.24). After
BIAS ID 121473
fine grained
coarse grained
bending angle
45
material
SE-Cu
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
material thickness s0 [µm]
spring back angle 
[ ]
Fig. 5.23 Dependence of spring back angle on scaling factor with a bending angle of 45 (data
with permission from [8])
5
Sheet Metal Forming
159

the workpiece hits the bending tool, spring back occurs. Thus a re-bending angle ^aR
is caused, which is composed of the elastic share of the bending, the spring back
with the spring back angle aSB, and the share of rebound with the rebound angle
aRB. This occurs through the impact of the workpiece on the tool at high speed.
The high speed bending of aluminum workpieces of different sizes show that with
a thickness of 50 lm higher workpiece velocities can be reached than with a
workpiece thickness of 20 lm (Table 5.3). In combination with the known
dependency of spring back angle with the ratio of bending radius to workpiece
thickness [formula (5.5)] an increase in spring back angle with increasing foil
thickness would be expected, providing the same die radius is used. The evaluation
of laser shock bending experiments (Fig. 5.25) results in contradictory behavior:
despite a lower workpiece velocity, larger re-bending angles are reached for a
workpiece thickness of 50 lm than for a thickness of 20 lm (Table 5.3) [62].
The reason for this behavior deviating from the theoretical observation is given
in [62]. Experimentally-based and theoretically-based calculations of the occurring
rebound angle are conducted. The theoretically-based calculation is done by
consideration of the acting energies of the workpiece after hitting the bending tool.
Thereby the energy for plastic forming of the workpiece, which is required for the
generation of the rebound angle after impacting the tool, correlates with the kinetic
0 µs
11 µs
22 µs
54 µs
75 µs
106 µs
1mm
BIAS ID 110969
Fig. 5.24 High speed camera records of laser shock bending of workpiece hit with one TEA-
CO2-laser pulse, pulse energy: 5.6 J, material: Al99.5, s0 = 50 lm
Table 5.3 Determined re-bending angles ^aR and return bending velocities vR for thicknesses of
20 and 50 lm by laser shock bending (r—standard deviation); for experimental conditions see
Fig. 5.25
s0 (lm)
^aR
vR
20
6.8 (r = 0.9)
2 m/s (r = 0.6)
50
12.1 (r = 0.8)
4.9 m/s (r = 0.8)
160
F. Vollertsen

energy, which acts after the impact and both are equated. The different calculations
demonstrate that the rebound of the workpiece causes this behavior. Thus the
rebound during the high speed forming of thin foils has to be observed.
5.4 Flange Forming
Heiko Brüning
The process of ﬂange forming belongs to tension compression forming manufac-
turing methods. The workpiece, e.g. sheet metal foil, is placed between a blank
holder and a perforated die, thus allowing penetration by the punch so that a closed
ﬂange is formed. In contrast with deep-drawing, plastic material ﬂow beneath the
blank holder is not desired. The radial deformation is rather small so that the
length of the bending leg is constant. The forming operation is completed as soon
as no sheet metal is left underneath the bottom punch surface.
Macro range ﬂange formed geometries are often used as preforms for threads.
This is a relatively cheap manufacturing method for large batch sizes because
special tools are available that generate the ﬂange and thread in one operation.
Other applications of ﬂange forming are in the increasing torsional stiffness of
blanks as well as welding on tubes. Furthermore, ﬂanges are used in order to give
bolts or axles guidance and contact faces in sheet metal. These applications can be
easily transferred into micro range, if reasonable.
As stated above, the main difference between deep-drawing and ﬂange forming
from the applicator’s point of view is the fact that the inﬂuence of the outer shape
of the blank is almost negligible for ﬂange forming, with the consequence that the
blank holder force does not need to be adjusted as precisely and the outer geometry
of the blank is not inﬂuenced by the manufacturing operation. A plastic material
s0 = 20 µm
s0 = 50 µm
30
35
40
°
50
Bending angle
2.0
Focal length
Focus area
Material
Pulse# 
Shock wave-
pressure 
Bending Angle
Work piece
overlap length
Foil thickness
BIAS ID 122041
Time
0.5
1.0
ms
0.0
200 mm
0.06 cm2
Al99.5
1
Ca. 10 MPa
45°
5 mm
Fig. 5.25 Bending angle achieved by laser shock bending dependent on foil thickness for Al99.5
workpieces with thicknesses of 20 and 50 lm
5
Sheet Metal Forming
161

ﬂow is mainly induced by tangential stresses within the ﬂange section, so that the
material for forming the ﬂange is provided by the thickness of the blank (see
Fig. 5.26).
Flange forming is mainly carried out with sheet metal as wrought material, but
tubes can be used as well [20]. In this paragraph tubes are not addressed, because
in micro range ﬂange forming the use of tubes has not yet been reported.
For both the micro- and macro range it is reasonable to divide the manufac-
turing method of ﬂange forming into three different groups based on the tools
needed for the process [56]:
• ﬂange forming without pre-hole
• ﬂange forming with pre-hole
• ﬂange forming with pre-hole and backup punch.
For ﬂange forming without pre-hole, the blank is ﬁxed between the blank holder
and die. The cone-shaped punch is driven through the blank and thus leads to it
cracking. The location of the crack line is generally not determined so that the
process tolerances have to be large. Due to the fact that the rim of the ﬂange is
formed by the crack line, ﬂanges usually have a poor quality. Therefore ﬂange
forming without a pre-hole is rarely employed.
s0
d0
uz
dP
rD
s0
a
a
b
s1
dP
d0
d0
dP
s0: initial blank thickness
s1: minimum blank thickness
d0: diameter of pre-hole
dP: punch diameter 
a : blank material to be bent
b : additional material due to
     reduction of thickness
uz: drawn clearance
rD: die radius
principle
forming a flange
BIAS ID 122042
Fig. 5.26 Principle of ﬂange forming with pre-hole
162
F. Vollertsen

The quality of the rim can be improved by ﬂange forming with a pre-hole. In
this case holes are cut into the blank before the forming process takes place. It is
obvious that the conditions of the hole borders have a strong inﬂuence on the result
of the ﬂange forming process [63]. The pre-hole is expanded due to the coaxial
penetration of the punch, while the thickness of the blank is reduced. Flange
forming with pre-hole is mainly affected by the sheet metal material and the
quality of the pre-hole, but punch geometry as well as the scaled pre-hole diameter
d0/s0 also have an inﬂuence.
The forming limit is reached as soon as the plastic material ﬂow either leads to
radial cracks in the ﬂange or peripheral cracks at the die rounding. Peripherally
oriented cracks appear if punches with a ﬂat bottom surface and a very narrow
drawn clearance are used [13]. In general, radial cracks are reported more often.
Improving the material ﬂow can be achieved by ﬂange forming with a pre-hole in
combination with a backup punch. The backup punch enables the possibility to
increase the axial stress at the border of the pre-hole thus superposing tangential
stresses, and therefore higher ﬂanges can be formed because ﬂanges generally tend
to fail due to tangential stresses as metal materials tolerate lower tangential than
axial stresses (Fig. 5.27).
+
-
+
-
tangential stress σt
tangential stress σt
axial stress σax
radial stress σr
radial stress σr
σ
σ
kf
kf
FBP
FBLH
FP
FP
FBLH
FBLH
FBLH
axial stress σax 
BIAS ID 122043
Fig. 5.27 Flange forming without and with backup punch and resulting stress states
5
Sheet Metal Forming
163

The fact that the pressure between the punch and backup punch by a given force
is dependent on the interfacial contact area, the bottom surface of the punch is
assumed to be ﬂat with a small-sized ﬂanging radius to enable the maximum
contact area.
The punch force needed for a complete forming operation is not only dependent
on the sheet metal material and the expected ﬂaring ratio, but also on the punch
geometry [40]. Punches with a ﬂat bottom surface generally require a higher punch
force than punches with a truncated cone surface, hemispherical surface or tractrix
surface. This is due to the fact that, considering at the tractrix shaped surface, the
bending leg is always as large as possible thus decreasing the punch forces
required [37]. Nevertheless, the advantages of a punch with a ﬂat surface are that
the displacement of the punch is the lowest and the manufacturing process is
relatively easy. The larger the drawn clearance, the lower the inﬂuence of the
punch geometry.
It is reasonable to differentiate between narrow ﬂanges and wide ﬂanges,
depending on the ratio of the (inner ﬂange diameter di)/(initial sheet thickness s0).
Lange [39] deﬁnes narrow ﬂanges as those with di \ 5s0 and wide ﬂanges with
di [ 5s0.
Investigations by Schlagau [53] show that the ﬂange height h of ﬂanges in the
macro range can be calculated as follows (see Fig. 5.26 for notation):
h ¼ dp þ 2uz  d0
2
þ 0:4rD þ 0:2s0
ð5:9Þ
For ratios other than those given, ﬂange heights can be calculated as shown by
Romanowski [49].
For ﬂange forming with a pre-hole, the ﬂaring ratio is deﬁned as di/d0. The
maximum achievable ﬂaring ratio is, as stated above, dependent on the sheet
material and the quality of the pre-hole. Experiments in the ﬂange forming with
pre-holes have been carried out using sheet metal foil of austenitic steel 1.4301
with thickness s0 = 25 lm and Copper E-Cu58 with s0 = 20 lm and s0 = 10 lm.
For sheet metal foils with thickness 20 lm B s B 25 lm, the punch diameter
dP = 1.00 mm and punch ﬂange radius as well as the die diameter and die radius
rD = 100 lm were kept constant, while the pre-hole diameter was gradually
reduced thus increasing the ﬂaring ratio starting from 1.1 and ending at 3.4. The
pre-hole was generated by laser sublimation cutting using a Nd–YAG Laser. The
punch velocity was 1.0 mm/s. No lubrication was applied. The same procedure
was conducted for sheet metal foil of s0 = 10 lm, but the punch diameter as well
as the die radius were reduced to dP = 0.50 mm and rD = 90 lm so that the ratio
s0/dP was kept almost constant.
The maximum ﬂaring ratio for 1.4301 s0 = 25 lm and E-Cu58 s0 = 20 lm
achieved with the setup used was 1.6. Flange forming with E-Cu58 s0 = 10 lm
was possible up to 1.3. For larger ﬂaring ratios, cracks come into existence starting
at the rim of the pre-hole. In the macro range these values are generally larger, up
to 3.0 [13]. It is most likely that the experimentally determined relatively low
164
F. Vollertsen

ﬂaring ratios are a consequence of the pre-hole quality, which is affected by
oxidation due to the laser ablation process, which leads to the conclusion that the
cutting method plays an important role in ﬂange forming.
The resulting ﬂange heights have been optically measured by a confocal
microscope, with the results shown in Fig. 5.28. Compared to the theoretical
model, which is based on formula 5.9 and approved for the macro range, the
measured ﬂange heights are generally smaller. Nevertheless, the experiment shows
that the theoretical model is also applicable in micro ranges, as deviations between
the measured values from processed ﬂanges and predicted values are rather small.
Figure 5.29 shows a formed ﬂange of 1.4301 with sheet thickness s0 = 25 lm
with a ﬂaring ratio of 1.6, as well as a cross-sectional view. It can be seen that the
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
Flaring rate 
0.0
0.1
0.2
mm
0.4
Flange height h
1.4301 25 µm
E-Cu58 10 µm
E-Cu58 20 µm
Model 20 µm 
Material foil thickness
BIAS ID 122044
Fig. 5.28 Flange heights in dependence of ﬂaring ratio; theoretically and experimentally
determined values
BIAS ID 122045
100 µm
100 µm
250 µm
Fig. 5.29 Material: 1.4301, size25, ﬂaring ratio 1.6, dP = 1.0 mm. Left Formed ﬂange. Rim is
uneven due to oxidation effects of pre-hole generation by sublimation cutting. Right cross-
sectional view, V2A-etchant
5
Sheet Metal Forming
165

ﬂange does not have any defects and that the ﬂange height is almost constant at the
circumference while the initial sheet thickness is reduced.
5.5 Piercing and Blanking
Gerrit Behrens
5.5.1 Piercing and Blanking Basics
Piercing and blanking are cutting processes by the application of a shearing force.
When the shear stress in the material exceeds the ultimate shear strength, the
material fails locally in the cutting zone and is subsequently separated. Shear
cutting is not a metal forming process, but the cutting is always connected with a
plastic deformation before the material ﬁnally fails. Piercing and blanking are
cutting processes with a closed cutting path. They require a metal sheet or foil, a
punch, a die and in most cases a blankholder (see Fig. 5.30). Both processes are
very similar. In blanking the punched-out material is the desired workpiece and the
remaining sheet is scrap, while in piercing, also known as punching, this remaining
material with a desired inner proﬁle is the workpiece and the removed material is
discarded. Various shapes of the cutouts can be realized, reaching from simple
geometric shapes such as circles or rectangles to combinations thereof, and more
complex structures. There is also the opportunity of using a large number of
punches and corresponding dies simultaneously to realize perforations in one
single operation.
The actual shear cutting process is quite complex, involving shares of upsetting,
bending, shearing and crack initiation and propagation, and it also depends on the
material properties as well as the tool geometries. Therefore, these properties also
determine the shape of the sheared edge. A characteristic cross-sectional proﬁle of
punch
blankholder
scrap
workpiece
die
Blanking
Piercing
workpiece
scrap
BIAS ID 122018
Fig. 5.30 Schematic of the
blanking and piercing
process; according to [15]
(with kind permission of
Springer Science ? Business
Media)
166
F. Vollertsen

a sheared surface usually consists of rollover, burnish, fracture and burr. Rollover
occurs when the punch contacts the sheet metal and draws the material slightly
into the clearance. Further penetration of the punch leads to shearing and the
material becomes locked and burnished in the punch and die clearance. When the
formability in the shearing zone is exhausted, crack initiation occurs, which is
followed by the ﬁnal fracture of the material, and leads to a typical fracture plane
as shown in Fig. 5.31. The distinctive features of the sheared edge are indicators of
the process quality and may be important if subsequent forming processes are
planned.
Piercing and blanking processes have large industrial relevance in the manu-
facture of micro parts [17]. Potential ﬁelds of application are leadframe structures,
connecting the die of a microchip with a circuit board in the electronics industry,
and injection nozzles for combustion engines or rinser foils. A further industrially-
relevant application for the use of micro holes is the outer shaving foil of electric
shavers (see Fig. 5.32) [38] or the production of inkjet printhead nozzles [31]. But
the miniaturization of the process is not applicable without any restrictions.
5.5.2 Tools for Piercing and Blanking
In piercing and blanking in the micro range there are two main technical obstacles
that complicate the miniaturization. One is the fabrication of tools with a high
geometrical accuracy and the other is the accurate alignment of the tools [65],
since both the clearance between punch and die, as well as the alignment of the
tools, are very important parameters to determine the quality of the piercing or
blanking process. Under standard blanking process conditions the ratio of die
clearance to workpiece thickness is about 5 %. This means the required die
rollover depth
burnish depth
fracture depth
burr heigth
BIAS ID 122047
Fig. 5.31 Distinctive
features of the sheared edge
in piercing and blanking
5
Sheet Metal Forming
167

clearance for a 20 lm thick foil is 1 lm. Therefore, the alignment between a
punch and die hole should be within 1 lm, and the straightness error in the punch
motion must be less than 1 lm during a punch stroke of several millimeters [32].
This is quite a challenge for adjusting the die set. The manufacturing of such die
sets requires advanced accuracy and time. An example for the susceptibility of a
micro blanking process is shown in Fig. 5.33. Here, the blanking tool set was used
in a follow-on tool, combining a blanking and a following a deep drawing process.
The tool set for the blanking operation was manufactured as clearance ﬁt (H7/g4)
according to ISO 286 with a diameter of 1.7 mm. This results in a tolerated die
clearance of at least 1 lm, in the case of truly accurate manufacturing and an ideal
alignment, and at most 15 lm for suboptimal manufacturing and adjustment of the
die set. The same tool set was used for the blanking of different foil materials
(Al99.5, E-Cu58, 1.4301) and foil thicknesses (20, 25, 50 lm). For all tested
materials with a thickness of 50 lm, the produced blanks exhibited high quality
cutting shapes and cutting edges (see Fig. 5.33a). In contrast, a reduction in the foil
thickness by a factor of 2 or 2.5 always led to defective blanks (Fig. 5.33b). This
demonstrates the sensitivity of a piercing or blanking process to changes in
100 µm
BIAS ID 122048
Fig. 5.32 Manufactured
prototype of an outer shaving
foil with SEM picture of a
detailed conically formed
single hole [38] (reprinted
with permission from
Elsevier)
  5 kV
     6 mm
x       50
200 µm
#      13
-BIAS-  
  5 kV
     6 mm
x       50
200 µm
#      13
-BIAS-  
BIAS ID 122049
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.33 Cu-blanks with different thicknesses produced by blanking using the same tool set.
a Foil thickness 50 lm. b Foil thickness 20 lm
168
F. Vollertsen

material thickness, and also illustrates the necessity of high geometrical accuracy
in the manufacture of the tool set.
So there is an increase in demand for innovative and very precise manufac-
turing technologies to realize these challenges. Special machines with raised
precision as well as improved existing manufacturing processes, or even new ones,
for the production of the tools are necessary to guarantee a high quality piercing or
blanking process in micro scale applications. Therefore several tooling concepts
were developed, and studies on micro hole piercing were investigated.
Conventional methods of tool manufacturing can, with restrictions, also be used
for micro forming tools. However besides manufacturing accuracy problems, the
tool’s availability, for example for micro drilling, is very limited and therefore also
restricts the fabrication of dies for piercing and blanking [7]. Reference [32]
reports on small punches made by ultra-precision micro grinding, achieving punch
diameters as small as 25 lm (see Fig. 5.34a). However, for producing noncircular
tools other processes have to be used. Electrical discharge machining processes
(EDM) enable the manufacture of even smaller structures without limitations on
circular geometries, as shown in [7]. Wire-EDM offers the opportunity of gener-
ating piercing and blanking dies down to a diameter of 10 lm [12], and minimum
punch diameters of 15 lm can also be achieved [65] (see Fig. 5.34b). With the use
of lithography-etching processes even smaller structures can be realized.
Reference [65] also presents a possibility for the improvement of tool alignment
accuracy by using an optical image acquisition system combining images of the
punch tip end and the die hole. For this, a cross correlation image processing
algorithm which measures the similarity between two images was used. The actual
tool alignment could be done by using a movable xy-stepper adjusting the hori-
zontal position of the die hole under the punch tip. However, the accuracy of this
tool alignment method was highly inﬂuenced by the edge sharpness of the punch
tip. As a result tool alignment accuracy was limited to an eccentricity error of
about 1 lm.
10 µm
10 µm
BIAS ID 122050
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.34 Tungsten carbide punches with a a diameter of 25 lm, fabricated by ultra-precision
micro grinding [32], b a diameter of 15 lm, fabricated by wire-EDM [65] (with kind permission
of Springer Science ? Business Media)
5
Sheet Metal Forming
169

Another important factor in micro piercing and punching is the occurrence of tool
wear. In [6] a comparative investigation on the wear tendency of different tool
materials and coatings for the dam-bar cutting of integrated circuit packages was
carried out. There, tools made of high speed steel exhibited the poorest wear
resistance while a titanium nitride coating by PVD and a surface treatment by
plasma nitriding reduced the run-in wear at the cutting edge and the ﬂank of the
punch (see Table 5.4). Tungsten carbide has been proved to have the best wear
resistance and is the most commonly used tool material in piercing and blanking [6].
However, even if increased efforts have been made to realize piercing and
blanking in micro scale dimensions there are some restrictions left, complicating
the trouble-free execution of the process. For example, even if it is possible to
achieve the necessary accuracy in manufacturing, assembly and alignment of the
tools, the dynamic behavior of machines and tooling and the resulting deﬂections
are very likely to cause an offset of the punch or the die of more than 1–2 lm.
Consequently resulting in damage to the tools and increased wear. If higher
clearances than appropriate are used burr formation may not be avoidable, which
would result in the need for an additional process step to remove them, since they
are unacceptable for further use in e.g. electronic products [47]. Also it might be
necessary to perform a conventional micro piercing or blanking process in a dust-
free and temperature-controlled environment, especially when multiple punches
are used to satisfy the precision requirements [31].
5.5.3 Alternative Micro Piercing and Blanking Processes
To circumvent some of the previously-mentioned problems of a downscaled
conventional piercing or blanking processes using rigid tools, some alternative
technologies were investigated. For instance, in [48] a ﬂexible polymer tool for the
simultaneous piercing of multiple holes instead of metal punches has been pro-
posed. This method is similar to rubber pad forming which is already applied in
conventional sheet metal punching. Figure 5.35 shows the concept of the ﬂexible
punching process, as well as the resulting product. The major tools in this process
are the silicon polymer punch and the corresponding die. In this setup, made from
a single crystal Si wafer with 500 lm thickness, the workpiece foil is positioned
between the wafer die and polymer punch and all these parts are placed inside the
container die and are crowned by the ﬂat punch holder which is necessary to
Table 5.4 Effect of tool
material and tool coating on
punch wear [6]
Tool material
and coating
Flank
wear (lm)
Face
wear (lm)
HSS
35.0
37.8
TiN coating on HSS
32.8
20.0
WC
17.8
16.7
Plasma-nitrided HSS
30.6
15.0
170
F. Vollertsen

transmit the punch motion to the polymer punch. To prevent the silicon polymer
from squeezing out through the gap between the container, die and blank holder
seal rings are used.
Experiments on the feasibility of this method as an operational piercing process
were conducted by Rhim et al. [48] using rolled pure copper of 3 lm in thickness
and CP titanium of 1.5 lm in thickness as foil material. The diameters of the
manufactured holes ranged from 2 to 10 lm. For the experiments, dies with cir-
cular as well as rectangular holes were used under non-lubricated conditions. The
results of this investigation show that a piercing process using a ﬂexible punch is
suited for production of very small holes, unobtainable by conventional piercing,
down to a diameter of 2 lm. The workpiece foil was easily separated from the
punch and die after piercing, without excessive force for separation. However, the
process of die fabrication needs to be improved, since the etching process used
provides some unwanted restrictions.
Another alternative to conventional piercing is presented by Takemasu et al. [57],
where a simple and effective piercing system using ultrasonic vibration was newly
developed for the production of micro holes with ﬁne sheared surfaces. The new
process, named shuttle piercing, consists of two independent units: an ultrasonic
vibration unit and a piercing unit. A schematic representation of the process is given
in Fig. 5.36. In the piercing unit, a coil spring is placed between the punch and the
guide bush to support the punch in a ﬂoating state. After inserting the target sheet or
foil and its ﬁxation between the die and the guide bush, the spring-supported punch is
moved downwards with a constant velocity while the ultrasonic vibration horn (UV-
horn) simultaneously generates a longitudinal vibration. Hereby, a back-and-forth
shuttling motion of the punch is continuously performed and the piercing process is
carried out incrementally until a hole is pierced.
Investigations by Takemasu et al. [57] using commercial thin steel sheet with
thicknesses ranging from 0.08 to 0.15 mm and a tungsten carbide punch with a tip
diameter of 0.13 mm, demonstrated the technological feasibility and the advan-
tages of this process. The constant feed rate was 0.15 mm/s and an ultrasonic
Punch rod
Punch holder
Container die
Workpiece
Silicon polymer punch
Wafer die
Die supporter
Die platen
20 µm 
2 µm
BIAS ID 122051
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.35 a Schematic of the ﬂexible punching process [48]. b 8 lm-diameter holes punched on
titanium foil with a thickness of 1.5 lm [48] (reprinted with permission from Elsevier)
5
Sheet Metal Forming
171

vibration frequency of 40 kHz was applied. The results achieved were compared
with those of a conventional piercing process. While the conventional process
showed a little rollover near the entrance of the pierced holes and the percentage
ratio of the fractured zone to the sheet thickness was 20–25 %, shuttle piercing
results revealed that the heights of the fractured zone were signiﬁcantly diminished
or almost eliminated. The percentage ratio of the fractured zone was 5 % or less in
every case, and it was conﬁrmed that the punch shuttling motion suppresses the
occurrence and the growth of destructive cracks. Not only vertical holes but also
inclined holes were pierced. Here, conventional piercing resulted in a large roll-
over and the fractured zone covered about 15 % of the sheet thickness. In shuttle
piercing rollover could not be detected, the sheared surface was smooth and the
fractured zone almost disappeared. In summary, it can be emphasized that this
process shows great potential for high precision piercing, although the process
velocity will remain below that of conventional piercing.
5.5.4 Inﬂuence of Miniaturization on the Piercing
and Blanking Process
One of the ﬁrst studies regarding the systematic investigation of the effects of
miniaturization on a piercing and blanking process was done by Geiger et al. [18].
Starting with a sheet thickness of 1 mm and a punch diameter of 20 mm, the
process was scaled down with factors of 0.5, 0.2 and 0.1. The maximum punching
forces achieved from the experiment were compared to the calculated values of the
same scaling factor. While for a scaling factor of 0.5 the punching force was
predicted very precisely, further miniaturization led to a strong increase in the
percentage deviation. The reason for this was anticipated as being the concen-
tration of the shear deformation in just a few grains. Due to their limited number of
6
5
4
3
2
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
1
BIAS ID 122052
Fig. 5.36 Schematic of shuttle piercing [57]. 1 Material sheet, 2 Die, 3 Guide-bush, 4 Coil
spring, 5 Punch, 6 U V-horn
172
F. Vollertsen

sliding planes and their constrained position they may have caused a larger
shearing resistance than in a polycrystalline material with its large number of
grains and grain boundaries.
Another study, investigating the inﬂuence of miniaturization on the piercing
and blanking process, was conducted by Joo et al. [32]. The piercing of holes with
a thickness to diameter ratio of 1 was carried out for 100, 50 and 25 lm foils of
brass and stainless steel. It was found that the quality of the punched holes, as well
as the shape of the sheared edge, changed with miniaturization. A decrease in the
hole diameter resulted in a smaller part of the fracture depth and an increase in
burnish depth and burr height (see Table 5.5). The mechanism of ductile fracture
by crack initiation and propagation, as typically known from conventional pierc-
ing, could be found when the piercing of the large holes was investigated. As a
consequence, a clearly visible fractured area in the sheared edge was the result.
With increasing miniaturization, this mechanism did not seem to work. Rather,
shear deformation was dominant but no crack initiation and propagation could be
found until shortly before the end of the piercing process. Hereby, the breakout
diameter met the punch diameter better than did the piercing of larger holes,
although the burr height increased. As an explanation for this difference in
behavior, the number of grains over the foil thickness was assumed to be the
reason.
Reference [36] also investigated the inﬂuence of miniaturization on the sheared
edge, and revealed as one characteristic effects of miniaturization an increasing
burr height. Furthermore, miniaturization led to an increasing irregular develop-
ment of the sheared edge, where the orientation of single grains towards the
shearing direction seemed to become rather decisive. The same specimen could
show extremely different sheared edges, making it difﬁcult to quantify the parts of
burnish depth and fracture depth when the downscaled process was considered.
Reference [11] conducted blanking tests, developed in order to simulate a part
of a leadframe manufacturing process, carried out with a long and very narrow
punch and FeNi42 material in different thicknesses, which revealed an increased
inﬂuence of the material’s anisotropy. Since the punch is much longer than it is
wide, nearly 95 % of the shearing line had the same orientation which results in a
punch force dependency on the rolling direction of the sheet material. Further-
more, the burnish depth of the sheared edge was also found to be a function of the
punch orientation.
Table 5.5 Inﬂuence of miniaturization on the sheared edge for brass and AISI 316 [32]
Foil material
Brass
Brass
Brass
AISI 316
AISI 316
AISI 316
Foil thickness (lm)
100
50
25
100
50
25
Tool size (lm)
100
50
25
100
50
25
Rollover depth (lm)
4.7
1.3
–
1.1
3.3
–
Burnish depth (lm)
91.4
42.9
25
77.7
46.6
25
Fracture depth (lm)
8.6
5.7
–
22.2
–
–
Burr height/thickness (%)
\1.4
\2
\6
\1.5
\4
\4
5
Sheet Metal Forming
173

References
1. Aden, M., Beyer, E., Herziger, G., Kunze, H.: Laser-induced vaporization of a metal surface.
J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 25(4), 57–65 (1992)
2. Barchukov, A.I., Bunkin, F.V., Konov, V.I., Prokhorov, A.M.: Low threshold breakdown of
air near a target by CO2 radiation, and the associated large recoil momentum. JETP-Lett.
17(8), 294–296 (1973)
3. Barchukov, A.I., Bunkin, F.V., Konov, V.I., Lyubin, A.A.: Investigation of low-threshold gas
breakdown near solid targets by CO2 laser radiation. Soviet Phys. JETP 39(3), 469–477
(1974)
4. Baumeister, M.: Dynamische laser-mikroperforation mit single-mode faserlaser, Dissertation
Universität Bremen, Strahltechnik Band 38, BIAS (2009)
5. Bergmann, H.W., Hügel, H.: Modellierung und Diagnose des Abtragsprogesses, in: Strahl-
Stoff-Wechselwirkung bei der Laserstrahlbearbeitung 2, Hrsg.: Gerd Sepold, Manfred
Geiger, Strahltechnik Band 6, BIAS Verlag, Bremen 35–44 (1998)
6. Cheung, C.F., Lee, W.B., Chiu, W.M.: An investigation of tool wear in the dam-bar cutting of
integrated circuit packages. Wear 237, 274–282 (2000)
7. Chern, G.L., Wang, S.D.: Punching of noncircular micro-holes and development of micro-
forming. Precis. Eng. 31, 210–217 (2007)
8. Diehl, A., Engel, U., Geiger, M.: Mechanical properties and bending behaviour of metal foils.
Proc. IMechE Part B: J. Eng. Manuf. 222, 83–91 (2008)
9. Diehl,
A.:
Größeneffekte
bei
Biegeprozessen—Entwicklung
einer
Methodik
zur
Identiﬁzierung
und
Quantiﬁzierung.
Dissertation,
Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Meisenbach (2010)
10. Dirscherl,
M.:
Nicht-thermische
Mikrojustiertechnik
mittels
ultrakurzer
Laserpulse.
Dissertation, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Meisenbach (2007)
11. Eckstein, R., Geiger, M., Engel, U.: Speciﬁc characteristics of micro sheet metal working. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Sheet Metal (SheMet’99), pp. 529–536.
Braunschweig (1999)
12. Engel, U., Eckstein, R.: Microforming: From basic research to its realization. J. Mater.
Process. Technol. 125–126, 35–44 (2002)
13. Erhardt, R.: Laserunterstütztes Umformen miniaturisierter Bauteile am Beispiel des Tief- und
Kragenziehens. Dissertation, PtU Darmstadt (2004)
14. Fabbro, R., Fournier, J., Ballard, P., Devaux, D., Virmont, J.: Physical study of laser-
produced plasma in conﬁned geometry. J. Appl. Phys. 68(2), 775–784 (1968)
15. Fritz, A.H., Schulze, G.: Fertigungstechnik, 7th edn, p. 239. Springer, Berlin (2006)
16. Gao, H., Ye, C., Cheng, G.C.: Deformation behaviors and critical parameters in microscale
laser dynamic forming. J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 131, 051011-1–051011-11 (2009)
17. Geiger, M., Kleiner, M., Eckstein, R., Tiesler, N., Engel, U.: Microforming. Ann. CIRP 50,
445–462 (2001)
18. Geiger, M., Vollertsen, F., Kals, R.: Fundamentals on the manufacturing of sheet metal
microparts. Ann. ClRP 45(1), 277–282 (1996)
19. Gong, F., Guo, B., Wang, C., Shan, S.: Micro deep drawing of micro cups by using DLC ﬁlm
coated blank holders and dies. Diamond and Related Materials 20, 196–200 (2011)
20. Hentrich, C.: Untersuchungen zum Aushalsen von Rohren mit starren Werkzeugen unter
besonderer
Berücksichtigung
der
Vorlochgeometrie.
Dissertation,
Otto-von-Guericke-
Universität Magdeburg (2002)
21. Hu, Z., Schulze Niehoff, H., Vollertsen, F.: Tribological size effects in deep drawing. In:
Vollertsen, F., Yuan, S. (eds.) International Conference on New Forming Technologies (2nd
ICNFT 2007), pp. 573–582. BIAS, Bremen (2007)
22. Hu, Z.: Analyse des tribologischen Größeneffekts beim Blechumformen, pp. 103–108.
Strahltechnik Band 37, BIAS (2009)
174
F. Vollertsen

23. Hu, Z., Wielage, H., Vollertsen, F.: Effect of strain rate on the forming limit diagram of thin
aluminum foil. In: Dohda, K (ed.) Proceedings of the International Forum on Micro
Manufacturing (IFMM’10), pp. 181–186. Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya (2010)
24. Hu, Z., Vollertsen, F.: Effect of size and velocity dependent friction in deep drawing on the
process window. In: Felder, E., Montmitonnet, P. (eds.) 4th International Conference on
Tribology in Manufacturing Processes (ICTMP2010), pp. 583–592. Transvalor, Paris (2010)
25. Hu, Z., Wielage, H., Vollertsen, F.: Forming behavior of thin foils. In: Duﬂou, J.R., Clarke,
R., Merklein, M., Micari, F., Shirvani, B., Kellens, K. (eds.) 14th International Conference on
Sheet Metal (SheMet11), pp. 1008–1015. TransTech Publication, Zurich-Durnten (2011)
26. Hu, Z., Wielage, H., Vollertsen, F.: Economic micro forming using DLC- and TiN-coated
tools. J. Technol. Plast. 36(2), 51–58 (2011)
27. Hu, Z.: Realisation and application of size dependent FEM-simulation for deep drawing of
rectangular workpieces. CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 4(1), 90–95 (2011)
28. Hu, Z., Vollertsen, F.: Investigation on the optimisation of the blank shape for micro deep
drawing of rectangular parts. In: Hirt, G., Tekkaya, A.E. (eds.) Steel Research International,
Special Edition: 10th International Conference on Technology of Plasticity (ICTP2011),
pp. 974–978. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim (2011)
29. Hugenschmidt, M., Schmitt, R.: Plasma supported processing with high-average-power
infrared-lasers. Infrared Phys. Technol. 36(1), 159–170 (1995)
30. Hugenschmidt, M.: Absorptionsverhalten und Energieübertragung gepulster Laserstrahlung
auf Werkstoffe. In: Jüptner, W. (ed.) Laser—Von der Wissenschaft zur Anwendung,
pp. 67–76. BIAS, Bremen (1997)
31. Joo, B.Y., Oh, S.I., Jeon, B.H.: Development of micro punching system. CIRP Ann. Manuf.
Technol. 50(1), 191–194 (2001)
32. Joo, B.Y., Rhim, S.H., Oh, S.I.: Micro-hole fabrication by mechanical punching process.
J. Mater. Process. Technol. 170, 593–601 (2005)
33. Justinger, H.; Hirt, G.; Witulski, N.: Analysis of Cup Geometry and Temperature Conditions
in the Miniaturized Deep Drawing Process. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Technology of Plasticity, Verona (2005) Extended Abstract 459–460 (Full Article
published on CD)
34. Justinger, H., Hirt, G.: Scaling effects in the miniaturization of the deep drawing process. In:
Vollertsen, F., Yuan, S. (eds.) International Conference on New Forming Technologies (2nd
ICNFT 2007), pp. 167–176. BIAS, Bremen
35. Kals, R., Vollertsen, F., Geiger, M.: Scaling effects in sheet metal forming. In: Kals, H.J.J.,
Shirvani, B., Singh, U.P., Geiger, M. (eds.) Sheet Metal, vol. 2, pp. 65–75. University of
Twente, Enschede (1996)
36. Kals, R.T.A.: Fundamentals on the miniaturization of sheet metal working processes. In:
Geiger, M. (ed.) Reihe Fertigungstechnik—Erlangen, p. 87. Meisenbach, Bamberg (1999)
37. Klocke, F., König, W.: Fertigungsverfahren—Umformen. Springer, Berlin (2006)
38. Kolleck, R., Vollmer, R., Veit, R.: Investigation of a combined micro-forming and punching
process for the realization of tight geometrical tolerances of conically formed hole patterns.
CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 60, 331–334 (2011)
39. Lange, K.: Umformtechnik. Band 3: Blechbearbeitung. Springer, Berlin (1990)
40. Leu, D.-k., Chen, T.-C., Huang, Y.-M.: Inﬂuence of punch shape on collar-drawing process
of sheet steel. J. Mater. Process. Technol. Nr. 88, 134–146 (1999)
41. Liu, H., Shen, Z., Wang, X., Wang, H., Tao, M.: Micromould based laser shock embossing of
thin metal sheets for MEMS applications. Appl. Surf. Sci. 256, 4687–4691 (2010)
42. Liu, J.G., Fu, M.W., Lua, J., Chan, W.L.: Inﬂuence of size effect on the spring back of sheet
metal foils in micro-bending. Comput. Mater. Sci. 50, 2604–2614 (2011)
43. Meschede, D.: Gerthsen Physik, p. 450. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
44. Montross, C.S., Wei, T., Ye, L., Clark, G., Mai, Y.-W.: Laser shock processing and its effects
on microstructure and properties of metal alloys: A review. Int. J. Fatigue 24, 1021–1036
(2002)
5
Sheet Metal Forming
175

45. O’Keefe, J.D., Skeen, C.H., York, C.M.: Laser-induced deformation modes in thin metal
targets. J. Appl. Phys. 44(10), 4622–4626 (1973)
46. Peyre, P., Fabbro, R.: Laser shock processing: A review of the physics and applications. Opt.
Quant. Electron. 27, 1213–1229 (1995)
47. Qin, Y., Brockett, A., Zhao, J., Razali, A., Ma, Y., Harrison, C.: in Micro-Manufacturing
Engineering and Technology, Chap. 8: Forming of Micro-Sheet-Metal Components, Elsevier,
130–145 (2010)
48. Rhim, S.H., Son, Y.K., Oh, S.I.: Punching of ultra small size hole array. CIRP Ann. Manuf.
Technol. 54(1), 261–264 (2005)
49. Romanowski, W.P.: Handbuch der Kaltumformung. Verlag Maschinenbau, Moskau (1971)
50. Schmidt-Uhlig, T.: Wechselwirkung intensiver Laserstrahlung mit Metalloberﬂächen am
Beispiel des Laser-Schock-Härtens, p. 35. Dissertation, Cuvillier, Göttingen (2000)
51. Schulze Niehoff, H., Vollertsen, F.: Non-thermal laser stretch-forming. Adv. Mater. Res. 6–8,
433–440 (2005)
52. Schulze Niehoff, H., Vollertsen, F.: Mechanical and Laser Micro Deep Drawing,
pp. 799–806. SheMet 2007, Trans Tech Publications, CH-Zürich (2007)
53. Schlagau,
S.:
Verfahrensverbesserung
beim
Kragenziehen
durch
Überlagerung
von
Druckspannungen. Dissertation, TH Darmstadt (1988)
54. Shan, D., Wang, C., Guo, B., Wang, X.: Effect of thickness and grain size on material
behavior in micro-bending. Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China 19, 507–510 (2009)
55. Spur, G., Stöferle, T. (eds.): Handbuch der Fertigungstechnik, vol. 2/3, p. 1301. Umformen
und Zerteilen, Carl Hanser, München/Wien (1983)
56. Spur, G., Stöferle, T.: Handbuch der Fertigungstechnik—Umformen, Zerteilen. Band 2, Carl
Hanser, München, Wien (1985)
57. Takemasu, T.; Yamasaki, S.; Miura, H.; Ozaki, T.: Development of New Piercing System for
Micro-Holes by Continuous Striking of a Punch using Ultrasonic Vibration. Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Technology of Plasticity, Verona (2005) Extended
Abstract 451–452 (Full Article published on CD)
58. Vollertsen, F., Hu, Z.: On the drawing limit in micro deep drawing. J. Technol. Plast. 32(1/2),
1–11 (2007)
59. Vollertsen, F.: Effects on the deep drawing diagram in micro forming. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev.
6(1), 11–18 (2012)
60. Walter, D., Michalowski, A., Gauch, R., Dausinger, F.: Monitoring of the micro-drilling
process by means of laser-induced shock waves. In: Vollertsen, F., Emmelmann, C., Schmidt,
M., Otto, A. (eds.) Proceedings of the Fourth International WLT-Conference on Lasers in
Manufacturing (LIM07), pp. 557–562. AT-Fachverlag, Stuttgart (2007)
61. White, R.M.: Elastic wave generation by electron bombardment or electromagnetic wave
absorption. J. Appl. Phys. 34, 2123–2124 (1963)
62. Wielage, H.: Hochgeschwindigkeitsumformen durch laserinduzierte Schockwellen, Series
Strahltechnik, vol. 44. BIAS, Bremen (2011)
63. Wilken, R.: Das Biegen von Innenborden mit Stempeln. Dissertation, TU Hannover (1957)
64. Yamaguchi, K., Sagrado, R., Takakura, N., Lizuka, T.: Effect of thickness on the restoration
behavior of sheet metals subjected to bulge deformation. Int. Conf. Technol. Plasticity
(ICTP) 7, 997–1002 (2002)
65. Yi, S.M., Joo, B.Y., Park, M.S.: Mechanical punching of 15 lm size hole. Microsys. Technol.
12, 877–882 (2006)
66. Zhang, W., Yao, Y.L., Noyan, I.C.: Microscale laser shock peening of thin ﬁlms, part 1:
Experiment, modeling and simulation. ASME 126, 10–17 (2004)
176
F. Vollertsen

Chapter 6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
Heinz-Rolf Stock
Latin
cp
Heat capacity (J/(kg K))
d
Diameter (mm)
ES
Surface energy (J)
F
Force (N)
kf
Yield stress (MPa)
l
Length (mm)
P
Power (W)
Q
Heat (J)
q
Latent heat (J/kg)
r
Radius (mm)
t
Time (s)
T
Temperature [C (K)]
TD
Deposition temperature [C (K)]
TM
Melting temperature [C (K)]
u
Upset ratio (-)
v
Velocity (mm/s)
V
Volume (m3)
Greek
a
Absorption coefﬁcient (-)
c
Surface tension (N/m)
g
Efﬁciency (-)
U
Amplitude (-)
Divergence angle ()
H.-R. Stock (&)
IWT, Badgasteiner str. 3 28359 Bremen, Germany
e-mail: stock@iwt-bremen.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_6,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
177

k
Wavelength (m)
q
Density (kg/m3)
h
Focus diameter (mm)
rM
Tensile strength (MPa)
rN
Nominal stress (MPa)
u
Natural strain (-)
6.1 Additive Sheet Generation
Heinz-Rolf Stock and Helge Decho
6.1.1 Thin Sheet Generation: Common Methods
and Alternatives
Micro metal forming requires rather thin parts as the wrought material. Typical
thicknesses for sheets are in the range of 10–50 lm. Such sheets can be produced
by cold rolling. Common materials, which can be rolled down to such low
thicknesses, are for example aluminum (Al99.5), low carbon steel, stainless steel
or copper (E58). These materials are available in large quantities at moderate
prices. Aluminum foil is for example not only used for the packaging of food but
also for thermal insulation, cables and electronics. These materials are work
hardened during the cold rolling process and are annealed afterwards to recover
their original material properties. All these materials mentioned are rather soft and
pliable. This diminishes their potential as construction materials for micro parts.
Other materials, like hardened tool steels or high-strength aluminum alloys in
the form of thin sheets, would be more useful for micro metal forming, but—to our
knowledge—are not available in such low thicknesses. In principle, it is possible to
roll each material down to several 10 lm. Demura et al. for example produced
23 lm thin foils of Ni3Al starting from 5 mm thick single crystals [8]. But this
process needs ambitious machining, e.g., a Sendzimir planetary mill [24] and
accurate annealing conditions to prevent cracking and tearing. It is therefore worth
considering alternative processes for the production of thin sheets. Potential can-
didates for this purpose are electroplating, thermal spraying and vapor deposition.
Balancing the options of these three candidates, electroplating fails because only
few metals like chromium or nickel can be deposited, but neither tool steels nor
high-strength aluminum alloys. Thermal spraying can be used to produce high-
strength materials, but voids within the deposited material cannot be avoided and
so drastically decreases the mechanical properties.
The most promising alternative is therefore vapor deposition, especially
physical vapor deposition (PVD). This method implies the evaporation of the
source material, transport of the gaseous atoms and deposition, atom by atom, on a
178
H.-R. Stock

substrate. This substrate has to afterwards be removed from the deposited foil.
There are several options to evaporate the source material; among them sputtering
is the method which will be reported here.
6.1.2 Sputtering: Principles
In physical vapor deposition processes coatings are formed from a ﬂux of atoms
that approaches the substrate from an evaporated source. It consists of three steps:
• Evaporation of a desired material, resulting in a ﬂux of particles like atoms, ions
or molecules,
• transportation of the particles towards the substrate, and
• condensation of the particles on the substrate.
With regard to step one there are ﬁve methods to evaporate materials: Thermal
evaporation, electron beam evaporation, arc evaporation, laser evaporation and
sputtering. Among them sputtering has the advantage that it is not expensive and
alloys can be evaporated—and afterwards recondensed—without signiﬁcantly
changing their chemical composition.
The ﬁrst step of a sputtering process is the ignition of a glow discharge. The
phenomena to be observed in a direct current (DC) glow discharge are shown
schematically in Fig. 6.1 [7]. In a vacuum tube ﬁlled with argon (up to 1,000 Pa)
two electrodes are placed and a voltage of several hundred volts is applied between
them. Within a few moments after applying the voltage some random argon ions
are accelerated towards the cathode, and on its way generate several other ions by
collision—resulting in a self-sustaining glow discharge. This physical condition is
called a plasma. Different glowing areas and dark spaces between them can now be
observed.
+
-
glow zones:
dark 
spaces:
potential
cathode
II
I
III
IV
pressure
10-1000 Pa
anode
I    Cathode glow
II   Negative glow
III  Positive column
IV  Anode glow
a   Aston dark space
b   Cathode dark space
c   Faraday dark space
d   Anode dark space
b
c
a
d
Fig. 6.1 Arrangement of a DC glow discharge, visible glow zones and dark spaces, and
corresponding potential gradient
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
179

The argon ions are driven towards the cathode and ﬁnally hit the surface of the
cathode. Depending on their energy these ions cause atoms—and even clusters of
atoms—to be knocked free from the cathode surface by momentum transfer,
shown schematically in Fig. 6.2. Due to this bombarding process the cathode
material is usually called the target.
These atoms have a certain amount of kinetic energy and move away from the
target in a straight line. To prevent collisions with gas atom the pressure in the
vacuum chamber must be in the range of 0.1–1 Pa. With that the mean free path is
in the range of several centimeters and allows the majority of the atoms to reach
the substrate without any collisions with gas atoms or molecules. This straight-
forward movement of sputtered atoms leads to one signiﬁcant drawback: Sput-
tering is a line-in-sight process, in other words only those areas which can ‘‘see’’
the sputtering source are coated. To overcome this difﬁculty special efforts have to
be made, e.g. the use of more than one source or the rotation of the substrate.
A second disadvantage is that such low pressure reduces the plasma intensity,
and with that the bombardment of the target with ions and the ﬂux of atoms away
from the target. To overcome this disadvantage the ﬂux can be signiﬁcantly
enhanced using magnets—thus upgrading the sputtering to magnetron sputtering.
Some strong permanent magnets placed behind the target—as depicted in
Fig. 6.3—generate magnetic ﬁelds. These ﬁelds have no effect on the atoms and
only a minor inﬂuence on the relatively heavy ions, but strongly inﬂuence the light
electrons. These electrons—they stem from the ionization processes or directly
from the negatively loaded cathode (secondary electrons)—are forced into tra-
jectories of convoluted spiral-like patterns across the target surface. This high
electron density near the target surface increases the ionization probability and
cathode
target atoms
ion
electron
sputtered atom
Fig. 6.2 Schematic of a sputtering incident: an incoming argon ion hits the target surface and
causes target atoms to be knocked free
180
H.-R. Stock

thus raises the amount of sputtered target material and the resulting deposition rate
by more than an order of magnitude.
One well-established method to enhance the mechanical properties of the
growing coatings, especially the adhesion, density and morphology, is the appli-
cation of a so-called bias voltage. This means that a negative potential—in the
range of -100 V—is applied to the substrates. This causes a slight bombardment
of the growing ﬁlm which results in the sputtering of already deposited particles,
especially those with a reduced bonding to the surface. As a consequence the
growing ﬁlm becomes denser and a better adhesion to the substrates is achieved.
Furthermore, due to the sputtering of the growing ﬁlm the overall deposition rate is
reduced.
In addition there are several possibilities for enhancing the plasma intensity,
either by intensifying the magnetic ﬁeld in the center of the vacuum chamber
(known as unbalanced magnetron sputtering) or intensifying the glow discharge
by means of a pulsed voltage. Latest developments in this topic are called high
pulse power magnetron sputtering (HPPMS) or high power impulse magnetron
sputtering (HIPIMS) with current densities up to 106 Acm-2 [18].
6.1.3 Morphology of Sputtered Foils
Depending on the preparation conditions, the microstructures of thin ﬁlms pre-
pared by physical vapor deposition show a wide range. This has led to the
development of models, which relate the microstructure of a ﬁlm to the deposition
parameters. Movchan and Demchishin were the ﬁrst to investigate the inﬂuence of
the substrate temperature [15]. They concluded that the structure of thermally
evaporated ﬁlms could be described as a function of the quotient of the deposition
temperature and melting temperature of the ﬁlm’s material [TD/TM], both
expressed in degrees Kelvin. They distinguished three zones as shown in Fig. 6.4.
Zone 1 (at TD/TM \ 0.3) show tapered crystals with domed tops which increase in
electron trajectory 
magnetic field lines
cathode
permanent magnets
S
S
S
N
N
N
target material
Fig. 6.3 Arrangement of
target and permanent magnets
in a magnetron sputtering
unit. Magnetic ﬁeld lines
force electrons into circular
trajectories and with that
enhance the ionization
process along that path
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
181

width with temperature. Zone 2 (0.3 B TD/TM B 0.5) consists of columnar grains
with smooth matt surfaces. Zone 3 (TD/TM [ 0.5) show equiaxed grains and a
bright surface.
The development of these zones can be explained by diffusion. Zone 1 is
determined by low adatom mobility—within the meaning of no diffusion. As the
temperature is increased, surface diffusion becomes more important and leads to
parallel sided columnar grains (zone 2). With a further increase in temperature
bulk diffusion also becomes important, resulting in equiaxed grains in zone 3.
This model was extended by Thornton [19] from thermal evaporation to
sputtering by the addition of a third axis to account for sputtering gas pressure in
the range of 0.1–4 Pa, as shown in Fig. 6.5. The main extension of Thornton’s
model is a fourth zone—named the transition zone (zone T)—which emerges
in-between zones 1 and 2 as the pressure of the sputtering gas is decreased. This
zone T consists of poorly-deﬁned ﬁbrous grains. For many applications—like
wear-resistant nitride coatings, e.g., titanium nitride (TiN), titanium-aluminum
nitride (TiAlN) and chromium nitride (CrN) on high speed steel (HSS)—the
morphology of zone T reveals the best wear resistance, whereas the mechanical
properties of zone 1 are poor. Zone 2 coatings are also promising, but the depo-
sition temperature required is too high. As the melting temperature of these
substrate temperature 
(TD/TM)
0
 ~ 0,25
~ 0,45
zone 1
zone 2
zone  3
Fig. 6.4 Structure zone
model according to Movchan
and Demchishin [15]
substrate temperature 
(TD /TM )
~ 0,25
~ 0,45
0
pressure 
(Thornton)
bias voltage 
(Messier)
zone 1
zone T
zone 2
zone 3
Fig. 6.5 Structure zone model according to Thornton [19] and Messier et al. [13]
182
H.-R. Stock

nitrides are high (for TiN TM & 3,000 C) and the substrate temperature during
deposition must not exceed the annealing temperature of the HSS (in most cases
550 C) TD/TM must not exceed 0.25.
As an alternative to decreasing the deposition pressure, zone 1 can be prevented
by the bombardment of the growing coating with particles of sufﬁcient energy.
This causes the ﬁlling of the voided boundaries by coating atoms, leading to a
structure type of zone T [6]. This bombardment can be achieved by a bias voltage
applied to the substrates (as mentioned above). This causes knock-on sputtering of
already deposited atoms and induces the enhanced mobility of these atoms. These
advantages were integrated into Thornton’s model by Messier et al. [13] by just
modifying the third axis, as already shown in Fig. 6.5.
Up to now, further ameliorations of the structure zone models are occurring.
They focus upon the incorporation of intensiﬁed sputtering methods like closed-
ﬁeld unbalanced magnetron sputtering [11] or on other parameters like the seg-
regation of impurities [2].
6.1.4 Sputtering of High Strength Aluminum Foils
As an example we will take a closer look at a magnetron sputtered aluminum alloy
doped with scandium. When added to aluminum, scandium acts as a grain reﬁner
and recrystallization inhibitor. The high hardness and high strength of aluminum-
scandium alloys are caused by the precipitation of the intermetallic phase Al3Sc,
which is coherent with the aluminum matrix. The coherency mismatch of about
1.2 % results in signiﬁcant lattice stress, which hinders dislocation motion.
The deposition took place in a magnetron sputtering unit with DC power
supply, schematically shown in Fig. 6.6. An aluminum-scandium pre-alloy with a
scandium content of 2.0 mass % was used as the target material, and 100 lm thick
sheets of unalloyed steel were used as substrates. The latter were mounted on a
temperature-controlled copper block in front of the target. The distance between
substrate and target was 50 mm. To start the sputtering process the chamber was
ﬁlled with argon up to a pressure of 0.6 Pa and a voltage of about -500 V was
applied to the targets. Thus, a self-sustaining glow discharge is generated. The
applied voltage was controlled to keep the target power constant at either 1 or
2 kW during deposition. The substrate temperature was kept constant at either 310
or 433 K by heating or cooling the copper block throughout the deposition time.
Temperature was controlled with a thermocouple mounted between the copper
block and the back side of the substrate.
As mentioned previously sputtering is a line-in-sight process, therefore special
efforts have to be met to produce sheets with a homogeneous thickness distribution
of the coatings. This could be the use of more than one sputter source, a rotation of
the substrates or a combination of both. Another or simple method is a reciprocal
motion of the substrate, which was applied here. As can be seen in Fig. 6.6, the
reciprocal motion can be described by its amplitude U which is the angle between
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
183

the center of the target and the center of the substrate. Hence during the deposition
process, the substrate holder consistently shifts between -U and +U. Figure 6.7
shows the thickness proﬁles of four sheets deposited with different motion
amplitudes between 0 (no motion) and 23. In the case of a motionless substrate
(0) or a movement of small amplitude (8), thick coatings with very uneven
thickness distributions are observed. With an amplitude of 15 the maximum
thickness and the thickness decline towards the edges are reduced. Finally, sheets
produced with an amplitude of 23 show a relatively thin but homogeneous
thickness of 8 lm. Therefore, this amplitude was used in the deposition experi-
ments described in the following.
rotating table 
substrate
target
Φ
Φ
Φ
Fig. 6.6 Schematic of the
magnetron sputtering unit,
which allows the reciprocal
motion of the substrate
target location
-60
-30
0
mm
60
5
12
μm
26
Position
Thickness
Φ
Φ
Φ
Φ
Fig. 6.7 Thickness proﬁles produced with different motion amplitudes
184
H.-R. Stock

After deposition, the aluminum-scandium coatings and the steel substrates are
well adhered to each other. To separate the coating from the steel substrate a nitric
acid solution can be used. In this way, the steel is dissolved whereas the thin free-
standing sheet of aluminum-scandium alloy remain unchanged. The outer surfaces
of the separated coatings look different; we distinguish between the contact sur-
face (during deposition in contact with the steel substrate) and the free surface,
both are shown in Fig. 6.8. It is obvious that the contact surface is relatively
smooth compared to the free surface. On the latter the top ends of the columnar
crystals are visible. The growth of these columns can be explained by the structure
zone model mentioned in Sect. 6.1.3. For the Al–Sc alloy a melting point of
655 C (938 K) can be assumed, slightly below that of pure aluminum (660 C).
Therefore, the Al–Sc foils were deposited at TD/TM = 0.33 or 0.46, which in both
cases led to zone 2 with its typical columnar grains.
6.1.5 Mechanical Properties of High Strength
Aluminum Foils
To assess the inﬂuence of artiﬁcial ageing on the mechanical properties of the
aluminum-scandium sheets, three temperatures (200, 300 and 400 C) were cho-
sen. The holding time was 1 h and additionally 0.5 h at 400 C. The resulting
hardness values are presented in Fig. 6.9. Compared to the hardness of the
untreated sheet, the hardness is increased by annealing for 1 h at 200 C and even
more after 1 h at 300 C. The annealing at 400 C caused a slight decrease in
hardness, indicating that 1 h at 400 C is an over ageing condition. By reducing
the treatment time to 0.5 h at 400 C this effect does not occur, and the resulting
hardness remains relatively high. A second post-treatment consisted in cold iso-
static pressing at 400 MPa. The aim of this treatment was to reduce the pores in the
bulk of the sheets.
Fig. 6.8 a Contact surface and b free surface of a sputtered aluminum-scandium thin sheet
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
185

Heat treatment to increase the hardness and strength of aluminum alloys normally
consists of three steps: Firstly a solution heat treatment to dissolve the soluble
phases, secondly quenching to achieve the supersaturation of alloying elements and
vacancies, and thirdly age hardening to precipitate soluted supersaturated atoms.
During the magnetron sputtering process supersaturation is settled by vapor
depositing the alloy atom by atom, and simultaneously avoiding too much diffusion
by limiting the substrate temperature. The third step—age hardening—is either
achieved at room temperature or with a precipitation heat treatment, also known as
artiﬁcial ageing. As reviewed by Royset and Ryum, it has been shown that Al3Sc
particles precipitating in the temperature range between 250 and 350 C cause a
signiﬁcant hardness increase in the alloy [17]. This can be approved by the hardness
measurements after the artiﬁcial ageing between 200 and 400 C as depicted in
Fig. 6.9. As known from other hard enable aluminum alloys, the optimum artiﬁcial
ageing to achieve maximum strength depends on the temperature and annealing time
[1]. The chosen ageing parameters—300 C and 1 h—show an increase in hardness
from 187 to 223 HV, both values are relatively high.
The most inﬂuential deposition parameters are target power and substrate
temperature. Therefore, four deposition experiments were conducted, using the
parameters listed in Table 6.1. After separation of the coatings from the steel
1 h
0.5h
0
100
200
300
°C
500
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
Annealing temperature
Hardness HV0,05
Fig. 6.9 Hardness of Al–Sc sheets after artiﬁcial ageing at different temperatures
Table 6.1 Deposition parameters and resulting coating thicknesses
Number of deposition
treatment
Substrate
temperature (C)
Target
power (kW)
Deposition
time (h)
Coating
thickness (lm)
1
160
1
4
32
2
160
2
2
23
3
37
1
4
32
4
37
2
2
21
186
H.-R. Stock

substrates the samples were either annealed at 300 C or cold isostatic pressed or
both. Together with the as-deposited probes, altogether 16 different samples of
tensile test specimens were manufactured.
In Fig. 6.10 the tensile test curves of coating No. 1—treated at 1 kW target
power at 160 C for 4 h—and different post-treatments are shown. The Al–Sc foil
No. 1A (1 kW, 433 K, 4 h, without post-treatment)—referred to ‘‘as deposited’’—
has a tensile strength of 351 MPa. A heat treatment at 300 C for 1 h enhances the
tensile strength to 424 MPa. In contrast with that cold isostatic pressing (CIP)
reduces the tensile strength to 327 MPa, and again subsequent heat treatment
increases this value to 370 MPa. Figure 6.11 graphically illustrates the results.
The
mean
value
of
all
tensile
strengths
in
Fig. 6.11
results
in
rM = 349 ± 11 MPa, which is relatively high. Especially if it is considered that the
applied tensile force acts perpendicularly to the aluminum columns. It is worthwhile
taking a closer look at the inﬂuence of the deposition parameters and the post-
treatments on the tensile strength rM. It is obvious that the deposition temperature
inﬂuences the tensile strength. The mean tensile strength of all eight tests with
coatings deposited at 160 C slightly increase the rM to 360 ± 10 MPa—compared
to the mean value rM = 349 ± 11 MPa. In contrast a deposition temperature of
37 C slightly reduces the tensile strength (rM = 339 MPa). Apparently the target
power has no signiﬁcant inﬂuence, rM values of 351 ± 11 and 347 ± 12 MPa are
within the margin of error compared with the mean value.
Figure 6.11 also reveals the inﬂuence of the two post-treatments. The as-
sputtered aluminum-scandium foils show a relatively low tensile strength (rM =
314 ± 19 MPa). However, the annealing treatment for 1 h at 300 C signiﬁcantly
raises the tensile strength to rM = 405 ± 13 MPa. In contrast, cold isostatic
nominal stress 
N
strain   [%]
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
MPa
450
2
6
10
12
14 
16
18
CIP
as deposited 
300 °C 1 h
300 °C 1 h + CI P
4
8
Fig. 6.10 Tensile tests on four Al–Sc foils from deposition treatment No. 1 (1 kW, 160 C, 4 h)
with different post-treatments
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
187

pressing does not increase the rM but the standard deviation of the rM values
achieved is signiﬁcantly reduced (to ±5 MPa). The combination of both post-
treatments results in a mixture of both effects: The tensile strength (364 ± 8 MPa)
is increased but not as much as with sole annealing, and the standard deviation is
reduced (to ±8 MPa) but to a lesser extent than with sole cold isostatic pressing.
6.2 Thermal Free form Heading
Heiko Brüning
6.2.1 Basic Aspects of Thermal Free form Heading
Bulk metal forming is a process which allows the production of goods with a high
accuracy in very low cycle times [9]. Due to size effects, process limits known in
the macro range cannot be easily transferred into the micro range. Especially, but
not exclusively, in the limit in the single step upsetting processes the upset ratio
u is reduced from u = 2.3 [12] to a maximum of u B 1.5 for workpieces with
dimensions less than 1 mm [14] (see Sect. 4.2). Greater upset ratios can only be
achieved by enhancing the number of upsetting steps combined with recrystalli-
zation annealing, leading to an increase in process complexity, process time and
overall costs if the conventional upsetting process is taken into account.
In order to still be able to beneﬁt from the advantages of bulk metal forming
without increasing the number of forming steps necessary, a free form upsetting
process called ‘‘thermal free form heading’’ has been designed and investigated.
The process consists of two main steps: the ﬁrst generates a material accumulation
by laser melting which is afterwards calibrated in a second step, e.g. by upsetting.
as deposited
tensile strength M 
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
MPa
440
300 °C 1 h
CIP
CIP+ 300 °C 1 h
1 kW 160 °C
2 kW 160 °C
1 kW 37 °C
2 kW 37 °C
Fig. 6.11 Tensile strength values due to different deposition and post-treatments
188
H.-R. Stock

6.2.2 Process Principle and Variants
Cylindrical wrought materials, such as rods, are used as the basis for the thermal
free form heading process. The longitudinal axis of the rod is oriented parallel to
the gravitational force. A heat source causes the end of the rod to melt. Within
certain limits, the molten material sticks to the rod and forms a sphere which is
called ‘‘material accumulation’’ or ‘‘preform’’ if a forming process is attached. It is
advisable to use a laser beam as the heat source so that the amount of energy can
be adjusted accurately in terms of amount and time such that it leads to a robust
process. Generating material accumulations can either take place at the bottom end
of a rod or at the top end, relative to the direction of gravitational force. If the
process is carried out on the top surface it is called ‘‘upright position’’, the opposite
arrangement is called the ‘‘hanging position’’. Figure 6.12 illustrates both, the
process of conventional upsetting as well as generating preforms by thermal free
form heading in a hanging position with an attached open die upsetting step. The
upset ratio u is deﬁned as the ratio of accumulated or upset length l0 and the initial
rod diameter d0. FP represents the required punch force for each forming opera-
tion. It is to be noted that the thermal free form heading process is supposed to take
place under inert gas ﬂow conditions if wrought material susceptible to oxidation
at high temperatures is used.
The smaller the semi-ﬁnished products are the more difﬁcult positioning
becomes. This challenge is omnipresent in the micro range and is ampliﬁed by the
fact that forces related to surface tension reach or even exceed the magnitude of
gravitational forces, so that the handling of goods is also a difﬁculty. Concerning
the topic of material accumulations, handling is simpliﬁed by producing contin-
uously conveyable structures. In this case, the process shown in Fig. 6.12 is
modiﬁed to enable either the generation of material accumulation within a con-
tinuous rod by applying a feeding force FF or the ﬁxing of the shaft of the material
accumulation to a carrier rod. These variants are schematically shown in Fig. 6.13.
BIAS ID 122054
l0
d 0
F P
F P
F P
F P
laserbeam
d 0
l0
F P
F P
tool
Fig. 6.12 Left Conventional upsetting process. Right Upsetting with preform generated by
thermal free form heading in hanging position
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
189

6.2.3 Process Analysis
6.2.3.1 Process Limits
Thermal free form heading is a process which is enabled by effect of surface
tension becoming more and more dominant compared to gravitational forces in the
micro range. The melt at the end of the rod does not release as long as the surface
tension at the border between liquid and solid material exceeds the volume forces
due to gravitation. Beyond this limit the material accumulation detaches. The ratio
of rod diameter d0 and effective upsetting length l0, called the upset ratio u, can be
calculated for generating material accumulations in hanging positions assuming
that the droplet forms a perfect sphere and the intersectional area between rod and
melt is even and circular. As shown in Fig. 6.14, two main forces act on the
droplet: the gravitational force FG and the surface tension Fc at the intersectional
area between the melt and rod [20].
Fc ¼ pd0c0
ð6:1Þ
FG ¼ 1
6 pd3
Sqg
ð6:2Þ
laser-
beam
laserbeam
laserbeam
FF
FF
FF
BIAS ID 122055
Fig. 6.13 Continuously
conveyable structures. Left
Material accumulation within
a continuous rod. Right
Material accumulation and
carrier rod
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Upset ratio u 
0. 1
1
10
Rod diameter [mm]
Steel 1.4301 exp.
Steel 1.4301
Copper
Aluminium
Fγ=πd0γ
Fg=1/6 πds
3
ds
d0
g
BIAS ID 122056
g
Fig. 6.14 Left Material accumulation in hanging position with acting forces. Right Maximum
achievable upset ratios dependence on rod diameter and material
190
H.-R. Stock

The maximum achievable upset ratio u is achieved if the gravitational force of
material accumulation equals surface tension. This value is dependent on the density
q, the surface tension c0 and the gravitation g and increases with decreasing rod
diameter d0 by the power of 2.
u ¼ l0
d0
¼ 4VS
pd3
0
¼ pd0c0
1
4 pd3
0qg ¼ 4c0
d2
0qg
ð6:3Þ
Formula 6.3 states that Al99.5 rod diameters have to be below 13 mm to allow
an effective upsetting ratio, for steel (1.4301) below 10 mm, and for E-Cu58 below
8 mm. For rod diameters below 1.0 mm, upsetting ratios of several 100 can be
achieved. Experiments with 1.4301 as the sample material show a good accor-
dance to calculated values for maximum upset ratios for rod diameters
0.4 \ d0 \ 1.0 mm. The larger the value of the upset ratio the longer the upset
length, which makes it more likely for the inert gas ﬂuid ﬂow to turn from laminar
to turbulent. Forces caused by irregular detaching eddies initiate the rod to vibrate
which leads the material accumulation to release so that theoretical upset ratios
cannot be achieved for rod diameters d0 \ 0.4 mm unless vibration of rod is
avoided. Nevertheless, upset ratios u = 500 for d0 = 0.2 mm are reached (see
Fig. 6.14). This value is far beyond the upset ratio u B 1.5 which can be achieved
by the conventional upsetting process [14].
6.2.3.2 Adiabatic Energy Model
The amount of energy ES needed to generate a spherical material accumulation
with volume VS can be estimated by an adiabatic model. ES is the thermal energy
brought into the rod to cause an increase in temperature from T0 to the melting
temperature TM.
ES ¼ VSq cp TM  T0
ð
Þ þ HM


þ Qloss
ð6:4Þ
Herein Qloss includes among others heat conduction within the rod, convec-
tional ﬂow of heat to inert gas, heat radiation or sputter formation.
The amount of absorbed energy ES at normal incidence on an opaque surface is
expressed by the effective absorption aeff and the laser beam energy E
ES ¼ aeffE:
ð6:5Þ
Setting Qloss = 0, experiments show that this basic model still characterizes
well the generation of material accumulations at the end of a rod, as long as the
beam quality is rather high so that the defocusing effect does not come into
account, and no abnormal absorption takes place nor keyhole exists (Fig. 6.15)
[21]. The smaller the rod diameter, the better it ﬁts the adiabatic model. This
behavior is strengthened by the fact that energy dissipation due to heat transfer
within the rod decreases by a square factor of the rod diameter [3]. Basic condi-
tions to diminish the keyhole effect apply, if the power density at the sample
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
191

surface is less than several MW/cm2. The defocusing effect takes place during the
accumulation process as long as the focus level and the rod are kept ﬁxed, because
the beam diameter at the sample surface increases and therefore results in a
decrease in absorbed energy. In contrast, only the increase in diameter of the
sphere increases the amount of absorbed energy as the angle of incidence differs
less intensely from 0 for larger material accumulations. The result of the
defocusing effect can be seen in Fig. 6.15 as the overestimation in predicted
volume by the adiabatic model, and the measured volume increases with
increasing accumulated volume.
6.2.3.3 Inﬂuence of Laser Beam Source
Poprawe [16] states that generally laser material processing is not only inﬂuenced
by the material parameters, which is true in case of thermal free form heading the
rod (surface tension, density), but also by the interaction of the processed material
and the laser beam, which is, assuming a constant wave length, inﬂuenced by:
• optical constants of the material
• chemical condition of the surface (oxidation, …)
• geometrical condition of the surface (impurities, striations, …)
• temperature, which also affects the above-stated parameters
• angle of incidence.
The results of the adiabatic model shown in Fig. 6.15 not only neglect heat
dissipation but also the defocusing effect, so that a constant absorption coefﬁcient
during complete irradiation time is applied which does not ﬁt the experiment. The
process efﬁciency of the thermal free form heading process can be deﬁned as the
quotient between the energy being absorbed by the surface of the material accu-
mulation and the total possible absorbable laser beam energy.
1.0 mm
0.5 mm
0.4 mm
0.3 mm
Adiabatic model
0
150
300
450
600
J/ml
8/3
900
Scaled energy E
0
10
20
mm3/ml
3
40
Scaled volume V 
Sphere diameter
BIAS ID 122057
Fig. 6.15 Scaled volume dependence on scaled energy. Adiabatic model is calculated with
constant absorption coefﬁcient aeff = 0.38 [4] and Qloss = 0 during irradiation time
192
H.-R. Stock

g ¼ Eabsorbed
Ebeamaeff
ð6:6Þ
The beam characteristic has a strong inﬂuence on process efﬁciency during
thermal free form heading if both the focus of the laser beam and rod are kept
ﬁxed, because the developing material accumulation moves out of focus. The
greater the divergence angle h, the stronger the decrease in process efﬁciency.
Bearing in mind that the distance between the spherical surface of the material
accumulation and the focus level is rising during the accumulation process, a small
angle of divergence h is aspired. Power densities in the focus layer exceeding
several MW/cm2 [21] result in the formation of a keyhole in the melted surface of
the rod so that the absorption coefﬁcient increases due to multi-scattering, so a
small laser beam diameter is another objective [22]. The geometrical parameters of
a laser beam in accordance with a rod and resulting material accumulation are
shown in Fig. 6.16, as well as beam parameters for a ﬁber laser and Nd-YAG laser.
The efﬁciency g of the process, in dependence on distance between sample surface
and focus layer h, as well as the divergence angle h is illustrated in Fig. 6.16 right
for rod diameters of d0 = 0.3 mm and d0 = 0.5 mm.
It can be seen that a small divergence angle h (e.g., ﬁber laser) enables process
efﬁciencies g close to 1 for rod diameters d0 = 0.3 mm and d0 = 0.5 mm and a
distance between sample and focus h \ 30 mm, while using the Nd-YAG laser
with divergence angle h = 23.0 forces the efﬁciency to decrease rapidly down
to B10 %.
Nd-YAG-laser
Fibre-laser
wave length
1064 nm
1085 nm
Beam radius
0
0.20 mm
0.02 mm
Divergence angle
23.0°
2.29°
beam
rod
d0
d
ω
ϕ
S
h
l0
z
r
λ
ω
Fig. 6.16 Beam characteristic with material accumulation in hanging position and resulting
process efﬁciency
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
193

The defocusing effect can be avoided by keeping the distance between sample
surface and focus constant, thus leading to an almost invariant input of energy at
the surface of the material accumulation. This is achieved by either shifting the
focus of the beam or by realizing feeding of the rod. In both cases, the velocity of
shifting has to equal the up-moving velocity of the material accumulation for
optimal conditions. Besides an increase in process efﬁciency, a further advantage
of feeding is that laser beam quality can be lower so that initial costs are reduced.
As long as a constant absorption coefﬁcient is assumed and a constant laser beam
power is applied, the vertical velocity vs of the material accumulation surface is
not constant. This is due to the fact that the volume of the sphere is growing
linearly with irradiation time, but concurrently expands in all three dimensions.
Independently of irradiation time, there is always the same amount of rod material
liqueﬁed per time unit; in other words the velocity vrod is only dependent on the
process variables of rod diameter d0 and beam power PL. Derivation of formula 6.4
with respect to t gives the following correlation between PL and vrod, where Qloss is
neglected:
PL ¼ q _VSðcp TM  T0
ð
Þ þ HM ¼ q pd2
0vrod
4
ðcp TM  T0
ð
Þ þ HM
ð6:7Þ
Based on formula 6.7, Fig. 6.17 illustrates the dependency between the velocity
of the surface of the sphere vS and vrod:
Figure 6.18 shows as a result of the experiments that the energetic process
efﬁciency g can almost be doubled by adjustment to an appropriate feeding speed.
In this case a constant feeding speed was applied for simpliﬁcation. The dashed
line represents the upset length l0 according to the adiabatic model, neglecting heat
dissipation (Qloss = 0) and the defocusing effect (formula 6.2.4.). For upset ratios
z
g
v
vs
d0
l0
z
g
vrod
vs
d0
l0
VS =   πrs
3 = VRod =    d0
2l0
VS(z) =    d0
2z =    d0
2vS(z)t
rS(t) = 3
d0
2vrodt
vS = vrod - 2rS(t) 
vrod-    
t
-
3
d0
2vrod
π
4
π
4
π
4
4
3
.
1
3 
3
16
3
16
2
3
BIAS ID 122059
= 
.
Fig. 6.17 Velocity of material accumulation during accumulation process
194
H.-R. Stock

u less than 20, the dependency between the average vertical velocity of the surface
of the material accumulation vS and the power of the laser beam PL can be stated as
linear. Regarding this, high laser beam power leads to an increase in process
efﬁciency g, which is not surprising because a lower process cycle time allows less
time for heat dissipation through the rod.
6.2.3.4 Reproducibility of Process
Material accumulations generated by laser melting are intended to be used, among
others, as preforms for bulk forming processes. The shaft may enable simpliﬁed
handling and ﬁxture if necessary. It is also possible to use the shaft as a functional
component, for example as an axle when forming the preform into a gear wheel.
Forming operations with closed forging dies require preforms with a very
accurately deﬁned volume [10] so that the resulting parts do not suffer any defects,
such as incomplete form ﬁlling. Investigations on the laser-based free form
heading process show that a sufﬁcient accuracy for a subsequent forming operation
is reached. Table 6.2 illustrates both the absolute and relative standard deviations
in diameter determined in experiments on preforms with a shaft diameter
d0 = 0.5 mm.
6.2.3.5 Inﬂuence of Shielding Gas
Although the adiabatic model neglecting heat dissipation is a proper approach,
heat dissipation has a clear inﬂuence on the process and the result of thermal free
form heading. With decreasing rod diameter d0, the relative amount of energy
being dissipated by heat conduction also decreases, as well while the fraction of
energy dissipated through the inert gas increases. Due to size effects, the surface/
volume ratio increases with decreasing sample size. This leads to a rising
0
10
20
30
mm
50
Upset length l 0
0
50
100
J
200
Pulse energy E
0 mm/s
8 mm/s
12 mm/s
14 mm/s
Adiabatic model
Feeding speed
Rod diameter
Material
Laserpower
Focuslayer
Absorpt. Coefficient
0.5 mm
1.4301
50 W
0 mm
0.38
BIAS ID 122060
Fig. 6.18 Upset length with and without feeding compared to adiabatic model with aeff = 0.38
and Qloss = 0
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
195

importance in the characteristic inert gas parameters. Helium for example has,
compared to Argon, a much higher heat transfer coefﬁcient thus resulting in a
different cooling behavior of the material accumulation. The cooling behavior of
rather small material accumulations and small upset ratios u are mainly affected by
the heat conduction within the rod and, directly at the end of the accumulation
process, heat transfer due to radiation. So the heat inside the accumulation is
dissipated through the rod so that the melt front moves from the beginning of the
heat affected zone towards the top of the material accumulation. This can be seen
in Fig. 6.19 in the orientation of the dendrites. The larger the upset ratio u the
bigger the inﬂuence of the shielding gas and heat radiation. A not negligible part of
heat is then dissipated by the inert gas. This at ﬁrst leads to material solidiﬁcation
on the surface while the core is still liquid, resulting in the radial symmetrical
orientation of the dendrites.
The time tR, which is called the cycle time, is the duration until a material
accumulation is generated by laser melting. It can be divided into irradiation time
tL and cooling time tc. The irradiation time, which is equivalent to pulse duration,
is directly linearly dependent on the aspired volume VS of the material
Table 6.2 Absolute and relative standard deviations of head diameter of preforms
PL (W)
tL (ms)
dS (mm)
Standard deviations (mm)
Standard deviations (%)
64
500
1.136
0.004
0.39
64
1,500
1.598
0.005
0.34
64
4,000
2.135
0.010
0.49
500 µm
500 µm
BIAS ID 122061
Fig. 6.19 Material
accumulations;
left:
d0 = 0.5 mm,
dS = 2.25 mm,
PL = 80 W,
tL =
4,000 ms. Radial symmetrical orientation of dendrites. Right: d0 = 1.0 mm, dS = 1.63 mm,
PL = 139 W, tL = 1,000 ms. Orientation of dendrites coaxial to shaft
196
H.-R. Stock

accumulation. As stated above, the part of the laser beam energy which is dissi-
pated into heat for melting the rod varies, contingent on (among others) the
irradiated material and laser beam wave length. Experiments have been carried out
using a ﬁber laser with PLmax = 300 W, so that based on d0 = 1.0 mm irradiation
times tL of a few 10 ms up to 10 s have been applied.
6.2.4 Formability of Preforms Generated by Thermal Free
form Heading
The formability of preforms is not expected to be very good due the fact that a
dendritic microstructure generally does not allow extended formability [23].
Experiments, similar to compression tests, have been carried out using a pneumatic
forming machine and forming tools with coplanar, polished surfaces. The shaft of
the preform is clamped by the lower die so that an axial movement of the preform
is avoided. Preforms with different head diameters ds have been formed with
progressively increasing punch forces, ranging from FP = 0.3 to 16.0 kN thus
leading a decrease in ﬁnal head heights after the forming process. After unloading
of the preform, the ﬂattened surface areas as well as the head heights were mea-
sured so that the average natural strain u of the head can be determined.
Figure 6.20 shows the dependence of the yield stress kf on the average natural
strain u. It can be seen that the yield stress increases linearly with decreasing value
of average natural strain (valid for u \ 0) [5]. This behavior is generally expected,
however, beyond this it is worth noting that there is a very good accordance in
yield stress between the three different sizes of preforms, so that within this variety
of head diameters no size effects concerning formability could be determined.
 0
1000
1500
N/mm2
2500
Yield stress k f
-1.50
-1.25
-1.00
-0.75
-0.50
-0.25
Sphere diameter
1.1 mm
1.6 mm
2.1 mm
Average natural strain
0
BIAS ID 122062
Fig. 6.20 Yield stress kf dependence on average natural strain u for different head diameters
dS = 1.1, 1.6, 2.1 mm
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
197

The forming limit of preforms is reached as soon as cracks appear. This is most
likely to happen at the ﬁllet between the circumference and the ﬂattened head, as
this is a strongly deformed area [12]. Due to the fact that the forming tools used are
of 42CrMo4 with a hardness of 55HRC, higher punch forces would have led to the
plastic deformation of the tool so that the maximum formability has not been
identiﬁed. Figure 6.21 shows a cross-sectional polish of a formed preform with
uS = -1.7 as well as an enlarged section of a strongly deformed area where no
cracks can be detected. The direction of the dendrites, whose orientation is a
signiﬁcant indication of the direction of the plastic ﬂow of the material, clearly
conforms to the behavior stated in [12].
References
1. American Society for Metals: ASM Handbook: Heat Treating. vol. 4, pp. 866 (1991)
2. Barna, P.B., Adamik, M.: Fundamental structure forming phenomena of polycrystalline ﬁlms
and the structure zone models. Thin Solid Films 317, 27–33 (1998)
3. Bergmann, L., Schaefer, C.: Lehrbuch der Experimentalphysik Band 1 Mechani Relativität
Wärme. Gruyter, Berlin (1998)
4. Beyer, E.: Schweißen mit dem Laser: Grundlagen (Laser in Technik und Forschung).
Springer, Berlin (1995)
5. Brüning, H., Vollertsen, F.: Formability of micro material preforms generated by laser
melting. In: Hinduja, S., Li L. (eds.) Proceedings of the 37th International MATADOR
Conference, pp. 373–376. Springer, London (2012)
6. Bull, S.J.: Correlation of microstructure and properties of hard coatings. Vacuum 43,
387–391 (1992)
7. Chapman, B.: Glow Discharge Processes. Wiley, New York (1980)
BIAS ID 122063
Fig. 6.21 Cross-sectional
view of deformed preform
uS = -1.7
198
H.-R. Stock

8. Demura, M., Kishida, K., Suga, Y., Takanashi, M., Hirano, T.: Fabrication of thin Ni3Al foils
by cold rolling. Scripta Mater. 47, 267–272 (2002)
9. Doege, E., Behrens, B.-A.: Handbuch Umformtechnik. Springer, Berlin (2007)
10. Ilschner, B., Singer, R.F.: Werkstoffwissenschaften und Fertigungstechnik. Springer, Berlin
(2001)
11. Kelly, P.J., Arnell, R.D.: Development of a novel structure zone model relating to the closed-
ﬁeld unbalanced magnetron sputtering system. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 16, 2858–2869 (1998)
12. Lange, K.: Umformtechnik: Band 2: Massivumformung. Springer, Berlin (1988)
13. Messier, R., Giri, A.P., Roy, R.A.: Revised structure zone model for thin ﬁlm physical
structure. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 2, 500–503 (1984)
14. Meßner,
A.:
Kaltmassivumformung
metallischer
Kleinstteile:
Werkstoffverhalten,
Wirkﬂächenreibung, Prozessauslegung. Meisenbach, Bamberg (1998)
15. Movchan, B.A., Demchishin, A.V.: Study of the structure and properties of thick vacuum
condensates of nickel, titanium, tungsten, aluminium oxide and zirconium dioxide. Fiz. Met. i
Metallovedeniye 28, 653–660 (1969)
16. Poprawe, R.: Lasertechnik für die Fertigung. Springer, Berlin (2005)
17. Royset, J., Ryum, N.: Scandium in aluminium alloys. Intern Mater. Rev. 50, 19–44 (2005)
18. Sproul, W.D., Christie, D.J., Carter, D.C., Tomasel, F., Linz, T.: Pulsed plasmas for
sputtering applications. Surf. Eng. 20, 174–176 (2004)
19. Thornton, J.A.: Inﬂuence of substrate temperature and deposition rate on structure of thick
sputtered Cu coatings. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 12, 830–835 (1975)
20. Vollertsen, F.: Size effects in Micro Forming (2011). In: 14th International conference on
sheet metal (2011). Key engineering materials, vol. 473, pp. 3–12 (2010)
21. Vollertsen, F., Walther, R.: Energy balance in laser-based free form heading. Ann CIRP 57,
291–294 (2008)
22. Walther, R., Zverev, M., Vollertsen, F. Enhanced Model for Energy balance in laser based
free form heading (2008). In: 1st International Conference on Nanomanufacturing
(nanoMan2008)
23. Weißbach, W.: Werkstoffkunde Strukturen Eigenschaften Prüfung. Vieweg & Teubner,
Wiesbaden (2010)
24. Yu, H.-L., Liu, X.-H., Lee, G.-T., Park, H.-D.: Numerical analysis of strip edge drop for
Sendzimir mill. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 208, 42–52 (2008)
6
Size Effect-Enabled Methods
199

Chapter 7
Tool Making
Ekkard Brinksmeier
Latin
a
Distance (mm)
Aa, xy
Laser affected area (m2)
aec
Width of cut (lm)
ala
Laser track distance (lm)
AMus
Ultrasonic amplitude (lm)
apc
Depth of cut (lm)
cp
Speciﬁc heat capacity (J kg-1 K-1)
cR
Material optical reﬂectivity
ca
Optical absorption coefﬁcient (m-1)
d
Diameter (lm)
D
Diffusion coefﬁcient
dG
Diamond grain size (lm)
dla
Laser beam diameter (lm)
dmin
Laser subtracted diameter (M)
E
Elastic modulus (N/mm2)
EA
Activation energy (J)
F
Force (N)
FN
Normal force (N)
f
Focal distance (m)
fla
Pulse frequency (laser repetition time) (Hz)
fus
Ultrasonic frequency (Hz)
fz
Feed per tooth (lm)
HK
Knoop hardness
ha
Laser affected depth (m)
hc
Chip thickness (lm)
hcu
Uncut chip thickness (lm)
E. Brinksmeier (&)
Laboratory for Precision Machining, Badgasteiner Straße 3 28359 Bremen, Germany
e-mail: brinksmeier@iwt.uni-bremen.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_7,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
201

hcu,crit
Material speciﬁc, critical uncut chip thickness (lm)
hcu,max
Maximum uncut chip thickness (lm)
hcu,min
Minimum uncut chip thickness (lm)
hs
Laser subtracted depth (m)
hk
Optical penetration depth (m)
I
Incident intensity (W m-2)
I0
Peak incident intensity (W m-2)
Iab
Peak absorbed intensity (W m-2)
ich
Chemical activity
j
Number of cutting edges
K
Thermal conductivity (W m-1 K-1)
Kc
Fracture toughness (MPa* m1/2)
KF
Faraday constant
Kp
Preston constant
kk
Optical damping constant
p
Pressure (N/mm2)
Pla
Average laser power (W)
PRR
Reactive sticking probability
Pus
Ultrasonic power (W)
Q0w
Speciﬁc material removal rate (mm3/(mm*s))
Qw
Material removal rate (mm3/s)
r
Radius (mm)
r0
Radius of the diffusing particles
Ra
Roughness, proﬁle, arithmetic (nm)
Rz
Roughness, proﬁle, average maximum height (m)
ra, x(y)
Laser affected radius (m)
rL
Laser beam radius at the optical lens (m)
rM
Laser melted radius (m)
rs, x(y)
Laser subtracted radius (m)
rth
Thermal penetration radius (heat affected zone) (m)
rw
Laser beam waist radius (m)
rb
Cutting edge radius (lm)
Sa
Roughness, area, arithmetic (nm)
Sk
Roughness, area, core roughness depth (nm)
Spk
Roughness, area, reduced summit height (nm)
Sq
Roughness, area, root mean squared (nm)
Svk
Roughness, area, reduced valley depth (nm)
t
Time (s)
T
Absolute temperature (K)
T0
Ambient (initial) temperature (K)
TB
Absolute temperature of boiling (K)
TM
Absolute temperature of melting (K)
Tsc
Absolute surface temperature (K)
tB
Material boiling time (s)
202
E. Brinksmeier

tD
Dwell time of laser-material interaction (pulse duration) (s)
te-ph
Electron-phonon scattering time (s)
tR
Material removal time (s)
_V
Volume material removal rate (m3/s)
_Ve
Flow rate of the etchant (ml/min)
vc
Cutting speed (m/min)
vf
Feed velocity (mm/min)
vf
Feed rate (m s-1)
vrel
Relative velocity (m/s)
vscan
Scanning speed (m s-1)
vt
Tangential velocity (mm/s)
vz
Drilling velocity (m s-1)
Z
Densiﬁcation ratio
zn
Powder bed height for the nth layer (mm)
zT
Platform lowering distance (mm)
Greek
a
Thermal expansion coefﬁcient (K-1)
b
Angle of incidence ()
c
Rake angle ()
d
Thickness of the Nernst layer
DHM
Enthalpy of melting (J kg-1)
DHV
Enthalpy of vaporization (J kg-1)
f
Beam quality factor
g
Dynamic viscosity of the liquid
hg
Angle of grit blasting ()
hmf
Angle of molten material front ()
h0
External angle of laser light incidence ()
q
Material density (kg m-3)
qbulk
Density of the consolidated powder (g/cm3)
qpowder
Density of the loose powder (g/cm3)
j
Thermal diffusion coefﬁcient (m2 s-1)
jel
Electron diffusion coefﬁcient (m2 s-1)
k
Optical wavelength (M)
/
Laser ﬂuence (J m-2)
/ab
Absorbed laser ﬂuence (J m-2)
/Loss
Fluence losses (J m-2)
wel
Electrochemical potential
7
Tool Making
203

7.1 Tool Materials
Alwin Schulz
Tool materials for forming processes require good ductility with high hardness and
high wear resistance. In the case of micro cold forming, additional aspects have to
be considered in the tool material selection. The tool shape requires structures of
microscopic dimensions, i.e. edge radii, bores and notches in submillimeter sizes,
which need to be formed or machined. Viscous lubricants should be avoided,
because they hinder the further handling of the workpieces. The use of tools
without lubricant accelerates wear and might aggravate corrosion. Wear and
corrosion debris on the tool surface are unacceptable for working with microscopic
structures. Thermal effects of friction require additional attention to chemical
processes at the surface.
There are many material candidates for making micro forming tools. Mono-
crystals like diamonds or sapphire are very hard (10,000 HV, 2,300 HV) and can
withstand chemical attack. However they are expensive and it is very difﬁcult to
make complex micro tool shapes with them. Ceramic materials, e.g. alumina,
zirconia, silicon nitride, etc., are also potential candidates because of their high
hardness and chemical resistance. In general such ceramics are produced by sin-
tering or hot isostatic pressing, both requiring great efforts on giving the bulk
ceramic full density. For micro tools extremely ﬁne powders are needed as the
base material for these ceramics to deliver ﬁne structures. Handling of these
powders requires great efforts in every process step (i.e. powder production,
storage, transport, green body forming, etc.). Another challenge to achieve precise
tool shapes is the control of shrinkage of the ceramic during consolidation.
Between ceramics and metallic alloys, cemented carbides are another group of
interest for micro forming tools. In these materials ﬁne carbides, usually tungsten
carbides or titanium carbides, are embedded in a cobalt, nickel or iron metallic
binder matrix. With fractions of the metallic binder down to 3 % and carbide sizes
which can be less than 0.5 l, cemented carbides are very hard (up to 1,650 HV),
corrosion resistant and can show high toughness (e.g. WC6Co has a bending
strength of 1,700 MPa and ultra ﬁne grain of 3,600 MPa). The high stiffness of
diamonds, ceramics and cemented carbides is another advantage of these mate-
rials. The Young’s modulus of diamonds is about 1,200 GPa, and ﬁne grained
cemented carbides can achieve more than 650 GPa which is more than three times
the modulus of elasticity of steels. On the other hand, the manufacturing route for
cemented carbides is expensive. In particular, the synthesizing of ultraﬁne carbide
powder is very complex. Furthermore, consolidation via hot isostatic pressing is
also limited to simple geometries. Machining of these materials is mainly possible
by grinding or electrical erosion. Among carbides only a few types [B4C
(3,700 HV), SiC (3,500 HV) and TiC (3,200 HV)] possess a very high hardness,
but they are not usually used for increasing the hardness of tool steels.
Nevertheless, TiC is frequently used in cemented carbides and especially in
204
E. Brinksmeier

Ferro-Titanites (Trademark of Deutsche Edelstahlwerke GmbH), where their sta-
bility during heat treatment of their steel-based binder phase is utilized.
The bonding strength of the hard materials to the binder phase is another aspect
which has to be considered. While it is desirable within the tool material to ensure
high fracture strength, a low binding energy is required by the workpiece to reduce
adhesive wear.
Hard phases can be subdivided with respect to their chemical binding, which
strongly inﬂuences the behavior (Table 7.1).
From Table 7.1 one can conclude that hard phases with metallic bonding show
a good compromise as long as chemical stability is not the major requirement.
Among the transition metal carbides, TiC has the highest stability and hardness but
the lowest toughness, while Cr- and W-carbides behave the other way round.
Vanadium carbide and niobium carbide are in-between.
Further potential candidates for micro forming tool materials are metallic
alloys. Among them iron-, nickel- and cobalt-based alloys are widely used. For
tool steels the hardness and the wear resistance strongly depend on the type of
carbides that precipitate during solidiﬁcation and heat treatment. Table 7.2 gives
an overview of carbide types in tool steels, including the composition and the
Table 7.1 Types of hard materials and basic properties
Chemical
binding
Examples
Toughness Adhesion
to metals
Hardness Stability
–DG
Chemically
inert
Metallic
Borides, nitrides,
carbides of transition
metals (e.g. TiB2,
TiC, TiN, VC, WC,
CrC)
***
***
**
**
*
Covalent
Borides, nitrides,
carbides of Al, Si, B
(e.g. B4C, SiC, BN),
diamond
**
*
***
*
**
Ionic
Oxides (e.g. Al2O3,
ZrO2, TiO2)
*
**
*
***
***
*** high, ** medium, * low
Table 7.2 Carbide types in tool steels [54]
Type
Hardness
Structure
Chemical composition in weight %
HV
C
Fe
Alloying elements
M3C
900
Orthorhombic
6.8
Rich (40–70 %)
Cr (B 18 %), Mn
M23C6
1,200–1,600
Cubic (complex)
5.5
Cr (20–60 %), Mo, W
M7C3
1,500
Hexagonal
9
Cr (30–65 %), Mo, W, V
M6C
1,500
FCC
2
W, Mo, V (R = 60 %)
M2C
1,800
Hexagonal
6
Poor (2–6 %)
W, Mo, V (R = 80 %)
MC
2,800–3,000
FCC
16
V (= 40 %), W, Mo
7
Tool Making
205

hardness of the carbides, with tungsten carbides and monocarbides from vanadium
and tungsten having the highest values.
A major challenge for preparing metallic alloys is their tendency to segregate
during solidiﬁcation and the presence of large inclusions, when the melt is cast. An
example is hypereutectoid 8 % chromium tool steel, which is produced by electro
slag remelting (ESR), a steelmaking process which already delivers very high
cleanliness and a lower degree of segregation compared to other melting and
casting methods. The longitudinal section of a forged bar shows segregation bands
with distances in the range of 100 lm and with some large chromium carbides
(Fig. 7.1). If the requested geometry of the tool is of similar dimensions it might
interfere with these material’s structures and problems might occur either during
machining or in service. If such alloys are to be used for micro forming tools, the
microstructure of the alloys needs further reﬁning. On the other hand, in particular
for iron based alloys, the properties of the materials can be altered by speciﬁc heat
treatments, giving excellent options for soft and hard machining according to cost
effectiveness and a variety of design and manufacturing solutions.
Generally tools need to resist speciﬁc loads (e.g. wear, pressure, corrosion) in
different areas. The selection of appropriate materials has to be aimed at the
deﬁned adaptation to the speciﬁc working behavior as well as to the reaching of an
adequate service time for the tool. Solutions are provided by material surface
modiﬁcations of a semi-ﬁnished tool or by direct combination of materials to a
well deﬁned compound with the desired properties.
Surface modiﬁcations have been produced for decades by plating, welding,
thermal spraying, electroplating and physical or chemical vapor deposition, to
name the most popular processes. These methods have in common that they
produce a relatively sharp transition between the different materials in the
micrometer scale or submicrometer scale. At the interface the binding is weakened
since the chemical bond is limited due to different crystal structures and lattice
parameters [109]. Furthermore, process-induced residual stresses show maximum
gradients at such interfaces. Different thermal expansion of the materials can lead
to additional stresses during in service heating, e.g. due to unlubricated friction
contact [51]. Therefore these composites may only exhibit limited stability [97].
100 µm 
Fig. 7.1 Microstructure of
hypereutectoid 8 % Cr tool
steel, produced by electro
slag remelting and forging
(longitudinal section of
forged material)
206
E. Brinksmeier

A countermeasure to enhance robustness is to generate a gradual transition of
the material properties between the different functional materials. On coated
surfaces intermediate layers are inserted between the materials with basic func-
tionality which serve to mediate the differences in crystal structure, lattice
parameters and thermal stresses [68]. In the case of a reactive component being
involved in the coating process, e.g. in PVD or CVD processes (see Sect. 7.5),
gradient layers can be developed just by the controlled variation of the reactive
gas. Also multilayer components are realized, so PVD and CVD are the most
promising techniques for generating tool materials with a gradient in chemical
composition, not only of light elements (C, B, N) but also in terms of the
dimensions of the micrometer scale.
Thicker coatings or bulks with layered graded structures scaled in the lower
millimeter range can be developed during thermal spraying (see Sect. 7.1.2).
Another method of the modiﬁcation of the surface material is to generate
chemical gradients into the near-surface region produced by thermochemical
processes. Here one component diffuses with a high diffusion rate into the base
material, thereby forming a gradient (carburizing, nitriding, boriding, etc.) usually
with the highest concentration of diffusing light elements at the surface. In all
cases of surface alteration by coating or thermochemical processes, subsequent
machining is limited to an adjustment of the surface, e.g. by grinding or polishing.
The preparation of tool composites of Fe-based materials is found in powder
metallurgy, just by the HIPing of a steel powder with high amount of carbides with
a core of a lower alloyed steel [100]. By powder mixing and adding of the powder
layer by layer to a green body for sintering, one can achieve graded high-speed
steel alloys, e.g. with signiﬁcant variation in tungsten carbide [23]. But this pro-
cedure is limited by the powder particle size to only a few different powder layers
per mm of gradient thickness. Several variants of the method for the manufacture
of graded green bodies for powder metallurgy and technical ceramics were
developed for this purpose, focusing on the handling of ultraﬁne powders to
achieve thinner gradient layers [52]. Because of the small particle size of the
powder required and a signiﬁcant shrinkage during the hot isostatic pressing (HIP)
of powders the techniques only show limited success, especially in the generation
of semi-ﬁnished graded structures in the submillimeter range.
Spray forming, as a combination of melt atomization and subsequent direct
consolidation, can be a more promising method to produce complex shaped gra-
dients. Beam-assisted methods, e.g. laser beam melting, where the powder is
deposited in thin layers and consolidated layer by layer, are also promising
techniques (Sect. 7.2). In the following sections four technologies for micro
forming tool materials production including gradients are presented: spray form-
ing, thermal spraying, laser beam based sintering and selective laser beam melting.
7
Tool Making
207

7.1.1 Spray Forming
Spray forming is a primary forming technique to achieve ﬁne grained materials
from a melt with a high production rate. This technique is located between ingot
casting and powder metallurgy with respect to production speed, ﬁne micro-
structure and the isotropy of properties. Spray forming was primarily developed
for the speeding up of powder metallurgical consolidation processes, like sintering
or hot isostatic pressing. The technique is able to produce 4 t of high-speed steel
billets in less than 2 h [91].
The main advantages of this technique are observed when working with alloys
with eutectic phases and hard and brittle phases that directly precipitate from the
melt. For high alloyed steels the former are mainly chromium-containing cold
work alloys with eutectic chromium carbides, the latter are high-speed steels with
high amounts of monocarbides (MC, mainly tungsten carbide and vanadium car-
bide). Figure 7.2 demonstrates this feature of the reﬁning and homogenization of
the microstructure by the spray forming technique (compare with Fig. 7.1 for the
same steel).
In spray forming, the alloy melt is prepared by conventional ladle metallurgical
measures. Usually the melt is kept in a vessel with a protective atmosphere and no
slag is used either for protection or cleaning from residual impurities (Fig. 7.3).
The melt with a superheat of 100–200 K is then poured into a funnel-shaped
tundish. Ceramic foam ﬁlters at the bottom of the tundish may be used for cleaning
the melt from oxides and other high melting point impurities. When leaving the
tundish as a free-falling stream the melt is atomized to a spray cone by a concentric
arrangement of gas nozzles. This spray cone consists of droplets with sizes in the
range of a few microns to a few hundred microns, depending on the alloy type,
diameter of the tundish opening, atomizing gas type and pressure. Furthermore,
these droplets are accelerated by the gas ﬂow to speeds of about 100 m/s. In
contrast to powder metallurgical production, where the atomized melt is collected
solidiﬁed as a powder, in the spray forming process a rotating disk is positioned in
the spray chamber. It works as a substrate to collect the droplets before complete
100 µm
Fig. 7.2 Microstructure
(longitudinal section) of
spray formed hypereutectoid
8 % Cr tool steel after
forging, hardening and
tempering (same alloy as in
Fig. 7.1)
208
E. Brinksmeier

solidiﬁcation and a billet-shaped deposit is formed while the disk is withdrawn in
the direction of the rotation axis.
After atomization there is a high amount of enthalpy dissipated from the spray
cone and the ﬁne droplets are completely solidiﬁed. Large droplets on the other
hand are still liquid but may be undercooled. There are also fractions of droplets in
the spray cone in a semi-solid state. Upon impinging the surface of the substrate,
the liquid droplets start to crystallize while the ﬁne solid particles start to absorb
heat from the larger droplets and are completely or partially dissolved. Therefore a
thin surface layer, called a mushy layer, is created where the alloy is partially
solidiﬁed and subsequently completely solidiﬁes while the mushy layer continu-
ously moves in the direction of the deposit growth. In addition, the momentum of
the impinging droplets is transferred to the mushy layer, leading to disturbances in
the liquid and fragmentation of the solidiﬁed structures, e.g. dendrite arms or
acicular precipitates.
Finally, a ﬁne and equiaxed microstructure results. Because of this sequential
solidiﬁcation from the mushy layer the microstructure only slightly depends on the
position within the billet and the billet dimensions, as indicated by the eutectic cell
diameters over the radius and for different sizes of high-speed steel billet (Fig. 7.4).
Due to sequential solidiﬁcation during spray forming it is possible to form more
complex deposit shapes. The use of a rotational tubular substrate leads to a tubular
billet, which can either be used as a clad product [108] or removed. By moving a
substrate plate through the spray cone and scanning it perpendicularly to the
moving direction via the oscillation of the gas nozzles, a plate can be spray-
formed. By using the even more complex movement of a negative substrate form it
is possible to directly replicate a tool shape like a deep drawing tool in the
automotive industry [71] or a stamping tool [111].
Gas supply N2, Ar
Crucible
Tundish
Atomizer
Spray cone
Deposit 
(Billet)
Substrat with
manipulator for
rotation and 
withdrawl
Exhaust
and filter
Fig. 7.3 Schematic of spray
forming of a cylindrical billet
7
Tool Making
209

Since the deposit is formed from disintegrated melt, i.e. droplets and particles,
the occurrence of porosity, i.e. microvoids and pores, in the deposit is of particular
importance. Porosity is classiﬁed into ‘‘cold porosity’’ and ‘‘hot porosity’’
according to its appearance and the mechanisms of its formation. Hot porosity
indicates a hot spray cone with insufﬁcient enthalpy dissipation. This leads to the
entrapment of atomization gas in the compaction layer, which forms spherical gas
pores (Fig. 7.5a). Gaseous dissolutions in the alloy melt (hydrogen, nitrogen)
might also be expelled from the solidiﬁed alloy and recombine into similar looking
pores (‘‘Type A’’ porosity). The second feature of hot porosity (‘‘Type B’’
porosity) are voids at the edges of dendritic cells due to the shrinkage of the
residual melt (Fig. 7.5b). In large billets, a very hot spray might lead to hot
cracking, e.g. thermal stresses, together with large amounts of residual melt
forming large voids in the central billet area. Cold porosity on the other hand is
caused by a lack of liquid material in the spray cone and in the mushy layer, where
the initial fraction of liquid becomes too low, i.e. the compaction conditions are
too cold. This leads to interstitial voids with a typical irregular shape (Fig. 7.5c),
which frequently occur at the substrate or close to the surface of the deposit.
For large billet-shaped deposits, cold porosity at the rim can in many cases be
neglected or, if necessary, can be removed by peeling or grinding prior to further
processing. For tubular or ﬂat deposits as well as for more complex shapes rim
porosity is a signiﬁcant problem. So the planning and running of a spray forming
Fig. 7.5 Types of porosity in spray-formed steels. a Hot porosity ‘‘type A’’ (spherical gas pores).
b Hot porosity ‘‘type B’’. c Cold porosity (lack of liquid leading to interstitial voids with irregular
shape)
Fig. 7.4 Eutectic cell diameter over the radius and for different sizes of billet
210
E. Brinksmeier
Spray-formed billets
 20 kg
  90 kg
 100 kg
 300 kg
700 kg
Range for 
4000 kg 
billets [86]
0
Core
Transition
Rim
25
50
75
100
µm
150
Diameter of eutectic
network cells
Ingot Casting
Randak, A. et al., Arch Eisenhüttenw.
36 (1965) 10, 725-736

process requires maximum efforts to overcome this problem. The heat transfer at
the substrate has to be adapted by the choosing of a suitable substrate material.
Pre-heating will help to reach thermally stable compacting conditions quickly and
reduce cold porosity at the bottom. The spray forming parameters need to be
properly adjusted to achieve an appropriate droplet size spectrum and appropriate
fraction of liquid in the spray at the compacting position. The important param-
eters are the superheat of the melt, the metallostatic height in the tundish and the
oriﬁce at the tundish, which deﬁne the melt mass ﬂow, the gas mass ﬂow and the
particle ﬂight distance. A further inﬂuencing factor is the relative movement of
substrate and spray-cone, which is ﬁrst and foremost responsible for the shape of
the deposit. The sum of movements is of utmost importance for keeping the
thermal condition of the compaction layer at the right level. This leads to optimum
compaction conditions concerning the cooling of surfaces outside the spray cone
by the surrounding gas stream. Positioning of the spray cone scanning turning
points outside the deposits can be used to smooth the mass and enthalpy input in
complex deposit shapes. This measure of course reduces the yield. On complex-
shaped deposits with high requirements of homogeneity in the microstructure,
additional corrections by machining will be necessary.
Due to its speciﬁc features, spray forming allows the generation of new alloys
or material combinations. In the ﬁeld of micro metal forming, graded materials are
of particular interest. Gradation of material composition can be done in several
ways during spray forming.
At ﬁrst, the composition of the alloy can be changed during pouring, either by
controlled dissolving components in the tundish or by the mixing of two melts by
simultaneously pouring into one tundish. As an example, Fig. 7.6 shows the radial
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
mass%
1.2
Carbon contents
0
5
10
15
20
25
mm
35
Radial height above the substrate
20 m
20 m
20 m
20 m
20 m
Fig. 7.6 Carbon gradient in low alloyed steel (spray formed tube, as-sprayed)
7
Tool Making
211

gradient of carbon in a tubular deposit [105]. This was achieved by continuously
increasing the melt’s carbon content by the further dissolution of carbon during the
spray forming run.
Secondly, solid particles could be injected into the spray cone with increasing
rate [18]. In this case a gradient will also be formed in the direction of deposit
growth.
The third method uses two sprays of different melts from independent tundish
and atomizers (Fig. 7.7). The different alloys, expressed by the two colors,
superpose while forming the deposit. The tilting angle together with the nozzle-to-
deposit distance affects the grade of the overlapping of the spray cones. If the axes
of the two spray cones are parallel, two successive layers of two different material
compositions will be deposited. At the interface there might only be slight tran-
sition zones because some elements will diffuse over a short distance at high
temperature according to the difference in concentration between alloys.
Tilting the atomizers leads to the overlapping of the spray cones and a mixing
of the droplets of the two different alloys before the complete solidiﬁcation of the
compaction layer. Due to turbulence in the semisolid surface layer the liquid
fraction will continue mixing. In addition, it can be assumed that further
homogenization of the composition of the alloy in the region of the gradient occurs
by diffusion at liquid/solid or solid/solid alloy boundaries. This mechanism is well
alloy 2
tilted 
atomizer
massflow-
density
superposed 
spray cones
moved 
substrate
graded 
deposit
alloy 1
Fig. 7.7 Spray forming of a two-layered deposit with a graded zone
212
E. Brinksmeier

known in powder metallurgy as ‘‘diffusion-alloying’’ but only works over short
distances and primarily for light elements [85].
With the assumption of a Gaussian mass distribution within two spray cones
and the scanning of the sprays perpendicular to the translational direction of the
substrate, the height of the resulting ﬂat deposit and the concentration proﬁle in the
deposit can be calculated. In Fig. 7.8 this is demonstrated for two alloys with
different carbon contents, where X12 is the distance between the two spray cones.
The concentration proﬁle reveals a graded zone with a slope that strongly depends
on X12. In this way, together with post-heat treatment and in combination with
various alloying elements, gradients of hardness, i.e. strength and wear resistance,
can be achieved. The height of the gradient depends on the two metal mass ﬂows,
the mass distributions in the spray cones and their distance to each other, as well as
on the spray distance and the translational speed of the substrate.
For spray formed billets the post-processing technique is very similar that of
ingot castings. Usually they are hot-worked to close the residual porosity and to
deform and recrystallize the grains to achieve a ﬁne microstructure without seg-
regation (compare Fig. 7.2). Eutectic carbides even in an as-sprayed state are
elongated to some extent. Therefore during hot-working they align in the main
forming direction. This causes some anisotropy of mechanical properties in the
material. Sometimes even fracture of the eutectic carbides is observed and the
matrix ﬁlls the gap between the fragments, thus reﬁning the carbide distribution
even more. While large billets are usually hammer-forged in a preliminary step,
hot-rolling is the preferred method to form semi-ﬁnished long products. In general,
because of the homogenous size and equiaxed shape of primary crystals and the
small hard phases, deformability of spray-formed materials is higher in compari-
son to as-cast materials.
X12 = 100 mm
X12 = 200 mm
0.0
0.2
m
0.6
Deposit length (from start)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
mm
40
Height of the deposit
0
10
20
mm
40
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
Carbon concentration in weight-%
Deposit height
1.4
Fig. 7.8 Calculated results of deposit thickness (left) and vertical concentration proﬁle (right) of
a spray formed gradient deposit. Base alloys carbon concentrations are 0.9 and 1.3 wt%,
respectively
7
Tool Making
213

Another method to get rid of the residual porosity (closed porosity) of spray-
formed alloys is hot isostatic pressing. This is the preferred method to densify
spray-formed materials in more complex shapes. Because the amount of porosity
of spray-formed materials, e.g. tool steels under optimized spray-form conditions,
is less than 2 %, no encapsulation is necessary and the shrinkage problem is
minimized. In principle these methods can also be used to reduce the width of the
gradient in a plate or to form a curved graded layer, e.g. by bending or die forging.
The production route of high-alloyed tool steels does not inﬂuence the hard-
ening and tempering behavior of the tool steel alloy [84]. For layered or gradient
materials the situation is much more complicated because the heat treatment must
be a compromise for all the alloys involved or a ‘‘gradient heat treatment’’ must be
applied.
7.1.2 Thermal Spraying
Thermal spraying includes a group of processes in which a feedstock material
(powder or wire) is molten by plasma, electric arc or combustion ﬂame of liquid or
gaseous fuel. The molten material is then accelerated by the expanding gases onto a
surface, where it rapidly solidiﬁes. The maximum particle speed mainly depends on
the process and ranges from 40 m/s in ﬂame spraying to 800 m/s in high velocity
oxygen fuel spraying, with arc and plasma spraying in between and detonation gun
spraying in the upper range. In the variant ‘‘cold spraying’’ the feedstock powder is
highly accelerated (up to 1,200 m/s) but its temperature remains below solidus. The
solid particles plastically deform and ﬂow upon impact, creating hydrodynamic
ﬂow instabilities at the interface between the particles and the already deposited
material. This results in bonding at the interface.
According to the technical standard EN 657:2005, one thermal spraying
method is molten metal spraying, in which molten material is used as feedstock for
spraying. This method is rarely used, but the binding link between thermal
spraying to spray forming can be seen.
Thermal spraying usually provides thick coatings in the range from around
50 lm to about 1 mm. The deposited coating materials can be metals, alloys,
ceramics, plastomers and composites.
The structure of the coating is dominated by highly deformed and rapidly
solidiﬁed droplets which bond mechanically together and adhere to the substrate,
respectively (Fig. 7.9). Therefore the substrate usually needs to be roughened, e.g.
by sand blasting. Porosity in-between the droplets and embedded unmolten par-
ticles characterize the structure. In the case of an ambient process atmosphere,
broken oxide shells are also embedded. At high particle impact speed, local fusion
or diffusion welding are assumed to be additional bonding mechanisms. In general,
the coating density and adhesion to the substrate increases with increasing particle
velocity.
214
E. Brinksmeier

An example of a thermal spray coating of chromium steel X20Cr13 (AISI 420)
on mild steel shows the difference in microstructure of different thermal spray
processes (Fig. 7.10). The rapid quenching of the droplets leads to a high hardness
of the coatings: 590 HV0.1 for atmospheric plasma spraying (APS) and 705 HV0.2
for high velocity oxygen fuel spraying (HVOF). The hardness differences can be
explained by the lower density in the APS coating (about 92 % of theoretical
density).
Using plasma spray torches with stainless steel and 88 %WC-12 %Co powder,
atmospheric plasma spraying can also be used for spray forming [113]. The
quenching of thermal-sprayed droplets (HVOF) is so rapid that e.g. FeAl-alloys
could be spray-formed to bulk materials with nanocrystalline structure [44].
Porosity in plasma spray coatings can be eliminated by hot isostatic pressing [92].
By using two thermal spray torches with different feedstock materials or by
mixing the powders in one ﬂame, the droplets can be mixed in the spray and
simultaneously hit the surface. Variation of the two feedstock supplies during
growth of the coating leads to a variation in the fractions of the two materials (e.g.
NiCr–ZrO2) in the direction of the growth of the coating, i.e. a gradient is
50 µm
50 µm
Fig. 7.10 Thermal spray coatings of steel X20Cr13 (left atmospheric plasma spraying, APS;
right high velocity oxygen fuel spraying, HVOF)
substrate
thermal spray 
layer
void
oxide
unmolten
particle
Fig. 7.9 Microstructure of a thermal spray coating (schematic)
7
Tool Making
215

generated [68]. The gradation is limited by the particle size since very ﬁne
powders are difﬁcult to process. Furthermore, the thermal sprayed materials have a
short thermal exposure and mixing of the different melt droplets or diffusion over
larger distances is impossible. In fact in the ‘‘graded system’’ metal-matrix-com-
posites or metal-mixtures with different mixing ratios are produced.
7.1.3 Properties of Graded Tool Materials
The properties of functionally combined materials are focused with regard to their
speciﬁc applications and services. Micro forming tools demand the careful
selection of materials or material combinations. Surface modiﬁcation by coatings
or diffusion layers, with more or less graded areas, can be advantageous. Post-heat
treatments for desired microstructures and properties always inﬂuence the whole
sample although it is possible to conﬁne a heat treatment within the sample surface
(e.g. short-term heat treatment by laser beam or high-frequency induction). Those
treatments change the stress state of the whole sample. Under unfavorable con-
ditions shear stresses at the interface of the combined materials might lead to
material separation. In addition, combined materials usually have different coef-
ﬁcients of thermal expansion. Under thermal load this further changes the stress
state and might promote cracking and/or delamination.
The resultant micro forming tool can reveal a very complex ‘‘property status’’
due to its elaborate design and manufacture. The orientation of graded or layered
structures relative to the functional surface of the tool is also important, and the
depth of loading also has to be considered (friction, abrasive wear, Hertzian
stress). Finally, the surface roughness of the tool inﬂuences the forming process
and the quality of the deformed workpiece, as it may cause tool failure due to
stress concentration. To understand the performance of a tool made of a composite
or graded material, it is therefore necessary to take the material features, the
process characteristics as well as the speciﬁc loads in service into consideration.
7.1.3.1 Mechanical Properties
Important mechanical properties for cold forming tools are strength, toughness and
fatigue resistance. Mechanical properties of a bulk material depend on the com-
position of the alloy and its microstructure. Experimental determination of these
properties is more sophisticated when the samples, e.g. micro forming tools,
become small. If the size of the compound becomes small, especially in the
direction of the gradient and within the gradient, local properties may not be
attainable from direct measurement. Here, and especially in the case of layered or
graded material, ﬁnite element modeling (FE) is a promising method for property
development and conditioning. On the other hand, one should focus on the relevant
216
E. Brinksmeier

material parameters of each material with respect to the speciﬁc loads. Addi-
tionally the determination of the interface properties is an important task.
In the last few decades there has been successful work to understand the
behavior of such materials by FE calculations with mixing rules for the mechanical
properties of the different phases (e.g. [76]) and with consideration of inner energy
for crack propagation [28]. In modelling indentation of hard bodies into layered
structures, even with signiﬁcant abstractions to reduce computing time, e.g. the
assumption of rotational symmetry, neglecting interfacial stresses, etc., the cal-
culations showed good agreement with experimental results [45]. Nevertheless,
indentation hardness measurements can also be used to estimate toughness on the
edge cracks or coating delamination by the generation of complex 3-axis stress
states below the indenter, showing that ductility of the layers needs to be con-
sidered and interfacial strength also needs to be introduced in these models.
Any kind of mechanical property can therefore be successfully modeled. Con-
versely, the desired mechanical properties are designable on demand via FE cal-
culations, as long as the material can be produced in a speciﬁc way and the
properties of the existing components and their interfacial behavior are well known.
As an example, the variation in impact toughness by slight variations in the
constituents of high alloyed tool steels, spray formed (SF) and powder metallur-
gical (PM), which are both candidates for micro forming tool materials, are shown.
It is dependent on the heat treatment, resulting in the corresponding hardness
values and on the alloy composition (Fig. 7.11). This can be explained by the
different amounts of hard carbides MC, M2C, M6C and M7C in these alloys, which
support crack propagation along the carbide/matrix interface in different ways. A
softer matrix caused by a higher tempering temperature slows down crack prop-
agation. Higher impact toughness in addition results from smaller carbides, i.e. the
path of the crack along the carbide before reaching the matrix is shorter. This
explains the difference between the SF alloys and the PM variants, and also the
FeC1.2Cr8Mo2V2Al1
FeC1.1Cr8MoV0.5Al1
FeC1.1Cr8Mo2V0.5Nb1Al1
FeC1.1Cr8Mo2V0.5Nb2Al1
FeC1.5Cr8Mo2V2Nb1Al1
X153CrMoV12-1
X220CrVMo13-4
PMHS6-5-3C
X153CrMoV12-1
X220CrVMo13-4
50
55
HRC
65
Hardness
  0
 20
 40
 60
 80
100
120
    J
160
y
g
r
e
n
e
t
c
a
p
m
I
Spray formed
Powder metallurgical
Fig. 7.11 Impact energy of high alloyed tool steels (sample 55 9 10 9 7 according to ‘‘SEP
1314’’) versus hardness due to tempering temperature (secondary hardening)
7
Tool Making
217

differences in alloys with different carbides. In the PM variants of high alloyed tool
steels the average carbide diameter is 20–40 % smaller than in similar SF variants.
Beside resistance against impact, the mechanical strength of a tool steel is an
important property. For tool steels with high hardness, which contain high amounts
of carbides, it is hardly possible to perform tensile tests, because there is limited
plastic deformation and the carbides must be considered as inner notches, thus
leading to high statistical uncertainties. Therefore the bending strength r4b, which
is determined by the four-point bending test, is a better measure to compare the
static mechanical properties of those steels (Fig. 7.12 left). In this test the bending
moment is constant between the rolls of the upper support and there are no high
stress concentrations. This reduces the uncertainties for the test of samples with
randomly distributed inner defects. From the permitted deﬂection of the sample in
the z-direction (z = 2 mm) in the sample mount the maximum stress in the set-up
used is limited to about 5,000 MPa (i.e. F * 37 kN).
l
l
ll
l
l
Fig. 7.12 Top sketch of the four-point bending set-up, Bottom four-point-bending strength r4B
of different variants of tool steels (samples: l = 35 mm, b = 7 mm, h = 5 mm) parallel and
orthogonal to forging direction)
218
E. Brinksmeier

The results show that there is a strong dependency of the bending strength on
forging direction, which can be explained by the orientation of elongated eutectic
carbides (Fig. 7.12 right). In the transversal direction, e.g. perpendicular to the
longest Feret diameter of the carbide, there are a high number of short boundaries
between the matrix and carbides. Therefore cracks can be easily initiated and
propagate on a short pass vertically through the sample. In the longitudinal
direction there are less carbides per length and therefore crack initiation is reduced.
In addition, the path of cracks around a long side of a carbide is longer, e.g. more
energy is needed to generate the new surface area, thus explaining the higher
longitudinal values.
From this context it becomes evident that the amount of carbides and their
morphology, both depending on the alloy’s composition, also inﬂuence the
bending strength. Eutectic chromium carbides have larger aspect ratios than nio-
bium carbides or tungsten carbides. From the rb4 values one can see that one
measure could be the increase of the Nb contents and therefore suppress some of
the Cr-carbide precipitation. On the other hand, after the addition of carbon, more
carbides precipitate. This decreases rb4 to some extent. Another aspect, which
becomes visible in Fig. 7.12, is the inﬂuence of the process, i.e. the solidiﬁcation
conditions. Despite containing approximately 0.4 % more carbon and 1 % more
vanadium in comparison with the spray-formed HS6-5-2C (AISI M2) the powder
metallugical PMHS6-5-3C (AISI M3:2) shows similar bending strength. This can
be explained by the faster solidiﬁcation rate during power production, i.e. there are
more but much smaller carbides in the PM material in comparison with the SF
material.
In spray formed materials, a small amount of the process gas nitrogen is
entrapped. It can inﬂuence material properties. An increased nitrogen content in a
vanadium containing hot-working steel (755 ppm instead of 340 ppm) decreases
the material ductility at 550 C by about 12 % [87]. This can be explained by
higher thermal stability of V(C,N) in comparison to VC at the grain boundaries,
which cannot be completely dissolved during heat treatment. Embrittlement due to
an increased amount of nitrogen in the vanadium containing tool steels was also
observed in bending-tests and impact tests at room temperature, as well as during
thermal fatigue testing.
As shown before for thermal sprayed coatings (Sect. 7.1.2), hardness is not only
a matter of constituents and heat treatment but also of porosity, which can be
interpreted as an additional very soft phase with poor binding.
7.1.3.2 Wear Resistance
Wear in general occurs at the surface of a tool in contact with a medium or another
solid material. Basic wear mechanisms are abrasive wear, adhesive wear and
corrosive wear as well as surface fatigue (see also Sect. 2.2.2). They all have to be
considered for tool wear in micro forming. In specially designed tools with a
material gradient at the effective surface, the wear resistance may change locally.
7
Tool Making
219

Disturbances in micro forming can occur, including failure of the complete tool
due to a local increase in friction and wear and therefore stresses. Such effects have
to be considered during tool development. However, considering the responsible
wear mechanisms, it may nonetheless be possible to use graded or layered func-
tional surfaces. Also the ﬁnal surface protection of graded materials can help
achieve equivalent wear conditions.
In the case of dry friction, but also in mixed friction or with hard particles
between the sliding materials, abrasive wear is the main wear mechanism. Hard
materials under sliding contact at the sample surface, e.g. inclusions or already
strain hardened areas in the workpiece, embedded or free particles, e.g. dust or
corrosion debris, scratch the tool surface. This leads to local plastic deformation,
e.g. debris from micro-cutting with material removal from the tools surface. With
increasing tool hardness the wear is reduced. Homogenously distributed mono-
carbides or eutectic carbides prevent ploughing by hard particles. Furthermore,
abrasive wear resistance depends on the carbide types. In particular monocarbides
from tungsten, vanadium or niobium are much harder (NbC, WC about
2,500 HV0.05;
VC
up
to
3,200 HV0.05)
than
(Fe80%,Cr20%)7C3
with
1,500 HV0.05 or 1,670 HV0.05 if they additionally contain 2 % vanadium, as
compared in Fig. 7.13. The variation in carbon content (for example produced by
spray forming for enhancement of tool strength) leads to different wear resistance.
This can be considered in the tool design.
A second wear mechanism with major importance for micro forming tool
applications is adhesion. In this case the tool and the workpiece are locally welded
X153CrMoV12
PM
SF
C
0
5
10
  15
   20
%
    30
Carbide area fraction 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Average abrasive wear VAbr
    (relative to the value for 
        X153CrMoV12 (C))
Cr7C3
plus hard MxC
X290Cr12 
X220CrVMo13-4
PMHS6-5-3C
HS6-5-2C
X210Cr12
Fig. 7.13 Abrasive wear resistance (pin on-disk and rubber-wheel test according to ASTM
G65.94) of hardened and tempered tool steels (61–64 HRC) versus carbide content determined by
light microscopy (average of wear losses of both tests relative to the loss of ingot casted
X153CrMoV12 (AISI D2) cold work steel), C ingot casting, SF spray formed, PM powder
metallurgical [88]
220
E. Brinksmeier

and torn apart which leads to material transfer between the wear partners. A typical
example for adhesive wear debris on a micro forming tool is shown in Fig. 7.14.
One solution can be the use of ﬁnely dispersed tiny V(C,N)-particles which
strongly reduce the tendency towards adhesion in cold-work steels. Due to the
similarity of V(C,N) and Nb(C,N), diffusion alloyed high-Nb steels are expected to
show similar performance [41].
Adhesive wear can also be avoided by selecting a ‘‘less similar’’ tool material
with or by coating of the tool to reduce the tendency towards welding. Oxidation
of the tool surface can also reduce adhesive wear. Therefore a ﬁnal oxidizing heat
treatment can be taken into account before using the tool to thicken the natural
oxide layer, especially when chromium or aluminum are dissolved in the surface
area.
As micro forming works with high local loads, one has to consider elastic
deformation in the region close to the tool surface, either due to friction or
Hertzian stress by local contact. There cyclic loading mainly leads to shear stresses
and later to fatigue cracks directly at or closely below the surface. During a
number of loading cycles the cracks grow and meet to form fatigue wear debris,
i.e. small or larger detached parts of the tool surface. When the tool is protected
against wear, by a coating or hard surface layer, the layer thickness must be
selected with respect to a maximum load, because the maximum Hertzian stress
should not be located at the interface or below. On the other hand, if the protective
surface layer has a low friction coefﬁcient, but has limited fatigue resistance, it can
be advantageous to reduce the thickness of this layer and to locate the maximum
shear stress below the gradient in a material that can withstand the alternating
shear stresses without serious fatigue for long load cycles. Gradients which reduce
the internal stresses at the interface between the different materials might further
reduce crack susceptibility.
100 µm
Fig. 7.14 Debris from
austenitic stainless steel
(arrow) on a micro swaging
tool (back scatter electron
image)
7
Tool Making
221

7.1.3.3 Corrosion Resistance
Corrosive attacks in principle occur at the surfaces of materials which are in direct
contact with a corrosive medium that disintegrates the material dissolving it into
the corrosive medium or by the formation of new, less stable compounds. For tool
materials electrochemical corrosion is the most common type of corrosion. In this,
a local Galvanic cell is formed a current ﬂows and the less noble metal is elec-
trolytically dissolved.
According to these mechanisms for metallic alloys in tool applications, the
main reason for tool corrosion is segregation, precipitation and the mechanical
electrical contact with other parts of the facility or with the workpiece material,
which might form a galvanic couple. In dry cold forming, moisture and chloride
from unprotected handling are the main sources for the electrolyte. Corrosion of
the tool anyway leads to a loss of tool material, i.e. corrosive wear. Figure 7.15
shows an example of severe corrosion caused by abrasive particles in a corrosive
medium (erosion corrosion). The corrosion is promoted by the segregation banding
of the continuous cast and hot-worked steel. This example shows that more
homogenous material, e.g. produced by spray forming, is expected to be less
susceptible to selective attack by corrosion. Looking at the gradients or layered
structures, these structures can be regarded in a similar way like segregations. As
long as the structure is graded or layered parallel to the surface only the outer layer
determines the corrosion behavior of the tool. In other cases where the layers are
inclined relative to the surface the weakest material determines the corrosion
behavior (Fig. 7.15).
The principal protection measure against corrosion is either the use of more
noble metals or the use of protective coatings, which might be natural, e.g. alumina
on aluminum, chromium oxide on stainless steel (steel with more than 10.5 % Cr
in dissolution) or artiﬁcial, e.g. galvanic chromium coatings or ceramic coating.
For corrosion resistant tools the main feature is the stability of the protective
coating. In particular, the natural passivation layer on chromium steels forms
100 µm
Fig. 7.15 Severe corrosion
of a conventionally produced
tool steel X46Cr13 (AISI
420)
222
E. Brinksmeier

within minutes and the growth rate and thickness of the layer increase with
temperature. But the layer is only in the range of 10 nm thick and can therefore be
easily damaged, especially by abrasive wear.
Another aspect of corrosion protective coatings is the density of the coating
layer. Porosity in a thin coating will reduce the corrosion resistance, as was
observed when comparing APS- and HVOF-coatings of around 150 lm thick
duplex stainless steel with a porosity of 1.5 % and less than 0.2 % [113]. In cases
where there is no possibility of avoiding porosity, the materials can be inﬁltrated
by polymers to ﬁll the pores and enhance their corrosion resistance.
7.2 Additive Manufacturing
Knut Partes
7.2.1 Basic Principles and Prospects
Additive layer manufacturing (ALM) is a generative layer-wise process to produce
objects from 3D model data. A near net shape geometry is desired. ALM can be
used for the production of prototypes (rapid prototyping), for the production of
parts (rapid production) or for the production of tools (rapid tooling).
In order to fabricate an object from a 3D model the following steps are
essential. The ﬁrst step is the 3D geometry slicing, corresponding to the layer
thickness. The thickness of the layers depends on the speciﬁc type of the process or
the demands on the vertical resolution. After the slicing step, trajectories have to
be deﬁned which describe the movement of the energy source in every plane. In
order to deﬁne the trajectories the spatial resolution of one plane has to be taken
into account. This resolution is named lateral resolution. The lateral resolution
depends on the ALM process itself. With the information of the plane geometries
and the individual trajectories, a ‘‘build job’’ for the ALM machine has to be
generated. The diversity of the possible methods to actually generate the object is
high. An overview of the historical development and the diversity is given in [56].
It was concluded that only three methods are signiﬁcant for the production of
dense metal parts. For the fabrication of tools only dense metal parts have the
potential properties of strength, fracture toughness and wear resistance. Hence in
the following only these methods will be taken into account.
These three techniques are Selective Laser Melting (SLM), Direct Metal
Deposition (DMD) and Electron Beam Melting (EBM). All these processes have
in common is that the parts are made from powder. For the generation of micro
forming tools the aspect of the lateral and vertical resolutions is very important.
The generation of micro tools is in general possible with all these techniques.
In SLM, a powder bed is placed with a deﬁned thickness. The process is
commonly placed in a chamber ﬂooded with an inert gas atmosphere in order to
7
Tool Making
223

avoid oxidation. The laser beam is commonly scanned with a 2D scanner over the
surface. The laser beam is generally focused with an f-Theta lens system on the
surface. This lens system keeps the focus in one plane instead of a curved plane
(petzval membrane). Hence the focal position is supposed to be independent of the
scanner position in terms of height. The laser beam interacts with the loose powder
bed and increases the local temperature above the melting temperature. The
powder particles completely melt and locally fuse together after solidiﬁcation. By
moving the laser beam the melt pool moves over the surface. After the melting
process the powder bed is partially consolidated. Afterwards the powder bed is
lowered and a new layer is placed on top and the process repeats. A generated part
density of 100 % is desired. However, the parts being generated do have a porosity
of about 0.5–1 %.
The layer thickness is basically limited by the powder particle size. The lowest
limit of the powder particle size in commercial machines is about 10 lm. However
layer thicknesses of 30–50 lm are more realistic. The lateral resolution is physi-
cally limited by the melt pool size and powder particle size. The melt pool size is
basically a consequence of the process parameters and the size of the laser spot on
the surface itself. In general it can be assumed that the size of the melt pool follows
the size of the laser spot. The line energy also inﬂuences the melt pool size. It is
obvious that the resolution is also limited by the increments of the scanner, but in
general this is smaller than the laser spot diameter. Moreover the size of the laser
spot is generally larger than the size of the particles. A state of the art laser today is
about 50 lm in diameter according to the manufacturers of the SLM machines.
In DMD the laser beam generates a melt pool on a surface. The powder is
delivered by a coaxial nozzle to the melt pool. The particles are commonly fed via a
pneumatic powder feeder. This powder feeding technique is basically developed for
thermal spray processes. Hence it is optimized for the particle sizes of this type of
process. The process is similar to the laser cladding process. A melt pool is gen-
erated with a laser beam. The particles travel through the laser beam, being partially
heated, and enter the melt pool. In the melt pool the particles melt and solidify.
After solidiﬁcation a clad track is formed. By putting clad tracks next to each other
a plane can be covered. One essential disadvantage is that the clad tracks can only
be placed on the material below. Hence, overhang structures can only be produced
up to a certain angle. The nozzle geometry is coaxial in order to get the ﬂexibility of
being independent of the moving direction in one plane. In this type of process one
layer is welded by moving the complete working head (or the object) in the x- and
y-coordinates. After processing one plane the table is lowered or the welding head
is increased in height and the next plane can be processed.
Moving speed and accelerations are limited due to the process principles of the
machine kinematics. Moreover, based on the pneumatic powder feeding technol-
ogy, the particle stream cannot instantaneously be switched on or off. Even if the
powder feeder is fast enough to switch on and off, the hoses that connect the
powder hopper with the working head can cause latencies in switching. Hence in
practical conditions the laser is switched on and off. The powder stream is more or
less continuously running. A lot of powder is lost due to misalignment or laser off
224
E. Brinksmeier

time. These powder particles can only rarely be recycled because some of the
powder particles have traveled through the laser beam. This causes an oxidation of
the particles. Experiments show that the processing result decreases greatly in
quality if a part of the powder particles was previously oxidized. Presently this
powder cannot be decontaminated. Moreover some machines are constructed
inside inert gas ﬂooded chambers like the SLM machines. Some of the particles
that have traveled through the laser beam remain as overspray on the surface.
The vertical resolution is limited by the minimum track height of the process.
This track height is in general somewhat as large as the particles themselves.
Thicknesses as small as to 20 lm [110] have been reported. The lateral resolution
is basically limited by the track width.
The power density plays an important role in the consolidation mechanism for
SLM and DMD. If the power density exceeds a certain threshold, the material will
start to vaporize. If vaporization occurs, the melt pool will start to be shifted apart
from the center of highest power density due to the pressure wave. A keyhole
(capillary ﬁlled with metal steam) will be formed. As a consequence the melting
depth is strongly increased. This is called the deep penetration effect.
Below the critical threshold of the power density the consolidation mechanism is
mainly driven by the heat conduction effect. The thermo physical property of the
material is dependent on the state of the material. The material can either be in the
powder state or in solid state. It can easily be seen that the heat conductivity of loose
powder is much less than that of the bulk material. It has been shown in models by
[82] that the melt pool geometry can be described by modeling the heat conduction
relationships taking the different heat conductivities into account. From this it can
be concluded that the position of the laser beam has an inﬂuence on the consoli-
dation result. E.g. it has been shown in [17] that the consolidation of an overhang
structure needs less energy because the local heat conduction losses are comparably
low. This is caused by the fact that consolidation is locally performed on loose
powder. However, currently the development of an online in situ laser power
control based on a pyrometric coaxial heat measurement unit are under investi-
gation. This could be an important development for SLM machines. Another effect
of local heat accumulation is described by [17] in U-turn situations. This is caused
by the surrounding weakly heat conducting powder bed and the acceleration of
mirror tilting. An online laser power control might avoid this accumulation.
Beside the power density, the scan velocity is another important parameter. If
the scan velocity increases, the laser power has to be increased as well in order
complete melting the powder bed. However, depending on the laser beam
geometry and the material, balling occurs above a certain threshold. The effect of
balling has been shown in many publications [110]. This is an effect correlated
with the Rayleigh theory of the free propagating jet of liquid. Lord Rayleigh
discovered that every continuous jet of ﬂuid tears apart due to surface tension
effects after a certain path length of free travel. This effect can be seen in every
water tap. If the scan velocity of the laser beam rises with the laser power, the melt
pool length becomes longer. If the length becomes critical, a similar effect occurs
on the melt pool. As a result of that the material solidiﬁes as droplets on the
7
Tool Making
225

surface. This effect, called balling, should be avoided. It is currently a limiting
effect of the buildup rate.
The EBM process is more or less similar to the laser process, but the energy
source for the powder consolidation is an electron beam. The electron beam is
scanned and focused by magnetic ﬁelds along the surface and generates a melt
pool. The advantage of the EBM process is the high dynamic of the electron beam.
The downside of this process is that the process needs a vacuum chamber. Some
commercial EBM systems are presently available. However, the process does not
seem as well developed as that of SLM technology.
Vertical resolution is basically limited by the particle size itself, as in the SLM
process. The lateral resolution is limited by the particle size and the size of the
melt pool. The melt pool size is coupled to the size of the electron beam spot at the
surface and by the current. Theoretically, the electron beam spot can be smaller
compared to the laser beam spot size.
In EBM the melt pool is generated by an electron beam. This beam is focused
and deﬂected by magnetic ﬁeld lenses. Due to the fact that the electromagnetic ﬁeld
lenses lack mass inertia, the deﬂection can occur much faster than compared to the
laser beam. The laser beam deﬂection is limited by the scanner servo inertia. This
has one particular advantage; the melt pool geometry can be modiﬁed by a fast
scanning beam in terms of a broadening or elongation of the melt pool by scanning
the electron beam parallel or perpendicular to the moving direction. Even though
the electron beam does not have the diffraction limit of a laser beam, the spot size of
on the surface is typically 10 lm [31] on ﬂat surfaces, e.g. for welding applications.
All these three processes are able to produce dense metallic parts. Therefore the
processes are possible candidates for the fabrication of tools. However the least
resolution and the limitation in the design in the DMD process makes this process
probably the last choice for most applications in the fabrication of micro tools. The
highest potential is given by the SLM and EBM processes in order to fabricate
near net shape micro geometries out of tool steel materials.
Different methods for the placing of the powder exist. In general the building
platform in SLM and EBM processes is lowered in order to place the following layer.
A common technology is the usage of a loader ﬁlled with powder (Fig. 7.16a). The
loader is moved over the previous layer and feeds the powder with a rotating cylinder
Part Powder bed
Piston 1
Piston 2
Substrate
Roller
Feeding 
cylinder
Piston
Substrate
Loader
Powder bed
Part
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7.16 Different powder placement mechanisms. a Loader. b Two piston strategy
226
E. Brinksmeier

drive. Afterwards a wiper makes the loose powder bed ﬂat. Hence the height of the
loose powder bed is given by the difference in height between the consolidated
surface and the amount of height the previous layer was decreased. Another method
of powder placing consists of two platforms (Fig. 7.16b). One cylinder is ﬁlled with
the loose powder and the other platform contains the building platform. While the
building platform is lowered the feeding platform is lifted. The changes in height
represent the same amount of volume as the decreased layer. Hence the right amount
of building platform and ﬂattens the surface.
The SLM scanning speed is limited by the inertia of the galvanometer mirrors
itself. One can see that the EBM process has the advantage of being a fast moving
energy source. This allows generating nearly arbitrary shaped temperature distri-
butions at the surface. However the surface ﬁnish and feature resolution of the
EBM process is somehow weak in comparison to SLM. These aspects could be
important for micro tool production. For high feature resolution SLM might be a
better choice. If the powder material needs a speciﬁc heat treatment during the
process, EBM could offer greater ﬂexibility. All the features of EBM and SLM are
listed in Table 7.3 according to [27].
There is no generally preferred production method for the fabrication of micro
tools. However it can be seen that regarding the restriction in terms of resolution,
the SLM process presently has the best performance. Moreover, the spectrum of
treatable materials is slightly larger compared to EBM.
In order to process the powder particles in the EBM or SLM process the ﬂux
ability of the powder is important. In order to have a high resolution, generally
small powder particles are needed. With a decrease in powder particle size, the
ability to ﬂow tends to decrease. This is caused by the comparably higher surface
to volume ratio with decreasing particle size. If the surface has greater inﬂuence
than the volume, adhesion forces between particles and hydroscopic effects makes
the powder tend to agglomerate. Moreover, the lowest surface area can be
achieved when the particles are spherical. However, depending on the atomization
process at the powder fabrication, some particles can have satellites, some can be
ﬂat or they can have a very irregular shape. If the particles are irregular, clamping
Table 7.3 Comparison of features of EBM and SLM, [27]
Characteristics
Electron beam melting
Selective laser melting
Thermal source
Electron beam
Laser
Atmosphere
Vacuum
Inert gas
Scanning
Deﬂection coils
Galvanometers
Energy absorption
Conductivity-limited
Absorptivity-limited
Powder pre-heating
Use electron beam
Use infrared heaters
Scan speeds
Very fast, magnetically-driven
Limited by galvanometer inertia
Energy costs
Moderate
High
Surface ﬁnish
Moderate to poor
Excellent to moderate
Feature resolution
Moderate
Excellent
Materials
Metals (conductors)
Polymers, metals and ceramics
7
Tool Making
227

between the particles can occur. In order to avoid having water in the powder the
powder should be placed in an oven before processing. Besides the oven, chemical
treatment methods exist for drying the powder before use.
In addition to the average particle size, it has to be taken into account that
the particle size distribution follows a logarithmic normal distribution from the
manufacturing process. The average size and the distribution have an effect on
the powder density. The powder density is always lower than the density of the
bulk material. The ratio between the powder density and the density of the bulk
material has an inﬂuence on the amount of porosity that has to be released during
the melting process. This ratio is called densiﬁcation ratio ‘‘z’’ in the following.
Moreover, it has a direct consequence on the layer height after solidiﬁcation. E.g.
if the densiﬁcation ratio is 0.4, the layer thickness will be reduced by the melting
process down to 40 % of the height of the powder bed.
The step height result of lowering the building platform will remain the same in
the complete process. The amount of powder thickness will increase from step to
step due to the densiﬁcation process.
The height of the ﬁrst loose powder bed is zT. After consolidation the density
increases by the densiﬁcation ratio Z. The thickness of the consolidated powder
bed is now reduced to z1. The index ‘‘1’’ represents the ﬁrst step. In the following
step the platform is decreased by zT. A loose powder bed is placed with the height
of zT plus the height that has been released in the previous step 1–Z. This powder
bed shrinks after consolidation to a height of z2. A general mathematical
description of this phenomenon, called ‘‘asymptotically layer height’’, is given
below according to Meiners [65].
zn ¼ zT 
X
n1
k¼0
1  qpowder
qbulk

k
ð7:1Þ
The resulting layer height of the nth layer can be calculated. By plotting this
equation it can be seen that the ﬁnal track height is reached after very few itera-
tions. It can be seen that the limiting value depends on the densiﬁcation ratio,
Fig. 7.17. It can be concluded that zn approximates zT/Z for a large number of
0
50
100
150
200
Layer thickness
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Number of layer
 Z = 0.75
ZT = 50 µm
 Z = 0.5
 Z = 0.25
BIAS ID 122065
Fig. 7.17 Asymptotic layer
height development with
various densiﬁcation factors
228
E. Brinksmeier

steps. Hence if the difference between the powder density and the bulk density is
low, the change in the layer height over time will also be low.
In order to fabricate tools it might be necessary, especially for micro scales, to
have geometries with a low amount of layers available. Moreover, the fabrication
of tool steel places demands on the temperature time regime, hence the amount of
energy density has to be chosen well. The aspect of asymptotic layer height can be
important in these cases.
It can be seen that the change in the ﬁrst layer is large. The energy might have
to be adapted for critical geometries and/or materials for the ﬁrst layers. Moreover,
it can be concluded that the larger the densiﬁcation ratio, the stronger the effect of
the asymptotic layer height. Hence for structures with very few layers, a powder
with a large Z should be chosen.
Different materials need different energies to melt. For SLM processes, different
laser powers are necessary for different materials and/or geometric conditions. In
order to achieve a high lateral resolution the spot size should be in the range of the
particle’s size. The minimum spot size is related to the beam quality of the laser
beam, assuming that the optical conﬁguration, e.g. the focal length of the f-theta
system, is constant. Today, single mode lasers are available that supply laser
beams very close to the physical diffraction limit. A high beam quality has the
consequence of a high power density. As a consequence of the high power density,
the energy losses in the lenses generate comparably high temperature gradients.
The index of refraction is a function of the temperature. Hence the laser generated
heat in the lens acts like a second lensing effect. Another consequence of the
energy losses in the optics is the deformation of the surface caused by the thermal
expansion coefﬁcient. The sum of these two effects is known as thermal lensing.
The thermal lensing effect lowers the beam quality and hence increases the
focus diameter. Moreover, the focus of the laser beam is shifted because of the
change in the overall focal length of the lens. In general the focal length is reduced.
This causes a movement of the focus away from the surface of the powder bed.
Both effects, decreasing beam quality and focus shift, increase the overall spot size
on the surface. This problem can currently be seen in some SLM systems using a
single mode laser and conventional fused silica lenses.
Another important aspect of the thermal lensing effect is the temporal devel-
opment of the thermal lens. This effect is called thermal blooming and is described
in the following. Before the laser is switched on all the optics are cold and in
equilibrium. After the laser is switched on, the optics heat up and the effect of
thermal lensing becomes more and more dramatic. The timescale in which thermal
blooming occurs is for a commercial system in the range of approximately one
minute from no thermal lensing to the maximum effect (Fig. 7.18). This is also
about the time used for the consolidation of one layer. The layer manufacturing
time is strongly dependent on the size and amount of the parts that are fabricated.
However the largest change in spot size occurs in the ﬁrst minute. It now becomes
very problematic, because the complete change of the spot size on the surface
happens in one layer. While the next layer is placed the optics have time to cool
7
Tool Making
229

down. By this effect a thermal cycle occurs in the optics that causes the spot at the
surface to change size in cycles.
The intensity of the laser beam is calculated by dividing the laser power by the
irradiated area, assuming that the intensity is homogeneously distributed in the
laser spot. As a consequence the change in intensity is proportional to the inverse
of the squared spot diameter. How strong the effect of thermal blooming can act on
the intensity distribution of the laser beam can be seen in Fig. 7.19. Moreover, the
intensity proﬁle different from the original Gaussian proﬁle.
The effect of thermal lensing can be reduced by using high quality quartz glass
optics. Figure 7.20 shows a typical optical setup of an SLM machine. The laser
beam is guided with an optical ﬁber and collimated with a collimator lens.
Fig. 7.18 Beam radius development over time
P = 200 W
f = 163 mm
r = 70 µm
M2 = 3.1
P = 200 W
f = 163 mm
r = 16 µm
2 
M = 1.3
Fig. 7.19 Intensity distribution without and with thermal lensing effect
230
E. Brinksmeier

Afterwards the laser beam goes through an optical isolator. The isolator blocks
possible back reﬂections. These back reﬂections can damage the end of the optical
ﬁbre. After the optical isolator, the beam is passed through a beam expander
consisting of a divergent and a convergent lens. One lens is connected to an
electrical motor. A shift in this lens is used in order to adjust the laser spot in the
z-direction in the process chamber. Two mirrors guide the expanded beam into an
f-theta lens system that focuses the beam. A replacement of the beam expander and
the f-Theta lens system by quartz glass optics decreased the thermal lensing and
thermal blooming effect signiﬁcantly. It was possible to reduce the spot size down
to 50 lm continuously. With a layer thickness of 50 lm the spatial resolution is
similar in the lateral plane and also vertically.
Another application of the rapid tooling technology is the possible generation of
tools with adapted integrated cooling channels. In forming processes the friction
between the part and tool can cause a signiﬁcant increase in temperature. The
friction strongly depends on the geometrical conditions of the forming process.
This causes heterogeneous temperature distributions in the tool. Cooling channels
in tools can reduce the temperature on the surface. SLM is an interesting tech-
nology for the generation of tools with a fully 3D-adapted cooling channel. These
cooling channels can be placed in 3D with nearly complete freedom. After the
consolidation of the layer, the powder remained in the cooling channels can be
blown out. Another application for the cooling channel is the usage of cooling
channels in injection molding tools. The cycle times of part production can be
reduced by this strategy.
Fibre laser
Beam expander
Focussing plane
x/y-scanner
z
0
opt. 
Isolater
collimator
aperture
BK7
Fig. 7.20 Typically optical setup of an SLM device
7
Tool Making
231

7.2.2 Design Rules for Micro Parts
In order to build a micro tool the following steps have to be followed. In Fig. 7.21
a possible process chain is visualized.
After the generation of the CAD model the 3D-part should be checked
regarding the following points:
• overhanging structures
• minimal wall thicknesses
• bonding to the substrate
• grinding allowance.
At the overhang it is possible that the heat conduction into the powder bed below
is weak and hence the melt pool size might increase. This can result in a higher
maximum temperature. As a consequence the cooling time will be modiﬁed which
results in a different microstructure. From a change in the microstructure, locally
different mechanical properties can be the result. In addition, the direct consoli-
dation in a loose powder bed always has a negative effect of the surface quality
towards the bottom. In order to avoid these problems one can change the general
design, include support structures and/or use a temperature controlled laser system.
The minimal wall thickness has in general the same disadvantages as overhang
structures. Heat conduction is reduced towards the side. Moreover, the problem
might be thermal distortion since when the wall is very thin, the overall structural
stiffness decreases. It is suggested avoiding thin wall structures altogether. The
minimum thickness should be in the order of 200 lm.
Two types of bonding towards the substrate exist. The ﬁrst is the direct
solidiﬁcation on the base plate. The second possibility is the usage of support
structures. The usage of support structures allows the easy separation of the tool
from the base plate after generation. If strong residual stresses occur during fab-
rication the tool might distort and lift from the base plate. In the case of a direct
CAD
modelling
Design
check
CAD model
slicing
Generate
buildjob
Support removal
Sand blasting
Heat
treatment
Grinding
finishing
fail
pass
Fig. 7.21 Possible process chain for the fabrication of a micro forming tool by SLM
232
E. Brinksmeier

bond cracking can occur. If the tool lifts off during fabrication, the build job should
be aborted. Otherwise damage might occur on the wiper during powder placement.
A grinding allowance should generally be included in every building job.
Hence, surface roughness and thermal distortion can be compensated. Moreover
the volume changes slightly due to heat treatment. The surface roughness is also
inﬂuenced by the design parameters. In order to achieve a low surface roughness
the powder should consist of small particles, the layer should thin and the func-
tional surfaces should be horizontal. The thermal distortion is a consequence of the
temperature gradient. The temperature gradient in the z-axis can be reduced by
heating the base plate. Moreover heating has the advantage to slightly decrease the
cooling speed. The volume increase by the heat treatment follows from the mar-
tensitic phase transformation.
Before the design is completed the following speciﬁc aspects of the SLM process
have to be taken into account. The powder has a typical size distribution of 50 lm
+/- 10 lm which limits the layer thickness. Typical layer thicknesses between 30
and 50 lm can be realized. This limits the axial resolution and causes the thickness
of the slices. The lateral resolution is limited by the melt pool size. This follows the
laser spot size. The build-up rate is presently between 2 and 10 mm3/s.
If the CAD model has passed the design check, the geometry has to be sliced.
During slicing the orientation in the buildjob and the layer thickness should be
speciﬁed. After slicing the process parameters and the trajectories have to be
deﬁned. A high density of the components should always be aimed for. For this
reason, a comparatively high energy density should be used. This is achieved by a
high laser power. A high laser power results in strong temperature gradient and
hence comparably high thermal distortion. For this reason the scanning strategy is
an important parameter possibility to reduce the accumulated residual stress. The
following scanning strategies are common (Fig. 7.22).
The simplest strategy is the meander strategy. In this strategy the laser beam
scans periodically from one end to the other. The lines are consolidated side by
side. The next complex step is to divide the meander tracks into stripes. These
stripes can be arranged unidirectionally or bi-directionally. A further segmentation
leads to the checker board strategy. In the checker board strategy the area is
divided into sub areas. These sub areas are scanned in a meander manner. The
order in which the areas are treated can be chosen arbitrarily. However, it was
evaluated in [112] that stresses accumulate in the different planes. This accumu-
lation is least if the checker board strategy is applied because accumulated stress is
not built in the loose powder bed in-between. It has to be taken into account that a
wall might be built up at every turn around of the laser track. This leads to a larger
waviness of the surface in case of the checker board strategy.
After the removal of the loose powder bed in the SLM machine the tool should
be cleaned of overspray powder. This should be done by sand blasting. Moreover,
the support structures, e.g. below overhang geometries, should be removed.
In order to get the mechanical properties desired, like high hardness and high
wear resistance, a heat treatment is often mandatory. A hardness of 63 HRC was
achieved with an SLM generated part and an additional heat treatment. Besides the
7
Tool Making
233

hardness, the advantage of the process is the microstructure. The carbides and
grains are comparably small. Moreover, the microstructure is free of segregation.
The tool steel has the following chemical composition (Table 7.4).
The heat treatment consists of three steps. Directly after generation the parts are
stress relief annealed in an oven. In order to avoid oxidation the oven is ﬂooded
with inert gas. The hardening treatment is performed in a vacuum oven. The
quenching is done by ﬂooding the chamber with nitrogen. After hardening the part
is tempered 3 times (Table 7.5).
After heat treatment the part has to be ﬁnished by milling technology. Special
challenges and methods which have to be applied when micro forming tools are
addressed in Sect. 7.4.
Table 7.4 Chemical
composition of
X110CrMoV8-2
X110CrMoV8-2
wt%
C
1.04
Cr
7.95
Mo
2.12
V
0.41
Si
1.08
Mn
0.22
Al
1.04
Nb
0.04
N
0.013
Fig. 7.22 Scanning
strategies: a meander;
b meander stripe
(unidirectional); c meander
stripe (bi-directional);
d checker board
234
E. Brinksmeier
1
3
2
(b)
1
3
2
(c)
(a)
2
8
5
3
9
6
1
7
4
(d)

7.2.3 Multi Material Processes
An interesting extension of the SLM process for adapted micro tools is the multi
material process. In this case two or more types of powder are used in order to
build parts. The charming aspect is the possibility to generate either concentration
gradients or rapid changes in materials. By placing different materials at different
positions it becomes possible in rapid tooling technology to generate tools with
tailored properties. Hence, it becomes possible to locally adapt the properties.
One approach is the generation of a tailored tool for the production of deep
drawing. In general the material ﬂow into the deep drawing die depends on the
chosen geometry. In macro scaled deep drawing technology the ﬂux can be
inﬂuenced locally by applying spatial dependent lubrication or constructing a local
clamping of the sheet. These possibilities are not transferable to micro scaled
forming processes. The approach is to generate a micro forming die with areas of
different materials to achieve different localized friction coefﬁcient between the
sheet and the tool (Fig. 7.23).
For the generation of this tool the SLM process was chosen. However, even if
the resolution is sufﬁcient, a few challenges are still valid. The diameter of the
punch anticipated in this project is in the order of 1 mm. Hence, the blank for the
forming process is about 2 mm in diameter. The functional surfaces of the tools
that are in contact with the blank have the same size as the blank. In order to only
build the important structures, the part could also be built on a platform, while
Table 7.5 Heat treatment for
SLM generated
X110CrMoV8-2 tools
Stress relief annealing
Hardening
Tempering 3 times
Inert gas
Vacuum
Inert gas
500 C
1080 C
550 C
3 h
10 min
2 h
Quenching
N2 @ 6 bar
µ1
µ2
Fig. 7.23 Micro deep
drawing die with locally
adapted properties
7
Tool Making
235

using the platform as part of the object itself. This method reduces the amount of
powder material and reduces the laser manufacturing time. This type of process is
called hybrid SLM.
Moreover, when welding dissimilar materials it is well known that stresses
occur caused by differences in the thermal physical properties of the two materials.
E.g. a difference in the thermal expansion coefﬁcient could cause compressive
stresses on one side and tensile stresses on the other. A specially adapted time
temperature regime can sometimes solve this problem. It is possible to preheat the
powder bed by a heater in the building platform. Moreover, a scan strategy could
be adapted individually in order to reduce the tensile stress.
In addition, if a hybrid structure is produced, the modiﬁcation might only be
necessary in the ﬁnal layers in order to modify the surface properties. The amount
of layers containing another material as the surrounding material should be as low
as possible. Thus, it can be possible to reduce the accumulated stress caused by the
different properties like the thermal expansion coefﬁcient. As shown before, the
problem of asymptotically layer height becomes important if only a few layers are
deposited. The equation of the asymptotic layer height (Eq. 7.1) should be taken
into account for the calculation of the correct energy deposition. Moreover, the
powders should have about the same particle size distributions in order to have
similar densiﬁcation ratios.
In order to achieve a defect-free connection between the two materials, both
have to be molten in the process. In this case a weld like bonding can be realized
without pores or other defects. The complete dilution of the two materials on the
interface is necessary, but complete dilution one layer with the layer below should
be avoided. The dilution should be kept as low as possible but as much as nec-
essary. It results that the resolution of the possible placement of the two different
properties is a bit less compared to the lateral resolution. In general it can be
assumed that the material with the lower melting temperature has to be melted
after the material with the higher melting temperature. Otherwise the dilution is
difﬁcult to be kept low.
Moreover, in some materials intermetallic phases can result if the solubility is
limited. These intermetallic phases are often very brittle. These can lead to the
formation of cracks when the tool is under load. Moreover, micro forming tech-
nology is a technology used for a large amount of parts. For this reason it is
necessary for the material to be fatigue resistant for high cycles. Intermetallic
phases can have a negative effect on the endurance limit.
Metal matrix composites (MMC), e.g. WC-Co, can be used for the production
of tools. Commonly the process for generating WC-Co parts is a liquid phase
sintering process. With SLM, only the Co binder is melted and WC particles are
distributed in the binder. The hard particles in MMC have the advantage of
increasing the overall hardness of the part. In order to have a large homogeneity
for the hardness, the hard particles should be smaller in comparison to the geo-
metrical structures. In micro forming a typical radius of the die is 120 lm. The
WC particles should be much smaller than the radius and thus smaller than the
average particle size, which is about 45 lm. This can be achieved by using
236
E. Brinksmeier

agglomerated WC-Co powder particles. The particles are generally of about
45 lm in size. Inside, the particle consists of WC edgy-shaped particles with an
average size of 1 lm. Within the Co matrix a typical mixture of 88:12 WC:Co is
present. By processing this type of material it often results that some of the
agglomerated sintered particles only partially melt, which causes a heterogeneous
distribution of the properties. This might be avoided by multiple melting of the
layers, in contrast to low dilution.
Moreover, it was shown in [99] that a NiBSi matrix can be used to embed Cr3C2
or WC-Co. It is clearly shown in the metallographic cross-sections that the
agglomerated sintered WC-Co particles partially remain in the matrix as unmolten
particles. In addition, it was shown for the case of Cr3C2 that the ratio between
primary and secondary carbides is dependent on the process parameters.
Another possible approach for the generation of an MMC is the in situ phase
formation. The basic concept is that a powder mixture of two materials are pre-
mixed and used in SLM. After melting, a new phase is formed consisting of an
intermediate phase of two or more elements from both powders. E.g. it was shown
in [34] that a TiC reinforced Ti–Al matrix can be synthesized by using Ti, Al and
graphite powder. The ﬁrst step was the mechanical alloying in a 6 planetary high
energy ball mill in an argon atmosphere. It turned out that nano crystalline TiC has
already been generated by the process of mechanical alloying. The second step
was the selective laser melting of this powder. The microstructure was still ﬁne
afterwards but small grain growth occurred.
7.3 Laser Based Subtractive Methods
7.3.1 Laser Milling
Helgi Diehl
7.3.1.1 Introduction and Deﬁnition
The sustainable industrial production of micro components of intricate shape, high
contour accuracy, surface quality and preset material characteristics is strongly
governed by the availability of appropriate, reliable, systematically designed and
manufactured tools. Tool making for micro metal forming deals with issues such
as tool shape, surface and bulk properties on submillimeter scale and is, therefore,
highly challenging. In this sense, very few approaches can be considered. Appli-
cation of a laser beam is one of them and belongs to non-conventional methods of
tool making. Up to now, laser material processing is not entirely understood.
Moreover, it is presumed to be expensive owing to the high investment and
maintenance costs. However, the wide implementation of lasers in modern pro-
duction lines as well as a growing interest of users in novel laser systems
7
Tool Making
237

demonstrates the high esteem of the unique laser properties. In machining appli-
cations, the focusability of the laser beam is one of them. This feature facilitates
high irradiances and hence allows high local energy deposition; unlike conven-
tional thermal sources like the welding torch or mercury arc lamp. This allows, in
particular, quick, accurate and controlled material removal for tool machining, i.e.
laser micromilling.
Laser milling is a subtractive manufacturing process which utilizes the laser
beam as a tool for the controlled removal of material from a substrate. It allows the
fabrication of parts from a wide range of tool materials, including metals and
insulators. Similar to conventional milling, the focused laser beam is moved rel-
ative to the workpiece, usually via a scanning system, and creates three-dimen-
sional shapes in the material. The chip generation known from mechanical
machining is not necessary due to the nature of light-matter interaction and pos-
sible mechanisms of material subtraction.
7.3.1.2 Laser Subtracted Chip
Subtraction of the material by laser radiation proceeds via mechanisms such as
vaporization, melt expulsion, coulomb explosion of ions, homogenous boiling,
spinodal decomposition, spallation, etc. Even though classical chip generation is
usually not present, relations known from mechanical milling may be, however,
useful. In conventional machining, high accuracy correlates with the diminution of
the chip subtracted. Similarly, the ‘‘chip’’ removed by laser radiation must be
minimized in order to facilitate high contour accuracy. The volume of the laser
subtracted chip (see Fig. 7.24b)—characterized by lateral radii rs;x and rs;y as well
as by the chip thickness hs—is due to the volume affected by radiation which
usually extends over the boundaries of the excavated volume (see Fig. 7.24a). The
affected volume is a product of the laser affected area Aa;xy times the laser affected
depth ha. While the ﬁrst results from the laterally affected radius ra;xðyÞ which is a
sum of the laser spot radius rw and the thermal penetration radius rth
ra;xðyÞ ¼ rw þ rth;
ð7:2Þ
the latter is determined by the optical penetration depth hk and the radius rth
ha ¼ hk þ rth:
ð7:3Þ
In the case of a focused laser operated in a fundamental single mode regime, rw
denotes the laser beam waist radius as a radius at which laser center intensity
decays by a factor of 1=e2 which is given by
rw ¼ fkf
prL
;
ð7:4Þ
238
E. Brinksmeier

whereby k is the laser wavelength, f the beam quality factor, rL the beam radius at
the lens and f the lens focal width. Small features can be illuminated by applying
laser systems with short wavelengths and low f factors, like frequency converted
solid state lasers as well as optical setups providing large convergence angles and,
hence, high rL=f ratios. Unlike the lateral extension of the incident beam, the
optical penetration length or the skin layer hk is determined as
hk ¼ 1=ca ¼ k=4pkd;
ð7:5Þ
with ca denoting the spectral absorbance (exponential attenuation) and kd the
damping constant in the material. The skin layer hk ranges for most steels and
cemented metal carbides owing to high damping kd in the order of tens of nano-
meters. The main contribution to the laser affected depth in Eq. (7.3) mostly
originates, therefore, from the thermal penetration radius rth
rth ¼ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jtD
p
;
ð7:6Þ
which is a square root function of the material-dependent thermal diffusivity j and
the laser pulse length tD. More generally, the time tD should be deﬁned as a time of
light-matter interaction or a dwell time. This is reasonable in milling applications
with a signiﬁcant relative motion of a sample and a laser beam. Hereby, the
effective pulse acting on a chip volume is shortened. In processing applications
with a continuous wave (cw) laser moved over the sample surface with a constant
feed rate vf , one may assume the effective dwell time as tD ¼ 2rw=vf .
Equation (7.6) obviously concludes that the reduction in pulse time tD results in a
decrease of the thermally affected volume, i.e. heat affected zone (HAZ), which
causes structural modiﬁcations in the material and is usually attempted to be
avoided. Furthermore, short tD consequently allow the subtracted chip to be
h
f
rth
rw
rL
x
y
z
x
y
z
(b)
(a)
rth
rs, x
rM
hs
BIAS ID 122071
λ
Fig. 7.24 a Deﬁnition of the material volume affected by a focused laser light (dark gray) and
the subsequently expanded HAZ (light gray). f, rL, rw, hk and rth denote the lens focal width, the
beam radius at the lens, beam waist radius, optical and thermal penetration lengths, respectively.
In metals, hk  rth is usually fulﬁlled. b Deﬁnition of the subtracted material ‘‘chip’’ (circles),
melted layer (dark gray) and HAZ (light gray). Hereby, rM; rs;x and hs and denote the radius of
the recast layer, the lateral radius and the depth of the subtracted chip, respectively
7
Tool Making
239

downsized (see Fig. 7.24b). Although true in a long pulse range, the straightfor-
ward scaling down of tD below a deﬁnite value does not lead to any further
reduction in the HAZ. This limit is deﬁned by the material speciﬁc electron–
phonon scattering time teph which is in the range of 1012  1010 s for metals
and may reach 106 s in insulators. For tD \ teph the HAZ and the molten layer
stabilize at some material-dependent value. Another determining factor in
Eq. (7.6) is the thermal diffusivity j (Table 7.6)
j ¼ K
qcp
;
ð7:7Þ
whereby K is the thermal conductivity, q the density and cp the speciﬁc heat
capacity. This value depends strongly on the current material properties and is high
in solid conducting materials. This ensures, in particular, that rth is the determining
contribution in the deﬁnition of the laser affected depth ha.
In contrast to metallic alloys and carbides, in dielectric tool materials like quartz,
fused silica, corundum/sapphire and alumina ceramics the thermal diffusivity j is
low. As a consequence, the affected depth is mostly governed by the skin layer hk
(dark gray in Fig. 7.24a) which is strongly dependent on the wavelength. For
instance, fused silica absorbs UV light (low hk) owing to electronic band
absorption and IR radiation due to vibrational band absorption being, however,
transparent in the intermediate VIS range (large hk). Moreover, hk is a function of
the laser intensity and dwell time. Indeed, non-linear absorption of the intense
radiation as well as the absorption enhancement owing to in-process emerging
incubation centers may shorten the effective optical depth. Among dielectrics,
diamond builds a special case since it possesses a large j owing to its non-
electronic character of thermal conductivity. Therefore, in diamonds both optical
and thermal penetration depths should be accounted for when deﬁning the laser
subtracted chip size.
7.3.1.3 Method of Choice
Precise tool making requires controlled chip generation on micro scale providing
high contour accuracy and low surface roughness. Hereby, minimal structural
modiﬁcations in the bulk material should be pursued. For this purpose, reasonable
thermal impact originating from the HAZ should be avoided. Besides precision, in
industrial manufacturing cost-effectiveness plays an important role. Therefore,
removal approaches and processes revealing high volume material removal rates
(MRR) are desired. Unfortunately, a universal method for controlled chip sub-
traction with both high precision and high processing efﬁciency is not existent.
Therefore the user has to balance the quality requirements in every singular
milling application against the anticipated efﬁciency and make a decision. The
following relationships are considered, however, as generally applicable and may
serve the user as a roadmap.
240
E. Brinksmeier

Table 7.6 Minimal feature diameters dmin, average surface roughnesses Ra and volume removal rates V reported in bulk tool materials by applying various
laser milling approaches
Material
Laser milling approach
Laser, tD, harmonics
dmin ½lm
Ra ½lm
_V ½mm3=s
References
Stainless steel
Non-reactive gas jet
Nd:YAG, cw
200
\ 2
34
[33]
Steel 25CrMo425
Non-reactive gas jet
CO2, pulsed
200
\ 2
8
[79]
Stainless steel
Grit blasting
CO2, cw
1000
15 - 42
70
[58]
Stainless steel
Reactive gas jet
Nd:YAG, cw
500
4
\ 78
[33]
Stainless steel
Reactive gas jet
Nd:YAG, cw
270
36
[43]
Cold working steel
Reactive ambient
Nd:YAG, cw
100
10*
3 9 10-3
[41]
Alumina
Controlled fracturing
Nd:YAG/CO2, cw
500
60
0.15
[102]
Stainless steel
Long pulse ablation
Nd:YAG, 10 ls
40
2.4
[75]
Stainless steel
Long pulse ablation
Yb: Fiber, 20 ls
40
10.7
2.5
[35]
WC-10Co
Long pulse ablation
Nd:YAG, 100 ns
25
[26]
Fused silica
Short pulse ablation
Excimer, 33 ns
380
3 9 10-3
[42]
Steel
Short pulse ablation
Co vapor, 10 ns
0.3**
6.5 9 10-3
[50]
CVD-diamond
Short pulse ablation
Co vapor, 10 ns
1.5 9 10-3
[50]
WC
Short pulse ablation
Nd:YAG, 63 ns
5 9 10-2
[37]
Steel
Ultrafast ablation
Nd:YVO4, \15 ps, 3rd
0.3
[50]
Alumina
Ultrafast ablation
Nd:YVO4, \15 ps, 3rd
0.25
[48]
Fused silica
Ultrafast ablation
Nd:YVO4, 8 ps, 3rd
0.3
[49]
WC-Co10
Ultrafast ablation
Ti:Sapphire, 150 fs
2 9 10-4
[26]
Synthetic diamond
Ultrafast ablation
Ti:Sapphire, 150 fs
2 9 10-5
[26]
Sapphire
Ultrafast ablation
Ti:Sapphire, 164 fs
4
0.3 – 1.5 9 10-5
[78]
Stainless steel
Liquid chemical jet
Yb:Fiber, cw
10
0.3
1.6 9 10-4
[96]
Stellite 21
Liquid chemical jet
Yb:Fiber, cw
10
0.3
1.6 9 10-4
[93]
Titanium
Liquid chemical jet
Nd:YAG, cw
10
0.1
1.6 9 10-4
[94]
* The data are presented for Rz
** Sacriﬁcial layer has been applied
7
Tool Making
241

From a material point of view, structures with a large value of absorbance ca
and small value of diffusivity j are beneﬁcial as they aid ﬁne chip generation and,
hence, the achievement of small features inhibiting the energy dissipation in the
surrounding area and preventing structural modiﬁcations. However, in tool making
one has to handle every certain basic raw material with given characteristics.
Therefore, parameters of the laser system as well as those of assisting media
become of crucial importance.
When considering ablative methods (see Sect. 7.3.2), the most important
parameters are the laser wavelength k, laser intensity I, the pulse length or dwell
time tD and last but not least the pulse frequency or laser repetition rate fla. Often in
literature a composite parameter called ﬂuence / / ItD is considered. Generally,
short pulse lengths allow the intensity to be increased by bunching the output
energy and the dwell time tD to be diminished. Ultrashort pulses (tD\100 ps)
therefore facilitate the quick deposition of highly intense light energy into the
surface matter with low structural modiﬁcations, owing to the minimal possible
HAZ. For instance, gentle milling of metals was shown to be advantageous with
picosecond lasers. For dielectrics, femtosecond laser pulses appear to be a kind of a
prerequisite to raise the intensity towards the levels necessary for a subtractive
processing which hence occurs over nonlinear phenomena. Variation in the
wavelength is a further instrument for more accurate as well as more efﬁcient tool
processing. The application of lasers with shorter wavelengths to conducting
materials are in particular more plug efﬁcient due to the lower reﬂectance of those
in the VIS and UV spectral range as compared to IR illumination. In dielectrics, the
UV laser light can even cause photolytic ablation of the material via the direct bond
breaking without signiﬁcant thermal damage, often referred to as ‘‘cold’’ ablation.
Last but not least, light of shorter wavelengths is better focusabale due to Eq. (7.4),
leading to smaller lateral dimensions of the optically affected region and boosting
both the intensity and temperature in the focus. The intensity in the focus is rec-
ommended to be chosen slightly above the material speciﬁc threshold. In this case,
the ablated chip remains small; also the surface roughness and the structural
modiﬁcations are lower compared to intense illumination due to more conﬁned
melted area and the HAZ (compare Ið2Þ and Ið1Þ in Fig. 7.30, respectively). Tuning
low intensities, short wavelengths and short pulse durations usually results in a rise
in milling precision; however, it decelerates the economic feasibility due to gen-
erally low MRR. Application of high laser repetition rates fla is a tool to compensate
for low throughput. These are to be chosen as high as possible, however are typi-
cally up to 20 MHz. Burst modes above this value are too fast to allow the ablated
matter to leave the ablated area and, hence, may lead to losses in milling quality.
Even though modern laser systems allow high deﬁnition material subtraction
with high removal rates by means of ablation, the highest MRR can still be
achieved by applying hybrid laser milling systems as discussed next. Hybrid
methods are strongly inﬂuenced by additional factors such as the constitution and
aggregate state of the involved medium, its pressure and—in cases of a directed
jet—the angle of incidence. An overview of the different approaches for the
242
E. Brinksmeier

milling of various tool materials is presented in Table 7.1, revealing three
important characteristics: minimal lateral feature diameter dmin, average surface
roughness Ra and volume MRR _V. Their concise description, including the most
relevant processes, their principles, physical background, processing methods and
application data is the subject of the following review.
7.3.1.4 Laser Milling Via Non-Reactive Gas Jet
Simultaneous application of laser radiation and a high pressure gas jet is a hybrid
approach in laser milling, often denoted abrasive laser machining. It is charac-
terized by high MRR and provides, for certain demands, a sufﬁcient quality. While
the cw lasers are considered as heat suppliers for selective melting, the jet pressure
is concurrently used to expel the liquid-phase and, hence, to locally subtract the
material (Fig. 7.25). The advantage of the approach is its plug efﬁciency, since
much less energy per volume is required than in laser induced vaporization.
Indeed, the energy needed to vaporize 1 gram of iron ranges at around 6.3 kJ, the
energy required to melt it—about only 0.3 kJ!1
When laser radiation of peak intensity I0 strikes a tool material surface, a part of
it proportional to cRI0 is lost by reﬂection, another part is absorbed in the material
or/and is transmitted. For most metals, the absorption coefﬁcient ca is in the range
107  108 m1 which means that the absorption takes place at the surface within a
skin layer of 10  100 nm; for bulk samples no transmission occurs. Therefore, the
absorbed intensity Iab at the center of the irradiated area is described by
Iab ¼ ð1  cRÞI0. Due to high reﬂection of infrared irradiation by solid metals, an
effective coupling into the material is usually mediated via plasma formation
(I0 [ 2:5  107 W/cm2) or at least after a characteristic time necessary to heat/
melt the surface layer and, hence, reduce the reﬂectivity. For instance, the
reﬂectivity of steel is reduced by a half after 600 ns when irradiating with CO2
laser radiation at tD ¼ 200 ns and intensity I0 ¼ 1:5  108 W/cm2 [80]. Therefore,
the application of long pulses or scanning cw radiation appears to be advantageous
in the sense of effective energy coupling into the medium. The goal of the
approach is the controlled melting of a chip with deﬁned dimensions. From the
energy balance, the maximum depth rM;max of the chip melted may be estimated
from
rM;max 
IabtD
q DHM þ cp TM  T0
½


 ;
ð7:8Þ
1 The data only represent the enthalpies of vaporization and melting. The total energies including
the heating of the material and relevant enthalpy contributions are, hence, 7.8 and 1 kJ,
respectively.
7
Tool Making
243

whereby TM and DHM denote the melting temperature and melting enthalpy,
respectively, and T0 is the initial temperature or/and the temperature of the
ambient medium. Tuning the absorbed ﬂuence /ab ¼ IabtD as a composite may
deliver both insufﬁcient processing conditions and milling results. Indeed, long tD
and intensities that are too low lead to extended HAZ in the material and, hence,
usually unwanted structural modiﬁcations. Otherwise, too short dwell times but
high peak intensities I0 lead to overheating and vaporization of the surface, which
are not plug efﬁcient processes. The optimum laser parameters tD and I0 can be
found from the condition rM;max  rth which are then given by
tD  r2
M
4j
ð7:9Þ
and
I0  2q DHM þ cp TM  T0
½



1  cR
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃj
tD
r
;
ð7:10Þ
respectively. As an example, the optimum dwell time and intensity for melting a
chip in iron with a depth of 10 lm can be estimated as tD  1 ls and
I0  2  107 W/cm2. Unfortunately, industrial lasers with such output parameters
are not present today. Alternatively, high power cw lasers with high feed rate vf or
pulsed solid state solid state lasers pumped by appropriate power supply units
provide intensities in the range of 104 W/cm2 at pulse lengths tD  1 ms suitable
for the melting of a 10 lm thick layer, however at the cost of an extended HAZ. If
the low extension of the HAZ is of basic importance for the user, then higher
intensities at shorter dwell times are required which lead to higher energy depo-
sition in the surface layer and its subsequent overheating. In this case, the maxi-
mum achievable depth of melting may be reduced as it correlates with the
maximum allowable surface temperature, which is the boiling point. Meanwhile,
the lateral dimensions of the chip are in accordance with Eq. (7.2). Geometrically,
the chip melted obtains a rounded cylindrical form if r2
w=jtD  1 (compare with
Coaxial Gas Jet
Laser
vf
BIAS ID 122072
Fig. 7.25 Basic principle of
tool milling by laser-gas jet
approach. vf denotes the feed
velocity vector
244
E. Brinksmeier

melted zone for Ið2Þ in Fig. 7.30b). In the case of the strongly opposite ratio, the
melted chip reveals the form of a ﬁlled hemisphere with radius rM. Once melted
and in the absence of the vapor recoil pressure or/and plasma shock waves at high
intensities, the liquid phase is retarded to leave the kerf owing to surface tension.
Hereby, an external source of gas pressure with Mach numbers of, typically,
around 0.2 offers an effective instrument to expel the melt off the cavity leading to
chip subtraction. The alignment of the nozzle is often chosen to be coaxial with the
orientation of the laser processing optics as shown in Fig. 7.25. Last but not least,
concurrent expulsion is of particular signiﬁcance. Indeed, after the pulse ends and
in non-reactive ambient conditions the melt starts to solidify from both the bottom
liquid–solid as well as from the upper liquid–gas interfaces. The experimentally
determined solidiﬁcation velocities in metals range from 10 to 103 m/s. These
times have to be considered in the process layout.
Physically the process can be described by predominantly photothermal phe-
nomena leading to melting. The electrons absorbing the light energy conduct the
energy in the interior of the tool material by electron–electron scattering and
transmit it to the lattice ions by electron–phonon scattering, which is accompanied
by a perceptible temperature rise. According to the temperature proﬁle, the solid
liqueﬁes and the ﬂuidity of the medium becomes locally enhanced. The liquid phase
is then abrased by mechanical forces provided by directed gas pressure waves.
In industrial tool milling, generally imposed limitations like the attainment of a
high surface quality and preservation of constant mechanical properties require the
avoidance of overheating. Therefore, instead of pursuing the near-net shape of the
surface in one shot or in a stationary mode, the application of a scanning (focusing)
technique is advantageous. The latter is based on a series of discrete overlapping
paths while machining low diameter craters (pulsed mode) or narrow grooves (cw
mode) in each single ﬂow. In this case, maximum depth limitations can be
overcome to some extent. Small features can be achieved by the application of
short wavelengths, lasers with high beam quality and in pulsed or short dwell time
regimes. Widely applied systems are multi-kilowatt continuous wave CO2 lasers,
however Nd:YAG laser systems allow much more ﬂexible handling by guiding the
beam over ﬁbers. Moreover, they are better focusable and more efﬁciently coupled
with metals owing to shorter emitted wavelengths. Lasers organized within glass
ﬁbers, i.e. ﬁber lasers, are newcomers and combine the advantages of solid state
lasers with ﬂexible beam optics, presently delivering the highest intensities in cw
mode. These systems can be quickly scanned relatively to the work surface, either
by moving the working head, the stage or even both, and are controlled by CNC
machines. For better handling of the workpiece, long focal lengths are preferred.
Short dwell times realized by quick scans (high feed rates) or pulsed radiation as
well as low intensities above the melting threshold provide, in general, small
features, low HAZs and low roughness [33]. Usually, higher intensities at pulse
lengths below 1 ms make it difﬁcult to avoid vaporization which, hence, increases
diffraction losses impacting negatively on the machining quality. An assist gas jet
is used to protect the optics from contamination and to facilitate material removal.
7
Tool Making
245

Hereby, assist gas type, gas pressure as well as nozzle geometry and position are of
additional importance. Usually gases such as nitrogen, argon and helium are used.
The process modeling is complex and can be proceeded by solving a set of balance
equations for energy, momentum and mass including all relevant parameters of the
laser beam and assist gas ﬂow [46].
Application of a laser-jet approach to milling has been addressed by different
authors (see for instance [19]). The most data on feature sizes, surface quality and
removal rates originate, however, from metal cutting applications. Nevertheless,
the knowledge gained may also be employed in laser milling. Machining of steels
by cw Nd:YAG laser and pulsed CO2 laser (500 Hz) with an average power of ca.
700 W have resulted in features with dmin ¼ 220 lm, Ra\2 lm and _V about
34 mm3=s [33] and 8 mm3=s [79], respectively. The average HAZ was found to be
around 50 lm. The presented data hence favors the Nd:YAG lasers, providing
higher removal rates with approximately the same accuracy. A strong disadvan-
tage of the method is a wide extended HAZ leading to enhanced structural
modiﬁcations and the low surface quality due to the recast layer and debris.
7.3.1.5 Laser Milling Via Grit Blasting
Laser melting and expulsion via grit blasting is a variation on the former approach.
For melt expulsion, different abrasives based mainly on silicon carbide and alumina
particles have been efﬁciently utilized which are delivered with a compressive gas
jet to the melt region. An issue is, hereby, the angle of particle impact. In order to
remove the material from the cavity, the angle of incidence hg should be smaller
than the angle of the molten front hmf hence providing an up-lifting force (see
Fig. 7.26). The extraction hood is used coincidently to collect the raised material.
In practice, particles of 50–110 lm size are delivered by a compressive air jet.
Application of a TEM01 mode of cw CO2 laser at 550 W and a jet at 5 bar pressure
to the steel 304, have yielded removal rates of 70 mm3/s, Ra = 15–42 lm and
HAZ of 20–50 lm [58]. Variations in abrasive jet inclination has revealed that
optimal melt removal can be achieved for oblique jet orientations at hg ¼ 25	. The
advantages of grit blasting are its high removal rates and relatively low HAZ,
l
l
l
l
l
Fig. 7.26 Principle of tool
milling via grit blasting. hmf
and hg denote the angles of
the molten front and grit
blasting, respectively.
According to [58]
246
E. Brinksmeier

however, high roughness values make a mechanical machining step necessary.
Feature diameters below 1 mm are possible with this method.
7.3.1.6 Laser Milling Via Reactive Gas Jet
Reactive laser machining is another variation on the basic method, whereby a
reactive gas is used instead of an inert gas. The reactive gas not only acts as an
abrasive but supplies additional energy owing to an exothermic reaction. Intro-
duction of oxygen as a jet gas leads to an enhancement of MRR originating from
combined effects such as a higher absorptivity of incident light by the hot oxides,
additional channel of heat input provided by exothermic reaction and lower
effective viscosity (lower surface tension) beneﬁcial for abrasion. In steels, the
energy supplied by a reaction of iron with oxygen atoms is
2Fe þ 1:5O2 !
T Fe2O3 þ 823 kJ/mol
ð7:11Þ
The reaction requires a certain initial temperature which is below the boiling
point. Once started and for certain processing conditions, the energy generated by
the reaction may even exceed the energy delivered by the absorption of the laser
beam. The concurrent ejection of the molten material from the chip volume by the
gas pressure leads to material removal. Basically, the absorbed laser radiation in
combination with an exothermic reaction affords enough energy to facilitate the
melting and even evaporation from the surface. Both, the evaporation pressure
(recoil pressure) as well as the pressure submitted by striking gas jet may lead to
melt expulsion. The surface evaporation (ablation) has been shown, however, to be
negligible. The affected chip volume is enlarged both optically, by the vapor
scattering of the incident light, and thermally, as a result of the exothermic
reaction.
Machining of stainless steel by cw Nd:YAG laser systems yielded roughness
values Ra & 4 lm [33], feature sizes dmin ¼ 270 lm and removal rates _V about
36 mm3=s [43] therefore revealing high processing speeds. However, great dis-
advantages are the modiﬁcations in material constitution due to surface oxidation,
enlargement of the feature size, wide extension of the HAZ, high roughness values
and striations, i.e. periodic lines appearing on the walls. Application of the method
to nonmetals has revealed that the efﬁciency and quality of milling is generally less
inﬂuenced by the type of assist gas used.
7.3.1.7 Laser Milling in a Reactive Ambient Gas
A combination of a laser and a reactive ambient gas is another hybrid approach in
laser milling. Both gaseous as well as liquid phases have already been successfully
introduced. When applying a combination of a low intensity cw laser and an
oxygen gas, material removal occurs owing to oxide stress chip generation. An
7
Tool Making
247

important precondition here is that the melting point of the oxidized dross is lower
than the melting point of the host material.
The initial physical mechanism is of photothermal origin. The material is
exposed locally to low irradiances leading to material heating without melting. The
supply of oxygen leads to an exothermic reaction of the heated material providing
additional energy and altering the material constitution in the focus by oxidation.
During the resolidiﬁcation time of the melted oxide, mechanical forces owing to
the difference in the shrinkage behavior of the dross and the host metal yield local
separation of the oxidized ﬂake from the bulk material.
From a practical point of view, submission of oxygen can be enabled by a stage
with a coaxial gas jet. The gas pressure parameter should however be optimized in
order to avoid the expulsion of the melt similar to laser milling via reactive gas jet.
A variation of the jet technique may be the oxygen sphere supplying the reactive
molecules to the heated spot. A focused laser beam with output powers ranging
around 10 W is scanned over the surface in multiple paths providing chip gen-
eration on the micro scale.
Application of this method to metals yields features with lateral dimensions in
the range of 100–500 lm and depths from 20–100 lm. In particular, irradiation of
cold working steel (EN X160CrMoV121) samples with the light of a cw Nd:YAG
radiation at Pla ¼ 7 W has allowed the achievement of groove depths of 80 lm,
_V ¼ 3  103 mm3=s and Rz ¼ 10 lm [41].
7.3.1.8 Laser Milling by Intersecting Beams
The basic concept of milling is based on chip-by-chip subtraction. This requires
either melting or vaporization of the whole volume to be removed and hence
signiﬁcantly raises the energy consumption. If energy efﬁciency is of capital
importance an alternative approach with two lasers can be applied [15]. This
implies a setup in which both laser beams are directed on the material surface and
the incidence axis of the ﬁrst beam intersects the axis of the second beam, as
shown in Fig. 7.27. It visualizes how blind cuts or drills may result in the removal
of chips with a triangular cross-section by their conjunction. The subtracted
Laser 1
Chip 
Laser 2
vf
BIAS ID 122074
Fig. 7.27 Basic principle of
tool milling by intersecting
laser beams. vf denotes the
feed velocity vector.
According to [15]
248
E. Brinksmeier

volume obviously depends on the intersecting point, the angle of convergence and
the properties of the blind kerfs or grooves produced. By elaboration of sophis-
ticated milling strategies, material removal rates comparable to those of
mechanical machining can be achieved. The surface quality and the accuracy are
mostly given by the straightness and the width of the kerfs and therefore depend on
the properties of the cuts and/or drills resulting from each single approach, which
can be of hybrid or ablative nature.
7.3.1.9 Fracture Machining
Another energy efﬁcient method is called fracture machining and is based on
controlled fracturing. First, a focused laser is used to scribe well deﬁned grooves.
In order to induce fracturing, immersion of a sample in an ultrasonic cell has been
successfully applied [32]. Another possibility is the application of defocused laser
radiation as a heating source [59]. The thermally generated tensile stresses have
been shown to result in the formation and extension of cracks from the tip of the
grooves downward. Their linkage leads to fracturing and material removal. This
approach is similar to machining with intersecting beams as it is based on a
breaking off of 3D chips out of the substrate and is, therefore, energy efﬁcient. By
its nature, the current method is well suited for the milling of brittle materials like
ceramics and glasses where it provides high speeds and clean surfaces.
In processing it is convenient to use two lasers serially. While the scribing laser
is focused on the surface structure and oriented normally, the second one,
responsible for the propagation of cracks, is aligned obliquely at an angle h0, as
demonstrated in Fig. 7.28, and is defocused.
Applying a focused cw Nd:YAG laser beam (Pla ¼ 53 W) of 32 lm beam waist
diameter as a scribing tool and a 373 lm wide cw CO2 laser beam (Pla ¼ 44 W)
inclined at angle h0 ¼ 15	 for the fracture-machining of closed square elements in
alumina (see Fig. 7.28), chips with dimensions below 1 mm at _V of 0:15 mm3=s have
Scribing 
Laser
Fracture 
Laser
Chip
Crack
Groove
0
BIAS ID 122075
Fig. 7.28 Basic principle of
tool milling by fracture
machining. h0 denotes the
inclination angle of a
defocused fracturing laser.
According to [102]
7
Tool Making
249

been extracted [102]. The achieved roughness Ra ranged at around 60 lm.
Improvement of milling strategies may enhance the removal efﬁciency. Indeed,
fracture-machining applied to the edge of alumina has yielded _V ¼ 10:8 mm3=s
[103].
7.3.2 Laser Ablation
Helgi Diehl
7.3.2.1 Deﬁnition
The term laser ablation is used if material subtraction can be performed in a
vacuum or in an inert ambient medium and requires the direct absorption of laser
light by the material. Ablation occurs, in general, at laser intensities above the
material vaporization threshold IV ranging above 10 kW/cm2. In order to submit
such irradiances a pulsed mode regime is usually required. In the following, three
pulse regimes—long pulse (100 ns–100 ms), short pulse (100 ps–100 ns) and
ultrashort pulse (100 fs–100 ps) ranges—are distinguished. Within each approach
speciﬁc laser setups are tailored to meet the challenges of controlled and precise
laser milling. Indeed, tuning effective dwell time but also variation in radiation
intensity and wavelength have a strong impact on the root and hence the result of
the milling process.
7.3.2.2 Laser Ablation with Long Pulses
Laser radiation with a pulse length from 100 ms down to 100 ns and intensities
above 10 kW/cm2 may result in surface evaporation. In metals, the vaporization
usually proceeds after passing a melting phase. Then, the evaporated material
imposes a recoil pressure on the surrounding which, acting on the melting pool,
leads to the hydrodynamic ﬂushing of the melt from the cavity providing an
additional channel of removal.
Surface evaporation is the basic process of material ablation. The advantages
are the reduction of recast layer, lower HAZ and better surface quality. In metals
and conducting ceramics, this process calls for shorter wavelengths in order to
couple the radiation efﬁciently into the matter and to produce smaller lateral
features. Commonly used systems are the Q-switched (pulsed) Nd:YAG lasers
with wavelength of 1.064 lm, however CO2 TEA lasers are also applied. For
visible and near infrared region, the intensities at which the evaporation is a
dominant process lie within the range from 1 to 150 MW/cm2. While in the lower
intensity regime the melting becomes prevailing, at intensities above the upper
threshold the strong absorption of incident light by the vaporized material leads to
250
E. Brinksmeier

generation of plasma. The latter interacts strongly with the high intensity light
blocking the incident radiation, diminishing the surface impinge and hence the
ablation rate. Additionally, plasma shock waves can result in material modiﬁcation
zones owing to shock hardening. Therefore, in long pulse ablation the upper limit
should not be crossed.
Volume MRR by evaporation can be quantitatively estimated from the energy
balance approach. The latter is based on a simple approximation implying two
stages: the melting and the removal by vaporization (see Fig. 7.29). Theoretical
calculations based on speciﬁc model assumptions allow calculation of the boiling
time tB, i.e., the time required to melt the surface and reach the vaporization stage
tB ¼ p
4
K.cp
I2
ab
TB  T0
ð
Þ2
ð7:12Þ
whereby TB denotes the boiling temperature. As an example, the time needed to
reach the boiling point in iron by illuminating it with common lasers at intensities
I0 ¼ 1 MW/cm2 and I0 ¼ 10 MW/cm2 is estimated to be 18.6 ls and 186 ns,
respectively [80]. Within the energy balance model, the uniaxial removal (drilling)
velocity vz is given by
vz ¼
Iab
. cp Tb  T0
ð
Þ þ DHM þ DHV

 
Iab
.DHv
;
ð7:13Þ
whereby DHv is the material-dependent enthalpy of vaporization, accounting by
approximation for the sum in the denominator brackets and determining the energy
efﬁciency of the ablation. In the case of ‘‘atom-by-atom’’ vaporization, the
enthalpy DHv boosts the energy required to vaporize 1 gram of atoms, allowing,
however, the removal of smaller chips. For ablation in the form of droplets or large
I0
(1)tR
(1)
I0
(1)
ILSA
tD
tB
(1)
tB
(2)
I0
(2)
t
I
I0
(1)tR
(1)
BIAS ID 122076
Fig. 7.29 Allocation of laser energy (intensity I) for melting (wave) and evaporating (circles) of
material in time. ILSA denotes the threshold intensity of plasma generation
7
Tool Making
251

fragments, the average removal energy per atom decreases, raising the energy
efﬁciency of the process. The applicability of the introduced model has been tested
by conducting a number of experiments. Those performed on steel 316 and
tungsten carbide have veriﬁed the theoretical estimations, demonstrating that time
tB is reached 27 times quicker in steel than in WC samples [36]. When applied to
tungsten carbide, it is noted that the radiation
of Nd:YAG
laser with
I0\10 MW/cm2 and tD as long as 160 ns is not even capable of starting ablation.
This result is, however, plausible within the theoretical model: tB exceeds tD
leaving no time for the removal stage. Under appropriate ﬁxed conditions, within
removal time tR ¼ tD  tB the steels are ablated 1.3 times faster than the WC
samples. With respect to the 3D case, the volume removal rate _V by evaporation
can be estimated from
_V  Ax;y fla IabtR  /Loss
ð
Þ
.DHv
;
ð7:14Þ
where /Loss describes ﬂuence losses arising in the system due to thermal radiation,
heat conduction, convection, etc. When modeling the technological process, one
issue is the discrepancy between the high physical ablation rates and low removal
rates in real processes. A relatively low _V mainly originates from the presence of
the product fla tR in Eq. (7.14) which for fla ¼ 50 kHz and tR  tD ¼ 200 ns
decelerates the milling by two orders of magnitude. Therefore, if machining speed
is of particular importance, then the factor fla tR should be increased. This can be
achieved in a plausible manner over playing up the laser repetition rate fla and
pulse length tD. In addition, the time tR can be increased by applying high
intensities providing shorter boiling times tB and, hence, tR  tD. A more
sophisticated approach arises when considering Eqs. (7.12) and (7.14). While the
attainment of boiling temperature TB scales as Iab
ﬃﬃﬃﬃtB
p , the subsequent vaporization
rate is IabtR. This observation suggests the use of modiﬁed pulses with high peak
intensities at their temporal forefront.
Besides the fact that the ablation is temporally limited to the pulse fraction tR, it
is spatially localized owing to transversal intensity proﬁle of the beam. Assuming
the single mode operation in its basic mode TEM00, the intensity distribution along
the
transversal
axis
x
is
described
by
the
Gaussian
function
I x
ð Þ ¼
I0 exp 2x2=r2
w


(see Fig. 7.30a). If ablation occurs at a threshold intensity of
vaporization IV 
 I0, then the lateral radius of the ablated chip rs;xðyÞ can be cal-
culated from
rs;xðyÞ ¼ rw
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ln
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
I0=IV
p
q
;
ð7:15Þ
whereby rw is given by Eq. (7.4). For a given threshold IV, the variation in peak
intensity I0 hence tunes the ablated crater radius rs;xðyÞ. While for I0 ¼ e2 IV 
7:4 IV the radius rs;xðyÞ ¼ rw, for a lower intensity I0 ¼ IV
ﬃﬃﬃe
p  1:65 IV the radius
rs;xðyÞ is only a half rw. When I0 approaches the threshold value, i.e., I0  IV, the
252
E. Brinksmeier

ablation condition is only fulﬁlled in a very conﬁned region providing smaller
features (rð2Þ
s;xðyÞ in Fig. 7.30b).
Physically, the evaporation process eventuates when the boiling temperature has
been achieved and the delivered energy exceeds the values for the enthalpy of
vaporization. Unfortunately this is often mixed with the term of sublimation, which
is the transition of a solid into a gaseous phase without passing the ﬂuid one. In the
case of evaporation, for a Gaussian beam and long pulses the temperature proﬁle in
the matter leads to a melting and subsequent heterogeneous evaporation of atoms or
molecules from the surface at the center of the incident beam. This evaporation is,
in general, retarded by gas molecules of an ambient atmosphere leading, for some
high aspect ratio applications, to limitations in the achievable depth.
In practice, there are a number of different processing techniques. Among them
are focusing, projection (mask), interference, microlens array and combined
techniques (for an overview see [3]). In the following, only the focusing technique
is considered as it is relevant for most applications. It is based on the direct writing
of craters on the material’s top surface by a focused pulsed radiation while the
sample is moved by translations of a xyz-table. Within a ﬁxed table position, in
ILSA
I (2)
(b)
(a)
I0
(1)
I
I0
(2)
IM
rw
IV
x(y)
Ix(y)
rs, x(y)
I (1)
(2)
rs, x(y)
(1)
(1)
BIAS ID 122077
Fig. 7.30 a Allocation of
areas of ablation (circles) and
melting (waves) in space
owing to sample illumination
with laser beam exhibiting
peak intensities Ið1Þ
0
and Ið2Þ
0
and Gaussian intensity
distribution. IM; IV and ILSA
denote the threshold
intensities for melting,
evaporation and plasma
generation, respectively.
b Qualitative description of
structural modiﬁcations in
metals owing to irradiation
with pulses of constant
duration but different
intensity levels. Lower
intensities ðIð2Þ
0
[ IVÞ yield
smaller features
7
Tool Making
253

advance, a laser beam can be rapidly moved over a small sample surface, i.e. beam
scanning or beam displacement, by means of galvanoscanner mirrors providing
higher speeds but less accuracy and stability. The setup discussed in [94] takes
advantage of a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser with tD ¼ 100 ns, fla ¼ 30 kHz, f\1:2,
rW ¼ 9 lm providing peak intensities up to 20 GW/cm2. While the galvanoscanner
window is 40  40 mm2 large with a lateral positioning resolution of 1 lm, the
table can be adjusted within a ﬁeld of 200  200 mm2. When scanning the beam in
one direction, the train of craters scribes a line into the material; a lateral shift and
the scribing a line in the other direction, as shown schematically in Fig. 7.31a,
make 2.5D machining possible. Achievement of uniform removal requires the
laser traces to overlap in the range of 50–80 %. Nevertheless, application of the bi-
directional technique results in a deﬁcient milling due to residual waviness. The
latter, however, may almost be avoided by carrying out cross scans (mutual angle
90, Fig. 7.31b) and wheel scans (mutual angle 15, Fig. 7.31c). The latter strategy
is to be preferred as it suppresses the waviness down to the roughness level. In
addition, the optimization of the laser path as well as removal strategies is shown
to reduce the thermal load of the material [75]. Concepts from drilling—like
percussion, trepanning and helical drilling (see for instance [98])—can be applied
to milling within automated part handling of overlapping paths. Furthermore, in
order to combine the advantages of fast and precise milling, machining has been
proposed to be split into rough and ﬁnishing machining [94]. While the ﬁrst one
calls for high laser intensities, the latter takes advantage of higher repetition rates
and lower power.
Application of the long pulse lasers to different materials has been frequently
reported. Most data are presented for metals and conducting ceramics. Ablation of
hard dielectric media like glass, corundum and diamond requires much higher
intensities above 10 TW/cm2 [57] or an UV radiation for direct bond breaking,
both not considered in the current subsection. Experimental employment of a Yb:
Fiber laser with tD ¼ 20 ls and peak intensities up to 770 MW/cm2 to stainless
steel surface has revealed roughness values Ra ¼ 10:7 lm [35]. Hereby,
dmin ¼ 40 lm, hs ¼ 24 lm and
_V ¼ 2:5 mm3=s have been achieved. The
approach utilizes pulses with an initial spike in power at their forefront. While
milling stainless steel by pulsed Nd:YAG laser at 9.5 W average power,
tD ¼ 10 ls, minimal feature sizes of 40 lm, hs ¼ 150 lm with Ra ¼ 2:4 lm at
(a)
90° 
(b)
15°
(c)
BIAS ID 122078
Fig. 7.31 Milling strategies: a bi-directional, b cross scanning and c wheel scanning. According
to [94]
254
E. Brinksmeier

scanning speeds vscan ¼ 400 mm/s have been demonstrated [75]. Laser drilling of
steels has revealed drilling velocities vz  104 mm/s above I0 ¼ 100 MW/cm2 [38].
An additional channel of material removal is provided by the positive feedback
of material vaporization. The recoil pressure of the evaporated plume may ﬂush off
the liquid material by carrying melt droplets from the cavity [16]. Recalling the
discussion on average enthalpy, this hydrodynamic expulsion process does not
have to supply that large amount of energy and is hence economically efﬁcient.
Melting ﬂushing appears at intensities above 10 MW/cm2 [16] and has been
demonstrated to be the dominant mechanism of material removal for pulses longer
than 100 ls.
Another ablation process in the long pulse range is due to subsurface explosions
[30]. This is relevant for materials with low absorbance coefﬁcient ca like non-
metallic ceramics yielding hk [ rth. In such cases a large volume is heated. Due to
the cooling of the surface by dissipative processes, subsurface overheating and
explosive ejection of particulate matter may occur. Ablation of WC-10Co with
tD ¼ 100 ns has revealed dmin  25 ls, hs  15 ls and a clean surface [26]. Here,
the removal mechanism is based on the selective melting and vaporization of
cobalt. The removal of the matrix material leads to casting out of WC grains by
both the cobalt melt and vapor. Different feedback relations such as absorption of
the laser energy in the blow off vapor and expelled liquid while illuminating with
long laser pulses have to be considered (see diagram in [16]). Therefore, controlled
subtraction requires forefront experimental studies providing a basic understand-
ing of the relationships between different mechanisms and mutual impacts in every
particular case which is indispensable for consistent processing.
7.3.2.3 Laser Ablation with Short Pulses
Application of laser pulses ranging from 100 ps to 100 ns is an effective approach
of material ablation under condition of suppressed thermal load. Both the recast
layer and the HAZ in the matter are reduced owing to the
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
tD
p
law. The ablation is
called ‘‘cold’’ if the ablated depth hs is of the order of the affected depth:
hs  max hk; rth
f
g. For many tool materials and UV radiation, this condition is well
fulﬁlled. From the point of the laser source, shortening of pulse length give a
positive feedback facilitating higher peak irradiances I0. These are highly desired in
some applications. Their further rise above plasma ignition threshold ILSA, however,
results in plasma shielding of the incident radiation as well as in scattering effects
which are highly undesired in intricate milling. Therefore, holding the intensity
below the plasma threshold ILSA, short pulse radiation has a disadvantage that the
removal rate pro pulse, compared to longer pulses, is limited by ﬂuence factor I0tR,
visualized in Fig. 7.29, which itself is conﬁned by the product ILSAtD.
Basically, for most metals the processes in nanosecond ablation regime are of
photothermal (pyrolytic) nature. The pulse length is longer than the time of
electron–phonon scattering, and therefore the mechanism of heterogeneous
7
Tool Making
255

vaporization discussed in Sect. 7.3.2.2 may be considered. Advantageous is the
better focusability of the UV radiation–due to the lower rw—providing smaller
features. In addition, the light is more efﬁciently coupled into the material due to
low electron plasma screening in this spectral range. In dielectrics with a band gap
energy Egap\8 eV, the photon energy of the UV radiation may exceed that of bond
breaking (hxUV [ Egap) and therefore cause bulk ablation by molecular frag-
mentation without signiﬁcant thermal damage owing to the linear absorption of
UV radiation. This mechanism is denoted photolytic or photochemical ablation. In
fused silica, however, the UV light provided by excimer lasers is neither sufﬁcient
to cause photochemical ablation (hxUV\Egap  8 eV) nor are the intensities
provided in the ns regime high enough to achieve efﬁcient multi-photon absorp-
tion. In this range, the ablation was shown to occur via a two-stage process. First,
weak absorption by impurities and defects at the surface or even low absorption in
the bulk generates so-called ‘‘incubation’’ centers, which, in the 2nd stage,
strongly absorb the incident light ablating the matter at high rates [42].
In practice, UV laser light is delivered by excimer or frequency-tripled
Nd:YAG lasers. The latter are favored due to higher exhibited beam quality as well
as higher repetition rates compared to that of excimer lasers. In addition to the UV
lasers, copper vapor and frequency-doubled Nd:YAG lasers provide nanosecond
pulses in the visible range. Usually, both the absorption and, therefore, ablation at
the center of the illuminated spot are higher than at its edges, leading to an inherent
taper angle of the ablated volume. An add-on used to produce vertical walls is
based on the controlled inclination of the incident beam, which is, for instance,
utilized in trepanning heads for hole drilling.
Applying excimer laser with k ¼ 308 nm, tD ¼ 33 ns and fla ¼ 5 Hz, fused
silica has been ablated with _V ¼ 3  103 mm3=s demonstrating feature sizes of
380 lm [42]. Applying copper vapor laser with k ¼ 511 nm and k ¼ 578 nm,
tD ¼ 20 ns and fla ¼ 10 kHz to synthetic CVD-diamond and a steel sample MRR
of 1:5  103 mm3=s and 6:5  103 mm3=s, respectively, have been demon-
strated [50]. In the case of steel milling, roughness values as low as Ra ¼ 0:3 lm
have been achieved. Here, a thin sacriﬁcial layer has been applied for surface
protection and the angle of the laser incidence has been controlled in order to
obtain vertical walls. Machining of the fused silica has failed with this laser
system. Application of a Q-switched Nd:YAG with I0  108 W/cm2, tD ¼ 63 ns
and fla ¼ 20 kHz to tungsten carbide has revealed milling rates
_V ¼ 5 
102 mm3=s [37].
7.3.2.4 Laser Ablation with Ultrashort Pulses
Machining with ultrashort pulses is an emerging and much more promising
approach of tool milling. The time constant which splits pulses into short and
ultrashort is given by the material-dependent electron–phonon scattering time
teph. In the following, this is assumed to be teph  1010 s and, hence, the pulses
256
E. Brinksmeier

tD\100 ps are called ultrashort. Since the ultrashort pulses pass before the thermal
equilibrium is adjusted, the system of electrons and lattice ions can no longer be
described by one temperature. At the end of every single pulse, the electrons
become overheated and the system is then described by a two-temperature model.
In this mode, the HAZ is no longer determined by Eq. (7.6), but can be described
according to [3] by
rth ¼ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jeteph
p
ð7:16Þ
where je is the electron diffusivity. Therefore, the heat affected zone strongly1791
depends on the material properties, and application of femtosecond lasers does
not1792 lead to a reduction of the HAZ compared to that under picosecond irradi-
ation.1793 Moreover, pulses below 5 ps were shown to scatter strongly on the cold
atmo-1794 spheric plasma [20]. Therefore, application offemtosecond pulses should
be1795 weighed in each particular case. For most applications, picosecond lasers
within1796 the 5–10 ps pulse range yield good results. A strong advantage of ul-
trashort pulses compared to longer pulses is the fact that the ultrafast pulses do not
interact with the hot plasma, which starts expanding after the pulse has passed [3].
Therefore, the high intensities which have been blocked by plasma ignition in the
longer pulse processing can now be utilized for the efﬁcient ablation of dielectric
materials. Here, intensities for optical breakdown can be achieved in the femtosec-
ond range whereby the dielectric material is ionized into a very dense and hot plasma.
Physically, different processes are responsible for ablation in ultrafast regime.
In metals, in addition to surface evaporation, thermal mechanisms at overcritical
temperatures are involved. Among them are processes such as explosive (homo-
geneous) boiling and phase separation by spinodal decomposition (for an overview
see [57]). In dielectrics, multi-photon and avalanche ionization may lead to an
optical breakdown, changing the optical properties from transparent to metal-like.
Intense radiation then efﬁciently couples to the electron plasma and initiates strong
photoemission of electrons. As a consequence, an electrostatic repulsion between
positive lattice ions may overcome the binding forces resulting in a Coulomb
explosion (for an overview see [3]).
For ultrafast processing, mode-locked Nd:YAG (Nd:YVO4) lasers with pulses
in the picosecond range or femtosecond Ti:Sapphire laser systems have been
utilized. Due to the high costs and complex design of Ti:Sapphire lasers, pico-
second laser sources have mostly obtained industrial relevance.
In the following, selected experimental data are presented. By milling steels with
mode-locked laser with frequency-tripled Nd:YVO4 laser with k ¼ 355 nm,
tD\15 ps and fla ¼ 30 kHz, a surface roughness of Ra ¼ 0:3 lm has been achieved
[50]. In alumina roughness values of Ra ¼ 0:25 lm have been achieved [48].
Employment of a laser source with k ¼ 355 nm, tD ¼ 8 ps and fla ¼ 10 kHz to fused
silica has revealed Ra ¼ 0:3 lm [49]. Applying the radiation of Ti:Sapphire laser
with k ¼ 800 nm, tD ¼ 150 fs and fla ¼ 1 kHz to WC-10Co and industrial diamond,
ablation rates of 2  104 mm3=s and 2  105 mm3=s, respectively, have been
obtained [26]. Illuminating sapphire with the radiation of Ti:Sapphire laser with
7
Tool Making
257

k ¼ 780 nm, tD ¼ 164 fs and fla ¼ 1 kHz, ablation rates of 0:3  105 mm3=s and
1:5  105mm3=s for gentle and strong ablation regimes, respectively, have been
demonstrated [78]. Here, the minimum structure diameter dmin ¼ 4 lm and depth
hs ¼ 0:22 lm have been reported, demonstrating the state of the art in producing
intricate shapes by laser ablation in hard-to-machine materials.
7.3.3 Laser-Induced Chemical Machining
Salar Mehrafsun
7.3.3.1 Process Fundamentals
Laser-induced chemical machining is based on the laser-induced thermal activa-
tion of a heterogeneous chemical reaction between an ambient and solid medium.
This process can be used for subtractive methods like surface modiﬁcations and
the milling of micro forming tools [3].
For the processing of metals, wavelength-independent thermal processes can be
efﬁciently applied. The inﬂuence of laser radiation causes chemical reactions on the
metal surface only, which are associated with material removal (for laser-induced
chemical machining) or deposition, depending on the composition of the ambient
medium. Due to the high concentration of reactants thermochemical machining is
particularly efﬁcient in reactive ﬂuids like phosphoric or sulfuric acid. In contrast
with laser ablation with laser power densities up to the GW/cm2 range, material
processing with laser-induced chemical machining already starts at laser power
densities of 0.1 MW/cm2 [96]. Due to the low laser power densities, thermal and
mechanical loading of the material is avoided. Also a redeposition of evaporated
and/or molten material inside and outside the laser irradiated area (see Fig. 7.32),
which may lower the quality of the machined structure, does not occur [40].
Selective material removal is possible in all metals which are protected against
corrosion by a thin natural passivation layer at room temperature. The passivation
layer leads to many metals having a negligible background etching rate
of \10-8 lm/s without laser radiation [69].
The material removal is a result of laser-induced thermochemical reactions
between an etchant and metal atoms on the surface of the workpiece, beginning at
low laser powers of \1 W [69]. The temperature distribution at the surface of the
workpiece is an important factor in material removal. Investigations with con-
tinuous wave (cw) Ar-ion (k = 514 nm) and cw Nd:YAG laser sources
(k = 1,064 nm) show that the passive layer is not affected up to a temperature of
90 C, and that equal temperatures lead to equal normalized removal rates for
different spot diameters and laser wavelengths [96]. Thereby only the laser
wavelength has an indirect inﬂuence on material removal due to differences in the
absorptivity of the materials. Therefore, the reaction leading to material removal
only depends on the temperature of the material surface and not on the absorbed
258
E. Brinksmeier

laser wavelength [96]. For metals with a dense natural oxide layer, thermal con-
ductivity reﬂects the achievable processing speeds. For NiTi alloys processing
rates of up to 8 9 104 lm3/s with laser powers of only 7 W can be achieved [94].
The achieved temperature at surface level is crucial to predict the material removal
and achieved contour. For laser beams arranged perpendicularly to the surface of
the workpiece the etched depth h can be calculated in dependence on the laser
power Pl and feed rate v by the semi-empirical equation:
h ¼ DePa
Pl
v þ v0
ð7:17Þ
where D is a pre-exponential factor with the units of a diffusion coefﬁcient (m2/s),
Pa the laser activation power and v0 a coefﬁcient considers that the maximum etching
depth, even for a feed rate of zero, is limited. These coefﬁcients do not depend on the
processing conditions but on the material properties [95]. Investigations show that
the calculated etch depths correlate well with experimental results (see Fig. 7.33).
For laser powers of 12 W etch depths of up to 380 lm for steel X110 and 150 lm for
Stellite 21 can be achieved [95].
Physically the process can be described by thermochemical phenomena leading
to etching reactions. In aqueous solutions the metallic workpiece behaves like an
electrode. A potential difference can be observed due to the formation of an
electrolytic double layer at the phase boundary. Metal ions which enter the
solution leave the electrode in an electron surplus. According to Helmholtz, metal
cations near the electrode are attracted and it comes to a formation of a simple
double layer (Fig. 7.34). This is also called a rigid Helmholtz double layer, in
contrast with the thereafter forming diffuse Nernst layer, which is followed by the
laser ablation
laser-induced chemical machining
work piece
work piece
melt
micro- 
cracks
burrs
droplets
electrolyte
laser beam
laser beam
4 µm
4 µm
20 µm
20 µm
BIAS ID 122079
Fig. 7.32 Comparison of processing quality in (left) laser ablation and (right) laser-induced
chemical machining
7
Tool Making
259

solution. Consequently the charge with increasing distance to the electrode
becomes weaker and the concentration of reactants increases [11].
The time-resolved measurements of the electrochemical potential wel against an
electrochemical reference electrode (saturated calomel electrode SCE) show that
the passivation layer is locally removed, followed by a subsequent dissolution of
 Steel X110
 Stellite 21
0
100
200
µm
400
Etch depth
0
2
4
6
8
10
W
14
Laser power
 Exp. 1 µm/s
 Exp. 20 µm/s
         Calculated
BIAS ID 122080
Fig. 7.33 Calculated and measured etch depths versus laser power using different feed rates for
Stellite 21 and steel X110 [95]
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
H+
H+
H2
Me2+
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
solution
Nernst layer
inner Helmholtz layer
outer Helmholtz layer
metal
electrolyte
BIAS ID 122081
Fig. 7.34 Schematic illustration of the electro-chemical double layer on an electrode and
chemical reaction between the metallic surface and the reactive wet ambient medium
260
E. Brinksmeier

the metal under the formation of hydrogen and water soluble metallic salts. This is
indicated by a sudden drop in the voltage down to -0.15 V caused by the thermal
inﬂuence of the laser beam (see Fig. 7.35). After the end of laser irradiation an
immediate interruption of the etching reaction is detected and a sudden increase in
voltage due to the repassivation of the metal surface, which is essential for high
quality machining [94].
Due to the chemical dissolution of the material (see Fig. 7.34 right), according
to Eq. (7.18) the activity of the products (hydrogen and metal ions) increases, at
the point where the activity of the educts (protons and metal) decreases [96].
Me þ 2Hþ ! Me2þ þ H2 "
ð7:18Þ
According to Nernst the decrease of proton activity causes a decrease of the
potential, while the increase in metal ion activity results in a positive change to the
electrochemical potential wel. Therefore the chemical material removal within
the reactive ﬂuid is driven by the temperature-dependent proton activity of the
redox reaction, and is mainly responsible for the formation of the electrochemical
potential [96]. This effect can be used for the effective and precise processing of a
range of different metallic materials (see Sect. 7.3.3.3). By applying different
external application-oriented electrical potentials it is possible to machine work-
pieces with high shape quality and contour accuracy (see Sect. 7.3.3.2). The laser
supports the kinematics of the metal dissolution without the melting effects (see
Fig. 7.32). The electrochemical potential wel of the workpiece not only depends on
the laser power-dependent temperature T but on the chemical activity ich of the
dissolving metal ions. According to Nernst the electrochemical potential is pro-
portional to the temperature, and therefore to the laser power applied [96].
Another fundamental inﬂuence on the processing speed beside the thermal
activation of chemical reactions is the mass transport limitation within the liquid
ambient medium. As previously mentioned, a non-moving layer is formed in
heterogeneous reactions in front of the solid surface (Helmholtz and Nernst layer).
The reactants must pass through this layer to react with the solid surface (see
 
Laser on
Laser off
-0.20
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
     V
0.10
Potential vs. SCE 
-20
0
20
40
60
80
  s
120
Time 
BIAS ID 122082
Fig. 7.35 Temporal
evolution of the potential for
an NiTi alloy switching the
laser on/off [94]
7
Tool Making
261

Fig. 7.34). The reactants can only get through this layer by diffusion. The Nernst
layer is depleted of reactants by their reaction with the solid surface. The con-
centration of the reactants near the solid surface at the outer Helmholtz layer may
decrease to a level where not enough educts can be delivered [11]. Investigations
show that for small removal depths the removal rate ﬂuctuates around a constant
value. For larger depths a monotone decrease with a gradient of m = -1 can be
observed, i.e. the reaction rate is inversely proportional to the removal depth [96].
For a heterogeneous chemical reaction with mass transport limitation the reaction
rate is a function of the diffusion coefﬁcient D and the thickness of the Nernst layer
d. Therefore, the processing speed in laser-induced thermochemical machining is
diffusion limited [96]. For the precise machining of e.g. micro metal forming tools
the inﬂuence of laser power, electrochemical potential and mass transport limi-
tations are important factors, which have to be taken into account.
7.3.3.2 Process Method
In practice, a signiﬁcant disadvantage of laser-induced chemical machining is the
low process speed (material removal rate = 1.6 9 10-5 mm3/s), which is an
obstacle for use in industrial applications. An increase in laser power leads to
higher material removal rates but can also cause molten surfaces and hence a
deterioration in processing quality. Nevertheless the laser irradiated surfaces can
reach higher temperatures than the boiling temperature of the reactive ﬂuid,
leading to the formation of gas bubbles which may slow down or interrupt the
etching reaction [22]. Resulting in a decrease in material removal and also in
processing quality. Since etching processes are transport limited, a further sig-
niﬁcant factor is the increasing metal ions density in the processing zone which
also leads to a decrease in material removal [69]. Thus a fast exchange of the
reactants is necessary to avoid saturation effects in the etching reaction.
One approach is the application of a reactive wet jet-stream. With the help of a
jet nozzle an efﬁcient and fast exchange of the reactants can be realized. It leads to
increased
removal
rates
one
order
of
magnitude
(material
removal
rate = 1.6 9 10-4 mm3/s), due to the intensive mass transport by direct injection
of the etchant into the laser irradiated area [94]. Additionally, the etchant jet-
stream cools the workpiece surface. This leads to a suppressed boiling of the
etchant and results in an improvement in the processing quality and shape ﬁdelity
[22]. The main components of this approach are a ﬁber-laser, a xyz-linear stage
and a liquid-phase etching cell as shown in Fig. 7.36. The continuous wave (cw)
ﬁber-laser source is operating at a wavelength of 1,080 nm. The focused laser
beam is guided coaxially to the etchant jet-stream through the nozzle onto the
workpiece surface. The workpiece is ﬁxed in a basin, which is mounted on the
computer-controlled xyz-linear stage. It allows feed rate v control of the workpiece
and adjustment of the workpiece with respect to focal position. An adjustable
pump enables ﬂow rates of the etchant jet-stream between 2 and 20 m/s.
262
E. Brinksmeier

Investigations show that with the right ﬂow rate setting there is an increase in
processing quality [64].
Additionally a three-electrode conﬁguration is integrated into the etching cell to
perform the electrochemical enhancement of the reaction if required. For an
automatic operation of the system a user interface is integrated. With this user
interface it is possible to set and control the processing parameters to machine a
desired structure. A quality control system optimizes the process stability and the
manufacturing accuracy, enabling ﬂexible and precise machining of hard and
geometrically-complex micro tools [64].
Material removal is strongly inﬂuenced by four main process variables namely
laser power PL, feed rate of the workpiece v, ﬂow rate of the etchant u and focus
diameter d of the laser beam spot. The intensity proﬁle of the ﬁber-laser is close to
a Gaussian bell curve. Combining several bell curves leads to the desired shape.
Laser path planning calculates the number, position and Gaussian intensity proﬁles
for a sequence of overlapping laser removal paths (cavities), as shown in Fig. 7.37.
The inverse process model calculates the required process parameters according to
the desired removal path. The calculated process variables are fed into the in-
process control block, individually observed and controlled by the graphic user
interface. The cross-section of a desired individual cavity can be approximated by
Gaussian curves. By changing both Gaussian form parameters, amplitude and
standard deviation (depth and width of the cavity), the cross-section of individual
removal paths can be varied and their superposition can be matched to a desired
contour [64]. An appropriate combination of process parameters allows successful
material removal and contouring of e.g. micro metal forming tools.
The chemical etching reaction can be further inﬂuenced by an external electric
ﬁeld, between the metal workpiece and an additional electrode. This is possible
due to the ionic nature of the reactants [94]. In contrast with laser-assisted
laser
motor 2
in-process laser
power control
telescope
work piece
xyz-linear stage
laser beam
etchant basin
etchant jet-nozzle
y
x
z
motor 1
pump
in-
process 
metrology
BIAS ID 122083
Fig. 7.36 Setup for laser-induced chemical machining with an etchant jet-nozzle and functional
schematic of liquid phase etching cell
7
Tool Making
263

electrochemical machining, where material removal is electrochemically domi-
nated (more than 100 V) [22], the applied voltage in laser-induced chemical
machining is very low (a few volts) [94]. Laser-induced currents are observed due
to the thermal activation of electrochemical etching reactions and/or laser-induced
breakthrough of the passivation layer. Depending on the polarity of the applied
electric ﬁeld, the increase in etching rate (reduction of the passivation layer
towards the cathodic potentials) can double (MRR = 3.2 9 10-4 mm3/s), or an
improvement of the processing quality with e.g. Ra down to 0.1 lm (stronger
passivation) can be realized. Even materials which are not protected by a thin
native oxide layer such as hardened tool steel can be electrochemically passivated
and therefore protected against corrosion outside the laser irradiated area by
applying an external electric ﬁeld [94]. Thus, combining the inﬂuence of ﬁve
independent process parameters (laser power, etchant ﬂow rate, feed rate of the
workpiece, focus diameter and electric ﬁeld), optimum conditions for obtaining
desired shape contours can be found.
7.3.3.3 Achievable Structures
With laser-induced chemical machining it is possible to generate complex geome-
tries and micro structured surfaces. It allows the machining of a number of different
materials and alloys. In particular, titanium, nickel and chromium-based alloys,
stainless steel as well as high performance and special materials such as Stellite
alloys are highly processable. Achievable structures are not limited in maximum
beam path 1
rotary swaging tool 
beam path 2
beam path 3
incoming laser irradiation
achieved contour
R = 125 m
-0.2
0
-0.15
mm
-0.05
0
0 µm
577.7 µm
0.1
-0.1
0.1
0.2
0.4
mm
width
height from reference level
BIAS ID 122084
Fig. 7.37 (left) Schematic representation of sequential removal paths for a rotary swaging tool
and (right) manufactured edge radius
264
E. Brinksmeier

size because they are successively generated. Cavities can be machined by moving
the workpiece perpendicular to the laser beam. The width and depth of the cavities
are inﬂuenced by the temperature distribution on the surface and the duration of the
temperature rise owing to the thermal activation of chemical reactions [96].
Depending on the nature of the material, minimal cavity widths down to 10 lm and
cavity depths up to 380 lm by single scanning can be realized [95]. Therefore, the
shape of the cavity reﬂects the effective heat conductivity of the machined material
and the intensity distribution of the incident laser beam [94]. In addition to its
capability in micro forming tool machining, laser-induced chemical machining is
also suitable for the manufacture of micro functional elements like micro grippers,
micro springs and micro channels, as shown in Fig. 7.38.
With minimum structure sizes of 10 lm, cutting angles of 3, edge radii of
2 lm and a mean roughness Ra in the range of 0.1 and 0.3 lm, achievable micro
structures are in the ﬁeld of competing processes such as micro milling, EDM or
ECM. Because of the lateral heat diffusion from the laser processing zone, with
increasing laser power the depth and width of the cavities simultaneously increase.
Thus, by single scanning of the cavity, aspect ratios (etched depth to width) of 3
can be realized. However, by multiple scanning of the laser beam along the same
cavity, higher aspect ratios (up to 10) can be realized [69]. The feed rate of the
workpiece can be up to 100 lm/s and material removal rates of up to
3.2 9 10-4 mm3/s can be achieved [94].
With the laser path planning algorithm, the number, position and Gaussian
intensity proﬁles for overlapping laser removal paths can be calculated. As shown
20 µm
200 µm
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
BIAS ID 122085
Fig. 7.38 Laser-induced chemical machining manufactured micro grippers made of nitinol (a,
b), contoured micro rotary swaging tool (c), micro spring made of nickel-titanium (d) and ﬂexible
shaped cavity in nickel (e)
7
Tool Making
265

in Fig. 7.37, the edges of a micro rotary swaging tool can be contoured with a
deﬁned radius. For the precise material processing of e.g. micro rotary swaging or
micro deep drawing tools a quality control system which includes an automated
laser path planning model is required. Additionally an in-process metrology via
interferometry for a depth control of the cavities helps improve the processing
quality and shape ﬁdelity.
7.3.3.4 In-situ Process Monitoring
Inﬂuencing factors such as minimal ﬂuctuations in laser beam intensity or etchant
ﬂow rate and material inhomogeneities affect the rate of material removal. The
result is a deviation in the desired width and depth of the cavity. Knowledge of
the actual geometry allows the control of the machining process and thus meets the
requirements of high accuracy and short processing times. For laser removal
processes with limited spatial accessibility, coaxial optical measuring techniques
offer suitable solutions for the given measuring tasks.
Here, interferometry represents a well-established and stable measuring tech-
nique with high resolution. A laser beam is used to measure the current leveling of
the cavity depth as shown in Fig. 7.39. The measuring laser beam is guided
coaxially to the machining laser beam, and the jet-stream onto the workpiece
surface. Depending on the measuring beam wavelength used, the measurement
movement direction of the 
machining beam relative 
to the work piece
measuring 
beam
cavity
heat affected zone
energy input
machining laser beam 
(Gaußian profile)
work piece surface
actual surface 
desired surface 
x
z
BIAS ID 122086
Fig. 7.39 (above) Arrangement of the measuring beam within the processing beam, (below)
illustration of the machined cavities in laser-induced chemical machining
266
E. Brinksmeier

accuracy reaches the nanometer range. But with increased measurement accuracy
the axial resolution decreases. In this case multiple wavelength measurement
systems have to be implemented to ensure successful and precise measurement.
Having the necessary information about the depth of the cavity, permanent
adjustment control of the process parameters is possible. This will lead to the
desired depth of the cavity and thus to the desired contour. By applying in-process
metrology to Laser-induced Chemical Machining, high surface quality, burr-free
cut edges and high shape quality can be achieved. Thus, the rejection of parts and
the processing time for good parts can be reduced.
7.4 Cutting and Abrasive Processes
Ekkard Brinksmeier, Oltmann Riemer, Sven Twardy and Christian
Robert
7.4.1 Machining Processes and Machine Tools
The machining of hard and wear resistant materials—like tool steels or cemented
carbides—at a micro scale is even more challenging than at macro scale, because
machining accuracy cannot be scaled down linearly and cutting tools are becoming
much more fragile when the tip sizes are reduced. Therefore, to achieve a high
quality in manufacturing, very precise and stiff machine tools in combination with
suitable processes have to be used. But without doubt, micro manufacturing
processes based on mechanical material removal exhibit a great potential for the
ﬂexible machining of micro forming tools in single piece production and for small
batches. Nevertheless, there is a tradeoff between surface quality and material
removal, like that shown in Fig. 7.40. For this reason, processes often have to be
combined in suitable process chains to achieve high quality products at reasonable
cost. In the following sections the general characteristics of mechanical micro
machining processes will be introduced, and the suitability for micro mold making
will be discussed in detail.
In general, all mechanical micro machining processes require machining sys-
tems which have to fulﬁll speciﬁc requirements regarding the machine tool itself,
the environment, the subsystems and the data management, i.e. the CAD-CAM
chain. Figure 7.41 shows a CNC precision micro machining center and essential
subsystems. For all precision machining operations four major areas have to be
taken into account, as described in the following:
7
Tool Making
267

7.4.1.1 Machine Tool
The applied machine tools should be built from state of the art technologies by
means of linear direct drives, hydrostatic guideways and glass scales for position
measurement and assembled on a frame with a high damping rate. For small
cutting tools a high frequency spindle (n [ 20,000 rpm) is also compulsory in
order to achieve sufﬁcient cutting speeds.
10-2
roughness Ra
material removal rate
10-1
100
µm³/min
102
100
101
nm
103
micro
milling
10-1
abrasive
polishing
laser
polishing
friction polishing
micro grinding
Fig. 7.40 Machining processes for micro forming tools categorized by typical material removal
rates and achievable surface roughness
dynamometer
centering clamps
laser tool setter
3D touch probe
tool clamping
Fig. 7.41 Precision micro machining center (DMG Sauer Ultrasonic 20 linear) and subsystems
268
E. Brinksmeier

7.4.1.2 Environment
Stable environmental conditions are essential to achieve high accuracy. For this
reason temperature and humidity should be controlled, and external inﬂuences
(e.g. sunlight, air ﬂow and vibrations) have to be isolated from the machine tool.
7.4.1.3 Subsystems
For high precision machining, a precise machine tool by itself is not sufﬁcient, but
also high quality subsystems are necessary. For the lowest tool run out (\3 lm) a
precise tool clamping system with high balance quality (G 2.5 or better) should be
used. For accurate determination of the tool’s center point and the radius at spindle
speed a laser tool setter is recommended. The workpiece should be clamped as
near as possible to the center of the rotational axes to minimize angular errors. The
exact position of the workpiece should be determined by a 3D-touch probe. For the
measurement of cutting forces a piezo-dynamometer can be applied.
7.4.1.4 CNC control
The CNC control must allow very short block processing times to enable accurate
high speed machining. Error compensation for guideways and thermal expansion
is useful to improve machining accuracy. An adapted interface to the CAD/CAM
system is essential for loss-free data transfer.
7.4.2 Cutting Processes
All material removal processes for which the number of cutting edges, the macro
geometry of the tool and the tool orientation are known, are deﬁned as cutting
processes. Through these processes workpiece material is removed mechanically in
the form of chips. The most commonly used cutting processes in mold making are
turning (for rotational symmetric parts) and milling. Milling in particular is widely
used because of its high ﬂexibility (non symmetrical parts and freeform surfaces),
removal rate and surface quality. If the milling process is scaled down to a certain
limit it is called micro milling. Micro machining has two popular deﬁnitions:
• structural dimensions smaller 1 mm by Masuzawa and Tönshoff [61]
• tool engagement less than 1 mm by Dornfeld et al. [25].
Molds for micro forming processes are usually larger than 1 mm, but contain
features in the micrometer range. For this reason in most cases mold making is a
combination of conventional milling and micro milling, because not all cutting tools
applied are smaller than 1 mm and not all machined features are smaller than 1 mm.
7
Tool Making
269

But the milling of hardened steel with small cutting tools even with diameters in
the range of a few millimeters is quite challenging, because there are two domi-
nating size effects when the milling process is scaled down (cf. Fig. 7.42):
• the workpiece grain size is in the same order-of-magnitude as the uncut chip
thickness hcu
– material behavior becomes anisotropic
• the uncut chip thickness hcu is in the same order-of-magnitude as the cutting
edge radius rb
– effective rake angle c becomes negative.
If the grain size of the workpiece material is in the same order-of-magnitude as
the uncut chip thickness h, the material will behave anisotropically, because the
interaction between the workpiece and cutting edge is limited to single grains with
different crystal orientations or alloying. This effect can cause strong variations in
the cutting conditions and chip loads, resulting in poor surface quality or chatter.
For this reason ﬁne grained tool steels with dispersed carbides are recommended
for micro milling.
If the uncut chip thickness h is in the same order-of-magnitude as the cutting
edge radius rb, the theory of minimum chip thickness becomes very important. For
micro milling of hardened tool steel, Aramcharoen and Mativenga have shown that
the minimum chip thickness hcu,min correlates approximately to the value of the
cutting edge radius, which is typically 0.5 lm \ rb \ 2.5 lm, in micro milling,
depending on the cutting material and coating. This effect is shown in Fig. 7.43 [2].
According to the theory of minimum chip thickness three cases can be
distinguished:
hcu \ hcu,min
No material will be removed in the form of chips. Only elastic and
plastic
deformation
occurs,
which
is
called
plowing.
For
hcu  hcu,min no plastic deformation occurs and material will
recover completely
hcu % hcu,min
Material is partly removed in the form of chips, but plowing can
still occur
hcu [ hcu,min
Material is completely removed in the form of chips
macro:
+
-
hcu
hcu
micro:
tool
hc
r
workpiece
workpiece
tool
Fig. 7.42 Size effects in down scaling of cutting processes: conventional macro-scale (left) and
micro-scale cutting (right) after [2]
270
E. Brinksmeier

Cutting tests have shown that the best surface quality in ball end milling of
hardened tool steel can be obtained if the uncut chip thickness hcu, is in the range
of the minimum chip thickness hcu,min. If the uncut chip thickness is too low,
plowing effects (elastoplastic material response) occur due to the negative rake
angle. On the other hand, if the uncut chip thickness is relatively high, regular feed
marks can be observed, leading to a rough surface proﬁle, which is dominated by
the kinematics of the cut (cf. Fig. 7.44).
Despite these limitations, micro milling is an appropriate technology for the
machining of tool steels with a hardness of up to 70 HRC, if performed on a
suitable machine tool, applying appropriate cutting tools and well selected cutting
parameters.
workpiece
workpiece
workpiece
hcu < hcu,min
hcu > hcu,min
hcu   hcu,min
hcu
hcu
hcu
tool
tool
tool
elastic 
recovery
chip
chip
removed 
material
removed 
material
elastic 
recovery
r
r
r
Fig. 7.43 Chip formation relative to minimum chip thickness hcu,min in micro scale machining
after [2]
0
5
10
15
20
30
µm
feed per foot fz
process:
ball end milling
workpiece:
hardened tool steel
1.2379 (60 HRC)
parameters:
d = 500 µm
j = 2
n = 40,000 rpm
vc = 21.4 m/min
apc = 15 µm
aec = 15 µm
lubrication:
minimun quantity
0
500
1000
1500
mm/min
2500
feed velocity vf
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
µm
0.6
surface roughness Sa
0.0
plowing (hcu = 0.6 µm)
cutting (hcu = 2.5 µm)
feed marks (hcu = 8.7 µm)
3.6 µm
apc aec
vf
vc
d
vf
1.6 µm
0.6 µm
3.6 µm
93 µm
93 µm
127 µm
127 µm
127 µm
93 µm
vf
vf
Fig. 7.44 Surface roughness Sa versus feed velocity vf and feed per tooth fz in micro ball end
milling of hardened tool steel
7
Tool Making
271

A further reduction in the uncut chip thickness without plowing is only possible
in
diamond
machining,
because
of
the
very
sharp
cutting
edge
(20 nm \ rb \ 50 nm) (cf. Fig. 7.45). Unfortunately diamonds cannot be applied
as cutting tool materials for the machining of iron based metals like steel, because
of the excessive wear rate due to the high afﬁnity for carbon atoms of the iron.
7.4.2.1 Cutting Tools
In conventional machining many different cutting tool materials, like High Speed
Steel (HSS), tungsten carbide, ceramics, cermets, CBN, diamond, etc., have been
adapted for individual machining tasks. In micro milling of hardened steel only
two common cutting tool materials are used, i.e. tungsten carbide and CBN.
Typical cutting tools are shown in Fig. 7.46. Micro cutting tools are shaped by
grinding on high precision multi-axes grinding machines. The cutting edge radius
of uncoated tools is usually smaller than 1 lm and for coated tools between 1 and
5 lm. The number of cutting edges j is usually two for micro milling tools, and in
rare cases four. High quality tool manufacturers provide measurement protocols
for all delivered cutting tools showing nominal/actual diameters and run out errors
between the shank and cutting edges.
7.4.2.2 Material Removal Rate
The material removal rate Qw is deﬁned as a product of the depth of cut, width of
cut and feed velocity:
cutting edge radius r
hcu = 10 r
hcu = r
cutting
micro 
machining
conventional 
machining
plowing
uncut chip thickness hcu
0.01
0.1
diamond machining 
1
µm
100
1000
µm
10
1
0.1
Fig. 7.45 Typical uncut chip
thickness versus cutting edge
radius for different cutting
processes
272
E. Brinksmeier

Qw ¼ apc  aec  vf
ð7:19Þ
In micro milling the optimal removal rate is mainly dependent on the combi-
nation of cutting tool and workpiece material. For each combination there is an
optimum cutting speed vc. All other parameters are dominated by the cutting tool
diameter. For this reason and for stability aspects cutting tools should always be
chosen as large as possible. Figure 7.47 shows typical material removal rates
versus cutting tool diameters in the ball end milling of hardened tool steels by
applying coated tungsten carbide tools. In straight end milling the material
removal rate is slightly increased, because a greater width of cut can be chosen.
50 µm
100 µm
250 µm
250 µm
straight end
tungsten carbide
d = 200 µm
straight end
tungsten carbide
d = 100 µm
ball end
tungsten carbide
d = 500 µm
ball end
CBN
d = 500 µm
Fig. 7.46 SEM pictures of state of the art micro milling tools
material removal rate Qw
cutting tool diameter d
7
5
4
3
2
2
mm
mm3
min
1
1
0 0
0.5
further increase of 
removal rate leads to 
excessive tool wear and 
worse surface quality
typical removal rate for 
hardened tool steels 
appliying coated tungsten 
carbide micro ball end tools
60 HRC (finishing)
40 HRC 
(roughing)
process:
ball end milling
work piece material: 
hardened tool steel 
45 < HRC < 60
parameters:
vc   = 120 -250 m/min
fz    = 2 - 22 µm
apc = 2 - 80 µm
aec = 2 - 50 µm
j   = 2
apc
aec
fz
vc
d
Fig. 7.47 Material removal rate versus cutting tool diameter in micro ball end milling of
hardened tool steel, based on cutting parameter suggestions of two different cutting tool
manufacturers
7
Tool Making
273

7.4.2.3 Shape Accuracy and Surface Quality
The achievable shape accuracy mainly depends on the positioning accuracy of the
applied machine tool. For precision machining in terms of micro milling, shape
accuracies of some micron can be achieved. For higher precision ultra precision
machine tools have to be applied. Besides positioning accuracy, tool workpiece
interaction and the resulting tool deﬂection are important factors limiting shape
accuracy, for this reason cutting forces should be minimized. Achievable aspect
ratios of structures are often only limited by tool size. Today, cutting tools for
milling and drilling are commercially available down to a diameter of 50 lm.
Smaller tools have also been manufactured and tested by research institutions.
After form accuracy, surface quality is the major quality criteria in mold making.
The surface ﬁnish in the forming zone in particular is a matter of concern, because
this area has a strong inﬂuence on the quality of the formed part. Rough forming
tools can damage blanks and induce defects during the forming process. But not
always does a smooth surface perform best. Many different studies have shown that
well-deﬁned micro structures can improve the performance of forming tools.
Nowadays, surfaces are mainly inspected by optical systems like white light
interferometers, but also tactile proﬁlers are still widely used. Regardless of the
measuring technique, surface parameters were calculated from recorded raw data
to evaluate surface qualities. In micro ball end milling surface qualities down to
Sa = 50 nm can be achieved on hardened tool steel surfaces under ideal cutting
conditions.
By the adaption of cutting conditions in terms of tool diameter, feed per tooth
and width of cut, various surface topographies with different tribological condi-
tions can be achieved, but only if the minimum chip thickness is exceeded. If not
plowing occurs, and the surface topography becomes undeﬁned. Figure 7.48
shows how the variation in width of cut (i.e. line pitch) affects the surface
topography expressed by roughness values and the Abbott-curve.
aec = 200 µm
Z[µm]
5
0
600
400
200
0 0
200
400
600
800
X[µm]
Y[µm]
aec = 100 µm
Z[µm]
5
0
600
400
200
0
0
200
400
600
800
X[µm]
Y[µm]
0
10
30
20
40
50
60
70
80
%
100
0
1
2
3
5
µm
height
bearing area
aec = 100 µm
   306 nm
   390 nm
   439 nm
   820 nm
   426 nm
aec = 200 µm
   306 nm
   390 nm
   439 nm
   820 nm
   426 nm
Sa
Sq
Spk
Sk
Svk
Fig. 7.48 Surface topography and Abbott-curve of micro ball end milled surfaces
274
E. Brinksmeier

7.4.2.4 Tribological Behavior
In most technical applications very smooth surfaces with a low roughness are
desired. But in tribological systems (e.g. forming processes like deep drawing)
smooth surfaces do not always perform optimally [9]. Especially in dry contact,
smooth surfaces tend to wear out very fast. Investigations on the inﬂuence of micro
structures on the tribological conditions in dry contact show that micro structures
can reduce the coefﬁcient of friction and wear rate, compared to smooth surfaces.
Figure 7.49 presents the results of pin-on-disc tests. In these tests only surface
topography was varied, all other parameters were kept constant. Micro structured
surfaces were machined by micro ball end milling in a radial direction and
compared to a polished reference sample. It is obvious, that the polished surface
immediately starts to wear out and hence the coefﬁcient of friction increases due to
debris in the contact zone. Micro structured surfaces can enclose wear particles
much better than smooth surfaces, and exhibit a much more constant tribological
behavior [104].
7.4.2.5 Cutting Forces
Cutting forces are a major parameter for the evaluation of machining processes,
especially to analyze the inﬂuence of different cutting tools, workpiece materials,
cooling lubricants and machining parameters on the work result or to identify
chatter. Furthermore, high frequency recording of cutting forces by a piezo-
dynamometer can deliver helpful information about the tool–workpiece interac-
tion. A typical force plot is shown in Fig. 7.50. It demonstrates that there is a
variation in feed force Fy according to the tool angle, which can be explained by
FN
FR
vT
0
5
10
15
20
m
30
distance a
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
coefficient of friction µ
micro structured (Sa = 600 nm)
smooth (Sa = 7 nm)
micro structured
(Sa = 200 nm)
test setup:
pin-on-disc
contacting body:
ball (100Cr6)
d = 6 mm
sample:
disc(X153CrMoV121)
d = 24 mm  
parameter:
FN = 90 mN
vT = 38 mm/s
r = 4 mm
Fig. 7.49 Coefﬁcient of friction over sliding distance of pin-on-disc test of micro structured
surfaces [104]
7
Tool Making
275

the run out error of the applied cutting tool. The run out error causes a variation in
uncut chip thickness for the individual cutting edges. This effect results in higher
loads for one cutting edge and hence increased wear rates. For this reason the run
out error has to be minimized in micro milling, because the feed per tooth is in the
range of a few microns.
The cutting forces can also give information on the tool deﬂection, which is
much more relevant in micro milling compared to macro milling, as tool stiffness is
relatively low. Bending stiffness of less than 100 N/mm can be expected for cutting
tools of 100 lm in diameter. Uhlmann and Schauer have shown that tool tip
deﬂection in micro milling can easily exceed 10 lm. For this reason new concepts
for the design of micro milling tools were developed, considering the type of
dynamic loads micro tools have to withstand. New tool designs are shown in
Fig. 7.51. Optimized micro end mills show 30 % less stress encountering the same
forces. In fact this reduces tool deﬂection and also the risk of tool breakage [106].
process:
slot milling
cutting tool:
TC+TIAIN
d = 2 mm
j = 2 
coolant:
dry
workpiece:
hardened tool steel
1.2379 (60 HRC)
parameters:
n    = 10.800 min-1
vc   = 68 m/min
vf    = 420 mm/min
apc = 80 µm
y
Fz
Fy
360°
0
-10
10
20
30
40
N
60
Fx
force
Fz
Fx
Fy
vf
vf
d
apc
tool engagement angle
Fig. 7.50 High resolution measurement of cutting forces in micro ball end milling of hardened
tool steel
conventional micro end mill
0.5 mm
400 µm
400 µm
0.5 mm
optimized micro end mill
(b)
(d)
max= 3630 N/mm2
max= 2440 N/mm2
(a)
(c)
Fig. 7.51 Reduction in maximum stress as consequence of new shank and ﬂute design [106]
276
E. Brinksmeier

7.4.2.6 Tool Wear
In micro milling of steel tool, wear is a major problem. Abrasive material removal is
the dominating wear mechanism and leads to a continuous reduction in cutting tool
diameter during the milling process in the case of slotting or side milling, as shown in
Fig. 7.52. It can be recognized that the highest wear rate occurs during the ﬁrst
millimeters of cutting, which can be explained by a very high wear of one cutting
edge due to the run out error of the ﬂutes. In addition to form deviations, worn out
cutting edges also increase burr formation. For high form accuracy and surface
quality it is essential to apply a fresh cutting tool for ﬁnishing after roughing.
In ball end milling, if the cutting tool is not inclined, the highest wear rate
occurs at the tool tip, were the cutting speed is zero. Figure 7.53 shows a heavily
worn micro ball end tool after ﬁnishing an area of 12 mm2 hardened tool steel.
The ﬁrst 16 lm of the tool tip were completely removed by abrasive wear.
Machining experiments have shown that tool wear in micro ball end milling
cannot be correlated to the workpiece material hardness. It is assumed that the
alloying elements involved and the type of carbides are much more inﬂuential on
the wear rate than the hardness. For this reason it is helpful to compare different
workpiece materials—with similar mechanical properties, but different alloy
composition—for cost efﬁcient mold making by micro milling, especially if batch
sizes increase.
0
100
200
mm
400
new tool d0
running-in wear
constant wear
worn tool d l=420
cutting distance I
new tool d0
worn tool dl=420mm
400
µm
360
340
320
cutting diameter d
d=0.4 mm
d=0.4 mm
200 µm
200 µm
Fig. 7.52 Tool wear of a 400 lm straight end cutting tool in the micro slot milling of hardened
tool steel
16 µm
200 µm
200 µm
Fig. 7.53 Side and top view of a heavily worn 500 lm micro ball end mill
7
Tool Making
277

7.4.3 Grinding
Grinding is a machining technology for the shaping and ﬁnishing of hard and
brittle materials, e.g. hardened steel, cemented carbides or ceramics, which cannot
be machined by cutting. In contrast with cutting, grinding is characterized by an
undetermined number and orientation of many cutting edges exhibiting negative
rake angles, which lead to different material removal mechanisms. In grinding the
material removal rate is mostly speciﬁed with regard to the grinding tool width,
and for this reason called the speciﬁc removal rate Q0
w. Figure 7.54 shows typical
speciﬁc material removal rates and applied grain sizes in micro grinding. It can be
recognized that Q0
w is relatively low, and for this reason micro or precision
grinding is only suitable as a ﬁnish machining technology.
7.4.3.1 Material Removal Mechanisms
Usually the grinding of hard and brittle materials causes microcracks which
deteriorate the surface quality. Thus the transition from brittle-to-ductile material
removal is considered to be of great importance for micro and precision grinding.
Much research effort has been spent to identify this transition and to understand the
removal mechanisms [4]. A major parameter for the transition from brittle-to-
ductile behaviour in chip removal is the stress condition in the workpiece material
around the cutting edge.
From the theory of plasticity and fracture mechanics it is known that the degree
of plastic deformation depends on the temperature, strain rate, as well as on the
stress state, e.g. multi axial compression or tensile stress in the workpiece.
Figure 7.55 illustrates the Coulomb-Mohr hypothesis which describes multi axial
compression and tensile stress conditions within crystalline and amorphous
workpieces which cannot comply with high tensile stresses [67]. From this
hypothesis it can be determined that hydrostatic compression stress ﬁelds in the
shear plane are necessary for the ductile cutting of hard and brittle materials.
Karman has shown that hard and brittle materials can be machined in ductile mode
(i.e. visco-plastic material ﬂow) if the hydrostatic compression and shear stresses
micro grindling, 
precision grindling
conventional 
grindling
polishing
material 
removal 
rate
grain size
10-5
10-4
10-3
103
[µm]
[mm3/mm*s]
10-2
102
10-1
10-1
10-0
10-0
101
101
Fig. 7.54 Typical speciﬁc material removal rates and applied grain sizes in conventional
grinding, precision grinding, micro grinding and polishing (according to [66])
278
E. Brinksmeier

are sufﬁciently high [47]. The contact of the abrasives with the machined substrate
leads to elastic material response and, with increasing depth of cut, to plastic
behavior, i.e. ‘‘micro grooving’’ and ‘‘micro ploughing’’ (Fig. 7.56a, b). An
increasing depth of cut leads to ‘‘micro cutting’’ (Fig. 7.56c). Eventually, a further
increase in depth of cut leads to micro-cracks below the workpiece surface
(Fig. 7.56d) [90].
Generating hydrostatic pressure and maintaining a critical chip thickness are
prerequisites for the crack-free, ductile grinding of brittle materials. Ductile and
damage-free grinding of hard and brittle materials requires a maximum chip
thickness hcu,max not exceeding the critical and material speciﬁc chip thickness
hcu,crit to avoid crack initiation [53]. The critical material speciﬁc chip thickness
hcu,crit depends on the Young’s modulus E, Knoop hardness HK and the critical
fracture toughness Kc [60]:
hcu;crit 
E
HK



KC
HK

2
ð7:20Þ
1
hyd
2
hyd
3
hyd
1
3
2
1 > 
2> 
3
separating strength 
T
1
max
shear yield 
stress F
shear strength B
ductile
machining 
possible
plastic
deformation
1 
min
lmin
3
max
lmax
l
l
l l
l l
Fig. 7.55 Inﬂuence of stress state on shear strength sB, shear yield stress sF and plastic
deformation of hard and brittle materials (according to [67])
(a) micro grooving
(b) micro plowing
(c) micro cutting
(d) micro crack 
generation
Fig. 7.56 Material removal mechanism in grinding of brittle materials (according to [90])
7
Tool Making
279

7.4.3.2 Grinding Tools
In conventional and also in precision grinding usually tools in the form of grinding
wheels are applied. In micro grinding tools of pin type or ball end shape are also
common. Micro grinding tools are usually manufactured in the form of a solid
body made of steel or cemented carbide with an abrasive layer consisting of a bond
and embedded grains, e.g. diamond or CBN grains. Grain sizes in micro grinding
are typically smaller than 100 lm. Besides conventional electroplating of diamond
grains to the tool body, an alternative technology is emerging, where tool bodies
are coated by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) with a rough diamond layer (cf.
Fig. 7.57). CVD coated grinding tools have already been manufactured down to a
diameter of some ten micro meters. Trueing and dressing is challenging for both
types of grinding tool, because there is only a mono layer of abrasives.
7.4.3.3 Grinding Kinematics for Mold Making
Besides conventional 5-axes machining, several grinding kinematics especially for
the manufacturing of rotational symmetric molds were developed in recent years.
According to Tohme [101] cross axis grinding (see Fig. 7.58a) is the most com-
mon 2-axes grinding technique, which is useful for the grinding of molds and dies.
Here, the wheel rotational direction is transverse to the rotational direction of the
ground workpiece. The grinding of the part is carried out by a simultaneous 2-axis
movement. The disadvantage of the cross axis grinding technique, especially in
mold manufacturing, is the size of the grinding wheel and the required clearance.
In order to avoid collisions, tool radius must be greater than workpiece’s surface
maximum sag when machining concave molds. Also, the shaft length must be
larger than the workpiece radius to provide full access; unfortunately, long tool
shafts in combination with high process forces tend towards high deﬂections
resulting in dynamic problems and high ﬁgure errors of the ground workpiece. To
overcome the disadvantage of the cross grinding method, tilted or inclined
10 µm 
100 µm 
Fig. 7.57 Photographs of diamond grinding tools: electroplated (left), resin-bonded (centre) and
SEM-pictures of diamond micro pins: electroplated (top right) and CVD-coated (bottom right
[29])
280
E. Brinksmeier

grinding (see Fig. 7.58b) has been developed. Again, the feed movement is per-
formed in two axes. Distinct from cross axis grinding, the grinding spindle rota-
tional axis is inclined with an angle a of e.g. 45 relative to the workpiece surface.
This enables ﬂexible access to the workpiece surface and tool designs with smaller
shaft lengths, increasing the setup stiffness and the form accuracy achievable.
In order to increase the grinding tool life and to reduce the complexity of tool
compensation methods, the parallel grinding (see Fig. 7.58c) process was devel-
oped and analyzed by Saeki et al. [83]. Here, a spherical or ball-shaped grinding
wheel is tilted horizontally by 45 with respect to the workpiece’s rotational axis
and moves across the part using two simultaneous axes of motion. During the
grinding process the rotational direction of the workpiece and the cutting direction
of the wheel become parallel at the grinding point which moves along the grinding
wheel proﬁle. Thus wheel wear can be reduced and the tool life is improved. A
disadvantage of this grinding technique is the sensitivity towards wheel geometry
errors because the grinding wheel shape is directly transferred to the ground
surface and affects the form accuracy of the mold. For this reason, once again
precision wheel truing and dressing processes as well as continuous workpiece
form measurement with a robust form error compensation technique are required
for the achievement of the required high surface form accuracy.
An improvement of the parallel grinding technique was developed by means of
the wheel normal grinding method (see Fig. 7.58d and e). Here, the grinding wheel
contact point is kept constant across the entire workpiece surface, which ensures
b
2-axes grinding 
3-axes grinding 
cross axis grinding
tilted or inclined grinding
wheel normal grinding 
three linear axes
wheel normal grinding 
2 linear axes and 1 rotary axis
center of B-axis 
rotation
concave 
mold
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
concave mold
pivoting 
grinding wheel
circular
grinding zone
ball-type grinding 
wheel
inclination 
angle
3D tool path
ball-shaped  
grinding 
wheel
tilted 
grinding 
wheel
grinding 
wheel
concave 
mold
concave 
mold
tool path
tool path
tool path
z
X
z
z
z
x
y
y
y
y
Y
z
x
x
x
B 
tool
path
vw
vw
vw
vw
vw
vs
vs
vs
vs
vs
va
va
parallel grinding
concave 
mold
Fig. 7.58 Overview of different grinding kinematics for mold manufacturing sorted by the
number of axes used [10]
7
Tool Making
281

that the geometric tool errors will not be copied into the part during the grinding
process. This type of grinding process requires three axes of motion. It also enables
the use of a variety of different tool geometries, like for e.g. spherical micro
grinding wheels for aspherical shaped, concave mold cavities or sharp edged
cylindrical wheels for the generation of small blend radii between convex and ﬂat
functional surfaces or micro structured surfaces.
Tohme [101] reported on a wheel normal grinding process using two linear axes
and a rotary axis. In this case the grinding wheel is kept normal to the workpiece
surface by commanding the rotary B-axis to remain perpendicular to the point of
contact. Therefore, the included angle a between grinding spindle axis and
workpiece surface needs to be controlled over the entire grinding process (see
Fig. 7.58d). Under these requirements the ﬁgure accuracy of the ground surface is
minimized to selective tool wear because wheel form errors do not copy onto the
ground mold.
7.4.3.4 Surface Quality
Surface quality in terms of roughness results from the machining parameters as
well as from the grain size of the applied abrasives. For a smooth surface ﬁnish the
grain size has to be small combined with a soft bond. In micro grinding surface
qualities of Sa \ 100 nm can be achieved under the application of ultra precision
machine tools and very ﬁne grained grinding tools, even Sa \ 10 nm. For high
form accuracy the bond has to be harder to reduce form deviations resulting from
tool deformation.
7.4.3.5 Ultrasonic Assisted Grinding
Wheel speed is one of the most inﬂuential parameters in grinding. If the grinding
process is scaled down, the wheel speed decreases proportional to the tool
diameter. For this reason very high spindle speeds are required in micro grinding,
especially if the cutting tool diameter is in the range of a few millimeters or even
less. Besides high wheel speeds, another approach to increase the material removal
rate is the superposition of ultrasonic vibration. In ultrasonic assisted grinding an
additional axial-movement with low amplitude (0.5–2 lm) but high frequency
(20–40 kHz) is superimposed onto the rotational velocity. This motion has two
effects, on the one hand the effective cutting speed increases and on the other the
axial movement operates as a micro jackhammer, shattering the surface layer.
Figure 7.59 shows the result of grinding experiments with and without ultrasonic
assistance. It can be seen that the achievable surface quality in ultrasonic assisted
grinding is almost independent of the removal rate. If no ultrasound is applied, the
surface quality decreases with increasing removal rate. Therefore, ultrasonic
assisted grinding is useful for producing roughing with very high removal rates,
282
E. Brinksmeier

but at low removal rates and without ultrasonic assistance a better surface ﬁnish
can be achieved.
7.4.4 Polishing
The classiﬁcation of manufacturing processes according to DIN 8580 does not
include polishing as a speciﬁed manufacturing process. Due to the complexity of the
process and the numerous mechanisms of action, a precise deﬁnition of polishing is
difﬁcult. In some publications polishing is described as a process for generating a
minimal surfaces roughness with high form accuracy and a surface layer with no
subsurface damage. Within the process chain for the manufacturing of optical or
technical surfaces, polishing is usually the last machining step for reaching a very
low surface roughness, typically in the nanometer range. In mold making for micro
forming processes polishing is an important ﬁnishing step, especially in micro
forming processes in which the surface topography of the forming tools is directly
transferred onto the formed part, like in micro rotary swaging.
7.4.4.1 Abrasive Polishing
In mechanical abrasive polishing processes the material is removed through an
abrasive action of grains which are supplied to the process in a polishing sus-
pension. Typical abrasives are mono- or polycrystalline diamond, because of their
high hardness and wear stability. In abrasive polishing a tool in the common sense
roughing (with US)
Q‘w = 1.25 mm3/mm*s
Sa = 750 nm
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
µm
2.5
Roughness Sa
0
0.25
0.5 
0.75
mm3/mm*s
1.00 
1.5
Material removal rate Q'w
without US
with US
finishing (with US)
Q‘w = 0.1 mm3/mm*s
Sa = 250 nm
process:
slot grinding
machine tool:
DMG Sauer
ultrasonic 20 linear
workpiece:
stellite 21 (SLM)
tool:
diamond
grinding pin
d = 4 mm
dk = 151 µm
spindle speed:
n = 8,000 rpm
ultrasonic:
fUS = 25 kHz
AUS  ~ 1 µm
PUS = 30 W
Fig. 7.59 Comparing material removal rate versus surface quality in grinding of satellite 21 with
and without ultrasonic assistance
7
Tool Making
283

does not exist, as the tool is emerging in the process from the interaction of the
grains, i.e. the suspension, the pad carrier and the workpiece.
In Fig. 7.60 different rotational polishing tools are shown. Depending on the
hardness of the pad material the removal rate varies due to the different embedding
of the grains in the pad. On the right side an SEM-image shows diamond grains
with a grain size of 9 lm on a wooden polishing pad after the polishing of
hardened steel. Grains are partly embedded in the pad material as well as lying on
the pad surface.
Relative motion between the pad carrier and the workpiece leads to material
removal. In abrasive polishing two abrasive mechanisms govern the process,
shown in Fig. 7.61. On the one hand there is two-body abrasion between the active
grains and the workpiece. This removal mechanism is characterized by embedded
grains in the polishing pad which are forced over the surface in a constrained
motion. In this case a microcutting or microploughing removal mechanism is
dominant. The surface of the workpiece typically shows a structure like grinding
with directional cutting grooves, as shown in Fig. 7.61 left. On the other hand
grains can roll over the workpiece. This so-called three-body abrasion is charac-
terized by the generation of microcracks or microfatigue resulting in the removal
of material by small particles from the workpiece’s surface. In this case the surface
exhibits a typically undirected structure with statistically distributed pits of
removed material, as shown in Fig. 7.61 right. The dominating removal mecha-
nism mainly depends on the contact force of the polishing tool and workpiece and
the properties of the pad material. The embedding of abrasive grains occurs more
easily in soft pad materials, and the two-body abrasion is dominant. However, a
higher force facilitates the embedding of grains in the pad. With hard pad materials
and low forces a rolling of abrasives over the surface is more likely and material
removal by microfatigue dominates.
wooden tools
felt tools
embedded 
grains
100 µm
SEM
Fig. 7.60 Different types of polishing tool and a SEM-image of a polishing tool surface with
diamond grains partly embedded in the pad material (wood)
284
E. Brinksmeier

The characterization of an abrasive polishing process was already investigated
by Preston in 1927 [83]. Preston developed a hypothesis for the temporal
dependence of material removal from three factors:
• polishing pressure p
• relative velocity between workpiece and polishing tool vrel and
• a constant factor Kp, the Preston constant.
dz
dt ¼ Kp  p  vrel
ð7:21Þ
Except for pressure p, polishing time t and relative velocity vrel, the Preston
constant summarizes all remaining factors inﬂuencing material removal:
• polishing tool
• polishing abrasive
• polishing suspension
• machine tool
• workpiece and
• process behavior.
For the ﬁnish machining of small molds or dies polishing with adapted pad
shapes is essential, the so-called proﬁle polishing. Depending on the structure to be
polished, different kinematics can be applied. Figure 7.62 shows an example of a
proﬁle polishing process for ﬁnish machining of the forming zone of a micro rotary
swaging tool. Micro rotary swaging is a forging process in which the surface
topography of the forming tool is directly copied onto the formed part. For this
reason a high quality surface ﬁnish is essential for high part quality. In this
example the rotary swaging tool was premachined by micro ball end milling,
achieving a surface roughness of Sa = 150 nm and afterwards polished. The
three-body abrasion
two-body abrasion
10 µm
10 µm
- chemical interactions
rolling 
abrasive
embadded 
abrasive
polishing 
tool
F
v
workpiece
- microcutting
- microploughing
- microcracks
- microfatigue
Fig. 7.61 Material removal mechanisms in abrasive polishing processes [8]
7
Tool Making
285

polishing process was performed in 2 steps, roughing with a hardwood polishing
tool and 3 lm diamond grains and ﬁnishing with a felt tool and 1 lm diamond
grains. After polishing a surface roughness of Sa = 13 nm was achieved in the
forming zone. The process setup and applied parameters are shown in Fig. 7.62.
7.4.4.2 Laser Polishing
Laser polishing is comparable with a multistage system of premachining and
ﬁnishing. The laser beam treats the workpiece surface under a certain angle and
melts a thin surface layer depending on the adjusted power of the laser, shown in
Fig. 7.63 (left). The following solidiﬁcation of the material results in a leveling of
the roughness peaks, due to an aspiring of minimal surface energy of the remolten
surface layer [70]. In the ﬁrst machining step, macro polishing, a leveling of deep
structures from a previous machining step e.g. milling or EDM-processes is
achieved by continuous laser radiation. The surface layer, which is molten, ranges
from 40 to 80 lm. During the second machining step, micro polishing, the micro
roughness remelts and micro roughness peaks evaporate by applying a pulsed laser
radiation. In this case the thickness of the molten layer is about 5 lm, so the
surface quality and especially the glossiness will be further improved. In addition
to the angle of incidence, the power and the mode of the laser (pulsed or con-
tinuous), beam diameter, track spacing and feed rate are the most important pro-
cess parameters. Typically the laser rasters in a meandering pattern over the
surface [70]. Figure 7.63 (right) shows a white light interferometer measurement
of a laser polished steel surface. Roughness Ra of the laser polished structures is in
the range of 400–600 nm [7].
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
Fig. 7.62 Proﬁle polishing of a micro rotary swaging tool
286
E. Brinksmeier

7.4.4.3 Friction Polishing
In the previous chapter, diamond is used as an abrasive material for polishing
because of its exceeding properties such as high hardness, low friction, high
chemical inertness and high wear resistance. Because of these properties diamond
appears to be an interesting candidate for micro forming tools to shape advanced
materials like e.g. aluminum-scandium-alloys by metal forming [6]. In contrast
with natural diamonds, synthetic diamonds are monocrystaline or polycrystalline
and almost free of inclusions. Therefore, the objective of the technology intro-
duced here, called friction polishing, aims at the ﬁnal machining of pre-machined
synthetic diamond workpieces as mold inserts.
The basic principle of friction polishing is based on a thermochemical process
in-between the diamond workpiece and a friction rod. To initialize a thermo-
chemical reaction between the diamond’s carbon, friction rod and ambient oxygen,
high contact temperatures are required. Frictional heat is generated in the contact
area between the rod and workpiece, resulting from relative motion and applied
force. In any case, due to excellent thermal conductivity and the associated heat
ﬂux from the effective area, additional heating of the workpiece is required. During
the machining a continuous removal on the rod’s surface is observed and nearly
carbon-free material is working at the contact point. Given that the friction rod is a
tool for micro machining, the revolution of the rod has to be high in order to
achieve an effective relative velocity. Figure 7.64 shows the principle design of the
friction polishing process with typical parameters and a polished diamond surface.
Up until now, the reaction-based wear of diamonds in contact with steel is not
fully understood. Paul et al. investigated the effects of diamond wear on different
metals. Whereby the authors described, ‘‘that the relevant factor in chemical wear
is the presence of unpaired ‘‘d’’ electrons in the sample’’ [74]. These atoms crack
the close bonds between the carbon–carbon atoms inside the diamond lattice. After
losing the close bonds the free carbon atoms are in a higher reactive phase. In the
second step the authors propose four different reaction mechanisms of these carbon
atoms:
ala: track distance
dla: laser beam diameter
vf  : feed velocity
ß  : angle of incidence
traces from 
laser polishing
workpiece
laser beam
Ra 0.52 µm
µm
18.2
0
0
0
405
307
µm
µm
ala
ß
dla
vf
Fig. 7.63 Principle of laser polishing after [70] (left) and white light interferometer measure-
ment of a laser polished surface (right) [7]
7
Tool Making
287

• diffusion into the counterpart (here: friction rod)
• formation of graphite on the diamond (here: mold insert)
• reaction with oxygen to form CO or CO2
• reaction with the workpiece (here: mold insert) to form carbides.
These reactions are utilized for the shaping of diamond in friction polishing.
Figure 7.65 shows two synthetic generated monocrystalline diamonds as well as a
diamond forming die inside a tool holder. To provide the basic geometry the
diamond was machined by laser cutting and subsequently friction polished inside
the cylindrical pilot hole. With this diamond forming die small micro cups with a
diameter of 1 mm can be produced without the application of lubricants.
spindle speed 
1,400 rpm
normal force 
20 N
external heating 300°C
rod diameter 
2 mm
steel rod
heater 
elements
Z [µm]
X [µm]
Y [µm]
3
2
1
0
0
0
200
200
400
400
600
600
800
800
1000
1200
diamond
Fig. 7.64 Setup of friction polishing (left) and polished diamond surface (right)
3,5 mm
1 mm
Fig. 7.65 Synthetic monocrystalline diamonds (left) and machined diamond as a forming die
(right)
288
E. Brinksmeier

7.5 Surface Coating
M. Schwander and K. Partes
7.5.1 Physical Vapor deposition
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) summarizes coating processes, which deposits
thin ﬁlms by vaporizing solid or liquid materials and then directly deposits them
onto surfaces. As shown in Fig. 7.66, a solid can be transformed into vapor by
melting and then evaporation or sublimation [62]. An important difference with
other coating processes is the direct deposition from the vapor phase without
reaction at the surface, or condensation and solidiﬁcation. The material, which is
designated the target, can vaporize in two different ways. First, the target can be
heated until the required steam pressure is reached. This can be done by resistance
heating or induction heating, for example. Second, by bombardment with highly
energetic ions, or electrons or photons by laser, the desired material can be ejected
from the target. All materials which do not degrade by the transition from the solid
to gaseous state can be deposited by using a PVD process.
An example of a typical PVD reactor is given in Fig. 7.67. The pressure inside
the chamber is usually reduced by a multi-stage pumping system in the range of
10-3–10-2 Pa. Typical PVD deposition rates vary from 10 to 100 Å/sec [62].
Since the target can consist of a powder or ﬂuid, it is usually kept at the bottom of
the chamber in a container. In the illustrated case, the energy supply is fed by a
resistance heater. The vaporization rate depends on the temperature and the
equilibrium vapor pressure of the material. For materials with a high vapor
pressure at low temperatures, a resistant heater is commonly used for evaporation.
However, for high temperature materials, which require a high temperature to
vaporize, a focused high-energy electron or laser beam system is often used.
Depending on the material and the energy supply, the vaporized material consists
melting
solidification
deposition
condensation
critical point
sublimation
evaporation
triple point
liquid
PVD
vapor
Temperature
Pressure
gas
supercritical 
fluid
solid
BIAS ID 122087
Fig. 7.66 Phase diagram
with the designated area of
PVD
7
Tool Making
289

of atoms, clusters or molecules. Especially antimony, carbon and selenium have
the tendency to generate clusters. Therefore, these materials are usually vaporized
by a source called a bafﬂe source, which ensures the depositing vapor is in the
form of atoms. Besides evaporation as atoms and clusters, some materials pri-
marily vaporize as molecules. The degree of atoms and molecules of a compound
depends strongly on the vaporization temperature and the degree of dissociation.
Through the low pressure and high temperature of the target, the evaporated
material moves through the chamber in the direction of the sample. Depending on
the shape of the target, the energy supply and the distance to the sample, evapo-
ration can be seen as a point source or a material beam. In the upper region of the
chamber, the sample is ﬁxed face down on a rotating and temperature-controlled
disk. As shown in Fig. 7.67, the vaporized material can be deposited through the
cooling of the sample.
As already stated, the electron beam and laser beam evaporation are two com-
monly used methods for the energy supply. The basic operating principle of laser
beam evaporation is shown in Fig. 7.68. In the ﬁrst nanoseconds (ns) the laser beam
hits the target. Depending on the material, wavelength and angle of incidence
between the beam and surface normal, the laser radiation is absorbed or reﬂected.
The absorbed power can either melt the surface and then evaporate, or directly
sublimate from solid into vapor. Another possibility, which is not shown, is that
depending on the thermal stresses introduced, individual clusters sputter out of the
target. The material which is converted into vapor increases the density in front of
the target and can absorb, for example via multiphoton absorption, the laser radi-
ation. By increasing the energy density the vapor becomes ionized and turns into a
substrate holder
temperature 
control
substrate 
vacuum 
pump
atoms
target
cluster
molecules
resistance heater
BIAS ID 122088
Fig. 7.67 Principle concept
of a PVD reactor
290
E. Brinksmeier

plasma. Since plasma consists of charged particles, more possibilities of interaction
develop, such as the inverse bremsstrahlung, which increases the absorption.
A disadvantage of this kind of energy supply is punctuate evaporation on a small
area of the target. A point source results in a cosine distribution of the vaporized
materials, as shown in Fig. 7.69 [62]. The cosine distribution describes a coating
which has a maximum deposition in the direction normal to the surface and a
minimum of 0 at an angle parallel to the plane. Without moving the sample, the
resulting coating is mainly dependent on the distance and substrate orientation
according to the cosine source. In advanced coating systems the ﬂux distribution
deviates from the cosine source through modiﬁed source geometry, collisions in the
vapor above the target, changes in energy source geometry, etc. However, during
PVD processes the depositing material is always in line-of-sight of the target.
The deposition of a thin ﬁlm which uniformly coats a three-dimensional
structure is known as conformal ﬁlm growth. The conformality and homogeneity
of a PVD coating depends primarily on the particle ﬂux, the surface structure and
the reactive sticking probability. In a small area near the surface, the shape of the
evaporation source can be neglected. Therefore the particle ﬂux can be assumed as
Time
thermal 
conduction
melting or 
sublimation
laser or elctron beam
Varporization
plasma 
emission
30 ns
0
BIAS ID 122089
Fig. 7.68 Time course of
vaporization using a laser or
electron beam
deposition
substrate
1
0.97
0.87
15°
0°
30°
30°
30°
15°
0°
15°
60°
point source
target
distance
0.5
BIAS ID 122090
Fig. 7.69 Distribution of
vaporized and deposited
material by a point source.
Based on [62]
7
Tool Making
291

a coherent beam. Figure 7.70a shows an example of the effect that surface mor-
phology and particulate contamination can have on surface coverage by a simple
particle ﬂux. Depending on the angle of the incoming particle ﬂow, roughness
peaks and contamination shadows can be generated, where no deposition occurs.
To reduce the shadows, the sample can be rotated, whereby the coating can occur
equally from all sides. However, there are still areas with different layer thick-
nesses as shown in Fig. 7.70b. A far greater impact than particle ﬂux and surface
structure on conformal growth is the reactive sticking probability SR. It represents
the ratio between the incident molecules (atoms) and the number of sticking
molecules on a speciﬁed surface. A maximum value of 1 is achieved when every
collision results in deposition. The non-conformal growth shown in Fig. 7.70c is
obtained using a typical PVD process with a line-of-sight source and SR * 1. Due
to preferential growth near the top of the side walls and on the bottom surface, the
ﬂux towards the side walls near the bottom becomes reduced. This result is con-
ﬁrmed by calculated proﬁles and can be found by evaporation or sputtering pro-
cesses. These issues mean PVD processes become very critical for integrated
circuits with feature sizes less than 0.5 lm, because structures with rather high
aspect ratios must be coated uniformly or ﬁlled.
Beside these geometric effects, coated surfaces contain grooves, ridges, conical
particles (hillocks), pin-holes, pores and open voids. The most identiﬁed mecha-
nism for the generation of surface defects is a contaminated surface. In particular,
particles which are stuck to the surface before the coating process can lead to ﬂake
defects with typical dimension of 5–40 lm [72]. Sources of these defects can be
mechanical pre-treatment or etching processes [13]. Furthermore, ﬁne particles can
originate during the deposition process from vacuum chamber components as well
through the formation of dust particles in plasma. These defects are, with an
average size of 1 lm, substantially smaller than ﬂake defects. Since defects are
drawbacks in the area of micro forming, it is important to minimize the defect
density. However, the number of possible reasons for defects occurring is very
large. In general it is nearly impossible to generate coatings without any defects
[73]. Therefore the reduction in defect density usually only occurs through
parameter studies on selected coating processes [1].
vapor flow
vapor flow
vapor flow
particle or 
roughness 
shadow
deposition
deposition
edge
edge
substrat
s
e
ubstrate
substrate
BIAS ID 122091
(b)
(c)
(a)
Fig. 7.70 Coating defects that can occur in PVD processes by geometrical effects. Based on [63,
Chap. 10]
292
E. Brinksmeier

7.5.2 Chemical Vapor Deposition
In contrast to physical vapor deposition (PVD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
cannot be described by a phase transformation from vapor to solid. CVD processes
involve a chemical reaction of the gas above the surface before the precursor is
deposited as powder or ﬁlm on the substrate surface. The gas used as a starting
material for the chemical reaction will be referred to as a precursor. Typical
precursors are metals, metal hydrides, halides, halo hydrides and metal organic
compounds.
The industrial use of CVD processes starts with the patent by de Lodguine in
1893 for the deposition of W onto carbon lamp ﬁlaments through the reduction of
WCl6 by H2 [21]. The principle coating process and the key steps in the majority
CVD processes are illustrated in Fig. 7.71. The individual points represent:
1. Generation of the precursors out of the solid or liquid phase through reaction
with a gas or evaporation. In most cases this point is omitted, since the pre-
cursors are delivered in gaseous form.
2. Diffusion and transport of the precursors inside a reaction chamber, or a nozzle.
3. Through thermal heating or ionization the precursor can undergo subsequent
decomposition or chemical reaction.
4. Through a reaction at the interface between gas and solid the precursor
becomes absorbed and produces a deposit. The chemical reaction may also
include the growth and etching of several intermediates. Requirements for
deposition include: temperature of the surface (i.e. heating), temperature of the
precursors, excitation level and decomposition of the precursors. A variety of
chemical reactions are given in Table 7.7.
5. After absorption the deposited molecules can diffuse along the surface,
decomposed and desorbed, or surface reactions can take place, and a ﬁlm can
form with various side products.
6. By-products are removed from the chamber by diffusion or convection.
CVD reactor chamber
Heater
(1)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(6)
(7)
(5)
reflection and 
desorption
Heated substrate
Diffusion
Diffusion
Absorption
Decomposition
Nucleation 
and 
growth
BIAS ID 122092
Fig. 7.71 Schematic
illustration of the operating
process during CVD
deposition
7
Tool Making
293

7. Depending on the toxicity and environmental impact of the by-products and
unreacted precursors the gas will be transported out into the atmosphere or will
be recycled.
A very simple example of a CVD process is the ‘‘Mond process’’. The pro-
cedure, which is named after the chemist Ludwig Mond, is mainly used for the
cleaning of nickel but can also be used to deposit coatings on a heated substrate.
The heating of nickel to 50–60 C inside a carbon monoxide (CO) atmosphere
produces tetracarbonylnickel as the precursor. Impurities like cobalt and iron do
not form carbonyls. Hence these contaminations will turn into the precursor gas.
They will remain at the starting point. Without adding additional components, the
precursor is transported inside a chamber with a 220–250 C heated sample. The
precursor decomposes through the higher temperatures at the surface back into
nickel and carbon monoxide. Nickel is deposited on the substrate and carbon
monoxide can be carried away [14]. The purity of the deposition is higher in
comparison to the reactant.
In addition to this simple procedure, there are countless different precursors in
different CVD–processes. However, the main CVD processes can be separated into
the reactions: thermal decomposition, reduction, oxidation, hydrolysis, nitridation,
disproportionation and synthesis. An overview of this reaction with a selected
example is given in Table 7.7.
As shown in points 4 and 5 of Fig. 7.71, deposition by CVD-processes is
dependent on the chemical absorption at the surface. In contrast to the PVD
process, the gas ﬂow is not considered as a particle beam. Therefore, the surface
Table 7.7 Examples of chemical processes used for CVD reactions
CVD reaction
Chemical precursor
Example
Tdep [C]
Thermal
decomposition
• Halides
TiI4 ? Ti ? 2I4
1,200
• Hydrides
SiH4 ? Si ? 2H2
600–1,150
• Metal cabonyl
• Metalorganic
Reduction
• Halides
SiCl4 ¢ Si ? 4HCl
900–1,200
WF6 ¢ W 6HF
550–800
Oxidation
• Halides
SiH4 ? 2O2 ? SiO2 ? 2H2O
350
• Hydrides
Zn(C2H5)2 ? 4O2 ? ZnO ? 5H2O
250–500
• Metalorganic
Hydrolysis
• Halides
2AlCl3 ? 3CO2 ? 3H2 ?
800–1,150
Al2O3 ? 6HCl +3CO
Nitridation
• Halides
TiCl4 ? 1/2N2 ? 2H2 ? TiN ? 4HCl
1,200
• Hydrides
3SiH4 ? 2N2H4 ? SI3N4 +10H2
600–1,100
• Halohydrides
Disproptionation
• Halides
GeI2 ¢ Ge ? GeI4
Si ? SiI4 ¢ 2SiI2
Synthesis
Two or more
precursors
TiCl4 ? 2BCl3 ? 5H2 ? TiB2 ? 10HCl 1,100
CH4 ? H2 ? C +3H2
900–1,100
294
E. Brinksmeier

morphology does not havwe such a strong inﬂuence on the layer formation. The
high temperature, the high density and the chemical diffusion processes support
conformal ﬁlm growth. In addition, the reactive sticking probability SR for CVD
processes is comparably small; around 0.05. As shown in Fig. 7.72, the control of
the chemical reaction at the surface during CVD allows conformal ﬁlm growth.
However, if the precursor was highly reactive, CVD processes can also have a
large SR and hence a high directionality, as shown in Fig. 7.70a). In this case SR
has to be controlled by precursor design or temperature distribution. For example,
inert gases such as nitrogen and argon are often used as carrier gases to facilitate
the movement of the precursor toward the reaction chamber. By the increase in the
degree of carrier gas the reactive sticking probability can be reduced.
The good aspect ratio presented by CVD coatings are in contrast to PVD
coatings measn they are particularly suitable for rough surface structures. How-
ever, it has to be considered that the growth of CVD ﬁlms usually starts with seed
crystals on the surface. The distance of the crystal seeds depends on the pre-
treatment, the growth material and the substrate. Under some circumstances the
distance can be several microns. Therefore, the deposition of CVD ﬁlms with only
a few nm thicknesses is sometimes technically complicated.
Although the growth of CVD ﬁlms depends on the chemical process, the
growth rate depends more on the kind of process and the process parameters. In
Fig. 7.73 it can be seen that the growth rate for polycrystalline CVD diamond ﬁlms
can change by up to ﬁve orders of magnitude by only changing the energy source
and the total gas ﬂow [89].
7.5.3 Multi-Layer Systems
The ﬁrst coatings have been used since the beginning of the last century in the ﬁeld
of optical coatings. However, the ﬁrst series production of coatings was used in
electronics as a resistor. The enormous potential in electrical engineering resulted
BIAS ID 122093
1µm
reflexions
diffusion
substrate
Fig. 7.72 Typical conformal growth of CVD coatings. Based on [24] and [55]
7
Tool Making
295

in the rapid development of various coating techniques and materials. Since 1970,
coatings on cutting tools were used with the aim of reducing wear and thereby to
increasing the lifetime. For several years only local hardening, nitriding and hard
chromium processes were used for dies and punches in forming applications.
However, the requirements from new materials with high strengths in the ﬁeld of
cutting tools have generally improved the development and application of new
advanced PVD and CVD coatings. In contrast with this, the majority of forming
tools are still uncoated. This is due to the large size and complex shape of most
forming tools. Furthermore, there always remains a residual risk that the coatings
peel off from the substrate, even if the coatings obtain a good adhesion. In the case
of cuttings tools this can produce difﬁculties, however not usually accompanied by
a disaster. If the coating of a forming tool fails, the detaching material can lead to
impairment in product surface quality and a destruction of a very expensive tool.
Repairing forming tools by re-coating is usually a very expensive procedure. As
for cutting tools, tools for micro metal forming can be also easily repaired by re-
coating, since they have the same dimensional order of magnitude. However, this
also imposes that the required accuracy of the layers, and the coating process
inﬂuences on the workpiece must satisfy the surface quality and geometrical
accuracy. In the case of deep-drawing, the coated punch should not inﬂuence the
clearance size, which is only a few micrometers. Hence the use of epitaxial growth
crystalline layers is often complicated due to the high temperatures, around
1,000 C, involved in the deposition process which can lead to the distortion of the
component. Additionally, those layers often have a high thickness and high surface
roughness which might lead to damage of the cavity.
The ﬁrst coatings, which were developed as wear protection, have been chosen
due to their high hardness. It was assumed that a high hardness goes hand in hand
with a high wear resistance. The use of hard coatings resulted in an improved tool
life, higher processing speeds and a reduction in lubricant usage. To reduce the use
of lubricant, the coatings must have good frictional properties in addition to high
wear resistance. Higher processing speeds and fewer lubricants usually leads to
higher temperatures, which provides further challenges to the coatings. Current
Thermal
Growth rate [µm/h]
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
25%
50%
75%
25%
50%
75%
25%
50%
75%
25%
50%
75%
100
101
102
103   
Chemical
Electromagnetic
Electrical
Fig. 7.73 Statistical view of
growth rate for different CVD
processes. Maximum and
minimum values are given by
the stars; whiskers gone from
5 to 95 % probability;
diamond forms show 25, 50
and 75 % probabilities; the
square represents the
arithmetic mean [89]
296
E. Brinksmeier

developments are moving away from single-layer hard coatings, in the direction of
high-temperature and oxidation resistant complex layer architectures. The
improved mechanical, thermal and physical properties of the coatings move the
weak points of the tools away from the surface in the direction of the layers and
the base material. Based on this, most research activities can be divided into three
areas of interest: surface, interlayer and tool, as shown in Fig. 7.74. Surface
includes layers which come in direct contact with the workpiece. The main fea-
tures are the surface structure, the pairing materials and the lubricants. The
interlayer is the connection between the workpiece and hard coating. In most cases
they are indispensable in producing a coating or to bond the top coating to the base
metal. The main features are the material properties and the architecture of the
layers. The ﬁeld of tools is dominated by the coating process, the tool materials
and the resultant coatability.
7.5.3.1 Material Combination
As shown in Sect. 2.2.2, the tool surface wears out due to mechanical and chemical
stress in the tribological system of two body interaction. Therefore, the ﬁrst logical
approach is to deposit a layer on the tool which adjusts the properties of the surface
of the respective strain. The ﬁrst coatings that were used were single-layer coat-
ings. At the start they were primarily designed to be hard in order to protect the
tool against wear. Therefore, the greatest number of coatings in metal forming are
in the hard material coating class. A selection of hard materials, their chemical
bonds, and their hardnesses are shown in Figs. 7.75 and 7.76.
If the only factor to consider is the hardness of the material, nothing other than
carbon or boron nitride layers will be used, because these alone determine the area
of greatest hardness. Meanwhile the widely used TiN layer does not stand out with
a hardness of 2,500 HV0.05. In addition to hard coatings, the hardness of the
Self-Lubrication coating
Structured Hardcoating
Gradient
Nucleation layer
Hard Soft structure
Oxidation protection
Thermal isolation
Adherent layer
Diffusion barrier
Etched Substrate
Substrate
interlayer
tool
surface
material combination 
material properties
coatability
layer architecture
coating process
surface structure lubricant
BIAS ID 122095
Fig. 7.74 Research areas for multilayers and the application of different coatings in the range of
micro metal forming
7
Tool Making
297

treated base material and the hardness of a widely used solid lubricant (MoS2) are
also listed in Fig. 7.75.
For single-layer coatings, the selected material must possess in addition to a
high hardness, high adhesion to the substrate and a high chemical stability. Good
adhesion can be achieved by metallic bonds, which have the highest adhesion. The
hardness of a material usually increases with the proportion of covalent bonds. In
micro hardness [HV0.05]
1000
I. Bulk material (substrate)
through hardened
surface hardened
nitrided
TiC
TiCN
TiN
CrN
TiAlN
a-C
a-C:H
a-C:H:Me
diamond
cBN
MoS2
MoS2Ti
Hard material coatings
Lubrications doatings
II.
II.
2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
10000
BIAS ID 122096
Fig. 7.75 Hardness of coatings and surface treatments used as ﬁnal layers
metallic
bond
covalent
bond
metallic hard materials
covalent hard materials
ionic hard materials
tough 
adhesive
stable 
inert
ZrO2
BeO2
Ti2AlC
Ti2N
WC
TiB2
TiAlN
TiN
VN
TiC
VC
CrN
Al2O3
Si3N4
B2C
BN
AlN
CNx
SiC
C
strong 
hard
ionic
bond
BIAS ID 122097
Fig. 7.76 Different hard materials and their characteristic bonding [39]
298
E. Brinksmeier

contrast with this, chemical stability, which prevents interaction with the sur-
rounding lubricant, is achieved by ionic bonds. These are reasons why TiN has
established itself as one of the ﬁrst successful hard material coatings which
combines all three required properties.
The posteriorly developed layers consist mostly of nitrides and carbides of
titanium and chromium and the large class of carbon layers. Examples are TiN,
TiCN, TiAlN, CrN, a-C:H and carbon in the shape of diamonds. Although multi-
layer coatings are becoming more and more important, the selection of single hard
material coatings as a ﬁnal protective coating still plays a major role.
7.5.3.2 Surface Structure
Due to the high pressures at the interlayer between tool and workpiece during
forming processes, the tool surface demands high abrasion and adhesion resistance
combined with high hardness and a low Young’s modulus. It is evident that a
structured surface has to resist the stresses during the forming process, without
changing its properties. A coating, such as the lotus effect, therefore only has a
small chance of success. However, several groups deal with the structuring of the
surface, for example to reduce the friction and to minimize the use of lubricant.
Another approach is the deliberate alteration of the surface roughness and the
associated change of the tangential friction force. A frequently used approach is
lubrication pockets. On the one hand these allow for a more homogeneous dis-
tribution, and on the other hand a reduction in the use of lubricant. A layer
combination as used to minimize the punch force in backward extrusion is shown
in Fig. 7.77. Located above the base material, a nanolaminated layer system
consisting of TiHfN and CrN is deposited on a tungsten carbide tool. In the right
part of the picture a schematic structure of the uppermost layer is shown, used for
the reduction of friction by the use of ester as a lubricant. Bobzin et al., demon-
strated that with the help of this layer, the punch force, in comparison with high-
speed steel, can be considerably reduced [5].
The application of self-lubricating materials is conducted in two ways. A
widely used method is to undermine dimples in an existing hard material layer and
the subsequent deposition of a solid lubricant. These kind of self-lubricating
coatings combine the high hardness of the hard material layer and the good sliding
properties of the soft coating.
Die
Force Punch
Workpiece
Lubricant
CrN
TiHfN/CrN
Substrate (punch)
BIAS ID 122098
Fig. 7.77 Textured coating
for minimizing the use of
lubricants [5]
7
Tool Making
299

7.5.3.3 Lubrication
As shown in the previous section, hard coatings are widely used to improve the
performance of forming tools. But these coatings are not necessarily useful for low
friction and do not provide any protection for the opposing surface. As shown in
section 2.2.2, the wear of the opposing surface is given by the choice of material,
their contact conditions and the resulting friction. For this reason, in some cases,
materials are used which protect the opposite surface by reducing the friction. It
can be distinguished between two friction-reducing concepts. First, the hard
material coatings which even without lubrication have a low friction coefﬁcient,
and second self-lubricating coatings that form a solid or liquid protective layer
between the tool and workpiece. The ﬁrst group mainly includes hard amorphous
and crystalline carbon layers. In dry loading the friction coefﬁcient is typically
0.15. However, these coatings do not provide an efﬁcient transfer ﬁlm on the
opposing surface. The group of self-lubricating coatings is dominated by MoS2
and graphite based materials. They enable friction coefﬁcients down to 0.01.
The development of MoS2 started in the 1950s. MoS2 consists of a lamella bond
by weak van der Waals forces, like graphite. Hence it can act as a solid lubricant.
But in the beginning there was still a rapid rise in friction through degradation by
contact with humid air. The use of ultrahigh vacuums in 1995 resulted in a sig-
niﬁcant enhancement of lifetime through the reduction of oxygen during the
coating process. One of the latest developments is the deposition of a titanium
interlayer or doping with titanium. This led to an increased hardness (1,000–2,000
HV) and a low sensitivity to humidity of the deposited MoS2 layer [81].
The application of self-lubricating materials is conducted in two ways. A
widely used method is to undermine dimples in an existing hard material layer and
the subsequent deposition of a solid lubricant. These kind of self-lubricating
coatings combine the high hardness of the hard material layer and the good sliding
properties of the soft coating.
The second approach is a complete coating of the tool by a self-lubricating
material. A disadvantage is that these materials are normally very soft and
therefore usually wear quickly. In particular, some self-lubricant layers are also
exceptional against humidity. However, the properties of self-lubricating layers are
continuously improving so that they are a good alternative to hard coatings.
7.5.3.4 Material Properties
Suitable materials for interlayers are the range of hard material coatings, but also
soft and ductile materials such as ZrC. The main applications are for an increase in
adhesion, the prevention of diffusion of impurity atoms into the tool, and a
reduction in residual stresses. A typical example where all three demands are given
for the interlayer is the CVD-deposition of diamond onto TiN (Fig. 7.78).
Due to the high reactivity of carbon during the CVD process, diamonds need
interlayers to deposit on materials like steel. One of the possible choices of
300
E. Brinksmeier

interlayer that can withstand the temperature and reactivity of carbon is TiN.
However, due to the the high temperature during the CVD process, the different
thermal expansion coefﬁcients of the substrate and the hard material coatings,
internal stresses result after the device has cooled down. In Fig. 7.79, the different
thermal expansions of the TiN-layer and the diamond coating are given. The
deposition temperature during the CVD-process is about 1,100 C. After the
coating process is complete, the multilayer cools down to room temperature. For
this reason a high transition between compressive stress and tensile stress is cre-
ated between the coatings. The consequence may be that the layer breaks off or the
adhesion is reduced. In addition, the internal stress can reduce the lifetime of the
component by continuous usage. In Fig. 7.79 it is shown how the internal stress
can be distributed by the interlayer, with materials which have a thermal expansion
coefﬁcient between TiN and diamond. In the example titanium carbide and silicon
carbide are deposited on the inter-layer. This can avoid the abrupt transition of the
expansion coefﬁcients. Challenges in the use of inter-layers are the different
process temperatures of the deposited coatings.
Another problem in addition to the different thermal expansion coefﬁcients is
the catalytic effect of ions in the preferential nucleation of graphite and the high
solubility of carbon during the CVD-process. Therefore many studies on interlayer
systems between the steel substrate and the diamond coating have been reported.
The most common interlayer for diamonds are Cr-, Ti- and Zr-based nitrided and
carbonized materials [77]. However, there are also Mo/Ag/Nb based multilayer
systems presenting good adhesion and reduced stress.
Diamond
TiN
coating process 
at 1100°C
1.0 - 1.3
7.9
 in 10-6K-1
Room         
temperature
stress build-up
Z
Ó
-
TiN
Diamond
BIAS ID 122099
Fig. 7.78 Creation of residual stresses due to the high temperature during the coating process
Diamond
TiN
TiC
SiC
Diamond
TiN
TiC
SiC
-
+
coating process 
at 1100°C
1.0 - 1.3
3.7 - 4.4
6.7
7.9
 in 10-6K-1
ó
Z
Room         
temperature
stress build-up
BIAS ID 122100
Fig. 7.79 Layer system to reduce the residual stress
7
Tool Making
301

7.5.3.5 Layer Architecture
In addition to the components, multilayers can also vary in terms of their archi-
tecture. An overview of different layer types is given in Fig. 7.80. The simplest
form of coatings is the monolayer. Typical samples are the early hard coatings as
shown in Fig. 7.77, and the self-lubricant coating MoS2. The advantages and
disadvantages of these layers are discussed in the previous sections.
The next logical step is to deposit two layers instead of one, and to combine their
properties. However, the idea of combining hard and soft materials to improve the
properties such as hardness and stiffness is not an invention of modern times. One of
the ﬁrst references is in ‘‘The Iliad’’ by Homer, which describes Achilles’ shield as a
laminate out of bronze/tin/gold/tin/bronze. Even prehistoric blades, often referred
to as Damascus swords, are welded out of high carbon steel and low carbon steel.
However, the depositing of combined hard and soft coatings with PVD and CVD
processes still starts at the end of the 20th century. Especially for very hard carbon
and boron nitride coatings, soft interlayers are used as bonds to the tool.
Interlayers between two different coatings can always be a weak point in the
architecture of the component. Especially when stress peaks are generated at the
transitions between the coatings, where it can result in a separation of the layers
and a failure of the component. One possibility to avoid this is to model the
transition between the two layers as a gradient. By choosing suitable materials, the
hardness can be increased continuously from the workpiece to the surface without
producing a sharp transition and a weak point in the coating system. However, the
use of graded coatings is only partly possible because on the one hand, most
materials cannot be converted into each other and on the other hand the process
conditions for the production of the layers are too different.
The sequential deposition of two different coatings is commonly referred to as
multilayer. Despite the much higher complexity, these types of coating are
substrate
substrate
substrate
substrate
substrate
substrate
substrate
TiHfN
Al2O3
MoS2
a-C:H
cBN
B-C-N
ZrC
TiAlN
CrN
Diamond
sinteres PCD
nanocomposite
nanolaminate
multilayer
columnar
monolayer
duolayer
gradient
C-content
BIAS ID 122101
Fig. 7.80 Different layer architectures
302
E. Brinksmeier

becoming more and more used. This can be explained by the improvement in the
mechanical, thermal and physical properties compared to common single-layer
coatings. Advantages are, in addition to an increase in layer hardness with a
simultaneous increase in fracture strength as with hard-soft combinations, a pre-
vention of crack growth through the interfaces of the layer. Due to the rapid
sequence of thin layers, and the resulting higher proportion of the nucleation
phase, the columnar growth of PVD coating in multilayer environments decreases.
The coatings become more compact and smoother. This results in a better diffusion
barrier. Furthermore, the internal stress can be reduced by the repeated grain
growth at the beginning of a new deposition.
Reduction of the layer thickness increases the number of interlayers and
increases the inﬂuence of nanocrystalline structures. The resulting layer structure
is called nanolaminate. This can lead to higher surface energies, better barrier
properties and thus to good oxidation resistance.
In addition to linearly-built coating systems, there are also some other layer
constructions which promise to improve the component properties. Here only the
nanocomposite is named, as shown in Fig. 7.80. Due to the large proportion of
interfaces in a nanocomposite, high hardness values can be achieved.
7.5.3.6 Coatability
In most cases, a coating is applied to an existing tool to improve its features.
Thereby the material of the tool is ﬁxed and the coating must be adapted to it.
Suitable substrates are therefore the entire range of steels, hard metals and
ceramics. But not every coating can be deposited on any material. The key factors
are how the base material behaves at high temperatures and its chemical resistance
against oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen and carbon. For metal forming and cutting
tools, polycrystalline CVD diamond coatings possess some of the preferred
properties like hardness and wear resistance [107]. However, beside the internal
stress through the high deposition temperature of about 900–1,000 C, the struc-
ture and geometry of tool steels is heavily inﬂuenced. For this reason, usually
hardening and tempering under vacuum conditions after the process is necessary as
well as the post processing of the contours.
Beside the effect of temperature, the tool can also be damaged by diffusion of
atoms and molecules during the coating process, or through chemical reactions
with the precursor or side products. As an example, the deposition of diamond
coatings on steel without an interlayer is not possible, since the solubility of carbon
in steel at the deposition temperature is high. But even the deposition of diamond
on hard metals like cemented tungsten carbide (CC) cannot be executed without
special surface treatment. The catalyzing inﬂuence of cobalt on the diamond
growth and the large mismatch between the thermal expansion coefﬁcients is
responsible for this. Without an adjusted surface treatment the cobalt content leads
to void formation at the interface, the presence of non-diamond material at the
interface, high residual stresses and therefore a lack of good adhesion. Various
7
Tool Making
303

pretreatments techniques are surface etching with aqua regia, Murakami treatment
and subsequent ultrasonic micro scratching with a ﬁne diamond suspension. An
example construction of a diamond coating with a cBN interlayer and an etched
tungsten carbide substrate is shown in Fig. 7.81. It can be easily identiﬁed that the
etching process removes the cobalt to a depth of up to 40 microns.
The main advantages of PVD coatings are the low temperature and the wide
range of usable materials. The substrate temperature is usually in the range of
300–600 C. At this temperature there is no distortion or structural change of the
base material. But by the absence of diffusion processes throughout this temper-
ature, the adherence of the coatings is limited. An example of a cubic boron
nitride-based coating system deposited by PVD processes is given in Fig. 7.82.
Diamond
cBN
etched CC
CC
25 µm
BIAS ID 122102
Fig. 7.81 Typical cross-
section of an etched tungsten
carbide (CC) sample with a
diamond coating [12]
B-C-N
B4C
TiAlN
CC
1 µm
c-BN
BIAS ID 122103
Fig. 7.82 Boron nitride-
based multilayer coating [93]
304
E. Brinksmeier

In contrast with the diamond multilayer, a TiAlN layer protects the tungsten
carbide substrate from a reaction with the necessary carbon during the following
coatings. Furthermore, gradient and adhesion layers are deposited to improve the
coating-system’s properties.
References
1. Aharonov, R.R., Chhowalla, M., Dhar, S., Fontana, R.P.: Factors affecting growth defect
formation in cathodic arc evaporated coatings. Surf. Coat. Technol. 82, 334–343 (1996)
2. Aramcharoen, A., Mativenga, P.T.: Size effect and tool geometry in micromilling of tool
steel. Precision Engineering 33, 402–407 (2009)
3. Bäuerle, D.: Laser Processing and Chemistry, 4th edn. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg (2011)
4. Bifano, T.G., Dow, T.A., Scattergood, R.O.: Ductile-regime grinding: A new technology for
machining brittle materials. J. Eng. Ind. Trans. ASME 113(2), 184–189 (1991)
5. Bobzin, K., Bagcivan, N., Immich, P., Warnke, C., Klocke, F., Zeppenfeld, C., Mattfeld, P.:
Advancement of a nanolaminated TiHfN/CrN PVD tool coating by a nano-structured CrN
top layer in interaction with a biodegradable lubricant for green metal forming. Surf. Coat.
Technol. 203, 3184–3188 (2009)
6. Brinksmeier, E., Klopfstein, M., Riemer, O.: Removal of diamond by solid metals. In: 2nd
International Conference on Nanomanufacturing and the 1st CIRP Conference on
Nanomanufacturing (2010)
7. Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Gessenharter, A., Autschbach, L.: Polishing of structured
molds. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 53(1), 247–250 (2004)
8. Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Gessenharter, A.: Finishing of structured surfaces by abrasive
polishing. Precis. Eng. 30(3), 325–336 (2006)
9. Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Twardy, S.: Tribological behaviour of micro structured
surfaces for micro forming tools. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 50(4), 425–430 (2010)
10. Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Rickens, K., Meiners, K.: Kinematics in ultra-precision
grinding of WC moulds. Int. J. Nanomanuf. 7(3–4), 199–213 (2011)
11. Butt, H.-J., Graf, K., Kappl, M.: Physics and Chemistry of Interfaces. Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim (2003)
12. Cappellia, E., Orlandob, S., Matteia, G., Armigliatoc, A.: Boron nitride thin ﬁlms deposited
by RF plasma reactive pulsed laser ablation as interlayer between WC–Co hard metals and
CVD diamond ﬁlms. Surf. Coat. Technol. 180–181, 184–189 (2004)
13. Cekada, M., Panjan, P., Kek-Merl, D., Panjan, M., Kapun, G.: SEM study of defects in PVD
hard coatings. Vacuum 82, 252–256 (2008)
14. Choy, K.L.: Chemical vapour deposition of coatings. Prog. Mater. Sci. 48, 57–170 (2003)
15. Chrysolouris, G., Bredt, J., Kordas, S., Wilson, E.: Theoretical aspects of a laser machine
tool. J. Eng. Ind. 110, 65–70 (1988)
16. Chun, M.K., Rose, K.: Interaction of high-intensity laser beams with metals. J. Appl. Phys.
41, 614 (1970)
17. Craeghs, T., Clijsters, S., Yasa, E., Bechmann, F., Berumen, S., Kruth, J.-P.: Determination
of geometrical factors in layerwise laser melting using optical process monitoring. Opt.
Lasers Eng. 49(12), 1440–1446 (2011)
18. Cui, C., Schulz, A., Uhlenwinkel, V., Zoch, H.-W.: Spray-formed stainless steel matrix
composites with co-injected carbide particles. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 42(8), 2442–2455
(2011)
19. Dahotre, N.B., Harimkar, N.P.: Laser Fabrication and Machining of Materials. Springer,
New York (2008)
7
Tool Making
305

20. Dausinger, F.: Femtosecond technology for precision manufacturing: Fundamental and
technical aspects. Riken Rev. 50, 77 (2003)
21. De Lodyguine, J.S.: Illuminant for incandecent lamps. US patent 575, 002 (1893)
22. De Silva, A.K.M., Pajak, P.T., McGeough, J.A., Harrison, D.K.: Thermal effects in laser
assisted jet electrochemical machining. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 60, 243–246, (2011)
23. Dobrzañski, L.A., Kloc-Ptaszna, A., Matula, G., Torralba, L.B.: Structure of the gradient
carbide steels of HS 6–5-2 high-speed steel matrix. Arch. Mater. Sci. Eng. 28(10), 589–592
(2007)
24. Doppelt, P.: Why is coordination chemistry stretching the limits of micro-electronics
technology? Coord. Chem. Rev. 178–180, 1785–1809 (1998)
25. Dornfeld, D., Min, S., Takeuchi, Y.: Recent advances in mechanical micromachining. CIRP
Ann. Manuf. Technol. 55(2), 745–768 (2006)
26. Dumitru, G., Romano, V., Weber, H.P., Sentis, M., Marine, W.: Femtosecond ablation of
ultrahard materials. Appl. Phys. A 74, 729–739 (2002)
27. Elahinia, M.H., Hashemi, M., Tabesh, M., Bhaduri, S.B.: Manufacturing and processing of
NiTi implants: A review. Prog. Mater. Sci. 57(5), 911–946 (2012)
28. Fischmeister, H.F., Exner, H.E., Poech, M.H., Kohlhoff, S., Gumbsch, P., Schmauder, S.,
Sigl, L.S., Spiegler, R.: Modelling fracture processes in metals and composite materials.
Z. Metallkde 80(12), 839–846 (1989)
29. Gäbler, J., Schäfer, L., Menze, B., Hoffmeister, H.W.: Micro abrasive pencils with CVD
diamond coating. Diam. Relat. Mater. 12, 707–710 (2003)
30. Gagliano, F.P., Paek, U.C.: Observation of laser-induced explosion of solid materials and
correlation with theory. Appl. Opt. 13, 274–279 (1974)
31. Gajapathi, C.S., Mitra, S.K., Mendez, P.F.: Controlling heat transfer in micro electron beam
welding using volumetric heating Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 54, 5545–5553 (2011)
32. Garibotti, D.J.: Dicing of micro-semiconductors, US Patent 3,112,850 (1963)
33. Ghany, K.A., Newishy, M.: Cutting of 1.2 mm thick austenitic stainless steel sheet using
pulsed and CW Nd:YAG laser. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 168, 438–447 (2005)
34. Gu, D., Wang, Z., Shen, Y., Li, Q., Li, Y.: In-situ TiC particle reinforced Ti–Al matrix
composites: Powder preparation by mechanical alloying and selective laser melting
behavior. Appl. Surf. Sci. 255, 9230–9240 (2009)
35. Harp, W.R., Dilwith, J.R., Tu, J.F.: Laser ablation using a long-pulsed, high ﬂuence, CW
single-mode ﬁber laser. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 198, 22–30 (2008)
36. Harrison, P.M., Henry, M., Henderson, I., Brownell, M.: Laser milling of metallic and non-
metallic substrates in the nanosecond regime with Q-switched diode pumped solid state
lasers. Proc. SPIE 5448, 624–633 (2004)
37. Henry, M., Harrison, P.M., Henderson, I., Brownell, M.: Laser milling–A practical
industrial solution for machining a wide variety of materials. Proc. SPIE 5662, 627–632
(2004)
38. Herziger, G.; Kreutz, E.W.: Fundamentals of laser micromachining of metals. In: Bäuerle,
D. (ed.) Laser Processing and Diagnostics, Springer Series in Chemical Physics, vol. 39,
p. 90. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg (1984)
39. Holleck, H., Schier, V.: Multilayer PVD coatings for wear protection. Surf. Coat. Technol.
76–77, 328–336 (1995)
40. Hua, Z., Jiawen, X.: Modeling and experimental investigation of laser drilling with jet
electrochemical machining. Chin. J. Aeronaut. 23, 454–460 (2010)
41. Hügel, H., Graf, TH.: Laser in der Fertigung, Vieweg ? Teubner, Wiesbaden, pp. 378–382
(2009)
42. Ihlemann, J., Scholl, A., Schmidt, H., Wolff-Rottke, B.: Nanosecond and femtosecond
excimer laser ablation of fused silica. Appl. Phys. A 54, 363–368 (1992)
43. Ivarson, A., et al.: The role of oxidation in laser cutting stainless and mild steel. J. Laser
Appl. 3, 41–45 (1991)
306
E. Brinksmeier

44. Ji, G., Grosdidier, T., Bernard, F., Paris, S., Gaffet, E., Launois, S.: Bulk FeAl
nanostructured materials obtained by spray forming and spark plasma sintering. J. Alloy.
Compd. 434–435, 358–361 (2007)
45. Kang, Y.S., Sharma, S.K., Sanders, J.H., Voevodin, A.A.: Finite element analysis of
multilayered and functionally gradient tribological coatings with measured material
properties. Tribol. Trans. 51(6), 817–828 (2008)
46. Kaplan, A.F.H.: An analytic model of metal cutting with a laser beam. J. Appl. Phys. A 79,
2198–2208 (1996)
47. Kármán, Th: Festigkeitslehre unter allseitigem Druck. Z. Ver. Dtsch. Ing. 55(42),
1749–1757 (1911)
48. Karnakis, D.M., Knowles, M.R.H., Petkov, P.V., Dobrev, T., Dimov, S.S.: Surface integrity
optimisation in ps-laser milling of advanced engineering materials. In: Proceedings of the
4th International WLT-Conference on Lasers in Manufacturing, Munich (2007)
49. Karnakis, D.M., Mortimer, V., Knowles, M.R.H.: Recent advances in ultrafast laser
micromachining systems for material micromanufacturing. In: 8th International Conference
and Exhibition on Laser Metrology, Machine Tool, CMM & Robotic Performance, Cardiff,
Wales (2007)
50. Karnakis, D., Rutterford, G., Knowles, M., Dobrev, T., Petkov, P., Dimov, S.: High quality
laser milling of ceramics, dielectrics and metals using nanosecond and picosecond lasers.
Proc. SPIE 6106, 610604 (2006)
51. Khor, K.A., Dong, Z.L., Gu, Y.W.: Inﬂuence of oxide mixtures on mechanical properties of
plasma sprayed functionally graded coating. Thin Solid Films 368, 86–92 (2000)
52. Kieback, B., Neubrand, A., Riedel, H.: Processing techniques for functionally graded
materials. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 362, 81–105 (2003)
53. Koch, N.: Technologie zum Schleifen asphärischer optischer Linsen. PhD Thesis,
Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen, Shaker Verlag Aachen (1991)
54. Kulmburg, A.: The microstructure of tool steels–An overview for the practice. Part I:
Classiﬁcation, systematics and heat treatment of tool steels. Pract. Metallography 35(4),
181–202 (1998)
55. Kusakabe, Y., Ohnishi, H., Takahama, T., Goto, Y., Machida, K.: Conformal deposition on
a deep-trenched substrate by MOCVD. Appl. Surf. Sci. 70–71, 763–767 (1993)
56. Levy, G.N.: The role and future of the laser technology in the additive manufacturing
environment. Phys. Procedia. Part A, 5, 65–80 (2010)
57. Lewis, L.J., Perez, D.: Theory and simulation of laser ablation—From basic mechanisms to
applications.
In:
Sugioka,
K.,
Meunier,
M.,
Piqué,
A
(eds.)
Laser
Precision
Microfabrication.Springer (2010)
58. Li, L., Kim, J.H., Shukor, M.H.: Grit blast assisted laser milling/grooving of metallic alloys.
CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 54, 183–186 (2005)
59. Lumley, R.M.: Controlled separation of brittle materials using a laser. Am. Ceram. Soc.
Bull. 48, 850–854 (1969)
60. Marshall, D.B., Lawn, B.R., Cook, R.F.: Microstructural effects on grinding of alumina and
glass-ceramics. Commun. Am. Ceram. Soc. 70(6), 139–140 (1987)
61. Masuzawa, T., Tönshoff, H.K.: Three-dimensional micromachining by machine tools. CIRP
Ann. Manuf. Technol. 46(2), 621–628 (1997)
62. Mattox, D.: Physical vapor deposition (PVD) processes. Met. Finish. 93, 387–400 (1995)
63. Mattox, D.: Handbook of physical vapor deposition (PVD) processing. Elsevier (2010)
ISBN: 9780815520375
64. Mehrafsun, S., Zhang, P., Vollertsen, F., Goch, G.: Laser-chemical precision machining of
micro forming tools at low laser powers. SPIE LASE 2012 laser-based micro- and
nanopackaging and assembly, vol. 6, SPIE 8244-19 (CD-Rom) (2012)
65. Meiners, W.: Direktes Selektives Laser Sintern einkomponentiger metallischer. Werkstoffe
PhDthesis RWTH Aachen(1999)
66. Miyashita, M. (ed.): 1st annual precision engineering conference, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC, USA (1985)
7
Tool Making
307

67. Mohr, O.: Welche Umstände bedingen die Elastizitätsgrenze und den Bruch eines Materials.
Zeitschrift des Vereins deutscher Ingenieure 24 (1900) 1524–1530 and 1572–1577
68. Musil, J., Fiala, J.: Plasma spray deposition of graded metal-ceramic coatings. Surf. Coat.
Technol. 52, 211–220 (1992)
69. Nowak, R., Metev, S.: Thermochemical laser etching of stainless steel and titanium in
liquids. Appl. Phys. A 63, 133–138 (1996)
70. Nüsser, C., Wehrmann, I., Willenborg, E.: Inﬂuence of intensity distribution and pulse
duration on laser micro polishing. Phys. Procedia. 12, 462–471 (2011)
71. Osborn,
J:
Die
fast,
live
long.
AMS
September/October
2003,
www.automotivemanufacturingsolutions.com
72. Panjan, P., Cekada, M., Panjan, M., Kek-Merl, D.: Growth defects in PVD hard coatings.
Vacuum 84, 209–214 (2010)
73. Panjan, P., Cekada, M., Panjan, M., Kek-Merl, D., Zupani, F., Curkovi, L., Paskvale, S.:
Surface density of growth defects in different PVD hard coatings prepared by sputtering.
Vacuum 86, 794–798 (2012)
74. Paul, E., Evans, C.J., Mangamelli, A., McGlauﬂin, M.L., Polvani, R.S.: Chemical aspects of
tool wear in single point diamond turning. Precis. Eng. 18, 4–19 (1996)
75. Petkov, P.V., Scholz, S., Dimov, S.: Strategies for material removal in laser milling.
Proceedings of 4M2008 International Conference on Multi-Material Micro Manufacture,
Cardiff, UK (2008)
76. Poech, M.H., Fischmeister, H., Spiegler, R.: Deformation and fracture of two-phase
materials. In: Tenckhoff, E., Vöhringer, O. (eds.) Microstructure and Mechanical Properties
of Materials. DGM Informationsgesellschaft-Verlag, Oberursel (1990)
77. Polini, R., Mantini, F.P., Braic, M., Amar, M., Ahmed, W., Taylor, H.: Effects of Ti- and Zr-
based interlayer coatings on the hot ﬁlament chemical vapour deposition of diamond on
high speed steel. Thin Solid Films 494, 116–122 (2006)
78. Qi, L., Nishii, K., Yasui, M., Aoki, H., Namba, Y.: Femtosecond laser ablation of sapphire
on different crystallographic facet planes by single and multiple laser pulses irradiation. Opt.
Lasers Eng. 48, 1000–1007 (2010)
79. Rajaram, N., Sheikh-Ahmad, J., Cheraghi, S.H.: CO2 laser cut quality of 4130 steel. Int.
J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 43, 351–358 (2003)
80. Ready, J.F.: Industrial Applications of Lasers, 2nd edn. Elsevier Academic Press, NY
(1997)
81. Renevier, N.M., Hamphire, J., Fox, V.C., Witts, J., Allen, T., Teer, D.G.: Advantages of
using self-lubricating, hard, wear-resistant MoS -based coatings. Surf. Coat. Technol.
142–144, 67–77 (2001)
82. Rombouts, M.: Selective laser sintering/melting of iron-based powders. PhD thesis
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (2006)
83. Saeki, M., Kuriyagawa, T., Lee, J.S., Syoji, K.: Machining of aspherical opto-device
parallel grinding method. In: ASPE 16th Annual Meeting, vol. 25, pp. 433–436 (2001)
84. Schneider, R., Schulz, A., Bertrand, C., Kulmburg, A., Oldewurtel, A., Uhlenwinkel, V.,
Viale, D.: The performance of spray formed tool steels in comparison to conventional route
material. In: Bergström, J., Frederiksson, G., Johannsson, M., Knotik, O., Thurvander, E.
(eds.) The Use of Tool Steels: Experience and research, vol. 2, Proceedings of the 6th
International Tooling Conference, Karlstad, Sweden, 10–13 September 2002, Karlstad
University (2002) 943–959
85. Schneiders, T., Berns, H., Theisen, W.: Neue Werkzeugwerkstoffe aus Pulvermischungen
HTM. J Heat Treatm. Mater. 60(3), 112–123 (2005)
86. Schruff, I., Schüler, V., Spiegelhauer, C.: Advanced tool steels produced via spray forming.
In: Bergström, J., Frederiksson, G., Johannsson, M., Knotik, O., Thurvander, E. (eds.) The
Use of Tool Steels: Experience and Research, vol. 2. Proceedings of the 6th International
Tooling Conference, Karlstad, Sweden, Sep 10–13 2002, Karlstad University (2002),
pp. 1159–1179
308
E. Brinksmeier

87. Schulz, A., Uhlenwinkel, V., Bertrand, C., Kohlmann, R., Kulmburg, A., Oldewurtel, A.,
Schneider, R., Viale, D.: Nitrogen pick-up during spray forming of high alloyed steels and
its inﬂuence on microstructure and properties of the ﬁnal products. In: Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Spray Deposition and Melt Atomization (SDMA 2003) and
5th International Conference on Spray Forming (ICSF V), 22–25 June 2003, Bremen,
Germany, (2003) 4-33–4-45
88. Schulz, A., Uhlenwinkel, V., Bertrand, C., Escher, C., Kohlmann, R., Kulmburg, A.,
Montero-Pascual,
M.C.,
Rabitsch,
R.,
Schneider,
R.,
Stocchi,
D.,
Viale,
D.:
Sprühkompaktierte hochlegierte Werkzeugstähle—Herstellung und Eigenschaften. HTM
Z.Werkst. Wärmebeh. Fertigung, 60, 2 (2005) S. 87–95
89. Schwander, M., Partes, K.: A review of diamond synthesis by CVD processes. Diam. Relat.
Mater. 20, 1287–1301 (2011)
90. Sinhoff, V.R.: Feinbearbeitung optischer Gläser in der Kleinserie. PhD Thesis, Rheinisch-
Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen, Shaker Verlag Aachen (1997)
91. Spiegelhauer, C.: Industrial production of tool steels using the spray forming technology. In:
Bergström J., Frederiksson, G., Johannsson, M., Knotik, O., Thurvander, E. (eds.) The use
of tool steels: Experience and research, vol. 2. Proceedings of the 6th International Tooling
Conference, pp. 1101–1109, Karlstad, Sweden, 10–13 Sep 2002, Karlstad University (2002)
92. Steffens, H.-D., Lebküchner-Neugebauer, J., Dvorak, M., Dammer, R.: Mechanical and
technological properties of vacuum plasma sprayed and hot isostatically pressed composite
materials. Materialwiss. Werkstofftech. 22, 468–472 (1991)
93. Stein, C., Keunecke, M., Bewilogua, K., Chudoba, T., Kölker, W., Van den Berg, W.: Cubic
boron nitride based coating systems with different interlayers for cutting inserts. Surf. Coat.
Technol. 205, 103–106 (2011)
94. Stephen, A., Vollertsen, F.: 3D microstructuring of mold inserts by laser-based removal. In:
Baltes, H., Brand, O., Fedder, G.K., Hierold, C., Korvink, J.G., Tabata, O., Löhe, D.,
Haußelt, J. (eds.) Advanced Micro and Nanosystems, Microengineering of Metals and
Ceramics, vol. 3, pp. 132–159. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim (2005)
95. Stephen, A.; Walther, R.; Vollertsen, F.:Removal rate model for laser chemical micro
etching. Lasers in Manufacturing LiM, Munich (2009) 615-619
96. Stephen, A., Vollertsen, F.: Mechanisms and processing limits in laser thermochemical
machining. Ann. CIRP 59(1), 251–254 (2010)
97. Sun, S., Pugh, M.: Interfacial properties in steel–steel composite materials. Mater. Sci. Eng.
A 318, 320–327 (2001)
98. Suttmann, O., Moalem, A., Kling, R., Ostendorf, A.: Drilling, cutting, welding, marking and
microforming.
In:
Sugioka,
K.,
Meunier,
M.,
Piqué,
A.
(eds.)
Laser
Precision
Microfabrication, Springer (2010)
99. Theiler, C., Seefeld, T., Sepold, G.: Deposition of graded metal matrix composites by laser
beam cladding laser assisted net shape engineering (LANE’01). In: Geiger, M., Otto, A.
(eds.) Meisenbach–Verlag Bamberg, pp. 421–429 (2001)
100. Theisen, W.: HIP cladding of tools. In: Bergström, J., Frederiksson, G., Johannsson, M.,
Knotik, O., Thurvander, E (eds.) The use of tool steels: Experience and research, vol. 2,
Proceedings of the 6th International Tooling Conference, pp. 947–960, Karlstad, Sweden,
10–13 Sep 2002, Karlstad University (2002)
101. Tohme, Y.E.: Grinding aspheric and freeform micro-optical molds. Proc. SPIE 6462,
64620K (2007)
102. Tsai, C.-H., Chen, H.-W.: Laser milling of cavity in ceramic substrate by fracture-
machining element technique. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 136, 158–165 (2003)
103. Tsai, C.-H., Chen, H.-W.: The laser shaping of ceramic by a fracture machining technique.
Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 23, 342–349 (2004)
104. Twardy, S., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E.: Tribology of micro milled surfaces. Key
engineering materials. Adv. Precis. Eng. 447–448, 681–684 (2010)
105. Uhlenwinkel, V., Schulz, A., Zoch, H.W.: Presentation at the ‘‘FAT Forum Nano Auto’’,
Frankfurt a.M, 28 Nov 2007
7
Tool Making
309

106. Uhlmann, E., Schauer, E.: Dynamic load and strain analysis for the optimization of micro
end mills. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 54, 75–78 (2005)
107. Vollertsen, F., Partes, K., Schubnov, A.: Thin nanocrystalline diamond ﬁlms deposited by
LaPlas-CVD at atmospheric pressure. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. 4, 9–14 (2010)
108. Wahlroos, J.M., Liimatainen, T.P.: Interface adherence of spray formed compound tube. In:
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Spray Forming, pp. 225–234, 13–15
Sep 1993, Swansea, UK, Woodhead Publishing Limited (1993)
109. Wang, R., Fichtborn, K.A.: Computer simulation of metal thin-ﬁlm epitaxy. Thin Solid
Films 272, 223–228 (1996)
110. Yadroitsev, I., Smurov, I.: Selective laser melting technology: from the single laser melted
track stability to 3D parts of complex shape. Phys. Procedia. 5, 551–560 (2010)
111. Yang, Y., Hannula, S.-P.: Development of precision spray forming for rapid tooling. Mater.
Sci. Eng. A 477, 63–68 (2008)
112. Zaeh, M.F., Branner, G.: Investigations on residual stresses and deformations selective laser
melting. Prod. Eng. Res. Devel. 4, 35–45 (2010)
113. Zhang, H., Wang, G., Luo, Y., Nakaga, T.: Rapid hard tooling by plasma spraying for
injection molding and sheet metal forming. Thin Solid Films 390, 7–12 (2001)
310
E. Brinksmeier

Chapter 8
Machines and Handling
Bernd Kuhfuss
Variables
a
Distance (mm)
v
Velocity (mm/s)
dS
Ball diameter (mm)
dw
Wire diameter (mm)
F
Force (N)
p
Pressure (psi)
U
Electrical potential (V)
T
Temperature (C)
8.1 Presses
Hendrik Schulze Niehoff
8.1.1 Classiﬁcation
Most micro metal forming processes need a linear, mechanical movement in order to
initiate and conduct the forming process. This applies especially to most bulk metal
forming processes, such as upsetting and cold forging, described in Chap. 4, and to
sheet metal forming processes, such as deep drawing, stretch drawing, bending,
ﬂange forming, piercing and blanking, described in Chap. 5. Nevertheless, there are
some processes with rotational movement, such as rotary swaging, or other incre-
mental forming processes. Furthermore, there are micro forming processes, which
B. Kuhfuss (&)
BIME, 28334 Bremen, Germany
e-mail: kuhfuss@bime.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_8,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
311

do not need any external mechanical movement at all. They obtain the forming
energy, for example, by laser induced shock waves, such as in laser shock forming.
The linear movement is provided by forming machines, called presses. The
requirements and properties of presses for use in micro forming processes will be
the subject of the following subchapters. Presses are traditionally classiﬁed into
work-linked, force-linked and travel-linked presses. Additionally, in the recent
past, presses have appeared which combine several mechanisms of action. They
can, therefore, be called hybrid presses.
8.1.2 Work-Linked Presses
Work-linked presses are hammer and screw presses. They are cheap and can
supply high force. Therefore, they are especially used for bulk forming processes
needing high force. The work of hammers is linked to the potential energy of the
ram. The work of screw presses is linked to the kinetic energy of the rotation of the
ﬂy wheel. Due to very poor accuracy, work-linked presses are not suitable for
micro forming processes.
8.1.3 Force-Linked Presses
Force-linked presses are characterized by the fact that the maximum force is
available at any position of the ram. This is especially useful for bulk forming
processes. The ram force can be generated either hydraulically, pneumatically,
piezo-electrically or by servo drives.
Hydraulic presses act with the pressure of a ﬂuid, which is transformed to
mechanical movement by a cylinder–piston system. Since the travel reverse is not
deﬁned by a certain pressure, the dead center can be set at any position of the ram.
But for processes which require high positioning accuracy, a mechanical stroke
limitation is necessary. Furthermore, the stroke rate is limited to 400 strokes/min
by the inertia of the ﬂuid. The use of hydraulic presses in micro forming processes
is, as yet, unknown.
Pneumatic presses act in a similar way to hydraulic presses, whereby the ﬂuid is
replaced by air. The lower air inertia allows higher stroke rates, but the higher
compressibility causes a lower stiffness, which can result in increased vibration at
the lower dead center. Thus, pneumatic presses are rather more suitable for
assembly jobs than for micro forming processes [20].
Piezo presses are currently only an object of scientiﬁc research and not avail-
able in the market, although piezo actuators exist in a wide range of applications.
They use the piezo effect, where the piezo elements expand proportionally to the
applied electric voltage and thus generate the ram movement, see Fig. 8.1. The
advantage of this drive is comparable high acceleration and high accuracy
312
B. Kuhfuss

simultaneously. The disadvantage is that the total height of the actuator has to be
1,000 times the stroke height. An important milestone was reached by Hess [12],
who built a fully functional piezo press. He combined the piezo actuator with a
hydraulic stroke enhancer in order to increase the stroke length from 120 lm to
2.85 mm. At the same time, the maximum force was reduced by 90 % to 350 N.
The intended stroke rate of 3,000 strokes/min could not be reached due to lack of
control performance. The measured stroke rate is 420 strokes/min at a stroke
height of 2.2 mm. The free travel-time control of the piezo actuator was of special
beneﬁt in blanking applications, where the share of the ﬂush-cut could be
increased from 70 to 100 % by changing the travel-time characteristic from sinus
to rectangular. Another piezo press was built by Saotome [19] for micro backward
extrusion processes.
Servo presses have had more and more impact recently. Their design is quite
similar to the crank press, but they have no ﬂywheel and the electric motor is
replaced by a torque motor with a very high moment of force. This allows it to
freely control the press in its travel-time characteristics. Bihler (Germany) uses its
servo press SP 500 in combination with its NC production and assembly system
BIMERIC, see Fig. 8.2. This all-in-one production system can be equipped with a
wide range of other NC units such as feeding units, stamping and forming units,
welding units, thread forming units, screw insertion units or pick and place units.
The servo press, SP 500, reaches a repeat accuracy of 10 lm at a maximum stroke
rate of 400 strokes/min. The maximum stroke height is 60 mm, the maximum
force is 500 kN.
8.1.4 Travel-Linked Presses
Travel-linked presses are driven by crankshafts, as in eccentric, toggle or crank
presses. The travel-time characteristic is directly linked to the mechanical parts
+-
ram travel
ram 
bearing
piezo element
platen
Δs
Fig. 8.1 Principle of piezo
press; left: upper dead center;
right: lower dead center
8
Machines and Handling
313

and, thus, is basically sinusoidal, see Fig. 8.3a. Slightly different characteristics
can be gained by a modiﬁed crank mechanism, as in toggle presses. This applies
especially for deep drawing processes, where the approach to the lower dead
center can be realized more gently. The link of the ram travel to the mechanical
parts allows the ram position to be adjusted at the lower dead center very accu-
rately, limited only by the slackness of the mechanical parts, see Fig. 8.3b.
If the press design is rather tight and small, then slackness, deﬂection and
torsion are signiﬁcantly reduced, which leads to an increase in stiffness and
accuracy (below 30 lm). The lower accelerated masses then allow very high
stroke rates between 300 and 2,000, occasionally up to 4,000 strokes/min. This
qualiﬁes crank presses for micro forming processes. Many different kinds are
available on the market. The fastest known are Omega F1, from Yamada Dobby
(Japan), and BSTA 200, from Bruderer AG (Switzerland), see Fig. 8.4.
Fig. 8.2 Servo press SP 500 as part of the NC production and assembly system BIMERRIC,
Bihler GmbH & Co. KG (Germany)
crank drive
bearing
ram
platen
toggle 
ram
bearing
drive
platen
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.3 Principle of a crank and b toggle press
314
B. Kuhfuss

8.1.5 Hybrid Presses
Hybrid presses combine several mechanisms of action, for example, a crank press
with a hydraulic auxiliary drive in order to combine the high stroke rate of the
crank press with the free travel-time characteristic of the hydraulic press. Another
type of hybrid press is the linear motor press since it can be seen as force-linked,
due to the electric linear motor, but also as work-linked, due to the kinetic energy
of the ram which is put into deformation work. The principle is based on an
uncoiled electric drive, where a stationary electric motor induces a Lorentz force
on permanent magnets, which are ﬁxed to the ram and thus lead to a linear
movement, see Fig. 8.5. There are further designs possible where the electric
linear motor is the moved part or asymmetric designs where only one electric
linear motor is used. Furthermore there exist different types of electric linear
motors, such as step motors, DC-motors, synchronous and asynchronous motors,
whereby the linear synchronous motor has the highest force related to the moved
mass and allows therefore the highest acceleration. A relatively rare electric linear
motor is the solenoid motor, where the electric motor is not a plate but tube halves
with circular slots.
The accurate control of the linear motor in combination with few moving parts,
allows a very high accuracy up to 1 lm. If the mass of the moving parts is kept
low, then high accelerations and thus high stroke rates up to 1,000 and occa-
sionally up to 3,000 strokes/min can be reached. The travel-time characteristic of
linear motors is free and the maximum force is available at any position of the ram.
The disadvantage of linear motors is that the maximum force is limited to 20 kN
per motor, but this means no limitation for micro forming applications. The unique
combination of very high accuracy, high stroke rates and a free travel-time
Fig. 8.4 Bruderer high
performance stamping press
BSTA 200, Bruderer AG
(Switzerland)
8
Machines and Handling
315

characteristic makes the linear drive press the most applicable principle for micro
forming processes.
Although they are rarely available on the market, several linear motor presses
have been built. Schepp [20] has built the so called ‘‘Stanzrapid’’ (Rapidstamper)
with two opposing linear motors. The press is commercially available from
Schuler AG (Germany). The use of plain bearings leads to an accuracy of 5.6 lm
at a stroke rate of 1,200 strokes/min. The stroke height is inﬁnitely variable up to
80 mm, whereby ram velocities of 2 m/s can be reached through a maximum
acceleration of 110 m/s2, see Fig. 8.6a. Another linear drive press has been built
by Paldan [17] at the Technical University of Denmark. He used a solenoid motor,
allowing very simple and cheap press design. A positioning accuracy of 1 lm
could be reached at a stroke rate of 300 strokes/min. This laboratory press has a
stroke height of 100 mm, see Fig. 8.6b.
platen
ram (translator)
permanent magnets
linear synchronous
motor (stator)
coil winding
Fig. 8.5 Principle of linear motor press
Fig. 8.6 a Linear motor press stanzrapid (PTU, Darmstadt), b Solenoid press (Technical
University of Denmark)
316
B. Kuhfuss

The most recent work is the development of the ‘‘MUM’’, a linear motor press
especially engineered for micro forming processes. The design and properties of
this press are described in the next chapter.
8.1.6 Engineering of a Press
The engineering of a press with special focus on micro forming processes is
described on the basis of the MUM, a linear motor press which was developed at
BIAS at the University of Bremen [21, 22].
Requirements
The press is focused on applications of deep drawing processes for metal parts of
0.5–10 mm in diameter. Therefore, a repeat accuracy of 3 lm or less is needed to
meet the required tolerances of the parts. The press force has not only to exceed
the punch force for such parts, which is far below 3 kN, but has also to supply the
high acceleration, which is needed to reach stroke rates of 1,000 strokes/min to be
competitive with commercial crank presses. In order to gain high ﬂexibility with
regard to different forming processes, a very high stroke height of 200 mm was
aimed for. Furthermore, it was necessary to have a variable ram travel versus time
characteristic in order to allow the examination of the advanced process design.
Additionally, force controlled travel should be possible, for example to reduce the
blank holder force during the deep drawing process and thus to increase the limit
drawing ratio. The force control yields to the demand that the force has to be
measured with an uncertainty smaller than 0.05 N. To control the blank holder
independently from the punch, a second axis will be needed. All in all, a fast,
double-axis, high precision press is demanded.
Drive
Many presses are driven by a crank motion, especially if a high output quantity is
demanded. But the crank motion is not suitable since the punch travel is not a
freely controllable characteristic and force control is not possible. A hydraulic or
pneumatic drive would meet these requirements, but they are rather slow. A piezo
drive is fast as well as free in force and motion control, but its punch travel height
is limited to a few millimeters. Thus, an electrical linear motor was chosen. It is
fast, free in force and motion control and can make high strokes. Another
advantage of the linear motor is its high precision. In order to reach high accel-
eration, the ratio of moved mass to force of the linear motor is decisive. It was
found that this ratio increases in larger motors. On the other hand, the motor
should be rather small to reduce disturbances, such as heat evolution, attraction
forces and snap in forces. It was also calculated that higher accelerations can be
reached if the magnets instead of the stator are moved. This also has the advantage
that the power and coolant supply do not need to be carried with the moved part.
8
Machines and Handling
317

Two linear motors per axis were installed in opposite orientations (Fig. 8.7), so
that the attraction forces between the linear motor and the magnetic board of
15.4 kN nearly cancel each other out. That makes the use of air bearings possible
as they can bear only small forces.
Bearings
The proper design of the bearings is essential to the press, since the bearings can
produce forces which disturb the measurement and thus the control of process
forces. Former tests showed that, for example, ball bearings are not suitable due to
disturbing forces, which are at least in the order of 1 N. Aerodynamic guide slide
bearings would have similar effects due to the stick–slip effects, especially for the
reversing movement. A hydrostatic bearing would need a high ﬂow rate for the
ﬂuent since the arrangement of movement is vertical. The contact-free magnetic
bearing is an interesting solution for the press, but it is not available on the market
and the design is very complex.
Thus, the decision was made for aerostatic bearings, which are contact-free and
non-wearing. However, they are very heat sensitive due to the small air gaps of
only 5 lm but can be designed as ﬂat discs or as pillars. Figure 8.8 shows the cross
section of a two-pillar air bearing design in comparison to a disc air bearing
design, subjected to a change in temperature of 1 K. The change in shape of the
aluminum ram leads to a reduction of the air gap from 5 to 1.5 lm, which is in the
order of the geometric accuracy of the pillar, so that locking could occur. In
contradiction to this, stands the use of disc air bearings, which are cheaper and heat
tolerant, since the change in shape can be compensated by disc springs.
Another advantage of the disc air bearing is the higher load and stiffness
compared to pillar air bearings. While the pillar air bearings would have had a
nominal load of 4 kN, the disc air bearings have a nominal load of 6.8 kN and a
stiffness of 800 N/lm. The springs for temperature compensation would, of
course, reduce this stiffness signiﬁcantly and vibration could occur in fast
reversing applications. It is, therefore, a hydraulic linear brake integrated into the
bearing system, which can lock the bearings and deactivate the effect of the springs
if needed. If, in this operational mode, changes in temperature occur, only a short
unlocking is needed and the bearings are again self-adjusted. For the worst case of
disc air bearing
spring mounted 
disc air bearing
hard stone core
relief hole
linear motor
preloaded 
magnetic boards
ram casing
press frame
Fig. 8.7 Cross section of the ram unit, ram casing and press frame
318
B. Kuhfuss

unavoidable contact, the disc surface is armed with a dry-running coating which
lasts for more than 5 km.
Ram
The use of disc air bearings requires very good planarity and parallelism of the
bearing surface. Thus, a ram core of hard stone was taken, enabling surfaces with a
planarity of 1 lm of 1,000 mm in length. The naturally grown stone relieved all
residual stresses, which guarantees the absolute absence of shape distortion and a
lifetime of parallelism. Furthermore, the hard stone has the same density as alu-
minum, which makes it light, but its thermal expansion coefﬁcient is only a third,
which reduces temperature based changes in shape.
The magnet boards on both sides of the ram have to be connected directly to
each other through holes within the hard stone, in order to preload the hard stone
with pressure, so that no tensile stresses are acting on the hard stone, if the
attraction forces start to work, since the hard stone cannot bear tensile stresses. The
same strategy is used for the upper and lower ram plates, which are also preloaded
through tie rods. The plates also act as a stop unit for the security dampers, which
come into operation if the electronic security devices fail. But, before they act,
linear brakes are designed to lock the ram if power failure occurs, the emergency
button is pressed or if an electronic part of the machine control fails. Furthermore,
a locking pin was designed to achieve positive controlled for tool changes and
adjustments, Fig. 8.9.
Entire construction
The press is based on a hard stone plate, which is anchored to the ground by shock
absorbers in order to reduce vibrations. The extreme planar surface of the ground
Pillar Air bearings
Disc air bearings
T = T0
T = T0
T = T0 + 1 K                                                              T = T0 + 1 K
300.007 
1.5 µm
300 mm
5 µm
air gap
ram
column
disc air bearing
spring
Fig. 8.8 Effect of temperature change of 1 K on air bearing with pillars and with discs
8
Machines and Handling
319

plate is the reference for the two columns, which are adjusted orthogonal to the
ground plate, and all other components. The columns are a welded construction,
which is ﬁlled with polymeric concrete to increase the damping effect. Two ram
cases are installed between the columns, which contain the linear drives, the air
bearings, the brakes, the locking pins, the shock absorber and the rams. The ram
cases can be dismantled and assembled without further adjustment of the machine.
The workbench is not only a ﬁxing plate for tools, but also a stiffness component.
It stands on leveling feet and is ﬁxed to the columns. The height of the workbench
Ram components
upper ram plate
hard stone core
magnet boards
brake bands
lower ram plate
Fixed parts
upper shock absorber
locking pin
electro-magnetic drive
brake calipers (emergency stop)
disc air bearings
lower shock absorber
Fig. 8.9 Ram unit and connected components
upper ram casing
upper ram
columns
workbench
lower ram
lower ram casing
ground plate
Fig. 8.10 Entire construction of the MUM
320
B. Kuhfuss

Table 8..1 Properties of known presses
Name of press
MUM
Stanzrapid
Solenoid press Piezo press
Omega F1
BSTA 200
SP 500
Manufacturer
BIAS
Schuler AG
IPU
ZFS
Yamada
Bruderer
Bihler
Number of
axes
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
Drive
Electro-
magnetic
Electro-
magnetic
Electro-
magnetic
Piezo-electric
Crank motion
Crank motion
Servo motor
Control
By force or
position
By force or
position
By position
By force
or position
Fixed
Fixed
By position
Maximum force
15 kN
20 kN
5.5 kN
0.38 kN
100 kN
200 kN
500 kN
Positioning error
3 lm
5.6 lm
1 lm
–
\5 lm
\30 lm
10 lm
Maximum velocity
3 m/s
2 m/s
2.5 m/s
–
13 m/s
–
–
Maximum
acceleration
10 g
11 g
40 g
10 g
–
–
–
Stroke rate
1,250/min at
1 mm
stroke
height*
1,200/min
300/min
420/min
4,000/min at
6 mm stroke
height
2,000/min at 8 mm
stroke height
400/min
Stroke height
200 mm
80 mm
100 mm
2.3 mm
20 mm
76 mm
60 mm
Installation space
(H 9 W 9 D)
200–400 9 600
9 300 mm
230 9 230 mm 200 9 300
9 150 mm
–
235 mm
260 9 410 9 400
311 9 1,000
9 560 mm
Bearings
Air
Plain
Rolling
–
Plain
–
Plain
*2,900/min with higher positioning error
8
Machines and Handling
321

can be varied in three positions, which differ by about 100 mm, so that the upper
or the lower installation space can be changed from 200 to 300 or 400 mm in
height respectively. Three holes in the workbench allow the interaction of the rams
directly (through the middle hole) or the transfer of one ram movement in either
the upper or the lower installation spaces (through the two outer holes). The width
of the installation space is 600 mm, which provides good accessibility, Fig. 8.10.
Properties
The developed press has two axes, which can interact and allow new processes. It
is very dynamic and can reach 2,900 strokes/min. The linear motor combined with
the air bearings ensures the absence of friction and clearance. Therefore, a high
positioning accuracy of less than 3 lm and a repeat positioning error of less than
1 lm at 1,250 strokes/min have been achieved. The combination of speed, accu-
racy and ﬂexibility makes the MUM unique from other described presses, see
Table 8.1.
8.2 Special Purpose Machines
Volker Piwek and Bernd Kuhfuss
8.2.1 Design of Rotary Swaging Machines
Generally there are three different types of machine for metal forming by rotary
swaging. For noncircular geometry it is necessary that the rotary shaft is locked
and that the tools do not perform any rotation. This can be achieved by the
application of an external rotor or expeller conﬁgured machine with a locked
rotary shaft. On the other hand, rotation-symmetric proﬁles can be manufactured
on internally driven as well as both the other types of machine (Fig. 8.11).
The basic kinematics of the drive system for the tools depends on the size of the
machines, and this size is a function of the dimensions of the machined cross-
sections with respect to the ﬁnal geometry to be achieved. Due to limited con-
structional space, currently small machines suited for micro forming are only
designed with an internal rotor. On the other hand, principle process variants—
infeed and plunge methods—are realized with small rotary swaging machines.
322
B. Kuhfuss

8.2.2 Extensions and Modiﬁcations of Small Machines
Principally for Micro Forming
8.2.2.1 Synchronization of Workpiece Rotation
To make noncircular geometries producible in the micro sphere the workpiece can
also be synchronously rotated with the speed frequency of the rotary shaft. Such a
machine kinematic has been realized as a prototype and proved within Collabo-
rative Research Centre Micro Cold Forming (Fig. 8.12).
The rotary motion is directly deducted from the swaging head by a spindle
which is connected to the synchronization gear drive. There the rotation is
transformed with the same reduction gear ratio that is realized in the swaging head.
The synchronized rotation between the tools and the workpiece is coupled into a
hub of an axial relocatable insert shaft, which is carrying the chuck for the
1) rotary swaging 
head
2) gear drive for 
synchronization
3) linear feeder
(direct driven)
1
2
3
Fig. 8.12 Experimental station with synchronization of workpiece rotation and linear feed drive
driven rotary  
shaft 
outer ring 
is locked
(a) internal rotor
(b) external rotor
(c) expeller
rotary shaft is 
locked 
driven outer 
ring 
driven rotary 
shaft
driven outer 
ring
Fig. 8.11 Types of machine (schematic)
8
Machines and Handling
323

workpiece at its front end. The axial feed with regard to the axial positioning of the
workpiece is induced by a linear direct drive. The table supports the insert shaft at
its rear end.
8.2.2.2 Axial Workpiece Feed Device
Forming in the micro domain by rotary swaging requires a higher accuracy on the
axial positioning of the workpiece due to smaller tolerances. Otherwise the acting
process forces on the feed unit are comparatively small, which enables the sub-
stitution of the conventional hydraulic linear axis by other active principles. The
integrated direct driven feed unit of the prototype features high positioning
accuracy as well as high dynamics (Fig. 8.12). Another design of the axial feed
unit which is not exclusively used for micro applications is a continuous friction
based system (Fig. 8.13). In particular, this kind of feed drive is applied when
forming endless wire material. Normally such a system is supplemented by two
coilers.
8.2.2.3 Radial Feed of the Tools
In plunge rotary swaging operations the radial feed motion of the forming tools
requires increased positional accuracy. Conventional machines are working basi-
cally with the hydraulic linear axis for the adjustment of the crank, that moves the
wedges into the gap between the base jaw and the forming tools. In micro process
machines this axis has been substituted by an electromechanical solution, con-
sisting of a servo drive and a ball screw to generate the feed motion of the crank
(Fig. 8.13). Hereby a high positioning accuracy can be achieved according to the
resolution of the encoder. Furthermore it becomes feasible to realize deﬁned
velocity–time proﬁles for the radial tool motion.
8.2.3 Development of the Potential of Dry Processing
Forming processes by rotary swaging are predominantly realized by using a
cooling lubricant. Primarily this ﬂuid enables the friction conditions in the contact
zone between the tools and the workpiece to be inﬂuenced. It is particularly used in
the production of macro components to ﬂush the roughened reduction zone of the
tools which is loaded-up with abrasion from the workpiece surface. Due to the
signiﬁcantly smaller process forces in the ﬁeld of micro production it becomes
feasible to avoid cooling lubricant, either partially or completely. The above-
mentioned ﬂushing function of the cooling lubricant can be dispensed with if the
reduction zone is designed with a ﬂat surface. For dry processing there are two
essential requirements. On the other hand, cooling lubricant is also used to
324
B. Kuhfuss

lubricate all contact zones on surfaces that perform relative movement within the
rotary swaging head. These conditions have to be maintained by dry processing,
and adequate methods are necessary to encapsulate the forming zone from the area
where the oscillating movement of the tools is generated to prevent the intrusion of
the cooling lubricant into the contact area between the tools and the workpiece.
This requires that the jaw disk has to be protected on the rear side from intrusion of
the cooling lubricant, and furthermore no passage of the medium should occur in
the radial guide slots between the frontal buffer plate and the tools. In the fol-
lowing two drawings, design features for the internal enclosure of the forming
zone within the rotary swaging head are illustrated.
Figure 8.14 shows schematically a longitudinal section through the rotary
swaging unit and the ﬁtting conditions of the jaw disk, the wedge adapter and the
swaging shaft. In order to prevent cooling lubricant from intruding into the forming
zone, the adjustable gap (15–45 mm) between the rear face side of the stationary jaw
2
1
3
4b
4a
1
2
3b
3a
1) rotary swaging 
head
2) friction wheel
feed unit
3) electromechanic
linear axis
(servo drive and 
ball screw)
1) rotary swaging 
head
2) roller feed
3) a) decoiler
b) recoiler
4) wire material before
(a) and after (b) the 
forming process
Fig. 8.13 Rotary swaging unit with a roller feed and an electro-mechanic linear axis (top),
conﬁguration to process wires consisting of two coilers (bottom)
8
Machines and Handling
325

disk and the axial relocatable wedge adapter has to be closed. The design solution
provides a ﬂange with a frontal integrated o-ring as a seal against the jaw disk at the
end of a tube, which is plugged into the hollow swaging shaft (Fig. 8.15). This tube
rotates together with the swaging shaft and is supported outside the swaging unit by a
ball bearing and an angle bracket on the machine base.
In the front area, seals are necessary between the tools and the radial guide slots
in the jaw disk with respect to the frontal buffer plate. Figure 8.16 shows possible
seals between the jaw disk and the frontal buffer plate as a modiﬁcation of a tool
segment for dry processing. In that case the enclosure is achieved by a slot and a
seal in the bearing surface of the tool.
axial support on the 
machine base
flange
tube
o-ring
ball bearing 
Fig. 8.15 Design solution for an enclosure of the forming zone in the rear area
swaging 
shaft
wedge 
adapter
wedges
jaw 
disk
tools
base 
jaw
gap
intrusion 
of cooling 
lubricant in the 
forming zone
frontal 
buffer 
plate
machine frame
detail 
X
X
Fig. 8.14 Longitudinal section through the rotary swaging head
326
B. Kuhfuss

8.2.4 Modiﬁcation of Tools for Micro Forming
8.2.4.1 Adaption of Tool Osculation
Due to unfavorable contact conditions a reduced resulting osculation between the
tools and the workpiece, especially using smaller machines with fewer tools in the
micro area, a decreased roundness respectively cylindricity is expected (Fig. 8.17).
One method to compensate for this effect is an aligned mechanical release of
the tools in the area facing the contact zone. The purpose is to increase the
osculation with respect to the load during the contact between the tools and the
surface of the workpiece. Figure 8.18 provides an overview were such mechanical
releases can be located in areas of the tool’s cross-section.
In terms of the high surface quality of the workpiece, it is practical to keep the
contact area continuous (designs b and d).
For the design with lateral release (b), a ﬁnite element calculation has been
conducted. Figure 8.19 shows the results of the comparison stress rc and the
overall deformation.
seal, 
e.g. o-ring
slot
jaw disk
buffer plate
(rear side)
polymer
seal
o-ring
Fig. 8.16 Modiﬁcation of jaw disk, frontal buffer plate and tools
8
Machines and Handling
327

8.2.4.2 Coating and Structuring of the Tool Surface
To realize a dry manufacturing process with respect to lubrication in minimal
amounts, a coating on the workpiece material could provide a reasonable contribu-
tion. This is particularly for the reduction of adhesive wear, due to the afﬁnity
between the material of the workpiece and the tools. Furthermore the friction con-
ditions in the different zones of the tools (reduction and calibration areas) can be
affected. To produce a proper surface quality, a small coefﬁcient offriction is needed
in the calibration zone. Coatings of chrome nitrite (CrN) and DLC (diamond-like
(a) initial conditions(monolithic body)
(b) lateral release
(c) lateral release withbreakup 
of the contact surface 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(d) central releaseby undercut
(e) central release by undercut
and breakup of the contact 
surface
Fig. 8.18 Different release zones of tools to increase osculation
reduced osculation with
two tools (machines for
the micro area)
improvement of the
osculation due to
adapted tools
sufficient osculation with
four tools (machines for 
the macro area)
Fig. 8.17 Osculation between the tools and the workpiece
328
B. Kuhfuss

carbon) which are already used for forming tools, e.g. with the deep drawing process,
are the focus of current research. Coatings of DLC feature a coefﬁcient of friction
lDLC below 0.2, compared with CrN-coatings with lCrN of about 0.5. In particular,
with DLC coatings a high resistance to wear can be expected due to its hardness,
combined with sufﬁcient ductility. Another approach to adjust the coefﬁcient of
friction in the reduction zone is the deﬁned structuring of the tool surface by metal
cutting processes, e.g. micro milling. On the other hand, in the macro area a coating
can be realized by the application of Wolfram carbide (WC).
8.2.4.3 Closure of the Gaps Between the Tools for Small Component
Geometries
As mentioned in Sect. 4.1, the risk that micro components can enter the gap
between the dies increases with smaller diameters (Fig. 8.20). To enlarge the tool
stroke, design modiﬁcations as well as process oriented methods can be consid-
ered. To avoid the undesired intrusion of the workpiece or part of it into the gap,
ﬂexible strips that offer an unaffected tool stroke, or rigid blocking elements that
are guided in notches can be applied (Fig. 8.20).
8.2.5 Design of Micro Cold Forging Machines
For the production of cold forged components, transfer presses are normally used.
According to the complexity of the workpieces, the forming can be designed as a
single or multi-stage process. While the transport between different forming sta-
tions in the macro range can be provided by a transfer system, e.g. a gripper rail,
the handling of micro parts is a major challenge which can be solved by inverting
this process. An approach for a multi-stage cold forging process of micro parts is
to supply the workpiece at various machining operations (stations) in the same
(b)
N/mm²
(a)
1308
1178
1047
917
787
656
526
396
265
135
5
µm
70
63
56
49
42
35
28
21
14
7
0
Fig. 8.19 Comparison stress rc a and overall deformation b of the coordinated mechanical
release of a tool segment
8
Machines and Handling
329

punching tool, instead of transferring it to different process stages by an additional
handling system. This can be appropriately realized by arranging the punching tool
on a rotary indexing table (rotor), where the different processing stations are
located in the circumferential direction (Fig. 8.21).
Besides the fundamental advantage that transportation of the micro-components
between the processing stations with an additional handling system is not required,
the circular arrangement offers an effective material ﬂow (components) as well as
an optimized cycle time due to unidirectional rotation. Furthermore, within this
machine concept different forming processes with respect to different manufac-
turing methods, such as forming and cutting, can be combined. The machine
system shown is designed to produce small parts in a diameter range of
0.5–1.5 mm. The maximum feeding length is limited to 12 mm, and the plunger-/
ejector stroke is speciﬁed at 8 mm. The press supplies a maximum force of 13 kN,
and depending on the component a processing performance of up to 200 work-
pieces per minute can be achieved.
workpiece feed
rotation and feed 
direction
punching tool
workpiece eject
modules for 
maching
operations
Fig. 8.21 Design of a
forging machine for micro
components (reference:
Waﬁos, machine type SMR)
tools
open
(a) 
(b) 
released
com-
pressed
defected
centered
tools 
closed
tools
open
tools
closed
Fig. 8.20 Design oriented approaches to closing gaps between tools by a ﬂexible strips, b rigid
blocking elements
330
B. Kuhfuss

8.3 Handling of Microparts
Kirsten Tracht and Florian Weikert
8.3.1 Challenges and Principles of Micro Handling
Handling devices like grippers, storage devices and clamping devices are essential
for the support of handling tasks. On the one hand the devices are component
speciﬁc, and on the other they depend on the assembly station. For example, serial
assembly grippers, clamping devices and feeding concepts have to satisfy several
boundary conditions. In micro production, some of these restrictions and
requirements are as follows:
• surface to volume ratio
• adaptability and convertibility
• clean room suitability.
Surface to volume ratio means that the smaller the dimensions of the compo-
nents the smaller the ratio of the weight forces and surface forces. Adhesion of the
parts to the surfaces of the gripper has to be considered during handling. Micro
piece parts are not robust and have touch-sensitive surface structures. When
assembling products, components of different forms and dimensions have to be
handled. Thus gripper, feeding devices and clamp devices have to be adaptive and
convertible to handle a greater number of micro components. Due to the fact that
micro production often takes place in dust-free environments, handling devices
should not be a source of contamination [13].
Handling of micro parts can be divided into two main categories: piece part
handling and linked parts handling. Piece part handling is used in assembly sta-
tions for the complex micro assemblies of small- and medium-sized production
lots. Linked parts handling is rather more suitable for less complex assemblies of
the scale and mass production of metal formed products. A further valuation can
be done regarding their applicability for transport, assembly and manufacture. The
distinctions described are shown in Table 8.2.
Table 8.2 Micro handling principles
Piece part handling
Linked parts handling
Principle
Contact handling
Non contact handling
Carrier medium
Transport
Suitable
Suitable
Suitable
Assembly
Suitable
Less suitable
Suitable with limitations
Manufacture
Suitable with limitations
Not suitable
Suitable
Examples
• Mechanical gripper
• Magnetic handling
• Belt conveying
• Vibration conveyor
• Air cushion
• Friction conveying
• …
• …
• …
8
Machines and Handling
331

8.3.2 Piece Part Handling
8.3.2.1 Micro Gripper
Gripper systems are necessary for deﬁned and safe handling. Micro grippers are
the most developed type of handling device in the case of contact micro handling
systems. Typical objects that grippers have to handle are mechanical piece parts,
micro optic elements and ﬁber elements. Mechanical piece parts are for example
gears and shaft rings with edge lengths between 50 and 1,000 lm. Micro optic
elements are for example spherical lenses and mirror elements with edge lengths
between 100 and 700 lm. Fiber elements are glass ﬁbers and wires with edge
lengths between 20 and 1,000 lm [14].
Micro grippers offer good access to these micro parts. Releasing micro parts is
more difﬁcult than gripping [2] because of adhesion. The functionality of grippers
is well understood in the macro scale. While in the macro scale (small) parts are
usually gripped with conventional principles like vacuum-sucking or mechanical
gripping, in the micro range static and dynamic effects of ﬂuids, e.g. capillary
forces or temporary adhesion, can also be used for contact handling [11]. These
mechanical gripper
electrical actuated gripper
medium actuated gripper
hydraulic
p oil
p oil
p < 1
p > 1
pneumatic
vacuum
shape memory alloy
piezo
electromagnetic
electrothermic
T1
T2 > T1
T2
U 
U 
U 
T1
T2
freezing
-°C
parallel
angular
Fig. 8.22 Gripping principles
332
B. Kuhfuss

principles can be divided by their actuation principles. Figure 8.22 provides an
overview of the main principles.
Parallel- and angular grippers are grippers where the gripping process is con-
trolled mechanically. Grippers with shape memory alloy (sma) drives, piezo
grippers, electromagnetic grippers and electrothermic grippers are electrically
actuated grippers. Grippers with shape memory alloy (sma) drives use shape
memory alloy wires. By applying electric potential, the gripper changes its shape
and the grasping mechanism is initiated. Piezo grippers also use electric potential,
which is converted into a grasping movement. Electromagnetic grippers use the
magnetic ﬁeld of an electromagnet. In electrothermic grippers the gripper ﬁnger is
partially heated, causing bending of the gripper ﬁnger. A movement of the gripper
jaw is induced but only a small movement of the ﬁngers is possible. Medium
actuated grippers use mediums like water, oil and air. Hydraulic grippers are for
example operated by pressurized oil, in which the oil is within a mold padding
which adapts itself to the form of the part to be handled. Pneumatic grippers use
compressed air for the expansion of bellows, this induces friction between the
gripper and piece part. Vacuum grippers induce a depression, within which the
piece parts are sucked. A freezing gripper freezes the part to the gripper, using a
freezable liquid.
Figure 8.23 shows two practical examples of micro contact grippers. On the
left-hand side a micro vacuum gripper is shown which picks and places micro
glass marbles. For the handling of parts smaller than 500 lm a two jaw micro
gripper is suitable. Using this gripper the handling of arbitrary formed parts is
made possible [5–8].
8.3.2.2 Feeding Systems
Feeding systems are necessary for the oriented provision of the parts. Using grip-
ping technologies requires the supply and separation of parts or small assemblies.
Part supply is a major bottleneck for successful automation in micro assembly. The
10 mm
Fig. 8.23 Micro vacuum gripper (l.) [5, 8] and two jaw micro gripper [6, 7]
8
Machines and Handling
333

feeding task can be subdivided into main parts separation, transfer, orientation and
the positioning of the parts. Only a few approaches exist for adapting storage
devices, order devices and transport devices to micro world conditions. At least
within experimental plants, micro parts are manually sorted into face magazines
like standardized wafﬂe-packs or magazines with part adjusted molding posts. After
that they are fed and positioned manually into the workspace, e.g. by a robot. An
alternative to part adjusted molding posts are adhesive carrier foils. This kind of
feeding is sufﬁcient for experimental plants. For industrial approaches it is not
economically feasible. Magazines, workpiece carriers and transport containers for
automatic feeding, which are also cleanroom-compatible, are key issues. This
includes the exact ﬁxation of sensitive micro parts. Moreover, this requires sufﬁ-
cient ﬂexibility, e.g. with regard to the form and size of the parts [16].
Different physical effects can be used for transportation. Vibration-based sys-
tems have a large share of different conﬁgurations. For the separation and supply
of parts from loose bulks, vibration conveyors can be used. They are periodically
induced mass-spring systems which transfer vibrations to the piece parts.
The piece parts start to vibrate and hop and slide towards the intended direction.
The throw principle and slide principle can be observed. The throw principle
uses the combined vertical and horizontal oscillations of the feeder. The parts on
the panel are induced to move forward by periodic throws. The slide principle
avoids throws which is why the micro part is sliding. Both principles are shown in
Fig. 8.24. By avoiding micro throws some undesirable impacts on the micro parts
are also avoided. Thin and fragile parts in particular can be damaged using the
throw principle, resulting in a conﬂict of cautious handling versus conveying
speed. These problems can be minimized using the slide principle. Moreover, the
slide principle offers the feeding of very different components. The parts can be
transported, positioned and oriented regardless of their shape and geometry.
Moreover small amplitudes of slide conveyance also facilitate a smooth convey-
ance [10].
In summary, vibration conveyors are widespread and are important for macro
feeding systems. The drive works without sliding and rubbing parts. Therefore
they are almost maintenance-free. They are easy to control and are energy efﬁcient
because of working near the eigenfrequency. Vibration conveyors are robust, have
a simple design and are cheap [16]. Most existing automatic feeding systems are
micro part
conveyor panel
z
x
y
z
x
y
oscillation
v(t)
micro part
oscillation
conveyor panel
v(t)
Fig. 8.24 Throw principle (l.) and slide principle (r.) [10]
334
B. Kuhfuss

designed for special applications [13]. Other principles of feeding systems in micro
production include maintaining the sequence of the parts produced.
8.3.2.3 Precision Robots
Kinematics are mostly accomplished by precision robots. Precision robots are
central units of micro assembly stations. There are two main embodiments that can
be distinguished. The ﬁrst type are robots based on serial structures, and the second
type are robots based on parallel structures. Serial robots, which represent the
majority of industrial robots, are based on open kinematic chains between the base
and working platform (Fig. 8.25(l.)).
All joints are active and have a single degree of freedom. A large workspace is
covered in proportion to the robot size. However, using serial robots also has its
drawbacks. One example is the installation space of the robots. The motors of the
joints also have to be moved with the robotic arm and the parts. Furthermore, the
miniaturization of the robots themselves is only possible to a certain degree.
Parallel robots can solve the problems of serial robots in micro assembly. Parallel
robots constitute a mechanism consisting of multiple closed kinematic chains
between the base frame and working platform. A closed kinematic chain has more
than two links, which are closed and connected over the joints and the base frame
(Fig. 8.25(r.)) [18]. A comparison of the use of serial and parallel robots in micro
production is shown in Table 8.3.
8.3.2.4 Non Contact Piece Part Handling
An alternative to contact based handling systems in the micro range are systems
which enable non contact piece part handling. Using magnetic and electrostatic
ﬁelds are examples of handling without contact with the workpiece. Besides
magnetic and electrostatic handling there are also optical levitation, Bernoulli
3
3
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
1: active joint
2: passivce joint
3: endeffector
Fig. 8.25 Open kinematic chain (l.) and closed kinematic chain (r.)
8
Machines and Handling
335

levitation, air cushion, standing wave and near ﬁeld handling. These principles are
especially suitable for the feeding of micro piece parts, and are shown in Fig. 8.26.
Static electrical ﬁelds are used for electrostatic levitation, this principle enables
the attraction and orientation of micro parts. The optical levitation principle uses
forces of radiation pressure from visible laser light, this also enables the movement
of micro parts. Bernoulli levitation uses compressed air to hold the micro part
below the end effector of a manipulator which consists of a radial air outﬂow
nozzle. The air ﬂows downwards through the nozzle and, after having passed the
micro part, ﬂows radially outwards. Air cushioning also uses air; the air ﬂows
upwards through several holes positioned in the holding area of the gripper causing
a repulsive levitation force. The repulsive levitation force counterbalances the
weight of the part, which is held above the manipulator. Standing wave levitation
uses an acoustic standing wave, where at the pressure nodes of the wave small
components can be levitated. The standing wave is induced between a vibrating
plate and a reﬂector. An alternative of acoustic levitation is the replacement of the
reﬂector by the piece part itself. The main advantage of non contact handling is
that surface forces can be completely neglected. Moreover, a reduction in the
friction effect can provide high resolution and accuracy and prevents stick slip
effects. Furthermore, a very important advantage is the absence of high local
Magnetic (not limited)
Electrostatic (not limited)
Optical (0,1-1nN)
Bernoulli
Air cushion (0,1-10N)
Standing Wave (10mN)
Near field (not limited)
Fig. 8.26 Contactless handling principles [25]
Table 8.3 Suitability comparison for the adoption of serial and parallel robots in micro pro-
duction [18]
Performance indicator
Serial robots
Parallel robots
Elbow room
Large (+)
Small (-)
Workspace
Large (+)
Small (-)
Installation space
Large (-)
Miniaturizable (+)
Repeatability
\1 lm possible
\1 lm possible
Clean room suitability
Yes
Yes
Velocity (v)
High
Very high
Stiffness
Low (-)
High (+)
336
B. Kuhfuss

contact pressure due to direct contact between the piece part and handling device
being avoided. The risk of destroying damageable components during handling, as
well as the risk of contamination from and of the end-effector, is reduced.
Otherwise there are some restrictions to the applicability of non contact handling
principles. (Electro)-magnetic and electrostatic principles, for example, depend on
the material type. Optical levitation, air cushion and standing waves are restricted
by the attainable maximum levitation forces. Optical levitation achieves a maxi-
mum of 0.1–1 nN, a standing wave 10 mN and the air cushion of 0.1–10 N.
Bernoulli levitation, near ﬁeld and air cushion also need planar parts or parts with
at least one ﬂat surface. Moreover, there are also environmental restrictions;
(electro)-magnetic and electrostatic principles are restricted to low temperature
applications, and Bernoulli, air cushion, standing wave and near ﬁeld are not
applicable in a vacuum [25].
Beside the restrictions mentioned, the stability of the different principles does
not always maintain the required process reliability. When overcoming the actual
existing challenges, non contact piece part handling can be an alternative in for
example the containerless processing of materials, or within handling and transfer
systems.
8.3.3 Linked Parts Handling
8.3.3.1 Basic Forms of Linkages
In mass production, linked parts are used. For the easier conveyance of linked parts
the parts/blanks are kept interconnected and are not separated from the wire/strap
of metal sheet/foil throughout the entire production chain. Linked parts are
common when forming with progressive tools. In particular, they are very
established in the production of punched parts. In micro deep drawing activities,
preliminary approaches are known where the parts are transported and produced
within a linkage.
The advantages of the feeding and transportation of micro parts in linkages are
obvious. Due to the linkage of the parts they can be continually fed through
multistage manufacturing processes when using adequate material-handling
technology. Moreover, the small dimensions of the parts require the reconsider-
ation of conventional transport strategies. Related to the small dimensions of the
parts, size effects can occur which can be overcome by linking the parts. After
linking they are handled collectively as a large macro part [24]. In industrial
practice, linked parts are often connected to a carrier medium which enables the
contact handling of the linkage without contacting the part itself. The carrier
medium can be formed by a wire or a sheet or by plastic.
Many linkage designs are possible. They depend on the production process and
the transported part itself. Nonetheless, three basic forms are recognizable from
which nearly every real design can be derived. According to their optical appearance,
8
Machines and Handling
337

line linked parts, ladder linked parts and comb linked parts can be distinguished.
Comb linked parts represent a hybrid form of the line type and the ladder type. The
following remarks are conﬁned to line linked parts and ladder linked parts, because
the main characteristics of comb linked parts are similar. Line linked parts have a
linear construction and are especially suitable for manufacturing products from wire
[15]. The micro parts are arranged in the ﬂux of forces. Important geometry data for
processing and positioning are for example the distance between the parts, the
diameter of the parts and the diameter of the wire blank with respect to the carrier
medium. An example is shown in Fig. 8.27, i.e. spheres on a wire.
These spheres can for example be produced by using micro free form heading
and incremental forming.
Ladder linked parts are named after their ladder-shaped construction. They are
suitable for the manufacture of objects from metal strips. The parts are arranged in
the center of the strip. The fringes of the strip are used for conveying and the
connection of the linkage. Transport forces are applied to the fringes of the strips.
The fringes of the strips are used for transport. The distances between the transport
areas and forming zone must be large enough to prevent the mutual impacts of
forming and conveying [15]. The principle of ladder linked parts is shown in
Fig. 8.28. Within this example micro cups are manufactured within metal strips
using deep drawing/stretch forming and punching.
A special challenge is the conveyance and feeding of the linkages. Therefore
the conveying zone, which is not necessary for forming the product, can be used.
This means that additional material is now used as the transport string. Often
support materials like plastic belts are used as carrier medium. In micro sheet
shaping the fringes of the sheet are already often used for conveying. In both cases
the belts are fed into progressive tools or micro assembly stations. Progressive
tools are tools where cutting operations using the principle of progressive forming
procedures, like bending, coining or upsetting, are accomplished in a second or
third step.
In the production of electronic and ﬁne mechanic components or complete
products in large lot sizes, the processes for handling and part inspection can be
integrated. Examples of these processes are order devices, handling and feed
systems, assembly operations and cleaning operations.
Such production systems have some special advantages that overcome prob-
lems of the handling of single piece micro parts. Single piece parts are often
ball distance a
ball diameter ds
wire diameter dw
Fig. 8.27 Spheres on line linked parts
338
B. Kuhfuss

difﬁcult to handle in ordering and positioning procedures in automatic assembly.
Cycle times become longer and it is difﬁcult to cope with disturbances. Using
progressive production systems these difﬁculties are avoided, because multiple
production procedures are handled in one system. Due to the keeping of parts in a
linkage, bulk material is avoided. The higher the integration degree of part pro-
duction, the shorter the cycle time becomes. Industrial companies already handle
linked parts successfully. However, part dimensions of less than 1 mm in at least
two dimensions cannot be handled reliably. Figure 8.29 shows an example of a
progressive tool and linked parts.
Not only does the production system need to be designed, but also the parts
have to be designed for linkage production. The selection of the right material is of
great importance. Moreover economic restrictions like a lot size of more than 2.5
million parts a year have to be taken into account.
Fig. 8.28 Ladder linked parts
Fig. 8.29 Progressive tool and micro parts linkage [tyco electronics]
8
Machines and Handling
339

8.3.3.2 Synchronization of Linked Parts
The adjustment and synchronization of multistage manufacturing systems is a
great challenge in micro production. By using different technologies, different set-
up times have to be coordinated. Moreover ramp up losses have to be minimized
and process reliabilities have to be maximized.
When manufacturing the linkage, structure procedural requirements and
restrictions like accessibility, holding forces and clamp forces, the forming zone
itself, axial material ﬂow and many more have to be taken into account. It is
important to synchronize good parts using linkages, for example within assembly
stations. Hence, a big challenge during manufacturing and transportation is the
synchronization of the different processes [23]. Compared to one-stage process, the
planning and coordination efforts are higher. Examples are the planning of the lot
size and assembly sequence. Poor planning and coordination worsen the pro-
cessing time. Since the development of analytic models is a key function in the
coordination of material ﬂow, it has a great practical value [3].
Nonetheless, the advantages of linking parts outweigh the disadvantages, as
well as the planning and coordination efforts. These efforts are proﬁtable, espe-
cially for products that have to be produced in large lot sizes with the involvement
of several manufacturing processes.
Technical solutions for the synchronization of movements already exist. There
are controlled and regulated systems to mechanically balance assembly objects and
convey parts. Mechanical synchronization of conveying systems, handling systems
and objects are realized by form ﬁt connections or by force ﬁt connections.
Controlled synchronization is achievable by specifying the nominal values for the
conveying direction and handling direction, whereas regulated synchronization
accounts for additional relative derivations. It is very important to adhere to the
synchronization distance, integration methods, synchronization principles and
synchronization run [26].
8.3.3.3 Strategies for the Extraction of Scrap Parts from Linked Parts
Defect parts in micro production become a problem, because of their potential to
jeopardize process reliability. They can stick to the tools because of van der Waals
forces and damage other tools and parts. In precision mechanical engineering, where
an exact orientation and a precise position are vital, defects are time and cost critical.
A possibility to avoid these problems and to only supply good parts is to
separate the defects from the linkage. But ladder linked parts and line linked parts
can lose connection by the use of cutting operations. Connection has to be restored
by adequate joining measures. A great challenge is to cut and rejoin without
deformation, because tolerances are of only a few lm. In addition, maintaining of
the position during cutting and assembly processes and repositioning after cutting
are other important factors to be taken into account. Positional changes cause
imprecision in the subsequent process, and in the worst case more defects.
340
B. Kuhfuss

The ﬁrst option for removing scrap parts from linkages is to separate defective
parts without breaking the connection of the linkages. This option is shown in
Fig. 8.30. Tolerances of a product are affected by the accuracy of positioning in
handling. Exact positioning, however, is very difﬁcult because of the small
dimensions of the parts. Otherwise it is convenient that the distances between the
parts and their orientation remain unaltered. Another disadvantage is that a gap
emerges at the linkage. Gaps are weak spots. In the case of cracking of the linkage
because of material failure, gaps can cause standstills within the process chain.
Even more problematic is that at the following process step a part may be missing
for an assembly operation. This has to be considered when programming the
machine control.
A second possibility is to shorten the linkage (Fig. 8.30(r.)). The predeﬁned
distances between the parts can be ensured by separating broken parts, including
their carrier medium, from the linkage. Thus the complexity of control engi-
neering, data handling and sensor systems of the following process steps are
reduced. The number of process steps for the separation and rejoining of the
linkage at one processing station is challenging.
Two alternatives for rejoining linkages are shown in Fig. 8.31. Either the two
ends of the linkage are positioned edge-to-edge and are rejoined by a welding
operation, or they are joined overlapping by a forming operation. Cutting and
rejoining of the linkages is a durable solution to deal with defects. Efforts in
handling during the following process steps, especially in long process chains, are
reduced.
8.3.4 Accuracies and Tolerances in Micro Handling
Micro production is confronted with high process variability and an increased
signiﬁcance of measurement uncertainty in relation to tight tolerance speciﬁcations
[9]. The consideration of these tolerances and accuracies in micro production is an
element of holistic balancing of part features and process characteristics. They
play an important role in micro handling. In micro production and handling a trend
towards rising accuracy is recognizable, depending on the application. In recent
years the range lies between 0.01 and 20 lm [1].
Fig. 8.30 Cutting principles without losing connection (l.) with loss of connection (r.)
8
Machines and Handling
341

Using precision robots as an example, the handling accuracy has to be very
precise. But, the accuracy of mechanical precision robots is limited. Often dis-
turbing inﬂuences like fabrication defects, friction, thermal expansion or control
errors play a greater role in disturbance than in the macro world. Regular main-
tenance and calibration activities need greater efforts than in the macro scale,
which makes them more expensive [4].
Nonetheless, gripping operations achieve an adequate accuracy when using self
centering principles. Also sensor systems for readjustments are realizable. In cases
where the functionality of a micro product depends on the correct distance and the
correct orientation of parts of an assembly group, the accuracy of the distances is
very important. An example is the retention of distance and parallelism between
two slides. DIN 7157 deﬁnes tolerance zones according to the dimensions of the
part. Tolerance zones also become smaller when the part dimensions become
smaller. Thus, challenges in manufacturing precision increase when part sizes
shrink. That means that part dimensions in the millimeter range use or need
tolerances in the micro range. But, deﬁning tolerances for micro products is
restrained by physical limits. Tolerances cannot be reduced by the same per-
centage as part dimensions. Furthermore, particularly at ﬁts the surface roughness
has an increasing impact [18].
These examples show that the standards for the macro range cannot be used
unrestricted in the micro range. Hence, presently tolerances in micro production
planning, and thus for micro handling, have to be deﬁned for every individual case.
References
1. Alting, L., Kimura, F., Hansen, H.N., Bissacco, G.: Micro engineering. CIRP Ann. Manufact.
Technol. 52(2), 635–657 (2003)
2. Ansel, Y., Schmitz, F., Kunz, S., Gruber, H.P., Popovic, G.: Development of tools for
handling and assembling microcomponents. J. Micromech. Microeng. 12, 430–437 (2002)
3. Boeck De, L., Vandaele, N.: Coordination and synchronization of material ﬂows in supply
chains—An analytical approach. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 116(2), 199–207 (2008)
Fig. 8.31 Joining principles without (l.) and with (r.) overlapping
342
B. Kuhfuss

4. van Brussel, H., Peirs, J., Reynaerts, D., Delchambre, A., Reinhart, G., Roth, N., Weck, M.,
Zussmann, E.: Assembly of microsystems. CIRP Ann. Manufact. Technol. 49(2), 451–472
(2000)
5. Burisch, A., Raatz, A., Hesselbach, J.: Strategies and devices for a modular desktop factory.
In: International Precision Assembly Seminar (IPAS 2008), Boston, pp. 337–344 (2008)
6. Burisch, A., Raatz, A.: Challenges of miniaturized robots and machine elements for desktop
factory applications. In: 7th International Workshop on Microfactories (IWMF 2010),
Daejeon, pp. 100–105 (2011)
7. Claverley, J.D., Sheu, D.-Y., Burisch, A., Leach, R.K., Raatz, A.: Assembly of a novel
MEMS-based 3D vibrating micro-scale co-ordinate measuring machine probe using desktop
factory automation. In: International Symposium on Assembly and Manufacturing (ISAM
2011), Tampere (2011)
8. Ellwood, J., Burisch, A., Schöttler, K., Pokar, G., Raatz, A., Hesselbach, J.: Size-adapted
manipulation robots for microassembly. In: Büttgenbach, S., Burisch, A., Hesselbach, J (eds.)
Manufacturing of Active Microsystems, Microtechnology and MEMS Series, Springer,
pp. 269–286 (2011)
9. Fleischer, J., Lanza, G., Schlipf, M.: Statistical quality control in micro-manufacturing
through multivariate l-EWMA chart. CIRP Ann. Manufact. Technol. 57(1), 451–472 (2008)
10. Fleischer, J., Herder, S., Leberle, U.: Automated supply of micro parts based on the micro
slide conveying principle. CIRP Ann. Manufact. Technol. 60(1), 13–16 (2011)
11. Grutzeck, L., Kiesewetter, L.: Downscaling of grippers for micro assembly. Microsystems
Technol. 8, 27–31 (2002)
12. Hess, A.: Piezo-hydraulischer Aktor für die Mikrobearbeitung von Metallen, Berichte aus
dem Institut für Konstruktion und Fertigung in der Feinwerktechnik, Dissertation, Universität
Stuttgart (2002)
13. Hesselbach, J., Wrege, J., Raatz, A.: Mikromontage. In: Lotter, B., Wiendahl, H.-P (eds.)
Montage in Der Industriellen Produktion, Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,
pp. 463–482 (2006)
14. Hesse, S.: Greifertechnik: Effektoren für Roboter und Automaten. Hanser München (2011)
15. Kuhfuß, B., Moumi, E., Tracht, K., Weikert, F., Vollertsen, F., Stephen, A.: Process chains in
microforming technology using scaling effects. In: Menary, G. (ed.) 14th International
ESAFORM Conference on Material Forming (ESAFORM 2011), Belfast, pp. 535–540 (2011)
16. Lotter, B., Wiendahl, H.-P.: Montage in der industriellen Produktion. Springer, New York
(2006)
17. Paldan, N.A., Arentoft, M., Eriksen, R.S.: Production equipment and processes for bulk
formed micro components, ESAFORM MS6-6 (2007)
18. Pokar, G.: Untersuchung zum Einsatz von Ebenen Parallelrobotern in der Mikromontage.
Vulkan Verlag, Essen (2004)
19. Saotome, Y., Inoue, A.: New amorphous alloys as micromaterials and the processing
technologies. In: Proceedings of IEEE, pp. 288–293 (2000)
20. Schepp, F.: Linearmotorgetriebene Pressen für die Stanztechnik, Berichte aus Produktion und
Umformtechnik, Dissertation, Shaker Verlag, Aachen (2002)
21. Schulze Niehoff, H., Vollertsen, F.: Versatile micro forming press. In: Proceedings 2nd
ICNFT, BIAS Verlag, Bremen, pp. 167–176 (2007)
22. Schulze
Niehoff,
H.:
Entwicklung
Einer
Hochdynamischen,
zweifachwirkenden
Mikroumformpresse, Dissertation, University of Bremen, BIAS Verlag (2008)
23. Tracht, K.; Schenck, C.; Weikert, F.; Kuhfuß, B.: Conveyance of micro-cold-formed parts in
a linkage. WT Werkstattstechnik Online, 100, 11/12 (2010) 864–868
24. Tracht, K., Weikert, F., Hanke, T., Kuhfuß, B., Hellwig, C.: Modeling of linked parts in
microforming. WT Werkstattstechnik Online, vol. 101, 11/12, pp. 765–769 (2011)
25. Vandaele, V., Lambert, P., Delchambre, A.: Non-contact handling in microassembly:
Acoustical levitation. Precis. Eng. 29, 491–505 (2005)
26. Werner, J.: Methoden zur roboterbasierten förderbandsynchronen Fließmontage am Beispiel
der Automobilindustrie. Herbert Utz Verlag, München (2009)
8
Machines and Handling
343

Chapter 9
Simulation Technologies
Peter Maaß
Latin
apc
Depth of cut (lm)
apc
1 , apc
2
Given depth of cut (lm)
apc
act(t)
Real depth of cut (lm)
apc
var
Variation of the depth of cut (lm)
apca
Optimal depth of cut (lm)
apca
1
Optimal depth of cut for apc
1 (lm)
apca
2
Optimal depth of cut for apc
2 (lm)
Dapc
Difference between the given apc
1 und apc
2 ,
the height of the ramp (lm)
a, b
Parameters that describe the stochastic spread of the grain
orientations around a basic orientation
B
Force coefﬁcient
C
Stiffness matrix (MPa)
C
Stiffness matrix of polycristal (GPa)
c
Stiffness matrix of monocrystal (GPa)
F
Force (N)
Fo
Surface force (N)
Ft, Fr, Fax,
Force in tangential, radial and axial direction (N)
Fx, Fy, Fz
Resulting force in three orthogonal directions x, y and z (N)
F*
Vector of three force components (N)
f
Body forces (N/m3)
g, g0, ~g
Rotation
P. Maaß (&)
Zentrum für Technomathematik, Universität Bremen, Bremen, Germany
e-mail: pmaass@math.uni-bremen.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_9,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
345

hc
Chip thickness (mm)
i
Refraction index
j
Number of cutting edges
k
Number of small independent rotations
lh
Height of the holder (mm)
Lq
Lebesgue saces
m
Function
n
Rotational speed of the tool [Hz (1/s)]
q
Parameters
t
Time (s)
v
Velocity (mm/s)
vf
Feed velocity (mm/min)
vf
act
Current feed velocity (mm/s)
w
Acement/deformation vector (m)
x
Coordinate in x-direction (mm)
y
Coordinate in y-direction (mm)
z
Coordinate in z-direction (mm)
Greek
A
Operator
a
Regularisation parameter
c
run out angle [ (deg)]
d
Deﬂection (lm)
dt, dr, dax
Deﬂection in radial, tangential and axial
direction (lm)
dv
Virtual displacement (m)
D
Difference (lm)
Dx
Length of the ramp (mm)
e
strain tensor
e, eel, ein
Strain tensors
exx,eyy,ezz,exy,exz,eyz
strain tensor components
f
orthogonal basis
h1, h2, h3
Euler angle (rad)
g
run out vector (lm)
gx
Run out vector in x direction (lm)
gy
Run out vector in y direction (lm)
t
variable
n
Integration variable
q
Density (kg/m3)
r
Stress tensor (MPa)
rij
components of stress tensor (MPa)
r
Averaged Stress tensor in RVE (MPa)
346
P. Maaß

U
Penalty functional
/
accumulated plastic strain
u
Rotational angle [ (Deg)]
X
Rotation matrix
9.1 FEM-Simulation
Jonathan Montalvo-Urquizo and Alfred Schmidt
9.1.1 Mechanical Models for Micro Metal Forming
Based on the physical principle of the conservation of momentum, the linear
elastic deformation of a solid body is described by the time dependent or stationary
elasticity equation
qutt  divðrÞ ¼ f
or
 divðrÞ ¼ f
ð9:1Þ
in the body’s three-dimensional domain X; subject to (initial and) boundary
conditions. Here, u depicts the deformation vector, f the body forces, and r ¼
ðrijÞ; i; j 2 f1; 2; 3g the stress tensor. For stationary situations, the ﬁrst term on the
left hand side vanishes.
Material laws describe the relationship between deformations and stresses. In
the linear elastic model, the stress tensor can be described using Hooke’s law as a
linear relation between the stiffness and strain tensors. Denoting the strain tensor
as e ¼ ekl
ð
Þ; k; l 2 f1; 23g; this relationship can be expressed by the tensor
equation:
rij ¼ Cijklekl :¼
X
3
k;l¼1
Cijklekl
ð9:2Þ
where C ¼ Cijkl


; i; j; k; l 2 1; 2; 3
f
g is the elasticity or stiffness tensor. Due to
symmetry, the strain and stress tensors only have six independent entries which
can be denoted as r11; r22; r33; r23; r13; r12; using the indices
1; 2; 3
f
g; to refer to
the X, Y and Z coordinates. Using these components, a matrix–vector notation can
be used instead of the tensor notation. The expression above can now be written:
r ¼ Ce
ð9:3Þ
where r and e are now vectors in R6 and C is the stiffness matrix in R6  6: Again,
the matrix C is symmetric and only has 21 independent entries.
For special materials, the stiffness matrix C only has 12 non-zero entries which
can be computed from only nine, three, or even two independent elasticity con-
stants. These special matrix forms correspond to the cases of orthotropic, cubic,
9
Simulation Technologies
347

and isotropic materials, respectively. For isotropic materials, the stiffness can be
computed from the modulus of elasticity E and the lateral contraction ratio m (or, in
other notation, from the two Lamé constants). In macroscopic situations, the
elastic behavior of a metal workpiece can typically be well described by an iso-
tropic material law, and the corresponding elasticity constants can be determined
by simple experimental setups.
When one looks very closely, as in the case of micro components, the local
mechanical behavior of a piece of metal is typically not isotropic. This is due to
the fact that solid metal atoms are arranged in a crystal lattice of e.g., cubic type,
and the elastic behavior in the lattice directions is different to behavior in non-
lattice directions. Thus the local elastic behavior is typically anisotropic, and this
anisotropy is, except for a very small and negligible deviation, constant inside each
metal grain.
Due to the fact that there are many different grains in a macroscopic workpiece,
with anisotropies in many different and randomly distributed directions, these
anisotropies average out and the macroscopically observable behavior of the metal
is isotropic. Thus, in the macro scale setting, the effects of the material micro-
structure can typically be neglected, and homogenized, isotropic material behavior
is a good approximation to describe the macroscopic mechanical response of a
workpiece. In special situations (like a material with segregations, etc.), the
assumption of an isotropic response is not enough to describe the macroscopic
behavior with sufﬁcient accuracy, and an anisotropic model must be used even in
the macroscopic scale.
But for micro components, the dimension of the component and the size of
grains might be comparable, and there might be only very few grains, especially in
the transversal direction of a metal foil. An assumption that the local anisotropies
do average out is no longer valid, and the effect of single grains is observable, with
deformations and stresses varying from grain to grain. Thus, the two Lamé con-
stants are not enough to determine the appropriate stiffness matrix C and a more
general material model with typically 6 elasticity constants must be used. The
three elasticity constants for a cubic monocrystal in lattice orientation can be
determined by experiments and give an elasticity matrix c: For a grain with a
general orientation, the stiffness matrix C is then given by the multiplication of the
corresponding rotation matrix g with the matrix c as:
C ¼ gc:
ð9:4Þ
A general three-dimensional rotation can be described by three angles. For this
reason the total number of degrees of freedom for C is six for the case of a cubic
crystal material. For a processed piece of material, like a rolled sheet, typically
some orientations are more probable than others. These preferences in orientation
are described by the texture of the material (compare with Sect. 9.2.1).
Forming processes produce permanent deformations of the workpiece, also
called plastic deformations in material science literature. In a continuum
mechanics model, plastic deformations occur when the elastic stress reaches
348
P. Maaß

values larger than the so-called elastic limit or yield stress ry: In formulas, the
yield stress is given as an upper bound for the equivalent stress, which is the norm
of the stress deviator deﬁned as
r ¼ r  1
3 trace r
ð ÞI;
ð9:5Þ
with I denoting the identity matrix in three dimensions. Using this deﬁnition of
equivalent stress gives the well known ﬂow rule
k r k  rv;
ð9:6Þ
meaning that any stress tensor with a norm over the yield value cannot be a valid
stress. In this case one speaks about material ﬂowing. Material is said to ﬂow as it
undergoes plastic deformation instead of increasing its internal stored stress. In
other words, the creation of plastic strains in the material compensates the stress
level during strong loading.
The yield stress can vary during a plastic deformation process in the presence of
hardening. For isotropic materials, this norm is typically just the von Mises norm.
This is why the equivalent stress is also known as von Mises stress. But for
anisotropic materials, the norm can also be considered anisotropic.
At molecular scale, permanent deformations are generated by the dislocations
of planes in the crystal lattice. When the deformation model respects the orien-
tation of the local crystal lattice, then one may even try to model possible dislo-
cations along various planes and compute plastic deformations in such a manner.
9.1.2 Mathematical Foundations and Numerical
Implementations
Different approaches exist for the numerical approximation of the system of partial
differential equations (PDE)—ﬁnite difference methods, based on the approxi-
mation of derivatives by difference quotients on a structured grid, and ﬁnite ele-
ment methods, based on a (typically piecewise polynomial) approximation of
functions on unstructured meshes (for example using tetrahedral, hexahedral, or
mixed geometric cells). While the ﬁrst one can exploit the grid structure for an
easier, efﬁcient implementation and solution, the latter one offers much more
ﬂexibility in choosing grids, especially for non-rectangular domains and special-
ized function spaces, already incorporating the desired local properties of the
problem solution. Here we will restrict ourselves to the description and presen-
tation of some ﬁnite element methods.
While from a mathematical point of view the derivation of ﬁnite element for-
mulations is based on a weak, variational formulation of the system of partial
differential equations, a mechanical interpretation of this is given by the virtual
work. The virtual work setting considers the problem of ﬁnding the amount of
9
Simulation Technologies
349

work produced by some virtual deformations, which are small variations of the
body’s deformation restricted by e.g. the boundary conditions of the mechanical
system.
For the three-dimensional case of a body at static mechanical equilibrium, one
considers an arbitrary vector-valued displacement function, dv; and calculates the
amount of work in the body. This is the sum of the forces acting in the body times
the corresponding displacement, it is:
Z
X
div r þ f
ð
Þ dv dV ¼ 0:
ð9:7Þ
with the equation being equal to zero as the expression in parenthesis is zero. This
equation can be transformed using the divergence theorem into:
Z
oX
r  dv ds 
Z
X
r  grad dv dV þ
Z
X
fdv dV ¼ 0;
ð9:8Þ
where dX represents the boundary surface and o the traction forces on it. Recalling
the arbitrariness of the virtual displacement dv; we can think of a displacement
increment as a measure of a virtual strain de ¼ rdv
ð
ÞSym: The equation of virtual
work becomes
Z
oX
o  dv dS 
Z
X
r  de dV þ
Z
X
f dv dV ¼ 0:
ð9:9Þ
This last equation is also known as weak formulation in the context of math-
ematical variational methods for which the virtual displacement vector is taken as
a general function belonging to a certain function space, usually of polynomial
type. The numerical solution of the virtual work equation (or the weak formula-
tion) is done by representing the virtual displacement in terms of a basis of the
function space containing it and using this representation to split each term in the
equation as a sum. These sums can be later ordered to form a linear system of the
form
Au ¼ F;
ð9:10Þ
where the elements of the matrix A include the information from the ﬁrst two terms
in Eq. (9.9), and the vector F includes the terms from the last integral.
This solution approach is known as Galerkin method to solve the weak for-
mulation of mechanical equilibrium, and constitutes the theoretical support for the
Finite Element Method (FEM). In practical applications, FEM takes special forms
of the basis functions with local support, so that many of the integrals over
products of basis functions, which are needed to build the linear system, are zero.
This approach results in sparse and well structured matrices for the linear system in
Eq. (9.10) and has major advantages for the efﬁciency of the method.
For the FEM solution of mechanical equilibrium, the expression of stress r in
terms of strains is required. For problems in which the strain levels are very small,
350
P. Maaß

the generalized Hooke’s law for anisotropic elastic behavior fully describes the
relation between strain and stress, but for larger forces and/or deformations this
relation must be described using a decomposition of the strain in an elastic eel
ð
Þ
and an inelastic part ein
ð
Þ: The most common approaches are to decompose the
strain additively as:
e ¼ eel þ ein;
ð9:11Þ
or multiplicatively as:
e ¼ eel ein:
ð9:12Þ
This gives a different form of the weak formulation of the problem, as the
equilibrium equation holds for the elastic part of the strain. Both approaches are
widely used, the additive for problems with small deformation gradients, and the
multiplicative for problems with large deformations, as in the case of forming.
Numerically, the elasto-plastic problem is solved by means of a method of
predictor–corrector type as described in mathematical terms by [1]. A more
practical description of the method’s implementation can be found in [2]. The
predictor–corrector method is applied for a time dependent mechanical problem in
which some forces are applied at every time step. It assumes that all variables of
the mechanical problem are known up to the previous time step, and computes
their evolution in the current time step. The evolution of all variables is updated in
one time step by the following procedure for every single node in the numerical
grid:
1. Initialization Assume that the variables of elastic strain, inelastic strain, and
stress are known for all points in the numerical domain for the simulation, i.e.,
en
el; en
in; rn: Also assume that the values of accumulated plastic strain /n from all
previous time steps have been stored.
2. Elastic predictor The loads of the current time step are applied and the stress
in the current time step is computed using the approximation of the elastic
stress. This produces a prediction for the correct stress assuming that the loads
in the material remain in the elastic range.
3. Flow rule The predicted value is evaluated with the ﬂow rule to decide whether
the value is under or above the yield stress value. This labels the current node
(at the current time step) as elastic or plastic, and decides between one of the
following two stages in the algorithm.
4. Elastic point If the stress prediction is lower or equal than the yield stress, the
time step is declared elastic for the current grid node. Predicted values are then
the correct values and the variables for the current time step can be updated as
rnþ1 ¼ rnþ1
trial;
ð9:13Þ
/nþ1 ¼ /n:
ð9:14Þ
9
Simulation Technologies
351

After the elastic update has been performed for the strain and stress variables,
the calculations at this point are ﬁnished.
5. Plastic point In the contrasting case that the prediction is above the yield stress,
the predicted values must be corrected as any stress above the yield value is not
allowed. This is done by updating it by means of e.g., a Newton–Raphson
scheme [3], giving the values for rnþ1 and /nþ1 which are consistent with the
ﬂow rule. The updating procedure at the node ﬁnishes when the consistent
values have been found. After that, the new values of the variables are stored
and the calculation in this point is ﬁnished.
This point wise update procedure substantially increases the computational
work required when compared to pure elastic simulations. The algorithm is valid
for both the additive and the multiplicative decomposed forms of strain, cf.
Eqs. (9.11) and (9.12). The resulting forms of the equations for both cases, as well
as other types of inelastic material behavior like hyperelasticity or viscoplasticity,
can be found in [4] in a rather mathematical setting, or in [2] with an emphasis on
ideas for computational implementation.
9.1.3 The Role of Different Scales in the Simulation of Micro
Components
When considering metallic micro components, the effects of local differences in
the material properties cannot be neglected. For example, it is usually assumed that
an averaged elastic modulus exists for every metallic material. This idea is based
in the existence of millions of material grains whose properties are smoothed out
to give the averaged modulus.
In the case of micro components, their sizes do not allow the existence of such a
large amount of grains. Differences in the local material properties cause
unavoidable differences in material behavior during the production and use of
micro components. In this sense, every simulation strategy using averaged material
properties will only give a very coarse approximation to the possible behavior of
any micro component.
In order to illustrate this idea, the simulation of deformation on a piece of steel
foil (type DC01, thickness 50 lm) has been performed for a test case of pressure
under the foil. Figure 9.1 shows the discrepancy between the deformation obtained
via a simulation with the stiffness averaged value and another simulation using
realistic assumptions on the local properties. It can be observed how the slight
stiffness variations cause discrepancies of up to 0.14 lm all over the foil piece.
The local stiffness has been chosen using the texture properties of the DC01 foil
(cf. Sect. 9.2). This result illustrates the necessity of considering local differences
in the material properties, which can produce relatively large differences in the
material responses at the micro components’ scale.
352
P. Maaß

9.1.4 Multi-Scale Finite Element Methods
The special features of micro components necessitate a simulation strategy which
not only includes the component scale but also the scale of its single crystals.
A common approach to simulate problems in multiple scales is the so-called FEn
method, based on the theory of mathematical homogenization, and its corre-
sponding two-scale version FE2 as presented in e.g., [5].
The FE2 method solves problems in which information on two different scales
must be included. The ﬁrst scale corresponds to the component under consider-
ation and the second corresponds to the scale where information about the single
crystals is used. The main idea is to consider a FEM-simulation in the ﬁrst scale in
which the material properties at each integration point are obtained via the com-
putation of an embedded FEM-simulation in the second scale. In computational
mechanics literature the ﬁrst and second scales are referred to as ‘‘macro’’ and
‘‘micro’’ scales, respectively. These names are not used here to avoid confusion in
the context of micro components.
In practice, the ﬁrst and second scales correspond to the component and the so-
called representative volume element (RVE), respectively. The RVE consists of a
volume of material small enough to avoid any smoothing of the local properties,
and large enough to include at least several single material crystals. It is important
for the method that the component geometry in the ﬁrst scale can be described as
periodic repetition of many RVEs [6]. Thus geometrical periodicity must be
considered while constructing any descriptor of the RVE domain.
The FE2 method has been successfully applied to problems of materials in two-
phases, foams or materials with pores. In these applications the RVE is often
constructed as a small volume made of the base material with an inclusion of the
second material in the center. The proportional volume fractions or the amount of
pores per unit volume are used to determine the precise size of the inclusion in the
base material.
The coupling between the ﬁrst and the second scale is performed via so-called
localization and homogenization steps:
200 µm
[µm]
0.1402
0.12
0.08
0.04
0
y
x
Fig. 9.1 Euclidian norm of
the deformation’s difference
computed using averaged
stiffness’ values umean
ð
Þ and
computed using a stochastic
realization of randomly-
chosen stiffness’
variations ur
ð
Þ
9
Simulation Technologies
353

• During localization, for every integration point in the ﬁrst scale, the variables
are passed to the second scale as boundary conditions to the FEM-simulation.
The solution of the FEM-simulation in the second scale produces the local
material response, with all detailed features like grain geometries and lattice
orientations. The results of this simulation fully describe the variables in the
continuous domain of the second scale.
In the case of mechanical problems, it is common to take values for strain at a
point of the ﬁrst scale and to pass them to the second scale as deformations.
Furthermore, these deformations are applied to the outer boundary of a small
volume around the point under consideration, i.e., the RVE at this point.
• Once the variable values in the second scale have been obtained, they can be
homogenized through an integration process over the RVE geometry and passed
as local responses for the current integration point in the ﬁrst scale. With this
step, the responses of the second scale can be transformed in punctual values for
the simulation of the ﬁrst scale.
The method is named FE2 due to the fact that for every integration point in the
ﬁrst scale, a complete simulation in the second scale must be performed. Although
FE2 methods are in general well suited to solve problems with different scales, they
have the drawback of being computationally expensive. The large amount of FEM-
simulations required to get one simulation in the ﬁrst scale is often calculated with
tailor-made parallel implementations, making neither of these solutions portable
nor easy to use. An alternative to these expensive computations is the material
characterization for the second scale via a large set of RVE conﬁgurations.
9.1.5 Computations in the Second Scale
For mechanical problems in micro components, calculations at the second scale
(i.e., the crystal aggregate with only few material grains) need the solution of the
localization problem in the RVE geometry.
The amount of grains ﬁtting inside a RVE for metallic materials can be obtained
from experimental measurements of the grain size and, if available, from certain
approximations of grain size distributions [6]. For example, one could consider
larger grains close to the upper and lower boundaries by assuming a distribution of
grain seeds with higher density in the vertical middle plane. For a given number
and distribution of single grains, the location of their centers can be stochastically
generated and the grain shapes can be constructed in form of a Voronoi tessellation
of the RVE [6].
In order to fulﬁll the strong homogenization assumption of periodicity in the
RVE, the creation of randomly located grains must be implemented with this
consideration. This allows the creation of RVE geometries of cubic shape in which
the grains at any boundary are not only cut, but the sliced part appears in the
opposite boundary, giving to any aggregate a perfect periodic structure.
354
P. Maaß

The periodicity is implemented by placing ghost grains outside the RVE in
periodic locations to each generated grain center (for X and Y periodic RVEs each
grain has eight copies whose centers lie outside the RVE). Figure 9.2 shows two
examples of RVE geometries and Fig. 9.3 shows some grains belonging to the ﬁrst
RVE. These geometries have been constructed for the DC01 foil with a thickness
of 50 lm and include the periodicities of a foil in the X and Y directions, while the
vertical direction is not periodic.
Local differences among the single crystals are determined by their stiffness
values. This causes the different regions in the RVE to have a stronger/weaker
reaction when mechanical loads are applied. The stiffness at each crystal can be
determined using its lattice orientations and thus can be easily connected to
concepts at the grain scale like texture (cf. Sect. 9.2).
Once the geometries and grain orientations are given for a RVE, all possible
local material responses can be examined. For this, each single crystal in the RVE
is endowed with its own mechanical properties. In this form, the stiffness through
the material is constant in every crystal, but differs among the different crystals.
The space-dependent stiffness matrix of the complete RVE-geometry can then be
described as:
C x
ð Þ ¼ C jð Þ;
ð9:15Þ
for x inside the jth crystal. j represents the crystal index this relation can be used
for any point x ¼ ðX; Y; ZÞ inside the domain.
The local modal responses of the material can be determined in the elastic case
by deforming the geometry of the RVE and analyzing the stress results in the
interior [7]. It is well known that the grain’s lattices can strongly inﬂuence the
stress level, which depends on whether or not they are aligned with the direction of
the loads.
Figure 9.4 shows the stress responses obtained for the second RVE example in
Fig. 9.2 for the cases in which the aggregate has an elongation in the X direction
and shear in the XZ plane. These responses are two of the six possible aggregate
z
y
x
z y
x
Fig. 9.2 Examples of representative volume elements. The geometries are constructed with
periodic boundaries in the X and Y directions. The RVE geometries are constructed as cubes, with
a diameter 50 lm
9
Simulation Technologies
355

responses for the RVE and are obtained by solving the boundary value problem for
elasticity.
div r x
ð Þ
ð
Þ ¼ 0;
in X
ð9:16Þ
u x
ð Þ ¼ Mx;
on oX
ð9:17Þ
with x and u being the 3D coordinates and the displacement vector, and with the
stress at point x deﬁned in the anisotropic form
r x
ð Þ ¼ C x
ð Þe x
ð Þ;
ð9:18Þ
with the stiffness matrix deﬁned as in Eq. (9.15).
Note that the boundary condition on oX assigns a ﬁxed outer shape to the RVE
and this causes different responses (or levels of stress) in the RVE’s grains. The
y
z
x
y
z
x
Fig. 9.3 Grains inside a RVE geometry with cuts due to periodicity. Left examples of grains with
periodical cut in the X direction (red), with periodical cut in the Y direction (green), and with
periodical cut in the X and Y directions (blue). Also shown is an internal grain without cuts
(yellow). Right Periodicity idea, example of a grain with Y periodicity
von Mises stress [MPa]
von Mises stress [MPa]
x
z
y
z
x
y
40
38
44
48
54
52
108
105
112
116 120
125
124
Fig. 9.4 Stress results for tension in the X direction (left) and shear in the XY plane (right) of the
same aggregate. The deformation of 1 % in the aggregate is scaled by a factor of 40 to improve
visualization
356
P. Maaß

symmetric matrix M determines the speciﬁc form of the Dirichlet boundary
condition on the aggregate geometry and is, for the cases of tension in the
X direction and shear in the XZ plane, equal to
Mxx ¼
n
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
@
1
A; and Mxz ¼
0
0
n
0
0
0
n
0
0
0
@
1
A;
ð9:19Þ
with n denoting the amount of strain applied.
Due to symmetry, there are only six possible boundary conditions or modes to
force the RVE, each of them determined by the corresponding matrix Mij  Mji for
i; j 2 x; y; z
f
g: Solving the boundary problem, Eqs. (9.16–9.17), for each of these
six modes provides information on the response of the aggregate for all possible
loads. Furthermore, any elastic load in the boundary of the RVE can be decom-
posed in a weighted sum of modal responses [7]. This idea allows the direct
connection with the two-scale methods as it provides a more efﬁcient way of
computing the solution of the micro problem after localization.
The colors in Fig. 9.4 shows the resulting stresses from tension and shear
applied to the second RVE in Fig. 9.2, with grain stiffness matrices taken from a
texture model (cf. Sect. 9.2.1). It can be observed how the grain geometry in
combination with the local stiffness determines how low/high the grain is stressed
by applying different forms of load on the aggregate. Here, both strains applied to
deform the boundary used n ¼ 0:01; i.e., 1 % of deformation.
Following the ideas of an FE2 method, the next step after the RVE solution
(second scale) has been computed is homogenization. For this, the local material
responses are concentrated and passed towards the component simulation (ﬁrst
scale). This is done for the loading modes on the aggregate by calculating the six
averaged stress tensors, each of them having the form:
rij ¼
1
RVE
j
j
Z
RVE
rij x
ð Þdx;
i; j 2 1; 2; 3
f
g:
ð9:20Þ
Based on the six averaged tensors, the overall response of the RVE can be
described in a compact form, including all local variations in both geometric
features and stiffness values of every single crystal. The components of the
complete stress tensor for the second RVE in Fig. 9.2 are presented Table 9.1.
9.1.6 Crystal Plasticity Methods
In recent years there has been a strong impulse to include the plastic effects
occurring in the material crystals. One of the most successful approaches to this
idea is the so called Crystal Plasticity Finite Element Method [3].
The method is also based on a mathematical homogenization idea, with
information on the plastic behavior of the single-crystals or crystal aggregates. The
9
Simulation Technologies
357

Table 9.1 Example of averaged stress values for one RVE under tension and shear using n ¼ 0:01
Load
Stress averaged response (MPa)
r11
r22
r33
r12
r13
r23
Tension
X
1.1715e ? 02
5.8548e - 03
2.8693e - 05
6.9091e - 03
5.3393e - 03
1.6665e - 03
Y
-4.6613e - 03
1.1770e ? 02
5.6218e - 03
1.1592e - 02
4.4307e - 04
6.7174e - 03
Z
1.5965e - 02
3.8249e - 03
1.1132e ? 02
-1.8502e - 02
-5.7823e - 03
-8.3840e - 03
Shear
XY
-3.0888e - 02
-1.6751e - 02
-7.9883e - 02
2.1888e ? 01
-1.8264e - 02
-5.0730e - 03
XZ
-2.4071e - 02
-9.5225e - 03
-4.2720e - 02
-2.7222e - 02
2.5440e ? 01
-8.3064e - 03
YZ
-2.8429e - 02
-1.7819e - 02
-8.1874e - 02
-1.0655e - 02
-1.1786e - 02
2.5468e ? 01
358
P. Maaß

FEM-simulation in the component scale is performed using a multiplicative
decomposition of the deformation gradient and a special form of the material law.
The material law contains a submodel for the determination of the deformation
behavior of the grains at each integration point using a crystal plasticity model.
The crystal plasticity model, as presented in [3], accounts for plastic defor-
mations arising from crystallographic slip at the lattice level and also for lattice
rotation due to the deformation itself. For fcc and bcc metals, the crystal plasticity
model considers 12 and 48 slip systems, respectively. The number of slip systems
is a direct effect of the main orientations present in fcc and bcc materials.
Once the amount of plastic deformation in the crystal scale has been homog-
enized, the elasto-plastic simulation in the ﬁrst scale is performed. This is done
with the usual predictor–corrector strategy (cf. Sect. 9.1.2), where the component
scale variables for the elastic deformation gradient, plastic deformation gradient,
and stress tensor are updated. The inputs for the update algorithm are the results
from the crystal plasticity model, where the main variables are the shear rate and
the plastic velocity gradient.
9.2 Hybrid Simulation
Jonathan Montalvo-Urquizo, Pavel Bobrov and Werner Brannath
9.2.1 Stochastic Model for Textured Metals
The mathematical and numerical investigation of material anisotropy and its
effects on the elasto-plastic behavior of polycrystals has been a topic of interest for
about 100 years [3]. Recent research aims at understanding the effect of stochastic
ﬂuctuations of the micro-structure in small scale specimens. For quasi-isotropic
material, the averages of elastic constants can be approximated by analytical
expressions [8]. However, the forming process usually induces a texture and leads
to an anisotropic distribution of crystalline orientations. The characterization of
anisotropic polycrystals requires numerical solutions which are usually based on
Finite Element (FE) Methods [9].
This and the following sections describe how the statistical distribution of
elastic properties of anisotropic micro components can be incorporated into FE
methods. The focus here is on methods that account for the effects of the stochastic
ﬂuctuations in the micro-structure of the material, while external process condi-
tions like tension and shear forces are assumed to be constant. Methods that also
account for ﬂuctuations in external input parameters like those in [10] have not yet
been considered in the context of micro cold forming.
A polycrystal consists of monocrystalline grains that can vary in their orien-
tations. If all orientations are equiprobable then the polycrystal is called quasi-
isotropic. But for most specimens the orientations show a concentration around
9
Simulation Technologies
359

basic directions due to the rolling of material during the production of metal
sheets. In this case the polycrystal material has a texture. The texture of rolled steel
and many other materials consist of ﬁbers [11]. Each ﬁber corresponds to a ﬁnite
set of basic orientations that arise from the production process (rolling, recrys-
tallizations, etc.) (cf. Sect. 3.1). The orientations of the monocrystallites do not
perfectly follow the basic orientations, but are statistically distributed around the
directions of the texture.
The orientation of a monocrystal in the polycrystal specimen can be described
by the rotation which maps the coordinate system of the specimen on the mono-
crystalline coordinate system. This rotation can be mathematically modeled as
~g ¼ gg0;
ð9:21Þ
where g0 represents the basic directions determined by the material’s production
process (e.g., the orientation of the ﬁbers resulting from a rolling process on metal
sheets) and g is a random small rotation describing the stochastic variation in the
grain orientation. The orientations’ statistical distribution is of importance in
mirco-metal specimens which can consist of only few monocrystalline grains in at
least one direction of the specimen. The statistical ﬂuctuations of the orientations
then have an effect on the elastic and plastic properties of the sample.
The elastic properties in each point of the polycrystalline material depend on
the orientation of the monocrystal at this point [12]. We denote here the stiffness
matrices in the single-grain reference system and in the global reference system by
c and C; respectively. These two matrices are related as:
C ¼ gg0c;
ð9:22Þ
with g and g0 as deﬁned above. Hence, the statistical distribution of the orienta-
tions g causes a statistical distribution of the stiffness tensor C.
To build a stochastic model for the specimen we need to determine the sta-
tistical distribution for the orientations. Assuming that the statistical ﬂuctuation g
of the grain orientations arises from many small and independent perturbations
during the production process, a normal distribution seems to be a reasonable
approximation. This normal approximation is based on Parthasarathy’s central
limit theorem [13]. The limiting normal distribution is not the usual normal dis-
tribution on the real numbers. It is a distribution on the rotation group. More
information about this type of normal distributions can be found in [14].
According to Parthasarathy’s central limit theorem, the normal distribution on
the rotation group can be approximated by a large number of identically distrib-
uted and independently acting small stochastic rotations. One can, for instance,
follow [14] and use small rotations that are uniformly distributed on the subsets.
P a; b
ð
Þ ¼
h1; h2; h3
ð
Þ :
h2  aﬃﬃﬃ
k
p ;
h1 þ h3
j
j  bﬃﬃﬃ
k
p


ð9:23Þ
360
P. Maaß

of the space of Euler angles h1; h2; h3
ð
Þ: Here k is the number of small independent
rotations applied. The parameters a and b describe the stochastic spread of the
orientations around the basic direction. Given a and b; the distribution of crys-
tallite orientations can be determined by a Monte-Carlo simulation. It is sufﬁcient
to simulate the distribution for a single basic direction. For other basic orientations
the distribution can be obtained by rotating the generated distribution towards the
actual direction.
The distribution of the orientations from the stochastic simulation can be
compared to the real orientations of the crystallites in the polycrystalline by pole
ﬁgures and the orientation distribution functions (ODFs) [11]. The pole ﬁgures of a
polycrystal can be obtained by X-ray diffraction (XRD) [9]. As an example, here
we consider DC01. A similar investigation for aluminum can be found in [7]. The
analysis of an empirical ODF from experiments for DC01 shows that for this
material the orientations are dominated by a- and c-ﬁbers [15]. Orientations from
other ﬁbers are barely visible. The pole ﬁgure from the stochastic simulation with
a- and c-ﬁbers is shown in Fig. 9.5. The empirical distribution of DC01 was found
to be best reproduced with a 7:3 ratio between the a- and c-ﬁbers.
For a more precise ﬁtting of the model parameters to the empirical data, the ﬁrst
ODF can be used, taking the angle values h1 ¼ 0; h3 ¼ 45. This corresponds to
the density plot shown in Fig. 9.6. The plot shows how both ﬁbers are well
represented by comparing the empirical and simulated distribution of the Euler
angle h2. The h2 angles at which the a- and c-ﬁbers occur are denoted by vertical
lines.
Using the parameters derived from the comparison between simulated and
observed pole ﬁgure and ODFs, one can generate the distribution of the stiffness or
compliance tensor from the distribution of the orientations in Eq. (9.22).
TD
RD
Fig. 9.5 3D plot of the
simulated 110-pole ﬁgure for
steel DC01 with two ﬁbers.
RD and TD denote the rolling
and traversal directions,
respectively
9
Simulation Technologies
361

9.2.2 Stochastic Two-Scale FEM
The stochastic model from Sect. 9.2.1 can be used in a numerical simulation for a
component which is produced by micro metal forming. The goal is to account for
the effects of the stochastic ﬂuctuations in the orientation and geometry of single
grains in the component.
Using the ideas of the two-scale methods presented in Sect. 9.1, it is possible to
implement a two-scale method for the simulation of material response including
some stochastic models in the second scale [12]. In this context, the ﬁrst scale
corresponds to the whole component under consideration and the second one
corresponds to the scale of the RVE. In computational mechanics literature the ﬁrst
and second scales are referred to as ‘‘macro’’ and ‘‘micro’’ scales, respectively.
These names are not used here to avoid confusion in the context of micro
components.
The main difference to a conventional two-scale FEM is the stochastic nature of
the material properties inside the representative volume element (RVE) [12]. The
aggregate of several grains forming the RVE, as deﬁned in Sect. 9.1, includes two
main sources of randomness which must be considered: the geometric shapes of
the mono-crystalline grains and the orientations of the single-grain lattices. An-
isotropies arising from these random sources are computationally tracked with the
numerical meshing for the RVE geometry, and the varying stiffness tensors for the
different grains obtained from the stochastic texture model.
The stiffness matrix C in the RVE domain with n grains can be described as a
function of the position inside the domain (cf. Sect. 9.1). Using the texture model
from the previous section, this function is:
C x
ð Þ ¼ C jð Þ;
j ¼ 1; . . .; n;
ð9:24Þ
0
0.000
0.010
0.020
0.030
Density
20
40
60
80
Fig. 9.6 Distributions from
the stochastic simulation
(solid line) and XRD-method
(dotted line) of the Euler
angle h2 when h1 ¼ 0 and
h3 ¼ 45. Vertical lines
indicate different components
of the ﬁbers
362
P. Maaß

where j represents the index of the grain and x is a point inside the domain, i.e.,
x ¼ ðX; Y; ZÞ: Each matrix C jð Þ can be described with the orientation of the
corresponding ﬁber component and a random small rotation, as explained in Sect.
9.2.1. With this stiffness, the values of stress at any point in the RVE can be
computed using Hooke’s law as r x
ð Þ ¼ C x
ð ÞeðxÞ and then homogenized with the
integrals of the form
rij ¼
1
RVE
j
j
Z
RVE
rij x
ð Þdx;
i; j 2 1; 2; 3
f
g:
ð9:25Þ
Computing and storing the homogenized tensors can describe the individual
response of a RVE when loads are applied. The randomness of grain geometries
and lattice orientations are captured by the stochastic texture model and the ran-
dom generation of crystal centers.
Via repeated computations on different randomly generated material realiza-
tions, we arrive at what we call a Material Library. This provides a discrete
approximation of all possible responses of a material under elastic loads. The idea
of this library is that every computation in the homogenization step of a two-scale
FEM method can be easily obtained by mapping a given strain tensor into a
volume averaged stress which now has a stochastic form, instead of a deterministic
one as the classical FE2 method presented in Sect. 9.1.
With a Material Library, every stress calculation in the RVE scale is reduced to
a simple additive evaluation in the library, avoiding the expensive calculation of a
ﬁnite element simulation for every integration point in the component scale. To
use the Material Library, it is only necessary to split the given strain into its
components as:
e ¼ exxe1 þ eyye2 þ ezze3 þ exye4 þ exze5 þ eyze6
ð9:26Þ
and to calculate the stochastic values of stress by multiplying each strain value
with the corresponding distribution in the Material Library.
The diagram in Fig. 9.7 summarizes the steps for constructing a Material
Library for texturized materials. This Material Library starts from the stochastic
nature of the single-grain stiffness determined by the main texture components,
includes the randomness in the RVE geometry, and ends with a complete sto-
chastic description of the mechanical properties for the component scale.
The computational effort to create the material library with N different material
realizations is equivalent to the effort to solve one FE2 method with 6N quadrature
points. Furthermore, the method has the important advantage that the material
library only needs be computed once for a given material, regardless of how many
simulations must be performed.
Material Libraries created with about one thousand realizations have been
shown to include enough stochastic information about the material properties. This
makes the construction of the library very affordable. The computational effort is
similar to the one needed for a single FE2 simulation in a domain with one
9
Simulation Technologies
363

thousand degrees of freedom, which is a very small number when considering
three-dimensional problems.
For the case of a DC01 foil with a thickness of 50 lm, the main components of
the Material Library obtained from 1,200 material realizations are presented in
Fig. 9.8 in the form of histograms. From these histograms, some of the usual
material responses for a foil can be observed. For example, the tensile response in
the foil’s horizontal directions (X and Y) is very similar, while the response in the
direction of thickness (Z direction) is of a different size. It can also be observed
how the absolute size of the stress differs between shear and tension modes, the
tension mode being the one creating higher levels of stress. However, the amount
of tensile stress is in many cases not decisive for permanent (plastic) deformations,
while the shear stresses are directly related to such effects.
9.2.3 Application of the Stochastic Two-Scale Method
to the Bulging Test
The use of the Material Library is illustrated here by showing the different stress
responses at some points during a bulge test on a circular piece of DC01 steel foil
with a thickness of 50 lm and radius of 450 lm.
Figure 9.9 shows the shape obtained after simulating the process. This simu-
lation has been performed by computing a FEM solution for the displacement and
strain ﬁelds using the expectation of the stiffness matrix (also taken from the
Material Library). In Fig. 9.9b, the colors represent the computed expectation of
Distribution of grain stiffness
Realization of material properties
RVE geometry
RVE stiffness
RVE responses
Grain sizes and distributions
Periodicity in horizontal plane 
Voronoi tesselation
Tetrahedral mesh generation 
Stiffness in each RVE grain 
Computation of the 6 modes
Multiple material realizations
Material Library
Stiffness in single grain 
Texture components 
Rotations in SO(3)
Grain scale
RVE scale
Material scale
Fig. 9.7 Diagram for the construction of a Material Library for texturized material and periodic
RVEs
364
P. Maaß

the von Mises stress. The anisotropies inherent to the texturized material can be
observed in radial equivalent areas with different stress results.
In Fig. 9.9, three speciﬁc points have also been chosen on the foil piece, one at
the top, one close to the edge, and one in the middle. The selected points belong to
three different areas of low stress (point 1), medium stress (point 2) and high stress
(point 3). The stochastic distributions of the stress tensor at these selected points
have been calculated using the strains at the component scale and the pre-com-
puted Material Library. The stress distributions can be found in Fig. 9.10.
It is easy to note that the selected locations correspond to very different levels of
stress. This can also be conﬁrmed by analyzing the values in the horizontal axes of
the subplots in Fig. 9.10. One can observe, for example, the very different sizes on
the tensile stresses for Point 3 (cf. Fig. 9.10c) which together with the large shear
in the XY and XZ planes cause the largest equivalent stress among the three points.
The Points 1 and 2 (cf. Fig. 9.10a, b) show also unequal values for the different
stress components, but are much smaller than the ones for Point 3.
Note that here the importance of the stochastic modeling and simulation is not
only to provide information on the stress levels that can be expected in the
component, but also to determine local spreading of such values trough the dis-
tributions obtained. In this form, predictions about critical values of stress can be
obtained in the form of probabilities for any desired location in a simulated
component. This can be very convenient at design stages and in the prototyping of
new micro components. A simulation performed in this way can be used to provide
a map of probable high stresses in a component, either for the whole piece or for a
11.6
11.7
11.8
11.9
0.00
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
11.6
11.7
11.8
11.9
0.00
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
DC01 Material Library [GPa]
10.9
11.1
11.3
0.00
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
2.1
2.2
2.3
0.00
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Density
2.45
2.5
2.55
2.6
0.00
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
2.45
2.5
2.55
2.6
0.00
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
xx
xy
zz
yz
xz
yy
Fig. 9.8 Material Library presented in the form of material response distributions. Each
histogram shows the distribution of stress (GPa) for loads of 1 % in each of the tensile (upper
row) and shear modes (lower row)
9
Simulation Technologies
365

region within it. With this, variations in the micro component’s structure can be
tracked without the need of simulating each possible production sample.
Regarding the computational effort, the method presented here allows the
computation of both deterministic and stochastic values without huge computa-
tional costs. Calculations on component scale are kept at the same complexity
level as in any standard simulation, while calculations in the second scale are
negligible once the Material Library is produced [12].
The local distributions of stress provide evidence of the existence of areas in
which the points might reach plastic deformation in terms of probability. This idea
can be used to later describe not only plastic strains and stresses, but also the
probability that they appear. The construction and use of Material Libraries for the
plastic case is a current research topic.
A major issue in this direction is the handling of stochastic distributions in the
one-time step of elasto-plastic computation (cf. Sect. 9.1). The equilibrium
equation to be solved in the predictor step is deterministic but must now account
for the plastic strain distribution. In principle this could be done by Monte-Carlo
simulations. However, a Monte-Carlo approach becomes infeasible when applied
to a large number of time steps with a large number of degrees of freedom. Taking
a simple summary measure for the plastic strain distribution (as e.g., the expec-
tation) might not sufﬁciently capture the stochastic nature of the problem.
Another possible approach is to connect the stochastic two-scale FEM with the
Crystal Plasticity method (cf. Sect. 9.1) by ﬁnding a set of basis functions for the
(a)
(b)
(c)
y
z
x
0.9 mm
von Mises stress [MPa]
100
200
300
324.3
1.36212
Fig. 9.9 a Bulge test setting simulated for DC01 foil with thickness of 50 lm. b Final shape
(deformation scaled by a factor of 20) and expectation of the von Mises stress. c Points with low
(1), medium (2), and high (3) equivalent stress for the analysis of stochastic local stresses, shown
in Fig. 9.10
366
P. Maaß

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.2
Shear XY 
Shear XZ 
Shear YZ
Tension X
Tension Y
Tension Z
−9.58
−9.46
−9.34
−29.52
−29.16
−28.80
−21.73
−21.38
−21.03
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.
1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
3.11
3.28
3.45
−0.27
−0.26
−0.25
2.21
2.28
2.36
Tension X
Tension Y
Tension Z
178.94
181.26
183.59
171.85
174.01
176.17
−26.52 −26.10 −25.67
Shear XY 
Shear XZ 
Shear YZ
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.2
−0.72
−0.68
−0.65
−13.66
−13.25
−12.85
−3.57
−3.46
−3.35
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
Tension X
Tension Y
Tension Z
480.95
487.21
493.46
319.81
323.83
327.85
102.84
104.54
106.25
Shear XY 
Shear XZ 
Shear YZ
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.2
 92.73
 97.87
103.01
−105.18
−102.06
 −98.94
16.24
16.77
17.29
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9.10 Distributions for local stress tensors at selected locations from Fig. 9.9a–c
9
Simulation Technologies
367

slip systems at the crystal level. With this idea, a modiﬁed construction of the RVE
responses could be obtained and combined for the construction of a plastic library.
9.3 Inverse Modelling
Iwona Piotrowska-Kurczewski, Christina Brandt, Peter Maaß and
Oltmann Riemer
The development and manufacturing of high quality micro machined structure
parts goes together with modeling, simulation, and optimization. In order to obtain
the optimal manufacturing results or to determine the causes of any unsatisfactory
manufacturing results, efﬁcient models and simulations depending on the struc-
tures and the process parameters are needed. To analyze the mathematical methods
for the parametrization and optimization of simulation models, two things are
needed. There has to be developed a forward model, which will depend on the
particular system, structures, material parameters, and process parameters, e.g.,
feed rates, depth of cut, stiffness, and damping parameters for the machine
structures. Secondly, an appropriate inverse model is required. In real processes,
only a rough approximation of some of these parameters might be available or they
might not be known at all. The relation between the parameters q and the mea-
surements m is mathematically described by the operator equation:
QðqÞ¼m;
ð9:27Þ
which is usually called ‘‘the parameter to state mapping’’. This model allows
simulating the measurements m for different parameters q. The process parameters
q can be constants or functions depending on time and/or space. The approaches
used to ﬁt the model to the data are the so-called inverse modeling methods. These
techniques allow ﬁnding the feasible values of the parameters q. In the case of
constant parameters, one treats of the calibration of the model, and Eq. (9.27) is
usually well-posed. If the parameters q ¼
t; x
ð
Þ are functions, then parameter
identiﬁcation methods need to be employed.
min
q
QðqÞ  m
k
k2:
ð9:28Þ
However, only a noisy version md of the true data and the noise level d with
m  md


2  d
ð9:29Þ
are known. In general, the problem (9.28) is ill-posed, meaning either that the
operator Q is not surjective on the space of all noisy data, that the problem does
not have a unique solution, or that the inverse Q1 is not continuous. In such a
case, the so-called regularization method has to be applied to determine the
parameters q. Probably the best known regularization technique for linear as well
368
P. Maaß

as nonlinear inverse problems is Tikhonov regularization [16]. Here, the solution is
obtained by minimizing the Tikhonov functional,
min
q
QðqÞ  md

2
2 þ aUðqÞ;
ð9:30Þ
where U is a non-negative penalty function suitably chosen to incorporate a priori
information about the true solution. Often the penalty functional,
UðqÞ ¼ q
k kw¼
Z
jqðnÞjwdn

	1
w
;
ð9:31Þ
for 0\w\1 is used. Here,
:
k kw for 0\w  1 means the norm of the Lebesgue
spaces Lw R
ð Þ, usually denoted by Lp R
ð Þ. When w ¼ 2, the techniques of Hilbert
spaces are used, which have been widely investigated in recent years, see [16]. The
presented parameter identiﬁcation techniques are illustrated on an example for the
manufacturing process of micro parts. The quality of the product obtained by
micro forming depends on the tribological properties of the micro molds. Hence,
mathematical models are needed for describing and characterizing its tribological
surface properties. The micro milling operations are taken into account. The model
development is based on two steps: numerical simulation for computing the actual
tool tip position, and the inverse method for determining the optimal input
parameters for the required surface quality.
9.3.1 Forward Model
This section will discuss the model development of the tool tip position for micro
milling operations. Only the main parts of the model will be given (for further
information, see [17]). The aim is the development of a model to characterize the
structures of the cutting processes with a deﬁned cutting edge. The model includes
the dynamical changes of the tool caused by the forces occurring during the
process. These changes have a direct impact on the removal of the material, and
hence on the machined surface. The interaction between the tool and the work-
piece is described by a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The
solution of this system provides the actual parameters and forces. Changes of
parameters lead to unexpected differences in the positions of the tool and thereby
in the surface generated. On the other hand, in the micro-range, size effects have to
be included, see [18].
The ball end milling cutter which is rotating and moving along the given path
through the workpiece [19] is analyzed. The tool moves along the x-axis with a
feed velocity vf and cuts the workpiece with a depth of cut apc. The ﬁrst part of the
model describes the position of the tool tip at each process time t. One of the major
factors causing dynamical changes in the relative work–tool position are the forces
acting during the process. It is therefore essential to predict these forces precisely.
9
Simulation Technologies
369

In developing a dynamical model and calculating the actual model parameters, the
process parameters are deﬁned to be time dependent functions, which can be
integrated later into the tool position model.
A coordinate system where the feed motion vf of the tool is in the x direction
and the z coordinate indicates the depth of cut apc is introduced, cf. Fig. 9.11. The
tool tip position at time t is described by a vector xðtÞ; yðtÞ; zðtÞ
ð
ÞT and is inﬂu-
enced by different effects. We take into account the run-out g and the deﬂections
drðtÞ; dtðtÞ; daxðtÞ of the tool in the radial, tangential, and axial directions, see
Fig. 9.12. For each direction i ¼ r; t; ax
f
g, they are computed as the fraction of the
force Fi tð Þ over the stiffness ci by:
diðtÞ ¼ FiðtÞ
ci
:
ð9:32Þ
By applying the coordinate transformation
XðtÞ ¼
cosðuðtÞÞ
 sinðuðtÞÞ
0
sinðuðtÞÞ
cosðuðtÞÞ
0
0
0
1
0
@
1
A;
ð9:33Þ
the deﬂections dxðtÞ; dyðtÞ; dzðtÞ on the X; Y; Z
ð
Þ system are obtained. Moreover, as
an additional effect, the total tool deﬂection is considered. It is calculated by means
of the resulting force F tð Þ ¼ Ft tð Þ þ Ft tð Þ such that the variation of the depth of cut
is given by
avar
pc ¼ d2ðtÞ
2lh
¼ d2
t ðtÞ þ d2
rðtÞ
2lh
;
ð9:34Þ
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.11 Coordinate system in milling operations. a (X, Y)-plane b (X, Z)-plane
370
P. Maaß

where lh denotes the length of the deﬂected tool. For more details, see the approach
developed in [20]. A similar method has been developed for precision turning
process, see [21].
The rotational angle is given by uðtÞ ¼ 2pnt, where n is the rotational speed of
the tool. In a ﬁrst modeling step, the acting forces, which can be separated into
three components, namely the radial force Fr tð Þ, the tangential force Ft tð Þ, and the
axial force Fax tð Þ; are considered. The vector of these force components is denoted
by
FðtÞ ¼ FrðtÞ; FtðtÞ; FaxðtÞ
ð
ÞT:
ð9:35Þ
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig.9.12 Dynamic deviations in the relative work–tool position. a Variation of the depth of cut.
b 3-dimensional view of the tool deﬂection with dx ¼  2; dy ¼ 1: c Model of a 2-ﬂuted ball-
end tool, cuting edge, and the rotation axis with parallel offset
9
Simulation Technologies
371

The force model is based on the usual approach in which the force is propor-
tional to the chip thickness hc tð Þ and the axial depth of cut apc tð Þ. It can be
extended by a second term which describes the frictional force, see [22]. This tool
position model is ﬂexible and can be easily generalized, for instance by taking into
account other models for the micro forces. Furthermore, let j be the number of
cutting edges. Thus, the total force at an arbitrary cutter rotation angle is evaluated
by adding the forces acting on each cutting edge, i.e.,
FðtÞ ¼
X
j
i¼1
F;iðtÞ ¼
X
j
i¼1
Bi
kapcðtÞhi
cðtÞ þ Bi
mapcðtÞ;
ð9:36Þ
where Bi
k ¼
Bi
k;r; Bi
k;t; Bi
k;ax

T
and Bi
m ¼
Bi
m;r; Bi
m;t; Bi
m;ax

T
are the vectors of
cutting constants which are dependent on the material properties and have to be
derived from measurements. By applying the coordinate transformation (9.33), the
resulting forces in the three orthogonal directions FðtÞ ¼ ðFxðtÞ; FyðtÞ; FzðtÞÞT of
the X; Y; Z
ð
Þ system are obtained. Furthermore, the chip thickness is
hcðtÞ ¼
vact
f ðtÞ
nj
sinðuðtÞÞ:
ð9:37Þ
In the second step, the forward model is extended by a model for the actual
process parameters and the actual tool path. Here, the approach introduced in [20]
is followed. The tool path at the time t in the coordinate system X; Y; Z
ð
Þ is then
given by
xðtÞ ¼
Z t
0
vf ðnÞdn  dxðtÞ þ gxðtÞ;
yðtÞ ¼ dyðtÞ þ gyðtÞ;
zðtÞ ¼ apcðtÞ  d2
rðtÞ þ d2
t ðtÞ
2lh
 dzðtÞ:
ð9:38Þ
Note that dz equals dax because of the transformation (9.33). Moreover, gx and
gy are the components of the static run out vector g ¼ ðgx; gy; 0Þ (see Fig. 9.12),
and for the run out angle c they are computed by
gðtÞ ¼
g
k k2sinðuðtÞ þ cÞ; g
k k2cosðuðtÞ þ cÞ; 0

T:
ð9:39Þ
For a given input depth of cut apc tð Þ and input feed velocity vf tð Þ; z tð Þ can be
interpreted as the real depth of cut aact
pc ðtÞ :¼ zðtÞ and _xðtÞ ¼: vact
f ðtÞ as the real feed
velocity vact
f ðtÞ. Combining Eq. (9.38) describing the tool path at the time t and Eq.
(9.34) modeling the deﬂections of the micro tool with the force model (9.36) and
their derivatives, one obtains the system of ordinary differential equations
372
P. Maaß

_uðtÞ
¼
2pnt ;
_xðtÞ
¼
vfðtÞ
_dxðtÞ
þ_gxðtÞ;
_yðtÞ
¼
_dyðtÞ
þ_gyðtÞ;
_zðtÞ
¼
_apcðtÞ
_daxðtÞ

_dtðtÞdtðtÞþ_drðtÞdrðtÞ
lh
;
_hcðtÞ
¼
vact
f ðtÞ
nj cosðuðtÞÞ _uðtÞ
þ
_vact
f ðtÞ
nj sinðuðtÞÞ;
_FiðtÞ
¼
Bk;i _aact
pc ðtÞhcðtÞ
þBk;iaact
pc ðtÞ_hcðtÞ
þBm;i _aact
pc ðtÞ;
ði ¼ r; t; axÞ
_diðtÞ
¼
c1
i
_FiðtÞ;
ði ¼ r; t; axÞ
_dxðtÞ
¼
 sinðuðtÞÞ _uðtÞdrðtÞ
þ cosðuðtÞÞ_drðtÞ
 cosðuðtÞÞ _uðtÞdtðtÞ
 sinðuðtÞÞ_dtðtÞ;
_dyðtÞ
¼
cosðuðtÞÞ _uðtÞdrðtÞ
þ sinðuðtÞÞ_drðtÞ
 sinðuðtÞÞ _uðtÞdtðtÞ
þ cosðuðtÞÞ_dtðtÞ
ð9:40Þ
for the special case of j ¼ 2. Its solution yields the actual process parameters as
well as the actual forces at each time step. With these results, we are able to
compute the resulting position of the tool tip. This gives a forward model
ðxðtÞ; yðtÞ; zðtÞÞ ¼ QðapcðtÞ; vf ðtÞÞ;
ð9:41Þ
where Q is the operator solving the system of ODEs for the input parameters apc tð Þ
and vf tð Þ:
9.3.1.1 Numerical example of the forward model
MATLAB routines were used to solve the system of ODEs numerically. The
solution is the vector of the actual process parameters and the actual forces at each
time of the process. The model was validated in order to derive the parameters
which are consistent with the measured cutting force. For the comparison of the
outcomes of the model simulations with the measurements, we refer to [17]. The
example was calculated using, as input parameters, the depth of cut a0
pcðtÞ and feed
velocity v0
f ðtÞ as plotted in Fig. 9.13. The input feed rate as well as the input depth
of cut is reduced by the elastic defection of the tool due to the cutting forces
appearing during the process. In Fig. 9.14, the positions z tð Þ and x tð Þ computed by
the forward model for these input parameters are showed as dashed lines. They are
compared with the input depth of cut and then the ideal position x0ðtÞ which
corresponds to the input feed velocity. The difference in both curves is shown.
9.3.2 Parameter Identiﬁcation Problem in Micro
Cutting Operations
An inverse parameter identiﬁcation problem for cutting processes is introduced
and solved by regularization methods with sparsity constraints. The forward model
9
Simulation Technologies
373

(9.41) which allows computing the tool tip position m ¼ x tð Þ; z tð Þ
ð
Þ for different
choices of parameters q ¼ apc; vf


is used. Moreover, only noisy data md ¼
xdðtÞ; zdðtÞ


is given, see Fig. 9.15. To obtain the best setting of the parameters
q ¼ apc; vf


, the minimizing problem (9.30) has to be solved. The problem under
consideration is ill-posed, so that appropriate regularization methods have to be
0
0.05
0.1
s
0.2
33
34
m
36
Time
Input depth of cut
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
s
0.2
0
100
200
mm/s
400
Time
(b)
Fig. 9.13 Given input parameters. a Input depth of cut a0
pcðtÞ: b Input feed velocity t0
f ðtÞ
0
0.05
0.1
s
0.2
32
33
34
m
36
Time
Position
Input position
Real position
0
0.05
0.1
s
0.2
0
100
m
300
Position
Input position
Real position
Fig. 9.14 Resulting
positions ðxðtÞ; zðxÞÞ ¼
Q a0
pcðtÞ; v0
f ðtÞ


computed by
the forward model for input
parameters a0
pc and v0
f from
Fig. 9.13. a Given depth of
cut a0
pc ¼ z0 and computed
vertical position z. b Given
position x0 ¼
R
t0
f ðnÞdn and
computed position
374
P. Maaß

applied. Because of restrictions on the cutting machine, we search for a solution to
the problem (9.28) which has a sparse representation, i.e., the solution can be
expressed in terms of an orthogonal basis or frame f :¼ ffigi2Z by
q ¼
X
i2Z
q; fi
h
ifi ;
ð9:42Þ
where only a ﬁnite number of coefﬁcients qi ¼ q; fi
h
i are nonzero. To achieve this,
the sparsity functional (9.31) is taken with w ¼ 1 in the penalty term U, i.e.,
UðqÞ ¼
Z
jqðsÞjds:
ð9:43Þ
These optimization techniques have recently become available. Especially, the
method presented in [23] is a breakthrough in the theory of inverse problems and
their applications.
Based on the method developed in [24], analogous techniques for micro milling
processes will be presented. The notations given there are used here, and, since the
methods are very similar, only the general idea without any focus on the details
will be presented.
Assume that the positions x tð Þ and z tð Þ are given. From (9.40) it follows that
diðtÞ for i ¼ r; t; ax
ð
Þ and dxðtÞ can be written as a function of vact
f ðtÞ ¼ _xðtÞ; x tð Þ
and z tð Þ. Together with (9.38), we have
Z t
0
v0
f ðnÞdn ¼ xðtÞ þ dxðx; _x; zÞ
ð9:44Þ
and
a0
pcðtÞ ¼ zðtÞ þ d2
rðx; _x; zÞ þ d2
t ðx; _x; zÞ
2lh
þ dzðx; _x; zÞ
ð9:45Þ
We refer to these functions as m1 tð Þ and m2ðtÞ; respectively. For the integral
operator
A1 : v !
Z
vðnÞ dn
ð9:46Þ
and the identity operator
A2 : v ! v ;
ð9:47Þ
Equations (9.44) and (9.45) can be reformulated in terms of the general setting
of (9.27):
A1ðv0
f Þ ¼ m1
ð9:48Þ
9
Simulation Technologies
375

and
A2ða0
pcÞ ¼ m2:
ð9:49Þ
The regularization methods with sparsity constraint, discussed above, for
computing the best input parameters will now be applied. This example covers the
problem of computing the optimal input parameters in order to achieve the desired
height of the ramp. The goal is the computation of the optimal depth of cut apc for
a given height of the ramp. Therefore, the Haar wavelet basis will be used for the
representation of the solution.
Assume that a1
pc and a2
pc are given and that a1
pc [ a2
pc. The milling tool starts to
cut with a given depth of cut a1
pc and at a given time, t1, the depth of cut changes to
a2
pc. In Fig. 9.15, we see the measurements of such an experiment and its resulting
depth of cut. The desired height difference Dapc ¼ a1
pc  a2
pc was 20 lm. The
measured values are a1
pc ¼ 36:241 lm and a2
pc ¼ 15:393 lm; so that the real dif-
ference is Dapc ¼ 20:848 lm: The parameters of the experiment are collected in
Table 9.2.
Workpiece
tool
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0
200
400
0
50
0.2
0.0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
s
0.5
15
20
25
m
35
Time
Depth of cut
(a)
(b)
Fig.9.15 Measured surface
for a milling experiment with
variation of depth of cut.
a 3D representation. b Proﬁle
of the measured depth of cut
376
P. Maaß

The task is the computation of the optimal inputs a1
pc;a and a2
pc;a so that the
resulting surface has the ramp Dapc;a ¼ 20 lm. The desired a
pc is plotted as a solid
line in Fig. 9.16a and is used to calculate the function m2. Taking into account the
regularization, we have to minimize the problem
apc;a ¼ arg min
apc
A2ðapcÞ  m2


2 þ a apc


1:
ð9:50Þ
The solution apc;a is plotted as the dashed line in Fig. 9.16a. We plug the apc
and the optimal apc;a into the forward model and obtain the positions z and za;
respectively. In Fig. 9.16b, the position z is plotted against time as the solid line
Table 9.2 Experimental
milling conditions
Radius of the tool
r ¼ 0:5 mm
Length of the ramp
Dx ¼ 0:2 mmZ
Rotation speed
n ¼ 20 rpm
Feed velocity
vf ¼ 200 ½mm=min	Z
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
s
0.5
15
20
25
m
35
Time
Depth of cut
desired
for
(a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
s
0.5
15
20
25
m
35
.
.
Time
Position
(b)
Fig. 9.16 Input and
corrected depth of cut and
their corresponding initial
position and the corrected
position. a Input
a0
pc and corrected optimal
ap; a: b The corresponding
initial position z0 and za
9
Simulation Technologies
377

and compared with the position za plotted as the dashed line. We observe the
improvement of the resulting height of the ramp.
References
1. Simo, J.C., Huges, T.J.R.: Computational Inelasticity. Springer, New York (1998)
2. Souza Neto, E.A. de, Peric, D., Owen, D.R.J.: Computational Methods for Plasticity: Theory
and Applications. Wiley, Chichester (2008)
3. Roters, F., Eisenlohr, P., Bieler, T.R., Raabe, D.: Crystal Plasticity Finite Element Methods in
Materials Science and Engineering. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim (2010)
4. Nemat-Nasser, S.: Plasticity: A Treatise on Finite Deformation of Heterogeneous Inelastic
Materials. Cambridge University Press, New York (2004)
5. Feyel, F.: A multilevel ﬁnite element method (FE2) to describe the response of highly non-
linear structures using generalized continua. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 192,
3233–3244 (2003)
6. Cailletaud, G., Forest, S., Jeulin, D., Feyel, F., Galliet, I., Mounoury, V., Quilici, S.: Some
elements of microstructural mechanics. Comput. Mater. Sci. 27, 351–374 (2003)
7. Montalvo-Urquizo, J., Bobrov, P., Schmidt, A., Wosniok, W.: Elastic responses of texturized
microscale materials using FEM simulations and stochastic material properties. Mech. Mater.
47, 1–10 (2012)
8. Böhlke, T., Jöchen, K., Kraft, O., Löhe, D., Schulze, V.: Elastic properties of polycrystalline
microcomponents. Mech. Mater. 42, 11–23 (2010)
9. Lütjens, J., Bobrov, P., Hunkel, M., Wosniok, W.: Towards a distribution-based formulation
of FEM for micro-scale components. Procedia Eng. 10, 1663–1669 (2011)
10. Emrich, A., Liewald, M., Ruf, G.: Stochastic analysis in FE-simulation of sheet metal
forming as a key enabler for a robust production process. In: Forming Technology Forum,
17–18 May 2011, pp 31–36. IVP, ETH Zurich, Switzerland (2011)
11. Kocks, U., Tomé, C., Wenk, H.-R., Mecking, H.: Texture and anisotropy: Preferred
orientations in polycrystals and their effect on materials properties. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (1998)
12. Montalvo-Urquizo, J.: Simulation of material response in thin metallic materials using a
mechanic-stochastic model. In: Boudouvis, A.G., Stavroulakis, G.E. (eds.) Proceedings of the
GRACM. GRACM Athens (2011)
13. Parthasarathy, K.: The central limit theorem for the rotation group. Theor. Prob. Appl. 9,
273–282 (1964)
14. Borovkov, M., Savyolova, T.: Approximation of the class of canonical normal distributions
by means of the method of random rotations in the texture analysis. Ind. Lab. 68, 16–21
(2002)
15. Bobrov, P., Montalvo-Urquizo, J., Lütjens, J., Brannath, W., Wosniok, W., Schmidt, A.,
Hunkel, M.: Ein stochastisches Modell zur Rekonstruktion elastischer Eigenschaften für
texturierte Metalle. In: Kraft, O., Haug, A., Vollertsen, F., Büttgenbach, S. (eds.) Kolloquium
Mikroproduktion und Abschlusskolloquium SFB 499, pp 183–189. KIT Scientiﬁc Report
7591, Karlsruhe (2011)
16. Engl, H.W., Hanke, M., Neubauer, A.: Regularization of Inverse Problems, volume 375 of
Mathematics and its Applications. Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, Dordrecht (2000)
17. Piotrowska-Kurczewski, I., Vehmeyer, J.: Simulation model for micro-milling operations and
surface generation. Adv. Mater. Res. 223, 849–858 (2011)
18. Vollertsen, F.: Size effects in micro forming. Key Eng. Mater. 473, 3–12 (2010). doi:10.4028/
www.scientiﬁc.net/KEM.473.3
378
P. Maaß

19. Altintas,
Y.:
Manufacturing
Automation:
Metal
Cutting
Mechanics,
Machine
Tool
Vibrations, and CNC Design. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2000). doi:10.
1115/1.1399383
20. Piotrowska, I., Brandt, C., Karimi, H.R., Maass, P.: Mathematical model of micro turning
process. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 45(1), 33–40 (2009)
21. Brandt, C., Niebsch, J., Ramlau, R., Maass, P.: Modeling the inﬂuence of unbalances for
ultra-precision cutting processes. Zeitschrift für Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik
91(10), 795–808 (2011)
22. Hömberg, D., Mense, C., Rott, O.: A comparison of analytical cutting force models. WIAS
Preprint 1151
23. Daubechies, I., Defrise, M., De Mol, C.: An iterative thresholding algorithm for linear inverse
problems with a sparsity constraint. Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 57(11), 1413–1457 (2004)
24. Brandt, C., Maass, P., Piotrowska-Kurczewski, I., Schifﬂer, S., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E.:
Mathematical methods for optimizing high precision cutting operations. Int. J. Nanomanuf.
8(4), 306–325 (2012). doi:10.1504/IJNM.2012.048580
9
Simulation Technologies
379

Chapter 10
Quality Aspects
Ralf B. Bergmann
Latin
a
Orthogonal distance of a line in R2 to the origin (mm)
bactual
Actual deviation (mm)
bspeciﬁed
Tolerated deviation (mm)
Cp
Capability index
Cpk
Minimum capability index
CpkLL
Lower capability index
CpkUL
Upper capability index
d
Lateral resolution (mm)
dai
(Orthogonal) Distance of point with index i (mm)
k
Factor k depends upon the type of probability distribution of the
output quantity in a measurement model and on the selected
coverage probability
LL
Lower limit
n
Refractive index
NA
Numerical aperture
Pr
Corresponding probability
Pc
Cost efﬁciency evaluation parameter
Pp
Process performance index
Ppk
Minimum process performance index
PpkLL
Lower process performance index
PpkUL
Upper process performance index
Pq
Quality evaluation parameter
Pt
Technological evaluation parameter
R. B. Bergmann (&)
Bremer Institut für angewandte Strahltechnik, Klagenfurter Straße 2,
28359 Bremen, Germany
e-mail: bergmann@bias.de
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8_10,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
381

QG
L2-norm or gaussian norm (mm)
Qsup
Supremum/Chebychev norm (mm)
r
Radius (mm)
rcircumscribed
Radius of a minimum circumscribed element (mm)
rinscribed
Radius of a maximum inscribed element (mm)
rL2
Radius of a Gaussian element (mm)
rsup
Radius of a chebychev/minimum zone element (mm)
U(x, y)
Complex ﬁeld amplitude (V/m)
UL
Upper limit
U
Expanded measurement uncertainty
ui
Individual standard measurement uncertainty
u
Coordinate (m)
v
Coordinate (m)
Wc
Cost efﬁciency weighting factor
Wcc
Costs
Wccm
Manufacturing costs
Wccs
Setup costs
Wcct
Transport costs
Wct
Time
Wctm
Manufacturing time
Wcts
Setup time
Wctt
Transport time
Wq
Quality weighting factor
Wqi
Impacts of quality
Wqip
Impact of process changing
Wqir
Impact of rechecking
Wqm
Quality of manufacturing processes
Wt
Technological weighting factor
Wtr
Resource availability
Wts
Technological sensibility
Xi
Inﬂuencing input quantities
XLL
Lower quantil
XUL
Upper quantil
X
Coordinate (m)
xin
n measured data for quantity Xi
xi
Mean value of n measured data for quantity Xi
Y
Model function
y
Coordinate (m)
Greek
a
Half angle of the aperture ()
b
Angle (around z-axis) (rad)
382
R. B. Bergmann

c
Tip angle ()
D
Estimator for dispersion
ei
Corresponding expectation value
k
Wavelength (nm)
g
Coordinate (m)
K
Synthetic wavelength (lm)
l
Estimator for location of distribution
ladd
Estimator for additional ﬂuctuations of the location of distribution
n
Coordinate (m)
remp,i
Empirical standard deviation of the inﬂuencing quantity Xi
remp,y
Combined standard measurement uncertainty for the expectation value y
of Y
ri
Standard deviation of the inﬂuencing quantity Xi
10.1 Metrology
10.1.1 Quality Inspection
Gert Goch and Karsten Lübke
Tactile, optical and the growing ﬁeld of tomographical measurement are widely
dominating the inspection of manufactured workpieces, applying a broad variety of
measuring devices. These instruments measure the deviations of the speciﬁed
geometry deﬁned in the design drawings. In general, these features can be sub-
divided into size, form, position according to ISO 1101 and the microtopography of
the measurand. Geometry measuring instruments are calibrated and thus the mea-
sured lengths are based on meters. The meter is one of the seven base units of the
International System of Units (SI) [7]: Unit of length in meter. The deﬁnition is
based on the speed of light travelling in a vacuum. In general, measurement is an
experimental process, comparing the objective geometric measurand with the
appropriate unit, i.e. the meter or a reference angle. The measurement result is
compared with the tolerated speciﬁed dimensions within a quality inspection.
Regarding micro metrology, manufactured workpieces offer features in different
sizes. Following the deﬁnition of Geiger [20], micro features are speciﬁed by at least
two dimensions in the sub-millimeter range. Therefore, manufactured parts in
geometric metrology can be divided into two groups: Macro parts with macro and
micro features and micro parts with micro features. Regarding micro metal forming,
Fig. 10.1 shows a micro deep drawing ring and punch and a micro-cup. The micro
deep drawing ring is a macro part with an outer diameter of more than 30 mm. But,
the forming zone has a diameter and forming radius below 1 mm. The corresponding
punch is also a macro part with a forming zone with micro features. Both tools are
required to manufacture a micro-cup, which is a cold formed micro part with micro
10
Quality Aspects
383

features, e.g. a cylindrical surface. Its diameter is below 1 mm. Micro features can
also be topographical structures or a speciﬁed waviness of the surface.
The quality inspection of macro parts is in general less challenging than micro
parts. There are differences in the handling and clamping of macro and micro
manufactured parts. Handling of manufactured parts covers temperature change,
storage, transportation and changes in the surface, e.g. by oxidation.
Deviations from the speciﬁed dimensions are related to different reasons. The
VDI/VDE guideline 2601 states that ‘‘Every workpiece, no matter how precisely it
has been manufactured, displays deviations from the geometrically ideal form’’
and deﬁnes the following deviation types [38]:
• machine-dependent deviations:
– static and dynamic deviations due to guide rails and bearings of moving
machine components
– positioning deviations of moving machine components
– elastic deformations of machine, guide rails, tool, etc.
– tool wear
– bearing play
– vibrations between the tool and the machine
• workpiece-dependent deviations:
– material inhomogeneities
– deformation of the workpiece during processing
– differing local temperature distribution during the production process
– subsequent shrinkage after processing
– release of inner stress after processing
– deformation due to hardening
• environmentally-dependent deviations:
– local temperature ﬂuctuations
– temporal temperature ﬂuctuations
– vibrations transferred to the machine from the surroundings via the foundation
(a)
(b)
d=1 mm 
d=1 mm 
micro
features
Fig. 10.1 Examples of macro and micro parts in dimensional metrology according to [20]:
a macro parts of micro deep drawing ring and punch with macro and micro features and b micro
cold formed micro-cup
384
R. B. Bergmann

These deviations are in general superimposed and cannot be completely sep-
arated [38]. Especially in the micro range, inhomogeneities and temperature
ﬂuctuations lead to relatively large deviations compared to the tolerances. This has
to be compensated for by quality inspection, because in general manufactured
parts are designed and inspected at a reference temperature of 20 C as described
in DIN EN ISO 1.
All manufactured products show structural deviations from their desired micro-
and macrostructure. According to the VDI/VDE-Guideline 2601, these two struc-
tural properties deﬁne the following deviations: The microstructure includes the
roughness and waviness of the surface and the macrostructure covers size, form and
position deviations. The corresponding size tolerances are deﬁned for both length
and angle deviations. In general, a size deviation can be positive or negative.
Form and position tolerances are deﬁned in ISO 1101. Form deviations are
determined based on the desired geometrical ‘‘shape’’ of a manufactured product.
The nominal form must be mathematically describable, ranging from simple
geometries such as circles, spheres or cylinders to complex geometries such as
gear ﬂanks, freeform surfaces or helixes. Based on these surfaces the corre-
sponding tolerance zone is deﬁned by a ‘‘generating’’ sphere or circle with a
diameter equal to the form tolerance. By moving this generating element along the
whole 2D or 3D nominal geometry, the surfaces limiting the tolerance zone are
generated. In Fig. 10.2a an example for a roundness deviation based on a mini-
mum zone/Tschebyscheff circle is shown. The tolerance zone deﬁned by an
annulus in Fig. 10.2b must contain all measured points for this feature.
Figure 10.2c shows the decision from a comparison of the actual deviation
bactual and the tolerated deviation bspeciﬁed. This is required for each feature of the
manufactured product. If one feature is out of tolerance it has to be rejected.
All tolerance zones for form deviations are either planar or spatial. ISO 1101
deﬁnes in detail the following 2D and 3D form tolerances:
• 2D: Straightness, roundness and line form
• 3D: Flatness, cylindricity and surface form
(a)
(b)
(c)
bactual
bspecified
bactual  < bspecified
yes
OK
no
Fig. 10.2 Quality inspection of form feature roundness deviation: a evaluation of the actual
deviation, b deﬁnition of the tolerance zone by a circle or a sphere and c decision based on
comparison
10
Quality Aspects
385

Form deviations of spherical or conical surfaces are deﬁned by surface form.
A perfectly manufactured product would have a zero form deviation, thus a form
deviation such as roundness deviation in Fig. 10.2 is always positive. Therefore, it
is tolerated single-sided by an upper limit. The lower limit is per deﬁnition null.
The geometrical shape of a product is fully deﬁned when all deviations are
speciﬁed. Therefore, position deviations must also be tolerated. Position tolerances
cover directions, positions and run-of features with respect to one or more datum
elements. They are deﬁned in ISO 1101, ISO 5458 and ISO 5459. The corre-
sponding tolerance zone is based on datum elements, which have to be measured
within the inspection of position deviations. The measured points of the tolerated
geometry must lie inside the deﬁned tolerance zone. Additionally, position toler-
ances may require nominal dimensions in the design drawing, which are high-
lighted with a rectangular box in the design drawings.
Not all features require a speciﬁc tolerance, because they may not be functional
parts. Thus, these features can be tolerated by the general i.e. wider tolerances
deﬁned in DIN ISO 2768. Size, form and positions are generally tolerated with a
remark in the design drawing. The lower character speciﬁes the size tolerances and
the upper character form and position tolerances. They vary on the speciﬁed size.
In general, all speciﬁed features of a product have to be measured. Due to
modern machine tools and precise manufacturing most of the general tolerances
can be quality inspected at a low sampling rate. All individually speciﬁed features
should be inspected with appropriate measuring devices or gauges.
Modern measuring instruments are able to measure proﬁles with a high point
density. This requires mathematical evaluations to calculate a geometric element
e.g. a circle or a cylinder. Due to the deﬁnition of size, form and position toler-
ances up to four different evaluation methods can be applied. They lead to different
results for the element, representing the totality of its measured points based on
orthogonal distances dai (Fig. 10.3):
a. Least squares element minimizing the square root of the sum of orthogonal
distances dai between the individual n measured points with individual indices
and the approximated ideal element, described by Eq. (10.1) [1, 18]. The cal-
culated radius of the circle is rL2.
L2  Norm :
QG ¼
X
n
i¼1
dai
½
2
 
!1
2
) Min:
ð10:1Þ
b. Minimum zone or Tschebyscheff element describing an ideal element lying ‘‘in
the middle’’ of all measured points (Fig. 10.2) and minimizing the zone
enclosing all of the points with their distances dai, described by Eq. (10.2).
The calculated radius of the circle is rsup.
Supremum  =Tschebyscheff  Norm :
Qsup ¼ sup dai
j
j ) Min:
ð10:2Þ
386
R. B. Bergmann

c. Minimum circumscribed element enclosing all measured points with a mini-
mum radius rcircumscribed, described by Eq. (10.3).
minimum circumscribed elements :
rcircumscribed ) Min:
ð10:3Þ
d. Maximum inscribed element with a maximized radius rinscribed such that all
measured points are outside the calculated element, described by Eq. (10.4).
maximum inscribed elements :
rinscribed ) Max:
ð10:4Þ
e. One-side ﬁtted element, regarding e.g. lines and planes. These elements and
also their evaluations are comparable to minimum circumscribed and maximum
inscribed elements.
Figure 10.3 shows a circle proﬁle evaluated as (a) minimum zone/Tsche-
byscheff, (b) minimum circumscribed and (c) maximum inscribed circle. A one-
side ﬁtted line is shown in Fig. 10.3d, where the line is described by a distance
a and an angle b to the origin.
10.1.2 Tactile Metrology
Gert Goch and Karsten Lübke
For inspection, and to acquire the actual geometry and the corresponding features
of a product, different tactile measuring and testing instruments are required. This
comprises manual instruments like micrometer screws or calipers as well as
numerically-controlled measuring devices in different designs. These tactile
measuring instruments of different sizes have several positioning axes allowing
(a)
bactual
rsup.
rcircum
rinscr.
dai
di: orthogonal distance of measured point to the ideal element with index i
x
y
a
dai
(X, Y)
(X, Y)
(b)   
(c)   
(d)   
Fig. 10.3 Examples of evaluations in the quality inspection of manufactured parts: a evaluation
of roundness deviation bactual of a circle proﬁle by a minimum zone/Tschebyscheff element
(dashed circle), b minimum circumscribed circle, c maximum inscribed circle and d one-side
ﬁtted line
10
Quality Aspects
387

them to move a probing system with respect to the shape of a product and to obtain
measuring points. Some examples of numerically controlled instruments are:
• Coordinate measuring machines (cmm) with or without a rotary table
• Form measuring devices
• Nano cmms
• Gear measuring instruments
• Measuring instrument for shafts, worms, screws, etc.
• Roughness measuring instruments
• Contour and roughness measuring instruments
• Various Scanning Probe Microscopes (SPM), e.g. Atomic Force Microscopes
(AFM)
Tactile measurements imply that a probing force is applied to the measured
object. These forces might be very low for micro parts, e.g. in the range of mN
down to nN. But, the measured object has to be ﬁxed during probing. Clamping is
speciﬁcally adapted to the intended measuring task. It is required for access to the
surface areas to be probed and for a reproducible alignment. Additionally, it can
lead to the distortion of the part due to clamping forces.
Before the inspection process starts, a manufactured product is coarse and ﬁne
aligned within the measuring area of the device. Alignment describes a method to
transfer the individual coordinate system of the speciﬁc product into the coordinate
system of the design drawing. This transformation is based on the measured shape,
showing deviations from the desired dimensions. It is performed by a mechanical
or numerical transformation or a combination of both methods. Each measuring
task may require a specialized measuring instrument. This leads to task speciﬁc
stylus tip sizes and geometries. Common stylus and tip geometries to measure size,
form and positional deviations and to measure surface roughness are shown in
Fig. 10.4.
The stylus itself consists of a shaft and a tip. To avoid shaft probing in
dimensional metrology, the size of the tip for size, form and positional measure-
ments in general exceed the diameter of the shaft. The tips are manufactured from
artiﬁcial ruby, ceramics or steel. Figure 10.4a and b shows:
(a)
shaft
tip
tip
radius
tip
radius
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 10.4 Stylus tip geometries in tactile dimensional metrology: a sphere, b spherical disc,
c cylinder, d cone and e pyramid with angle c and tip radius
388
R. B. Bergmann

a. Sphere: A spherical tip geometry is a common geometry in dimensional
metrology. The sphere geometry is suitable for almost all kinds of surface. Its
size ranges between 0.3 mm and several 10 mm with typical sphericity devi-
ations of 50 lm or less.
b. Spherical disk: The spherical disc is a cut sphere with a large radius, which
leads to a mechanical ﬁltering effect. It is applied e.g. for small ring grooves in
boreholes.
c. Cylinder: The cylindrical tip geometry, sometimes combined with a sphere tip,
is applied for e.g. holes in ﬂat sheet metal with small probing edges.
Surface measurements cover topography and roughness measuring tasks. The
standardized tip geometries are deﬁned according to ISO 3274:
d. Cone form geometry.
e. Pyramid form geometry.
In both cases, the tip of the cone is a very small sphere and common materials are
diamond or steel. The standardized tip angle c in Fig. 10.4 is 60 or 90 with a tolerance
of ±5. Three different tip radii are deﬁned: (2 ± 1), (5 ± 2) and (10 ± 3) lm.
In tactile dimensional metrology different probing systems are common. They
can be roughly divided into switching systems (with a touch trigger) and mea-
suring systems (mostly scanning) sensitive in one, two or three directions. Gen-
erally, the stylus can be changed manually or automatically. All probing systems
have to ensure their repeatability under varying inﬂuences: e.g. material, surface,
temperature, vibrations, dynamics and dirt. Each stylus has to be corrected
numerically according to its speciﬁc geometry. This geometry inﬂuences the
measurement result [51].
To ensure a mechanical contact during probing contact, the stylus tip is pressed
onto the surface with a certain force F by the probing system. This force is
adjustable and has to be lowered for micro probes and parts. Therefore, every
stylus acts as a cantilever beam, depending on its geometry, and thus bends. This
bending is direction- and force-dependent and can be corrected numerically within
the calibration routine of the measuring device. It affects the effective tip diameter
and the shaft geometry. These inﬂuences are superimposed to the diameter and the
sphericity deviations of the tip itself. Moreover, during the probing of the product
surface ﬂattening effects occur caused by the probing force. It applies Hertzian
stress to the material (Fig. 10.5).
(a)
F
F
(b)
Fig. 10.5 Inﬂuences of stylus geometry: a Hertzian pressure and b bending applied by the
contacting force F
10
Quality Aspects
389

All stylus tip geometries lead to an additional mechanical ﬁltering. Therefore, the
measured points, e.g. the coordinates of the probing ball centers, do not represent the
real surface, but a ﬁltered one. Mechanical ﬁltering shown in Fig. 10.6 depends on
the diameter of the stylus tip with respect to the local concave or convex curvature
and curvature direction. This leads to very small tip diameters in roughness
metrology to obtain a measured representation of the micro-topography [51].
In general a stylus has to be monitored with respect to possible changes in its tip
diameter. Based on the number of measurements carried out with a certain stylus
and depending on the surface material together with the surface topography, wear
will occur on tactile stylus tips. This affects the correction of the probing ball,
evaluating the ‘‘true’’ contact point between the surface and probing element.
More details about tactile probing systems can be found in [51].
A completely different type of tactile quality inspection is realized by gauging
(Fig. 10.7). Gauging in dimensional metrology describes the comparison of a
geometric feature, e.g. a length or a diameter, with a reference standard. A double-
sided tolerance zone is described by two gauges representing the lower and upper
limit. To fulﬁll the double-side tolerated desired geometry one side must ﬁt with
the inspected feature and the other must not. The signiﬁcant differences between
measuring and gauging are:
surface
surface
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.6 Mechanical ﬁltering by tactile probing: a smoothening of sharp edges and b lowered
amplitude of periodical surface structures, depending on the probe tip diameter
inspected 
object
inspected 
object
gauge
(c)
(b)
(a)
width
inspected 
object
dupper
dupper
dlower
dlower
Fig. 10.7 Gauges for boreholes and shafts: a plug gauge, b limit roller gauge and c size
relationship of ‘‘go’’-gauge according to the Taylor-principle (length equal or larger than the
depth of the inspected borehole)
390
R. B. Bergmann

• In contrast with measurement, gauging never leads to a measuring result, i.e. a
quantitative amount multiplied by a unit.
• Gauging always includes an assessment of the inspected feature (‘‘too small’’,
‘‘too large’’, ‘‘within tolerance’’).
Both measurement and gauging can be combined for a complete quality
inspection of a measuring object. In contrast to measuring instruments, gauges
cannot determine a quantitative result. The result of gauging is ‘‘accepted’’,
‘‘rejected’’ or ‘‘rework’’, depending on the manufactured feature. In general they
represent manual calipers, e.g. plugs or limit roller gauges for boreholes and shafts
(Fig. 10.7). Many gauges have two sides, representing the upper and the lower
limit of the tolerance zone. Often the ‘‘no go’’ side is marked red. According to the
‘‘Taylor-principle’’ plug ring gauges, for example, for the ‘‘go’’ side must ﬁt
completely into the borehole. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 10.7c, its cylindrical
length should be larger than the borehole in order to inspect the whole feature. The
‘‘no go’’ side is engineered as a point-wise gauge contacting the borehole at only
two points. With this design almost every local deviation out of tolerance can be
detected. Many plug gauges do not follow this principle for several reasons, e.g.
size, weight or cost. Both sides are e.g. designed as cylinders or as two-point
calipers like the example in Fig. 10.7b.
With different types of gauge several inspections are possible. According to
[38] this includes: size gauging, form gauging, position gauging, limit gauging and
special gauging. Gauging is a very common process. In order to gauge micro
features, the principle is limited by handling, clamping or accessibility issues.
Measurements in the micro range present speciﬁc challenges. When the styli get
smaller and thus so do the tips, the measurements become more sensitive.
Therefore inﬂuences that could be neglected in the macro range have an important
impact in the micro range. Some of these inﬂuences are described in the VDI/VDE
guideline series 2617:
a. Dirt inﬂuences: In the micro range dirt can inﬂuence the measuring result.
For tactile measurements the inﬂuence is lowered by the increased Hertzian
pressure due to small probing balls and thus the dirt may be ﬂattened. In general
artifacts and measured workpieces should be cleaned accurately in every case to
minimize these inﬂuences.
b. Form deviations of the calibration artifacts: Measuring instruments and their
styli are calibrated with artifacts. These artifacts are often spheres with low
form deviations. Due to the high accuracy of coordinate measuring machines in
the micro range these form deviations are relatively high in comparison with
the diameter of the spheres, which inﬂuences the speciﬁed probing deviations.
c. Calibration uncertainties of artifact features like sphere diameter: Coordinate
measuring machines are monitored in repeated tests with calibrated artifacts.
Due to the high accuracy of coordinate measuring machines in the micro range
the geometric features of the artifact should offer lowered uncertainties based on
their calibration. But such improved calibrations raise the required effort and cost.
10
Quality Aspects
391

10.1.3 Optical Metrology
Christoph von Kopylow and Ralf B. Bergmann
10.1.3.1 Description of Distinctive Features of Microformed Parts
and Their Classiﬁcation
Microparts have a size in two or more dimensions of less than 1 mm.
For developing or optimizing a manufacturing process it is mandatory to precisely
determine the shape or geometry of such microparts. Precise information on every
step in a process chain is necessary to understand and to control the process.
A deviation from the desired geometry always leads to restrictions and deviations
in the process. Standard strategies, measurement systems and methods are usually
not available for measurement tasks in the ﬁeld of micro forming. For process
support, 3D-coordinates with an accuracy down to 1 lm may be required, for
example to control deviations in the shape or to get information about geometrical
characteristics like radii or roundness. Very often the measured objects have a
freeform shape without pass points, hence methods which measure area-wise are
preferred. In contrast with tactile measurement systems, optical sensors work in a
contactless manner and therefore do not affect the object under investigation, and
are therefore especially suitable for micro components with sensitive and ﬁne
structured parts [3]. Optical sensors allow for both a higher working distance and a
higher lateral resolution. Due to touch elements, the lateral resolution is about
300 lm for tactile systems and 15 lm for opto-tactile sensors. The optical
approach allows for a (diffraction limited) lateral resolution down to the sub-lm
area and a vertical resolution down to the nm range.
Micro parts have some properties which greatly affect optical metrology: high
surface gradients or high surface angles. In addition the presence of both rough and
reﬂecting parts of the surface changes the properties of the backscattered light
which contains the information for the measuring system. The system should
measure the complete or at least a large area of the objects’ surface. However,
certain areas of micro parts with high surface gradients will not scatter enough
light back into the detector (camera). Hence the numerical aperture has to be
increased which leads to a reduced depth of sharpness. In addition, the accessi-
bility to the object is also frequently limited. For geometrical (non-interferometric)
measuring techniques the observable surface angle can be increased by the illu-
mination and measurement of the object from different directions. In [9] a method
which varies the focus by vertical scanning of the probe and thereby providing
topographical and color information is adapted by increasing the illuminating
angle, which allows for measuring steep surface angles—unfortunately with a
resolution of only several lm.
Figure 10.8 shows an example of a micro forming tool. Here, the abrasion in
the marked area has to be detected with high resolution. Typically in micro cold
392
R. B. Bergmann

forming objects, such strong curvatures and high gradients are predominant. These
attributes have a strong effect on the measurement process.
Figure 10.9a demonstrates the loss of light of a micro wire manufactured by
micro rotary swaging, when measuring with an imaging system like a microscope.
The wire with a diameter of 0.5 mm nearly ﬁlls the complete image, but only the
central area scatters back enough light for measurement. Another effect is shown
in Fig. 10.9b: the curvature leads to high fringe orders during an interferometrical
measurement, which means the data cannot be resolved outside of the central
region. In addition, the noise increases in the outer region as well due to the small
amount of light in this area.
The surface of the object can be optically rough, which means that the
roughness is as large or even larger than the measurement wavelength, or it can be
specular, which means that the roughness is low compared to the wavelength.
Optical measuring techniques usually cannot measure optically rough and specular
surfaces at the same time, and the result of the measurement is affected by the
roughness.
Figure 10.10a illustrates the resolution along the optical axis for the different
methods of reﬂectometry, shearography and interferometry as a function of the
roughness. It can be seen that reﬂectometry is restricted to smooth surfaces,
whereas shearography can take measurements on rough but also partly on specular
0,5 mm
(a)
(c)
(b)
0.5 mm
BIAS ID 122104
Fig. 10.8 a Micrograph of a deep drawing ring with a diameter of 1 mm, b cut-out of virgin tool,
and c tool with deterioration
200 µm
(b)
(a)
BIAS ID 122105
Fig. 10.9 Different measurements of a micro wire. a Camera image with reduced measurement
area caused by the limited numerical aperture. b Interferometric phase with fast increasing fringe
density caused by the high surface gradient
10
Quality Aspects
393

surfaces. In Fig. 10.10b the operating range of these methods can be seen,
depending on the surface gradient and roughness. A method like reﬂectometry can
be extended for higher surface gradients by using multiple illumination planes,
which means that for an extreme case the object is encased by illumination planes
and several cameras are used.
Considering this background it is useful to separate a measurement task into
different problem-categories and measuring methods, whereas one measuring task
can contain several categories. An example of the segmentation of one measure-
ment problem into different measurement classes can be found in [17], where a
micro-cylindrical gear is divided into system elements. In the literature there exist
some overviews with a ﬁxed mapping of measuring problems to measuring
techniques: [40] for example performs a rough classiﬁcation of measurement
objects regarding size, complexity, material resistance and surface roughness.
These categories are directly assigned to measurement techniques. For micro
objects this classiﬁcation is not adequately speciﬁc and because of the ﬁxed
assignment not being ﬂexible enough regarding additional requirements such as
handling. In [2] the inspection problem is used for classiﬁcation: geometry, surface
and defects (surface defects and deterioration). For non-destructive testing the
measured data lead to information about defects in the material, join patches and
assembly/alignment.
If these tasks are summed up a ﬁrst discrimination regarding the object clas-
siﬁcation can be carried out into the shape and material of the object under
investigation. Common types of shape deviations (nth order) are deﬁned in the
DIN4760 and DIN4762 standards depending on the spatial frequency. Table 10.1
shows a ﬁrst classiﬁcation which is relevant for optical measurement techniques.
Boundary conditions of the measurement process itself deliver more attributes.
For example the handling of the object can have an effect on the measurement
Fig. 10.10 a Axial resolution of optical metrology as function of surface roughness: parameters
normalized to the measuring wavelength. b Operating range of reﬂectometry and shearography
depending on surface roughness and gradient [2]
394
R. B. Bergmann

process. Table 10.2 shows as an example some boundary conditions which are
based on the geometry of the object under investigation.
Table 10.3 gives an overview of well-known measurement techniques and their
applicability to selected requirements of a measurement process of micro parts.
As a consequence of the evaluation given in Table 10.3, micro fringe reﬂection
and shearography appear to be particularly suitable for the metrology of micro
parts, but one has to take into account that these techniques require an integration
of the data to obtain the shape of the object. Hence they are prone to systematic
errors. On the other hand techniques like holography directly deliver the shape and
are applicable if the height range is small, what is often the case for micro objects
due to their limited size.
10.1.3.2 Overview on Different Optical Methods for Micro
Measurement
In the ﬁeld of contactless measurement methods radiographic tomographic
methods have to be taken into account. For measuring areas which are difﬁcult to
Table 10.1 Classiﬁcation of objects which are optically observed
Property
Parameters of interest
Geometry
Border, roundness, chip formation, feathering, position, location, length, angle,
ﬂatness, freeform recording (3D-point cloud)
Surface
structure
Structure recognition (e.g. as texture), roughness (tribology), reﬂectivity, defects,
abrasion
Material
Change in material, color, layer (for example coatings or oxidation)
Table 10.2 Classiﬁcation of boundary conditions which have an effect on the measurement
process
Property
Parameters of interest
Macro-geometry
Macro-geometry with micro properties: handling relatively
easy, tactile measurable (slow); example: drawing tools,
(raw) material, tools, semi-ﬁnished goods
Micro-geometries (with micro properties): problem stability
(varying measurement results depending on location of
measurement); example micro-cap, micro parts
Micro-geometry (measuring area):
shape classiﬁcation
Flat (panel sheet)
Simple curved (edge): convex (micro-wire, cutting edge),
concave (groove)
Curved in two directions (muff): convex (cap from outside,
deep drawing piston), concave (deep drawing ring)
Freeform objects (part of a micro valve, micro structures
with high aspect ratio)
Accessibility
Shadowing, maximum angles or gradients, undercuts
Handling
Stability, handling technique (fastener) and handling
conditions
10
Quality Aspects
395

access or which are inside an object, micro x-ray computed tomography (lXCT) is
the only applicable method for non-destructive measurement. The method reaches
a resolution of some lm, in special cases down to the sub-lm range relative to a
reference part [11]. It is necessary that the object is accessible from two sides and
can be rotated. The technical effort is comparatively high and can only be applied
when appropriate shielding of the ionizing radiation is possible. The resolution
compared to optical measurement methods like white light interferometry is
inferior; therefore once optical methods are applicable they should be preferred,
which is the case for most micro metal parts.
Knowledge of the limits of the different optical techniques is essential for their
proper use. For micro parts the main limits are, as mentioned above, given by a
limited optical access and high surface gradients of the object under investigation
leading to an insufﬁcient quantity of light at the recording unit. In the following,
suitable optical measurement techniques will be shortly described.
Up to now no universal measurement system has been available for micro
measurements [26]. Therefore at present measurements are performed using vari-
ous completely different sensors. The employment of a method depends strongly on
the measurement task, the object and the boundary conditions. Very often the
measurement problem can only be solved using multi-sensor equipment. An
overview of methods which can be used in the micro range can be found in [17].
A classiﬁcation of optical sensors can be done using the type of sensing: 1D
(point sensor), 2D (line sensor) and 3D (area sensor) or considering the light
source (laser/no-laser) or with regard to scanning or non-scanning methods.
However, this does not reveal the physical behavior of the measurement method.
Table 10.3 Schematic classiﬁcation of different measurement techniques with respect to object
properties
measuring 
method 
contact-
less 
(non-
distort.) 
robust 
fast 
suitable for 
specular 
surfaces 
suitable for 
high 
surface 
gradient 
capable of 
several µm 
height 
range 
capable of 
sub-µm 
resolution 
tactile 
coordinate 
measurement 
laser  
triangulation 
scanning con-
focal microsc. 
(micro) fringe 
reflection  
(micro) fringe 
projection 
interferometry 
white light 
interferometry 
holography 
shearography 
Legend: dark unsuitable, light gray suitable under speciﬁc conditions, white generally suitable
396
R. B. Bergmann

In addition, several techniques work point-wise and also area-wise. Hence a
classiﬁcation should be based on the physical principles:
1. Coherent Methods
These methods explicitly use the phase value of electromagnetic waves,
therefore the use of temporal coherent light is mandatory. These methods are:
• Interferometry and digital holography [30, 41]
• Shear-interferometry [15, 45]
• Scanning methods:
– White light interferometry (WLI) [14] with an endoscope [29] and with
additionally adapted optics [2]
– White light heterodyne interferometry (WHI): short coherent two wave-
length interferometry [2]
2. Geometrical Methods
The following methods are based on the analysis of geometrical proportions
and allow for the utilization of incoherent light sources. The methods are:
• Triangulation (for rough, scattering objects)
– Focus-based triangulation: focus varying microscopy [9] and confocal
microscopy
– Scanning methods: line scanner and point scanner (laser scanner)
– Photogrammetry (for example stereo photogrammetry)
– Micro-fringe projection
• Micro-fringe reﬂection (for specular surfaces)
• Reﬂectometric stereo techniques for any freeform areas and miniaturized
systems [25]
3. Measurement features and limits
The capability of a measurement method is characterized by the following
attributes:
• Measurement area (size)
– Lateral measurement area: inline methods (confocal sensor, WLI, focus
variation) have combined with a low working distance (high numerical
aperture) small possible measurement areas. For geometrical methods like
fringe projection measurement areas with dimensions of several mm are
typical [34]
– Depth (deepness of the object)
• Resolution:
– Best possible lateral resolution d is given by Abbe’s resolution limit
10
Quality Aspects
397

d ¼ 0:61 k
NA
ð10:5Þ
with NA = n sin a with the refractive index n = 1 for measurement in air
and the half angle of the aperture a leading to d = 2 … 6 lm for NA = 0.1
… 0.3
– Depth resolution: dependent on the method correlated for example with
the numerical aperture and may be as low as the nm range
– The physical limit of the minimum detectable feature size due to the
uncertainty relation is discussed in [24]
• Dynamic range: height resolution compared to the measurement area. For
many measurement systems it is about 1:104; but for reﬂectometry it is for
example 1:106
• Accuracy and traceability
4. Boundary conditions of the measurement process
The choice and application of a measurement method also depends on boundary
conditions where the most important are:
• Measurement time or velocity: here one has to balance between stability and
accuracy (often determined by the production process!)
• Inspection costs: a rough comparison can be found in [2]
• Risk potential: for example the use of ionizing radiation for inspection
• Interaction of measurement method with the surface of the object [3, 17]
• Limitations for the measurable object geometry: surface curvature (for
example fringe density in interferometry) and surface gradient (for example
missing back-reﬂection)
In industrial applications, very often the inspection costs play a major role in
the operation of measurement techniques [2]. In general measurement sensors for
inspection in the micro range are usually considerably more expensive than cor-
responding methods in the macro range.
As an example, here we present measurements of a micro wire which have been
also shown in Fig. 10.9. A good approach is using an area sensor. In Fig. 10.11
measurement of the micro wire with the help of a WLI (Fig. 10.11a) and a confocal
microscope (Fig. 10.11b) are shown. The measurement area of the WLI is typically
small (here 260 9 260 lm2). The measurement is restricted to the top area of the
wire, which makes it difﬁcult to get precise information about the radius and
roundness. But it allows for a detailed structural analysis of the surface properties.
The confocal microscope also only delivers data from the top area (Fig. 10.11b, c)
and is very noisy in the shoulders (turquois curve in the line cut). The reason for
this—the decreasing backscattered intensity—is displayed as green curve in
Fig. 10.11c.
398
R. B. Bergmann

As for all optical methods, the measurement signal vanishes at steep edges in
the micro fringe reﬂection technique. This can be seen from measurements of the
deep drawing ring described in Fig. 10.8a.
Figure 10.12 describes measurement with the micro fringe reﬂection technique
of a ring which is used as a micro deep drawing tool. The setup is shown in
Fig. 10.12a. In Fig. 10.12b a line cut from the curved part of this ring can be seen
illustrating the problem. Micro parts can be measured completely as long as the
maximum angle of the surface is not exceeded, which is given for a light ray
coming from the outer border of the reference plane via the surface into the
aperture of the camera. For the fringe reﬂection technique the angle is not limited
because of the optics from the capturing camera, but from the limited area on
which the reﬂected fringes are generated. Hence a well-designed, size-adapted area
of fringes can signiﬁcantly increase the usable measurement area.
Table 10.4 shows an overview of several measurement techniques. The table
shows the possible measurement volume, the reachable measurement precision
and approximate costs of the measurement device. The costs largely depend on the
degree of automation of the manufacturing process and the handling of the object.
10.1.3.3 Testing Strategy for Measuring a Micropart
Using Digital Holograph
A testing strategy takes into account the optimal combination of object classiﬁ-
cation and qualiﬁed measurement method to solve the measurement problem, as
well as the necessary process steps for the characterization and adaptation of the
measurement method.
For measuring micro objects very often interferometric measurement tech-
niques are particular suitable, because they measure area-wise, are contact free and
have an accuracy of a fraction of the wavelength employed. In this context digital
holography has been identiﬁed as an important tool [44]. In this method the object
under investigation is illuminated with a laser and the backscattered light is
superimposed with a reference wave. Digital holography allows for the
200µm 
500µm
0 µm
260 µm
550 µm
0 µm
526 µm
(a)
(b)
(c)
BIAS ID 122107
Fig. 10.11 Micro wire measurement: a using white light interferometry (measurement area
200 9 260 lm2); b using confocal microscopy with a measurement area of 2 9 1.5 mm2; c line
cut from b: turquois: height, green: intensity; bright transparent: wire (measurement area
526 9 550 lm2)
10
Quality Aspects
399

100
500 µm
1/radius
100
position (µm)
object
source
(OLED)
virtual
fringes
camera
(a)
(b)
BIAS ID 122108
Fig. 10.12 Micro-fringe reﬂection: a schematic of a micro fringe reﬂection system. The fringe
pattern, which is generated from an OLED, is reﬂected with the help of a beam splitter onto the
object. For the camera it appears to be a reﬂex from a point in the virtual pattern plane with an
angle of 2a to the light ray, which goes from the object to the corresponding camera pixel.
b Micrograph of the measurement of a deep drawing ring. Inset along dashed line shows
curvature data which can be measured very close to the edge of the ring
Table 10.4 Overview of different measurement methods including typical values for measu-
rands, measurement volume, precision and costs
Measuring
method
Measurand
Measured
volume
Precision
Cost
(order
of k€)
lateral
(mm)
depth
(lm)
lateral
(lm)
depth
(nm)
Tact. coord.
3D coordinates
1,000
600 mm 2
2 lm 500
l-fringe reﬂection
Surface angle ) 3D
coordinates
5
500
40
1
50
l-fringe projection
3D coordinates
20
5
40
1
50
Interferometry
3D coordinates or
deformation
5
50
2
\1
50
Digital holography
Wave ﬁeld (interference)
5
50
2
5
50
Shearography
Gradients ) 3D coordinates
5
500
2
25
50
Confocal
microscopy
3D coordinates
1
7
130
20
100
Laser triangulation
3D coordinates
200
2
10
20
50
White light
interferom
3D coordinates
1
1
5
\1
100
400
R. B. Bergmann

reconstruction of the complex waveﬁeld at any depth in the computer, and hence
the geometrical data of the object can be calculated. Usually the latter are deter-
mined from an analysis of the phase distribution in the reconstruction plane. To
derive metrical data a geometry model of the interferometric setup including the
optical path is mandatory. The properties of the objects’ surface are essential.
Typical microsystems very often have a reﬂecting surface which is made from
aluminum, silica or copper. The size of the object is less than 1 9 1 mm2.
The lateral resolution obtainable with digital holography is typically determined
by the restriction of the numerical aperture due to the construction of the setup, as
the necessary optical components such as illumination optics and beam splitter
have to be placed and aligned between the object and sensor. This problem can be
overcome using a microscope objective with high numerical aperture, which
allows for the capture of the hologram in the image plane [52].
Figure 10.13a shows a sketch of a holography setup using a microscope
objective. The collimated beam of a coherent light source is divided into a ref-
erence and an object wave by a beam splitter. The object wave encounters a lens
via a reﬂecting mirror. The focal plane of this lens is located in the focal plane of
the following microscope objective, resulting in an illumination of the object with
parallel light. The second beam splitter superposes the light, which is backscat-
tered from the object with the reference wave, and the camera captures the
hologram.
Figure 10.13b depicts the geometry model used for digital holography with a
microscope objective: the complex ﬁeld amplitude U(x, y) which is backscattered
from the object passes through the microscope objective with its aperture in the
n-g-plane and propagates to the image area where it is superimposed with the
reference wave, and the resulting hologram is captured by the camera in the u-v-
plane. Using a phase shifter in the light path of the reference beam allows for
applying phase-sampling techniques. For calculating the ﬁeld distribution U(u, v) in
the hologram plane an algorithm is used, which requires four holograms. Each of
these holograms has an increasing phase difference of p/2 with respect to the pre-
vious one. The ﬁeld distribution U(x’, y’) in the reconstruction plane is afterwards
calculated by numerically solving the diffraction integral [28]. Because of the free
choice of the reconstruction distance, digital holography is not bound to a ﬁxed
image plane. This is an advantage when measuring for example objects which are
thermally loaded resulting in a thermal enlargement of the setup, which would move
the object out of the focus plane in conventional microscopy. The shape of the object
can be obtained from an analysis of the phase of the light in the reconstruction plane.
If this is the image plane of the objective, the conditions correspond besides the
magniﬁcation m to those directly above the objects’ surface. Therefore the mea-
surement result can be interpreted as a comparison of the surface topography with
this virtual plane.
Figure 10.14 shows the results of measuring a microformed cup using the two-
wavelength contouring method. The wavelengths used were k1 = 580 and
k2 = 583 nm, leading to a synthetic wavelength of K = 112 lm. Figure 10.13a
displays the reconstructed intensity distribution. The typical problem of measuring
10
Quality Aspects
401

ND Filter
Fibercoupler
Lens
(Colimator)
Beam Splitter 
(50:50)
Beam Splitter 
(50:50)
Mirror, Piezo 
(Phaseshifting Element)
Mirror
Aperture
Lens 
(Illumination)
Camera and 
Image Processing
Objective
(N.A.=0.25)
Object
a
Object plane 
U(x,y)
Aperture
Reference
Hologram plane 
U(u,v)
Reconstruction plane 
U(x´,y´)
d
u
v
x´
v´
BIAS ID 122109
(b)
(a)
Fig. 10.13 Experimental setup of a digital holographic microscope (DHM): a sketch of setup;
b digital holography using a microscope objective (For explanation see text.)
402
R. B. Bergmann

such a micropart can clearly be recognized as shadowing effects due to the high
surface gradients and decorrelation effects because of the surface structure. This
leads to noise in the measured 3D shape data at points where not enough light is
backscattered. This can be seen in Fig. 10.14b, where the phase data of the
backscattered light which corresponds to the height data of the microcup are
shown. Each line corresponds to a height difference of K/2. Hence the noise is in
the range of several tens of micrometers depending on the illumination intensity.
Figure 10.14c shows the intensity reconstruction when the object is illuminated
from three directions. The corresponding height data in Fig. 10.14d have reduced
noise. Using an algorithm which takes the illumination into account and weighting
the data with the amplitude of the backscattered light, the three illumination
BIAS ID 122110
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
Fig. 10.14 Determination of the shape of a micro cup. a Intensity and b phase from holographic
reconstruction. c Intensity using three illumination sources. d Phase from holographic
reconstruction with three illumination sources (length of the edge of all images 0.5 9 0.5 mm2)
10
Quality Aspects
403

directions lead to a better signal to noise ratio of 3 dB with a measurement
uncertainty of less than 3 lm.
A decreased measurement uncertainty allows for a better analysis of the
properties of the micropart. Figure 10.15b shows a cut-out of the measurement of
the micro cup which displays the object’s shape in this area. After removing the
proﬁle the ﬁne structure of the object’s surface becomes visible, which is displayed
in Fig. 10.15c.
10.1.4 Measuring Uncertainty
Gert Goch and Karsten Lübke
According to the International Vocabulary of Metrology (VIM) or DIN 1319, the
complete measurement result is generally expressed as a single measured quantity
value together with the unit and a measurement uncertainty. An example is given
in Eq. (10.6):
Length ¼ ð10; 234  0; 005Þ m
ð10:6Þ
The measurement uncertainty is a non-negative quantity. VIM deﬁnes it as a
parameter characterizing the dispersion of the quantity values being attributed to
a measurand. It further notes that the parameter may be a standard deviation or a
speciﬁed multiple of it, called standard measurement uncertainty or the half-width
of an interval, related to a stated coverage probability.
The measurement uncertainty always corresponds to a certain measuring pro-
cess and not to a certain measuring device. A mathematical description of the
measuring process is based on a model expressed e.g. by the function Y in
Eq. (10.7), describing the physical or technical basis of the measurement.
Y ¼ f X1; X2; X3; . . .; XN
ð
Þ
ð10:7Þ
BIAS ID 122111
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 10.15 Determination of the shape of a micro cup. a Phase from holographic reconstruction
and marked cut-out area (length of the edge 0.5 9 0.5 mm2). b Calculated shape data. c Fine
structure of object’s surface after removing the shape of the object
404
R. B. Bergmann

This measurement model comprises of several, in detail N, inﬂuencing input
quantities Xi with individual standard measurement uncertainties ui. These indi-
vidual standard measurement uncertainties can refer to various distributions.
Common distributions are e.g. normal, rectangular or triangular distributions
(Fig. 10.16).
In order to calculate the measurement uncertainty for a speciﬁc measurement
result of Y, comparable to Eq. (10.6), each of the inﬂuencing quantities Xi should
have been measured several times such that one of the distributions in Fig. 10.16
can be applied reasonably. I.e. for each of the quantities Xi a limited number of
measured data xi1, xi2,…, xin are available. They result in a set of N mean values xi
and N empirical standard deviations remp, i, one pair for each inﬂuencing quantity
Xi (see Table 10.5 and Fig. 10.16). Since the set of measured values has to be
limited, xi and remp, i can be regarded as (best possible) estimations of the cor-
responding expectation values ei and standard deviations ri of the inﬂuencing
quantities Xi.
As a result, the standard measurement uncertainty of a measured or evaluated
value yi of the measurand Y is based on these individual uncertainties and thus
called the combined standard measurement uncertainty.
The method behind this combination of random uncertainties is the theory of
errors and error propagation by Gauß [19]. The method presented here does not
cover unknown systematic errors, which are a challenge in metrology. Gauß [19]
included systematic errors in his model about 200 years ago. They were introduced
in international standards in around the millennium. The combined standard
measurement uncertainty for the expectation value y of Y according to the model
of Eq. (10.7) is given in Eq. (10.8). It is valid for non-correlated inﬂuences.
remp;y ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
N
i¼1
of
oXi

2
r2
emp;i
 
!
v
u
u
t
ð10:8Þ
(a)
f(xj)
f(xj)
b-a
1
f(xj)
b-a
2
a
b
a
b
c
xj
xj
68.26 %
95.44 %
99.73 %
Normal 
distribution
Rectangular
distribution
Tr iangular
distribution
(b)
(c)
xj
xj
xj
xj
Fig. 10.16 Different distributions common for measuring uncertainty evaluations: a normal
distribution and the respective coverage, b rectangular distribution and c triangular distribution
10
Quality Aspects
405

Nonetheless, most of the individual uncertainties ui can be evaluated according to
the Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement (GUM) published by
ISO/BIPM [5]. It deﬁnes two evaluation methods:
a. Type A: evaluation of the measurement uncertainty from a series of measured
values obtained for the quantity and its characterization by standard deviations
(referring to an assumed statistical distribution).
b. Type B: characterization by standard deviations, evaluated from probability
density functions based on experience or other information.
To cover a certain probability with the combined standard measurement
uncertainty, u(x1,…,xN) can be multiplied with a factor k larger than one. This
results in the expanded measurement uncertainty U(x1,…,xN) in Eq. (10.9). The
VIM [6] notes that the factor depends upon the type of probability distribution of
the output quantity in a measurement model and on the selected coverage
probability.
U x1; . . .; xN
ð
Þ ¼ k  u x1; . . .; xN
ð
Þ
ð10:9Þ
If the combined standard measurement uncertainty u is normally distributed,
Table 10.6 shows the coverage probability. The more the individual uncertainties
are combined, the more the resulting distribution approaches a normal distribution
and thus the factor k can be applied.
Table 10.5 Expectation value based on limited measurement series and corresponding empirical
standard deviation of selected distributions
Distribution
Expectation value based on limited
measurement series
Empirical standard deviations
Normal
distribution
xi ¼ 1
n
P
n
j¼1
xj
remp;i ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
n1
P
n
j¼1
xj  xi

2
s
Rectangular
distribution
xi ¼ aþb
2
remp;i ¼ ba
2 ﬃﬃ
3
p
Triangular
distribution
xi ¼ aþbþc
3
remp;i ¼ 1
6
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a  b
ð
Þ2þ b  c
ð
Þ2þ a  c
ð
Þ2
q
Table 10.6 Factor k and the
corresponding probability Pr
of a given percentage of
values is within the interval
Factor k
Probability Pr in %
0.676
50
1
68.27
1.645
90
1.96
95
2
95.45
2.576
99
3
99.73
406
R. B. Bergmann

10.1.5 Quality-Oriented Process Planning
Gert Goch and Karsten Lübke
In order to assess a result like the one in Eq. (10.6) together with its expanded
measurement uncertainty, it has to be compared with its nominal value and the
corresponding tolerances. They are speciﬁed in the design drawing and can be
double- or single-sided. Figure 10.17 explains the principle for two examples.
Features with a double-sided tolerance, e.g. a diameter of a borehole, offer an
upper speciﬁcation limit UL and a lower speciﬁcation limit LL. When the mea-
surement result of the feature holds these limits, the feature is accepted. Single-
sided features, e.g. form deviations, are per deﬁnition non-negative. They are
tolerated with an upper speciﬁcation limit, which should not be exceeded by the
measurement result.
However, all measurement results, namely every feature measured within the
quality inspection of products and their components, should be precisely conﬁned
by the corresponding measurement uncertainty. Thus the measurement speciﬁes an
interval, within which the correct quantity value can be found with a speciﬁed
probability. In Fig. 10.17 both examples (a) and (b) show three different cases:
(a) The uncertainty interval of the measurement result is completely inside the
tolerance ? the measured feature is OK
(b) The uncertainty interval of the measurement result is completely outside the
tolerance ? the measured feature is not OK
(c) The uncertainty interval of the measurement result overlaps with one limit of
the tolerance zone ? the quality assessment of the proposed measured feature
is ambiguous
To avoid case (c), in 1968 Berndt et al. proposed the so-called ‘‘Golden Rule of
Production Metrology’’ [4]. It states that the measuring uncertainty should be less
than one tenth of the tolerance. On the one hand, even today it is not always
possible to fulﬁll this requirement with modern measuring instruments, e.g. in gear
(a)
double-sided 
tolerance
single-sided 
tolerance
U(Y)
U(Y)
LL
UL
UL: upper limit
LL: lower limit
U:  uncertainty
single measured quantity 
value together with the 
measurement uncertainty
OK: accepted
NO: not accepted
?:    ambigous
UL
(b)
NO
OK
OK
Y
Y
?
?
NO
Fig. 10.17 Interaction between tolerance zone, measuring uncertainty and quality assessment:
a double-side tolerated feature, e.g. length and b single-side tolerated feature with upper limit,
e.g. form deviation
10
Quality Aspects
407

metrology [21]. On the other hand, the tolerances in production metrology are
more and more reduced. Thus the interaction between tolerances, measuring
uncertainty and quality assessment must be taken into account when measuring
product features. Therefore, ISO 14253 deﬁnes decision rules for proving con-
formance or non-conformance with speciﬁcations [35]. They differ between
manufacturers and customers:
• When a manufacturer inspects a product and measures a geometric feature, he
must prove conformance with the tolerance zone, uniformly reduced by the
expanded uncertainty U. The measured result must hold the limits of this
reduced tolerance zone to accept it.
• When a customer inspects a product and measures a geometric feature, he must
prove conformance with the tolerance zone, uniformly expanded by the
expanded uncertainty U. The measured result must hold the limits of this
expanded tolerance zone to accept it.
Thus, an inﬂuence of the expanded measuring uncertainty on the statistical
control of a process exists. Manufacturing includes the generation of several
features and results for one produced part. Each of these individual features is
related to its corresponding manufacturing process, including one or more
machines. For a regular production process it is assumed that all individual pro-
cesses are in a state of statistical control and show a stationary and regular process
behavior. Unfortunately, most processes tend to change, because of e.g. tool wear,
and do not remain in a stationary and normally distributed state. ISO 21747
provides methods for evaluating the quality capability and performance of man-
ufacturing processes with respect to time. They are categorized by the stability of
the ﬁrst and second distributional moments. This includes tests as to whether these
criteria are constant, change systematically or randomly.
ISO 21747 requires extensive process analysis and subsequent process stabil-
ization or improvement measures over time. They enable the efﬁcient and effective
control of a process, resulting in a higher quality of products. For the process
analysis samples are taken from the process ﬂow. The number of samples and the
frequency of their analysis depend on the process type and the type of product. All
important changes should be detected in time. The measurement results obtained
from these samples lead to time-dependent functions, described by the distribution,
the location, the dispersion and the shape of the results obtained from the analyzed
samples. These time-dependent distributions can be classiﬁed into four main
distribution models A, B, C, D with several sub-models, all based on the location
and dispersion moments of individual (instantaneous) and resulting (outcoming)
distributions. Figure 10.18 shows three examples of such time-dependent distri-
bution models.
Based on the characterization of an individual product feature, performance and
capability indices can be determined. The location and dispersion characteristic is
calculated with respect to the tolerance of the feature. For this purpose, four
methods M1–M4 are deﬁned according to [36]:
408
R. B. Bergmann

a. Method M1: General geometric method. Calculations with estimators for
location l and dispersion D.
b. Method M2: Explicit inclusion of additional variation. Calculations with esti-
mators for location l, dispersion D and additional ﬂuctuations ladd.
c. Method M3: Alternative method of explicit inclusion of additional variation.
Calculations with estimators for location l, dispersion D and additional ﬂuc-
tuations ladd.
d. Method M4: Excess proportions approach. Calculations with estimators for
upper and lower excess proportions.
Process performance indices are deﬁned by ratios of a length parameter of the
distribution to the speciﬁed tolerance [36]. For the general geometric method M1 l
(a)
A1
process is
under 
statistical
control
location:
dispersion:
instantenous 
distribution:
outcoming 
distribution:
normally
distributed
normally
distributed
normally distributed
not normally
distributed, unimodal
not normally
distributed, unimodal
systematic or
random variation
random (not normally
distributed, unimodal)
source: based on DIN ISO 21747
normally
distributed
constant
constant
constant
constant
B
C2
time t
time t
time t
(b)
(c)
Fig. 10.18 Time-dependent distribution models for characterizing processes, deﬁned in DIN
ISO 21747: a distribution model A1, b distribution model B and c distribution model C2
lower limit L
u
L
pper limit UL
specified tolerance
Δ = XUL-XLL = ΔLL+ΔUL
 XUL
 XLL
µ
ΔLL
ΔUL
Fig. 10.19 Graphical
representation of method M1
[36]
10
Quality Aspects
409

indicates the location of the process and D the dispersion of the process, shown in
Fig. 10.19. The dispersion D is bound by the lower quantile XLL and the upper
quantile XUL.
The corresponding process performance indices are deﬁned by Eqs. (10.10)–
(10.13)
process performance index
Pp ¼ UL  LL
D
ð10:10Þ
lower process performance index
PpkLL ¼ l  LL
DLL
ð10:11Þ
upper process performance index
PpkUL ¼ UL  l
DUL
ð10:12Þ
minimum process performance index
Ppk ¼ min PpkLL; PpkUL


ð10:13Þ
When a process is in a state of statistical control its capability can be described by a
process capability index. The corresponding formulae are deﬁned by Eqs.
(10.14)–10.17), and are the same as for the corresponding performance indices:
capability index
Cp ¼ UL  LL
D
ð10:14Þ
lower capability index
CpkLL ¼ l  LL
DLL
ð10:15Þ
upper capability index
CpkUL ¼ UL  l
DUL
ð10:16Þ
minimum capability index
Cpk ¼ min CpkLL; CpkUL


ð10:17Þ
DIN ISO 21747 deﬁnes different estimators for the location l and the dispersion
D of a given data set [36]. It notes that no quantitative comparison of the indices is
feasible, because the indices are calculated according to different methods. To
keep a process in statistical control continuous monitoring is required. The stan-
dard solution is the use of different control charts. Today they are implemented as
software tools allowing an easy backup of data and evaluation [31].
The process capability indices Cp and Cpk should be at least greater than or
equal to 1. When Cp is equal to Cpk the expectation value lies in the middle of the
tolerance zone. With a decreasing index Cpk the expectation value moves away
from the middle. A common requirement in industry is both indices greater than or
equal to 1.33. While Cpk = 1.0 corresponds to a minimum distance of 3r to the
next tolerance limit, Cpk = 1.33 corresponds to 4r with around 66 failure parts per
410
R. B. Bergmann

million. According to the ‘‘Six Sigma’’ philosophy Cpk = 2.0 is required more
frequently [32] and leads to less than one failure parts per million. For values of
Cp/Cpk C 1.33 the production process is considered to be well controlled.
10.2 Closed-Loop Control
Gert Goch, Peiran Zhang and Volker Renken
In general, control engineering aims to manipulate a technical variable to achieve a
desired value. So the error between the controlled and desired values should be
zero. If the system does not have any disturbances this aim could be achieved by
an open-loop-controller, where the manipulated variable of the plant is only
affected by the desired value. However, most technical systems experience dis-
turbances, which affect the plant in an unknown way. Therefore these systems
demand a closed-loop-controller with a feedback of the measured controlled
variable as the input for the controller. The measured controlled variable is
compared with the desired value in order to eliminate their difference [13]. In the
ﬁeld of traditional control engineering, linear system theory became the basis for
analyzing the control system. Therefore conventional controlled variables are
usually the directly measurable process variables, such as the actual position of a
tool or the rotational speed of a motor.
In a quality control system, it is essential to directly control the quality features
of a workpiece (instead of the process variables creating these features), such as
size (e.g. diameter of a bearing ring) or form parameters (e.g. edge radius), which
are affected by both process variables and unplanned disturbances. According to
the DIN ISO 8402 standard, quality can be deﬁned as follows [39]:
Deﬁnition Quality is the entirety of characteristics belonging to a unit, with
respect to their ability to fulﬁll deﬁned or preconditioned requirements.
In general, the objective of a control system is to ensure certain quantities—in
engineering applications usually output quantities of technical processes—at a
speciﬁed target value. Besides the desired quality features, the quality require-
ments (e.g. tolerance) also represent important input information for the quality
control system and must be deﬁned before the production phase. In principle, a
quality control system consists of an input block to deﬁne the quality features and
quality requirements desired, which are compared with the actual measured values
of the quality features. The metrology in Sect. 10.1 could be applied for the
measurement of quality features. The controller applies a quality control strategy
to inﬂuence the manipulated variables, which, together with possible disturbances,
represent the input of the controlled process (Fig. 10.20).
Since the relationships between quality features and manipulated variables are
usually complex and nonlinear, classical linear controllers (e.g. PID-controllers or
Riccati-controllers) are not suitable to enable quality control. Therefore in the ﬁeld
10
Quality Aspects
411

of quality management various methods are applied, e.g. SPC (Statistical Process
Control) and quality control charts that are used post-process. For in-process
quality control, process models and measuring methods are needed.
10.2.1 Types of Control-Loops According to the Measuring
Methods
In Sect. 10.1 different measurement methods for microstructures were introduced.
Within control engineering, the applied measuring techniques can be divided into
three groups: post-process, in situ and in-process. Furthermore, the control loop as
well as the feedback can be realized on three levels: in-process, near-process and at
cross-process level. The in-process level controls the quality features or the pro-
cess variables for each subprocess. Here a real-time model is applied to operate the
machine by manipulating variables. Based on a subprocess model and on in situ
measurement, the near-process level controls the quality feature for the subpro-
cess. The cross-process level controls the desired quality features and requirements
Disturbances
Controlled process
Controller
-
Measurement of the 
quality features 
desired quality
features and quality
requirements
Manipulating 
variables
Fig. 10.20 Quality control system
Desired quality 
features and 
requirements
Post- process 
measured quality 
features of 
workpiece
Set-value of 
quality features 
for 
subprocesses
In-situ measured 
quality features 
of subprocess
Set-value of quality 
features or process 
variables for  
subprocesses
In-process 
measured quality 
features or process 
variables
Real-time model
Process model
Subprocess model
Cross-process 
controller
Near-process 
controller
-
-
-
Sub- 
process 
In-process 
control 
loop
Fig. 10.21 Levels of a quality control system
412
R. B. Bergmann

of the whole process. Therefore a whole process model is necessary, which could
be built of several subprocess models. The ﬁnal processed structures should be
measured and used to optimize the manufacturing activities in the future
(Fig. 10.21).
At the in-process level, the controlled variables are measured and fed back
while the subprocess is in action, in order to adjust the processing in real-time.
A classical linear time-invariant control loop for the process variables is assigned
to this level. A closed-loop quality control system based on in-process measure-
ment was a new development in recent years. Figure 10.22 shows an example in
the macro range. It was designed for the turning of bearing rings using a cascade
control concept. The quality feature of the product (wall thickness of the bearing
ring) is controlled by in-process ultrasonic measurements [48]. The in-process
quality control system for micro products should be designed with similar ele-
ments: controller, process model and in-process quality measurement.
Near- and cross-process control is applied at the upper (2nd and 3rd) levels of
quality control systems. In near-process control loops, the quality features are
identiﬁed when the manufacturing process is interrupted or when the product has
left the actual subprocess. The applied measurement is used to optimize the
subprocess and to recognize improved operating procedures and process values.
As the near-process control is time discrete during production, in situ (workpiece
still in the production facility) or near-process (outside machine tool) measure-
ments are applied. Statistical process control (SPC) is one reasonable method of
near-process control, which is mainly applied in mass production, e.g. for the
electroplating of heated rear car windows [50]. By using a quantitative process
model, the correlation between the variation of a quality feature and the related
process variables can be explicitly described. Within the great variety of mathe-
matical modeling approaches, physical equations are the classical method to
describe a process. An approximation, e.g. by polynoms, is used to represent a
nonlinear system. A practical manufacturing process dependent on multiple pro-
cess variables usually shows complex interactions, where the cause-effect rela-
tionships are difﬁcult to describe. In this case modeling by an artiﬁcial neural
network is a common solution. The neural network is based on a large number of
simple units. Conventionally it is robust against errors of single experimental data.
Such a model can be optimized at all times with new data [33]. Hence, it can self-
adapt to small changes of the process (e.g. changes in environmental conditions).
workpiece
reference point
turning tool
wall thickness d
controller
coupling fluid
US 
sensor
processing 
unit
vc
ϕ
Fig. 10.22 Closed-loop
quality control of wall
thickness in the turning
process of bearing rings,
based on in-process
measurement
10
Quality Aspects
413

Cho et al. [8] presents a near-process quality control based on a Polynomial Neural
Network (PNN). The model is trained with data obtained from the near-process
measurements of ﬁnished parts.
If the quality features of a workpiece are affected by more than a single sub-
process, optimization throughout the whole process chain is necessary. Here the
cross-process control links various sub-processes of a process chain and deter-
mines the optimal conﬁguration for the production process. Therefore, the cross-
process control also includes a feed-forward of information. For example, it
determines the desired quality features for the remaining sub-processes.
In order to explain the principle of cross-process control, an approach realized
for the production of bearing rings [22] is illustrated in Fig. 10.23. This cross-
process control is based on the individual subprocess models. Having ﬁnished a
certain subprocess, the cross-process controller transfers the remaining quality
feature deviations of the workpiece to the next sub-process model, which predicts
the quality feature values according to its actual input process variables. At the end
of the process chain the resulting quality feature deviations are calculated. An
objective function is used to quantitatively describe the performance of all sub-
processes. Through minimizing the objective function, the optimal set values of
the quality features are determined for the current and subsequent processes.
after cutting 
(y1)
before cutting 
(y0)
y0
measurement
workpiece
objective function: Min [Jcutting(u1,v1,y1) + Jheating(u2,v2,y2) + Jquenching(u3,v3,y3)]
local 
process model
local 
process model
local 
process model
dynamic cutting
asymmetrical
heating
asymmetrical 
quenching
after heating 
(y2)
after quenching 
(y3)
u3
u2
u1
prognosis
Fig. 10.23 Cross-process quality control concept for the production of bearing rings [12]
J objective function, y quality features (roundness), u process variables, v required effort
(production time, required energy, etc.)
414
R. B. Bergmann

10.2.2 Application of Quality Control Systems in Micro
Manufacturing
An exemplary quality control system in three levels is implemented in the ﬁeld of
micro manufacturing, speciﬁcally for Laser-Induced Electrochemical Machining
(LECM, q.v. Sect. 7.3.3). For this process, the objective quality feature is the
deﬁned form deviation of the manufactured workpiece contour. In a preliminary
study, the control system of the LECM process concerns three process variables,
which affect the quality features (i.e. the cross-section of the removed material):
laser power, feed rate of workpiece and ﬂow rate of the etchant. The desired
contour is achieved by a sequence of overlapping removal paths. Each removal
path can be considered as a subprocess, where its cross-section deviations are the
quality features for this sub-process (Fig. 10.24).
For the LECM system the cross-process level calculates the quality variables
for the subprocess, and the set-values of the process variables for the in-process
controller are determined at the near-process level. The near-process controller is
realized by an inverse process model based on an artiﬁcial neural network and an
iterative optimization algorithm. By using this near-process controller, the desired
Cross-process 
controller
Path planning
Process 
prediction
Control loops of
the process 
variables
In-process 
controller
Set values of
the process 
variables
Set values of
the quality 
features and 
requirements
The quality control system for LECM
Required cross 
section of each 
removal path
Set values of the 
process variables
for the control 
loops
First removal path
Second removal path
i-st removal path
Process chain
Near-process 
controller
Fig. 10.24 Quality control system for laser induced electrochemical machining (LECM)
10
Quality Aspects
415

process variables for sub-processes can be calculated according to the required
cross-section of each removal path.
The cross-process controller links the sub-processes, the individual removal
paths, and designs its positions as well as its cross-sections to achieve the desired
smooth contour. The cross-process controller predicts the form accuracy of the
workpiece. The deviations between the predicted and the post-process measured
contour proﬁles are recorded and saved in a database. Hence, the process accuracy
constantly improves [54].
10.3 Quality-Oriented Design of Process Chains
Bernd Scholz-Reiter, M. Lütjen, D. Weimer,
D. Rippel and H. Thamer
10.3.1 Process Chain Design in Micro-Manufacturing
The design of efﬁcient micro production process chains is one of the most chal-
lenging tasks in the product development process. Before a new product can be
launched, the production process has to be designed to achieve the given volume
and quality requirements. Thereby, a lot of interdependencies along these multi-
stage manufacturing process chains have to be considered. Due to the size effects,
there is a lack of stable processes and standardized interfaces for the manufac-
turing, handling and quality inspection technologies in micro production. Tech-
nical requirements and capabilities of technologies vary greatly, while tolerances
become increasingly small with the decreasing size of the products. For instance,
the result of a deep drawing process can vary when using the same metal sheet
because of the different orientations of the grains. Therefore, the design of micro
process chains requires the consideration of the speciﬁc characteristics of the
product, as well as of those technologies applied in manufacturing. A quality-
oriented design method helps identify process sequences, which best meet the
requirements. The idea of quality-oriented design in micro-manufacturing is to
itemize complex technical as well as logistical correlations along the process chain
and relate them to the manufacturing system, which is used to execute the process
chain.
A micro manufacturing system is characterized by processes with high pro-
duction rates of up to 450 parts per minute, with a throughput of several hundred to
hundred-thousand parts per series. In addition, production tolerances with geo-
metrical deviations below one micrometer have to be satisﬁed. In order to achieve
such high production rates at a satisfactory product quality, micro process chains
have to be designed very carefully, considering the interdependencies between
different processes and technologies. Thereby, quality control and handling
operations are integral to the production process and have to be adapted to the
416
R. B. Bergmann

speed and tolerances of the manufacturing process. Consequently, an integrated
planning of process chains has to consider the manufacturing, handling and quality
inspection processes (Fig. 10.25).
By modeling such dependencies as a part of the process chain, more robust
process chains can be designed, and issues between different processes or technol-
ogies can be identiﬁed. Ideally, this will be done in the early design phases and
parallel to product design. This chapter introduces the general concept of process
chains. Thereby, it discusses different techniques for designing and evaluating
process chains. Afterwards, it presents a procedure for the quality-oriented design of
process chains for micro production processes. Finally it demonstrates the integra-
tion of a quality control process and a micro deep drawing manufacturing process.
10.3.2 Fundamentals of Process Chain Design
Process chain design is one of the most important factors for efﬁcient production.
It can be done after or parallel to product design. By using the concept of
simultaneous engineering, process design is integrated into to the product design
and will be conducted parallel to it [16]. The objective of simultaneous engi-
neering is to cease the sequential work ﬂow of product and process design. The
idea is to prepone work packages from process design and conduct them in parallel
with product design. Therefore, preliminary planning results are used for the
coordination of product and process design. This leads to a high demand on
communication, because of the many small changes which have to be done during
the design process. The idea is to avoid cost-intensive large changes in later
phases. In general, the design of a process chain has to deal with the same
Manufacturing 
Technology
• Manufacturing processes
• Manufacturing and tools 
  Dimensioning
• Adapted handling and 
  transportation technology
• Planning of material flow 
Integrated Micro Process Chain
• Measurement technology
• Planning of information
  flow 
• Quality assurance
Handling and 
Transportation
Quality
Management
Fig. 10.25 Integration of different process types in micro manufacturing process chains
10
Quality Aspects
417

problems as other engineering design tasks. Usually the design process is faced
with a very ill-structured problem. This problem has to be solved by achieving an
objective with limited time and resources. Tong deﬁnes the term ‘‘design’’ as
followed [49]:
What is design? Design is the process of constructing a description of an artifact that
satisﬁes a (possibly informal) functional speciﬁcation, meets certain performance criteria
and resource limitations, is realizable in a given target technology, and satisﬁes criteria
such as simplicity, testability, manufacturability, reusability etc.; the design process itself
may also be subject to certain restrictions such as time, human power, cost, etc.
Based on this deﬁnition, the design of process chains is about the creation of a
temporal and logical sequence of processes, which is able to transform given
inputs into deﬁned outputs. Thereby, a substantial distinction between the terms
‘‘operation’’, ‘‘process’’ and ‘‘process chain’’ is necessary. The following deﬁnition
provides three different levels (Fig. 10.26).
The ﬁrst level is about the ‘‘operation’’, which represents the smallest unit of a
process chain. Each operation includes input and output variables and refers to an
activity, for example the drilling of a hole [10]. The second level is about the
‘‘process’’, which consists of several operations. Such an operation sequence is
always linear and has to be assigned to at least one machine or resource. The
combination of several processes into one process chain takes place at the third
level.
In order to design high performance process chains, it is necessary to use
knowledge from former implementations. In particular, the phases of conﬁguration
and evaluation need such information in order to estimate the behavior of the
process chain in regard to the technical feasibility, cost-efﬁciency and product
quality (Fig. 10.27).
input variables
output variables
operation
operation
process chain
process
process
process
process
process
operation
operation
Fig. 10.26 Visualization of process chains, consisting of processes and operations
418
R. B. Bergmann

The ﬁrst phase of process chain design is the accomplishment of the require-
ment analysis. Thereby, the product (form, shape, surface, etc.) is analyzed in
order to deﬁne the requirements for production. The next phase of process chain
conﬁguration concerns the generation of process chains by using deﬁned process
modules. Several different process chains can be generated, tuned and afterwards
evaluated. The incremental change in some parameters and process modules
allows the optimization of the process chain scenario. For the optimization of the
process chain, the technical feasibility, cost efﬁciency and the aspired quality have
to be taken into account. Thereby, historical data, simulation techniques or
experiments can be used as data sources. The best process chain scenario is chosen
for implementation. After determining material ﬂows and layout of the process
chain resources the sequence will be constructed and commissioned. The phase of
process calibration tries to improve the product quality of the process chain overall
by adjusting single process modules with each other. At least, however, the pro-
duction can be started.
10.3.3 Conﬁguration and Evaluation of Process Chains
The conﬁguration and evaluation of process chains is an important part of the
design process. The conﬁguration of process chains comprises many opportunities
and possible scenarios, which have to be evaluated and compared to each other.
Therefore it is necessary to have a systematic approach for the conﬁguration of
optimized process chains. Denkena describes a method for the conﬁguration
of process chain with three different conﬁguration strategies [10]. The strategies of
adoption, substitution and integration are depicted in Fig. 10.28.
Require-
ment
Analysis
Factory 
Planning
Construc-
tion
Commissi-
oning
Calibration
Start of
Production
Configura-
tion
Process Chain Design
Process Chain Implementation 
Tuning & Evaluation
historical 
data
technical 
feasibility
cost
efficiency
product 
quality
knowledge 
transfer
simulation 
runs
experi-
ments
Fig. 10.27 Procedure model of process chain design and implementation
10
Quality Aspects
419

The ﬁrst strategy of adaption tries to tune process steps in a way that they would
better ﬁt their predecessor and successor. In the ﬁgure it is shown that process B is
adapted to processes A and C. That could be for example the adjustment of some
process parameters in order to harden the workpiece for the next process step. The
strategy of substitution is very useful, if there are other manufacturing technolo-
gies which are much more cost-efﬁcient, technological feasible or produce a better
product quality. An example could be the replacement of grinding (Process B) by
hard turning (Process D). The strategy of integration is about the reduction of the
operation sequence. Usually, the additional handling operations between the
processes are eliminated by having more than one process in one machine. This
can be done, for example, by a machining center. These strategies of conﬁguration
help generate process chain scenarios. In order to identify the most promising ones
and to discontinue the worst ones, it is necessary to continuously evaluate the
process chain scenarios, because it is planned from the outline to the detail. Ide-
ally, each conﬁguration step could be evaluated and compared to the other sce-
narios, but this approach is too time-consuming. Instead, the different scenarios are
compared to each other by using the same level of detail.
The evaluation of process chains depends on three general requirements:
• process chains have to be technologically feasible
• process chains have to be cost-efﬁcient
• process chains have to assure a high quality of manufacturing.
Obviously, the general requirements are in contrast with each other. Cost-
efﬁcient process chains almost never assure the best quality. Thereby, a tradeoff
between technological demands, cost-efﬁciency and product quality have to be
found. This can be done by the use of weighting factors and an objective function
in order to determine the total value of across these three criteria:
Fig. 10.28 Strategies for the conﬁguration of process chains [11]
420
R. B. Bergmann

totalvalue ¼ Wt  Pt þ Wc  Pc þ Wq  Pq
ð10:18Þ
Wt
Technological weighting factor
Pt
Technological evaluation parameter
Wc
Cost efﬁciency weighting factor
Pc
Cost efﬁciency evaluation parameter
Wq
Quality weighting factor
Pq
Quality evaluation parameter
One suitable method for evaluating different objectives in a structured way is
the use of an objective tree. An objective tree starts with one over-arching
objective, which is subdivided into several main objectives. These main objectives
can also be divided in some sub-objectives and so on. This process is continued
until a ‘‘tree’’ is created that covers all the separate objectives. In order to achieve a
structured weighting of the different objectives, the sum of the weighting factors
for each level is 100 %. For the ﬁrst level it would be:
100 % ¼ Wt þ Wc þ Wq
ð10:19Þ
Wt
Technological weighting factor
Wc
Cost efﬁciency weighting factor
Wq
Quality weighting factor
To give an example, Jurklies used this method for the evaluation of process
chains in the context of tool and mold making [26]. Tool and mold making demand
high quality process chains with few deviations, which makes such an systematic
total value
time
(wct)
quality of 
manufacturing 
process 
(wct)
impacts of 
quality 
(wqi)
product quality 
(wq)
cost-efficiency 
(wc)
costs 
(wcc)
technological
feasibility
(wt)
technological
sensibility
(wts)
resource 
availibility 
(wts)
impacts of 
process 
changing
(wqip)
impacts of 
rechucking 
(wqir)
setup 
time
(wcts)
transport 
time
(wctt)
manufactoring 
time
(wctm)
setup 
costs
(wccs)
transport 
costs
(wcct)
manufactoring 
costs
(wccm)
Fig. 10.29 Example of an objective tree for the evaluation of process chains [27]
10
Quality Aspects
421

approach very necessary. An enhanced structure of Jurklies’ evaluation scheme is
given in Fig. 10.29.
It is obvious that the evaluation of new process chains is much more difﬁcult
than the evaluation of process chains with minor changes. In particular, the esti-
mation of technological feasibility and possible product quality requires a lot of
experience and the support of knowledge-based planning systems.
10.3.4 Design Aspects of an Integrated Micro
Manufacturing Process Chain
In comparison to the planning of macro process chains, the consideration of size
effects implies an additional planning factor. Although the procedure of process
chain planning outlined at the beginning of this chapter can also be used for micro
process chains, the planning is much more challenging as the process chain
behavior is more dynamic and complex than in the macro world. As a result, the
Fig. 10.30 Procedure for the generation and conﬁguration of integrated micro manufacturing
process chains [42]
422
R. B. Bergmann

evaluation of the technical feasibility, cost-efﬁciency and product quality is much
more difﬁcult. Therefore, it is necessary to rely on a knowledge-based planning
approach, in order to enable the quality-oriented design of micro process chains.
The general idea is to make use of past experiences. The objective of the quality-
oriented process chain is to identify serious issues early during the planning phase.
Thereby, the focus is on the conﬁguration and the evaluation of integrated micro
process chains. The overall procedure for the conﬁguration and tuning of inte-
grated micro process chains is shown in Fig. 10.30. In order to enable an effective
process design, this procedure should be followed in conjunction with the product
design. Thereby, for each of the products features, suitable processes have to be
selected and conﬁgured and tuned. As a result, dependencies between processes
can be determined during the product design and serious issues can be taken into
consideration early on. For instance, a speciﬁc manufacturing technology can be
suitable to satisfy a speciﬁc production process, whereas its characteristics can
lead to problems in another process later in the chain.
By considering manufacturing as well as quality inspection and handling pro-
cesses, an integrated micro process chain will be designed. The ﬁrst step is to
identify process requirements and select adequate manufacturing technologies.
Then the design of the process sequence starts by specifying the selected manu-
facturing processes. The next step integrates quality inspection processes into the
process chain. Thereby, quality inspection processes will be deﬁned based on
speciﬁc quality parameters derived from global requirements, and of requirements
implied by preceding manufacturing processes.
Afterwards, suitable quality inspection technologies will be identiﬁed or
developed and will be integrated into the existing process chain of the manufac-
turing processes. In the same way, handling processes will be included in the
process chain, depending on the handling requirements of manufacturing and
quality inspection processes. After deﬁning the integrated processes chain, the
phase of tuning starts. Thereby, relevant input and output process parameters as
well as the workpiece parameters will be deﬁned and actual values will be
assigned depending on the technologies deﬁned. In addition, process tuning
parameters are speciﬁed and process overlapping parameters are identiﬁed. Pro-
cess overlapping parameters are either input or output parameters of two or more
processes. As a result, these indicate dependencies between distinct processes
within the overall process chain. These parameters could either refer to process
speciﬁc characteristics (e.g. a manufacturing or quality inspection process
requiring a minimum positioning precision from the preceding handing process) or
they could refer to product speciﬁc characteristics (e.g. a manufacturing step
requiring a speciﬁc roughness, which has to be ensured by the preceding manu-
facturing steps).
After deﬁning the process chain’s parameters, an impact analysis will be per-
formed, in order to tune the process chain in an optimal way. By specifying input
and output thresholds as well as rules for the interpretation of these thresholds, the
interdependencies between the processes are deﬁned. Additionally, experiments or
simulation runs can be developed, in order to acquire data for sensitive processes.
10
Quality Aspects
423

Finally, impact analysis will be performed along the complete process chain. It
aims to identify issues between the different processes. The objective of the tuning
phase is to solve all serious issues by adjusting the parameters, and therefore the
selected technologies. The next step is to evaluate the process chain and compare
the results with the other scenarios. The most promising scenarios will be detailed
further and strived to be optimized. After some iteration, the best scenario will be
identiﬁed and used for the general process design’s implementation phase.
10.3.5 Example: Quality-Oriented Design of a Micro Deep
Drawing Process Chain
This section is about the speciﬁc quality-oriented design of a micro deep drawing
process chain. Therefore an integrated process chain consisting of a quality
inspection process and a micro deep drawing process is designed. This simple
scenario shows some very relevant aspects of integrated quality control by pre-
senting the methods applied for sampling and surface inspection. The structure of
the process chain for micro deep drawing is shown in Fig. 10.31.
The left side of the image denotes the process chain, whereas the right side
depicts quality control. The process chain starts with an initial tool and material
check. During the deep drawing process, all relevant parameters for the manu-
facturing of a micro cup, e.g. drawing force and punch velocity, are set. At the
beginning, all parameters are set to initial values relevant to the process window.
After that, the operative cold forming procedure is performed. Following the
manufacturing process, the procedure of quality control is executed. As micro cold
Fig. 10.31 Quality-oriented
design of a micro deep
drawing process chain
424
R. B. Bergmann

forming enables the bulk production of micro components, it is usually impossible
to inspect all manufactured micro parts. This requires statistical methods to ensure
reliable and accurate quality control. Instead of inspecting all micro components,
quality inspection is applied to a subset of micro parts. Due to the deviation in
processing speeds of the applied technologies, the ﬁrst operation of the quality
control process is the partitioning and random sampling of manufactured com-
ponents. Finding an appropriate size and interval for these samples is a crucial step
in statistical quality control. Large sizes and small intervals correspond to higher
inspection costs. Each sample as well as the correlating subset requires additional
handling and storage operations. Smaller sizes and longer intervals are cheaper,
but could lead to substantial quality issues. Therefore, it is necessary to organize
sampling in an efﬁcient way.
10.3.5.1 Determining the Sample Size and Interval
In many manufacturing scenarios a constant sample size and interval is not suf-
ﬁcient, because there are long phases of very stable processes and only short
phases of strong varying product quality. The idea of dynamic quality control is to
adjust the sample size and interval depending on the actual process stability.
Techniques like the sequential probability ratio test enable ﬂexible, appropriate
and reliable sampling for quality inspection. Another common technique for
ﬂexible subset quantity is fuzzy control. Fuzzy control systems are based on fuzzy
logic, introduced by Zadeh [53]. Compared with classical Boolean logic systems,
fuzzy logic provides the opportunity for a continuous transition between the
belonging and not belonging of a statement to a speciﬁc set. Thereby, statements
that are classiﬁed as true or false can only be processed to a certain degree. The
objective is to dynamically adapt the size of the sample subset within the statistical
quality control dependent on the quality index. Figure 10.32 illustrates the com-
ponents and the operating principle of the fuzzy control system.
Within fuzzy control, the ﬁrst step is the fuzzyﬁcation of the input variables. In
this case, the QI is represented as a linguistic variable. By using linguistic vari-
ables, information that is expressed linguistically can be modeled and processed
without any loss of information. In the example, the range of the values of the QI is
from 0 to 1. Within the fuzzy control, these values are expressed by the linguistic
Fuzzy control
Fuzzyfication
Input u(t)
Output y(t)
500
1
0
0
1
1
µ
µ
Defuzzyfication
Inference
Rule Base
Fig. 10.32 Fuzzy control for determining the dynamic sample size
10
Quality Aspects
425

values very bad, bad, normal, good and very good. In order to transform the real
value of the QI, the fuzzy control performs fuzzyﬁcation. The fuzzyﬁcation step in
Fig. 10.32 shows the behavior of all membership functions. Each deﬁned linguistic
variable has its own membership function that describes to what extent the
statement of the linguistic variable is true. After fuzzyﬁcation the linguistic
variables are analyzed by using a rule base that is generated by expert knowledge.
For each single rule of the rule base the degree of fulﬁllment is computed. By
analyzing all rules the inference step of the fuzzy control system is performed. The
following defuzzyﬁcation step generates the real value of the output value, in this
case the size of the sample subset. There a many different ways of performing this
step. In order to implement an efﬁcient defuzzyﬁcation, the fuzzy output variables
are often modeled as so-called singletons. By using the gravity methods for sin-
gletons a real value for the size of the sample subset can be computed.
10.3.5.2 Surface Inspection and Rectiﬁcation
All micro parts from the correct and signiﬁcant subset are used for the Quality
inspection sub-process. An image acquisition technique successfully applied in the
micro domain, which satisﬁes the strict accuracy requirements of the image pro-
cessing operation, is confocal laser microscopy [23]. This technique generates 2D
and 3D information from the surface and form of the micro part. At the beginning
of the Quality inspection sub-process, the focus is set to the veriﬁcation of
geometry and form deviations as described in the previous sections. In addition to
these investigations, another important part of quality control is automated surface
inspection. Here, image processing and statistical methods are used to ﬁnd surface
defects. A major challenge in automated surface inspection is the arbitrary shape,
size and orientation of surface defects. Therefore, the surface inspection frame-
work starts with a decomposition of the input image in different scales and ori-
entations, using multi-scale analysis methods like the steerable pyramid technique
[46]. After decomposition, the local binary pattern operator (LBP) is applied [37].
This operator is based on local pixel thresholding and calculates weights in a range
1
0.50
0
1
0.50
0
10
20
20
20
30
30
30
10
10
0
10
20
30
Fig. 10.33 Defect detection result of the surface inspection framework; from left to right: input
image with labeled defect, two different statistical features
426
R. B. Bergmann

of [0, 255], where 0 corresponds to no change and 255 to a maximum change in
texture. To detect the exact localization of a defect each LBP image is decomposed
in overlapping blocks. In each block statistical values are calculated, like mean,
median, and standard deviation. For comparison, all statistical values are nor-
malized into a range of [0, 1]. A ﬁnal decision on defect location results from a
non-maxima suppression and merging of all individual block statistics. A detailed
overview of the surface inspection process developed in CRC 747 is given in [43].
A result of the framework without segmentation of the micro cup border is shown
in Fig. 10.33:
The ﬁgure shows an input image with a labeled defect. The two resulting
images represent two different statistical features. The magnitude of the statistical
results in the images correspond to the probability of a defect region. In this case,
both results vote for the correct defect location.
Besides the detection of defects or form deviations, the classiﬁcation of these
imperfections is a major part of quality inspection. A detailed statistical analysis of
different kinds of defect is important for further quality control and parameter
adjustment. Defects occurring during deep drawing processes can have several
reasons, like faulty manufacturing, material deﬁciency or thermal stress. A detailed
overview of defects during deep drawing is given in [47]. Table 10.7 shows two
main defect classes projected from the macro to micro domain. The micro cup has a
diameter of 500 lm and was acquired using a confocal laser microscope. Further
methods for optical measurement are described in Sect. 10.2.4.
The last step in the quality control process is Impact analysis. During this
operation all defects occurring are evaluated. Signiﬁcant accumulations of speciﬁc
defect classes result in changes to the process parameters. The evaluation of the
whole manufacturing process results in a new parameter setting, which is propa-
gated back into the manufacturing process.
References
1. Ahn, S.J.: Least Squares Orthogonal Distance Fitting of Curves and Surfaces. Universität
Stuttgart, Dissertation (2004)
2. Bergmann, R.B., Bessler, F.T., Bauer, W.: Non-Destructive Testing in the Automotive
Supply Industry: Proc. ECNDT, Berlin (2006)
Table 10.7 Main defect classes during deep drawing
Defect
Example Cause
Retiﬁcation
Bottom
wrinkling
Loose punch/Blank holder
clearance
Reduce blankholder pressure
Wall
wrinking
Loose punch/Blank holder
clearance
Reduce stamp radius
Bottom
fraction
Overcharge drawing force
Reduce blankholder pressure, increase
stamp radius
10
Quality Aspects
427

3. Bergmann, R.B., Huke, P.: Advanced Methods for Optical Nondestructive Testing. In: Osten,
W., Reingand, N. Optical Imaging and Metrology, pp. 393–412. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim
(2012)
4. Berndt,
G.,
Hultzsch,
E.,
Weinhold,
H.:
Funktionstoleranz
und
Messunsicherheit.
Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Technischen Universität Dresden 17(2), 465–471 (1968)
5. Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM): JCGM 100:2008, Evaluation of
Measurement Data—Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement (2008).
Retrieved from www.BIPM.org
6. Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM): JCGM 200:2008, International
Vocabulary of Metrology—Basics and General Concepts and Associated Terms (VIM)
(2008). Retrieved from www.BIPM.org
7. Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM): The International System of Units (SI),
8th edn (2006). Retrieved from www.BIPM.org
8. Cho, M.W., Kim, G.-H., Seo, T.-I., Gong, Y.-C., Cheng, H.-H.: Integrated machining error
compensation method using OMM data and modiﬁed PNN algorithm. Int. J. Mach. Tools
Manuf. 46, 1417–1427 (2006)
9. Danzl, R, Helmli, F.: Three-dimensional reconstruction of surfaces with steep slopes using an
optical measurement system based on a colour focus sensor. In: Proceeding of the 6th Euspen
International Conference, pp. 516–519 (2006)
10. Denkena, B., Tönshoff, H.K.: Prozessauslegung und -integration in die Prozesskette. Spanen-
Grundlagen. Springer, Berlin (2011). doi:10.1007/978-3-642-19772-7
11. Dierolf, M., Menzel, A., Thibault, P., Schneider, P., Kewish, C.M., Wepf, R., Bunk, O.,
Pfeiffer, F.: Ptychographic x-ray computed tomography at the nanoscale. Nature 467,
436–440 (2010)
12. Dijkman, M., Goch, G.: Distortion compensation strategies in the production process of
bearing rings. International Conference on Distortion Engineering (IDE), pp. 227–234 (2008)
13. Dorf, R.C., Bishop R.H.: Modern Control Systems. Pearson Education, pp. 227–234 (2011).
ISBN:978-0-13-138310-4
14. Dresel, T., Häusler, G.l., Venske, H.: Threedimensional sensing of rough surfaces by
coherence radar. Appl. Opt. 31(7), 919–925 (1992)
15. Falldorf, C., Heimbach, Y., von Kopylow, C., Jüptner, W.: Efﬁcient reconstruction of
spatially limited phase distributions from their sheared representation. Appl. Opt. 46(22),
5038–5043 (2007)
16. Filippi, S., Cristofolini, I.: The Design Guidelines Collaborative Framework. Springer,
London (2010). doi:10.1007/978-1-84882-772-1
17. Fleischer, J., Buchholz, I., Peters, J., Viering, B., Goch, G., Patzelt, S., Tausendfreund, A.,
Mehner, J., Dötzel, W., Shaporin, A., Neuschaefer-Rube, U., Hilpert, U., Simon, S., Tutsch, R.,
Herbst, C., Weckenmann, A., Hoffmann, J., Krämer, P.: Erfassung von Standardgeometrieelem
enten im Mikrometerbereich: Herausforderungen und Lösungsansätze. TM. Tech. Mess. 75(5),
327–338 (2008)
18. Forbes, A.B.: Least-squares best-ﬁt geometric elements. Technical Report NPL Report DICT
140/89 (1989)
19. Gauß, C.F.: Theoria motus corporum coelestium in sectionibus conicis solem ambientium.
Perthes Verlag, Hamburg (1809)
20. Geiger, M., Kleiner, M., Eckstein, R., Tiesler, N., Engel, U.: Microforming. CIRP Ann.—
Manuf. Technol. 50(2), 445–462 (2001)
21. Goch, G.: Gear metrology. CIRP Ann.—Manuf. Technol. 52(2), 659–695 (2003)
22. Goch, G., Dijkman, M.: Holonic quality control strategy for the process chain of bearing
rings. CIRP Ann.—Manuf. Technol. 58(1), 433–436 (2009)
23. Hansen, H.N., Carneiro, K., Haitjema, H., De Chiffre, L.: Dimensional micro and nano
technology. Ann. CIRP 55(2), 721–734 (2006)
24. Häusler, G., Leuchs, G.: Physikalische Grenzen der optischen Formerfassung mit Licht. Phys.
Bl. 53(5), 417–422 (1997)
428
R. B. Bergmann

25. Häusler, G., Richter, C., Leitz, K.-H., Knauer, M.C.: Microdeﬂectometry—a novel tool to
acquire three-dimensional microtopography with nanometer height resolution. Opt. Lett.
33(4), 396–398 (2008)
26. Hoffmann, J.: Tastsysteme für die Mikro- und Nanomesstechnik Nanometeraufgelöste
Oberﬂächenerfassung. In: tm—Technisches Messen 75(5), 311–317 (2008)
27. Jurklies, I.: Generierung und Bewertung von Prozessketten für den Werkzeug- und
Formenbau. Shaker Verlag, Aachen, Germany (2004)
28. Kreis, T.: Handbook of Holographic Interferometry. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim (2005)
29. Lindner, M. W.: White-light interferometry via an endoscope. In: Creath, K., Schmit, J. (eds.)
SPIE. 4777, Nr. 1: Interferometry XI: Techniques and Analysis, pp. 90–101 (2002)
30. Malacara, D., Malacara, Z.: Handbook of Optical Design, 2nd edn. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New
York (2004)
31. Mittag, H.J.: Qualitätsregelkarten. Carl Hanser Verlag, München (1993). ISBN 978-
3446176616
32. Montgomery, D.C.: Introduction to Statistical Quality Control 6th edn. Wiley, New York
(2008). ISBN:978-0470169926
33. Nelles, O.: Nonlinear System Identiﬁcation, pp. 239–269. Springer, Berlin (2001). ISBN:3-
540-6736-5
34. Neuschaefer-Rube, U., Neugebauer, M., Ehrig, W., Bartscher, M., Hilpert, U.: Tactile and
optical microsensors: test procedures and standards. In: Measurement Science and
Technology 19, Nr. 8, S. 084010, p. 5 (2008)
35. NORM ISO 14253: Geometrical Product Speciﬁcation (GPS)—Inspection by Measurement
of Workpieces and Measuring Equipment, Part 1–Part 4 (1998–2011)
36. NORM ISO 21747: Statistical Methods—Process Performance and Capability Statistics for
Measured Quality Characteristics (2006)
37. Ojala, T., Pietikäinen, M., Harwook, D.: A comparative study of texture measures with
classiﬁcation based on featured distributions. Pattern Recogn. 29(1), 51–59 (1996)
38. Pfeifer, T.: Production Metrology. Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag, München (2002). ISBN
3486258850
39. Pfeifer, T.: Quality management—strategies, methods, techniques, pp. 143–150. Carl Hanser,
Munich (2002). ISBN:3-446-22003-8
40. Savio, E., De Chiffre, L., Schmitt, R.: Metrology of freeform shaped parts. CIRP Ann.—
Manuf. Technol. 56(2), 810–835 (2007)
41. Schnars, U., Jüptner, W.: Direct recording of holograms by a CCD target and numerical
reconstruction. Appl. Opt. 33(2), 179–181 (1994)
42. Scholz-Reiter, B., Lütjen, M., Brenner, N.: Technologieinduzierte Wirkungszusammenhänge
in der Mikroproduktion—Entwicklung eines Modellierungskonzepts. In: Schenk, M. (ed.) 22.
HAB-Forschungsseminar: Digital Engineering—Herausforderung für die Arbeits- und
Betriebsorganisation, October, pp. 81–102. GITO Verlag, Magdeburg (2009)
43. Scholz-Reiter, B., Weimer, D., Thamer, H.: Automated surface inspection of cold-formed
micro-parts. Ann. CIRP 61(1), 531–534 (2012)
44. Seebacher, S., Osten, W., Jüptner, W.: Measuring shape and deformation of small objects
using digital holography. In: Pryputniewicz, R., Brown, G., Jüptner, W. (eds.) Laser
Interferometry IX, Proc SPIE 3479, pp. 104–115 (1998)
45. Servin, M., Cywiak, M., Davila, A.: Extreme shearing interferometry: Theoretical limits with
practical consequences. Opt. Express 15(26), 17805–17818 (2007)
46. Simoncelli, E.P.; Freeman, W.T.: The steerable pyramid: A ﬂexible architecture for multi-
scale derivative computation. In: International Conference on Image Processing, pp. 444–447
(1995)
47. Spur, G.; Stöferle, T.: Handbuch der Fertigungstechnik, vol. 2–3. Hanser, Munich (1983).
ISBN:978-3-446-12533-9
48. Stöbener, D., Goch, G.: In-process measurements of wall thickness deviations during turning.
Materialwiss. Werkstofftech. 40(5-6), 420–425 (2009)
10
Quality Aspects
429

49. Tong, C., Sriram, D.: Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Engineering Design: Design representation and
models of routine design. Academic Press Professional, San Diego (1992)
50. Weck,
M.,
Eversheim,
W.,
König,
W.,
Pfeifer,
T.:
Die
Realisierung
von
Qualitätsregelkreisen—zentrales
Moment
der
integrierten
Qualitätssicherung.
In:
Wettbewerbsfaktor Produktionstechnik. VDI-Verlag, Düsseldorf (1990)
51. Weckenmann, A., Estler, T., Peggs, G., McMurtry, D.: Probing systems in dimensional
metrology. CIRP Ann.—Manuf. Technol. 53(2), 657–684 (2004)
52. Yamaguchi, I., Zhang, T.: Phase-shifting digital holography. Opt. Lett. 22, 1268–1270 (1997)
53. Zadeh, L.A.: Fuzzy sets. Inf. Control 8, 338–353 (1965)
54. Zhang,
P.,
Mehrafsun,
S.,
Lübke,
K.,
Goch,
G.,
Vollertsen,
F.:
Laserchemische
Feinbearbeitung und Qualitätsprüfung von Mikrokaltumform-Werkzeugen. Kolloquium
Mikroproduktion, Karlsruhe (2011)
430
R. B. Bergmann

Index
A
Abrasive wear, 33, 219
Acceleration, 312
Accuracy, 238, 312
Activation enthalpy, 74, 75
Additive layer manufacturing (ALM), 223
Adhesion, 220
Adhesion at grippers, 16
Adhesive wear, 34, 219
Adiabatic energy model, 191
Aero-bulgetest, 40
Aerostatic bearings, 318
Affected radius, 238
Age hardenable alloy, 61
Age hardening, 62–64
Aging, 62–64
Alloying elements, 58, 62, 63
Aluminum, 75, 79, 82, 83, 92
Aluminum-scandium alloy, 183
Anisotropy, 348
Apparent stress, 69, 70
Artiﬁcial ageing, 185, 186
Asynchronous motors, 315
Austenite, 57–60
Austenite grain size, 58
Austenitization temperature, 57, 58
Austenitization time, 58
Axial feed rate, 108
B
Bainite, 58
Bamboo grain structure, 97
Bamboo structure, 42, 53
Bauschinger effect, 113
Beam characteristic, 193
Bearings, 318
Bending, 92, 94, 155, 157
Bending angle, 159
Bending fatigue specimen, 91
Bending force, 157
Bergmann, Ralf B., 392
Brass (CuZn15), 85
Buckling, 115, 116
Bulge test, 40
Bulk metal forming, 104
Burgers vector, 73, 74
C
Calibration zone, 108
Carbides, 58
Carbon, 58, 60
Carbon content, 59, 61
Categories of size effect, 8
Characteristic geometries for extruded
parts, 122
Characteristic, 313
Characteristic length, 17
Charging, 65
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), 293
Classiﬁcation of the different variants
of extrusion methods, 122
Coarse grains, 129
Coatings, 328
Coefﬁcient of friction l, 21
Coherency strain, 63
Coherent precipitates, 63
Cold forging, 122
Cold isostatic pressing, 185
Cold work hardening, 122
Combined standard measurement
uncertainty, 405
Complete measurement result, 404
F. Vollertsen (ed.), Micro Metal Forming, Lecture Notes in Production Engineering,
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-30916-8,  Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
431

Complex design, 2
Component feed, 67, 68
Compression, 70, 85
Compression test, 69, 70, 81
Compression yield strength, 71
Conﬁguration of process chain, 419
Confocal, 397
Confocal microscope, 398, 400
Conformal ﬁlm growth, 291
Continuous-cooling transformation(CCT), 58
Continuous friction based system, 324
Cooling rate, 58, 64
Coordinate measurement, 396
Copper, 75, 79, 83, 84, 86, 87, 92, 95–99
Core grain, 72, 80
Core zone, 80
Corrosion, 222
Corrosion resistance, 222
Corrosive wear, 219
Crack initiation, 92, 94, 99
Crank presses, 314
Crankshafts, 313
Critical shear stress, 77
Crystal orientation factor, 78
Crystal plasticity, 359, 366
Cumulative disibution function, 90
CVD-processes, 294
Cyclic load, 93–95
Cyclic loading, 93
D
DC01, 352
DC-motors, 315
Decho, Helge, 178
Deep drawing, 136
Deep drawing diagram, 137
Deﬁnition, 8, 250
Deﬁnition for the size, 10
Deﬁnition micro metal forming, 1
Deﬁnition, size effects, 8
Defocusing effect, 191
Deformation degree, 57, 58, 107, 125, 129
Deformation mechanism, 72
Degree of deformation, 93, 95
Density effects, 12
Density size effect, 95
Description of size effects, 7
Designation for size, 10
Diamond forming die, 288
Diffusion, 56, 58, 62, 63, 66
Diffusor, 67
Direct-forward extrusion process, 129
Direct metal deposition, 223
Dislocation, 72, 93
Dislocation annihilation, 57, 72, 96
Dislocation density, 73
Dislocation hardening, 73
Dislocation movement, 72, 74, 80
Dislocations at free surfaces, 55
Dislocation sources, 72
Distribution , 90
Double-Cup-Extrusion-Test (DCE), 126
Drawing ratio, limiting, 138
Drop-down tube furnace, 58, 60, 64–68
Drop duration, 64, 66–68
Dry friction, 28
Dry processing, 324
E
Effect strength, 11
Efﬁciency of deformation gF, 126
Efﬁciency, 152
Eggshell-effect, 34
Elastic deformation, 347
Elastic limit, 70
Elastic spring back, 157, 159
Elasto-plastic computation, 366
Electric linear, 315
Electro-chemical, 260
Electron beam melting, 223
Elongation after fracture, 70
Elongation at maximum load, 70
Endurance limits, 89–95, 99
Engineering of a press, 317
Equivalent stress amplitude, 94
Etching reaction, 263
Euler buckling, 109
Expulsion via grit blasting, 246
Extended hall-petch relationship, 78, 79
Extrusion tools for micro forming, 129
F
Failure probability, 90
Fatigue, 89–92, 94, 99
Fatigue crack initiation, 96
Fatigue limit, 88–90
Fatigue notch factor, 93
Fatigue ratio, 92, 93
Fatigue specimen, 90, 96
Fatigue strength, 97, 99
Fatigue test, 90
Feeding units, 313
FEM-simulation, 353
Ferrite, 58
Ferrite/pearlite, 57
432
Index

Fine-grained structure, 129
Finite element method, 350
Flange height, 164
Flaring ratio, 164
Flexible machining of micro forming
tools, 267
Flow stress, 69, 71, 75–78, 80, 82, 115
Flow stress atlas, 82
Flush, 255
Force-linked presses, 312
Formability, 38, 118
Formability of preforms, 197
Forming limit diagram (FLD), 39
Forming limit, 163
Forming machines, 312
Forward model, 368
Fracture machining, 249
Free-standing sheet, 185
Friction, 20
Friction factor m, 22
Friction function, 26
Friction polishing, 287
Fringe projection, 396, 397, 400
Furnace concepts, 59, 64, 65, 68
G
Gauging, 390
General demands on the materials
for extrusion tools, 131
General mechanism of size effects, 10
General requirements on extrusion tools, 130
Geometrical size effect, 95
Geometrically necessary dislocations, 55, 72
Geometry, 392, 394, 395, 398, 401
Glide dislocation, 73, 74
Glow discharge, 178
Goch, Gert, 383, 407
Gradation of material composition, 211
Gradient, 94, 212
Grain accommodation factor, 74, 78
Grain boundaries, 77, 80
Grain boundary hardening, 73, 73
Grain boundary movement, 57
Grain boundary resistance, 73, 78
Grain growth, 56, 57
Grains, 79
Grain size, 52, 56–58, 72, 73, 78–80, 82,
86–88
Grain size effect, 77, 78
Grain-size-to-thickness ratios, 96
Grain structure, 57
Gripping, 332, 342
H
Hall-petch effect, 18
Hall-petch equation, 78, 79
Hall-petch relation, 78
Hall-petch relationship, 73
Hammer, 312
Handling, 2, 331, 333–335
Hardening, 74
Hardening mechanism, 73, 80
Hardness, 92, 186
Heat affected zone, 239
Heat transfer coefﬁcient, 64, 65
Heat transfer rate, 64
Heat treatment, 56, 57, 62, 64, 66–68
Heat treatment time, 64
Heinz-Rolf Stock, 178
Helmholtz double layer, 259
High dimensional and shape
accuracy, 122
High-cycle fatigue (HCF), 89, 95
High-strength aluminum alloys, 178
Holograph, 395–397, 399–402
Homogenization, 353
Hooke’s law, 69
Hybrid Presses, 312, 315
Hydraulic bulge test, 41
Hydraulic presses, 312
I
Ideal work wid, 124
Impact analysis, 427
Incoherent, 63
Incremental forming, 104
Individual standard measurement
uncertainties, 405
Inert gas, 67
Infeed and plunge methods, 322
Infeed swaging, 106
Inﬂuences, 93
Inﬂuences on the endurance limit, 92
In-process, 412, 413
In-process controller, 415
Integrated direct driven feed, 324
Interferometry, 393, 396–400
Intermetallic phase, 62
Introduction and deﬁnition, 237
Inverse modelling, 368
Isostatic pressing, 187
J
Joining, 2
Index
433

K
Kelly-ﬁne mechanism, 63, 73
L
Large variety of size effects, 11
Laser ablation, 250
with long pulses, 250
with short pulses, 255
with ultrashort pulses, 356
Laser beam waist radius, 238
Laser-induced chemical machining, 358
Laser induced shock wave, 150
Laser intensity, 242
Laser melting, 188
Laser milling, 237, 238
Laser milling by intersecting beams, 248
Laser Milling in a Reactive Ambient Gas, 247
Laser Milling Via Grit Blasting, 246
Laser Milling Via Non-Reactive Gas Jet, 243
Laser Milling Via Reactive Gas Jet, 247
Laser repetition rate, 242
Laser shock bending, 160
Laser shock formation, 43
Laser subtracted chip, 238
Laser wavelength, 242
Layer architectures, 302
Leiden frost phenomena, 64, 65
Lifetime, 89, 90
Linear motor press, 315
Line density effect, 13
Linked parts, 331, 337
Liquid phase etching, 263
Load frequency, 91
Loading, 90, 92, 94
Local endurance limit, 94
Logarithmic degree of deformation, 71
Log normal distribution, 90
Low carbon steel (DC01), 84
Low-cycle fatigue (LCF), 89
Lower dead center, 314
Low weight, 2
Lübke, Karsten, 383, 407
Lubricant pocket model, 28
Lubrication pockets, 299
M
Machine work, 123
Magnetron sputtering, 180
Mandrel, 107
Manufacturing, 340
Marten’s hardness, 111
Martensite, 58–61
Martensite ﬁnish, 59
Martensite start, 59, 61
Martensite transformation, 59
Martensitic hardening, 57, 64
Material accumulation, 189
Material gradient, 219
Material library, 364, 365
Material properties, 86
Material removal rates (MRR), 240, 242
Maximum local stress, 93
Measurement systems, 392, 398
Measurement uncertainty, 404
Measuring methods, 394
Measuring technique, 90
Mechanical properties, 58
Medium ﬂow stress kfm, 124
Metal, 93, 239
Method of choice, 240
Micro grinding, 278
Micro metal forming (MMF), 1
Micro milling, 269
Micro structure size effect, 95
Micro structured surfaces, 275
Micro valve housing, 107
Microgeometry effects, 18, 19
Microscopy, 397
Microstructural parameters, 86–88
Microstructure of a thermal spray
coating, 215
Microstructure size effect, 99
Milling precision, 242
Models, 77
Mond process, 294
Motors, 315
MUM, 317
N
Nakajima test, 40
Natural aging, 63
Near-process, 412, 413
Near-process control loops, 415
Near-process controller, 413
Near-process level, 412, 415
Near-process quality control, 415
Neutral surface, 108
Nomenclature, 10
Nominal stress, 93
Non-destructive testing, 394
Normal grain growth, 53
Notch, 91–94
Notch root, 93, 94
Number of cycles until
fracture, 89
434
Index

O
Occurring distortion of extruded micro
parts, 129
Oligo structure, 42
Optical metrology, 392, 394
Optical sensors, 392, 396
Orientation distribution function, 361
Orientation factor, 78, 79
Orientation of a monocrystal, 360
Orowan mechanism, 63, 73
Osculation ratio, 110
Overaging, 63
P
Parameter identiﬁcation, 373
Particle hardening, 73
Pearlite, 58
Phase, 63
Phase diagram, 62
Phase transformation, 57, 58
Photogrammetry, 397
Physical vapor deposition (PVD), 178, 289
Piece part, 331, 338
Piercing and blanking, 166
Piezo actuator, 313
Piezo presses, 312
Plasma, 178
Plastic behavior, 70, 77
Plastic deformation, 69, 70, 72, 3490
Plasticity, 72, 77
Plastic strain, 70
Plunge swaging, 106
Pneumatic bulge test, 40
Pneumatic presses, 312
Point density effect, 12
Pole ﬁgure, 361
Polycrystal, 76–79
Polycrystalline, 41, 77
Polycrystal with size effects, 42
Porosity, 210
Post-processing, 213
Precipitation hardening, 61–63
Precipitation sequence, 63
Predictor-corrector method, 351
Presses, 311
Primary recrystallization, 56–58
Principle of ﬂange forming, 162
Probing systems, 389
Process capability index, 410
Process limits, 190
Process performance indices, 409
Production of cold forged components, 329
Productivity, 107
Pulse length or dwell time, 242
Punch force, 116
Punch velocity, 142
Push-pull endurance limit, 93
PVD sheet, 86
Q
Quality assurance, 2
Quality control, 411, 413, 415
Quenching, 58, 62, 64–66, 68
R
Random variables, 90
Real contact area, 32
Rebound, 160
Recoil pressure, 255
Recrystallization, 56, 93
Recrystallization annealing, 56, 57
Recrystallization temperature, 56–58
Reducing zone, 108
Reﬂectometry, 393, 394, 398
Rejection force, 108
Repeat accuracy, 313
Representative volume element
(RVE), 353, 362
Reproducibility of process, 195
Resolution, 392–394, 396–399
Resulting osculation, 327
Retained austenite, 59, 59, 61
Rolling texture, 99
Rotary bending, 89
Rotary swaging, 104, 322
Roughness parameters, 94
S
Sachs, 77, 79
Sachs and Taylor models, 79
Scale parameter, 90, 91
Scaling, 7
Scaling factor, 10
Schmid factors, 99
Schulz, Alwin, 204
Screw presses, 312
Secondary, 56
Secondary artifacts, 19
Secondary recrystallization, 57, 58
Selective laser melting, 223
Self-lubricant, 302
Semi-coherent precipitates, 63
Servo presses, 313
Shape balance effects, 16
Index
435

Shape effects, 14
Shape parameter, 90, 91
Shape size effect, 95
Shape sum effects, 16, 72, 79, 80
Shawn’s wear law, 37
Shear cutting, 166
Shear modulus, 73
Shearography, 393–396, 400
Short cycle times, 122
Shuttle piercing, 172
Silicon technology, 2
Simulation, 351, 352, 364
Single crystal, 77–79
Single crystalline, 42
Single crystalline diamond, 2
Single or multi-stage process, 329
Size effects, 8, 72, 77, 79, 94, 95, 99
Size effects, use of, 11
Size100, 77
Skin layer, 239
Smaller is stronger, 11
Smaller is weaker, 11
S–N curve, 88–90, 96
S–N diagram, 98, 99
Solenoid motor, 315
Solid solution hardening, 73
Solution annealing, 62, 64
Source of size effects, 10
Sparsity, 379
Speciﬁc features of MMF, 1
Specimen size effect, 77
Spray forming, 208
Spring back angle, 159
Sputtering, 178
Stack effect, 67
Standard deviation, 404
Static strength, 93
Statistical size effect, 95
Statistically stored dislocations, 72
Steel, 78, 84, 85, 87, 92, 93
Steel X4CrNi18-10 (1.4301), 85
Step motors, 315
Stiffness, 318
Stiffness tensor, 360
Stochastic model, 360
Strain, 38, 69–71, 76, 77, 80–82, 84, 85,
94
Strain amplitude, 97
Strain distribution, 147, 148
Strain gradient model, 72
Strain gradient plasticity, 72
Strain gradients, 72
Strain hardening, 72, 76, 80
Strain measurement, 81, 82
Strain rate, 73–77, 148, 154
Strain rate sensitivity, 76, 77
Stain sensor, 347
Stress amplitude, 90
Stress-compression diagram, 71
Stress concentration factor, 93, 94
Stress concentration, 91
Stress gradient, 94, 95
Stress state, 93, 94
Stress-strain curves, 82–84
Stress-strain diagram, 69
Stress-strain distribution, 71
Stretch drawing, 146, 151, 153, 154
Stroke frequency, 108
Stroke rate, 313
Structure effects, 17
Structure zone model, 182, 185
Subsurface explosions, 255
Supersaturated solid solution, 62
Surface, 96, 150, 151
Surface effect, 95
Surface evaporation, 250
Surface fatigue, 34
Surface grain model, 72, 79, 80
Surface inspection, 426
Surface grains, 52, 72, 79, 80
Surface layer, 72
Surface roughness, 93, 94
Surface topography, 93, 94
Surface to volume-ratio, 14
Surface zone, 80
Synchronized rotation between the tools and
the workpiece , 323
Synchronous motor, 315
T
Target, 180
Taylor’s polycrystal, 77
TEA, 151
TEA-CO2-laser, 150
Technical strain, 38
Technological size effects, 95
Tensile strength, 187
Tensile tests, 69, 71, 81
Tension compression, 161
Tertiary recrystallization, 54
Testing equipment, 81
Testing strategy, 399
Texture, 348, 355, 359
Thermal free form heading, 188
Thermal penetration radius, 239
Thermal spraying, 214
Thickness to grain size ratio, 78
436
Index

Thin ice-effect, 34
Thread forming, 313
Tiffany grain structure, 96
Tiffany structure, 42, 52, 139
Tikhonov regularization, 369
Time-temperature austenitization diagram, 58
Toggle presses, 314
Tolerance zone, 391
Tool materials, 204
Torque motor, 313
Torsion, 94
Travel-linked presses, 313
Travel-time characteristic, 313
Treatment time, 58
Tribochemical reaction, 36
Tribological size effect, 29
Tribological system, 20
Twin boundaries, 73
Two-scale FEM, 362, 366
Types of machine, 322
U
Ultimate tensile strength, 70
Ultrasonic assisted grinding, 282
Uninterrupted grain ﬂow, 122
Upset ratio, 117, 189
Upsetting, 113
Upsetting test, 70
V
Vapor deposition, 178
Vapor ﬁlm, 64
Variational formulation, 349
Very high-cycle fatigue (VHCF), 89
Vibration, 318
Video extensometer, 81, 82
Vollertsen, Frank, 1, 7
Volume MRR, 251
von Bargen, 56
von Hehl, 56
von Kopylow, Christoph, 392
von Mises stress, 349
W
Weakest-link, 93
Weakest-link concept, 95
Wear, 32
Wear mechanism maps, 36
Wear mechanisms, 32
Wear rate map, 37
Weibull distribution, 90
Weibull effect, 12
Wing forming, 111
Work-hardening, 78
Work-lnked presses, 312
Y
Yield strength models, 72
Yield strengths, 69, 70, 72, 73, 76–78, 80
Yield stress, 349
Young’s modulus, 70, 86, 87
Z
Zhang, 83, 411
Index
437

