www.allitebooks.com

Microsoft Windows Intune 2.0: 
Quickstart Administration
Manage your PCs in the Enterprise through the Cloud 
with Microsoft Windows Intune 
David Overton
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
 
www.allitebooks.com

Microsoft Windows Intune 2.0: Quickstart Administration
Copyright © 2012 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: January 2012
Production Reference: 2230112
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84968-296-1
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Meir Jacob (meirjac@netvision.net.il)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
David Overton
Reviewers
Richard Diver
Robert Pearman
Jason Wallace
Andy Trish
Acquisition Editor
Kerry George
Lead Technical Editor
Susmita Panda
Technical Editors
Kedar Bhat
Priyanka Shah
Naheed Shaikh
Project Coordinator
Jovita Pinto
Proofreader
Stephen Swaney
Indexer
Monica Ajmera Mehta
Graphics
Valentina Joseph D'Silva
Manu Joseph
Production Coordinator 
Shantanu Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu Zagade
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
David Overton has been in the IT industry for over 25 years and has worked at 
Microsoft, in the UK, for more than eleven years. David fell in love with Small and 
Medium Business when he was given responsibility for engaging with journalists, at 
the time of the launch of Small Business Server 2003, in the UK. He has also written 
Small Business Server 2008 Installation, Migration and Conﬁ guration. For the next four 
years, David was responsible for improving SBS deliveries by Microsoft partners. 
David has since moved on to other roles within Microsoft but still continues work 
with a number of small and medium businesses and Microsoft partners.  
David's role at Microsoft includes working with organizations that are moving 
towards cloud-based computing models. He personally became involved with the 
Windows Intune product, as a result. Working with both the UK and US teams, in 
his role there, has lead to the writing of this book.
Besides his day job, David is also a writer; he has written for consumer 
publications and Windows XP and Windows Vista magazines, and he blogs at 
http://davidoverton.com, where he helps readers ﬁ nd solutions to questions 
and problems. In 2009, David published his ﬁ rst book on SBS 2008, which was 
well received.
When not working or writing, David likes to spend time with his family and also 
tries to ﬁ t in sailing, at any time of the year, in any weather.
www.allitebooks.com

Acknowledgement
I would like to thank all those around me who have inspired me to undertake 
another book to help others. My wife and daughters are incredibly generous with 
what would be our time together, allowing me to borrow it to write. My father, 
who is always asking me why things do and don't work and what can be done to 
ﬁ x them. Friends and colleagues have provided feedback, honestly, that has helped 
shape the book with their insight and differing opinions, enabling it to answer more 
questions and provide more useful insight.
Finally, I want to thank and remember my mum. She taught me to chase my dreams, 
no matter how difﬁ cult they may be. My mum got to see my ﬁ rst book published 
and to see this one start, but was not there, in the end, to see this book arrive in its 
ﬁ nished form. I hope she looks down at me from wherever she is and is as proud of 
me as I am of her. I will miss you, mum, and your support for my projects, such as 
this book. For this reason, I dedicate this book to you, for all the love, knowledge, 
and strength you have given me. 
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Richard Diver is a passionate technologist with over 10 years' experience in 
Enterprise level IT systems. Having worked his way up from helpdesk to server 
team, and from consultant to architect, Richard has worked on many large-scale 
projects and gained a wide breadth of knowledge in technology, people, and process. 
During his time at Microsoft, Richard developed technical content and training 
courses in Windows Server Performance, Sysinternals Tools, and Personal 
Productivity, delivering this to internal audiences and customers. He is currently 
working as an Enterprise Architect for Methods Consulting, a London-based 
consultancy specializing in the Public Sector.
Richard has recently completed the review of the latest book Windows Sysinternals 
Administrator's Reference by Mark Russinovich, and has completed the creation of an 
accompanying training course that is now being delivered by Microsoft Engineers 
to their Premier customers.
Andy Trish is an ex-military man with two war medals. He came into the IT 
world in 1999 and has since gained over 60 Microsoft Certiﬁ ed Professional 
qualiﬁ cations in a whole variety of subjects. He has recently written the questions 
and answers for some of the new Microsoft exams. He has held the title of Microsoft 
Most Valuable Professional (MVP) since 2008 and contributed to developing the 
Microsoft Partner Network.
Andy has presented at ﬁ ve Microsoft Worldwide Partner Conferences and a variety 
of other events, globally.
He was the Founding Director of NCI Technologies, based in Cornwall, that won 
the Microsoft OEM Hardware Reseller of the Year, 2011 award and was ﬁ nalist for 
Microsoft Midmarket Provider of the Year, 2011. He has grown the company to a 
staff of twenty-eight, in just seven years.
Andy also co-authored Thinking of Maximising Your Investment as a Microsoft Partner? 
Ask the Smart Questions, with Julie Simpson.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support ﬁ les, eBooks, discount offers, and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support ﬁ les and downloads related to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub ﬁ les 
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print book 
customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at service@
packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range 
of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book library. 
Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notiﬁ ed! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com

 
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface 
1
Chapter 1: Overview of Cloud Computing  
7
Centralized solution, management, and upgrades 
9
Elastic in scale and power 
10
Pricing based on utilization 
11
Delivered using Internet protocols 
11
Secure and private 
12
Service Level Agreement 
12
Availability 
12
Service hours 
13
Recompense 
13
Window Intune SLA 
14
Multiple client device types 
14
Client Software 
15
Programmable interfaces 
16
Different levels of cloud computing 
16
Infrastructure as a Service 
17
Platform as a Service 
17
Software as a Service 
18
Challenges of cloud computing 
18
Network requirements 
19
Data accesses and synchronization 
19
Network bandwidth and latency 
19
Security 
20
Customization 
20
Bringing all this together for Windows Intune 
21
Summary 
21
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 2: Introduction to PC Management Concepts 
23
Continuous cycle of PC Management 
24
Deinition of IT management goals 
24
Using policies for coniguration and deployment 
25
Policies that deliver against the business goals 
26
Ensuring the security settings on the PC provide an adequate level of protection 
26
Tracking the hardware and software assets 
28
Policies that help the IT team do their job 
29
Deploying Windows 7 for everyone 
29
Keeping the PC up-to-date with updates 
29
Reactive response to problems 
30
Ongoing maintenance tasks 
30
Dealing with alerts 
31
Working with users' support requests 
31
Dealing with major problems 
32
Hardware 
32
Software 
33
Reporting on IT management 
33
Summary 
34
Chapter 3: Overview of Windows Intune Features 
35
Why use Windows Intune 
35
Situations when Intune makes sense 
36
First management solution for small and medium enterprises 
36
Moving to a subscription management solution 
37
Managing part of an estate, such as computers that users bring in from home 
37
Windows Intune solution architecture 
37
Windows Intune feature set 
38
Windows 7 
39
Existing Windows 7 Software Assurance customers 
40
Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack 
40
Installation 
42
Management console 
43
Security management 
44
Windows system updates 
44
Anti-malware 
45
Firewall control 
46
Auditing 
47
Reporting 
47
Alerts and Support 
49
Alerts 
50
Remote Assistance 
52

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Software distribution 
53
Managing multiple organizations 
54
Summary 
55
Chapter 4: Signing Up for Windows Intune and  
Installing the Client Software 
57
Preparing for Windows Intune 
57
Licensing of Windows Intune 
58
Software and hardware requirements for Windows Intune 
58
Hardware requirements 
59
Software requirements 
60
Skills required to manage with Windows Intune 
60
Signing up to Windows Intune 
62
Create a Windows Live ID 
62
Sign into MOCP and conigure contacts 
66
Add Windows Intune to your basket and conirm the purchase 
67
Activate your purchase 
70
Adding MDOP to your purchase 
71
Installing Windows Intune onto a client PC 
72
Downloading the client software to the device 
72
Unzipping and installing 
74
Installing via alternative methods 
74
Image based deployment 
75
Waiting for the update process to complete 
76
Conirming installation 
76
Enabling others to manage your PC estate with Windows Intune 
78
Adding a partner to your subscription 
79
Changes a partner sees when managing more than one client 
80
Summary 
82
Chapter 5: Coniguring Windows Intune 
83
Adding additional administrators to Windows Intune 
83
Adding an additional administrator 
84
Changing the Tenant Administrator 
85
Coniguring computer groups 
87
Choosing a group structure 
88
Creating the group structure 
90
Assigning PCs to groups 
92
Coniguring Windows Intune alerts 
96
Coniguring alert activation 
96
Changing alert notiication  
98

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
License management 
104
Managing your Microsoft Volume License details 
104
Managing your other license details 
107
Summary 
109
Chapter 6: Coniguring Management Policy 
111
Policy management 
111
Windows Firewall Settings 
114
Windows Intune Center Settings 
119
Windows Intune Agent Settings 
121
General section 
122
Endpoint Protection section 
122
Updates section 
128
Network bandwidth 
129
Deploy Policy 
130
Editing an existing policy 
131
Update management 
131
Selecting products and classiication of updates to manage 
132
Update Classiication 
134
Coniguring automatic approval of updates 
135
Manually approving updates 
138
Summary 
142
Chapter 7: Software Deployment 
143
Preparing an application for uploading 
144
Understand how the application is installed in silent or quiet mode 
144
Create a folder for each installation package 
144
Place all iles needed for installation into one folder 
145
Examples 
145
Ofice 2010 
145
Adobe Reader and Flash 
146
Intel chipset software 
147
Using App-V packaging for deploying a package 
147
Uploading an application 
148
Adobe Flash – 64-bit MSI 
149
Adobe Flash – 32-bit EXE 
152
Adobe Reader – Windows 7 EXE 
155
Adobe Reader – XP SP3 EXE 
156
Intel drivers 
157
Ofice 2010 
157
Deploying a package 
158
Managing Non-Microsoft Updates 
161

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Removing a package 
167
Uninstalling software from a client PC 
167
Removing a software package 
168
Summary 
169
Chapter 8: Tracking and Reporting 
171
Reporting basics 
172
Reporting basics in Reports workspace 
173
Selection customization 
173
Saving and loading customizations 
174
Sorting data in the columns 
175
Printing a report 
175
Exporting data 
177
Reporting basics in Alerts workspace 
178
Update reports 
179
Tracking software usage 
180
Software installed on an individual computer 
181
Estate-wide software view 
182
Tracking hardware 
185
Computers workspace view 
186
Hardware Inventory Reports 
188
License management 
189
Purchase report 
189
Installation report 
189
Alerts reporting 
190
Custom reports 
192
Reporting on overall PC management achievements 
193
Summary 
193
Chapter 9: Monitoring and Responding to  
Windows Intune Alerts 
195
General Windows Intune alerts 
196
Monitoring alerts 
196
Responding and closing alerts 
199
Malware alerts 
201
Testing malware checks are working 
202
Actions following malware instance 
203
Remote Assistance alerts 
204
Preparing to deliver support 
206
Preparing the client computer for support 
206
Preparing the support agent's computer to offer support 
207

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Providing Assistance 
207
Receiving alert and responding 
208
Providing remote support 
211
Summary 
218
Chapter 10: Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT 
219
Downloading MDOP 
219
Installing DaRT 
222
Building a DaRT CD 
226
Using DaRT to resolve issues 
231
Locksmith 
234
Crash Analyzer 
235
Hotix Uninstaller 
239
Standalone System Sweeper 
240
Summary 
242
Chapter 11: Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition 
243
Downloading Windows 7 Enterprise Edition 
244
Checking pre-requisites for Windows 7 
247
Backing up settings for migration 
249
Installing Windows 7 Enterprise Edition 
253
Restoring user settings and installing applications 
260
Updating Windows Intune 
265
Removing the computer from Windows Intune 
265
Installing the Windows Intune tools 
267
Considering tools for scale deployment of Windows 7 
268
Microsoft Assessment and Planning (MAP) toolkit 
268
Microsoft Deployment toolkit 
269
Summary 
269
Chapter 12: Integration with Existing Microsoft Products 
271
Typical computing scenarios 
272
Desktop environment 
272
Management tools 
273
Services to enable productivity and collaboration 
273
Ofice 365 and on-premise SharePoint and Exchange 
274
System Center 
274
On-premise Windows Server 
275
Identity management with Active Directory 
276
Group Policy 
276
Update management with Windows Software Update Services 
277

Table of Contents
[ vii ]
Windows Small Business Server 
278
Windows Home Server 
279
On-premise versus cloud solutions summary 
280
Mixing on-premise and cloud solutions 
281
Anti-malware products 
282
Summary 
283
Index 
285


Preface
Microsoft Windows Intune is a cloud service solution that simpliies how small and 
mid-sized businesses manage and secure PCs using Microsoft cloud services and 
Windows 7—so your computers and users can operate at peak performance all  
the time.
This step-by-step guide will show you how to plan, set up, and maintain Windows 
Intune, showing you how to manage a group of PCs (either one business or several) 
from the base operating system, through to the patches, anti-malware solution  
and deployed software and policies from a central console, using the Windows 
Intune service.
This book takes you through all the steps to plan, set up and maintain Windows 
Intune and how to manage a group of PCs. The book starts by providing an 
overview of cloud computing and PC management. The book then dives into topics 
such as Windows Intune features, signing up for Windows Intune and installing 
the client software, coniguring Windows Intune, proactive management, and 
monitoring and dealing with alerts, including remote assistance among others. As 
Windows 7 is part of Windows Intune, the book will also cover the minimum steps 
required to move from Windows XP to Windows 7 while keeping user settings  
and preferences.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Overview of Cloud Computing, explores the new cloud computing and  
cloud-based services world that we are moving rapidly towards and includes 
Windows Intune. Before we can embark on this journey it is important that we 
understand the beneits and pitfalls that cloud services bring with them and how 
they apply to us. One mechanism to help protect us against the uncertainties is the 
use of Service Level Agreements, which are explained for Windows Intune.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 2, Introduction to PC Management Concepts, introduces the important concepts 
behind PC management, with a focus on ensuring that the needs of the business are 
the fundamental driver of the IT policy we implement with Windows Intune. We 
then explore how the IT policy decisions are taken to relect these needs and are then 
able to demonstrate that they are delivering on them.
Chapter 3, Overview of Windows Intune Features, describes the features within 
Windows Intune, ensuring that we can take advantage of all of the beneits it has to 
offer, including anti-malware software, update management for both the Windows 
Operating System, and Windows applications, software distribution, system alerts 
and reporting.
Chapter 4, Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software, walks 
through the Microsoft Online Services Portal, coniguring the service administrators, 
and if desired, assigning a partner to assist us. We also download and install the 
Windows Intune client software and ensure it is up and running on each computer.
Chapter 5, Coniguring Windows Intune, runs through the coniguration steps for 
Windows Intune. This starts by adding additional administrators to the system  
to allow multiple system’s managers. We then conigure the computer groups  
for the management process. We enable the alerts that Windows Intune will raise 
and conigure who they are sent to. Finally, we conigure the Microsoft and  
non-Microsoft software license purchases so Windows Intune can report on 
compliance to this.
Chapter 6, Coniguring Management Policy, enables us to construct the policies  
that Windows Intune uses to conigure each computer. This covers irewall,  
anti-malware, and operating system and software updates.  The Windows updates 
section includes coniguring which update categories are checked on each computer 
to see if they are required and the deployment policy options, either manual or 
automatic approval.
Chapter 7, Software Deployment, using Windows Intune can be a complex process 
as all software must be installed silently and with all the iles in one location. We 
explore the process, setting up the command switches and including the right iles 
for a number of common applications as working examples.
Chapter 8, Tracking and Reporting, is a key activity to demonstrate that we are 
delivering a useful service. We explore the activities required to track the hardware 
and software managed by Windows Intune and then the reporting options for 
software use, alerts, and hardware tracking. Since custom reports are often desired, 
we also look at how these could be delivered into a spreadsheet and then enable 
greater insight if desired.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Chapter 9, Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts, requires different 
responses depending on the alert and the level. We will examine how to monitor the 
computers and deal with the special case of remote assistance alerts that a user can 
request and require an almost immediate response due to the fact that someone is 
waiting for us.
Chapter 10, Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT, is an optional purchase with 
Windows Intune that is delivered as part of the Microsoft Desktop Optimization 
Pack. It can be used to resolve deep technical issues that stop a computer booting or 
being accessed by a user. We will understand how we can repair a system, change 
passwords, and edit the devices conigured on a computer. This is a critical for all IT 
desktop managers.
Chapter 11, Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition, is something many of us will 
have to do and is made easier as Windows Intune includes the license required to 
update to the latest version of Windows. We will cover the process of migrating 
from Windows XP to Windows 7 Enterprise Edition. This includes moving the user 
settings from one system to another and then updating Windows Intune.
Chapter 12, Integration with Existing Microsoft Products, is an area we explore as many 
of us will use Windows Intune with other Microsoft technologies. We examine how 
Window Intune interacts with other Microsoft products and whether they are a 
natural it for use with Windows Intune.
What you need for this book
The requirements for Windows Intune are very simple. We need a group of 
Windows-based computers that we want to manage, access to the Internet,  
and a web browser that supports Microsoft Silverlight.
Who this book is for
If you are an administrator or partner who wants to plan, set up, and maintain 
Windows Intune and manage a group of PCs, then this book is for you. You should 
have a basic understanding of Windows administration, however, knowledge of 
Windows Intune would not be required.
Conventions
In this book, you will ind a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 4 ]
Code words in text are shown as follows: "Type a group name, such as  
Office Licenses."
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
# cp /usr/src/asterisk-addons/configs/cdr_mysql.conf.sample
     /etc/asterisk/cdr_mysql.conf
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "If  
you want the user to have full permissions, select Full access, otherwise select  
Read-only access".
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us 
to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title through the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you ind a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you ind any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are veriied, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded to our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title.
 

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


Overview of Cloud 
Computing 
Welcome to the cloud computing revolution currently sweeping through the IT 
landscape. It might be slightly confusing as to why we are starting a book on PC 
management with an introduction to cloud computing, however, the management 
service you are signing up for is a cloud based solution, with beneits and challenges 
that need to be addressed and planned for.
Through this chapter we will understand what cloud computing is and how it 
compares to the traditional on-premise computing models of today. We will then 
discuss what this means to us when relying on the Windows Intune Service and 
highlight other cloud computing services that we might want to use, or perhaps 
already be using from the cloud.
The one word of warning that I will give here is that every IT company on the  
planet appears to have a deinition of cloud computing that suits the products they 
sell. Here, we will deine the key aspects that are required for something to be a 
cloud computing solution.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• 
Facets of cloud computing
• 
Different levels of cloud computing
• 
Challenges of cloud computing
• 
Bringing all this together for Windows Intune

Overview of Cloud Computing
[ 8 ]
We are going to cheat a little. I'm not going to provide one of those quotable 
deinitions of cloud computing, but rather explain what I believe are the key facets 
of cloud computing and how these beneit us and provide us with caution in some 
areas. The reason I'm going to do this is because I recently saw a presentation by a 
UK government oficial that stated they had found twenty-two deinitions of cloud 
computing and none of these deinitions itted their needs, so they deined number 
twenty-three. No doubt I will upset some in the IT world with my information, but 
that is one of the luxuries of being the author, although I think this aligns with most 
of the twenty-three deinitions to date.
The key facets of a cloud solution are as follows:
• 
Centralized solution, management, and upgrades
• 
Elastic in scale and power
• 
Pricing based on utilization
• 
Delivered using Internet protocols
• 
Secure and private
• 
Service Level Agreement
There are other facets that are often part of a cloud solution, but not required and we 
shall also explore these:
• 
Multiple client device types
• 
Client software 
• 
Programmable interfaces
What should not be ignored is that all of the these facets could be delivered on 
our premises, especially if the delivery is for a large organization. However, the 
economies of scale and shared ixed costs that trend to zero are limited by our own 
ability to scale. Some would call this on-premise solution a private cloud, while 
others would call it a well-managed data center with many aspects shared with a 
historic well-run mainframes estate. As a side note, my computing life started with 
mainframes and it makes me smile that a mainframe expert would see almost all of 
the key facets of a cloud solution as those by which mainframe based solutions were 
delivered from private data centers. 
This is one of the key things to understand here. While Internet scalability enables a 
lower cost model and the protocols are becoming more manageable even with our 
irewalls that protect our networks as they connect to the Internet, there is very little 
here that by itself is new. The uniqueness here is that organizations like Microsoft are 
investing billions of dollars to build the data centers and solutions that bring each 
facet together into a handful of locations at a game changing price point.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Centralized solution, management, and 
upgrades
Given that a cloud service is normally provided over the Internet, for scale, the 
solution will be located in a handful of data centers owned and managed by the 
service provider. They will provide everything we need to run the solution, from 
physical servers to networking and application software; however we are not be able 
to directly access this. We use the interfaces they provide for the services and the 
service provider manipulates hardware, software, and conigures the network for us. 
The key thing is that it is a highly replicated solution that has a level of management 
that is taken care of for you. The different cloud computing models and what is 
managed for you, versus by you, will be discussed later in this chapter.
The following diagram demonstrates the items that could move from a distributed 
to a centralized solution with cloud services. We can see that with a centralized 
solution, more resources are required in an IT function rather than repeated in each 
department. While the boxes are not drawn to scale, we should get economies of 
scale as things are centralized. Centralization can take place on our premises or using 
a cloud services provider where some of the IT functions in the diagram are, in effect, 
outsourced to the cloud service provider.
Centralized
Servers
Production
PC’s
IT provided
Multi-Department
Servers and applications
Central services,like e-mail
and internet connection
Software managed, Anti-
Malware and Updates
Storage provided
and backed up
Sales team
Admin team
PC’s
PC’s
Distributed
IT provided
Services
Like e-mail
and internet
connection
Servers
Production
Locally managed Pc’s
software, Anti-Malware
and Updates
Storage
Locally managed
Pc’s and software,
Anti-Malware and
Update
Servers
Storage
Sales team
Admin team
Servers
Storage
Locally managed
Pc’s and software,
Anti-Malware and
Updates

Overview of Cloud Computing
[ 10 ]
With Windows Intune, all the information about each Windows computer is 
centrally stored in multiple Microsoft data centers and can be managed by us, 
no matter whether a server, the network, or even the entire data center fails. The 
application that runs on this infrastructure is the Windows Intune management 
software and it is maintained and upgraded without needing to be involved in the 
process. We will also have client software that connects to this infrastructure that is 
provided by Windows Intune, but the installation onto each client computer still falls 
to us to manage. When we make a change using the management tools at the data 
center, this will automatically be distributed out to the client computers provided 
they are connected to the Internet, implementing our changes without having to visit 
or touch these machines.
While Windows Intune centralizes the management function, storage and 
applications are still provided in the same way as previously delivered.
Elastic in scale and power
The Internet is a big place and the demands on services can be tiny or massive and this 
is expected to change over time, sometimes within minutes. A cloud solution should 
have that lexibility built into it. When we deliver computing resources in our own 
ofices or data center, we have to buy the right number of servers and storage to enable 
us to meet the peak demand. Probably, because it is too complex to do anything else, 
most organizations simply leave these servers on all the time, consuming electricity, 
but adding no value to the business. In a cloud environment, servers are started and 
stopped as needed to deliver the solution, often by the service provider on our behalf. 
We can see all the opportunities that an elastic service can simply scale up or be turned 
off according to our business needs in the following diagram:
Day / Night work load
Comouting Resources Required
On Premise
Resource level
Month / year end peak
On Premise
Resource level
Massive growth
On Premise
Resource level
Time

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
In the case of Windows Intune, this is the application that Microsoft manages and 
they start up and stop the servers as required to deliver the information to the 
Windows Intune client software on the PCs and the management interfaces. 
Pricing based on utilization
There are two elements to the pricing of cloud solutions that need to be discussed. 
The irst is that by virtue of the elastic number of servers used, the cost of the service 
is lower than purchasing for peak capacity. The second is that rather than paying for 
servers, power, cooling, storage, and people, we now pay for utility. This may be a 
fee per user, compute hour, storage, and so on, but it is nothing like the traditional 
buy or lease models for IT where we paid for the hardware and software rather  
than usage.
The low fee we pay for Windows Intune relates to the fact that the service is 
delivered at Internet scale with elastic scalability that means that the actual 
computing required is right sized for all the users of the service at any moment.  
Our usage would be a fraction of the IT required to deliver ourselves because we 
do not actively interact with the management system 100% of the time. Beyond the 
scalability, Microsoft is also able to deliver greater eficiencies in managing the whole 
solution. This enables Microsoft to charge a lat rate per user for the services that is 
lower than the cost of acquiring the software, hardware, and people to manage by a 
signiicant amount.
Delivered using Internet protocols
Protocols describe the way machines talk to each other. Some of these are deined 
by standards bodies and others are known as de-facto standards as they have been 
popularized by the organization or organizations that use them. Either way, they 
need to be Internet friendly so that they can be routed, inspected and secured by 
irewalls and received by different client device types where appropriate.
Windows Intune uses a combination of standards based and de-facto standards,  
but all the protocols are published and known, enabling routing and securing  
via the Internet. Windows Intune uses a standard web browser to deliver the 
management interfaces and then a well-known set of protocols to deliver the  
rest of the information to the client PCs.
The term Cloud is often used when describing solutions that are often hosted and 
certainly connected to over the Internet. What used to be an Internet service is now 
often referred to as a Cloud service, but the terms are often interchangeable.

Overview of Cloud Computing
[ 12 ]
Secure and private
The inal technical facet that all cloud services should have relates to security and 
privacy. The service needs to be as trustworthy as if we were running it ourselves. 
This means that our data is not shared or leaked, and that the communication 
protocols are secure. This is often not something we can test, but we should look  
for a privacy statement from the service provider.
Windows Intune's privacy statement can be found by following the link:  
http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?20.
Service Level Agreement
All quality cloud services should have a Service Level Agreement or SLA for short. 
This will need some careful analysis as this is one of the areas that differs the most 
from running the technology and delivering the service ourselves, and having it 
provided as a cloud service. 
Service Level Agreements consist of two elements repeated for each different 
feature or function of the service being offered. These two elements are Availability 
level and Service hours of a time period and, as a customer, we get some form of 
Recompense if the level of service is not delivered. As we are managing multiple 
users, the number of users impacted, or the proportion of them that were impacted  
is often also included in the calculation.
Availability
Availability is often described as a number of nines, such as "three nines" meaning 
99.9% availability or uptime. Don't be fooled by the number of nines by themselves 
as a service interruption (known as downtime) as it could still have a major impact 
if it was in the middle of our busiest day. The following table shows us what the 
downtime implications are:
 
99% uptime
1% downtime
99.9% uptime
0.1% downtime
Day
23h 45m 36s
14m 24s
23h 58m
1m 26s
Week
6 days 22:19:12
1h 40m
6 days 23h 49m
10m 5s
Month
30 days 16h 33m
7h 26m
30 days 23h 15m
44m
Year 
361 days 8h 24m
3 days 15h 36m
364 days 15h 14m
8h 45m

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
The irst consideration is the time period of which the measure is taken. Consider the 
preceding table which shows the time period of which certain availability levels are 
considered acceptable. It may all look relatively rosy, but if the availability is over a 
year, then there can be over a working day without the service at 99.9% availability 
(that of Windows Intune) and over 3 days if a service is provided at the "two nines" 
level of 99%, that of many services. Depending on the service, this will either be 
acceptable or unacceptable. Some cloud services do not have availability levels  
at all and these can be ofline for months without recompense.
Finally, some services do not count downtime as soon as things go wrong,  
meaning that a large number of short failures are not considered to be breaking  
the availability agreements. 
Service hours
The other consideration is serviceable hours. In the preceding table we have 
assumed that the service has no "planned" downtime or maintenance windows and 
that it is available and measured for 24 hours every day. Some services have large 
maintenance windows, as much as 16 hours per day, and during this time if the 
service is available, that is great, but if not then there is again no recompense.
If we were running the technology on-premise, we could discuss improving the 
service availability and how we could impact the quality of service. With a cloud 
service we may be able to pay more to get a higher availability level, utilize more 
servers, or have no choice but to accept what it given.
Windows Intune, at the time of writing, stated that 10 hours scheduled downtime 
per year was acceptable and personally I would agree with this as it amounts to 10 
hours out of 8,760 per year which is a very high level of availability. While this may 
sound a little scary, since Windows Intune only delivers management functionality, 
in the event of a failure it is only this management functionality that stops working. 
The users can continue to use their computers during this issue.
Recompense
The balance to the expected Service Level Statement is the Recompense, should 
the service not meet this level. Again, here we need to ensure that this matches our 
business needs. Some services will provide usage or service credits, while others will 
provide us with cold hard cash as compensation. 
Service credits can be nice, but sometimes they materialize as an extension to our 
existing contract period, which is not necessarily useful or desirable. The alternatives 
include actual refunds or a reduction in our next bill.
www.allitebooks.com

Overview of Cloud Computing
[ 14 ]
Windows Intune, at the time of writing, delivers service credits in the following 
month and it is quite generous.
Window Intune SLA
We have covered the Windows Intune SLA several times in the preceding text and 
there is a snippet of this document below. To get the latest version of this, please go 
to the following URL: http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?21.
In this snippet, we can see how Microsoft calculates uptime at the time of writing. 
We can see that Microsoft considers the number of users impacted as well as the 
number of minutes that they were disrupted to be key to calculating the Availability 
or "Monthly Uptime Percentage".
We can see that if the service impacts all users for more than 44 minutes a month, we 
are entitled to a 25% service credit. In my opinion, this is one of the best value service 
credits available in the marketplace today.
Multiple client device types
We are now moving on to requirements that are not always present in all cloud 
computing scenarios, but it is important to understand how they might be useful.
Not that many years ago, the de facto desirable device for all computing needs was a 
Windows based PC. While the beneits of Windows have increased, as has the use  
of Windows 7, people want to be able to access information and applications from 
other devices. We have seen the rise of netbooks, tablets and phones as information 
access devices. 

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
These devices all have relatively small storage and processing capacity, so the 
natural thing is to store information and provide the computing power on the 
Internet where it can be delivered on mass as needed. The services that provide all 
of this are often delivered using cloud computing solutions as they need the facets 
discussed in the preceding text. 
Once the key information, data, and processing are deployed in the cloud, all these 
devices can utilize it from a browser or a small application that calls upon these 
cloud services. This means that rather than having to write complex software for 
all these devices, which has always been a barrier to deploying on anything but 
Windows in the past, now it is developed once for the cloud environment and 
delivered as a simple piece of consumption software for each device type. As the 
consumption software is lower in complexity because the complex solution is now 
being delivered by the cloud service, it becomes cost effective to write it multiple 
times, once for each device.
Now we have a model that allows access from multiple devices from any location 
provided they have a possible connection to the network with the cloud service  
on it, normally the Internet.
iPhones, iPads, Android, Windows Phone 7, netbooks, notebooks, Windows XP, 
Vista, and Windows 7 PCs are now all excellent consumers of cloud services. Each 
device has its own interface quirks, tools, and other management issues, but for  
a cloud service provider, they can now address more devices and users than  
ever before.
Today, Windows Intune is only used to manage Windows PC devices and the 
management interface is only available through a web browser with Silverlight 
installed, however, I expect more interfaces to become available over time.
Client Software
Cloud computing requires a way for us, the user, to interact with it. This may be 
via a web browser, but if that is not the case, then we need to ensure the device we 
are planning on using has the software available to download in a marketplace, or 
application store for the speciic device. This could be an application on a phone  
or computer. Familiar examples would include an e-mail client or music  
playing software.
In the case of Windows Intune, we need client software on each Windows device  
that will be managed. The client software communicates to the cloud service and  
we manage the service via a web browser.
 

Overview of Cloud Computing
[ 16 ]
Programmable interfaces
With a cloud computing solution we have much of the data and clever computer 
processing being done in a data center across a network, which means this now has 
to be controlled remotely. There are two choices here as to how this is done, either 
by building the whole service and infrastructure and solution as the vendor, or by 
enabling third parties to have access to the control interfaces.
For some solutions, having third parties access these control interfaces makes 
perfect sense as it enables additional beneits to users without having to spend the 
time building it ourselves as the vendor. For some solutions however, the data is 
considered too complex to manage or too important to let third parties change,  
so the interfaces are not accessible.
Windows Intune today does not have publicly accessible programmable interfaces, 
so no enhancement of the software is possible 
If these interfaces are available then the vendor will also have some form of 
additional shop front or application store to enable us as the user to choose to 
augment the cloud computing solution we have.
Different levels of cloud computing
Having discussed all the different facets that make up cloud computing, we now 
need to understand that there are various models for delivering cloud computing, 
each with beneits and challenges. The three different types of cloud computing 
solutions in common use today are:
• 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
• 
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
• 
Software as a Service (SaaS)
Software
as a Service
Service provider
responsibility
Applications
Operating
System
Virtualization
Servers
Storage
Infrastructure
as a Service
Your responsibility
Service provider
responsibility
Applications
Operating
System
Virtualization
Servers
Storage
Platform
as a Service
Service provider
responsibility
Your responsibility
Applications
Operating
System
Virtualization
Servers
Storage

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
As we can see from the preceding diagram, each option for cloud computing delivers 
the same components of a solution which historically would have been delivered 
from our own premises. However, as we move from infrastructure as a service to 
software as a service, our cloud solution provider becomes responsible for more of 
the solution.
Infrastructure as a Service
Probably the best known Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) solution available today 
is from Amazon with their EC2. Solutions exist from other providers, including 
Microsoft with the Azure VM role.
Each of these services provides us with a virtual machine running an operating 
system, often Windows Server, hosted in their data center. This means that we do not 
need to purchase hardware or the operating system, and only pay for the computing 
that we use. It is likely that we will not physically have a server in their data center, 
but it is more likely we will have a virtual machine or a slice of a physical server that 
delivers the power promised in the agreement.
We are responsible for managing that server in the form of security, patches, and 
software that is loaded onto it in the same way as if we had it physically installed  
on our premises. 
Platform as a Service
The most complete Platform as a Service (PaaS) available in my opinion is Microsoft 
Azure which provides a development environment for organizations to create 
solutions that they can then use themselves or sell to customers. Microsoft has all the 
facets of cloud computing here and my day-to-day role involves helping Microsoft 
business partners adopt Azure.
There are other vendors who offer PaaS solutions that offer similar functionality, 
although my own personal experience is with Microsoft Azure. Wikipedia maintains 
links to some of them at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Platform_as_a_service. 
The key thing is that there is a platform for developers to build upon to deliver a 
solution. The only thing these vendors have to worry about is writing their software as 
all aspects of running the platform they build upon is delivered for them, including the 
operating system and any database maintenance, system scalability, and hardware and 
network management.

Overview of Cloud Computing
[ 18 ]
The beneits here are that almost all of the start-up costs for infrastructure that a 
traditional services or software organizations would have are eliminated, as well as 
the ability to expand as rapidly as the solution is successful. Previously, a business 
had to predict their IT requirements for development and delivery of a solution and 
buy in advance, but not with PaaS.
Software as a Service
The most complete cloud computing solution available today is called software as a 
service. These are inished goods that we can take advantage of in the same way as 
traditional software, except the whole service is managed by someone else.
Examples that we are familiar with include Hotmail, Salesforce.com, Ofice 365, and 
of course, Windows Intune. All of these are highly functional application that are 
consumed and conigured over the Internet. Some offer software that can be installed 
to further increase the application's functionality or enable ofline access to the data 
when we are not connected to the Internet.
As the consumer of the software, we do not need to worry about the scalability of 
the hardware, network, or application that is delivering the functionality as this is all 
managed for us, often as a service built on top of a PaaS solution which is often built 
on an IaaS platform, however this is not always the case.
Challenges of cloud computing
Having described the facets of cloud computing, it sounds like there are only 
beneits; however, with all new uses of technology, there are some challenges too. 
While these will continue to be worked on and removed or improved, we need to be 
aware of them to help decide if a cloud computing solution is right for you.
Picking and deploying Windows Intune means we have to be comfortable with these 
areas, although clarity will be provided as to what this all means to us as a Windows 
Intune user at the end of the chapter.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Network requirements
Any cloud service requires by its very nature a connection to the Internet via a 
network. While this might not sound like a challenge, many businesses can access 
and process their data today irrespective as to whether a connection to the Internet 
is present or not. This means that a well-managed Internet connection will become 
more important to all users of such a service, rather than just managing the  
corporate network. Mobile workers can be more commonly connected to the  
Internet rather than their corporate network, so delivering a cloud service can 
provider simpler access for these users without the hassle of VPN network  
settings or dedicated hardware.
Data accesses and synchronization
If today our is data stored on our computer's hard disk and tomorrow it is stored in 
a cloud service, we have just moved from a service which can work on an airplane 
or train without an Internet connection to one where we now require ubiquitous 
Internet access to work.
Cloud service providers have realized this and offer many solutions to this failing. 
Many providers offer ofline support where we can read and update our data when 
we are disconnected and then synchronize it to the service when we connect again. 
This functionality is normally delivered by client software that we have to load 
onto our devices and this software manages the ofline data and synchronization. 
The only downside to this is that we may have to deal with synchronization errors 
should more than one person update the same information while we are ofline.
Network bandwidth and latency
The second challenge with Internet based services relates to the amount of Internet 
network usage. For some services, functionality that would result in network usage 
within our corporate network gets moved to lowing over the Internet. This is likely 
to increase the bandwidth we require to enable this increased usage.

Overview of Cloud Computing
[ 20 ]
Added to this requirement is the speed at which we can get the data and services. 
When the data is local on a hard disk or on a network that we control, access to the 
data and service can be very quick. The further we move it away from our control 
and network, the slower access can be, decreasing a user's satisfaction with the 
service if they have to interact with it. 
Again, it is possible that the client software will change the way the service works to 
remove the issues or limit the bandwidth consumed, but large amounts of data being 
moved from a local connection to a remote one can still be problematic if ultimately a 
large amount of data needs to be moved in a small amount of time.
Security
If the cloud computing solution we are using or connecting to requires a connection 
over the Internet, then it is possible that some sensitive data will low over the 
Internet. Most cloud solutions offer ways to secure this trafic. Some industries are 
governed by a number of legal regulations and this transport over the Internet may 
have to comply with these regulations, which is something to watch out for. 
The same goes for the storage of data, in terms of the physical protection it is given 
and the actual location. Some services are not based in the same country as us and 
this may give rise for concern.
For this reason, military, inancial, and some government situations are not 
easily compatible with a public, Internet hosted cloud solution. However, there is 
frequently a private cloud solution that can meet these requirements.
Customization
When using a cloud service, one of the reasons that it is possible for us to  
receive the service at scale and often with a beneicial price point is because it is 
a mass-production system. This means that the level of customization possible is 
frequently lower than a traditional on-premise application or service that we would 
otherwise use. When a solution is installed on premise, it can be customized heavily, 
however with a shared cloud solution, customization is often restricted to the 
coniguration options provided in the solution.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
Bringing all this together for Windows 
Intune
Windows Intune is a SaaS solution, meaning that Microsoft is responsible for all 
layers shown in the diagram in the preceding Different levels of cloud computing 
section. This relieves us of the responsibility of installing, maintaining, and 
upgrading the server infrastructure required to deliver this solution, but it also 
removes a level of control.
With Windows Intune, while the service is provided like electricity down the wire, 
we do need to conigure and customize the service to make it deliver value as well as 
manage the installation on the client computers and respond to alerts and requests 
for assistance. 
This means that we get the beneits of being able to manage our Windows 
computers, by policy, but do not have to worry about how that management is 
implemented at all. To me, this is the beauty of Windows Intune. It is like the beneits 
of all the systems management capability of Microsoft Small Business Server 2011 
and more, without the need to manage the server and software itself.
Just like Small Business Server, we will still have to approve system updates, talk to 
people about alerts that are raised and sometimes visit their computers to diagnose 
problems, although the tools in Windows Intune with MDOP make this easier too.
For all this to work, we as the administrators and the computers that we are 
managing must connect to a network that has access to the Internet with regularity. 
If this is unlikely then our ability to manage these computers and for them to get 
updates in policy, security settings, and system updates is signiicantly reduced,  
as is our ability to provide accurate reporting and timely assistance.
Summary
In this chapter, we have gone on a rapid tour of the world of cloud computing, but 
it is important to understand the concepts that we are signing up for with Windows 
Intune and the related services. The key item being that it is centrally provided by 
Microsoft, over the Internet on a massive shared service basis, removing a large set of 
infrastructure management headaches. While we can conigure the options provided, 
we can't customize the service beyond those options.
In this next chapter, we will explore what we should be looking at to manage our PC 
estate to make it more predictable and reliable. This will include deining polices and 
goals as well as reporting against these. We will also explore the activities we will 
need to carry out to hit our goals and have happy, more productive users. 


Introduction to PC 
Management Concepts
Windows Intune is a cloud service, as discussed in the previous chapter, but it is 
not there to deliver e-mail or music, but to deliver the service to manage your PCs.  
Before we can embark on using Windows Intune, we need to explore the concepts  
of PC management that Windows Intune facilitates.
PC management is not a "ire and forget", look at and conigure once and then 
everything will be ine arrangement.  It is like a house, when purchased everything 
is great, but both preventative and reactive maintenance is required to keep 
things optimal.  There is a continuous cycle of evaluation for an IT administrator 
to understand what the business wants, what IT needs to do for the business and 
then trying to enable this while minimising the effort for the IT team and the user. 
We will briely explore the continuous cycle and how it impacts us to enable us to 
gain an understanding of how policy management aligns to business requirements, 
such as "how secure does a PC need to be" and what software have we purchased 
and therefore can be installed. Once we understand these, deining the IT goals and 
policies, and reporting on them is the path to pro-active IT management.
To explore the above process, we will cover the following topics in this chapter:
• 
Continuous cycle of PC management
• 
Deinition of IT management goals
• 
Using  policies for coniguration and deployment
• 
Reactive response to problems
• 
Reporting on IT management
www.allitebooks.com

Introduction to PC Management Concepts
[ 24 ]
Continuous cycle of PC Management
PC management is a continuous cycle of evaluation, similar to 6-sigma or other 
management processes. It starts by evaluating the goals that the IT team have been 
given by the business. These may be vague or speciic, but they have to be translated 
into policies and actions for us to manage against. It has ive stages to it and it is a 
continuous process of evaluation to ensure that goals and deliverables are aligned.
We can see the ive stages below, starting with the deinition of goals, then the 
implementation of those responding to problems that arise. By reporting on IT's 
performance and challenges, the business is able to reevaluate the goals and change 
the original goals if required.
Defintion of IT
management
goals
Configuration
and deployment
Evaluation of
goals versus
changing
business needs
Reactive
response to
problems
Reporting on IT
management
Windows Intune can help us with the implementation of your IT goals and 
reporting, however the setting and evaluation of goals is something we can  
explore in this book briely, but it would be impossible for me to deine here as  
every business's needs are different as are the goals they place on their IT team.
Deinition of IT management goals
This is a broader discussion than implementing the features provided by Windows 
Intune. This is about setting the goals your organisation wants its IT to achieve.  For 
the purposes of this book, this needs to be within the goals of managing PCs, but the 
broader aims still needs to be addressed.
For most organisations, this will consist of having computers that are working 
to their maximum capability when a user wishes to use them.  This will require 
planning to ensure the computers are ready, free of malware, with the right  
software loaded, kept up-to-date and correctly licensed.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
To maintain this state of readiness, the computers will need to be secured and kept 
up-to-date with various tools from several manufacturers  and even with this careful 
planning and maintenance, problems will still arise that require attention to ix. 
Finally, the computers will stop being able to deliver against the latest requirements 
as they grow over time or become too physically unreliable and they will need 
replacing, preserving as much of the goodness on that computer as is possible.
These goals are different for each organisation.  For some, the performance or 
availability requirements are low, while for others they are pushing the boundary  
of computing available today. We may decide that a computer out of action for  
2 days is acceptable, while others will want someone to start working on a PC 
problem within minutes.
However, once these goals are set, it is possible to deine the policies that enable 
these to be realised.  Do not think of this as a big long list of goals, but without 
them, we will struggle to know if the policies that we implement are delivering the 
business needs. It is possible to over-specify the policies such that we are exceeding 
the business requirements.  While this will deliver against the business requirements, 
we may be spending more than we need to or wasting time that is not adding 
business value.
It is also important when deining your goals to think not just about the business 
from the point of view of performing a task, but also what experience we want the 
user to have.  If goals and policies do not allow a user to identify with their PC, their 
respect and interactions might not match those hoped for and they simply view the 
PC and IT or Management team as too restricting. This can generate a personnel 
issue, which I'm sure we have all experienced at some point, in the pull between 
freedom of control by an individual user and control by the business.
Using policies for coniguration and 
deployment
IT Policies are  a broad topic and there are several types of policy that will need to be 
deined. Some policies can be implemented using technology while others are better 
if they appear in a Human Resources handbook. For example, we may wish to state 
that work resources could not be used to create or access inappropriate materials.  
While we can implement some technical solutions to aim towards this, putting it 
in the conditions of work is very simple without having to technically deine and 
implement what is a complex and ambiguous area.

Introduction to PC Management Concepts
[ 26 ]
The IT policies will ultimately deine the conigurations that are acceptable to IT 
and deploy technologies to assist with meeting the business requirements. The two 
types of policy that we will focus on here, especially since Windows Intune can help 
deliver on them are:
• 
Policies that deliver against the business goals 
• 
Policies that help the IT team do their job
My one word of warning is to keep the policies as light as possible as the more  
they impinge on users, making their use of the PC more stressful or complex, the 
more people will ight against it, ultimately undoing your attempts to manage  
their systems.
Policies that deliver against the business 
goals
Most organisations want to know that their information is safe and secure, the 
computer is legally licensed with the correct software and that their employees will 
remain productive while using their PCs.  In the world of PC management, that 
normally comes down to the following areas:
• 
Ensuring the security settings on the PC provide an adequate level of 
protection
• 
Tracking the hardware and software assets
• 
Software distribution
With or without Windows Intune, we have the ability to do exactly this, however 
Windows Intune enables us to do this from one console that can be accessed 
anywhere with an Internet connection.
Ensuring the security settings on the PC provide an 
adequate level of protection
Ensuring the right security settings on a PC is a basic requirement of PC 
management; many times this is ignored on the basis of cost, performance or 
ignorance.  Anyone who believes that security slows things down just has to wait 
until information is stolen, lost, or a PC is put out of action to realise that this is 
a false economy. There are also various compliance and legal implications of not 
securing a computer that can also have serious ramiications for a business if not 
considered.  The route to good security is through the following areas:
 

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
• 
Education
• 
Stopping malicious theft of data
• 
Blocking malware
Education
Education of the users is the key irst step before we start on the right level of 
technical solutions.  Users of a computer should understand that while most  
day-to-day actions will not damage their data or computer, it is possible if they 
ignore simple security measures.  
We need to educate a user not to install software without this being consented to do 
so, and to always read and question security warnings that the computer displays for 
them.  Windows 7 and Windows Intune keep their on screen alerts to a minimum, so 
if it is asking us if we are sure, we need to be sure.
If this is a key issue for the organisation then these requirements can be placed  
in a Human Resources handbook to enable the right level of weight behind them.  
Bear in mind that in doing so, you may overly restrict the users or everyone may 
simply ignore the policy if it is not necessary and enforced, making it a waste of 
everyone's time.
Stopping malicious theft of data
Stopping malicious theft of data often has many business ramiications.  While we 
might not be subject to the scrutiny and threats of the corporate espionage, we still 
need to consider the business, legal, and regulatory requirements to keep the data 
on our computers secure.  Protecting data on PC's can be simple and completely 
transparent and planning correctly may avoid our sensitive data from becoming 
public information.  
There are two aspects of security that we need to consider, in the form of hard 
disk encryption and enabling the irewall, to stop people browsing your computer 
without consent.
Windows 7 Enterprise edition, which is available as part of your Windows Intune 
subscription, and Windows 7 Ultimate edition provides Bitlocker technology which 
can transparently encrypt the hard disk so only valid users can access data.  Users 
can be required to enter a pin number on booting the computer, but this is the only 
visible sign that the disk is protected and everything else works as expected.  Since a 
BitLocker secured hard disk is encrypted,  from a support point of view, we can no 
longer take a disk and access it on another machine without the recovery key, but 
access without authority is the whole point here, so this requirement is expected.

Introduction to PC Management Concepts
[ 28 ]
The second area to be managed is the irewall which monitors and regulates the 
low of data into and out of the PC over a network, and again, I have seen many 
organisations that run without this feature enabled as they consider it a burden to 
manage.  Using Windows Intune, the management of the irewall can be controlled 
from the Windows Intune console by setting policy to enable this security feature 
without it interfering with the users' legitimate uses for the computer.
Blocking malware
Data can become corrupted or compromised by malware in the form of viruses 
or Trojan software being loaded onto a computer. Malware is often delivered via 
e-mail or through a web page, as well as via iles downloaded from the Internet or 
programs that are installed by the user without IT's permission and support.  When 
enabled, Windows Intune Endpoint Protect will detect any ile that is malicious as 
it being written to the hard disk. It will intercept the ile and provide a warning to 
the user.  Windows Intune Endpoint Protection delivers this functionality as well as 
allowing it's coniguration to be controlled by policy.
We should always have anti-malware software installed and enabled to provide this 
level of protection at all times, but sometimes, people believe it is too much of an 
overhead for their computer and disable it. Windows Intune Endpoint Protection can 
inform us if it has been disabled and when any malware is detected on the computer.
Tracking the hardware and software assets
Tracking the organisation's hardware and software assets is vital to ensuring 
that we understand where our budget has been spent and ensuring that we are 
legally licensed for our software. I have seen situations where companies have had 
hardware go missing, such as memory removed from a PC, or where an install CD 
has been used repeatedly by different users without checking a license actually exists 
for the product being installed. The result is that the company loses assets, starts 
using pirated software, or is unaware of the software needs of their staff and fails to 
provide needed tools. Frequently, this is not a malicious act, but nevertheless, one 
that requires management.
Deining the business policy is the irst step to understanding what the business 
does or does not expect to be managed and monitored.  At a high level, it could be 
as simple as to record the hardware and software in use and ensure that these lists 
match with those purchased on a regular basis.
Once the business policy has been deined, we can use Windows Intune to 
automatically record the hardware and software coniguration on each  
computer and monitor for changes.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
The user of a computer will need software.  This needs to be licensed, installed, and 
conigured as per the company's business requirements.  Windows Intune provides 
an amazingly simply way to do this, ensuring the licenses are accounted for and 
that the right computers get the software installed without the computer having to 
come into contact with a corporate network.  By distributing software this way, you 
can ensure the software cannot be inappropriately copied or installed without IT 
ensuring compliance to policy and purchased licenses. 
Policies that help the IT team do their job
Policies are sometimes used to support the business goals, however they are there to 
make life easier for the IT team to deliver them.  Clearly there is a ine line between 
those that help IT and those that help the business, but the items below are more 
about helping IT to help others.  The areas we will examine are:
• 
Deploying Windows 7 for everyone
• 
Keeping the  PC up-to-date with updates
Deploying Windows 7 for everyone
Our Windows Intune subscription includes an upgrade to Windows 7 Enterprise 
edition if we do not already own it.  Windows 7 is the most secure and manageable 
version of Windows from Microsoft, so deploying this for everyone makes sense for 
IT as it is often the easiest way to implement all the policy decisions and normally 
pleases users too.
Windows Intune can be deployed on Windows XP and Windows Vista, but these 
operating systems are showing their age versus Windows 7.  
The Bitlocker feature discussed above can only be deployed on Windows 7 
Enterprise and Ultimate editions.  Windows 7 has many other features, but  
these are not relevant to the discussion at hand right now. 
Keeping the PC up-to-date with updates
Even with all the protection enabled, there are still reliability and security related 
issues which can arise that will not be stopped with anti-malware software.  The way 
to protect against these is with a combination of the irewall, as already discussed, 
and by managing the system updates from Microsoft that are deployed onto the PCs 
being managed.

Introduction to PC Management Concepts
[ 30 ]
Every second Tuesday of each month, Microsoft releases a range of updates for 
its products.  We need to ensure that the required updates are deployed onto each 
PC and that we can tell when the user has rebooted, if required, so that they are in 
effect.  Using Windows Intune, we are in control of this from the center. Occasionally 
Microsoft will not recommend an update in certain scenarios, or an update will 
interfere with another product, however as the administrator, it will become our role 
to manage this using Windows Intune.
Windows Intune enables both the controlling of updates, and also reporting to see 
which computers are and are not compliant with the policies put in place.
Reactive response to problems
Reacting to problems is a key requirement of a good IT administrator. Good 
planning will minimise the situations in which these occur, but having in place  
both proactive and reactive support plans is the key to success.
Going back to the house analogy I used earlier, starting the right way will make 
management easier, but incidents will occur and these will need to be dealt with.  
Some areas of maintenance in a house are carried out to avoid things breaking, such 
as painting the exterior or ixing roof tiles. Others are reactionary, such as dealing 
with a burst pipe or perhaps something minor, such as replacing a light bulb.  
Managing a PC has similar features with a continuous low level of maintenance, kept 
as short as possible with the use of Windows Intune. Windows Intune will also send 
alerts to you, giving us the opportunity to focus time on areas that are showing stress 
as well as dealing with situations that your users bring to your attention that may be 
either minor or major.
Problem management falls into four categories:
• 
Ongoing maintenance tasks
• 
Dealing with alerts
• 
Working with users' support requests
• 
Dealing with major problems
Ongoing maintenance tasks
The ongoing maintenance tasks have already been discussed, in terms of setting 
out the policies and ensuring that PCs are secure, protected, and have the required 
updates applied. While Windows Intune can look after the Microsoft side of this, we 
will need to carry this out for the non-Microsoft software installed on the computers.  

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
If we use the Microsoft Desktop Optimisation Pack (MDOP) as part of Windows 
Intune then we can use the Microsoft Application Virtualisation (App-V) 
technology to enable centralised packaging and updating.
Moving users to Windows 7 over time may also be a key ongoing management task.
Dealing with alerts
Before a computer or application fails, we are likely to see alerts through  
Windows Intune that inform us that something is not performing or behaving  
in an expected way.  
Our role as administrators is to evaluate these alerts and work on a plan of action. 
The irst part of this process is to evaluate the critical nature of the alert.  If a disk 
failure alert arrives, this probably means that the user data is either at risk, or will 
be very soon.  The right course of action would be to ensure that all critical iles are 
backed up and let the user know what is happening, and then planning on how 
to replace the disk with the least disruption. On the other hand, if a performance 
alert arrives, we know that this suggests the user's computer is under-powered for 
the task they are carrying out.  If this is an occasional issue then it can perhaps be 
ignored, or if this is a key task then it is time to consider an upgrade.
Other alerts will tell us things such as the fact that a user's computer has had a virus 
which has been successfully removed, but we need to consider whether you speak 
to the user to ind out how it happened and perhaps change our policies, or educate 
them on how to avoid such situations again.
Working with users' support requests
Not all problems will be brought to your attention via alerts and reports in Windows 
Intune.  The users will also be contacting you.  Sometimes this will be via the phone 
or e-mail and sometimes they will use automated features, such as Remote Support 
requests that are provided as part of Windows Intune.
Just like other alerts, we need to prioritise these, but more importantly, we need to 
have an ability to respond if the expectation has been set with the users that this will 
happen. This is another aspect of the education, setting the expectation for how long 
this will take.

Introduction to PC Management Concepts
[ 32 ]
If a user has requested remote support where we can both see their screen, then this 
typically needs to be a very quick response. The advantage of remote support is 
that we can be almost anywhere and see what they want us to see and plan how to 
respond, should it be advice or starting work on resolving a problem that they are 
seeing. One challenge of having remote support is that users may expect a response 
and resolution immediately. We have to ensure that one of the irst things we do 
when communicating with the user is set an expectation as to what the support will 
involve. Informing them how quickly we will be able to respond fully to them, how 
long the support might take, and the impact on them, such as not being able to use 
their computer, is important so they can make plans while the issue is unresolved. 
Dealing with major problems
Major problems will still arise with all the planning and care given so far as above.  
The two most critical requirements when dealing with these situations is to prioritise 
them as they might not be conveniently spaced out, and to set a level of expectation 
with the user as to how long they are likely to be impacted.
In PC management, major problems are going to fall into two categories – hardware 
and software.
Hardware
Hardware issues will happen.  Either in the form of a major component failing, 
requiring the replacement of the whole device, or the disk .  To deal with these 
incidents adequately, support contracts should be in place to enable timely 
replacements.  If the main device fails then there is a good chance that we can 
recover the users data from their hard disk, enabling the most up-to-date user  
data to be restored.
In the event that the user's hard disk fails, then we will need an adequate backup 
strategy to be in place to stop useful company information from being lost.  
Information stored in the cloud or on other servers will still be preserved, such as 
e-mail and iles on ile shares, but the rest will need another solution. There are a 
number of backup options available, from automatically mirroring the user data to a 
server elsewhere, or implementing a user backup strategy and providing each user 
with this ability.
Personally, I prefer a centralised backup or mirroring strategy, as anything that 
reduces the workload of non-IT users is normally a good thing and ensures it 
actually gets done.  Forensic recovery of data can be done by a number of tools and 
thrid-party companies, but the time is lengthy and the chance of success is low.  I 
have used various Microsoft solutions in the past to deliver this.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
No matter what your strategy, it is vitally important to check regularly that we can 
recover data from it.  Finding out in that critical moment that something important is 
not recoverable is not a comfortable place to ind ourselves.
Software
Software issues are much easier to resolve if we enable the facilities such as System 
Restore that have been in Windows for many years now.  This enables us to roll the 
system back through various changes.  It is very unlikely that we will hit a major 
software problem that cannot be addressed in this way to get a user back up and 
running while we then do further diagnosis.
If an update is delivered to a system that stops it booting, there are a number of tools 
provided by Microsoft to help with this, including Safe Mode Boot and WinRE.  
Booting Windows 7 into Safe Mode will try to start the computer with a minimum 
number of device drivers to enable basic administrative access.  Once this is done,  
we can then start to diagnose and repair a major software issue.
If Safe Mode does not work then we can boot the system from a Windows 7 DVD 
and enter the Windows Recover Environment, known as WinRE.  Again, from here we 
can backup data and perform a system restore, as well as automatically ix a number 
of minor disk issues that would stop a system booting.
Windows Intune adds to this when purchased with MDOP with the addition of the 
Diagnostic and Recovery Tools (DaRT). These tools provide a number of features; 
the key ones are as follows: 
• 
Editing of the system registry
• 
Reset of local user passwords
• 
Basic disk repairs
• 
Uninstalling of hotixes
• 
System Sweeper to check for malware and root kits.
Reporting on IT management
Reporting is a vital part of the IT management process.  Without reporting to the 
business and IT management, the actions and effectiveness of the work carried out, 
value for money, and continued investment is very dificult to justify.  It is a bit 
like the saying "if a tree falls in a wood and no one is there to hear it, does it make a 
sound."  If we are managing the IT well, but no-one knows about it, do they believe 
we are making a difference?
www.allitebooks.com

Introduction to PC Management Concepts
[ 34 ]
Good reporting will show the areas of success and challenge against our goals and 
enable us to ensure that our efforts are focused on the right areas as we continue to 
administer the PCs.
Reporting should show both the proactive efforts and the expected results, for 
example, low incidents, and the reactive efforts to respond to alerts and support 
requests.  This can become a serious strain on time if the information required is too 
dificult to access, so results are best recorded as the activity is carried out or even 
better be automatically generated.
Windows Intune enables the exporting of a number of the alerts, malware 
information, user updates, and other information, as well as the production of a 
number of reports.  Personally, I place all this data into a pre-populated spreadsheet 
that then uses this information to make the results accessible to the readers of the 
report.  Simplicity and readability are the keys to an easy life when delivering 
reporting to those who need to know.
Summary
In this chapter, we have explored the process of delivering a well-managed PC 
solution to your business.  There is no rocket science involved, but working out 
what we need to do, how we are going to do it, and then telling everyone who 
needs to know what we have done is important. Almost all of the tools to deliver 
this are provided by Windows Intune, with the rest being things like educating our 
users on the expectations and being prepared for the unexpected.  Ensuring that 
the unexpected arises less frequently through the use of a good process is key to 
minimising the workload and this means using all that Windows Intune has to offer.
In the next chapter, we will explore exactly what the features of Windows Intune are 
before we get down to the nitty gritty of installing and using Windows Intune.

Overview of Windows  
Intune Features
Windows Intune, as we have already discussed, is a Software as a Service cloud 
solution that enables us to manage PCs within our business. We will start this 
chapter with an overview as to why businesses should use Windows Intune to 
ensure that we are all expecting the same results from Windows Intune. We will 
investigate the architecture that it requires to enable Windows Intune's features  
and then inally we will deine exactly what the features of Windows Intune are.
Therefore, in this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• 
Why use Windows Intune
• 
Windows Intune solution architecture
• 
Windows Intune feature set
Why use Windows Intune
Computer management today means dealing with an increasingly complex list of 
operating systems, software and licenses, locations and infrastructure. 
Keeping track of all of these, and in a way that delivers value to the business, 
requires investment in a number of technologies including Windows 7, systems 
management software, anti-malware software; as well as the server and network 
infrastructure to run and deploy all of this. Add to this the fact that users are 
becoming more mobile which makes traditional management techniques more 
complex as they require users to be connected to the private network.

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 36 ]
Windows Intune solves the network connectivity problem by delivering a reliable 
and secure service from the Internet, meaning that every user can access it no 
matter where they are physically located. This means that the ability to set policy, 
control the computers, and offer support is all possible no matter where the users 
are working providing they have Internet access. Providing support is also simpler 
as we can also do this from any location with an Internet connection enabling both 
users and administrators to be fully mobile.
Windows Intune also provides all the software required to deliver this service. This 
is similar to functionality provided by Microsoft Forefront Protection Suite, Microsoft 
System Center Coniguration Manager, and Microsoft System Center Essentials.
Of course, Windows Intune provides us with access to Windows 7 Enterprise edition 
which includes many great features, especially if our existing computers are running 
Windows XP today. For most businesses, the key features of the Enterprise edition 
of Windows 7 include Bitlocker and BranchCache. Also, while we are a Windows 
Intune subscriber, we are able to get access to the latest version of Windows, so when 
the next version ships, we will be able to use that too.
The inal reason that Windows Intune makes sense is the fact that it is a subscription 
service with a low cost per user per month. We can start with a single user, then add 
and remove users as required by our business needs. We can also add MDOP to the 
subscription to provide additional support options.
Situations when Intune makes sense
There are three situations when installing Windows Intune makes sense:
• 
First management solution for small and medium enterprises
• 
Moving to a subscription management solution
• 
Managing part of an estate, such as computers that users bring in from home
First management solution for small and medium 
enterprises
If you do not have any systems management, then Windows Intune provides a 
fantastic irst step towards a well-managed computer estate. It will make life more 
predictable to ensure secure, productive workers with software managed and 
deployed via Windows Intune.

Chapter 3
[ 37 ]
Moving to a subscription management solution
If you wish to move from an older solution to a subscription solution, then  
Windows Intune will enable you to scale your management solution without having 
to manage on-premise hardware and software to deliver the solution. This can make 
management easier and reduce the cost of the infrastructure required to deliver 
computer management.
Managing part of an estate, such as computers that 
users bring in from home
If there is already a management strategy in place and you wish to extend this to a 
group of machines that need to be managed in a different way, then Windows Intune 
can help solve this problem. Once the agent is installed, provided the computer 
connects to the Internet, you can deliver management capabilities, including  
software distribution, without the computers having to be part of the current  
ofice managed domain.
Windows Intune solution architecture
The architecture information closes off the introduction to cloud services and PC 
management that we have been discussing in the previous two chapters as we move 
away from how Windows Intune is delivered as a service towards how we use it 
without worrying about this information. As Windows Intune is a service, like the 
electricity and water that we use at home, it is good to know how it gets to us. 
The following diagram shows which pieces of the Windows Intune solution are hosted 
by Microsoft and those which are deployed and hosted by us as the PC administrator:
Windows Intune Cloud Service
Reports engine
Alerts repository
Policy Settings
Sofware & Updates
Malware Updates
Internet
Mobile Users
Users in the office
Support
Intune Installation
Windows 7
Report generation
Management
1234567890
1234567890
1234567890
1234567890
1234567890
1234567890

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 38 ]
It can be seen that all the services are hosted by Microsoft, but the installation 
software, Windows 7, and support tools are more likely to be managed and deployed 
by us as the administrators, even if they are initially downloaded from the Windows 
Intune or other Microsoft website. Because of this split, once a user is set up they 
can work from the ofice or while out and about and can continue to access and be 
managed by the service, even if we do not have direct access to their computer.
As the administrator, we connect to the Windows Intune service to conigure the 
policies, manage the alerts and reporting, but not directly to the user's computers. 
Windows Intune, once installed on the users' computer, connects to the same 
Windows Intune service to receive and enforce the policies, apply updates, and 
report back any issues or alerts.
There are several notable mentions required for this architecture. First, we have 
Windows 7 which we are entitled to once we have subscribed to Windows Intune. 
We download this via the Windows Intune site and then deploy it to the client 
PCs on an individual basis. There are several steps to this process and they will be 
covered in detail in Chapter 8, Tracking and reporting.
Then we have the support tools, some of which are supplied within the standard 
subscription and others that are optional additions. These are again downloaded and 
then used or managed by us with the PC directly.
Finally, we need to look at reporting. The reports that Windows Intune produces are 
unlikely to present the information we will want to present in an easily consumable 
form. This means that we will need to carry out the additional tasks of exporting the 
data and then presenting it in a relevant form back to the business.
Windows Intune feature set
There are two viewpoints that can be used to group the Windows Intune 
functionality. The irst is by individual technical feature to ensure that all usable 
elements of Windows Intune are known. Later we will examine the administration 
tasks that we need to carry out in order to manage our PC deployments. We are 
exploring both viewpoints as my experience tells me that useful features can be 
missed if examined from only one perspective. I have seen a number of customers 
and partners waste money, time and effort by purchasing and implementing 
additional technologies when they are already provided with a product like 
Windows Intune. 

Chapter 3
[ 39 ]
The Windows Intune technical feature set can be broken down into the  
following areas:
• 
Windows 7
• 
Installation
• 
Management console
• 
Security management
• 
Auditing
• 
Reporting
• 
Alerts and Support
• 
Software distribution
• 
Managing multiple organizations
Windows 7
As mentioned, many organizations are not running Windows 7, or do not have  
the Enterprise Edition, with the functionality that is provided by your Windows 
Intune subscription.
One challenge most businesses have is computers across their PC estate running a 
number of different versions of Windows. Using Windows Intune, we can move 
all subscribed computers to a common version of Windows providing we are 
running a business targeted version of Windows already. This means Windows 
XP Professional, Windows Vista Business or Ultimate, or Windows 7 Professional 
or Ultimate edition. While we can standardize on a previous version of Windows, 
standardizing on Windows 7 makes sense to deliver the best Total Cost of 
Ownership (TCO).
We are not going to turn this into an advert for Windows 7; however, the key 
differences are as follows: 
• 
Bitlocker for hard disk encryption
• 
AppLocker for application security 
• 
Faster start up and resuming
• 
BranchCache
• 
Direct Access
• 
New user interface

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 40 ]
Obviously having hardware that meets Windows 7 requirements is vital, so we will 
need to check the speciication of our PCs, but if we have Windows XP machines, 
it is advised that we have a plan to upgrade the operating system and possibly the 
hardware too.
We will discuss how to move to Windows 7 later in this book. This can be achieved 
by either performing a clean install or upgrading from Windows Vista. Each option 
has both positive and negative impacts on us and the user. Microsoft provides a 
number of tools to assist in the process of getting to Windows 7 that we will explore 
later too.
Existing Windows 7 Software Assurance customers
Some organizations will already have the rights to Windows 7 via Software 
Assurance (SA). If this is the case then we can request a discount on the Windows 
Intune account subscription in light of this.
Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack
The Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack (MDOP) is a Windows SA beneit that 
is available to Windows Intune customers for a small additional fee per month. One 
of the MDOP beneits is covered by Windows Intune already, the Asset Inventory 
Service. Of the six others, listed below, the Diagnostic and Recovery Toolset, and 
Enterprise Desktop Virtualization have easy-to-utilize beneits for an organisation 
with distributed employees using Windows Intune as the main management tool. 
The seven items in the pack are as follows:
• 
Diagnostic and Recovery Toolset
• 
Advanced Group Policy Management
• 
Asset Inventory Service
• 
Enterprise Desktop Virtualization
• 
Application Virtualization
• 
System Center Desktop Error Monitoring
• 
Bitlocker Administration and Management
Diagnostic and Recovery Toolset
The Diagnostic and Recovery Toolset (DaRT) provides 14 tools that are truly 
useful to a system administrator. These can be installed with a Windows 7 build 
or provided on a CD and will require a user to boot to the DaRT environment. The 
following tools are available when the DaRT tools are loaded:
 

Chapter 3
[ 41 ]
The options we can see on this screen are as follows:
ERD Registry Editor which allows us to edit the 
registry of the operating system being repaired
Explorer to view and modify the iles on the 
computer 
Locksmith to change the passwords for 
accounts local to the machine, including the 
Administrators password, without knowing what 
it is currently set to 
Solution Wizard which will take the user 
through a series of questions and then attempt 
to diagnose the reason why a system is failing 
Crash Analyzer will examine a system memory 
dump after a crash and highlight what it believes 
is the cause of a crash. The item causing problems 
can then be disabled or removed with the  
other tools 
TCP/IP Conig to conigure the network of 
the DaRT booted environment so that further 
remote access can be delivered 
File Restore to recover iles that have been 
deleted on the disk
Hotix Uninstall tools to remove a hotix or 
other system update that might be preventing 
the booting of the computer
Disk commander to repair the master boot 
record, disk volumes, and partition tables as well 
as back up and restore the partition information 
SFC Scan which performs a scan of key system 
iles and enables the replacement of these iles 
with good copies
Disk Wipe will cleanse a disk, making all data 
unrecoverable for security purposes, if necessary 
to levels acceptable to the U.S. Department of 
Defence
Search allows us to ind iles by name, date 
modiied, or size to then copy them from the 
computer 
Computer Management tools to access the core 
system information such as the event logs, drivers 
installed, and the programs set to automatically 
run when the computer starts 
Standalone System Sweeper to identify 
malware and root kits that have otherwise not 
been detected and remove them 

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 42 ]
We will explore some of these later in the book when discussing Windows 7, 
although these tools can be used on earlier versions of Windows too.
Microsoft Enterprise Desktop Virtualization
Microsoft Enterprise Desktop Virtualization (MED-V) enables a virtualized copy of 
Windows, such as Windows XP to run alongside the installed copy of Windows 7 for 
certain applications that will not run on Windows 7. These applications are installed 
into the MED-V environment and run on the virtualized copy of Windows XP, but 
are presented on the Windows 7 Start Menu and appear to the user as if they are 
running on Windows 7.
Most applications today support Windows 7, so the requirement for this is reducing, 
but one key application that can still be a problem, is the requirement for Internet 
Explorer 6 (IE6). MED-V enables us to redirect URLs for applications that require IE6 
to the MED-V IE6 install, while the rest are natively displayed by Internet Explorer in 
Windows 7.
Installation
We will run through the details of the installation process in the next chapter, but 
this is still a key requirement for Windows Intune. Each organisation will have a 
unique installation component that needs to be loaded onto each computer to be 
managed. This component contains a certiicate that enables the linkage between the 
computer being managed and the subscription, so download and deploy carefully. 
To download the installation component, select the Client Software Download 
option in the Administration workspace: 

Chapter 3
[ 43 ]
Under the download string, there are details on how to deploy this download. Once 
the Windows Intune client software is installed, the computer will take up to 30 
minutes to register itself with Windows Intune.
Management console
The management console for Windows Intune is a Silverlight console accessed over 
the Internet. From here, we can control all aspects of the Windows Intune service 
with the exception of a Windows 7 installation and MDOP tools.
The following console, with the three panels, is used to manage everything: 
The left most panel provides access to the different workspaces relating to the 
Windows Intune features. By default we see the System Overview workspace is 
displayed, which highlights any areas that we may need to focus on. On the right  
is a context sensitive task panel. 
www.allitebooks.com

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 44 ]
Looking in more detail at the System Overview workspace, we can see any notices 
that we need to take note of, such as creating rules or installing the client software. 
Below this, we can see the System Status section telling us if we need to examine 
Endpoint Protection (anti-malware), Windows updates, or Windows Intune Agent 
Health issues. Finally, below this we can also see a prioritized list of alerts that will 
require action by the administrator.
The components that are installed through the installation process all have interfaces 
on the user's computer which can be examined when delivering remote assistance 
or physically sitting at the computer, but they are all conigured from here. If a user 
changes the coniguration, it will be overridden by the policies and settings in  
this console.
Security management
Security management is delivered by three mechanisms with Windows Intune that 
cover the requirements as deined by Microsoft and are all implemented by policies 
that are deined in the management console: 
• 
Windows system updates
• 
Anti-malware
• 
Firewall control
Windows system updates
By default, a Windows computer can search for system updates on the Microsoft 
Windows Updates site and the end user can decide which updates are loaded or 
not. With Windows Intune, as the person who sets the policy for the computers we 
are managing, we have the ability to choose which Microsoft system updates are 
applied and which are not. While it happens very rarely, if an application has an 
incompatibility with an update we can disable the update, although I would always 
recommend this as a temporary ix rather than a permanent one.
We can deine policies that automatically approve certain types of updates,  
such as security updates, that are applied to some or all of the computers that  
we are managing. 
We can also approve individual updates for a group of computers that it may be 
required for, as shown in the following screenshot: 

Chapter 3
[ 45 ]
As the organisation grows in complexity the more we need to consider implementing 
a full patch management lifecycle that includes evaluation, testing, deployment, and 
reporting to ensure this does not become a business inhibitor. 
Anti-malware
Anti-malware protection provided by Windows Intune is an effective way to block 
both viruses and Trojan applications on a computer. Windows Intune enables us 
to set policies relating to malware management and give us alerts relating to this, 
either when the software is disabled, or any malware issues are stopped on the user's 
computer. Unlike some products on the market, it does not offer e-mail checking. 
However, as soon as a malware delivered via e-mail is executed, it will still protect 
the computer. Many e-mail services, such as those provided by Small Business  
Server or Microsoft Ofice 365, also have the ability to scan e-mail and clean it  
before it reaches your inbox.
We can see an example of the malware protection status on the following console, 
showing all anti-malware issues closed and the computers in a healthy state:

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 46 ]
As many of us have experienced, some anti-malware products are constantly 
prompting a user about many trivialities that cause user frustration. The Windows 
Intune software does not do this, which means that most users do stop and react 
when it does alert them. It also has a low impact on the machine that it is running  
on, so the system performance is also not degraded, unlike some other products. 
Firewall control
The inal part of securing a system from malware is to use a irewall. From Windows 
XP SP2, Microsoft has shipped a very capable irewall service as part of Windows. 
Windows Intune enables us as the administrator to set the irewall policy; allowing 
if necessary different settings if the user is connected to the main organization's 
network, a known home network, or roaming on a guest network. 
In the following example, we can see that informing the user when the irewall 
blocks a program is turned off when connected to a public network. Underneath  
this, we can see the start of the pre-deined exceptions:
As an administrator, we will be alerted if the irewall is turned off and can 
investigate if there is a need for a further change in management policy, a personal 
exception, or a need to discuss the importance of the irewall with the user.

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
Auditing
Windows Intune collects information about each computer that is connected to the 
Windows Intune system and stores this information for reporting. This information 
includes the updates installed, software installed, and hardware inventory of each 
computer. Microsoft also states that it will not probe this information in any way 
other than to provide Windows Intune reporting and alerts only and will not be 
shared within Microsoft itself.
The following example shows the computer hardware information that Windows 
Intune's audit functionality has gathered from one of the computers being managed:
Reporting
Windows Intune provides two types of reporting. Windows Intune provides four 
standardised reports that you can use, and the ability to create your own reports 
by exporting information from most workspaces into your own custom reporting 
spreadsheet. The four standard reports cover the following areas:
• 
Update Reports to enable quick identiication of failed updates or updates 
requiring approval. This can also be used to demonstrate the successful 
deployment of a number of Windows Updates.
• 
Detected Software Reports to show the applications that are installed across 
the organisation as discovered by the audit technology.

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 48 ]
• 
Hardware Inventory Reports enable us report on the hardware deployed. 
One very nice feature is the ability to report on hardware that is running an 
old operating system or with hardware that would not support an upgrade.
• 
License Purchase and License Installation Reports that highlight the 
Microsoft licenses that are purchased through a volume license agreement 
and installed on client computers.
We can see an example of the software report produced by Windows Intune:
To enable the reports to be more useful to the business, building a spreadsheet that 
processes a number of exports can make it easier for to deliver a standardized report 
with less work. The following example shows data in such a report:

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Alerts and Support
The main stay of PC administration is dealing with the alerts that are raised, and 
supporting the users through their problems. Windows Intune has three mechanisms 
that deal with this if we sign up for MDOP, or two without. These are:
• 
Alerts
• 
Remote Assistance
• 
Diagnostic and Repair Toolset
Given that we have already discussed DaRT, let us look in a bit more detail at the 
Alerts and Remote Assistance features.

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 50 ]
Alerts
Alerts are used to bring something to your attention by Windows Intune. These 
range from notice and informational alerts through to Warnings and Critical alerts. 
These are delivered via e-mail to a select group of recipients as well as displayed  
on the Console. In the following screenshot, we can see the range of alerts in the 
Alerts workspace:
For each of the alert types we can conigure who is notiied via e-mail of the alert 
with a minimum set of details. 
The alerts fall into many categories that relate to policy settings or speciic areas of 
monitoring:
• 
Endpoint Protection (malware protection)
• 
Monitoring
• 
Microsoft Desktop Applications
• 
Microsoft Ofice XP / 2003 / 2007 / 2010
• 
Microsoft Windows XP / Vista / Server 2003 / Server 2008 / 7
• 
Notices
• 
Policy
• 
Remote Assistance
• 
System
• 
Updates

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
The three alerts that require the fastest evaluation will normally fall into malware 
protection, Remote Assistance, and System as these always highlight areas where 
immediate support is required.
We can conigure what we do and don't get alerted for as there is a very long list of 
alerts. To enable or disable an alert, simply select the button along the workspace  
as shown: 

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 52 ]
Remote Assistance
Remote Assistance is the inal part of the support tools provided by Windows 
Intune. This is where a user requests direct assistance with a particular issue. While 
this is surfaced as an alert in Windows Intune, it is the only user generated one, and 
thus requires immediate action as we can't expect them to hang around for hours 
before we get back to them. 
The user initiates the request from the Windows Intune center from the Start Menu 
and then selects Microsoft Easy Assist which is the lowermost option as seen in the 
following screenshot: 
We will then receive an e-mail that will invite us to connect to the user. Once we 
connect to the computer we have the ability to share the screen and even control  
the remote user's computer, chat or display the connection information, or bring 
other administrators into the support session to also view and participate. The 
last option is very strong as it allows a team to support a single user with the most 
appropriate person carrying out speciic tasks. The administration application is 
shown as follows:

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
The key beneit of the Microsoft solution is that it works not just on LANs as many 
solutions do, but across the Internet with both the user and administrator being in 
remote locations.
Software distribution
Windows Intune enables us to have a single repository of software that can be 
installed on the computers that we manage by changing the settings in the console.
In the preceding example, we can see a package ready to be deployed if desired by 
the administrator. This means that as we purchase software, it can be installed once 
to the cloud and distributed as required to client PCs without the administrator 
having to become involved in the actual process at the client computer.
 
www.allitebooks.com

Overview of Windows Intune Features
[ 54 ]
There are limitations, such as the need to enable a silent, or non-interactive, 
installation, but this is incredibly useful. We can also use the App-V capabilities 
supplied with MDOP to create an application bubble and distribute it via  
Windows Intune.
Managing multiple organizations
Windows Intune can be used by either internal IT administrators or Microsoft 
partners who are managing a number of organizations' PCs. Windows Intune allows 
for this by allowing partners to be associated with a Windows Intune subscription by 
the customer. Once a partner is associated, the partner will then be presented with 
the following screen to enable them to see which customers have the most alerts and 
then select the organisation to manage.
When a partner is managing multiple customers, no data is shared between 
customers, however it is vital that the correct customer is chosen before downloading 
the client installation software as this is what links a customer to a subscription.

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have examined the many features of Windows Intune that 
facilitate good PC management. The Windows Intune architecture enables 
management from any location with the computers being managed located 
anywhere providing they have access to the Internet.
The Windows Intune subscription includes Windows 7 Enterprise edition,  
anti-malware software, management of Windows Updates, and a suite of audit and 
alerting technology to enable us to keep informed of the status of the environment. 
To assist with PC management, Remote Assistance is also provided to ensure that  
we can deliver an excellent quality of service. Reporting and the ability to export 
data for our own reports enables us to provide evidence that the excellent service  
is being delivered.
Finally, Windows Intune enables us to have this support provided by a Microsoft 
partner so not only can the infrastructure costs be managed, but so can the  
actual administration.
These features enable us to deliver the tasks that we will need to understand to 
make the deployment of Windows Intune successful. The tasks and implementation 
methods are examined in the chapters after this.
In the next chapter, we will purchase our Windows Intune subscription and install 
the client software onto PCs so we can start delivering the PC management service 
we have been discussing with Windows Intune. 


Signing Up for Windows 
Intune and Installing the 
Client Software
As a subscription based product, you need to sign up for Windows Intune and 
deploy the software.
In this chapter, we will ensure that we have the skills and technology required to 
deliver Windows Intune based management, and then go through the process to 
sign up for an account and purchase a subscription. Once this is completed, we will 
be able to add additional administrators and then download the software that needs 
to be deployed to the computers which we will be managing. Finally, we will add a 
Microsoft partner to the account to enable them to also manage your PCs if desired. 
For many businesses, having a partner assist in this way is both a useful and desired 
option. Therefore, in this chapter, we will cover the following topics: 
• 
Preparing for Windows Intune
• 
Signing up to Windows Intune
• 
Installing Windows Intune onto a client PC
• 
Enabling others to manage your PC estate with Windows Intune
Preparing for Windows Intune
Once you sign the Windows Intune subscription agreement you are committed to 
a minimum of one year's payment, so it is vital that we make sure all is well before 
you sign up. One way to do this is to sign up for a trial period of 30 days and see 
what works, but a better way is to ensure you meet and understand the licensing, 
hardware, software, and people requirements.

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 58 ]
Licensing of Windows Intune
In some ways, the licensing of Windows Intune is very simple. You count the 
number of PCs (known as devices in the Windows Intune world) that you wish to 
manage with Windows Intune and then purchase the Window Intune subscription 
for that number of PCs. Windows Intune can be purchased via an Enterprise 
Agreement or via the online portal. Since many organizations purchasing Windows 
Intune will have less than 250 desktops in the service, the online portal is the best 
solution for these organizations and we will discuss how to do this here. Just to 
reiterate, our minimum subscription is for a twelve months period.
While it is that simple, there are some things you need to be aware of. Firstly, your 
computers must be running a version of Windows that is a business version. This 
means the following versions:
• 
Windows XP Professional
• 
Windows Vista Business, Enterprise or Ultimate
• 
Windows 7 Professional, Enterprise or Ultimate
If the monthly bill is going to be less than $500 US dollars in the United States or $250 
dollars elsewhere, then we have to purchase with a credit card and the payments will 
be taken monthly. 
Finally, the price we see will be discounted if you choose to manage 250 or  
more computers or if you already have Software Assurance on your Windows 
desktop computers.
Therefore, knowing how many PCs we can manage as they it the software and 
hardware requirements and what other agreements you have with Microsoft is  
the key to understanding the licensing as everything else falls out of this.
Software and hardware requirements for 
Windows Intune
Windows Intune's software and hardware requirements should cover most 
computers that are used in business today, and if the computers are of a lower 
speciication, we should be thinking of replacing anyway. Since Windows Intune 
offers an upgrade to Windows 7 Enterprise Edition, aiming to use this should be 
something we are all aiming to do. 

Chapter 4
[ 59 ]
The next version of Windows, codenamed "Windows 8", will be available to 
Windows Intune customers as part of the subscription and Microsoft has stated that 
computers capable of running Windows 7 will run this version. This means that we 
do not have to worry that an upgrade now will be short-lived for continuing our use 
of Windows in the future.
Hardware requirements
The hardware requirements are as follows:
• 
Windows Vista and Windows 7:
 °
32-bit or 64-bit hardware
 °
Meets the minimum hardware speciications for the operating system 
currently installed if that operating system is Windows Vista or 
Windows 7
• 
Windows XP:
 °
For Windows XP, the hardware requirements are higher than the 
requirements for the operating system. They are CPU of 500 MHz or 
higher and at least 256MB of RAM.
 °
If you plan to upgrade from Windows XP to Windows 7, then the 
Windows 7 hardware requirements will need to be met:
i. 
1GHz CPU
ii. 1GB or RAM for 32-bit or 2GB for 64-bit systems
iii. 16 GB hard disk space available for 32-bit or 20GB for  
64-bit systems
iv. DirectX 9 graphics device with at least a WDDM 1.0
If the Windows 7 requirements all sound a little dificult to comprehend, then go to 
http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?22 to download the free upgrade advisor to get 
a more detailed assessment of the hardware and software.
The preceding requirements are the minimum and we all know that a Windows 
system with a more current CPU, greater than 1GB RAM, and plenty of hard disk 
space will perform better.

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 60 ]
Software requirements
The software requirements for Windows Intune have been summarized in the 
preceding text. However, for completeness they are as follows:
• 
Windows Operating system running on hardware that meets the listed 
requirements. One of the following:
 °
Windows 7 Enterprise, Ultimate, and Professional
 °
Windows Vista Enterprise, Ultimate, and Business
 °
Windows XP Professional with Service Pack (SP) 2 or later (SP3 is 
strongly recommended and SP2 is no longer supported by Microsoft)
• 
If you are running Windows XP SP2 then you will need to load the  
following updates:
 °
Forefront Client Security Filter Manager QFE for Windows XP/SP2 
(http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?23)
 °
Microsoft Core XML Services (MSXML) 6.0 (http://davidoverton.
com/r.ashx?24)
 °
Security update, MSXML 6.0 SP2 (http://davidoverton.com/r.
ashx?25)
• 
Administrator access, each computer
• 
For the web based administrators console, you must have the following 
available: 
Web browser that supports Silverlight 3.0, such as Windows Internet 
Explorer 7.0 or higher.
You may notice that there is nothing here about the computers being a member 
of a Windows Active Directory domain, such as that provided by Windows 
Small Business Server or Windows Server. This is because it is not required. If 
the computer is, however, part of a domain, this is not a problem although some 
Windows Intune policy features do overlap with Active Directory Group Policy,  
the domain policy overrides the Windows Intune policy.
Skills required to manage with Windows Intune
The skills required to manage PCs using Windows Intune are slightly more complex 
to describe. There are two levels required here. The irst skill level is the minimum 
required to enable sensible decisions about policy settings and reporting, which is 
hard to articulate via an exam or other credential. The second skill level describes 
those skills required to diagnose and resolve more complex issues directly on  
a computer.

Chapter 4
[ 61 ]
Rather than offering a number of Microsoft exam numbers it might be useful to 
describe what you might look for on a CV for an individual or partner. the following 
list is what I would look for someone to have experience in. We will cover all of the 
simple management skills in this book and some of the complex diagnostic skills too, 
but there is only so much that can be passed on via a book for such a broad subject 
that is parallel, but not the purpose of this book.
Simple management skills
• 
Good communication skills with an ability to explain IT issues to  
non-IT users
• 
Understanding of installing and coniguring Windows XP, Windows Vista, 
and Windows 7
• 
Ability to migrate Windows XP and Windows Vista users to Windows 7
• 
Ability to understand when to apply or disable Microsoft updates
• 
Ability to conigure and use anti-malware software.
• 
Ability to understand and manage simple irewall coniguration
• 
Basics of license management to ensure compliance
Desired complex management and diagnostic skills
• 
Ability to resolve complex application and security issues that arise on a 
user's computer
• 
Ability to resolve issues that stop a computer booting, using tools such as 
DaRT
• 
Application packaging and deployment
• 
Deploying Windows 7 using automated tools
• 
Group Policy for Windows
The good news is that most issues are conined to the simple management skills 
section and the complex diagnostic skills can be obtained by a Microsoft Partner if 
they are not readily available. As has been stated before, it may make sense to also 
seek a Microsoft Partner if you do not have the ability to deliver the listed skills.

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 62 ]
Signing up to Windows Intune
Signing up to Windows Intune requires you to create a Windows Live ID and 
complete a purchase through the Microsoft Online Customer Portal (MOCP). Even 
if you already have a Windows Live ID, it is recommended that we create a new one 
as this will be the primary, or Tenant Administrator, for Windows Intune by default 
and this Windows Live ID cannot be removed as an administrator of the service. The 
process to get signed up for Windows Intune is as follows: 
• 
Create a Windows Live ID
• 
Sign into MOCP and conigure contacts
• 
Add Windows Intune to your basket and conirm the purchase
• 
Activate your purchase
• 
Adding Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack (MDOP) to your purchase
Create a Windows Live ID
If you have already subscribed to another service from Microsoft, then you can use 
the same ID and skip this section, providing you are happy that the person who 
administers your other subscription accounts will have administrative capability 
over this subscription and if you choose administrative rights for your computer 
management. In many cases this may not be desired, so I suggest creating a  
new account:
1. To start the purchase process, go to: https://mocp.microsoftonline.com. 
You should be presented with the default portal as below. If you are already 
signed in, it will say so in the top right of the screen and you will need to 
sign-out using the Sign Out link in the top right of the portal. To ensure 
the process takes place for the right location, click the Change my location 
link in the top right of the screen and conirm this is set to the right country, 
United Kingdom, for example:

Chapter 4
[ 63 ]
 
2. Select the link Sign in now under the Things I Need To Do section to  
create a new Live ID. Note that this is referred to in the ID creation process  
as both an MSN sign-in address and a Windows Live ID by the sites used in 
this process. 
3. The irst question asks us if we wish to use an existing e-mail address 
or create a new one. This is the e-mail address of the person who will 
administrate the Windows Intune subscription and the PCs. Select Yes to use 
an existing e-mail address and ensure that this address does exist and has not 
been used for other MOCP sign-ins. Then press Continue:

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 64 ]
4. Now enter the e-mail address to use, along with a password that shows 
as green on the screen and has a Password strength of Strong. Fill in the 
additional credentials screen, remembering that this may need to be changed 
via MOCP should the current administrator leave the organization:
5. Press Continue to access the next page in the form and enter the Personal 
Information, Home Location and then press Continue again. We now need 
to review and sign the agreements. Once you are happy with the agreements, 
type the e-mail address that you used and press I Accept:

Chapter 4
[ 65 ]
6. You will get a conirmation screen stating that the account has been created. 
Now press Continue to move to the Verify your email address screen. You 
should have received an e-mail, such as the one in the following screenshot. 
If this is not in your inbox or junk-mail, press the Send email button to re-
send the e-mail:
7. Click the link in the e-mail and you should see the conirmation. Press  
Finish to complete the process. I've discovered that before you can continue, 
you need to give the Windows Live ID system a minute or two to complete 
the process:

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 66 ]
Sign into MOCP and conigure contacts
You should now be back at the MOCP portal; if not, use the link https://mocp.
microsoftonline.com to get back there. Once there, follow the ensuing steps:
1. Press the Sign in link in the top right corner where you will be prompted to 
enter the Windows Live ID and password you have just created. You now 
have to enter contact, proile, and company information, which is all very 
standard information.
2. You are then required to enter the Service Usage Address. This is the person 
who is set up as the Tenant Administrator. While this user can be changed 
later, there is an option to copy the contact information used to manage the 
subscription. For smaller organizations where this will sit purely within 
an IT function, I would select Copy my contact information. For larger 
organizations, enter the appropriate person. The contact you enter here  
will also require a Windows Live ID. Press the Finish Button to complete  
the proile.
 

Chapter 4
[ 67 ]
3. We should now see conirmation that the proile has been completed with the 
Conirmation message as shown in the following screenshot. Press Close to 
close the proile screen:
Add Windows Intune to your basket and 
conirm the purchase
Now our proile is complete; we can purchase the Windows Intune item from  
the MOCP: 
1. From the Services tab, select Buy Now under the Available Services. If 
you want to use the trial which does not provide a download of Windows 7 
Enterprise Edition or MDOP, you can choose the trial.

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 68 ]
2. In the Shopping Cart, you can see that the Qty is 1 for just one device. 
Change this to the number of devices you wish to manage within your 
organization and press the Update Total button. If you know that a partner 
will be managing your PCs then you can search for their information now by 
pressing the Find a Partner link or you can enter it later. We will learn how 
to add a partner later in this chapter:
3. Press Checkout. You will be asked to add a New credit card to MOCP and 
enter a purchase order number. Press Next to move on in this process:
4. We now have to enter the normal credit card information, such as card 
number, name and address, and security information. Once the credit 
card information has been accepted, we are presented with the full Online 
Subscription and Terms and Conditions. It is recommended that this is read 
through and then the Full Name and Title information is completed before 
pressing the I Accept button:

Chapter 4
[ 69 ]
5. We are now presented with your last opportunity to review and conirm the 
order. If the total per month is as expected, press the Conirm Order button:

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 70 ]
6. The order conirmation screen then presents an option to Proceed to 
activation. Press the button to enable the subscription you have just 
purchased:
Activate your purchase
You will not be able to utilize your subscription until you have activated it:
1. The irst step is to create a Subscription Identiier. This is used on the bills 
you receive from Microsoft and can only contain letters, numbers, and 
hyphens. Enter this and then press Next:
2. We now have to conirm the Service Administrator before receiving 
conirmation that the activation has been successful. Go through the  
steps until you receive a conirmation similar to the one shown: 

Chapter 4
[ 71 ]
3. The process itself may take a few moments as will be demonstrated by the 
Subscriptions tab showing a Status of Activation in Progress:
This will change to Service Active shortly.
Adding MDOP to your purchase
We can now add MDOP to our subscription too. This is achieved by selecting the 
action of Buy MDOP Add-On* and then pressing Go:

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 72 ]
Once again we are presented with a familiar checkout process where you conirm  
the number of licenses required and then either select the credit card previously  
used or enter new credit card details. Complete this process and once again, close  
the Conirmation window.
Installing Windows Intune onto a client 
PC
Now that Windows Intune is available as a subscription, we need to load it onto each 
PC that will be managed and enable them to register and update themselves. This 
involves following the subsequent process on each computer:
• 
Downloading the client software to the device
• 
Unzipping and installing
• 
Waiting for the update process to complete
• 
Conirming installation
It is vital that the machine has access to the Internet and can access  
https://manage.microsoft.com during the installation process.
Downloading the client software to the device
We now need to download the client software onto each device. This can be 
downloaded once from the Windows Intune console and then distributed on a USB 
lash drive or via a network share or other mechanism. Installing the software ties 
the computer to the Windows Intune subscription and we have to ensure that we 
have purchased enough computer subscriptions to cover the total number of devices 
that the software will be installed on.
We need to go to the Windows Intune console by going to  
https://manage.microsoft.com/WindowsIntune/App.aspx and signing  
in with the Service Manager credentials you created or used earlier in this  
chapter. You will see the System Overview view when you do this. There  
is plenty to explore here which we will do later in this book:

Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
From here, we need to download the software. This can be done by clicking 
Administration and then Client Software Download. This brings us to the 
following screen:
Now click the Download Client Software link and save the ZIP ile produced.

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 74 ]
Unzipping and installing
Assuming you are installing from a USB stick or have downloaded the  
ZIP ile directly, unzip the ile and you will see two iles inside. They are  
Windows_Intune_Setup.exe and WindowsIntune.accountcert. These iles  
are the same for all users within one organization:
Run the Windows_Intune_Setup program to start the installer. Press Continue 
through the installer until you have inished the installation and see the Finish 
button as shown:
The installer only runs for a short time and the Windows Intune components 
themselves are deployed via Windows Update.
Installing via alternative methods
For administrative purposes, you may wish to either facilitate a quiet install  
where the user is not involved in the deployment, or as part of an operating system 
sysprep image based deployment. Windows Intune now supports both of these. 
You may also want to deploy via a MSI ile rather than setup.exe program as this 
is required by some application deployment tools and again, this is available with 
Windows Intune.

Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
Quiet installation
It is possible to run the executable ile via script with the following command line: 
Windows_Intune_Setup.exe /quiet
This will install Windows Intune without prompting on the screen and will succeed 
or fail silently. If you are using an automated software distribution solution, then this 
may be desired or required. If you do chose this method, then success or diagnosing 
failure can be done by looking at the log iles located here:
%ProgramFiles%\microsoft\onlinemanagement\logs 
Image based deployment
The latest version of Windows Intune brings with it image based deployment 
where you can place the Windows Intune iles on a computer image that will then 
be loaded onto several computers. There are several steps to this process if you 
are using the Microsoft deployment tools. The process is as follows once you have 
installed Windows and customized the computer for rolling out to computers as a 
standard image:
1. Download and conigure Windows Intune.
2. Prepare the image for multiple deployments.
3. Check the computer has connected to Windows Intune. Details of this 
process with the commands required are in Chapter 11, Deploying Windows 7 
Enterprise Edition.
MSI ile deployment
If you need to install using a Microsoft Installer Package (MSI), then you can extract 
the iles using the following command line to then be installed by your speciic tool:
Windows_Intune_Setup.exe /extract <extract location>
This will place the iles in the <extract location> folder for you to distribute via 
your chosen deployment tools. Once the iles are extracted, you will see both a 32-bit 
and 64-bit installer. It important that you use the correct MSI ile for the operating 
system and that the ile windowsintune.accountcert is included with the MSI ile. 
Once you have extracted the iles, the following commands would install Windows 
Intune interactively or without user interaction:
• 
64-bit quiet installation:
 
Msiexec /I Windows_Intune_X64.msi /quiet

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 76 ]
• 
64-bit interactive installation:
 
Msiexec /I Windows_Intune_X64.msi /qf
• 
32-bit (quiet or full user interface commands):
 
Msiexec /I Windows_Intune_X86.msi /quiet
• 
32-bit interactive installation:
 
Msiexec /I Windows_Intune_X86.msi /qf
• 
For other MSI command options, use:
 
MSIexec /?
Waiting for the update process to complete
Because the installation components are delivered silently, you will not see obvious 
signs that the various technologies are being installed and we need to wait for the 
update process to complete. The most obvious sign is that the Windows Intune 
EndPoint Protection gets installed. Shortly after this is installed, you will be asked 
to reboot the computer as shown in the following screenshot. This can take between 
ive and thirty minutes depending on your Internet connection capability and the 
other tasks on the computer.
Conirming installation
As the installation is a behind-the-scenes process, it can be dificult to conirm that 
the Windows Intune installation has completed. The installation process is normally 
complete within thirty minutes while the computer is being used and will require a 
reboot once complete for the Microsoft Online Policy Agent 
There are several ways to see if the installation is progressing and has completed. 
First, the applications will install, so we will see Microsoft Forefront Client 
Protection on the taskbar and an icon for Windows Intune Center will appear  
on the desktop.

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
We can check the log iles that are found by going to this location: 
%programfiles%\microsoft\onlinemanagement\logs 
We can see a number of log iles in that folder that should grow in size as the 
installation proceeds. The Enrolment.log ile contains the information on the 
process of adding the computer to the Windows Intune environment. An example  
of the contents of the folder is shown in the following screenshot:
Finally, we can see progress in the Windows Intune console. In the following 
example, you can see that the computer has contacted the Windows Intune Service, 
but has not inished the registration. To access this screen, open the Windows  
Intune console and then select Computers, followed by Unassigned Computers in 
the All Computers section of the navigation tree. You should see a screen showing 
General information:
 

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 78 ]
Now select Computers from the Unassigned Computers workspace and you will see 
all computers that have been enrolled into the Windows Intune service. If you click a 
computer, such as the Russell-PC example in following screenshot you will see how 
far we are through the process: 
 
If the computer does not appear in the Windows Intune, console then you need to 
explore the log folders on the computer to diagnose the issue further. Details of the 
log iles can be found at http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?31.
Enabling others to manage your PC 
estate with Windows Intune
It is reasonable to assume that you may want more than one person to administer 
your computer estate. These additional people may work for your organization or 
may not. If you are working with a Microsoft partner, you need to enter the partner 
details into your subscription if you have not already done so while creating the 
subscription.

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
Adding a partner to your subscription
By adding a partner to your subscription, you are telling Microsoft that this partner 
inluenced the purchase or ongoing use of Windows Intune. It is important to both 
the partner and Microsoft for both recognition and auditing purposes. This should  
be completed within the irst 30 days of signing up to Windows Intune for the  
initial partner.
To do this, open the MOCP by going to https://mocp.microsoftonline.com:
1. Select the Subscriptions tab. From here, select the Add/edit partner item in 
the actions list and press Go.
2. Search for the partner by name, location, or their Partner ID if they have 
shared it. Enter this information and press Search. In the following example 
we are searching by name.

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 80 ]
3. Select the partner you want from the list and then press Next.
4. We can see a summary of the partner added, and if this is correct, press 
Finish to see the following conirmation screen. Pressing Close here will 
inalize the process.
Both the customer and the partner will receive an e-mail conirming this change.
The ability to remove or change the partner is provided through the same interface, 
should you change the partner assisting with PC management.
Changes a partner sees when managing more than 
one client
When a Microsoft partner logs into the Windows Intune console, they manage PCs 
via an identical process that a customer would do. The only difference is that in the 
title bar of the console, the partner has the ability to pick which account to manage 
by pressing Switch to another account:

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
Pressing this link prompts us to choose which customer to manage. This list is 
ordered by default so that those with the most alerts are at the top of the list. In 
the following example you can see that the top entry has two warnings while the 
organization below is healthy:
We can ilter this using a variety of ilters from the Filters drop down box. These 
enable us to focus on organizations with problems we wish to resolve:
• 
None (show all accounts)
• 
Accounts with issues
• 
Account with agent issues (normally installation problems)
• 
Account with critical health issues
• 
Account with endpoint protection issues (malware alerts)
• 
Account with policy issues
• 
Account with updates issues
• 
Account with software issues

Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing the Client Software
[ 82 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have completed the process of signing up to the MOCP, 
purchasing a Windows Intune subscription, and any additional products such as 
MDOP. This included the creation of a Windows Live ID and setting the Tenant 
Administrator who always has access to the Windows Intune console.
We have also run through the Windows Intune client PC installation process which 
relies on Internet access and discussed how to check the progress of the installation.
Finally, we have added a partner to the subscription for audit and recognition 
purposes and also to enable the partner to administer the client computers.
In the next chapter, we will conigure Windows Intune, adding administrators, 
coniguring the management policies, and ensuring that the PC is protected against 
malware and other attacks from the Internet. We will also examine the remote 
assistance and license management tools available to us in Windows Intune.

Coniguring Windows Intune
In this chapter, we are going to go through the steps required to conigure the 
Windows Intune management tools. We will add an additional Windows Intune 
administrator, which provides both safety should someone lose access to their 
account, and also allows a Microsoft partner to manage the solution if desired. We 
will learn how to group computers so they can be effectively managed. We will 
enable the alert communication system so the right person is made aware when an 
alert is raised by Windows Intune.
Finally, since Microsoft licensing can be a challenging task, we will enable access to 
any Microsoft volume license agreements through the Windows Intune console and 
see how that makes this easier.
This chapter will have the following sections:
• 
Adding additional administrators to Windows Intune
• 
Coniguring computer groups
• 
Coniguring Windows Intune alerts
• 
License management
Adding additional administrators to 
Windows Intune
Before we start doing any coniguration for Windows Intune, we need to add 
additional administrators. It is always good practice to have at least two people who 
can access the administration console in case one person locks themselves out of the 
system, goes sick, or leaves the business. We may also want to enable a Microsoft 
partner with good desktop management skills to administer Windows Intune, so 
again, adding them now makes sense.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 84 ]
Adding an additional administrator
To add additional administrators, follow the ensuing steps:
1. Start the Windows Intune console by going to  
https://manage.microsoft.com/. 
2. Select the Administration workspace followed by Administrator 
Management. There will always be a Tenant Administrator who is the 
user who signed up to the Windows Intune service. This user has full 
administrative access to Windows Intune and while they can be displayed 
within the console, they are not changed here.
3. Now select Service Administrators. We will notice that there is either 
one or no administrators showing depending on the steps you took when 
signing up to Windows Intune. In the following screenshot, there are no 
administrators shown:
4. Press the Add Administrator button and enter the e-mail address for the 
additional administrator into the entry box. If you want the user to have full 
permissions, select Full access, otherwise select Read-only access. Press OK 
to complete the process:

Chapter 5
[ 85 ]
5. You will now see the Service Administrator shown in the Windows  
Intune console:
We can add additional administrators by following the same process or we 
can delete Service Administrators by selecting the administrator on the same 
screen and selecting Delete instead.
Changing the Tenant Administrator
There can be up to two tenant administrators for Windows Intune and these 
are set by the person who owns the subscription to Windows Intune. One is 
the administrator who manages the subscription and the other is the service 
administrator as set in the MOCP. By default, these are the same person. These are 
not changed in Windows Intune and will change as the subscription administrators 
change rather than Windows Intune administrators.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 86 ]
Should we wish to change these administrators, we will be changing your Microsoft 
Online subscription information rather than Windows Intune and this needs to be 
understood and considered before making changes. Since the tenant administrator  
is tied to the subscription, adding the service administrator as a different account 
gives greater separation between managing the subscription and managing 
Windows Intune.
Changing the service administrator is done via the MOCP rather than the Windows 
Intune console. Once you change the service administrator, you will end up with 
two tenant administrators relecting the two Windows Live IDs logged with MOCP. 
Follow the ensuing steps to change the tenant administrator in Windows Intune: 
1. Start the Windows Intune console and by navigate to Tenant Administrators 
in the Administration workspace. We can see the current single tenant 
administrator shown. Click the Go to Microsoft Online Services link to edit 
your subscription information:
2. Locate your Windows Intune subscription and select Edit Service Details 
and press the Go button:

Chapter 5
[ 87 ]
3. Conirm the Service Details by pressing Next and then modify the service 
account for the subscription as shown in the following screenshot:
4. Press Next to see the summary and then press Next again. Select Close to 
save the changes.
Coniguring computer groups
All computers belong to groups that assist with managing them. Policy settings, 
reporting, and alerts can be viewed or changed by groups, so it is important to 
consider the groupings and conigure them appropriately for these tasks. One 
very nice feature of Windows Intune is that a PC can belong to multiple groups 
and therefore, you can have multiple group hierarchies, one for reporting, one for 
policies, and so on.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 88 ]
By default, PCs are assigned to two groups: the All Computers and the Unassigned 
Computers groups. To manage the computer’s membership to groups, we need to 
do the following:
• 
Choose a group structure
• 
Create the group structure
• 
Assign PCs to groups
Choosing a group structure
For smaller organizations, I would recommend creating a singular group 
infrastructure. However, for larger organizations where reporting becomes  
more critical, we should consider PC management and reporting separately.
This structure has no bearing on any other Microsoft tools you may be using, such as 
Active Directory (AD). This is an administrative feature of Windows Intune only. 
For management purposes, grouping computers by type or coniguration makes 
sense. Consider the following groups to be created: 
• 
Location
 °
Home
 °
Ofice
 °
Mobile
• 
Type of computer
 °
Laptop
 °
Netbook
 °
Desktop
 °
Virtual machine
• 
Ownership
 °
Company
 °
Personal

Chapter 5
[ 89 ]
In the preceding example, a computer would belong to three groups and these 
would provide all the management separations you might want for the policies. 
Just because a computer belongs to a group, this does not mean that additional 
policies have to be set as this also helps with reporting. These structures enable us to 
understand the primary location of a computer, what type of computer it is, and who 
owns it.
For larger organizations where we may have to report by organizational division, we 
can also create additional groups structures such as:
• 
Organizational groups
 °
Human Resources
 °
Administration
 °
Sales
 °
Support
• 
Role in company
 °
Executive
 °
Managerial
 °
Revenue generating
 °
Others
• 
Geographical Location
 °
United Kingdom
 °
North
 °
South
I could continue on in many ways, but I hope you get the idea. We will now walk 
through how to create the basic structure we just described.
 

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 90 ]
Creating the group structure
To reproduce the group structure described earlier, complete the following steps. 
You can customize them to it your own needs as required:
1. Start the Windows Intune Console by navigating to  
http://manage.microsoft.com and then click on the Computers  
to display the computers workspace.
2. Click Create Computer Group listed under Tasks in the right action pane: 
3. Type the group Name and a Description of the group into the Details section 
of the screen:

Chapter 5
[ 91 ]
4. Select the parent group from the drop down, which in this case is All 
Computers. It will default to the group you are in when you create the group
5. Press the Save button to inish adding the group:
6. This needs to be done for each group—Location, Type of Computer and 
Ownership, giving us the structure shown in the following image. Be sure  
to create each group with Parent Group of All Computers.
7. We now need to create the groups under these top level groups. Click in 
the irst group you want to create groups under, such as Location in the 
following screenshot:
8. Repeat steps 3 and 4 from to start to create the new group. When we come 
to selecting the Parent Group, ensure the correct parent is chosen, such as 
Location in the following screenshot. If we start in the right parent group 
then this should be automatically set correctly.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 92 ]
Assigning PCs to groups
Now that we have created the groups, we need to assign the computers to the 
groups. As we install new computers in our business, they will appear in the 
Unassigned Computers group and will need adding to the appropriate groups  
for management.
There are several ways to assign a computer to groups, the irst involves starting in 
the group and assigning the computers to it. To do this, follow the ensuing steps:
Start the Windows Intune console by navigating to http://manage.microsoft.com 
and then click on the Computers to display the computers workspace.
At this stage you may also wish to add a computer to the group. Ensure you are 
in the group you want to add computers to, and then press Add Computers in the 
Tasks section:
Select the Group Name where the computers already exist. This is likely to be under 
the All Computers group:

Chapter 5
[ 93 ]
Now select the computers you want to add by clicking the computers, or selecting 
multiple computers by holding the Control key down while you click the computers.
Press Add to add them to the list to add, giving you a inished selection as shown:
Press OK to inish the process of adding computers to that group and check that the 
Computers section is showing the computers added.
This needs to be done for each group under the already existing groups of  
Location, Type of Computer, and Ownership, giving us the inal structure  
with each computer belonging to multiple groups.
While we do not have to use this hierarchy, it gives us the lexibility to manage by 
policy, and deliver reporting with several slices of data.
Note that a computer is automatically removed from the 
Unassigned Computers group when it is assigned membership 
of at least one other group.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 94 ]
The second method involves moving computers to a speciic group or groups. To do 
this, simply drag and drop the chosen computers from within the unassigned or All 
Computers group. In the following screenshot we are dragging david-win7x64 to the 
Ofice group. It is worth noting that multiple computers can be dragged at once:
The inal way is to assign a single computer to multiple groups. This is done  
as follows:
1. Under All Computers, navigate to the All Computers group or the 
Unassigned Computers group and then the Computers tab in  
the workspace:
Click the computer name shown in the list of Computers list; for example, 
the computer called derek-pc in the preceding screenshot.

Chapter 5
[ 95 ]
2. Click the Edit Group Membership task under Tasks in the action pane on 
the right of the screen.
3. Select the groups that the PC needs to belong to. You may have to scroll 
down to see all the groups the computer needs to belong to:
4. Press OK to inish the process.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 96 ]
Coniguring Windows Intune alerts
Windows Intune will raise an alert in a number of situations where we, as the 
administrators, will either need to be aware of an event or respond to it directly. The 
alerts will appear in a number of the screens and reports within Windows Intune 
and they can also be sent via e-mail to selected e-mail addresses. The recipients of the 
alert e-mails do not have to be administrators. 
The reporting of alerts from the client computer to Windows Intune requires an 
Internet connection, so we are unlikely to see an alert saying that the user’s PC is 
having network trouble. However, if a user is having connectivity trouble we are still 
alerted, not because the client computer sends an alert, but because Windows Intune 
will raise an alert because the computer has not checked in for a period of time.
In this section we will examine how to conigure Windows Intune alerts so the right 
people are notiied for each different alert type.
Windows Intune provides two coniguration options for alert management:
• 
Which alerts are enabled
• 
Who is notiied about an alert
With the preceding two settings, we can control the circumstance where an alert will 
be raised and who the users are that get an e-mail notiication. This is conigured in 
two stages:
• 
Coniguring alert activation
• 
Changing alert notiication
We will run through both of these in the following text. Note that the alert 
notiication will, by default, always go to the service administrator.
Coniguring alert activation
There are several hundred alerts that can be enabled or disabled and the only way 
to ensure that the ones we want are enabled is to scroll through the list and check. A 
number are enabled by default; but not all of the Windows and Ofice ones I would 
want. I normally match the additional product alerts, such as Windows 7 and Ofice 
to align with the updates we selected. So, if I enabled updates for Ofice, I turn on the 
Ofice related alerts. To check and change the alerts, follow the ensuing steps:
1. Navigate to the Windows Intune console by going to http://manage.
microsoft.com and then go to the Administration workspace, and click  
on Alerts and Notiications:

Chapter 5
[ 97 ]
2. Click Conigure Alert Type Settings
3. Scroll through the list of alerts to enable and disable those we wish to change 
by clicking Enable Alert Type or Disable Alert Type:
4. We can search for key words using the Search alert types box in the top 
right, however be aware that this only searches the Name. This means that 
we cannot ind all the Windows alerts by searching for Windows. 

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 98 ]
5. In the following example, I have searched for all items with ofice in the 
name and selected them. Pressing Enable will enable alerting on all  
these items:
6. To select multiple alerts to update by pressing the Control key and clicking 
each alert type.
Changing alert notiication 
Alert notiication consists of two different stages:
• 
Adding recipients to the console
• 
Choosing which recipients align to the notiication rules.
These two steps consist of entering the details of each person who will receive an 
alert and then selecting them against the pre-deined notiication rules. These users 
do not have to be administrators in Windows Intune, and may be support staff or 
others who require visibility of some alerts. The ive default notiication rules are:
• 
All Alerts
• 
All Critical Alerts
• 
All Information Alerts
• 
All Warning Alerts
• 
Remote Assistance Requests

Chapter 5
[ 99 ]
To change the notiications, follow the ensuing steps:
1. Navigate to the Windows Intune console by going to  
http://manage.microsoft.com and then go to the Administration 
workspace and click on Alerts and Notiications.
2. Expand the items under Alerts and Notiications and select Recipients:
3. Press Add… to add a new contact or the Edit… button to change an  
existing contact.
4. Complete all the details, paying note to the Language selection which will 
enable most, but not all messages to be displayed in the chosen preferred 
language. Press OK when completed:

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 100 ]
5. Continue adding contacts for each person or e-mail alias that should be 
notiied about an alert type.
6. In the Administration workspace, press Notiication Rules so we can assign 
the recipients to the ive notiication rules.
7. To modify the recipient, select a rule and then press Select Recipients… on 
the toolbar or right-click on the alert and select Select Recipients… from  
the menu:
8. Click in the boxes to select the recipients and then press OK:

Chapter 5
[ 101 ]
9. Complete this for each rule. You will notice that while the top four rules 
relate to the criticality of the alert, the ifth rule is speciic to Remote 
Assistance requests. These always need to be carefully monitored and should 
be sent to a monitored alias or a person or group of people who are able to 
respond in a very timely manner.
Creating a customer alert rule
We can also add our own custom rules. Once again, we need to ensure the 
individuals are already added to our recipient list. Once this is done, follow  
the ensuing steps to create a custom notiication rule:
1. Select Create New Rule... from the toolbar:

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 102 ]
2. We need to name our rule. As an example, we will create a rule to lag policy 
errors, so name it Policy Errors:
3. Select the categories of alert that will be sent to the selected recipients. In 
this case, select Policy and since we only want the errors, not information 
notiications, select Warning and Critical and then press Next.
4. We can choose to have rules send notiications to different people depending 
on the groups the computers belong to. Since we should only see policy 
errors for company owned computers as these are likely driven by group 
policy issues, select the Company as the group under Ownership. Press  
Next to continue:
 

Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
5. We can now choose who should be notiied in the event of these alerts. Select 
the people we want to notify and then press Save.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 104 ]
6. We can now see our custom rule in the Notiication Rules section:
These custom rules can be deleted, while the default rules cannot. This is shown with 
the padlock next to the rule. All rules can be Enabled or Disabled from this same 
screen in Windows Intune.
License management
If you have a Microsoft Volume License Agreement, such as Open Value, Open 
Subscription, Select plus, or other agreement, you can see what licenses are available 
to you here and report on what has been purchased and installed. If you have 
purchased Microsoft or any other product licenses, Windows Intune can also store 
information about the licenses you have and align them to the software detected by 
Windows Intune on each client computer.
Managing your Microsoft Volume License 
details
Volume Licensing is an eficient way to purchase Microsoft software licenses. It is 
important that we tally the licenses purchased to those deployed to avoid unlicensed 
software distribution. Windows Intune can help with this process. To add Volume 
License information, follow these steps:

Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
1. To access the Licenses workspace, open the Windows Intune console and 
select Licenses:
2. Now select Add Volume Licensing Agreements from the Tasks list.
3. Ensure the Agreement Type is Volume License agreement.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 106 ]
4. We can now either upload a CSV ile that contains the agreement information 
or we can manually add the details. For this example, we will add the  
details manually:
5. Type in a friendly Agreement name for the agreement and then the  
paired numbers.
6. We can now add the agreement details to either to Unassigned  
Agreements group or we can start to group the agreements together for 
easier management. If there are no groups, then we must create one. Type 
a Group name, such as Office Licenses or Open Agreements so that the 
group makes sense to us when we report on usage:
You will now be able to report against usage to ensure you are correctly licensed. 

Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
Managing your other license details
We can now add the non-Volume License agreement information into Windows 
Intune. To do this, follow the ensuing steps:
1. To access the Licenses workspace, open the Windows Intune console and 
select Licenses as before.
2. Now select Add Other Software Agreement from the Tasks list.
3. Ensure the Agreement Type is Other software Licensing agreement:
4. Provide a friendly agreement name, such as Retail Ofice 2010:
5. Start typing the Publisher of the software you are selecting. As you type a 
drop down list of publishers will appear. Select the one from the list that 
matches your software, in this case, Microsoft:
6. Now start to type the product title. You do not have to type in the entire 
product name as keywords are searched. In the example above when Ofice 
is typed, we are able to pick Microsoft Ofice 2010 Pro from the list shown.

Coniguring Windows Intune
[ 108 ]
7. We can now enter the license count so Windows Intune can tally the number 
of licenses purchased against the number installed:
8. If the license is a subscription or is time limited we can enter the License start 
date and the License end date so compliance is provided only during the 
correct period. 
9. In the Agreement details box, enter a description of the licenses and if 
appropriate any reference number that may help associate the licenses in  
the future:
10. We now need to assign the agreement to a group. In this case, I want all my 
retail licenses to be in one group so we can create a Retail Purchases group 
to keep them together.
11. Finally, press Save to complete the license information.

Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have managed the people who can administer our Windows 
computers which are managed by the Windows Intune service, and understood 
that the subscription owner and service administrator are part of this group of 
people. We have prepared Windows Intune for a simpler management experience 
by creating a computer group structure that we can use for policy and update 
administration. Finally, we have entered the license information for Microsoft 
Volume License agreements as well as details of other license agreements to enable 
this to be checked and reported against.
In the next chapter, we will look at how we proactively manage the PCs through 
Windows Intune to keep things running smoothly by approving system updates, 
and managing policy.


Coniguring Management 
Policy
In this chapter, we are going to go through the steps required to conigure the 
Windows Intune management policies. There are two key areas of policy that  
we need to consider:
• 
Policy management
• 
Update management
Policy management will generally be set infrequently, with only occasional updates 
to IT policy, or small changes to items such as irewall coniguration. The updates 
will require both policy management as well as at least a monthly review of any 
additional updates that fall outside the scope of the previously deined policies.
Policy management
Policy management is the creation of policies and then the application of those 
policies onto one or more computer groups. The three areas are:
• 
Windows Firewall Settings
• 
Windows Intune Center Settings
• 
Windows Intune Agent Settings
The groups are those we created earlier and policies can be applied to multiple 
groups. If we also have Active Directory Group Policy, this will override policy 
settings in Windows Intune.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 112 ]
Policies are updated on client computers with the check for system updates, so  
until a computer connects to the Internet and checks for updates, policies will  
not be distributed. 
If we have multiple policies that apply to a computer and there are conlicts, there 
are two rules that govern the inal policy settings. These rules are as follows:
• 
Policies closest to the computer (that is,. inherited through the groups tree) 
win over those above them
• 
When two policy settings are both as "close", the newest policy wins
In the following example, all computers have Policy A applied to them. If a 
computer is in the Home or Ofice Location group, it will also have Policy B applied 
to it. Finally, if a computer is in the Mobile group then Policy C is also applied. 
Each policy is applied in order, so anything that conlicts between policies is 
overwritten by each subsequent policy.
There is a potential, and likely, situation in the example below where both Policy 
C and Policy D would be applied to the same computer. Going by the irst rule just 
mentioned, it would not be possible to determine which policy would win. In this 
case, the second is applied, which ever policy is newer "wins" in the case of a conlict:

Chapter 6
[ 113 ]
Remember that the preceding rules only cover conlicts in the individual policy 
settings and that a policy may have items set as not conigured, which in effect 
means "no policy setting", thus enabling two policies to be applied without any 
conlict in the actual settings applied to a particular computer. This is a good point to 
remind ourselves to keep our policy rules manageable and to only have additional 
policy setting where required and to use disabled settings for all additional policies 
except for the speciic setting we want to change.
We will now look at each of the three policy templates. To get into the policy 
settings, open the Windows Intune console and navigate to the Policy workspace. 
From here, click Create New Policy to create a policy. Remember that once the policy 
has been conigured, we will still need to conigure which group or groups it applies 
to before it is applied:
We will then be asked to choose the template we wish to edit. Pick the template and 
press Create Policy:

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 114 ]
In each section, each policy item can be enabled or disabled. When disabled, the 
policy does not change any setting on the computer. Click the switch to change  
from green, which represents enabled, to grey for disabled:
After the General section in each policy, there is the ability to enable or disable all 
items in the policy. This is particularly useful if we have conigured a policy at a high 
level and then are creating a policy to make a small change to the policy settings for 
a speciic group to override it, such as a special exception to the irewall settings for 
a group of users. In this case, we will want almost all items in the policy disabled. 
To start with all items in the policy disabled, click on the switch to disable all policy 
items and we only need to enable and conigure the few items we wish to override. 
The following screenshot shows the setting when all are enabled:
Windows Firewall Settings
The Windows Firewall Settings is a key policy, but one with several versions, 
depending on the location and ownership of the computers. While in a controlled 
business LAN environment the irewall policy may be consistent, when we have to 
cater for users at home or with a computer they also use for personal tasks, we may 
be required to provide different settings for these scenarios. It will possibly be easier 
to do this with multiple policies for the private irewall policy settings. 
We will walk through the creation of a policy, and discuss the options in this section. 
To create the policy, as mentioned in the preceding text, select Create New Policy 
from the Policy workspace task list. When prompted to select a template, choose the 
Windows Firewall Settings and then press Create Policy. Create a unique policy 
name and add a description in the General section.

Chapter 6
[ 115 ]
The next item allows us to enable or disable all settings in the policy before we 
continue to modify the speciic settings that we want. We can see that this button has 
three settings, all conigured, some conigured, and none conigured. Moving the 
switch to the middle position selects the option for some settings in this policy are 
not conigured. The switch is shown in this way in the following screenshot. If this 
setting is moved from the middle position, we cannot move it back into this position 
as it can only enable or disable all policies. The middle position deines the starting 
coniguration of the policy when it is irst created, with some items enabled and 
some disabled:
The irewall policy is the only one where this setting defaults to this middle position.
The Proile Settings enable us to conigure when the irewall is enabled or disabled, 
whether it should block all incoming connections, and whether it should inform the 
user when it blocks a new program.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 116 ]
For maximum protection, we should ensure the irewall is enabled at all times and 
if conigured correctly, we should not need to block all incoming connections. If 
your users are aware of what a irewall is, we should also inform them when a new 
application is blocked so they can enable an exception if desired. These settings 
would look like the following:
By default, all the Predeined Exceptions are disabled. If you we have an ofice 
environment where a number of computers are connected to a LAN behind a 
corporate irewall, we should consider enabling Branch Cache features of Windows 
7 as this can improve the performance of web content downloads. This should only 
be enabled on Domain networks if you have a Windows domain and likewise on 
Private networks if you do not have a domain, but do have a workgroup network 
for a small ofice. A private network is frequently a user's home network, so we 
need to make the decision according to the network design, possibly even using two 
policies—one for home based machines and another for ofice based machines if 
required. The settings in the following screenshot can either be enabled in a unique 
proile deployed to the ofice group or in a common policy for all, depending on 
your choice.

Chapter 6
[ 117 ]
Depending on your business requirements, we may use Network Projectors and if 
so, this should be enabled as per the following screenshot.
We should also enable Core Networking as this is utilized in Windows Vista and 
Windows 7 to provide networking connectivity using IPv4 and IPv6.
For home users, consider enabling the File and Printer Sharing option and the 
HomeGroup as this enables users to share information with family members as well 
as Media Center Extenders if the home user might also use the machine as a Media 
Center for their Xboxes. In the following screenshot, these are only enabled in the 
home network or Private network setting.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 118 ]
Finally, consider enabling the Network Discovery option as this is a really useful 
feature of Windows 7 and Windows Vista to examine the devices on a network:
The last two options we should enable relate to Remote Assistance in the operating 
system and Remote Desktop. While these do not relate to the Windows Intune 
feature to enable remote assistance, they can be extremely useful administrative tools 
and it is a real pain should we need to use them and discover that they are blocked 
by policy in the irewall:
Once we have completed the information, press Save Policy, after which we will get 
the choice of deploying the policy. Pressing Yes will enable us to choose the group 
this is deployed in. Given that this information is likely to be common across the 
whole organization, we can deploy this to all groups by selecting the All Computers 
group by clicking in the box and then OK.
 

Chapter 6
[ 119 ]
If you want to learn more about the impact of these irewall settings on Windows 7 
irewall settings, have a look at my blog article on this at http://davidoverton.
com/r.ashx?32.
Windows Intune Center Settings
The Windows Intune Center Settings conigure the Windows Intune Center that 
is installed on each computer. The functionality is not changed by these settings, 
however, we can conigure the information that is provided to the user at the bottom 
of the screen under the section Your computer is managed by:

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 120 ]
To conigure the Windows Intune Center to provide the information above, we need 
to edit or create a Windows Intune Center Settings policy. You can do this as per the 
previous section, or if you are in the All Policies section, press New at the top of  
the screen.
Select Windows Intune Center Settings and press Create Policy:
Once again, create a unique name for the policy in the General section:
In the Windows Intune Center section, complete the details as desired. The Name 
can either be an organization or personal name, as is true for the E-mail address, 
which might be support@myorganisation.com if we want a generic support alias.

Chapter 6
[ 121 ]
We can also share additional information via the notes ield as seen in the  
following screenshot:
Once you we have conigured all the settings to meet the business needs, press Save 
Policy and deploy it to the All Computers group, or if working to a subset of users, 
the appropriate group.
Windows Intune Agent Settings
The Windows Intune Agent Settings conigures the anti-malware settings for 
Windows Intune Endpoint Protection and the Windows System Update. The policy 
creation or update is split into four steps:
1. General
2. Endpoint Protection
3. Updates
4. Network bandwidth
Start the policy creation process in the same way again, and this time, select 
Windows Intune Agent Settings.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 122 ]
General section
In the General section, we put in a name for the policy that is unique across all policy 
names and a description to help describe what the settings are when we are looking 
at the policy summaries.
Endpoint Protection section
The Endpoint Protection section conigures all of the anti-malware settings provided 
by Windows Intune. This contains several sections:
• 
Endpoint Protection Service
• 
Real-time Protection
• 
Scan Schedule
• 
Scan Options
• 
Default Actions
• 
Excluded Files and Folders
• 
Excluded Processes
• 
Excluded FileTypes
• 
Microsoft SpyNet
We will now look at each section.
Endpoint Protection Service
The Endpoint Protection Service is the heart of the anti-malware engine. It can be 
enabled on all computers, none or only those without anti-malware installed. We 
will only be able to receive malware alerts and control computers where Windows 
Intune Endpoint Protection is installed. The following screenshot shows the settings 
available in the form and the settings we should use:

Chapter 6
[ 123 ]
We should consider changing this to Enable Endpoint Protection: Yes for all 
computers that are company owned at a minimum if Windows Intune is to be used 
as the company wide malware protection product. If we want to respect local anti-
malware settings of non-business owned machines, consider an additional policy to 
only protect computers that are unprotected when Endpoint Protection is installed.
The other default setting to consider changing is the Track resolved malware (days) 
setting, which defaults to 7 days. We should consider changing this to the maximum 
setting of 30 days to provide the greatest visibility of users who got themselves into 
a situation where malware was or attempted to install on their computer. This is 
a good lag to watch for when reporting to enable the education of the users or a 
pattern of attempted infection.
Real-time Protection
The Real-time Protection area of the settings enables or disables the anti-malware 
engine and controls what it monitors. These settings should be left as per the default 
and are shown in the following screenshot:

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 124 ]
The Enable behavior monitoring setting conigures Windows Intune Endpoint 
Protection to check for and monitor the patterns of behavior of the computer and 
react if these are seen to change signiicantly, pointing to possible malware.
The script scanning works with web based scripts that execute through Internet 
Explorer. It only works with and should be used along with Internet Explorer as the 
browser. Internet Explorer on the client PC provides the most secure web browsing 
experience possible on Windows today as it integrates the protection that the 
operating system can bring as well as that of the browser.
The Network Inspection System works to ensure that network born malware is also 
blocked before it can impact the client computer. The Network Inspection System 
uses signatures of known vulnerabilities to detect and block malicious network 
trafic. The information is provided by the Microsoft Malware Protection Center. This 
means that when vulnerability is discovered or information about it is released that 
our computers have greater protection, even if a patch does not exist or there is no 
known malware.
Scan Schedule
Windows Intune Endpoint Protection can perform a quick scan each day to ensure 
the integrity of the system along with a full scan weekly. The defaults for these are in 
the middle of the night and unless computers are likely to be on, we should change 
the settings to times when the computer is likely to be on, but have less of an impact.
Scheduled scans normally only run when the computer is idle and these are 
conigured in the next part of the form.
If we want to schedule a computer to wake up and perform a scan, it is not possible 
to do this from within Windows Intune, however, I have blogged on a mechanism to 
enable this at http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?33.

Chapter 6
[ 125 ]
Scan Options
When a scan runs, there are various options that control what iles are scanned and 
the settings for when scans occur:
Since the status of a computer is unknown when Endpoint Protection is installed, I 
would advise that a full scan is conigured to run once the software is installed and if 
required, after malware detection.
We can also control if a scan requires a computer to be idle or not for a scan to take 
place. If the computer does not have to be idle, consider lowering the Limit CPU 
usage to ensure it does not signiicantly impact a user.
By default, network locations are not scanned, but consider changing this if the 
network storage does not have its own anti-malware solution installed. There are 
two settings here to consider.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 126 ]
The Scan iles opened from network shared folders setting will scan iles as they 
are opened from the network. If you use mapped drives, you can also have the client 
scan these by setting the Scan mapped network drives to Yes. This option needs to 
be carefully considered as every full scan by each computer would result in a full 
scan of the mapped network drives. While having one computer doing this is not a 
problem, if you have a large number of computers using the same mapped drives 
from the network storage, they will all be trying to scan the same network storage 
device as roughly the same time, having a negative impact on your network and 
your network storage as well as having multiple unnecessary malware scans.
For either of these network scan options, the user will require write access to the iles 
should malware be detected and for it to be removed, quarantined, or repaired.
Default Actions
If malware is detected we need to conigure the default action for the user. While 
the default for all actions is to Quarantine the ile, which removes it from harm's 
way, but it is recoverable through Windows Intune Endpoint Protection. We should 
consider changing the Severe and High classiications to Remove as per the settings 
in the following screenshot to completely remove known dangerous malware:
Excluding iles and processes
Some iles or processes can be known to provide what are known as false positives and 
trigger the anti-malware engine. These should be reported to Microsoft, however, we 
can work around this in the short term by putting in place special exclusions. 
If a speciic process is known to cause false positives or has problems running with 
Windows Endpoint Protection, then we can provide details of the process name to 
be ignored. While we can simply use the process name, doing so provides greater 
opportunity for malware writers to exploit these settings and therefore avoid 
detection by any anti-malware product. To help resolve this issue it is better to user 
full paths. Since applications are not installed in the same place depending on the 
location of speciic system or user folders, with the use of environment variables it is 
possible to ensure we can use a full path and handle these variations.

Chapter 6
[ 127 ]
Common environment variables that you we can use are listed as follows:
Environment Variable
Typical Settings
%CommonProgramFiles%
C:\Program Files\Common Files
%HOMEPATH%
\Users\David
%ProgramFiles%
C:\Program Files
%Public%
C:\Users\Public
%SystemDrive%
C:
%SystemRoot%
C:\Windows
%USERPROFILE%
C:\Users\David
To add a speciic ile or folder, enter the path into the Excluded Files and Folders 
section and press Add. We will then see the settings conigured as follows:
Some applications themselves have speciic issues and we can exclude all their 
activity from monitoring. To add an application, list it in the Excluded Processes 
section. This is the path that would be seen in Task Manager. Again, the more 
speciic we can be while using environment variables, the better:

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 128 ]
The inal exclusion option for us is to exclude certain ile extensions. To exclude a ile 
extension, type the extension only into the Excluded File Types box and press Add. 
Note that we do not have to put the full stop before the extension.
Microsoft SpyNet
Microsoft SpyNet is a service that collects information on malware and sends it to 
Microsoft for analysis. While this should collect only malware, if a ile with personal 
data is infected, this may also be collected. Microsoft does not examine or share the 
personal data or use it for any purpose other than improving the Endpoint Protection 
engine, but this may be something of concern in certain industries.
Unless there is a speciic concern we should consider Joining Microsoft SpyNet and 
setting changing the Membership level to Advanced from Basic. More information 
is shared when Advanced is selected. The settings in the form can be seen in the 
following screenshot:
Updates section
The next section for this policy is the Updates section. We can conigure the actions 
of the update process, including how frequently these are checked and when updates 
should be installed.
As with scheduling for anti-malware scans, we should also consider changing the 
schedule to a time when the computer is more likely to be turned on so the update 
schedule is better managed. This section can be seen in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 129 ]
Network bandwidth
The last section of the form enables us to limit the network usage of the Background 
Intelligent Transfer Service (BITS). This is the service that downloads the policies 
and updates from Windows Intune. If there are no network bandwidth issues then 
this can be left disabled. However, if there is a desire to ensure that a single computer 
does not hog the network, this can be throttled accordingly, potentially only during 
certain times of day. In the following screenshot, we have limited BITS to 200 kbps 
between 9:00 AM and 5:00PM to ensure it does not interfere with other users:

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 130 ]
Deploy Policy
Once we have conigured the policy, press the Save Policy button at the bottom of 
the form. We will then be prompted as to whether we want to deploy the policy now:
Pressing No will save the policy without assigning it to any groups. Pressing Yes will 
allow us to select the groups this applies to. If we intend on creating multiple policies 
then we could save this to a group lower down the group tree, such as the Company 
group shown in the next screenshot, to enable an additional policy for personally 
owned computers. If we intend on only having one policy or for this to be the master 
policy, select the All Computers group. In the following screenshot we are deploying 
the policy to just the Mobile and Ofice computers that are Company owned:

Chapter 6
[ 131 ]
Editing an existing policy
To get into the policy settings to edit an existing policy, open the Windows Intune 
console and navigate to the Policy workspace. From here, click All Policies and then 
click the policy Name that we wish to edit:
We will see the exact same forms as we saw when creating the policy with the same 
options. If we wish to change the groups that a policy is applied to, select the policy 
line without clicking on the Name and then select Manage Deployment.
Update management
It is time to manage the system updates to ensure all computers are kept up-to-date 
with security and bug ixes for the Microsoft software and operating systems. We can 
approve updates on an individual basis, as well as enabling automatic approval of 
certain types, such as security and critical updates. We need to break this down into 
three stages:
• 
Selecting products and classiication of updates to manage
• 
Coniguring automatic approval of updates
• 
Manually approving updates
There is a fourth step to update management which is the deployment of  
non-Microsoft updates. This uses the software distribution mechanism that  
is discussed in the next chapter and will be covered there rather than here.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 132 ]
Selecting products and classiication of 
updates to manage
The irst stage with Windows Intune is to choose the products to manage and 
then the classiications of updates against those products. Since we are managing 
updates for the computers rather than the users checking themselves with Windows 
Updates, missing out products could lead to a product remaining insecure or  
buggy even though a ix has been released, and the user would not be aware  
of their situation!
As we go through the steps we need to consider the coniguration that we will make 
for Product Category and Update Classiications.
To start the process, follow these steps:
1. Go to https://manage.microsoft.com and sign in to the Windows  
Intune console.
2. Select the Updates workspace from the menu. 
3. In the Updates Overview, we will see the Tasks in the actions pane on the 
right. Click the Select Classiication and Product task:
4. This takes us to the Service Settings: Updates screen as shown in the 
following screenshot. This is split into three sections, the irst of which  
is the Product Category: 

Chapter 6
[ 133 ]
The product categories are delivered as a tree, dividing as we go lower in detail, 
starting with All Categories and Microsoft. 
While there is the ability to manage to this level of detail, I think in most cases it 
makes sense to stick to the high level of which products and not the details as this 
can be reined in automatic and manual update approval.
The default product categories selected are listed as follows:
• 
Ofice
• 
Silverlight
• 
Windows
• 
Windows Live
• 
Works
Given the tools found on most computers and the software delivered as part of 
Windows Intune, we should consider adding the following products to the list  
that is managed as they frequently occur on users computers: 
• 
Developer Tools, Runtimes and Redistributables
• 
Microsoft Application Virtualization
• 
SQL Server
• 
System Center Online

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 134 ]
If we are using other Microsoft-based cloud products, we should also consider the 
following items as well:
• 
Bing
• 
Microsoft Dynamics CRM
• 
Microsoft Lync Server and Microsoft Lync
Remember, this does not install the product, but simply means that Windows Intune 
checks the client computer to see if the update is required.
Simply click in the check boxes to add the products we want to have Windows 
Intune check for updates for.
Update Classiication
The next section covers the types of updates that are checked to see if they are 
needed by Windows Intune. The Update Classiication section we need to conigure 
looks like the following screenshot when we start. By default, all items except 
Feature Packs, Tools, and Updates are selected:
The default selected classiications are as follows, and we can see that we  
would want to manage all of these and install them onto our computers that  
we are managing:
• 
Critical Update—A ix for a critical, non-security related product failure
• 
Security Updates—A ix for a product's security vulnerability
• 
Deinition Updates—Updates for things like anti-malware
• 
Service Packs—A collection of updates, often covering both security and 
minor feature updates
• 
Update Rollups—Similar to a service pack, but often targets a subset of a 
product rather than a complete platform update
 

Chapter 6
[ 135 ]
Of the remaining items, we should carefully consider the following items:
• 
Feature Packs—New product functionality that is released before the next 
full version of a product
• 
Updates—A ix for a speciic problem addressing a non-critical, non-security 
related bug
Again, these are both areas we may consider managing for rolling out updates.
That leaves the inal option of Tools which is described as a utility or feature that 
aids in accomplishing a task or set of tasks if we hover over the Tools text in the 
console. This is the one area we could consider not putting a check in the box for. For 
simplicity, if we want Windows Intune to manage as much as possible, we should 
simply tick All Classiications.
Coniguring automatic approval of updates
We are now ready to let Windows Intune take the hard work out of updates for us 
by coniguring the automatic approval of update.
We need to choose which updates are approved without us having to do it ourselves. 
We could approve all updates, however, this could be considered a little rash if we 
wish to manage the update process in any way. However it is vital that all Windows 
and security updates should be evaluated and approved quickly and are, therefore, 
ideal candidates for automatic approval. If Microsoft Ofice is a key tool for our users 
then we should select Ofice updates too, at least for the business owned computers. 
To create an automatic approval, follow these steps:
1. Ensure that the Updates section of the Windows Intune console is open. If 
not, go to the Administration workspace and select Updates. Clicking the 
Automatic Approval Rules will take us to the right section of the form.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 136 ]
2. Press the New button. A dialog box will appear and here we type the Name 
of the new Rule and then press Next.
3. Select the Product Categories required. At a minimum, we should select 
Windows and if this is for all business owned computers, Ofice as well. 
When all the desired products have been selected, press Next.
Now we need to select the Update Classiications. As this is for the baseline 
of updates, I would recommend selecting all items. We may want to keep 
Feature Packs and Services Packs requiring manual approval, in which  
case, do not tick those items. Once the correct selection has been completed, 
press Next. 

Chapter 6
[ 137 ]
4. Choose the Groups of computers that we want to receive the updates and 
press Finish. As this is the company baseline, I have selected those in the 
Company group, and those that are Mobile, or in the Ofice. Remember 
the group select means that a computer in any of those groups would be 
subject to the rule, so a personal computer located in the ofice would get the 
updates automatically. I think this is important as we want to ensure that 
a computer connecting to our network, or visiting a customer is secure and 
reliable at all times.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 138 ]
5. We should now see the new rule in the list of Automatic Approval Rules. 
Press Save to ensure all changes are saved.
6. To run the rule against all previous updates, select the rule and press Run 
Selected. We will see a short popup window showing the rule is being 
executed and then it will return back to the Service Settings: Updates screen.
If this rule did not cover all computers, we will need to create additional rules for 
home computers and ones not owned by the business with Windows selected as the 
product and the Personal and Home groups selected as the groups to update. Our 
multiple rules will show in the Automatic Approval Rules similar to those below. 
Each rule will need to have the Run Selected button pressed to accept the historic 
updates not yet approved. 
Manually approving updates
Once we have run the automatic rules, there will still be some updates that require 
approval for some computers. We need to check this at least monthly, after "patch 
Tuesday", which is the second Tuesday of each month when Microsoft releases  
their updates to the Internet, and therefore, Windows Intune. To do this, follow  
this process:

Chapter 6
[ 139 ]
1. Open the Windows Intune console and navigate to the Updates workspace. 
In the Overview section, we will see the Update Status showing. In the 
following screenshot we can see that we have three updates requiring 
updates. Click the item showing New updates to approve:
2. Select the update or updates we want to approve and then press the Approve 
button to approve these updates being deployed. If we did not want the 
update deployed, pressing Decline would achieve this. We will need to 
repeat this for all updates as required, as different updates may have  
different deployment timescales applied to them:

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 140 ]
3. We have to choose which computer groups will receive these updates. 
Some are not approved because they require a new End User Licensing 
Agreement (EULA) being agreed to, as is the case in this example, while 
others fall outside the scope of the automatic rules. The Updates Details 
at the bottom will describe why each update requires additional approval. 
Select the Group Names as required. In the example image, this will go to all 
machines with those groups selected. We have to change the Approval and 
Deadline for each group individually.
4. Press the Keep Existing Approvals drop down list for each group to deine 
the next step for these updates.
5. We next need to set a deadline when we want the users to have these 
approved. As some updates require a reboot, we may wish to extend the  
time a user has. Press the Keep Existing Deadline list to choose from the 
following list. Once a selection is made, a date and time will show in the 
Deadline column:
• 
None
• 
As soon as possible
• 
One week
• 
Two weeks

Chapter 6
[ 141 ]
• 
One month
• 
Custom
Press OK to start the process.
6. If we have to approve EULAs we will see each one and have to press Accept.

Coniguring Management Policy
[ 142 ]
We can now see that all the updates are approved and awaiting deployment by 
Windows Intune showing as Updates that are pending installation:
Summary
In this chapter, we have conigured the policies that deine how Windows Intune 
operates with the computers and the policies it deploys to the users for updates, 
irewall, and anti-malware. We have also examined the approval process that we 
will need to follow each month to approve or decline updates that fall outside the 
automatic approval rules and policies that we have selected.
In the next chapter, we will look at software distribution. This includes both 
Microsoft software as well as non-Microsoft software, and updates to distributed 
software too.

Software Deployment
In this chapter, we will deploy software using Windows Intune. The options 
available are kept simple by Windows Intune, but it is adequate for most  
software application deployments, both from Microsoft and others.
In this chapter, we will cover the following:
• 
Preparing an application for uploading
• 
Using App-V packaging for deploying an application
• 
Uploading an application
• 
Deploying an application
• 
Managing Non-Microsoft Updates
• 
Removing an application
Some aspects of building a package for deployment are beyond the scope of this 
book, however, there is plenty of advice on how to do this on the Internet and I will 
provide information on where to ind it as part of the topics.
It is also vital to ensure you do not break any licensing regulations before deploying 
technology this way and that we have the software licenses required to cover all the 
computers we deploy to.
The packages are kept secure by encrypting them on our computer before they 
are uploaded to Windows Intune. For deployment, the encrypted packages are 
transmitted to the destination computer and then decoded. The packages are never 
decoded or decrypted on the Windows Intune servers.

Software Deployment
[ 144 ]
Preparing an application for uploading
Before an application can be deployed by Windows Intune, it needs to be prepared to 
ensure correct installation. These steps are:
• 
Understand how the application is installed in silent or quiet mode
• 
Create a folder for each installation package
• 
Place all iles needed for installation into one folder
To explain this, I will work through some examples from Microsoft, Intel,  
and Adobe.
Understand how the application is installed in 
silent or quiet mode
This is probably the most important step. The applications installed by Windows 
Intune do not interact with the user as part of the install process. For this reason, 
understanding how to make this work for each package is vital. If the ile can be 
distributed as a Microsoft Installer package (iles with a MSI extension), then  
there is a switch already built into the install process.
One important additional advantage of MSI-based installs is 
that they can be uninstalled by Windows Intune. EXE installs 
cannot be uninstalled by Windows Intune.
Once you have understood this, we can move onto the next stage.
Create a folder for each installation package
If the package is a single ile, then this step can be avoided. However, it is always 
good to keep a folder with each application in separate folders underneath it, so we 
can manage these on an ongoing basis.

Chapter 7
[ 145 ]
Place all iles needed for installation into one 
folder
Some applications come in a container that requires extracting. A good example of 
this is Windows Intune. In Chapter 4, Signing Up for Windows Intune and Installing 
the Client Software, we had to unpack Windows Intune before we could install it as 
part of a sysprep image. Any application you wish to install needs to be copied or 
unpacked into a single folder that we can point the uploading wizard to. There can 
be other iles and subfolders that are required in this folder, but all iles need to be in 
this folder structure.
Examples
The steps, mentioned previously, all seem very simple, so I thought I would run 
through some real-world examples in the form of:
• 
Ofice 2010
• 
Adobe Reader
• 
Adobe Flash
• 
Intel Chipset software
Ofice 2010
Microsoft ofice is distributed on CD/DVD or via a download. If you have 
downloaded it via the Microsoft store, then you will need to extract the ile  
to enable customization of the coniguration iles to enable a silent install.
First, we need to ensure that we have our software folders sorted out. I have created 
c:\Software_Repository and I then use these commands to extract the iles from a 
Command Prompt:
MD C:\software_Repository\Office_2010_Download
"Office 2010 Pro-X17-22376" /extract:c:\Software_repository\Office_2010_
Download

Software Deployment
[ 146 ]
Once this is completed, we need to edit the coniguration ile for a silent install. 
Details of this can be found at http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2T. It entails 
editing the config.xml ile, found in the subfolder SingleImage.WW, and ensuring 
that the right lines are uncommented and changed, and then placing the ile into the 
same folder as the setup.exe ile. The changed lines in my inished ile look as  
the following:
<Display Level="none" CompletionNotice="no" SuppressModal="yes" 
AcceptEula="yes" />
<COMPANYNAME Value="David Overton Associates" />
With these changes, the program is ready for uploading and installing.
If you have copied the iles from a CD/DVD, then we will need to make the same 
changes to the config.xml ile, but we will not have to extract the iles as they are 
already extracted.
Adobe Reader and Flash
To distribute Adobe Reader and Flash, we must irst obtain a license. The whole 
process took a few minutes for me, including waiting for e-mails to conirm my 
company details. To get the license, go to http://www.adobe.com/products/
reader/distribution.html and select the Adobe products you wish to distribute.
Once we receive the download links, we can distribute the Adobe products. They 
can be saved as either MSI or EXE iles. However, note that the programs are 32-bit 
and 64-bit dependant as well as operating system version dependant, so be sure  
to download all versions to cover the requirements of the computers on the 
networks. The versions I downloaded, each went into a folder as follows in  
my Software_Repository folder:
• 
Adobe_Flashx64
• 
Adobe_Flashx86
• 
Adobe_Reader_Win7
• 
Adobe_Reader_XPsp3
You can see here that Flash has both 32-bit and 64-bit versions and the Reader 
product differs between Windows 7 and Windows XP SP3.

Chapter 7
[ 147 ]
If we have MSI packages, then these can be installed quietly with a /quiet switch 
which Windows Intune delivers automatically. For the EXE ile installs, Adobe 
changes the commands from time to time, which means you need to ind the right 
command for that version of the installer. For 10.1 of Adobe Flash, the switch /
install appears to be the correct line. For the Adobe Reader, we need to master 
commands like the following ones for Windows 7 and Windows XP. Unfortunately, 
only by searching around on the web can you ind the correct command for each 
version of each product. Adobe now does have a customization tool that can build 
MSI iles, but we will use these as good examples of complex EXE ile installs.
• 
For Windows 7, use the command:
Adberdr1011_en_US.exe /sAll /rs /l /msi "/qb-! /norestart 
ALLUSERS=1 EULA_ACCEPT=YES SUPPRESS_APP_LAUNCH=YES"
• 
For the XP SP3 versions, we use the following command:
 
AdbeRdr940_en_US /sAll /rs /msi "/qb-! /norestart "
We are now ready to upload these iles and deploy them with Windows Intune.
Intel chipset software
The Intel chipset software can be downloaded from http://davidoverton.com/r.
ashx?2V and is frequently required on Intel-based systems. If appropriate, we could 
deploy it via Windows Intune, provided we were certain the target machines were 
Intel based, either through a purchasing policy or group membership inside Windows 
Intune. To help us work out on how to install silently, the Intel download page has a 
link to a readme ile that states the following on how to deliver a quiet or silent install:
• 
-S: Silent install (no user prompts or Intel RST user interface display). If used 
in combination with -B, the installer will automatically reboot.
Knowing this means that we now have the ile ready to upload and deploy via 
Windows Intune.
Using App-V packaging for deploying a 
package
Building App-V sequenced packages is not something I will be walking through in 
this book. App-V can require a whole infrastructure, however, it is possible to build 
the package and then deliver it via Windows Intune. This does not provide the full 
beneits, such as running the application before it is fully downloaded or updates 
through the server, however, App-V does provide management beneits including 
application separation and avoiding DLL hell.

Software Deployment
[ 148 ]
A great blog to help you can be found at http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2Y.
Uploading an application
We will now upload the application package iles, that we prepared so that Windows 
Intune can deploy them to client computers. To do this, irst of all, start the Windows 
Intune management console and navigate to the Software workspace and select 
Managed Software.
If there are any applications already uploaded, then they will show here. Now  
click on Upload to start the process. It will initially download the tool to your 
computer to upload the installation packages. We will be required to sign in  
again to ensure security.
Once you have read the initial Before you begin screen, choose whether to put a tick 
in the box to Do not show this page again to avoid having to click through this page 
each time we start an upload of the installation package. Then click Next to continue.

Chapter 7
[ 149 ]
Now, for each example product that we discussed earlier, we will now complete 
the upload process. As we repeat the process for each application, I’ve signiicantly 
reduced the amount of information provided, as uploading a package is a repetitive 
process with only a small number of changes for each application that make the  
vital difference.
Adobe Flash – 64-bit MSI
The Adobe Flash install package is the only Microsoft Installer package used in this 
example, which means the pages shown as part of the wizard are fewer than those 
used for EXE setup routines, however, the process is still the same.
Follow these steps to upload the 64-bit version of Adobe Flash:
1. Click on the Browse button to select the MSI ile for Adobe.
2. Since we do not need any additional iles, ensure the Include additional iles 
and subfolders from the same folder checkbox is clear and then click Next.
 

Software Deployment
[ 150 ]
3. Enter information about the package; wherever possible, this will be  
pre-populated from the ile itself. Once this is all complete, click Next.
4. We now want to limit the platforms this software will be installed on. In this 
case, we need to ensure that only 64-bit versions of Windows receive this 
package. To do this, we need to pick 64-bit from the Architecture drop-down 
box and ensure that Operating System is set to Any. Once the coniguration 
is correct, click Next.
5. If we need to add additional commands to the installer, they should be 
added here. In this instance, we do not need to add a command line to this 
installer and to make it non-interactive with the user. If we were deploying 
from a command line, we would know that MSI-based installs have a /Q or 
/Quiet install switch and use this. Windows Intune automatically applies 
this for us, so adding again would cause the install to fail. Once we are ready, 
click Next.

Chapter 7
[ 151 ]
6. Check the summary information and if satisied that this is correct click 
Upload to start the compression, encryption, and then upload process.

Software Deployment
[ 152 ]
7. Once the upload is completed successfully, we will be notiied. Clicking on 
Close will close the upload application.
8. Click on Managed Software, to refresh the list of software, and our irst 
package will appear.
Adobe Flash – 32-bit EXE
Our next example is an EXE-based installer that we want to install on 32-bit and 64-
bit versions of Windows. This is slightly unusual as we normally only want 32-bit 
versions on 32-bit machines, however, Windows has 32-bit and 64-bit versions of 
Internet Explorer on 64-bit machines, so we want to target both with this application 
package. To do this, follow the steps given:

Chapter 7
[ 153 ]
1. Start the Upload application and browse to the 32-bit Adobe Flash installer 
EXE ile in the Software_Repository structure we created earlier and select 
the ile.
2. Continue through the coniguration, entering information into the Software 
description page and click Next.
3. On the Requirements page, we need to make changes to relect the 
capabilities of the installer. We want to install this application onto both  
32-bit and 64-bit machines as 64-bit Windows machines have a 32-bit and 
64-bit version of Internet Explorer. To do this, select the architecture of 32-bit 
and 64-bit. Also, since this can be loaded on to machines running Windows 
XP and above, select the Operating System of Windows XP onwards. Once 
completed, click Next.

Software Deployment
[ 154 ]
4. Windows Intune will only try to install a product if it does not believe it is 
already installed. We can either let Windows Intune monitor this by tracking 
previous installations it has delivered or we can add our own rule. If we were 
to add our own rule, we could then check for a particular ile on the hard 
disk, a MSI product code or a speciic registry key. For now, we will be using 
the default detection rules. Click Next to continue.
5. Since the Adobe Flash installer requires a command line of /install to 
deliver a silent install, select Yes and then enter the /install command  
into the Command line arguments box.
6. Non-MSI installers can inform Windows Intune if the install has been 
successful via return codes. A return code is a number that the installer sends 
back to the program that started it. There are some standard codes that are 
commonly used by installation routines and we should accept these defaults, 
unless we know speciic alternatives for our application.
7. Windows Intune presumes that unless one of the success return codes is 
provided, the installation has failed in some way. We can, however, have 
multiple Success and Success with restart codes. Leave these as the default 
and click Next.

Chapter 7
[ 155 ]
8. The wizard can be inalized (the application will upload) and the tool can  
be closed.
Adobe Reader – Windows 7 EXE
Follow the same process for Adobe Reader for Windows 7 as we have used for 
other EXE packages. There are two pages where we need to set non-default settings 
for this installation package. The irst is to ensure this application is only installed 
on Windows 7 or a newer operating system and the second is to put in the correct 
command line for a silent install.
To ensure only Windows 7 is the deployment target, ensure that the Architecture is 
Any or 32-bit and 64-bit and the Operating System is set to From Windows 7 and to 
All newer operating systems.

Software Deployment
[ 156 ]
Progress through the wizard until we can enter the command line arguments which 
needs to be entered as per the discussion earlier, or the following screen. This has an 
interesting aspect to it as the setup program calls the Microsoft Installer. When this 
is executed by Windows Intune directly, it automatically adds the /q switches for 
a silent install. Since Windows Intune is calling the EXE ile and not the Microsoft 
Installer, in this command line we need to keep the /qn switch.
Continue through the wizard and close it once the application is uploaded.
Adobe Reader – XP SP3 EXE
We now need to upload Adobe Reader for Windows XP only. Load the upload tool 
and select the ile and continue.
Now, we need to progress through the tool until the Requirements page and limit 
the Operating System to Windows XP through to Windows XP, as per the following 
screenshot. Since Windows XP only shipped as a 32-bit product, we can limit this to 
a 32-bit install.

Chapter 7
[ 157 ]
The setup again needs a number of setup command line arguments. Move  
through the tool until we get to the Command line arguments. Set these and  
inish the wizard.
Intel drivers
The Intel drivers are similar to other rules with a command line argument of –S and 
the requirements that it is strictly deployed on Windows 7 and not earlier or later 
operating systems.
Ensure the Requirements settings are as per the following screenshot to limit the 
Operating System only to Windows 7:
Continue through the wizard and inish the upload.
Ofice 2010
Ofice 2010 is the irst package that we are uploading where we need to include 
additional iles. Since we have modiied the config.xml ile, there is little we have 
to do as there are no command line switches to include. This means that the only 
page that is different to the others we have gone through is the irst page to select the 
setup iles where we must select Include additional iles and subfolders from the 
same folder to package all the installation iles.

Software Deployment
[ 158 ]
Deploying a package
We now have all our packages uploaded to Windows Intune. By selecting Managed 
Software in the Software workspace, we can see all the uploaded packages and the 
statistics on installations, failures, and pending installs.
To deploy a package, select the package or packages and then click on the  
Deploy button.
We now have to select which groups will have the software deployed to them and 
when the package must be installed by. In the following example, I am deploying all 
company-owned machines that are not in a home environment:

Chapter 7
[ 159 ]
Click on OK and the installation of the packages will be scheduled.
When we return to the Managed Software page, we can see in the following 
screenshot that the packages are in various states of installation. We can see that two 
of the packages have Installed on 1 machine and that 1 has Failed with two more 
machines with Pending installations. We can also see that 3 machines are lagged as 
Not Meeting Requirements, so will not have the application installed to them at all.

Software Deployment
[ 160 ]
Clicking on the numbers enables us to gather more information as to what has 
happened. For example, clicking the number 1 in the Failed column showed the 
following information:
We now need to research what Error code 0x411 means for that application installer 
and take action to resolve the problem. This will be speciic to each application.
Additional information can be found at the Windows Intune help page at  
http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2Z.
We can see the application updates on a client PC through the Windows  
Intune Updates:

Chapter 7
[ 161 ]
Managing Non-Microsoft Updates
A non-Microsoft Update can be used to deliver any update that will not be delivered 
via the Update Service provided for Microsoft applications. It can be a Microsoft 
Update or one from another vendor. Since we have deployed Ofice 2010 through 
software deployment tool, we will use the non-Microsoft Update capability to update 
this. The process is almost identical to the software deployment tools that we have 
already used with Windows Intune, which is why it is in this section. To demonstrate 
this, we will deliver Ofice 2010 SP1 update following these steps:
1. Start the Windows Intune management console and navigate to the  
Non-Microsoft Updates section of the Updates workspace.
2. Select Upload to start the tool to upload the update.
3. Click Next to start the tool.
4. Click on the Browse button to locate the ile we will use to deliver the 
update. If we need to include other iles in the folder, click the Include 
additional iles and subfolders from the same folder checkbox.

Software Deployment
[ 162 ]
5. Fill in the details describing the update. As it is an update, it needs a 
classiication to be assigned. Since this is a Service Pack update to Ofice, 
choose Service Pack. This is used in the reporting on updates that we  
discuss in the next chapter. Once the details are complete, click Next.
6. Specify the Requirements as we would for any application upload and  
click Next.
 

Chapter 7
[ 163 ]
7. For Windows Intune to understand if the update has been installed, we 
again have a number of choices as to how to tell. If we select Use the default 
detection rules, then Windows Intune will work on its own information. We 
can alternatively look for to see if a File exists, MSI product code exists, or a 
Registry key exists. For this example, we will use the default detection rules. 
Click Next once this is complete as desired.
8. We have a choice as to whether this is an update to an existing deployed 
software item. If it is, then we need to select It is managed software in 
Windows Intune and click Browse.

Software Deployment
[ 164 ]
9. Select the software item that this is an update to and click OK. In the 
following example, it is Ofice 2010 Pro:
10. If the update is for an item that is not managed by Windows Intune, then we 
can either select None as a dependency, which means it will automatically 
install, or we can add our own rules.
11. In the following example, I’ve added two File exists rules to check for 
WINWORD.EXE and Excel.EXE. Once the dependencies are set, click Next.

Chapter 7
[ 165 ]
12. Now, we need to enter any Command line arguments that are required for a 
silent install. In this case, the requirements are /quiet /passive. Once these are 
set, click Next.
13. Finally, we have to conigure the Return codes in the same way that we have 
to do this for Managed software within Windows Intune. Set the return 
codes and then click on Next.
14. We are now shown a full summary of the settings. Once we are sure they are 
correct, click on Upload for the update to be loaded to the server.

Software Deployment
[ 166 ]
15. Once the update is uploaded, it now needs to be approved. Return to the 
management console and refresh the window to see the update.
16. Select the update and click on Approve.
17. Choose the groups for the update to be sent to and then set the Approval to 
Install and chose a Deadline, such as ASAP.
18. We have now completed the process of deploying an update through 
Windows Intune.

Chapter 7
[ 167 ]
Removing a package
Removing a package can mean removing it from Windows Intune’s storage and 
deployment process or uninstalling it from a client PC. If the package was installed 
as a MSI, then it can be uninstalled from a computer.
Uninstalling software from a client PC
Uninstalling MSI software is almost identical to installing software. Start at  
the Windows Intune management console in the Software workspace on  
Managed Software.
Identify the MSI-based install package and then click Deploy. We can now see 
the normal deployment screen. However, the Deployment setting can be set to 
Uninstall with a Deadline of ASAP to ensure it happens quickly. Making the group 
choices and clicking on OK will remove the software from the computers selected.

Software Deployment
[ 168 ]
Removing a software package
The other option discussed is removing a software package from the list that is 
managed by Windows Intune. This stops further deployments but does not  
remove existing installations.
To remove a package, go to the Managed Software section of the Software 
workspace in the Windows Intune console and select the item we want to remove.
Now click on Delete on the toolbar. We will see a large warning. If this is the right 
item, click Delete:
When we return to the console, the item removed will have a thin line through it to 
show that is has been selected for removal. Once we refresh this page, the item will 
be removed.

Chapter 7
[ 169 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have uploaded and installed a number of different software items, 
learning about the differences in process for MSI and EXE installation tools. The 
silent installation process requires careful attention to the settings and iles required 
for a successful installation when we are not at a computer. Through examples, we 
have examined those options.
Windows Intune can also install applications through the wizard-based delivery 
tools and we have deployed an update using this same mechanism too.
Finally, we have removed an application and a software package from  
Windows Intune.
In the next chapter, we will proactively track and report alerts to monitor our 
effectiveness and demonstrate value to our management. We will also track the 
computing hardware and software environment to ensure compliance and no 
misappropriation of our technology.


Tracking and Reporting
In this chapter, we will ascertain the tasks that we will need to carry out regularly to 
ensure a good baseline of proactive management for the computers that we manage. 
We set Windows Intune policy in previous chapters, and now we have to set our 
own policy on regular tasks that we carry out to ensure the lowest risk of alerts due 
to failing computers or malware. We also need to be able to demonstrate to our 
business that is paying for Windows Intune that the impact is positive for the users 
as well as the IT team.
In this chapter, we will discuss the following areas which align to the reports 
available in Windows Intune and the Reports workspace:
• 
Reporting basics
• 
Update reports
• 
Tracking software usage
• 
Tracking hardware
• 
License management
• 
Alerts reporting
• 
Custom reports
• 
Reporting on overall PC management achievements

Tracking and Reporting
[ 172 ]
Reporting basics
Most of the reports that we will use in Windows Intune are generated through the 
Reports workspace, as shown in the following screenshot. We can see that there 
are many reports available through this workspace and they can be customised and 
saved to enable quick access to a number of views.
The other location where we will generate data for reports is from the Alerts 
workspace as there is no report for alerts that have been received or closed. 
Understanding the outstanding issues that need to be ixed and being able to report 
on this to the business or customer is vital to show that the management system put 
in place is working. The report data is generated by the last icon on the toolbar. It is 
available in many locations throughout Windows Intune; however, from a reporting 
point of view, only the Alerts workspace provides us with unique information not 
available via the Reports workspace.

Chapter 8
[ 173 ]
Reporting basics in Reports workspace
While each report in the Reports workspace provides different information, there are 
some common customizations that we should be aware of. We are going to explore:
• 
Selection customization
• 
Saving and loading customizations
• 
Sorting data in the columns
• 
Printing a report
• 
Exporting data
Selection customization
Each report has a number of customization selection ilters to enable you to ilter 
down the data that is reported on. An example is shown in the following screenshot:

Tracking and Reporting
[ 174 ]
If we want to export the data and manage it elsewhere, such as a spreadsheet or 
database, then it may make sense to not ilter data here, but in a spreadsheet.
One ilter that is available in all but one of the reports is the computer groups ilter. 
To use this ilter, press the Edit button and then select the groups to report against. 
Once the groups are selected, press OK.
Given that this is common across the reports and much of Windows Intune, I shall 
not be talking through this selection any further in this chapter.
Saving and loading customizations
Once we have customized a report, we can save it so that we do not have to set the 
customizations in the future. For example, the report in the following screenshot has 
everything I want to report on:

Chapter 8
[ 175 ]
To save the customizations, press the Save As button in the tool bar and enter a 
name for the customizations and press OK.
We can now go to the Update Reports any time and reload that report by clicking on 
the Load button on the toolbar and selecting the previously saved report.
Sorting data in the columns
I know this is a very simple item, but some of the reports have lots of rows with 
zeros in them. To bring meaningful data to the top of the report, ind the column 
that you are interested in and click on the columns title. The irst click may sort the 
data lowest to highest, so click again to reverse this. In the following example, I have 
clicked on the Installed column text to bring the updates that have been installed to 
the top of the list.
Printing a report
Once we have a report sorted and delivering the information we want, printing to 
a printer or ile writer, such as a PDF or XPS writer to enable a permanent copy, is 
always a good policy to enable historic information to be at hand.
 

Tracking and Reporting
[ 176 ]
To start printing, press the printer icon in the top-right corner of the report.
Windows Intune will then prepare the data for printing. This may take some time 
and while it is doing this, we will see a dialog box with only a cancel option as 
shown in the following screenshot:
Once the processing has completed, the standard printer dialog box will appear. 
Select the printer and press Print for the report to be printed.

Chapter 8
[ 177 ]
Exporting data
Once a report is produced, we can export the data from the report so that we can 
present it ofline or import it into a spreadsheet. To export data, run a report and 
select the export icon in the top-right corner of the report, next to the printer icon.
We now have a choice of two Export formats, either .csv or .html. Csv stands for 
Comma Separated Values and is a format that most spreadsheet applications,  
such as Microsoft Excel and databases can import. The .html ile format is ideal  
for displaying at a later date in a browser when not connected to the Internet.
For many exports, we also have the option to Export summary data only or  
full data. When exporting .csv iles, I would recommend removing the tick in the 
Export summary data only checkbox as this gives us more detail to drill down on 
and report.
Once the Export format and summary data choices are selected, press Export.

Tracking and Reporting
[ 178 ]
We are then given a choice of the ile name and location for the exported ile. Type a 
ile name and location and press Save.
Reporting basics in Alerts workspace
We can also gather information from the workspaces in Windows Intune and we 
will do so throughout this chapter. However, the Alerts workspace requires special 
attention as it is the only place to gather information on the alerts that have been 
raised or closed within Windows Intune, and we can export them in the same way 
that we export data for reports. This information is a vital section of our report on the 
effectiveness of the PC management that we provide to the business.

Chapter 8
[ 179 ]
Each Alert is categorized as one of the following:
• 
Critical
• 
Warning
• 
Informational
• 
Closed
There are some ilter concepts we need to understand before we can export data from 
here. The irst is that we can ilter the alert by category; however, when the ilter is 
set to None, it does not show Closed Alerts, so None is more like "Open Alerts" in 
functionality. This means that at the very minimum, we need to export data twice 
from this workspace to get a complete picture of the user issues and the activity to 
close them.
Update reports
The update report enables us to review the updates that have been processed by each 
computer and then evaluate their current deployment status. Because each update is 
evaluated by the client computer, Windows Intune can only determine if the update 
is required once the computer has contacted the service. There are a huge number of 
updates available for Windows and the other products managed by Windows Intune 
and any report will be very long, which is a strong indicator that this data is perhaps 
easier to analyze in Microsoft Excel.
There are a number of reports we may wish to examine—these can be managed by 
changing the ilters available to us in the report and if desired saving each view.
The ilters are shown in the following screenshot:

Tracking and Reporting
[ 180 ]
Report settings that we should consider are listed as follows:
Settings
Description
Update status = Failed
Update installation issues.
Effective approval = Install
Status of all approved updates across the 
estate, including those where installation 
succeeded, failed, or is pending.
An example of the second report is shown in the following screenshot:
In the irst row, we can see one machine is pending and two have installed the update.
We can also consider changing the update classiication option. The Important 
updates classiication contains all updates classiied as follows:
• 
Security Updates
• 
Critical Updates
• 
Rollup Updates
• 
Service Packs
The High-priority updates classiication only includes those that are security and 
critical updates, while All includes all update types.
Tracking software usage
By tracking the software used within the business, we can ensure we know what 
software we have to support down to the product version and who is using it. This 
also enables us to track authorized versus unauthorized software installation.

Chapter 8
[ 181 ]
Windows Intune splits software into two important categories—installed and 
licensed. All installed and deployed software is managed from the Software 
workspace. The Licensing workspace shows information regarding our software 
licenses and detected installations against those purchases. To effectively manage 
software, we need to look at the installed software as well as the license purchase 
and usage.
There are two ways to look at the software installed on managed computers from 
within Windows Intune:
• 
Software installed on an individual computer
• 
Estate-wide software view
Software installed on an individual computer
We can examine each computer to see the software installed. This enables us to see 
what versions of software and the name of the product for auditing purposes for any 
user. To do this, follow the steps:
1. Start the Windows Intune console by going to the https://manage.
microsoft.com site. Navigate to the Computers workspace and ind 
the group that we want to examine in the Computers list. Click on the 
Computers tab to show the computers in the group, and then select the 
computer to examine, as shown in the following screenshot:

Tracking and Reporting
[ 182 ]
2. Right click on the name of the computer to examine and select View 
Properties from the menu shown. Select the Software tab to see the 
screenshot, shown as follows, listing all the software installed on the 
computer:
3. We can print or export the data as per the processes discussed earlier in  
this chapter.
Estate-wide software view
There are multiple ways to get an estate-wide view of the software that Windows 
Intune has detected. We can drill down and examine the detected software through 
the Software workspace, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 183 ]
While this enables us to examine the information, review the computers, and even 
export the data, the Detected Software Reports enable customization that is not 
possible through this view.

Tracking and Reporting
[ 184 ]
For maximum reporting if we are going to export the data, we should leave all the 
reports as per their defaults of All.
If we click on Select publishers option by pressing the Edit button underneath it, we 
are shown a list of all the publishers for detected software, similar to the list shown 
in the following screenshot:
Likewise, if we look at the categories, we again see a selection similar to the one 
shown as follows:

Chapter 8
[ 185 ]
It is worth noting that sometimes an item of software will be installed on more 
computers than those managed. This is because some software may have multiple 
versions installed on one computer, thus being counted multiple times.
An example of the report is shown in the following screenshot with the detail 
expanded to show which computers have Adobe AIR 2.6 installed. When exporting 
the data, the summary data does not contain the per-computer information shown in 
the following screenshot:
Tracking hardware
Tracking the hardware that is running in the business and how this changes over 
time enables us to ensure that we are meeting the legal responsibilities we have, as 
well as ensuring that we are making the right purchasing decision for the future, and 
are able to support any hardware installed today.
Understanding the hardware that we are delivering support for enables us to ensure 
we have the right support contracts and appropriate spare parts available to deliver a 
reliable computer experience to the users. It also enables us to make decisions about 
inventory low down and replacement, as well as to ensure that all the hardware we 
purchased is still installed in the machine months or years later.
Within Windows Intune, we can track information about the full hardware inventory 
on a computer-by-computer basis or search for computers that meet a particular 
speciication, perhaps for consideration of replacement or upgrading.

Tracking and Reporting
[ 186 ]
By comparing how this information changes over time, we are able to ensure our 
computer estate is well maintained.
As with the software information, this can be obtained either through the Computers 
workspace or through the Reports workspace and the Hardware Inventory Reports.
Computers workspace view
By navigating to the Computers workspace and selecting a group, it is possible to  
see the computers within that group. Setting the ilter at the top of the view to 
Computer details and user account shows the hardware information as shown  
in the following screenshot:
If we right click on a computer and select View properties from the menu, we then 
see the computer details. If we select the Hardware tab, then full information on 
the computer is provided, including information about the manufacturer, BIOS, 
processor, physical disks, disk partitions, network adapters, and other devices in  
the system. An example can be seen in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 187 ]
This information can be exported as a CSV ile for storing and comparing in  
the future.

Tracking and Reporting
[ 188 ]
Hardware Inventory Reports
The Hardware Inventory Reports are in the Reports workspace and enables us to 
dissect information about the hardware across the estate. The most important feature 
is found at the end of the ilters available to us.
There are a number of ilters not shown in the preceding screenshot that are at the 
top of the form. These cover:
• 
Computer groups
• 
Operating Systems
• 
Manufacturers
• 
Models
I don't think I need to explain how to use these ilters as they are self-explanatory, so 
we shall concentrate on the ones in the above screenshot.
If we wanted to ind all the computers with a slow processor and less than 2 GB of 
RAM, then we would set the last two ilters as below:
We should note that the settings are all enforced, so we cannot ind all machines with 
less than 2 GB of RAM or a processor slower than 2 GHz in a single search.
Once again we can export the data and carry out greater analysis in a spreadsheet.

Chapter 8
[ 189 ]
License management
We have already looked at how to view software installed on computers managed 
by Windows Intune. Another fantastic beneit of Windows Intune is the ability 
to compare this usage to the licenses that have been purchased and entered into 
Windows Intune. There are two reports available for this that we shall explore:
• 
License Purchase report
• 
License Installation report
Purchase report
The Purchase report details the licenses that have been purchased from the license 
agreement information that we have already entered into Windows Intune. There  
are only two ilters available to us with this report.
The Select license type option can be set to either Volume Licensing agreements  
or Other software licensing agreements, enabling us to the see the Microsoft or  
non-Microsoft agreements.
When we added license information to Windows Intune, we created license groups 
and so we can pick from these groups, or view everything.
Once again, this information can be exported using the Export button in the  
top-right corner.
Installation report
The Installation report compares the license purchased information and the number 
of installations on the managed computers. We have the same options as the 
Purchase report, plus the ability to view only selected group of computers.
 

Tracking and Reporting
[ 190 ]
With this report, we can see the software purchases and which computers 
have software that matches those purchases. Sometimes the information can 
be mismatched, so this report requires some interpretation. For example, in the 
following screenshot we can see that Microsoft Ofice has been purchased, but the 
license type does not match that which we entered. If this is correct, then the license 
purchase information needs to be updated.
For this report to be truly useful, inserting information on all purchases is required to 
enable the matching of installed and purchased software otherwise many items will 
show as unlicensed.
Alerts reporting
There is not a report for alerts in the reports workspace; however, we can get all 
the information we need by exporting two sets of information from the Alerts 
workspace. To do this, follow these steps:
1. Start the Windows Intune console by going to the https://manage.
microsoft.com site. Navigate to the Alerts workspace and click on All 
Alerts. If we only wanted a subset of the alerts, we could examine the sub 
areas under Filters, such as Critical. For reporting, we will only set the 
Filters option to None.

Chapter 8
[ 191 ]
2. Now export this information using the Export icon in the top-right corner.
3. Change the Filters option to Closed to see all the closed alerts.
4. Now export this information using the Export icon in the top-right corner.
We have now exported the data required to report on alerts. We can obviously also 
use this view to see which alerts require our attention too.

Tracking and Reporting
[ 192 ]
Custom reports
We have now accessed all the information we need to enable us to report, but if we 
want to provide a useful single snapshot to enable graphs and further analysis,  
then it is time to utilize a spreadsheet to create a summary of the information with 
useful statistics.
I have placed a sample spreadsheet found at http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?27 
that could be a useful starting point.
If you examine the spreadsheet, you will see that the raw data is loaded into several 
tabs. If you are familiar with Excel, you can not only use the summary sheet, but also 
sort and ilter the data in the tabs as needed.

Chapter 8
[ 193 ]
Reporting on overall PC management 
achievements
One very important aspect of pro-active management is to be reporting to the 
business the information on your management tasks. This covers both pro-active  
and reactive management. The areas we should report on are as follows:
• 
Size of estate, by group if appropriate
• 
Hardware inventory
• 
Software
 °
Inventory
 °
Updates approved and installed
• 
Alerts
 °
Malware
 °
Open issues
 °
Closed issues
 °
Remote assistance
We have already discussed gathering information for all of the above sections.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at ensuring that we have exported and stored all 
information on the hardware and software utilized on the computers being 
managed. This enables us to audit information when required as well as to  
ensure our legal responsibilities are covered around licensing and maintenance.
We have also examined the different types or reports available, all of which can 
be exported to enable us to put together our own management report on the 
activities across the estate. While we do have all the Windows Intune reports, these 
can be dificult to digest and examine if all kept separate; so I have shared a basic 
spreadsheet that I use to enable high level reporting and allow further analysis 
without going through the reports individually.
In the next chapter, we will look at how we deal with the alerts that we have 
reported on here, including requests for assistance, dealing with computer  
health issues, and responding to malware threats.


Monitoring and Responding 
to Windows Intune Alerts
So far we have examined the coniguration of the computers with policies to control 
their behavior. As we manage these computers, they will report back to Windows 
Intune against those policies in the form of reporting and alerts. We have looked at 
the reporting, which provides a snapshot of the computer estate. In this chapter, we 
will examine the real-time nature of PC management as we explore the alerts that 
Windows Intune raises which require action on our part, exploring how we both 
monitor and respond to them.
In the previous chapters, we have conigured the computers to minimize the 
situations where alerts will be raised through good practices of updates, irewall, and 
anti-malware management. Problems will still arise with users' computers, whether 
this is a request for assistance, a computer that will not boot, or some other warning 
picked up by Windows Intune. These need to be categorized and responded to in 
a timely manner. Some can be closed and iled depending on circumstances, while 
others require a visit to the computer itself with other tools to further diagnose  
and resolve.
In this chapter, we will discuss this in the following sections:
• 
General Windows Intune alerts
• 
Malware alerts
• 
Remote Assistance alerts

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 196 ]
General Windows Intune alerts
Windows Intune will raise an alert in a number of situations where we, as the 
administrators, need to either be aware of an event or respond directly to it. The 
alerts will appear in a number of the screens and reports in Windows Intune. 
Windows Intune has seven alert categories:
• 
Endpoint Protection
• 
Monitoring
• 
Notices
• 
Policy
• 
Remote Assistance
• 
System
• 
Updates
Some of these alerts require special attention and have their own section, while 
others can be generically dealt with. The two areas that need some special attention 
are the Endpoint Protection alerts relating to malware and remote assistance, as 
the actions taken here always need to be decisive. We have also already tackled the 
update alerts in the previous chapter.
Before we examine alerts in more detail, I thought I should share a quick, but 
obvious, note. The reporting of alerts from the client computer to Windows Intune 
requires an Internet connection from the client computer, so we are unlikely to see an 
alert saying that the user's PC is having network trouble. However, if a computer has 
not checked in with Windows Intune for a while, we will see an alert for this from 
Windows Intune, pointing to a machine that has not been turned on for a while, or 
with problems! It is more likely that a user will contact us via other means if they are 
having a networking problem, but we should remember to tell users to do that in 
that situation rather than them requesting remote assistance and wondering why  
we don't respond!
Monitoring alerts
There are two ways to monitor alerts once they have been enabled and the 
notiication has been completed. The two choices are to either look at the console 
and refresh, or wait for notiications to arrive via e-mail. The e-mail notiications 
look similar to the one in the following screenshot. Clicking the link takes us to the 
Windows Intune console.

Chapter 9
[ 197 ]
To view the alerts in the Windows Intune console, go to the Alerts workspace and 
go to All Alerts. We can choose which alerts are displayed by changing the Filters 
selection at the top of the screen. All the ilters shown open alerts, except for the ilter 
choice of Closed. The ilter choice of None shows all open Critical, Warning, and 
Informational alerts.

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 198 ]
We can also view alerts speciic to the category by selecting one of the items below 
All Alerts selection tree. For example, in the Monitoring category, we can see one 
alert at the moment:
Finally, we can view alerts that relate to a speciic computer by looking at the Alerts 
tab in the Computers workspace.

Chapter 9
[ 199 ]
Responding and closing alerts
Once we have an alert to deal with, we need to respond in some way. By  
clicking on the alert, the details pane is displayed. Under the Recommended 
Actions, there will either be a link to Click here to take action or one to View 
Troubleshooting Information.
If we click the information link, a window will open that, depending on the problem 
and potential solution, will show either a link to the Windows Intune help ile or a 
link to carry out the action if appropriate. In the following example, the alert is for 
malware and a link to information on the speciic malware that was seen. We can see 
that the following information does not show us a speciic action for malware. We 
will discuss how to respond to malware a little later in this chapter.

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 200 ]
Once we have resolved the alert, it needs to be closed to remove it from the console 
and to enable us to demonstrate that we have resolved an issue with computers that 
we manage. Windows Intune will not close the alert for us unless one of these criteria 
is met:
• 
Windows Intune can detect that the issues have been resolved
• 
45 days have passed since the alert was opened
To manually close an alert, follow these steps, but be careful to close the right one. 
While we can re-activate a closed alert in Windows Intune, if the alert is closed by 
mistake then we may miss taking important action.
1. Open up the Windows Intune console and ind the alert to close. We can 
select more than one alert if desired here.
2. Click Close Alert in the toolbar, or right-click on the alert and select Close 
Alert from the menu.
We can also close an alert when we have opened it fully and are looking at the Alert 
Properties by clicking the Close This Alert link under Tasks.
 

Chapter 9
[ 201 ]
The automated closing of alerts, when an issue has been resolved, can be a little 
confusing as we see alert e-mails, but then they don't exist in the console. This is 
most common when malware and policy issues occur as Windows Intune can detect 
the resolution of these. It is always worth checking the closed alert log to ensure 
these do not require further action or highlight an underlying issue, such as network 
or security, that needs resolving. A good example of where we might see this is  
with the Unable to Update Policies alert which are generated when a user's 
computer is not in contact with Windows Intune. The alert e-mail looks similar  
to the following screenshot:
This is the type of alert that will be automatically closed once connectivity is resolved 
and the policies updated.
Malware alerts
Malware alerts fall into two broad categories; those that indicate a problem with the 
anti-malware software that installs as part of Windows Intune and those that indicate 
the anti-malware software has detected and responded to a malware threat.
The alerts I have seen are:
• 
Anti-malware software issue
 °
Some computers have protection warnings
• 
Malware detection
 °
Malware seen for irst time
 °
Some computers have recently resolved malware

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 202 ]
The irst alert requires investigation to ensure the machine in question is properly 
protected, but something as simple as a user cancelling a full scan will generate 
this error. A quick call to the user or visit from a technician to look at the Windows 
Intune software will resolve this. This alert can automatically close if the situation  
is resolved.
For the malware detection alerts, these need closer management. When a user irst 
encounters malware they are prompted by Windows Intune to remove it.
At this point, the irst alert will be sent. The user is prompted with a choice as to the 
action to take. If the malware Alert Status is considered to be Medium or Low, then 
the user may Allow the iles to remain as the Recommended action. Once the user 
has made the choice, the second alert is sent stating that a recent malware issue has 
been resolved, whether the ile was allowed to stay on the hard disk or not.
The only time when a ile should be allowed is when it is misevaluated as a virus. 
The best way to resolve this is to create an exception policy in Windows Intune 
speciic to the computers and the program of ilename.
Once we are satisied that the situation is correctly resolved, we can close the alert in 
Windows Intune if it does not do this itself.
Testing malware checks are working
To test that various aspects of an anti-malware system are working, it is vital that we 
do not use a live virus. Just as in the medical world, the IT world has a universally 
accepted virus ile that does not cause harm and can be used for testing. This is 
simply a ile that has the signature of a dummy virus, not a virus itself. This can be 
downloaded from EICAR at http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2O. Downloading 
any of these iles should trigger Windows Intune Endpoint Protection or any other 
anti-malware solution.

Chapter 9
[ 203 ]
Distributing this ile is a little tricky as the download will be blocked by default by 
Windows Intune, as will copying the ile, which means that disabling the malware 
protection is required to obtain the ile.
Actions following malware instance
Once we know that a computer has had a malware incident, we need to gain 
conidence that the issue has been resolved. Through policy we are able to decide  
if a user can Allow a ile, however, we may wish to take additional precautions.
First, we need to identify the computers by opening the alert up by going to  
the Windows Intune console and selecting the Endpoint Protection in the  
Alert workspace.
If we click on the link shown as the Source, we will see the computers impacted.

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 204 ]
We can now remotely run a number of operations on the computer in question. For 
malware issues, select the computer or computers that we want to inspect and then 
select Remote Tasks from the toolbar, or right-click on the computers. Then select 
either Run a Full Malware Scan or Run a Quick Malware Scan.
We will see a conirmation dialog box for the request to run a scan for a short period 
of time before it disappears. We can check the progress by clicking on the Remote 
Tasks link in the bottom-right corner of the console which will show us the status, 
similar to those in the following screenshot:
Remote Assistance alerts
A Remote Assistance alert is generated when a user requests help from the Windows 
Intune Center by clicking the link under Microsoft Easy Assist.

Chapter 9
[ 205 ]
When the user clicks the link on their computer, the Microsoft Easy Assist changes 
to look as follows:
While there are many remote administration tools available for Windows the 
Microsoft Easy Assist tool has the following beneits:
• 
Secure connection through corporate irewalls providing users access to the 
Internet and websites
• 
Desktop sharing – the user requesting assistance can either show the support 
person the problem or hand control over completely
• 
Application Sharing – rather than share a whole desktop, just an application 
can be shared
• 
File transfers – we can upload and download iles so scripts or  
exported data can be shared between the support person and the  
computer being supported
• 
Chat application – if we can't talk to the person being supported, we can still 
type in an instant messaging chat window
• 
Multiple person assistance – if the particular problem needs another person 
to assist or offer guidance, this is possible using the Easy Assist tool

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 206 ]
Preparing to deliver support
However, before we can deliver support, it is important to ensure that the Microsoft 
Easy Assist application is loaded onto the support person's computer and that  
the user's computer is conigured for optimal performance when support is  
being delivered.
Preparing the client computer for support
Windows Intune conigures Microsoft Easy Assist to provide support, however, the 
coniguration of User Account Control (UAC) can mean that every administrative 
task requires interaction from the user to approve the administrative application 
being started. To overcome this, search for uac in the start menu. We will see the 
option to Change User Account Control settings appear as the top result.
Click Change User Account Control settings to start the tool.

Chapter 9
[ 207 ]
Before we make any adjustments, note where this setting is on the client computer 
– it is normally at the second notch down. Now, lower this to the third notch down 
and press OK. This means the user's screen will not dim when the UAC dialogs 
appear, but it also means that we can accept these, which may be desirable.
If the user does change this setting for us, we must change it back once we have 
completed the support session.
Preparing the support agent's computer to offer 
support
If the computer we are connecting from has Windows Intune installed, then we 
already have the client loaded. However, if it does not, we will need to install the 
Microsoft Easy Assist tool. To do this, go to http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?28 
and run the setup program.
If Easy Assist is not installed correctly and we try to open a remote assistance 
session, then we will see the following dialog box from Windows:
Providing Assistance
There is a simple progression that describes the actual process of delivering 
assistance using Windows Intune. It will consist of the following steps:
• 
Windows Intune receives the request and creates an alert and sends e-mails
• 
Support agent starts communicating with the user and a remote session is 
initiated
• 
Support is provided and the remote session is terminated
• 
The alert is closed

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 208 ]
Receiving alert and responding
We are irst aware of a remote assistance request through the e-mail notiication. 
Follow the steps given to start the remote assistance:
1. Open the e-mail and click the link in it to open the Windows Intune console.
2. In the Windows Intune console, we will see an alert similar to the one in the 
following screenshot. Click the link Approve request and launch Remote 
Assistance to start the remote assistance process.

Chapter 9
[ 209 ]
3. When the windows opens up, click on the link Accept the remote  
assistance request.
4. This will open a web page that will create a launch.eas ile. Open this ile to 
start the session.
5. Once the Microsoft Easy Assist tool has started and connected through the 
server, we will be asked to provide our display name. Enter a Display Name 
that will be meaningful to the user we are connecting too. It should also 
distinguish us from other support agents as we may need further colleagues 
to join us in the shared session. Then press the Join button.

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 210 ]
6. We will start the Easy Assist Session tool on the support agent's console as 
shown in the following screenshot:
7. After a few seconds Easy Assist will continue on the user's desktop with a 
question as to whether they wish to share their desktop. We should advise 
them to click OK so that we can see what is on their desktop.
8. The user will see their desktop reformat itself for sharing, which will include 
turning off the Aero graphics that are part of Windows Vista and Windows 7.
9. The two way joining into the Microsoft Easy Assist support session is 
acknowledged with a dialog similar to the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 211 ]
10. Finally, both users are shown in the Easy Assist Session window  
under participants.
Providing remote support
Now that we have access to the remote user's computer, we can manage it as if we 
were in front of it. We have the following tools available to us:
• 
Chatting
• 
Shared Desktop - View the user's desktop while they are in control
• 
Shared Desktop - Take control of the user's desktop and they can watch
• 
File transfer between the two computers
• 
Reboot the remote computer and continue session once logged in by the user

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 212 ]
Chat
There is nothing stopping us talking on the phone to the user who requested 
assistance, but if this is not available then we have a chat window that can be 
utilized. Type the text to send and press Send.
Shared Desktop
The desktop is shared when we can both enter the session and see the end user's 
desktop while they are using the computer.
Initially, this is in a view-only mode, meaning that the support agent can watch,  
but not do anything. Frequently, it will be desirable for the support agent to take 
control and this can be delivered by either the support agent requesting it or the  
user offering it. To take control, follow the steps given:
1. In the Microsoft Easy Assist shared desktop tool, press the Request  
Control button.
2. The user will have to acknowledge that we are taking control. If they are 
happy for us to take control, they should press Yes. They can press Esc at any 
time to stop the control of their computer.

Chapter 9
[ 213 ]
3. The user will see the small toolbox on their screen that enables them to stop 
control at any time by pressing the Stop sharing button or pressing Esc.
File transfer
The ile transfer facility is a temporary holding area that we can upload to and 
download iles from during the session. The iles are automatically removed once  
the session ends and the total ile size that can be stored is 100MB.
To transfer iles to the holding area, follow these steps:
1. Press the button on the toolbar labeled Upload and download iles.
2. Now press the Upload button. Pick the ile to upload and press OK.
 

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 214 ]
3. We will now see the ile in the File Transfer window.
4. Repeat this as required.
Once the iles have been uploaded, they can be downloaded on another machine in 
the session. To do this, follow these steps:
1. Select the iles to be downloaded by putting a check mark in the box to the 
left of the ilename.
2. Now press the Download button to download the iles.
3. We will be asked to choose a folder for the iles to be copied to. Find the right 
folder and press OK.

Chapter 9
[ 215 ]
4. The iles will now transfer.
Rebooting the remote computer
The functionality to reboot the computer is really useful as not only does the 
computer reboot, but once the user logs back in, it will reconnect back to the same 
remote assistance session to enable further administrative activity. This is vital if a 
change requires a reboot mid-way through the process.
To start the process, follow the steps given:
1. Right-click on the users name in the Participants list and select Request 
Reboot and Reconnect.

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 216 ]
2. We will be asked to conirm that we want to reboot the computer. Press OK 
to continue.
3. The user whose computer we are providing assistance to will now also be 
asked to conirm the restarting of their computer. If they agree, they also 
need to press OK on their computer.
4. We will now see conirmation that remote user has accepted the request to 
restart. Press OK to remove the dialog.
5. When the computer reboots, the user logs in and they will then see a message 
telling them that the computer is Attempting to reconnect to the Microsoft 
Easy Assist server. No additional credentials are required.

Chapter 9
[ 217 ]
6. Once the reconnection is complete, the support agent will receive 
conirmation that the user has joined the session. Press OK to close  
the notiication.
7. The user will again have to conirm they are going to Share Desktop with us.
Closing the alert
Once we have inished providing the assistance to the user, we need to uninstall any 
utilities that were added to their computer and if appropriate, re-conigure UAC to 
the pre-support level. This then leaves us with one inal activity, which is to close the 
alert in Windows Intune.

Monitoring and Responding to Windows Intune Alerts
[ 218 ]
To do this, ind the Remote Assistance Session Request in the Alerts workspace and 
select Close Alert in the toolbar.
Summary
In this chapter, we have examined the process of monitoring the alerts and 
responding with appropriate actions. These actions have included anti-malware 
checks as well as interacting with the users directly to understand their issues and 
helping them through using the Remote Assistance functionality.
In the next chapter, we will look at how to use Microsoft DaRT to resolve more 
challenging issues that require deeper actions to ix issues, often ones that stop  
a computer booting, with a skilled engineer sitting at the computer to resolve  
these issues.

Resolve Problems Using 
Microsoft DaRT
In this chapter, we will use the Microsoft Desktop and Recovery Toolset (DaRT) to 
diagnose and ix more complex computer support issues where Windows itself fails 
to boot or the removal of a component is not possible through remote access.
DaRT itself has been described earlier in the book in terms of the tools and features 
it provides a user who has signed up for Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack 
(MDOP). MDOP has a number of tools and capabilities that can be useful to an 
organization, however, in terms of resolving computer issues, DaRT is the  
relevant tool.
In this chapter, we will cover the following points:
• 
Downloading MDOP
• 
Installing DaRT
• 
Building a DaRT CD
• 
Using DaRT to resolve issues
Downloading MDOP
To download MDOP, follow these steps:
1. Navigate in a web browser to https://mocp.microsoftonline.com. Sign in 
and select the Subscription tab.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 220 ]
2. Find the row where the Service Name is Windows Intune and select  
the Actions of Download Windows and/or MDOP Software. Press Go  
to continue.
3. We will see a list of software downloads. Each edition of MDOP supports a 
different version of Windows; however, the MDOP install often has several 
versions of DaRT in it. For example, the Microsoft Desktop Optimization 
Pack for Software Assurance 2011 contains DaRT 6.5 which supports 
Windows 7 as well as DaRT 6.0 and 5.0 for Windows Vista, XP, and 2000 
support. Select the version appropriate for the operating system we need  
to support and then press Download.

Chapter 10
[ 221 ]
4. Select the language and then press the Download button under Download 
Manager. While you can download without using the Download Manager, 
due to the size of the download, the Download Manager will avoid any 
issues due to connectivity issues.
5. If pop-up windows are not enabled, then we will be prompted to enable  
pop ups and try again. If this is the case, press OK and then start the 
download again.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 222 ]
6. The Download Manager window will show, however, we may now need to 
install the Active-X control. Once this is completed, we may need to close the 
window and start the download again.
7. You will now be asked to pick a location for the download to be saved into. 
Pick a folder and press OK.
8. The download will now start using the Download Manager as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Installing DaRT
Once you have downloaded the MDOP DVD image, this needs to be burnt to a DVD 
or mounted via tools such as Virtual CloneDrive from slysoft.com. Since Windows 
7 can burn the DVD image ile without additional software to DVD, I will discuss 
how to do this here.
1. Find the ile you have just downloaded and right-click the ilename.

Chapter 10
[ 223 ]
2. Select Burn disc image from the menu.
3. Insert a DVD into the DVD drive.
4. To ensure the quality of the disc, select Verify disc after burning.
5. Press Burn to start burning the DVD.
We are now able to install the DaRT utilities by inserting the DVD back into the 
drive. Follow these steps to install the DaRT:
1. The MDOP window will appear similar to the following screenshot:

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 224 ]
2. We now need to install either the 32-bit or 64-bit version of DaRT depending 
on the version of Windows that you are installing the toolset into. Select the 
appropriate Install DaRT 6.5 link and click it. If you scroll down, you will 
see the DaRT build for supporting earlier versions of Windows.
3. We can also see the documentation and release notes links on this page here 
too and I would strongly encourage looking at them for much greater detail 
which I will provide here.
4. Once the installer starts, press Next to continue.
5. You will now have to accept the End User License Agreement. Assuming 
you do agree, press the I Agree button.

Chapter 10
[ 225 ]
6. Change the installation folder if desired and then press Next. Now, select the 
Complete installation option and then press Next.
7. Press Install to start the installation. If you are prompted with a UAC 
prompt, allow the installation to continue.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 226 ]
8. The DaRT is installed onto the administrator's computer.
Building a DaRT CD
The DaRT is now installed on the administrator's computer. There are two tools 
installed; the Crash Analyzer Wizard that will help diagnose the memory dump iles 
when a computer blue screens, and the ERD Commander Boot Media Wizard that 
builds the CD/DVD that is used to boot a problem user's computer.
Since we want to use the toolset on a problem computer, we will use the ERD 
tool. You will also need your Windows 7 DVD that matches the same processor 
architecture as the version of Windows you are using. This means a 64-bit DVD, if 
you are running a 64-bit version of Windows on the computer that is building the 
CD/DVD.
Once you have your Windows DVD and are ready to build the recover toolset, 
follow these steps:
1. Run the ERD Commander Boot Media Wizard program from the  
start menu.
2. You will be presented with a UAC prompt, we have to click the Yes button to 
proceed with the tool.
3. Press Next to move to the next screen.

Chapter 10
[ 227 ]
4. Press the Browse button to select the location of the Windows DVD. For 
example, if your DVD is E: and we have the Windows 7 DVD in there, 
selecting E:\ here is the right answer.
5. Press Next to extract the relevant iles to your hard disk.
6. If the DVD does not have the right processor architecture, you will see this 
error. If you see this error, press OK to continue, insert the correct DVD and 
press Next again. If you wish to produce a 64-bit and 32-bit solution, you will 
need both a 64-bit and 32-bit Windows DVD and a computer running 32-bit 
and 64-bit Windows to produce the CD.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 228 ]
7. You will be asked to choose the tools to be installed. By default, all tools are 
included. To remove a tool press the Remove button. Once the tools desired 
are selected, press Next.
8. For the Crash Analyzer Wizard to work, you will be asked for the location of 
the Debugging Tools for Windows, either on your system or the system you 
are installing. Since it is unwise to assume they will be on the system being 
debugged, either download the tools by going to http://go.microsoft.
com/fwlink/?LinkId=99934 or if you already have them installed, press the 
Browse button to locate them. If you download the tools, you will still need 
to browse to the correct location.
 

Chapter 10
[ 229 ]
9. For the anti-malware tools to contain the latest updates, select Yes, download 
the latest deinitions (Recommended) and then press Next.
10. We can add additional drivers if required to the image for speciic network 
or disk hardware. If this is required, press Add Device and browse to the 
location of the .inf ile. Once you have completed this, press Next.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 230 ]
11. Once all the iles are processed, we can now see all the iles that will be 
copied to the CD. If there are additional programs or iles to copy, press the 
Show Files button and add them through Windows Explorer. Once you have 
completed this, press Next.
12. Finally, the ISO CD disk image is ready to be created. Conirm the ilename 
and press Next.
13. Once the ISO image is completed, we can optionally burn the image directly 
to a CD. If you wish to do so, tick the box to Burn the image and press Next. 
If you do not wish to burn a CD now, just press Next.

Chapter 10
[ 231 ]
14. Once the process is complete, press Finish to exit the ERD Commander Boot 
Media Wizard.
Using DaRT to resolve issues
Now that we have an ERD disk, we can boot this to repair a PC. In this version of 
DaRT, this all has to be carried out by the person in front of the computer. In future 
versions of DaRT, there will be limited remote capability which means that some of 
this can be delivered in a remote environment.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 232 ]
When we boot a computer with the DaRT CD, we are asked a number of basic 
coniguration questions before you can start. They are as follows:
1. The irst question is about network initialization. Since we are likely to be 
using network functionality, select Yes.
2. We are now given the choice as to whether the drive letters on the system we 
are repairing should be made to match the drive mappings when the target 
operating system is booted. Again, select Yes.
3. Next, we need to choose the keyboard layout. You should set this to match 
the layout of your keyboard. For example, if you are in the UK, choose 
United Kingdom and then press Next.

Chapter 10
[ 233 ]
4 
Finally, we have to choose the operating system we are ixing. Remember 
that this needs to match the DaRT operating system version (such as 
Windows XP, Vista, or Windows 7, and 32-bit or 64-bit). If you have multiple 
versions of Windows on the hard disk, select the appropriate one and  
press Next.
5. The System Recovery Options are now shown. These are the same options 
that are shown when booting from a Windows 7 installation DVD, except for 
the last option. Select the Microsoft Diagnostics and Recovery Toolkit.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 234 ]
Now, the DaRT environment is loaded and we can see there are 15 options for us to 
choose from.
Since many of the tools are self-explanatory, we will examine those which provide 
less familiar functionality. They are:
• 
Locksmith
• 
Crash Analyzer
• 
Hotix Uninstaller
• 
Standalone System Sweeper
Locksmith
The Locksmith tool enables us to change the password of any user of the system. 
If a user has encrypted ile stores, these may not be accessible after the password is 
changed. Follow this short process to change a password:
1. Select Locksmith from the main DaRT menu.
2. We can see the welcome screen. Press Next to proceed.

Chapter 10
[ 235 ]
3. Choose the Account from the list of accounts and then type in the desired 
password in the New Password and the Conirm Password boxes. Then 
press Next.
4. Press Finish to return to the DaRT main menu.
Crash Analyzer
The Crash Analyzer is used to work out why a system generates blue screens of 
death. Since many systems are set to reboot after such a failure, the user may simply 
see random reboots. If more detailed crash dumps are required, turn on kernel level 
crash dumps. If we need to do this via the registry, look at http://davidoverton.
com/r.ashx?2A. We can use the ERD Registry Editor from the DaRT main menu to 
do this if you cannot boot the computer to set this option via the graphical interface.
One other item of note, if a computer crashes at random moments and the crash 
report keeps showing different errors, run the memory checker, as this type of 
random failure is often attributed to bad memory.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 236 ]
To examine a crash dump, follow this process:
1. Start the Crash Analyzer from the main menu. You will see the welcome 
screen. While you can leave the Automatically conigure box ticked, we will 
examine searching for and selecting the crash dump ile, so remove the check 
mark from the box and then press Next.
 
2. Since we built the debug tools into the bootable disk, the correct directory for 
the tools should be X:\windows\system32\DebugTools. This should be pre-
populated, so press Next.
 
3. The Crash Analyzer will require debug information to be available. While 
we can change where these will be stored, such as onto a USB key, by default, 
leave the settings as they are and then press Next.

Chapter 10
[ 237 ]
 
4. We can now browse to ind the crash dump. For a system crash, this will 
normally be found in the C:\windows\MEMORY.DMP file. If this is not the 
case, press the Browse button to locate the ile and then press Next. If there is 
no dump ile then the crash is either being caused by the hard disk controller 
driver or the settings to create a crash dump are not set. If it is the hard disk 
controller driver, check that the bios settings have not been change. If the 
crash dumps are not conigured to be created, enable them in the registry  
and reboot the computer to reproduce the crash.
 

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 238 ]
5. The system will analyze the dump ile. It may download the symbol  
iles from the Internet and store them on the hard disk as per the  
settings in step 3.
 
6. Once the analysis is complete, you can either view the Details by pressing 
the button or just examine the summary. Unless you are familiar with the 
Microsoft debugging software, the details may be overwhelming, but they 
can be useful to a debug expert to further analyze the problem. If a speciic 
ile or driver is at fault, then you now know what to search for on the Internet 
to ind a replacement. Remember that you can modify hardware and drivers 
using the DaRT toolset. Once you have the information required, press Next:
 

Chapter 10
[ 239 ]
7. Finally, the process is inished and we can exit the tool using the  
Finish button.
 
Hotix Uninstaller
The Hotix Uninstaller enables you to remove an update from Microsoft that you 
believe is the cause of a computer malfunction. This is something that should not 
be undertaken lightly and preferably only once a full backup has been taken. To 
complete the task, follow these steps:
1. Start the tool by selecting Hotix Uninstall from the DaRT main menu.
2. To continue past the welcome screen, press Next.
3. Select the hotix that you want to uninstall and put a tick in the box. It is 
recommended that you choose the latest ix irst and remove only one before 
rebooting and seeing if the same issue occurs. Once you have selected the 
hotix or update to remove, press Next to continue.

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 240 ]
4. The system may take some time processing the removal and then it will show 
the status. If the status is not Succeeded, then you will need to do further 
analysis, and perhaps a call to Microsoft support would be a sensible step. 
Press Next to continue.
5. Finally, press Finish to inish the process. You can now reboot the system to 
see if the problem has been resolved.
Standalone System Sweeper
The inal tool that we are going to examine is the anti-malware tool. This can detect 
and remove a number of malicious software items on the computer in question, 
without the worry that the tool is being interfered with by an infected host operating 
system. This is something that is best delivered with an Internet connection to enable 
the latest deinition ile updates to be applied.
To scan a system, follow these steps:
1. Start the Standalone System Sweeper from the DaRT main menu.
2. We are prompted to update the deinitions. We can ignore this and press 
Scan immediately, however, I would strongly recommend pressing the 
Check for updates now button.

Chapter 10
[ 241 ]
3. Unless the latest updates have been manually downloaded, press Download 
to get these from the Internet now.
4. Press the Scan button to start a scan. As with all full system scans, this will 
take a good 10-20 minutes to complete, depending of the number of iles on 
the computer and the hard disk speed.
 

Resolve Problems Using Microsoft DaRT
[ 242 ]
5. Once the scan is complete, you will either need to take speciic action to clean 
iles or it will report no errors.
6. We can now close the tool by pressing the cross in the top right corner of the 
window to carry out more tasks or inish our repair.
Summary
In this chapter, we have we have looked at how DaRT, part of MDOP, can be used 
to resolve a number of deeper and more challenging issues. DaRT requires several 
preparation steps before it can be used, including licensing MDOP, downloading, 
and building a CD before it can be used to resolve a problem. There are 14 tools, plus 
help as part of the tool and we have examined four extremely useful tools that are 
not always found on a PC to resolve password issues in a supported manner. We 
have examined crash dumps to understand what is behind a computer crash as well 
as learned how to remove hotixes that may be preventing a computer from booting.
Finally, we ran the Microsoft anti-malware tools to ensure a PC is free from 
unwanted malicious software.
In the next chapter, we will download and install Windows 7 Enterprise Edition 
onto computers running older versions of Windows and look in detail about using 
Windows XP as a starting point for these upgrades.

Deploying Windows 7 
Enterprise Edition
In this chapter, we will look at the process of moving users from a previous edition 
of Windows 7 to the Windows 7 Enterprise Edition that users are entitled to through 
the use of Windows Intune. The beneits of Windows 7 were discussed earlier in the 
book, so I will not be repeating them here.
Before we can progress to Windows 7, we need to ensure the computers are capable 
of running Windows 7 and that the applications will continue to function. The 
greater the number of applications and the older they are, the higher the risk that 
one or more applications will need updating or replacing. Having said that, many 
utilities that people use with Windows XP are no longer required, such as CD-ROM 
and DVD burning software or specialist disk defragmentation tools.
If the user has Windows XP, there is no direct "upgrade" available, so the process 
of deploying consists of backing up the user's settings, installing a clean copy of 
Windows 7, and then installing their software programs back onto the computer. 
Even if moving from Windows Vista or from Windows 7 Professional Edition, this 
is often the cleanest process to follow. For this reason, I will start with a version of 
Windows XP as my baseline and the steps for other versions are similar to this.
In this chapter, we will cover the following:
• 
Downloading Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
• 
Checking pre-requisites for Windows 7
• 
Backing up settings for migration
• 
Installing Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
• 
Restoring user settings and installing applications
• 
Updating Windows Intune
• 
Considering tools for scale deployment of Windows 7

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 244 ]
Downloading Windows 7 Enterprise 
Edition
Before we can install Windows 7 Enterprise Edition, we need to download the ISO of 
the operating system. To do this, follow these steps:
1. Log into the Microsoft Online Customer Portal by going to  
https://mocp.microsoftonline.com.
2. Select Manage subscriptions from the Actions menu on the right-hand side 
of the portal.
3. Find Windows Intune under the list of Service Name column and then select 
the Download Windows and/or MDOP software option under the Actions 
column. Press Go to continue.
4. Several products will be displayed. Find Windows 7 Enterprise and press 
View to see the Product Key for the install. Make a note of this as it will  
be needed.

Chapter 11
[ 245 ]
5. Press Download and the Download Product screen will appear. Choose 
your installation language and whether we want a 32 bit or 64 bit installation 
under Operating system type drop-down menu.
6. Put a tick in the I Accept box to accept the legal statement. If you do not 
agree, then do not proceed! The two download options will be enabled. If 
they do not, then it means that one of the selection boxes earlier in the form 
has not been completed.

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 246 ]
7. We have a choice on how to download the ISO ile. Given its size we should 
use the Download Manager to ensure a reliable non-corrupt version of  
the ile. Click on Download under the Download Manager title to start  
the process.
8. We will be prompted with a security prompt from Internet Explorer. Press 
Allow and then choose a location on your local disk or a ile server to store 
the ISO image. Once this is complete, the download will start and will take 
several minutes to complete, depending on your Internet connection speed.
9. Once the ISO is downloaded, the Status will change from Downloading  
to Finished.
10. We can burn to a DVD or install onto a USB stick. For the Microsoft  
software to do this, go to http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2C and  
install the software. Full instructions are provided on the website and  
it is a simple process.
We now have a bootable DVD or USB stick that we can use to install Windows 7 
Enterprise Edition and the product key to do this with. The product key will  
activate with the Microsoft servers on the Internet.

Chapter 11
[ 247 ]
Checking pre-requisites for Windows 7
The hardware requirements for Windows 7 are higher than those for Windows XP, 
so older computers may need hardware upgrades before we can proceed. The easiest 
way to see if a computer meets all the requirements is to run an automated tool from 
Microsoft. This can be downloaded from http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2B.
Plug in all the devices that the user will want to use with Windows 7. This should 
include printers and USB devices, as older ones may not work with Windows 7 and 
the advisor can only test for the hardware and software installed.
To use the advisor, follow these steps:
1. Install the Windows 7 Advisor Tool and start it.
2. Once all your devices are installed, press the Start check button.
3. The tool will display Checking compatibility for several minutes before 
displaying the list of issues that need addressing and items that are ine. 
We can choose to consider a 32-bit report or 64-bit report depending on the 
version of Windows that could be installed on the device by changing the 
tabs at the top a shown in the following screenshot.
4. First look at the system requirements. In the following screenshot, we can see 
that the computer will need a RAM upgrade, ideally to 2 GB of RAM and 1 
GB as a minimum. There is also a warning about the graphics card, which is 
suggesting an upgrade to enable the best user interface experience.

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 248 ]
We can ignore the Outlook Express warning as this can be replaced  
with Windows Live Mail, but it is best to do the e-mail migration before  
the upgrade.
Each item will need to be examined and the appropriate solution put in place 
before a migration can be successful.
5. We now examine the programs that are currently installed. While most are 
ine, there is a warning about the Microsoft .Net Framework 1.1. If this is 
required for an application, then we should consider Windows XP Mode as 
noted at the bottom of the report.

Chapter 11
[ 249 ]
6. We can now choose to save the report by pressing the Save Report button, 
and then press the Close button to close the advisor.
Now that we have the report, we can ensure that each computer is adequately 
prepared for Windows 7. Resolving each blocking issue and making sensible 
decisions about computer hardware is vital before we can progress to  
the installation.
Backing up settings for migration
We need to create a secure backup of the settings in the previous version of 
Windows. This can be used to transfer the user to a new computer or for Windows 7 
when installed on the same computer. To do this, follow these steps:
1. Insert the Windows DVD or USB stick. Navigate to \support\migwiz and 
ind the ile migsetup.exe. This is the Windows Easy Transfer wizard. Start 
the program.
2. We will see the welcome screen for the wizard. Press Next to continue 
through the wizard.

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 250 ]
3. Unless we have two machines set side-by-side that we are migrating 
between, select to transfer using An external hard disk or USB lash drive. 
Ensure the drive is connected and recognized by the computer before 
continuing.
4. We need to tell the wizard that we are on the old computer—the one running 
Windows XP. Do this by pressing the This is my old computer option.

Chapter 11
[ 251 ]
5. We can now see a selection of users that can be migrated as well as any 
shared resource. Ensure that each user we want to transfer has a tick against 
their name.
6. If there are any additional iles that you want to transfer, press the 
Customize link, and then the Advanced option at the bottom of the  
list as shown in the following screenshot:

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 252 ]
7. Select any additional iles that are required. In this example, I have a folder 
called Other Stuff that has critical iles in it. Ensure that the box to the left of 
the folder name has a tick in it. Then press Save to return to the user list and 
then press Next once completed.
8. Since the backup will have the user's iles, settings, and any conidential data 
in them, type a password and then press Save.
9. We now have to choose where the user's iles and settings will be saved. 
Choose a location, such as an external USB drive to save the iles to. Once  
this is done, press Save and the process will start.
 

Chapter 11
[ 253 ]
10. Once all the iles and settings have been successfully completed, press Next 
on this and the subsequent screens to exit the wizard.
We now have the vital user settings required to create the user on a new installation 
of Windows 7 Enterprise Edition.
Installing Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
We are now ready to install Windows 7. Close the explorer window if it is still open 
and start the Windows 7 setup program. I'm assuming that this is not the irst time 
that you have installed Windows 7, so I am going to cover the actual installation 
process very lightly. If we need to install additional disk or network drivers or wish 
to upgrade the hard drive in the user's computer while embarking on this process, 
then you can and should, but I will not cover those details.

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 254 ]
To install Windows 7 back onto the computer that was running Windows XP, follow 
these steps:
1. When the Windows 7 installer has started, press Install now to start  
the process.
2. Since important updates to Windows 7 setup may have been made since the 
version of Windows that we downloaded was created, press the Go online 
button to get latest updates.
3. Accept the license agreement by checking on the I accept the license terms 
checkbox and then press Next.

Chapter 11
[ 255 ]
4. We cannot upgrade Windows XP, so we have to select Custom (advanced).

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 256 ]
5. Select the disk partition that we wish to install on. If there is not enough 
space, we will see an error. Then press Next to continue.
6. We will see a warning informing us that the previous version of Windows 
will be stored in C:\Windows.old. Press OK to continue.
7. Windows 7 will now install. The computer will reboot several times through 
this process. It is time to have a cup of tea!

Chapter 11
[ 257 ]
8. Windows 7's next prompt to us will be asking for the Country or region and 
associated information. Set this information for the user and then press Next.
9. Now type the name of the primary user. This user will be created as the 
administrator, so if that is not appropriate, create an administrative user here.
We can also choose the name of the computer. I always add the operating 
system to the computer name. While this makes my life a little easier, users 
who share iles or remotely access their machine may ind this inconvenient 
as their computer name has just changed!

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 258 ]
Press Next when completed.
10. Create the password for the user here along with a hint. We will need 
the user to reset this to something only known to them once they get the 
computer back. Press Next once completed.
11. Select the default Windows update settings for the computer. It will be 
necessary to run Windows update several times, and once Windows Intune 
is loaded onto the computer again, it will override these settings.

Chapter 11
[ 259 ]
12. Set the right date and time. This should simply be a case of choosing the 
Time Zone and then pressing Next.

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 260 ]
13. We need to let Windows 7 know that this computer is connected to the work 
network, assuming that it is. This will impact the irewall settings, so setting 
this correctly is important.
14. Windows 7 will now inalize the installation and then log us in as a user.
Windows 7 Enterprise Edition is installed and we can now restore the user's iles and 
settings and then join the computer into the Windows Intune management list.
Restoring user settings and installing 
applications
We now need to make this look and feel like the user's computer again. This is done 
by using Windows Easy Transfer wizard again. Follow these steps to complete  
the process:
1. Go to the Start menu and search for Easy Transfer. We will see Windows 
Easy Transfer show on the list of programs. Start this.
2. We will again see the welcome screen. Press Next to pass through this  
as before.
3. As previously, select the same transfer mechanism, such as An external hard 
disk or USB lash drive.

Chapter 11
[ 261 ]
4. We are now asked if this computer is the new or old one. Select This is my 
new computer.
5. We need to conirm that the settings have already been saved to the storage 
device, so select Yes.
6. We need to ind the ile that we previously created. Navigate to the location 
and select the ile, and then press Open.

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 262 ]
7. Enter the password and press Next.
8. We can modify the information that will be restored, although I rarely need 
to. Once we are happy, press Transfer.
9. Once the process is complete, we can see what was transferred as well as the 
programs that we need to install. Select the See a list of programs you might 
want to install on your new computer option.

Chapter 11
[ 263 ]
10. We need to work through the list of programs that need to be installed. Once 
we have restored the functionality of the computer, close this window and 
press the Close button.

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 264 ]
11. The last part of the process is to reboot the computer. Do this by pressing the 
Restart now button.
It is worth remembering that if we installed Windows 7 onto the same hard disk that 
Windows XP was originally installed without formatting, then the user's iles and the 
old copy of Windows XP can be found at C:\windows.old.
Once we are sure there is no need of these iles, they should be removed using the 
Disk Cleanup tool that can be found by searching in the Start menu. Press the Clean 
up system iles button and the tool will restart. Once this has completed, we can 
select the Previous Windows installation(s) option and press OK to remove the iles 
from the hard disk.
Pressing OK will start the process. Note that there is no way to undo this, so only 
complete this step once you are sure that you need nothing from there.
Now that the user's settings and iles are back in place, we need to add this computer 
back into the computers that are managed by Windows Intune.

Chapter 11
[ 265 ]
Updating Windows Intune
There are two steps that we need to undertake to manage this computer through 
Windows Intune. The irst is to remove the Windows XP computer from the Windows 
Intune console, freeing up the license, and stopping any alerts about the computer  
not communicating with Windows Intune. The second is to add the computer that  
we have installed Windows 7 on back into Windows Intune as a new computer.
Removing the computer from Windows Intune
Before we add the new computer back into Windows Intune, we need to gather some 
Windows Intune data on the old computer and then retire it. If you have managed 
your Windows Intune membership closely, you will not have spare computers in the 
system, which means that the old computer will have to be removed before the new 
one is added to keep compliant with your licensing. To do this, follow these steps:
1. Navigate to https://manage.microsoft.com and sign in.
2. Navigate to the All Computers view in the Computers workspace and then 
select the computer to remove.
3. Select the Edit Group Membership task from the Tasks pane.
 

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 266 ]
4. Make a note of the groups that the computer belongs to, and then  
press Cancel.
5. While the Easy Transfer wizard has a view of software from the old machine, 
Windows Intune also provides the Software workspace and it is worth 
collecting this information before it is lost when the machine is retired. To do 
this, select the Software view from the tabs along the top of the Computer 
Properties panel.

Chapter 11
[ 267 ]
6. It is possible to export this information and I would recommend this. Use the 
Export icon to save this information.
7. We are now ready to remove the computer from Windows Intune. Press the 
Retire link in the Tasks pane.
8. We are prompted to conirm that we want to retire the computer. Check that 
the correct computer has been selected and if so, press the Retire Computer 
button to conirm.
The computer is now removed from Windows Intune management and Windows 
Intune is ready to have the computer with the new operating system added to the 
managed computers.
Installing the Windows Intune tools
This process is no different to the normal Windows Intune process. We use the same 
download to install the software and register with Windows Intune.

Deploying Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
[ 268 ]
Once the computer is showing in the Unassigned Computers list in Windows 
Intune, we can update the group membership to match, where appropriate, the 
computer that it has replaced. If any of the group memberships relates to Windows 
XP being installed on it, obviously do not add it back into those groups.
Considering tools for scale deployment 
of Windows 7
We have migrated from Windows XP to Windows 7 Enterprise Edition using a very 
manual process. If you are upgrading enough computers, then there are tools that 
are excellent at streamlining the process; although the beneits are only realised 
when more than 100 computers are being migrated.
We will not be exploring any of these tools in great detail, but I will explain how they 
can assist in the migration process. These tools are:
• 
Microsoft Assessment and Planning (MAP) toolkit
• 
Microsoft Deployment toolkit
Both of these tools can offer signiicantly greater value than just migrating from 
Windows XP to Windows 7.
Microsoft Assessment and Planning (MAP) 
toolkit
The MAP toolkit performs three key tasks for you:
• 
Inventory assessment of your computing estate, including operating system, 
hypervisors, databases, and web browsers
• 
Analysis of the hardware and software in this environment and its ability to 
operate in the new environment (Windows 7 in this case)
• 
Reporting the state of the environment and usage of software,  
including compliance
As we can see, this is a signiicant tool and one that requires deep knowledge to 
implement. For further details, go to http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2D.

Chapter 11
[ 269 ]
Microsoft Deployment toolkit
The Microsoft Deployment toolkit provides a centrally managed desktop 
deployment tool for Windows 7 and Ofice 2010, amongst others. The tool uses an 
on-premise installation of System Center as part of the solution for "zero-touch" 
deployments or a Lite Touch installation, where the majority of the work is delivered 
by the tool.
For further details, go to http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2E.
Summary
In this chapter, we have collected the iles and settings from a Windows XP 
environment and after installing Windows 7, restored that information. We have 
then updated Windows Intune to manage the new operating system so we can 
continue to provide excellent management services.
Finally, I have pointed out some "scale" tools to help with large scale deployments of 
Windows 7.
In the next chapter, we will look at other Microsoft products and how they interact 
with a computer running Windows Intune.


Integration with Existing 
Microsoft Products
Microsoft has an array of products that are commonly associated with Windows 
desktops and their management. Some work well with Windows Intune, such as 
Ofice 365 and Windows Server 2008 R2, some can cooperate, and others do not  
work well together as they are trying to achieve the same goals as Windows Intune.
In this chapter, we will discuss which Microsoft products mix well with Windows 
Intune and which to avoid. The more complex an organization, the more likely it 
is that they will have products that overlap or clash with Windows Intune. This is 
not because of bad design, but because in larger organizations, Windows Intune is 
likely to be used to manage a subset of the computers where it is best suited, and 
these other technologies will be used elsewhere in the business. To this end, this is 
about products mixed together and their impact on an individual computer, not their 
impact across an organization using all the products to manage and deliver services 
to different groups of computers.
In this chapter, we will cover the following:
• 
Typical computing scenarios
• 
Ofice 365 and on-premise SharePoint and Exchange
• 
System Center
• 
On-premise Windows Server
• 
Windows Small Business Server
• 
Windows Home Server
• 
On-premise versus cloud solutions summary
• 
Mixing on-premise and cloud solutions
• 
Anti-malware products

Integration with Existing Microsoft Products
[ 272 ]
Typical computing scenarios
The typical computing scenarios that relates to a desktop user are made up of  
three areas:
• 
Desktop environment
• 
Management tools
• 
Services to enable productivity and collaboration
These technologies it together as shown in the following diagram:
The technologies are not mutually exclusive or exhaustive, but are indicative of those 
most businesses would use. The Management and Services shown on the right-hand 
side of the diagram could be replaced with Windows Small Business Server 2011 for 
smaller organizations and we shall look at that as a speciic scenario.
These technologies can be delivered on premise or in the cloud as the diagram 
suggests. There are numerous reasons why we may pick one over the other, 
including lexibility, physical location, security, and payment proile with most  
cloud services being subscription based.
Desktop environment
The desktop environment in the Microsoft world consists of Windows 7, Ofice 
2010, and any related tools to enable the management of that desktop. There will be 
a number of additional applications installed on the desktop to connect to all other 
services. Some will be provided by Microsoft and many might not be.

Chapter 12
[ 273 ]
There should always be anti-malware tools on the computer too, whether they are 
provided by Microsoft or not. For small businesses, Microsoft Security Essentials is 
free for up to 10 computers in the organization and can deliver the same or better 
anti-malware capabilities as many charged products. Security Essentials does not 
have the centralized management ability that other products deliver, including 
Windows Intune.
Windows Intune delivers Windows 7 Enterprise Edition, which is not a beneit 
of any of the other products discussed later in the chapter, although purchasing 
Windows Intune simply for Windows 7 does not make sense. Windows Intune will 
work with previous versions of Windows too, so a solution could be delivered with 
Windows XP or Windows Vista, although the older operating systems will need 
upgrading eventually, ideally to Windows 7 as provided by Windows Intune.
Management tools
The on-premise management tools are provided by two areas from Microsoft. They 
are Windows Server 2008 R2 with Group Policy and Active Directory being the 
most obvious, and then System Center, which is a dedicated system management 
platform. These both reside on-premise and are operated by the business.
As an alternative to the on-premise management tools, we have Windows Intune. 
This provides some of the technology and capabilities from both of these products to 
deliver its service as well as having some components that are unique to Windows 
Intune itself.
Both technologies manage access to Windows Updates for Microsoft product 
updates, although the actual delivery can be from a Windows server when using  
the on-premise technology.
Services to enable productivity and 
collaboration
The inal part of the scenario is the Microsoft productivity services. For most users, 
this means Microsoft Ofice Outlook connected to an Exchange Server for e-mail, 
calendar, and contact management, and the use of a SharePoint site for collaboration 
and web applications.
These can be provided on-premise as separate servers or with Windows Small 
Business Server as a basis for these.

Integration with Existing Microsoft Products
[ 274 ]
There are other products that are becoming more prevalent in this, including 
Microsoft Lync which provides instant messaging, presence (being able to tell if 
someone is available, busy, away, or not to be disturbed), group conferencing, 
webinars, and voice communications and management.
The cloud-based alternative is Ofice 365, which is hosted by Microsoft. A number of 
hosting companies also offer similar services, often with greater customization and 
lexibility than that currently offered by Microsoft.
Ofice 365 and on-premise SharePoint 
and Exchange
Ofice 365 and the on-premise versions of Exchange 2010 and SharePoint provide 
very similar functionality, with Ofice 365 being a Microsoft hosted version of 
the same product. Ofice 365 also can include the Ofice WebApps (Word, Excel, 
PowerPoint, and OneNote) and Lync (instant messenger and online meetings) as 
well as these being available to install on-premise as well. Information on Ofice 365 
can be found at http://www.office365.com.
With Ofice 365, the amount of customization and integration with other products 
is restricted versus the on-premise products; however, the cost of running a 
standardized service may be much lower with Ofice 365 as this includes both the 
software, maintenance, and upgrades in the price.
Either solution works equally well with Windows Intune; however, since we have 
opted for a subscription business model for desktop management with Windows 
Intune, opting for a subscription business model for these other services can make 
sense to ensure your IT services are delivered in a predictable way. Management 
of an Ofice 365 and Windows Intune subscription is delivered via the same web 
interface, the Microsoft Online Customer Portal (MOCP).
System Center
System Center is the Microsoft umbrella brand for its management products. The 
tools behind Windows Intune are from System Center, so there is deinitely an 
overlap. Windows Intune is a small subset of the functionality provided by System 
Center. System Center has not just the capability to manage and secure the desktop, 
but also back it up, deploy applications, and much more. System Center also 
manages all other Microsoft products, so it really does cover a much bigger target 
area than just the desktop.

Chapter 12
[ 275 ]
The only time when Windows Intune and System Center being mixed together 
makes sense is when we are managing desktops that are not connected to the 
corporate domain or do not have access the corporate network. If this is not the  
case, it is unlikely we will mix these products on the same computer.
More information on System Center can be found at  
http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2K.
While Windows Intune is strictly aimed at policy and update management of 
Windows desktop computers, System Center offers a much broader range of 
capabilities. It is designed to deliver management of Windows client and server 
solutions as well as non-Windows based technology.
System Center also goes beyond the functionality sphere offered by Windows 
Intune with products such as Data Protection Manager that enables snapshot 
backup technology of your important iles. If you want to use Windows Intune and 
a good backup technology and you are a business with less than 25 computers, then 
Windows SBS 2011 Essentials in an excellent product that offers this functionality 
as an alternative to System Center and has a much lower level of overlap with 
Windows Intune.
System Center Service Manager provides fantastic management of the whole suite 
to deliver IT Service Management. This again delivers signiicantly more than the 
functionality of Windows Intune and again can supplement it or replace it.
Overall, as has been said before, if you are after a deep, highly modular, and 
customizable solution for managing a broad range of devices with deep reporting and 
protection technologies, then System Center is for you. If this is your irst step towards 
desktop management, then Windows Intune will deliver an excellent solution.
On-premise Windows Server
Windows Server 2008 R2 is the current version of Windows Server with the next 
edition being expected in 2012 or 2013. When connected with a desktop user, 
the typical functionality we might expect to deliver which has any overlap with 
Windows Intune is as follows:
• 
Identity management with Active Directory
• 
Group Policy
• 
Update management with Windows Software Update Services
Windows Server can deliver many other beneits to the user, including additional 
security management, ile storage, and web serving, but these are more about 
services the user may use and have very little overlap with Windows Intune.

Integration with Existing Microsoft Products
[ 276 ]
One very important difference between an on-premise based solution using a  
server and Windows Intune is the need to manage the server and all the tools. 
Windows Intune provides this functionality without you having to manage it, while 
Windows Server, Small Business Server, and Windows Home Server all require a 
server on premise.
Identity management with Active Directory
Active Directory (AD) launched as part of Windows 2000 and has become the 
most common mechanism for managing users, the groups they belong to, and their 
permission to access resources. Many applications use the information in AD to 
manage their own permissions too, so it can be a critical part of a solution.
Windows Intune does have group management; however, the other functionality is 
not provided by Windows Intune today and, therefore, it is very common to require 
both solutions in a business.
Today, there is no integration between the AD users and groups and those in 
Windows Intune, which could lead to some complexity if both products are being 
used to manage users and computers. If computer management is delivered using 
Windows Intune, which is device based, and user and application management is 
managed by AD, then those complexities largely disappear.
Also, since AD includes the user sign-in and network permission, most organizations 
will use Windows Servers with AD as well as Windows Intune unless network 
identity and access to local network ile stores is not required.
Group Policy
Group Policy (GP) is a very broad capability of Windows Server and other Microsoft 
products to control Windows and other applications. Given the broad range of 
capabilities, some ind it a little daunting. Windows Intune offers control over the 
ones that are commonly used to monitor and manage desktop computers.
For complex solutions, Windows Server will always provide the greater control and 
management of these policies and as with AD, if the computer management is left 
to Windows Intune and the user and other tasks are managed by Group Policy, then 
little complexity should arise.
Given though that it is more likely that there will be overlap between the two sets  
of policy, a very simple rule has been put in place. In the situation where AD Group  
Policy and Windows Intune Policy conlict, the GP settings will always override  
the Windows Intune policies. More information about AD and GP can be found 
http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2L.
 

Chapter 12
[ 277 ]
Windows Intune includes a tool to enable us to check if policies are in conlict so that 
we can understand the details of any policy issues. We would see a policy alert if an 
error was detected. When looking at the information on a speciic computer in the 
Computers workspace, we can see information in the Policy tab.
Update management with Windows Software 
Update Services
Windows Software Update Services (WSUS) has been available for a number 
of years to move the update process from user management to policy-based 
management. With WSUS, we can also locate the updates themselves on a server 
inside the corporate irewall to reduce Internet bandwidth and data consumption 
requirements. One hundred people all trying to update the same 10 MB update is 
1 GB of data saved if the update is being locally serviced, and is likely to download 
much faster too.
The management of updates is a complete overlap between Windows Intune and 
WSUS, although as mentioned earlier, the delivery is different.
WSUS settings are conigured via group policy, so if we have Windows Intune and 
WSUS running, WSUS will be in control of the updates.

Integration with Existing Microsoft Products
[ 278 ]
Windows Small Business Server
Windows Small Business Server (SBS) is an amazing product that delivers high 
power capability all squeezed into one system box. Obviously, as the author of a 
book on SBS, you would expect me to say so, but I really do think that.
The functionality provided by each version of SBS 2011 is not identical, even when 
limiting to the areas that Windows Intune covers. The following table describes the 
different versions:
SBS 2011 Essentials
SBS 2011 Standard
Windows Server 2008 R2
Yes
Yes
AD
Yes
Yes
WSUS
No
Yes
Group Policy
No
Yes
Management tools
Simple monitoring
Yes
Exchange 2010
No
Yes
SharePoint Foundation
Optional, but not pre-built
Yes
Premium Add-on Services
Optional
Optional
User / PC limit
25
75
SBS 2011 Standard Edition delivers most of the items of functionality that we have 
just discussed. It has Windows Server 2008 (or 2008 R2 with the 2011 version), 
Exchange, and SharePoint Services for the collaboration components. It also has its 
own customized user-management tools and some limited device management. This 
version is limited to a maximum of 75 users or devices, each of which will require 
a Client Access License (CAL) as well as the core product. It provides a signiicant 
number of features not discussed here.
SBS 2011 Essentials is based on Windows Home Server and offers a much simpliied 
solution that is ideal for non-IT skilled small businesses. While there is some use 
of policy in both products, there is almost no overlap with Windows Intune in the 
policy or management capabilities. One stand-out feature of the Essentials edition is 
the integrated PC backup solution that will also back up the computers on the LAN 
to the server for added security. This product is licensed to a maximum of 25 users or 
computers and has no additional license fees besides the initial server product.
Both products can work well with Windows Intune for managing the device as well 
as using the additional functionality of SBS for other functions.

Chapter 12
[ 279 ]
Since the Essentials edition does not provide the likely desired collaboration services, 
this is well suited to being paired with Ofice 365, meaning that we can get the most 
optimum solution using Windows Intune, Ofice 365, and Essentials if we do not 
have more than 25 users or computers.
For more information about Windows SBS, have a look at my blog:  
http://davidoverton.com/blogs/doverton or for the product comparison  
go to http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2G.
Windows Home Server
Windows Home Server has been used by some small businesses since its release. 
The latest version, Windows Home Server 2011, delivers some functionality that  
is found in SBS Essentials. A quick comparison of features can be seen in the 
following table:
SBS 2011 Essentials
Windows Home Server 
2011
Windows Server 2008 R2
Yes
Yes
AD
Yes
No
WSUS
No
No
Group Policy
No
No
Management tools
Simple monitoring
Simple monitoring
Exchange 2010
No
No
SharePoint Foundation
Optional, but not pre-built
No
Premium Add-on Services
Optional
No
User / PC limit
25
10
The overlap between Home Server and Windows Intune is even lower than SBS 
Essentials and as such can be used as a companion to Windows Intune without 
worry or conlict. For more information on Windows Home Server, please go to 
http://davidoverton.com/r.ashx?2M.

Integration with Existing Microsoft Products
[ 280 ]
On-premise versus cloud solutions 
summary
We have discussed a number of technologies in this chapter, and for those who 
prefer a table to compare against, here are the Microsoft technologies compared  
side by side:
Small Business Server 
2011
Traditional  
on-premise
Microsoft cloud
Windows 
Server 2008 R2
Yes
Yes
Yes through 
Windows Azure
Active 
Directory
Yes
Yes
No
WSUS
Essentials—No
Standard—Yes
Yes
Intune—Yes
Group Policy
Essentials—No
Standard—Yes
Yes
Intune—Yes (some)
Management 
tools
Essentials—Simple
Standard—Yes
System Center—Yes
Intune—Yes
Exchange 2010
Essentials—No
Standard—Yes
Exchange 2010—Yes
Ofice 365—Yes
SharePoint 
Foundation
Essentials—Optional
Standard—Yes
Yes
Ofice 365—Yes
Premium  
add-on 
services
Optional
Full Purchases only
Azure—Yes
User / PC 
limit
Essentials—25
Standard—75
Unlimited
Unlimited
Windows 
7 (and later 
versions)
No
Full purchase only
Intune—Yes
Anti-malware
No (non-centralized for 
1-9 PCs)
Forefront Protect 
Manager—Yes
Intune—Yes
Remote 
shared screen 
assistance
No
Yes
Yes
Payment 
model
Up front
Up front or three-year 
contract with annual 
payment
Subscription

Chapter 12
[ 281 ]
Mixing on-premise and cloud solutions
Having described where the products do and do not work together, there may be 
an expectation that a System Center organization would have no use for a Windows 
Intune solution. This is not the case, however, as organizations often have to provide 
solutions for a number of different scenarios. If an organization wishes to support 
users who rarely connect to the corporate network or users who wish to utilize 
non-company PCs, often referred to as Bring Your Own Technology (BYOT), then 
Windows Intune enables an excellent level of management for what could otherwise 
be a complex management issue. To this end, hybrid solutions are possible where 
a non-traditional desktop support model is desired. This might look a bit as the 
following diagram:

Integration with Existing Microsoft Products
[ 282 ]
Anti-malware products
While not all anti-malware products are made by Microsoft, there is an interesting 
process that is executed by Windows Intune to decide whether to install the 
Windows Intune Endpoint Protection software on a client computer or not. The 
process is described by the low chart shown as follows:
The process ensures that a computer is never left without anti-malware protection.  
If a computer has no anti-malware, or has Microsoft Security Essentials, or  
Forefront Endpoint Protection, then an upgrade is carried out to Windows  
Intune Endpoint Protection.
If it has another anti-malware tool, then this will be removed and Windows 
Intune Endpoint Protection will be installed if the policy explicitly says to install 
the product. If not, then the existing anti-malware solution will be left in place. It 
is worth stating again though that Windows Intune can only provide alerts and 
manage via policy if the Windows Intune Endpoint Protection is installed.

Chapter 12
[ 283 ]
Summary
There are a number of Microsoft products that overlap and compliment Windows 
Intune. Depending on our requirements, the importance of the overlap and, whether 
all or some computers should use both products, can be decided.
System Center is the product with the most overlap and additional functionality 
with Windows Intune. SBS 2011 Standard Edition is the next closest, but Windows 
Intune still provides several unique beneits over SBS 2011, including the Windows 7 
Enterprise Edition license and the ability to purchase MDOP.
All other products complement Windows Intune signiicantly and should be 
considered as part of our IT estate in one way or another.
We are now ready to deliver a well-managed PC estate and report on how this estate 
performs against expectations. We can proactively and reactively resolve user's 
computer challenges so they can get on with their day job and we can spend more 
time improving this, rather than ighting IT management ires.

 

Index
A
Active Directory. See  AD
AD  88, 276
administrators
additional administrators, adding to  
Windows Intune  83-85
tenant administrators, adding to Windows 
Intune  85-87
Adobe Flash - 32-bit EXE  152-154
Adobe Flash - 64-bit MSI  149-152
Adobe Reader - Windows 7 EXE  155, 156
Adobe Reader - XP SP3 EXE  156
alerts and support, Windows Intune
about  49
remote assistance  52, 53
alerts, Windows Intune
about  196
activation, coniguring  96-98
closing  200, 201, 217
coniguring  96
customer alert rule, creating  101-104
malware alerts  201
monitoring  196-198
notiication, changing  98-101
notiication, rules  98
remote assistance alerts  204
responding  199
alerts workspace
about  178, 179
categories  179
reporting basics  178, 179
anti-malware
products  282
protection  45
application
installation modes  144
package, deploying  158-160
package iles, folder creating for  144
preparing, for uploading  144
application package iles
Adobe Flash - 32-bit EXE  152-155
Adobe Flash - 64-bit MSI  149-152
Adobe Reader - Windows 7 EXE  155, 156
Adobe Reader - XP SP3 EXE  156
Intel drivers  157
Ofice 2010  157
placing, in one folder  145-147
uploading  148
auditing, Windows Intune  47
B
Background Intelligent Transfer Service 
(BITS)  129
Bring Your Own Technology (BYOT)  281
C
CAL  278
chat tool  212
Client Access License. See  CAL
cloud computing
about  7
centralized solution  9, 10

[ 286 ]
challenges  18
client software  15
customization  20
data accesses and synchronization  19
elastic in scale and power  10
facets  8
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)  17
levels  16
management  9, 10
multiple client device types  14, 15
network bandwidth and latency  19
network requisites  19
programmable interfaces  16
protocols  11
secure and private  12
security  20
upgrades  9, 10
utilization based pricing  11
cloud solutions
and on-premise, mixing  281
versus on-premise, summary  280
Comma Separated Values (CSV)  177
computer groups
All Computers groups  88
computer, assigning to multiple groups   
94, 95
coniguring  87
group structure, selecting  88-91
PCs, assigning  92-95
Unassigned Computers groups  88
Computer Management option  41
computers workspace view  186, 187
computing scenarios
about  272
desktop environment  272, 273
management tools  273
productivity services  273, 274
Crash Analyzer option  41, 235
Create New Policy  113
customer alert rule
creating  101-104
D
DaRT
about  40, 219
CD, building  226-230
Crash Analyzer  235-239
Hotix Uninstaller  239, 240
installing, steps  222-226
Locksmith tool  234, 235
standalone system sweeper  240-242
troubleshooting with  231-234
Data Protection Manager  275
deploy policy, Windows Intune Agent  
Settings  130
desktop environment, computing scenarios  
272, 273
Diagnostic and Recovery Toolset. See  DaRT
Disk commander option  41
Disk Wipe option  41
E
Endpoint Protection section,  
Windows Intune Agent Settings
Default Actions  126
Endpoint Protection Service  122, 123
iles and processes, excluding  126-128
Microsoft SpyNet  128
Real-time Protection  123, 124
Scan Options  125
Scan Schedule  124
Endpoint Protection Service  122
End User Licensing Agreement (EULA)  140
ERD Commander Boot Media Wizard  231
ERD Registry Editor option  41
estate-wide software view  182-185
F
File Restore option  41
ile transfer  213, 214
irewall  46
Forefront Client Security Filter Manager 
QFE for Windows XP/SP2
URL  60

[ 287 ]
G
GP  276, 277
Group Policy. See  GP
H
hardware
computers workspace view  186, 187
inventory reports  188
tracking  185
Hotix Uninstaller  239, 240
I
IaaS  17
individual computer software view  181, 182
infrastructure as a Service. See  IaaS
installation report, license  189
installation, Windows Intune  42
Intel drivers  157
Internet Explorer 6 (IE6)  42
inventory reports, hardware  188
IT management
goals, deining  24, 25
reporting on  33
IT policies
against business goals  26
alerts  31
education  27
hardware assets, tracking  28, 29
hardware issues  32
issues, reacting to  30
major issues, dealing with  32
malicious theft of data, stopping  27, 28
malware, blocking  28
ongoing maintenance tasks  30, 31
PC, updating  29, 30
PC, updating with updatesDeploy  
Windows 7  29
security settings, ensuring on PC  26
software assets, tracking  28, 29
software issues  33
users' Support Requests, working with   
31, 32
using  25, 26
L
license
installation report  189
Microsoft Volume License details,  
managing  104, 106
other license details, managing  107, 108
purchase report  189
Locksmith option  41
Locksmith tool  234, 235
M
malware alerts
about  201, 202
anti-malware software issue  201
detecting  201
malware checks, testing  202
management console, Windows Intune  43, 
44
management tools, computing scenarios  273
MDOP
about  40, 62
downloading, steps  219-222
MED-V  42
Microsoft Assessment and Planning (MAP) 
toolkit  268
Microsoft Core XML Services (MSXML) 6.0
URL  60
Microsoft Deployment toolkit  269
Microsoft Desktop and Recovery Toolset. 
See  DaRT
Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack. See  
MDOP
Microsoft Easy Assist tool
beneits  205
Microsoft Enterprise Desktop  
Virtualization. See  MED-V
Microsoft Installer Package (MSI)  75
Microsoft Online Customer Portal (MOCP)
about  62, 274
contacts, coniguring  66, 67
signing into  66, 67
Microsoft SpyNet  128

[ 288 ]
Microsoft Volume License details
managing  104, 106
multiple organizations, Windows Intune
managing  54
N
network bandwidth, Windows Intune 
Agent Settings  129
Network Inspection System  124
Non-Microsoft Updates
managing  161-166
O
Ofice 365
about  274
and on-premise Exchange  274
and on-premise SharePoint  274
URL  274
Ofice 2010  157
on-premise
and cloud solutions, mixing  281
versus cloud solutions, summary  280
Windows Server  275, 276
on-premise Exchange
and Ofice 365  274
on-premise SharePoint
and Ofice 365  274
P
PaaS  17
package
deploying  158-160
removing  167
software package, removing  168
PC management
about  23
alerts  31
continuous cycle  24
IT policies, using for coniguration  25, 26
IT policies, using for deployment  25, 26
ongoing maintenance tasks  30, 31
problem management, categories  30
users' Support Requests, working with  31, 
32
Platform as a Service. See  PaaS
policy management
about  111-113
Create New Policy  113
existing policy, editing  131
General section  114
Windows Firewall Settings  111, 114-116
Windows Intune Agent Settings  111, 121
Windows Intune Center Settings   
111, 119-121
productivity services, computing scenarios  
273, 274
purchase report, license  189
R
Real-time Protection  123
remote assistance alerts
about  204, 205
assistance, providing  207
client computer, preparing for support  206, 
207
receiving  208-210
remote support, providing  211-213
steps  208-210
support agent's computer, preparing for 
support  207
support delivery, preparing  206
remote computer
rebooting  215-217
reporting
alerts  190
basics  172
custom reports  192
in alerts workspace  178, 179
in reports workspace  173
on PC management achievements  193
updating  179, 180
reporting, Windows Intune  47
reports workspace
about  173
customization, loading  174, 175
customization, saving  174, 175

[ 289 ]
customization, selecting  173, 174
data, exporting  177, 178
data, sorting in columns  175
reporting basics  173
report, printing  175, 176
S
SaaS  18
SBS  278
Scan Options  125
script scanning  124
security management, Windows Intune
about  44
anti-malware protection  45
irewall control  46
Windows system updates  44, 45
Security update, MSXML 6.0 SP2
URL  60
Service Level Agreement. See  SLA
shared desktop  212, 213
SLA
about  12
availability  12
recompense  13
service hours  13
Window Intune SLA  14
software
estate-wide software view  182-185
individual computer software view   
181, 182
usage, tracking  180
Software as a Service. See  PaaS
software distribution, Windows Intune   
53, 54
standalone system sweeper  240-242
System Center
about  274, 275
service manager  275
URL  275
T
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)  39
U
update management
about  131
automatic approval of updates, coniguring  
135-138
classiication, selecting  132
products categories  133
products, selecting  132
Update Classiication section  134, 135
updates, approving manually  138-142
updatesDeploy Windows 7
used, for updating PC  29
User Account Control (UAC)  206
V
Virtual CloneDrive  222
W
Windows 7 Enterprise Edition
downloading, steps  244-246
installing  253
installing, steps  254-260
prerequisites, checking for  247-249
scale deployment, tools  268
settings, backing up for migration  249-253
Windows 7, Windows Intune
about  39
Diagnostic and Recovery Toolset (DaRT)  
40, 41
Microsoft Desktop Optimization Pack 
(MDOP)  40
Microsoft Enterprise Desktop Virtualization 
(MED-V)  42
Windows 7 Software Assurance customers  
40
Windows Easy Transfer wizard  249
Windows Firewall Settings
about  114, 115
Proile Settings  115
Windows Home Server  297

[ 290 ]
Windows Intune
about  23, 57, 58
adding, to basket  67-70
additional administrators, adding  83-85
advantages  36, 37
application installation, modes  144
application package iles, folder creating 
for  144
application package iles, placing in one 
folder  145, 147
application, preparing for upload  144
application, uploading  148
App-V packaging, used for deploying  
package  147
App-V packaging, using to deploy package  
147
architecture  37, 38
client PC, image based deployment  75
client PC installation, conirming  76-78
client PC installation, via alternative  
methods  74
client PC, MSI ile deployment  75
client PC, quiet installation  75
client PC, update process  76
client software, downloading to device  72
complex management skills  61
computer, removing from Windows Intune  
265-267
diagnostic skills  61
features  38, 39
hardware requisites  59
help page, URL  160
installing, on client PC  72
licensing  58
management skills  61
MDOP, adding to purchase  71, 72
need for  35, 36
package, deploying  158-160
package, removing  167
partner, adding to subscription  79, 80
purchase, activating  70, 71
purchase, coniguring  67-70
reporting, basics  172
signing up  62
skills requisites  60
software package, removing  168
software requisites  60
software, uninstalling from client PC  167
Switch to another account  80, 81
tenant administrator, changing  85-87
tools, installing  267
unzipping  74
updating  265
Windows Intune Agent Settings
about  121
deploy policy  130
Endpoint Protection section  122
General section  122
network bandwidth  129
Updates section  128
Windows Intune Center Settings
about  119
All Policies section  120
Create Policy  120
Windows Intune Center Settings  120
Windows Intune, features
about  38
alerts and support  49
auditing  47
management console  43, 44
multiple organizations, managing  54
reporting  47, 48
security management  44
software distribution  53, 54
Windows 7  39
Windows Intune, installing on client PC
about  72
client software, downloading  72
conirming  76-78
image based deployment  75
MSI ile deployment  75
quiet installation  75
uninstalling  74
unzipping  74
update process, completing  76
via alternative methods  74
Windows Intune, signing up
MDOP, adding to purchase  71, 72
MOCP, signing into  66, 67

[ 291 ]
Windows Intune, adding to basket  67-70
Windows Intune, purchase activating  70, 
71
Windows Intune, purchase conirming   
67-70
Windows Live ID, creating  62-65
Windows Intune SLA  14
Windows Live ID, Windows Intune
creating  62-65
Windows Server, on-premise
about  275, 276
Group Policy (GP)  276
identity management, with Active  
Directory (AD)  276
on-premise  275, 276
Windows Software Update Services 
(WSUS)  277
Windows Small Business Server. See  SBS
Windows Software Update Services. See  
WSUS
Windows system updates  44
WSUS  277


 
Thank you for buying  
Microsoft Windows Intune 2.0: 
Quickstart Administration
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its irst book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective MySQL 
Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing highly focused 
books on speciic technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting and 
customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give you the 
knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get the job done. 
Packt books are more speciic and less general than the IT books you have seen in the past. Our 
unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving you more of what 
you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For  
more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to books 
published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but not limited 
to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer information 
relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, architects, and 
end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like to 
discuss it irst before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning editors 
will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.
 

Microsoft Forefront UAG 2010 
Administrator's Handbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-162-9             Paperback: 484 pages
Take full command of Microsoft Forefront 
Uniied Access Gateway to secure your business 
applications and provide dynamic remote access with 
DirectAccess
1. 
Maximize your business results by fully 
understanding how to plan your UAG 
integration
2. 
Consistently be ahead of the game by taking 
control of your server with backup and 
advanced monitoring
3. 
An essential tutorial for new users and a great 
resource for veterans
Least Privilege Security for 
Windows 7, Vista and XP
ISBN: 9978-1-849680-04-2             Paperback: 464 pages
Secure desktops for regulatory compliance and 
business agility
1. 
Implement Least Privilege Security in Windows 
7, Vista and XP to prevent unwanted system 
changes
2. 
Achieve a seamless user experience with 
the different components and compatibility 
features of Windows and Active Directory
3. 
Mitigate the problems and limitations 
many users may face when running legacy 
applications
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Microsoft Windows Server 
AppFabric Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-418-7             Paperback: 526 pages
Over 60 recipes for getting the most out of WCF/WF 
services on the Microsoft Windows Platform using 
Windows Server AppFabric
1. 
Gain a solid understanding of the capabilities 
provided by Windows Server AppFabric with a 
pragmatic, hands-on, results-oriented approach
2. 
Learn how to apply the WCF and WF skills 
you already have to make the most of what 
Windows Server AppFabric has to offer 
3. 
Includes step-by-step recipes for developing 
highly scalable composite services that 
utilize the capabilities provided by Windows 
Server AppFabric including caching, hosting, 
monitoring and persistenc
Microsoft Windows Azure 
Development Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-222-0            Paperback: 392  pages
Over 80 advanced recipes for developing scalable 
services with the Windows Azure platform
1. 
Packed with practical, hands-on cookbook 
recipes for building advanced, scalable cloud-
based services on the Windows Azure platform 
explained in detail to maximize your learning
2. 
Extensive code samples showing how to use 
advanced features of Windows Azure blobs, 
tables and queues.
3. 
Understand remote management of Azure 
services using the Windows Azure Service 
Management REST API
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

