colander
10e
microeconomics

Microeconomics

The McGraw-Hill Series in Economics
Essentials of economics
Brue, McConnell, and Flynn
Essentials of Economics
Third Edition
Mandel
Economics: The Basics
Second Edition
Schiller
Essentials of Economics
Tenth Edition
Principles of economics
Asarta and Butters
Principles of Economics, Principles of 
Microeconomics, and Principles of 
Macroeconomics
First Edition
Colander
Economics, Microeconomics, and 
­Macroeconomics
Tenth Edition
Frank, Bernanke, Antonovics, and Heffetz
Principles of Economics, Principles of 
Microeconomics, and Principles of 
Macroeconomics
Sixth Edition
Frank, Bernanke, Antonovics, and Heffetz
A Streamlined Approach for:
Principles of Economics, Principles of 
Microeconomics, and Principles of 
Macroeconomics
Third Edition
Karlan and Morduch
Economics, Microeconomics, and
Macroeconomics
First Edition
McConnell, Brue, and Flynn
Economics, Microeconomics, and 
­Macroeconomics
Twentieth Edition
McConnell, Brue, and Flynn
Brief Editions: Microeconomics and 
Macroeconomics
Second Edition
Miller
Principles of Microeconomics
First Edition
Samuelson and Nordhaus
Economics, Microeconomics, and 
­Macroeconomics
Nineteenth Edition
Schiller
The Economy Today, The Micro 
­Economy Today, and The Macro 
Economy Today
Fourteenth Edition
Slavin
Economics, Microeconomics, and 
­Macroeconomics
Eleventh Edition
Economics of Social Issues
Guell
Issues in Economics Today
Seventh Edition
Register and Grimes
Economics of Social Issues
Twenty-First Edition
Econometrics
Gujarati and Porter
Basic Econometrics
Fifth Edition
Gujarati and Porter
Essentials of Econometrics
Fourth Edition
Hilmer and Hilmer
Practical Econometrics
First Edition
Managerial Economics
Baye and Prince
Managerial Economics and  
Business Strategy
Eighth Edition
Brickley, Smith, and Zimmerman
Managerial Economics and 
­Organizational Architecture
Sixth Edition
Thomas and Maurice
Managerial Economics
Twelfth Edition
Intermediate Economics
Bernheim and Whinston
Microeconomics
Second Edition
Dornbusch, Fischer, and Startz
Macroeconomics
Twelfth Edition
Frank
Microeconomics and Behavior
Ninth Edition
Advanced Economics
Romer
Advanced Macroeconomics
Fourth Edition
Money and Banking
Cecchetti and Schoenholtz
Money, Banking, and Financial 
­Markets
Fourth Edition
Urban Economics
O’Sullivan
Urban Economics
Eighth Edition
Labor Economics
Borjas
Labor Economics
Seventh Edition
McConnell, Brue, and Macpherson
Contemporary Labor Economics
Eleventh Edition
Public Finance
Rosen and Gayer
Public Finance
Tenth Edition
Seidman
Public Finance
First Edition
Environmental Economics
Field and Field
Environmental Economics: An 
­Introduction
Seventh Edition
International Economics
Appleyard and Field
International Economics
Seventh Edition
King and King
International Economics, 
­Globalization, and Policy: A  
Reader
Fifth Edition
Pugel
International Economics
Sixteenth Edition

Microeconomics
TENTH EDITION
David C. Colander
Middlebury College

MICROECONOMICS, TENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2017 by 
McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions  
© 2013, 2010, and 2008. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by 
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill 
Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or 
broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside 
the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 DOW 21 20 19 18 17 16 
ISBN    978-1-259-65550-0
MHID  1-259-65550-4
Chief Product Officer, SVP Products & Markets: G. Scott Virkler
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Marty Lange
Managing Director: James Heine
Senior Brand Manager: Katie Hoenicke
Director, Product Development: Rose Koos
Senior Product Developer: Christina Kouvelis
Marketing Manager: Virgil Lloyd
Director of Digital Content Development: Douglas Ruby
Digital Product Analyst: Kevin Shanahan
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Linda Avenarius
Program Manager: Mark Christianson
Content Project Managers: Harvey Yep (Core)/Bruce Gin (Assessment)
Buyer: Laura M. Fuller
Design: Egzon Shaqiri
Content Licensing Specialists: Melissa Homer (Image)/Beth Thole (Text)
Cover Image: Jag_cz
Compositor: Aptara®, Inc.
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright 
page.
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Colander, David C., author.
Title: Microeconomics / David C. Colander, Middlebury College.
Description: Tenth Edition. | Dubuque, IA : McGraw-Hill Education, 2016. | 
        Revised edition of the author’s Microeconomics, 2013.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016021260| ISBN 9781259655500 (alk. paper) |  
        ISBN 1259655504 (alk. paper)
Subjects:  LCSH: Microeconomics.
Classification: LCC HB172 .C558 2016 | DDC  
338.5—dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016021260
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a 
website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill 
Education does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/highered

David Colander is Distinguished College Professor at Middlebury College. He 
has authored, coauthored, or edited over 40 books and over 150 articles on a wide 
range of economic topics.
	
He earned his B.A. at Columbia College and his M.Phil. and Ph.D. at Columbia 
University. He also studied at the University of Birmingham in England and at 
Wilhelmsburg Gymnasium in Germany. Professor Colander has taught at Columbia 
University, Vassar College, the University of Miami, and Princeton University as 
the Kelley Professor of Distinguished Teaching. He has also been a consultant to 
Time-Life Films, a consultant to Congress, a Brookings Policy Fellow, and Visiting 
Scholar at Nuffield College, Oxford.
	
He has been president of both the History of Economic Thought Society and 
the Eastern Economics Association. He has also served on the editorial boards of 
the Journal of Economic Perspectives, The Journal of Economic Education, The 
Journal of Economic Methodology, The Journal of the History of Economic 
Thought, The Journal of Socio-Economics, and The Eastern Economic Journal. 
He has been chair of the AEA Committee on Electronic Publishing, a member of 
the AEA Committee on Economic Education, and is currently the associate editor 
for content of the Journal of Economic Education.
	
He is married to a pediatrician, Patrice. In their spare time, the Colanders 
designed and built an oak post-and-beam house on a ridge overlooking the Green 
Mountains to the east and the Adirondacks to the west. The house is located on the 
site of a former drive-in movie theater. (They replaced the speaker poles with fruit 
trees and used the I-beams from the screen as support for the second story of the 
carriage house and the garage.) They now live in both Florida and Vermont.
About the Author

Preface
“Imagine . . . a textbook that students enjoy!” That 
comment, from an instructor who taught at Purdue, was 
e-mailed to me as I was struggling to write the preface to 
an earlier edition. That comment still captures what I be-
lieve to be the most distinctive feature of this edition. It 
speaks to students.
An Entire Learning Platform
That comment continues to guide this edition. But be-
cause students today learn differently than they did 
twenty years ago, it does so in new ways. Students today 
grew up with the Internet and social media that provide 
them with access to a broad range of digital resources and 
instant feedback. That changes the way they learn, and if 
we are to reach them, we have to present material to them 
in ways that fit their learning style. They want to be able 
to bring their course with them, to access it anywhere, 
anytime—at a coffee shop in the afternoon, in their dorm 
room late at night, or at lunch hour at work. They still 
want material that speaks to them, but it has to speak to 
them in their language at the time they want to listen. 
Modern learning is blended learning in which online pre-
sentations, review and testing of material, and feedback 
are seamlessly blended with the narrative of the text.
The strengths of previous editions translate well in this 
new environment. Students don’t want an automaton. They 
want a person who speaks to them, even if it is online. 
They don’t differentiate a “virtual” world from a “real” 
world. Both are real and students seek the same thing in 
both—a presentation of material that engages them. And 
that’s what I do. I tell stories. I use colloquial language, and 
I offer material that they read about online, or hear about 
through other media—today’s economic issues. The mate-
rial speaks to them in ways that they can hear and enjoy.
This edition has built upon the last edition, and is struc-
tured so as to reach out to students in the digital language 
of online communication. To teach modern students effec-
tively, we’ve got to get their attention and hold it, and digi-
tal tools give us that opportunity. That’s why I’ve worked 
hard in this revision to provide material that students can 
engage in a single, seamless, and fully digital product.
All of the content, including end-of-chapter questions, 
lines up directly with learning objectives. These learning 
objectives serve as the organizational structure for the 
material. The learning objectives, themselves, are broken 
down into further learning objectives associated with 
concepts that are presented in bite-sized portions of the 
text as part of the LearnSmart offer. This allows students 
the opportunity to master concepts that support the larger 
picture. As a result, within McGraw Hill’s Connect plat-
form, students can learn the core building blocks online 
with instant feedback; instructors can assess student 
learning data and know what their students understand, 
and what they don’t. With that information, they can de-
vote class time to those issues with which students are 
having problems.
The end-of-chapter material is written for optimal on-
line delivery: All of the standard questions and problems 
are auto-gradable and integrated with the online experi-
ence. Such integration allows students to move seamlessly 
between homework problems and portions of the narra-
tive to get the information they need, when they need it. 
This is a significant advance in pedagogy. Now, even pro-
fessors in large lecture classes can assign questions and 
exercises at the end of chapters and provide feedback to 
students at the point of need.
To provide the greatest flexibility for the range of 
course approaches, in addition to the standard questions 
and exercises at the end of every chapter, I also provide a 
set of Issues of Ponder and Alternative Perspective Ques-
tions that have no “correct” answer, but instead are de-
signed to get the students to think. In a blended learning 
environment, these are the questions that can form the ba-
sis for rich classroom discussions that engage the students 
with broad issues as much as the online material engages 
them with the building blocks. Classes become discussion 
and thinking time, not regurgitation and repetition time.
I am confident that the combination of the digital tools 
via LearnSmart and Connect, the modern material presented, 
and the colloquial style I have worked so hard to perfect will 
engage students in the tenth edition like never before.
Modern, Not Outdated  
1950s Economics
You can have the best online platform and presentation in 
the world, but if the content isn’t relevant or engaging, it 
serves little purpose. My goal is to present students with the 
best economics I can. That means that I want to teach mod-
ern economics, not neoclassical economics (or ­whatever 
vi

	
■ Preface ■	
vii
else the collection of models that developed in the 1950s is 
called). That doesn’t mean that I don’t teach the traditional 
models; it just means that I integrate modern interpretations 
and insights into those models. That approach makes the 
tone and format somewhat different from the 1950s’ tone 
and format of many current competitors that make it seem 
as if economics hasn’t changed in over 60 years.
Why haven’t competitors changed? Because it is re-
ally, really hard to deviate from the standard template de-
veloped in the 1950s. I fully recognize the difficulty. 
I know and accept that if we are going to teach modern 
economics, it has to involve an evolutionary, not revolu-
tionary, template. But recognizing the importance of the 
existing template is not a call for laziness and compla-
cency in what we teach; it is a call for creativity. Econom-
ics has changed and that means the content of the texts 
has to change as well.
Over the past decade I have been working on ways to 
introduce modern economics into the principles course—
trying different ideas on my students and colleagues and 
discovering what works and what doesn’t. In earlier edi-
tions I started to integrate modern economics into the 
standard principles template, and I continue that integra-
tion in this edition after getting useful comments from 
many of my users about the best way to do it.
One of the biggest problems that many people pointed 
out with presenting the subtleties of modern economics to 
students is that many of their students are, shall we say, 
less-than-perfect students. I am not unaware of the nature 
of students—in fact I was one of those far-less-than-perfect 
students. I am no utopian; I am a realist who recognizes 
that many, perhaps most, students could care less about 
how economists think. They are taking the course because 
it is required, because their parents told them they had to, 
or because it was what fit in their schedule. That is the 
­reality, and they are the students I’m writing for.
So my target student is a non-economics major who 
doesn’t especially care about the content they are learning; he 
or she is much more likely to be concerned with what is 
­going to be on the exam. For these non-economics majors it 
is even more important that we teach them modern econom-
ics, not a set of models from an outdated template. I want 
students to know TANSTAAFL, to know the strengths of 
markets, the weaknesses of markets, the importance of incen-
tives, and why economic policy is so complicated and messy.
Big Think Economics: Teaching 
More than Modules
Much of the recent focus in economic pedagogy involves 
a shift in focus away from seeing textbooks as a whole to 
seeing them as a compilation of modules. This has been 
accompanied by a modularization of the teaching of eco-
nomic principles: economic understanding is divided into 
learning objectives, sub learning objectives, and sub-sub 
learning objectives. These learning objectives are pre-
sented to students as the building blocks of economic un-
derstanding: Know these and you know economics.
This atomization approach makes lots of sense as long 
as one remembers that to hold the building blocks together 
one needs both mortar and an architectural blueprint. Un-
fortunately, mortar and blueprints don’t fit nicely into 
building block modules. Mortar and blueprints require 
conceptualization that goes beyond the standard models—
conceptualization that brings the big picture into focus, 
not just the individual building blocks. Because there are 
alternative architectural blueprints, there is not a single 
big picture, but instead a variety of them. The study of 
such issues is the grist for “big think” economics.
To present big think economics to students requires 
nuanced contextual discussion, as well as mathematical 
models involving analytic understanding. Students have 
to be presented with questions without definitive answers, 
but ones upon which, when addressed creatively, eco-
nomic models can shed light. My book contains lots of 
such discussions. In the book I continually remind stu-
dents that the models they are learning are based on as-
sumptions, and that to apply the models the students need 
to decide whether the assumptions fit. The text presents 
students with examples of how economists have put the 
building blocks together in different ways so that they 
recognize the strength and limitations of the models. The 
goal is to have the students come away not with a set 
rules, but a set of tools, which if used with judgment, can 
help the student arrive at reasonable conclusions.
Modern Critical Thinking Economics
Modern economics can mean different things to different 
people, and my interpretation of modern economics cen-
ters around critical thinking. Modern economics is based 
on the traditional models, but it subjects those models to 
critical thinking, and does not apply the models where 
they don’t fit empirically. It focuses on the real world, 
rather than on abstract models.
To maintain that critical thinking approach, two prin-
ciples stand out: (1) institutions and history are important 
in policy discussions and (2) good economics is open to 
dealing with all ideas. The mantra of modern critical 
thinking economics is, “Tell me something I don’t al-
ready know, using whatever method works.” Let me dis-
cuss each of these principles briefly.

viii	
■ Preface ■
Institutions and History Are 
Important to Understand Policy
If one opens up Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations, John 
Stuart Mill’s Principles of Political Economy, or Alfred 
Marshall’s Principles of Economics, one will see eco-
nomic analysis placed in historical and institutional con-
text. The modern textbook template moved away from 
that, and in previous editions, I tried to return the princi-
ples of economics toward that broader template, present-
ing models in a historical and institutional context. This 
edition continues that emphasis on institutions and his-
tory. Modern work in game theory and strategic decision 
making is making it clear that the implications of eco-
nomic reasoning depend on the institutional setting. To 
understand economics requires an understanding of 
­existing institutions and the historical development of those 
institutions. In a principles course we don’t have time to 
present much about history and institutions, but that does 
not preclude us from letting students know that we know 
that these issues are important. And that’s what I try to do.
When I say that institutions and history are important, 
I am talking especially about economic policy. As I stated 
above, this text and the accompanying package is not de-
signed for future economics majors. Most principles stu-
dents aren’t going to go on in economics. I write for 
students who will probably take only one or two econom-
ics courses in their lifetime. These students are interested 
in policy, and what I try to present to them is modern 
economic reasoning relevant to policy questions.
Because I think policy is so important in explaining 
how to apply economic reasoning, I utilize a distinction 
made by J.N. Keynes (John Maynard Keynes’ father) and 
Classical economists generally. That distinction is be-
tween theorems—the deductive conclusions of models—
and precepts—the considered judgments of economists 
about the policy implications of the models. I make it 
clear to students that models do not tell us what to do 
about policy—they give us theorems. Only when we 
combine the model’s results with our understanding of 
institutions, our understanding of the social context, and 
the normative goals we want to achieve, can we arrive at 
policy conclusions embodied in precepts.
Openness to Various Views
While I present modern economics, I present it in such a 
way that is open to many different points of view. I don’t 
present the material as “the truth” but simply as the con-
ventional wisdom, the learning of which is a useful hur-
dle for all students to jump over. To encourage students to 
question conventional wisdom, at the end of each chapter 
I include a set of questions—Questions from Alternative 
Perspectives—written by economists from a variety of 
different perspectives. These include Post-Keynesian, 
feminist, Austrian, Radical, Institutionalist, and religious 
perspectives. Each are described further in the “Distin-
guishing Features” section that follows the preface. The 
Radical questions come from the Dollars and Sense Col-
lective, a group with whom I’ve worked to coordinate 
their readers (www.dollarsandsense.org/bookstore.html) 
with this text. I also often integrate Austrian ideas into 
my class; I find that The Free Market (www.mises.org) is 
a provocative resource.
I often pair an article in The Free Market with one in 
Dollars and Sense in my assignments to students for sup-
plementary reading. Having students read both Radical 
and Austrian views, and then integrate those views into 
more middle-of-the-road, views is, for me, a perfect way 
to teach the principles course. (If I have a lot of radicals 
and libertarians in the class, I assign them articles that 
advocate more middle-of-the-road views.)
Teaching both Models and  
Critical Thinking
The goal in most principles courses is to teach students 
economic insights by presenting them a collection of 
models. Models are central to modern economics. Robert 
Solow nicely captured their importance when he said 
that, for better or worse, economics is a modeling science. 
This means that an important aspect of teaching students 
modern economics involves introducing them to the 
modeling approach to understanding the world. But 
teaching models, in my view, should be along the lines 
of Marshall, not Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green. 
­Marshall emphasized that economics was an approach to 
problems, not a body of confirmed truths.
In my view, the modeling method, not the models, is 
the most important to an economics class. In my presen-
tation of models, I carefully try to guide students in the 
modeling method, rather than having them memorize 
truths from models. I carefully emphasize the limitations 
of the models and the assumptions that underlie them, 
and am constantly urging students to think beyond the 
models. This approach pushes the students a bit harder 
than the alternative, but it is, in my view, the best peda-
gogical approach; it is the critical thinking approach.
Changes to This Edition
The principles of economics are unchanging, but the 
problems to which those principles are applied are in a 

	
■ Preface ■	
ix
continual state of flux. The revisions in this edition re-
flect that state of flux. Micro principles are relatively 
stable, which means that most of the changes made in the 
micro chapters are on the margin. I modified some key 
terms here, and added clarifying material there where us-
ers told me a discussion was unclear, or where the profes-
sion has moved on in its thinking. For example, users told 
me that the discussion of technical and economic effi-
ciency was subject to misinterpretation, so I ­reworked it. 
They also said that formally covering increasing and de-
creasing cost industries was really tough going for stu-
dents, so I modified the coverage to focus on constant cost 
industries. Throughout the micro sections I incorporated 
more recent real-world examples wherever possible. This 
led to changes in the discussions of anti-trust policy and 
government redistribution programs. But overall, in this 
edition the changes in micro have focused on updating and 
fine tuning, not instituting major changes.
There are also a variety of small changes to keep the 
text up to date; data has all been updated and references to 
time sensitive issues changed. But, overall, this 10th edi-
tion is similar in structure to the 9th edition that reflects the 
essential character of the text since the beginning. That es-
sential character involves blending the teaching of big-
think issues with the teaching of building blocks.
People to Thank
Let me conclude this preface by thanking the hundreds of 
people who have offered suggestions, comments, kudos, 
and criticism on this project since its inception. This book 
would not be what it is without their input. So many peo-
ple have contributed to this text in so many ways that I 
cannot thank everyone. So, to all the people who helped—
many, many thanks. I specifically want to thank the tenth 
edition reviewers, whose insightful comments kept me on 
track. Reviewers include:
Catherine M. Chambers
University of Central Missouri
Frankie P. Albritton Jr.
Seminole State College
Paul Chambers
University of Central Missouri
B. Andrew Chupp
Georgia Institute of Technology
Diane Cunningham
Los Angeles Valley College
Gregory E. DeFreitas
Hofstra University
John P. Finnigan
Marist College
Bernhard Georg Gunter
American University
Benjamin Leyden
University of Virginia
Victoria Miller
Akin Technical College
ABM E. Nasir
North Carolina Central University
Christina Ann Robinson
Central Connecticut State University
William Shambora
Ohio University
Mark Griffin Smith
Colorado College
Don Uy-Barreta
De Anza College
Kenneth Woodward
Saddleback College
In addition to the comments of the formal reviewers 
listed above, I have received helpful suggestions, encour-
agement, and assistance from innumerable individuals 
via e-mails, letters, symposia, and focus groups. Their 
help made this edition even stronger than its predecessor. 
They include James Wetzel, Virginia Commonwealth 
University; Dmitry Shishkin, Georgia State University; 
Amy Cramer, Pima Community College–West; Andrea 
Terzi, Franklin College; Shelby Frost, Georgia State Uni-
versity; Doris Geide-Stevenson, Weber State University; 
James Chasey, Advanced Placement Economics Teaching 
Consultant and Homewood-Flossmoor High School 
(ret.); David Tufte, Southern Utah University; Eric 
­Sarpong, Georgia State University; Jim Ciecka, DePaul 
University; Fran Bradley, George School; Ron Olive, 
­University of Massachusetts–Lowell; Rachel Kreier, Hofstra 
University; Kenneth Elzinga, University of Virginia;  
Ben Leyden, University of Virginia; Poul Thøis Madse, 
Danmarks Medie—OG Journalistehojskole; Rich Tarmey, 
Colorado Mountain College; Michael Mandelberg, Stuart 
Webber, Trinity Lutheran College; Bob Rogers, Ashland 
University, Zackery Hansen, Southern Utah University; 
and Matt Gaffney, Missouri State University.
I want to give a special thank-you to the supplement 
­authors and subject matter experts including Shannon 
­Aucoin, the University of Louisiana at Lafayette; Edward 
Gullason, Dowling College; Peggy Dalton, Frostburg State 
University; Feng Yao, University of West Virginia; Frankie 
P. Albritton Jr., Seminole State University; ­Kenneth Wood-
ward, Saddleback College; and Paul Aaron Fisher, Henry 
Ford Community College. They all did an outstanding job.

x	
■ Preface ■
I’d also like to thank the economists who wrote the 
alternative perspective questions. These include Ann Mari 
May of the University of Nebraska–Lincoln, John Miller 
of Wheaton College, Dan Underwood of Peninsula College, 
Ric Holt of Southern Oregon University, and Bridget 
­Butkevich of George Mason University. I enjoyed working 
with each of them, and while their views often differed 
substantially, they were all united in wanting questions 
that showed economics as a pluralist field that encourages 
students to question the text from all perspectives.
I have hired numerous students to check aspects of the 
book, to read over my questions and answers to questions, 
and to help proofread. For this edition, these include 
Jenna Danielle ­Marotta, Andrew Pester, Christian Alex-
ander Schmitt, Trish Singh, and Santiago Navarro Roby. I 
thank them all.
A special thank-you for this edition goes to two peo-
ple. The first is Jenifer Gamber, whose role in the book 
cannot be overestimated. She helped me clarify its vision 
by providing research, critiquing expositions and often 
improving them, and being a good friend. She has an 
amazing set of skills, and I thank her for using them to 
improve the book. The second is Christina Kouvelis, who 
came into this project and with her hard work, dedication, 
and superb ability made it possible to get the book done 
on time. She and Jenifer are two amazing women.
Next, I want to thank the entire McGraw-Hill team, 
including James Heine, managing director; Katie 
­Hoenicke, senior brand manager; Christina Kouvelis, se-
nior product developer; Harvey Yep, project manager 
(core); Bruce Gin, project manager (assessment); Susan 
Gottfried, copyeditor; Peter deLissovoy, proofreader. 
­Egzon Shaqiri, designer; Virgil Lloyd, marketing man-
ager, Dave O’Donnell, marketing specialist, and Doug 
Ruby, director of digital content. All of them have done a 
superb job, for which I thank them sincerely.
Finally, I want to thank Pat, my wife, and my sons, 
Kasey and Zach, for helping me keep my work in per-
spective, and for providing a loving environment in which 
to work.

Distinguishing Features
Margin Comments
Located throughout the text in the margin, these key take-
aways underscore and summarize the importance of the 
material, at the same time helping students focus on the 
most relevant topics critical to their understanding.
Margin Questions
These self-test questions are presented in the margin of 
the chapter to enable students to determine whether the 
preceding material has been understood and to reinforce 
understanding before students read further. Answers to 
Margin Questions are found at the end of each chapter.
Web Notes
This feature extends the text discussion onto the web. 
Web Notes are housed within Connect and featured in 
SmartBook.
Podcasts
Written and recorded by Robert Guell of Indiana State 
University, more than 50 three- to five-minute audio clips 
delve deeper into the concepts. The audio clips are featured 
in SmartBook and are also housed within Connect.
Issues to Ponder
Each chapter ends with a set of Issues to Ponder questions 
that are designed to ­encourage additional economic think-
ing and application.
Questions from Alternative 
Perspectives
The end-of-chapter  material includes a number of ques-
tions that ask students to assess economics from alterna-
tive perspectives. Specifically, six different approaches 
are highlighted: Austrian, Post-Keynesian, Institutional-
ist, Radical, feminist, and religious. Below are brief 
­descriptions of each group.
Austrian Economists
Austrian economists believe in methodological individu-
alism, by which they mean that social goals are best met 
through voluntary, mutually beneficial interactions. Lack 
of information and unsolvable incentive problems under-
mine the ability of government to plan, making the mar-
ket the best method for coordinating economic activity. 
Austrian economists oppose state intrusion into private 
property and private activities. They are not economists 
from Austria; rather, they are economists from anywhere 
who follow the ideas of Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich 
Hayek, two economists who were from Austria.
Austrian economists are sometimes classified as con-
servative, but they are more appropriately classified as 
libertarians, who believe in liberty of individuals first and 
in other social goals second. Consistent with their views, 
they are often willing to support what are sometimes con-
sidered radical ideas, such as legalizing addictive drugs 
or eliminating our current monetary system—ideas that 
most mainstream economists would oppose. Austrian 
economists emphasize the uncertainty in the economy and 
the inability of a government controlled by self-interested 
politicians to undertake socially beneficial policy.
Institutionalist Economists
Institutionalist economists argue that any economic analy-
sis must involve specific considerations of institutions. The 
lineage of Institutionalist economics begins with the pio-
neering work of Thorstein Veblen, John R. Commons, and 
Wesley C. Mitchell. Veblen employed evolutionary analy-
sis to explore the role of institutions in directing and retard-
ing the economic process. He saw human behavior driven 
by cultural norms and conveyed the way in which they 
were with sardonic wit and penetrating insight, leaving us 
with enduring metaphors such as the leisure class and con-
spicuous consumption. Commons argued that institutions 
are social constructs that improve general welfare. Accord-
ingly, he established cooperative investigative programs to 
support pragmatic changes in the legal structure of govern-
ment. Mitchell was a leader in developing economics as an 
empirical study; he was a keen observer of the business 
cycle and argued that theory must be informed by system-
atic attention to empirical data, or it was useless.
xi

xii	
■ Preface ■
Contemporary Institutionalists employ the founders’ 
“trilogy”—empirically informed, evolutionary analysis, 
directed toward pragmatic alteration of institutions shap-
ing economic outcomes—in their policy approach.
Radical Economists
Radical economists believe substantial equality-preferring 
institutional changes should be implemented in our eco-
nomic system. Radical economists evolved out of Marxian 
economics. In their analysis, they focus on the lack of equity 
in our current economic system and on institutional changes 
that might bring about a more equitable system. Specifically, 
they see the current economic system as one in which a few 
people—capitalists and high-level managers—benefit enor-
mously at the expense of many people who struggle to make 
ends meet in jobs that are unfulfilling or who even go with-
out work at times. They see the fundamental instability and 
irrationality of the capitalist system at the root of a wide ar-
ray of social ills that range from pervasive inequality to 
alienation, racism, sexism, and imperialism. Radical econo-
mists often use a class-oriented analysis to address these is-
sues and are much more willing to talk about social conflict 
and tensions in our society than are mainstream economists.
A policy favored by many Radicals is the establish-
ment of worker cooperatives to replace the corporation. 
Radicals argue that such worker cooperatives would see 
that the income of the firm is more equitably allocated. 
Likewise, Radical economists endorse policies, such as 
universal health care insurance, that conform to the ethic 
of “putting people before profits.”
Feminist Economists
Feminist economics offers a substantive challenge to the 
content, scope, and methodology of mainstream econom-
ics. Feminist economists question the boundaries of what 
we consider economics to be and examine social arrange-
ments surrounding provisioning. Feminist economists 
have many different views, but all believe that in some 
way traditional economic analysis misses many important 
issues pertaining to women.
Feminist economists study issues such as how the in-
stitutional structure tends to direct women into certain 
types of jobs (generally low-paying jobs) and away from 
other types of jobs (generally high-paying jobs). They 
draw our attention to the unpaid labor performed by 
women throughout the world and ask, “What would GDP 
look like if women’s work were given a value and in-
cluded?” They argue for an expansion in the content of 
economics to include women as practitioners and as wor-
thy of study and for the elimination of the masculine bias 
in mainstream economics. Is there such a bias? To see it, 
simply compare the relative number of women in your 
economics class to the relative number of women at your 
school. It is highly likely that your class has relatively 
more men. Feminist economists want you to ask why that 
is, and whether anything should be done about it.
Religious Economists
Religion is the oldest and, arguably, the most influential in-
stitution in the world—be it Christianity, Islam, Judaism, 
Buddhism, Hinduism, or any of the many other religions in 
the world. Modern science, of which economics is a part, 
emphasizes the rational elements of thought. It attempts to 
separate faith and normative issues from rational analysis in 
ways that some religiously oriented economists find ques-
tionable. The line between a religious and non-religious 
economist is not hard and fast; all economists bring ele-
ments of their ethical considerations into their analysis. But 
those we call “religious economists” integrate the ethical 
and normative issues into economic analysis in more com-
plex ways than the ways presented in the text.
Religiously oriented economists have a diversity of 
views; some believe that their views can be integrated 
reasonably well into standard economics, while others 
see the need for the development of a distinctive faith-
based methodology that focuses on a particular group of 
normative concerns centered on issues such as human 
dignity and caring for the poor.
Post-Keynesian Economists
Post-Keynesian economists believe that uncertainty is a 
central issue in economics. They follow J. M. Keynes’ ap-
proach more so than do mainstream economists in em-
phasizing institutional imperfections in the economy and 
the importance of fundamental uncertainty that rational-
ity cannot deal with. They agree with Institutionalists that 
the study of economics must emphasize and incorporate 
the importance of social and political structure in deter-
mining market outcomes.
While their view about the importance of uncertainty 
is similar to the Austrian view, their policy response to 
that uncertainty is quite different. They do not see uncer-
tainty as eliminating much of government’s role in the 
economy; instead, they see it leading to policies in which 
government takes a larger role in guiding the economy.

Supplements
McGraw-Hill has established a strong history of top-rate 
supplements to accompany this text, and this tenth edition 
strives to carry on the tradition of excellence. The follow-
ing ancillaries are available for quick download and con-
venient access via the Instructor Resource material 
available through McGraw-Hill Connect®.
Solutions Manual
Prepared by Jenifer Gamber and me, this manual provides 
answers to all end-of-chapter questions—the Questions 
and Exercises, Questions from Alternative Perspectives, 
and Issues to Ponder.
Test Banks
The test bank contains thousands of unique quality multi-
ple choice and true-false questions for instructors to draw 
from in their classrooms. Jenifer Gamber and I have 
worked diligently to make sure that the questions are clear 
and useful. Each question is categorized by learning ob-
jective, level of difficulty, economic concept, AACSB 
learning categories, and Bloom’s Taxonomy objectives. 
Questions were reviewed by professors and students alike 
to ensure that each one was effective for classroom use. 
All of the test bank content is available for assigning 
within Connect and EZ Test. An essay only test bank, 
­organized by chapter, will be available via the Instructor 
Resource material available within Connect.
PowerPoint Presentations
Shannon Aucoin of the University of Louisiana at Lafay-
ette and Edward Gullason of Dowling College worked 
tirelessly to revise the PowerPoint slide program, animat-
ing graphs and emphasizing important concepts. Each 
chapter has been scrutinized to ensure an accurate, direct 
connection to the text.
Problem Sets
Additional problems sets accompany each chapter, which 
can be assigned to students either for practice or assess-
ment. They are also included as extra assessment content 
available within Connect.
Study Guide
A traditional print study guide—written by Jenifer Gam-
ber and me—­is available through direct order. It provides 
a wide range of activities and questions (with answers 
and explanations) that review the central concepts of each 
chapter. Split versions of the study guide are available 
and can be packaged with this text. You can also custom-
ize the study guide to suit your course needs on Create, 
McGraw-Hill’s custom publishing platform.
Assurance of Learning Ready
Many educational institutions today are focused on the 
notion of assurance of learning, an important element of 
some accreditation standards. Microeconomics, 10/e is 
designed specifically to support your assurance of learn-
ing initiatives with a simple yet powerful solution.
Instructors can use Connect to easily query for learn-
ing outcomes/objectives that directly relate to the learning 
objectives of the course. You can then use the reporting 
features of Connect to aggregate student results in similar 
fashion, making the collection and presentation of assur-
ance of learning data simple and easy.
AACSB Statement
McGraw-Hill Global Education is a proud corporate 
member of AACSB International. Understanding the im-
portance and value of AACSB accreditation, the author 
of Microeconomics, 10/e, has sought to recognize the 
curricula guidelines detailed in the AACSB standards for 
business accreditation by connecting questions in the test 
bank and end-of-chapter material to the general knowl-
edge and skill guidelines found in the AACSB standards.
It is important to note that the statements contained in 
Microeconomics, 10/e are provided only as a guide for the 
users of this text. The AACSB leaves content coverage 
and assessment within the purview of individual schools, 
the mission of the school, and the faculty. While Micro-
economics, 10/e and the teaching package make no claim 
of any specific AACSB qualification or evaluation, we 
have within Microeconomics, 10/e labeled selected ques-
tions according to the general knowledge and skills areas.
McGraw-Hill Customer Care  
Contact Information
At McGraw-Hill, we understand that getting the most 
from new technology can be challenging. That’s why our 
services don’t stop after you purchase our products. You 
can e-mail our Product Specialists 24 hours a day to get 
product-training online. Or you can search our knowledge 
bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support web-
site. For Customer Support, call 800-331-5094 or visit 
www.mhhe.com/support. One of our Technical Support 
Analysts will be able to assist you in a timely fashion.

Required=Results
®
McGraw-Hill Connect®		
 
Learn Without Limits
Connect is a teaching and learning platform that is proven 
to deliver better results for students and instructors.
Connect empowers students by continually adapting to deliver 
precisely what they need, when they need it, and how they 
need it, so your class time is more engaging and effective.
Mobile
Connect Insight®	
Connect Insight is Connect’s new one-of-a-kind visual 
analytics dashboard—now available for both instructors and 
students—that provides at-a-glance information regarding 
student performance, which is immediately actionable. By presenting 
assignment, assessment, and topical performance results together with a time 
metric that is easily visible for aggregate or individual results, Connect Insight 
gives the user the ability to take a just-in-time approach to teaching and 
learning, which was never before available. Connect Insight presents data that 
empowers students and helps instructors improve class performance in a way 
that is efficient and effective.
88% of instructors who use Connect 
require it; instructor satisfaction increases 
by 38% when Connect is required.
Students can view  
their results for any 
Connect course.
Analytics
 Using Connect improves passing rates 
by 10.8% and retention by 16.4%.
Connect’s new, intuitive mobile interface gives students and instructors 
flexible and convenient, anytime–anywhere access to all components of 
the Connect platform.
©Getty Images/iStockphoto 

SmartBook®  
Proven to help students improve grades and study more 
efficiently, SmartBook contains the same content within 
the print book, but actively tailors that content to the 
needs of the individual. SmartBook’s adaptive technology 
provides precise, personalized instruction on what the 
student should do next, guiding the student to master and 
remember key concepts, targeting gaps in knowledge and 
offering customized feedback, driving the student toward 
comprehension and retention of the subject matter. 
Available on smartphones and tablets, SmartBook puts 
learning at the student’s fingertips—anywhere, anytime.
Adaptive
Over 4 billion questions have been 
answered making McGraw-Hill 
Education products more intelligent, 
reliable & precise.
THE FIRST AND ONLY  
ADAPTIVE READING 
EXPERIENCE DESIGNED  
TO TRANSFORM THE  
WAY STUDENTS READ
More students earn A’s and  
B’s when they use McGraw-Hill 
Education Adaptive products.
www.mheducation.com
©Getty Images/iStockphoto 


xvii
PART I  INTRODUCTION: THINKING 
LIKE AN ECONOMIST
I	
	
Economics and Economic Reasoning  4
2	 	
The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and 
Globalization  24
	
Appendix: Graphish: The Language of Graphs  42
3	 	
Economic Institutions  51
	
Appendix: The History of Economic Systems  71
4	 	
Supply and Demand  77
5	 	
Using Supply and Demand  100
Appendix: Algebraic Representation of Supply, 
Demand, and Equilibrium  116
PART II  MICROECONOMICS
I	
	 THE POWER OF TRADITIONAL  
ECONOMIC MODELS
6	 	
Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities  122
7	
	
Taxation and Government Intervention  142
8	 	
Market Failure versus Government Failure  162
8W		
Politics and Economics: The Case of Agricultural 
Markets  183 and 8W-1
II	 	 INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC  
POLICY ISSUES
9	 	
Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and 
Globalization  184
10	 	
International Trade Policy  203
III	 	 PRODUCTION AND COST ANALYSIS
11	 	
Production and Cost Analysis I  224
12	 	
Production and Cost Analysis II  243
Appendix: Isocost/Isoquant Analysis  260
Brief Contents
IV	 	 MARKET STRUCTURE
13	 	
Perfect Competition  265
14	 	
Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition  285
Appendix: The Algebra of Competitive and 
Monopolistic Firms  310
15	 	
Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy  312
16	 	 Real-World Competition and Technology  331
V	 FACTOR MARKETS
17	 	
Work and the Labor Market  351
Appendix: Derived Demand  375
17W	 Nonwage and Asset Income: Rents, Profits, and 
Interest  381 and 17W-1
18	 	
Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income  382
VI	 	 CHOICE AND DECISION MAKING
19	 	
The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of 
Supply and Demand  407
Appendix: Indifference Curve Analysis  427
20		
Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and 
Behavioral Economics  432
Appendix: Game Theory and Oligopoly  452
VII		 MODERN ECONOMIC THINKING
21	 	
Thinking Like a Modern Economist  457
22		
Behavioral Economics and Modern Economic 
Policy  483
23		
Microeconomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and 
Beyond  501


xix
Contents
Globalization and the Law of One Price  34
Globalization  34
Exchange Rates and Comparative Advantage  36
The Law of One Price  37
Globalization and the Timing of Benefits  
of Trade  37
Conclusion  38
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  38–41
Appendix: Graphish: The Language of Graphs  42
3	 	Economic Institutions  51
Economic Systems  52
How Markets Work  52
What’s Good about the Market?  53
Capitalism and Socialism  53
Economic Institutions in a Market Economy  55
Business  56
Households  59
The Roles of Government  61
Government as an Actor  61
Government as a Referee  62
Specific Roles for Government  63
Market Failures and Government Failures  65
Global Institutions  66
Global Corporations  66
Coordinating Global Issues  66
Conclusion  67
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  68–71
Appendix: The History of Economic Systems  71
4	 	Supply and Demand  77
Demand  77
The Law of Demand  78
The Demand Curve  78
PART I
INTRODUCTION: THINKING LIKE  
AN ECONOMIST
1	 	Economics and Economic Reasoning  4
What Economics Is  4
Scarcity  5
Microeconomics and Macroeconomics  5
A Guide to Economic Reasoning  6
Marginal Costs and Marginal Benefits  7
The Economic Decision Rule  8
Economics and Passion  8
Opportunity Cost  9
Economic Forces, Social Forces, and Political Forces  11
Economic and Market Forces  11
Social and Political Forces  11
Using Economic Insights  13
The Invisible Hand Theorem  14
Economic Theory and Stories  15
Economic Institutions  15
Economic Policy Options  16
Objective Policy Analysis  17
Policy and Social and Political Forces  19
Conclusion  19
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  20–23
2	 	The Production Possibility Model, Trade, 
and Globalization  24
The Production Possibilities Model  24
A Production Possibility Curve for an Individual  24
Increasing Opportunity Costs of the Trade-off  25
Comparative Advantage  27
Efficiency  28
Distribution and Productive Efficiency  28
Examples of Shifts in the PPC  30
Trade and Comparative Advantage  30
Markets, Specialization, and Growth  37
The Benefits of Trade  37

xx	
■ Contents ■
PART II
MICROECONOMICS
SECTION I
THE POWER OF TRADITIONAL ECONOMIC 
MODELS
6	 	Describing Supply and Demand: 
Elasticities  122
Price Elasticity  122
What Information Price Elasticity Provides  123
Classifying Demand and Supply as Elastic or  
Inelastic  123
Elasticity Is Independent of Units  123
Calculating Elasticities  124
Other Examples  126
Elasticity Is Not the Same as Slope  126
Five Terms to Describe Elasticity  128
Substitution and Elasticity  128
Substitution and Demand  129
How Substitution Factors Affect Specific Decisions  130
Elasticity, Total Revenue, and Demand  131
Total Revenue along a Demand Curve  132
Income and Cross-Price Elasticity  133
Income Elasticity of Demand  133
Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand  134
Some Examples  135
The Power of Supply/Demand Analysis  136
When Should a Supplier Not Raise Price?  136
Elasticity and Shifting Supply and Demand  137
Conclusion  137
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  138–141
7	 	Taxation and Government 
Intervention  142
Producer and Consumer Surplus  142
Burden of Taxation  144
Who Bears the Burden of a Tax?  146
Tax Incidence and Current Policy Debates  148
Government Intervention as Implicit Taxation  150
Price Ceilings and Floors  150
The Difference between Taxes and Price Controls  151
Shifts in Demand versus Movements along a  
Demand Curve  79
Some Shift Factors of Demand  80
The Demand Table  81
From a Demand Table to a Demand Curve  81
Individual and Market Demand Curves  82
Supply  84
The Law of Supply  84
The Supply Curve  85
Shifts in Supply versus Movements along a  
Supply Curve  85
Shift Factors of Supply  86
The Supply Table  87
From a Supply Table to a Supply Curve  87
Individual and Market Supply Curves  87
The Interaction of Supply and Demand  88
Equilibrium  89
The Graphical Interaction of Supply  
and Demand  90
What Equilibrium Isn’t  90
Political and Social Forces and Equilibrium  91
Shifts in Supply and Demand  92
A Limitation of Supply/Demand Analysis  94
Conclusion  94
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  95–99
	 5	Using Supply and Demand  100
Real-World Supply and Demand Applications  100
Government Intervention: Price Ceilings and  
Price Floors  103
Price Ceilings  103
Price Floors  105
Government Intervention: Excise Taxes  
and Tariffs  107
Government Intervention: Quantity  
Restrictions  108
Third-Party-Payer Markets  110
Conclusion  111
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  111–115
Appendix: Algebraic Representation of Supply, Demand, 
and Equilibrium  116

	
■ Contents ■	
xxi
Economics, Politics, and Real-World Policies  8W-10
Interest Groups  8W-10
International Issues  8W-11
Conclusion  8W-12
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  8W-12–8W-15
SECTION II
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC  
POLICY ISSUES
9	 	Comparative Advantage, Exchange 
Rates, and Globalization  184
The Principle of Comparative Advantage  184
The Gains from Trade  184
Dividing Up the Gains from Trade  186
Why Economists and Laypeople Differ in Their Views 
of Trade  188
Gains Are Often Stealth  188
Opportunity Cost Is Relative  188
Trade Is Broader Than Manufactured Goods  188
Trade Has Distributional Effects  189
Sources of U.S. Comparative Advantage  190
Some Concerns about the Future  192
Inherent and Transferable Sources of  
Comparative Advantages  192
The Law of One Price  192
How the United States Gained and Is Now Losing Sources 
of Comparative Advantage  193
Methods of Equalizing Trade Balances  193
Determination of Exchange Rates and Trade  194
Exchange Rates and Trade  196
Some Complications in Exchange Rates  197
Conclusion  198
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  198–202
10	International Trade Policy  203
The Nature and Patterns of Trade  203
Increasing but Fluctuating World Trade  203
Differences in the Importance of Trade  203
What and with Whom the United States Trades  204
Debtor and Creditor Nations  206
Varieties of Trade Restrictions  208
Tariffs and Quotas  208
Voluntary Restraint Agreements  210
Rent Seeking, Politics, and Elasticities  151
Inelastic Demand and Incentives to Restrict Supply  153
Inelastic Supplies and Incentives to Restrict Prices  154
The Long-Run/Short-Run Problem of Price Controls  154
Conclusion  157
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  157–161
8	 	Market Failure versus Government 
Failure  162
Externalities  162
A Negative Externality Example  164
A Positive Externality Example  165
Alternative Methods of Dealing with Externalities  165
Direct Regulation  165
Incentive Policies  166
Voluntary Reductions  168
The Optimal Policy  168
Public Goods  169
The Market Value of a Public Good  169
Excludability and the Costs of Pricing  171
Informational and Moral Hazard Problems  172
Signaling and Screening  173
Policies to Deal with Informational Problems  173
Government Failure and Market Failures  176
Conclusion  178
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  178–182
8W  Politics and Economics: The Case of 
Agricultural Markets  183 and 8W-1
The Good/Bad Paradox in Agriculture  8W-2
The Long-Run Decline of Farming  8W-2
The Short-Run Cyclical Problem Facing Farmers  8W-3
The Difficulty of Coordinating Farm Production  8W-4
Ways around the Good/Bad Paradox  8W-4
The General Rule of Political Economy  8W-4
Four Price Support Options  8W-5
Supporting the Price by Regulatory Measures  8W-6
Providing Economic Incentives to Reduce Supply  8W-8
Subsidizing the Sale of the Good  8W-8
Buying Up and Storing, Giving Away, or Destroying  
the Good  8W-9
Which Group Prefers Which Option?  8W-9

xxii	
■ Contents ■
12		Production and Cost Analysis II  243
Technical Efficiency and Economic Efficiency  243
The Shape of the Long-Run Cost Curve  244
Economies of Scale  244
Diseconomies of Scale  246
Constant Returns to Scale  248
The Importance of Economies and  
Diseconomies of Scale  248
Envelope Relationship  248
Entrepreneurial Activity and the Supply Decision  250
Using Cost Analysis in the Real World  251
Economies of Scope  251
Learning by Doing and Technological Change  252
Many Dimensions  255
Unmeasured Costs  255
The Standard Model as a Framework  256
Conclusion  256
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  257–260
Appendix: Isocost/Isoquant Analysis  260
SECTION IV
MARKET STRUCTURE
13		Perfect Competition  265
Perfect Competition as a Reference Point  265
Conditions for Perfect Competition  265
Demand Curves for the Firm and the Industry  266
The Profit-Maximizing Level of Output  266
Marginal Revenue  267
Marginal Cost  267
Profit Maximization: MC = MR  268
The Marginal Cost Curve Is the Supply Curve  269
Firms Maximize Total Profit  270
Total Profit at the Profit-Maximizing Level of 
Output  271
Determining Profit from a Table of Costs and 
Revenue  271
Determining Profit from a Graph  272
The Shutdown Point  274
Short-Run Market Supply and Demand  275
Long-Run Competitive Equilibrium: Zero Profit  275
Adjustment from the Short Run to the Long Run  277
An Increase in Demand  277
Long-Run Market Supply  278
An Example in the Real World  279
Embargoes  210
Regulatory Trade Restrictions  211
Nationalistic Appeals and “Buy Domestic”  
Requirements  211
Reasons for Trade Restrictions  211
Unequal Internal Distribution of the  
Gains from Trade  212
Haggling by Companies over the  
Gains from Trade  213
Haggling by Countries over Trade Restrictions  214
Specialized Production  214
Macroeconomic Costs of Trade  216
National Security  216
International Politics  216
Increased Revenue Brought in by Tariffs  217
Why Economists Generally Oppose  
Trade Restrictions  217
Institutions Supporting Free Trade  218
Conclusion  220
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  221–223
SECTION III
PRODUCTION AND COST ANALYSIS
11		Production and Cost Analysis I  224
The Role of the Firm  225
Firms Maximize Profit  225
The Difference between Economists’ Profits and 
Accountants’ Profits  225
The Production Process  227
The Long Run and the Short Run  228
Production Tables and Production Functions  228
The Law of Diminishing Marginal Productivity  229
The Costs of Production  230
Fixed Costs, Variable Costs, and Total Costs  230
Average Costs  231
Marginal Cost  232
Graphing Cost Curves  233
Total Cost Curves  233
Average and Marginal Cost Curves  234
Intermission  237
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  238–242

	
■ Contents ■	
xxiii
Empirical Measures of Industry Structure  319
Conglomerate Firms and Bigness  320
Oligopoly Models and Empirical Estimates of Market 
Structure  320
Antitrust Policy  321
Judgment by Performance or Structure?  321
Standard Oil: Judging Market Competitiveness by 
Performance  322
The ALCOA Case: Judging Market Competitiveness by 
Structure  322
Judging Markets by Structure and Performance: The 
Reality  322
The Role of Antitrust in Today’s Economy  324
Assessment of U.S. Antitrust Policy  326
Conclusion  326
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  327–330
16		Real-World Competition and 
Technology  331
The Goals of Real-World Firms and the Monitoring 
Problem  332
Short-Run versus Long-Run Profit  332
The Problem with Profit Maximization  332
What Do Real-World Firms Maximize?  334
The Lazy Monopolist and X-Inefficiency  335
The Fight between Competitive and Monopolistic 
Forces  337
How Monopolistic Forces Affect Perfect Competition  337
Economic Insights and Real-World Competition  338
How Competitive Forces Affect Monopoly  338
Competition and Natural Monopoly  339
How Firms Protect Their Monopolies  341
Cost/Benefit Analysis of Creating and Maintaining 
Monopolies  341
Establishing Market Position  342
Technology, Efficiency, and Market Structure  343
Perfect Competition and Technology  343
Monopolistic Competition and Technology  344
Monopoly and Technology  344
Oligopoly and Technology  344
Network Externalities, Standards, and Technological 
Lock-In  345
Conclusion  346
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  347–350
Conclusion  280
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  280–284
14		Monopoly and Monopolistic 
Competition  285
The Key Difference between a Monopolist and a Perfect 
Competitor  285
A Model of Monopoly  286
Determining the Monopolist’s Price and Output 
Numerically  286
Determining Price and Output Graphically  287
Comparing Monopoly and Perfect Competition  289
An Example of Finding Output and Price  289
Profits and Monopoly  290
Welfare Loss from Monopoly  292
The Normal Monopolist  292
The Price-Discriminating Monopolist  293
Barriers to Entry and Monopoly  294
Natural Ability  296
Natural Monopolies  296
Government-Created Monopolies  298
Government Policy and Monopoly: AIDS Drugs  298
Monopolistic Competition  299
Characteristics of Monopolistic Competition  299
Advertising and Monopolistic Competition  301
Output, Price, and Profit of a Monopolistic 
Competitor  302
Comparing Monopoly, Monopolistic Competition and 
Perfect Competition  303
Conclusion  304
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  305–310
Appendix: The Algebra of Competitive and Monopolistic 
Firms  310
15		Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy  312
The Distinguishing Characteristics of Oligopoly  312
Models of Oligopoly Behavior  313
The Cartel Model  313
The Contestable Market Model  315
Comparison of the Contestable Market Model and the 
Cartel Model  316
Classifying Industries and Markets in Practice  317
The North American Industry Classification System  317

xxiv	
■ Contents ■
The Marginal Productivity Theory of Income 
Distribution  17W-11
Conclusion  17W-12
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  17W-12–17W-14
18		Who Gets What? The Distribution of 
Income  382
Measuring the Distribution of Income, Wealth, and 
Poverty  383
The Lorenz Curve  383
U.S. Income Distribution over Time  384
Defining Poverty  386
International Dimensions of Income Inequality  389
The Distribution of Wealth  391
Socioeconomic Dimensions of Income and Wealth 
Inequality  392
Income Distribution According to Socioeconomic 
Characteristics  392
Income Distribution According to Class  393
Income Distribution and Fairness  395
Philosophical Debates about Equality and Fairness  395
Fairness and Equality  396
Fairness as Equality of Opportunity  396
The Problems of Redistributing Income  397
Three Important Side Effects of Redistributive 
Programs  397
Politics, Income Redistribution, and Fairness  398
Income Redistribution Policies  398
How Successful Have Income Redistribution  
Programs Been?  402
Conclusion  403
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  403–406
SECTION VI
CHOICE AND DECISION MAKING
19		The Logic of Individual Choice: The 
Foundation of Supply and Demand  407
Rational Choice Theory  407
Total Utility and Marginal Utility  408
Diminishing Marginal Utility  410
Rational Choice and Marginal Utility  410
SECTION V
FACTOR MARKETS
17		Work and the Labor Market  351
The Supply of Labor  352
Real Wages and the Opportunity Cost of Work  353
The Supply of Labor and Nonmarket Activities  353
Income Taxation, Work, and Leisure  354
The Elasticity of the Supply of Labor  355
Immigration and the International Supply of Labor  356
The Derived Demand for Labor  356
Factors Influencing the Elasticity of Demand for 
Labor  357
Labor as a Factor of Production  357
Shift Factors of Demand  357
Determination of Wages  360
Imperfect Competition and the Labor Market  361
Political and Social Forces and the Labor Market  362
Fairness and the Labor Market  363
Discrimination and the Labor Market  364
Three Types of Direct Demand-Side Discrimination  365
Institutional Discrimination  366
The Evolution of Labor Markets  367
Evolving Labor Laws  367
Unions and Collective Bargaining  368
The Labor Market and You  369
Conclusion  370
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  371–374
Appendix: Derived Demand  375
	17W  Nonwage and Asset Income: Rents, 
Profits, and Interest  381 and 17W-1
Rent  17W-2
The Effect of a Tax on Land  17W-3
Quasi Rents  17W-4
Rent Seeking and Institutional Constraints  17W-5
Profit  17W-6
Profit, Entrepreneurship, and Disequilibrium 
Adjustment  17W-6
Market Niches, Profit, and Rent  17W-6
Interest  17W-7
The Present Value Formula  17W-8
Some Rules of Thumb for Determining Present  
Value  17W-8
The Importance of Present Value  17W-10

	
■ Contents ■	
xxv
SECTION VII
MODERN ECONOMIC THINKING
	21	Thinking Like a Modern Economist  457
The Nature of Economists’ Models  458
Scientific and Engineering Models  459
Behavioral and Traditional Building Blocks  459
Behavioral Economic Models  459
The Advantages and Disadvantages of Modern Traditional 
and Behavioral Models  462
Behavioral and Traditional Informal (Heuristic) 
Models  464
The Armchair Economist: Heuristic Models Using 
Traditional Building Blocks  464
The Economic Naturalist: Heuristic Models Using 
Behavioral Building Blocks  467
The Limits of Heuristic Models  468
Empirical and Formal Models  469
The Importance of Empirical Work in Modern 
Economics  469
The Role of Formal Models  472
What Difference Does All This Make to Policy?  478
Conclusion  479
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  479–482
	22	Behavioral Economics and Modern 
Economic Policy  483
Behavioral Economic Policy in Perspective  483
Behavioral Economics and Economic Engineering  483
Economists as Mechanism Design Engineers  484
Behavioral Economics and Mechanism Design  486
Policy Implications of Traditional Economics  487
Choice Architecture and Behavioral Economic 
Policy  488
Nudge Policy and Libertarian Paternalism  489
When Are Nudges Needed?  490
Two Types of Nudges  491
The Problems of Implementing Nudges  492
Distinguishing a Nudge from a Push  493
Behavioral and Traditional Economic Policy Frames  494
Concerns about Behavioral Economic Policies  495
Few Policies Meet Libertarian Paternalism Criterion  495
Designing Helpful Policies Is Complicated  495
It Isn’t Clear Government Knows Better  496
Maximizing Utility and Equilibrium  412
An Example of Maximizing Utility  413
Extending the Principle of Rational Choice  414
Rational Choice and the Laws of Demand and 
Supply  415
The Law of Demand  415
Income and Substitution Effects  416
The Law of Supply  417
Opportunity Cost  418
Applying Economists’ Theory of Choice to the  
Real World  418
The Cost of Decision Making  418
Given Tastes  419
Utility Maximization  421
Conclusion  422
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  423–426
Appendix: Indifference Curve Analysis  427
20	Game Theory, Strategic Decision  
Making, and Behavioral Economics  432
Game Theory and the Economic Way of Thinking  432
Game Theory and Economic Modeling  433
The Game Theory Framework  433
The Prisoner’s Dilemma  434
Dominant Strategies and Nash Equilibrium  436
An Overview of Game Theory as a Tool in Studying 
Strategic Interaction  437
Some Specific Games  438
Strategies of Players  438
Informal Game Theory and Modern Behavioral 
Economics  441
Informal Game Theory  442
Real-World Applications of Informal Game Theory  443
An Application of Game Theory: Auction Markets  445
Game Theory and the Challenge to Standard Economic 
Assumptions  445
Fairness  446
Endowment Effects  446
Framing Effects  446
Behavioral Economics and the Traditional Model  447
The Importance of the Traditional Model: Money Is Not 
Left on the Table  447
Conclusion  448
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  448–452
Appendix: Game Theory and Oligopoly  452

xxvi	
■ Contents ■
Putting Cost/Benefit Analysis in Perspective  507
The Problem of Other Things Changing  508
The Cost/Benefit Approach in Context  508
Failure of Market Outcomes  509
Distribution  509
Consumer Sovereignty and Rationality Problems  511
Inalienable Rights  512
Government Failure  514
Conclusion  515
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  516–519
Glossary  G
Colloquial Glossary  CG
Index  IND-1
Government Policy May Make the Situation Worse  496
A Changing View of Economists: From Pro-market 
Advocates to Economic Engineers  497
Conclusion  497
Summary, Key Terms, Questions and Exercises, Questions 
from Alternative Perspectives, Issues to Ponder, Answers to 
Margin Questions  498–500
	23	Microeconomic Policy, Economic 
Reasoning, and Beyond  501
Economists’ Differing Views about Social Policy  502
How Economists’ Value Judgments Creep into Policy 
Proposals  502
The Need for a Worldview  503
Agreement among Economists about Social Policy  504
Economists’ Cost/Benefit Approach to Government 
Regulation  504
The Value of Life  505
Comparing Costs and Benefits of Different 
Dimensions  507

xxvii
List of Boxes
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Winston Churchill and Lady Astor  12
Economists and Market Solutions  16
Economics and Climate Change  18
Made in China?  35
Who Are the 1%?  60
Uber, Lyft, and Taxi Pricing  109
Empirically Measuring Elasticities  134
College Newspaper Editors Should Take More 
Economics  149
The Excess Burden of a Draft  152
Climate Change, Global Warming, and  
Economic Policy  177
The Cost of a Box of Wheaties  8W-2
Changes in U.S. Agricultural Policy  8W-11
Hormones and Economics  212
The Antiglobalization Forces  215
Transaction Costs and the Internet  226
Changing Technology in Automobile Production  245
Travels of a T-Shirt and Economies of Scale  247
Holacracy, Diseconomies of Scale, and Zappos  248
Why Are Textbooks So Long?  250
The Internet and the Perfectly  
Competitive Model  268
The Shutdown Decision and the  
Relevant Costs  278
Walmart, State Laws, and Competition  323
Nefarious Business Practices  325
Why Are CEOs Paid So Much?  334
Branding  342
From Welfare to Work  402
What Game Is Being Played?  441
Can You Explain Landsburg’s Provocative Insights?  466
Can You Explain Frank’s Observations?  468
Markets as Information-Gathering Mechanisms  486
Economists in the Courtroom  506
Where to Locate Polluting Industries  513
ADDED DIMENSION
Economic Knowledge in One Sentence: TANSTAAFL  7
Economics in Perspective  10
Choices in Context: Decision Trees  29
The Developing Country’s Perspective on Globalization  36
Tradition and Today’s Economy  54
Our International Competitors  65
The Supply and Demand for Children  93
Geometric Tricks for Estimating Price Elasticity  129
The Ambiguity of Total Surplus  144
Pareto Optimality and the Perfectly Competitive 
Benchmark  163
Common Resources and the Tragedy of the Commons  166
Licensure and Surgery  175
International Issues in Perspective  207
Dumping  219
Value Added and the Calculation of Total Production  227
A Trick in Graphing the Marginal Revenue Curve  288
Can Price Controls Increase Output and  
Lower Market Price?  295
Monopolizing Monopoly  297
Normative Views of Monopoly  298
Who Controls Corporations?  333
Other Factors of Production  352
Income and Substitution Effects  354
Nonwage Income and Property Rights  363
Democracy in the Workplace  365
The Gini Coefficient  388
What Should Be the Goal of Economic Policy?  397
Making Stupid Decisions  421
Game Theory and Experimental Economics  439
The Segregation Game and Agent-Based Modeling  443
Neuroeconomics and Microeconomics  463
Karl Marx and Shove Policy  495
Economic Efficiency and the Goals of Society  510
Elasticity and Taxation to Change Behavior  512
The Conventional Policy Wisdom among Economists  515

xxviii	
■ List of Boxes ■
The Austan Goolsbee Check-a-Box Method for Finding 
Dominant Strategies and Nash Equilibria  437
Modern Traditional and Behavioral Economists  476
THINKING LIKE A MODERN ECONOMIST
Why Do So Many Prices End in 99 Cents?  128
How to Get Students to Be Responsible  156
What “Goods” Do Firms Produce? The Costs of  
Producing Image  232
Social Norms and Production  252
Profit Maximization and Real-World Firms  273
The Traditional Models as Stepping Stones  408
Mental Accounting  419
A REMINDER
Production Possibility Curves  28
Inverse and Direct Relationships  44
Six Things to Remember about a Demand Curve  84
Six Things to Remember about a Supply Curve  89
Supply and Demand in Action  102
A Review of Various Elasticity Terms  136
What Goods Should Be Taxed?  146
A Review of Costs  238
Finding Output, Price, and Profit  276
A Summary of a Perfectly Competitive Industry  279
Finding a Monopolist’s Output, Price, and Profit  291
A Comparison of Various Market Structures  318
Choices at the Margin  415



Microeconomics



PART I
	CHAPTER 1	
Economics and Economic Reasoning
	CHAPTER 2	
The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization
	CHAPTER 3	
Economic Institutions
	CHAPTER 4	
Supply and Demand
	CHAPTER 5	
Using Supply and Demand
Introduction: 
Thinking Like an Economist

P
art I is an introduction, and an introduction to an 
introduction seems a little funny. But other sec-
tions have introductions, so it seemed a little 
funny not to have an introduction to Part I; and besides, as 
you will see, I’m a little funny myself (which, in turn, has 
two interpretations; I’m sure you will decide which of the 
two is appropriate). It will, however, be a very brief intro-
duction, consisting of questions you may have had and 
some answers to those questions.
Some Questions and Answers
Why study economics?
Because it’s neat and interesting and helps provide insight 
into events that are constantly going on around you.
Why is this book so big?
Because there’s a lot of important information in it and 
because the book is designed so your teacher can pick and 
choose. You’ll likely not be required to read all of it, 
especially if you’re on the quarter system. But once you 
start it, you’ll probably read it all anyhow. (Would you 
believe?)
Why does this book cost so much?
To answer this question, you’ll have to read the book.
Will this book make me rich?
No.
Will this book make me happy?
It depends.
This book doesn’t seem to be written in a normal textbook 
style. Is this book really written by a professor?
Yes, but he is different. He misspent his youth working 
on cars; he married his high school sweetheart after they 
met again at their 20th high school reunion, and they re-
main happily married today, still totally in love. Twenty-
five years after graduating from high school, his wife 
went back to medical school and got her MD because she 
was tired of being treated poorly by doctors. Their five 
kids make sure he doesn’t get carried away in the profes-
sorial cloud.
Will the entire book be like this?
No, the introduction is just trying to rope you in. Much of 
the book will be hard going. Learning happens to be a 
difficult process: no pain, no gain. But the author isn’t a 
sadist; he tries to make learning as pleasantly painful as 
possible.
What do the author’s students think of him?
Weird, definitely weird—and hard. But fair, interesting, 
and sincerely interested in getting us to learn. (Answer 
written by his students.)
	
So there you have it. Answers to the questions that 
you might never have thought of if they hadn’t been put 
in front of you. I hope they give you a sense of me and 
the approach I’ll use in the book. There are some neat 
ideas in it. Let’s now briefly consider what’s in the first 
five chapters.
A Survey of the  
First Five Chapters
This first section is really an introduction to the rest of the 
book. It gives you the background necessary so that the 
later chapters make sense. Chapter 1 gives you an over-
view of the entire field of economics as well as an intro-
duction to my style. Chapter 2 focuses on the production 
possibility curve, comparative advantage, and trade. It 
explains how trade increases production possibilities but 
also why, in the real world, free trade and no government 
regulation may not be the best policy. Chapter 3 gives you 
some history of economic systems and introduces you to 
the institutions of the U.S. economy. Chapters 4 and 5 
introduce you to supply and demand, and show you 
not only the power of those two concepts but also the 
limitations.
	
Now let’s get on with the show.

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO1-1	 Define economics and identify 
its components.
LO1-2	 Discuss various ways in which 
economists use economic 
reasoning.
LO1-3	 Explain real-world events in 
terms of economic forces, social 
forces, and political forces.
LO1-4	 Explain how economic insights 
are developed and used.
LO1-5	 Distinguish among positive 
economics, normative 
economics, and the art  
of economics.
“
”
When an artist looks at the world, he sees color. When a musician 
looks at the world, she hears music. When an economist looks at the world, 
she sees a symphony of costs and benefits. The economist’s world might 
not be as colorful or as melodic as the others’ worlds, but it’s more practi-
cal. If you want to understand what’s going on in the world that’s really out 
there, you need to know economics.
I hardly have to convince you of this fact if you keep up with the news. 
You will be bombarded with stories of unemployment, interest rates, how 
commodity prices are changing, and how businesses are doing. The list is 
endless. So let’s say you grant me that economics is important. That still 
doesn’t mean that it’s worth studying. The real question then is: How much 
will you learn? Most of what you learn depends on you, but part depends 
on the teacher and another part depends on the textbook. On both these 
counts, you’re in luck; since your teacher chose this book for your course, 
you must have a super teacher.1
What Economics Is
Economics is the study of how human beings coordinate their wants and desires, 
given the decision-making mechanisms, social customs, and political realities 
of the society. One of the key words in the definition of the term “economics” 
is coordination. Coordination can mean many things. In the study of economics, 
In my vacations, I visited the poorest quarters of 
several cities and walked through one street after 
another, looking at the faces of the poorest people. 
Next I resolved to make as thorough a study as  
I could of Political Economy.
—Alfred Marshall
Economics and Economic Reasoning
chapter 1
1This book is written by a person, not a machine. That means that I have my quirks, my odd 
sense of humor, and my biases. All textbook writers do. Most textbooks have the quirks  
and eccentricities edited out so that all the books read and sound alike—professional but dull. 
I choose to sound like me—sometimes professional, sometimes playful, and sometimes 
stubborn. In my view, that makes the book more human and less dull. So forgive me my 
quirks—don’t always take me too seriously—and I’ll try to keep you awake when you’re 
reading this book at 3 a.m. the day of the exam. If you think it’s a killer to read a book this 
long, you ought to try writing one.
© Hulton-Deutsch Collection/Corbis

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
5
coordination refers to how the three central problems facing any economy are solved. 
These central problems are:
1.	What, and how much, to produce.
2.	How to produce it.
3.	For whom to produce it.
	
How hard is it to make the three decisions? Imagine for a moment the problem of 
living in a family: the fights, arguments, and questions that come up. “Do I have to do 
the dishes?” “Why can’t I have piano lessons?” “Bobby got a new sweater. How come 
I didn’t?” “Mom likes you best.” Now multiply the size of the family by millions. The 
same fights, the same arguments, the same questions—only for society the questions 
are millions of times more complicated. In answering these questions, economies find 
that inevitably individuals want more than is available, given how much they’re will-
ing to work. That means that in our economy there is a problem of scarcity—the 
goods available are too few to satisfy individuals’ desires.
Scarcity
Scarcity has two elements: our wants and our means of fulfilling those wants. These 
can be interrelated since wants are changeable and partially determined by society. The 
way we fulfill wants can affect those wants. For example, if you work on Wall Street, 
you will probably want upscale and trendy clothes. In Vermont, I am quite happy wearing 
Levi’s and flannel; in Florida I am quite happy in shorts.
	
The degree of scarcity is constantly changing. The quantity of goods, services, and 
usable resources depends on technology and human action, which underlie production. 
Individuals’ imagination, innovativeness, and willingness to do what needs to be done 
can greatly increase available goods and resources. Who knows what technologies are 
in our future—nanites or micromachines that change atoms into whatever we want 
could conceivably eliminate scarcity of goods we currently consume. But they would 
not eliminate scarcity entirely since new wants are constantly developing.
	
So, how does an economy deal with scarcity? The answer is coercion. In all known 
economies, coordination has involved some type of coercion—limiting people’s wants 
and increasing the amount of work individuals are willing to do to fulfill those wants. 
The reality is that many people would rather play than help solve society’s problems. 
So the basic economic problem involves inspiring people to do things that other people 
want them to do, and not to do things that other people don’t want them to do. Thus, an 
alternative definition of economics is: the study of how to get people to do things 
they’re not wild about doing (such as studying) and not to do things they are wild 
about doing (such as eating all the lobster they like), so that the things some people 
want to do are consistent with the things other people want to do.
Microeconomics and Macroeconomics
Economic theory is divided into two parts: microeconomic theory and macroeconomic 
theory. Microeconomic theory considers economic reasoning from the viewpoint of indi-
viduals and firms and builds up to an analysis of the whole economy. Microeconomics is 
the study of individual choice, and how that choice is influenced by economic forces. 
Microeconomics studies such things as the pricing policies of firms, households’ deci-
sions on what to buy, and how markets allocate resources among alternative ends.
	
As we build up from microeconomic analysis to an analysis of the entire economy, 
everything gets rather complicated. Many economists try to uncomplicate matters by tak-
ing a different approach—a macroeconomic approach—first looking at the aggregate, or 
whole, and then breaking it down into components. Macroeconomics is the study of the 
Three central coordination problems 
any economy must solve are what to 
produce, how to produce it, and for 
whom to produce it.
The coordination questions faced by 
society are complicated.
The quantity of goods, services,  
and usable resources depends on 
technology and human action.
Microeconomics is the study of how 
individual choice is influenced by 
economic forces.
Macroeconomics is the study of the 
economy as a whole. It considers the 
problems of inflation, unemployment, 
business cycles, and growth.

6	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
economy as a whole. It considers the problems of inflation, unemployment, business cycles, 
and growth. Macroeconomics focuses on aggregate relationships such as how household 
consumption is related to income and how government policies can affect growth.
	
Consider an analogy to the human body. A micro approach analyzes a person by 
looking first at each individual cell and then builds up. A macro approach starts with 
the person and then goes on to his or her components—arms, legs, fingernails, feel-
ings, and so on. Put simply, microeconomics analyzes from the parts to the whole; 
macroeconomics analyzes from the whole to the parts.
	
Microeconomics and macroeconomics are very much interrelated. What happens in 
the economy as a whole is based on individual decisions, but individual decisions are made 
within an economy and can be understood only within its macro context. For example, 
whether a firm decides to expand production capacity will depend on what the owners 
expect will happen to the demand for their products. Those expectations are determined 
by macroeconomic conditions. Because microeconomics focuses on individuals 
and macroeconomics focuses on the whole economy, traditionally microeconomics and 
macroeconomics are taught separately, even though they are interrelated.
A Guide to Economic Reasoning
People trained in economics think in a certain way. They analyze everything critically; 
they compare the costs and the benefits of every issue and make decisions based on those 
costs and benefits. For example, say you’re trying to decide whether a policy to eliminate 
terrorist attacks on airlines is a good idea. Economists are trained to put their emotions 
aside and ask: What are the costs of the policy, and what are the benefits? Thus, they are 
open to the argument that security measures, such as conducting body searches of every 
passenger or scanning all baggage with bomb-detecting machinery, might not be the 
appropriate policy because the costs might exceed the benefits. To think like an econo-
mist involves addressing almost all issues using a cost/benefit approach. Economic 
reasoning also involves abstracting from the “unimportant” elements of a question and 
focusing on the “important” ones by creating a simple model that captures the essence of 
the issue or problem. How do you know whether the model has captured the important 
elements? By collecting empirical evidence and “testing” the model—matching the 
predictions of the model with the empirical evidence—to see if it fits. Economic 
reasoning—how to think like a modern economist, making decisions on the basis of 
costs and benefits—is the most important lesson you’ll learn from this book.
	
The book Freakonomics gives examples of the economist’s approach. It describes a 
number of studies by University of Chicago economist Steve Levitt that unlock seem-
ingly mysterious observations with basic economic reasoning. For example, Levitt asks 
the question: Why do drug dealers on the street tend to live with their mothers? The 
answer he arrives at is that it is because they can’t afford to live on their own; most earn 
less than $5 an hour. Why, then, are they dealing drugs and not working a legal job that, 
even for a minimum wage job, pays over $7.00 an hour? The answer to that is deter-
mined through cost/benefit analysis. While their current income is low, their potential 
income as a drug dealer is much higher since, given their background and current U.S. 
institutions, they are more likely to move up to a high position in the local drug business 
(and Freakonomics describes how it is a business) and earn a six-figure income than 
they are to move up from working as a Taco Bell technician to an executive earning a 
six-figure income in corporate America. Levitt’s model is a very simple one—people 
do what is in their best interest financially—and it assumes that people rely on a cost/
benefit analysis to make decisions. Finally, he supports his argument through careful 
empirical work, collecting and organizing the data to see if they fit the model. His work 
is a good example of “thinking like a modern economist” in action.
Economic reasoning is making decisions 
on the basis of costs and benefits.
Q-1  Classify the following topics  
as primarily macroeconomic or 
microeconomic:
1.	 The impact of a tax increase on 
aggregate output.
2.	 The relationship between two 
competing firms’ pricing behavior.
3.	 A farmer’s decision to plant soy  
or wheat.
4.	 The effect of trade on economic 
growth.

7
	
Economic reasoning, once learned, is infectious. If you’re susceptible, being 
exposed to it will change your life. It will influence your analysis of everything, includ-
ing issues normally considered outside the scope of economics. For example, you will 
likely use economic reasoning to decide the possibility of getting a date for Saturday 
night, and who will pay for dinner. You will likely use it to decide whether to read this 
book, whether to attend class, whom to marry, and what kind of work to go into after 
you graduate. This is not to say that economic reasoning will provide all the answers. 
As you will see throughout this book, real-world questions are inevitably complicated, 
and economic reasoning simply provides a framework within which to approach a 
question. In the economic way of thinking, every choice has costs and benefits, and 
decisions are made by comparing them.
Marginal Costs and Marginal Benefits
The relevant costs and relevant benefits to economic reasoning are the expected incre-
mental, or additional, costs incurred and the expected incremental benefits that result 
from a decision. Economists use the term marginal when referring to additional or 
incremental. Marginal costs and marginal benefits are key concepts.
	
A marginal cost is the additional cost to you over and above the costs you have 
already incurred. That means not counting sunk costs—costs that have already been 
incurred and cannot be recovered—in the relevant costs when making a decision. 
Consider, for example, attending class. You’ve already paid your tuition; it is a sunk 
cost. So the marginal (or additional) cost of going to class does not include tuition.
	
Similarly with marginal benefit. A marginal benefit is the additional benefit 
above what you’ve already derived. The marginal benefit of reading this chapter is the 
additional knowledge you get from reading it. If you already knew everything in this 
chapter before you picked up the book, the marginal benefit of reading it now is zero.
ADDED DIMENSION
	
The economists returned to their desks, shivering in 
their sandals and pondering their impossible task. Think-
ing about their fate if they were not successful, they de-
cided to send out for one last meal. Unfortunately, when 
they were collecting money to pay for the meal, they dis-
covered they were broke. The disgusted delivery man 
took the last meal back to the restaurant, and the econo-
mists started down the path to the beheading station. On 
the way, the delivery man’s parting words echoed in their 
ears. They looked at each other and suddenly they real-
ized the truth. “We’re saved!” they screamed. “That’s it! 
That’s economic knowledge in one sentence!” They wrote 
the sentence down and presented it to the king, who there-
after fully understood all economic problems. (He also 
gave them a good meal.) The sentence?
There Ain’t No Such Thing As A Free Lunch—
TANSTAAFL
Economic Knowledge in One Sentence: TANSTAAFL
Once upon a time, Tanstaafl was made king of all the 
lands. His first act was to call his economic advisers and 
tell them to write up all the economic knowledge the soci-
ety possessed. After years of work, they presented their 
monumental effort: 25 volumes, each about 400 pages 
long. But in the interim, King Tanstaafl had become a very 
busy man, what with running a kingdom of all the lands and 
all. Looking at the lengthy volumes, he told his advisers to 
summarize their findings in one volume.
	
Despondently, the economists returned to their desks, 
wondering how they could summarize what they’d been so 
careful to spell out. After many more years of rewriting, they 
were finally satisfied with their one-volume effort, and tried 
to make an appointment to see the king. Unfortunately, 
affairs of state had become even more pressing than before, 
and the king couldn’t take the time to see them. Instead he 
sent word to them that he couldn’t be bothered with a whole 
volume, and ordered them, under threat of death (for he had 
become a tyrant), to reduce the work to one sentence.

8	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
The Economic Decision Rule
Comparing marginal (additional) costs with marginal (additional) benefits will often 
tell you how you should adjust your activities to be as well off as possible. Just follow 
the economic decision rule:
If the marginal benefits of doing something exceed the marginal costs, do it.
If the marginal costs of doing something exceed the marginal benefits, don’t do it.
	
As an example, let’s consider a discussion I might have with a student who tells me 
that she is too busy to attend my classes. I respond, “Think about the tuition you’ve 
spent for this class—it works out to about $60 a lecture.” She answers that the book 
she reads for class is a book that I wrote, and that I wrote it so clearly she fully under-
stands everything. She goes on:
I’ve already paid the tuition and whether I go to class or not, I can’t get any  
of the tuition back, so the tuition is a sunk cost and doesn’t enter into my  
decision. The marginal cost to me is what I could be doing with the hour 
instead of spending it in class. I value my time at $75 an hour [people who 
understand everything value their time highly], and even though I’ve heard 
that your lectures are super, I estimate that the marginal benefit of attending 
your class is only $50. The marginal cost, $75, exceeds the marginal benefit, 
$50, so I don’t attend class.
	
I congratulate her on her diplomacy and her economic reasoning, but tell her that 
I give a quiz every week, that students who miss a quiz fail the quiz, that those who fail 
all the quizzes fail the course, and that those who fail the course do not graduate. In 
short, she is underestimating the marginal benefits of attending my classes. Correctly 
estimated, the marginal benefits of attending my class exceed the marginal costs. So 
she should attend my class.
Economics and Passion
Recognizing that everything has a cost is reasonable, but it’s a reasonableness that 
many people don’t like. It takes some of the passion out of life. It leads you to consider 
possibilities like these:
•	 Saving some people’s lives with liver transplants might not be worth the  
additional cost. The money might be better spent on nutritional programs that 
would save 20 lives for every 2 lives you might save with transplants.
•	 Maybe we shouldn’t try to eliminate all pollution because the additional cost  
of doing so may be too high. To eliminate all pollution might be to forgo too 
much of some other worthwhile activity.
•	 Providing a guaranteed job for every person who wants one might not be a 
worthwhile policy goal if it means that doing so will reduce the ability of an 
economy to adapt to new technologies.
•	 It might make sense for the automobile industry to save $12 per car by not 
installing a safety device, even though without the safety device some people 
will be killed.
	
You get the idea. This kind of reasonableness is often criticized for being cold-
hearted. But, not surprisingly, economists disagree; they argue that their reasoning 
leads to a better society for the majority of people.
	
Economists’ reasonableness isn’t universally appreciated. Businesses love the 
result; others aren’t so sure, as I discovered some years back when my then-girlfriend 
If the marginal benefits of doing 
something exceed the marginal  
costs, do it. If the marginal costs  
of doing something exceed the  
marginal benefits, don’t do it.
Q-2  Say you bought a share of 
Oracle for $100 and a share of  
Cisco for $10. The price of each is 
currently $15. Assuming taxes are not 
an issue, which would you sell if you 
need $15?
Economic reasoning is based on the 
premise that everything has a cost.
Q-3  Can you think of a reason why a 
cost/benefit approach to a problem 
might be inappropriate? Can you give 
an example?

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
9
told me she was leaving me. “Why?” I asked. “Because,” 
she responded, “you’re so, so . . . reasonable.” It took me 
many years after she left to learn what she already knew: 
There are many types of reasonableness, and not  everyone 
thinks an economist’s reasonableness is a virtue. I’ll dis-
cuss such issues later; for now, let me simply warn you 
that, for better or worse, studying economics will lead you 
to view questions in a cost/benefit framework.
Opportunity Cost
Putting economists’ cost/benefit rules into practice isn’t 
easy. To do so, you have to be able to choose and measure 
the costs and benefits correctly. Economists have devised the 
concept of opportunity cost to help you do that. Opportunity 
cost is the benefit that you might have gained from choosing 
the next-best alternative. To obtain the benefit of something, 
you must give up (forgo) something else—namely, the next-
best alternative. The opportunity cost is the market value of 
that next-best alternative; it is a cost because in choosing one 
thing, you are precluding an alternative choice. The TANSTAAFL story in the earlier 
Added Dimensions box embodies the opportunity cost concept because it tells us that 
there is a cost to everything; that cost is the next-best forgone alternative.
	
Let’s consider some examples. The opportunity cost of going out once with Natalie 
(or Nathaniel), the most beautiful woman (attractive man) in the world, is the benefit 
you’d get from going out with your solid steady, Margo (Mike). The opportunity cost 
of cleaning up the environment might be a reduction in the money available to assist 
low-income individuals. The opportunity cost of having a child might be two boats, 
three cars, and a two-week vacation each year for five years, which are what you could 
have had if you hadn’t had the child. (Kids really are this expensive.)
	
Examples are endless, but let’s consider two that are particularly relevant to you: what 
courses to take and how much to study. Let’s say you’re a full-time student and at the 
beginning of the term you had to choose five courses. Taking one precludes taking some 
other, and the opportunity cost of taking an economics course may well be not taking a 
course on theater. Similarly with studying: You have a limited amount of time to spend 
studying economics, studying some other subject, sleeping, or partying. The more time 
you spend on one activity, the less time you have for another. That’s opportunity cost.
	
Notice how neatly the opportunity cost concept takes into account costs and benefits 
of all other options and converts these alternative benefits into costs of the decision 
you’re now making. One of the most useful aspects of the opportunity cost concept is 
that it focuses on two aspects of costs of a choice that often might be forgotten—implicit 
costs and illusionary sunk costs. Implicit costs are costs associated with a decision that 
often aren’t included in normal accounting costs.
	
For example, in thinking about whether it makes sense to read this book, the next-
best value of the time you spend reading it should be one of the costs that you consider. 
Often, it isn’t, because it is an implicit, not normally measured cost. Similarly with 
firms—owners often think that they are making a profit from a business, but if they add 
the value of their time to their cost, which economists argue they should, then their profit 
often becomes a loss. They might have earned more simply by taking a job somewhere 
else. Implicit costs should be included in opportunity costs. Sunk costs, however, are 
often included in making decisions, but should not be. These costs are called illusionary 
sunk costs—costs that show up in financial accounts but that economists argue should not 
Opportunity cost is the basis of  
cost/benefit economic reasoning;  
it is the benefit that you might have 
gained from choosing the next-best 
alternative.
© Bleichroeder Print Collection, Kress Collection, Baker Library, Harvard 
Business School (CA g29 xx)
Opportunity costs have always made choice difficult, as we see in 
the early-19th-century engraving One or the Other.

10
ADDED DIMENSION
itself split into subdivisions: economics, political science, 
history, geography, sociology, ­anthropology, and psychol-
ogy. Many of the insights about how the economic system 
worked were codified in Adam Smith’s The Wealth of  
Nations, written in 1776. Notice that this is before eco-
nomics as a subdiscipline developed, and Adam Smith 
could also be classified as an anthropologist, a sociologist, 
a political scientist, and a social philosopher.
	
Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, economists such 
as Adam Smith, Thomas Malthus, John Stuart Mill, David 
­Ricardo, and Karl Marx were more than economists; they 
were social philosophers who covered all aspects of social 
­science. These writers were subsequently called classical 
economists. Alfred Marshall continued in that classical tradi-
tion, and his book, Principles of Economics, published in the 
late 1800s, was written with the other social sciences much 
in evidence. But Marshall also changed the questions econ-
omists ask; he ­focused on those questions that could be 
asked in a graphical supply/demand framework.
	
This book falls solidly in the Marshallian tradition. It pres-
ents economics as a way of thinking—as an engine of analy-
sis used to understand real-world phenomena. But it goes 
beyond Marshall, and introduces you to a wider variety of 
models and thinking than the supply and demand models 
that Marshall used.
	
Marshallian economics is primarily about policy, not 
theory. It sees institutions as well as political and social di-
mensions of reality as important, and it shows you how 
economics ties in to those dimensions.
Economics in Perspective
All too often, students study economics out of context. 
They’re presented with sterile analysis and boring facts to 
memorize, and are never shown how economics fits into 
the larger scheme of things. That’s bad; it makes econom-
ics seem boring—but economics is not boring. Every so 
often throughout this book, sometimes in the appendixes 
and sometimes in these boxes, I’ll step back and put the 
analysis in perspective, giving you an idea from whence 
the analysis sprang and its historical context. In educa-
tional jargon, this is called enrichment.
	
I begin here with economics itself.
	
First, its history: In the 1500s there were few universi-
ties. Those that existed taught religion, Latin, Greek, phi-
losophy, history, and mathematics. No economics. Then 
came the Enlightenment (about 1700), in which reasoning 
replaced God as the explanation of why things were the 
way they were. Pre-Enlightenment thinkers would answer 
the question “Why am I poor?” with “Because God wills it.” 
Enlightenment scholars looked for a different explanation. 
“Because of the nature of land ownership” is one answer 
they found.
	
Such reasoned explanations required more knowledge 
of the way things were, and the amount of information ex-
panded so rapidly that it had to be divided or categorized 
for an individual to have hope of knowing a subject. Soon 
philosophy was subdivided into science and philosophy. In 
the 1700s, the ­sciences were split into natural sciences 
and social sciences. The amount of knowledge kept increas-
ing, and in the late 1800s and early 1900s social science  
be considered in a choice, because they are already spent. They will not change regardless 
of what the person making the decision chooses. For example, once you have bought a 
book (that can’t be resold), what you paid for that book is sunk. Following economic 
reasoning, that sunk cost shouldn’t enter into your decision on whether to read it. An 
important role of the opportunity cost concept is to remind you that the costs relevant to 
decisions are often different from the measured costs.
	
The relevance of opportunity cost isn’t limited to your individual decisions. Oppor-
tunity costs are also relevant to government’s decisions, which affect everyone in soci-
ety. A common example is what is called the guns-versus-butter debate. The resources 
that a society has are limited; therefore, its decision to use those resources to have 
more guns (more weapons) means that it will have less butter (fewer consumer goods). 
Thus, when society decides to spend $50 billion more on an improved health care sys-
tem, the opportunity cost of that decision is $50 billion not spent on helping the home-
less, paying off some of the national debt, or providing for national defense.
	
The opportunity cost concept has endless implications. It can even be turned upon 
itself. For instance, thinking about alternatives takes time; that means that there’s a 
cost to being reasonable, so it’s only reasonable to be somewhat unreasonable. If you 
The costs relevant to decisions are 
often different from the measured costs.
Q-4  John, your study partner, has 
just said that the opportunity cost of 
studying this chapter is about 1/38 the 
price you paid for this book, since the 
chapter is about 1/38 of the book. Is he 
right? Why or why not?

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
11
followed that argument, you’ve caught the economic bug. If you didn’t, don’t worry. 
Just remember the opportunity cost concept for now; I’ll infect you with economic 
thinking in the rest of the book.
Economic Forces, Social Forces,  
and Political Forces
The opportunity cost concept applies to all aspects of life and is fundamental to under-
standing how society reacts to scarcity. When goods are scarce, those goods must be 
rationed. That is, a mechanism must be chosen to determine who gets what.
Economic and Market Forces
Let’s consider some specific real-world rationing mechanisms. Dormitory rooms are 
often rationed by lottery, and permission to register in popular classes is often rationed 
by a first-come, first-registered rule. Food in the United States, however, is generally 
rationed by price. If price did not ration food, there wouldn’t be enough food to go 
around. All scarce goods must be rationed in some fashion. These rationing mecha-
nisms are examples of economic forces, the necessary reactions to scarcity.
	
One of the important choices that a society must make is whether to allow these eco-
nomic forces to operate freely and openly or to try to rein them in. A market force is an 
economic force that is given relatively free rein by society to work through the market. 
Market forces ration by changing prices. When there’s a shortage, the price goes up. 
When there’s a surplus, the price goes down. Much of this book will be devoted to ana-
lyzing how the market works like an invisible hand, guiding economic forces to coordi-
nate individual actions and allocate scarce resources. The invisible hand is the price 
mechanism, the rise and fall of prices that guides our actions in a market.
Social and Political Forces
Societies can’t choose whether or not to allow economic forces to operate—economic 
forces are always operating. However, societies can choose whether to allow market forces 
to predominate. Social forces—forces that guide individual actions even though those 
actions may not be in an individual’s selfish interest, and political forces—legal directives 
that direct individuals’ actions—play a major role in deciding whether to let market forces 
operate. Economic reality is determined by a contest among these various forces.
	
Let’s consider a historical example in which social forces prevented an economic 
force from becoming a market force: the problem of getting a date for Saturday night 
back when people actually dated (or called the pairing off of two individuals a “date”). 
If a school (or a society) had significantly more heterosexual people of one gender than 
the other (let’s say more men than women), some men would find themselves without a 
date—that is, men would be in excess supply—and would have to find something else 
to do, say study or go to a movie by themselves. An “excess supply” person could solve 
the problem by paying someone to go out with him or her, but that would have changed 
the nature of the date in unacceptable ways. It would be revolting to the person who 
offered payment and to the person who was offered payment. That unacceptability is an 
example of the complex social and cultural norms that guide and limit our activities. 
People don’t try to buy dates because social forces prevent them from doing so.2
Q-5  Ali, your study partner, states 
that rationing health care is immoral—
that health care should be freely 
available to all individuals in society. 
How would you respond?
When an economic force operates 
through the market, it becomes a 
market force.
Economic reality is controlled by  
three forces:
1.	 Economic forces (the invisible 
hand).
2.	 Social forces.
3.	 Political forces.
Social, cultural, and political forces can 
play a significant role in the economy.
2Pairing habits of young adults have changed in ways that have made “dating” somewhat of a  
historical social convention. The new social conventions that guide such pairing functions do not 
eliminate the problem of excess individuals, but they do obscure it and create multiple dimensions 
of “excess.” Thinking about how they do so is a useful exercise.

12
	
Now let’s consider another example in which political and legal influences stop 
economic forces from becoming market forces. Say you decide that you can make 
some money delivering mail in your neighborhood. You try to establish a small busi-
ness, but suddenly you are confronted with the law. The U.S. Postal Service has a legal 
exclusive right to deliver regular mail, so you’ll be prohibited from delivering regular 
mail in competition with the post office. Economic forces—the desire to make 
money—led you to want to enter the business, but in this case political forces squash 
the invisible hand.
	
Often political and social forces work together against the invisible hand. For exam-
ple, in the United States there aren’t enough babies to satisfy all the couples who desire 
them. Babies born to particular sets of parents are rationed—by luck. Consider a group of 
parents, all of whom want babies. Those who can, have a baby; those who can’t have one, 
but want one, try to adopt. Adoption agencies ration the available babies. Who gets a baby 
depends on whom people know at the adoption agency and on the desires of the birth 
mother, who can often specify the socioeconomic background (and many other charac-
teristics) of the family in which she wants her baby to grow up. That’s the economic 
force in action; it gives more power to the supplier of something that’s in short supply.
	
If our society allowed individuals to buy and sell babies, that economic force would 
be translated into a market force. The invisible hand would see to it that the quantity 
of babies supplied would equal the quantity of babies demanded at some price. The 
market, not the adoption agencies, would do the rationing.3
Q-6  Your study partner, Joan, states 
that market forces are always operative. 
Is she right? Why or why not?
3Even though it’s against the law, some babies are nonetheless “sold” on a semilegal market, also 
called a gray market. Recently, the “market price” for a healthy baby was about $30,000. If selling 
babies were legal (and if people didn’t find it morally repugnant to have babies in order to sell 
them), the price would be much lower because there would be a larger supply of ­babies. (It was not 
against the law to sell human eggs in the early 2000s, and one human egg was sold for $50,000.  
The average price was much lower; it varied with donor characteristics such as SAT scores and  
athletic accomplishments.)
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
There are many stories about Nancy Astor, 
the first woman elected to Britain’s Parlia-
ment. A ­vivacious, fearless American woman, 
she married into the English aristocracy and, 
during the 1930s and 1940s, became a bright 
light on the English ­social and political scenes, 
which were already quite bright.
	
One story told about Lady Astor is that she 
and Winston Churchill, the unorthodox genius 
who had a long and distinguished political 
career and who was Britain’s prime minister 
during World War II, were sitting in a pub hav-
ing a theoretical discussion about morality. 
Churchill suggested that as a thought experi-
ment Lady Astor ponder the following question: If a man 
were to promise her a huge amount of money—say a mil-
lion pounds—for the privilege, would she sleep with him? 
Lady Astor did ponder the question for a while and finally 
Winston Churchill and Lady Astor
­answered, yes, she would, if the money were 
guaranteed. Churchill then asked her if she 
would sleep with him for five pounds. Her re-
sponse was sharp: “Of course not. What do 
you think I am—a prostitute?” Churchill re-
sponded, “We have already established that 
fact; we are now simply negotiating about 
price.”
One moral that economists might draw from 
this story is that economic incentives, if high 
enough, can have a powerful influence on be-
havior. But an equally important moral of the 
story is that noneconomic incentives also can 
be very strong. Why do most people feel it’s 
wrong to sell sex for money, even if they might be willing 
to do so if the price were high enough? Keeping this sec-
ond moral in mind will significantly increase your economic 
understanding of real-world events.
© Bettmann/Corbis
Lady Astor
© Rachel Epstein/PhotoEdit

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
13
	
Most people, including me, find the idea of selling babies repugnant. But why? It’s 
the strength of social forces reinforced by political forces. One can think of hundreds 
of examples of such social and political forces overriding economic forces.
	
What is and isn’t allowable differs from one society to another. For example, in 
North Korea, many private businesses are against the law, so not many people start 
their own businesses. In the United States, until the 1970s, it was against the law to 
hold gold except in jewelry and for certain limited uses such as dental supplies, so 
most people refrained from holding gold. Ultimately a country’s laws and social norms 
determine whether the invisible hand will be allowed to work.
	
Social and political forces are active in all parts of your life. You don’t practice 
medicine without a license; you don’t sell body parts or certain addictive drugs. These 
actions are against the law. But many people do sell alcohol; that’s not against the law 
if you have a permit. You don’t charge your friends interest to borrow money (you’d 
lose friends); you don’t charge your children for their food (parents are supposed to 
feed their children); many sports and media stars don’t sell their autographs (some do, 
but many consider the practice tacky); you don’t lower the wage you’ll accept in order 
to take a job from someone else (you’re no scab). The list is long. You cannot under-
stand economics without understanding the limitations that political and social forces 
place on economic actions.
	
In summary, what happens in a society can be seen as the reaction to, and interac-
tion of, three sets of forces: (1) economic forces, (2) political and legal forces, and 
(3) social and cultural forces. Economics has a role to play in sociology and politics, 
just as sociology and politics have roles to play in economics.
Using Economic Insights
Economic insights are based on generalizations, called theories, about the workings 
of an abstract economy as well as on contextual knowledge about the institutional 
structure of the economy. In this book I will introduce you to economic theories and 
models. Theories and models tie together economists’ terminology and knowledge about 
economic institutions. Theories are inevitably too abstract to apply in specific cases, and 
thus a theory is often embodied in an economic model—a framework that places the 
generalized insights of the theory in a more specific contextual setting—or in an 
economic principle—a commonly held economic insight stated as a law or principle. 
To see the importance of principles, think back to when you learned to add. You didn’t 
memorize the sum of 147 and 138; instead, you learned a principle of addition. The 
principle says that when adding 147 and 138, you first add 7 + 8, which you memorized 
was 15. You write down the 5 and carry the 1, which you add to 4 + 3 to get 8. Then 
add 1 + 1 = 2. So the answer is 285. When you know just one principle, you know 
how to add millions of combinations of numbers.
	
Theories, models, and principles are continually “brought to the data” to see if the 
predictions of the model match the data. Increases in computing power and new statistical 
techniques have given modern economists a far more rigorous set of procedures to 
determine how well the predictions fit the data than was the case for earlier econo-
mists. This has led to a stronger reliance on quantitative empirical methods in modern 
economics than in earlier economics.
	
Modern empirical work takes a variety of forms. In certain instances, economists 
study questions by running controlled laboratory experiments. That branch of economics 
is called experimental economics—a branch of economics that studies the economy 
through controlled experiments. These include laboratory experiments—experiments 
in which individuals are brought into a computer laboratory and their reactions to vari-
ous treatments are measured and analyzed; field experiments—experiments in which 
What happens in society can be seen  
as a reaction to, and interaction of, 
economic forces with other forces.

14	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
treatments in the real world are measured and analyzed; computer experiments—
experiments in which simulated economies are created within the computer and results 
of various policies are explored; and natural experiments—naturally occurring events 
that approximate a controlled experiment where something has changed in one place 
but has not changed somewhere else. 
	
An example of a natural experiment occurred when New Jersey raised its minimum 
wage and neighboring state Pennsylvania did not. Economists Alan Kruger and David 
Card compared the effects on unemployment in both states and found that increases in 
the minimum wage in New Jersey did not significantly affect employment. This led to 
a debate about what the empirical evidence was telling us. The reason is that in such 
natural experiments, it is impossible to hold “other things constant,” as is done in labo-
ratory and field experiments, and thus the empirical results in economics are more 
subject to dispute.
	
While economic models are less general than theories, they are still usually too 
general to apply in specific cases. Models lead to theorems (propositions that are 
logically true based on the assumptions in a model). To arrive at policy precepts 
(policy rules that conclude that a particular course of action is preferable), theo-
rems must be combined with knowledge of real-world economic institutions and 
value judgments determining the goals for which one is striving. In discussing 
policy implications of theories and models, it is important to distinguish precepts 
from theorems.
The Invisible Hand Theorem
Knowing a theory gives you insight into a wide variety of economic phenomena even 
though you don’t know the particulars of each phenomenon. For example, much of 
economic theory deals with the pricing mechanism and how the market operates to 
coordinate individuals’ decisions. Economists have come to the following theorems:
When the quantity supplied is greater than the quantity demanded, price has a 
tendency to fall.
When the quantity demanded is greater than the quantity supplied, price has a 
tendency to rise.
	
Using these generalized theorems, economists have developed a theory of mar-
kets that leads to the further theorem that, under certain conditions, markets are 
efficient. That is, the market will coordinate individuals’ decisions, allocating 
scarce resources efficiently. Efficiency means achieving a goal as cheaply as pos-
sible. Economists call this theorem the invisible hand theorem—a market economy, 
through the price mechanism, will tend to allocate resources efficiently.
	
Theories, and the models used to represent them, are enormously efficient methods 
of conveying information, but they’re also necessarily abstract. They rely on simplify-
ing assumptions, and if you don’t know the assumptions, you don’t know the theory. 
The result of forgetting assumptions could be similar to what happens if you forget that 
you’re supposed to add numbers in columns. Forgetting that, yet remembering all the 
steps, can lead to a wildly incorrect answer. For example,
 147
+138
1,608 is wrong.
	
Knowing the assumptions of theories and models allows you to progress beyond 
gut reaction and better understand the strengths and weaknesses of various economic 
theories and models. Let’s consider a central economic assumption: the assumption 
Theories, models, and principles must 
be combined with a knowledge of real-
world economic institutions to arrive at 
specific policy recommendations.
Q-7  There has been a superb 
growing season and the quantity  
of tomatoes supplied exceeds the 
quantity demanded. What is likely  
to happen to the price of tomatoes?
If you don’t know the assumptions, you 
don’t know the theory.

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
15
that individuals behave rationally—that what they choose reflects what makes them 
happiest, given the constraints. If that assumption doesn’t hold, the invisible hand 
theorem doesn’t hold.
	
Presenting the invisible hand theorem in its full beauty is an important part of any 
economics course. Presenting the assumptions on which it is based and the limitations 
of the invisible hand is likewise an important part of the course. I’ll do both throughout 
the book.
Economic Theory and Stories
Economic theory, and the models in which that theory is presented, often developed as 
a shorthand way of telling a story. These stories are important; they make the theory 
come alive and convey the insights that give economic theory its power. In this book 
I present plenty of theories and models, but they’re accompanied by stories that provide 
the context that makes them relevant.
	
At times, because there are many new terms, discussing theories takes up much of 
the presentation time and becomes a bit oppressive. That’s the nature of the beast. As 
Albert Einstein said, “Theories should be as simple as possible, but not more so.” 
When a theory becomes oppressive, pause and think about the underlying story that 
the theory is meant to convey. That story should make sense and be concrete. If you 
can’t translate the theory into a story, you don’t understand the theory.
Economic Institutions
To know whether you can apply economic theory to reality, you must know about eco-
nomic institutions—laws, common practices, and organizations in a society that affect 
the economy. Corporations, governments, and cultural norms are all examples of eco-
nomic institutions. Many economic institutions have social, political, and religious 
dimensions. For example, your job often influences your social standing. In addition, 
many social institutions, such as the family, have economic functions. I include any insti-
tution that significantly affects economic decisions as an economic institution because 
you must understand that institution if you are to understand how the economy functions.
	
Economic institutions differ significantly among countries. For example, in Germany 
banks are allowed to own companies; in the United States they cannot. This helps 
explain why investment decisions are made differently in Germany as compared to the 
United States. Alternatively, in the Netherlands workers are highly unionized, while in 
the United States they are not. Unions in the Netherlands therefore have the power to 
agree to keep wages lower in exchange for more jobs. This means that government 
policies to deal with inflation might differ in these two countries.
	
Economic institutions sometimes seem to operate in ways quite different than eco-
nomic theory predicts. For example, economic theory says that prices are determined 
by supply and demand. However, businesses say that they set prices by rules of 
thumb—often by what are called cost-plus-markup rules. That is, a firm determines 
what its costs are, multiplies by 1.4 or 1.5, and the result is the price it sets. Economic 
theory says that supply and demand determine who’s hired; experience suggests that 
hiring is often done on the basis of whom you know, not by market forces.
	
These apparent contradictions have two complementary explanations. First, eco-
nomic theory abstracts from many issues. These issues may account for the differ-
ences. Second, there’s no contradiction; economic principles often affect decisions 
from behind the scenes. For instance, supply and demand pressures determine what 
the price markup over cost will be. In all cases, however, to apply economic theory to 
reality—to gain the full value of economic insights—you’ve got to have a sense of 
economic institutions.
Theory is a shorthand way of telling  
a story.
To apply economic theory to reality, 
you’ve got to have a sense of  
economic institutions.

16
Economic Policy Options
Economic policies are actions (or inaction) taken by government to influence eco-
nomic actions. The final goal of the course is to present the economic policy options 
facing our society today. For example, should the government restrict mergers between 
firms? Should it run a budget deficit? Should it do something about the international 
trade deficit? Should it decrease taxes?
	
I saved this discussion for last because there’s no sense talking about policy options 
unless you know some economic terminology, some economic theory, and something 
about economic institutions. Once you know something about them, you’re in a position 
to consider the policy options available for dealing with the economic problems our 
society faces.
	
Policies operate within institutions, but policies also can influence the institutions 
within which they operate. Let’s consider an example: welfare policy and the institu-
tion of the two-parent family. In the 1960s, the United States developed a variety of 
policy initiatives designed to eliminate poverty. These initiatives provided income to 
single parents with children, and assumed that family structure would be unchanged by 
these policies. But family structure changed substantially, and, very likely, these poli-
cies played a role in increasing the number of single-parent families. The result was 
the programs failed to eliminate poverty. Now this is not to say that we should not have 
programs to eliminate poverty, nor that two-parent families are always preferable to 
one-parent families; it is only to say that we must build into our policies their effect on 
institutions.
To carry out economic policy effectively, 
one must understand how institutions 
might change as a result of the 
economic policy.
Q-8  True or false? Economists 
should focus their policy analysis on 
institutional changes because such 
policies offer the largest gains.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Economic reasoning is playing an in-
creasing role in government policy. Con-
sider the regulation of pollution. Pollution 
became a policy concern in the 1960s as 
books such as Rachel Carson’s Silent 
Spring were published. In 1970, in re-
sponse to concerns about the environ-
ment, the Clean Air Act was passed. It 
capped the amount of pollutants (such as 
sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen 
dioxides, lead, and hydrocarbons) that firms could emit. This 
was a “command-and-control” approach to regulation, 
which brought about a reduction in pollution, but also 
brought about lots of complaints by firms that either found 
the limits costly to meet or couldn’t afford to meet them and 
were forced to close.
	
Enter economists. They proposed an alternative ap-
proach, called cap-and-trade, that achieved the same 
overall reduction in pollution but at a lower overall cost. In 
the plan they proposed, government still set a pollution 
cap that firms had to meet, but it gave individual firms 
some flexibility. Firms that reduced emissions by less than 
the required limit could buy pollution permits from other 
Economists and Market Solutions
firms that reduced their emissions by 
more than their limit. The price of the 
permits would be determined in an 
“emissions permit market.” Thus, firms 
that had a low cost of reducing pollution 
would have a strong incentive to reduce 
pollution by more than their limit in order 
to sell these permits, or rights to pollute, 
to firms that had a high cost of reducing 
pollution and therefore could reduce their 
pollution by less than what was required. The net reduc-
tion was the same, but the reduction was achieved at a 
lower cost.
	
In 1990 Congress adopted economists’ proposal and 
the Clean Air Act was amended to include tradable emis-
sions permits. An active market in emissions permits de-
veloped, and it is estimated that the tradable permit 
program has lowered the cost of reducing sulfur dioxide 
emissions by $1 billion a year while, at the same time, reduc-
ing emissions by more than half, to levels significantly  
below the cap. Other cap-and-trade programs have devel-
oped as well. You can read more about the current state of 
tradable emissions at www.epa.gov/­airmarkets.
© Design Pics/Kelly Redinger RF

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
17
Objective Policy Analysis
Good economic policy analysis is objective; that is, it keeps the analyst’s value judgments 
separate from the analysis. Objective analysis does not say, “This is the way things should 
be,” reflecting a goal established by the analyst. That would be subjective analysis because 
it would reflect the analyst’s view of how things should be. Instead, objective analysis says, 
“This is the way the economy works, and if society (or the individual or firm for whom 
you’re doing the analysis) wants to achieve a particular goal, this is how it might go about 
doing so.” Objective analysis keeps, or at least tries to keep, an individual’s subjective 
views—value judgments—separate. That doesn’t mean that policy analysis involves 
no value judgments; policy analysis necessarily involves value judgments. But an 
objective researcher attempts to make the value judgments being used both transparent 
and not his own, but instead value judgments an “impartial spectator” (using Adam 
Smith’s terminology) would use.
	
To make clear the distinction between objective and subjective analysis, econo-
mists have divided economics into three categories: positive economics, normative 
economics, and the art of economics. Positive economics is the study of what is, and 
how the economy works. It explores the pure theory of economics, and it discovers 
agreed-upon empirical regularities, often called empirical facts. Economic theorists 
then relate their theories to those facts. Positive economics asks such questions as: 
How does the market for hog bellies work? How do price restrictions affect market 
forces? These questions fall under the heading of economic theory.
	
As I stated above, economic theory does not provide definitive policy recommendations. 
It is too abstract and makes too many assumptions that don’t match observed behavior. In 
positive economic theory, one looks for empirical facts and develops theorems—propositions 
that logically follow from the assumptions of one’s model. Theorems and agreed-upon 
empirical facts are almost by definition beyond dispute and serve as the foundation for eco-
nomic science. But these theorems don’t tell us what policies should be followed.
	
Policies are built on two other branches of economics: normative economics and 
political economy, or the art of economics. Normative economics is the study of what 
the goals of the economy should be. Normative economics asks such questions as: 
What should the distribution of income be? What should tax policy be designed to 
achieve? In discussing such questions, economists must carefully delineate whose 
goals they are discussing. One cannot simply assume that one’s own goals for society 
are society’s goals. For example, let’s consider a debate that is currently ongoing in 
economics. Some economists are worried about climate change; they believe that high 
consumption in rich societies is causing climate change and that the high consumption 
is a result of interdependent wants—people want something only because other people 
have it—but having it isn’t necessarily making people happier. These economists argue 
that society’s normative goal should include a much greater focus on the implications 
of economic activities for climate change, and the distribution of income, than is currently 
the case. Discussion of these goals falls under the category of normative economics.
	
The art of economics, also called political economy, is the application of the 
knowledge learned in positive economics to achieve the goals one has determined in 
normative economics. It looks at such questions as: To achieve the goals that society 
wants to achieve, how would you go about it, given the way the economy works?4 
Positive economics is the study of what 
is, and how the economy works.
Q-9  John, your study partner, is a 
free market advocate. He argues that 
the invisible hand theorem tells us that 
the government should not interfere 
with the economy. Do you agree?  
Why or why not?
Normative economics is the study  
of what the goals of the economy 
should be.
The art of economics is the application  
of the knowledge learned in positive 
economics to achieve the goals 
determined in normative economics.
4This three-part distinction was made back in 1891 by a famous economist, John Neville Keynes, 
father of John Maynard Keynes, the economist who developed macroeconomics. This distinction 
was instilled into modern economics by Milton Friedman and Richard Lipsey in the 1950s. They, 
however, downplayed the art of economics, which J. N. Keynes had seen as central to understanding 
the economist’s role in policy. In his discussion of the scope and method of economics, Lionel  
Robbins used the term “political economy” rather than Keynes’s term “the art of economics.”

18
Most policy discussions fall under the art of economics. The art of economics branch 
is specifically about policy; it is designed to arrive at precepts, or guides for policy. 
Precepts are based on theorems and empirical facts developed in positive economics 
and goals developed in normative economics. The art of economics requires econo-
mists to assess the appropriateness of theorems to achieving the normative goals in the 
real world. Whereas once the assumptions are agreed upon, theorems derived from 
models are not debatable, precepts are debatable, and economists that use the same 
theorems can hold different precepts. For example, a model may tell us that rent con-
trols will cause a shortage of housing. That does not mean that rent controls are neces-
sarily bad policies since rent controls may also have some desirable effects. The 
precept that rent controls are bad policy is based upon a judgment about the impor-
tance of those other effects, and one’s normative judgments about the benefits and 
costs of the policy. In this book, when I say that economists tend to favor a policy, I am 
talking about precepts, which means that alternative perspectives are possible even 
among economists.
	
In each of these three branches of economics, economists separate their own 
value judgments from their objective analysis as much as possible. The qualifier “as 
much as possible” is important, since some value judgments inevitably sneak in. We 
are products of our environment, and the questions we ask, the framework we use, 
and the way we interpret the evidence all involve value judgments and reflect our 
backgrounds.
Q-10  Tell whether the following  
five statements belong in positive 
economics, normative economics, 
or the art of economics.
1.	 We should support the market 
because it is efficient.
2.	 Given certain conditions, the market 
achieves efficient results.
3.	 Based on past experience and  
our understanding of markets, if 
one wants a reasonably efficient 
result, markets should probably  
be relied on.
4.	 The distribution of income should be 
left to markets.
5.	 Markets allocate income according 
to contributions of factors of 
production.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
A good example of the central role that 
economics plays in policy debates is 
the debate about climate change. Al-
most all ­scientists are now convinced 
that climate change is occurring and that 
human activity such as the burning of 
fossil fuel is one of the causes. The pol-
icy question is what to do about it. To an-
swer that question, most governments 
have turned to economists. The first part 
of the question that economists have con-
sidered is whether it is worth doing anything, and in a well-
publicized report commissioned by the British government, 
economist Nicholas Stern argued that, based upon his 
cost/benefit analysis, yes it is worth doing something. The 
reason: Because the costs of not doing anything would 
likely reduce output by 20 percent in the future, and those 
costs (appropriately weighted for when they occur) are less 
than the benefits of policies that can be implemented.
	
The second part of the question is: What policies to im-
plement? The policies he recommended were policies that 
changed incentives—specifically, policies that raised the 
costs of emitting greenhouse gases and decreased the 
Economics and Climate Change
costs of other forms of production. 
Those recommended policies reflected 
the economist’s oppor­tunity cost frame-
work in action: If you want to change the 
result, change the incentives that indi-
viduals face.
There is considerable debate about 
Stern’s analysis—both with the way he 
conducted the cost/benefit analysis and 
with his policy recommendations. Such 
­debates are inevitable when the data are 
incomplete and ­numerous judgments need to be made. I 
suspect that these debates will continue over the coming 
years with economists on various sides of the debates. 
Economists are generally not united in their views about 
complicated policy issues since they differ in their normative 
views and in their assessment of the problem and of what 
politically can be achieved; that’s because policy is part of 
the art of economics, not part of positive economics. But the 
framework of the policy debate about climate change is the 
economic framework. Thus, even though political forces will 
ultimately choose what policy is followed, you must under-
stand the economic framework to take part in the debate.
© AP Photo/Alden Pellett

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
19
	
Maintaining objectivity is easiest in positive economics, where you are working 
with abstract models to understand how the economy works. Maintaining objectivity is 
harder in normative economics. You must always be objective about whose normative 
values you are using. It’s easy to assume that all of society shares your values, but that 
assumption is often wrong.
	
Maintaining objectivity is hardest in the art of economics because it can suffer 
from the problems of both positive and normative economics. Because noneconomic 
forces affect policy, to practice the art of economics we must make judgments about 
how these noneconomic forces work. These judgments are likely to reflect our own 
value judgments. So we must be exceedingly careful to be as objective as possible in 
practicing the art of economics.
Policy and Social and Political Forces
When you think about the policy options facing society, you’ll quickly discover that 
the choice of policy options depends on much more than economic theory. Politicians, 
not economists, determine economic policy. To understand what policies are chosen, 
you must take into account historical precedent plus social, cultural, and political 
forces. In an economics course, I don’t have time to analyze these forces in as much 
depth as I’d like. That’s one reason there are separate history, political science, sociology, 
and anthropology courses.
	
While it is true that these other forces play significant roles in policy decisions, 
specialization is necessary. In economics, we focus the analysis on the invisible 
hand, and much of economic theory is devoted to considering how the economy 
would operate if the invisible hand were the only force operating. But as soon as we 
apply theory to reality and policy, we must take into account political and social 
forces as well.
	
An example will make my point more concrete. Most economists agree that hold-
ing down or eliminating tariffs (taxes on imports) and quotas (numerical limitations 
on imports) makes good economic sense. They strongly advise governments to follow 
a policy of free trade. Do governments follow free trade policies? Almost invariably 
they do not. Politics leads society in a different direction. If you’re advising a policy 
maker, you need to point out that these other forces must be taken into account, and 
how other forces should (if they should) and can (if they can) be integrated with your 
recommendations.
Conclusion
Tons more could be said to introduce you to economics, but an introduction must 
remain an introduction. As it is, this chapter should have:
1.	Introduced you to economic reasoning.
2.	Surveyed what we’re going to cover in this book.
3.	Given you an idea of my writing style and approach.
	
We’ll be spending long hours together over the coming term, and before entering 
into such a commitment it’s best to know your partner. While I won’t know you, by the 
end of this book you’ll know me. Maybe you won’t love me as my mother does, but 
you’ll know me.
	
This introduction was my opening line. I hope it also conveyed the importance 
and relevance of economics. If it did, it has served its intended purpose. Economics is 
tough, but tough can be fun.

20	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
• The three coordination problems any economy must 
solve are what to produce, how to produce it, and for 
whom to produce it. In solving these problems, societies 
have found that there is a problem of scarcity.  (LO1-1)
• Economics can be divided into microeconomics and 
macroeconomics. Microeconomics is the study of  
individual choice and how that choice is influenced 
by economic forces. Macroeconomics is the study  
of the economy as a whole. It considers problems 
such as inflation, unemployment, business cycles,  
and growth.  (LO1-1)
• Economic reasoning structures all questions in a  
cost/benefit framework: If the marginal benefits of 
doing something exceed the marginal costs, do it.  
If the marginal costs exceed the marginal benefits, 
don’t do it.  (LO1-2)
• Sunk costs are not relevant in the economic decision 
rule.  (LO1-2)
• The opportunity cost of undertaking an activity is  
the benefit you might have gained from choosing the 
next-best alternative.  (LO1-2)
• “There ain’t no such thing as a free lunch” 
(TANSTAAFL) embodies the opportunity cost  
concept.  (LO1-2)
Summary
• Economic forces, the forces of scarcity, are always 
working. Market forces, which ration by changing 
prices, are not always allowed to work.  (LO1-3)
• Economic reality is controlled and directed by three 
types of forces: economic forces, political forces, and 
social forces.  (LO1-3)
• Under certain conditions, the market, through its 
price mechanism, will allocate scarce resources  
efficiently.  (LO1-4)
• Theorems are propositions that follow from the  
assumptions of a model; precepts are the guides for 
policies based on theorems, normative judgments,  
and empirical observations about how the real world 
differs from the model.  (LO1-4)
• Economics can be subdivided into positive econom-
ics, normative economics, and the art of economics. 
Positive economics is the study of what is, norma-
tive economics is the study of what should be, and 
the art of economics relates positive to normative 
economics.  (LO1-5)
Key Terms
art of economics
economic decision rule
economic forces
economic model
economic policy
economic principle
economics
efficiency
experimental economics
implicit costs
invisible hand
invisible hand theorem
macroeconomics
marginal benefit
marginal cost
market force
microeconomics
normative economics
opportunity cost
political forces
positive economics
precept
scarcity
social forces
sunk cost
theorem
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Why does the textbook author focus on coordination rather 
than on scarcity when defining economics?  (LO1-1)
	 2.	 State whether the following are primarily microeconomic 
or macroeconomic policy issues:  (LO1-1)
	a.	 Should U.S. interest rates be lowered to decrease the 
amount of unemployment?
	b.	 Will the fact that more and more doctors are selling 
their practices to managed care networks increase the 
efficiency of medical providers?
	c.	 Should the current federal income tax be lowered to 
reduce unemployment?
	d.	 Should the federal minimum wage be raised?

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
21
	e.	 Should Sprint and Verizon both be allowed to build  
local phone networks?
	f.	 Should commercial banks be required to provide loans 
in all areas of the territory from which they accept  
deposits?
	 3.	 List two microeconomic and two macroeconomic  
problems.  (LO1-1)
	 4.	 Calculate, using the best estimates you can:  (LO1-2)
	a.	 Your opportunity cost of attending college.
	b.	 Your opportunity cost of taking this course.
	c.	 Your opportunity cost of attending yesterday’s lecture 
in this course.
	 5.	 List one recent choice you made and explain why you 
made the choice in terms of marginal benefits and  
marginal costs.  (LO1-2)
	 6.	 You rent a car for $29.95. The first 150 miles are free,  
but each mile thereafter costs 15 cents. You plan to  
drive it 200 miles. What is the marginal cost of driving 
the car?  (LO1-2)
	 7.	 Economists Henry Saffer of Kean University, Frank J. 
Chaloupka of the University of Illinois at Chicago, and 
Dhaval Dave of Bentley College estimated that the gov-
ernment must spend $4,170 on drug control to deter one 
person from using drugs and that the cost one drug user 
imposes on society is $897. Based on this information 
alone, should the government spend the money on drug 
control?  (LO1-2)
	 8.	 What is the opportunity cost of buying a $20,000  
car?  (LO1-2)
	 9.	 Suppose you currently earn $30,000 a year. You are  
considering a job that will increase your lifetime earnings 
by $300,000 but that requires an MBA. The job will mean 
also attending business school for two years at an annual 
cost of $25,000. You already have a bachelor’s degree,  
for which you spent $80,000 in tuition and books. Which 
of the above information is relevant to your decision on 
whether to take the job?  (LO1-2)
	10.	 Suppose your college has been given $5 million. You have 
been asked to decide how to spend it to improve your col-
lege. Explain how you would use the economic decision 
rule and the concept of opportunity costs to decide how to 
spend it.  (LO1-2)
	11.	 Give two examples of social forces and explain how  
they keep economic forces from becoming market 
forces.  (LO1-3)
	12.	 Give two examples of political or legal forces and explain 
how they might interact with economic forces.  (LO1-3)
	13.	 Individuals have two kidneys, but most of us need only 
one. People who have lost both kidneys through accident 
or disease must be hooked up to a dialysis machine, which 
cleanses waste from their bodies. Say a person who has 
two good kidneys offers to sell one of them to someone 
whose kidney function has been totally destroyed. The 
seller asks $30,000 for the kidney, and the person who  
has lost both kidneys accepts the offer.  (LO1-3)
	a.	 Who benefits from the deal?
	b.	 Who is hurt?
	c.	 Should a society allow such market transactions? 
Why?
	14.	 What is an economic model? What besides a  
model do economists need to make policy  
recommendations?  (LO1-4)
	15.	 Does economic theory prove that the free market system 
is best? Why? (Difficult)  (LO1-4)
	16.	 Distinguish between theorems and precepts. Is it possible 
for two economists to agree about theorems but disagree 
about precepts? Why or why not?  (LO1-4)
	17.	 What is the difference between normative and positive 
statements?  (LO1-5)
	18.	 State whether the following statements belong in  
positive economics, normative economics, or the art  
of economics.  (LO1-5)
	a.	 In a market, when quantity supplied exceeds quantity 
demanded, price tends to fall.
	b.	 When determining tax rates, the government should 
take into account the income needs of individuals.
	c.	 Given society’s options and goals, a broad-based tax is 
generally preferred to a narrowly based tax.
	d.	 California currently rations water to farmers at  
subsidized prices. Once California allows the trading 
of water rights, it will allow economic forces to be a  
market force.
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Is it possible to use objective economic analysis as a basis 
for government planning? (Austrian)
	 2.	 In “Rational Choice with Passion: Virtue in a Model of 
Rational Addiction,” Andrew M. Yuengert of Pepperdine 
University argues that there is a conflict between reason 
and passion.
	a.	 What might that conflict be?
	b.	 What implications does it have for applying the  
economic model? (Religious)

22	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
	 3.	 Economic institutions are “habits of thought” that  
organize society.
	a.	 In what way might patriarchy be an institution and 
how might it influence the labor market?
	b.	 Does the free market or patriarchy better explain why 
98 percent of secretaries are women and 98 percent of 
automobile mechanics are men? (Feminist)
	 4.	 In October of 2004, the supply of flu vaccine fell by over 
50 percent when a major producer of the vaccine was shut 
down. The result was that the vaccine had to be rationed, 
with a priority schedule established: young children, people 
with weakened immunity, those over 65, etc., taking priority.
	a.	 Compare and contrast this allocation outcome with a 
free market outcome.
	b.	 Which alternative is more just? (Institutionalist)
	 5.	 The textbook model assumes that individuals have enough 
knowledge to follow the economic decision rule.
	a.	 How did you decide what college you would attend?
	b.	 Did you have enough knowledge to follow the economic 
decision rule?
	c.	 For what type of decisions do you not use the economic 
decision rule?
	d.	 What are the implications for economic analysis if 
most people don’t follow the economic decision rule  
in many aspects of their decisions? (Post-Keynesian)
	 6.	 Radical economists believe that all of economics, like all 
theorizing or storytelling, is value-laden. Theories and 
stories reflect the values of those who compose them and 
tell them. For instance, radicals offer a different analysis 
than most economists of how capitalism works and what 
ought to be done about its most plaguing problems:  
inequality, periodic economic crises with large-scale  
unemployment, and the alienation of the workers.
	a.	 What does the radical position imply about the  
distinction between positive economics and normative 
economics that the text makes?
	b.	 Is economics value-laden or objective and is the dis-
tinction between positive and normative economics 
tenable or untenable? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 At times we all regret decisions. Does this necessarily 
mean we did not use the economic decision rule when 
making the decision?
	 2.	 Economist Steven Landsburg argues that if one believes  
in the death penalty for murderers because of its deterrent 
effect, using cost/benefit analysis we should execute  
computer hackers—the creators of worms and viruses—
because the deterrent effect in cost saving would be greater 
than the deterrent effect in saving lives. Estimates are that 
each execution deters eight murders, which, if one valued 
each life at about $7 million, saves about $56 million; he 
estimates that executing hackers would save more than that 
per execution, and thus would be the economic thing to do.
	a.	 Do you agree or disagree with Landsburg’s argument? 
Why?
	b.	 Can you extend cost/benefit analysis to other areas?
	 3.	 Adam Smith, who wrote The Wealth of Nations, and who 
is seen as the father of modern economics, also wrote The 
Theory of Moral Sentiments. In it he argued that society 
would be better off if people weren’t so selfish and were 
more considerate of others. How does this view fit with 
the discussion of economic reasoning presented in the 
chapter?
	 4.	 A Wall Street Journal article asked readers the following 
questions. What’s your answer?
	a.	 An accident has caused deadly fumes to enter the 
school ventilation system where it will kill five chil-
dren. You can stop it by throwing a switch, but doing 
so will kill one child in another room. Do you throw 
the switch?
	b.	 Say that a doctor can save five patients with an organ 
transplant that would end the life of a patient who is 
sick, but not yet dead. Does she do it?
	c.	 What is the difference between the two situations  
described in a and b?
	d.	 How important are opportunity costs in your decisions?
	 5.	 Economics is about strategic thinking, and the strategies 
can get very complicated. Suppose Marge kisses Mike 
and asks whether he liked it. She’d like Mike to answer 
“yes” and she’d like that answer to be truthful. But Mike 
knows that, and if he likes Marge, he may well say that he 
liked the kiss even if he didn’t. But Marge knows that, and 
thus might not really believe that Mike liked the kiss—
he’s just saying “yes” because that’s what Marge wants  
to hear. But Mike knows that Marge knows that, so some-
times he has to convey a sense that he didn’t like it, so that 
Marge will believe him when he says that he did like it. 
But Marge knows that . . . You get the picture.
	a.	 Should you always be honest, even when it hurts someone?
	b.	 What strategies can you figure out to avoid the problem 
of not believing the other person?
	 6.	 Say that divorce is made illegal unless both parties agree 
to remarry at the time of the divorce. If such a law were 
enacted, would you expect a divorced-person market for 
remarriage to develop? On average would you expect  
husbands or wives to have a higher price? Why?
	 7.	 Go to two stores: a supermarket and a convenience store.
	a.	 Write down the cost of a gallon of milk in each.
	b.	 The prices are most likely different. Using the termi-
nology used in this chapter, explain why that is the 

	
Chapter 1 ■ Economics and Economic Reasoning	
23
case and why anyone would buy milk in the store with 
the higher price.
	c.	 Do the same exercise with shirts or dresses in Walmart 
(or its equivalent) and Saks (or its equivalent).
	 8.	 About 100,000 individuals in the United States are waiting 
for organ transplants, and at an appropriate price many  
individuals would be willing to supply organs. Given 
those facts, should human organs be allowed to be bought 
and sold?
	 9.	 Name an economic institution and explain how it affects 
economic decision making or how its actions reflect  
economic principles.
	10.	 Tyler Cowen, an economist at George Mason University, 
presents an interesting case that pits the market against  
legal and social forces. The case involves payola—the 
payment of money to disk jockeys for playing a songwriter’s 
songs. He reports that Chuck Berry was having a hard 
time getting his music played because of racism. To coun-
ter this, he offered a well-known disk jockey, Alan Freed, 
partial songwriting credits, along with partial royalties,  
on any Chuck Berry song of his choice. Freed chose  
Maybellene, which he played and promoted. It went on  
to be a hit, Chuck Berry went on to be a star, and Freed’s 
estate continues to receive royalties.
	a.	 Should such payments be allowed? Why?
	b.	 How did Freed’s incentives from the royalty payment 
differ from Freed’s incentives if Chuck Berry had just 
offered him a flat payment?
	c.	 Name two other examples of similar activities—one 
that is legal and one that is not.
	11.	 Name three ways a limited number of dormitory rooms 
could be rationed. How would economic forces determine 
individual behavior in each? How would social or legal 
forces determine whether those economic forces become 
market forces?
	12.	 Prospect theory suggests that people are hurt more by 
losses than they are uplifted by gains of a corresponding 
size. If that is true, what implications would it have for 
economic policy?
	13.	 Is a good economist always objective? Explain your answer.
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 (1) Macroeconomics; (2) Microeconomics; (3) Microeco-
nomics; (4) Macroeconomics.  (LO1-1)
	 2.	 Since the price of both stocks is now $15, it doesn’t matter 
which one you sell (assuming no differential capital gains 
taxation). The price you bought them for doesn’t matter; 
it’s a sunk cost. Marginal analysis refers to the future  
gain, so what you expect to happen to future prices of the 
stocks—not past prices—should determine which stock 
you decide to sell.  (LO1-2)
	 3.	 A cost/benefit analysis requires that you put a value  
on a good, and placing a value on a good can be seen as  
demeaning it. Consider love. Try telling an acquaintance 
that you’d like to buy his or her spiritual love, and see 
what response you get.  (LO1-2)
	 4.	 John is wrong. The opportunity cost of reading the chapter 
is primarily the time you spend reading it. Reading the 
book prevents you from doing other things. Assuming  
that you already paid for the book, the original price is  
no longer part of the opportunity cost; it is a sunk cost. 
Bygones are bygones.  (LO1-2)
	 5.	 Whenever there is scarcity, the scarce good must be rationed 
by some means. Free health care has an opportunity cost 
in other resources. So if health care is not rationed, to get 
the resources to supply that care, other goods would have 
to be more tightly rationed than they currently are. It is 
likely that the opportunity cost of supplying free health 
care would be larger than most societies would be willing 
to pay.  (LO1-3)
	 6.	 Joan is wrong. Economic forces are always operative; 
market forces are not.  (LO1-3)
	 7.	 According to the invisible hand theorem, the price of  
tomatoes will likely fall.  (LO1-4)
	 8.	 False. While such changes have the largest gain, they also 
may have the largest cost. The policies economists should 
focus on are those that offer the largest net gain—benefits 
minus costs—to society.  (LO1-5)
	 9.	 He is wrong. The invisible hand theorem is a positive theo-
rem and does not tell us anything about what policy to adopt. 
To do so would be to violate Hume’s dictum that a “should” 
cannot be derived from an “is.” This is not to say that gov-
ernment should or should not interfere; whether government 
should interfere is a very difficult question.  (LO1-5)
	10.	 (1) Normative; (2) Positive; (3) Art; (4) Normative;  
(5) Positive.  (LO1-5)

No one ever saw a dog make a fair and 
deliberate exchange of one bone for 
another with another dog.
—Adam Smith
“
”
chapter 2
The Production Possibility Model, 
 Trade, and Globalization
Every economy must solve three main coordination 
problems:
1.  What, and how much, to produce.
2.  How to produce it.
3.  For whom to produce it.
In Chapter 1, I suggested that you can boil down all 
economic knowledge into the single phrase “There ain’t 
no such thing as a free lunch.” There’s obviously more to 
economics than that, but it’s not a bad summary of the 
core of economic reasoning—it’s relevant for an individual, for nonprofit orga-
nizations, for governments, and for nations. Oh, it’s true that once in a while 
you can snitch a sandwich, but what economics tells you is that if you’re offered 
something that approaches free-lunch status, you should also be on the lookout 
for some hidden cost.
	
Economists have a model, the production possibility model, that conveys the 
trade-offs society faces. This model is important for understanding not only 
the trade-offs society faces but also why people specialize in what they do 
and trade for the goods they need. Through specialization and trade, indi-
viduals, firms, and countries can achieve greater levels of output than they 
could otherwise achieve.
The Production Possibility Model
The production possibility model can be presented both in a table and in a 
graph. (The appendix to this chapter has a discussion of graphs in economics.) 
I’ll start with the table and then move from that to the graph.
A Production Possibility Curve for an Individual
Let’s consider a study-time/grades example. Say you have exactly 20 hours a 
week to devote to two courses: economics and history. (So maybe I’m a bit 
optimistic.) Grades are given numerically and you know that the following 
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO2-1	 Demonstrate trade-offs with 
a production possibility curve.
LO2-2	 Relate the concepts of 
comparative advantage and 
efficiency to the production 
possibility curve.
LO2-3	 State how, through 
comparative advantage  
and trade, countries can 
consume beyond their 
individual production 
possibilities.
LO2-4	 Explain how globalization  
is guided by the law of  
one price.
© Royalty-Free/Corbis RF

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
25
relationships exist: If you study 20 hours in economics, you’ll get a grade of 100; 
18 hours, 94; and so forth.1
	
Let’s say that the best you can do in history is a 98 with 20 hours of study a week; 
19 hours of study guarantees a 96, and so on. The production possibility table in Fig-
ure 2-1(a) shows the highest combination of grades you can get with various alloca-
tions of the 20 hours available for studying the two subjects. One possibility is getting 
70 in economics and 78 in history.
	
Notice that the opportunity cost of studying one subject rather than the other is 
reflected in the production possibility table, which lists the trade-offs between two 
choices. The information in the table comes from experience: We are assuming that 
you’ve discovered that if you transfer an hour of study from economics to history, 
you’ll lose 3 points on your grade in economics and gain 2 points in history. Assuming 
studying economics is your next-best alternative, the opportunity cost of a 2-point rise 
in your history grade is a 3-point decrease in your economics grade.
	
The information in the production possibility table also can be presented graphi-
cally in a diagram called a production possibility curve. A production possibility 
curve (PPC) is a curve measuring the maximum combination of outputs that can be 
obtained from a given number of inputs. It gives you a visual picture of the trade-off 
embodied in a decision.
	
A production possibility curve is created from a production possibility table by 
mapping the table in a two-dimensional graph. I’ve taken the information from the 
table in Figure 2-1(a) and mapped it into Figure 2-1(b). The history grade is mapped, 
or plotted, on the horizontal axis; the economics grade is on the vertical axis.
	
As you can see from the bottom row of Figure 2-1(a), if you study economics for 
all 20 hours and study history for 0 hours, you’ll get grades of 100 in economics and 
58 in history. Point A in Figure 2-1(b) represents that choice. If you study history for 
all 20 hours and study economics for 0 hours, you’ll get a 98 in history and a 40 in 
economics. Point E represents that choice. Points B, C, and D represent three possible 
choices between these two extremes. The slope of the PPC provides a measure of the 
opportunity cost of a choice; increasing your grade in economics by 3 points will have 
an opportunity cost of 2 points on your history grade.
	
Notice that the production possibility curve slopes downward from left to right. 
That means that there is an inverse relationship (a trade-off) between grades in eco-
nomics and grades in history. The better the grade in economics, the worse the grade 
in history, and vice versa.
	
To summarize, the production possibility curve demonstrates that:
1.	There is a limit to what you can achieve, given the existing institutions, 
resources, and technology.
2.	Every choice you make has an opportunity cost. You can get more of some-
thing only by giving up something else.
Increasing Opportunity Costs of the Trade-Off
In the study-time/grade example, the cost of one grade in terms of the other remained 
constant; you could always trade 2 points on your history grade for 3 points on your 
economics grade. This assumption of an unchanging trade-off made the production 
possibility curve a straight line. Although this made the example easier, is it realistic? 
Q-1  In the graph below, what is the 
opportunity cost of producing an extra 
unit of good X in terms of good Y?
The production possibility curve is 
a curve measuring the maximum 
combination of outputs that can be 
obtained from a given number of 
inputs.
The slope of the production possibility 
curve tells you the trade-off between the 
cost of one good in terms of another.
Y
5
4
3
2
1
0
X
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
1Throughout the book I’ll be presenting numerical examples to help you understand the concepts. 
The numbers I choose are often arbitrary. After all, you have to choose something. As an exercise, 
you might choose different numbers than I did, numbers that apply to your own life, and work out 
the argument using those numbers.

26	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Probably not, especially if we are using the PPC to describe the choices that a society 
makes. For many of the choices society must make, the perceived opportunity costs of 
society’s next-best alternative tend to increase as we choose more and more of an item. 
This principle can be summarized as follows:
In order to get more of something, generally one must give up ever-increasing 
quantities of something else.
In other words, initially the opportunity costs of an activity are low, but they increase the 
more we concentrate on that activity. A production possibility curve that exhibits increas-
ing marginal opportunity costs of a trade-off is bowed outward, as in Figure 2-2(b).
	
Why are production possibility curves typically bowed outward? Because some 
resources are better suited for the production of certain kinds of goods than other kinds 
of goods. To understand what that means, let’s talk about the graph in Figure 2-2(b), 
which is derived from the table in Figure 2-2(a). This curve represents society’s choice 
between defense spending (guns) and spending on domestic needs (butter).
	
Suppose society is producing only butter (point A). Giving up a little butter (1 pound) 
initially gains us a lot of guns (4), moving us to point B. The next 2 pounds of butter we give 
up gain us slightly fewer guns (point C). If we continue to trade butter for guns, we find 
The principle of increasing marginal 
opportunity cost tells us that opportunity 
costs increase the more you 
concentrate on the activity.
Economics grade
100
88
70
46
40
58
66
78
94 98
History grade
(20 hours 
of history,
 0 hours of 
economics)
E
D
C
B
(20 hours of economics,
 0 hours of history)
A
(b)  Production Possibility Curve
(a)  Production Possibility Table
	Hours of Study	
Grade in	
Hours of Study	
Grade in
	
in History	
History	
in Economics	
Economics
	
20	
98	
0	
40
	
19	
96	
1	
43
	
18	
94	
2	
46
	
17	
92	
3	
49
	
16	
90	
4	
52
	
15	
88	
5	
55
	
14	
86	
6	
58
	
13	
84	
7	
61
	
12	
82	
8	
64
	
11	
80	
9	
67
	
10	
78	
10	
70
	
9	
76	
11	
73
	
8	
74	
12	
76
	
7	
72	
13	
79
	
6	
70	
14	
82
	
5	
68	
15	
85
	
4	
66	
16	
88
	
3	
64	
17	
91
	
2	
62	
18	
94
	
1	
60	
19	
97
	
0	
58	
20	
100
FIGURE 2-1 (A AND B)  A Production Possibility Table and Curve for Grades in Economics and History
The production possibility table (a) shows the highest combination of grades you can get with only 20 hours available for studying economics 
and history. The information in the production possibility table in (a) can be plotted on a graph, as is done in (b). The grade received in 
economics is on the vertical axis, and the grade received in history is on the horizontal axis.

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
27
that at point D we gain very few guns from giving up a pound of butter. The opportunity 
cost of choosing guns in terms of butter increases as we increase the production of guns.
Comparative Advantage
The reason we must give up more and more butter as we produce more guns is that 
some resources are relatively better suited to producing guns, while others are rela-
tively better suited to producing butter. Put in economists’ terminology, some resources 
have a comparative advantage—better suited to the production of one good than to the 
production of another good. In this example, some resources have a comparative 
advantage over other resources in the production of butter, while other resources have 
a comparative advantage in the production of guns.
	
When making small amounts of guns and large amounts of butter, we primarily use 
those resources whose comparative advantage is in the production of guns to produce 
guns. All other resources are devoted to producing butter. Because the resources used in 
producing guns aren’t good at producing butter, we’re not giving up much butter to get 
those guns. As we produce more and more of a good, we must use resources whose 
comparative advantage is in the production of the other good—in this case, more suit-
able for producing butter than for producing guns. As we continue to remove resources 
from the production of butter to get the same additional amount of guns, we must give 
up increasing amounts of butter. Guns’ costs in terms of butter increase because we’re 
using resources to produce guns that have a comparative advantage in producing butter.
	
Let’s consider two more examples. Say the United States suddenly decides it needs 
more wheat. To get additional wheat, we must devote additional land to growing it. 
This land is less fertile than the land we’re already using, so our additional output of 
wheat per acre of land devoted to wheat will be less. Alternatively, consider the use of 
relief pitchers in a baseball game. If only one relief pitcher is needed, the manager 
Q-2  If no resource had a 
comparative advantage in the 
production of any good, what  
would the shape of the production 
possibility curve be? Why?
Butter
(b)  Production Possibility Curve
Guns
4 guns
3 guns
1 gun
4
7
9
11
12
0
5 pounds 
of butter
5
9
12
14
15
1 pound 
of butter
2 pounds 
of butter
A
B
C
D
E
F
	% of Resources	
	
% of Resources
	 Devoted to	
	
Devoted to
	 Production	
Number	
Production	
Pounds
	
of Guns	
of Guns	
of Butter	
of Butter	
Row
	
0	
0	
100	
15	
A
	
20	
4	
80	
14	
B
	
40	
7	
60	
12	
C
	
60	
9	
40	
9	
D
	
80	
11	
20	
5	
E
	
100	
12	
0	
0	
F
(a)  Production Possibility Table
FIGURE 2-2 (A AND B)  A Production Possibility Table and Curve
The table in (a) contains information on the trade-off between the 
production of guns and butter. This information has been plotted on  
the graph in (b). Notice in (b) that as we move along the production 
possibility curve from A to F, trading butter for guns, we get fewer and 
fewer guns for each pound of butter given up. That is, the opportunity cost 
of choosing guns over butter increases as we increase the production of 
guns. The phenomenon occurs because some resources are better suited 
for the production of butter than for the production of guns, and we use 
the better ones first.

28
sends in the best; if he must send in a second one, then a third, and even a fourth, the 
likelihood of winning the game decreases.
Efficiency
We would like, if possible, to get as much output as possible from a given amount of 
inputs or resources. That’s productive efficiency—achieving as much output as pos-
sible from a given amount of inputs or resources. We would like to be efficient. The 
production possibility curve helps us see what is meant by productive efficiency. Con-
sider point A in Figure 2-3(a), which is inside the production possibility curve. If we 
are producing at point A, we are using all our resources to produce 6 guns and 4 pounds 
of butter. Point A in Figure 2-3(a) represents inefficiency—getting less output from 
inputs that, if devoted to some other activity, would produce more output. That’s 
because with the same inputs we could be getting either 8 guns and 4 pounds of but-
ter (point B) or 6 pounds of butter and 6 guns (point C). As long as we prefer more to 
less, both points B and C represent efficiency—achieving a goal using as few inputs 
as possible. We always want to move our production out to a point on the production 
possibility curve.
	
Why not move out farther, to point D? If we could, we would, but by definition the 
production possibility curve represents the most output we can get from a certain com-
bination of inputs. So point D is unattainable, given our resources and technology.
	
When technology improves, when more resources are discovered, or when the eco-
nomic institutions get better at fulfilling our wants, we can get more output with the 
same inputs. What this means is that when technology or an economic institution 
improves, the entire production possibility curve shifts outward from AB to CD in 
Figure 2-3(b). How the production possibility curve shifts outward depends on how 
the technology improves. For example, say we become more efficient at producing 
butter, but not more efficient at producing guns. Then the production possibility curve 
shifts outward to AC in Figure 2-3(c).
Distribution and Productive Efficiency
In discussing the production possibility curve for a society, I avoided questions of dis-
tribution: Who gets what? But such questions cannot be ignored in real-world situa-
tions. Specifically, if the method of production is tied to a particular income distribution 
Q-3  Identify the point(s) of 
inefficiency and efficiency. What  
point(s) are unattainable?
A REMINDER
Production Possibility Curves
The production possibility
curve is a curve that
measures the maximum
combination of outputs that
can be obtained with a given
number of inputs.
Deﬁnition
Shape
The production possibility
curve is downward-sloping.
Most are outward bowed
because the cost of producing 
a good increases as more is 
produced. If the opportunity 
cost doesn’t change, the
production possibility curve is
a straight line.
Shifts
Increases in inputs or
increases in the productivity
of inputs shift the production
possibility curve out.
Decreases have the opposite
eﬀect; the production possi-
bility curve shifts along the
axis whose input is changing.
Points In, Out, and On
Points inside the production
possibility curve are points of
ineﬃciency; points on the
production possibility curve
are points of eﬃciency; points
outside the production
possibility curve are not
obtainable.
Y
A
B
C
D
X

29
Butter
Butter
Eﬃcient 
points
Unattainable point, 
given existing 
technology, resources, 
and labor force
Ineﬃcient point
10
8
6
4
2
0
2 
4 
6 
8 
10
Guns
(a)  Eﬃciency and Ineﬃciency
C
D
A
B
C
A
B
D
Guns
(b)  Neutral Technological Change
0
(c)  Biased Technological Change
Butter
Guns
0
B
C
A
ADDED DIMENSION
of retracing your path and starting over. The decision trees of 
life have thousands of branches; each decision you make 
rules out other paths, or at least increases their costs signifi-
cantly. (Remember that day you decided to blow off your 
homework? That decision may have changed your future life.)
	
Another way of putting this same point is that all decisions 
are made in context: What makes sense in one context 
may not make sense in another. For example, say you’re 
answering the question “Would society be better off if stu-
dents were taught literature or if they were taught agricul-
ture?” The answer depends on the institutional context. In a 
developing country whose goal is large increases in mate-
rial output, teaching agriculture may make sense. In a de-
veloped country, where growth in material output is less 
important, teaching literature may make sense.
	
Recognizing the contextual nature of decisions is impor-
tant when interpreting the production possibility curve.  
Because decisions are contextual, what the production pos-
sibility curve for a particular decision looks like depends on 
the existing institutions, and the analysis can be applied only 
in institutional and historical context. The production possi-
bility curve is not a purely technical phenomenon. The curve 
is an engine of analysis to make contextual choices, not a 
definitive tool to decide what one should do in all cases.
Choices in Context: Decision Trees
The production possibility curve presents choices without 
regard to time and therefore makes trade-offs clear-cut; 
there are two choices, one with a higher cost and one with 
a lower cost. The reality is that most choices are dependent 
on other choices; they are made sequentially. With sequen-
tial choices, you cannot simply reverse your decision. Once 
you have started on a path, to take another path you have 
to return to the beginning. Thus, following one path often 
lowers the costs of options along that path, but it raises the 
costs of options along another path.
	
Such sequential decisions can best be seen within 
the framework of a decision tree—a visual description of 
sequential choices. A decision tree is shown in the accom-
panying figure.
	
Once you make the initial decision to go on path A, the 
costs of path B options become higher; they include the costs 
A
B
FIGURE 2-3 (A, B, AND C)  Efficiency, Inefficiency, and Technological Change
The production possibility curve helps us see what is meant by efficiency. At point A, in (a), all inputs are used to make 4 pounds of butter 
and 6 guns. This is inefficient since there is a way to obtain more of one without giving up any of the other, that is, to obtain 6 pounds of 
butter and 6 guns (point C) or 8 guns and 4 pounds of butter (point B). All points inside the production possibility curve are inefficient. 
With existing inputs and technology, we cannot go beyond the production possibility curve. For example, point D is unattainable.
	
A technological change that improves production techniques will shift the production possibility curve outward, as shown in both (b) and (c). 
How the curve shifts outward depends on how technology improves. For example, if we become more efficient in the production of both guns and 
butter, the curve will shift out as in (b). If we become more efficient in producing butter, but not in producing guns, then the curve will shift as in (c).

30	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
and choosing one method will help some people but hurt others, we can’t say that one 
method of production is efficient and the other inefficient, even if one method produces 
more total output than the other. As I stated above, the term efficiency involves achieving 
a goal as cheaply as possible. The term has meaning only in regard to a specified goal. 
Say, for example, that we have a society of ascetics who believe that consumption above 
some minimum is immoral. For such a society, producing more for less (productive 
efficiency) would not be efficient since consumption is not its goal. Or say that we have 
a society that cares that what is produced is fairly distributed. An increase in output that 
goes to only one person and not to anyone else would not necessarily be efficient.
	
In our society, however, most people prefer more to less, and many policies have rela-
tively small distributional consequences. On the basis of the assumption that more is bet-
ter than less, economists use their own kind of shorthand for such policies and talk about 
efficiency as identical to productive efficiency—increasing total output. But it’s impor-
tant to remember the assumptions under which that shorthand is used: The distributional 
effects of the policy are deemed acceptable, and we, as a society, prefer more output.
Examples of Shifts in the PPC
To see whether you understand the production possibility curve, let us now consider 
some situations that can be shown with it. Below, I list four situations. To test your 
understanding of the curve, match each situation to one of the curves in Figure 2-4.
1.	A meteor hits the world and destroys half the earth’s natural resources.
2.	Nanotechnology is perfected that lowers the cost of manufactured goods.
3.	A new technology is discovered that doubles the speed at which all goods can 
be produced.
4.	Climate change increases the cost of producing agricultural goods.
	
The correct answers are: 1–d; 2–a; 3–b; 4–c.
	
If you got them all right, you are well on your way to understanding the production 
possibility curve.
Trade and Comparative Advantage
Now that we have gone through the basics of the production possibility curve, let’s dig 
a little deeper. From the above discussion, you know that production possibility curves 
are generally bowed outward and that the reason for this is comparative advantage. To 
Q-4  Your firm is establishing a 
trucking business in Saudi Arabia. The 
managers have noticed that women are 
generally paid much less than men in 
Saudi Arabia, and they suggest that 
hiring women would be more efficient 
than hiring men. How should you 
respond?
Q-5  When a natural disaster hits the 
Midwestern United States, where most 
of the U.S. butter is produced, what 
happens to the U.S. production 
possibility curve for guns and butter?
FIGURE 2-4 (A, B, C, AND D)  Examples of Shifts in Production Possibility Curves
Each of these curves reflects a different type of shift. (The axes are left unlabeled on purpose. Manufactured and agricultural goods may be 
placed on either axis.) Your assignment is to match these shifts with the situations given in the text.

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
31
remind you of the argument, consider Figure 2-5, which is the guns and butter produc-
tion possibility example I presented earlier.
	
At point A, all resources are being used to produce butter. As more guns are pro-
duced, we take resources away from producing butter that had a comparative advan-
tage in producing guns, so we gain a lot of guns for little butter (the opportunity cost 
of additional guns is low). As we continue down the curve, the comparative advantage 
of the resources we use changes, and as we approach B, we use almost all resources to 
produce guns, so we are using resources that aren’t very good at producing guns. Thus, 
around point B we gain few guns for a lot of butter (the opportunity cost of additional 
guns is high).
	
A society wants to be on the frontier of its production possibility curve. This 
requires that individuals produce those goods for which they have a comparative 
advantage. The question for society, then, is how to direct individuals toward those 
activities. For a firm, the answer is easy. A manager can allocate the firm’s resources 
to their best use. For example, he or she can assign an employee with good people 
skills to the human resources department and another with good research skills to 
research and development. But our economy has millions of individuals, and no man-
ager directing everyone on what to do. How do we know that these individuals will be 
directed to do those things for which they have a comparative advantage? It was this 
question that was central to the British moral philosopher Adam Smith when he wrote 
his most famous book, The Wealth of Nations (1776). In it he argued that it was 
humankind’s proclivity to trade that leads to individuals using their comparative 
advantage. He writes:
This division of labour, from which so many advantages are derived, is not originally 
the effect of any human wisdom, which foresees and intends that general opulence 
to which it gives occasion. It is the necessary, though very slow and gradual conse-
quence of a certain propensity in human nature which has in view no such extensive 
utility; the propensity to truck, barter, and exchange one thing for another . . . 
[This propensity] is common to all men, and to be found in no other race of  
animals, which seem to know neither this nor any other species of contracts . . . 
Nobody ever saw a dog make a fair and deliberate exchange of one bone for 
another with another dog. Nobody ever saw one animal by its gestures and natural 
cries signify to another, this is mine, that yours; I am willing to give this for that.
	
As long as people trade, Smith argues, the market will guide people, like an invis-
ible hand, to gravitate toward those activities for which they have a comparative 
advantage.
Adam Smith argued that it is 
humankind’s proclivity to trade  
that leads to individuals using their 
comparative advantage.
Butter
Cost of additional guns
is low.
A
Guns
Cost of additional
guns is high.
B
FIGURE 2-5  Comparative 
Advantage and the Production 
Possibility Curve
As we move down along the 
production possibility curve from 
point A to point B, the cost of 
producing guns is increasing 
since we are using resources less 
suited for gun production.

32	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Markets, Specialization, and Growth
We can see the effect of trade on our well-being empirically by considering the growth 
of economies. As you can see from Figure 2-6, for 1,700 years the world economy 
grew very slowly. Then, at the end of the 18th century, the world economy started to 
grow rapidly, and it has grown at a high rate since then.
	
What changed? The introduction of markets that facilitate trade and the spread of 
democracy. There’s something about markets that leads to economic growth. Markets 
allow specialization and encourage trade. The bowing out of the production possibility 
curve associated with trade is part of the story, but a minor part. As individuals com-
pete and specialize, they learn by doing, becoming even better at what they do. 
Markets also foster competition, which pushes individuals to find better ways of doing 
things. They devise new technologies that further the growth process.
	
The new millennium is offering new ways for individuals to specialize and com-
pete. More and more businesses are trading on the Internet. For example, colleges such 
as the University of Phoenix are providing online competition for traditional colleges. 
Similarly, online stores are proliferating. As Internet technology becomes built into 
our economy, we can expect more specialization, more division of labor, and the eco-
nomic growth that follows.
The Benefits of Trade
The reason why markets make people better off follows from a very simple argument: 
When people freely enter into a trade, both parties can be expected to benefit from the 
trade; otherwise, why would they have traded in the first place? So when the butcher 
sells you meat, he’s better off with the money you give him, and you’re better off with 
the meat he gives you. Voluntary trade is a win-win proposition.
	
When there is competition in trading, such that individuals are able to pick the best 
trades available to them, each individual drives the best bargain he or she can. The end 
result is that both individuals in the trade benefit as much as they possibly can, given 
what others are willing to trade. This argument for the benefits from trade underlies 
the general policy of laissez-faire—an economic policy of leaving coordination of 
individuals’ actions to the market. (Laissez-faire, a French term, means “Let events 
take their course; leave things alone.”) Laissez-faire is not a theorem in economics; it 
is a precept because it extends the implications of a model to reality and draws conclu-
sions about the real world. It is based on normative judgments, judgments about the 
relevance of the model, and assumptions upon which the model is based.
	
Let’s consider a numerical example of the gains that accrue to two countries when 
they trade. I use an international trade example so that you can see that the argument 
Voluntary trade is a win-win proposition.
Q-6  What argument underlies the 
general laissez-faire policy argument?
FIGURE 2-6  Growth in the Past Two Millennia
For 1,700 years the world economy grew very slowly. Then, 
since the end of the 18th century with the introduction of 
markets and the spread of democracy, the world economy  
has grown at increasing rates.
Source: OECD/Angus Maddison 1995, Monitoring the World Economy, 
OECD Publishing, Paris; Angus Maddison, "Poor until 1820," The Wall 
Street Journal, January 11, 1999; and author extrapolations.
2020
1500
1000
500
0
Years
$6,000
$5,000
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
$0
Per capita income 
(in 1990 international dollars)
(inset) © David Sacks/Getty Images RF
Source: Library of Congress, Prints & 
Photographs Division, photograph by 
Carol M. Highsmith [LC-HS503-5530]
Markets can be very simple or very 
complicated.

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
33
Textiles in yards
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0.5
1
2
3
4
5
Chocolate in tons
A
B
Consumption with trade
(a)  Pakistan
C
Textiles in yards
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
500
1
2
3
4
5
Chocolate in tons
D
F
E
Consumption with trade
(b)  Belgium
holds for international trade as well as domestic trade. Let’s say that the two countries 
are Pakistan and Belgium, and that Pakistan has a comparative advantage in producing 
textiles, while Belgium has a comparative advantage in producing chocolate. Specifi-
cally, Pakistan can produce 4,000 yards of textiles a day or 1 ton of chocolate a day, or 
any proportional combination in between. Pakistan’s production possibility curve is 
shown in Figure 2-7(a). Similarly, in a given day, Belgium can produce either 1,000 yards 
of textiles or 4 tons of chocolate, or any proportion in between. Its production possibil-
ity curve is shown in Figure 2-7(b).
	
In the absence of trade, the most each country can consume is some combination 
along its production possibility curve. Say Pakistan has chosen to produce and con-
sume 2,000 yards of textiles and 0.5 ton of chocolate [point A in Figure 2-7(a)], while 
Belgium has chosen to produce and consume 500 yards of textiles and 2 tons of 
chocolate [point D in Figure 2-7(b)].
	
Let’s now consider what would happen if each specialized, doing what it does best, 
and then traded with the other for the goods it wants. This separates the production and 
consumption decisions. Because Pakistan can produce textiles at a lower cost in terms 
of chocolate, it makes sense for Pakistan to specialize in textiles, producing 4,000 yards 
[point C in Figure 2-7(a)]. Similarly, it makes sense for Belgium to specialize in choc-
olate, producing 4 tons [point F in Figure 2-7(b)]. By specializing, the countries 
together produce 4 tons of chocolate and 4,000 yards of textiles. If the countries divide 
Specialization and trade create gains 
that make all better off.
FIGURE 2-7 (A AND B)  The Gains from Trade
Trade makes those involved in the trade better off. If each country specializes and takes advantage of its comparative advantage, each can 
consume a combination of goods beyond its production possibility curve. In the example shown, Pakistan can consume at point B and 
Belgium at point E.
	
Textiles	
Chocolate
Pakistan	
2,000 yards	
0.5 ton
Belgium	
500 yards	
2 tons

34	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
production so that each country gets 2,000 yards of fabric and 2 tons of chocolate, 
Pakistan can consume at point B and Belgium at point E. Both are consuming beyond 
their production possibility curves without trade. This tells us an important principle 
about trade: Trade lets countries consume beyond their “no-trade” production possibility 
curve. It is primarily these gains that lead to economists’ support of free trade and their 
opposition to barriers to trade.
	
The pressure to find comparative advantages is never-ending, in part because com-
parative advantage can change. Two hundred years ago, the United States had a com-
parative advantage in producing textiles. It was rich in natural resources and labor, and 
it had a low-cost source of power (water). As the cost of U.S. labor went up, and as 
trade opportunities widened, that comparative advantage disappeared. As it did, the 
United States moved out of the textile industry. Countries with cheaper labor, such as 
Bangladesh, today have the comparative advantage in textiles. As firms have relocated 
textile production to Bangladesh, total costs have fallen. The gains from trade show up 
as higher pay for Bangladeshi workers and lower-priced cloth for U.S. consumers. Of 
course, trade is a two-way street. In return for Bangladesh’s textiles, the United States 
sends computer software and airplanes, products that would be highly expensive, 
indeed almost impossible, for Bangladesh to produce on its own. So Bangladeshi con-
sumers, on average, are also made better off by the trade.
	
That same process of changing comparative advantage that the United States expe-
rienced long ago is going on in China today. As Chinese wages rise relative to other 
less developed countries (wages have been going up about 14 percent a year in China), 
China is moving out of low-skilled labor-intensive industries and into higher-skilled 
industries. This moves the nature of Chinese competition up the value chain, providing 
more competition for U.S. college students going into the job market.
Globalization and the Law of One Price
There is much more to be said about both trade and the gains from trade, and later 
chapters will explore trade in much more detail. But let me briefly discuss the relation-
ship of the theory of comparative advantage to globalization.
Globalization
Globalization is the increasing integration of economies, cultures, and institutions 
across the world. In a globalized economy, firms think of production and sales at a 
global level. They produce where costs are lowest, and sell across the world at the 
highest price they can get. A globalized world is a world in which economies of the 
world are highly integrated. Globalization has two effects on firms. The first is posi-
tive; because the world economy is so much larger than the domestic economy, the 
rewards for winning globally are much larger than the rewards for winning domesti-
cally. The second effect is negative; it is much harder to win, or even to stay in busi-
ness, competing in a global market. A company may be the low-cost producer in a 
particular country yet may face foreign competitors that can undersell it. The global 
economy increases the number of competitors for the firm. Consider the automobile 
industry. Three companies are headquartered in the United States, but more than 
40 automobile companies operate worldwide. U.S. automakers face stiff competition 
from foreign automakers; unless they meet that competition, they will not survive.
	
These two effects are, of course, related. When you compete in a larger market, you 
have to be better to survive, but if you do survive the rewards are greater.
	
Globalization increases competition by allowing greater specialization and division 
of labor, which, as Adam Smith first observed in The Wealth of Nations, increases growth 
and improves the standard of living for everyone. Thus, in many ways globalization is 
Q-7  Steve can bake either 4 loaves 
of bread or 8 dozen cookies a day. 
Sarah can bake either 4 loaves of bread 
or 4 dozen cookies a day. Show, using 
production possibility curves, that  
Steve and Sarah would be better off 
specializing in their baking activities and 
then trading, rather than baking only for 
themselves.
Q-8  True or false? Two countries can 
achieve the greatest gains from trade by 
each producing the goods for which it 
has a comparative advantage and then 
trading those goods.
The global economy increases the 
number of competitors for the firm.

35
simply another name for increased specialization. Globalization allows (indeed, forces) 
companies to move operations to countries with a comparative advantage. As they do 
so, they lower costs of production. Globalization leads to companies specializing in 
smaller portions of the production process because the potential market is not just one 
country but the world. Such specialization can lead to increased productivity as firms 
get better and better at producing through practice, what economists call learning  
by doing.
	
In a globalized economy, production will shift to the lowest-cost producer. Global-
ization scares many people in the United States because, with wages so much lower in 
many developing countries than in the United States, they wonder whether all jobs will 
move offshore: Will the United States be left producing anything? Economists’ answer 
is: Of course it will. Comparative advantage, by definition, means that if one country 
has a comparative advantage in producing one set of goods, the other country has to 
have a comparative advantage in the other set of goods. The real questions are: In what 
goods will the United States have comparative advantages? and: How will those com-
parative advantages come about?
	
One reason people have a hard time thinking of goods in which the United States 
has a comparative advantage is that they are thinking in terms of labor costs. They ask: 
Since wages are lower in China, isn’t it cheaper to produce all goods in China? The 
answer is no; production requires many more inputs than just labor. Technology, natu-
ral resources, institutional structure, specialized types of knowledge, and entrepreneur-
ial know-how are also needed to produce goods, and the United States has significant 
Q-9  How does globalization reduce 
the costs of production?
Q-10  Is it likely that all U.S. jobs  
one day will have moved abroad?  
Why or why not?
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Barbie and her companion Ken are as American as apple 
pie, and considering their origins gives us some insight into 
the modern U.S. economy and its interconnection with other 
countries. Barbie and Ken are not produced in the United 
States; they never were. When Barbie first came out in 1959, 
she was produced in Japan. Today, it is unclear where Barbie 
and Ken are produced. If you look at the box they come in, it 
says “Made in China,” but looking deeper 
we find that Barbie and Ken are actually 
made in five different countries, each focus-
ing on an aspect of production that reflects 
its comparative advantage. Japan produces 
the nylon hair. China provides much of what 
is normally considered manufacturing— 
factory spaces, labor, and energy for  
assembly—but it imports many of the com-
ponents. The oil for the plastic comes from 
Saudi Arabia. That oil is refined into plastic pellets in Taiwan. 
The United States even provides some of the raw materials 
that go into the manufacturing process—it provides the 
cardboard, packing, paint pigments, and the mold.
	
The diversification of parts that go into the manufactur-
ing of Barbie and Ken is typical of many goods today. As 
Made in China?
the world economy has become more integrated, the pro-
cess of supplying components of manufacturing has be-
come more and more spread out, as firms have divided 
up the manufacturing process in search of the least-cost 
location for each component.
But the global diversity in manufacturing and supply of 
components is only half the story of modern production. 
The other half is the shrinking of the rela-
tive importance of that manufacturing, 
and it is this other half that explains how 
the United States maintains its position in 
the world when so much of the manufac-
turing takes place elsewhere. It does so 
by maintaining its control over the distri-
bution and marketing of the goods. In 
fact, of the $15 retail cost of a Barbie or 
Ken, $12 can be accounted for by activi-
ties not associated with manufacturing—design, transpor-
tation, merchandising, and advertising. And, luckily for 
the United States, many of these activities are still done 
in the United States, allowing the country to maintain its 
high living standard even as manufacturing spreads 
around the globe.
© AP Photo/Ariana Cubillos

36
ADDED DIMENSION
to compete on these levels as well as on basic production 
levels. They are ­actively trying to develop such skills in 
their population and to compete with the United States not 
only in manufacturing and low-tech jobs but also in re-
search, development, finance, organizational activities,  
artistic activities, and high-tech jobs. Right now companies in 
China and India are working to challenge U.S. dominance 
in all high-tech and creativity fields. (For example, they too 
are working on nanotechnology.) To do this, they are trying 
to entice top scientists and engineers to stay in their coun-
try, or to return home if they have been studying or work-
ing in the United States. Since more than 50 percent of all 
PhDs given in science, engineering, and economics go to 
non-U.S. citizens (in economics, it is more than 70 per-
cent), many observers believe that the United States can-
not assume its past dominance in the innovative and 
high-tech fields will ­continue forever. The competitive front 
that will determine whether the United States can maintain 
much higher wages than developing countries is not 
the competition in current industries, but competition in  
industries of the future.
The Developing Country’s Perspective on Globalization
This book is written from a U.S. point of view. From that 
­perspective, the relevant question is: Can the United 
States maintain its high wages relative to the low wages in 
China, India, and other developing countries? I suspect 
that most U.S. readers hope that it can. From a developing 
country’s perspective, I suspect that the hope is that it can-
not; their hope is that their wage rates catch up with U.S. 
wage rates. Judged from a developing country’s perspec-
tive, the question is: Is it fair that U.S. workers don’t work 
as hard as we do but earn much more?
	
The market does not directly take fairness into account. 
The market is interested only in who can produce a good 
or service at the lowest cost. This means that in a com-
petitive economy, the United States can maintain its high 
wages only to the degree that it can produce sufficient 
goods and services cheaper than low-wage countries 
can at the market exchange rate. It must keep the trade 
balance roughly equal.
	
Developing countries recognize that, in the past, the 
United States has had a comparative advantage in creativ-
ity and innovation, and they are doing everything they can 
© McGraw-Hill Education
Nanotechnology—dynamic industry 
of the future?
advantages in these other factors. It is these advantages that result in higher U.S. wages 
compared to other countries.
	
The United States has excelled particularly in goods that require creativity and 
innovation. The United States has remained the leader of the world economy and has 
kept a comparative advantage in many goods even with its high relative wages, in part 
because of continual innovation. For example, the Internet started in the United States, 
which is why the United States is the location of so many information technology 
firms. The United States also has led the way in biotechnology innovation. Similarly, 
the creative industries, such as film, art, and advertising, have flourished in the United 
States. These industries are dynamic, high-profit, high-wage industries. (One of the 
reasons insourcing occurs is that the United States has such a great comparative advan-
tage in these other aspects of production.) As long as U.S. production maintains a 
comparative advantage in innovation, the United States will be able to specialize in 
goods that allow firms to pay higher wages.
Exchange Rates and Comparative Advantage
There is, however, reason to be concerned. If innovation and creativity don’t develop 
new industries in which the United States has a comparative advantage fast enough, 
as  the current dynamic industries mature and move to low-wage areas, at current 
exchange rates (the value of a currency relative to the value of foreign currencies), the 
United States will not maintain comparative advantages in sufficient industries to war-
rant the relative wage differentials that exist today. In that case, U.S. demand for for-
eign goods and services will be higher than foreign demand for U.S. goods and 

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
37
services. For the last 20 years that has been the case. To bring them into equilibrium, 
the U.S. wage premium (the higher pay that U.S. workers receive compared to equiva-
lent foreign workers) will have to decline to regain our comparative advantages. Since 
nominal wages (the wages that you see in your paycheck) in the United States are 
unlikely to fall, this will most likely occur through a decline in the U.S. exchange rate, 
large increases in foreign wages, or both. Either of these will make foreign products 
imported into the United States more expensive and U.S. products cheaper for foreign-
ers, and eventually (over 30 or 40 years) will balance the comparative advantages and 
trade flows.
The Law of One Price
Many Americans do not like the “exchange rate answer,” but in terms of policy, it is 
probably the best the United States can hope for. If the United States tries to prevent 
production from moving to other countries with trade restrictions, U.S.-based compa-
nies will find that they can no longer compete internationally, and the United States 
will be in worse shape than if it had allowed outsourcing. The reality is that competi-
tion, combined with transferable technology and similar institutions, drives wages and 
prices of similar factors and goods toward equality. This reality often goes by the name 
of the law of one price—the wages of workers in one country will not differ signifi-
cantly from the wages of (equal) workers in another institutionally similar country. As 
we will discuss in a later chapter, the debate is about what an “equal” worker is and 
what an equivalent institutional structure is.
	
Because of a variety of historical circumstances, the United States has been able to 
avoid the law of one price in wages since World War I. One factor has been the desire 
of foreigners to increase their holding of U.S. financial assets by trillions of dollars, 
which has let the United States consume more goods than it produces. Another is that 
the United States’ institutional structure, technology, entrepreneurial labor force, and 
nonlabor inputs have given the United States sufficiently strong comparative advan-
tages to offset the higher U.S. wage rates. The passage of time and modern techno-
logical changes have been eroding the United States’ comparative advantages based on 
institutional structure and technology. To the degree that this continues to happen, to 
maintain a balance in the comparative advantages of various countries, the wages of 
workers in other countries such as India and China will have to move closer to the 
wages of U.S. workers.
Globalization and the Timing of Benefits of Trade
One final comment about globalization and the U.S. economy is in order. None of the 
above discussion contradicts the proposition that trade makes both countries better off. 
Thus, the discussion does not support the position taken by some opponents to trade 
and globalization that foreign competition is hurting the United States and that the 
United States can be made better off by imposing trade restrictions. Instead, the dis-
cussion is about the timing of the benefits of trade. Many of the benefits of trade 
already have been consumed by the United States during the years that the United 
States has been running trade deficits (importing more than it is exporting). The reality 
is that the United States has been living better than it could have otherwise precisely 
because of trade. It also has been living much better than it otherwise could because it 
is paying for some of its imports with IOUs promising payment in the future instead of 
with exports. But there is no free lunch, and when these IOUs are presented for pay-
ment, the United States will have to pay for some of the benefits that it already has 
consumed.
The law of one price states that wages 
of workers in one country will not differ 
significantly from the wages of (equal) 
workers in another institutionally similar 
country.
The reality is that the United States has 
been living better than it could have 
otherwise precisely because of trade 
and outsourcing.

38	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Conclusion
While the production possibility curve model does not give unambiguous answers as to 
what government’s role should be in regulating trade, it does serve a very important pur-
pose. It is a geometric tool that summarizes a number of ideas in economics: trade-offs, 
opportunity costs, comparative advantage, efficiency, and how trade leads to effi-
ciency. These ideas are all essential to economists’ conversations. They provide the 
framework within which those conversations take place. Thinking of the production 
possibility curve (and picturing the economy as being on it) directs you to think of the 
trade-offs involved in every decision.
	
Look at questions such as: Should we save the spotted owl or should we allow log-
ging in the western forests? Should we expand the government health care system or 
should we strengthen our national defense system? Should we emphasize policies that 
allow more consumption now or should we emphasize policies that allow more con-
sumption in the future? Such choices involve difficult trade-offs that can be pictured 
by the production possibility curve.
	
Not everyone recognizes these trade-offs. For example, politicians often talk as if 
the production possibility curve were nonexistent. They promise voters the world, tell-
ing them, “If you elect me, you can have more of everything.” When they say that, they 
obscure the hard choices and increase their probability of getting elected.
	
Economists do the opposite. They promise little except that life is tough, and they 
continually point out that seemingly free lunches often involve significant hidden 
costs. Alas, political candidates who exhibit such reasonableness seldom get elected. 
Economists’ reasonableness has earned economics the nickname the dismal science.
The production possibility curve 
represents the tough choices society 
must make.
Economists continually point out that 
seemingly free lunches often involve 
significant hidden costs.
• The production possibility curve measures the maxi-
mum combination of outputs that can be obtained 
from a given number of inputs.  (LO2-1)
• In general, in order to get more and more of some-
thing, we must give up ever-increasing quantities of 
something else.  (LO2-1)
• Trade allows people to use their comparative advan-
tage and shift out society’s production possibility 
curve.  (LO2-2)
• The rise of markets coincided with significant in-
creases in output. Specialization, trade, and competi-
tion have all contributed to the increase.  (LO2-2)
• Points inside the production possibility curve are inef-
ficient, points along the production possibility curve are 
efficient, and points outside are unattainable.  (LO2-2)
• By specializing in producing those goods for which 
one has a comparative advantage (lowest opportunity 
Summary
cost), one can produce the greatest amount of goods 
with which to trade. Doing so, countries can increase 
consumption.  (LO2-3)
• Globalization is the increasing integration of economies, 
cultures, and institutions across the world.  (LO2-4)
• Because many goods are cheaper to produce in  
countries such as China and India, production that 
formerly took place in the United States is now  
taking place in foreign countries.  (LO2-4)
• If the United States can maintain its strong comparative 
advantage in goods using new technologies and inno-
vation, the jobs lost by production moving outside the 
United States can be replaced with other high-paying 
jobs. If it does not, then some adjustments in relative 
wage rates or exchange rates must occur.  (LO2-4)
• Business’s tendency to shift production to countries 
where it is cheapest to produce is guided by the law  
of one price.  (LO2-4)

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
39
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Show how a production possibility curve would shift if a 
society became more productive in its output of widgets 
but less productive in its output of wadgets.  (LO2-1)
	 2.	 Show how a production possibility curve would shift if a 
society became more productive in the output of both 
widgets and wadgets.  (LO2-1)
	 3.	 Design a grade production possibility table and curve that 
demonstrates a rising trade-off as the grade in each subject 
rises.  (LO2-1)
	 4.	 In two hours JustBorn Candies can produce 30,000 Peeps 
or 90,000 Mike and Ikes or any combination in  
between.  (LO2-2)
	a.	 What is the trade-off between Peeps and Mike and Ikes?
b.	 Draw a production possibility curve that reflects this 
trade-off.
	c.	 Identify and label three points: efficient production, 
inefficient production, impossible.
	d.	 Illustrate what would happen if JustBorn candies  
developed a technology that increased productivity 
equally for both products.
	 5.	 How does the theory of comparative advantage relate to 
production possibility curves?  (LO2-2)
	 6.	 A country has the following production possibility  
table:  (LO2-2)
	Resources	
	
Resources 
	Devoted to	
Output of	
Devoted to	
Output of 
	 Clothing	
Clothing	
Food	
Food
	
100%	
20	
0%	
0
	
80	
16	
20	
5
	
60	
12	
40	
9
	
40	
8	
60	
12
	
20	
4	
80	
14
	
0	
0	
100	
15
	a.	 Draw the country’s production possibility curve.
	b.	 What’s happening to the trade-off between food and 
clothing?
	c.	 Say the country gets better at the production of  
food. What will happen to the production possibility 
curve?
	d.	 Say the country gets equally better at producing both 
food and clothing. What will happen to the production 
possibility curve? 
	 7.	 If neither of two countries has a comparative advantage in  
either of two goods, what are the gains from trade?  (LO2-3)
	 8.	 Does the fact that the production possibility model tells us 
that trade is good mean that in the real world free trade is 
necessarily the best policy? Explain.  (LO2-3)
	 9.	 Suppose the United States and Japan have the following 
production possibility tables:  (LO2-3)
	
Japan	
United States
Bolts of	
Tons of	
Bolts of	
Tons of
	 Cloth	
Wheat	
Cloth	
Wheat
	1,000	
0	
500	
0
	
800	
100	
400	
200
	
600	
200	
300	
400
	
400	
300	
200	
600
	
200	
400	
100	
800
	
0	
500	
0	
1,000
	a.	 Draw each country’s production possibility curve.
	b.	 In what good does the United States have a comparative 
advantage?
	c.	 Is there a possible trade that benefits both countries?
	d.	 Demonstrate your answer graphically. 
	10.	 What effect has globalization had on the ability of firms 
to specialize? How has this affected the competitive  
process?  (LO2-4)
	11.	 If workers in China and India become as productive as 
U.S. workers, what adjustments will allow the United 
States to regain its competitiveness?  (LO2-4)
	12.	 State the law of one price. How is it related to the move-
ment of manufacturing out of the United States?  (LO2-4)
Key Terms
comparative advantage
efficiency
globalization
inefficiency
laissez-faire
law of one price
production possibility 
curve (PPC)
productive efficiency

40	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 When all people use economic reasoning, inefficiency is 
impossible because if the benefit of reducing that ineffi-
ciency were greater than the cost, the inefficiency would 
be eliminated. Thus, if people use economic reasoning, 
it’s impossible to be on the interior of a production  
possibility curve. Is this statement true or false? Why?
	 2.	 If income distribution is tied to a particular production 
technique, how might that change one’s view of alterna-
tive production techniques?
	 3.	 Research shows that after-school jobs are highly corre-
lated with decreases in grade point averages. Those who 
work 1 to 10 hours get a 3.0 GPA and those who work  
21 hours or more have a 2.7 GPA. Higher GPAs are,  
however, highly correlated with higher lifetime earnings. 
Assume that a person earns $8,000 per year for working 
part-time in college, and that the return to a 0.1 increase 
in GPA gives one a 10 percent increase in one’s lifetime 
earnings with a present value of $80,000.
	a.	 What would be the argument for working rather than 
studying harder?
	b.	 Is the assumption that there is a trade-off between 
working and grades reasonable?
	 4.	 Lawns produce no crops but occupy more land (25 million 
acres) in the United States than any single crop, such as 
corn. This means that the United States is operating  
inefficiently and hence is at a point inside the production 
possibility curve. Right? If not, what does it mean?
	 5.	 Groucho Marx is reported to have said “The secret of  
success is honesty and fair dealing. If you can fake 
those, you’ve got it made.” What would likely happen to 
society’s production possibility curve if everyone could 
fake honesty? Why? (Hint: Remember that society’s pro-
duction possibility curve reflects more than just technical 
relationships.)
	 6.	 Say that the hourly cost to employers per German indus-
trial worker was $44. The hourly cost to employers per 
U.S. industrial worker was $34, while the average cost  
per Taiwanese industrial worker was $20.
	a.	 Give three reasons why firms produce in Germany 
rather than in a lower-wage country.
	b.	 Germany has an agreement with other EU countries 
that allows people in any EU country, including Greece 
and Italy, which have lower wage rates, to travel and 
work in any EU country, including high-wage coun-
tries. Would you expect a significant movement of 
workers from Greece and Italy to Germany right away? 
Why or why not?
	c.	 Workers in Thailand are paid significantly less than 
workers in Taiwan. If you were a company CEO, what 
other information would you want before you decided 
where to establish a new production facility?
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Why might government be less capable than the market to 
do good? (Austrian)
	 2.	 The text makes it look as if maximizing output is the goal 
of society.
	a.	 Is maximizing output the goal of society?
	b.	 If the country is a Christian country, should it be?
	c.	 If not, what should it be? (Religious)
	 3.	 It has been said that “capitalism robs us of our sexuality 
and sells it back to us.”
	a.	 Does sex sell?
	b.	 Is sex used to sell goods from Land Rovers to tissue 
paper?
	c.	 Who, if anyone, is exploited in the use of sex to sell 
commodities?
	d.	 Are both men and women exploited in the same ways? 
(Feminist)
	 4.	 Thorstein Veblen wrote that vested interests are those 
seeking “something for nothing.” In this chapter, you 
learned how technology shapes the economy’s production 
possibilities over time so that a country becomes increas-
ingly good at producing a subset of goods.
	a.	 In what ways have vested interests used their influence 
to bias the U.S. economy toward the production of 
military goods at the expense of consumer goods?
	b.	 What are the short-term and long-term consequences 
of that bias for human welfare, in the United States 
and abroad? (Institutionalist)
	 5.	 Writing in 1776, Adam Smith was concerned with not 
only the profound effects of the division of labor on  
productivity (as your textbook notes) but also its stulti-
fying effect on the human capacity. In The Wealth of  
Nations, Smith warned that performing a few simple  
operations over and over again could render any worker, 
no matter his or her native intelligence, “stupid and  
ignorant.”
	a.	 Does the division of labor in today’s economy  
continue to have both these effects?
	b.	 What are the policy implications? (Radical)

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
41
Steve
Sarah
Dozens of cookies
8
2
0
4
6
2
4
6
8
10
12
Loaves of bread
A
B
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 You must give up 2 units of good Y to produce 4 units of 
good X, so the opportunity cost of X is ½ Y.  (LO2-1)
	 2.	 If no resource had a comparative advantage, the produc-
tion possibility curve would be a straight line connecting 
the points of maximum production of each product as in 
the graph below.
	 6.	 The argument that underlies the general laissez-faire  
policy argument is that when there is competition in trade, 
individuals are able to pick the best trades available to 
them and the end result is that both parties to the trade 
benefit as much as they possibly can.  (LO2-3)
	 7.	 Steve’s and Sarah’s production possibility curves are 
shown in the figure below. If they specialize, they can, 
combined, produce 4 loaves of bread and 8 dozen cookies, 
which they can split up. Say that Steve gets 2 loaves of 
bread and 5 dozen cookies (point A). This puts him beyond 
his original production possibility curve, and thus is an 
improvement for him. That leaves 2 loaves of bread and 
3 dozen cookies for Sarah (point B), which is beyond  
her original production possibility curve, which is an  
improvement for her. Both are better off than they  
would have been without trade.  (LO2-3)
	
	 At all points along this curve, the trade-off between  
producing guns and butter is equal.  (LO2-2)
	 3.	 Points A and C are along the production possibility curve, 
so they are points of efficiency. Point B is inside the pro-
duction possibility curve, so it is a point of inefficiency. 
Point D is to the right of the production possibility curve, 
so it is unattainable.  (LO2-2)
	 4.	 Remind them of the importance of cultural forces. In Saudi 
Arabia, women’s right to drive is limited.  (LO2-2)
	 5.	 The production possibility curve shifts in along the butter 
axis as in the graph below.  (LO2-2)
	 8.	 True. By producing the good for which it has a compara-
tive advantage, a country will have the greatest amount of 
goods with which to trade and will reap the greatest gains 
from trade.  (LO2-3)
	 9.	 Globalization allows more trade and specialization. 
That specialization lowers costs of production since  
it allows the lowest-cost producer to produce each  
good.  (LO2-4)
	10.	 No. By definition, if one country has a comparative  
advantage in producing one set of goods, the other coun-
try has a comparative advantage in the production of the 
other set. Jobs will be needed to support this production. 
Additionally, many jobs cannot be moved abroad effec-
tively because they require physical proximity to the  
point of sale.  (LO2-4)
Butter
Maximum production 
of butter
Maximum 
production
of guns
Guns
Butter
Reduced 
production 
possibility 
of butter
Original production
possibility of guns 
and butter
Guns

42
number line allows us to represent a number at an appro-
priate point on the line. For example, point A represents 
the number 4.
	
The number line in Figure A2-1(a) is drawn hori-
zontally, but it doesn’t have to be; it also can be drawn 
vertically, as in Figure A2-1(b).
	
How we divide our axes, or number lines, into inter-
vals is up to us. In Figure A2-1(a), I called each interval 1; 
in Figure A2-1(b), I called each interval 10. Point A appears 
after 4 intervals of 1 (starting at 0 and reading from left to 
right), so it represents 4. In Figure A2-1(b), where each 
interval represents 10, to represent 5, I place point B 
halfway in the interval between 0 and 10.
	
So far, so good. Graphish developed when a vertical 
and a horizontal number line were combined, as in Fig-
ure A2-1(c). When the horizontal and vertical number 
lines are put together, they’re called axes. (Each line is an 
axis. Axes is the plural of axis.) I now have a coordinate 
system—a two-dimensional space in which one point 
represents two numbers. For example, point A in Fig-
ure A2-1(c) represents the numbers (4, 5)—4 on the hori-
zontal number line and 5 on the vertical number line. 
Point B represents the numbers (1, 20). (By convention, 
the horizontal numbers are written first.)
	
Being able to represent two numbers with one point 
is neat because it allows the relationships between two 
numbers to be presented visually instead of having to be 
expressed verbally, which is often cumbersome. For ex-
ample, say the cost of producing 6 units of something is 
$4 per unit and the cost of producing 10 units is $3 per 
A picture is worth 1,000 words. Economists, being effi-
cient, like to present ideas in graphs, pictures of points in 
a coordinate system in which points denote relationships 
between numbers. But a graph is worth 1,000 words only 
if the person looking at the graph knows the graphical 
language: Graphish, we’ll call it. (It’s a bit like English.) 
Graphish is usually written on graph paper. If the person 
doesn’t know Graphish, the picture isn’t worth any words 
and Graphish can be babble.
	
I have enormous sympathy for students who don’t un-
derstand Graphish. A number of my students get thrown 
for a loop by graphs. They understand the idea, but 
Graphish confuses them. This appendix is for them, and 
for those of you like them. It’s a primer in Graphish.
Two Ways to Use Graphs
In this book I use graphs in two ways:
1.	To present an economic model or theory visually, 
showing how two variables interrelate.
2.	To present real-world data visually. To do this,  
I use primarily bar charts, line charts, and pie 
charts.
	
Actually, these two ways of using graphs are related. 
They are both ways of presenting visually the relation-
ship between two things.
	
Graphs are built around a number line, or axis, like 
the one in Figure A2-1(a). The numbers are generally 
placed in order, equal distances from one another. That 
Graphish: The Language of Graphs
APPENDIX
0
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
–1
–2
–3
(a)  Horizontal Number Line
(b)  Vertical Number Line
(c)  Coordinate System
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
–10 
–20 
–30 
–40 
40 
 30 
20 
10 
0 
B (1, 20)
A
(4, 5)
B
A
FIGURE A2-1 (A, B, AND C)  Horizontal and Vertical Number Lines and a Coordinate System

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
43
Price (per pen)
Price (per pen)
Price (per pen)
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
.50
0
(c)  From a Table to a Graph (2)
Quantity of pens bought
Quantity of pens bought
Quantity
$3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
.50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(b)  From a Table to a Graph (1)
A
B
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
E
$6
 5
 4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
20
30
40
(d)  Nonlinear Curve
often used in describing these graphs, and we’ll now go 
over them. Consider Figure A2-2(a), which lists the num-
ber of pens bought per day (column 2) at various prices 
(column 1).
	
We can present the table’s information in a graph by 
combining the pairs of numbers in the two columns of the 
table and representing, or plotting, them on two axes. I do 
that in Figure A2-2(b).
	
By convention, when graphing a relationship between 
price and quantity, economists place price on the vertical 
axis and quantity on the horizontal axis.
	
I can now connect the points, producing a line like 
the one in Figure A2-2(c). With this line, I interpolate the 
numbers between the points (which makes for a nice 
unit. By putting both these points on a graph, we can  
visually see that producing 10 costs less per unit than 
does producing 6.
	
Another way to use graphs to present real-world data 
visually is to use the horizontal line to represent time. Say 
that we let each horizontal interval equal a year, and each 
vertical interval equal $100 in income. By graphing your 
income each year, you can obtain a visual representation 
of how your income has changed over time.
Using Graphs in Economic Modeling
I use graphs throughout the book as I present economic 
models, or simplifications of reality. A few terms are 
	
	
Quantity of
	
	
Pens Bought
	
Price per Pen	
per Day
A	
$3.00	
4
B	
2.50	
5
C	
2.00	
6
D	
1.50	
7
E	
1.00	
8
(a)  Price/Quantity Table
FIGURE A2-2 (A, B, C, AND D)  A Table and Graphs Showing the 
Relationships between Price and Quantity

44
A REMINDER
Inverse and Direct Relationships
X
Y
X
Y
    Direct relationship:
When X goes up, Y goes up.
When X goes down, Y goes down.
    Inverse relationship:
When X goes up, Y goes down.
When X goes down, Y goes up.
Slope
One can, of course, be far more explicit about how much 
the curve is sloping upward or downward by defining it in 
terms of slope—the change in the value on the vertical 
axis divided by the change in the value on the horizontal 
axis. Sometimes the slope is presented as “rise over run”:
Slope = Rise
Run =
Change in value on vertical axis
Change in value on horizontal axis
Slopes of Linear Curves
In Figure A2-3, I present five linear curves and measures 
of their slopes. Let’s go through an example to show how 
we can measure slope. To do so, we must pick two points. 
Let’s use points A (6, 8) and B (7, 4) on curve a. Looking 
at these points, we see that as we move from 6 to 7 on the 
horizontal axis, we move from 8 to 4 on the vertical axis. 
So when the number on the vertical axis falls by 4, the 
number on the horizontal axis increases by 1. That means 
the slope is −4 divided by 1, or −4.
	
Notice that the inverse relationships represented by 
the two downward-sloping curves, a and b, have negative 
slopes, and that the direct relationships represented by the 
two upward-sloping curves, c and d, have positive slopes. 
Notice also that the flatter the curve, the smaller the  
numerical value of the slope; and the more vertical, or 
steeper, the curve, the larger the numerical value of the 
slope. There are two extreme cases:
1.	When the curve is horizontal (flat), the slope is zero.
2.	When the curve is vertical (straight up and down), 
the slope is infinite (larger than large).
	
Knowing the term slope and how it’s measured lets us 
describe verbally the pictures we see visually. For example, 
if I say a curve has a slope of zero, you should picture in 
your mind a flat line; if I say “a curve with a slope of minus 
one,” you should picture a falling line that makes a 45° 
angle with the horizontal and vertical axes. (It’s the hy-
potenuse of an isosceles right triangle with the axes as the 
other two sides.)
Slopes of Nonlinear Curves
The preceding examples were of linear (straight) curves. 
With nonlinear curves—the ones that really do curve—
the slope of the curve is constantly changing. As a result, 
we must talk about the slope of the curve at a particular 
point, rather than the slope of the whole curve. How can a 
point have a slope? Well, it can’t really, but it can almost, 
and if that’s good enough for mathematicians, it’s good 
enough for us.
visual presentation). That is, I make the interpolation  
assumption—the assumption that the relationship be-
tween variables is the same between points as it is at the 
points. The interpolation assumption allows us to think of 
a line as a collection of points and therefore to connect 
the points into a line.
	
Even though the line in Figure A2-2(c) is straight, 
economists call any such line drawn on a graph a curve. 
Because it’s straight, the curve in A2-2(c) is called a  
linear curve—a curve that is drawn as a straight line. 
Notice that this curve starts high on the left-hand side and 
goes down to the right. Economists say that any curve 
that looks like that is downward-sloping. They also say 
that a downward-sloping curve represents an inverse  
relationship—a relationship between two variables in 
which when one goes up, the other goes down. In this  
example, the line demonstrates an inverse relationship  
between price and quantity—that is, when the price of 
pens goes up, the quantity bought goes down.
	
Figure A2-2(d) presents a nonlinear curve—a curve 
that is drawn as a curved line. This curve, which really is 
curved, starts low on the left-hand side and goes up to 
the right. Economists say any curve that goes up to the 
right is upward-sloping. An upward-sloping curve repre-
sents a direct relationship—a relationship in which 
when one variable goes up, the other goes up too. The 
direct relationship I’m talking about here is the one be-
tween the two variables (what’s measured on the hori-
zontal and vertical lines). Downward-sloping and 
upward-sloping are terms you need to memorize if you 
want to read, write, and speak Graphish, keeping graphi-
cally in your mind the image of the relationships they 
represent.

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
45
is zero. I demonstrate those in Figure A2-4(a) and (b). At 
point A we’re at the top of the curve, so it’s at a maximum 
point; at point B we’re at the bottom of the curve, so it’s at 
a minimum point. These maximum and minimum points 
are often referred to by economists, and it’s important to 
realize that the value of the slope of the curve at each of 
these points is zero.
	
There are, of course, many other types of curves, 
and much more can be said about the curves I’ve talked 
about. I won’t do so because, for purposes of this course, 
we won’t need to get into those refinements. I’ve  
presented as much Graphish as you need to know for 
this book.
	
Defining the slope of a nonlinear curve is a bit more 
difficult. The slope at a given point on a nonlinear curve is 
determined by the slope of a linear (or straight) line that’s 
tangent to that curve. (A line that’s tangent to a curve is a 
line that just touches the curve, and touches it only at one 
point in the immediate vicinity of the given point.) In Fig-
ure A2-3, the line LL is tangent to the curve ee at point E. 
The slope of that line, and hence the slope of the curve at 
the one point where the line touches the curve, is +1.
Maximum and Minimum Points
Two points on a nonlinear curve deserve special mention. 
These points are the ones for which the slope of the curve 
FIGURE A2-3  Slopes of Curves
The slope of a curve is determined by rise over run. The slope of 
curve a is shown in the graph. The rest are shown below:
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
A
B
a
L
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
E
c
b
e
L
Run = 1
e
Rise = –4
Slope = –4
d
	
Rise	
÷	
Run	
=	
Slope
b	
−1	
	
+2	
	
−.5
c	
1	
	
  1	
	
  1
d	
  4	
	
  1	
	
  4
e	
  1	
	
  1	
	
  1
FIGURE A2-4 (A AND B)  A Maximum and a Minimum Point
Maximum
Slope = 0
A
(a)  Maximum Point
(b)  Minimum Point
Slope = 0
Minimum
B

46	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
and change slope. These changes are reflected in changes 
to the m and b variables in the equation. Suppose the  
vertical-axis intercept rises from 8 to 12, while the slope 
remains the same. The equation becomes y = −2x + 12; 
for every value of y, x has increased by 4. Plotting the 
new equation, we can see that the curve has shifted to 
the right, as shown by the orange line in Figure A2-5(a). 
If instead the slope changes from −2 to −1, while the 
vertical-axis intercept remains at 8, the equation becomes 
y = −x + 8. Figure A2-5(b) shows this change graphi-
cally. The original blue line stays anchored at 8 and rotates 
out along the horizontal axis to the new orange line.
	
Here’s an example for you to try. The lines in Figure 
A2-5(c) show two relationships between consumption 
and income. Write the equation for the blue line.
	
The answer is C = 1⁄3Y + $1,000. Remember, to write 
the equation you need to know two things: the vertical-
axis intercept ($1,000) and the slope (1⁄3). If the intercept 
changes to $4,000, the curve will shift up to the orange 
line as shown.
Presenting Real-World Data 
in Graphs
The previous discussion treated the Graphish terms that 
economists use in presenting models that focus on hypo-
thetical relationships. Economists also use graphs in 
presenting actual economic data. Say, for example, that 
you want to show how exports have changed over time. 
Then you would place years on the horizontal axis 
Equations and Graphs
Sometimes economists depict the relationships shown in 
graphs using equations. Since I present material algebra-
ically in the appendixes to a few chapters, let me briefly 
discuss how to translate a linear curve into an equation. Lin-
ear curves are relatively easy to translate because all linear 
curves follow a particular mathematical form: y = mx + b, 
where y is the variable on the vertical axis, x is the variable 
on the horizontal axis, m is the slope of the line, and b is 
the vertical-axis intercept. To write the equation of a 
curve, look at that curve, plug in the values for the slope 
and vertical-axis intercept, and you’ve got the equation.
	
For example, consider the blue curve in Figure A2-5(a). 
The slope (rise over run) is −2 and the number where the 
curve intercepts the vertical axis is 8, so the equation that 
depicts this curve is y = −2x + 8. It’s best to choose vari-
ables that correspond to what you’re measuring on each 
axis, so if price is on the vertical axis and quantity is on the 
horizontal axis, the equation would be p = −2q + 8. This 
equation is true for any point along this line. Take point A 
(1, 6), for example. Substituting 1 for x and 6 for y into 
the equation, you see that 6 = −2(1) + 8, or 6 = 6. At 
point B, the equation is still true: 4 = −2(2) + 8. A move 
from point A to point B is called a movement along a 
curve. A movement along a curve does not change the 
relationship of the variables; rather, it shows how a change 
in one variable affects the other.
	
Sometimes the relationship between variables will 
change. The curve will shift, change slope, or both shift 
FIGURE A2-5 (A, B, AND C)  A Shifting Curve versus a Movement along a Curve
Y
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
X
Consumption in dollars
10,000
5,000
4,000
1,000
0
3,000
6,000
10,000
(a)  Shifting Curve
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
X
Income in dollars
1  2  3  4  5  6  7
9 10 11 12
1  2  3  4  5  6
8  9 10 11 12
(b)  Changing Slope
(c)  An Example
Y
Rise = 1,000
Run = 3,000
A
B
8
7

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
47
	
There are other types of graphs, but they’re all varia-
tions on line and bar graphs and pie charts. Once you un-
derstand these three basic types of graphs, you shouldn’t 
have any trouble understanding the other types.
Interpreting Graphs about  
the Real World
Understanding Graphish is important because, if you 
don’t, you can easily misinterpret the meaning of graphs. 
For example, consider the two graphs in Figure A2-7(a) 
and (b). Which graph demonstrates the larger rise in in-
come? If you said (a), you’re wrong. The intervals in the 
vertical axes differ, and if you look carefully you’ll see 
that the curves in both graphs represent the same combi-
nation of points. So when considering graphs, always 
(by  convention) and exports on the vertical axis, as in 
Figure A2-6(a) and (b). Having done so, you have a  
couple of choices: You can draw a line graph—a 
graph where the data are connected by a continuous 
line; or you can make a bar graph—a graph where  
the area under each point is filled in to look like a bar. 
Figure A2-6(a) shows a line graph and Figure A2-6(b) 
shows a bar graph.
	
Another type of graph is a pie chart—a circle divided 
into “pie pieces,” where the undivided pie represents the 
total amount and the pie pieces reflect the percentage of 
the whole pie that the various components make up. This 
type of graph is useful in visually presenting how a total 
amount is divided. Figure A2-6(c) shows a pie chart, 
which happens to represent the division of grades on a 
test I gave. Notice that 5 percent of the students got A’s.
FIGURE A2-6 (A, B, AND C)  Presenting Information Visually
Exports
Exports
(a)  Line Graph
(b)  Bar Graph
2010 
2011 
2012 2013 
2014 2015
Years
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Years
A
B
C
(c)  Pie Chart
12%
7%
8%
5%
5%
6%
12%
10%
16%
19%
C–
A–
B+
B–
C+
D+ D
FIGURE A2-7 (A AND B)  The Importance of Scales
Income 
Income 
$14,000
13,000
12,000
11,000
10,000
(a)  Income over Time (1)
Years
$18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
(b)  Income over Time (2)
Years
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

48	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
4.	If U.S. production of corn was 60 million bushels 
in 2002 and 100 million bushels in 2003, what was 
the percentage change in corn production from 
2002 to 2003?
	
a.  40	
b.  60	
c.  66.67
	
d.  100	
e.  200
The reason students got these questions wrong is un-
known. Many of them had had higher-level math 
courses, including calculus, so it is not that they weren’t 
trained in math. I suspect that many students missed the 
questions because of carelessness: the students didn’t 
think about the question carefully before they wrote 
down the answer.
	
Throughout this book we will be discussing issues 
assuming a quantitative literacy sufficient to answer 
these questions. Moreover, questions using similar rea-
soning will be on exams. So it is useful for you to see 
whether or not you fall in the majority. So please answer 
the four questions given above now if you haven’t done 
so already.
	
Now that you’ve answered them, I give you the correct 
answers upside-down in the footnote at the bottom of 
the page.1
	
If you got all four questions right, great! You can stop 
reading this appendix now. If you missed one or more, 
read the explanations of the correct answers carefully.
1.	The correct answer is c. To calculate a percentage, 
you multiply the percentage times the number. 
Thus, 25 percent of 400 is 100.
2.	 The correct answer is c. To answer it you had to 
recognize that U.S. consumption of oil comes from 
make sure you understand the markings on the axes. Only 
then can you interpret the graph.
Quantitative Literacy: Avoiding Stupid 
Math Mistakes
The data of economics are often presented in graphs 
and tables. Numerical data are compared by the use of 
percentages, visual comparisons, and simple relationships 
based on quantitative differences. Economists who have 
studied the learning process of their students have found 
that some very bright students have some trouble with 
these presentations. Students sometimes mix up percent-
age changes with level changes, draw incorrect implica-
tions from visual comparisons, and calculate quantitative 
differences incorrectly. This is not necessarily a math 
problem—at least in the sense that most economists think 
of math. The mistakes are in relatively simple stuff—the 
kind of stuff learned in fifth, sixth, and seventh grades. 
Specifically, as reported in “Student Quantitative Literacy: 
Is the Glass Half-full or Half-empty?” (Robert Burns, 
Kim Marie McGoldrick, Jerry L. Petr, and Peter Schuh-
mann, 2002 University of North Carolina at Wilmington 
Working Paper), when the professors gave a test to stu-
dents at a variety of schools, they found that a majority of 
students missed the following questions.
1.	What is 25 percent of 400?
	
a.  25	
b.  50	
c.  100
	
d.  400	
e.  none of the above
2.	Consider Figure A2-8, where U.S. oil consumption 
and U.S. oil imports are plotted for 1990–2000. 
Fill in the blanks to construct a true statement: 
U.S. domestic oil consumption has been steady 
while imports have been 
;  
therefore U.S. domestic oil production has  
been 
.
	
a.  rising; rising	
b.  falling; falling
	
c.  rising; falling	
d.  falling; rising
3.	Refer to the following table to select the true 
statement.
Economic Growth in Poland 
Percent Increase in GDP, 1990–1994
	1990	
1991	
1992	
1993	
1994
−11.7	
−7.8	
−1.5	
4.0	
3.5
	
a.  GDP in Poland was larger in 1992 than in 1991.
	
b.  GDP in Poland was larger in 1994 than in 1993.
	
c.  GDP in Poland was larger in 1991 than in 1992.
	
d.  GDP in Poland was larger in 1993 than in 1994.
	
e.  Both b and c are true.
FIGURE A2-8
1998
1996
1994
1992
1990
Years
2000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
Thousands of barrels a day
Total U.S.
oil consumption
U.S. oil 
imports
1
1-c; 2-c; 3-e; 4-c.

	
Chapter 2 ■ The Production Possibility Model, Trade, and Globalization	
49
probably makes sense to practice some similar questions 
to make sure that you have concepts down.
A Review
Let’s now review what we’ve covered.
•	 A graph is a picture of points on a coordinate  
system in which the points denote relationships 
between numbers.
•	 A downward-sloping line represents an inverse  
relationship or a negative slope.
•	 An upward-sloping line represents a direct rela-
tionship or a positive slope.
•	 Slope is measured by rise over run, or a change 
of y (the number measured on the vertical axis) 
over a change in x (the number measured on the 
horizontal axis).
•	 The slope of a point on a nonlinear curve is mea-
sured by the rise over the run of a line tangent to 
that point.
•	 At the maximum and minimum points of a  
nonlinear curve, the value of the slope is zero.
•	 A linear curve has the form y = mx + b.
•	 A shift in a linear curve is reflected by a change in 
the b variable in the equation y = mx + b.
•	 A change in the slope of a linear curve is reflected 
by a change in the m variable in the equation  
y = mx + b.
•	 In reading graphs, one must be careful to under-
stand what’s being measured on the vertical and 
horizontal axes.
U.S. imports and U.S. production. Thus, the distance 
between the two lines represents U.S. production, 
which is clearly getting smaller from 1990 to 2000.
3.	The correct answer is e. The numbers given to you 
are percentage changes, and the question is about 
levels. If the percentage change is positive, as it is 
in 1993 and 1994, the level is increasing. Thus, 
1994 is greater (by 3.5 percent) than 1993, even 
though the percentage change is smaller than in 
1993. If the percentage change is negative, as it is 
in 1992, the level is falling. Because income fell in 
1992, the level of income in 1991 is greater than 
the level of income in 1992.
4.	The correct answer is c. To calculate percentage 
change, you first need to calculate the change, 
which in this case is 100 − 60, or 40. So corn  
production started at a base of 60 and rose by 40. 
To calculate the percentage change that this repre-
sents, you divide the amount of the rise, 40, by the 
base, 60. Doing so gives us 40∕60 = 2∕3 = .6667, 
which is 66.67 percent.
	
Now that I’ve given you the answers, I suspect that 
most of you will recognize that they are the right answers. 
If, after reading the explanations, you still don’t follow the 
reasoning, you should look into getting some extra help in 
the course either from your teacher, from your TA, or from 
some program the college has. If, after reading the expla-
nations, you follow them and believe that if you had really 
thought about them you would have gotten them right, 
then the next time you see a chart or a table of numbers 
being compared really think about them. Be a bit slower in 
drawing inferences since they are the building blocks of 
economic discussions. If you want to do well on exams, it 
Key Terms
bar graph
coordinate system
direct relationship
graph
interpolation assumption
inverse relationship
line graph
linear curve
nonlinear curve
pie chart
slope
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Create a coordinate space on graph paper and label the following points:
a.  (0, 5)	
b.  (−5, −5)
c.  (2, −3)	
d.  (−1, 1)

50	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
	 2.	 Graph the following costs per unit, and answer the questions 
that follow.
Horizontal Axis: 	
Vertical Axis:  
	
Output	
Cost per Unit
	
1	
$30
	
2	
20
	
3	
12
	
4	
6
	
5	
2
	
6	
6
	
7	
12
	
8	
20
	
9	
30
	 5.	 Given the following nonlinear curve, answer the following 
questions:
	a.	 At what point(s) is the slope negative?
	b.	 At what point(s) is the slope positive?
	c.	 At what point(s) is the slope zero?
	d.	 What point is the maximum? What point is the  
minimum?
	 6.	 Draw the graphs that correspond to the following equations:
	a.	 y = 3x − 8
	b.	 y = 12 − x
	c.	 y = 4x + 2
	 7.	 Using the equation y = 3x + 1,000, demonstrate the  
following:
	a.	 The slope of the curve changes to 5.
	b.	 The curve shifts up by 500.
	 8.	 State what type of graph or chart you might use to show 
the following real-world data:
	a.	 Interest rates from 1929 to 2013.
	b.	 Median income levels of various ethnic groups in the 
United States.
	c.	 Total federal expenditures by selected categories.
	d.	 Total costs of producing between 100 and 800 shoes.
	a.	 Is the relationship between cost per unit and output 
linear or nonlinear? Why?
	b.	 In what range in output is the relationship inverse?
	 	 In what range in output is the relationship direct?
	c.	 In what range in output is the slope negative?
	 	 In what range in output is the slope positive?
d.	 What is the slope between 1 and 2 units?
	 3.	 Within a coordinate space, draw a line with
	a.	 Zero slope.	
b.	 Infinite slope.
	c.	 Positive slope.	
d.	 Negative slope.
	 4.	 Calculate the slope of lines a through e in the following 
coordinate system.
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
a
b
c
d
e
A
B
C
D
E

© Marianna Day Massey/ZUMA/Corbis
Nobody can be a great economist 
who is only an economist—and I 
am even tempted to add that the 
economist who is only an economist 
is likely to become a nuisance if not a 
positive danger.
—Friedrich Hayek
“
”
The powerful U.S. economy generates a 
high ­standard of living and sense of economic 
well-being (compared to most other countries) 
for almost all those living in the United States. 
The reason why is often attributed to its use of 
markets, and to the wonders of a market economy. 
To some degree, that’s true, but simply saying markets are the reason for 
the strength of the U.S. economy ­obscures as much information as it con-
veys. First, it misses the point that other countries have markets too, but 
many of those have much lower standards of living. ­Second, it conveys a 
sense that markets exist independently of social and ­cultural institutions, 
and that’s just not ­correct. ­Markets are highly developed social constructs 
that are part of a country’s social and economic institutions. ­Markets are 
based on institutions, which Nobel Prize–winning economist Douglass 
North ­defines as “the ­formal and informal rules that constrain ­human eco-
nomic behavior.” ­Institutions ­include laws that protect ownership of prop-
erty and the legal system to ­enforce and interpret laws. They also ­include 
political institutions that ­develop those laws, the cultural traits of society 
that guide people’s tastes and behaviors, and the many organizational struc-
tures such as ­corporations, banks, and nonprofit ­organizations that make up 
our ­economy. To understand markets, you need to understand ­institutions. 
In a principles course, we don’t have time to develop a full ­analysis of insti-
tutions, but what we can do is to provide an overview of U.S. economic 
institutions and a brief ­discussion of why they are important. That’s what 
we do in this chapter.
	
We begin by looking at the U.S. economic system in historical perspec­
tive, considering how it evolved and how it relates to other historical 
­economic systems. Then we consider some of the central institutions of the 
modern U.S. economy and how they influence the way in which the econ-
omy works.
Economic Institutions
chapter 3
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO3-1	 Define market economy  
and compare and contrast 
socialism with capitalism.
LO3-2	 Describe the role of 
businesses and households 
in a market economy.
LO3-3	 List and discuss the various 
roles of government.
LO3-4	 Explain why global policy 
issues differ from national 
policy issues.

52	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Economic Systems
The U.S. economy is a market economy—an economic system based on private 
­property and the market in which, in principle, individuals decide how, what, and 
for whom to produce. In a market economy, individuals follow their own self-
interest, while market forces of supply and demand are relied on to coordinate those 
individual pursuits. Businesses, guided by prices in the market, produce goods and 
services that they believe people want and that will earn a profit for the business. 
Prices in the market guide businesses in deciding what to produce. Distribution of 
goods is to each individual according to his or her ability, effort, inherited ­property, 
and luck.
	
Reliance on market forces doesn’t mean that political, social, and historical 
forces play no role in coordinating economic decisions. These other forces do 
influence how the market works. For example, for a market to exist, government 
must allocate and defend private property rights—the control a private individual 
or firm has over an asset. The concept of private ownership must exist and must be 
­accepted by individuals in society. When you say “This car is mine,” you mean 
that it is unlawful for someone else to take it without your permission. If someone 
takes it without your permission, he or she is subject to punishment through the 
government-enforced legal ­system.
How Markets Work
Markets work through a system of rewards and payments. If you do something, you get 
paid for doing that something; if you take something, you pay for that something. How 
much you get is determined by how much you give. This relationship seems fair to 
most people. But there are instances when it doesn’t seem fair. Say someone is unable 
to work. Should that person get nothing? How about Joe down the street, who was 
given $10 million by his parents? Is it fair that he gets lots of toys, like Corvettes 
and skiing trips to Aspen, and doesn’t have to work, while the rest of us have to work 
40 hours a week and maybe go to school at night?
	
I’ll put those questions about fairness off at this point—they are very difficult 
questions. For now, all I want to present is the concept of fairness that underlies a mar-
ket economy: “Them that works, gets; them that don’t, starve.”1 In a market economy, 
individuals are encouraged to follow their own self-interest. 
	
In market economies, individuals are free to do whatever they want as long as it’s 
legal. The market is relied on to see that what people want to get, and want to do, is 
consistent with what’s available. Price is the mechanism through which people’s 
desires are coordinated and goods are rationed. If there’s not enough of something to 
go around, its price goes up; if more of something needs to get done, the price given to 
individuals willing to do it goes up. If something isn’t wanted or doesn’t need to be 
done, its price goes down. In a market economy,  fluctuations in prices play a central 
role in coordinating individuals’ wants.
A market economy is an economic 
system based on private property and 
the market. It gives private property 
rights to individuals and relies on 
market forces to coordinate economic 
activity.
Q-1  John, your study partner, is 
telling you that the best way to allocate 
property rights is through the market. 
How do you respond?
1How come the professor gets to use rotten grammar but screams when he sees rotten grammar in 
your papers? Well, that’s fairness for you. Actually, I should say a bit more about writing style. All 
writers are expected to know correct grammar; if they don’t, they don’t deserve to be called writers. 
Once you know grammar, you can individualize your writing style, breaking the rules of grammar 
where the meter and flow of the writing require it. In college you’re still proving that you know 
grammar, so in papers handed in to your teacher, you shouldn’t break the rules of grammar until 
you’ve proved to the teacher that you know them. Me, I’ve done lots of books, so my editors give 
me a bit more leeway than your teachers will give you.
Fluctuations in prices play a central role 
in coordinating individuals’ wants in a 
market economy.

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
53
What’s Good about the Market?
Is the market a good way to coordinate individuals’ activities? Much of this book will be 
devoted to answering that question. The answer that I, and most U.S. economists, come to 
is: Yes, it is a reasonable way. True, it has problems; the market can be unfair, mean, and 
arbitrary, and sometimes it is downright awful. Why then do economists support it? For the 
same reason that Oliver Wendell Holmes supported democracy—it is a lousy system, but, 
based on experience with alternatives, it is better than all the others we’ve thought of.
	
The primary debate among economists is not about using markets; it is about how 
markets should be structured, and whether they should be modified and adjusted by 
government regulation. Those are much harder questions, and on these questions, 
opinions differ enormously.
Capitalism and Socialism
The view that markets are a reasonable way to organize society has not always been 
shared by all economists. Throughout history strong philosophical and practical argu-
ments have been made against markets. The philosophical argument against the market 
is that it brings out the worst in people—it glorifies greed. It encourages people to beat 
out others rather than to be cooperative. As an alternative some economists have sup-
ported socialism. In theory, socialism is an economic system based on individuals’ 
goodwill toward others, not on their own self-interest, and in which, in principle, 
­society decides what, how, and for whom to produce. The concept of socialism 
­developed in the 1800s as a description of a hypothetical economic system to be 
­contrasted with the predominant market-based economic system of the time, which 
was called capitalism. Capitalism is defined as an economic system based on the 
­market in which the ownership of the means of production resides with a small group 
of individuals called capitalists.
	
You can best understand the idea behind theoretical socialism by thinking about 
how decisions are made in a family. In most families, benevolent parents decide who 
gets what, based on the needs of each member of the family. When Sabin gets a new 
coat and his sister Sally doesn’t, it’s because Sabin needs a coat while Sally already has 
two coats that fit her and are in good condition. Victor may be slow as molasses, but 
from his family he still gets as much as his superefficient brother Jerry gets. In fact, 
Victor may get more than Jerry because he needs extra help.
	
Markets have little role in most families. In my family, when food is placed on the 
table, we don’t bid on what we want, with the highest bidder getting the food. In my 
family, every person can eat all he or she wants, although if one child eats more than a 
fair share, that child gets a lecture from me on the importance of sharing. “Be thought-
ful; be considerate; think of others first” are lessons that many families try to teach.
	
In theory, socialism was an economic system that tried to organize society in the 
same way as most families are organized, trying to see that individuals get what they 
need. Socialism tried to take other people’s needs into account and adjust people’s own 
wants in accordance with what’s available. In socialist economies, individuals were 
urged to look out for the other person; if individuals’ inherent goodness does not make 
them consider the general good, government would make them. In contrast, a capitalist 
economy expected people to be selfish; it relied on markets and competition to direct 
that selfishness to the general good.2
The primary debate among economists 
is not about using markets but about 
how markets are structured.
Q-2  Which would be more likely 
to attempt to foster individualism: 
socialism or capitalism?
Q-3  Are there any activities in  
a family that you believe should  
be allocated by a market? What 
characteristics do those activities  
have?
Socialism is, in theory, an  
economic system that tried to 
organize society in the same way  
as most families are organized—all 
people contribute what they can  
and get what they need.
2As you probably surmised, the above distinction is too sharp. Even capitalist societies wanted people 
to be selfless, but not too selfless. Children in capitalist societies were generally taught to be selfless 
at least in dealing with friends and family. The difficulty parents and societies face is finding a balance 
between the two positions: selfless but not too selfless; selfish but not too selfish.

54
	
As I stated above, the term socialism originally developed as a description of a 
hypothetical, not an actual, economic system. Actual socialist economies came into 
being only in the early 1900s, and when they developed they differed enormously from 
the hypothetical socialist economies that writers had described earlier.
	
In practice socialist governments had to take a strong role in guiding the economy. 
Socialism became known as an economic system based on government ownership of 
the means of production, with economic activity governed by central planning. In a 
centrally planned socialist economy, sometimes called a command economy, govern-
ment planning boards set society’s goals and then directed individuals and firms as to 
how to achieve those goals.
	
For example, if government planning boards decided that whole-wheat bread was 
good for people, they directed firms to produce large quantities and priced it exception-
ally low. Planners, not prices, coordinated people’s actions. The results were often not 
quite what the planners desired. Bread prices were so low that pig farmers fed bread to 
their pigs even though pig feed would have been better for the pigs and bread was more 
costly to produce. At the low price, the quantity of bread demanded was so high that there 
were bread shortages; consumers had to stand in long lines to buy bread for their families.
	
As is often the case, over time the meaning of the word socialism expanded and 
evolved further. It was used to describe the market economies of Western Europe, 
which by the 1960s had evolved into economies that had major welfare support 
­systems and governments that were very much involved in their market economies. 
For example, Sweden, even though it relied on markets as its central coordinating 
­institution, was called a socialist economy because its taxes were high and it provided 
a cradle-to-grave welfare system.
Q-4  What is the difference between 
socialism in theory and socialism in 
practice?
ADDED DIMENSION
2.
The raised eyebrows when a man is 
introduced as a nurse, secretary, 
homemaker, or member of any other 
profession conventionally identified 
as women’s work.
3.
Society’s unwillingness to permit the 
sale of individuals or body organs.
4.
Parents’ willingness to care for their  
children without financial compensation.
Each of these tendencies reflects tradi-
tion’s ­influence in Western society. Some 
are so deeply rooted that we see them as 
self-evident. Some of tradition’s effects we 
like; others we don’t—but we often take 
them for granted. Economic forces may 
work against these traditions, but the fact that they’re still 
around indicates the continued strength of ­tradition in 
our market economy.
Tradition and Today’s Economy
In a tradition-based society, such as a feudal 
society, the social and ­cultural forces ­create an 
inertia (a tendency to resist change) that pre-
dominates over economic and political forces.
	
“Why did you do it that way?”
	
“Because that’s the way we’ve always 
done it.”
	
Tradition-based societies had markets, 
but they were peripheral, not central, to 
economic life. In feudal times, what was 
produced, how it was produced, and for 
whom it was produced were primarily 
­decided by tradition.
	
In today’s U.S. economy, the market plays 
the central role in economic decisions. But 
that doesn’t mean that tradition is dead. As 
I said in Chapter 1, tradition still plays a significant role in 
today’s society, and, in many aspects of society, tradition 
still overwhelms the ­invisible hand. Consider the following:
1.	 The persistent view that women should be home-
makers rather than factory workers, consumers 
rather than ­producers.
Source: National Archives and Records 
Administration (NWDNS-179-WP-1563)

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
55
	
When the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) broke apart, Russia and the 
countries that evolved out of the USSR adopted a market economy as their organizing 
framework. China, which is ruled by the Communist Party, also adopted many market 
institutions. As they did, the terms capitalism and socialism fell out of favor. People 
today talk little about the differences in economic systems such as capitalism and 
­socialism; instead they talk about the differences in institutions. Most economies today 
are differentiated primarily by the degree to which their economies rely on markets, 
not whether they are a market, capitalist, or socialist economy.
	
The term socialism, however, still shows up in the news. China, for example, 
continues to call itself a socialist country, even though it is relying more and more 
heavily on markets to organize production, and is sometimes seen as more capitalis-
tic than many Western economies. Another example of the interest in socialism can 
be found in the rhetoric of Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, and his successor, 
Nicolás Maduro, who attempted to transform Venezuela into what they called 
“21st century socialism.” They defined 21st century socialism as government own-
ership, or at least control, of major resources, and an economy dominated by busi-
ness cooperatives owned and operated by workers supported by government loans 
and contracts. Their hope was that this “21st century ­socialism” would serve as a 
new economic model of egalitarianism for the entire world. Most observers were 
doubtful, and as of 2016 the Venezuelan economy was floundering, moving away 
from its socialist model. The bottom line is that economic systems and the institu-
tions that make them up are constantly evolving, and will likely continue to evolve.3
	
Revolutionary shifts that give rise to new economic systems are not the only way 
economic systems change. Systems also evolve internally, as I discussed above. For 
example, the U.S. economy is and has always been a market economy, but it has changed 
over the years, evolving with changes in social customs, political forces, and the strength 
of markets. In the 1930s, during the Great Depression, the U.S. economy integrated a 
number of what might be called socialist institutions into its existing institutions. Distri-
bution of goods was no longer, even in theory, only according to ability; need also played 
a role. Governments began to play a larger role in the economy, taking control over some 
of the how, what, and for whom decisions. From the 1980s until the 2010s the process 
was reversed. The United States became even more market-oriented and the government 
tried to pull back its involvement in the market in favor of private enterprise. That 
movement slowed, and possibly ended, with the financial crisis of 2007. Which direc-
tion the future will take remains to be seen, but we can expect institutions to con-
tinue to change.
Economic Institutions in a Market Economy
Now that we have put the U.S. economic system in historical perspective, let’s 
­consider some of its main components. The U.S. economy can be divided into 
three sectors: businesses, households, and government, as Figure 3-1 shows. 
Households supply ­labor and other factors of production to businesses and are paid 
by businesses for ­doing so. The market where this interaction takes place is called 
a factor market. ­Businesses produce goods and services and sell them to house-
holds and government. The market where this interaction takes place is called the 
goods market.
	
Each of the three sectors is interconnected; moreover, the entire U.S. economy is 
interconnected with the world economy. Notice also the arrows going out to and com-
ing in from both business and households. Those arrows represent the connection of an 
People today talk little about differences 
in economic systems; instead they talk 
about differences in institutions.
Q-5  Into what three sectors are 
market economies generally broken up?
3The appendix to this chapter traces the development of economic systems.

56	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
economy to the world economy. It consists of interrelated flows of goods (exports and 
imports) and money (capital flows). Finally, consider the arrows connecting govern-
ment with households and business. Government taxes business and households. It 
buys goods and services from business and buys labor services from households. 
Then, with some of its tax revenue, it provides services (for example, roads and 
­education) to both business and households and gives some of its tax revenue directly 
back to ­individuals. In doing so, it redistributes income. But government also serves a 
second function. It oversees the interaction of business and households in the goods 
and factor markets. Government, of course, is not independent. The United States, 
for instance, is a democracy, so households vote to determine who shall govern. 
Similarly, ­governments are limited not only by what voters want but also by their 
relationships with other countries. They are part of an international community of 
countries, and they must keep up relations with other countries in the world. For 
example, the United States is a member of many international organizations and has 
signed international treaties in which it has agreed to limit its domestic actions, such as 
its ability to tax imports.
	
Now let’s look briefly at the individual components.
Business
President Calvin Coolidge once said “The business of America is business.” That’s a 
bit of an overstatement, but business is responsible for over 80 percent of U.S. produc-
tion. (Government is responsible for the other 20 percent.) In fact, anytime a house-
hold decides to produce something, it becomes a business. Business is simply the 
name given to private producing units in our society.
	
Businesses in the United States decide what to produce, how much to produce, 
and for whom to produce it. They make these central economic decisions on the 
­basis of their own self-interest, which is influenced by market incentives. Anyone 
Businesses in the United States decide 
what to produce, how much to produce, 
and for whom to produce it.
FIGURE 3-1  Diagrammatic Representation of a Market Economy
This circular-flow diagram of the economy is a good way to organize your thinking about the aggregate economy. As you can see, the three 
sectors—households, government, and business—interact in a variety of ways.
International 
connection
Households
(consumption)
P
S
D
Q
Goods market
Government
W
S
Factor market
D
L
International 
connection
Business
(production)

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
57
who wants to can start a business, provided he or she can come up with the required 
cash and meet the necessary regulatory requirements. Each year, about 700,000 
businesses are started.
	
Don’t think of business as something other than people. Businesses are ulti-
mately made up of a group of people organized together to accomplish some end. 
Although corporations account for about 75 percent of all sales, in terms of numbers 
of ­businesses, most are one- or two-person operations. Home-based businesses are 
easy to start. All you have to do is say you’re in business, and you are. However, 
some ­businesses require licenses, permits, and approvals from various government 
agencies. 
	
Whatever the business, actually starting one is inevitably more difficult than one 
initially imagined. Succeeding in running a business requires hard work and an almost 
fanatical dedication; that’s why entrepreneurship (the ability to organize and get 
something done) is such an important part of business. It is the market’s ability to align 
entrepreneurial activities with the general benefit of society that gives the market its 
power.
What Do U.S. Firms Produce? 
Producing physical goods is only one of 
society’s economic tasks. Another task is to provide services (activities done for 
­others). Services do not involve producing a physical good. When you get your hair cut, 
you buy a service, not a good. Much of the cost of the physical goods we buy actually 
is not a cost of producing the good, but is a cost of one of the most important services: 
distribution, which includes payments associated with having the good where you 
want it when you want it. After a good is produced, it has to be transported to consum-
ers, either indirectly through retailers or directly to consumers. If the good isn’t at the 
right place at the right time, it can often be useless.
	
Let’s consider an example: hot dogs at a baseball game. How many of us have been 
irked that a hot dog that costs 40 cents to fix at home costs $5.00 at a baseball game? The 
reason why the price can differ so much is that a hot dog at home isn’t the same as a hot 
dog at a game and you are willing to pay the extra $4.60 to have the hot dog when and 
where you want it. Distribution—getting goods where you want them when you want 
them—is as important as production and is a central component of a service economy.
	
The importance of the service economy can be seen in modern technology compa-
nies. They provide information and methods of handling information, not physical 
goods. Google and Facebook produce no physical product but they provide central 
­services to our lives. As the U.S. economy has evolved, the relative importance of 
­services has increased. Today, services make up approximately 80 percent of the U.S. 
economy, compared to 20 percent in 1947, and services are likely to continue to rise in 
importance in the future.
Consumer Sovereignty and Business 
To say that businesses decide what 
to produce isn’t to say that consumer sovereignty (the consumer’s wishes determine 
what’s produced) doesn’t reign in the United States. Businesses decide what to pro-
duce based on what they believe will sell. A key question a person in the United States 
generally asks about starting a business is: Can I make a profit from it? Profit is 
what’s left over from total revenues after all the appropriate costs have been sub-
tracted. Businesses that guess correctly what the consumer wants generally make a 
profit. Businesses that guess wrong generally operate at a loss.
	
People are free to start businesses for whatever purposes they want. No one 
asks them: “What’s the social value of your term paper assistance business, your 
Twinkies business, your pornography business, or your textbook publishing 
­business?” In the United States we rely on the market to channel individuals’ 
Entrepreneurship is an important  
part of business.
Although businesses decide what to 
produce, they are guided by consumer 
sovereignty.
Q-6  True or false? In the United 
States, the invisible hand ensures that 
only socially valuable businesses are 
started. Why?

58	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
­desire to make a profit into the general good of society. That’s the invisible hand at 
work. As long as the business violates no law and conforms to regulations, people 
in the United States are free to start whatever business they want, if they can get 
the money to finance it.
Forms of Business 
The three primary forms of business are sole proprietorships, 
partnerships, and corporations. Sole proprietorships—businesses that have only one 
owner—are the easiest to start and have the fewest bureaucratic hassles. Partnerships—
businesses with two or more owners—create possibilities for sharing the burden, but they 
also create unlimited liability for each of the partners. Corporations—businesses that 
are treated as a person, and are legally owned by their stockholders, who are not 
­liable for the actions of the corporate “person”—are the largest form of business 
when ­measured in terms of receipts. In corporations, ownership is separated from 
­control of the firm. Of the 37 million businesses in the United States, approximately 
72 percent are sole proprietorships, 10 percent are partnerships, and 18 percent are 
corporations, as we see in Figure 3-2(a). In terms of total receipts, however, we get a 
quite different picture, with corporations far surpassing all other business forms, as 
Figure 3-2(b) shows.4
	
In the past few years a new type of company called flexible-purpose corporation or 
benefit corporation (B-corporation) has arisen that explicitly take social mission in 
addition to profit into consideration when making decisions. An ­example is Maine’s 
Own Organic Milk Company (MOO Milk Co), which has both ­selling milk and educat-
ing the public about the value of local family farming as explicit goals. Some states have 
established a new form of corporation—the L3C, which allows companies, such as 
MOO Milk Co, to blend social and private goals. Unlike for-profit companies, L3Cs can 
receive grants and endowments otherwise reserved for nonprofits. Other companies, 
such as Google, are retaining their for-profit corporate status but are explicitly including 
social welfare in their charters.
Q-7  Are most businesses in the 
United States corporations? If not, 
what are most businesses?
A corporation provides the owner with 
limited liability.
FIGURE 3-2 (A AND B)  Forms of Business
The charts divide firms by the type of ownership. Approximately 72 percent of businesses in the United States are sole proprietorships (a). 
In terms of annual receipts, however, corporations surpass all other forms (b).
Source: Statistics of Income, IRS (www.irs.gov/uac/Tax-Stats-2).
Corporations (18%)
(a)
Partnerships (10%)
Partnerships (20%)
By Numbers
(b) By Receipts
Sole proprietorships (5%)
Sole proprietorships (72%)
Corporations (75%)
4As laws have evolved, the sharp distinctions among forms of businesses have blurred. Today 
there are many types of corporations and types of partnerships that have varying degrees of 
­limited liabilities.

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
59
	
The advantages and disadvantages of each form of business are summarized in the 
following table:
 Advantages and Disadvantages of Various Forms of For-Profit Businesses
	
Sole Proprietorship	
Partnership	
Corporation
1.  Minimum 
bureaucratic 
hassle
2.  Direct control by 
owner
 
1.  Limited ability to 
get funds
2.  Unlimited 
personal liability
1.  Ability to share 
work and risks
2.  Relatively easy 
to form
 
 
1.  Unlimited 
personal liability 
(even for partner’s 
blunder)
2.  Limited ability  
to get funds
1.  No personal 
liability
2.  Increasing ability 
to get funds
3.  Ability to avoid 
personal income 
taxes
1.  Legal hassle to 
organize
2.  Possible double 
taxation of income
3.  Monitoring 
­problems
Advantages
Disadvantages
Finance and Business 
Much of what you hear in the news about business 
concerns financial assets—assets that acquire value from an obligation of someone 
else to pay. Stocks are one example of a financial asset; bonds are another. Finan-
cial assets are traded in markets such as the New York Stock Exchange. Trading in 
­financial markets can make people rich (or poor) quickly. Stocks and bonds also 
can provide a means through which corporations can finance expansions and new 
investments.
	
An important tool investors use to decide where to invest is the accounting state-
ments firms provide. From these, individuals judge how profitable firms are, and how 
profitable they are likely to be in the future. In the early 2000s, investors’ trust in firms 
was shattered by a series of accounting frauds, which led government to increase the 
regulatory control of business accounting practices.
Households
The second classification we’ll consider in this overview of U.S. economic institutions 
is households. Households (groups of individuals living together and making joint 
decisions) are the most powerful economic institution. They ultimately control govern-
ment and business, the other two economic institutions. Households’ votes in the polit-
ical arena determine government policy; their decisions about supplying labor and 
capital determine what businesses will have available to work with; and their spending 
decisions or expenditures (the “votes” they cast with their dollars) determine what 
business will be able to sell.
The Power of Households 
While the ultimate power does in principle reside 
with the people and households, we, the people, have assigned much of that power to 
representatives. As I discussed above, corporations are only partially responsive to 
owners of their stocks, and much of that ownership is once-removed from individuals. 
Ownership of 1,000 shares in a company with a total of 2 million shares isn’t going to 
get you any influence over the corporation’s activities. As a stockholder, you simply 
accept what the corporation does.
Trading in financial markets can make 
people rich (or poor) quickly.
In the economy, households vote with 
their dollars.

60
	
A major decision that corporations make independently of their stockholders 
concerns what to produce. True, ultimately we, the people, decide whether we will 
buy what business produces, but business spends a lot of money telling us what 
­services we want, what products make us “with it,” what books we want to read, and 
the like. Most economists believe that consumer sovereignty reigns—that we are not 
fooled or controlled by advertising. Still, it is an open question in some economists’ 
minds whether we, the people, control business or whether the business representa-
tives ­control the people.
	
Because of this assignment of power to other institutions, in many spheres of the 
economy households are not active producers of output but merely passive recipients 
of income, primarily in their role as suppliers of labor.
Suppliers of Labor 
The largest source of household income is wages and sala-
ries (the income households get from labor). Households supply the labor with which 
businesses produce and government governs. The total U.S. labor force is about 
159 million people, about 5 percent of whom were unemployed in 2016. The average 
U.S. workweek was about 41 hours for men and about 36 hours for women. The 
median pay in the United States was $894 per week for men and $726 for women. The 
median hourly wage for all workers is about $25. Of course, that average ­represents enor-
mous variability and depends on the occupation and region of the ­country where one is 
employed. For example, lawyers often earn $100,000 per year; physicians earn about 
$190,000 per year; and CEOs of large corporations often make $2 million per year or 
more. A beginning McDonald’s employee generally makes about $15,000 per year.
Consumer sovereignty reigns, but  
it works indirectly by influencing 
businesses.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
The difference between the very rich and everyone else 
has come to the fore with the Occupy movement. The slo-
gan “We are the 99%” pits most people against the 1%. 
Who are the 1%?
	
When presidential candidate Mitt Romney was asked 
about his income in 2012, he declined to answer, but he 
did note that in 2011 he got speaker’s fees from time to 
time, but that they were “not very much.” Elsewhere he 
had listed those “not very much” speaker’s fees—they 
totaled $375,000. When you can say that $375,000  
is not very much, you are definitely part of the 1%.  
In fact, that “not very much” alone would have almost 
put him in the top 1%, since a household’s income needs 
to be at least $383,000 to be in the top 1%. That’s ap-
proximately eight times the median income. $188,000 
puts you in the top 5% while $90,000 puts you in the 
top 25%.
	
Those numbers are an average for the country as a 
whole. The threshold differs a lot by state. In Flint, 
­Michigan, $180,000 would put you in the top 1% but in the 
New York City area that’s only the top 10%. In Stamford, 
Connecticut, you’d have to earn about $900,000 to be in 
the top 1%.
Who Are the 1%?
	
This top 1% earns about 20% of total pretax ­income in 
the United States and pays about 25% of all federal in-
come taxes. Forty percent of them inherited money as well 
as earning it, and they are twice as likely to be married, in 
part because that gives them two incomes, and in part be-
cause they are good “marriage ­material.” They don’t have 
more cars than the middle class, but they do tend to drive 
ritzier cars—you see lots of Lexuses and ­Mercedes in 
­Naples, Florida. You see a lot more clunkers in Flint.
	
When thinking about the 1%, it is important to realize that 
one can consume only so much “stuff.” Capitalism may cre-
ate ­inequalities but it also can improve the life of the poor. 
As economist Joseph Schumpeter pointed out: “Electric 
lighting is no great boon to anyone who has money enough 
to buy a sufficient number of candles and to pay servants 
to attend them. It is the cheap cloth, the cheap cotton and 
rayon fabric, boots, motorcars and so on that are the typical 
achievements of capitalist production, and not as a rule im-
provements that would mean much to a rich man. Queen 
Elizabeth owned silk stockings. The capitalist achievement 
does not typically consist in providing more silk stockings 
for queens but in bringing them within the reach of factory 
girls in return for steadily decreasing amounts of effort.”

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
61
The Roles of Government
The third major U.S. economic institution I’ll consider is government. Government 
plays two general roles in the economy. It’s both a referee (setting the rules that deter-
mine relations between business and households) and an actor (collecting money in 
taxes and spending that money on projects such as defense and education). Let’s first 
consider government’s role as an actor.
Government as an Actor
The United States has a federal government system, which means we have various 
levels of government (federal, state, and local), each with its own powers. Together 
they consume about 18 percent of the country’s total output and employ about 22 million 
individuals. The various levels of government also have a number of programs that 
redistribute income through taxation and social welfare and assistance programs 
­designed to help specific groups.
	
State and local governments employ over 19 million people and spend about 
$2 trillion a year. As you can see in Figure 3-3(a), state and local governments get 
much of their income from taxes: intergovernmental transfers, property taxes, 
sales taxes, and state and ­local income taxes. They spend their tax revenues on pub-
lic safety, health, administration, education (education through high school is avail-
able free in U.S. public schools), and transportation as Figure 3-3(b) shows.
	
Probably the best way to get an initial feel for the federal government and its 
size is to look at the various categories of its tax revenues and expenditures in 
­Figure 3-4(a). Notice individual income taxes make up about 46 percent of the federal 
government’s revenue, and Social Security taxes make up about 34 percent. That’s 
about 80 percent of the federal government’s revenues, most of which show up as a 
deduction from your paycheck. In Figure 3-4(b), notice that the federal government’s 
two largest categories of spending are income security and health and education, with 
expenditures on ­national defense a distant third.
Q-8  What are the two largest 
expenditure categories for the federal 
government?
(b)  Expenditures
(a)  Income
Individual and 
corporate 
income tax (19%)
Property 
tax (20%)
Sales tax (24%)
Income on
assets (4%)
Other (5%)
Intergovernmental
(28%)
Administration
and interest (15%)
Transportation
 (6%)
Public
safety (13%)
Income security
(6%)
Other
(3%)
Health
(24%)
Education 
(33%)
FIGURE 3-3 (A AND B)  Income and Expenditures of State and Local Governments
The charts give you a sense of the importance of state and local governments—where they get (a) and where they spend (b) their  
revenues.
Source: State and Local Government Finance Estimates, Bureau of the Census (www.census.gov).

62	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Government as a Referee
Even if government spending made up only a small proportion of total expendi-
tures, government would still be central to the study of economics. The reason is 
that, in a market economy, government sets the rules of interaction between house-
holds and businesses, and acts as a referee, enforcing the rules and changing them 
when it sees fit. Government decides whether economic forces will be allowed to 
operate freely.
	
Some examples of U.S. laws regulating the interaction between households and 
businesses today are:
1.	 Businesses are not free to hire and fire whomever they want. They must comply 
with equal opportunity and labor laws. For example, closing a plant requires  
60 days’ notice for many kinds of firms.
2.	Many working conditions are subject to government regulation: safety rules, 
wage rules, overtime rules, hours-of-work rules, and the like.
3.	Businesses cannot meet with other businesses to agree on prices they will 
charge.
4.	In some businesses, workers must join a union to work at certain jobs.
	
Most of these laws evolved over time. Up until the 1930s, household members, in 
their roles as workers and consumers, had few rights. Businesses were free to hire and 
fire at will and, if they chose, to deceive and take advantage of consumers.
	
Over time, new laws to curb business abuses have been passed, and government 
agencies have been formed to enforce these laws. Some people think the pendulum has 
swung too far the other way. They believe businesses are saddled with too many regula-
tory burdens.
	
One big question that I’ll address throughout this book is: What referee role should 
the government play in an economy? For example, should government use its taxing 
powers to redistribute income from the rich to the poor? Should it allow mergers 
­between companies? Should it regulate air traffic? Should it regulate prices? Should it 
attempt to stabilize fluctuations of aggregate income?
FIGURE 3-4 (A AND B)  Income and Expenditures of the Federal Government
The pie charts show the sources and uses of federal government revenue. It is important to note that, when the government runs a deficit, 
expenditures exceed income and the difference is made up by borrowing, so the size of the income and expenditure pies may not be equal. 
In recent years expenditures have significantly exceeded income.
Source: Historical Tables: Budget of the U.S. Government (www.whitehouse.gov).
(a) Income
(b) Expenditures
Individual income 
taxes (47%)
Social security taxes 
and contributions (34%)
Excise taxes 
and other (8%)
Corporate 
income 
taxes (11%)
National 
defense 
(16%)
Other (9%)
Interest (6%)
Health and 
education (31%)
Income security 
(38%)

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
63
Specific Roles for Government
In its role as both an actor and a referee, government plays a variety of specific roles in 
the economy. These include:
1.	Providing a stable set of institutions and rules.
2.	Promoting effective and workable competition.
3.	Correcting for externalities.
4.	Ensuring economic stability and growth.
5.	Providing public goods.
6.	Adjusting for undesirable market results.
Provide a Stable Set of Institutions and Rules 
A basic role of govern-
ment is to provide a stable institutional framework that includes the set of laws speci-
fying what can and cannot be done as well as a mechanism to ­enforce those laws. For 
example, if someone doesn’t pay you, you can’t go take what you are owed; you have 
to go through the government court system. Where governments don’t provide a stable 
institutional framework, as often happens in developing and transitional countries, 
economic activity is difficult; usually such economies are ­stagnant. Somalia in the 
early 2000s is an example. As various groups fought for political control, the ­Somalian 
economy stagnated.
Promote Effective and Workable Competition 
In a market economy, 
the pressure to monopolize—for one firm to try to control the market—and competi-
tion are always in conflict; the government must decide what role it is to play in 
protecting or promoting competition. Thus, when Microsoft gained monopolistic con-
trol of the computer operating system market with Windows, the U.S. government 
took the company to court and challenged that monopoly.
	
What makes this a difficult function for government is that most individuals and 
firms believe that competition is far better for the other guy than it is for themselves, that 
their own monopolies are necessary monopolies, and that competition facing them is 
unfair competition. For example, most farmers support competition, but these same 
farmers also support government farm subsidies (payments by government to producers 
based on ­production levels) and import restrictions. Likewise, most firms support 
­competition, but these same firms also support tariffs, which protect them from foreign 
competition. Most professionals, such as architects and engineers, support competition, 
but they also support professional licensing, which limits the number of competitors who 
can enter their field. As you will see when reading the newspapers, there are always 
­arguments for limiting entry into fields. The job of the government is to determine 
whether these arguments are strong enough to overcome the negative effects those 
­limitations have on competition.
Correct for Externalities 
When two people freely enter into a trade or 
agreement, they both believe that they will benefit from the trade. But unless they’re 
required to do so, traders are unlikely to take into account any effect that an action 
may have on a third party. Economists call the effect of a decision on a third party 
not taken into account by the decision maker an externality. An externality can be 
positive (in which case society as a whole benefits from the trade between the two 
parties) or negative (in which case society as a whole is harmed by the trade between 
the two parties).
	
An example of a positive externality is education. When someone educates herself or 
himself, all society benefits, since better-educated people usually make better citizens and 
© Sinisha Karich/123RF RF
The government may be able to 
help correct for externalities.

64	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
are better equipped to figure out new approaches to solving problems—approaches that 
benefit society as a whole. An example of a negative externality involves the burning of 
coal, which puts sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide, and fine particulates into the air. Sulfur 
­dioxide contributes to acid rain, carbon dioxide contributes to global warming, and fine 
particulates damage people’s lungs. This means that burning coal has an ­externality associ-
ated with it—an effect of an action that is not taken into account by market participants.
	
When there are externalities, there is a potential role for government to adjust the 
market result through taxes, subsidies, or regulation. Throughout this book we will be 
considering the advantages and disadvantages of each.
Ensure Economic Stability and Growth 
In addition to providing ­general 
stability, government has the potential role of providing economic stability. Most people 
would agree that if it’s possible, government should prevent large fluctuations in the 
level of economic activity, maintain a relatively constant price level, and provide an eco-
nomic environment conducive to economic growth. These aims, which became the goals 
of the U.S. government in 1946 when the Employment Act was passed, are ­generally 
considered macroeconomic goals. They’re justified as appropriate aims for government 
to pursue because they involve macroeconomic externalities (externalities that affect 
the levels of unemployment, inflation, or growth in the economy as a whole).
	
Here’s how a macro externality could occur. When individuals decide how much to 
spend, they don’t take into account the effects of their decision on others; thus, there 
may be too much or too little spending. Too little spending often leads to unemploy-
ment. But in making their spending decision, people don’t take into account the fact 
that spending less might create unemployment. So their spending decisions can involve 
a macro externality. Similarly, when people raise their price and don’t consider the 
effect on inflation, they too might be creating a macro externality.
Provide Public Goods 
Another role for government is to supply public goods. 
A public good is a good that if supplied to one person must be supplied to all and 
whose consumption by one individual does not prevent its consumption by another 
individual. In contrast, a private good is a good that, when consumed by one individ-
ual, cannot be consumed by another individual. An example of a private good is an 
apple; once I eat that apple, no one else can consume it. An example of a public good 
is national defense, which, if supplied to one, will also protect others. In order to 
­supply defense, governments must require people to pay for it with taxes, rather than 
leaving it to the market to supply it.
Adjust for Undesirable Market Results 
A controversial role for gov-
ernment is to adjust the results of the market when those market results are seen as 
socially undesirable. Government redistributes income, taking it away from some 
­individuals and giving it to others whom it sees as more ­deserving or more in need. In 
doing so, it attempts to see that the outcomes of trades are fair. Determining what’s fair 
is a difficult philosophical question that economists can’t answer. That question is for the 
people, through the government, to decide.
	
An example of this role involves having government decide what’s best for people, 
independently of their desires. The market allows individuals to decide. But what if 
people don’t know what’s best for themselves? Or what if they do know but don’t act 
on that knowledge? For example, people might know that addictive drugs are bad for 
them, but because of peer pressure, or because they just don’t care, they may take 
drugs anyway. Government action prohibiting such activities through laws or high 
taxes may then be warranted. Goods or activities that government believes are bad for 
A macroeconomic externality is the 
effect of an individual decision that 
affects the levels of unemployment, 
inflation, or growth in an economy as a 
whole but is not taken into account by 
the individual decision maker.

65
people even though they choose to use the goods or engage in the activities are called 
demerit goods or activities. Illegal drugs are a demerit good and using addictive 
drugs is a demerit activity.
	
Alternatively, there are some activities that government believes are good for ­people, 
even if people may not choose to engage in them. For example, government may believe 
that going to the opera or contributing to charity is a good activity. But in the United 
States only a small percentage of people go to the opera, and not everyone in the United 
States contributes to charity. Similarly, government may believe that whole-wheat bread 
is more nutritious than white bread. But many consumers prefer white bread. Goods 
like whole-wheat bread and activities like contributing to charity are known as merit 
goods or activities—goods and activities that government ­believes are good for you 
even though you may not choose to engage in the activities or to ­consume the goods. 
Government sometimes provides support for them through subsidies or tax benefits.
Market Failures and Government Failures
The reasons for government intervention are often summed up in the phrase market 
­failure. Market failures are situations in which the market does not lead to a desired 
With merit and demerit goods, 
individuals are assumed to be doing 
what is not in their self-interest.
ADDED DIMENSION
	
United 	
	
European 
	
States	
China	
Union
Area (square  
miles)	
3,537,438	
3,705,407	
1,691,588
Population	
321 million	
1.4 billion	
509 million
GDP* 	
$17.9 trillion	 $18.1 trillion	 $18.4 trillion
Percentage  
of world  
output	
16%	
16%	
17%
GDP per  
capita	
$56,000	
$13,000	
$36,000
Natural 	
Coal, copper,	 Coal, iron	
Coal, iron 
resources	
  lead, and 	
  ore	
  ore, natural 
	
  others	
	
  gas, fish,  
	
	
	
  and others
Exports as a  
percentage  
of GDP	
13%	
22%	
12%
Imports as a  
percentage  
of GDP	
17%	
19%	
13%
Currency
  Value (as of 	
Dollar	
Yuan	
Euro 
March 2016)	
($1 = $1)	
(¥6.51 = $1)	 (€0.89 = $1)
Our International Competitors
The world economy is often divided into three main ar-
eas or trading blocs: the Americas, Europe and Africa, 
and East Asia. These trading blocs are shown in the 
map below.
	
Each area has a major currency. In the Americas, it is 
the dollar; in Europe, it is the euro; and in East Asia, it is 
the ­Japanese yen. These areas are continually chang-
ing; the EU ­recently expanded to 28 countries, incorpo-
rating many of the countries of Eastern Europe. China’s 
economy has been ­growing fast and, given the size of 
its population, is likely to overtake Japan as the key 
Asian economy in the coming ­decades.
	
The accompanying table gives you a sense of the simi-
larities and differences in the economies of the United 
States, China, and the European Union.
*Calculated using purchasing power parity.
Source: CIA World Factbook (www.cia.gov) and current exchange  
rate tables. Currency changes can affect GDP figures. 

66	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
result. In the real world, market failures are pervasive—the market is always 
­failing in one way or ­another. But the fact that there are market failures does not 
mean that government ­intervention will improve the situation. There are also 
­government failures—situations in which the government intervenes and makes 
things worse. Government failures are ­pervasive in the real world—the government is 
always failing in one way or another. So real-world policy makers usually end  
up choosing which failure—market failure or ­government failure—will be least 
problematic.
Global Institutions
So far in this chapter we’ve put the U.S. economy in historical and institutional 
­perspective. In this last section, we briefly put it into perspective relative to the 
world economy. By doing so, we gain a number of insights into the U.S. economy. 
The U.S. economy makes up about 20 percent of world output and consumption, a per-
centage that is much larger than its relative size by geographic area (6 percent of the 
world’s land mass) or by population (just over 4 percent of the world population). 
It is ­becoming more integrated; it is impossible to talk about U.S. economic 
­institutions without considering how those institutions integrate with the world 
economy.
Global Corporations
Consider corporations. Most large corporations today are not U.S., German, or 
­Japanese corporations; they are global corporations (corporations with substantial 
operations on both the production and sales sides in more than one country). Just 
­because a car has a Japanese or German name doesn’t mean that it was produced 
abroad. Many Japanese and German companies now have manufacturing plants in the 
United States, and many U.S. firms have manufacturing plants abroad. When goods 
are produced by global ­corporations, corporate names don’t always tell much about 
where a good is produced. As global corporations’ importance has grown, most 
­manufacturing decisions are made in reference to the international market, not the U.S. 
domestic market. This means that the consumer sovereignty that guides decisions of 
firms is becoming less and less U.S. consumer sovereignty, and more and more global 
consumer sovereignty.
	
Global corporations offer enormous benefits for countries. They create jobs; they 
bring new ideas and new technologies to a country; and they provide competition for 
domestic companies, keeping them on their toes. But global corporations also pose a 
number of problems for governments. One is their implication for domestic and inter-
national policy. A domestic corporation exists within a country and can be dealt with 
using policy measures within that country. A global corporation exists within many 
countries and there is no global government to regulate or control it. If it doesn’t like 
the policies in one country—say taxes are too high or regulations too tight—it can 
shift its operations to other countries.
Coordinating Global Issues
Global economic issues differ from national economic issues because national econo-
mies have governments to referee disputes among players in the economy; global 
economies do not—no international government exists. Some argue that we need a 
global government to oversee global businesses. But that argument has not been 
heeded. The closest institution there is to a world government is the United Nations 
(UN), which, according to critics, is simply a debating society. It has no ability to tax 
Q-9  If there is an externality, does 
that mean that the government should 
intervene in the market to adjust for that 
externality?
Global corporations are corporations 
with substantial operations on both the 
production and sales sides in more than 
one country.

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
67
and no ability to impose its will separate from the political and military power of its 
members. When the United States opposes a UN mandate, it can, and often does, 
ignore it. Hence, ­international problems must be dealt with through negotiation, con-
sensus, bullying, and concessions.
	
Governments, however, have developed a variety of international institutions to 
promote negotiations and coordinate economic relations among countries. Besides the 
United Nations, these include the World Bank, the World Court, and the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF). These organizations have a variety of goals. For example, the 
World Bank, a multinational, international financial institution, works with developing 
countries to secure low-interest loans, channeling such loans to them to foster eco-
nomic growth. The International Monetary Fund, a multinational, international finan-
cial institution, is concerned primarily with monetary issues. It deals with international 
financial arrangements. When developing countries encountered financial problems in 
the 1980s and had large international debts that they could not pay, the IMF helped 
work on repayment plans.
	
Countries also have developed global and regional organizations whose job it 
is to coordinate trade among countries and reduce trade barriers. On the interna-
tional level, the World Trade Organization (WTO) works to reduce trade barriers 
among countries. On the regional level, there are the European Union (EU), which 
is an organization of European countries that developed out of a trade association 
devoted to reducing trade barriers among member countries; the North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), an organization devoted to reducing trade barri-
ers between the United States, Mexico, and Canada; and Mercosur, an organiza-
tion devoted to reducing trade barriers among North, Central, and South American 
countries.
	
In addition to these formal institutions, there are informal meetings of various 
countries. These include the Group of Eight, which meets to promote negotiations and 
to coordinate economic relations among countries. The eight are Japan, Germany, 
Britain, France, United States, Canada, Italy, and Russia.
	
Since governmental membership in international organizations is voluntary, their 
power is limited. When the United States doesn’t like a World Court ruling, it simply 
states that it isn’t going to follow the ruling. When the United States is unhappy with 
what the United Nations is doing, it withholds some of its dues. Other countries do the 
same from time to time. Other member countries complain but can do little to force 
compliance. It doesn’t work that way domestically. If you decide you don’t like U.S. 
policy and refuse to pay your taxes, you’ll wind up in jail.
	
What keeps nations somewhat in line when it comes to international rules is a 
moral tradition: Countries want to (or at least want to look as if they want to) do what’s 
“right.” Countries will sometimes follow international rules to keep international opinion 
favorable to them. But perceived national self-interest often overrides international 
scruples.
Conclusion
This has been a whirlwind introduction to economic institutions and their role in the 
economy. Each of them—business, households, and government—is important, and to 
understand what happens in the economy, one must have a sense of how these institu-
tions work and the role they play. In the remainder of the book we won’t discuss insti-
tutions much as we concentrate on presenting economic analysis. I rely upon you to 
integrate the analysis with institutions as you apply the economic analysis and reason-
ing that you learn to the real world.
Governments have developed 
international institutions to promote 
negotiations and coordinate economic 
relations among countries. Some  
are: the UN; the World Bank; the 
World Court; and the International 
Monetary Fund.
Countries have developed global and 
regional organizations to coordinate 
trade and reduce trade barriers. Some 
are: the WTO; the EU; and NAFTA.
Since governmental membership  
in international organizations is 
voluntary, their power is limited.
Q-10  If the United States  
chooses not to follow a World  
Court decision, what are the 
consequences?

68	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
• A market economy is an economic system based on 
­private property and the market. It gives private 
­property rights to individuals and relies on market 
forces to solve the what, how, and for whom 
­problems.  (LO3-1)
• In a market economy, price is the mechanism 
through which people’s desires are coordinated and 
goods are rationed. The U.S. economy today is a 
market economy.  (LO3-1)
• The predominant market-based system during the 
early 1900s was capitalism, an economic system 
based on the market in which the ownership of 
­production resided with a small group of individuals 
called capitalists.  (LO3-1)
• In principle, under socialism society solves the  
what, how, and for whom problems in the best 
­interest of the individuals in society. It is  
based on individuals’ goodwill toward one 
­another.  (LO3-1)
• In practice, socialism was an economic system based 
on government ownership of the means of production, 
with economic activity governed by central planning. 
Socialism in practice was sometimes called a command 
economy.  (LO3-1)
• A diagram of the U.S. market economy shows the 
connections among businesses, households, and gov-
ernment. It also shows the U.S. economic connection 
to other countries.  (LO3-2)
• In the United States, businesses make the what, how, 
and for whom decisions.  (LO3-2)
Summary
• Although businesses decide what to produce,  
they ­succeed or fail depending on their ability  
to meet ­consumers’ desires. That’s consumer 
­sovereignty.  (LO3-2)
• The three main forms of business are corporations, 
sole proprietorships, and partnerships. Each has its 
advantages and disadvantages.  (LO3-2)
• Although households are the most powerful eco-
nomic institution, they have assigned much of their 
power to government and business. Economics 
­focuses on households’ role as the supplier of 
­labor.  (LO3-2)
• Government plays two general roles in the economy: 
(1) as a referee and (2) as an actor.  (LO3-3)
• Six roles of government are to (1) provide a stable 
set of institutions and rules, (2) promote effective 
and workable competition, (3) correct for 
­externalities, (4) ensure economic stability and 
growth, (5) provide public goods, and (6) adjust  
for undesirable market results.  (LO3-3)
• To understand the U.S. economy, one must understand 
its role in the world economy.  (LO3-4)
• Global corporations are corporations with significant 
operations in more than one country. They are in-
creasing in importance.  (LO3-4)
• Global economic issues differ from national economic 
issues because national economies have governments. 
The global economy does not.  (LO3-4)
Key Terms
business
capitalism
consumer sovereignty
corporation
demerit good or activity
entrepreneurship
externality
global corporation
government failure
households
institutions
macroeconomic externality
market economy
market failure
merit good or activity
partnership
private good
private property right
profit
public good
socialism
sole proprietorship

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
69
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 In a market economy, what is the central coordinating 
mechanism?  (LO3-1)
	 2.	 In a centrally planned socialist economy, what is the 
­central coordinating mechanism?  (LO3-1)
	 3.	 How does a market economy solve the what, how, and for 
whom to produce problems?  (LO3-1)
	 4.	 How does a centrally planned socialist economy solve the 
what, how, and for whom to produce problems?  (LO3-1)
	 5.	 Is capitalism or socialism the better economic system? 
Why?  (LO3-1)
	 6.	 Why does an economy’s strength ultimately reside in its 
people?  (LO3-2)
	 7.	 Why is entrepreneurship a central part of any 
­business?  (LO3-2)
	 8.	 List the three major forms of business.  (LO3-2)
	a.	 What form is most common?
	b.	 What form accounts for the largest proportion of sales?
	 9.	 You’re starting a software company in which you plan to 
sell software to your fellow students. What form of ­business 
organization would you choose? Why?  (LO3-2)
	10.	 What are the two largest categories of state and local 
­government expenditures?  (LO3-3)
	11.	 What are the six roles of government listed in the  
text?  (LO3-3)
	12.	 Say the government establishes rights to pollute so that 
without a pollution permit you aren’t allowed to emit 
­pollutants into the air, water, or soil. Firms are allowed 
to buy and sell these rights. In what way will this correct 
for an externality?  (LO3-3)
	13.	 Give an example of a merit good, a demerit good, 
a public good, and a good that involves an 
­externality.  (LO3-3)
	14.	 Name two international organizations that countries have 
­developed to coordinate economic actions.  (LO3-4)
	15.	 What are two organizations that countries can use to 
­coordinate economic relations and reduce trade 
­barriers?  (LO3-4)
	16.	 Why are international organizations limited in their 
­effectiveness?  (LO3-4)
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Friedrich Hayek, the man quoted at the start of the chap-
ter, is an Austrian economist who won a Nobel Prize in 
economics. He argued that government intervention is dif-
ficult to contain. Suppose central planners have decided to 
financially support all children with food vouchers, free 
day care, and public school.
	a.	 What problems might this create?
	b.	 How might this lead to further interference by central 
planners into family choices? (Austrian)
	 2.	 In his The Social Contract, Jean-Jacques Rousseau argued 
that “no State has ever been founded without a religious 
basis [but] the law of Christianity at bottom does more 
harm by weakening than good by strengthening the con-
stitution of the State.” What does he mean by that, and is 
he correct? (Religious)
	 3.	 In economics, a household is defined as a group of  
individuals making joint decisions as though acting as  
one person.
	a.	 How do you think decisions are actually made about 
things like consumption and allocation of time within 
the household?
	b.	 Does bargaining take place?
	c.	 If so, what gives an individual power to bargain effec-
tively for his or her preferences?
	d.	 Do individuals act cooperatively within the family and 
competitively everywhere else?
	e.	 Does this make sense? (Feminist)
	 4.	 This chapter emphasized the importance of the relation-
ship between how the economic system is organized and 
value systems. Knowing that how I raise my child will 
greatly shape how he or she will ultimately fit into the 
social and economic process, should I raise my child to 
be selfless, compassionate, and dedicated to advancing 
the well-being of others, knowing she will probably be 
poor; or shall I raise her to be self-centered, uncaring, 
and greedy to increase her chances to acquire ­personal 
fortune? Which decision is just and why? 
­(Institutionalist)
	 5.	 The text discusses consumer sovereignty and suggests that 
it guides the market choices.
	a.	 Is consumer sovereignty a myth or reality in today’s 
consumer culture?
	b.	 Do consumers “direct” the economy as suggested 
by the text, or has invention become the mother of 
­necessity, as Thorstein Veblen once quipped?
	c.	 If the consumer is not sovereign, then who is and what 
does that imply for economics? (Radical)

70	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 What arguments can you give for supporting a socialist 
organization of a family and a market-based organization 
of the economy?
	 2.	 Economists Edward Lazear and Robert Michael calculated 
that the average family spends two and a half times as much 
on each adult as they do on each child.
	a.	 Does this mean that children are deprived and that the 
distribution is unfair?
	b.	 Do you think these percentages change with family 
­income? If so, how?
	c.	 Do you think that the allocation would be different in 
a family in a command economy than in a capitalist 
economy? Why?
	 3.	 One of the specific problems socialist economies had was 
keeping up with capitalist countries technologically.
	a.	 Can you think of any reason inherent in a centrally 
planned economy that would make innovation difficult?
	b.	 Can you think of any reason inherent in a capitalist 
economy that would foster innovation?
	c.	 Joseph Schumpeter, a famous Harvard economist of 
the 1930s, predicted that as firms in capitalist societies 
grew in size, they would innovate less. Can you sug-
gest what his argument might have been?
	d.	 Schumpeter’s prediction did not come true. Modern 
capitalist economies have had enormous innovations. 
Can you provide explanations as to why?
	 4.	 Tom Rollins founded a company called Teaching Co. He 
taped lectures at the top universities, packaged the lec-
tures on DVD, and sold them for between $20 and $230 
per ­series.
	a.	 Discuss whether such an idea could be expanded to 
­include college courses that one could take at home.
	b.	 What are the technical, social, and economic issues 
­involved?
	c.	 If it is technically possible and cost-effective, will the 
new venture be a success?
	 5.	 Go to a store in your community.
	a.	 Ask what limitations the owners faced in starting their 
business.
	b.	 Were these limitations necessary?
	c.	 Should there have been more or fewer limitations?
	d.	 Under what heading of reasons for government 
­intervention would you put each of the limitations?
	e.	 Ask what kinds of taxes the business pays and what 
benefits it believes it gets for those taxes.
	f.	 Is it satisfied with the existing situation? Why? What 
would it change?
	 6.	 A market system is often said to be based on con-
sumer sovereignty—the consumer determines what’s  
to be ­produced. Yet business decides what’s to be 
­produced. Can these two views be reconciled? How? 
If not, why?
	 7.	 How might individuals disagree about the government’s 
role in intervening in the market for merit, demerit, and 
public goods?
	 8.	 Discuss the concepts of market failure and government 
failure in relation to operas.
	 9.	 You’ve set up the rules for a game and started the game 
but now realize that the rules are unfair. Should you 
change the rules?
	10.	 In trade talks with Australia, the United States proposed 
that Australia cannot regulate the amount of foreign 
­content on new media without first consulting the United 
States. Actress Bridie Carter of McLeod’s Daughters 
­argued against adopting the trade agreement, arguing 
the agreement trades away Australia’s cultural identity. 
This highlights one of the effects of globalization: the 
loss of variety based on cultural differences. How 
­important should such cultural identity issues be in 
trade negotiations?
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 He is wrong. Property rights are required for a market to 
operate. Once property rights are allocated, the market 
will allocate goods, but the market cannot distribute the 
property rights that are required for the market to ­ 
operate.  (LO3-1)
	 2.	 Capitalism places much more emphasis on fostering indi-
vidualism. Socialism tries to develop a system in which 
the individual’s needs are placed second to society’s 
needs.  (LO3-1)
	 3.	 Most families allocate basic needs through control and 
command. The parents do (or try to do) the controlling 
and commanding. Generally parents are well-intentioned, 
trying to meet their perception of their children’s needs. 
However, some family activities that are not basic needs 
might be allocated through the market. For example, if 
one child wants a go-cart and is willing to do extra work 
at home in order to get it, go-carts might be allocated 
through the market, with the child earning vouchers that 
can be used for such nonessentials.  (LO3-1)

APPENDIX
	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
71
	 4.	 In theory, socialism is an economic system based upon 
­individuals’ goodwill. In practice, socialism involved 
central planning and ­government ownership of the 
­primary means of ­production.  (LO3-1)
	 5.	 Market economies are generally broken up into businesses, 
households, and government.  (LO3-2)
	 6.	 False. In the United States, individuals are free to start any 
type of business they want, provided it doesn’t violate the 
law. The invisible hand sees to it that only those ­businesses 
that customers want earn a profit. The others lose money and 
eventually go out of business, so in that sense only busi-
nesses that customers want stay in ­business.  (LO3-2)
	 7.	 As can be seen in Figure 3-2, most businesses in the 
United States are sole proprietorships, not corporations. 
Corporations, however, generate the most ­ 
revenue.  (LO3-2)
	 8.	 The two largest expenditure categories for the federal 
­government are health and education and income 
­security.  (LO3-3)
	 9.	 Not necessarily. The existence of an externality creates 
the possibility that government intervention might 
help. But there are also government failures in which 
the government intervenes and makes things  
worse.  (LO3-3)
	10.	 The World Court has no enforcement mechanism. Thus, 
when a country refuses to follow the court’s decisions, 
the country cannot be directly punished except through 
­indirect international pressures.  (LO3-4)
The History of Economic Systems
In Chapter 1, I made the distinction between market and eco-
nomic forces: Economic forces have always existed—they 
operate in all aspects of our lives—but market forces have 
not always existed. Markets are social creations societies use 
to coordinate individuals’ actions. Markets ­developed, some-
times spontaneously, sometimes by ­design, because they of-
fered a better life for at least some—and usually a large 
majority of—individuals in a society.
	
To understand why markets developed, it is helpful to 
look briefly at the history of the economic systems from 
which our own system descended.
Feudal Society: Rule of Tradition
Let’s go back in time to the year 1000 when Europe had 
no nation-states as we now know them. (Ideally, we 
would have gone back further and explained other 
­economic systems, but, given the limited space, I had to 
draw the line somewhere—an example of a trade-off.) 
The predominant economic system at that time was 
­feudalism. There was no coordinated central ­government, 
no unified system of law, no national ­patriotism, no 
­national defense, although a strong ­religious institution 
simply called the Church fulfilled some of these roles. 
There were few towns; most ­individuals lived in walled 
manors, or “estates.” These manors “belonged to” the 
“lord of the manor.” (Occasionally the “lord” was a lady, 
but not often.) I say “belonged to” rather than “were 
owned by” because most of the empires or federations at 
that time were not formal nation-states that could 
­organize, administer, and regulate ownership. No docu-
ments or deeds gave ownership of the land to an individ-
ual. Instead, tradition ruled, and in normal times nobody 
questioned the lord’s right to the land. The land ­“belonged 
to” the lord because the land “belonged to” him—that’s 
the way it was.
	
Without a central nation-state, the manor served many 
functions a nation-state would have served had it existed. 
The lord provided protection, often within a walled area 
surrounding the manor house or, if the manor was large 
enough, a castle. He provided administration and decided 
disputes. He also decided what would be done, how it 
would be done, and who would get what, but these 
­decisions were limited. In the same way that the land 
­belonged to the lord because that’s the way it always had 
been, what people did and how they did it were determined 
by what they always had done. Tradition ruled the manor 
more than the lord did.

72	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Problems of a Tradition-Based Society
Feudalism developed about the 8th and 9th centuries and 
lasted until about the 15th century, though in isolated 
countries such as Russia it continued well into the 19th 
century, and in all European countries its influence 
­lingered for hundreds of years (as late as about 150 years 
ago in some parts of Germany). Such a long-lived system 
must have done some things right, and feudalism did: 
It solved the what, how, and for whom problems in an 
­acceptable way.
	
But a tradition-based society has problems. In a tra­
ditional society, because someone’s father was a baker, 
the son also must be a baker, and because a woman was a 
homemaker, she wouldn’t be allowed to be ­anything but a 
homemaker. But what if Joe Blacksmith Jr., the son of Joe 
Blacksmith Sr., is a lousy blacksmith and longs to knead 
dough, while Joe Baker Jr. would be a superb blacksmith 
but hates making pastry? Tough. Tradition dictated who 
did what. In fact, tradition probably ­arranged things so 
that we will never know whether Joe Blacksmith Jr. 
would have made a superb baker.
	
As long as a society doesn’t change too much, tradi-
tion operates reasonably well, although not especially 
­efficiently, in holding the society together. However, 
when a society must undergo change, tradition does not 
work. Change means that the things that were done ­before 
no longer need to be done, while new things do need to 
get done. But if no one has traditionally done these new 
things, then they don’t get done. If the change is impor-
tant but a society can’t figure out some way for the new 
things to get done, the society falls apart. That’s what 
happened to feudal society. It didn’t change when change 
was required.
	
The life of individuals living on the land, called serfs, 
was difficult, and feudalism was designed to benefit the 
lord. Some individuals in feudal society just couldn’t take 
life on the manor, and they set off on their own. Because 
there was no organized police force, they were unlikely 
to be caught and forced to return to the manor. Going 
hungry, being killed, or both, however, were frequent fates 
of an escaped serf. One place to which serfs could safely 
escape, though, was a town or city—the remains of what 
in Roman times had been thriving and active cities. These 
cities, which had been decimated by plagues, plundering 
bands, and starvation in the preceding centuries, never-
theless remained an escape hatch for runaway serfs 
­because they relied far less on tradition than did manors. 
City dwellers had to live by their wits; many became mer-
chants who lived predominantly by trading. They were 
middlemen; they would buy from one group and sell to 
another.
	
Trading in towns was an alternative to the traditional 
feudal order because trading allowed people to have an 
income independent of the traditional social structure. 
Markets broke down tradition. Initially merchants traded 
using barter (exchange of one kind of good for another): 
silk and spices from the Orient for wheat, flour, and 
­artisan products in Europe. But soon a generalized 
­purchasing power (money) developed as a medium of 
­exchange. Money greatly expanded the possibilities of 
trading because its use meant that goods no longer needed 
to be bartered. They could be sold for money, which 
could then be spent to buy other goods.
	
In the beginning, land was not traded, but soon the 
feudal lord who just had to have a silk robe but had no 
money was saying, “Why not? I’ll sell you a small 
piece of land so I can buy a shipment of silk.” Once 
land became tradable, the traditional base of the feudal 
society was undermined. Tradition that can be bought 
and sold is no longer tradition—it’s just another 
­commodity.
From Feudalism to  
Mercantilism
Toward the end of the Middle Ages (mid-15th century), 
markets went from being a sideshow, a fair that spiced up 
people’s lives, to being the main event. Over time, some 
traders and merchants started to amass fortunes that 
dwarfed those of the feudal lords. Rich traders settled 
down; existing towns and cities expanded and new towns 
were formed. As towns grew and as fortunes shifted from 
feudal lords to merchants, power in society shifted to the 
towns. And with that shift came a change in society’s 
­political and economic structure.
	
As these traders became stronger politically and eco-
nomically, they threw their support behind a king (the 
strongest lord) in the hope that the king would expand 
their ability to trade. In doing so, they made the king even 
stronger. Eventually, the king became so powerful that his 
will prevailed over the will of the other lords and even 
over the will of the Church. As the king consolidated his 
power, nation-states as we know them today evolved. The 
government became an active influence on economic 
­decision making.
	
As markets grew, feudalism evolved into mercantilism. 
The evolution of feudal systems into mercantilism occurred 
in the following way: As cities and their markets grew in 
size and power relative to the feudal manors and the tradi-
tional economy, a whole new variety of possible economic 
activities developed. It was only natural that individuals 
began to look to a king to establish a new tradition that 

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
73
would determine who would do what. Individuals in 
­particular occupations organized into groups called guilds, 
which were similar to strong labor unions today. These 
guilds, many of which had financed and supported the 
king, now expected the king and his government to protect 
their interests.
	
As new economic activities, such as trading compa-
nies, developed, individuals involved in these activities 
similarly depended on the king for the right to trade 
and for help in financing and organizing their activities. 
For example, in 1492, when Christopher Columbus 
had the wild idea that by sailing west he could get to 
the East ­Indies and trade for their riches, he went to 
Spain’s Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand for financial 
support.
	
Since many traders had played and continued to play im-
portant roles in financing, establishing, and supporting the 
king, the king was usually happy to protect their ­interests. 
The government doled out the rights to undertake a variety 
of economic activities. By the late 1400s, Western Europe 
had evolved from a feudal to a mercantilist ­economy.
	
The mercantilist period was marked by the increased 
role of government, which could be classified in two 
ways: by the way it encouraged growth and by the way it 
limited growth. Government legitimized and financed a 
variety of activities, thus encouraging growth. But 
­government also limited economic activity in order to 
protect the monopolies of those it favored, thus limiting 
growth. So mercantilism allowed the market to operate, 
but it kept the market under its control. The market was 
not allowed to respond freely to the laws of supply and 
demand.
From Mercantilism to  
Capitalism
Mercantilism provided the source for major growth in 
western Europe, but mercantilism also unleashed new 
tensions within society. Like feudalism, mercantilism 
limited entry into economic activities. It used a different 
form of limitation—politics rather than social and ­cultural 
tradition—but individuals who were excluded still felt 
unfairly treated.
	
The most significant source of tension was the different 
roles played by craft guilds and owners of new businesses, 
who were called industrialists or capitalists (business­
people who have acquired large amounts of money and use 
it to invest in businesses). Craft guild members were artists 
in their own crafts: pottery, shoemaking, and the like. 
New business owners destroyed the art of production by 
devising machines to replace hand production. Machines 
produced goods cheaper and faster than craftsmen.1 The 
result was an increase in supply and a downward pressure 
on the price, which was set by the government. Craftsmen 
didn’t want to be replaced by machines. They argued that 
machine-manufactured goods didn’t have the same quality 
as hand-crafted goods, and that the new machines would 
disrupt the economic and social life of the community.
	
Industrialists were the outsiders with a vested interest in 
changing the existing system. They wanted the freedom to 
conduct business as they saw fit. Because of the enormous 
cost advantage of manufactured goods over crafted goods, a 
few industrialists overcame government opposition and 
­succeeded within the mercantilist system. They earned their 
fortunes and became an independent political power.
	
Once again, the economic power base shifted, and 
two groups competed with each other for power—this 
time, the guilds and the industrialists. The government 
had to decide whether to support the industrialists (who 
wanted government to loosen its power over the country’s 
economic affairs) or the craftsmen and guilds (who ar-
gued for strong government limitations and for maintain-
ing traditional values of workmanship). This struggle 
raged in the 1700s and 1800s. But during this time, gov-
ernments themselves were changing. This was the Age of 
Revolutions, and the kings’ powers were being limited by 
democratic reform movements—revolutions supported 
and financed in large part by the industrialists.
The Need for Coordination  
in an Economy
Craftsmen argued that coordination of the economy was 
necessary, and the government had to be involved. If govern-
ment wasn’t going to coordinate economic activity, who 
would? To answer that question, a British moral philosopher 
named Adam Smith developed the concept of the invisible 
hand, in his famous book The Wealth of Nations (1776), and 
used it to explain how markets could coordinate the ­economy 
without the active involvement of government.
	
As stated in Chapter 2, Smith argued that the market’s 
invisible hand would guide suppliers’ actions toward the 
general good. No government coordination was necessary.
	
With the help of economists such as Adam Smith, the 
industrialists’ view won out. Government pulled back 
from its role in guiding the economy and adopted a laissez-
faire policy.
1Throughout this section I use men to emphasize that these societies 
were strongly male-dominated. There were almost no business- 
women. In fact, a woman had to turn over her property to a man upon 
her marriage, and the marriage contract was written as if she were 
owned by her husband!

74	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
The Industrial Revolution
The invisible hand worked; capitalism thrived. Begin-
ning about 1750 and continuing through the late 1800s, 
­machine production increased enormously, almost 
­totally replacing hand production. This phenomenon 
has been given a name, the Industrial Revolution. The 
economy grew faster than ever before. Society was 
­forever ­transformed. New inventions changed all 
­aspects of life. James Watt’s steam engine (1769) made 
manufacturing and travel easier. Eli Whitney’s cotton 
gin (1793) changed the way cotton was ­processed. 
James Kay’s ­flying shuttle (1733),2 James Hargreaves’ 
spinning jenny (1765), and Richard ­Arkwright’s  
power loom (1769), combined with the steam engine, 
changed the way cloth was processed and the clothes 
people wore.
	
The need to mine vast amounts of coal to provide 
power to run the machines changed the economic and 
physical landscapes. The repeating rifle changed the na-
ture of ­warfare. Modern economic institutions replaced 
guilds. Stock markets, insurance companies, and corpo­
rations all became important. Trading was no longer 
­financed by ­government; it was privately financed 
­(although government policies, such as colonial policies 
giving certain companies monopoly trading rights with a 
country’s colonies, helped in that trading). The Industrial 
Revolution, democracy, and capitalism all arose in the 
middle and late 1700s. By the 1800s, they were part of 
the institutional landscape of ­Western society. Capitalism 
had arrived.
	
Welfare Capitalism  
From Capitalism to Socialism
Capitalism was marked by significant economic 
growth in the Western world. But it was also marked 
by human abuses—18-hour workdays; low wages; chil-
dren as young as five years old slaving long hours in 
dirty, dangerous factories and mines—to produce enor-
mous wealth for an elite few. Such conditions and in-
equalities led to criticism of the capitalist or market 
economic system.
Marx’s Analysis
The best-known critic of this system was Karl Marx, a 
­German philosopher, economist, and sociologist who wrote 
in the 1800s and who developed an analysis of the dynamics 
of change in economic systems. Marx argued that economic 
systems are in a constant state of change, and that capitalism 
would not last. Workers would ­revolt, and capitalism would 
be replaced by a socialist ­economic system.
	
Marx saw an economy marked by tensions among 
economic classes. He saw capitalism as an economic 
system controlled by the capitalist class (businessmen). 
His class analysis was that capitalist society is divided 
into capitalist and worker classes. He said constant 
­tension between these economic classes causes changes 
in the system. The capitalist class made large profits by 
exploiting the proletariat class—the working class—and 
extracting what he called surplus value from workers 
who, according to Marx’s ­labor theory of value, pro-
duced all the value inherent in goods. Surplus value was 
the additional profit, rent, or ­interest that, according to 
Marx’s normative views, capitalists added to the price of 
goods. What standard economic analysis sees as recog-
nizing a need that society has and fulfilling it, Marx saw 
as exploitation.
	
Marx argued that this exploitation would increase as pro-
duction facilities became larger and larger and as ­competition 
among capitalists decreased. At some point, he ­believed, ex-
ploitation would lead to a revolt by the ­proletariat, who 
would overthrow their capitalist ­exploiters.
	
By the late 1800s, some of what Marx predicted had 
occurred, although not in the way that he thought it 
would. Production moved from small to large factories. 
Corporations developed, and classes became more 
­distinct from one another. Workers were significantly 
­differentiated from owners. Small firms merged and were 
organized into monopolies and trusts (large ­combinations 
of firms). The trusts developed ways to prevent competition 
among themselves and ways to limit entry of new com-
petitors into the market. Marx was right in his predictions 
about these developments, but he was wrong in his 
­prediction about society’s ­response to them.
The Revolution That Did Not Occur
Western society’s response to the problems of capitalism 
was not a revolt by the workers. Instead, governments 
stepped in to stop the worst abuses of capitalism. The 
hard edges of capitalism were softened.
	
Evolution, not revolution, was capitalism’s destiny. 
The democratic state did not act, as Marx argued it would, 
as a mere representative of the capitalist class. Competing 
2The invention of the flying shuttle frustrated the textile industry 
­because it enabled workers to weave so much cloth that the 
­spinners of thread from which the cloth was woven couldn’t keep 
up. This challenge to the textile industry was met by offering a 
prize to anyone who could invent something to increase the thread 
­spinners’ productivity. The prize was won when the spinning jenny 
was invented.

	
Chapter 3 ■ Economic Institutions	
75
pressure groups developed; workers gained political 
power that offset the economic power of businesses.
	
In the late 1930s and the 1940s, workers dominated 
the political agenda. During this time, capitalist econo-
mies developed an economic safety net that included 
­government-funded programs, such as public welfare and 
unemployment insurance, and established an extensive 
set of regulations affecting all aspects of the economy. 
Today, depressions are met with direct government policy. 
Antitrust laws, regulatory agencies, and social programs 
of government softened the hard edges of capitalism. 
Laws were passed prohibiting child labor, mandating a 
certain minimum wage, and limiting the hours of work. 
Capitalism became what is sometimes called welfare 
capitalism.
	
Due to these developments, government spending 
now accounts for about a fifth of all spending in the 
United States, and for more than half in some European 
countries. Were an economist from the late 1800s to 
­return from the grave, he’d probably say socialism, not 
capitalism, exists in Western societies. Most modern-day 
economists wouldn’t go that far, but they would agree that 
our economy today is better described as a welfare capi-
talist economy than as a capitalist, or even a market, 
economy. Because of these changes, the U.S. and ­Western 
European economies are a far cry from the ­competitive 
“capitalist” economy that Karl Marx criticized. Markets 
operate, but they are constrained by the government.
	
The concept capitalism developed to denote a market 
system controlled by one group in society, the capitalists. 
Looking at Western societies today, we see that domination 
by one group no longer characterizes Western economies. 
Although in theory capitalists control corporations through 
their ownership of shares of stock, in practice corporations 
are controlled in large part by managers. There remains an 
elite group who control business, but capitalist is not a 
good term to describe them. Managers, not capitalists, 
­exercise primary control over business, and even their 
­control is limited by laws or the fear of laws being passed 
by governments.
	
Governments, in turn, are controlled by a variety of 
­pressure groups. Sometimes one group is in control; at 
other times, another. Government policies similarly fluc-
tuate. Sometimes they are proworker, sometimes proin-
dustrialist, sometimes progovernment, and sometimes 
prosociety.
From Feudalism to Socialism
You probably noticed that I crossed out Socialism in the 
previous section’s heading and replaced it with Welfare 
Capitalism. That’s because capitalism did not evolve to 
socialism as Karl Marx predicted it would. Instead, 
Marx’s socialist ideas took root in feudalist Russia, a 
­society that the Industrial Revolution had in large part 
­bypassed. Since socialism arrived at a different place 
and a different time than Marx predicted it would, you 
shouldn’t be surprised to read that socialism arrived in a 
different way than Marx predicted. The proletariat did not 
revolt to establish socialism. Instead, World War I, which 
the Russians were losing, crippled Russia’s feudal econ-
omy and government. A small group of socialists over-
threw the czar (Russia’s king) and took over the 
government in 1917. They quickly pulled Russia out of 
the war, and then set out to organize a socialist society 
and economy.
	
Russian socialists tried to adhere to Marx’s ideas, but 
they found that Marx had concentrated on how capitalist 
economies operate, not on how a socialist economy 
should be run. Thus, Russian socialists faced a huge task 
with little guidance. Their most immediate problem was 
how to increase production so that the economy could 
emerge from feudalism into the modern industrial world. 
In Marx’s analysis, capitalism was a necessary stage in 
the evolution toward the ideal state for a very practical 
reason. The capitalists exploit the workers, but in doing 
so capitalists extract the necessary surplus—an amount of 
production in excess of what is consumed. That surplus 
had to be extracted in order to provide the factories and 
machinery upon which a socialist economic system would 
be built. But since capitalism did not exist in ­Russia, a 
true socialist state could not be established ­immediately. 
Instead, the socialists created state socialism—an economic 
system in which government sees to it that people work 
for the common good until they can be relied upon to do 
that on their own.
	
Socialists saw state socialism as a transition stage to 
pure socialism. This transition stage still exploited the 
workers; when Joseph Stalin took power in Russia in the 
late 1920s, he took the peasants’ and small farmers’ land 
and turned it into collective farms. The government then 
paid farmers low prices for their produce. When farmers 
balked at the low prices, millions of them were killed.
	
Simultaneously, Stalin created central planning agen-
cies that directed individuals on what to produce and how 
to produce it, and determined for whom things would be 
produced. During this period, socialism became synony-
mous with central economic planning, and Soviet-style 
socialism became the model of socialism in practice.
	
Also during this time, Russia took control of a num-
ber of neighboring states and established the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), the formal name of 
the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union also installed Soviet-
dominated governments in a number of Eastern European 

76	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
countries. In 1949 most of China, under the rule of Mao 
Zedong, adopted Soviet-style socialist principles.
	
Since the late 1980s, the Soviet socialist economic 
and political structure has fallen apart. The Soviet Union 
as a political state broke up, and its former republics 
­became autonomous. Eastern European countries were 
released from Soviet control. Now they faced a new 
­problem: transition from socialism to a market economy. 
Why did the Soviet socialist economy fall apart? 
­Because workers lacked incentives to work; production 
was inefficient; consumer goods were either unavailable 
or of poor quality; and high Soviet officials were 
­exploiting their positions, keeping the best jobs for 
themselves and moving themselves up in the waiting 
lists for consumer goods. In short, the parents of the 
­socialist family (the Communist Party) were no longer 
acting benevolently; they were taking many of the benefits 
for themselves.
	
These political and economic upheavals in Eastern 
Europe and the former Soviet Union suggest the kind of 
socialism these societies tried did not work. However, 
that failure does not mean that socialist goals are bad; nor 
does it mean that no type of socialism can ever work. The 
point is that all systems have problems, and it is likely 
that the political winds of change will lead to new forms 
of economic organization being tried as the problems of 
the existing system lead to political demands for change. 
Venezuela’s recent attempt to establish a new form of 
­socialism is an example. Given past experience with 
­socialist systems, however, most economists believe that 
any future workable “new socialist” system will include 
important elements of market institutions.

Teach a parrot the terms supply  
and demand and you’ve got an 
economist.
—Thomas Carlyle
“
”
chapter 4
Supply and Demand
Supply and demand. Supply and demand. Roll the 
phrase around in your mouth; savor it like a good 
wine. Supply and demand are the most-used words in 
economics. And for good reason. They provide a 
good off-the-cuff answer for any economic question. 
Try it.
Why are bacon and oranges so expensive this 
­winter? Supply and demand.
Why are interest rates falling?  
Supply and ­demand.
Why can’t I find decent wool socks anymore? Supply and demand.
	
The importance of the interplay of supply and demand makes it only natural 
that, early in any economics course, you must learn about supply and demand. 
Let’s start with demand.
Demand
People want lots of things; they “demand” much less than they want because 
demand means a willingness and ability to pay. Unless you are willing and able 
to pay for it, you may want it, but you don’t demand it. For example, I want to 
own a Ferrari. But, I must admit, I’m not willing to do what’s necessary to own 
one. If I really wanted one, I’d mortgage everything I own, increase my income 
by doubling the number of hours I work, not buy anything else, and get that car. 
But I don’t do any of those things, so at the going price, $650,000, I do not 
demand a Ferrari. Sure, I’d buy one if it cost $30,000, but from my actions it’s 
clear that, at $650,000, I don’t demand it. This points to an important aspect of 
demand: The quantity you demand at a low price differs from the quantity you 
demand at a high price. Specifically, the quantity you demand varies ­inversely—
in the opposite direction—with price.
	
Prices are the tool by which the market coordinates individuals’ desires and 
limits how much people demand. When goods become scarce, the market ­reduces 
the quantity people demand; as their prices go up, people buy fewer goods. As 
goods become abundant, their prices go down, and people buy more of them. The 
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO4-1	 State the law of demand and 
distinguish shifts in demand 
from movements along a 
demand curve.
LO4-2	 State the law of supply and 
distinguish shifts in supply 
from movements along a 
supply curve.
LO4-3	 Explain how the law of 
demand and the law of 
supply interact to bring 
about equilibrium.
LO4-4	 Discuss the limitations of 
demand and supply analysis.
Neil Roy Johnson/Shutterstock.com

78	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
invisible hand—the price mechanism—sees to it that what people demand (do what’s 
necessary to get) matches what’s available.
The Law of Demand
The ideas expressed above are the foundation of the law of demand:
Quantity demanded rises as price falls, other things constant.
Or alternatively:
Quantity demanded falls as price rises, other things constant.
This law is fundamental to the invisible hand’s ability to coordinate individuals’ desires; 
as prices change, people change how much they’re willing to buy.
	
What accounts for the law of demand? If the price of something goes up, people 
will tend to buy less of it and buy something else instead. They will substitute other 
goods for goods whose relative price has gone up. If the price of MP3 files from the 
Internet rises, but the price of CDs stays the same, you’re more likely to buy that new 
Coldplay recording on CD than to download it from the Internet.
	
To see that the law of demand makes intuitive sense, just think of something you’d 
­really like but can’t afford. If the price is cut in half, you—and other consumers—become 
more likely to buy it. Quantity demanded goes up as price goes down.
	
Just to be sure you’ve got it, let’s consider a real-world example: demand for vanity—
specifically, vanity license plates. When the North Carolina state legislature increased the 
vanity plates’ price from $30 to $40, the quantity demanded fell from 60,334 to 31,122. 
Assuming other things remained constant, that is the law of demand in action.
The Demand Curve
A demand curve is the graphic representation of the relationship between price and 
quantity demanded. Figure 4-1 shows a demand curve.
	
As you can see, the demand curve slopes downward. That’s because of the law of 
demand: As the price goes up, the quantity demanded goes down, other things constant. 
In other words, price and quantity demanded are inversely related.
The law of demand states that the 
quantity of a good demanded is 
inversely related to the good’s  
price.
When price goes up, quantity 
demanded goes down. When price 
goes down, quantity demanded  
goes up.
Q-1  Why does the demand curve 
slope downward?
FIGURE 4-1  A Sample Demand Curve
The law of demand states that the 
quantity demanded of a good is 
inversely related to the price of that 
good, other things constant. As the 
price of a good goes up, the quantity 
demanded goes down, so the demand 
curve is downward-sloping.
Price (per unit)
0
Quantity demanded (per unit of time)
PA
QA
A
Demand

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
79
	
Notice that in stating the law of demand, I put in the qualification “other things 
constant.” That’s three extra words, and unless they were important I wouldn’t have 
included them. But what does “other things constant” mean? Say that over two years, 
both the price of cars and the number of cars purchased rise. That seems to violate the 
law of demand, since the number of cars purchased should have fallen in response to 
the rise in price. Looking at the data more closely, however, we see that individuals’ 
income has also increased. Other things didn’t remain the same.
	
The increase in price works as the law of demand states—it decreases the 
­number of cars bought. But the rise in income increases the quantity demanded at 
­every price. That increase in demand outweighs the decrease in quantity demanded 
that results from a rise in price, so ultimately more cars are sold. If you want to 
study the effect of price alone—which is what the law of demand refers to—you 
must make adjustments to hold income constant. Because other things besides price 
affect demand, the qualifying phrase “other things constant” is an important part of 
the law of demand.
	
The other things that are held constant include individuals’ tastes, prices of 
other goods, and even the weather. Those other factors must remain constant if 
you’re to make a valid study of the effect of an increase in the price of a good on the 
quantity demanded. In practice, it’s impossible to keep all other things constant, so 
you have to be careful when you say that when price goes up, quantity demanded 
goes down. It’s likely to go down, but it’s always possible that something besides 
price has changed.
Shifts in Demand versus Movements along a Demand Curve
To distinguish between the effects of price and the effects of other factors on how much 
of a good is demanded, economists have developed the following precise terminology—
terminology that inevitably shows up on exams. The first distinction is between demand 
and quantity demanded.
Demand refers to a schedule of quantities of a good that will be bought per unit 
of time at various prices, other things constant.
Quantity demanded refers to a specific amount that will be demanded per unit 
of time at a specific price, other things constant.
	
In graphical terms, the term demand refers to the entire demand curve. Demand 
tells us how much will be bought at various prices. Quantity demanded tells us how 
much will be bought at a specific price; it refers to a point on a demand curve, such as 
point A in Figure 4-1. This terminology allows us to distinguish between changes in 
quantity demanded and shifts in demand. A change in price changes the quantity 
demanded. It refers to a movement along a demand curve—the graphical represen-
tation of the effect of a change in price on the quantity demanded. A change in any-
thing other than price that affects demand changes the entire demand curve. A shift 
factor of demand causes a shift in demand, the graphical representation of the effect of 
anything other than price on demand.
	
To make sure you understand the difference between a movement along a demand 
curve and a shift in demand, let’s consider an example. Singapore has one of the world’s 
highest numbers of cars per mile of road. This means that congestion is considerable. 
Singapore adopted two policies to reduce road use: It increased the fee charged to use 
roads and it provided an expanded public transportation system. Both policies reduced 
congestion. Figure 4-2(a) shows that increasing the toll charged to use roads from 
$1 to $2 per 50 miles of road reduces quantity demanded from 200 to 100 cars per mile 
“Other things constant” places a 
limitation on the application of the 
law of demand.
Q-2  The uncertainty caused by  
the terrorist attacks of September 11, 
2001, made consumers reluctant  
to spend on luxury items. This 
reduced ________. Should the  
missing words be demand for luxury 
goods or quantity of luxury goods 
demanded?
Change in price causes a movement 
along a demand curve; a change  
in a shift factor causes a shift in 
demand.

80	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
every hour (a movement along the demand curve). Figure 4-2(b) shows that ­providing 
alternative methods of transportation such as buses and subways shifts the demand 
curve for roads in to the left so that at every price, demand drops by 25 cars per mile 
every hour.
Some Shift Factors of Demand
Important shift factors of demand include:
1.	Society’s income.
2.	The prices of other goods.
3.	Tastes.
4.	Expectations.
5.	Taxes and subsidies.
	
Let’s consider a couple of them. First, income. From our example above of the 
“other things constant” qualification, we saw that a rise in income increases the 
­demand for goods. For most goods this is true. As individuals’ income rises, they 
can afford more of the goods they want, such as steaks, computers, or clothing. 
These are normal goods. For other goods, called inferior goods, an increase in income 
reduces demand. An example is urban mass transit. A person whose income has 
risen tends to stop riding the bus to work because she can afford to buy a car and rent 
a parking space.
	
Next, let’s consider the price of other goods. Because people make their buying 
decisions based on the price of related goods, demand will be affected by the prices of 
other goods. Suppose the price of jeans rises from $25 to $35, but the price of khakis 
remains at $25. Next time you need pants, you’re apt to try khakis instead of jeans. 
They are substitutes. When the price of a substitute rises, demand for the good whose 
FIGURE 4-2 (A AND B)  Shift in Demand versus a Change in Quantity Demanded
A rise in a good’s price results in a reduction in quantity demanded and is shown by a movement up along a demand curve from point A to 
point B in (a). A change in any other factor besides price that affects demand leads to a shift in the entire demand curve, as shown in (b).
Price (per 50 miles)
Cars (per mile each hour)
B
A
$2
$1
0
100
200
Demand
(a) Movement along a Demand Curve
Price (per 50 miles)
Cars (per mile each hour)
B
A
$1
0
175 200
D0
D1
(b) Shift in Demand

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
81
price has remained the same will rise. Or consider another example. Suppose the price 
of movie tickets falls. What will happen to the demand for popcorn? You’re likely to 
increase the number of times you go to the movies, so you’ll also likely increase the 
amount of popcorn you purchase. The lower cost of a movie ticket increases the 
­demand for popcorn because popcorn and movies are complements. When the price of 
a good declines, the demand for its complement rises.
	
Let’s consider taxes and subsidies as examples of shift factors. Taxes levied on 
consumers increase the cost of goods to consumers and therefore reduce demand 
for those goods. Subsidies to consumers have the opposite effect. When states 
host ­tax-free weeks during August’s back-to-school shopping season, consumers 
load up on products to avoid sales taxes. Demand for retail goods rises during the 
tax holiday.
	
There are many other shift factors in addition to the ones I’ve listed. In fact 
­anything—except the price of the good itself—that affects demand (and many 
things do) is a shift factor. While economists agree these shift factors are important, 
they believe that no shift factor influences how much of a good people buy as con-
sistently as its price. That’s why economists make the law of demand central to 
their analysis.
	
Before we move on let’s test your understanding: What happens to your demand 
curve for CDs in the following examples: First, let’s say you buy an iPod. Next, let’s 
say that the price of CDs falls. Finally, say that you won $1 million in a lottery. What 
happens to the demand for CDs in each case? If you answered: It shifts in to the left; it 
remains unchanged; and it shifts out to the right—you’ve got it.
The Demand Table
As I emphasized in Chapter 2, introductory economics depends heavily on graphs and 
graphical analysis—translating ideas into graphs and back into words. So let’s graph 
the demand curve.
	
Figure 4-3(a), a demand table, describes Alice’s demand for online movies. For 
example, at a price of $4, Alice will rent (buy the use of) six movies per week, and at 
a price of $1 she will rent nine.
	
Four points about the relationship between the number of movies Alice rents 
and the price of renting them are worth mentioning. First, the relationship follows 
the law of demand: As the rental price rises, quantity demanded decreases.  
Second, quantity demanded has a specific time dimension to it. In this example, 
demand refers to the number of movie rentals per week. Without the time dimen-
sion, the table wouldn’t provide us with any useful information. Nine movie rent-
als per year is quite different from nine movie rentals per week. Third, the analysis 
assumes that Alice’s movie rentals are interchangeable—the ninth movie rental 
doesn’t significantly differ from the first, third, or any other movie rental. The 
fourth point is already familiar to you: The analysis assumes that everything else 
is held constant.
From a Demand Table to a Demand Curve
Figure 4-3(b) translates the demand table in Figure 4-3(a) into a demand curve. Point 
A (quantity = 9, price = $1.00) is graphed first at the (9, $1.00) coordinates. Next we 
plot points B, C, D, and E in the same manner and connect the resulting dots with a 
solid line. The result is the demand curve, which graphically conveys the same infor-
mation that’s in the demand table. Notice that the demand curve is downward-sloping, 
indicating that the law of demand holds.
Q-3  Explain the effect of each of  
the following on the demand for new 
computers:
1.	 The price of computers falls by 
30 percent.
2.	 Total income in the economy rises.

82	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
	
The demand curve represents the maximum price that an individual will pay 
for various quantities of a good; the individual will happily pay less. For example, 
say iTunes offers Alice six movie rentals at a price of $2 each [point F of Fig-
ure 4-3(b)]. Will she accept? Sure; she’ll pay any price within the shaded area to 
the left of the demand curve. But if iTunes offers her six rentals at $7 each 
(point G), she won’t accept. At a price of $7 apiece, she’s willing to rent only 
three ­movies.
Individual and Market Demand Curves
Normally, economists talk about market demand curves rather than individual demand 
curves. A market demand curve is the horizontal sum of all individual demand curves. 
Firms don’t care whether individual A or individual B buys their goods; they only care 
that someone buys their goods.
	
Adding individual demand curves together to create a market demand curve is a 
good graphical exercise. I do that in Figure 4-4. In it I assume that the market consists 
of three buyers, Alice, Bruce, and Carmen, whose demand tables are given in Fig-
ure 4-4(a). Alice and Bruce have demand tables similar to the demand tables discussed 
previously. At a price of $6 each, Alice rents four movies; at a price of $4, she rents 
six. Carmen is an all-or-nothing individual. She rents one movie as long as the price is 
equal to or less than $2; otherwise she rents nothing. If you plot Carmen’s demand 
curve, it’s a vertical line. However, the law of demand still holds: As price increases, 
quantity demanded decreases.
	
The quantity demanded by each consumer is listed in columns 2, 3, and 4 of Fig-
ure 4-4(a). Column 5 shows total market demand; each entry is the horizontal sum of 
the entries in columns 2, 3, and 4. For example, at a price of $6 apiece (row F), Alice 
demands four movie rentals, Bruce demands one, and Carmen demands zero, for a 
total market demand of five movie rentals.
The demand curve represents the 
maximum price that an individual  
will pay.
Q-4  Derive a market demand curve 
from the following two individual 
demand curves:
	
	
Movie Rentals 
	
Price	
Demanded  
	
per Movie	
per Week
A	
$1.00	
9
B	
2.00	
8
C	
4.00	
6
D	
6.00	
4
E	
8.00	
2
(a)  A Demand Table
FIGURE 4-3 (A AND B)  From a Demand Table to a Demand Curve
The demand table in (a) is translated into a demand curve in (b). 
Each combination of price and quantity in the table corresponds 
to a point on the curve. For example, point A on the graph 
represents row A in the table: Alice demands nine movie rentals at 
a price of 50 cents. A demand curve is constructed by plotting  
all points from the demand table and connecting the points  
with a line.
Price (per movie)
(b) A Demand Curve
Quantity of movies demanded
(per week)
Demand for 
movies
1  
2  3  
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12  13
$12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
1.00
0
7.00
E
D
G
C
F
B
A
Price
$10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
D1
D2
Quantity
10
1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
83
	
Figure 4-4(b) shows three demand curves: one each for Alice, Bruce, and 
­Carmen. The market, or total, demand curve is the horizontal sum of the individ-
ual demand curves. To see that this is the case, notice that if we take the quantity 
­demanded at $2 by Alice (8), Bruce (5), and Carmen (1), they sum to 14, which is 
point B (14, $2) on the market demand curve. We can do that for each price. 
­Alternatively, we can ­simply add the individual quantities demanded, given in the 
demand tables, prior to graphing [which we do in column 5 of Figure 4-4(a)], and 
graph that total in relation to price. Not surprisingly, we get the same total market 
demand curve.
	
In practice, of course, firms don’t measure individual demand curves, so they 
don’t sum them up in this fashion. Instead, they statistically estimate market 
demand. Still, summing up individual demand curves is a useful exercise because it 
shows you how the market demand curve is the sum (the horizontal sum, graphi-
cally speaking) of the individual demand curves, and it gives you a good sense of 
where market demand curves come from. It also shows you that, even if individuals 
don’t respond to small changes in price, the market demand curve can still be 
smooth and downward-sloping. That’s because, for the market, the law of demand 
is based on two phenomena:
1.	At lower prices, existing demanders buy more.
2.	At lower prices, new demanders (some all-or-nothing demanders like Carmen) 
enter the market.
For the market, the law of demand is 
based on two phenomena:
1.	 At lower prices, existing demanders 
buy more.
2.	 At lower prices, new demanders 
enter the market.
FIGURE 4-4 (A AND B)  From Individual Demands to a Market 
Demand Curve
The table (a) shows the demand schedules for Alice, Bruce, and 
Carmen. Together they make up the market for movie rentals. 
Their total quantity demanded (market demand) for movie 
rentals at each price is given in column 5. As you can see in (b), 
Alice’s, Bruce’s, and Carmen’s demand curves can be added 
together to get the total market demand curve. For example,  
at a price of $4, Carmen demands 0, Bruce demands 3, 
and Alice demands 6, for a market demand of 9 (point D).
	
(1) 	
(2)	
(3)	
(4)	
(5) 
	
Price 	
Alice’s	
Bruce’s	
Carmen’s	
Market 
	
(per Movie)	 Demand	
Demand	
Demand	
Demand
A	
$1.00	
9	
6	
1	
16
B	
2.00	
8	
5	
1	
14
C	
3.00	
7	
4	
0	
11
D	
4.00	
6	
3	
0	
9
E	
5.00	
5	
2	
0	
7
F	
6.00	
4	
1	
0	
5
G	
7.00	
3	
0	
0	
3
H	
8.00	
2	
0	
0	
2
(a)  A Demand Table	
(b)  Adding Demand Curves
Price (per movie)
Quantity of movies demanded
(per week)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
$8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0
Carmen
Bruce
Alice
Market demand

84
Supply
In one sense, supply is the mirror image of demand. 
­Individuals control the factors of production—inputs, or 
resources, necessary to produce goods. Individuals’ ­supply 
of these factors to the market mirrors other ­individuals’ 
demand for those factors. For example, say you decide you 
want to rest rather than weed your ­garden. You hire some-
one to do the weeding; you demand labor. Someone else 
decides she would ­prefer more income ­instead of more rest; 
she supplies labor to you. You trade money for ­labor; she 
trades labor for money. Her supply is the mirror image of 
your demand.
For a large number of goods and services, however, the 
supply process is more complicated than demand. For many 
goods there’s an intermediate step: Individuals ­supply fac-
tors of production to firms.
Let’s consider a simple example. Say you’re a taco techni-
cian. You supply your labor to the factor market. The taco 
company demands your labor (hires you). The taco company 
combines your labor with other inputs such as meat, cheese, 
beans, and tables, and produces tacos (production), which it 
supplies to customers in the goods market. For produced 
goods, supply depends not only on individuals’ decisions to ­supply factors of produc-
tion but also on firms’ ability to transform those factors of production into usable goods.
	
The supply process of produced goods is generally complicated. Often there are 
many layers of firms—production firms, wholesale firms, distribution firms, and 
­retailing firms—each of which passes on in-process goods to the next layer of firms. 
Real-world production and supply of produced goods is a multistage process.
	
The supply of nonproduced goods is more direct. Individuals supply their labor in the 
form of services directly to the goods market. For example, an independent ­contractor 
may repair your washing machine. That contractor supplies his labor ­directly to you.
	
Thus, the analysis of the supply of produced goods has two parts: an analysis of 
the supply of factors of production to households and to firms and an analysis of 
the process by which firms transform those factors of production into usable goods 
and services.
The Law of Supply
There’s a law of supply that corresponds to the law of demand. The law of supply 
states:
Quantity supplied rises as price rises, other things constant.
Or alternatively:
Quantity supplied falls as price falls, other things constant.
Price determines quantity supplied just as it determines quantity demanded. Like the 
law of demand, the law of supply is fundamental to the invisible hand’s (the market’s) 
ability to coordinate individuals’ actions.
	
The law of supply is based on a firm’s ability to switch from producing one good 
to another, that is, to substitute. When the price of a good a person or firm supplies 
rises, individuals and firms can rearrange their activities in order to supply more of 
that good to the market. They want to supply more because the opportunity cost of not 
Supply of produced goods involves  
a much more complicated process  
than demand and is divided into 
analysis of factors of production  
and the transformation of those  
factors into goods.
The law of supply is based on 
substitution and the expectation of 
profits.
A REMINDER
Six Things to Remember  
about a Demand Curve
• A demand curve follows the law of demand: 
When price rises, quantity demanded falls, and 
vice versa.
• The horizontal axis—quantity—has a time 
dimension.
• The quality of each unit is the same.
• The vertical axis—price—assumes all other 
prices remain the same.
• The demand curve assumes everything else 
is held constant.
• Effects of price changes are shown by 
movements along the demand curve. Effects 
of anything else on demand (shift factors) are 
shown by shifts of the entire demand curve.

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
85
­supplying the good rises as its price rises. For example, if the price of corn rises and 
the price of soybeans has not changed, farmers will grow less soybeans and more corn, 
other things constant.
	
With firms, there’s a second explanation of the law of supply. Assuming firms’ 
costs are constant, a higher price means higher profits (the difference between a firm’s 
revenues and its costs). The expectation of those higher profits leads it to increase out-
put as price rises, which is what the law of supply states.
The Supply Curve
A supply curve is the graphical representation of the relationship between price and 
quantity supplied. A supply curve is shown in Figure 4-5.
	
The supply curve represents the set of minimum prices an individual seller will 
­accept for various quantities of a good. The market’s invisible hand stops suppliers 
from charging more than the market price. If suppliers could escape the market’s invis-
ible hand and charge a higher price, they would gladly do so. Unfortunately for them, 
and fortunately for consumers, a higher price encourages other suppliers to begin 
­selling movies. Competing suppliers’ entry into the market sets a limit on the price any 
supplier can charge.
	
Notice how the supply curve slopes upward to the right. That upward slope ­captures 
the law of supply. It tells us that the quantity supplied varies directly—in the same 
­direction—with the price.
	
As with the law of demand, the law of supply assumes other things are held con-
stant. If the price of soybeans rises and quantity supplied falls, you’ll look for some-
thing else that changed—for example, a drought might have caused a drop in supply. 
Your explanation would go as follows: Had there been no drought, the quantity sup-
plied would have increased in response to the rise in price, but because there was a 
drought, the supply decreased, which caused price to rise.
	
As with the law of demand, the law of supply represents economists’ off-the-cuff 
response to the question “What happens to quantity supplied if price rises?” If the 
law seems to be violated, economists search for some other variable that has changed. 
As was the case with demand, these other variables that might change are called 
shift factors.
FIGURE 4-5  A Sample Supply Curve
The supply curve demonstrates 
graphically the law of supply, which 
states that the quantity supplied of a 
good is directly related to that good’s 
price, other things constant. As the 
price of a good goes up, the quantity 
supplied also goes up, so the supply 
curve is upward-sloping.
Quantity supplied (per unit of time)
0
Supply
A
Price (per unit)
PA
QA

86	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Shifts in Supply versus Movements along a Supply Curve
The same distinctions in terms made for demand apply to supply.
Supply refers to a schedule of quantities a seller is willing to sell per unit of time 
at various prices, other things constant.
Quantity supplied refers to a specific amount that will be supplied at a specific price.
	
In graphical terms, supply refers to the entire supply curve because a supply curve 
tells us how much will be offered for sale at various prices. “Quantity supplied” refers 
to a point on a supply curve, such as point A in Figure 4-5.
	
The second distinction that is important to make is between the effects of a change 
in price and the effects of shift factors on how much is supplied. Changes in price 
cause changes in quantity supplied; such changes are represented by a movement 
along a supply curve—the graphical representation of the effect of a change in price 
on the quantity supplied. If the amount supplied is affected by anything other than 
price, that is, by a shift factor of supply, there will be a shift in supply—the graphical 
representation of the effect of a change in a factor other than price on supply.
	
To make that distinction clear, let’s consider an example: the supply of oil. In 
­September 2005, Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast region of the United States 
and disrupted oil supply lines and production in the United States. U.S. production 
of oil declined from 4.6 to 4.1 million barrels each day. This disruption ­reduced the 
amount of oil U.S. producers were offering for sale at every price, thereby shifting 
the supply of U.S. oil to the left from S0 to S1, and the quantity of oil that would 
be supplied at the $50 price fell from point A to point B in Figure 4-6. But the price 
did not stay at $50. It rose to $80. In response to the higher price, other areas in the 
United States ­increased their quantity supplied (from point B to point C in 
­Figure 4-6). That increase due to the higher price is called a movement along the 
supply curve. So if a change in quantity supplied occurs because of a higher price, 
it is called a movement along the supply curve; if a change in supply occurs because 
of one of the shift factors (i.e., for any reason other than a change in price), it is 
called a shift in supply.
Q-5  Assume that the price of 
gasoline rises, causing the demand for 
hybrid cars to rise. As a result, the  
price of hybrid cars rises. This makes 
_______ rise. Should the missing words 
be the supply or the quantity supplied?
FIGURE 4-6  Shifts in Supply versus 
Movement along a Supply Curve
A shift in supply results when the  
shift is due to any cause other than a 
change in price. It is a shift in the 
entire supply curve (see the arrow 
from A to B). A movement along a 
supply curve is due to a change 
in price only (see the arrow from  
B to C). To differentiate the two, 
movements caused by changes 
in price are called changes in the 
quantity supplied, not changes 
in supply.
S0
S1
Price (per barrel)
Barrels per year (in millions)
Shift in
supply
Movement
along supply
curve
A
B
C
20
40
60
50
80
$100
4.1
4.6
4.3
© U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 
3rd Class Patrick Kelley

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
87
Shift Factors of Supply
Other factors besides price that affect how much will be supplied include the price of 
inputs used in production, technology, expectations, and taxes and subsidies. The 
­analysis of how these affect supply parallels the analysis of the law of demand, so we 
will only consider technology, leaving the analysis of other shift factors to you.
	
Advances in technology change the production process, reducing the number of 
inputs needed to produce a good, and thereby reducing its cost of production. A 
­reduction in the cost of production increases profits and leads suppliers to increase 
production. Advances in technology increase supply.
	
Remember, as was the case with demand, a shift factor of supply is anything other 
than its price that affects supply. It shifts the entire supply curve. A change in price 
causes a movement along the supply curve.
	
To be sure you understand shifts in supply, explain what is likely to happen to 
your supply curve for labor in the following cases: (1) You suddenly decide that 
you absolutely need a new car. (2) You win a million dollars in the lottery. And 
finally, (3) the wage you earn doubles. If you came up with the answers: Shift out 
to the right, shift in to the left, and no change—you’ve got it down. If not, it’s time 
for a review.
	
Do we see such shifts in the supply curve often? Yes. A good example is comput-
ers. For the past 30 years, technological changes have continually shifted the supply 
curve for computers out to the right.
The Supply Table
Remember Figure 4-4(a)’s demand table for movie rentals? In Figure 4-7(a), we ­follow 
the same reasoning to construct a supply table for three hypothetical movie suppliers. 
Each supplier follows the law of supply: When price rises, each supplies more, or at 
least as much as each did at a lower price.
From a Supply Table to a Supply Curve
Figure 4-7(b) takes the information in Figure 4-7(a)’s supply table and translates it into 
a graph of each supplier’s supply curve. For instance, point CA on Ann’s supply curve 
corresponds to the information in columns 1 and 2, row C. Point CA is at a price of 
$2 per movie and a quantity of two movies per week. Notice that Ann’s supply curve 
is upward-sloping, meaning that price is positively related to quantity. Charlie’s and 
Barry’s supply curves are similarly derived.
Individual and Market Supply Curves
The market supply curve is derived from individual supply curves in precisely the 
same way that the market demand curve was. To emphasize the symmetry, I’ve 
made the three suppliers quite similar to the three demanders. Ann (column 2) will 
supply two at $2; if price goes up to $4, she increases her supply to four. Barry 
(column 3) begins supplying at $2, and at $6 supplies five, the most he’ll supply 
regardless of how high price rises. Charlie (column 4) has only two units to sup-
ply. At a price of $7 he’ll supply that quantity, but higher prices won’t get him to 
supply any more.
	
The market supply curve is the horizontal sum of all individual supply curves. In 
Figure 4-7(a) (column 5), we add together Ann’s, Barry’s, and Charlie’s supplies to 
arrive at the market supply curve, which is graphed in Figure 4-7(b). Notice that each 
Shift factors of supply are similar to 
those for demand. Examples include:
1.	 Price of inputs.
2.	 Technology.
3.	 Expectations.
4.	 Taxes and subsidies.
Q-6  Explain the effect of each of the 
following on the supply of romance 
novels:
1.	 The price of paper rises by  
20 percent.
2.	 Government provides a  
10 percent subsidy to book 
producers.

88	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
point corresponds to the information in columns 1 and 5 for each row. For example, 
point H corresponds to a price of $7 and a quantity of 14.
	
The market supply curve’s upward slope is determined by two different sources: As 
price rises, existing suppliers supply more and new suppliers enter the market. Some-
times existing suppliers may not be willing to increase their quantity supplied in 
­response to an increase in prices, but a rise in price often brings brand-new suppliers 
into the market. For example, a rise in teachers’ salaries will have little effect on the 
number of hours current teachers teach, but it will increase the number of people 
choosing to be teachers.
The Interaction of Supply and Demand
Thomas Carlyle, the English historian who dubbed economics “the dismal science,” 
also wrote this chapter’s introductory tidbit. “Teach a parrot the terms supply and 
­demand and you’ve got an economist.” In earlier chapters, I tried to convince you 
that economics is not dismal. In the rest of this chapter, I hope to convince you that, 
while supply and demand are important to economics, parrots don’t make good 
economists. If students think that when they’ve learned the terms supply and demand 
they’ve learned economics, they’re mistaken. Those terms are just labels for the 
ideas behind supply and demand, and it’s the ideas that are important. What matters 
about supply and demand isn’t the labels but how the concepts interact. For instance, 
what happens if a freeze kills the blossoms on the orange trees? If price doesn’t 
change, the quantity of oranges supplied isn’t expected to equal the quantity 
The law of supply is based on two 
phenomena:
1.	 At higher prices, existing suppliers 
supply more.
2.	 At higher prices, new suppliers enter 
the market.
If students think that when they’ve 
learned the terms supply and demand 
they’ve learned economics, they’re 
mistaken.
FIGURE 4-7 (A AND B)  From Individual Supplies to a Market Supply
As with market demand, market supply is determined by adding all 
quantities supplied at a given price. Three suppliers—Ann, Barry, and 
Charlie—make up the market of movie suppliers. The total market 
supply is the sum of their individual supplies at each price, shown in 
column 5 of (a).
	
Each of the individual supply curves and the market supply curve 
have been plotted in (b). Notice how the market supply curve is the 
horizontal sum of the individual supply curves.
	
(1)	
(2) 	
(3)	
(4)	
(5) 
Quantities	
Price	
Ann’s 	
Barry’s	
Charlie’s	
Market 
Supplied	
(per Movie) 	 Supply	
Supply	
Supply	
Supply
	
A	
$0.00	
0	
0	
0	
  0
	
B	
1.00	
1	
0	
0	
  1
	
C	
2.00	
2	
1	
0	
  3
	
D	
3.00	
3	
2	
0	
  5
	
E	
4.00	
4	
3	
0	
  7
	
F	
5.00	
5	
4	
0	
  9
	
G	
6.00	
6	
5	
0	
11
	
H	
7.00	
7	
5	
2	
14
	
I	
8.00	
8	
5	
2	
15
(a)  A Supply Table
Price (per movie)
Quantity of movies supplied (per week)
$8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
      0
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
CA
B
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
(b) Adding Supply Curves
Charlie
Barry
Ann
Market supply

89
­demanded. But in the real world, prices do change, often 
before the frost hits, as expectations of the frost lead ­people 
to adjust. It’s in understanding the interaction of supply and 
demand that economics becomes interesting and relevant.
Equilibrium
When you have a market in which neither suppliers nor 
consumers collude and in which prices are free to move up 
and down, the forces of supply and demand interact to 
arrive at an equilibrium. The concept of equilibrium 
comes from physics—classical mechanics. Equilibrium 
is a concept in which opposing dynamic forces cancel 
each other out. For example, a hot-air balloon is in equi­
librium when the upward force exerted by the hot air in 
the balloon equals the downward pressure exerted on the 
balloon by gravity. In supply/demand analysis, equilib-
rium means that the upward pressure on price is exactly off-
set by the downward pressure on price. Equilibrium 
quantity is the amount bought and sold at the equilib-
rium price. Equilibrium price is the price toward which the 
invisible hand drives the market. At the equilibrium price, 
quantity demanded equals quantity supplied.
	
What happens if the market is not in equilibrium—if quantity supplied doesn’t 
equal quantity demanded? You get either excess supply or excess demand, and a 
­tendency for prices to change.
Excess Supply 
If there is excess supply (a surplus), quantity supplied is greater 
than quantity demanded, and some suppliers won’t be able to sell all their goods. Each 
supplier will think: “Gee, if I offer to sell it for a bit less, I’ll be the lucky one who sells 
my goods; someone else will be stuck with goods they can’t sell.” But because all 
­suppliers with excess goods will be thinking the same thing, the price in the market 
will fall. As that happens, consumers will increase their quantity demanded. So the 
movement toward equilibrium caused by excess supply is on both the supply and 
­demand sides.
Excess Demand 
The reverse is also true. Say that instead of excess supply, 
there’s excess demand (a shortage)—quantity demanded is greater than quantity sup-
plied. There are more consumers who want the good than there are suppliers selling 
the good. Let’s consider what’s likely to go through demanders’ minds. They’ll likely 
call long-lost friends who just happen to be sellers of that good and tell them it’s good 
to talk to them and, by the way, don’t they want to sell that . . . ? Suppliers will be 
rather pleased that so many of their old friends have remembered them, but they’ll also 
likely see the connection between excess demand and their friends’ thoughtfulness. To 
stop their phones from ringing all the time, they’ll likely raise their price. The reverse 
is true for excess supply. It’s amazing how friendly suppliers become to potential con-
sumers when there’s excess supply.
Price Adjusts 
This tendency for prices to rise when the quantity demanded 
exceeds the quantity supplied and for prices to fall when the quantity supplied exceeds 
A REMINDER
Six Things to Remember  
about a Supply Curve
• A supply curve follows the law of supply. 
When price rises, quantity supplied increases, 
and vice versa.
• The horizontal axis—quantity—has a time 
dimension.
• The quality of each unit is the same.
• The vertical axis—price—assumes all other 
prices remain constant.
• The supply curve assumes everything else is 
constant.
• Effects of price changes are shown by 
movements along the supply curve. Effects of 
nonprice determinants of supply are shown 
by shifts of the entire supply curve.
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Gary 
He, photographer
Bargain hunters can get a deal 
when there is excess supply.

90	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
the quantity demanded is a central element to understanding supply and demand. So 
remember:
When quantity demanded is greater than quantity supplied, prices tend to rise.
When quantity supplied is greater than quantity demanded, prices tend to fall.
	
Two other things to note about supply and demand are (1) the greater the difference 
between quantity supplied and quantity demanded, the more pressure there is for prices 
to rise or fall, and (2) when quantity demanded equals quantity supplied, the market is 
in equilibrium.
	
People’s tendencies to change prices exist as long as quantity supplied and quantity 
demanded differ. But the change in price brings the laws of supply and demand into play. 
As price falls, quantity supplied decreases as some suppliers leave the business (the law 
of supply). And as some people who originally weren’t really interested in buying the 
good think, “Well, at this low price, maybe I do want to buy,” quantity demanded 
­increases (the law of demand). Similarly, when price rises, quantity supplied will 
increase (the law of supply) and quantity demanded will decrease (the law of demand).
	
Whenever quantity supplied and quantity demanded are unequal, price tends to 
change. If, however, quantity supplied and quantity demanded are equal, price will 
stay the same because no one will have an incentive to change.
The Graphical Interaction of Supply and Demand
Figure 4-8 shows supply and demand curves for movie rentals and demonstrates the 
force of the invisible hand. Let’s consider what will happen to the price of movies in 
three cases:
	
1.  When the price is $7 each.
	
2.  When the price is $3 each.
	
3.  When the price is $5 each.
1.	When price is $7, quantity supplied is seven and quantity demanded is only 
three. Excess supply is four. Individual consumers can get all they want, but 
most suppliers can’t sell all they wish; they’ll be stuck with movies that they’d 
like to rent. Suppliers will tend to offer their goods at a lower price and 
demanders, who see plenty of suppliers out there, will bargain harder for an 
even lower price. Both these forces will push the price as indicated by the 
down ­arrows in Figure 4-8.
Now let’s start from the other side.
2.	 Say price is $3. The situation is now reversed. Quantity supplied is three and quan-
tity demanded is seven. Excess demand is four. Now it’s consumers who can’t get 
what they want and suppliers who are in the strong bargaining position. The pres-
sures will be on price to rise in the direction of the up arrows in Figure 4-8.
3.	At $5, price is at its equilibrium: Quantity supplied equals quantity demanded. 
Suppliers offer to sell five and consumers want to buy five, so there’s no 
­pressure on price to rise or fall. Price will tend to remain where it is (point E in 
Figure 4-8). Notice that the equilibrium price is where the supply and demand 
curves intersect.
What Equilibrium Isn’t
It is important to remember two points about equilibrium. First, equilibrium isn’t a 
state of the world. It’s a characteristic of the model—the framework you use to look at 
the world. The same situation could be seen as an equilibrium in one framework and as 
Prices tend to rise when there is excess 
demand and fall when there is excess 
supply.
Equilibrium isn’t a state of the world. It’s 
a characteristic of the model.

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
91
a disequilibrium in another. Say you’re describing a car that’s speeding along at 
100 miles an hour. That car is changing position relative to objects on the ground. Its 
movement could be, and generally is, described as if it were in disequilibrium. 
­However, if you consider this car relative to another car going 100 miles an hour, the 
cars could be modeled as being in equilibrium because their positions relative to each 
other aren’t changing.
	
Second, equilibrium isn’t inherently good or bad. It’s simply a state in which 
­dynamic pressures offset each other. Some equilibria are good—a market in competitive 
equilibrium is one in which people can buy the goods they really want at the best pos-
sible price. Other equilibria are awful. Say two countries are engaged in a nuclear war 
against each other and both sides are blown away. An equilibrium will have been 
reached, but there’s nothing good about it.
Political and Social Forces and Equilibrium
Understanding that equilibrium is a characteristic of the model, not of the real world, 
is important in applying economic models to reality. For example, in the preceding 
description, I said equilibrium occurs where quantity supplied equals quantity 
demanded. In a model where economic forces were the only forces operating, that’s 
true. In the real world, however, other forces—political and social forces—are operat-
ing. These will likely push price away from that supply/demand equilibrium. Were we 
to consider a model that included all these forces—political, social, and economic—
equilibrium would be likely to exist where quantity supplied isn’t equal to quantity 
demanded. For example:
•	 Farmers use political pressure to obtain prices that are higher than supply/
demand equilibrium prices.
•	 Social pressures often offset economic pressures and prevent unemployed 
­individuals from accepting work at lower wages than currently employed 
workers receive.
Equilibrium is not inherently good  
or bad.
FIGURE 4-8  The Interaction of Supply and Demand
Combining Ann’s supply from Figure 4-7 and Alice’s demand from 
Figure 4-4, let’s see the force of the invisible hand. When there is 
excess demand, there is upward pressure on price. When there is 
excess supply, there is downward pressure on price. Understanding 
these pressures is essential to understanding how to apply economics 
to reality.
	
Price 	
Quantity	
Quantity	
Surplus (+)/ 
	(per Movie)	
Supplied	
Demanded	
Shortage (−)
	
$7.00	
7	
3	
+4
	
5.00	
5	
5	
  0
	
3.00	
3	
7	
−4
Price (per movie)
$7.00
5.00
3.00
Supply
Quantity of movies supplied and demanded
(per week)
Excess supply
Excess demand
E
 
 
3 
 
5 
 
7 
Demand

92	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
•	 Existing firms conspire to limit new competition by lobbying Congress to 
pass ­restrictive regulations and by devising pricing strategies to scare off new 
entrants.
•	 Renters often organize to pressure local government to set caps on the rental 
price of apartments.
If social and political forces were included in the analysis, they’d provide a counter–
pressure to the dynamic forces of supply and demand. The result would be an equi-
librium with continual excess supply or excess demand if the market were 
considered only in reference to economic forces. Economic forces pushing toward a 
supply/demand equilibrium would be thwarted by social and political forces push-
ing in the other direction.
Shifts in Supply and Demand
Supply and demand are most useful when trying to figure out what will happen to 
equilibrium price and quantity if either supply or demand shifts. Figure 4-9(a) deals 
with an increase in demand. Figure 4-9(b) deals with a decrease in supply.
	
Let’s consider again the supply and demand for movie rentals. In Figure 4-9(a), the 
supply is S0 and initial demand is D0. They meet at an equilibrium price of $4.50 per 
movie and an equilibrium quantity of 8 movies per week (point A). Now say that the 
demand for movie rentals increases from D0 to D1 . At a price of $4.50, the quantity of 
movie rentals supplied will be 8 and the quantity demanded will be 10; excess demand 
of 2 exists.
Q-7  Demonstrate graphically the 
effect of a heavy frost in Florida on 
the equilibrium quantity and price of 
oranges.
Price (per movie)
Excess
demand
A
B
D1
S0
Quantity of movies (per week)
$5.00
4.50
0
$5.00
4.50
0
9
8
10
Price (per movie)
Excess
demand
A
C
D0
S0
S1
Quantity of movies (per week)
7
6
8
D0
(a) A Shift in Demand
(b) A Shift in Supply
FIGURE 4-9 (A AND B)  Shifts in Supply and Demand
If demand increases from D0 to D1, as shown in (a), the quantity of movie rentals that was demanded at a price of $4.50, 8, increases to 10, 
but the quantity supplied remains at 8. This excess demand tends to cause prices to rise. Eventually, a new equilibrium is reached at the 
price of $5, where the quantity supplied and the quantity demanded are 9 (point B).
	
If supply of movie rentals decreases, then the entire supply curve shifts inward to the left, as shown in (b), from S0 to S1. At the price of 
$4.50, the quantity supplied has now decreased to 6 movies, but the quantity demanded has remained at 8 movies. The excess demand tends 
to force the price upward. Eventually, an equilibrium is reached at the price of $5 and quantity 7 (point C).

93
	
The excess demand pushes prices upward in the direction of the small arrows, 
­decreasing the quantity demanded and increasing the quantity supplied. As it does so, 
movement takes place along both the supply curve and the demand curve.
	
The upward push on price decreases the gap between the quantity supplied and 
the quantity demanded. As the gap decreases, the upward pressure decreases, but 
as long as that gap exists at all, price will be pushed upward until the new equilib-
rium price ($5) and new quantity (9) are reached (point B). At point B, quantity 
­supplied equals quantity demanded. So the market is in equilibrium. Notice that 
the adjustment is twofold: The higher price brings about equilibrium by both increas-
ing the quantity supplied (from 8 to 9) and decreasing the quantity demanded 
(from 10 to 9).
	
Figure 4-9(b) begins with the same situation that we started with in Figure 4-9(a); 
the initial equilibrium quantity and price are eight movies per week at $4.50 per 
movie (point A). In this example, however, instead of demand increasing, let’s assume 
supply decreases—say because some suppliers change what they like to do and decide 
they will no longer supply movies. That means that the entire supply curve shifts 
­inward to the left (from S0 to S1). At the initial equilibrium price of $4.50, the quantity 
demanded is greater than the quantity supplied. Two more movies are demanded than 
are supplied. (Excess demand = 2.)
	
This excess demand exerts upward pressure on price. Price is pushed in the 
­direction of the small arrows. As the price rises, the upward pressure on price is 
­reduced but will still exist until the new equilibrium price, $5, and new quantity, 
seven, are reached. At $5, the quantity supplied equals the quantity demanded. 
The adjustment has ­involved a movement along the demand curve and the new 
­supply curve. As price rises, quantity supplied is adjusted upward and quantity 
­demanded is adjusted downward until quantity supplied equals quantity demanded 
where the new supply curve intersects the demand curve at point C, an equilibrium 
of seven and $5.
	
Here is an exercise for you to try. Demonstrate graphically how the price of com-
puters could have fallen dramatically in the past 10 years, even as demand increased. 
(Hint: Supply has increased even more, so even at lower prices, far more computers 
have been supplied than were being supplied 10 years ago.)
Q-8  Demonstrate graphically the 
likely effect of an increase in the price 
of gas on the equilibrium quantity and 
price of hybrid cars.
ADDED DIMENSION
on how many children to have. In farming communi-
ties, children can be productive early in life; by age six 
or seven, they can work on a farm. In an advanced in-
dustrial community, children provide ­pleasure but 
generally don’t contribute productively to family 
­income. Even getting them to help around the house 
can be difficult.
	
Becker argues that since the price of having children is 
lower for a farming society than for an industrial society, 
­farming societies will have more children per family. Quan-
tity of children demanded will be larger. And that’s what we 
find. Developing countries that rely primarily on farming of-
ten have three, four, or more children per family. Industrial 
societies average fewer than two children per family.
The Supply and Demand for Children
In Chapter 1, I distinguished between an economic force 
and a market force. Economic forces are operative in all 
aspects of our lives; market forces are economic forces 
that are allowed to be expressed through a market. My 
examples in this ­chapter are of market forces—of goods 
sold in a market—but supply and demand also can be 
used to analyze situations in which economic, but not mar-
ket, forces operate. An economist who is adept at this is 
Gary Becker of the University of Chicago. He has applied 
supply and demand analysis to a wide range of ­issues, 
even the supply and demand for children.
	
Becker doesn’t argue that children should be 
bought and sold. But he does argue that economic 
considerations play a large role in people’s decisions 

94	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
A Limitation of Supply/Demand Analysis
Supply and demand are tools, and, like most tools, they help us enormously when used 
­appropriately. Used inappropriately, however, they can be misleading. Throughout the 
book I’ll introduce you to the limitations of the tools, but let me discuss an important 
one here.
	
In supply/demand analysis, other things are assumed constant. If other things change, 
then one cannot directly apply supply/demand analysis. Sometimes supply and demand are 
interconnected, making it impossible to hold other things constant. Let’s take an example. 
Say we are considering the effect of a fall in the wage rate on unemployment. In supply/
demand analysis, you would look at the effect that fall would have on workers’ decisions to 
supply labor, and on business’s decision to hire workers. But there are also other effects. 
For instance, the fall in the wage lowers people’s income and thereby reduces demand for 
goods. That reduction in demand for goods may feed back to firms and reduce the firms’ 
demand for workers, which might further reduce the demand for goods. If these ripple 
­effects do occur, and are important enough to affect the result, they have to be added for the 
analysis to be complete. A complete analysis always includes the relevant feedback effects.
	
There is no single answer to the question of which ripples must be included. There is 
much debate among economists about which ripple effects to include, but there are some 
­general rules. Supply/demand analysis, used without adjustment, is most appropriate for 
questions where the goods are a small percentage of the entire economy. That is when the 
other-things-constant assumption will most likely hold. As soon as one starts analyzing 
goods that are a large percentage of the entire economy, the other-things-constant 
­assumption is likely not to hold true. The reason is found in the fallacy of composition—
the false assumption that what is true for a part will also be true for the whole.
	
Consider a lone supplier who lowers the price of his or her good. People will sub-
stitute that good for other goods, and the quantity of the good demanded will increase. 
But what if all suppliers lower their prices? Since all prices have gone down, why 
should consumers switch? The substitution story can’t be used in the aggregate. There 
are many such examples.
	
An understanding of the fallacy of composition is of central relevance to macro-
economics. In the aggregate, whenever firms produce (whenever they supply), they 
create income (demand for their goods). So in macro, when supply changes, demand 
changes. This interdependence is one of the primary reasons we have a separate mac-
roeconomics. In macroeconomics, the other-things-constant assumption central to 
­microeconomic supply/demand analysis often does not hold.
	
It is to account for these interdependencies that we separate macro analysis from 
micro analysis. In macro we use curves whose underlying foundations are much more 
complicated than the supply and demand curves we use in micro, and in modern eco-
nomics there is an active debate about how more complex structural models can extend 
our understanding of how markets operate.
	
One final comment: The fact that supply and demand may be interdependent does 
not mean that you can’t use supply/demand analysis; it simply means that you must 
modify its results with the interdependency that, if you’ve done the analysis correctly, 
you’ve kept in the back of your head. Using supply and demand analysis is generally a 
step in any good economic analysis, but you must remember that it may be only a step.
Conclusion
Throughout the book, I’ll be presenting examples of supply and demand. So I’ll 
end this chapter here because its intended purposes have been served. What were 
those intended purposes? First, I exposed you to enough economic terminology 
Q-9  When determining the effect of 
a shift factor on price and quantity, in 
which of the following markets could 
you likely assume that other things will 
remain constant?
1.	 Market for eggs.
2.	 Labor market.
3.	 World oil market.
4.	 Market for luxury boats.
The fallacy of composition is the  
false assumption that what is true  
for a part will also be true for the  
whole.
Q-10  Why is the fallacy of 
composition relevant for 
macroeconomic issues?
It is to account for interdependency 
between aggregate supply decisions 
and aggregate demand decisions that 
we have a separate micro analysis and 
a separate macro analysis.

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
95
and economic thinking to allow you to proceed to my more complicated examples. 
Second, I have set your mind to work putting the events around you into a supply/
demand framework. Doing that will give you new insights into the events that 
shape all our lives. Once you incorporate the supply/demand framework into your 
way of looking at the world, you will have made an important step toward under-
standing the economic way of thinking.
• The law of demand states that quantity demanded 
rises as price falls, other things constant.  (LO4-1)
• The law of supply states that quantity supplied rises 
as price rises, other things constant.  (LO4-2)
• Factors that affect supply and demand other than 
price are called shift factors. Shift factors of demand 
include income, prices of other goods, tastes, 
­expectations, and taxes on and subsidies to consumers. 
Shift factors of supply include the price of inputs, 
technology, expectations, and taxes on and subsidies 
to producers.  (LO4-1, LO4-2)
• A change in quantity demanded (supplied) is a 
­movement along the demand (supply) curve. A 
change in demand (supply) is a shift of the entire 
­demand (supply) curve.  (LO4-1, LO4-2)
• The laws of supply and demand hold true because 
­individuals can substitute.  (LO4-1, LO4-2)
• A market demand (supply) curve is the horizontal 
sum of all individual demand (supply)  
curves.  (LO4-1, LO4-2)
Summary
• When quantity supplied equals quantity demanded, 
prices have no tendency to change. This is 
­equilibrium.  (LO4-3)
• When quantity demanded is greater than quantity 
­supplied, prices tend to rise. When quantity supplied 
is greater than quantity demanded, prices tend to 
fall.  (LO4-3)
• When the demand curve shifts to the right (left), 
­equilibrium price rises (declines) and equilibrium 
quantity rises (falls).  (LO4-3)
• When the supply curve shifts to the right (left), 
­equilibrium price declines (rises) and equilibrium 
quantity rises (falls).  (LO4-3)
• In the real world, you must add political and social 
forces to the supply/demand model. When you do, 
equilibrium is likely not going to be where quantity 
demanded equals quantity supplied.  (LO4-4)
• In macro, small side effects that can be assumed away 
in micro are multiplied enormously and can significantly 
change the results. To ignore them is to fall into the 
fallacy of composition.  (LO4-4)
Key Terms
demand 
demand curve 
equilibrium 
equilibrium price 
equilibrium quantity 
excess demand 
excess supply 
fallacy of composition 
law of demand 
law of supply 
market demand curve 
market supply curve 
movement along a 
demand curve 
movement along a supply 
curve 
quantity demanded 
quantity supplied
shift in demand 
shift in supply
supply
supply curve

96	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
	 1.	 State the law of demand. Why is price inversely related to 
quantity demanded?  (LO4-1)
	 2.	 You’re given the following individual demand tables for 
comic books.  (LO4-1)
 
Price 
John 
Liz 
Alex
	
$  2	
4	
36	
24
	
    4	
4	
32	
20
	
    6	
0	
28	
16
	
    8	
0	
24	
12
	
  10	
0	
20	
  8
	
  12	
0	
16	
  4
	
  14	
0	
12	
  0
	
  16	
0	
  8	
  0
	a.	 Determine the market demand table.
	b.	 Graph the individual and market demand curves.
	c.	 If the current market price is $4, what’s total market 
demand? What happens to total market demand if 
price rises to $8?
	d.	 Say that an advertising campaign increases demand by 
50 percent. What will happen to the individual and 
market demand curves? 
	 3.	 List four shift factors of demand and explain how each 
­affects demand.  (LO4-1)
	 4.	 Distinguish the effect of a shift factor of demand on the 
demand curve from the effect of a change in price on the 
demand curve.  (LO4-1)
	 5.	 State the law of supply. Why is price directly related to 
quantity supplied?  (LO4-2)
	 6.	 Mary has just stated that normally, as price rises, supply 
will increase. Her teacher grimaces. Why?  (LO4-2)
	 7.	 List four shift factors of supply and explain how each 
­affects supply.  (LO4-2)
	 8.	 Derive the market supply curve from the following two 
individual supply curves.  (LO4-2)
	 9.	 You’re given the following demand and supply 
­tables:  (LO4-3)
	
	
	
Demand
	
P	
D1	
D2	
D3
	
$30	
20	
5	
10
	
  40	
15	
3	
  7
	
  50	
10	
0	
  5
	
  60	
  5	
0	
  0
	
	
	
Supply
	
P	
S1	
S2	
S3
	
$30	
  0	
  4	
11
	
  40	
  0	
  8	
17
	
  50	
10	
12	
18
	
  60	
10	
15	
20
	a.	 Draw the market demand and market supply curves.
b.	 What is excess supply/demand at price $30? Price $60?
	c.	 Label equilibrium price and quantity.
	10.	 It has just been reported that eating red meat is bad for your 
health. Using supply and demand curves, demonstrate the 
report’s likely effect on the equilibrium price and quantity 
of steak sold in the ­market.  (LO4-3)
	11.	 Why does the price of airline tickets rise during the 
­summer months? Demonstrate your answer 
­graphically.  (LO4-3)
	12.	 Why does sales volume rise during weeks when states 
suspend taxes on sales by retailers? Demonstrate your 
­answer graphically assuming that the retailer pays the 
tax.  (LO4-3)
	13.	 What is the expected impact of increased security 
­measures imposed by the federal government on airline 
fares and volume of travel? Demonstrate your answer 
graphically.  (LO4-3)
	14.	 Explain what a sudden popularity of “Economics 
­Professor” brand casual wear would likely do to prices  
of that brand.  (LO4-3)
	15.	 In a flood, usable water supplies ironically tend to 
­decline because the pumps and water lines are 
­damaged. What will a flood likely do to prices of 
­bottled water?  (LO4-3)
	16.	 OPEC announces it will increase oil production by 
20 percent. What is the effect on the price of oil? 
­Demonstrate your answer graphically.  (LO4-3)
Questions and Exercises
P
2
2
4
6
8
$10
4
6
8
10
Q
S2
S1

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
97
	17.	 Draw hypothetical supply and demand curves for  
tea. Show how the equilibrium price and quantity  
will be ­affected by each of the following 
­occurrences:  (LO4-3)
	a.	 Bad weather wreaks havoc with the tea crop.
	b.	 A medical report implying tea is bad for your health is 
published.
	c.	 A technological innovation lowers the cost of 
­producing tea.
	d.	 Consumers’ income falls. (Assume tea is a normal good.)
	18.	 You’re a commodity trader and you’ve just heard a report 
that the winter wheat harvest will be 2 billion bushels, a 
40 percent jump, rather than an expected 30 percent 
jump.  (LO4-3)
	a.	 What would you expect would happen to wheat prices?
	b.	 Demonstrate graphically the effect you suggested in 
part a.
	19.	 In the United States, say gasoline costs consumers about 
$2.50 per gallon. In Italy, say it costs consumers about 
$6 per gallon. What effect does this price differential 
likely have on:  (LO4-3)
	a.	 The size of cars in the United States and in Italy?
	b.	 The use of public transportation in the United States 
and in Italy?
	c.	 The fuel efficiency of cars in the United States and 
in Italy?
	d.	 What would be the effect of raising the price of 
­gasoline in the United States to $5 per gallon?
	20.	 Assume that Argentina imposes a 20 percent tax on 
­natural gas ­exports.  (LO4-3)
	a.	 Demonstrate the likely effect of that tax on gas exports 
using supply and demand curves.
	b.	 What does it likely do to the price of natural gas in 
­Argentina?
	21.	 In most developing countries, there are long lines of taxis 
at airports, and these taxis often wait two or three hours. 
What does this tell you about the price in that market? 
Demonstrate with supply and demand analysis.  (LO4-3)
	22.	 Define the fallacy of composition. How does it affect the 
supply/demand model?  (LO4-4)
	23.	 In which of the following three markets are there  
likely to be the greatest feedback effects: market for 
housing, market for wheat, market for manufactured 
goods?  (LO4-4)
	24.	 State whether “other things constant” is likely to hold 
in the following supply/demand analyses:  (LO4-4)
	a.	 The impact of an increase in the demand for pencils on 
the price of pencils.
	b.	 The impact of an increase in the supply of labor on the 
quantity of labor demanded.
	c.	 The impact of an increase in aggregate savings on 
­aggregate expenditures.
	d.	 The impact of a new method of producing CDs on the 
price of CDs.
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 In a centrally planned economy, how might central plan-
ners estimate supply or demand? (Austrian)
	 2.	 In the late 19th century, Washington Gladden said, “He 
who battles for the Christianization of society, will find 
their strongest foe in the field of economics. Economics is 
indeed the dismal science because of the selfishness of its 
maxims and the inhumanity of its conclusions.”
	a.	 Evaluate this statement.
	b.	 Is there a conflict between the ideology of capitalism 
and the precepts of Christianity?
	c.	 Would a society that emphasized a capitalist mode of 
production benefit by a moral framework that empha-
sized selflessness rather than selfishness? (Religious)
	 3.	 Economics is often referred to as the study of choice.
	a.	 In U.S. history, have men and women been equally 
free to choose the amount of education they receive 
even within the same family?
	b.	 What other areas can you see where men and women 
have not been equally free to choose?
	c.	 If you agree that men and women have not had equal 
rights to choose, what implications does that have 
about the objectivity of economic analysis? (Feminist)
	 4.	 Knowledge is derived from a tautology when something 
is true because you assume it is true. In this chapter, you 
have learned the conditions under which supply and de-
mand explain outcomes. Yet, as your text author cautions, 
these conditions may not hold. How can you be sure if 
they ever hold? (Institutionalist)
	 5.	 Do you think consumers make purchasing decisions based 
on general rules of thumb instead of price?
	a.	 Why would consumers do this?
	b.	 What implication might this have for the conclusions 
drawn about markets? (Post-Keynesian)
	 6.	 Some economists believe that imposing international 
­labor standards would cost jobs. In support of this 
­argument, one economist said, “Either you believe 
­labor demand curves are downward-sloping, or you 
don’t.” Of course, not to believe that demand curves 
are negatively sloped would be tantamount to declaring 
yourself an economic illiterate. What else about the 
­nature of labor demand curves might help a policy 
maker design policies that could counteract the 
­negative effects of labor standards employment? 
­(Radical)

98	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 Oftentimes, to be considered for a job, you have to know 
someone in the firm. What does this observation tell you 
about the wage paid for that job?
	 2.	 In the early 2000s, the demand for housing increased 
­substantially as low interest rates increased the number of 
people who could afford homes.
	a.	 What was the likely effect of this on housing prices? 
Demonstrate graphically.
	b.	 In 2005, mortgage rates began increasing. What was 
the likely effect of this increase on housing prices? 
Demonstrate graphically.
	c.	 In a period of increasing demand for housing, would 
you expect housing prices to rise more in Miami 
­suburbs, which had room for expansion and fairly 
loose laws about subdivisions, or in a city such as San 
Francisco, which had limited land and tight subdivision 
restrictions?
	 3.	 In 1994, the U.S. postal service put a picture of rodeo 
rider Ben Pickett, not the rodeo star Bill Pickett, whom it 
meant to honor, on a stamp. It printed 150,000 sheets. 
Recognizing its error, it recalled the stamp, but it found 
that 183 sheets had already been sold. 
	a.	 What would the recall likely do to the price of the 
183 sheets that were sold?
	b.	 When the government recognized that it could not 
­recall all the stamps, it decided to issue the remaining 
ones. What would that decision likely do?
	c.	 What would the holders of the misprinted sheets 
likely do when they heard of the government’s 
­decision?
	 4.	 What would be the effect of a 75 percent tax on lawsuit 
punitive awards that was proposed by California ­Governor 
Arnold Schwarzenegger in 2004 on: 
	a.	 The number of punitive awards. Demonstrate your 
­answer using supply and demand curves.
	b.	 The number of pretrial settlements.
	 5.	 Why is a supply/demand analysis that includes only 
­economic forces likely to be incomplete?
	 5.	 The quantity supplied rises because there was a movement 
along the supply curve. The supply curve itself remains 
unchanged.  (LO4-2)
	 6.	 (1) The supply of romance novels declines since paper is 
an input to production (supply shifts in to the left). 
(2) The supply of romance novels rises since the subsidy 
decreases the cost to the producer (supply shifts out to  
the right).  (LO4-2)
	 7.	 A heavy frost in Florida will decrease the supply of 
­oranges, increasing the price and decreasing the  
quantity demanded, as in the accompanying  
graph.  (LO4-3)
Answers to Margin Questions
Price
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
D1
D2
D3
Quantity
10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
	 1.	 The demand curve slopes downward because price and 
quantity demanded are inversely related. As the price of a 
good rises, people switch to purchasing other goods 
whose prices have not risen by as much.  (LO4-1)
	 2.	 Demand for luxury goods. The other possibility, quantity 
of luxury goods demanded, is used to refer to movements 
along (not shifts of) the demand curve.  (LO4-1)
	 3.	 (1) The decline in price will increase the quantity of comput-
ers demanded (movement down along the demand curve). 
(2) With more income, demand for computers will rise (shift 
of the demand curve out to the right).  (LO4-1)
	 4.	 When adding two demand curves, you sum them horizon-
tally, as in the accompanying diagram.  (LO4-1)
P0
P1
S'
S
D
Quantity
Price
Q1 Q0

	
Chapter 4 ■ Supply and Demand	
99
	 8.	 An increase in the price of gas will likely increase the 
­demand for hybrid cars, increasing their price and 
­increasing the quantity supplied, as in the accompanying 
graph.  (LO4-3)
	 9.	 Other things are most likely to remain constant in the 
egg and luxury boat markets because each is a small 
­percentage of the whole economy. Factors that affect 
the world oil market and the labor market will have 
­ripple effects that must be taken into account in any 
analysis.  (LO4-4)
	10.	 The fallacy of composition is relevant for macroeconomic 
issues because it reminds us that, in the aggregate, small 
effects that are immaterial for micro issues can add up and 
be material.  (LO4-4)
P0
P1
S
D
D'
Quantity
Price
Q1
Q0

It is by invisible hands that we are bent 
and tortured worst.
—Nietzsche
“
”
chapter 5
Using Supply and Demand
Supply and demand give you a lens through which to 
view the economy. That lens brings into focus issues that 
would otherwise seem like a muddle. In this chapter, we 
use the supply/­demand lens to consider real-world events.
Real-World Supply and  
Demand Applications
Let’s begin by giving you an opportunity to apply 
supply/demand analysis to real-world events. Below 
are three events. After reading each, try your hand at explaining what 
happened, using supply and demand curves. To help you in the process 
Figure 5-1 provides some diagrams. Before reading my explanation, try to 
match the shifts to the examples. In each, be careful to ­explain which 
curve, or curves, shifted and how those shifts affected equilibrium price 
and quantity.
1.	A hurricane damages farms in the ­northeastern United States, destroy-
ing a significant portion of the ­apple crop. As a result apple prices rise. 
Market: Apples in the United States.
2.	At one time the price of gas rose so that it cost as much as $100 to fill a 
tank of gas, Americans switched from SUVs to more fuel-efficient cars. 
The number of people shopping for used SUVs fell over 30 percent and 
the price of used SUVs fell an average of 10 percent. Market: Used 
SUVs in the United States.
3.	A growing middle class in China and India has increased the demand 
for many food products, particularly edible oils such as soy and palm. 
At the same time, to meet the increasing demand for ethanol, U.S. farm-
ers have chosen to grow less soy (from which soy oil is made) and more 
corn (from which ethanol is made). The result? Dramatic increases in 
the price of edible oil worldwide. Market: Global edible oils.
Now that you’ve matched them, let’s see if your analysis matches mine.
A Hurricane 
Weather is a shift factor of supply. A hurricane shifts the 
supply curve for apples to the left, as shown in Figure 5-1(b). At the original 
price (shown by P0), quantity demanded exceeds quantity supplied and the 
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO5-1	 Apply the supply and 
demand model to  
real-world events.
LO5-2	 Demonstrate the effect of a 
price ceiling and a price floor 
on a market.
LO5-3	 Explain the effect of excise 
taxes and tariffs on a market.
LO5-4	 Explain the effect of quantity 
restrictions on a market.
LO5-5	 Explain the effect of a third-
party-payer system on 
equilibrium price and 
quantity.
Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration/Department of Commerce

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
101
invisible hand of the market pressures the price to rise until quantity demanded equals 
quantity supplied (shown by P1).
Sales of SUVs 
Gas is a significant cost of driving a car. To reduce their automo-
tive gas bills, Americans reduced their demand for gas-guzzling SUVs, both new and 
used. Figure 5-1(a) shows that the demand curve for SUVs in the used-car market 
shifted from D0 to D1. At the original price P0, sellers were unable to sell the SUVs 
they wanted to sell and began to lower their price. Buyers of used SUVs were able to 
purchase them at a 10 percent lower price, shown by P1.
Edible Oils 
Increases in the size of the middle class in developing countries such 
as China and India increased the demand for food and edible oils used to prepare those 
foods. This is represented by a shift in the demand for edible oils out to the right from 
D0 to D1. At the same time, increases in the price of crude oil led U.S. farmers to grow 
less soy and more corn, which shifted the supply curve for edible oils from S0 to S1. 
The result was a dramatic increase in the price of edible oils, shown in Figure 5-1(c) as 
an increase from P0 to P1.
	
Now that we’ve been through some examples, let’s review. Remember: ­Anything 
that affects demand and supply other than price of the good will shift the curves. 
Changes in the price of the good result in movements along the curves. Another thing 
to recognize is that when both curves are shifting, you can get a change in price but 
little change in quantity, or a change in quantity but little change in price.
	
To test your understanding Table 5-1 gives you six generic results from the 
­interaction of supply and demand. Your job is to decide what shifts produced those 
results. This exercise is a variation of the one with which I began the chapter. It goes 
over the same issues, but this time without the graphs. On the left-hand side of 
­Table 5-1, I list combinations of movements of observed prices and quantities, ­labeling 
them 1–6. On the right I give six shifts in supply and demand, labeling them a–f.
	
You are to match the shifts with the price and quantity movements that best fit each 
described shift, using each shift and movement only once. My recommendation to you 
is to draw the graphs that are described in a–f, decide what happens to price and quan-
tity, and then find the match in 1–6.
Q-1  True or false? If supply rises, 
price will rise.
Anything that affects demand or supply 
other than the price of the good will 
shift the curves.
Q-2  Say a hormone has been 
discovered that increases cows’ milk 
production by 20 percent. 
Demonstrate graphically what effect this 
discovery would have on the price and 
quantity of milk sold in a market.
If you don’t confuse your “shifts of” with 
your “movements along,” supply and 
demand provide good off-the-cuff 
answers for many economic questions.
Answers: 1–b; 2–a; 3–c.
FIGURE 5-1 (A, B, AND C) 
In this exhibit, three shifts of supply and demand are shown. Your task is to match them with the events listed in the text.
P0
P1
Q1 
         Q0
(a)
Supply
D1
P1
P0
(c)
Demand
P1
P0
Q1 Q0
S0
(b)
S1
S0
D1
S1
D0
D0
Q0

102
	
Now that you’ve worked them, let me give you the answers I came up with. They are: 
1–e; 2–a; 3–b; 4–f; 5–d; 6–c. How did I come up with the answers? I did what I sug-
gested you do—took each of the scenarios on the right and predicted what happens to 
price and quantity. For case a, supply shifts in to the left and there is a movement up 
along the demand curve. Since the demand curve is downward-sloping, the price rises 
and quantity declines. This matches number 2 on the left. For case b, demand shifts out 
to the right. Along the original supply curve, price and quantity would rise. But supply 
shifts in to the left, leading to even higher prices but lower quantity. What happens to 
quantity is unclear, so the match must be number 3. For case c, demand shifts in to the 
Q-3  If both demand and supply shift 
in to the left, what happens to price and 
quantity?
A REMINDER
Supply and Demand in Action
Sorting out the effects of the shifts of supply or demand or 
both can be confusing. Here are some helpful hints to 
keep things straight:
• Draw the initial demand and supply curves and 
label them. The equilibrium price and quantity is 
where these curves intersect. Label them.
• If only price has changed, no curves will shift and a 
shortage or surplus will result.
• If a nonprice factor affects demand, determine the 
direction demand has shifted and add the new 
demand curve. Do the same for supply.
• Equilibrium price and quantity is where the new 
demand and supply curves intersect. Label them.
• Compare the initial equilibrium price and quantity to 
the new equilibrium price and quantity.
	
See if you can describe what happened in the three 
graphs below.
A Change in Price
Price 
Quantity
P0
QD
Supply
Q0
QS
P1
Demand
Surplus
A Shift in Demand
Price 
Quantity
P0
Supply
Q0
Q1
P1
D1
D0
A Shift in Supply
Price 
Quantity
P1
S0
Q0
Q1
P0
Demand
S1
TABLE 5-1 
 Price and Quantity Changes 
Shifts in Supply and Demand
1.	
P↑­	
Q↑­	
a.  No change in demand. Supply shifts in.
2.	
P↑­	
Q↓	
b.  Demand shifts out. Supply shifts in.
3.	
P↑­	
Q?	
c.  Demand shifts in. No change in supply.
4.	
P↓	
Q?	
d.  Demand shifts out. Supply shifts out.
5.	
P?	
Q↑­	
e.  Demand shifts out. No change in supply.
6.	
P↓	
Q↓	
  f.  Demand shifts in. Supply shifts out.

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
103
left. There is movement down along the supply curve with lower price and lower quan-
tity. This matches number 6. For case d, demand shifts out and supply shifts out. As 
demand shifts out, we move along the supply curve to the right and price and quantity rise. 
But supply shifts out too, and we move out along the new demand curve. Price declines, 
erasing the previous rise, and the quantity rises even more. This matches number 5.
	
I’ll leave it up to you to confirm my answers to e and f. Notice that when supply 
and demand both shift, the change in either price or quantity is uncertain—it depends 
on the relative size of the shifts. As a summary, I present a diagrammatic of the com-
binations in Table 5-2.
Government Intervention: Price Ceilings  
and Price Floors
People don’t always like the market-determined price. If the invisible hand were the 
only factor that determined prices, people would have to accept it. But it isn’t; social 
and political forces also determine price. For example, when prices fall, sellers look to 
government for ways to hold prices up; when prices rise, buyers look to government 
for ways to hold prices down. Let’s now consider the effect of such actions in the 
­supply/demand model.1 Let’s start with an example of the price being held down.
Price Ceilings
When government wants to hold prices down, it imposes a price ceiling—a government-
imposed limit on how high a price can be charged. That limit is generally below the 
equilibrium price. (A price ceiling that is above the equilibrium price will have no 
effect at all.) From Chapter 4, you already know the effect of a price that is below 
the equilibrium price—quantity demanded will exceed quantity supplied and there 
will be excess demand. Let’s now look at an example of rent control—a price 
Q-4  If price and quantity both fell, 
what would you say was the most 
likely cause?
TABLE 5-2  Diagram of Effects of 
Shifts of Demand and Supply on 
Price and Quantity
This table provides a summary of 
the  effects of shifts in supply and 
­demand on equilibrium price and 
equilibrium quantity. Notice that 
when both curves shift, the effect on 
either price or quantity depends on 
the relative size of the shifts.
No Change
in Supply
Supply Increases
Supply Decreases
P same
Q same
P down
Q up
P up
Q down
P up
Q up
P ambiguous
Q up
P up
Q ambiguous
P down
Q ambiguous
P ambiguous
Q down
P down
Q down
No change
in demand
Demand
increases
Demand
decreases
1Modern economists use many different models. No model precisely fits reality, and when I discuss 
a real-world market as fitting a model, I am using pedagogical license. As I have emphasized in 
­previous chapters, the propositions that come out of a model are theorems–logical conclusions given 
the assumptions. To extend the theorem to a policy precept requires considering which assumptions of 
the model fit the situation one is describing.

104	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Q-6  What is the effect of the price 
ceiling, Pc, shown in the graph below on 
price and quantity?
ceiling on rents, set by government—and see how that excess demand shows up in 
the real world.
	
Rent controls exist today in a number of American cities as well as other cities 
throughout the world. Many of the laws governing rent were first instituted during the 
two world wars in the first half of the 20th century. Consider Paris, for example. In World 
War II, the Paris government froze rent to ease the financial burden of those families 
whose wage earners were sent to fight in the war. When the soldiers returned at the end 
of the war, the rent control was continued; removing it would have resulted in an increase 
in rents from $2.50 to $17 a month, and that was felt to be an unfair burden for veterans.
	
Figure 5-2 shows this situation. The below-market rent set by government created 
an enormous shortage of apartments. Initially this shortage didn’t bother those renting 
apartments, since they got low-cost apartments. But it created severe hardships for those 
who didn’t have apartments. Many families moved in with friends or extended families. 
Others couldn’t find housing at all and lived on the streets. Eventually the rent controls 
started to cause problems even for those who did have apartments. The reason is that 
owners of buildings cut back on maintenance. More than 80 percent of Parisians had no 
private bathrooms and 20 percent had no running water. Since rental properties weren’t 
profitable, no new buildings were being constructed and existing buildings weren’t kept 
in repair. It was even harder for those who didn’t have ­apartments.
	
Since the market price was not allowed to ration apartments, alternative methods of 
rationing developed. People paid landlords bribes to get an apartment, or watched the 
obituaries and then simply moved in their furniture before anyone else did. Eventually 
the situation got so bad that rent controls were lifted.
	
The system of rent controls is not only of historical interest. Below I list some 
­phenomena that existed in New York City.
1.	A couple paid $450 a month for a two-bedroom Park Avenue apartment with a 
solarium and two terraces, while another individual paid $3,500 a month for a 
studio apartment shared with two roommates.
2.	The vacancy rate for apartments in New York City was 1.2 percent. Anything 
under 5 percent is considered a housing emergency.
3.	The actress Mia Farrow paid $2,900 a month (a fraction of the market-clearing 
rent) for 10 rooms on Central Park West. It was an apartment her mother first 
leased 70 years ago.
4.	Would-be tenants made payments, called key money, to current tenants or 
landlords to get apartments.
Q-5  What is the effect of the price 
ceiling, Pc, shown in the graph below on 
price and quantity?
FIGURE 5-2  Rent Control in Paris
A price ceiling imposed on housing rent in 
Paris during World War II created a shortage of 
housing when World War II ended and veterans 
returned home. The shortage would have been 
eliminated if rents had been allowed to rise to 
$17 per month.
$17.00
QS
QD
Supply
Demand
Rental price per month
 Quantity of apartments
Shortage
$2.50
Price 
Quantity 
Supply
Demand
Pc
Price 
Quantity 
Supply
Demand
Pc

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
105
	
Your assignment is to explain how these phenomena might have come about, and 
to demonstrate, with supply and demand, the situation that likely caused them. (Hint: 
New York City had rent control.)
	
Now that you have done your assignment (you have, haven’t you?), let me give you 
my answers so that you can check them with your answers.
	
The situation is identical with that presented above in Figure 5-2. Take the first item. 
The couple lived in a rent-controlled apartment while the individual with roommates 
did not. If rent control were eliminated, rent on the Park Avenue apartment would rise 
and rent on the studio would most likely decline. Item 2: The housing emergency was a 
result of rent control. Below-market rent resulted in excess demand and little vacancy. 
Item 3: That Mia Farrow rented a rent-controlled apartment was the result of nonprice 
rationing. Instead of being rationed by price, other methods of rationing arose. These 
other methods of rationing scarce resources are called nonprice rationing. In New York 
City, strict rules determined the handing down of rent-controlled apartments from fam-
ily member to family member. Item 4: New residents searched for a long time to find 
apartments to rent, and many discovered that illegal payments to landlords were the 
only way to obtain a rent-controlled apartment. Key money is a black market payment 
for a rent-controlled apartment. Because of the limited supply of apartments, individu-
als were willing to pay far more than the controlled price. Landlords used other meth-
ods of rationing the limited supply of apartments—instituting first-come, first-served 
policies, and, in practice, selecting tenants based on gender, race, or other personal 
characteristics, even though such discriminatory selection was illegal. In some cases in 
New York City the rent was so far below the market that developers paid thousands of 
dollars—in one case $400,000—to a tenant to vacate an apartment so the developer 
could buy the building from the landlord, tear it down, and replace it with a new building.
	
If rent controls had only the bad effects described above, no community would 
­institute them. They are, however, implemented with good intentions—to cope with 
sudden increases in demand for housing that would otherwise cause rents to explode 
and force many poor people out of their apartments. The negative effects occur over 
time as buildings begin to deteriorate and the number of people looking to rent and 
unable to find apartments increases. As this happens, people focus less on the original 
renters and more on new renters excluded from the market and on the inefficiencies of 
price ceilings. Since politicians tend to focus on the short run, we can expect rent 
­control to continue to be used when demand for housing suddenly increases.
Price Floors
Sometimes political forces favor suppliers, sometimes consumers. So let us now go 
briefly through a case in which the government is trying to favor suppliers by attempt-
ing to prevent the price from falling below a certain level. Price floors—government-
imposed limits on how low a price can be charged—do just this. The price floor is 
generally above the existing price. (A price floor below equilibrium price would have 
no effect.) When there is an effective price floor, quantity supplied exceeds quantity 
demanded and the result is excess supply.
	
An example of a price floor is the minimum wage. Both individual states and the 
federal government impose minimum wage laws—laws specifying the lowest wage a 
firm can legally pay an employee. The U.S. federal government first instituted a minimum 
wage of 25 cents per hour in 1938 as part of the Fair Labor Standards Act. It has been 
raised many times since. As of 2016 the federal minimum wage was $7.25 per hour. 
Twenty-nine states had minimum wages higher than the federal minimum, and a num-
ber of cities had a $15 minimum wage. Only a small percentage of workers (about 1.6 
percent of hourly paid workers) receive the minimum wage, almost all of whom are 
With price ceilings, existing goods are 
no longer rationed entirely by price. 
Other methods of rationing existing 
goods arise called nonprice rationing.
Q-7  What is the effect of the  
price floor, Pf, shown in the graph 
below, on price and quantity?
Price 
Quantity 
Supply
Demand
Pf

106	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
unskilled and/or part-time. The market-determined equilibrium wage for most full-time 
adult workers is generally above the minimum wage.
	
The effect of a minimum wage on the unskilled labor market is shown in Figure 5-3. 
The government-set minimum wage is above equilibrium, as shown by Wmin. At the 
market-determined equilibrium wage We, the quantity of labor supplied and demanded 
equals Qe. At the higher minimum wage, the quantity of labor supplied rises to Q1 and 
the quantity of labor demanded declines to Q2. There is an excess supply of workers (a 
shortage of jobs) represented by the difference Q1 − Q2. This represents people who are 
looking for work but cannot find it.
	
Who wins and who loses from a minimum wage? The minimum wage improves the 
wages of the Q2 workers who are able to find work. Without the minimum wage, they 
would have earned We per hour. The minimum wage hurts those, however, who cannot 
find work at the minimum wage but who are willing to work, and would have been 
hired, at the market-determined wage. These workers are represented by the ­distance 
Qe − Q2 in Figure 5-3. The minimum wage also hurts firms that now must pay their 
workers more, increasing the cost of production, and consumers to the extent that firms 
are able to pass that increase in production cost on in the form of higher product prices.
	
All economists agree that the above analysis is logical and correct. But they dis-
agree about whether governments should have minimum wage laws. One reason is that 
the empirical effects of minimum wage laws are relatively small; in fact, some studies 
have found them to be negligible. (There is, however, much debate about these esti-
mates, since “other things” never remain constant.) A second reason is that some real-
world labor markets are not sufficiently competitive to fit the supply/demand model. A 
third reason is that the minimum wage affects the economy in ways that some econo-
mists see as desirable and others see as undesirable. I point this out to remind you that 
the supply/demand framework is a tool to be used to analyze issues. It does not provide 
final answers about policy. (In microeconomics, economists explore the policy issues 
of interferences in markets much more carefully.) There is nothing in economic theory 
that says that minimum wage laws are bad and should not be supported. Such laws 
have costs and benefits; what economics says is that the decision on whether to impose 
them should be based on a careful analysis of those costs and benefits.
The minimum wage helps some people 
and hurts others.
FIGURE 5-3  A Minimum Wage
A minimum wage, Wmin, above 
equilibrium wage, We, helps those 
who are able to find work, shown 
by Q2, but hurts those who would 
have been employed at the 
equilibrium wage but can no 
longer find employment, shown  
by Qe − Q2. A minimum wage  
also hurts producers who have 
higher costs of production and 
consumers who may face higher 
product prices.
Wmin
We
Wage (per hour)
Supply
Demand
Quantity of workers
Q2
Q1
Qe
© Rachel Epstein/PhotoEdit.

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
107
	
Because the federal minimum wage is low, and not binding for most workers, a move-
ment called the living-wage movement has begun. The living-wage movement focuses on 
local governments, calling on them to establish a minimum wage at a living wage—a 
wage necessary to support a family at or above the federally determined ­poverty line. 
Hundreds of cities have established living-wage laws at varying levels, often about $15 an 
hour. The analysis of these living-wage laws is the same as that for minimum wages.
Government Intervention: Excise Taxes  
and Tariffs
Let’s now consider an example of a tax on goods. An excise tax is a tax that is levied on a 
specific good. The luxury tax on expensive cars that the United States imposed in 1991 is 
an example. A tariff is an excise tax on an imported good. We can see the effect that excise 
taxes and tariffs will have on prices and quantities by considering the impact of taxes in 
the supply/demand model: A tax on suppliers shifts the supply curve up by the amount of 
the tax; a tax on demanders shifts the demand curve down by the amount of the tax.
	
To lend some sense of reality, let’s take an example from the 1990s, when the 
United States taxed the suppliers of expensive boats. We show that case in Figure 5-4. 
The price of a boat before the luxury tax was $60,000, and 600 boats were sold at that 
price. Now the government taxes suppliers $10,000 for every luxury boat sold. What 
will the new price of the boat be, and how many will be sold?
	
If you were about to answer “$70,000,” be careful. Ask yourself whether I would 
have given you that question if the answer were that easy. By looking at the supply and 
demand curves in Figure 5-4, you can see why $70,000 is the wrong answer.
	
To sell 600 boats, suppliers must be fully compensated for the tax. So the tax of $10,000 
on the supplier shifts the supply curve up from S0 to S1. However, at $70,000, consumers 
are not willing to purchase 600 boats. They are willing to purchase only 420 boats. ­Quantity 
supplied exceeds quantity demanded at $70,000. Suppliers lower their prices until quantity 
supplied equals quantity demanded at $65,000, the new equilibrium price.
	
The new equilibrium price is $65,000, not $70,000. The reason is that at the higher 
price, the quantity of boats people demand is less. Some people choose not to buy boats 
and others find substitute vehicles or purchase their boats outside the United States. The 
tax causes a movement up along a demand curve to the left. Excise taxes reduce the quan-
tity of goods demanded. That’s why boat manufacturers were up in arms after the tax was 
A tax on suppliers shifts the supply 
curve up by the amount of the tax.
Q-8  Your study partner, Umar, has just 
stated that a tax on demanders of $2 per 
unit will raise the equilibrium price 
consumers pay from $4 to $6. How do 
you respond?
D
S1
t
S0
FIGURE 5-4  The Effect of an Excise Tax
An excise tax on suppliers shifts the entire supply 
curve up by the amount of the tax. Since at a price 
equal to the original price plus the tax there is 
excess supply, the price of the good rises by less 
than the tax.
S1
Demand
S0
Quantity of luxury boats
The supply curve 
shifts up by the 
tax, $10,000
420
510
600
Price of luxury boats
$10,000
0
$70,000
60,000
65,000

108	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
S
D
QR
Quantity
Price
imposed and why the revenue generated from the tax was less than ­expected. Instead of 
collecting $10,000 × 600 ($6 million), revenue collected was only $10,000 × 510 
($5.1 million). (The tax was repealed three years after it was imposed.)
	
A tariff has the same effect on the equilibrium price and quantity as an excise tax. 
The difference is that only foreign producers sending goods into the United States pay 
the tax. An example is the 30 percent tariff imposed on steel imported into the United 
States in the early 2000s. The government instituted the tariff because U.S. steelmak-
ers were having difficulty competing with lower-cost foreign steel. The tariff increased 
the price of imported steel, making U.S. steel more competitive to domestic buyers. As 
expected, the price of imported steel rose by over 15 percent, to about $230 a ton, and 
the quantity imported declined. Tariffs don’t hurt just the foreign producer. Tariffs 
increase the cost of imported products to domestic consumers. In the case of steel, 
manufacturing companies such as automakers faced higher production costs. The 
increase in the cost of steel lowered production in those industries and increased the 
cost of a variety of goods to U.S. consumers.
Government Intervention: Quantity Restrictions
Another way in which governments often interfere with, or regulate, markets is with 
licenses, which limit entry into a market. For example, to be a doctor you need a ­license; 
to be a vet you need a license; and in some places to be an electrician, a financial planner, or 
a cosmetologist, or to fish, you need a license. There are many reasons for licenses, and 
we will not consider them here. Instead, we will simply consider what effect licenses have 
on the price and quantity of the activity being licensed. Specifically, we’ll look at a case 
where the government issues a specific number of licenses and holds that number con-
stant. The example we’ll take is licenses to drive a taxi. In New York City, these are called 
taxi medallions because the license is an aluminum plate attached to the hood of a taxi. 
Taxi medallions were established in 1937 as a way to increase the wages of licensed taxi 
drivers. Wages of taxi drivers had fallen from $26 a week in 1929 to $15 a week in 1933. 
As wages fell, the number of taxi drivers fell from 19,000 to about 12,000. The remaining 
12,000 taxi drivers successfully ­lobbied New York City to grant drivers with current 
licenses who met certain requirements permanent rights to drive taxis—medallions. 
(It wasn’t until the early 2000s that the number of medallions was increased slightly.) 
The restriction had the desired ­effect. As the economy grew, demand for taxis grew (the 
demand for taxis shifted out) as shown in Figure 5-5(a) and because the supply of taxis 
remained at about 12,000, the wages of the taxi drivers owning medallions increased.
Q-9  What is the effect of the quantity 
restrictions, QR, shown in the graph 
below, on equilibrium price and 
quantity?
FIGURE 5-5 (A AND B)  Quantity 
Restrictions in the Market for Taxi 
Licenses
When the demand for taxi services 
increased, because the number of 
taxi licenses was limited to 12,000, 
wages increased to above $15 an 
hour, as (a) shows. Because taxi 
medallions were limited in supply, 
as demand for taxi services rose, so 
did the demand for medallions. 
Their price rose significantly, as  
(b) shows.
$15
0
(a)
D0
D1
Number of licensed taxis
Wages per week
QR
(b)
Number of taxi medallions
$700,000
Initial
fee
Price of taxi medallion
D0
D1
QR

109
	
Issuing taxi medallions had a secondary effect. Because New York City also 
granted medallion owners the right to sell their medallions, a market in medallions 
developed. Those fortunate enough to have been granted a medallion by the city found 
that they had a valuable asset. A person wanting to drive a taxi, and earn those high 
wages, had to buy a medallion from an existing driver. This meant that while new taxi 
drivers would earn a higher wage once they had bought a license, their wage after 
­taking into account the cost of the license would be much lower.
	
As the demand for taxis rose, the medallions became more and more valuable. The 
effect on the price of medallions is shown in Figure 5-5(b). The quantity restriction, 
QR, means that any increases in demand lead only to price increases. Although the 
initial license fee was minimal, increases in demand for taxis quickly led to higher and 
higher medallion prices.
	
The demand for taxi medallions continued to increase each year as the New York 
City population grew more than the supply increased. The result was that the price of 
a taxi medallion continued to rise. Even with the slight increase in the number of 
­medallions, in 2016 taxi medallions for individuals cost about $700,000, giving any-
one who had bought that license a strong reason to oppose an expansion in the number 
of licenses being issued.2
Quantity restrictions tend to  
increase price.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Recently, the taxi business has been in flux because of the 
development of companies such as Uber and Lyft that 
match individuals who need rides with private drivers will-
ing to provide them on demand. The innovation over tradi-
tional taxi services is that the finding of the ride is handled 
on smartphone apps. Apart from these characteristics, 
Uber and Lyft function essentially just like 
taxi services—people hire drivers for 
transportation from one location to 
­another. So allowing Uber and Lyft to 
­operate in a city is equivalent to increas-
ing the number of taxi medallions in the 
city. Allowing more taxi drivers adds more 
competition, holding the prices of taxi 
services down and lowering the value of 
the taxi medallions. (Prices of NYC taxi 
medallions fell from $1.3 million before Uber was active to 
about $700,000 in 2016.) It is not surprising that existing 
taxi companies and drivers don’t like the new entrants.
	
Existing taxi services have lobbied against these new 
companies, arguing that Uber should be subject to the 
same regulations that they are. Because they aren’t, they 
have a significant cost advantage that ­allows them to  
Uber, Lyft, and Taxi Pricing
undercut traditional taxi prices. Some ­municipalities, such 
as Las Vegas, have agreed with that argument and passed 
laws forbidding Uber to operate there. These fights will 
likely continue.
	
One pricing innovation that Uber has implemented that 
existing taxi services do not use—in large part because 
the regulatory commissions do not let 
them use it—is “surge pricing.” Surge 
pricing means that at certain times when 
taxis are in high demand—when it is rain-
ing, or on holidays such as New Year’s 
Eve—Uber raises its rates, sometimes to 
seven times as high as its regular rates. 
This means that only those who are will-
ing and able to pay such high prices are 
able to get a ride. Many in the lay public 
do not like surge pricing, but it is a pricing feature that 
economists have urged for many years—an efficient mar-
ket means that as demand rises, price rises, reducing the 
quantity demanded to the available quantity supplied. 
With surge pricing, taxis are available for those who really 
want a taxi and are willing to pay. Economists call this 
practice peak and off-peak pricing.
2As is usually the case, the analysis is more complicated in real life. New York issues both 
­individual and corporate licenses. But the general reasoning carries through: Effective quantity 
­restrictions increase the value of a license.
© Prathan Chorruangsak/Shutterstock.com RF

110	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Third-Party-Payer Markets
As a final example for this chapter, let’s consider third-party-payer markets. In third-
party-payer markets, the person who receives the good differs from the person pay-
ing for the good. An example is the health care market, where many individuals have 
insurance. They generally pay a co-payment for health care services and an HMO or 
other insurer pays the remainder. Medicare and Medicaid are both third-party payers. 
Figure 5-6 shows what happens in the supply/demand model when there is a third-
party-payer market and a small co-payment. In the normal case, when the individual 
demander pays for the good, equilibrium quantity is where quantity demanded equals 
quantity supplied—in this case at an equilibrium price of $25 and an equilibrium 
quantity of 10.
	
Under a third-party-payer system, the person who chooses how much to purchase 
doesn’t pay the entire cost. Because the co-payment faced by the consumer is much 
lower, quantity demanded is much greater. In this example with a co-payment of $5, 
the consumer demands 18. Given an upward-sloping supply curve, the seller requires 
a higher price, in this case $45 for each unit supplied to provide that quantity. Assum-
ing the co-payment is for each unit, the consumers pay $5 of that price for a total out-
of-pocket cost of $90 ($5 times 18). The third-party payer pays the remainder, $40, for 
a cost of $720 ($40 times 18). Total spending is $810. This compares to total spending 
of only $250 (25 times 10) if the consumer had to pay the entire price. Notice that with 
a third-party-payer system, total spending, represented by the large shaded rectangle, 
is much higher than total spending if the consumer paid, represented by the small 
darker rectangle.
	
The third-party-payer system describes much of the health care system in the United 
States today. Typically, a person with health insurance makes a fixed co-payment 
for an office visit, regardless of procedures and tests provided. Given this payment 
­system, the insured patient has little incentive to limit the procedures offered by the 
­doctor. The ­doctor charges the insurance company, and the insurance company pays. 
The rise in health care costs over the past decades can be attributed in part to the third-
party-payer system.
	
A classic example of how third-party-payer systems can affect choices is a case 
where a 70-year-old man spent weeks in a hospital recovering from surgery to address 
abdominal bleeding. The bill, to be paid by Medicare, was nearing $275,000 and the 
patient wasn’t recovering as quickly as expected. The doctor finally figured out that the 
In third-party-payer markets, equilibrium 
quantity and total spending are much 
higher.
Q-10  If the cost of textbooks were 
included in tuition, what would likely 
happen to their prices? Why?
FIGURE 5-6  Third-Party-Payer Markets
In a third-party-payer system, the person 
who chooses the product doesn’t pay the 
entire cost. Here, with a co-payment of 
$5, consumers demand 18 units. Sellers 
require $45 per unit for that quantity. 
Total expenditures, shown by the entire 
shaded region, are much greater 
compared to total spending when the 
consumer pays the entire cost, shown by 
just the dark shaded region.
$45
25
5
Price
Supply
Demand
Quantity
10
18

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
111
patient’s condition wasn’t improving because ill-fitting dentures didn’t allow him to 
eat properly. The doctor ordered the hospital dentist to fix the dentures, but the ­patient 
refused the treatment. Why? The patient explained: “Seventy-five dollars is a lot of 
money.” The $75 procedure wasn’t covered by Medicare.
	
Third-party-payer systems are not limited to health care. (Are your parents or the 
­government paying for part of your college education? If you were paying the full 
amount, would you be demanding as much college education as you currently are?) Any-
time a third-party-payer system exists, the quantity demanded will be higher than it oth-
erwise would be. ­Market forces will not hold down costs as much as they would 
otherwise because the person using the service doesn’t have an incentive to hold down 
costs. Of course, that doesn’t mean that there are no pressures. The third-party payers—
parents, employers, and government—will respond to this by trying to limit both the 
quantity of the good ­individuals consume and the amount they pay for it. For example, 
parents will put pressure on their kids to get through school quickly rather than lingering 
for five or six years, and government will place limitations on what procedures Medicare 
and Medicaid patients can use. The goods will be rationed through social and political 
means. Such effects are not unexpected; they are just another example of supply and 
demand in action.
Conclusion
I began this chapter by pointing out that supply and demand are the lens through which 
economists look at reality. It takes practice to use that lens, and this chapter gave you 
some practice. Focusing the lens on a number of issues highlighted certain aspects of 
those issues. The analysis was simple but powerful and should, if you followed it, pro-
vide you with a good foundation for understanding the economist’s way of thinking 
about policy issues.
• By minding your Ps and Qs—the shifts of and 
movements along curves—you can describe  
almost all events in terms of supply and 
­demand.  (LO5-1)
• A price ceiling is a government-imposed limit on how 
high a price can be charged. Price ceilings below mar-
ket price create shortages.  (LO5-2)
• A price floor is a government-imposed limit on how 
low a price can be charged. Price floors above market 
price create surpluses.  (LO5-2)
Summary
• Taxes and tariffs paid by suppliers shift the supply 
curve up by the amount of the tax or tariff. They raise 
the equilibrium price (inclusive of tax) and decrease 
the equilibrium quantity.  (LO5-3)
• Quantity restrictions increase equilibrium price and 
reduce equilibrium quantity.  (LO5-4)
• In a third-party-payer market, the consumer and the 
one who pays the cost differ. Quantity demanded, 
price, and total spending are greater when a third 
party pays than when the consumer pays.  (LO5-5)
Key Terms
excise tax
minimum wage law
price ceiling
price floor
rent control
tariff
third-party-payer  
market

112	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Say that the equilibrium price and quantity both  
rose. What would you say was the most likely 
cause?  (LO5-1)
	 2.	 Say that equilibrium price fell and quantity remained 
­constant. What would you say was the most likely 
cause?  (LO5-1)
	 3.	 The technology has been developed so that road use can 
be priced by computer. A computer in the surface of 
the road picks up a signal from your car and automati-
cally charges you for the use of the road. How  
would this affect bottlenecks and rush-hour 
­congestion?  (LO5-1)
	 4.	 Demonstrate the effect on price and quantity of each of 
the following events:  (LO5-1)
	a.	 In a recent popularity test, Elmo topped Cookie 
­Monster in popularity (this represents a trend in 
­children’s tastes). Market: cookies.
	b.	 The Atkins Diet that limits carbohydrates was reported 
to be very effective. Market: bread.
	 5.	 In 2011 oil production in Libya was interrupted by 
­political unrest. At the same time, the demand for oil by 
China continued to rise.  (LO5-1)
	a.	 Demonstrate the impact on the quantity of oil bought 
and sold.
	b.	 Oil production in Libya returned to its original levels 
by the end of 2012. What was the likely effect on 
equilibrium oil price and quantity? Demonstrate your 
answer graphically.
	 6.	 Kennesaw University Professor Frank A. Adams III and 
­Auburn University Professors A. H. Barnett and David 
L. Kaserman recently estimated the effect of ­legalizing 
the sale of cadaverous organs, which currently are in 
shortage at zero price. What are the effects of the 
­following two possibilities on the equilibrium price  
and quantity of transplanted organs if their sale  
were to be legalized? Demonstrate your answers 
­graphically.  (LO5-1)
	a.	 Many of those currently willing to donate the organs 
of a deceased relative at zero price are offended that 
organs can be bought and sold and therefore withdraw 
from the donor program.
	b.	 People are willing to provide significantly more  
organs.
	 7.	 In the early 2000s a drought in Australia’s rice-growing 
regions raised the world price of rice from 12 to 24 cents 
a pound. Demonstrate graphically the effect of the 
drought on ­equilibrium price and quantity in the world 
rice ­market.  (LO5-1)
	 8.	 Demonstrate graphically the effect of an effective price 
ceiling.  (LO5-2)
	 9.	 Demonstrate graphically why rent controls might 
­increase the total payment that new renters pay for an 
apartment.  (LO5-2)
	10.	 Demonstrate graphically the effect of a price 
floor.  (LO5-2)
	11.	 Graphically show the effects of a minimum wage on the 
number of unemployed.  (LO5-2)
	12.	 Taxes can be levied on consumers or producers.  (LO5-3)
	a.	 Demonstrate the effect of a $4 per-unit tax on suppliers 
on equilibrium price and quantity.
	b.	 Demonstrate the effect of a $4 per-unit tax on con-
sumers on equilibrium price and quantity.
	c.	 How does the impact on equilibrium prices (paid by 
consumers and received by producers) and ­quantity 
differ between a and b?
	13.	 Draw the supply and demand curves associated with the 
tables below.  (LO5-3)
	
Price	
QS	
QD
	
$0.00	
  50	
200
	
.50	
100	
175
	
1.00	
150	
150
	
1.50	
200	
125
	
2.00	
250	
100
	a.	 What is equilibrium price and quantity?
	b.	 What is equilibrium price and quantity with a  
$0.75 per-unit tax levied on suppliers? Demonstrate 
your answer graphically.
	c.	 How does your answer to b change if the tax were 
­levied on consumers not suppliers? Demonstrate your 
answer graphically.
	d.	 What conclusion can you draw about the difference 
­between levying a tax on suppliers and ­consumers?
	14.	 Quotas are quantity restrictions on imported goods. 
Demonstrate the effect of a quota on the price of 
­imported goods.  (LO5-4)
	15.	 The city of Pawnee issues a fixed number of fishing 
­licenses each year.  (LO5-4)
	a.	 Using the accompanying graph, demonstrate the 
­effect of a limit of 100 fishing licenses at a cost of 
$20 per license.
	b.	 Is there excess supply or demand for licenses? Label 
the excess supply or demand on the graph.
	c.	 What is the maximum amount a person would be 
­willing to pay on the black market for a license?
	d.	 How much would Pawnee need to charge to eliminate 
the excess supply or demand?

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
113
	16.	 In what ways is the market for public postsecondary 
education an example of a third-party-payer market? 
What’s the impact of this on total educational  
expenditures?  (LO5-5)
	17.	 You’re given the following supply and demand 
­tables:  (LO5-5)
	
Demand	
Supply
	 P	
Q	
P	
Q
	$ 0	
1,200	
$ 0	
0
	 2	
900	
2	
0
	 4	
600	
4	
150
	 6	
300	
6	
300
	 8	
0	
8	
600
	10	
0	
10	
600
	12	
0	
12	
750
	14	
0	
14	
900
	a.	 What is equilibrium price and quantity in a market 
system with no interferences?
b.	 If this were a third-party-payer market where the 
­consumer pays $2, what is the quantity demanded? 
What is the price charged by the seller?
	c.	 What is total spending in the two situations described 
in a and b?
1
2
3
4
5
Fishing licenses (in hundreds)
6
S
D
Price of licenses
$50
 40
30
20
10
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Some economists believe minimum wages create distor-
tions in the labor market. If you are an employer and 
­unable to hire the one willing and able to work for the 
lowest wage, how else might you choose a worker? Is this 
fair? Why or why not? (Austrian)
	 2.	 On average, women are paid less than men. What are the 
likely reasons for that? Should the government intervene 
with a law that requires firms to pay equal wages to those 
with comparable skills? (Feminist)
	 3.	 Biological evolution occurs very slowly; cultural evolu-
tion occurs less slowly, but still slowly compared to  
institutional and market evolution.
	a.	 Give some examples of these observations about the 
different speeds of adjustment.
	b.	 Explain the relevance of these observations to economic 
reasoning. (Institutionalist)
	 4.	 Most religions argue that individuals should not fully 
­exploit market positions. For example, the text makes it 
sound as if allowing prices to rise to whatever level clears 
the market is the best policy to follow. That means that if, 
for example, someone were stranded in the desert and were 
willing to pay half his or her future income for life for a 
drink of water, charging him or her that price would be  
appropriate. Is it ­appropriate? Why or why not? (Religious)
	 5.	 Rent control today looks far different from the rent freeze 
New York City enacted after World War II. Most rent 
controls today simply restrict annual rent increases and 
guarantee landlords a “fair return” in return for maintain-
ing their properties.
	a.	 How would the economic effects of today’s rent con-
trols differ from the rent control programs depicted in 
your textbook?
	b.	 Do you consider them an appropriate mechanism to 
address the disproportionate power that landlords hold 
over tenants?
	c.	 If not, what policies would you recommend to address 
that inequity and the lack of affordable housing in U.S. 
cities? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 In the late 1990s, the television networks were given  
$70 billion worth of space on public airways for broad-
casting high-definition television rather than auctioning  
it off.
	a.	 Why do airways have value?
	b.	 After the airway had been given to the network, 
would you expect that the broadcaster would produce 
high-definition television?

114	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
	 2.	 About 10,000 tickets for a Men’s Final Four ­college bas-
ketball games at the St. Louis Edward Jones Dome are to 
be sold in a lottery system for ­between $110 and $130 
apiece. Typically applications exceed available tickets by 
100,000. A year before the game, scalpers already offer to 
sell tickets for between $200 and $2,000 depending on 
seat location, even though the practice is illegal.
	a.	 Demonstrate the supply and demand for Final Four 
tickets. How do you know that there is an excess 
­demand for tickets at $130?
	b.	 Demonstrate the scalped price of between $200 and $2,000.
	c.	 What would be the effect of legalizing scalping on the 
resale value of Final Four tickets?
	 3.	 In some states and localities “scalping” is against the law, 
although enforcement of these laws is spotty.
	a.	 Using supply/demand analysis and words, demonstrate 
what a weakly enforced antiscalping law would likely 
do to the price of tickets.
	b.	 Using supply/demand analysis and words, demonstrate 
what a strongly enforced antiscalping law would likely 
do to the price of tickets.
	 4.	 In 1938 Congress created a Board of Cosmetology in 
Washington, D.C., to license beauticians. To obtain a  
license, people had to attend a cosmetology school.  
In 1992 this law was used by the board to close down a 
hair-braiding salon specializing in cornrows and braids 
operated by unlicensed Mr. Uqdah, even though little 
was then taught in cosmetology schools about braiding 
and cornrows.
	a.	 What possible reason can you give for why this board 
exists?
	b.	 What options might you propose to change the system?
	c.	 What will be the political difficulties of implementing 
those options?
	 5.	 In the Oregon health care plan for rationing Medicaid 
­expenditures, therapy to slow the progression of AIDS and 
treatment for brain cancer were covered, while liver 
­transplants and treatment for infectious mononucleosis 
were not covered.
	a.	 What criteria do you think were used to determine 
what was covered and what was not covered?
	b.	 Should an economist have opposed the Oregon plan 
because it involves rationing?
	c.	 How does the rationing that occurs in the market differ 
from the rationing that occurs in the Oregon plan?
	 6.	 Airlines and hotels have many frequent flyer and frequent 
visitor programs in which individuals who fly the airline 
or stay at the hotel receive bonuses that are the equivalent 
to discounts.
	a.	 Give two reasons why these companies have such 
­programs rather than simply offering lower prices.
	b.	 Can you give other examples of such programs?
	c.	 What is a likely reason why firms whose employees 
receive these benefits do not require their employees 
to give the benefits to the firm?
	 7.	 Since 1981, the U.S. government has supported the U.S. 
price of sugar by limiting sugar imports into the United 
States. Restricting imports is effective because the United 
States consumes more sugar than it produces.
	a.	 Using supply/demand analysis, demonstrate how import 
restrictions increase the price of domestic sugar.
	b.	 What other import policy could the government imple-
ment to have the same effect as the import ­restriction?
	c.	 Under the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade, the United States agreed to per-
mit at least 1.25 million tons of sugar to be imported 
into the United States. How does this affect the U.S. 
sugar price support program?
	 8.	 Apartments in New York City are often hard to find. One 
of the major reasons is rent control. 
	a.	 Demonstrate graphically how rent controls could make 
apartments hard to find.
	b.	 Often one can get an apartment if one makes a side 
payment to the current tenant. Can you explain why?
	c.	 What would be the likely effect of eliminating rent 
controls?
	d.	 What is the political appeal of rent controls?
	 9.	 Until recently, angora goat wool (mohair) was designated 
as a strategic commodity (it used to be utilized in some 
military clothing). Because of that, in 1992 for ­every 
­dollar’s worth of mohair sold to manufacturers, ranchers 
received $3.60.
	a.	 Demonstrate graphically the effect of eliminating this 
designation and subsidy.
	b.	 Why was the program likely kept in existence for so long?
	c.	 Say that a politician has suggested that the government 
should pass a law that requires all consumers to pay a 
price for angora goat wool high enough so that the sell-
ers of that wool would receive $3.60 more than the mar-
ket price. Demonstrate the effect of the law ­graphically. 
Would consumers support it? How about suppliers?
	10.	 Supply/demand analysis states that equilibrium occurs 
where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded, but in 
U.S. agricultural markets quantity supplied almost always 
exceeds quantity demanded. How can this be?
	11.	 Nobel Prize–winning economist Bill Vickrey suggested 
that automobile insurance should be paid as a tax on gas, 
rather than as a fixed fee per year per car. How would 
that change likely affect the number of automobiles that 
individuals own?
	12.	 The United States imposes substantial taxes on cigarettes 
but not on loose tobacco. When the tax went into effect, 
what effect did it likely have for cigarette rolling machines? 
	13.	 In Japan, doctors prescribe drugs and sell the drugs to the 
patient, receiving a 25 percent markup. In the United States, 
doctors prescribe drugs, but, generally, they do not sell them. 
	a.	 Which country prescribes the most drugs? Why?
	b.	 How would a plan to limit the price of old drugs, but 
not new drugs to allow for innovation, likely affect the 
drug industry?

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
115
	c.	 How might a drug company in the United States en-
courage a doctor in the United States, where doctors 
receive nothing for drugs, to prescribe more drugs?
	14.	 In the early 2000s, Whole Foods Market Inc. switched  
to a medical care plan that had a high deductible, which 
meant that employees were responsible for the first $1,500 
of care, whereas after that they received 80 percent coverage. 
The firm also put about $800 in an account for each em-
ployee to use for medical care. If employees did not use 
this money, they could carry it over to the next year.
	a.	 What do you expect happened to medical claim costs?
	b.	 What do you believe happened to hospital admissions?
	c.	 Demonstrate graphically the reasons for your answers 
in a and b.
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 False. When supply rises, supply shifts out to the right. Price 
falls because demand slopes downward.  (LO5-1)
	 2.	 A discovery of a hormone that will increase cows’ milk 
production by 20 percent will increase the supply of milk, 
pushing the price down and increasing the quantity de-
manded, as in the accompanying graph.  (LO5-1)
	
P0
P1
S'
S
Demand
Q1
Q0
Quantity
Price
	 3.	 Quantity decreases but it is unclear what happens to 
price.  (LO5-1)
	 4.	 It is likely demand shifted in and supply remained 
­constant.  (LO5-1)
	 5.	 Since the price ceiling is above the equilibrium price, it 
will have no effect on the market-determined equilibrium 
price and quantity.  (LO5-2)
	 6.	 The price ceiling will result in a lower price and quantity 
sold. There will be excess demand QD − QS.  (LO5-2)
Price 
Quantity 
S
D
Pc
QD
QS
	 7.	 Since the price floor is below the equilibrium price, it will 
have no effect on the market-determined equilibrium price 
and quantity.  (LO5-2)
	 8.	 I would respond that the tax will most likely raise the 
price by less than $2 since the tax will cause the quantity 
demanded to decrease. This will decrease quantity 
­supplied, and hence decrease the price the suppliers 
­receive. In the diagram below, Q falls from Q0 to Q1 and 
the price the supplier receives falls from $4 to $3, making 
the final price $5, not $6.  (LO5-3)
Quantity
Price
$6
5
4
3
2
1
D
S
Q1 Q0
Price demander pays
Tax—$2
Price supplier 
receives
0
D1
	 9.	 Given the quantity restriction, equilibrium quantity will 
be QR and equilibrium price will be P0, which is higher 
than the market equilibrium price of Pe.  (LO5-4)
P0
Pe
S
D
QR
Quantity
Price
	10.	 Universities would probably charge the high tuition they 
do now, but they would likely negotiate with publishers 
for lower textbook prices because they are both demand-
ing and paying for the textbook.  (LO5-5)

116
Thus, equilibrium price is $5.
	
Step 3: To find equilibrium quantity, you can sub-
stitute $5 for P in either the demand or supply equa-
tion. Let’s do it for supply: QS = −5 + (2 × 5) = 5 units. 
I’ll leave it to you to confirm that the quantity you 
­obtain by substituting P = $5 in the demand ­equation 
is also 5 units.
	
The answer could also be found graphically. The 
­supply and demand curves specified by these 
­equations are depicted in Figure A5-1. As you can see, 
demand and supply intersect; quantity demanded 
equals quantity supplied at a quantity of 5 units and a 
price of $5.
Movements along a Demand  
and Supply Curve
The demand and supply curves above represent schedules 
of quantities demanded and supplied at various prices. 
Movements along each can be represented by selecting 
various prices and solving for quantity demanded and 
supplied. Let’s create a supply and demand table using 
the above equations—supply: QS = −5 + 2P; demand:  
QD = 10 − P.
In this chapter and in the previous chapter, I discussed 
demand, supply, and the determination of equilibrium 
price and quantity in words and graphs. These concepts 
also can be presented in equations. In this appendix I do 
so, using straight-line supply and demand curves.
The Laws of Supply and 
Demand in Equations
Since the law of supply states that quantity supplied is 
­positively related to price, the slope of an equation specify-
ing a supply curve is positive. (The quantity intercept term 
is generally less than zero since suppliers are generally 
­unwilling to supply a good at a price less than zero.) An 
example of a supply equation is
QS = −5 + 2P
where QS is units supplied and P is the price of each unit 
in dollars per unit. The law of demand states that as price 
rises, quantity demanded declines. Price and quantity are 
negatively related, so a demand curve has a negative 
slope. An example of a demand equation is
QD = 10 − P
where QD is units demanded and P is the price of each 
unit in dollars per unit.
Determination of  
Equilibrium
The equilibrium price and quantity can be determined in 
three steps using these two equations. To find the equilib-
rium price and quantity for these particular demand and 
supply curves, you must find the quantity and price that 
solve both equations simultaneously.
	
Step 1: Set the quantity demanded equal to quantity 
supplied:
QS = QD → −5 + 2P = 10 − P
	
Step 2: Solve for the price by rearranging terms. 
­Doing so gives:
3P = 15
  P = $5
Algebraic Representation of Supply,  
Demand, and Equilibrium
APPENDIX
FIGURE A5-1  Supply and Demand Equilibrium
The algebra in this appendix leads to the same results as the 
geometry in the chapter. Equilibrium occurs where quantity 
supplied equals quantity demanded.
Price (per unit)
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Quantity (per unit of time)
QS = –5 + 2P
QD = 10 – P
10
1
2
3 4
5 6    7   8 9

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
117
P	
QS = −5 + 2P	
QD = 10 − P
	$ 0	
−5	
10
	 1	
−3	
9
	 2	
−1	
8
	 3	
1	
7
	 4	
3	
6
	 5	
5	
5
	 6	
7	
4
	 7	
9	
3
	 8	
11	
2
	 9	
13	
1
	10	
15	
0
As you move down the rows, you are moving up along the 
supply schedule, as shown by increasing quantity supplied, 
and moving down along the demand schedule, as shown by 
decreasing quantity demanded. Just to confirm your equi-
librium quantity and price calculations, notice that at a 
price of $5, quantity demanded equals quantity supplied.
Shifts of a Demand and Supply Schedule
What would happen if suppliers changed their expecta-
tions so that they would be willing to sell more goods at 
every price? This shift factor of supply would shift the 
entire supply curve out to the right. Let’s say that at every 
price, quantity supplied increases by 3. Mathematically 
the new equation would be QS = −2 + 2P. The quantity 
intercept increases by 3. What would you expect to hap-
pen to equilibrium price and quantity? Let’s solve the 
equations mathematically first.
	
Step 1: To determine equilibrium price, set the new 
quantity supplied equal to quantity demanded:
10 − P = −2 + 2P
Step 2: Solve for the equilibrium price:
12 = 3P
  P = $4
Step 3: To determine equilibrium quantity, substitute P in 
either the demand or supply equation:
QD = 10 − (1 × 4) = 6 units
QS = −2 + (2 × 4) = 6 units
Equilibrium price declined to $4 and equilibrium quantity 
rose to 6, just as you would expect with a rightward shift 
in a supply curve.
	
Now let’s suppose that demand shifts out to the 
right. Here we would expect both equilibrium price and 
equilibrium quantity to rise. We begin with our original sup-
ply and demand curves—supply: QS = −5 + 2P; ­demand: 
QD = 10 − P. Let’s say at every price, the ­quantity demanded 
rises by 3. The new equation for demand would be QD = 13 
− P. You may want to solve this equation for various prices 
to confirm that at every price, quantity demanded rises by 3. 
Let’s solve the equations for equilibrium price and quantity.
	
Step 1: Set the quantities equal to one another:
13 − P = −5 + 2P
	
Step 2: Solve for equilibrium price:
18 = 3P
  P = $6
	
Step 3: Substitute P in either the demand or supply 
equation:
QD = 13 − (1 × 6) = 7 units
QS = −5 + (2 × 6) = 7 units
Equilibrium price rose to $6 and equilibrium quantity 
rose to 7 units, just as you would expect with a rightward 
shift in a demand curve.
	
Just to make sure you’ve got it, I will do two more 
examples. First, suppose the demand and supply equa-
tions for wheat per year in the United States can be speci-
fied as follows (notice that the slope is negative for the 
demand curve and positive for the supply curve):
QD = 500 − 2P
QS = −100 + 4P
P is the price in dollars per thousand bushels and Q is the 
quantity of wheat in thousands of bushels. Remember 
that the units must always be stated. What are the equilib-
rium price and quantity?
	
Step 1: Set the quantities equal to one another:
500 − 2P = −100 + 4P
	
Step 2: Solve for equilibrium price:
600 = 6P
   P = $100
	
Step 3: Substitute P in either the demand or supply 
equation:
QD = 500 − (2 × 100) = 300
QS = −100 + (4 × 100) = 300
Equilibrium quantity is 300 thousand bushels.
	
As my final example, take a look at Alice’s demand 
curve depicted in Figure 4-4(b) in Chapter 4. Can you write 
an equation that represents the demand curve in that figure? 

118	
Introduction ■ Thinking Like an Economist
It is QD = 10 − 2P. At a price of zero, the quantity of movie 
rentals Alice demands is 10, and for every increase in price 
of $1, the quantity she demands falls by 2. Now look at 
Ann’s supply curve shown in Figure 4-7(b) in Chapter 4. 
Ann’s supply curve mathematically is QS = 2P. At a zero 
price, the quantity Ann supplies is zero, and for every $1 in-
crease in price, the quantity she supplies rises by 2. What are 
the equilibrium price and quantity?
	
Step 1: Set the quantities equal to one another:
10 − 2P = 2P
	
Step 2: Solve for equilibrium price:
4P = 10
  P = $2.5
	
Step 3: Substitute P in either the demand or supply 
equation:
QD = 10 − (2 × 2.5) = 5, or
QS = 2 × 2.5 = 5 movies per week
Ann is willing to supply five movies per week at $2.50 per 
rental and Alice demands five movies at $2.50 per movie 
rental. Remember that in Figure 4-8 in Chapter 4, I showed 
you graphically the equilibrium quantity and price of Alice’s 
demand curve and Ann’s supply curve. I’ll leave it up to you 
to check that the graphic solution in Figure 4-8 is the same 
as the mathematical solution we came up with here.
Price Ceilings and Price Floors
Let’s now consider a price ceiling and price floor. We 
start with the supply and demand curves:
QS = −5 + 2P
QD = 10 − P
This gave us the solution
P = 5
Q = 5
Now, say that a price ceiling of $4 is imposed. Would you 
expect a shortage or a surplus? If you said “shortage,” you’re 
doing well. If not, review the chapter before continuing with 
this appendix. To find out how much the shortage is, we 
must find out how much will be supplied and how much will 
be demanded at the price ceiling. Substituting $4 for price in 
both equations lets us see that QS = 3 units and QD = 6 units. 
There will be a shortage of three units. Next, let’s consider a 
price floor of $6. To determine the surplus, we follow the 
same exercise. ­Substituting $6 into the two equations gives a 
quantity supplied of seven units and a quantity ­demanded of 
four units, so there is a surplus of three units.
Taxes and Subsidies
Next, let’s consider the effect of a tax of $1 placed on the 
supplier. That tax would decrease the price received by 
suppliers by $1. In other words,
QS = −5 + 2(P − 1)
Multiplying the terms in parentheses by 2 and collecting 
terms results in
QS = −7 + 2P
This supply equation has the same slope as in the previ-
ous case, but a new intercept term—just what you’d ex-
pect. To determine the new equilibrium price and 
quantity, follow steps 1 to 3 discussed earlier. Setting this 
new equation equal to demand and solving for price gives
P = 52⁄3
Substituting this price into the demand and supply equa-
tions tells us equilibrium quantity:
QS = QD = 41⁄3 units
Of that price, the supplier must pay $1 in tax, so the price 
the supplier receives net of tax is $42⁄3.
	
Next, let’s say that the tax were put on the demander 
rather than on the supplier. In that case, the tax increases 
the price for demanders by $1 and the demand equation 
becomes
QD = 10 − (P + 1), or
QD = 9 − P
Again solving for equilibrium price and quantity requires set-
ting the demand and supply equations equal to one another 
and solving for price. I leave the steps to you. The result is
P = 42⁄3
This is the price the supplier receives. The price demanders 
pay is $52⁄3. The equilibrium quantity will be 41⁄3 units.
	
These are the same results we got in the previous 
cases showing that, given the assumptions, it doesn’t matter 
who actually pays the tax: The effect on equilibrium price 
and quantity is identical no matter who pays it.
Quotas
Finally, let’s consider the effect of a quota of 41⁄3 placed 
on the market. Since a quota limits the quantity supplied, 
as long as the quota is less than the market equilibrium 
quantity, the supply equation becomes
QS = 41⁄3
where QS is the actual amount supplied. The price that 
the market will arrive at for this quantity is determined by 

	
Chapter 5 ■ Using Supply and Demand	
119
the demand curve. To find that price, substitute the quan-
tity 41⁄3 into the demand equation (QD = 10 − P):
41⁄3 = 10 − P
and solve for P:
P = 52⁄3
Since consumers are willing to pay $52⁄3, this is what sup-
pliers will receive. The price that suppliers would have 
been willing to accept for a quantity of 41⁄3 is $42⁄3. This 
can be found by substituting the amount of the quota in 
the supply equation:
41⁄3 = −5 + 2P
and solving for P:
2P = 91⁄3
  P = 42⁄3
Notice that this result is very similar to the tax. For de-
manders it is identical; they pay $52⁄3 and receive 41⁄3 
units. For suppliers, however, the situation is much pref-
erable; instead of receiving a price of $42⁄3, the amount 
they received with the tax, they receive $52⁄3. With a quota, 
suppliers receive the “implicit tax revenue” that results 
from the higher price.
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Suppose the demand and supply for milk are described by 
the following equations: QD = 600 − 100P; QS = −150  
+ 150P, where P is price in dollars, QD is quantity de-
manded in millions of gallons per year, and QS is quantity 
supplied in millions of gallons per year.
	a.	 Create demand and supply tables corresponding to 
these equations.
	b.	 Graph supply and demand and determine equilibrium 
price and quantity.
	c.	 Confirm your answer to b by solving the equations 
mathematically.
	 2.	 Beginning with the equations in question 1, suppose a 
growth hormone is introduced that allows dairy farmers to 
offer 125 million more gallons of milk per year at each price.
	a.	 Construct new demand and supply curves reflecting 
this change. Describe with words what happened to 
the supply curve and to the demand curve.
	b.	 Graph the new curves and determine equilibrium price 
and quantity.
	c.	 Determine equilibrium price and quantity by solving 
the equations mathematically.
	d.	 Suppose the government set the price of milk at $3 a 
gallon. Demonstrate the effect of this regulation on the 
market for milk. What is quantity demanded? What is 
quantity supplied?
	 3.	 Write demand and supply equations that represent demand, 
D0, and supply, S0, in Figure A5-1 in this appendix.
	a.	 Solve for equilibrium price and quantity mathematically. 
Show your work.
	b.	 Rewrite the demand equation to reflect an increase in 
demand of 3 units. What happens to equilibrium price 
and quantity?
	c.	 Rewrite the supply equation to reflect a decrease in supply 
of 3 units at every price level. What happens to equilib-
rium price and quantity using the demand curve from b?
	 4.	 a.	 How is a shift in demand reflected in a demand equation?
	b.	 How is a shift in supply reflected in a supply equation?
	c.	 How is a movement along a demand (supply) curve 
­reflected in a demand (supply) equation?
	 5.	 Suppose the demand and supply for wheat are described 
by the following equations: QD = 10 − P; QS = 2 + P, 
where P is the price in dollars, QD is quantity demanded 
in millions of bushels per year, and QS is quantity ­supplied 
in millions of bushels per year.
	a.	 Solve for equilibrium price and quantity of wheat.
	b.	 Would a government-set price of $5 create a surplus or 
a shortage of wheat? How much? Is $5 a price ­ceiling 
or a price floor?
	 6.	 Suppose the U.S. government imposes a $1-per-gallon-of-
milk tax on dairy farmers. Using the demand and supply 
equations from question 1:
	a.	 What is the effect of the tax on the supply equation? 
The demand equation?
b.	 What are the new equilibrium price and quantity?
	c.	 How much do dairy farmers receive per gallon of milk 
after the tax? How much do demanders pay?
	 7.	 Repeat question 6 assuming the tax is placed on the buy-
ers of milk. Does it matter who pays the tax?
	 8.	 Repeat question 6 assuming the government pays a sub-
sidy of $1 per gallon of milk to farmers.
	 9.	 Suppose the demand for movies is represented by  
QD = 15 − 4P, and the supply of movies is represented by 
QS = 4P − 1. Determine if each of the following is a 
price floor, price ceiling, or neither. In each case, 
­determine the shortage or surplus.
	a.	 P = $3
	b.	 P = $1.50
	c.	 P = $2.25
	d.	 P = $2.50

PART II
	 SECTION I	
THE POWER OF TRADITIONAL 
ECONOMIC MODELS
	
CHAPTER 6	
Describing Supply and Demand: 
Elasticities
	
CHAPTER 7	
Taxation and Government 
Intervention
	
CHAPTER 8	
Market Failure versus Government 
Failure
	 CHAPTER 8W	
Politics and Economics: The Case  
of Agricultural Markets
	 SECTION II	
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC 
POLICY ISSUES
	
CHAPTER 9	
Comparative Advantage, Exchange 
Rates, and Globalization
	
CHAPTER 10	
International Trade Policy
	SECTION III	
PRODUCTION AND COST 
ANALYSIS
	
CHAPTER 11	
Production and Cost Analysis I
	
CHAPTER 12	
Production and Cost Analysis II
	SECTION IV	
MARKET STRUCTURE
	
CHAPTER 13	
Perfect Competition
	
CHAPTER 14	
Monopoly and Monopolistic 
Competition
	
CHAPTER 15	
Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy
	
CHAPTER 16	
Real-World Competition and 
Technology
	 SECTION V	
FACTOR MARKETS
	
CHAPTER 17	
Work and the Labor Market
	 CHAPTER 17W	
Nonwage and Asset Income: Rents, 
Profits, and Interest
	 CHAPTER 18	
Who Gets What? The Distribution  
of Income
	SECTION VI	
CHOICE AND DECISION MAKING
	 CHAPTER 19	
The Logic of Individual Choice: The 
Foundation of Supply and Demand
	 CHAPTER 20	
Game Theory, Strategic Decision 
Making, and Behavioral Economics
	SECTION VII	
MODERN ECONOMIC THINKING
	 CHAPTER 21	
Thinking Like a Modern Economist
	 CHAPTER 22	
Behavioral Economics and Modern 
Economic Policy
	 CHAPTER 23	
Microeconomic Policy, Economic 
Reasoning, and Beyond
Microeconomics

In my vacations, I visited the poorest quarters of several cit-
ies and walked through one street after another, looking at 
the faces of the poorest people. Next I resolved to make as 
thorough a study as I could of Political Economy.
Y
ou may remember having already seen this 
quotation from Alfred Marshall. It began the 
first chapter. I chose this beginning for two 
­reasons. First, it gives what I believe to be the best reason 
to study economics. Second, the quotation is from a hero 
of mine, one of the economic giants of all times. His 
Principles of Economics was the economists’ bible in the 
late 1800s and early 1900s. How important was Marshall? 
It was Marshall who first used the supply and demand 
curves as an engine of analysis.
	
I repeat this quotation here because, for Marshall, 
economics was microeconomics, and it is his vision of 
economics that underlies this book’s approach to 
­microeconomics. For Marshall, economics was an art 
that was meant to be applied—used to explain why 
things were the way they were, and what we could do 
about them. He had little use for esoteric theory that 
didn’t lead to a direct application to a real-world 
­problem. Reflecting on the state of economics in 1906, 
Marshall wrote to a friend:
I had a growing feeling in the later years of my work at 
the subject that a good mathematical theorem dealing 
with ­economic hypotheses was very unlikely to be good 
economics: and I went more and more on the rules—
(1)  Use mathematics as a shorthand language, rather 
than as an engine of inquiry. (2) Keep to them until you 
have done. (3) Translate into English. (4) Then illustrate 
by examples that are important in real life. (5) Burn the 
mathematics. (6) If you can’t succeed in (4), burn (3). 
This last I did often. (From a letter from Marshall to 
A. L. Bowley, reprinted in A. C. Pigou, Memorials of 
Alfred Marshall, p. 427.)
Marshall didn’t feel this way about mathematical 
­economics because he couldn’t do mathematics. He was 
trained as a formal mathematician, and he was a good 
one. But, for him, mathematics wasn’t economics, and the 
real world was too messy to have applied to it much of the 
fancy mathematical economic work that some of his fel-
low economists were doing. Marshall recognized the in-
fluence of market, political, and social forces and believed 
that all three had to be taken into account in applying eco-
nomic reasoning to reality.
	
You won’t see much highfalutin mathematical 
­economics in these microeconomic chapters. The chapters 
follow the Marshallian methodology and present the min-
imum of formal theory necessary to apply the concepts of 
economics to the real world, and then they do just that: 
start talking about real-world issues.
	
Section I, The Power of Traditional Economic Models 
(Chapters 6, 7, 8, and 8W), develops the supply/demand 
model and shows you how it can be used to analyze 
­policy issues. Section II, International Economic Policy 
Issues (Chapters 9 and 10), extends ­economic reasoning 
to international issues. Section III, Production and Cost 
Analysis (Chapters 11 and 12), shows the foundation of 
cost analysis and how it relates to firms.
	
Section IV, Market Structure (Chapters 13–16), 
­introduces you to various market structures, and anti-
trust policy.
	
Section V, Factor Markets (Chapters 17, 17W, and 18), 
looks at a particular set of markets—factor markets. These 
­markets play a central role in determining the distribution 
of income. These chapters won’t tell you how to get rich 
(you’ll have to wait for the sequel for that), but they will 
give you new insights into how labor markets work.
	
Section VI, Choice and Decision Making (Chapters 19 
and 20), presents both the traditional and modern theories 
of choice, including the game theoretic foundations of 
modern economic thinking and its relation to some new 
developments in behavioral economics.
	
Section VII, Modern Economic Thinking (Chapters 
21–23), discusses some new developments that are 
changing the nature of modern microeconomics.

“
”
The master economist must understand 
symbols and speak in words. He must 
contemplate the particular in terms of the 
general, and touch abstract and concrete in 
the same flight of thought.
—J. M. Keynes
chapter 6
Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO6-1	 Use elasticity to describe the 
responsiveness of quantities 
to changes in price and 
distinguish five elasticity terms.
LO6-2	 Explain the importance of 
substitution in determining 
elasticity of supply and demand.
LO6-3	 Relate price elasticity of 
demand to total revenue.
LO6-4	 Define and calculate income 
elasticity and cross-price 
elasticity of demand.
LO6-5	 Explain how the concept of 
elasticity makes supply and 
demand analysis more useful.
In 2014, firms increased the price of the antibiotic tetra-
cycline from $0.03 to $2.36 a tablet. That’s a 67-fold 
increase! They did it because they felt that the quantity 
demanded of tetracycline was not highly responsive to 
price, which meant that the increase in price would not 
­significantly decrease the quantity demanded or, in eco-
nomic terminology, that the demand for the antibiotic was 
highly price inelastic.
As you can see, information about elasticity is extremely 
important to firms in making their pricing decisions, and to 
economists in their study of the economy. That’s one reason 
why grocery stores like shoppers to use their preferred-­customer cards. These 
cards provide the stores with data about shopper behavior such as how sensitive 
shoppers are to price changes. ­Whenever a firm is thinking of changing its 
prices, it has a strong interest in elasticity.
Price Elasticity
The most commonly used elasticity concept is price elasticity of demand and 
supply. Price elasticity of demand is the percentage change in quantity 
­demanded divided by the percentage change in price:
ED = Percentage change in quantity demanded
Percentage change in price
Price elasticity of supply is the percentage change in quantity supplied divided 
by the percentage change in price:
ES = Percentage change in quantity supplied
Percentage change in price
	
Let’s consider some numerical examples. Say the price of a good rises by 
10 percent and, in response, quantity demanded falls by 20 percent. The price 
© Comstock/PunchStock RF

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
123
elasticity of demand is 2 (−20 percent/10 percent). Notice that I said 2, not −2. Because 
quantity demanded is inversely related to price, the calculation for the price elasticity 
of demand comes out negative. Despite this fact, economists talk about price elasticity 
of demand as a positive number. (Those of you who remember some math can think of 
elasticity as an absolute value of a number, rather than a simple number.) Using this 
convention makes it easier to remember that a larger number for price elasticity of 
demand means quantity demanded is more responsive to price.
	
To make sure you have the idea down, let’s consider two more examples. Say that 
when price falls by 5 percent, quantity supplied falls by 2 percent. In this case, the 
price elasticity of supply is 0.4 (2 percent/5 percent). And, finally, say the price goes 
up by 10 percent and in response the quantity demanded falls by 15 percent. Price 
elasticity of demand is 1.5 (15 percent/10 percent).
What Information Price Elasticity Provides
Price elasticity of demand and supply tells us exactly how quantity responds to a 
change in price. A price elasticity of demand of 0.3 tells us that a 10 percent rise in 
price will lead to a 3 percent decline in quantity demanded. If the elasticity of demand 
were a larger number, say 5, the same 10 percent rise in price will lead to a 50 percent 
decline in quantity demanded. As elasticity increases, quantity responds more to price 
changes.
Classifying Demand and Supply as Elastic or Inelastic
It is helpful to classify elasticities by relative responsiveness. Economists usually 
describe supply and demand by the terms elastic and inelastic. Formally, demand or sup-
ply is elastic if the percentage change in quantity is greater than the percentage change 
in price (E > 1). Conversely, demand or supply is inelastic if the percentage change in 
quantity is less than the percentage change in price (E < 1). In the last two examples, 
an elasticity of demand of 0.3 means demand is inelastic (ED < 1), and an elasticity of 
demand of 5 means demand is elastic (ED > 1).
	
The commonsense interpretation of these terms is the following: An inelastic 
­supply means that the quantity supplied doesn’t change much with a change in price. 
For example, say the price of land rises. The amount of land supplied won’t change 
much, so the supply of land is inelastic. An elastic supply means that quantity supplied 
changes by a larger percentage than the percentage change in price. For example, say 
the price of pencils doubles. What do you think will happen to the quantity of pencils 
supplied? I suspect it will more than double, which means that the supply of pencils is 
elastic.
	
The same terminology holds with demand. Consider a good such as Hulu, which 
has a close substitute, Netflix. If Hulu’s price rises, the quantity demanded will fall a 
lot as people shift to the substitute (Netflix). So the demand for Hulu would be highly 
elastic. Alternatively, consider table salt, which has no close substitute, at least at cur-
rent prices. Demand for table salt is highly inelastic. That is, a rise in the price of table 
salt does not result in a large decline in quantity demanded.
Elasticity Is Independent of Units
Before continuing, notice that elasticity measures the percentage, not the unit, 
change in variables. Using percentages allows us to measure responsiveness 
­independent of units, making comparisons among different goods easier. Say a  
Price elasticity is the percentage 
change in quantity divided by the 
percentage change in price.
Q-1  If when price rises by 4 percent, 
quantity supplied rises by 8 percent, 
what is the price elasticity of supply?
Elastic: E > 1
Inelastic: E < 1
Q-2  If price elasticity of demand is 
greater than 1, what would we call 
demand: elastic or inelastic?
Percentages allow us to have a 
measure of responsiveness that is 
independent of units, making 
comparisons of responsiveness among 
different goods easier.

124	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
$1 increase in the price of a $1,000 computer decreases the quantity demanded  
by 1, from 10 to 9. Say also that a $1 increase in the price of a pen, from $1 to $2, 
­decreases quantity demanded by 1—from 10,000 to 9,999. Using unit changes, the 
$1 price increase reduced the ­quantities demanded for both pens and computers by 1. 
But such a comparison of unit changes is not very helpful. To see that, ask 
­yourself if you were planning on raising your price, which good you’d rather be 
selling.
	
The computer price increased by 1/1,000 of its original price, a relatively small 
percentage increase, and quantity demanded declined by 1/10 of original sales, a 
large percentage decline. The percentage decline in quantity demanded exceeded 
the ­percentage rise in price, so your total revenue (Price × Quantity) would 
­decrease. The percentage increase in price of pens was relatively large— 
100 percent—and the ­percentage decline in quantity demanded was relatively 
small—1/100 of 1 percent. So if you raise the price of pens, total revenue ­increases. 
Clearly, if you’re raising your price in these examples, you’d rather be selling pens 
than computers.
	
By using percentages, this is made clear: With computers, a 0.1 percent increase in 
price decreases quantity demanded by 10 percent, so the elasticity is 100. With pens, a 
100 percent increase in price decreases quantity demanded by 0.01 percent—an 
­elasticity of 0.0001.
Calculating Elasticities
To see that you’ve got the analysis down, calculate price elasticity of demand or ­supply 
in the following three real-world examples:
Case 1: When the City of London raised the daily toll motorists pay to drive in 
central London by 46 percent, the number of motorists driving in central London 
fell by 3 percent.
Case 2: In the 1980s, when gasoline prices rose by 10 percent in Washington, 
D.C., the quantity of gasoline demanded there fell by 40 percent.
Case 3: When the minimum wage in Vermont rose by 11 percent, the quantity of 
labor supplied for relevant jobs increased by about 1.7 percent.
In the first case, price elasticity of demand is 0.07. The quantity of motorists in 
­London did not change much when the toll was increased. Elasticity was less than 1, 
so ­demand was inelastic. In the second case, price elasticity of demand is 4. The 
quantity of gas demanded in Washington, D.C., responded by a lot to a relatively 
small change in gas prices. Elasticity was greater than 1, so demand was elastic. The 
price elasticity of supply in the third case is 0.16. The quantity of labor supplied did 
not respond much to the change in wage. Elasticity was less than 1, so supply was 
inelastic.
	
Let’s now calculate some elasticities graphically. Let’s begin by determining the 
price elasticity of demand between points A and B in Figure 6-1(a).
	
The demand curve in the figure is a hypothetical demand for WolfPack Simulation 
Software. You can see that as the price of the software rises from $20 to $26, the quan-
tity demanded falls from 14,000 to 10,000 units a year. To determine the price elasticity 
of demand, we need to determine the percentage change in quantity and the percentage 
change in price. In doing so, there is a small problem that is sometimes called the 
­endpoint problem: The percentage change differs depending on whether you view 
the change as a rise or a decline. For example, say you calculate the rise in price 
from $20 to $26, starting from $20. That gives you a percentage increase in price of 

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
125
[(20 − 26)/20] × 100 = 30 percent. If, however, you calculate that same change in 
price, $6, as a fall in price from $26 to $20, the percentage decrease in price is 
[(26 − 20)/26] × 100 = 23 percent. The easiest way to solve this problem is to use the 
average of the two end values to calculate percentage change. In our example, instead 
of using 20 or 26 as a starting point, you use (20 + 26)/2, or 23. So the percentage 
change in price is
P2 −P1
1⁄2(P1 + P2) = (26 −20)
23
× 100 = 26 percent
Similarly, the percentage change in quantity is
Q2 −Q1
1⁄2(Q1 + Q2) = (10 −14)
12
× 100 = −33 percent
Having done this, we can calculate elasticity as usual by dividing the percentage 
change in quantity by the percentage change in price:1
Elasticity = Percentage change in quantity
Percentage change in price
= −33
26 = 1.27
The elasticity of demand between points A and B is approximately 1.3. This means that 
a 10 percent increase in price will cause a 13 percent fall in quantity demanded. Thus, 
demand between A and B is elastic.
Economists use the average of the two 
end values to get around the endpoint 
problem.
FIGURE 6-1 (A AND B)  Graphs of Elasticities
In (a) we are calculating the elasticity of the demand curve between A and B. We essentially calculate the midpoint and use that midpoint to 
calculate percentage changes. This gives us a percentage change in price of 26 percent and a percentage change in quantity of 33 percent, 
for an elasticity of 1.27. In (b) the percentage change in price is 10.53 percent and the percentage change in quantity is 1.87 percent, giving 
an elasticity of 0.18.
Price
(a)  Elasticity of Demand
Quantity of software
(in thousands)
$26
23
20
0
C
B
A
Demand
Wage per hour
(b)  Elasticity of Supply
Quantity of workers
$5.00
4.75
4.50
0
C
B
A
(midpoint)
Supply
10
12
14
484
476 480
1I drop the negative sign because, as discussed earlier, economists talk about price elasticity of  
demand as a positive number.

126	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
Other Examples
In Figure 6-1(b) I go through another example, this time using the supply elasticity 
from case 3 given in the previous section. Say that, initially, the Vermont minimum 
wage was $9 an hour; it was then raised to $10 an hour. The average of the two endpoints 
is $9.50 and so the percentage change in price is (1.00/9.50) × 100 = 10.53 percent. The 
initial ­quantity of labor supplied that I estimated for my area in Vermont was 476; the 
rise in the ­minimum wage increased that number to 484, which gives us a percentage 
change in quantity of (8/480) × 100 = 1.67 percent. To calculate the elasticity of supply, 
­divide the percentage change in quantity by the percentage change in price to get 
1.67/10.53 = 0.16. A 10 percent rise in the minimum wage will bring about a 1.6 percent 
increase in quantity of labor supplied. The labor supply at the minimum wage in ­Vermont 
is inelastic.
	
Learning the mechanics of calculating elasticities takes some practice, so in the 
figure to the left are three additional examples, leaving the calculations for you.
a.  Move from A to B on the demand curve.
b.  Move from C to D on the demand curve.
c.  Move from E to F on the supply curve.
Now that you’ve calculated them (you have, haven’t you?), here are the 
answers upside down: 
Elasticity Is Not the Same as Slope
There are two important points to remember about elasticity and supply 
and demand curves. The first is that elasticity is related to (but is not the 
same as) slope, and the second is that elasticity changes along straight-line 
demand and supply curves.
Elasticity Is Related to Slope 
Let’s begin with the first point. 
The relationship between elasticity and slope is the following: The steeper 
the curve becomes at a given point, the less elastic is supply or demand. 
The limiting examples of this are a vertical curve (most steep), shown in Figure 6-2(a), 
and a horizontal (least steep) curve, shown in Figure 6-2(b).
The vertical demand curve shown in Figure 6-2(a) demonstrates how a change in 
price leads to no change in quantity demanded. Economists describe this curve as 
­perfectly inelastic—quantity does not respond at all to changes in price 
(E = 0). Curves that are vertical are perfectly inelastic. The demand curve shown in 
Figure 6-2(b), in contrast, is horizontal. A change in price from above or below P0 
­results in an infinitely large increase in quantity demanded. This curve is ­perfectly 
elastic, reflecting the fact that quantity responds enormously to changes in price 
(E = ∞). Horizontal curves are perfectly elastic. From these extreme cases, you can 
see that steeper (more vertical) curves at a given point are more inelastic and less steep 
(more horizontal) curves at a given point are more elastic. Elasticity, however, is not 
the same as slope. The second point illustrates this well.
Elasticity Changes along Straight-Line Curves 
On straight-line sup-
ply and demand curves, slope does not change, but elasticity does. Figure 6-2(c and d) 
shows how elasticity changes along demand and supply curves. At the price intercept of 
the demand curve in Figure 6-2(c), demand is ­perfectly elastic (ED = ∞); elasticity 
becomes smaller as price declines until it becomes perfectly ­inelastic (ED = 0) at the quan-
tity intercept. At one point along the demand curve, ­between an elasticity of infinity and 
zero, demand is unit ­elastic—the percentage change in quantity equals the percentage 
Q-3  What is the approximate 
elasticity between points A and B  
on the graph below?
a = 4; b = 0.54; c = 0.67
Q-4  Your study partner, Nicole, has 
just stated that a straight-line demand 
curve is inelastic. How do you respond?
4
3
2
1
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 
B 
A 
Quantity
Price
Price
Quantity 
$10
9
7
5
3
2
1
C
D
F
E
B
A
a
b
c
Supply
Demand
5
10 15
25
40
50

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
127
change in price (E = 1). In Figure 6-2(c) demand is unit elastic at a price of $5. To con-
firm this, calculate elasticity of demand between $4 and $6. The percentage change in 
price is (2/5) × 100 = 40 percent, and the percentage change in quantity is (2/5) × 100 = 
40 percent. The point at which demand is unit elastic divides the demand curve into two 
sections—an elastic portion (ED > 1) above the point at which demand is unit elastic 
and an inelastic portion (ED < 1) below the point at which demand is unit elastic.
	
The change in elasticity along a supply curve is less dramatic. At the point on a 
straight-line supply curve that intercepts the price axis, supply is perfectly ­elastic  
(ES = ∞). Points become less elastic as you move out along the supply curve. At the 
point on a straight-line supply curve that intercepts the quantity axis, supply is perfectly 
inelastic (ES = 0); it becomes more elastic as you move out along the supply curve. 
These changes are labeled in Figure 6-2(d). I leave it to you to ­determine what happens 
to the elasticity of the supply curve if the supply curve intercepts the origin. (Hint: See 
the Added Dimension box “Geometric Tricks for Estimating Price Elasticity.”)
FIGURE 6-2 (A–D)  Elasticities and Supply and Demand Curves
In (a) and (b), two special elasticity cases are shown. A perfectly inelastic curve is vertical; a perfectly elastic curve is horizontal. In 
(c) and (d), I show how elasticity generally varies along both supply and demand curves. Along demand curves, it always goes from infinity 
at the vertical-axis intercept to zero at the horizontal-axis intercept. How elasticity of supply varies depends on which axis the supply 
curve intersects. If it intersects the vertical axis, elasticity starts at infinity and declines, and eventually approaches 1. If it intersects 
the horizontal axis, it starts at zero and increases, and eventually approaches 1. The one exception is when the supply curve intersects 
the origin. A good exercise is to determine what happens to elasticity in that case.
Price
Perfectly inelastic 
demand curve
0
Quantity
Price
Perfectly elastic
demand curve
P0
0
Quantity
(c)  Elasticity along a Demand Curve
1 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
ED = ∞
ED > 1
ED = 1
ED < 1
ED = 0
(d)  Elasticity along a Supply Curve
(a)  Perfectly Inelastic Demand Curve
(b)  Perfectly Elastic Demand Curve
1 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
ES declines
ES = 0
ES rises
Quantity
Quantity
S1
S0
Elasticity 
declines along 
the demand curve 
as we move toward 
the quantity axis
ES = ∞
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Price
$10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Price
$10

128	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
Five Terms to Describe Elasticity
As a review, the five terms to describe elasticity along a curve are listed here from 
most to least elastic:
1.	Perfectly elastic: Quantity responds enormously to changes in price (E = ∞).
2.	Elastic: The percentage change in quantity exceeds the percentage change in 
price (E > 1).
3.	Unit elastic: The percentage change in quantity is the same as the percentage 
change in price (E = 1).
4.	Inelastic: The percentage change in quantity is less than the percentage change 
in price (E < 1).
5.	Perfectly inelastic: Quantity does not respond at all to changes in price (E = 0).
	
Now that you have seen that elasticity changes along straight-line supply and 
demand curves, the first point—that elasticity is related to but not the same as slope—
should be clear. Whereas elasticity changes along a straight-line curve, slope does not.
Substitution and Elasticity
Now that you know how to measure elasticity, let’s consider some of the factors that 
are likely to make demand more or less elastic, that is, more or less responsive to price.
	
How responsive quantity demanded will be to changes in price can be summed up 
in one word: substitution. As a general rule, the more substitutes a good has, the more 
elastic is its demand.
Five elasticity terms are:
1.	 Perfectly elastic (E = ∞).
2.	 Elastic (E > 1).
3.	 Unit elastic (E = 1).
4.	 Inelastic (E < 1).
5.	 Perfectly inelastic (E = 0).
The most important determinant of price 
elasticity of demand is the number of 
substitutes for the good.
Thinking Like a Modern Economist
Why Do So Many Prices End in 99 Cents?
The traditional economic assumption is 
that a 1 percent change in price, say 
from $1.01 to $1.00, is the close equiva-
lent to a similar 1 percent change in 
price, say from $1.00 to 99 cents. Both 
should have almost identical effects. 
­Behavioral economists have found that 
that is not the case; people react more 
to a fall in price from $1.00 to 99 cents 
than they do to a fall in price from $1.01 
to $1.00. That’s why we see so many 
prices that end in 99 cents. People per-
ceive a $4.00 price as much higher 
than a $3.99 price, and they buy much 
more at $3.99. So the elasticity is much 
greater for price declines from $1.00 to 
$0.99 than from $1.01 to $1.00. This is a 
predictably irrational behavior.
Another predictably irrational behavior involves a 
zero price—when goods are free. People seem to react 
quite differently to a zero price than to other prices. In 
an experiment, behavioral economists 
Kristina Shampanies and Dan Ariely 
­offered to sell people one  of two 
­chocolates—a ritzy Lindt Chocolate 
truffle for 15 cents or a Hershey kiss for 
1 cent. Seventy-three percent chose 
the truffle and 27 percent chose the 
Kiss. Then they ­reduced the price of 
both chocolates by a penny—the Lindt 
chocolate to 14 cents and the Kiss to 
FREE. The effect on demand was enor-
mous. Now only 31 percent chose the 
Lindt and 69 percent chose the Her-
shey Kiss. A zero price seems to have 
a big effect on the quantity demanded.
Firms know that people react to 
zero prices in this manner, and they 
try to take advantage of it all the time. 
For example, they offer “free” goods that aren’t really 
free; buy one and get one free sells a lot more 
goods than cutting price by 50 percent.
© Erica S. Leeds RF

129
	
The reasoning is as follows: If a good has substitutes, a rise in the price of that good 
will cause the consumer to shift consumption to those substitute goods. Put another way, 
when a satisfactory substitute is available, a rise in that good’s price will have a large 
effect on the quantity demanded. For example, I think a Whopper is a satisfactory substi-
tute for a Big Mac. If most people agree with me, when the price of Big Macs rises people 
will switch from Big Macs to Whoppers. The demand for Big Macs would be very elastic.
Substitution and Demand
The number of substitutes a good has is affected by several factors. Four of the most 
important are:
1.	The time period being considered.
2.	The degree to which a good is a luxury.
ADDED DIMENSION
Quantity
Price
S2
S3
S1
Unit
elastic
Elastic
Inelastic
• If the extension intersects the vertical (price) axis, as 
does S1, all points on the supply curve have an 
elasticity greater than 1; the supply curve is elastic.
• If the extension intersects the horizontal (quantity) 
axis, as does S2, all points on the supply curve have 
an elasticity less than 1; the supply curve is inelastic.
• If the extension intersects the two axes at the origin, 
the supply curve has an elasticity of 1; the supply 
curve has unit elasticity.
If you combine these tricks with a knowledge that a per-
fectly elastic supply or demand curve is horizontal and 
crosses the price axis, and a perfectly inelastic supply or 
demand curve is vertical and crosses the quantity axis, 
you can even remember which is which. If a straight-line 
supply curve crosses the quantity axis, all points on it are 
inelastic; if it crosses the price axis, all points on it are elas-
tic. Similarly, the top half of the demand curve (the part that 
crosses the price axis) is elastic; the bottom half (the part 
that crosses the quantity axis) is inelastic.
Geometric Tricks for Estimating Price Elasticity
There are a couple of useful tricks to determine whether a 
point on a straight-line supply or demand curve is elastic 
or inelastic. The trick with demand is the following: (1) De-
termine where the demand curve intersects the price and 
quantity axes. (2) At a point midway between the origin 
and the quantity line ­intersection, draw a vertical line back 
up to the demand curve. The point where it intersects the 
demand curve will have an elasticity of 1; it will be unit 
elastic; all points to the left of that line (in the graph below, 
at a price above $4) will be elastic, and all points to the 
right of that (a price below $4) will be inelastic.
Quantity
1 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Perfectly elastic
Elastic
Unit elastic
Inelastic
Perfectly inelastic
Price
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
$10
	
To determine whether a straight-line supply curve is 
elastic or inelastic you simply extend it to one of the axes, 
as in the following graph. The point at which this extension 
intersects the axes indicates the elasticity of the supply 
curve:
© Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit

130	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
3.	The market definition.
4.	The importance of the good in one’s budget.
These four reasons are derivatives of the substitution factor. Let’s consider each to see why.
	
1.  The time period being considered:  The larger the time interval considered, or 
the longer the run, the more elastic is the good’s demand. There are more substitutes in 
the long run than in the short run. That’s because the long run provides more ­alternatives. 
Consider when the price of rubber went up significantly during World War II. In the 
short run, rubber had few substitutes; the demand for rubber was inelastic. In the long 
run, however, the rise in the price of rubber stimulated research for ­alternatives. Today 
automobile tires, which were made of all rubber when World War II broke out, are 
made from almost entirely synthetic materials. In the long run, demand was very elastic.
	
2.  The degree to which a good is a luxury:  The less a good is a necessity, the 
more elastic is its demand. Because by definition one cannot do without necessities, 
they tend to have fewer substitutes than do luxuries. Insulin for a diabetic is a ­necessity; 
the demand is highly inelastic. Chocolate Ecstasy cake, however, is a luxury. A variety 
of other luxuries can be substituted for it (for example, cheesecake or a ball game).
	
3.  The market definition:  As the definition of a good becomes more specific, 
demand becomes more elastic. If the good we’re talking about is broadly defined (say, 
transportation), it has few substitutes and demand will be inelastic. If you want to get 
from A to B, you need transportation. If the definition of the good is narrowed—say, 
to “transportation by bus”—there are more substitutes. Instead of taking a bus, you can 
walk, ride your bicycle, or drive your car. In that case, demand is more elastic.
	
4.  The importance of the good in one’s budget:  Demand for goods that represent 
a large proportion of one’s budget is more elastic than demand for goods that represent a 
small proportion of one’s budget. Goods that cost very little relative to your total expendi-
tures aren’t worth spending a lot of time figuring out whether there’s a good substitute. An 
example is pencils. Their low price means most people would buy just as many even if 
their price doubled. Their demand is inelastic. It is, however, worth spending lots of time 
looking for substitutes for goods that take a large portion of one’s income. The demand for 
such goods tends to be more elastic. Many colleges have ­discovered this as they tried to 
raise tuition when other colleges did not. The demand curve they faced was elastic.
How Substitution Factors Affect Specific Decisions
Let’s consider how some of the substitution factors affect a specific decision. Let’s say 
you’ve been hired by two governments (the city of Washington, D.C., and the U.S. 
government) to advise them about the effect that raising the gas tax by 10 percent will 
have on tax revenues. You look at the three factors that affect elasticity of demand.
	
In your report to the two governments, you would point out that in the short run 
demand is less elastic than in the long run, since people aren’t going to trade in their 
gas-guzzling cars for fuel-efficient cars immediately in response to a 10 percent rise in 
gas taxes—partly because they can’t afford to, partly because they don’t want to, and 
partly because not that many fuel-efficient cars are available to buy at the moment. 
When the time comes, however, that they would ordinarily purchase a new car, they’re 
likely to switch to cars that are more fuel-efficient than their old cars, and to switch as 
much as they can to forms of transportation that are more fuel-efficient than cars. In 
the long run the demand will be far more elastic.
	
The second point you’d note is that gasoline is generally considered a necessity, 
although not all driving is necessary. However, since gasoline is only a small part of 
the cost of driving a car, demand will probably tend to be inelastic.
	
The third factor (how specifically the good is defined) requires special care. It 
makes your recommendations for the government of the city of Washington, D.C., and 
The more substitutes, the more elastic 
the demand and the more elastic the 
supply.
Q-5  What are four important factors 
affecting the number of substitutes a 
good has?
Q-6  In the long run would you 
expect demand to be more or less 
elastic?
In the long run, demand generally 
becomes more elastic.

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
131
the U.S. government quite different from each other. For the U.S. government, which 
is interested in the demand for gasoline in the entire United States, gasoline has a 
­relatively inelastic demand. The general rule of thumb is that a 1-cent rise in tax will 
raise tax revenues by $1 billion. That inelasticity can’t be carried over to the demand 
for gasoline in a city such as Washington, D.C. Because of the city’s size and location, 
people in Washington have a choice. A large proportion of the people who buy gas in 
Washington can as easily buy gas in the adjacent states of Maryland or Virginia. 
­Gasoline in Washington is a narrowly defined good and therefore has a quite elastic 
demand. A rise in price will mean a large fall in the quantity of gas demanded.
	
I mention this point because someone forgot about it when the city of Washington, 
D.C., raised the tax on a gallon of gasoline by 8 cents, a rise at that time of about 
10 percent (this was case 2 in our discussion of calculating elasticities). In ­response, 
monthly gasoline sales in Washington fell from 16 million gallons to less than 11 mil-
lion gallons, a 40 percent decrease! The demand for gas in Washington was not inelas-
tic, as it was for the United States as a whole; it was very elastic (ED = 4). 
Washingtonians went elsewhere to buy gas.
	
The fact that smaller geographic areas have more elastic demands limits how 
highly state and local governments can tax goods relative to their neighboring locali-
ties or states. Where there are tax differences, new stores open all along the border and 
existing stores expand to entice people to come over that border and save on taxes. For 
example, the liquor tax is higher in Vermont than in New Hampshire, so it isn’t sur-
prising that right across the border from Vermont, New Hampshire has a large number 
of liquor stores. Here’s one final example: If you look at license plates in Janzen 
Beach, Oregon (right across the Washington state border), you’ll see a whole lot of 
Washington license plates. Why? If you answered that it likely has something to do 
with ­differential sales taxes in Washington and Oregon, you’ve got the idea.
Elasticity, Total Revenue, and Demand
Knowing elasticity of demand is useful to firms because from it they can tell whether the 
total revenue will go up or down when they raise or lower their prices. The total revenue 
a supplier receives is the price he or she charges times the quantity he or she sells. (Total 
revenue equals total quantity sold multiplied by the price of the good.) Elasticity tells 
sellers what will happen to total revenue if their price changes. Specifically:
•	 If demand is elastic (ED > 1), a rise in price lowers total revenue. (Price and 
total revenue move in opposite directions.)
•	 If demand is unit elastic (ED = 1), a rise in price leaves total revenue unchanged.
•	 If demand is inelastic (ED < 1), a rise in price increases total revenue. (Price 
and total revenue move in the same direction.)
The relationship between elasticity and total revenue is no mystery. There’s a very 
logical reason why they are related, which can be seen most neatly by recognizing 
that total revenue (P × Q) is represented by the area under the demand curve at that 
price and quantity. For example, at point E on the demand curve in Figure 6-3(a), the 
total revenue at price $4 and quantity 6 is the area designated by the A and B rectan-
gles, $24.
	
If we increase price to $6, quantity demanded decreases to 4, so total revenue is 
still $24. Total revenue has remained constant, so the demand curve from point E to 
point F is unit elastic. The new total revenue is represented by the A and C rectangles. 
The difference between the old total revenue (A and B) and the new total revenue 
(A and C) is the difference between the rectangles B and C. Comparing these rectangles 
provides us with a visual method of estimating elasticities.
Q-7  If demand is inelastic and a firm 
raises price, what happens to total 
revenue?

132	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
	
Figure 6-3(b) shows an inelastic range; Figure 6-3(c) shows a highly elastic range. 
While in Figure 6-3(b) the slope of the demand curve is the same as in Figure 6-3(a), 
we begin at a different point on the demand curve (point G). If we raise our price from 
$1 to $2, quantity demanded falls from 9 to 8. The gained area (rectangle C) is much 
greater than the lost area (rectangle B). In other words, total revenue increases signifi-
cantly, so the demand curve between points H and G is highly inelastic.
	
In Figure 6-3(c) the demand curve is again the same, but we begin at still another 
point, J. If we raise our price from $8 to $9, quantity demanded falls from 2 to 1. The 
gained area (rectangle C) is much smaller than the lost area (rectangle B). In other 
words, total revenue decreases significantly, so the demand curve from points J to K is 
highly elastic.
Total Revenue along a Demand Curve
The way in which elasticity changes along a demand curve and its relationship to total 
revenue can be seen in Figure 6-4. When output is zero, total revenue is zero; similarly, 
when price is zero, total revenue is zero. That accounts for the two endpoints of the total 
revenue curve in Figure 6-4(b). Let’s say we start at a price of zero, where ­demand is 
­perfectly inelastic. As we increase price (decrease quantity demanded), total revenue 
increases significantly. As we continue to do so, the increases in total revenue become 
smaller until finally, after output of Q0, total revenue actually starts decreasing. It ­continues 
decreasing at a faster and faster rate until finally, at zero output, total revenue is zero.
	
As an example of where such calculations might come in handy, recall the vanity 
license plates that we used to illustrate the law of demand in Chapter 4. A rise in the 
price of vanity plates of about 29 percent, from $30 to $40, decreased the quantity 
demanded about 64 percent, from 60,334 to 31,122, so the price elasticity of demand 
was about 0.64/0.29 = 2.2. Since demand was elastic, total revenue fell. Specifically, 
total revenue fell from $1,810,020 ($30 × 60,334) to $1,244,880 ($40 × 31,122).
With elastic demands, a rise in  
price decreases total revenue. With 
inelastic demands, a rise in price 
increases total revenue.
J
K
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9
Quantity
(c)  Elastic
Gained revenue
G
H
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9
Quantity
(b)  Inelastic
Lost
revenue
Demand
(a)  Unit Elastic
Quantity
E
F
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9
Gained revenue
Lost
revenue
Demand
C
A
B
Gained revenue
C
A
B
C
B
A
Lost
revenue
Demand
Price
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
$10
Price
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
$10
Price
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
$10
FIGURE 6-3 (A, B, AND C)  Elasticity and Total Revenue
Total revenue is measured by the rectangle produced by extending lines from the demand curve to the price and quantity axes. The 
change in total revenue resulting from a change in price can be estimated by comparing the sizes of the before and after rectangles. If 
price is being raised, total revenue increases by rectangle C and decreases by rectangle B. As you can see, the effect of a price rise on total 
revenue differs significantly at different points on a demand curve; (a) shows an almost unitary elastic range, (b) shows an inelastic range, 
and (c) shows an elastic range.

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
133
Income and Cross-Price Elasticity
There are many elasticity concepts besides the price elasticity of demand and the price 
elasticity of supply. Since these other elasticities can be useful in specifying the effects 
of shift factors on the demand for a good, I will introduce you to two of them: income 
elasticity of demand and cross-price elasticity of demand.
Income Elasticity of Demand
The most commonly used of these other elasticity terms is income elasticity of ­demand. 
Income elasticity of demand is defined as the percentage change in demand divided 
by the percentage change in income. Put another way,
Income elasticity of demand = Percentage change in demand
Percentage change in income
It tells us the responsiveness of demand to changes in income. (Notice I used demand, 
not quantity demanded, to emphasize that in response to a change in anything but the 
price of that good, the entire demand curve shifts; there’s no movement along the 
­demand curve.) An increase in income generally increases one’s consumption of 
­almost all goods, although the increase may be greater for some goods than for others. 
Normal goods—goods whose consumption increases with an increase in income—
have income elasticities greater than zero.
	
Normal goods are sometimes divided into luxuries and necessities. Luxuries are 
goods that have an income elasticity greater than 1—their percentage increase in 
­demand is greater than the percentage increase in income. For example, say your 
­income goes up 10 percent and you buy 20 percent more songs from iTunes. The 
Income elasticity of demand shows the 
responsiveness of demand to changes 
in income.
Q-8  If a good’s consumption 
increases with an increase in income, 
what type of good would you call it?
FIGURE 6-4 (A AND B)  How Total Revenue Changes
Total revenue is at a maximum when elasticity equals 1, as you 
can see in (a) and (b). When demand is elastic, total revenue 
decreases with an increase in price. When demand is inelastic, 
total revenue increases with an increase in price.
Price
Total revenue
Elastic range ED > 1
ED = 1
Inelastic range ED < 1
Q0
Quantity
(a)
0
0
Q0
Quantity
(b)
Demand
TR 
TR    
TR constant   
TR constant
    
TR    
TR  
Inelastic  (ED < 1)
Unit elastic  (ED = 1)
Elastic  (ED > 1)
Price Rise   
Price Decline
Relationship between
Elasticity (E) and Total Revenue (TR)

134
­income elasticity of iTunes music is 2; thus, iTunes music is a luxury good. Economist 
Robert Fogel estimates income elasticity for health care to be 1.6 and, therefore, it is a 
luxury. Alternatively, say your income goes up by 100 percent and your demand for 
shoes goes up by 50 percent. Your income elasticity for shoes would be 0.5. Shoes are 
a necessity—a good that has an income elasticity between 0 and 1. The consumption 
of a necessity rises by a smaller proportion than the rise in income. Economists 
­estimate the income elasticity of all food to be 0.2; food is a necessity.
	
It is even possible that an increase in income can cause a decrease in the consump-
tion of a particular good. Unlike normal goods, which have a positive income elasticity 
of demand, these goods have a negative income elasticity of demand. The term applied 
to such goods is inferior goods—goods whose consumption ­decreases when income 
increases. In some circumstances, potatoes could be an ­example of an inferior good. 
As income goes up, people might so significantly shift their consumption toward meat 
and away from potatoes that their total consumption of potatoes decreases. A recent 
study by a Stanford economist found tortillas to be an inferior good in Mexico.
	
Income elasticity for most goods is different in the short run than in the long run. 
The income elasticity for foreign travel, for example, is estimated to be 0.2 in the short 
run and 3.0 in the long run. Short-run decisions to travel abroad may be motivated by 
factors other than income such as business trips or family emergencies. Foreign travel 
decisions in the long run are likely to be part of vacation plans and people choose from 
a variety of locations, both domestic and foreign. In the short run, people often save 
high proportions of their increases in income, so most goods, other than impulse 
goods, such as furniture, have low short-run income elasticities. To avoid this problem, 
economists generally focus on long-run income elasticities.
Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand
Cross-price elasticity of demand is another frequently used elasticity concept. It 
tells us the responsiveness of demand to the change in prices of related goods. 
Q-9  Label each of the following 
goods as a luxury, necessity, or inferior 
good. Income elasticity is given for 
each.
a.	 Dental services: 1.6
b.	 Beer: 0.8
c.	 Baloney: −0.15
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Where do firms get the information they need to calculate 
elasticities? Think of the grocery store where you can get 
a special buyer’s card; the checkout clerk scans it and you 
get all the discounts. And the card is free! Those grocery 
stores are not just being nice. When the clerk scans your 
purchases, the store gets information 
that is forwarded to a central processing 
unit that can see how people react to dif-
ferent prices. This information allows 
firms to fine-tune their pricing—raising 
prices on goods for which the demand is 
inelastic and lowering prices on goods 
for which the demand is elastic.
	
Alternatively, think of the warranty 
cards that you send in when you buy a 
new computer or a new TV. The information goes into the 
firms’ databases and is used by their economists in future 
price-setting decisions.
Empirically Measuring Elasticities
	
How do stores use this information? One way is that they 
develop user profiles, and run promotions on items such as 
laundry products, carbonated soft drinks, cereal, and sev-
eral other items for which consumers are most responsive 
to price (i.e., the demand is elastic). This attracts shoppers 
to their store. Then, the stores place 
high-profit novelty items that consumers 
generally do not compare across stores, 
but for which demand is inelastic, in 
prominent in-store displays. It’s not quite 
a bait-and-switch strategy, but it is a strat-
egy to lure shoppers into a store for a 
“deal” but still end up selling higher-priced 
products than their competitors. Another 
way stores calculate the elasticity of de-
mand for goods is to initially charge different prices in dif-
ferent stores, and then, once they have determined the 
elasticity, they choose a price that maximizes total profit.
© AP Photo/Nell Redmond

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
135
Cross-price elasticity of demand is defined as the percentage change in demand 
divided by the percentage change in the price of a related good. Put another way,
Cross-price elasticity of demand =
Percentage change in demand
Percentage change in price of a related good
	
Let’s consider an example. Say the price of Apple iPhones rises. What is likely to 
happen to the ­demand for Android phones? It is likely to rise, so the cross-price elas-
ticity between the two is positive. Positive cross-price elasticities of demand mean the 
goods are substitutes—goods that can be used in place of one another. When  
the price of a good goes up, the demand for the substitute goes up. Another example is 
the ­demand for beef and pork, with an estimated cross-price elasticity of 0.1. When the 
price of beef rises, ­consumers will switch to pork. 
	
Most goods are substitutes for one another, so most cross-price elasticities are pos-
itive. But not all. To see that, let’s consider another example: Say the price of hot dogs 
rises; what is likely to happen to the demand for ketchup? If you’re like me and use lots 
of ketchup on your hot dogs, as you cut your consumption of hot dogs, you will also 
cut your consumption of ketchup. Ketchup and hot dogs are not substitutes but rather 
complements. Complements are goods that are used in conjunction with other goods. 
A fall in the price of a good will increase the demand for its complement. The cross-
price elasticity of complements is negative. As practice, list pairs of goods that are 
complements, make another list of substitutes, and compare lists with a study partner. 
On the list might be name and generic brands of the same product. If you’ve identified 
these as substitutes, you’re on the right track.
Some Examples
To make sure you’ve got these concepts down, see Figure 6-5, which demonstrates two 
examples. In Figure 6-5(a), income has risen by 20 percent, increasing demand at price P0 
from 20 to 26. To determine the income elasticity, we must first determine the percentage 
change in demand. We calculate the percentage change in demand to be 6/[(20 + 26)/2] = 
(6/23) × 100 = 26 percent. The percentage change in income is 20, so the income elasticity 
is 26/20, or 1.3.
	
In Figure 6-5(b), a 33 percent fall in the price of pork has caused the demand for 
beef to fall by 3.8 percent—from 108 to 104 at a price of P0. The cross-price elasticity 
of demand is 3.8/33 = 0.12.
Cross-price elasticity of demand shows 
the responsiveness of demand to 
changes in prices of related goods.
Substitutes have positive cross-price 
elasticities; complements have negative 
cross-price elasticities.
FIGURE 6-5 (A AND B)  Calculating 
Elasticities
Shift factors, such as income or the 
price of another good, shift the 
entire demand curve. To calculate 
these elasticities, we see how much 
demand will shift at a constant price 
and then calculate the relevant 
elasticities.
P0
D0 D1
D0
D1
P0
(a)  Calculating Income Elasticity
Quantity
26
20
Shift due
to rise in income
P0
P0
104
108
(b)  Calculating Cross-Price Elasticity
Shift due to fall
in price of pork
Quantity of beef
Price
Price of beef

136
The Power of Supply/Demand 
Analysis
Now that you’ve got the elasticity terms down, let’s 
­consider some examples that demonstrate the power of 
supply/demand analysis when it is combined with the con-
cept of elasticity. Let’s start with some easy cases.
When Should a Supplier Not  
Raise Price?
First, let’s say a firm is trying to increase its profits and 
hires you to tell it whether it should raise or lower its price. 
The firm knows that it faces an inelastic demand. Should it 
raise its price?
I hope your answer was: Definitely yes. How can I 
be so sure the correct answer is yes? Because I remem-
bered the discussion of the relationship between price 
elasticity of demand and total revenue. With an inelastic 
demand, the percentage change in quantity is less than 
the percentage change in price, so total revenue must 
increase with an increase in price. Total costs also will 
­decrease, so profits—total revenues minus total costs—
also must increase.
Along those same lines, consider a university president 
thinking of raising tuition. Say that raising tuition by  
10 percent will decrease the number of students by 1 per-
cent. What’s the price elasticity? The percentage change in 
quantity is 1 percent; the percentage change in price is 10. 
Dividing the percentage change in quantity by the percent-
age change in price, we have an elasticity of 0.1. That’s an 
inelastic demand (ED < 1), so raising tuition will increase 
the university’s total revenue.
But if a 10 percent rise in tuition will decrease the enrollment by 25 percent, 
the elasticity will be large (2.5). In response to an increase in tuition, the univer-
sity’s total revenue will decrease significantly. When you have an elastic demand, 
you should hesitate to increase price. To make sure you’re following the argument, 
explain the likely effect an elastic demand will have on lowering tuition. (Your 
argument should involve the possibility of increasing profit.) If you’re not follow-
ing the argument, go back to the section on elasticity and total revenue, especially 
Figure 6-3.
	
When the long-run and short-run elasticities differ, the analysis becomes 
­somewhat more complicated. Consider the case of a local transit authority that, 
faced with a budget crisis, increased its fares from $1.50 to $2.50. The rise in 
revenue during the first year helped the authority balance its books. But in the 
two years following, ridership declined so much that total revenue fell. What hap-
pened? In the short-run, commuters had few substitutes to taking the bus—
demand was relatively inelastic, so that total revenue rose when fares were 
increased. But, as time went on, commuters found alternative ways to get to work. 
Long-run demand was more ­elastic in this case, so much so that total revenue 
declined.
Q-10  A firm faces an elastic  
demand for its product. It has come  
to an economist to advise it on  
whether to lower its price. The  
answer she gives is: Maybe. Why is  
this the right answer?
A REMINDER
A Review of Various Elasticity 
Terms
Income elasticity of demand is defined as the per-
centage change in demand divided by the ­percentage 
change in income.
Income elasticity
of demand
=
Percentage
change in demand
Percentage change
in income
Cross-price elasticity of demand is defined as the per-
centage change in demand divided by the ­percentage 
change in the price of a related good.
	
Cross-price
elasticity
of demand
=
Percentage
change in demand
Percentage change in
price of a related good
Complement: Cross-price elasticity of demand  
is negative.
Substitute: Cross-price elasticity of demand  
is positive.
Normal good: Income elasticity of demand  
is positive.
Luxury: Income elasticity is greater than 1.
Necessity: Income elasticity is less than 1.
Inferior good: Income elasticity of demand is negative.

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
137
Elasticity and Shifting Supply and Demand
Let’s now turn to shifts in supply and demand. Knowing the elasticity of the supply 
and demand curves allows us to be more specific about the effects of shifts in supply 
and demand.
	
Figure 6-6 demonstrates the relative effects of supply shifts on equilibrium price 
and quantity under different assumptions about elasticity. As you can see, the more 
elastic the demand, the greater the effect of a supply shift on quantity, and the smaller 
the effect on price. Going through a similar exercise for demand shifts with various 
supply elasticities is also a useful exercise. If you do so, you will see that the more 
elastic the supply, the greater the effect of a demand shift on quantity, and the smaller 
the effect on price.
	
To be sure that you have understood elasticity, consider the following three obser-
vations about price and quantity and match them with the three descriptions of supply 
and demand:
a.	 Price rises significantly; quantity 
hardly changes at all.
b.	Price remains almost constant; 
quantity increases enormously.
c.	 Price falls significantly; quantity 
hardly changes at all.
1.	Demand is highly elastic; supply 
shifts out.
2.	Supply is highly inelastic; 
demand shifts out.
3.	Demand is highly inelastic; sup-
ply shifts out.
The answers are: 
a–2; b–1; c–3
Conclusion
I’ll stop the exercises here. As you can see, the elasticity concept is important. Econo-
mists use it all the time when discussing supply and demand.
	
However, the elasticity concept is not easy to remember, or to calculate, so working 
with it takes some practice. It becomes a bit less forbidding if you remember that elas-
ticity is what your shorts lose when they’ve been through the washer and drier too 
many times. If a relationship is elastic, price (for price elasticity) exerts a strong pull 
on quantity. If it’s inelastic, there’s little pull on quantity.
FIGURE 6-6 (A AND B)  Effects of 
Shifts in Supply on Price and 
Quantity
In (a), supply intersects demand 
where demand is inelastic and the 
quantity effects are relatively small. 
In (b), demand is more elastic and 
the quantity effects are much larger. 
In general the effects of shifts in 
supply on equilibrium quantity and 
price are determined by the 
elasticity of demand.
S1
S0
(a)  Inelastic Supply and Inelastic Demand
P0
P1
Q1
Q0
Demand
S1
S0
(b)  Inelastic Supply and Elastic Demand
P1
P0
Q0
Q1
Quantity
Price
Price
Quantity
Demand

138	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
Key Terms
complement
cross-price elasticity of 
demand
elastic
income elasticity of 
demand
inelastic
inferior good
luxury
necessity
normal good
perfectly elastic
perfectly inelastic
price elasticity of demand
price elasticity of supply
substitute
unit elastic
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Determine the price elasticity of demand if, in response to an 
increase in price of 10 percent, quantity demanded decreases 
by 20 percent. Is demand elastic or inelastic?  (LO6-1)
	 2.	 A firm has just increased its price by 5 percent over last 
year’s price, and it found that quantity sold remained the 
same.  (LO6-1)
	a.	 What is its price elasticity of demand?
	b.	 How would you calculate it?
	c.	 What additional information would you search for 
­before you did your calculation?
	 3.	 When tolls on the Dulles Airport Greenway were ­reduced 
from $1.75 to $1.00, traffic increased from 10,000 to 
• Elasticity is defined as percentage change in quantity 
divided by percentage change in some variable that 
affects demand (or supply) or quantity demanded (or 
supplied). The most common elasticity concept used 
is price elasticity.  (LO6-1)
	
ED = Percentage change in quantity demanded
Percentage change in price
	
ES = Percentage change in quantity supplied
Percentage change in price
• Elasticity is a better descriptor than is slope because it 
is independent of units of measurement.  (LO6-1)
• To calculate percentage changes in prices and quanti-
ties, use the average of the end values.  (LO6-1)
• Five elasticity terms are elastic (E > 1); inelastic  
(E < 1); unit elastic (E = 1); perfectly inelastic (E = 0); 
and perfectly elastic (E = ∞).  (LO6-1)
• The more substitutes a good has, the greater its 
­elasticity.  (LO6-2)
• Factors affecting the number of substitutes in demand 
are (1) time period considered, (2) the degree to which 
the good is a luxury, (3) the market definition, and (4) 
the importance of the good in one’s ­budget.  (LO6-2)
• The most important factor affecting the number of 
substitutes for supply is time. As the time interval 
lengthens, supply becomes more ­elastic.  (LO6-2)
Summary
• Elasticity changes along straight-line demand and 
supply curves. Demand becomes less elastic as we 
move down along a demand curve.  (LO6-3)
• When a supplier raises price, if demand is inelastic, 
total revenue increases; if demand is elastic, total 
­revenue decreases; if demand is unit elastic, total  
revenue remains constant.  (LO6-3)
• Other important elasticity concepts are income ­elasticity 
and cross-price elasticity of ­demand.  (LO6-4)
	
Income
elasticity
of demand
= Percentage change in demand
Percentage change in income
	
Cross-price
elasticity
of demand
=
Percentage
change in demand
Percentage change in
price of a related good
• Knowing elasticities allows us to be more precise 
about the qualitative effects that shifts in ­demand and 
supply have on prices and ­quantities.  (LO6-5)
• The more elastic the demand, the greater the effect of 
a supply shift on quantity and the smaller the effect 
on price.  (LO6-5)
• The more elastic the supply, the greater the effect of a 
demand shift on quantity and the smaller the effect on 
price.  (LO6-5)

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
139
Price
Quantity
$40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
C
E
F
D
G
H
B
A
10
20 30
40
50
60
70
80 90 100 110 120
	 7.	 Which of the pairs of goods would you expect to have a 
greater price elasticity of demand?  (LO6-2)
	a.	 Cars, transportation.
	b.	 Housing, leisure travel.
	c.	 Rubber during World War II, rubber during the entire 
20th century.
	 8.	 Economists have estimated the following transportation 
elasticities. For each pair, explain possible reasons why 
the elasticities differ.  (LO6-2)
	a.	 Elasticity of demand for buses is 0.23 during peak 
hours and 0.42 during off-peak hours.
	b.	 Elasticity of demand for buses is 0.7 in the short run 
and 1.5 in the long run.
	c.	 Elasticity of demand for toll roads is 4.7 for low-income 
commuters and 0.63 for high-income commuters.
	 9.	 Kean University Professor Henry Saffer and Bentley 
­University Professor Dave Dhaval estimated that if the 
­alcohol industry increased the prices of alcoholic 
­beverages by 100 percent underage drinking would fall  
26,000 trips a day. Assuming all changes in quantity were 
due to the change in price, what is the price elasticity of 
demand for the Dulles Airport ­Greenway?  (LO6-1)
	 4.	 One football season Domino’s Pizza, a corporate sponsor 
of the Washington Redskins (a football team), offered to 
reduce the price of its medium-size pizza by $1 for every 
touchdown scored by the Redskins during the previous 
week. Until that year, the Redskins weren’t scoring many 
touchdowns. Much to the surprise of Domino’s, in one 
week in 1999, the Redskins scored six touchdowns. 
(Maybe they like pizza.) Domino’s pizzas were selling  
for $2 a pie! The quantity of pizzas demanded soared the 
following week from 1 pie an hour to 100 pies an hour. 
What was price elasticity of demand for Domino’s 
pizza?  (LO6-1)
	 5.	 Which has greater elasticity: a supply curve that goes 
through the origin with slope of 1 or a supply curve that 
goes through the origin with slope of 4?  (LO6-1)
	 6.	 Calculate the elasticity of the designated ranges of supply 
and demand curves on the following graph.  (LO6-1)
by 28 percent and underage binge drinking would fall by 
51 percent.  (LO6-2)
	a.	 What is the elasticity of demand of underage drinking 
and binge drinking?
	b.	 What might explain the difference in elasticities?
	10.	 A newspaper recently lowered its price from 50 cents to 
30 cents. As it did, the number of newspapers sold in-
creased from 240,000 to 280,000.  (LO6-3)
	a.	 What was the newspaper’s elasticity of demand?
	b.	 Given that elasticity, did it make sense for the 
­newspaper to lower its price?
	c.	 What would your answer be if much of the firm’s 
­revenue came from advertising and the higher the 
­circulation, the more it could charge for ­advertising?
	11.	 Once a book has been written, would an author facing an 
inelastic demand curve for the book prefer to raise or 
lower the book’s price? Why?  (LO6-3)
	12.	 University of Richmond Professor Erik Craft analyzed 
the states’ pricing of vanity plates. He found that in 
California, where vanity plates cost $28.75, the  
elasticity of demand was 0.52. In Massachusetts, 
where vanity plates cost $50, the elasticity of  
demand was 3.52.  (LO6-3)
	a.	 Assuming vanity plates have zero production cost and 
his estimates are correct, was each state collecting the 
maximum revenue it could from vanity plates? ­Explain 
your reasoning.
	b.	 What recommendation would you have for each state 
to maximize revenue?
	c.	 If these estimates are correct, which state was most likely 
to be following a politically unsupportable policy?
	d.	 Assuming the demand curves were linear, graphically 
demonstrate your reasoning in a and b.
	13.	 How is elasticity related to the revenue from a sales 
tax?  (LO6-3)
	14.	 Suppose average movie ticket prices are $8.50 and 
­attendance is 1.2 billion. The price of tickets rises to 
$9.50 and attendance rises to 1.4 billion.  (LO6-3)
	a.	 What happened to total revenue?
	b.	 If you were to estimate elasticity from these figures, 
what would your estimate be?
	c.	 What provisos would you offer about your estimate  
of elasticity?
	15.	 Which of the following producers would you expect to 
support a tax on beer? Which would not? Explain your 
answer.  (LO6-4)
	a.	 Producers of hard liquor. Cross-price elasticity with 
beer: −0.11.
	b.	 Producers of wine. Cross-price elasticity with beer: 0.23.
	16.	 For each of the following goods, state whether it is a normal 
good, a luxury, a necessity, or an inferior good. Explain your 
answers.  (LO6-4)
	a.	 Vodka.	
	
d.  Perfume.
	b.	 Table salt.		
e.  Beer.
	c.	 Furniture.		
f.  Sugar.

140	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
	17.	 For each of the following pairs of goods, state whether the 
cross-price elasticity is likely positive, negative, or zero. 
Explain your answers.  (LO6-4)
	a.	 Lettuce, carrots.
	b.	 Housing, furniture.
	c.	 Nike sneakers, Puma sneakers.
	d.	 Jeans, formal suits.
	18.	 When the price of ketchup rises by 15 percent, the 
­demand for hot dogs falls by 1 percent.  (LO6-4)
	a.	 Calculate the cross-price elasticity of demand.
	b.	 Are the goods complements or substitutes?
	c.	 In the original scenario, what would have to happen to 
the demand for hot dogs for us to conclude that hot 
dogs and ketchup are substitutes?
	19.	 Calculate the income elasticities of demand for the 
­following:   (LO6-4)
	a.	 Income rises by 20 percent; demand rises by  
10 percent.
	b.	 Income rises from $30,000 to $40,000; demand increases 
(at a constant price) from 16 to 19.
	20.	 Would you expect a shift in supply to have a greater ­effect 
on equilibrium quantity in the short run or in the long 
run? Explain your answer.  (LO6-5)
	21.	 Would a shift in demand have a greater effect on the 
­percentage change in equilibrium quantity for a straight-
line supply curve that intersects the quantity axis or the 
price axis?  (LO6-5)
	22.	 For each of the following assume that the supply curve 
shifts while the demand curve remains constant. What is 
the direction of the supply shift and relative elasticity of 
demand?  (LO6-5)
	a.	 Price remains nearly constant. Quantity increases 
enormously.
	b.	 Price falls enormously. Quantity does not change.
	c.	 Price rises slightly. Quantity remains nearly constant.
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 The text tells us that there are long-run elasticities and 
short-run elasticities.
	a.	 How long is the long run and how long is the short run?
	b.	 What meaning do the elasticity measures have if you 
don’t know those lengths? (Austrian)
	 2.	 In this chapter, we learn that most new cars aren’t sold at 
their list price but are sold at a discount and that this al-
lows dealerships to charge more to customers with inelas-
tic demand. At the same time, studies have shown that 
retail car dealerships systematically offer substantially 
better prices on identical cars to white men than they do 
to blacks or women. (Source: Ian Ayres, “Fair Driving: 
Gender and Race Discrimination in Retail Car Negotia-
tions,” Harvard Law Review 104 (1991): 817–72.)
	a.	 Why do you think this happens?
	b.	 In this example, does the fact that customers have  
different elasticities allow for racial or sexual 
­discrimination? ­(Feminist)
	 3.	 Early economists made a distinction between needs and 
wants. Needs were economists’ concern; wants were of  
far less importance.
	a.	 Is such a distinction useful?
	b.	 Would making such a distinction change the nature of 
economic analysis?
	c.	 Does the fact that the book makes no distinction ­between 
luxuries and necessities other than in their elasticity of 
demand reflect a bias in economic ­analysis? (Religious)
	 4.	 In the chapter, you saw that an increase in Vermont’s  
minimum wage stimulated a small quantity response.
	a.	 What does this tell you about the nature of the labor 
market in Vermont? (Hint: Think carefully and criti-
cally about the conditions shaping worker options and 
their responses to changes in wages.)
	b.	 What policy implications does your answer to a sug-
gest? (Institutionalist)
	 5.	 If elasticities are constantly changing as the time period gets 
longer, how do managers use a measure of elasticity of de-
mand to determine the price they charge? If they don’t use 
elasticities, how do they set price? (Post-Keynesian)
	 6.	 Price elasticity is not just a technical economic concept. It also 
reflects the distribution of economic power—the ­bargaining 
power and economic opportunities of buyers and sellers.
	a.	 When suppliers (for example, landlords or energy 
companies) hold disproportionate power over buyers, 
or consumers (for example, employers in low-wage la-
bor markets) hold disproportionate power over sellers, 
what meaning do elasticities have?
	b.	 Should anything be done about those inequities? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 In the box “Geometric Tricks for Estimating Price Elastic-
ity,” there are three statements about the elasticities of 
straight-line supply curves. One of those statements is that 
supply curves intersecting the quantity axis are inelastic. 
Can you prove that that is true by algebraic manipulation 
of the elasticity formula?

	
Chapter 6 ■ Describing Supply and Demand: Elasticities	
141
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 Price elasticity of supply = Percentage change in quantity 
supplied divided by percentage change in price = 8/4 = 2.   
(LO6-1)
	 2.	 If price elasticity of demand is greater than 1, by defini-
tion demand is elastic.  (LO6-1)
	 3.	 The percentage change in quantity is 100 (8/8 × 100) and the 
percentage change in price is 100 (2/2 × 100). Elasticity, 
therefore, is approximately 1 (100/100).  (LO6-1)
	 4.	 I tell her that she is partially right (for the bottom part of 
the curve), but that elasticity on a straight-line demand 
curve changes from perfectly elastic at the vertical-axis 
intersection to perfectly inelastic at the horizontal-axis 
­intersection.  (LO6-1)
	 5.	 Four factors affecting the number of substitutes in ­demand 
are (1) time period considered, (2) the degree to which the 
good is a luxury, (3) the market definition, and (4) impor-
tance of the good in one’s budget.  (LO6-2)
	 6.	 I would expect demand to be more elastic in the long run 
because people have more time to find substitutes and 
change their behavior.  (LO6-2)
	 7.	 If demand is inelastic, total revenue increases with an 
­increase in price.  (LO6-3)
	 8.	 If consumption increases with an increase in income, the 
good is a normal good.  (LO6-4)
	 9.	 a.   Luxury.
	b.	 Necessity.
	c.	 Inferior good.  (LO6-4)
	10.	 With an elastic demand, lowering price will increase total 
revenue because it will increase sales by more than the 
change in price. But producing more also will increase 
costs, so information about total revenue is not enough to 
answer the question.  (LO6-5)
	 2.	 In the 1960s, coffee came in 1-pound cans. Today, most 
coffee comes in 11-ounce cans.
	a.	 Can you think of an explanation why?
	b.	 Can you think of other products besides coffee whose 
standard size has shrunk? (Often the standard size is 
supplemented by a “supersize” alternative.)
	 3.	 Why would an economist be more hesitant about making 
an elasticity estimate of the effect of an increase in price 
of 1 percent than an increase in price of 50 percent?
	 4.	 A major cereal producer decides to lower price from 
$3.60 to $3 per 15-ounce box. 
	a.	 If quantity demanded increases by 18 percent, what is 
the price elasticity of demand?
	b.	 If, instead of lowering its price, the cereal producer 
­increases the size of the box from 15 to 17.8 ounces, 
what would you expect that the response would have 
been? Why?
	 5.	 Economists have estimated the demand elasticity for motor 
fuel to be between 0.4 and 0.85.
	a.	 If the price rises 10 percent and the initial quantity 
sold is 10 million gallons, what is the range of esti-
mates of the new quantity demanded?
	b.	 In carrying out their estimates, they came up with dif-
ferent elasticity estimates for rises in price than for 
falls in price, with an increase in price having a larger 
elasticity than a decrease in price. What hypothesis 
might you propose for their findings? 
	 6.	 Demand for “prestige” college education is generally 
considered to be highly inelastic. What does this suggest 
about tuition increases at prestige schools in the future? 
Why don’t colleges raise tuition by amounts even greater 
than they already do?
	 7.	 In 2004, Congress allocated over $20 billion to fight 
­illegal drugs. About 60 percent of the funds was 
­directed at reducing the supply of drugs through 
­domestic law enforcement and interdiction. Some crit-
ics of this approach argue that supply-side approaches 
to reduce the drug supply actually help drug producers. 
	a.	 Demonstrate graphically the effect of supply-side  
measures on the market for illegal drugs.
	b.	 Explain how these measures affect drug producers. 
(Hint: Consider the elasticity of demand.)
	c.	 Demonstrate the effect of demand-side measures such 
as treatment and prevention on the market for illegal 
drugs.
d.	 How does the shift in demand affect the profitability 
of producers?
	 8.	 In the discussion of elasticity and raising and lowering 
prices, the text states that if you have an elastic ­demand, 
you should hesitate to raise your price, and that lower-
ing price can possibly increase profits (total revenue  
minus total cost). Why is the word possibly used?
	 9.	 Colleges have increasingly used price sensitivity to 
­formulate financial aid. The more eager the student, the 
less aid he or she can expect to get. Use elasticity to ex-
plain this phenomenon. Is this practice justified?
	10.	 If there were only two goods in the world, can you say 
whether they would be complements or substitutes? 
­Explain your answer.

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO7-1	 Show how equilibrium 
maximizes producer and 
consumer surplus.
LO7-2	 Demonstrate the burden of 
taxation to consumers and 
producers.
LO7-3	 Explain how government 
intervention is a type of 
implicit taxation.
LO7-4	 Define rent seeking and 
show how it is related to 
elasticity.
“
”
Collecting more taxes than is  
absolutely necessary is legalized 
robbery.
—Calvin Coolidge
chapter 7
Taxation and Government Intervention
John Baptiste Colbert, finance minister for Louis 
XIV, once said that the art of taxation consists of 
plucking the goose so as to obtain the largest amount 
of feathers with the least amount of squawk. In figur-
ing out what taxes will bring about the least amount of 
squawk, politicians have turned to economists, who, in 
turn, turn to their models. Previous chapters introduced 
you to those models; in this chapter, we apply the mod-
els to taxation. As we do that, you’ll see that when 
­combined with the concept of elasticity, supply and 
demand become powerful tools. We’ll see how by consid-
ering the burden of taxation and government interven-
tion into markets.
Producer and Consumer Surplus
We begin our discussion of the effects of taxation and government interven-
tion by looking at how economists measure the benefits of the market to 
consumers and producers; the benefit can be seen by considering what the 
supply and demand curves are telling us. Each of these curves tells us how 
much individuals are willing to pay (in the case of demand) or accept (in 
the case of supply) for a good. Thus, in Figure 7-1(a), a consumer is willing 
to pay $8 each for 2 units of the good. The supplier is willing to sell 2 units 
for $2 apiece.
	
If the consumer pays less than what he’s willing to pay, he ends up with a 
net gain—the value of the good to him minus the price he actually paid for the 
good. Thus, the distance between the demand curve and the price he pays is the 
net gain for the consumer. Economists call this net benefit consumer surplus—
the value the consumer gets from buying a product less its price. It is represented 
by the area underneath the demand curve and above the price that an individual 
pays. Thus, with the price at equilibrium ($5), consumer surplus is represented by 
the blue area.
	
Similarly, if a producer receives more than the price she would be will-
ing to sell the good for, she too receives a net benefit. Economists call this 
gain producer surplus—the price the producer sells a product for less the cost 
© Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
143
of producing it. It is represented by the area above the supply curve but below the 
price the producer receives. Thus, with the price at equilibrium ($5), producer 
surplus is represented by the brown area.
	
What’s good about market equilibrium is that it makes the combination of con-
sumer and producer surpluses as large as it can be. To see this, say that for some 
reason the equilibrium price is held at $6. Consumers will demand only 4 units of 
the good, and some suppliers are not able to sell all the goods they would like. The 
combined producer and consumer surplus will decrease, as shown in Figure 7-1(b). 
The gray triangle represents lost consumer and producer surplus. In general, a devi-
ation of price from equilibrium lowers the combination of producer and consumer 
surplus. This is one of the reasons economists support markets and why we teach 
the supply/demand model. It gives us a visual sense of what is good about markets: 
By allowing trade, markets maximize the combination of consumer and producer 
surplus.
	
For straight-line demand curves, the amount of surplus can be determined by cal-
culating the area of the relevant triangle or rectangle. For example, in Figure 7-1(a), 
the consumer surplus triangle has a base of 5 and a height of 5 (10 − 5). Since the area 
of a triangle is ½ (base × height), the consumer surplus is 12.5 units. Alternatively, in 
Figure 7-1(b), the lost surplus from a price above equilibrium price is 1. This is calcu-
lated by determining that the height of the triangle (looked at sideways) is 1 (5 − 4) 
and the base is 2 (6 − 4), making the area of lost surplus ½ × 2 × 1 = 1. In this 
case, the consumer and producer share in the loss equally. The higher price 
­transfers 4 units of surplus from consumer to producer, calculated by determining 
the area of the rectangle (base × height) created by the origin and output, 4, and 
Q-1  If price moves from 
disequilibrium to equilibrium, what 
happens to the combination of  
producer and consumer surplus in  
the market? 
Price
$10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Quantity 
Supply
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
(a)
(b) 
Price
$10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Quantity 
Supply
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Consumer
surplus
Producer
surplus
Demand
Demand
Transferred
surplus
Consumer
surplus
Producer
surplus
Lost
surplus
FIGURE 7-1 (A AND B)  Consumer and Producer Surplus
Market equilibrium price and quantity maximize the combination of consumer surplus (shown in blue) and producer surplus (shown in 
brown) as demonstrated in (a). When price deviates from its equilibrium, as in (b), combined consumer and producer surplus falls. The 
gray shaded region shows the loss of total surplus when price is $1 higher than equilibrium price.

144
prices 5 and 6, which equals (6 − 5) × (4 − 0) = 4. This leaves the consumer with 
8 units of surplus.1
	
To fix the ideas of consumer and producer surplus in your mind, let’s consider a 
couple of real-world examples. Think about the water you drink. What does it cost? 
Almost nothing. Given that water is readily available, it has a low price. But since 
you’d die from thirst if you had no water, you are getting an enormous amount of con-
sumer surplus from that water. Next, consider a ballet dancer who loves the ballet so 
much he’d dance for free. But he finds that people are willing to pay to see him and 
that he can receive $4,000 a performance. He is receiving producer surplus.
Burden of Taxation
Now that you have seen how market equilibrium can provide benefits to producers and 
consumers, as measured by producer and consumer surplus, let’s see how taxes affect that 
surplus. You already know that taxes on suppliers shift the supply curve up by the amount 
of the tax. In most cases, equilibrium price (including the tax) rises and equilibrium quan-
tity ­declines. Taxes on consumers shift the “after-tax” demand curve down by the amount 
of the tax, lowering ­equilibrium quantity and also lowering the price paid to suppliers. But 
the price ­demanders pay inclusive of the tax rises (which is why the equilibrium quantity 
­demanded falls). In both cases, taxes reduce, or limit, trade. Economists often talk about 
the limitations that taxes place on trade as the burden of taxation. Figure 7-2 provides the 
basic framework for understanding the burden of taxation. For a given good, a per-unit tax 
t paid by the supplier increases the price at which suppliers are ­willing to sell that good. The 
A tax paid by the supplier shifts the 
supply curve up by the amount of 
the tax.
1Additional explanations of how to calculate consumer and producer surplus can be found via 
­McGraw-Hill Connect®
ADDED DIMENSION
	
Economists get around part of the problem theoretically 
­either by assuming individuals have the same tastes or by 
­assuming that income can be costlessly redistributed. This 
­separates the issue of equity from the issue of efficiency. In 
­practice, economists recognize that these conditions do not 
hold. They know that, in the real world, it is extraordinarily 
­difficult to redistribute income. You can’t go up to Bill Gates 
and tell him, “Hey, you need to give $10 billion to some poor 
­people,” ­although he might choose to do it on his own, as 
he has done.
	
For this reason economists are careful to apply the 
producer and consumer surplus analysis only to those 
cases where the conditions are “reasonable” approxi-
mations of ­reality—where distributional and taste issues 
do not play a big role in a policy recommendation. Of 
course, economists may disagree on what are “reason-
able” approximations of reality. That is why economic 
policy is an art, not a science.
The Ambiguity of Total Surplus
The consumer and producer surplus concepts do not treat 
all wants equally. How much importance your surplus is 
given depends on how much income you have. People 
with lots of income generate lots of surplus; people with 
little income generate little. So if Mr. Rich likes gold-plated 
toilets but ­dislikes bread, while Mr. Poor likes bread but 
has little money to spend on bread, it is gold-plated toilets, 
not bread, that will generate the most consumer surplus.
	
What this means is that if income were distributed dif-
ferently, our measure of consumer surplus would change. 
Let’s consider an extreme example to show the problems 
this can present. Say we have two individuals, Jules and 
Jim, and two goods, apples and oranges. Jules likes only 
oranges and Jim likes only apples. If Jim has all the in-
come, only apples will provide any consumer surplus. 
Now, say that Jules has all the income. In that case, only 
oranges will provide any consumer surplus. More gener-
ally, when two individuals have different tastes, the way in 
which income is distributed between them can change the 
measure of consumer surplus.

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
145
effect of the tax is shown by a shift upward of the supply curve from S0 to S1. The equilibrium 
price of the good rises and the quantity sold declines.
	
Before the tax, consumers pay P0 and producers keep P0. Consumer surplus is rep-
resented by areas A + B + C, and producer surplus is represented by areas D + E + F. 
With the tax t, equilibrium price rises to P1 and equilibrium quantity falls to Q1. Con-
sumers now pay a higher price P1, but producers keep less, only P1 − t. Tax revenue 
paid equals the tax t times equilibrium quantity Q1, or areas B and D.
	
The total cost to consumers and producers is taxes they pay plus lost surplus 
because of fewer trades. Consumers pay area B in tax revenue and lose area C in con-
sumer surplus. Producers pay area D in tax revenue and lose area E in producer sur-
plus. The triangular area C + E represents a cost of taxation over and above the taxes 
paid to government. It is lost consumer and producer surplus that is not gained by 
government. The loss of consumer and producer surplus from a tax is known as dead-
weight loss. Deadweight loss is shown graphically by the welfare loss triangle—a 
geometric ­representation of the welfare cost in terms of misallocated resources caused 
by a ­deviation from a supply/demand equilibrium. Keep in mind that with the tax, 
quantity sold declines. The loss of welfare, therefore, represents a loss for those con-
sumers and producers who, because of the tax, no longer buy or sell goods.
	
The deadweight loss from taxes shows up in a variety of other ways. Say the 
­government establishes a property tax that increases with the number of floors a 
­building has, as Paris did in the 1700s. A three-story building was taxed a third higher 
than a two-story building. That will lead people to build in a way to minimize what are 
counted as floors. The Mansard roof—as shown in the photo in the margin—does this; 
it hides the top floor so that it looks like an attic, not a floor. Such roofs can be found 
throughout Paris. They are building in a style that is less efficient (in terms of the 
building’s function) than they would build without the tax. Building in a style that is 
less efficient in terms of function is another consequence of a tax, and is a type of 
deadweight loss.2
Q-2  Demonstrate the welfare loss of 
a tax when the supply is highly elastic 
and the demand is highly inelastic.
FIGURE 7-2  The Costs of Taxation
A per-unit tax t paid by the supplier 
shifts the supply curve up from S0 to 
S1. Equilibrium price rises from P0 to 
P1, and equilibrium quantity falls 
from Q0 to Q1. Consumer surplus is 
represented by areas A, B, and C 
before the tax and area A after the 
tax. Producer surplus is represented 
by areas D, E, and F before the tax 
and area F after the tax. Government 
collects tax shown by areas B and D. 
The tax imposes a deadweight loss, 
represented by the welfare loss 
triangle of areas C and E.
A
B
D
F
C
E
P1
P0
P1– t
Price
Q1
Q0
Quantity
Demand
S1
S0
t
© Royalty-Free/Corbis RF
Mansard roofs
2Interestingly, in terms of aesthetics, people have come to like the style of Paris roofs; it is one of 
the many things that make Paris distinct. Including aesthetics complicates the analysis enormously. 
Economic reasoning is based on the architectural view that form follows function.

146
	
The costs of taxation don’t end there. Resources must be devoted by government to 
administer the tax code and by individuals to comply with it. Firms and individuals 
­either spend hours filling out income tax forms or pay others to do so. Firms hire 
accountants and lawyers to take full advantage of any tax-code allowances. Adminis-
tration costs are often as much as 5 percent or more of the total tax revenue paid to 
government. Like the tax itself, these costs increase the price at which producers are 
willing to sell their goods, reducing quantity sold and further increasing welfare loss.
Who Bears the Burden of a Tax?
Taxes are like hot potatoes: Everyone wants to pass them on to someone else. Nobody 
wants to pay taxes, and there are usually large political fights about whom government 
should tax. For example, should the Social Security tax (mandated by the Federal 
Insurance Contributions Act, or FICA) be placed on workers or on the company that 
hires them? As you will see, the supply/demand framework gives an unexpected 
answer to this question.
Burden Depends on Relative Elasticity 
Let’s consider the issue of 
who bears the burden of a tax by looking at the example involving excise taxes intro-
duced in Chapter 5. There I defined an excise tax as a tax levied on a specific good 
The cost of taxation includes the direct 
cost of revenue paid, lost surplus, and 
administrative cost.
A REMINDER
What Goods Should Be Taxed?
What goods should be taxed depends on the goal of gov-
ernment. If the goal is to fund a program with as little loss 
as possible in consumer and producer surplus, then the 
government should tax a good whose supply or demand 
is inelastic. If the goal is to change behavior, taxes will  
be most effective if demand or supply is ­elastic. In 2011 
­Denmark implemented a “fat tax” to reduce consumption 
of goods with saturated fat to raise overall health among 
Danes. The effect was mixed. While some Danes switched 
to lower-fat dairy products, others crossed the border to 
Germany to do their grocery shopping and in 2012 
­Denmark repealed the tax. The effectiveness of a tax 
­depends on the elasticity of demand. As a quick review, 
use the following table:
	
Distributional issues also must be considered when de-
termining what goods are to be taxed. In general, the 
group with the relatively more inelastic supply or demand 
will bear a greater portion of the tax. The following table 
reviews these conclusions:
Goal of Government
Raise revenue, 
limit deadweight loss
Most Eﬀective When
Demand or supply is inelastic
Demand or supply is elastic
Change behavior
Both supply and 
demand elastic
Elasticity
Demand inelastic and
supply elastic
Supply inelastic and 
demand elastic
Shared; but the group
whose supply or demand
is more inelastic pays more
Who Bears the Burden?
Consumers
Producers

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
147
and gave the example of a luxury tax on expensive boats that the United States 
imposed in 1990. An excise tax can be levied on (physically paid by) the consumer 
or the seller.
	
The person who physically pays the tax, however, is not necessarily the person who 
bears the burden of the tax. Who bears the burden of the tax (also known as tax incidence) 
depends on who is best able to change his or her behavior in response to the tax, or who 
has the greater elasticity. Elasticity and supply/demand analysis let us answer the ques-
tion “Who will end up bearing the burden of the tax?” (More technically: “What is the 
incidence of the tax?”)
	
Figure 7-3(a) shows the case I considered in Chapter 5. A $10,000 per-unit tax 
levied on the supplier shifts the supply curve up from S0 to S1. That reduces quan-
tity supplied and quantity demanded by 90—from 600 to 510. The equilibrium 
price rises from $60,000 to $65,000. Suppliers are able to shift $5,000 of the total 
$10,000 per-unit tax onto consumers, leaving the suppliers the burden of the 
remaining $5,000.
	
Had we known elasticities at the market equilibrium, we could have stated, without 
additional calculations, that the tax burden would be shared equally. Specifically, sup-
pliers sold and consumers purchased 90 fewer boats, an approximate 15 percent reduc-
tion. The suppliers’ price fell by about 8 percent while the consumers’ price rose  
by about 8 percent, meaning the elasticity of both supply and demand was approxi-
mately 1.9.3 With equal elasticities, the tax burden will be divided equally.
	
In reality, the tax burden is rarely shared equally because elasticities are rarely 
equal. The relative burden of the tax follows this general rule: The more inelastic one’s 
relative supply and demand, the larger the burden of the tax one will bear. If demand 
were more inelastic, sellers would have been able to sell the boats at a higher price and 
The person who physically pays the tax 
is not necessarily the person who bears 
the burden of the tax.
Q-3  If a person has a highly 
elastic demand, will he likely bear a 
large or small percentage of the burden 
of a tax? 
D0
D1
Price of luxury boats (in thousands)
(c)  Consumer Pays Tax
Quantity of luxury boats 
55
60
65
510 600
Supply
S0
S1
Demand
(b)  Demand Is Inelastic
Quantity of luxury boats 
58
60
68
590 600
Price of luxury boats (in thousands)
(a)  Supplier Pays Tax
Quantity of luxury boats 
55
60
65
Demand
510 600
S0
S1
Tax
Price of luxury boats (in thousands)
Tax
Tax
FIGURE 7-3 (A, B, AND C)  Who Bears the Burden of a Tax?
In the general case, the burden of a tax is determined by the relative elasticities of supply and demand. The blue shaded area shows the 
burden on the consumer; the brown shaded area shows the burden on the supplier. This split occurs regardless of who actually pays the 
tax, as can be seen by noticing that the burden of the tax is equal in (a), where the supplier pays the tax, and in (c), where the consumer 
pays the tax. In (b) you can see how consumers with an inelastic demand bear a greater burden of the tax.
3There will be slight variations in the measured elasticities depending on how they are calculated. 

148	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
could have passed more of the tax along to the buyers. If supply were more inelastic, 
less of the tax would be passed along to buyers.
	
Figure 7-3(b) shows what the divisions would have been had the demand curve 
been highly inelastic. In this case, the price would rise more, the supplier would pay a 
lower proportion of the tax (the brown area), and the consumer would pay a much 
larger proportion (the blue area). The general rule about elasticities and the tax burden 
is this: If demand is more inelastic than supply, consumers will pay a higher percentage 
of the tax; if supply is more inelastic than demand, suppliers will pay a higher share. 
This rule makes sense—elasticity is a measure of how easy it is for the supplier and 
consumer to change behavior and substitute another good.
	
More specifically, we can calculate the fraction of the tax actually borne by the 
demander by dividing the price elasticity of supply by the sum of the price elasticities 
of supply and demand:
Fraction of tax borne by demander =
ES
ED + ES
Similarly, we can calculate the fraction of the tax borne by the supplier by dividing the 
price elasticity of demand by the sum of the price elasticities of supply and demand:
Fraction of tax borne by supplier =
ED
ED + ES
For example, say the price elasticity of supply is 4 and the price elasticity of 
demand is 1. In that case, the supplier will pay one-fifth [1/(1 + 4)] of the tax and 
the consumer will pay four-fifths [4/(1 + 4)] of the tax. This situation is shown in 
Figure 7-3(b).
	
The rule about the elasticities and the tax burden can lead to some unexpected con-
sequences of taxation. For example, the U.S. luxury tax on boats was initially imple-
mented as a way to tax the wealthy. It turned out, however, that the wealthy found 
substitutes for American-made boats; their demand was relatively elastic. They either 
purchased other luxury items or purchased their boats from foreign firms. U.S. boat 
manufacturers, ­however, couldn’t easily switch to producing other products. Their sup-
ply was inelastic. As a result, when they tried to pass on the cost increase to consum-
ers, their sales plummeted. They had to lower their price by almost as much as the tax, 
which meant that they were bearing most of the burden of the tax. As noted in Chapter 5, 
pressured by boat manufacturers, the government repealed the luxury tax on boats 
three years after it was instituted.
Who Pays a Tax Is Not Necessarily Who Bears the Burden 
The 
allocation of tax burden by relative elasticity means that it doesn’t matter who actually 
pays the tax and that, as I said earlier, the person who bears the burden can differ from 
the person who pays. To assure yourself that it doesn’t matter who pays the tax, ask 
yourself how your answer would have differed if the tax of $10,000 had been paid by 
the consumer. Figure 7-3(c) shows this case. Because the tax is paid by the consumer, the 
demand curve shifts down by the amount of the tax. As you can see, the results of the 
tax are identical. The percentage of the tax paid by the supplier and the consumer, after 
adjusting for the changes in supply and demand price, is independent of who ­actually 
makes the physical payment of the tax.
Tax Incidence and Current Policy Debates
Now let’s consider two policy questions in relation to what we have learned about tax 
incidence.
Tax burden is allocated by relative 
elasticities.
Q-4  How much of a $100 tax would 
a consumer pay if elasticity of demand 
is .2 and elasticity of supply is 1.8?
The burden is independent of who 
physically pays the tax.

149
Social Security Taxes 
The first policy question concerns the Social Security 
(or payroll) tax, which accounts for about 35 percent of federal government revenue. In 
2016, the Social Security and Medicare tax rate was 12.4 percent on wages up to an 
annual maximum wage of $118,000, and another 2.9 percent on all wages, no matter 
how high. As a political compromise, half of Social Security taxes are placed on the 
employee and half on the employer. But the fact that the law places the tax equally on 
both does not mean that the burden of the tax is shared equally between employees and 
employers. On average, labor supply tends to be less elastic than labor demand. This 
means that the Social Security tax burden is primarily on the employees, even though 
employees see only their own statutory portion of the Social Security tax on their pay stub.
	
Now, let’s say that you are advising a person running for Congress who has come 
up with the idea to place the entire tax on the employer and eliminate the tax on the 
employee. What will the effect of that be? Our tax incidence analysis tells us that, 
­ultimately, it will have no effect. Wages paid to employees will fall to compensate 
employers for the cost of the tax. This example shows that who is assessed the tax can 
be quite different than who actually bears the burden, or incidence, of the tax. The 
burden will be borne by those with the most inelastic supply or demand because they 
are less able to get out of paying the tax by substitution.
	
So what do you tell the candidate? Is the idea a good one or not? Although eco-
nomically it will not make a difference who pays the tax, politically it may be a ­popular 
proposal because individuals generally look at statutory assessment, not incidence. 
The candidate may gain significant support from workers, since they would no longer 
see a Social Security tax on their pay stub. The moral, then, is this: Politics often focuses 
on surface appearance; economics tries to get under the surface, and what is good econom-
ics is not always good politics.
Sales Taxes 
Our second policy question concerns sales taxes paid by retailers on 
the basis of their sales revenue. Say, for example, that the general sales tax is 6 cents 
on the dollar. Since sales taxes are broadly defined, consumers have little ability to 
Q-5  If Social Security taxes 
were paid only by employees, what 
would likely happen to workers’ pretax 
pay?
What makes sense politically is 
not always what makes sense 
economically.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
In almost all towns and counties, nearly 
­every year property taxes rise. College and 
university towns are no different. In 2006, 
the Orange County Board of Commissioners 
imposed an annual 7-cent property tax in-
crease per $100 assessed value on properties 
in Orange County, the county where the 
­University of North Carolina is located. 
UNC’s student newspaper, the Daily Tar 
Heel, covered the story and suggested that 
off-campus rents would surely rise.
	
Based on the tools you’ve learned in this 
chapter, you know that the answer to that is 
not “surely” but is, rather, that the answer 
depends on elasticities. In the short run, the supply of 
housing tends to be very inelastic. The demand for 
College Newspaper Editors Should Take More Economics
housing by students, however, is generally 
quite  elastic; they just haven’t got much 
money, and often can choose to live on 
campus in a dorm. So who will likely pay al-
most all the property tax? The owner of the 
house, which means that rents are unlikely 
to be significantly affected by the tax. To 
put some numbers on it, economists who 
study the tax incidence of property taxes 
have found that for every $1 increase in 
property taxes, about 88 cents is paid by 
­landlords and 12 cents is paid by renters, 
which  means that the renter’s share of 
the 7-cent per $100 tax increase on an apart-
ment valued at $100,000 amounts to about 70  cents 
a month.
© BananaStock/JupiterImages RF

150	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
substitute. ­Demand is ­inelastic and consumers bear the greater burden of the tax. 
Although stores could simply incorporate the tax into the price of their goods, most 
stores add the tax onto the bill after the initial sale is calculated, to make you aware of 
the tax. So even though economically, it doesn’t matter whether the tax is assessed on 
the store or on you, psychologically, it ­matters a lot.
Government Intervention as Implicit Taxation
Taxes are not the only way government affects our lives. For example, government 
establishes laws that dictate what we can do, what prices we can charge for goods, and 
what working conditions are and are not acceptable. This second part of the chapter 
continues the discussion of such issues, which began in Chapter 5. I show how the 
elasticity concept can help us talk about such interventions and how, using the pro-
ducer and consumer surplus framework, such interventions can be seen as a combina-
tion tax and subsidy that does not show up on government books.
	
To see how government intervention in the market can be viewed as a combination 
tax and subsidy, let’s first consider the two types of price controls mentioned in Chap-
ter 5: price ceilings and price floors.
Price Ceilings and Floors
As discussed in Chapter 5, an effective price ceiling is a government-set price below 
the market equilibrium price. It is in essence an implicit tax on producers and an 
­implicit subsidy to consumers. Consider the effect of a price ceiling on producer and 
consumer surplus, shown in Figure 7-4(a).
	
If the price were at the market equilibrium price, the total surplus would be the 
combination of the areas A through F. But with an effective price ceiling P1, the 
­quantity supplied falls from Q0 to Q1. The combined producer and consumer surplus is 
reduced by triangles C and E. The loss of surplus represents those individuals who 
would like to make trades—the individuals represented by the demand and supply 
curves between Q1 and Q0—but cannot do so because of the price ceiling.
Q-6  Demonstrate the effect of an 
effective price ceiling on producer 
and consumer surplus when both supply 
and demand are highly inelastic.
Price
(a)  Price Ceiling
Quantity
P0
Price ceiling = P1
Demand
Supply
A
B
D
E
C
F
(b)  Price Floor
Quantity
Price
Price ﬂoor = P2
P0
Demand
Supply
A
B
D
E
C
F
Q1
Q0
Q1
Q0
FIGURE 7-4 (A AND B)  Effect of Price Controls on Consumer and Producer Surplus
Price floors and price ceilings create deadweight loss just as taxes do. In (a) we see how a price ceiling, P1, transfers surplus D from producers 
to consumers. Price ceilings are equivalent to a tax on producers and a subsidy to consumers. In (b) we see how a price floor, P2, transfers 
surplus B from consumers to producers. With either a price floor or a price ceiling, areas C and E represent the welfare loss triangle.

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
151
	
This loss of consumer and producer surplus includes the welfare loss from taxation. 
That is not a coincidence. The price ceiling is a combination implicit tax on suppliers, 
shown by area D, and implicit subsidy to consumers of that same area. It is as if 
­government places a tax on suppliers when they sell the good, and then gives that tax 
revenue to consumers when they purchase the good.
	
Price floors have the opposite effect on the distribution of consumer and pro-
ducer ­surplus. Effective price floors—government-set prices above equilibrium 
price—transfer consumer surplus to producers. They can be seen as a tax on 
­consumers of area B and a subsidy to producers of that same area, as shown in 
­Figure 7-4(b). Price floors also impose a deadweight loss, shown by the welfare loss 
triangle, areas C and E.
The Difference between Taxes and Price Controls
While the effects of taxation and price controls are similar, there is an important differ-
ence: Price ceilings create shortages; taxes do not. The reason is that taxes leave people 
free to choose how much they want to supply and consume as long as they pay the tax. 
Taxes create a wedge between the price the consumers pay and the price the suppliers 
receive just large enough to equate quantity demanded with quantity supplied.
	
Since with price ceilings the price consumers pay is the same as the price suppliers 
receive, as long as the price ceiling is below equilibrium price, the desired quantity 
demanded will exceed the quantity supplied. Some method of rationing—limiting the 
demand or ­increasing the supply in the case of price ceilings, and limiting the supply 
or increasing the demand in the case of price floors—must be found. Because so far 
we have assumed that suppliers can choose how much or how little they want to sup-
ply, there are shortages. Such shortages create black markets—markets in which indi-
viduals buy or sell illegally. (Taxes also may create black markets if buyers and sellers 
attempt to evade the tax.)
Rent Seeking, Politics, and Elasticities
If price controls reduce total producer and consumer surplus, why do governments insti-
tute them? The answer is that people care about their own surplus and how the surplus 
is distributed more than they do about total surplus. As we have seen, price ceilings 
­redistribute surplus from producers to consumers, so if the consumers have the political 
power, there will be strong pressures to create price ceilings. Alternatively, if the suppli-
ers have the political power, there will be strong pressures to create price floors.
	
The possibility of transferring surplus from one set of individuals to another causes 
people to spend time and resources on doing so. For example, if criminals know that 
$1 million ransoms are commonly paid for executives, it will be worthwhile for them 
to figure out ways to kidnap executives—which happens in some developing and tran-
sitional economies. (That’s why all countries state that they will never pay ransoms; 
however, not all countries follow their stated policies.)
	
The possibility of kidnapping, in turn, causes executives to hire bodyguards, which 
in turn causes kidnappers to think of ingenious ways to kidnap (which in turn . . .). The 
result is that, as one group attempts to appropriate surplus from another group, enor-
mous amounts of resources are spent on activities that benefit no one.
	
The same reasoning holds for lobbying government. Individuals have an incentive 
to spend resources to lobby government to institute policies that increase their own sur-
plus. Others have an incentive to spend money to counteract those lobbying efforts. 
Activities designed to transfer surplus from one group to another are called rent-­
seeking activities. Rent-seeking activities require resources, and the net result is unpro-
ductive. Public choice economists—economists who integrate an economic analysis of 
A price ceiling is a combination implicit 
tax on suppliers and implicit subsidy to 
consumers.
Price ceilings create shortages;  
taxes do not.
Q-7  Would a firm’s research and 
development expenditures be classified 
as rent seeking?

152
politics with their ­analysis of the economy—argue that rent seeking through govern-
ment is significant, and that much of the transfer of surplus that occurs through govern-
ment intervention creates an enormous waste of resources. They argue that the taxes 
and the benefits of government programs offset each other and do not help society sig-
nificantly, but they do cost resources. These economists point out that much of the 
redistribution through government is from one group of the middle class to another 
group of the middle class.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
One way to deal with shortages is to require by law that 
­suppliers supply all the goods demanded at the ceiling price. 
The military draft is an example. A draft is a law that requires 
some people to serve a set period in the armed forces at 
whatever pay the government chooses. It has often been 
used as a way of meeting the military’s need for soldiers. 
The draft is a price ceiling combined with forced supply.
	
The effects of a draft are shown in the graph. A draft 
must be imposed when the wage offered by the army is 
­below equilibrium because the quantity of soldiers de-
manded exceeds the quantity supplied. In the graph, the 
offered wage W0 is below the equilibrium wage We. 
The market answer to the shortage would be to increase 
the wage to We, which would both reduce the quantity of 
soldiers demanded by ­government and increase the quan-
tity of people willing to ­become soldiers. How much the 
wage would need to be ­increased to bring about equilib-
rium depends on the elasticity of supply and demand. If 
both supply and demand are inelastic, then the pay will 
need to be increased enormously; if both are elastic, the 
pay will need to be increased only slightly.
	
The people who are proposing the draft suspect that 
both supply and demand are inelastic, in which case the 
market solution would be very expensive to the govern-
ment, requiring large increases in taxes. They argue that a 
draft is much cheaper, and requires lower taxes.
	
Our supply/demand analysis reveals the fallacy in that 
reasoning. It’s true that with a draft the government does not 
have to collect as much revenue as it would have to if it 
raised the wage to a market-clearing wage. But that doesn’t 
mean it’s costless ­because the draft places an implicit hidden 
tax on the draftees. By paying a lower-than-equilibrium wage 
and instituting a draft, which requires draftees to serve in the 
military whether they want to or not, the supply curve effec-
tively becomes the horizontal line at W0. Individuals drafted 
are implicitly taxed by the difference ­between the wage they 
would have received, We, in their ­alternative private em-
ployment and the military wage, W0. For example, when Elvis 
The Excess Burden of a Draft
Presley was drafted, he gave up a wage of over a million 
­dollars a year for a wage of about $5,000 a year. That is a 
large implicit tax on him. So, the draft imposes an implicit tax 
on draftees that doesn’t show up on the government books.
	
Who, you ask, gets the proceeds of the tax? Those pro-
ceeds are implicitly given to those who consume defense 
services. ­Specifically, in the graph, the brown shaded area is 
transferred from suppliers to consumers of national de-
fense. In this case, the welfare loss triangle is the shaded tri-
angle to the right of the market equilibrium. It represents 
the opportunities that the suppliers lose but that the de-
manders do not receive.
	
The welfare loss triangle shows only the minimum loss 
that the ceiling will create. The analysis assumes that the 
­individuals drafted will be those whose opportunity cost of 
being drafted is lowest. In fact, that is not the case. The 
actual amount of loss depends on how the draft selects 
individuals. If it selects individuals totally randomly (which, 
in principle, is how drafts are structured), it will draft some 
into the armed forces who would not consider serving 
even at the equilibrium wage (Elvis Presley, for example). 
Thus, the welfare loss is larger for interferences in the mar-
ket such as the draft than it is for an equivalent tax, al-
though it is ­difficult to specify precisely how much larger.
QS
QD = Draft
Supply
Demand
We
W0
Wage
Quantity of soldiers

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
153
Inelastic Demand and Incentives to Restrict Supply
To understand the rent-seeking process a bit better, let’s look more carefully at the 
­incentives that consumers and producers have to lobby government to intervene in 
the market. We’ll begin with suppliers. A classic example of the political pressures 
to limit supply is found in agricultural markets. Within the past century, new machin-
ery, new methods of farming, and hybrid seeds have increased the productivity of 
farmers ­tremendously. You might think that because farmers can now produce more 
at a lower cost, they’d be better off. But if you think that, you’re ignoring the interac-
tion of supply and demand. As advances in productivity increase supply, they do 
increase the quantity sold, but they also result in lower prices. Farmers sell more but 
they get less for each unit they sell. Because food is a necessity and has few substi-
tutes, the demand for many agricultural goods is inelastic. Since demand is inelastic, 
the price declines by a greater proportion than the rise in quantity sold, meaning that 
total revenue ­declines and the farmers are actually worse off. The situation is shown 
in Figure 7-5.
	
Because of the increase in supply, price declines from P0 to P1 and quantity sold 
increases from Q0 to Q1. The farmer’s revenue rises by area B but also falls by the 
larger area A. To counteract this trend, farmers have an incentive to get government 
to restrict supply or create a price floor, thereby raising their revenue. In fact, that’s 
what they did in the 1930s. Farmers then were instrumental in getting the govern-
ment to establish the Farm Board, a federal agency whose job was to manage pro-
ductivity of agricultural goods. The benefits of limiting competition are greatest for 
suppliers when demand is inelastic because price will rise proportionately more than 
quantity will fall.
	
Farmers have been very successful in lobbying government to restrict the supply 
of agricultural goods. Public choice economists have suggested that the reasons for 
farm groups’ success involve the nature of the benefits and costs. The groups that are 
hurt by agricultural subsidies are large, but the negative effect on each individual in 
that group is relatively small. Large groups that experience small costs per individ-
ual don’t provide a strong political opposition to a small group that experiences large 
gains. This seems to reflect a general rule of political economy in a democracy: 
When small groups are helped by a government action and large groups are hurt by 
that same action, the small group tends to lobby far more effectively than the large 
group; thus, policies tend to reflect the small group’s interest, not the interest of the 
large group.
Q-8  How can an increase in 
productivity harm suppliers?
The general rule of political 
economy states that small groups 
that are significantly affected by a 
government policy will lobby more 
effectively than large groups that 
are equally affected by that same policy.
FIGURE 7-5  Inelastic Demand and the 
Incentive to Restrict Supply
When demand is inelastic, increases in 
productivity that shift the supply curve to 
the right result in lower revenue for 
suppliers. Although suppliers gain area B, 
they lose the much larger area A. Suppliers 
have an incentive to restrict supply 
when demand is inelastic because, by 
doing so, they will increase their revenues.
Demand
P0
S0
B
A
P1
S1
Price
Q0 Q1
Quantity

154	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
	
This simple example provides us with an important insight about how markets 
work and how the politics of government intervention work. Inelastic demand creates 
an ­enormous incentive for suppliers either to pressure government to limit the quantity 
­supplied or to get together and look for other ways to limit the quantity supplied. The 
more inelastic demand is, the more suppliers have to gain by restricting supply.
	
Sometimes sellers can get government to limit quantity supplied through licensing. 
For example, to practice law, one needs a license, which is why lawyers can charge 
hundreds of dollars an hour. Other times sellers can limit supply by force. A well-
placed threat (“If you enter this market, I will blow up your store”) is often effective. 
In some developing economies, such threats are common. What stops existing suppli-
ers from making good on such threats? ­Government. But the government also creates 
opportunities for individuals to prevent others from entering the market. Therein lies a 
central problem of political economy. You need government to see that competition 
works—to ensure that existing suppliers don’t prevent others from entering the 
­market—but government can also be used to prevent competition and protect existing 
suppliers. Government is part of both the problem and the solution.
Inelastic Supplies and Incentives to Restrict Prices
Firms aren’t the only ones that can lobby government to intervene. Consider consum-
ers. When supply is inelastic, consumers can face significant price increases if their 
demand increases. Thus, when the supply of a good is inelastic and the demand for 
that good rises, prices will rise significantly and consumers will scream for price 
controls.
	
This is what happened in the New York City rent-control example (price ceil-
ings ­imposed on apartments) in Chapter 5. During World War II, an influx of short-
term ­workers into New York City increased demand for apartments. Because supply 
was inelastic, rents rose tremendously. To keep apartments affordable, the city 
capped rents.
	
Such controls are not costless. One of the results of rent control is an ongoing 
­shortage of apartments. As we noted earlier, effective price ceilings will cause a short-
age unless suppliers are forced to supply a market-clearing quantity. With the knowl-
edge of elasticities, you also know whether a large or small shortage will develop with 
a price ceiling and whether a large or small surplus will develop with a price floor.
	
To make sure you understand how elasticity can tell you the relative size of a 
­surplus or shortage when there are price controls, look at Figure 7-6, which shows 
three cases of price floors, each with different elasticities of supply and demand.
	
As you can see, all three cases create excess supply—surpluses—but the propor-
tional amount of excess supply depends on the elasticity. In Figure 7-6(a), supply and 
demand intersect at PE, where they are relatively elastic. There, the price floor, PF, 
leads to a relatively large surplus. The more elastic supply and demand, the larger the 
surplus or shortage created by price controls. Figure 7-6(b) represents an intermediate 
case: The intersection is where supply is elastic and demand is highly inelastic, and a 
­relatively smaller surplus is created by the price floor. In Figure 7-6(c), where the 
demand and supply curves intersect at relatively inelastic portions, the surplus ­created 
by the price floor is relatively small. A good exercise is to go through the same analy-
sis for price ceilings.
The Long-Run/Short-Run Problem of Price Controls
Now let’s combine our analysis of price controls with another insight from the 
­elasticity chapter—that in the long run, supply tends to be much more elastic than 
in the short run. This means that price controls will cause only relatively small 
The central problem of political 
economy is that you need government 
to ensure that competition works, but 
government also can be used to 
prevent competition.
Q-9  If supply is perfectly inelastic, 
will price controls cause a large 
shortage?
The more elastic supply and demand, 
the larger the surplus or shortage 
created by price controls.

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
155
shortages or surpluses in the short run, but large ones in the long run. Let’s con-
sider how this would play out in our rent-control example—see Figure 7-7. In the 
short run, supply is inelastic; thus, if demand shifts from D0 to D1, and the govern-
ment ­allows landlords to charge the price they want, they will raise their price sig-
nificantly, from P0 to P1.
	
In the long run, however, additional apartments will be built and other existing 
buildings will be converted into apartments. Supply becomes more elastic, rotating 
from S0 to S1. Faced with additional competition, landlords will lower their price 
Supply
(a)  Price Floor with Elastic 
       Supply and Demand
PF
PE
QS
QD
Demand
Supply
(b)  Price Floor with Elastic Supply 
       and Inelastic Demand
PF
PE
QS
QD
Supply
(c)  Price Floor with Inelastic Supply
       and Demand
Demand
Price
Price
Price
Quantity
Quantity
Quantity
Demand
PF
PE
QD QS
FIGURE 7-6 (A, B, AND C)  Price Floors and Elasticity of Demand and Supply
A price floor above equilibrium market price will always create a surplus. The extent of the surplus created depends on the elasticity of the 
curves. With elastic curves, a large surplus is created by price controls; with inelastic curves, a small surplus is created. Thus, in (a) the 
intersection of supply and demand occurs where the curves are more elastic and the result is a larger surplus. In (b) demand and supply 
intersect where the demand curve is less elastic and the surplus declines. In (c) demand and supply intersect where supply and demand are 
most inelastic and the result is the smallest surplus.
P1
P2
S0 (Short run)
P0
S1 (Long run)
Q0
Q1
Q2
Q3
D1
D0
Price
Quantity
FIGURE 7-7  Long-Run and ­ 
Short-Run Effects of Price Controls
This graph shows how lower 
long-run elasticities result in 
smaller price increases when 
demand increases. Price ceilings 
keep the long-run supply from 
lowering price impacts of shocks 
to housing markets.

156	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
to P2. In the long run, price will fall and the number of apartments rented will 
­increase.
	
Herein lies another political policy problem. In large part, it is the rise in price that 
brings in new competitors and increases in output. But if the government imposes price 
controls, keeping prices at P0, the long-run incentives for competitors to enter the market 
will be eliminated. Landlords would not build additional apartments, and the shortage 
resulting from the price controls (Q3 − Q0) would remain. The political problems arise 
­because politics generally responds to short-run pressures. In the short run, ­demand 
and supply are generally inelastic, making it look as if the price ceiling will not create 
significant problems. But in the long run, supply is usually elastic. Price controls that 
might alleviate the short-run problem cause fewer new apartments to be built. In the 
long run, the shortage becomes even more severe. As we noted in Chapter 5,  
the rent-control laws in New York City were initially written to be effective whenever the 
­vacancy rate was below 5 percent, which was the vacancy rate at the time. But the rent 
controls stopped new apartments from being built and old ones from being maintained. 
Today, the vacancy rate is less than 3 percent and many rent-controlled apartments have 
deteriorated. The government’s imposition of a price ceiling prevents the market from 
achieving a more desirable long-run equilibrium, at which output has expanded and price 
has fallen from its initially high level.
Q-10  Why do price controls tend to 
create ongoing shortages or surpluses 
in the long run?
Thinking Like a Modern Economist
How to Get Students to Be Responsible
Traditional economic policy focuses on getting the 
incentives right. If you  want people to do less of 
something, raise its price. Behavioral economists 
take a broader view of policy and argue that econo-
mists’ policy should go beyond incentives. For exam-
ple, they point out that at times being in a state of 
high emotion “makes” people act irrationally (at least 
when compared to the choices they would make 
when not emotional). To demonstrate this tendency, 
Duke University economist Dan Ariely tested peo-
ple’s reactions under different ­emotional states. In 
one experiment, students answered the following 
questions in two different states: a normal state of 
calm and an emotionally excited state. (To get them 
into an emotional state, he showed students erotic 
photos.)
• Could you enjoy sex with someone you hate?
• Would you slip a person a drug to increase 
the chance that he or she would have sex 
with you?
• Would you always use a condom?
He found that students in a sexually aroused state 
were often twice as likely to answer “yes, yes, and 
no” than when they were calm and collected. 
­Behavioral economists ­argue that these and similar 
results suggest that policies designed around ratio-
nal responses to incentives in situations that involve 
emotion likely will not work. Instead, policy makers 
must design policies that take into account people’s 
emotional self, which is far less likely to respond to 
incentives. Dan Ariely writes, “If we don’t teach our 
young people how to deal with sex when they are 
half out of their minds, we are not only fooling them; 
we are fooling ourselves as well.”
	
Policy makers include not only governments. 
They also include ­parents. And emotions don’t affect 
just sexual decisions; they affect other high-risk be-
havior such as driving. To help parents deal with situ-
ations where their teenagers’ emotions lead them to 
drive too fast, Ariely suggests that if parents provide 
their teenagers with cars, those cars should be 
equipped with a radio that automatically switches 
from playing 2Pac to Schumann’s Second Symphony 
(and a phone that ­automatically calls his or her par-
ents) whenever the student exceeds 65 miles an 
hour. I leave it to you to figure out if the policy makes 
sense, and whether some similar plan could be de-
signed to get teenagers to abstain from sex, or at 
least practice safe sex.

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
157
Conclusion
Government is a part of our life and, therefore, so too are taxes. Economic theory 
doesn’t say government should or shouldn’t play any particular role in the economy or 
what the taxes should be. Those decisions depend on normative judgments and the 
relevant costs and benefits. What economic theory does is to help point out the costs 
and benefits. For example, in the case of taxes, economists can show that the cost of 
taxation in terms of lost surplus is independent of who physically pays the tax.
In thinking about taxes and government involvement, the public often perceives eco-
nomic theory and economists as suggesting the best policy is one of laissez-faire, or 
government noninvolvement in the economy. Many economists do suggest a laissez-
faire policy, but that suggestion is based on empirical observations of government’s role 
in the past, not on economic theory. Economic theory, alone, has nothing directly to say 
about policy; it simply highlights some of the costs and benefits of various policies.
Still, economists as a group generally favor less government involvement than does 
the general public. One reason for this is that economists are taught to look below the 
surface at the long-run effect of government ­actions. They’ve discovered that the 
­effects often aren’t the intended effects, and that programs frequently have long-run 
consequences that make the problems worse, not better. Economists, both liberal and 
conservative, speak in the voice of reason: “Look at all the costs; look at all the 
­benefits. Then decide whether ­government should or should not intervene.” The 
­supply/demand framework and the ­elasticity concept are extremely useful tools in 
making those assessments.
Economists’ suggestions for laissez-
faire policy are based on empirical 
observations of government’s role in 
the past, not on economic theory.
• Equilibrium maximizes the combination of consumer 
surplus and producer surplus. Consumer surplus is the 
net benefit a consumer gets from purchasing a good, 
while producer surplus is the net benefit a producer 
gets from selling a good.  (LO7-1)
• Taxes create a loss of consumer and producer surplus 
known as deadweight loss, which graphically is repre-
sented by the welfare loss triangle.  (LO7-2)
• The cost of taxation to consumers and producers 
­includes the actual tax paid, the deadweight loss, and 
the costs of administering the tax.  (LO7-2)
• Who bears the burden of the tax depends on the 
­relative elasticities of demand and supply. The more 
inelastic one’s relative supply and demand, the larger 
the burden of the tax one will bear.  (LO7-2)
• Price ceilings and price floors, like taxes, result in 
loss of consumer and producer surplus.  (LO7-3)
• Price ceilings transfer producer surplus to consumers 
and therefore are equivalent to a tax on producers and 
a subsidy to consumers. Price floors have the opposite 
Summary
effect; they are a tax on consumers and a subsidy to 
producers.  (LO7-3)
• Rent-seeking activities are designed to transfer 
­surplus from one group to another. Producers facing 
inelastic demand for their product will benefit more 
from rent-seeking activities than producers facing 
elastic demand. Consumers facing inelastic supply for 
a product benefit more from rent-seeking activities 
such as lobbying for price ceilings than consumers 
facing an elastic supply.  (LO7-4)
• The more elastic supply and/or demand is, the 
greater the surplus is with an effective price floor 
and the greater the shortage is with an effective 
price ceiling.  (LO7-4)
• The general rule of political economy is that policies 
tend to reflect small groups’ interests, not the interests 
of large groups.  (LO7-4)
• The negative aspects of price controls worsen as the 
length of time considered rises because elasticity rises 
as time progresses.  (LO7-4)

158	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
Key Terms
consumer surplus
deadweight loss
excise tax
general rule of political 
economy
price ceiling
price floor
producer surplus
public choice economist
rent-seeking activity
welfare loss triangle
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Why isn’t the combination of consumer and producer 
surplus maximized if there is either excess demand or 
supply?  (LO7-1)
	 2.	 Why does nearly every purchase you make provide you 
with consumer surplus?  (LO7-1)
	 3.	 How is elasticity related to the revenue from a sales 
tax?  (LO7-2)
	 4.	 Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank economist Edward 
Prescott estimates the elasticity of the U.S. labor 
­supply to be 3. Given this elasticity, what would be 
the impact of funding the Social Security program 
with tax increases on the number of hours worked and 
on the amount of taxes collected to fund Social 
­Security?  (LO7-2)
	 5.	 Demonstrate the welfare loss of:  (LO7-2)
	a.	 A restriction on output when supply is perfectly elastic.
	b.	 A tax t placed on suppliers.
	c.	 A subsidy s given to suppliers.
	d.	 A restriction on output when demand is perfectly 
­elastic. 
	 6.	 Use the graph below that shows the effect of a  
$4 per-unit tax on suppliers to answer the following 
­questions:  (LO7-2)
Price
$14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
S0
St
Demand
Quantity 
100
200
300
400
500
$4
	a.	 What are equilibrium price and quantity before the 
tax? After the tax?
	b.	 What is producer surplus when the market is in 
­equilibrium before the tax? After the tax?
	c.	 What is consumer surplus when the market is in 
­equilibrium before the tax? After the tax?
	d.	 What is total tax revenue collected after the tax is 
­implemented?
	 7.	 If the federal government wanted to tax a good and 
­suppliers were strong lobbyists, but consumers were not, 
would government prefer supply or demand to be more 
­inelastic? Why?  (LO7-2)
	 8.	 What types of goods would you recommend that the 
­government tax if it wants the tax to result in no welfare 
loss? Name a few examples.  (LO7-2)
	 9.	 Suppose demand for cigarettes is inelastic and the supply 
of cigarettes is elastic. Who would bear the larger share 
of the burden of a tax placed on cigarettes?  (LO7-2)
	10.	 If the demand for a good is perfectly elastic and the 
supply is elastic, who will bear the larger share of the 
­burden of a tax on the good where the tax is paid by 
consumers?  (LO7-2)
	11.	 What percentage of a tax will the demander pay if 
price elasticity of supply is 0.3 and price elasticity  
of ­demand is 0.7? What percentage will the supplier 
pay?  (LO7-2)
	12.	 Which good would an economist normally recommend 
taxing if government wanted to minimize welfare loss 
and maximize revenue: a good with an elastic or inelastic 
supply? Why?  (LO7-2)
	13.	 Should tenants who rent apartments worry that ­increases in 
property taxes will increase their rent? Does your ­answer 
change when considering the long run?  (LO7-2)
	14.	 Calculate the percentage of the tax borne by the 
­demander and supplier in each of the following 
cases:  (LO7-2)
	a.	 ED = 0.3, ES = 1.2
	b.	 ED = 3, ES = 2
	c.	 ED = 0.5, ES = 1
	d.	 ED = 0.5, ES = 0.5
	e.	 Summarize your findings regarding relative elasticity 
and tax burden. 

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
159
	15.	 In which case would the shortage resulting from a price 
ceiling be greater: when supply is inelastic or elastic? 
­Explain your answer.  (LO7-3)
	16.	 Demonstrate how a price floor is like a tax on consum-
ers and a subsidy to suppliers. Label the following: tax 
on consumers, transfer of surplus to suppliers, and wel-
fare loss.  (LO7-3)
	a.	 Who gets the revenue in the case of a tax?
	b.	 Who gets the revenue in the case of a price floor? 
	17.	 Suppose government imposed a minimum wage above 
equilibrium wage.  (LO7-3)
	a.	 Assuming nothing else changes, what do you expect 
to happen to the resulting shortage of jobs as time 
­progresses?
	b.	 What do you expect to happen to the producer surplus 
transferred to minimum wage earners as time 
­progresses? 
	18.	 Use the graph below to answer the following 
­questions:  (LO7-3)
Price 
Supply
Demand
Quantity 
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
$16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
	a.	 What are equilibrium price and quantity?
	b.	 What is producer surplus when the market is in 
­equilibrium?
	c.	 What is consumer surplus when the market is in 
­equilibrium?
	d.	 If price were held at $12 a unit, what are consumer 
and producer surplus?
	19.	 A political leader comes to you and wonders from 
whom she will get the most complaints if she institutes 
a price ceiling when demand is inelastic and supply is 
elastic.  (LO7-3)
	a.	 How do you respond?
	b.	 Demonstrate why your answer is correct. 
	20.	 Define rent seeking. Do firms have a greater incentive to 
engage in rent-seeking behavior when demand is elastic or 
when it is inelastic?  (LO7-4)
	21.	 What is the general rule of political economy? Give an 
example from the real world.  (LO7-4)
	22.	 Given the graph below, up to how much would suppliers 
be willing to spend to restrict supply to Q1?  (LO7-4)
Supply
Q1
Price
Quantity
Demand
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 The quotation from Calvin Coolidge at the beginning of 
the chapter equates taxation to robbery.
	a.	 Is that a reasonable position to take?
	b.	 What alternatives to taxation could a country consider 
to collect the revenue it needs to operate? (Austrian)
	 2.	 The chapter frames the issue of the effects of taxation in 
terms of its effects on producer and consumer surplus.
	a.	 What does that framework leave out of the analysis?
	b.	 How might one frame the analysis differently?
	c.	 If women are discriminated against and receive less in-
come than men on average, do they get less weight 
than men in society’s consumer surplus? (Feminist)
	 3.	 Do Pierre, a software engineer earning $200,000 a year, 
and Sally, a single mother whose welfare benefits are 
about to expire, get equal weight in the measure of 
­consumer surplus? (Institutionalist)
	 4.	 The elasticity of the supply of labor in part determines 
who bears the burden of Social Security taxes. Those 
taxes are typically levied in matching 6.2 percent 
shares on workers’ wages and wages paid out by employers. 
­Economists treat the two shares as one tax and then consider 
two cases. In competitive labor markets, the supply of 
­labor is taken to be totally inelastic. In noncompetitive 
­labor markets, workers’ bargaining power matches that of 

160	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
employers and the supply and demand curves for labor 
have similar elasticities. Who bears the burden of Social 
Security taxes in each case? Illustrate your answer with 
two labor market diagrams. (Hint: Empirical evidence 
­indicates that in the noncompetitive case, the employer’s 
share of Social ­Security taxes is passed on to consumers 
in the form of higher prices.) (Radical)
	 5.	 God sees all individuals as equal, and that what one does 
to the least of God’s children, one does to all. How does 
that approach to thinking about issues fit with the economic 
analysis that focuses on consumer and producer surplus? 
(Religious)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 Many of the buildings in Paris have Mansard roofs, such 
as those shown in the photograph on page 145.
	a.	 What property tax structure would bring this about?
	b.	 Could you imagine a change in the property tax that 
would reduce the number of Mansard roofs built?
	c.	 Can you think of other design elements that reflect tax 
structure? 
	 2.	 Because of the negative incentive effect that taxes  
have on goods with elastic supply, in the late 1980s 
Margaret Thatcher (then prime minister of Great Britain) 
changed the property tax to a poll tax (a tax at a set rate 
that every individual must pay).
	a.	 Show why the poll tax is preferable to a property tax 
in terms of consumer and producer surplus.
b.	 What do you think the real-life consequences of the 
poll tax were? 
	 3.	 Can you suggest a tax system that led to this building 
style, which was common in old eastern European cities? 
Courtesy of David Colander
	 4.	 The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 is known as  
“Dr. Wiley’s Law.” It is generally regarded by non- 
economic historians as representing the triumph of 
­consumer interests over producer interests. 
	a.	 Why might an economist likely be somewhat wary 
of this interpretation?
	b.	 What evidence would a skeptical economist likely 
look for to determine the motives behind the passage 
of this law?
	c.	 What would be the significance of the fact that the 
Pure Food and Drug Act was passed in 1906, right 
when urbanization and technological change were 
­fostering new products that competed significantly 
with existing producers’ interests? 
	 5.	 The president of Lebanon Valley College proposed the fol-
lowing tuition program: provide a 50 percent tuition reduc-
tion for those graduating in the top 10 percent of their high 
school class, 33 percent reduction for those in the top 20 per-
cent, and 25 percent reduction for those in the top 30 percent. 
All scholarship recipients were also required to maintain a 
minimum GPA. The comptroller estimated that the elasticity 
of demand for these students was greater than 1. 
	a.	 Economics professor Paul Heise recommended that 
the president institute the program, arguing that it 
would increase revenues. What was his argument?
	b.	 Why did the program distinguish among top-performing 
students?
	c.	 Why didn’t the president reduce tuition for all students?
	 6.	 In 2004, the University of California education system 
drastically cut enrollment due to significant state budget 
cuts and asked 7,600 applicants to defer enrollment for 
two years after completing two years at a community col-
lege. Tuition costs remained fixed by the state. 
	a.	 Demonstrate the situation described with supply and 
demand curves, carefully labeling any excess supply or 
demand for college admissions.
	b.	 What is the market solution to the excess demand for 
college?
	c.	 What is a possible reason the market solution was not 
pursued? 
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 The combination of consumer and producer surplus will 
increase since there will be no lost surplus at the equilib-
rium price.  (LO7-1)
	 2.	 Welfare loss when supply is highly elastic and demand is 
highly inelastic is shown by the shaded triangle in the fol-
lowing graph. The supply curve shifts up by the amount 

	
Chapter 7 ■ Taxation and Government Intervention	
161
of the tax. Since equilibrium quantity changes very little, 
from Q0 to Q1, welfare loss is very small.  (LO7-2)
P1
Supply with tax
P0
Supply
Q0
Q1
Price
Quantity
Demand
	 3.	 If a person’s demand is highly elastic, he would bear a 
small percentage of the burden of a tax.  (LO7-2)
	 4.	 The percentage of the tax borne by the consumer equals 
price elasticity of supply divided by the sum of the price 
elasticities of demand and supply, or
	
1.8
(0.2 + 1.8) = 0.9.
	
	 The consumer pays $90 of the tax.  (LO7-2)
	 5.	 If the entire amount of the tax were levied on employees, 
their before-tax income would rise because employers 
would have to compensate their employees for the 
­increased taxes they would have to physically pay. 
The burden of the taxation does not depend on 
who pays the tax. It depends on relative  
elasticities.  (LO7-2)
	 6.	 The effect of a price ceiling below equilibrium price 
when demand and supply are inelastic is shown in the 
following graph. Quantity demanded exceeds quantity 
supplied, but because demand and supply are both 
­inelastic, the shortage is not big. Likewise, the welfare 
loss triangle, shown by the shaded area in the graph, is 
not large.  (LO7-3)
Supply
Price
ceiling
Q0
Q1
Price
Quantity
Demand
	 7.	 No. Research and development expenditures are an effort 
to increase technology to either lower production costs or 
discover a new product that can be marketed. If the firm 
can get a patent on that new product, the firm will have a 
monopoly and be able to restrict supply, transferring sur-
plus from consumers to itself, but this is not rent seeking. 
Rent-seeking activities are designed to transfer surplus 
from one group to another given current technology. They 
are unproductive.  (LO7-4)
	 8.	 If suppliers are selling a product for which demand is in-
elastic, increases in productivity would result in a drop in 
price that would be proportionately greater than the rise  
in equilibrium quantity. Total revenue would decline for 
suppliers.  (LO7-4)
	 9.	 With a perfectly inelastic supply, price controls will 
cause a smaller shortage compared to other supply 
elasticities.  (LO7-4)
	10.	 Price controls tend to create ongoing shortages and 
­surpluses in the long run because they prevent market 
forces from working.  (LO7-4)

The business of government is to keep the 
government out of business—that is unless 
business needs government aid.
—Will Rogers
“
”
chapter 8
Market Failure versus Government Failure
There is an ongoing (indeed unending) debate: Should the 
­government intervene in markets such as health care or agriculture? 
The supply/demand framework you learned in the previous chapters 
was created to provide some insight into answering that question, 
and those chapters began ­exploring the issues. In this chapter we 
explore economic policy questions more deeply and ­develop a fuller 
understanding of some of the roles of government first presented in 
Chapter 3.
The economic analysis of policy is set in the economic frame-
work, which can also be called the invisible hand framework. It says 
that if markets are perfectly competitive, they will lead individuals to 
make voluntary choices that are in the society’s interest. It is as if 
­individuals are guided by an invisible hand to do what society wants 
them to do.
For the invisible hand to guide private actions toward the social 
good, a number of conditions must be met. When they are not met, 
economists say that there is a market failure—a situation in which the 
invisible hand pushes in such a way that individual decisions do not 
lead to socially desirable outcomes. In this chapter we consider three sources of 
market ­failures: externalities, public goods, and imperfect information.
	
Any time there is a market failure, it is possible that government ­intervention 
could improve the outcome. But it is important to remember that even if a 
­market failure exists, it is not clear that government action will improve the 
result since the politics of implementing the solution often lead to further prob-
lems. These problems of government intervention are often called government 
failures—when the government intervention in the market to improve the 
­market failure actually makes the situation worse. After discussing the three 
sources of market failures, we will discuss government failures. The economic 
policy debate can be best thought of as choosing which failure is likely to be the 
lesser of two evils.
Externalities
An important requirement for the invisible hand to guide markets in society’s 
interest is that market transactions have no side effects on anyone not involved 
in the ­transactions. As discussed in Chapter 3, such side effects are called 
After reading this chapter, you 
should be able to:
LO8-1	 Explain what an externality is 
and show how it affects the 
market outcome.
LO8-2	 Describe three methods of 
dealing with externalities.
LO8-3	 Define public good and 
explain the problem with 
determining the value of a 
public good to society.
LO8-4	 Explain how informational 
and moral hazard problems 
can lead to market failure.
LO8-5	 Explain why market failure is 
not necessarily a reason for 
government intervention.
© John Anthony Rizzo/age fotostock RF

163
externalities—the effects of a decision on a third party that are not taken into ­account 
by the decision maker. Externalities can be either positive or negative. Secondhand 
smoke and carbon monoxide emissions are examples of negative ­externalities, which 
occur when the effects of a decision not taken into account by the decision maker are 
detrimental to others. Positive externalities occur when the effects of a decision not 
taken into ­account by the decision maker are beneficial to others. An example is edu-
cation. When you purchase a college education, it benefits not only you but others as 
well. ­Innovation is another example. The invention of the personal computer has had 
significant beneficial effects on society, which were not taken into account by the 
inventors. When there are externalities, the supply and/or demand curves no longer 
represent the marginal cost and marginal benefit curves to society.
An externality is an effect of a decision 
on a third party not taken into account 
by the decision maker.
ADDED DIMENSION
Thus, perfect competition will never exist in the real 
world. Comparing reality to a situation that cannot 
occur (i.e., to nirvana) is unfair and unhelpful be-
cause it leads to attempts to achieve the unachiev-
able. A better benchmark would be workable 
competition—a state of competition that one might 
reasonably hope could exist.
2.	 The second-best criticism: The conditions that al-
low us to conclude that perfect competition leads 
to a Pareto optimal position are so restrictive that 
they are never even approached in reality. If the 
economy deviates in hundreds of ways from per-
fect competition, how are we to know whether a 
movement toward more competition will improve 
people’s welfare?
3.	 The normative criticism: Even if the previous two 
criticisms didn’t exist, the perfect competition 
benchmark still isn’t appropriate because there is 
nothing necessarily wonderful about Pareto opti-
mality. A Pareto optimal position could be horren-
dous. For example, say one person has all the 
world’s revenues and all the other people are starv-
ing. If that rich person would be made worse off by 
taking some money from him and giving it to the 
starving poor, that starting position would be Pareto 
optimal. By most people’s normative criteria, it 
would also be a lousy place to remain.
	
Critics of the use of the perfect competition benchmark 
argue that society has a variety of goals. Pareto optimality 
may be one of them, but it’s only one. They argue that 
economists should take into account all of society’s 
goals—not just Pareto optimality—when determining a 
benchmark for judging policies.
Pareto Optimality and the Perfectly Competitive Benchmark
Perfect competition serves as a benchmark for judging 
policies. A foundation for this benchmark is in the work of 
Stanford economist Kenneth Arrow, who showed that the 
market translates self-interest into society’s interest. (Arrow 
was given a Nobel Prize in 1972 for this work.) Arrow’s ideas 
are based on many assumptions that can only be touched 
on in an introductory book. I will, however, discuss one 
here—the interpretation of the term society’s welfare. In the 
economic framework, society’s welfare is interpreted as 
coming as close as one can to a Pareto optimal position—a 
position from which no person can be made better off with-
out another being made worse off. 
	
Let’s briefly consider what Arrow proved. He showed 
that if the market was perfectly competitive, and if there 
was a complete set of markets (a market for every possi-
ble good now and in the future), the invisible hand would 
guide the economy to a Pareto optimal position. If these 
assumptions hold true, the supply curve (which repre-
sents the marginal cost to the suppliers) would represent 
the marginal cost to society. Similarly, the demand curve 
(which represents the marginal benefit to consumers) 
would represent the marginal benefit to society. In a 
­supply/demand equilibrium, not only would an individual 
be as well off as he or she possibly could be, given where 
he or she started from, but so too would society. A per-
fectly competitive market equilibrium would be a Pareto 
optimal position.
	
A number of criticisms exist to using perfect competi-
tion as a benchmark:
1.	 The nirvana criticism: A perfectly competitive equi-
librium is highly unstable. It’s usually in some per-
son’s interest to restrict entry by others, and, when 
a market is close to a competitive equilibrium, it is 
in few people’s interest to stop such restrictions. 

164	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
A Negative Externality Example
Say that you and I agree that I’ll produce steel for you. I’ll build my steel plant on land 
I own, and start producing. We both believe our welfare will improve. But what about 
my plant’s neighbors? The resulting smoke will pollute the air they breathe. The peo-
ple involved in the market trade (you and I) are made better off, but people external to 
the trade are made worse off. Thus, there is a negative externality. My production of 
steel has a cost to society that neither you nor I take into account.
	
The effect of a negative externality is shown in Figure 8-1. The supply curve S 
­re­presents the marginal private cost to society of producing steel. The demand 
curve D represents the marginal social benefit of consuming the steel. With no 
externalities, the marginal private costs and benefits represent the marginal social 
costs and benefits, so the supply/demand equilibrium (P0, Q0) represents where the 
marginal social benefit equals the marginal social cost. At that point society is as 
well off as possible.
	
But now consider what happens when production results in negative externalities. 
In that case people not involved in production also incur costs. This means that the 
supply curve no longer represents both the marginal private and marginal social costs 
of supplying the good. Marginal social cost is greater than the marginal private cost. 
This case can be represented by adding a curve in Figure 8-1 called the marginal 
­social cost curve. The marginal social cost includes all the marginal costs that society 
bears—or the marginal private costs of production plus the cost of the negative exter-
nalities associated with that production.
	
Since in this case the externality represents an additional cost to society, the 
marginal social cost curve lies above the marginal private cost curve. The distance 
between the two curves represents the additional cost of the externality. For 
­example, at quantity Q0, the private marginal cost faced by the firm is P0. The mar-
ginal cost from the externality at quantity Q0 is shown by distance C. The optimal 
price and quantity for society are P1 and Q1. When the externality is not taken into 
account, the supply/demand equilibrium is at too high a quantity, Q0, and at too 
low a price, P0.
	
Notice that the market solution results in a level of steel production that exceeds 
the level that equates the marginal social costs with the marginal social benefits. If the 
market is to maximize welfare, some type of government intervention may be needed 
to reduce production from Q0 to Q1 and raise price from P0 to P1.
When there are externalities, the 
marginal social cost differs from the 
marginal private cost.
Q-1  Why does the existence of  
an externality prevent the market  
from working properly?
FIGURE 8-1  A Negative Externality
When there is a negative externality, 
the marginal private cost will be 
below the marginal social cost and 
the competitive price will be too low 
to maximize social welfare.
Price
D = Marginal 
       social 
       beneﬁt
C
S = Marginal 
      private 
      cost
S1 = Marginal social cost
Q1
Q0
Quantity
P1
P0
0

	
Chapter 8 ■ Market Failure versus Government Failure	
165
A Positive Externality Example
Private trades can also benefit third parties not involved in the trade. These are positive 
externalities. Again, an example is education. Consider a person who is working and 
takes a class at night. He or she will bring the knowledge from class back to co-workers 
through day-to-day interaction on projects. The co-workers will be learning the mate-
rial from the class indirectly. They are outside the initial decision to take the class, but 
they benefit nonetheless.
	
In the case of positive externalities, the market will not provide enough of the 
good. Let’s see how. In Figure 8-2, we start again with the standard demand and 
­supply curves. The supply curve S represents the marginal private cost of the course. 
The ­demand curve D0 is the marginal private benefit to those who take the course. 
Since others not taking the course also benefit, the marginal social benefit, shown by 
D1, is above the marginal private benefit. The marginal social benefit equals the 
marginal private benefit of consuming a good plus the benefits of the positive exter-
nalities ­resulting from consuming that good. The vertical distance between D0 and 
D1 is the additional benefit that others receive at each quantity. At quantity Q0, the 
market ­equilibrium, the marginal benefit of the externality is shown by distance B. 
At this quantity, the marginal social benefit exceeds the marginal social cost. The 
market provides too little of the good. The optimal price and quantity for society are 
P1 and Q1, respectively. Again, some type of intervention to increase quantity may 
be warranted.
Alternative Methods of Dealing with Externalities
Ways to deal with externalities include (1) direct regulation, (2) incentive policies (tax 
incentive policies and market incentive policies), and (3) voluntary solutions.
Direct Regulation
In a program of direct regulation, the amount of a good people are allowed to use is 
­directly limited by the government. Let’s consider an example. Say we have two ­individuals, 
Ms. Thrifty, who uses 10 gallons of gasoline a day, and Mr. Big, who uses 20 gallons a day. 
Say we have decided that we want to reduce total daily gas consumption by 10 percent, or 
3 gallons. The regulatory solution might require both individuals to reduce consumption by 
Q-2  If a positive externality exists, 
does that mean that the market works 
better than if no externality exists?
Positive externalities result in the 
marginal private benefit being below 
the marginal social benefit.
Externalities can be dealt with via
1.	 Direct regulation.
2.	 Incentive policies.
3.	 Voluntary solutions.
FIGURE 8-2  A Positive Externality
When there is a positive externality, 
the marginal social benefit will be 
above the marginal private benefit 
and the market price will be too low 
to maximize social welfare.
Price
D0 = Marginal 
         private
         beneﬁt
D1 = Marginal 
        social 
        beneﬁt
B
S = Marginal 
      private and 
      social cost
Q0
Q1
Quantity
P1
P0
0

166
some specified amount. Likely direct regulatory strategies would be to require an equal 
quantity reduction (each consumer reducing consumption by 1.5 gallons) or an equal per-
centage reduction (each consumer reducing consumption by 10 percent).
	
Both of those strategies would reduce consumption, but neither would be efficient 
(achieving a goal at the lowest cost in total resources without consideration as to who 
pays those costs). This is because direct regulation does not take into account that the 
costs of reducing consumption may differ among individuals. Say, for example, that Ms. 
Thrifty could almost costlessly reduce consumption by 3 gallons while Mr. Big would 
find it very costly to reduce consumption by even 0.5 gallon. In that case, either regula-
tory solution would be inefficient (achieving a goal in a more costly manner than neces-
sary). It would be less costly (more efficient) to have Ms. Thrifty undertake most of the 
reduction. A policy that would automatically make the person who has the lower cost of 
reduction choose (as opposed to being required) to undertake the most reduction would 
achieve the same level of reduction at a lower cost. In this case, the efficient policy 
would get Ms. Thrifty to choose to undertake the majority of the reduction.
Incentive Policies
Two types of incentive policies would each get Ms. Thrifty to undertake the larger share 
of reduction. One is to tax consumption; the other is to issue certificates to individuals 
who reduce consumption and to allow them to trade those certificates with others.
Tax Incentive Policies 
Let’s say that the government imposes a tax on gaso-
line consumption of 50 cents per gallon. This would be an example of a tax incentive 
Q-3  It is sometimes said that  
there is a trade-off between fairness 
and efficiency. Explain one way in which 
that is true and one way in which that is 
false.
Economists tend to like incentive 
policies to deal with externalities.
ADDED DIMENSION
in the United States and throughout the world. Thus, the trag-
edy of the commons is caused by individuals not taking into 
account the negative externalities of their actions.
	
Why doesn’t the market solve the externality problem? 
Some economists argue that in the tragedy of the com-
mons examples it would, if given a chance. The problem is 
a lack of property rights (lack of ownership). If rights to all 
goods were defined, the tragedy of the 
commons would disappear. In the fishing 
example, if someone owned the sea, he 
or she would charge individuals to fish. 
By charging for fishing rights, the owner 
would internalize the externality and 
thus avoid the tragedy of the commons.
Nobel Prize–winning political econo-
mist Elinor Ostrom has studied common 
resources in a number of cultures, and 
has found that different societies have used a wide variety 
of institutional arrangements to deal with the tragedy of 
the commons. Her work has shown that there is no single 
answer to these problems, and that the answer chosen 
needs to reflect cultural mores of the society.
Common Resources and the Tragedy of the Commons
Individuals tend to overuse commonly owned goods. Let’s 
consider an example—say that grazing land is held in com-
mon. Individuals are free to bring their sheep to graze on 
the land. What is likely to happen? Each grazing sheep will 
reduce the amount of grass for other sheep. If individuals 
don’t have to pay for grazing, when deciding how much to 
graze their sheep they will not take into account the cost to 
others of their sheep’s grazing. The result 
may be overgrazing—killing the grass 
and destroying the grazing land. This is 
known as the tragedy of the commons. A 
more contemporary example of the trag-
edy of the commons is fishing. The sea is 
a common resource; no one owns it, and 
whenever people catch fish, they reduce 
the number of fish that others can catch. 
The result will likely be overfishing.
	
The tragedy of the commons is an example of the prob-
lems posed by externalities. Catching fish imposes a negative 
externality—fewer fish for others to catch. Because of the 
negative effect on others, the social cost of catching a fish is 
greater than the private cost. Overfishing has been a problem 
© Photolink/Getty Images RF

	
Chapter 8 ■ Market Failure versus Government Failure	
167
program (a program using a tax to create incentives for individuals to structure their 
activities in a way that is consistent with the desired ends). Since Ms. Thrifty can 
almost costlessly reduce her gasoline consumption, she will likely respond to the tax 
by reducing gasoline consumption, say, by 2.75 gallons. She pays only $3.63 in tax but 
undertakes most of the conservation. Since Mr. Big finds it very costly to reduce his 
consumption of gasoline, he will likely respond by reducing gasoline consumption by 
very little, say by 0.25 gallon. He pays $9.88 in tax but does little of the conservation.
	
In this example, the tax has achieved the desired end in a more efficient manner 
than would the regulatory solution—the person for whom the reduction is least costly 
cuts consumption the most. Why? Because the incentive to reduce is embodied in the 
price, and individuals are forced to choose how much to change their consumption. 
The tax has made them internalize the externality. The solution also has a significant 
element of fairness about it. The person who conserves the most pays the least tax.
	
Let’s now consider how the tax incentive solution will solve the problem in our 
earlier example of steel production. Figure 8-3 shows the situation. Say the govern-
ment determines that the additional cost to society of producing steel equals C. If the 
government sets the pollution tax on steel production at C, the firm will reduce its 
output to Q1 on its own. Such taxes on externalities are often called effluent fees—
charges imposed by government on the level of pollution created. The efficient tax 
equals the additional cost imposed on society and not taken into account by the deci-
sion maker. With such a tax, the cost the suppliers face is the social cost of supplying 
the good. With the tax, the invisible hand guides the traders to equate the marginal 
social cost to the marginal social benefit and the equilibrium is socially optimal.
Market Incentive Policies 
A second incentive policy that gets individuals 
to internalize an externality is a market incentive plan (a plan requiring market 
­participants to certify that they have reduced total consumption—not necessarily their 
own individual consumption—by a specified amount). Such a program would be close 
to the regulatory solution but involves a major difference. If individuals choose to 
­reduce consumption by more than the required amount, they will be given a marketable 
certificate that they can sell to someone who has chosen to reduce consumption by less 
than the required amount. By buying that certificate, the person who has not person-
ally reduced consumption by the requisite amount will have met the program’s 
requirements. Let’s see how the program would work with Mr. Big and Ms. Thrifty.
Q-4  In what sense is the tax 
incentive approach to externalities fair?
FIGURE 8-3   
Regulation through Taxation
If the government sets a tax 
sufficient to take into account a 
negative externality, individuals 
will respond by reducing the 
quantity of the pollution-causing 
activity supplied to a level that 
individuals would have supplied 
had they included the negative 
externality in their decision.
Cost
Marginal
social 
beneﬁt
Marginal 
private 
cost
C = Eﬃcient tax
Marginal social cost
Quantity of steel
Q1
Q0
0
P0
P1

168	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
	
In our example, Mr. Big finds it very costly to reduce consumption while Ms. Thrifty 
finds it easy. So we can expect that Mr. Big won’t reduce consumption much and will 
­instead buy certificates from Ms. Thrifty, who will choose to undertake ­significant reduc-
tion in her consumption to generate the certificates, assuming she can sell them to Mr. Big 
for a high enough price to make that reduction worth her while. So, as was the case in the 
tax incentive program, Ms. Thrifty undertakes most of the conservation—but she reaps a 
financial benefit for it.
	
Obviously there are enormous questions about the administrative feasibility of 
these types of proposals, but what’s important to understand here is not the specifics 
of the proposals but the way in which incentive policies are more efficient than the regula-
tory policy. As I stated before, more efficient means less costly in terms of resources, 
with no consideration paid to who is bearing those costs. Incorporating the incentive 
into a price and then letting individuals choose how to respond to that incentive lets 
those who find it least costly undertake most of the adjustment.
	
More and more, governments are exploring incentive policies for solving prob-
lems. Sin taxes (taxes on goods government believes to be harmful) are an example of 
the tax incentive approach. (These will be discussed further in Chapter 23, “Microeco-
nomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and Beyond.”) Marketable permits for pollution 
and for CO2 emissions are an example of the marketable certificate approach. You can 
probably see more examples discussed in the news.
Voluntary Reductions
A third alternative method of dealing with externalities is to make the reduction voluntary, 
leaving individuals free to choose whether to follow a socially optimal or a privately 
­optimal path. Let’s consider how a voluntary program might work in our Mr. Big and 
Ms. Thrifty example. Let’s say that Ms. Thrifty has a social conscience and undertakes 
most of the reduction while Mr. Big has no social conscience and reduces consumption 
hardly at all. It seems that this is a reasonably efficient solution. But what if the costs were 
reversed and Mr. Big had the low cost of reduction and Ms. Thrifty had the high cost? Then 
the voluntary solution would not be so efficient. Of course, it could be argued that when 
people do something voluntarily, it makes them better off. So one could argue that even 
when Ms. Thrifty has a high cost of reduction and voluntarily undertakes most of the 
­reduction, she also has a high benefit from reducing her consumption.
	
The largest problem with voluntary solutions is that a person’s willingness to do 
things for the good of society generally depends on that person’s belief that others will 
also be helping. If a socially conscious person comes to believe that a large number of 
other people won’t contribute, he or she will often lose that social conscience: Why 
should I do what’s good for society if others won’t? This is an example of the free rider 
problem (individuals’ unwillingness to share in the cost of a public good), which econ-
omists believe will often limit, and eventually undermine, social actions based on vol-
untary contributions. A small number of free riders will undermine the social 
consciousness of many in the society and eventually the voluntary policy will fail.
	
There are exceptions. During times of war and extreme crisis, voluntary programs 
are often successful. For example, during World War II the war effort was financed in 
part through successful voluntary programs. But generally the results of voluntary 
programs for long-term social problems that involve individuals significantly changing 
their actions haven’t been positive.
The Optimal Policy
An optimal policy is one in which the marginal cost of undertaking the policy equals 
the marginal benefit of that policy. If a policy isn’t optimal (that is, the marginal cost 
exceeds the marginal benefit or the marginal benefit exceeds the marginal cost), 
Incentive policies are more efficient 
than direct regulatory policies.
Q-5  What are two reasons to  
be dubious of solutions based  
on voluntary action that is not  
in people’s self-interest?
Economists believe that a small number 
of free riders will undermine the social 
consciousness of many in the society 
and that eventually a voluntary policy 
will fail.

	
Chapter 8 ■ Market Failure versus Government Failure	
169
resources are being wasted because the savings from reducing expenditures on a program 
will be worth more than the gains that would be lost from reducing the program, or the 
benefit from spending more on a program will exceed the cost of expanding the program.
	
Let’s consider an example of this latter case. Say the marginal benefit of a program 
significantly exceeds its marginal cost. That would seem good. But that would mean 
that we could expand the program by decreasing some other program or activity whose 
marginal benefit doesn’t exceed its marginal cost, with a net gain in benefits to society. 
To spend too little on a beneficial program is as inefficient as spending too much on a 
nonbeneficial program.
	
This concept of optimality carries over to economists’ view of most problems. For 
example, some environmentalists would like to completely rid the economy of pollution. 
Most economists believe that doing so is costly and that since it’s costly, one would 
want to take into account those costs. That means that society should reduce pollution 
only to the point where the marginal cost of reducing pollution equals the marginal 
benefit. That point is called the optimal level of pollution—the amount of pollution at 
which the marginal benefit of reducing pollution equals the marginal cost. To reduce 
pollution below that level would make society as a whole worse off.
Public Goods
A public good is a good that is nonexclusive (no one can be excluded from its ­benefits) 
and nonrival (consumption by one does not preclude consumption by others). As I 
­discussed in Chapter 3, in reality there is no such thing as a pure public good, but many 
of the goods that government provides—education, defense, roads, and legal systems—
have public-good aspects to them. Probably the closest example we have of a pure public 
good is national defense. A single individual cannot protect himself or herself from a 
foreign invasion without protecting his or her neighbors as well. ­Protection for one 
­person means that many others are also protected. Governments generally provide goods 
with significant public aspects to them because private businesses will not supply them, 
unless they transform the good into a mostly ­private good.
	
What is and is not considered a public good depends on technology. Consider 
roads—at one point roads were often privately supplied since with horses and buggies 
the road owners could charge tolls relatively easily. Then, with the increased speed of 
the automobile, collecting tolls on most roads became too time-consuming. At that 
point the nonexclusive public-good aspect of roads became dominant—once a road 
was built, it was most efficiently supplied to others at a zero cost—and government 
became the provider of most roads. Today, with modern computer technology, sensors 
that monitor road use can be placed on roads and in cars. Charging for roads has once 
again become more feasible. In the future we may again see more private provision of 
roads. Some economists have even called for privatization of existing roads, and pri-
vate roads are being built in many states and countries.
The Market Value of a Public Good
One of the reasons that pure public goods are sufficiently interesting to warrant a 
­separate discussion is that the supply/demand model can be modified to neatly contrast 
the ­efficient quantity of a private good with the efficient quantity of a public good. The 
key to ­understanding the difference is to recognize that once a pure public good is sup-
plied to one individual, it is simultaneously supplied to all, whereas a private good is 
supplied only to the individual who purchased it. For example, if the price of an apple 
is 50 cents, the efficient purchase rule is for individuals to buy apples until the mar-
ginal benefit of the last apple consumed is equal to 50 cents. The analysis focuses on 
the individual. If the equilibrium price is 50 cents, the marginal benefit of the last 
If a policy isn’t optimal, resources are 
being wasted because the savings from 
reducing expenditures on a program will 
be worth more than the gains that will be 
lost from reducing the program.
Some environmentalists want to rid the 
world of all pollution, while most 
economists want to reduce pollution to 
the point where the marginal cost of 
reducing pollution equals the marginal 
benefit.
A public good is a good that is 
nonexclusive and nonrival.

170	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
apple sold in the market is equal to 50 cents. That benefit is paid for by one individual 
and is enjoyed by one individual.
	
Now consider a public good. Say that the marginal benefit of an additional missile 
for national defense is 50 cents to one individual and 25 cents to another. In this case 
the value of providing one missile provides 75 cents (25 + 50) of total social benefit. 
With a public good the focus is on the group. The societal benefit in the case of a pub-
lic good is the sum of the individual benefits (since each individual gets the benefit of 
the good). With private goods, we count only the benefit to the person buying the good 
since only one person gets it.
	
The above reasoning can be translated into supply and demand curves. The market 
demand curve represents the marginal benefit of a good to society. As we saw in 
­Chapter 4, in the case of a private good, the market demand curve is the horizontal 
sum of the individual demand curves. The total amount of a private good supplied is 
split up among many buyers. While the market demand curve for a private good is 
­constructed by adding all the quantities demanded at every price, the market demand 
curve in the case of public goods is the vertical sum of the individual demand curves 
at every quantity. The quantity of the good supplied is not split up; the full benefit of 
the total output is received by everyone.
	
Figure 8-4 gives an example of a public good. In it we assume that society consists of 
only two individuals—A and B, with demand curves DA and DB. To arrive at the mar-
ket demand curve for the public good, we vertically add the price that each individual 
is willing to pay for each unit since both receive a benefit when the good is supplied. 
Thus, at quantity 1 we add $0.60 to $0.50. We arrive at $1.10, the marginal benefit of 
providing the first missile. By adding together the willingness to pay by individuals A 
and B for quantities 2 and 3, we generate the market demand curve for missiles. 
Extending this example from two individuals to the economy as a whole, you can see 
that, even though the benefit of a public good is small to each person, the total benefit 
is large. With about 320 million people in the United States, the benefit of that missile 
would be $160 million even if each person valued it on average at 50 cents.
	
Adding demand curves vertically is easy to do in textbooks, but not in practice. 
With private-good demand curves, individuals reveal their demand when they buy a 
good. If they don’t buy it, it wasn’t worth the price. Since public goods are free of 
With private goods you sum  
demand curves horizontally; with  
public goods you sum them  
vertically.
Q-6  Why is it so difficult for 
government to decide the efficient 
quantity of a public good to  
provide?
FIGURE 8-4  The Market Value  
of a Public Good
Since a public good is enjoyed by 
many people without diminishing its 
value to others, the market demand 
curve is constructed by adding the 
marginal benefit each individual 
receives from the public good at each 
quantity. For example, the value of 
the first unit to the market is $1.10, 
the sum of individual A’s value 
($0.50) and individual B’s value 
($0.60).
Price
DA
0.50
1
2
3
Quantity
$1.20
1.1 0
1.00
.90
.80
.70
.60
.50
.40
.30
.20
.1 0
0.40
0.60
0.50
(0.60 + 0.50)
(0.10 + 0.40)
0.10
0.10
DB
Market demand

	
Chapter 8 ■ Market Failure versus Government Failure	
171
charge, individuals do not purchase public goods; their demand is not revealed by their 
actions. Government must guess how much people are willing to pay. If a public good 
is to be financed by a tax on the citizens who benefit from it, individuals have an incen-
tive to conceal their willingness to pay for it. The self-interested citizen wants to benefit 
from the public good without bearing the cost of providing it. Similarly, if people think 
they will not be taxed but will benefit from the public good, they have an incentive to 
exaggerate their willingness to pay. That is, people have an incentive to be free riders.
Excludability and the Costs of Pricing
The public-/private-good differentiation is seldom clear-cut since many goods are 
somewhat public and somewhat private in nature, with the degree of publicness in 
large part determined by available technology. As technology changes, the degree of 
publicness of a good changes. For example, radio signals were previously classified as 
public goods because it was technologically impossible to exclude listeners, but when 
encoded satellite broadcasting was developed, exclusion became relatively easy. Today 
companies such as SIRIUS Satellite Radio supply radio broadcasts as private goods.
	
To capture the complicated nature of goods, economist Paul Romer suggested that 
instead of categorizing goods as purely public or private, it is better to divide them by 
their degree of publicness and privateness, which means by their degree of rivalry in 
consumption, and their degree of excludability in pricing. This division gives us the 
following categories:
Fish in ocean
General R&D
Encoded radio
broadcast
Apple
Degree of excludability
Degree of rivalry in consumption
100%
0%
100%
0%
	
True private goods, such as an apple (if you eat it, no one else can, and you can 
easily exclude others from consuming it), which are both rival in consumption and 
100 percent excludable, are in the upper-left corner; they are most efficiently supplied 
privately. True public goods, such as basic research and development (sometimes called 
the development of general-purpose technology), which are nonrival in consumption 
and 0 percent excludable, are in the lower-right corner; they must be supplied publicly. 
Goods in other positions in the box can be provided either publicly or privately. How 
they are supplied depends on political decisions made by the government. An example 
of a debate about how to supply a good that is somewhat excludable is music. It is 
nonrival in consumption (after you’ve listened to a song, that song is still available to 
others to hear) but is excludable (those not owning FLAC files or concert tickets cannot 
­listen), although the ease of excludability depends on the nature and level of enforcement 
The public-/private-good differentiation 
is seldom clear-cut.

172	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
of the property rights for music. For example, at one time Napster offered free music 
downloads, but because of pressure by the music industry, Napster, along with a vari-
ety of other providers such as iTunes, now sells music downloads and pays royalties to 
those who own the songs. Because technology has changed with the development of 
digital recording and the Internet, the nature of supply of music has become more 
­contested, as the fights about Napster and other online sharing services demonstrate.
Informational and Moral Hazard Problems
The final case of market failure I want to address is caused by imperfect information. 
The perfectly competitive model assumes that individuals have perfect information 
about what they are buying. So, if they voluntarily buy a good, it is a reasonable pre-
sumption that they expect that they are making themselves better off by doing so. But 
what if buyers don’t know everything there is to know about the product or service—that 
is, they don’t have perfect information? Say someone convinces you that he is selling 
an expensive diamond and you buy it, only to find out later that it is actually just glass. 
Alternatively, say someone convinces you her used car is a cherry (in perfect condi-
tion). You buy it only to discover later that it is a lemon (faulty) and won’t run no mat-
ter what you do to it.
	
Real-world markets often involve deception, cheating, and inaccurate information. 
For example, car dealers often know about defects in the cars they sell but do not always 
reveal those defects to consumers. Another example occurs when consumers who want 
health insurance do not reveal their health problems to the insurance company. In both 
cases, it is in the interest of the knowledgeable person not to reveal information that 
the other person or firm would need to know to make an informed decision about the 
transaction. Hence, imperfect information can be a cause of market failure.
	
Markets in goods where there is a lack of information or when buyers and sellers 
don’t have equal information may not work well. Let’s consider the used-car example 
more carefully to make the point. Let’s say that owners of used cars know everything 
about their cars, but buyers know nothing. If sellers are profit maximizers, they will 
reveal as little as possible about the cars’ defects; they will reveal as much as they can 
about the cars’ good qualities.
	
To make the example specific, let’s say also that only two types of used cars are offered 
for sale: “lemons” that are worth $4,000 and “cherries” that are worth $8,000. The 
market initially consists of equal quantities of lemons and cherries. Say also that the 
buyers cannot distinguish between lemons and cherries. What will happen? Individu-
als, knowing that they have a 50 percent chance of buying a lemon, may well offer 
around $6,000 (the average of $4,000 and $8,000). Given that price, individuals with 
cherries will be very hesitant to sell and individuals with lemons will be eager to sell. 
Eventually, buyers will recognize that the sellers of cherries have left the market. In the 
end only lemons will be offered for sale, and buyers will offer only $4,000 with the 
expectation that cars ­offered will be lemons. The result is a market failure: The market for 
cherries—good used cars—has disappeared.
	
Such a market failure is called an adverse selection problem—a problem that occurs 
when buyers and sellers have different amounts of information about the good for sale and 
use that information to the detriment of the other. In the case of adverse selection, only 
lemons—those with the most problems—remain in the market. Take the example of medi-
cal insurance. Insurance providers need to make a profit. To do so, they set rates that reflect 
their estimate of the costs of providing health care. The problem is that individuals have 
better information about their health than do the insurance providers. Health insurers want 
a diverse group to spread out the costs, but they face a greater demand among those with 
the worst health problems. Seeing that their customers have more health problems than 
Imperfect information can be a cause of 
market failure.
Adverse selection problems can occur 
when buyers and sellers have different 
amounts of information about the good 
for sale.

	
Chapter 8 ■ Market Failure versus Government Failure	
173
average, medical insurance providers raise the rates. Those who are in good health find 
those charges to be too high and reduce the quantity of health insurance they purchase. The 
providers are therefore left with a group with an even higher incidence of health problems 
and higher medical costs than the general population. Less than the desired amount of 
­low-cost insurance exists for people in good health. In addition to the adverse selection 
problem there is also a moral hazard problem—a problem that arises when people 
don’t have to bear the negative consequences of their actions. In ­insurance this means 
that individuals tend to change their behavior to the ­detriment of the insurer because 
they have insurance. Put simply, people with insurance tend to be less careful, because 
the consequences of not being careful are reduced. So not only do those with more 
medical problems choose to be insured, but once insured they will be less careful.
Signaling and Screening
Informational problems can be partially resolved by signaling. Signaling refers to 
an action taken by an informed party that reveals information to an uninformed party 
that offsets the false signal that caused the adverse selection problem in the first place. 
Take the lemon problem with used cars. The adverse selection problem occurred 
­because the individual’s act of selling the used car provided a signal to the buyer that 
the car was a lemon. Lowering the offering price of a car would provide an even 
­stronger signal that the car is a lemon—buyers reasonably would equate low prices with 
low quality. But the false signal can be partially offset by a seller warranty—a guarantee 
to the buyer that the car is not a lemon. That’s why many used cars come with warranties. 
The warranty offers a signal to the buyer that the car is not a lemon.
	
In other cases it is harder to offset a false signal. Consider the plight of an 
­unemployed worker. This person may be an excellent worker who, because she is 
­unemployed, is willing to work for a low wage because she really needs the job. 
­However, if she offers to work for a low wage, the firm may think that she must not be 
a very good worker. The knowledge that the firm may think that way may prevent her 
from offering to work at a low wage. So she remains unemployed even though, if there 
were full information, there is a wage at which she would like to work and at which the 
firm would like to hire her.
	
The informational problem can also be partially resolved by screening. Screening 
refers to an action taken by the uninformed party that induces the informed party to 
reveal information. Whereas signaling is an action taken by the informed party, screening 
is an action taken by the uninformed party. Take the car example. The person buying 
the car could ask the seller’s permission to take the car to a mechanic. If the seller says 
“no,” the car is likely a lemon. Another example is asking job applicants for references 
even if a company isn’t going to contact them.
Policies to Deal with Informational Problems
What should society do about informational problems that lead to market failures? One 
answer is to regulate the market and see that individuals provide the right information. 
An example of regulation is government licensing of individuals in the market, requiring 
those with licenses to reveal full information about the good being sold. Government 
has set up numerous regulatory commissions and passed laws that require full disclosure 
of information. The Federal Trade Commission, the Consumer Product Safety 
Commission, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Food and Drug 
Administration, and state licensing boards are all examples of regulatory solutions 
designed to partially offset informational market failures.
	
But these regulatory solutions have problems of their own. The commissions and 
their regulations introduce restrictions that can slow down the economic process and 
Q-7  How would you expect medical 
insurance rates to change if medical 
insurers could use information contained 
in DNA to predict the likelihood of major 
medical illnesses?
Signaling refers to an action taken by 
an informed party that reveals 
information to an uninformed  
party and thereby partially offsets 
adverse selection.

174	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
prevent trades that people want to make. Consider as an example the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA). It restricts what drugs may be sold until sufficient information 
about the drugs’ effects can be disclosed. The FDA testing and approval process can 
take 5 to 10 years, is extraordinarily costly, and raises the price of drugs. The delays 
have caused some people to break the law by buying the drugs before they are approved.
A Market in Information 
Economists who lean away from government 
­regulation suggest that the problem presented by the information examples above is not 
really a problem of market failure but instead a problem of the lack of a market. They 
propose an alternative way to deal with informational problems—let the market deal 
with the problem. Information is valuable and is an economic product in its own right. 
Left on their own, markets will develop to provide the information that people need and 
are willing to pay for. (For example, a large number of consumer magazines provide such 
information.) In the car example, the buyer can hire a mechanic who can test the car with 
sophisticated diagnostic techniques and determine whether it is likely a cherry or a 
lemon. Firms can offer guarantees that will provide buyers with assurance that they can 
either return the car or have it fixed if the car is a lemon. There are many variations of 
such market solutions. If the ­government regulates information, these markets may not 
develop; people might rely on government instead of markets. Thus, the informational 
problem can be seen as a problem of government regulation not a problem of the market.
Licensing of Doctors 
Let’s consider another informational problem that ­contrasts 
the market approach with the regulatory approach: medical licensing.1 Currently all doctors 
in the United States are required to be licensed to practice, but this was not ­always the case.
	
In the early 1800s, medical licenses were not required by law, so anyone who 
wanted to could set up shop as a physician. Today, however, it is illegal to practice 
medicine without a license. Licensing of doctors can be justified by informational 
­problems since individuals often don’t have an accurate way of deciding whether a 
doctor is good. Licensing requires that all doctors have at least a minimum competency. 
Because people see the license framed and hanging on the doctor’s office wall, they 
have the information that a doctor must be competent.
	
A small number of economists, of whom Milton Friedman is the best known, have 
proposed that licensure laws be eliminated, leaving the medical field unlicensed. 
­Specifically, critics of medical licensure raise these questions:
Why, if licensed medical training is so great, do we even need formal restrictions 
to keep other types of medicine from being practiced?
Whom do these restrictions benefit: the general public or the doctors who practice 
mainstream medicine?
What have been the long-run effects of licensure?
	
Even the strongest critics of licensure agree that, in the case of doctors, the infor-
mational argument for government intervention is strong. But the question is whether 
licensure is the right form of government intervention. Why doesn’t the government 
simply provide the public with information about doctors’ training and about which 
treatments work and which don’t? That would give the freest rein to consumer sover-
eignty (the right of the individual to make choices about what is consumed and pro-
duced). The same argument applies to pharmaceuticals. Some people believe laetril is 
an effective cancer treatment even when scientific studies have shown it is not. If peo-
ple have the necessary information but still choose to treat cancer with laetrile, why 
should the government tell them they can’t?
Informational problems may be a 
problem of the lack of a market.
Some economists argue that licensure 
laws were established to restrict 
supply, not to help the consumer.
1The arguments presented here about licensing doctors also apply to dentists, lawyers, college professors, 
cosmetologists (in some states, cosmetologists must be licensed), and other professional groups.

175
	
If the informational alternative is preferable to licensure, why didn’t the govern-
ment choose it? Friedman argues that government didn’t follow that path because the 
licensing was done as much for the doctors as for the general public. Licensure has led 
to a monopoly position for doctors. They can restrict supply and increase price and 
thereby significantly increase their incomes.
	
Let’s now take a closer look at the informational alternative that critics say would 
be preferable.
The Informational Alternative to Licensure 
The informational alter-
native would allow anyone to practice medicine but would have the government certify 
doctors’ backgrounds and qualifications. The government would require that doctors’ 
backgrounds be made public knowledge. Each doctor would have to post the following 
information prominently in his or her office:
1.	Grades in college.
2.	Grades in medical school.
3.	Success rate for various procedures.
4.	References.
5.	Medical philosophy.
6.	Charges and fees.
	
According to supporters of the informational alternative, these data would allow 
individuals to make informed decisions about their medical care. Like all informed 
decisions, they would be complicated. For instance, doctors who only take patients 
Q-8  Who would benefit and 
who would lose if an informational 
alternative to licensing doctors 
were used?
ADDED DIMENSION
	
The informational alternative wouldn’t necessarily elimi-
nate the seven-year surgical residency. If the public believed 
that a seven-year residency was necessary to create skilled 
surgeons, many potential surgeons would choose that route. 
But there would be other ways to become a surgeon. For 
example, in high school, tests could be 
given for manual dexterity. Individuals with 
superb hand/eye coordination could go to 
a one-year technical college to train to be 
“heart technicians,” who would work as 
part of a team doing heart surgery.
Clearly open-heart surgery is the ex-
treme case, and most people will not be 
convinced that it can be performed by 
unlicensed ­medical personnel. But what 
about minor surgery? According to infor-
mational alternative advocates, many operations could be 
conducted more cheaply and better (since people with 
better manual dexterity would be doing the work) if restric-
tive licensing were ended. Or, if you don’t accept the argu-
ment for human medical treatments, how about for 
veterinarians? For cosmetologists? For plumbers? Might 
the informational alternatives work in these professions?
Licensure and Surgery
Surgery should be the strongest case for licensure. Would 
you want an untrained butcher to operate on you? Of 
course not. But opponents of licensure point out that it’s 
not at all clear how effectively licensure prevents butchery. 
Ask a doctor, “Would you send your child to any board-
certified surgeon picked at random?” 
The honest answer you’d get is “No way. 
Some of them are butchers.” How do 
they know that? Being around hospitals, 
they have access to information about 
various surgeons’ success and failure 
rates; they’ve seen them operate and 
know whether or not they have manual 
dexterity.
	
Advocates of the informational alterna-
tive suggest that you ask yourself, “What 
skill would I want in a surgeon?” A likely answer would be 
“Manual dexterity. Her fingers should be magic fingers.” 
Does the existing system of licensure ensure that everyone 
who becomes a surgeon has magic fingers? No. To become 
licensed as a surgeon requires a grueling seven-year resi-
dency after four years of medical school, but manual dexter-
ity, as such, is never explicitly tested or checked!
© Royalty-Free/Corbis RF

176	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
with minor problems can show high “success rates,” while doctors who are actually 
more skilled but who take on problem patients may have to provide more extensive 
information so people can see why their success rates shouldn’t be compared to those 
of the doctors who take just easy patients. But despite the problems, supporters of the 
informational alternative argue that it’s better than the current situation.
	
Current licensure laws don’t provide any of this information to the public. All a 
­patient knows is that a doctor has managed to get through medical school and has passed 
the medical board exams (which are, after all, only sets of multiple-choice questions). 
The doctor may have done all this 30 years ago, possibly by the skin of his or her teeth, 
but, once licensed, a doctor is a doctor for life. (A well-known ­doctor joke is the 
­following: What do you call the person with the lowest passing grade point average in 
medical school? Answer: Doctor.) The informational alternative would provide much 
more useful data to the public than the current licensing procedure does. There are, of 
course, arguments on both sides. A key issue of debate is whether people have the ­ability 
to assess the information provided. Supporters of licensing argue that people do not have 
ability; supporters of the informational alternative ­argue that they do.
Government Failure and Market Failures
The above three types of market failure—externalities, public goods, and informational 
problems—give you a good sense of how markets can fail. They could be ­extended almost 
infinitely; all real-world markets in some way fail. But the point was to provide you not 
only with a sense of the way in which markets fail but also with a sense that economists 
know that markets fail and many of them support markets and oppose regulation anyway. 
Simply to point out a market failure is not necessarily to call for government to step in and 
try to rectify the situation. Why? The reason can be called government failure, which we 
defined above as happening when the government intervention in the market to improve 
the market failure actually makes the situation worse.
	
Why are there government failures? Let’s briefly list some important reasons:
1.	Government doesn’t have an incentive to correct the problem. Government 
­reflects politics, which reflects individuals’ interests in trying to gain more for 
themselves. Political pressures to benefit some group or another will often 
dominate over doing the general good.
2.	Governments don’t have enough information to deal with the problem. 
­Regulating is a difficult business. To intervene effectively, even if it wants to, 
government must have good information, but just as the market often lacks 
­adequate information, so does the government.
3.	Intervention in markets is almost always more complicated than it initially 
seems. Almost all actions have unintended consequences. Government 
­attempts to offset market failures can prevent the market from dealing with the 
problem more effectively. The difficulty is that generally the market’s ways of 
dealing with problems work only in the long run. As government deals with 
the short-run problems, it eliminates the incentives that would have brought 
about a long-run market solution.
4.	 The bureaucratic nature of government intervention does not allow fine-tuning. 
When the problems change, the government solution often responds far more 
slowly. An example is the Interstate Commerce Commission, which continued to 
exist years after its regulatory job had been eliminated.
5.	Government intervention leads to more government intervention. Given the 
nature of the political process, opening the door in one area allows government 
to enter into other areas where intervention is harmful. Even in those cases 
Q-9  Would an economist necessarily 
believe that we should simply let the 
market deal with a pollution problem?
Q-10  If one accepts the three 
reasons for market failure, why might 
one still oppose government 
intervention?

177
where government action may seem to be likely to do some good, it might be 
best not to intervene, if that intervention will lead to additional government 
­action in cases where it will not likely do good.
	
The above list is only a brief introduction to government failures. Much more 
could be said about each of them. But exploring them would take us away from eco-
nomics and into political science. The important point to remember is that ­government 
failures exist and must be taken into account before making any ­policy recommenda-
tion. That’s why real-world economic policy falls within the art of economics, and 
policy conclusions cannot be drawn from the models of positive economics.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
An issue in which almost all the dimen-
sions of economic policy analysis come 
into play is global warming. The issue is 
enormous, and a recent expert consensus 
estimate of the cost of global warming in 
terms of lost income was a 1 percent de-
cline in global economic activity, which for 
the United States comes out to about $150 
billion, or $470 per person. As discussed 
in the box in Chapter 1 on market solutions, the framework 
within which the debate is taking place is the economic 
framework. Economists have done numerous studies of 
the costs and benefits of various policies, which have led 
to a consensus that global warming and the accompany-
ing climate change should be seen as an issue of market 
failure, that is, that the market places no price on emitting 
carbon-dioxide gas into the atmosphere even though 
emissions impose a cost on society.
	
The policy problems of dealing with climate change are 
formidable. The first is a major free rider problem. Because 
there is no world government that can force countries to 
comply with any global effort to address carbon emissions, 
any policy has to be voluntary, making it easy for one 
country to opt out (free ride). A second problem is that cli-
mate change is not bad for all areas. Some countries and 
areas within countries may actually benefit from climate 
change. For example, significant global warming will likely 
extend the growing season in northern countries and 
make areas that previously were almost uninhabitable be-
cause of the cold more pleasant. The costs of global 
warming are highly concentrated in low-lying coastal areas. 
This diversity of costs and benefits makes arriving at a 
­voluntary agreement much less likely.
	
A third problem is that the largest expected benefits to 
stopping climate change are in the future, while many of 
the costs are now, and people tend to discount future 
Climate Change, Global Warming, and Economic Policy
costs and benefits. A fourth problem is the 
lack of a clear cost/benefit analysis for 
various policy alternatives and the uncer-
tainty of the success of various technolo-
gies. Cost estimates of various policies to 
become largely free of fossil fuel emis-
sions by 2100 vary from 1 percent to 
16 percent of total world output. (Were a 
cost-competitive fuel-cell-powered car or 
a fusion nuclear reactor developed, the use of fossil fuel 
would decrease significantly, and the cost estimate would 
be much less.)
All these problems suggest that the ­debate about cli-
mate change policy will likely be a lively one. Over the 
coming years, we can expect to see three types of poli-
cies implemented: (1) the lowest-cost/highest-benefit 
­policies that are easy to implement such as more use of 
­energy-efficient lightbulbs, improved insulation stan-
dards on new buildings, and reduced standby power re-
quirements on electronic devices; (2) the politically 
high-profile policies ­instituted on a state or country basis, 
rather than on a global basis, that don’t really do much to 
solve the problem but that sound good in a sound bite; 
and (3) those policies that do not make much sense in an 
economic framework but that help certain firms and geo-
graphic areas, and that make sense within a political 
framework. 
Many economists believe that increased corn-based 
­ethanol production is an example; the carbon-dioxide emis-
sions from producing ethanol from corn are almost as 
great as the reduction in carbon-dioxide ­emissions re-
sulting from the use of ethanol as a fuel, but the pro-
grams significantly help ­farmers, so they have political 
support. Despite calls for change, the requirement that 
refiners use a certain portion of renewable fuels such as 
ethanol has remained.
© Carl De Souza/AFP/Getty Images

178	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
Conclusion
As a textbook writer, I wish I could say that some conclusions can be drawn about 
whether the government should, or should not, enter into the economy. I certainly have 
views about particular instances (in case you haven’t guessed, I’m a highly opinionated 
individual), but to lay out arguments and information that would convince a ­reasonable 
person to agree with me would take an entire book for each area in which government 
might intervene.
	
What I can do in this textbook is stimulate your interest in discovering for 
­yourself the information and the subtleties of the debates for and against government 
intervention. Just about every time you read, hear, or are asked the question “Should 
the government intervene in a market?” the answer is “It depends.” If your first 
­impulse is to give any answer other than that one, you may have trouble maintaining 
the ­appropriate objectivity when you start considering the costs and benefits of gov-
ernment intervention.
Should the government intervene in the 
market? It depends.
• An externality is the effect of a decision on a third 
party that is not taken into account by the decision 
maker. Positive externalities provide benefits to third 
parties. Negative externalities impose costs on third 
parties.  (LO8-1)
• The markets for goods with negative externalities 
produce too much of the good for too low a price. 
The markets for goods with positive externalities 
produce too little of the good for too great a 
price.  (LO8-1)
• Economists generally prefer incentive-based ­programs 
to regulatory programs because ­incentive-based pro-
grams are more efficient. An example of an incentive-
based program is to tax the producer of a good that 
results in a negative­ ­externality by the amount of the 
externality.  (LO8-2)
• Voluntary solutions are difficult to maintain for 
long periods of time because people have an 
­incentive to be free riders—to enjoy the benefits 
of others’ volunteer efforts without putting forth 
­effort themselves.  (LO8-2)
• An optimal policy is one in which the marginal cost 
of undertaking the policy equals its marginal 
­benefit.  (LO8-2)
• Public goods are nonexclusive and nonrival. It is 
­difficult to measure the benefits of public goods 
Summary
­because people do not reveal their preferences by 
­purchasing them in the marketplace.  (LO8-3)
• Theoretically, the market value of a public good can be 
calculated by summing the value that each individual 
places on every quantity. This is vertically summing 
­individual demand curves.  (LO8-3)
• Individuals have an incentive to withhold information 
that will result in a lower price if one is a seller and a 
higher price if one is a consumer. Because of this 
­incentive to withhold information, the markets for 
some goods disappear. Such market failures are 
known as adverse selection problems.  (LO8-4)
• The health insurance market suffers from both 
­adverse selection problems and moral hazard 
­problems.  (LO8-4)
• Licensure and full disclosure are two solutions to the 
informational problem.  (LO8-4)
• Government intervention may worsen the problem 
­created by the market failure. Government failure occurs 
because: (1) governments don’t have an ­incentive to 
­correct the problem, (2) governments don’t have enough 
information to deal with the problem, (3) intervention is 
more complicated than it initially seems, (4) the bureau-
cratic nature of government precludes fine-tuning, and 
(5) government intervention often leads to more 
­government ­intervention.  (LO8-5)

	
Chapter 8 ■ Market Failure versus Government Failure	
179
Key Terms
adverse selection problem
direct regulation
efficient
effluent fee
externality
free rider problem
government failure
inefficient
marginal social benefit
marginal social cost
market failure
market incentive plan
moral hazard problem
negative externality
optimal policy
positive externality
public good
screening
signaling
tax incentive program
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 State three reasons for a potentially beneficial role of 
­government intervention.  (LO8-1)
	 2.	 Is the marginal social benefit of a good that exhibits 
­positive externalities greater or less than the private social 
benefit of that good? Why?  (LO8-1)
	 3.	 How would an economist likely respond to the statement 
“There is no such thing as an acceptable level of 
­pollution”?  (LO8-1)
	 4.	 Would a high tax on oil significantly reduce the amount 
of pollution coming from the use of oil? Why or why 
not?  (LO8-2)
	 5.	 The marginal cost, marginal social cost, and demand for 
fish are represented by the curves in the graph below. Sup-
pose that there are no restrictions on fishing.  (LO8-1)
	a.	 Assuming perfect competition, demonstrate graphi-
cally what the catch is going to be, and at what price it 
will be sold.
	b.	 What are the socially efficient price and output?
MSC
MC
Demand
Price
Quantity
	 6.	 Which is more efficient: a market incentive program or a 
direct regulatory program? Why?  (LO8-2)
	 7.	 There’s a gas shortage in Gasland. You’re presented with 
two proposals that will achieve the same level of reduction 
in the use of gas. Proposal A would force everybody to 
­reduce their gas consumption by 5 percent. Proposal B 
would impose a 50-cent tax on the consumption of a gallon 
of gas, which would also achieve a 5 percent reduction.
Consumers of gas can be divided into two groups—one 
group whose demand is elastic and another group whose 
demand is inelastic.  (LO8-2)
	a.	 How will the proposals affect each group?
	b.	 Which group would support a regulatory policy?
	c.	 Which would support a tax policy?
	 8.	 Economists Don Fullerton and Thomas C. Kinnaman 
studied the effects of the Charlottesville, Virginia, change 
from charging a flat fee for garbage collection to 
­charging $0.80 per 32-gallon bag and found the 
­following results:
	 	 The weight of garbage collected fell by 14 percent.
	 	 The volume of garbage collected fell by 37 percent.
	 	 The weight of recycling rose by 16 percent.  (LO8-2)
	a.	 Why did recycling increase and garbage collection 
­decrease?
	b.	 Why did the weight of garbage fall by less than the 
volume of garbage collected?
	c.	 Demonstrate, using supply and demand curves, the 
­effect of the change in pricing on the volume of 
­garbage collected.
	 9.	 List the public-good aspects (if any) of the following 
goods: safety, street names, and a steak dinner.  (LO8-3)
	10.	 Why are both nonexcludability and nonrivalry important 
­elements of public goods?  (LO8-3)
	11.	 Why are voluntary contributions to provide for public 
goods such as city parks unlikely to lead to an efficient 
quantity of parks in a city?  (LO8-3)
	12.	 Use the table below, which shows the demand for a public 
good in an economy consisting of two households, A and 
B, to answer a to d below.  (LO8-3)
Price	
$0.00	 $0.50	 $1.00	
$1.50	 $2.00	 $2.50	 $3.00
Quantity    A	
12	
10	
8	
6	
4	
2	
0
demanded  B	
 4	
 3	
2	
1	
0	
0	
0
	a.	 Graph the individual demand curves and the market 
demand curve.

180	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
	b.	 What would make you doubt that the table is an 
­accurate reporting of the individual demand curves?
	c.	 If the marginal cost of providing 1 unit of the good is 
$2.00, what is the socially optimal amount of the 
­public good?
	d.	 Given the free rider problem, is your answer to c most 
likely an underestimate or an overestimate?
	13.	 If you are willing to pay $1,000 for a used stereo that is a 
“cherry” and $200 for a used stereo that is a “lemon,” how 
much will you be willing to offer to purchase a ­stereo if 
there is a 50 percent chance that the stereo is a lemon? If 
owners of cherry stereos want $700 for their cherries, how 
will your estimate of the chance of getting a cherry 
change?  (LO8-4)
	14.	 Give three examples of signaling in the real world.  (LO8-4)
	15.	 Automobile insurance companies offer low-premium 
­contracts with a high deductible and high-premium 
­contracts with low deductibles. How is this an example 
of screening?  (LO8-4)
	16.	 What is the adverse selection problem?  (LO8-4)
	17.	 If neither buyers nor sellers could distinguish between 
“lemons” and “cherries” in the used-car market, what 
would you expect to be the mix of lemons and cherries 
for sale?  (LO8-4)
	18.	 Automobile insurance companies charge lower rates to 
married individuals than they do to unmarried individuals. 
What economic reason is there for such a practice? Is it 
fair?  (LO8-4)
	19.	 An advanced degree is required to teach at most colleges. 
In what sense is this a form of restricting entry through 
­licensure?  (LO8-4)
	20.	 Who would benefit and who would lose if an informational 
alternative to licensing doctors were introduced?  (LO8-4)
	21.	 What is the effect of the moral hazard problem on insur-
ance premiums? Explain your answer.  (LO8-4)
	22.	 The total cost of government regulations in the U.S. manu-
facturing sector was estimated by the National Association 
of Manufacturers to be about $2 trillion in 2012, or $15,400 
per family.  (LO8-5)
	a.	 Do their findings mean that the United States had too 
many regulations?
	b.	 How would an economist decide which regulations to 
keep and which to do away with?
	23.	 When Ben wears his red shirt, it bothers Sally, who hates 
the color red. Since Ben’s wearing of a red shirt ­imposes a 
cost on Sally, it involves an externality. Would it therefore 
be correct to have the government intervene and forbid 
Ben to wear a red shirt?  (LO8-5)
	24.	 True or false? Burning fossil fuels contributes to  
climate change. Thus, it makes sense for the 
­government to place a tax on the burning of fossil 
­fuels. Why?  (LO8-5)
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 The book titles this chapter “Market Failure versus 
­Government Failure.”
	a.	 Does the fact that the author spends most of the 
chapter discussing market failure rather than 
­government failure suggest an ideological bias in 
the book?
	b.	 If so, how would you characterize that bias? (Austrian)
	 2.	 In the late 19th century, Washington Gladden said, “He 
who battles for the Christianization of society will find 
their strongest foe in the field of economics. Economics is 
indeed the dismal science because of the selfishness of its 
maxims and the inhumanity of its conclusions.”
	a.	 Evaluate this statement.
b.	 Is there a conflict between the ideology of the market 
and the precepts of Christianity?
	c.	 Would a society that emphasized a market mode of 
production benefit from having a moral framework 
that emphasized selflessness rather than selfishness? 
(Religious)
	 3.	 Institutional economists define economics as the study of 
how people use institutions to socially interact in the 
­process of extracting materials from the biophysical 
world to ­produce and exchange goods and services to 
­reproduce ­culture and better the human condition. If you 
accept this definition of economics, under what condi-
tions is government intervention in the market acceptable? 
­(Institutionalist)
	 4.	 Post-Keynesians suggest that contractual agreements 
might be a way to deal with asymmetric information.
	a.	 Name a business or consumer transaction where 
­asymmetric information might occur.
	b.	 How could a contractual agreement overcome the 
problems of asymmetric information in that market?
	c.	 Would that contractual agreement arise without 
­government intervention? (Post-Keynesian)
	 5.	 Water privatization in South Africa has been guided by 
what the World Bank calls the “cost recovery” approach: 
Water should be made available to people only if the 
­company providing it can recover its costs plus a profit. 
In 1995, private companies began taking over the 
­provision of water in South Africa. By the early 2000s 
some ­cities saw water prices increase fourfold, millions 

	
Chapter 8 ■ Market Failure versus Government Failure	
181
of people had their water cut off, and outbreaks of cholera 
returned for the first time in decades.
	a.	 Which of your textbook’s list of market failures 
­apply to the privatization of water utilities in  
South Africa?
	b.	 Is the failure so serious that it makes the private 
­provision of water bad public policy?
	c.	 If not, why not? If so, what policies would make more 
economic sense? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 More than half of 30 economists polled recently stated 
that the federal gasoline tax should be raised to $1 or 
higher. What do you suppose were their reasons?
	 2.	 In his book At the Hand of Man, Raymond Bonner argues 
that Africa should promote hunting, charging large fees 
for permits to kill animals (for example, $7,500 for a 
­permit to shoot an elephant).
	a.	 What are some arguments in favor of this proposal?
	b.	 What are some arguments against?
	 3.	 Suppose an air-quality law is passed that requires 3.75 per-
cent of all the cars sold to emit zero pollution.
	a.	 What would be the likely impact of this law?
	b.	 Can you think of any way in which this law might 
­actually increase pollution rather than decrease it?
	c.	 How might an economist suggest modifying this law 
to better achieve economic efficiency?
	 4.	 Economist Robert W. Turner suggested three market 
­failures that could justify government provision of 
­national parks. What three failures did he likely discuss 
and what is the cause of the failure?
	 5.	 Should government eliminate the Food and Drug 
­Administration’s role in restricting which drugs may be 
marketed? Why or why not?
	 6.	 Financial analysts are not currently required to be 
­licensed. Should they be licensed? Why or why not?
	 7.	 Recently scientists identified a gene that accounts for 
5 percent of thrill-seeking behavior. People with this 
gene are likely to take more risks such as smoking and 
bungee jumping in search of the next thrill. Provide two 
arguments—one for and one against—requiring people to 
undergo testing to find out if they have this gene before a 
company agrees to provide life insurance.
	 8.	 List five ways you are affected on a daily basis by 
­government intervention in the market. For what rea-
son might government be involved? Is that reason 
­justified?
	 9.	 Would a high tax on oil significantly reduce the total 
amount of pollution in the environment?
	10.	 A debate about dairy products concerns the labeling of 
milk produced from cows that have been injected with the 
­hormone BST, which significantly increases milk produc-
tion. Since the FDA has determined that this ­synthetically 
produced copy of a milk hormone is ­indistinguishable from 
the hormone produced naturally by the cow, and also has 
determined that milk from cows treated with BST is indis-
tinguishable from milk from untreated cows, some people 
have argued that no labeling requirement is necessary. 
­Others argue that the consumer has a right to know.
	a.	 Where do you think most dairy farmers stand on this 
labeling issue?
	b.	 If consumers have a right to know, should labels 
­inform them of other drugs, such as antibiotics, 
­normally given to cows?
	c.	 Do you think dairy farmers who support BST labeling 
also support the broader labeling law that would be 
needed if other drugs were included? Why?
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 An externality is an effect of a decision not taken into 
­account by the decision maker. When there are externali-
ties, the private cost no longer necessarily reflects the 
­social cost, and therefore the market may not work 
­properly.  (LO8-1)
	 2.	 No. The existence of a positive externality does not mean 
that the market works better than if no externality ex-
isted. It means that the market is not supplying a 
­sufficient amount of the resource or activity, and 
­insufficient supply can be as inefficient as an 
­oversupply.  (LO8-1)
	 3.	 Because efficiency does not take into account who pays 
the costs, there may be a trade-off between fairness and 
­efficiency. For example, a tax on gasoline would be ­efficient, 
but because the poor tend to drive older, less fuel-efficient 
cars, they will end up paying more of the tax, which some 
may believe to be unfair. The tax could be seen as both 
fair and efficient because consumers choose to reduce 
their gas use based on the new price, so the ­solution is 
efficient. The ­solution has an element of ­fairness in it 
since those causing the pollution are those paying 
more.  (LO8-2)

182	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
	 4.	 The tax incentive approach to deal with externalities is 
fair in the following sense: Individuals whose actions 
­result in more pollution pay more. Individuals whose 
­actions result in less pollution pay less. In some broader 
sense this may not be fair if one takes into account the 
­initial positions of those polluting. For example, people 
who live in less-populated states often have to drive 
­farther to work and would pay a higher tax than  
others.  (LO8-2)
	 5.	 Voluntary actions that are not in people’s self-interest may 
not work in large groups because individuals will rely on 
others to volunteer. There is also a potential lack of effi-
ciency in voluntary solutions since the person who volun-
tarily reduces consumption may not be the person who 
faces the least cost of doing so.  (LO8-2)
	 6.	 It is difficult for government to decide the efficient 
­quantity of a public good because public goods are not 
purchased by individuals in markets. Therefore, individuals 
do not reveal the value they place on public goods. 
­Individuals also face incentives to overstate the value they 
place on public goods if they do not have to pay for them, 
and to understate the value if they do have to share the 
cost.  (LO8-3)
	 7.	 Since adverse selection is a problem in the medical insur-
ance industry, with fuller information, I would expect that 
average medical rates would decline since the adverse 
­selection problem would disappear. Medical insurers 
would be able to offer lower-cost insurance to people who 
are less likely to get sick and who perhaps choose not to 
be covered at today’s high rates.  (LO8-4)
	 8.	 If an informational alternative to licensing doctors were 
introduced, existing doctors would suffer a significant 
monetary loss, and students who would likely go on to 
medical school in existing institutions would face lower 
potential incomes when they entered practice. Those who 
benefit would likely be (1) those who did not want to go 
through an entire medical school schedule but were will-
ing to learn a specialty that required far less education and 
in which they had a particular proclivity to do well and 
(2) consumers, who would get more for less.  (LO8-4)
	 9.	 An economist would not necessarily believe that we 
should simply let the market deal with the pollution 
­problem. Pollution clearly involves externalities. Where 
economists differ from many laypeople is in how to 
­handle the problem. An economist is likely to look more 
carefully into the costs, try to build price incentives into 
whatever program is designed, and make the marginal 
­private cost equal the marginal social cost.  (LO8-5)
	10.	 One can accept all three explanations for market failure 
and still oppose government intervention if one believes 
that government intervention will cause worse problems 
than the market failure causes.  (LO8-5)

”
American farmers have become 
welfare addicts, protected and 
assisted at every turn by a network  
of programs paid for by their fellow 
citizens. If Americans still believe in  
the virtue of self-reliance, they  
should tell Washington to get  
out of the way and let farmers  
practice it.
—Stephen Chapman
“
Politics and Economics:  
The Case of Agricultural Markets
This web chapter can be found among the 
library resources in McGraw-Hill Connect® 
Chapter Outline
The Good/Bad Paradox in Agriculture
The Long-Run Decline of Farming
The Short-Run Cyclical Problem Facing Farmers
The Difficulty of Coordinating Farm Production
Ways around the Good/Bad Paradox
The General Rule of Political Economy
Four Price Support Options
Supporting the Price by Regulatory Measures
The Need for Rationing
Distributional Consequences 
Providing Economic Incentives to Reduce Supply
The Need for Rationing
Distributional Consequences
Subsidizing the Sale of the Good
Buying Up and Storing, Giving Away, or Destroying the Good
Distributional Consequences
The Need to Dispose of Surplus
Which Group Prefers Which Option?
Economics, Politics, and Real-World Policies
Interest Groups
International Issues
Conclusion
chapter 8W
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO8W-1	
Explain the good/bad 
paradox in farming and 
how it can be avoided.
LO8W-2	 Explain how a price 
support system works 
and show the 
distributional 
consequences of four 
alternative methods of 
price support.
LO8W-3	 Discuss real-world 
pressures politicians face 
when designing 
agricultural policy.
Source: Jeff Vanuga, USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service

“
Source: Jeff Vanuga, USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
”
American farmers have become welfare 
addicts, protected and assisted at every 
turn by a network of programs paid  
for by their fellow citizens. If Americans still 
believe in the virtue of self-reliance, they 
should tell Washington to get  
out of the way and let farmers  
practice it.
—Stephen Chapman
Ever since the 1930s, the U.S. Congress has pro-
vided aid to farmers in the form of price ­supports and 
other payments. In the early 1990s, Congress tried to 
wean farmers off government support systems with the Freedom to Farm Act. 
It paid them a large amount of support immediately with the understanding 
that, in the future, price supports and other payments would be reduced. That 
didn’t happen, and, every few years, ­Congress passes an agricultural support 
bill that continues support payments to farmers for a variety of ­programs. 
Why? The answer lies in politics, not ­economics; a number of farm states 
are swing states in elections, and both parties want to win their votes.
	
Agricultural markets provide good examples of the interaction between the 
invisible hand and political forces. Considering the economics of agricultural 
markets shows us how powerful a tool supply/demand analysis is in helping us 
understand not only the workings of perfectly competitive markets but also the 
effects of government intervention in a market.
	
While this chapter is about agricultural markets, bear in mind that the les-
sons of the analysis apply to a wide variety of markets in which the invisible 
hand and politics interact. As you read the chapter, applying the analysis to 
other markets will be a useful exercise.
	
In many ways, agricultural markets fit the classic picture of perfect 
­competition. First, there are many independent sellers who are generally price 
takers. Second, there are many buyers. Third, the products are ­interchangeable: 
Farm A’s wheat can readily be substituted for farm B’s wheat. And fourth, 
prices can, and do, vary considerably. On the basis of these inherent characteristics, 
it is reasonable to talk about agricultural markets as competitive markets.
Politics and Economics:  
The Case of Agricultural Markets
chapter 8W
After Reading This Chapter, 
You Should Be Able To:
LO8W-1	
Explain the good/bad 
paradox in farming and 
how it can be avoided.
LO8W-2	 Explain how a price 
support system  
works and show the 
distributional 
consequences of four 
alternative methods of 
price support.
LO8W-3	 Discuss real-world 
pressures politicians face 
when designing 
agricultural policy.

8W-2
	
In other ways, however, agricultural markets are far from perfectly competitive. 
The competitiveness of many agricultural markets is influenced by government 
­programs. In fact, neither the United States nor any other country allows the market, 
unhindered, to control agricultural prices and output. For example, the U.S. 
­government sets a minimum price for milk; buys up large quantities of wheat and 
stockpiles it; and allows only those with government-issued licenses to grow tobacco.
	
I could have made the list of government programs much longer because the govern-
ment has a program for just about every major agricultural market. The point is clear, 
however: The competitive market in agriculture is not a story of the invisible hand alone. 
It’s the story of a constant struggle between political and economic forces. Whenever the 
invisible hand pushes prices that farmers receive down, various coalitions of political 
forces generally work to push them back up. Without continued political pressure and 
government programs, far fewer farms would exist. Farm states know this and are strongly 
encouraging their farmers to engage in value-added farming, in which farmers take over 
some of the other activities that give agricultural goods their value to the consumer.
The Good/Bad Paradox in Agriculture
Agriculture is characterized by what might be called a good/bad paradox (the 
­phenomenon of doing poorly because you’re doing well). This good/bad paradox shows 
up in a variety of ways. Looking at the long run, we see that the enormous ­increase in 
agricultural productivity over the past few centuries has reduced ­agriculture’s importance 
in U.S. society and has forced many farmers off the farm. Looking at the short run, we see 
that when harvests are good, farmers often fare badly financially; when harvests are poor, 
some farmers do very well financially. Let’s ­consider these two cases in some detail.
The Long-Run Decline of Farming
Most countries, the United States included, began as predominantly agricultural societies. 
When the United States was founded, 97 percent of the labor force was engaged in 
farming. Today less than 1 percent of the U.S. labor force works in agriculture.
Agricultural markets involve a constant 
struggle between political and 
economic forces.
The good/bad paradox is the 
phenomenon of doing poorly  
because you’re doing well.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
When people think of agricultural products, 
they often think of the products they buy, 
like Wheaties. Doing so gives them the 
wrong impression of the cost of agricultural 
products. To see why, let’s consider a 
15.6-ounce box of Wheaties that costs you, 
say, $3.75.
	
If you look at the ingredients, you’ll see 
that you’re buying wheat, sugar, salt, malt 
syrup, and corn syrup. So you’re buying 
­agricultural products, right? Well, a little 
bit. Actually, the total cost of those agricul-
tural ingredients is probably somewhere 
around 38 cents, about 10 percent of the 
cost of the box of Wheaties. What are you 
The Cost of a Box of Wheaties
­spending the other 90 percent on? Well, 
there’s packaging, advertising, transport-
ing  the boxes, processing the ingredients, 
stocking the grocery store shelves, and 
­profits. These are important components 
of Wheaties, but they aren’t ­agricultural com-
ponents.
The point of this example is simple: Much 
of our food expenditure isn’t for ­agricultural 
goods; it’s for the services that transform ag-
ricultural goods into processed foods, 
­convince us we want to eat those foods, and 
get those foods to us.
© John Ewing/Portland Press 
Herald/Getty Images

	
Chapter 8W ■ Politics and Economics: The Case of Agricultural Markets	
8W-3
	
The decline in the number of farmers isn’t the result of the failure of U.S. agricul-
ture. Rather, it’s the result of its tremendous success—the enormous increase in its 
productivity. It used to take the majority of the population to provide food for the 
United States. Today it takes only a small proportion to produce more food than the 
U.S. population can consume.
	
Figure 8W-1 shows how success, however, can lead to problems. In the long run, 
the demand for wheat is inelastic (i.e., the percentage change in quantity demanded is 
small relative to the percentage change in price), as it is for most agricultural products, 
so the figure shows the equilibrium in the inelastic portion of the demand curve.
	
In this example, initially farmers are selling quantity Q0 for price P0. Their ­total 
­income is P0Q0, shown by rectangles A and B. Now say that increases in productivity shift 
the supply curve out from S0 to S1. Output increases from Q0 to Q1, and price falls by a 
proportionately greater amount to P1. Income falls to P1Q1, shown by the B and C 
­rectangles. Farmers gained the C rectangle but lost the A rectangle. The net effect is the 
difference in size between the two rectangles. So, the net effect is negative.
	
In short, although productivity has increased, total revenue has fallen and many 
farmers have stopped farming altogether. They’ve done good by producing a lot, but 
the result for themselves is bad. This good/bad paradox will occur whenever the ­supply 
curve shifts outward in the inelastic range of the demand curve.
	
Due to competition among farmers, most benefits of productivity increases in agri-
culture have gone to consumers in the form of lower prices. As an example, consider 
chicken. In the early 1930s, when Herbert Hoover was president of the United States 
and running for reelection, he promised prosperity to the country by saying there 
would be “two chickens in every pot.” That promise meant a lot because, in today’s 
money, chicken then cost $8 a pound. Today the price of a whole chicken is under $2 
a pound, only about one-quarter of its price in 1930.
The Short-Run Cyclical Problem Facing Farmers
The long-run good/bad paradox for farmers is mirrored by a short-run good/bad 
­paradox: Good harvests often mean bad times and a fall in income; poor harvests often 
mean a rise in income.
	
A fact of life that farmers must deal with is that agricultural production tends to be 
highly unstable because it depends on weather and luck. Crops can be affected by too 
Q-1  What is the good/bad  
paradox?
Due to competition among farmers, 
most benefits of productivity increases 
in agriculture have gone  
to consumers in the form of lower 
prices.
FIGURE 8W-1  The Good/Bad Paradox
The good/bad paradox is demonstrated 
in this graph. At price P0, the quantity 
of wheat produced is Q0. Total income 
is P0Q0. But if increased productivity 
increases the supply of wheat from S0 
to S1, the price of wheat will fall from 
P0 to P1 and quantity demanded will 
increase from Q0 to Q1. The increase in 
farmers’ income (area C) is smaller 
than the decrease in farmers’ income 
(area A). Increased productivity 
decreased farmers’ incomes.
Price
S0
S1
P0
P1
0
Q0Q1
Quantity of wheat
A
C
Demand
B

8W-4	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
little rain, too much rain, insects, frost, heat, wind, hail—none of which can be easily 
controlled. Say you’re an apple grower and you’re having a beautiful spring—until the 
week that your trees are blossoming, when it rains continually. Bees don’t fly when it 
rains, so they don’t pollinate your trees. No pollination, no apple crop. There goes your 
apple crop for this year, and there goes your income.
	
The short-run demand for most agricultural goods is even more inelastic than the 
long-run demand. Because short-run demand is so inelastic, short-run changes in sup-
ply can have a significant effect on price. The result is that good harvests for farmers 
in general can lower prices significantly, while poor harvests can raise prices 
­significantly. When the short-run price effect overwhelms the short-run quantity effect 
(as it does when demand is inelastic), farmers face the short-run good/bad paradox.
The Difficulty of Coordinating Farm Production
This good/bad paradox caused by inelastic demand isn’t lost on farmers. They, quite 
naturally, aren’t wild about passing on the gains to consumers instead of keeping the 
gains themselves. However, because agriculture is competitive, it is not in any one 
farmer’s interest to decrease his or her supply to avoid encountering the paradox. Com-
petitive farmers take the market price as given. That’s the definition of a competitive 
industry. While it is in the industry’s interest to have a “bad year” (to reduce total sup-
ply), it is in each individual farmer’s interest to have a good year (to increase ­output) 
even if the combination of all farmers having a good year would cause all farmers to 
have a bad year (revenues would fall).
	
It is, however, in farmers’ joint interest to figure out ways to have continually “bad” 
years—which are, of course, actually “good” years for them. In other words, it’s in 
their interest to figure out ways to limit the production of all farmers.
	
In a competitive industry, limiting production is easier said than done. It is difficult 
for farmers to limit production privately among themselves because although they 
make up only a small percentage of the total U.S. population, there are still a lot of 
them; there were approximately 1 million people working on farms in 2016. That’s too 
many to coordinate easily.
Ways around the Good/Bad Paradox
The difficulty of organizing privately to limit supply can be avoided by organizing 
through government. The U.S. political structure provides an alternative way for 
­farmers (and other suppliers) to coordinate their actions and limit supply. Suppliers 
can organize and get government to establish programs to limit production or hold 
price high, thereby avoiding the good/bad paradox. And that’s what farmers did, which 
is why so many government agricultural programs exist today. These programs have 
been a combination of price stabilization programs—programs designed to ­eliminate 
short-run fluctuations in prices, while allowing prices to follow their long-run trend 
line—and price support programs—programs designed to maintain prices at levels 
higher than the market prices.
The General Rule of Political Economy
If farmers are helped by farm programs, who is hurt? The answer is taxpayers and 
consumers. One would expect that these broad groups would strongly oppose farm 
programs because farm programs cost them in two ways: (1) higher taxes that govern-
ment requires to buy up surplus farm output and (2) higher prices for food. It’s not easy 
for a politician to tell nonfarm constituents, “I’m supporting a bill that means higher 
prices and higher taxes for you.” Nevertheless, the farm lobby has been quite success-
ful in seeing that these programs are retained.
Q-2  How can it be in the  
interest of the agricultural industry  
to have a “bad year”?
Q-3  What are two ways around the 
good/bad paradox?
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Marketing Poultry, a 1936 
Department of Agriculture 
publication, is representative of the 
major role government has played 
in agriculture.

	
Chapter 8W ■ Politics and Economics: The Case of Agricultural Markets	
8W-5
	
Economists who specialize in the relationship between economics and politics 
(known as public choice economists) have suggested that the reasons for farm groups’ 
success involve the nature of the benefits and costs. The groups that are hurt by agri-
cultural subsidies are large, but the negative effect on each individual in that group is 
relatively small. Large groups that experience small costs per individual don’t provide 
a strong political opposition to a small group that experiences large gains. This seems 
to reflect the general rule of political economy in a democracy, which we discussed 
in a previous chapter: When small groups are helped by a government action and large 
groups are hurt by that same action, the small group tends to lobby far more effectively 
than the large group; thus, policies tend to reflect the small group’s interest, not the 
interest of the large group.
	
This bias in favor of farm programs is strengthened by the historical representation 
of farmers in Congress. Right from its beginnings in 1787, the U.S. political system 
has reflected the importance of agriculture. The Constitution gives representation in 
the Senate equally to all states. Only representation in the House of Representatives is 
based on a state’s population. Since farm states have smaller populations than urban 
states, this arrangement gives farmers relatively more political power per capita than 
nonfarmers. This political structure plays an important role in making the farm states 
the voter swing states in national elections and, in part, explains why farmers can 
lobby effectively for strong support packages.
	
Farmers’ strong political representation in Congress establishes a core of law-
makers who favor price supports. That core is supplemented with individuals who 
like the countryside filled with farms rather than with suburban sprawl. Consumers 
and taxpayers in general, who would be hurt by price supports, generally lack the 
political organization necessary to make their will known and counter the pressure 
for price controls.
Four Price Support Options
Let’s now consider the theory underlying some alternative farm price support options. 
In doing so, we’ll try to understand which options, given the political realities, would 
have the best chance of being implemented, and why.
	
In a price support system, the government maintains a higher-than-equilibrium 
price, as diagrammed in Figure 8W-2. At support price P1, the quantity farmers want 
to supply is QS, but the quantity demanded at that price is QD.
	
At price P1, there’s excess supply, which exerts a downward pressure on price 
(arrow A). To maintain price at P1, some other force (arrow B) must be exerted; other-
wise the invisible hand will force the price down.
	
The government has various options to offset the downward pressure on price. 
These include
1.	Using legal and regulatory force to prevent anyone from selling or buying at a 
lower price.
2.	Providing economic incentives to reduce the supply enough to eliminate the 
downward pressure on price.
3.	Subsidizing the sale of the good to consumers so that while suppliers get a 
high price, consumers have to pay only a low price.
4.	 Buying up and storing, giving away, or destroying enough of the good so that the 
total demand (including government’s demand) increases enough to eliminate 
downward pressure on price.
	
These methods distribute the costs and benefits in slightly different ways. Let’s 
consider each in detail.
The general rule of political  
economy states that small groups  
that are significantly affected by a 
government policy will lobby more 
effectively than large groups that  
are equally affected by that same  
policy.
Farmers’ strong political  
representation in Congress  
establishes a core of lawmakers  
who favor price supports.
In a price support system, the 
government maintains a ­ 
higher-than-equilibrium price.
Four price support options are:
1.	 Using regulatory force.
2.	 Providing economic incentives to 
reduce supply.
3.	 Subsidizing the sale of goods to 
consumers.
4.	 Buying up and storing, giving away, 
or destroying the good.

8W-6	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
Supporting the Price by Regulatory Measures
Suppose the government simply passes a law saying that, from now on, the price of 
wheat will be at least $5 per bushel. No one may sell wheat at a lower price. If the 
competitive equilibrium price is higher than $5, the law has no effect. When the 
­competitive equilibrium is below the price floor (say the competitive equilibrium is 
$3.50 per bushel), the law limits suppliers from selling their wheat at that lower price.
	
The price floor helps some suppliers and hurts others. Those suppliers lucky enough 
to sell their wheat benefit. Those suppliers who aren’t lucky and can’t find buyers are 
hurt. How many suppliers will be helped and how many will be hurt depends on the 
elasticities of supply and demand. When supply and demand are inelastic, a large change 
in price brings about a small change in quantity supplied, so the hurt group is relatively 
small. When the supply and demand are elastic, the hurt group is larger.
	
In Figure 8W-3(a), at $5 suppliers would like to sell quantity Q2 but they can sell 
only Q1. They end up with a surplus of wheat, Q2 − Q1. Consumers, who must pay the 
higher price, $5, and receive only Q1 rather than Qe, are also hurt.
The Need for Rationing 
The law may or may not specify who will, and who 
will not, be allowed to sell, but it must establish some noneconomic method of ration-
ing the limited demand among the suppliers. If it doesn’t, buyers are likely, for exam-
ple, to buy from farmers who are their friends. If individual farmers have a ­surplus, 
they’ll probably try to dispose of that surplus by selling it on the black market at a 
price below the legal price. To maintain the support price, the government will have to 
arrest farmers who sell below the legal price. If the number of producers is large, such a 
regulatory approach is likely to break down quickly since individual incentives to sell 
illegally are great and the costs of enforcing the law are accordingly high.
	
In understanding who benefits and who’s hurt by price floors, it’s useful to distinguish 
between two groups of farmers: the farmers who were producing before the law went 
into effect and the farmers who entered the market afterward. In Figure 8W-3(a), the 
first group supplies Qe; the second group, which would want to enter the market when 
the price went up, would supply Q2 − Qe. Why must these groups be clearly ­identified? 
Because one relatively easily enforceable way to limit the quantity supplied is to ­forbid 
any new farmers to enter the market. Only people who were producing at the ­beginning 
of the support program will be allowed to produce, and they will be allowed to ­produce 
With a price floor, some method of 
nonprice rationing must determine how 
the limited demand will be distributed 
among suppliers.
FIGURE 8W-2  A Price Support System
In a price support system, the government 
maintains a higher-than-equilibrium price. 
At support price P1, the quantity of product 
demanded is only QD, while the quantity 
supplied is QS. This causes downward 
pressures on the price, P1, which must be 
offset by various government measures.
Price
QS
Supply
A
B
E
QD QE
Quantity
PE
P1
0
Demand

	
Chapter 8W ■ Politics and Economics: The Case of Agricultural Markets	
8W-7
only as much as they did before the program went into effect. Restricting production to 
the existing suppliers will reduce the quantity supplied to Qe, leaving only Qe − Q1 to 
be rationed among suppliers.
	
To use this method of restriction is to grandfather—to pass a law affecting a specific 
group but providing that those in the group before the law was passed are exempt from 
some provisions of the law. To “grandfather in” existing suppliers is one of the easiest 
provisions to enact into law and one of the easiest to enforce; thus, it is one of the most 
widely used. For example, when supply limitations were placed on tobacco, existing 
growers were all allowed to grow tobacco on land they were currently using for tobacco 
production. They could not, however, devote any new land to growing tobacco. (Later, 
tobacco farmers were allowed to sell their acreage allocations so that if old land was 
taken out of tobacco production, new land could be added.)
	
When it comes to keeping groups out of production, foreign producers are perhaps the 
politically easiest targets. To keep the domestic price of a good up, foreign imports, as well 
as domestic production, must be limited. U.S. taxpayers might put up with subsidizing U.S. 
farmers, but they’re likely to balk at subsidizing foreign farmers. So most farm subsidy 
programs are supplemented with tariffs and quotas on foreign imports of the same com-
modity. (See Chapter 10 for definitions and further discussion of tariffs and quotas.)
Distributional Consequences 
Notice that with the equilibrium in the 
inelastic portion of the demand curve, even though the average farmer is constrained 
Grandfathering is one of the  
politically easiest ways of restricting 
supply.
Price
Price
Price
Price
(a)  Regulating Price Directly
3.50
 
$5 
 
 
 
 
0
Supply
A
C
D
B
Demand
Q1Qe
Q2
Quantity
 
$5 
 
 
 
 
0
3.50
2.80
(b)  Providing Incentives to Reduce Supply
Quantity
Q1 Qe
Q2
Demand
A
Supply
B
 
$5 
 
 
 
 
0
3.50
1.75
Q2
Quantity
(c)  Subsidizing the Sale
Demand
C
Supply
B
A
(d)  Buying Up and Storing
Quantity
Q1
Q2
Demand
A
B
Supply
 
$5
 
0
3.50
FIGURE 8W-3 (A, B, C, AND D)   
Alternative Methods of Government 
Price Supports
Alternative methods have different 
distributional consequences. The 
consequences of regulatory 
measures are shown in (a); the 
consequences of providing 
economic incentives to reduce 
supply in (b); the consequences of 
subsidizing the sale in (c); and the 
consequences of buying up and 
storing the good in (d).

8W-8	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
as to how much can be sold, he or she is made better off by that constraint because the 
total revenue going to all farmers is higher than it would be if supply weren’t 
­constrained. The farmer’s total revenue from this market increases by rectangle A in 
Figure 8W-3(a) and decreases by the rectangle composed of the combined areas B and 
C. Of course, making the farmer better off is not cost-free. Consumers are made worse 
off because they must pay more for a smaller supply of wheat. There’s no direct cost to 
taxpayers other than the cost of enforcing and administering the regulations.
	
Notice in the diagram the little triangle made up of areas C and D. It shows an 
amount of income that society loses but farmers don’t get; it’s simply wasted. As dis-
cussed in Chapter 7, that little triangle is the welfare loss of producer and consumer 
surplus to society from the restriction.
Providing Economic Incentives to Reduce Supply
A second way in which government can keep a price high is to provide farmers with 
economic incentives to reduce supply.
	
Looking at Figure 8W-3(b), you see that at the support price, $5 per bushel, the 
quantity of wheat supplied is Q2 and quantity demanded is Q1. To avoid a surplus, the 
government must somehow find a way to reduce the quantity supplied back from Q2 to 
Q1. For example, it could pay farmers not to grow wheat, as it did in the acreage con-
trol programs established under President John F. Kennedy in the early 1960s. How 
much would such an economic incentive cost? Given the way the curves are drawn, to 
reduce the quantity supplied to Q1, the government would have to pay farmers 
$2.20 ($5.00 − $2.80) for each bushel of wheat they didn’t grow. This payment of 
$2.20 would induce suppliers producing Q2 − Q1 not to produce, reducing the quantity 
supplied to Q1. The payment is shown by the A rectangle.
The Need for Rationing 
There is, however, a problem in identifying those 
individuals who would truly supply wheat at $5 a bushel. Knowing that the govern-
ment is paying farmers not to grow wheat, farmers who otherwise had no interest in 
growing wheat will pretend that at $5 they would, simply to get the subsidy. To 
avoid this problem, often this incentive approach is combined with our first option, 
regulatory restrictions. Farmers who are already producing wheat at Qe are grand-
fathered in; only they are given economic incentives not to produce. All others are 
forbidden to produce.
Distributional Consequences 
When economic incentives are supplied, the 
existing farmers do very well for themselves. Their income goes up for two reasons. 
They get part of the A rectangle from the government in the form of payments not to 
grow wheat, and they get the B rectangle from consumers in the form of higher prices for 
the wheat they do grow. Farmers are also free to use their land for other ­purposes, so 
their income rises by the amount they can earn from using the land taken out of wheat 
production for something other than growing wheat. Consumers are still being hurt as 
before: They are paying a higher price and getting less. In addition, they’re being hurt in 
their role as taxpayers because the lightly shaded area (rectangle A) represents the taxes 
they must pay to finance the government’s economic incentive program. Thus, this 
­option is much more costly to taxpayers than the regulatory option.
Subsidizing the Sale of the Good
A third option is for the government to subsidize the sale of the good to hold down the 
price consumers pay but keep the amount suppliers receive high. Figure 8W-3(c) 
shows how this works. Suppliers supply quantity Q2 and are paid $5 per bushel. The 
Q-4  Which of the four methods of 
price support would farmers favor least? 
Why?

	
Chapter 8W ■ Politics and Economics: The Case of Agricultural Markets	
8W-9
government then turns around and sells that quantity at whatever price it can get—in 
this case, $1.75. No direct transfer takes place from the consumer to the supplier. Both are 
made better off. Consumers get more goods at a lower price. They benefit by area A. Sup-
pliers get a higher price and can supply all they want. They benefit by area B. What’s the 
catch? The catch, of course, is that taxpayers foot the entire bill, paying the difference 
between the $5 and the $1.75 ($3.25) for each bushel sold. The cost to ­taxpayers is 
represented by areas A, B, and C. This option costs taxpayers the most of any of the 
four options.
Buying Up and Storing, Giving Away,  
or Destroying the Good
The final option is for the government to buy up all the quantity supplied that consum-
ers don’t buy at the support price. This option is shown in Figure 8W-3(d). At the 
­support price of $5 a bushel, consumers buy Q1 and the government buys Q2 − Q1 at a 
total cost represented by the A rectangle.
Distributional Consequences 
In this case, consumers transfer the B 
­rectangle to ­suppliers when they pay $5 rather than $3.50, the competitive equilibrium 
price. The government (i.e., the taxpayers) pays farmers rectangle A. The situation is 
very similar to our second option, in which the government provides suppliers with 
economic ­incentives not to produce. However, this fourth option is more expensive for 
the ­government since it must pay $5 rather than providing a $2.20-per-bushel incentive 
not to grow as it did in option (b). In return for this higher payment, the government is 
­getting something in return: Q2 − Q1 of wheat.
The Need to Dispose of Surplus 
Of course, if the government buys the 
surplus wheat, it takes on the problem of what to do with this surplus. Say the govern-
ment decides to give it to the poor. Since the poor were already buying food, in 
­response to a free-food program they will replace some of their purchases with the 
free food. This replacement brings about a drop in demand—which means that 
the ­government must buy even more surplus. Instead of giving it away, though, the 
­government can burn the surplus or store it indefinitely in warehouses and grain 
­elevators. Burning up the surplus or storing it, at least, doesn’t increase the amount 
government must buy.
	
Why, you ask, doesn’t the government give the surplus to foreign countries as a 
type of humanitarian aid? The reason is that just as giving the surplus to our own poor 
creates problems in the United States, giving the surplus to the foreign poor creates 
problems in those countries. To the degree that the foreign poor have any income, 
they’re likely to spend most of it on food. Free food would supplant some of their 
­demand, thus lowering the price for those who previously sold them food. Giving any-
thing away destroys somebody’s market, and when markets are destroyed someone 
gets upset. So when the United States has tried to give away its surplus food, other 
foreign countries have put enormous pressure on the United States not to “spoil the 
world market.”
Which Group Prefers Which Option?
The four price support options I’ve just described can, of course, be used in various 
combinations. It’s a useful exercise at this point to think through which of the options 
farmers, taxpayers, and consumers would likely favor and to relate current debates 
about farm programs to these options.
Q-5  Which of the four methods  
of price support would taxpayers favor 
least? Why?
Q-6  Which of the four methods  
of price support would consumers favor 
least? Why?

8W-10	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
	
The first option, regulation, costs the government the least, but it benefits farmers 
the least. Since existing farmers are likely to be the group directly pushing for price 
supports, government is least likely to choose this approach. If it is chosen, most of the 
required reduction in quantity supplied will probably come from people who might 
enter farming at some time in the future, not from existing farmers.
	
The second option, economic incentives, costs the government more than the first 
option but less than the third and fourth options. Farmers benefit from economic 
incentive programs in two ways. They get paid not to grow a certain crop, and they can 
sometimes get additional income from using the land for other purposes. When farm-
ers aren’t allowed to use their land for other purposes, they usually oppose this option, 
preferring the third or fourth option.
	
The third option, subsidies on the sales to keep prices down, benefits both consum-
ers (who get low prices) and farmers (who get high prices). Taxpayers are harmed the 
most by this option. They must finance the subsidy payments.
	
The last option, buying up and storing or destroying the goods, costs taxpayers 
more than the first two options but less than the third since consumers pay part of the 
cost. However, it leaves the government with a surplus to deal with. If there’s a group 
who can take that surplus without significantly reducing their current demand, then 
that group is likely to support this option.
Economics, Politics, and Real-World Policies
The two farm programs most prevalent in the United States have been the land bank 
program (in which government supports prices by giving farmers economic ­incentives 
to reduce supply) and the nonrecourse loan program (in which government “buys” 
goods in the form of collateral on defaulting loans). Programs that support prices 
through regulation, our first option, generally haven’t been applied to existing farmers. 
They have often been used, however, to prevent new farmers from entering the 
­market—which isn’t surprising since the political impetus for farm programs comes 
from existing farmers. The third option, to subsidize the sale of the good so the farmer 
gets a high price and the consumer pays a low price, hasn’t been used because, as 
­discussed previously, it would be the most costly to taxpayers.
Interest Groups
The actual political debate is, of course, much more complicated than presented here. 
For example, other pressure groups are involved. For example, at times, farm groups 
and environmental groups have combined forces and have become more effective in 
shaping and supporting farm policy. Thus, new restrictions on supply in farming often 
operate in ways that environmentalists would favor, such as regulating the types of 
fertilizer and chemicals farmers can use.
	
Moreover, the three interest groups discussed here—farmers, taxpayers, and 
consumers—aren’t entirely distinct from one another. Their memberships overlap. All 
taxpayers are also consumers, farmers are both taxpayers and consumers, and so on. Thus, 
much of the political debate is simply about from whose pocket the government is going 
to get money to help farmers. Shall it be the consumer’s pocket (through higher prices)? 
Or the taxpayer’s (through higher taxes)? That said, the political reality is that consumer 
and taxpayer interests and the lobbying groups that represent them generally examine only 
part of the picture—the part that directly affects them. Accordingly, politicians often act 
as if these groups had separate memberships. Politicians weigh the options by ­attempting 
to balance their view of the general good with the power and preferences of the special 
interest groups that they represent or that contribute to their election campaigns.
The U.S. House Committee on 
Agriculture posts information  
about current farm legislation at  
www.agriculture.house.gov.
Q-7  What two farm programs have 
been the most prevalent in the 
United States?
Q-8  Are taxpayers, farmers, and 
consumers separate groups that are 
independent of each other?

8W-11
International Issues
The final real-world complication that must be taken into account is the international 
dimension. If you think government is significantly involved in U.S. agriculture, you 
should see its role in other countries such as the members of the European Union (EU) 
and Japan. For example, about 40 percent of the EU’s budget is devoted to farm subsi-
dies, and most of its farms stay in business only because of protection. Our agricultural 
policy is, in part, determined by trade negotiations with these other countries. For 
­example, a reduction in EU subsidies could bring about a reduction in our subsidies.
	
A second important international dimension of agricultural markets involves the 
growth of the Chinese and Indian economies. As these economies grow, the demand 
for food increases, both because people in these countries are eating more and because 
they are switching to eating more meat, which requires more grain per calorie than 
would a diet of primarily grain. The result of this increase in demand is an upward 
pressure on food prices. In the past, that upward pressure has been more than offset by 
new technological developments, such as the Green Revolution, which has increased 
If you think government is  
significantly involved in U.S. agriculture, 
you should see its role in other 
countries such as the members of the 
European Union and Japan.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
In 1996 the U.S. government voted for sweeping reforms 
­designed to eliminate major aspects of the farm support 
programs by 2002. What made that politically possible 
was a combination of three forces: (1) the government def-
icit, which put pressure on government to eliminate costly 
programs; (2) the ability of U.S. farmers to sell abroad, 
which reduced the benefits of the existing farm support 
program to them; and (3) the general pro-
market ideology that gained favor in the 
late 1990s and early 2000s.
	
When we look at the reforms more 
carefully, they look less sweeping than 
they initially appeared. There are three 
reasons why. First, three of the programs 
that most sharply limit production—peanut, 
sugar, and dairy programs—were left 
­untouched because of strong lobbying 
­efforts directed at members of Congress. 
Second, while in a number of areas direct 
price supports were eliminated, other indirect price support 
systems were not. The most important of these was the pro-
gram that allowed farmers to borrow money cheaply from 
the government, using the expected crop as collateral. This 
program allowed farmers to default on the loan, instead of 
paying it back, when the price of their crop was less than the 
prices set as collateral. This meant that if agricultural prices 
fell significantly, the buy-up-and-store option discussed in 
the text still existed and would hold prices up. This method 
of price support is extraordinarily costly to taxpayers.
Changes in U.S. Agricultural Policy
	
Third, to “compensate” farmers for the elimination of 
­direct price supports, the government gave direct grants 
to farmers. These grants were scheduled to start at  
$5.8 billion in 1998 and fall to $4 billion by 2002, when 
the law ended. With agricultural prices high, as they were 
at the time the law was passed, the net result of this  
“compensation” was that the total payments to farmers 
were initially higher than they were un-
der the old price support system. As 
prices fell in 1999, large emergency 
grants were given to farmers. In 2002 
Congress passed a large farm bill that re-
introduced and expanded subsidies to 
U.S. farmers, and Congress ­continued 
those subsidies with the farm bills of 
2008. These subsidies were still in place 
in 2016 despite pressure from the WTO 
to ­reduce them. In fact, the Doha round 
of international cooperation failed 
­because of the unwillingness of the United States and 
­Europe to reduce their farm subsidies. The situation 
hasn’t changed since then. Every five years a new farm 
bill is passed, and despite the high cost to the taxpayers, 
each new bill continues to heavily subsidize farming, 
­although the nature of the subsidization changes, and 
which particular farming sectors benefit changes. The 
changes in the nature of the ­programs allow politicians to 
say that they are reducing farm subsidies even as the 
overall subsidies increase.
© Scenics of America/PhotoLink/Getty 
Images RF

8W-12	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
supply more than demand. That is why in the past food prices have fallen over time. 
Whether that can continue is an open question.
Conclusion
This chapter has focused on agricultural markets, but it should be clear that the discus-
sion is about much more than just agriculture; it’s about the interrelationship between 
economics and politics. If individuals are self-interested maximizers, it’s reasonable to 
assume that they’re maximizers in all aspects of their lives. What they can’t achieve in 
the economic sphere, they might be able to achieve in the political sphere.
	
To understand the economic policies that exist, we must consider how people act in 
both spheres. Consideration of the economics underlying government policies often 
leads to useful insights. For example, as discussed in Chapter 7, a military draft can be 
seen as a mechanism for shifting the costs of defense away from the taxpayer and onto 
a specific group of individuals—young people. The government’s support for the arts 
can be seen as a transfer from general taxpayers to a specific group of individuals who 
like the arts. Government support for education can be seen as a transfer from general 
taxpayers to a specific group of individuals: students and instructors. These groups 
maintain strong lobbies to achieve their political ends, and the interaction of the ­various 
lobbying groups typically strongly influences what policies government will follow.
	
Economics doesn’t tell you whether government intervention or any particular-
policy is good or bad. That you must decide for yourself. But what economics can do is 
pose the policy question in terms of gains and losses for particular groups. Posing the 
question in that framework often cuts through to the real reasons behind various groups’ 
support for this or that policy. Often people support programs that transfer money from 
other taxpayers and consumers to themselves. They are, however, unlikely to say that is 
their motive. For example, I’ve seldom heard teachers say that the reason they favor 
government support for education is that those policies transfer money to them.
	
The economic framework directs you to look beyond the reasons people say they 
support policies; it directs you to look for the self-interest. The supply/demand frame-
work provides a neat graphical way to picture the relative gains and losses resulting 
from various policies.
	
But as usual there’s an on the other hand. Just because some groups may support 
policies for self-serving reasons, it is not necessarily the case that the policies are bad 
or shouldn’t be adopted. Reality is complicated, with many more gray answers than 
black-and-white ones.
Q-9  Is the military draft a  
cheaper way of maintaining  
defense than a volunteer army?
Q-10  Economic theory tells us that a 
volunteer army is preferable to an army 
maintained by a draft. True or false? 
Why?
• Agricultural markets have many qualities of perfectly 
competitive markets: sellers are price takers, there are 
many buyers, products are interchangeable, and prices 
vary considerably. The competitiveness of agricultural 
markets is affected by significant government 
­intervention.  (LO8W-1)
• The good/bad paradox is the result of the inelastic 
­demand in most agricultural markets. Increases in 
productivity increase supply; but because demand is 
inelastic, the percentage decline in price is greater 
Summary
than the percentage increase in equilibrium quantity. 
Total revenue declines.  (LO8W-1)
• A general rule of political economy in a democracy is 
that policies tend to reflect small groups’ interests, 
not the interests of large groups.  (LO8W-1)
• Because farmers are a small, easily identifiable group, 
and because farm states get larger representation 
­relative to population in the Senate, the farm lobby is 
very strong.  (LO8W-1)

	
Chapter 8W ■ Politics and Economics: The Case of Agricultural Markets	
8W-13
• A price support program works by government 
­maintaining higher-than-equilibrium prices  
through regulations, economic incentives,  
subsidies, and/or buying up and storing or  
destroying.  (LO8W-2)
• Regulatory price supports cost government the least, 
but benefit farmers the least.  (LO8W-2)
• Economic incentive price supports cost the government 
and taxpayers more than regulatory price supports, but 
less than subsidy price supports or buying up and storing 
the good.  (LO8W-2)
• Subsidy price supports benefit consumers, who pay 
lower prices, and farmers, who receive higher prices. 
Subsidy price supports cost taxpayers the 
most.  (LO8W-2)
• Buying up and storing the good gives government a 
surplus to deal with.  (LO8W-2)
• Two prevalent farm programs in the United States are 
the land bank program, in which government gives 
farmers economic incentives to reduce supply, and the 
nonrecourse loan program, in which government 
“buys” goods in the form of collateral on defaulting 
loans.  (LO8W-3)
• Agricultural policy is affected by interest groups (con-
sumers, taxpayers, and farmers) and ­international is-
sues (farm policies of trading ­partners).  (LO8W-3)
Key Terms
general rule of political 
economy
good/bad paradox
grandfather
land bank program
nonrecourse loan program
price stabilization program
price support program
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Would you characterize the agriculture market in the 
United States as perfectly competitive? Why or why 
not?  (LO8W-1)
	 2.	 If the demand for farm products were elastic rather than 
inelastic, would the good/bad paradox still exist? Why or 
why not?  (LO8W-1)
	 3.	 What is the general rule of political economy? How does 
it relate to the agriculture market?   (LO8W-1)
	 4.	 Show graphically how the effects of an increase in 
­supply will differ according to the elasticities of supply 
and demand.  (LO8W-1)
	a.	 Specifically, demonstrate the following combinations:
	 	 1.  An inelastic supply and an inelastic demand.
	 	 2.  An elastic supply and an inelastic demand.
	 	 3.  An elastic supply and an elastic demand.
	 	 4.  An inelastic supply and an elastic demand.
	b.	 Demonstrate the effect of a government guarantee of 
the price in each of the four cases.
	c.	 If you were a farmer, which of the four combinations 
would you prefer?
	 5.	 Demonstrate, using supply and demand curves, the distri-
butional consequences of a price support system achieved 
through acreage restriction.  (LO8W-2)
	 6.	 Which would a taxpayers’ group prefer: price support 
achieved through buying up the surplus or through 
­providing economic incentives for not producing?  
Why?   (LO8W-2)
	 7.	 What is the most costly method of price support to the 
taxpayer? Demonstrate graphically.  (LO8W-2)
	 8.	 What is the least costly method of price support to the 
taxpayer? Demonstrate graphically.   (LO8W-2)
	 9.	 Why do tariffs and quotas generally accompany price 
­support systems?  (LO8W-2)
	10.	 How does the elasticity of supply affect the cost of price 
supports in each of the four options?  (LO8W-2)
	11.	 Why is grandfathering an attractive option for govern-
ments when they institute price supports?  (LO8W-2)
	12.	 All government intervention in markets makes society 
worse off. True or false? Evaluate.  (LO8W-3)
	13.	 What type of price support program is the nonrecourse 
loan? What type is the land bank program?  (LO8W-3)
	14.	 Say that a law, if passed, will reduce Mr. A’s wealth  
by $100,000 and increase Mr. B’s wealth by 
$100,000.  (LO8W-3)
	a.	 How much would Mr. A be willing to spend to stop 
passage of the law?
	b.	 How much would Mr. B be willing to spend to ensure 
passage of the law?
	c.	 What implications for social policy do your answers to 
a and b have?

8W-14	
Microeconomics ■ The Power of Traditional Economic Models
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 American agricultural policy, which subsidizes farming, 
not only harms U.S. consumers but keeps many foreign 
­countries poor.
	a.	 How does American agricultural policy keep poor 
­nations poor?
	b.	 What argument should foreign leaders use to persuade 
the United States to abandon its current agricultural 
subsidies? (Austrian)
	 2.	 Humans and animals share much the same genetic struc-
ture, often as much as 98 percent. What implications 
does that shared genetic structure have for the productive 
techniques used in farming? (Religious)
	 3.	 Fifty years ago, farmers in North America received 
­between 45 percent and 60 percent of what consumers 
paid for food; today they receive a mere 3.5 percent.
	a.	 What is the reason for this change?
	b.	 What implications for agricultural policy does it 
­suggest? (Post-Keynesian)
	 4.	 Farm families have traditionally passed on the family farm 
to sons rather than daughters.
	a.	 Why is this?
	b.	 What does it suggest about the way in which daughters 
are treated in many families?
	c.	 Recently women have been increasing their relative 
ownership of small farms. What is the likely reason for 
this increase? (Feminist)
	 5.	 During the 1980s, almost 100,000 farmers abandoned 
­agriculture each year. Today, agribusiness dominates food 
growing, processing, distribution, and retailing in the 
United States. As early as the mid-1970s, just 20 corpora-
tions controlled poultry production, three corporations 
dominated lettuce production in California, and 25 giant 
supermarket chains accounted for over half of all U.S. 
­retail food sales.
	a.	 Has the development of agribusiness hurt small 
­farmers and farm communities?
	b.	 How has it hurt, or failed to hurt, small farmers?
	c.	 Is there a difference in where small farmers reinvest 
their profits as compared to agribusiness? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 Congratulations. You’ve been appointed finance ­minister 
of Farmingland. The president wants to ­protect her  
political popularity by increasing farmers’ ­incomes. She’s 
considering two alternatives: (a) bolstering agricultural 
prices by adding governmental demand to ­private demand 
and (b) giving farmers financial incentives to restrict sup-
ply and thereby increase price. She wants to use the mea-
sure that’s least costly to the government. The conditions 
of supply and demand are illustrated in the ­accompanying 
diagram. (S1 is what the restricted ­supply curve would 
look like. Ps is the price that the ­president wants to estab-
lish.) Which measure would you ­advise?  (LO8W-2)
S1
S
Ps
Pe
Qe
D
Quantity
Price
	 2.	 How do you suppose the federal government’s farm policy 
(specifically as it relates to corn) might have contributed to 
the obesity epidemic in the United States?  (LO8W-3)
	 3.	 The U.S. government made it against the law to grow  
peanuts unless the grower had been granted a government 
quota. It also essentially forbade peanut imports and set a 
minimum U.S. price of peanuts at about 50 percent higher 
than the price of peanuts on the world market. This 
­program cost the government $4 million a year in 
­administrative costs.  (LO8W-2, LO8W-3)
	a.	 Were there likely any other costs associated with the 
program?
	b.	 Demonstrate graphically how to come up with about 
$250 million of additional costs.
	c.	 When “peanut land”—land with peanut quotas—was 
sold, what was the likely price of that land compared 
to equivalent land without a peanut quota?
	d.	 Say that, under the World Trade Organization, the 
United States agreed to allow open imports of peanuts 
into the United States and guaranteed that all sellers 
received the existing price. What would happen to the 
governmental costs of the program?
	e.	 Say the government limited the guaranteed high price 
to U.S. producers. What would it have to do to make 
that guarantee succeed?
	 4.	 The U.S. Bureau of Land Management sets a fee for 
ranchers who graze their animals on public land. The fee 

	
Chapter 8W ■ Politics and Economics: The Case of Agricultural Markets	
8W-15
is equal to $1.43 per animal unit per month—the amount 
of forage needed to feed one cow and its calf, or five 
sheep, for a month. The market rate for grazing on private 
land is about $14 per animal unit per month.  (LO8W-3)
	a.	 Why do you think there is a difference?
	b.	 What are the advantages of setting the lower fee?
	c.	 Would you expect excess demand for government 
­grazing land? Why? Demonstrate graphically.
	 5.	 In early 2000, sugar prices were severely depressed, 
­falling below 18 cents a pound for raw cane sugar. Sugar 
producers received loans from the government, putting up 
their sugar as collateral at 18 cents a pound.  (LO8W-3)
	a.	 If sugar prices fall below 18 cents a pound and there are 
no consequences of default other than forfeit of collat-
eral, what would a sugar producer do if the ­market price 
of sugar is 16 cents a pound? ­Demonstrate graphically.
	b.	 Assuming the government ends up with the sugar, 
what three options does the government have for deal-
ing with it and what is a problem with each option?
	c.	 What would you predict would happen to the sugar 
lobby’s spending on lobbying efforts during this time?
	d.	 What lobbies might be fighting against this support 
program?
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 The good/bad paradox is the phenomenon of doing 
poorly because you’re doing well. It exists when 
­demand for your product is inelastic. Specifically, as it  
applies to ­agriculture, it means that when most farmers 
produce a lot, prices are low and their net income  
drops.  (LO8W-1)
	 2.	 Because demand is inelastic, it is in the interest of  
the agricultural industry for the supply of agricultural 
goods to decline due to bad weather or other supply 
­disruptions. The percentage rise in price will be greater 
than the ­percentage decline in quantity demanded, and  
total ­revenue for the industry will rise.  (LO8W-1)
	 3.	 There are two ways around the good/bad paradox. One is 
for suppliers to coordinate their activity and limit supply. 
The second way is for suppliers to lobby and get govern-
ment to establish programs to limit production, stabilizing 
the price and holding it high. Because of the difficulty  
of coordinating the production of a large number of  
farmers, it is this second track that U.S. farmers have  
followed.  (LO8W-1)
	 4.	 Farmers are least likely to support the regulatory method of 
price support, in which regulatory force is used to prevent 
anyone from selling or buying at a lower price. Although 
such a policy benefits farmers, it benefits them far less than 
other price support policies.  (LO8W-2)
	 5.	 Taxpayers will likely least favor the price support 
method of subsidizing the sale of goods to consumers 
because this method costs taxpayers the most. The 
low price paid by consumers and the high price 
­received by farmers together necessitate large 
­subsidies.  (LO8W-2)
	 6.	 Consumers would least favor the price support method  
of providing economic incentives to reduce supply and  
the price support method of regulatory force. Both these 
methods reduce the supply and push up the price. Some 
consumers would benefit from the buying up, giving 
away, or destroying method, which suggests that consum-
ers on average would prefer this to the regulatory or the 
economic incentive method.  (LO8W-2)
	 7.	 The land bank program, which gives farmers incentives to 
reduce supply, and the nonrecourse loan program, which 
buys up goods, have been the two most prevalent U.S. 
farm programs.  (LO8W-3)
	 8.	 While this chapter discusses taxpayers, farmers, and con-
sumers as separate groups independent of each other, in 
reality they are not. Each individual is, generally, both a 
taxpayer and a consumer, while farmers are generally 
members of all three groups. It is nonetheless useful to 
treat them as separate groups because specific interests 
predominate: for example, farmers’ interests as farmers 
significantly outweigh their interests as taxpayers or as 
consumers.  (LO8W-3)
	 9.	 In terms of actual money payment by the government, hav-
ing a military draft likely is a cheaper way of ­maintaining 
defense than is a volunteer army. However, a military 
draft can be seen as a type of hidden tax on a specific 
group of individuals—young people who are subject to 
the draft—to the degree that they are paid less than the 
going wage. If that hidden tax is also included in the cost, 
the military draft is not a cheaper way of maintaining de-
fense. Because it ­involves inefficiencies in who partici-
pates, it can, ­indeed, be seen as more expensive than an 
all-volunteer army.  (LO8W-3)
	10.	 False. Economic theory tells us nothing about what is 
preferable. Choices about what is preferable can only be 
made by specifying one’s value judgments. Such choices 
belong in normative economics and in the art of econom-
ics, where distributional effects, broader sociological is-
sues, and value judgments are included in the 
analysis.  (LO8W-3)

One of the purest fallacies is that trade follows  
the flag. Trade follows the lowest price current.  
If a dealer in any colony wished to buy  
Union Jacks, he would order them from  
Britain’s worst foe if he could save a  
sixpence.
—Andrew Carnegie
“
”
chapter 9
Comparative Advantage, 
Exchange Rates, and 
Globalization
If economists had a mantra, it would be “Trade is good.” Trade 
allows specialization and division of labor and thereby promotes 
economic growth. Much of economists’ support for trade comes 
from their theory of comparative advantage. In this chapter we 
consider how the theory of ­comparative advantage relates to the U.S. 
economy. We also explore the role exchange rates play in the theory of com-
parative advantage and international trade.
The Principle of Comparative Advantage
The reason countries trade is the same reason that people trade: Trade can make 
both better off. The reason that this is true is the principle of ­comparative 
­advantage to which you were introduced in Chapter 2. It is, however, important 
enough to warrant an in-depth review. The basic idea of the principle of 
­comparative advantage is that as long as the relative ­opportunity costs of 
producing goods (what must be given up of one good in order to get another 
good) differ among countries, then there are potential gains from trade. Let’s 
review this principle by considering the story of I.T., an imaginary interna-
tional trader, who convinces two countries to enter into trades by giving both 
­countries some of the advantages of trade; he keeps the rest for himself.
The Gains from Trade
Here’s the situation. On his trips to the United States and Saudi Arabia, I.T. 
­noticed that the two countries did not trade. He also noticed that the opportunity 
cost of producing a ton of food in Saudi Arabia was 10 barrels of oil and that the 
opportunity cost for the United States of producing a ton of food was 1/10 of a 
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO9-1	 Explain the principle of 
comparative advantage.
LO9-2	 Explain why economists’ and 
laypeople’s views of trade 
differ.
LO9-3	 Summarize the sources of 
U.S. comparative advantage 
and discuss some concerns 
about the future of the U.S. 
economy.
LO9-4	 Discuss how exchange rates 
are determined and what 
their role is in equalizing 
trade flows.
© Steve Allen/Brand X Pictures/Getty Images RF

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
185
­barrel of oil. At the time, the United States’ production was 60 barrels of oil and 400 tons 
of food, while Saudi Arabia’s production was 400 barrels of oil and 60 tons of food.
	
The choices for the United States can be seen in Figure 9-1(a), and the choices for 
Saudi Arabia can be seen in Figure 9-1(b). The tables give the numerical choices and 
the figures translate those numerical choices into graphs.
	
These graphs represent the two countries’ production possibility curves. Each com-
bination of numbers in the table corresponds to a point on the curve. For example, 
point B in each graph corresponds to the entries in row B, columns 2 and 3, in the 
­relevant table.
	
Let’s assume that the United States has chosen point C (production of 60 barrels of 
oil and 400 tons of food) and Saudi Arabia has chosen point D (production of 400 barrels 
of oil and 60 tons of food).
The principle of comparative advantage 
states that as long as the relative 
opportunity costs of producing goods 
differ among countries, then there are 
potential gains from trade.
Q-1  If the opportunity cost of oil for 
food were the same for both the United 
States and Saudi Arabia, what should I.T. 
do?
FIGURE 9-1 (A AND B)  Comparative Advantage: The United States and Saudi Arabia
Looking at tables (a) and (b), you can see that if Saudi Arabia devotes all its resources to oil, it can produce 1,000 barrels of oil, but if it 
devotes all of its resources to food, it can produce only 100 tons of food. For the United States, the story is the opposite: Devoting all of  
its resources to oil, the United States can produce only 100 barrels of oil—10 times less than Saudi Arabia—but if it devotes all of its 
resources to food, it can produce 1,000 tons of food—10 times more than Saudi Arabia. Assuming resources are comparable, Saudi Arabia 
has a comparative advantage in the production of oil, and the United States has a comparative advantage in the production of food. The 
information in the tables is presented graphically below each table. These are the countries’ production possibility curves. Each point on 
each country’s curve corresponds to a row on that country’s table.
Oil (in barrels)
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
A
B
C
G (After trade)
D (Initial choice)
E
F
(b)  Saudi Arabia’s Production Possibility Curve
Food (in tons)
Oil (in barrels)
A
B
C (Initial choice)
H (After trade)
D
E
F
Food (in tons)
(a)  United States’ Production Possibility Curve
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160
200
400
600
800
1,000
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
United States’ Production Possibility Table	
Saudi Arabia’s Production Possibility Table
	 Percentage 	
Oil	
Food 
	 of Resources 	
Produced	
Produced 
Devoted to Oil	
(barrels)	
(tons)	
Row
	
100%	
100	
0	
A
	
80	
80	
200	
B
	
60	
60	
400	
C
	
40	
40	
600	
D
	
20	
20	
800	
E
	
0	
0	
1,000	
F
Percentage 	
Oil	
Food 
of Resources 	
Produced	
Produced 
Devoted to Oil	
(barrels)	
 (tons)	
Row
	
100%	
1,000	
0	
A
	
80	
800	
20	
B
	
60	
600	
40	
C
	
40	
400	
60	
D
	
20	
200	
80	
E
	
0	
0	
100	
F

186	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
	
Now I.T., who understands the principle of comparative advantage, comes along 
and offers the following deal to the United States:
If you produce 1,000 tons of food and no oil [point F in Figure 9-1(a)] and give 
me 500 tons of food while keeping 500 tons for yourself, I’ll guarantee you  
120 barrels of oil, double the amount you’re now getting. I’ll put you on point H, 
which is totally beyond your current production possibility curve. You’ll get more 
oil and have more food. It’s an offer you can’t refuse.
I.T. then flies off to Saudi Arabia, to which he makes the following offer:
If you produce 1,000 barrels of oil and no food [point A in Figure 9-1(b)] and 
give me 500 barrels of oil while keeping 500 barrels for yourself, I guarantee 
you 120 tons of food, double the amount of food you’re now getting. I’ll put you 
on point G, which is totally beyond your current production possibility curve. 
You’ll get more oil and more food. It’s an offer you can’t refuse.
	
Both countries accept; they’d be foolish not to. So the two countries’ final con-
sumption positions are as follows:
	
Oil (barrels)	
Food (tons)
Total production	
1,000	
1,000
U.S. consumption	
   120	
   500
  U.S. gain in consumption	
       +60	
     +100
Saudi consumption	
   500	
   120
  Saudi gain in consumption	
     +100	
       +60
I.T.’s profit	
   380	
   380
For arranging the trade, I.T. makes a handsome profit of 380 tons of food and 380 bar-
rels of oil. I.T. has become rich because he understands the principle of comparative 
advantage.
	
Now obviously this hypothetical example significantly overemphasizes the gains a 
trader makes. Generally the person arranging the trade must compete with other trad-
ers and offer both countries a better deal than the one presented here. But the person 
who first recognizes a trading opportunity often makes a sizable fortune. The second 
and third persons who recognize the opportunity make smaller fortunes. Once the 
insight is generally recognized, the possibility of making a fortune is gone. Traders 
still make their normal returns, but the instantaneous fortunes are not to be made with-
out new insights. In the long run, benefits of trade go to the producers and consumers 
in the trading countries, not the traders, but the long run can be years, and even 
decades, in coming.
Dividing Up the Gains from Trade
As the above story suggests, when countries avail themselves of comparative advan-
tage, there are high gains of trade to be made. Who gets these gains is unclear. The 
principle of comparative advantage doesn’t determine how those gains of trade will be 
divided up among the countries involved and among traders who make the trade possi-
ble. While there are no definitive laws determining how real-world gains from trade 
will be apportioned, economists have developed some insights into how those gains 

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
187
are likely to be divided up. The first insight concerns how much the trader gets. The 
general rule is:
The more competition that exists among traders, the less likely it is that the trader 
gets big gains of trade; more of the gains from trade will go to the citizens in the 
two countries, and less will go to the traders.
	
What this insight means is that where entry into trade is unimpaired, most of the 
gains of trade will pass from the trader to the countries. Thus, the trader’s big gains 
from trade occur in markets that are newly opened or if the product is unique and can-
not be easily copied.
	
This insight isn’t lost on trading companies. Numerous import/export companies 
exist whose business is discovering possibilities for international trade in newly opened 
markets. Individuals representing trading companies go around hawking ­projects or 
goods to countries. For example, at the end of the 1999 NATO bombing campaign in 
Kosovo, what the business world calls the import/export contingent flew to Kosovo 
with offers of goods and services to sell. Many of those same individuals were in Iran 
as the United States lifted sanctions in 2016, and were also waiting to set up deals with 
Cuba as U.S. relations with Cuba thawed.
	
A second insight is:
Once competition prevails, smaller countries tend to get a larger percentage of 
the gains of trade than do larger countries.
The reason, briefly, is that more opportunities are opened up for smaller countries 
by trade than for larger countries. The more opportunities, the larger the relative 
gains. Say, for instance, that the United States begins trade with Mali, a small coun-
try in Africa. Enormous new consumption possibilities are opened up for Mali—
prices of all types of goods will fall. Assuming Mali has a comparative advantage 
in fish, before international trade began, cars were probably extraordinarily expen-
sive in Mali, while fish were cheap. With international trade, the price of cars in 
Mali falls substantially, so Mali gets the gains. Because the U.S. economy is so 
large compared to Mali’s, the U.S. price of fish doesn’t change noticeably. Mali’s fish 
are just a drop in the bucket. The price ratio of cars to fish doesn’t change much for 
the United States, so it doesn’t get much of the gains of trade. Mali gets almost all the 
gains from trade.
	
There’s an important catch to this gains-from-trade argument. The argument holds 
only if competition among traders prevails. That means that Mali residents are sold 
cars at the same price (plus shipping costs) as U.S. residents. International traders in 
small countries often have little competition from other traders and keep large shares 
of the gains from trade for themselves. In the earlier food/oil example, the United 
States and Saudi Arabia didn’t get a large share of the benefits. It was I.T. who got 
most of the benefits. Since the traders often come from the larger country, the smaller 
country doesn’t get this share of the gains from trade; the larger country’s international 
traders do.
	
A third insight is:
Gains from trade go to the countries producing goods that exhibit economies 
of scale.
Trade allows an increase in production. If there are economies of scale, that increase 
can lower the average cost of production of a good. Hence, an increase in production 
can lower the price of the good in the producing country. The country producing the 
good with the larger economies of scale has its costs reduced by more, and hence gains 
more from trade than does its trading partner.
Three determinants of the terms of 
trade are:
1.	 The more competition, the less the 
trader gets.
2.	 Smaller countries get a larger 
proportion of the gain than larger 
countries.
3.	 Countries producing goods with 
economies of scale get a larger gain 
from trade.
Q-2  In what circumstances would a 
small country not get the larger 
percentage of the gains from trade?

188	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
Why Economists and Laypeople Differ in  
Their Views of Trade
The comparative advantage model conveys a story with the theme of “trade is good”; 
trade benefits both parties to the trade. This story doesn’t fit much of the lay public’s 
view of trade, nor its fear of outsourcing. If trade is good, why do so many people 
oppose it, and what accounts for the difference between economists’ view of trade and 
the lay public’s view? I suggest four reasons.
Gains Are Often Stealth 
One reason for the difference is that laypeople often do not recognize the gains of 
trade—the gains are often stealth gains such as a decline in prices—while they easily 
identify the loss of jobs caused by the trade adjustments as countries shift production 
to take advantage of trade. For example, consider the price of clothing: A shirt today 
costs far less in real terms (in terms of the number of hours you have to work to buy it) 
than it did a decade or two ago. Much of the reason for that is trade. But how many 
people attribute that fall in price of shirts to trade? Not many; they just take it for 
granted. But the reality is that much of our current lifestyle in the United States has 
been made possible by trade.
Opportunity Cost Is Relative
A second reason for the difference between the lay view of trade and economists’ view 
is that the lay public often believes that since countries such as China have lower 
wages, they must have a comparative advantage in just about everything so that if we 
allow free trade, eventually we will lose all U.S. jobs. This belief is a logical contradic-
tion; by definition comparative advantage refers to relative cost. If one country has a 
comparative advantage in one set of goods, the other country must have a comparative 
advantage in another set.
	
That said, economists also must admit that the lay public does have a point. The 
comparative advantage model assumes that a country’s imports and exports are equal. 
That is, its balance of trade—the difference between the value of exports and the 
value of imports—is zero. But U.S. imports and exports are not equal. Currently, the 
United States imports much more than it exports; it pays for the excess of imports over 
exports with IOUs. As long as foreign countries are willing to accept U.S. promises to 
pay some time in the future, they can have a comparative advantage in the production 
of many more goods than the United States.1 Currently, people in other countries 
­finance the U.S. trade deficit by buying U.S. assets. Once the other countries decide 
that it is no longer in their interests to finance the U.S. trade deficit, economic forces 
such as the adjustment of exchange rates will be set in motion to restore a more equal 
division of comparative advantages.
Trade Is Broader than Manufactured Goods
A third reason accounting for the difference between the lay view of trade and the 
economists’ view is that laypeople often think of trade as trade in just manufactured 
goods. Trade is much broader, and includes the services that traders provide. Countries 
can have comparative advantages in trade itself, and the gains the trader makes can 
account for the seeming differences in countries’ comparative advantages.
Gains from trade are often stealth gains.
Much of our current lifestyle is  
made possible by trade.
The comparative advantage model 
assumes that a country’s imports  
and exports are equal.
Q-3  What are four reasons for the 
difference between laypeople’s and 
economists’ views of trade?
1One could make the model fit reality if one thinks of the United States as having a comparative 
­advantage in producing IOUs that other people will accept.

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
189
	
Notice in my example that the international traders who brought the trade about 
benefited significantly from trade. I included traders because trade does not take place 
on its own—markets and trade require entrepreneurs. The market is not about abstract 
forces; it is about real people working to improve their position. Many of the gains 
from trade do not go to the countries producing or consuming the good but rather to 
the trader. And the gains that traders get can be enormous.
	
Consider, for example, the high-priced sneakers ($190) that many “with-it” students 
wear. Those sneakers are likely made in China, costing about $8 to make. So much of the 
benefits of trade do not go to the producer or the consumer; they go to the trader. However, 
not all of the difference is profit. The trader has other costs, such as the costs of transporta-
tion and advertising—someone has to convince you that you need those “with-it” sneakers. 
(Just do it, right?) A portion of the benefits of the trade accrues to U.S. advertising 
firms, which can pay more to creative people who think up those crazy ads.
	
The United States currently has a large comparative advantage in facilitating trade 
and many trade companies are U.S.-based. These companies buy many of the goods 
and services that support trade from their home country—the United States. What this 
means is that goods manufactured in China, India, and other Asian countries are creating 
demand for advertising, management, and distribution, and are therefore creating jobs and 
income in the United States. That’s one reason for the large increase in ­service jobs in the 
U.S. economy. These are jobs that laypeople often do not associate with trade.
Trade Has Distributional Effects
A fourth reason most economists see international trade differently than do most laypeople 
involves distributional issues. The economists’ model doesn’t take into account trade’s 
­effect on the distribution of income. Most laypeople, however, are extremely concerned 
with the distribution of income, which means that they look at the effects of trade 
­differently. The problem is that while trade tends to benefit society as a whole, the benefits 
are often highly unevenly distributed. In the short run (which can last for 10 or  
20 years), trade can hurt some a lot. Specifically, when trade is opened among countries, as it 
has been during the period of globalization, those producers whose goods are both tradable 
and internationally competitive benefit; those producers whose goods are both tradable and 
not internationally competitive lose. On the consumer’s side, most people generally 
benefit since they now can get tradable goods at the lower international prices. 
	
For the United States, this has meant that with globalization many people who 
worked in manufacturing either lost their jobs or saw their wages fall to make U.S. 
production competitive. The same was true for those holding ­less-skilled jobs that 
could be outsourced. Blue-collar America was hard hit by globalization. The problems 
facing these groups were multiplied by immigration of workers who were willing to 
work at physically ­difficult jobs for lower wages than Americans were willing to work 
for. This immigration is another aspect of globalization that put further downward 
pressure on wages in those sectors. 
	
On the high end of the income distribution were people with intellectual property 
rights who suddenly had billions more people to whom to sell their products. Their 
income shot up; instead of being multimillionaires, they were now billionaires. 
­Similarly, demand for the services of those in high-tech and managerial and organiza-
tional jobs increased enormously because their work could not (yet) be duplicated in 
low-wage countries. Both finance and high-level management fell into these categories. 
So while the share of U.S. jobs in the manufacturing sector fell from 25 percent in the 
1970s to 10 percent more recently, the share of U.S. jobs in the professional service sec-
tor rose from 7 percent to 24 percent. The income going to that sector also rose signifi-
cantly. ­Finance in the economy rose from about 4 percent of the economy in the 1980s to 
Trade with China and India has  
been generating jobs in the  
United States.
Four reasons economists and laypeople 
differ in their views of trade are:
1.	 Gains are often stealth.
2.	 Opportunity cost is relative.
3.	 Trade is broader than manufactured 
goods.
4.	 Trade has distributional effects.

190	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
about 9 percent, more recently, and the financial sector accounted for much of the 
­profits in the U.S. economy. Salaries in the financial sector went up to astronomical lev-
els, even as manufacturing wages were falling. Put another way, the international trad-
ers and those associated with them (those who got many of the gains from trade in our 
comparative advantage ­example) thrived as a result of globalization. The gains from trade 
from which to take their share of the trade grew. So with every switch of business from the 
United States to China, U.S. international traders benefited. 
	
Workers in the education, health care, and government sectors also felt little or no 
downward pressure on their wages from globalization, because these sectors produce 
goods and services that cannot be easily traded on the global market. They are non-
tradables. In fact, wages in these sectors grew, just as they did in the financial sector. 
­Employment in the government, education, and health industries rose significantly, 
while manufacturing jobs fell. Whereas workers in the tradable sector would lose their 
jobs if their wages didn’t fall, workers in these nontradable sectors faced no global 
competition, so they could both raise their wages and keep their jobs. 
	
People in these nontradable sectors benefited not just as producers but also as 
consumers—earning more and getting manufactured and tradable agricultural goods 
such as televisions, tablets, automobiles, shirts, shoes, and grapes—at lower and 
lower prices. Thus, the workers in these sectors got the gains of trade as consumers—
lower prices—and kept their jobs and higher wages.
	
In contrast, manufacturing wages in the United States have not risen for 40 years; 
lower-paid individuals in these sectors have been able to keep up their consump-
tion only by borrowing and by increasing workloads (e.g., as in two-income fami-
lies). When you put all these effects together, you can see that globalization played 
a major role in increasing the income disparity in the United States. It created a 
group of haves—those who worked in nontradable and trade-organization sectors—
and of have nots—those who worked in sectors facing brutal global competition. Much 
of the lay public’s ­concern about globalization and international trade is rooted in 
these distributional effects. True, on average, trade may have benefited the United 
States, but that is of little comfort to those whose pay has fallen, and who have lost 
a job, because of it.
	
These distributional effects within the United States are important, and it is true 
that economists’ comparative advantage model doesn’t focus on them. Instead it 
­focuses on the aggregate effects of trade. In the aggregate the many U.S. workers who 
have been hurt by trade are counterbalanced by the billions of people in developing 
countries who have been pulled out of poverty by trade. Outsourced U.S. jobs often go 
to people who earn one-tenth of what a U.S. worker earns, and those jobs sometimes 
mean that the job holders can feed their families. On a global perspective, if one 
believes in global income equality, trade is the way it comes about. Trade also leads to 
greater world economic growth. That world growth ­increases income and wealth 
abroad, thereby creating ­additional demand for U.S. goods. Two billion consumers 
whose ­incomes are increasing offer many new growth opportunities for U.S. firms. 
Trade ­expands the total pie, and even when a country gets a smaller proportion of the 
new total pie, the absolute amount it gets can increase.
Sources of U.S. Comparative Advantage
When thinking about how the theory of comparative advantage relates to the current debate 
about outsourcing—what jobs are outsourced and what jobs are created in the United 
States—it is important to remember that comparative advantage is not determined 
by wages alone. Many other factors enter into comparative advantage and these other 
Q-4  Why has globalization caused 
employment and wages to decline in the 
manufacturing sector but not in the 
education, government, and  
health care sectors?
The concentrated nature of the costs of 
trade and the dispersed nature of the 
benefits present a challenge for policy 
makers.

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
191
­factors give the United States a comparative advantage in a variety of goods and services. 
Some of those other sources of U.S. comparative advantage include:
	 1.	 Skills of the U.S. labor force:  Our educational system and experience in 
­production (learning by doing) have created a U.S. workforce that is highly 
productive, which means that it can be paid more and still be competitive.
	 2.	 U.S. governmental institutions:  The United States has a stable, relatively noncor-
rupt government, which is required for effective production. These ­institutions 
give firms based in the United States a major comparative ­advantage.
	 3.	 U.S. physical and technological infrastructure:  The United States has ­probably 
the best infrastructure for production in the world. This infrastructure includes 
extensive road systems, telecommunications networks, and power grids.
	 4.	 English as the international language of business:  U.S. citizens learn English 
from birth. Chinese and Indian citizens must learn it as a second language. 
One is seldom as comfortable or productive working in one’s second lan-
guage as in one’s first language.
	 5.	 Wealth from past production:  The United States is extraordinarily wealthy, 
which means that the United States is the world’s largest consumer. ­Production 
that supports many aspects of consumption cannot be easily ­transferred geo-
graphically, and thus the United States will maintain a ­comparative advantage 
in producing geographically tied consumption goods, such as gourmet dining. 
	 6.	 U.S. natural resources:  The United States is endowed with many resources: rich 
farmland, a pleasant and varied climate, beautiful scenery for tourism, minerals, 
and water. These give it comparative advantages in a number of ­areas.
	 7.	 Cachet:  The United States continues to be a cultural trendsetter. People all 
over the world want to watch U.S. movies, want to have U.S. goods, and are 
influenced by U.S. advertising agencies to favor U.S. goods. As long as that 
is the case, the United States will have a comparative advantage in goods tied 
to that cachet.
	 8.	 Inertia:  It takes time and costs money to change production. Companies will 
not move production to another country for a small cost differential. The 
­difference has to be large, it has to be expected to continue for a long time, 
and it must be large enough to offset the risk of the unknown. Thus, the 
United States has an advantage over other potential places for production 
simply because the situation is known.
	 9.	 U.S. intellectual property rights:  Currently, U.S. companies and individuals hold 
a large number of intellectual property rights, which require other countries that 
use their patented goods or methods to pay U.S. patent holders. Every time some-
one (legally) buys the Windows operating system for his or her computer, a por-
tion of the purchase price covers a payment to a U.S. company. America’s culture 
of embracing new ideas and questioning authority cultivates an environment of 
innovation that will likely continue to generate new intellectual property rights.
	10.	 A relatively open immigration policy:  Many of the brightest, most entrepre-
neurial students of developing countries immigrate and settle in the United 
States. They create jobs and help maintain U.S. comparative advantages in a 
number of fields, especially high-technology fields. More than 50 percent of 
the engineering degrees, for example, go to foreign students, many of whom 
remain in the United States. 
	
Combined, these other sources of comparative advantage will maintain the United 
States’ competitiveness in a variety of types of production for the coming decades.
The United States has numerous 
sources of comparative advantage.

192	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
Some Concerns about the Future
The above discussion of the sources of U.S. comparative advantage should have made 
those of you who are U.S. citizens feel a bit better about the future of the U.S. econ-
omy; the United States is not about to lose all its jobs to outsourcing. But that does not 
mean that there are not real issues of concern. The typical layperson’s concern that the 
comparative advantage story does not capture what is going on with trade and out-
sourcing has some real foundations, and deserves to be considered seriously.
Inherent and Transferable Sources of  
Comparative Advantages
When David Ricardo first made the comparative advantage argument in the early 
1800s, he was talking about an economic environment that was quite different from 
today’s. His example was Britain and Portugal, with Britain producing wool and 
­Portugal producing wine. What caused their differing costs of production was climate; 
Britain’s climate was far less conducive to growing grapes than Portugal’s but more 
conducive to raising sheep. Differing technologies or labor skills in the countries did 
not play a key role in their comparative advantages, and it was highly unlikely that the 
climates, and therefore comparative advantages, of the countries could change. Put 
another way, both countries had inherent sources of comparative advantages, which we 
will call inherent comparative advantages—comparative advantages that are based 
on factors that are relatively unchangeable, rather than transferable sources of com-
parative advantages, which we will call transferable comparative advantages—
comparative advantages based on factors that can change relatively easily.
	
As the theory of comparative advantage developed, economists applied it to a 
much broader range of goods whose sources of comparative advantage were not due to 
climate. For example, some countries had land, specific resources, capital, types of 
labor, or technology as sources of comparative advantage. Extending the analysis to 
these other sources of comparative advantage makes sense, but it is important to keep 
in mind that only some of these comparative advantages are inherent; others are trans-
ferable. Comparative advantages due to resources or climate are unlikely to change; 
comparative advantages that depend on capital, technology, or education, however, can 
change. In fact, we would expect them to change.
The Law of One Price
Whether a country can maintain a much higher standard of living than another country 
in the long run depends in part on whether its sources of comparative advantage are 
transferable or inherent. Saudi Arabia will maintain its comparative advantage in 
­producing oil, but the United States’ comparative advantage based on better education 
is likely to be more fleeting. In cases where sources of comparative advantage are not 
inherent, economic forces will push to eliminate that comparative advantage. The 
­reason is the law of one price—in a competitive market, there will be pressure for 
equal factors to be priced equally. If factor prices aren’t equal, firms can reduce costs 
by ­redirecting production to countries where factors are priced lower. Even seemingly 
inherent comparative advantages can be changed by technology. Consider oil. The 
development of cost-effective fuel cells may leave Saudi Arabia with a comparative 
advantage in oil but not necessarily with a ­comparative ­advantage in producing energy.
	
When markets are working, any country with a comparative advantage due only to 
transferable capital and technology will lose that comparative advantage as capital and 
technology spread to other countries. Ultimately, in the case of transferable comparative 
advantage, production will shift to the lower-wage country that has equivalent institutional 
Inherent comparative advantages are 
based on factors that are relatively 
unchangeable.
Transferable comparative advantages 
are based on factors that can change 
relatively easily.
Law of one price: In a competitive 
market, there will be pressure for equal 
factors to be priced equally.
Q-5  Will transferable or inherent 
comparative advantages be more 
impacted by the law of one price? Why?

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
193
structures. This is the law of one price in action: The same good—including equivalent 
labor—must sell for the same price, unless trade is restricted or other differences exist. 
That is what’s happening now with the United States and outsourcing. Skills needed in 
the information technology sector, for example, are transferable. Because an information 
technology professional with three to five years’ experience earns about $75,000 in the 
United States and only $26,000 in India, those jobs are moving abroad. As long as wages 
differ, and the workers’ productivities in countries are comparable, transferable compara-
tive advantages of U.S. production will continue to erode until costs of production in 
different countries equalize. As they erode, production and jobs will be moved abroad.
	
The question, therefore, is not: Why is outsourcing to China and India occurring today? 
The questions are: Why didn’t it happen long ago? And how did U.S. productivity, and 
hence the U.S. standard of living, come to so exceed China’s and India’s productivity? Or 
­alternatively: How did the United States get in its current high-wage position, and is it 
likely to maintain that position into the indefinite future?
How the United States Gained and Is Now Losing  
Sources of Comparative Advantage
To better understand the current U.S. position, let’s look at it historically. The United 
States developed its highly favorable position from the 1920s until the late 1940s when 
the two world wars directed production toward the United States. Those wars, the 
entrepreneurial spirit of the U.S. population, U.S. institutions conducive to production, 
and the flow of technology and capital (financial assets) into the United States gave the 
United States a big boost both during the two world wars and after. Coming out of 
World War II, at the then-existing exchange rates, the United States had a major cost 
advantage in producing a large majority of goods, just as China has a cost advantage in 
producing the large majority of goods today.
	
Such cost advantages in a majority of areas of production are not sustainable because 
the balance of trade will be highly imbalanced. In the absence of specific policy by 
­governments, or large private flows of capital to pay for those imports, eventually that 
imbalance will right itself. After World War II, the trade balance that favored the United 
States was maintained temporarily by U.S. companies, which invested heavily in Europe, 
and by the U.S. government, which transferred funds to Europe with programs such as the 
Marshall Plan—a program to aid Europe in rebuilding its economy. These flows of capital 
financed Europe’s trade deficits—when imports exceed exports—and allowed the United 
States to run large trade surpluses—when exports exceed imports—just as current flows 
of capital into the United States from a variety of countries, and the explicit policy of 
buying U.S. bonds by Chinese and Japanese central banks, are financing the U.S. trade 
deficits now, and allowing large Chinese trade surpluses with the United States.
Methods of Equalizing Trade Balances
Capital flows that sustain trade imbalances eventually stop, and when they do, adjustments 
in sources of comparative advantages must take place so that the trade surplus countries—
such as China today—become less competitive (lose sources of comparative advantage) 
and the trade deficit countries—in this case, the United States—become more competitive 
(gain sources of comparative advantage). This adjustment can occur in a number of ways. 
The two most likely adjustments today are that wages in China rise relative to wages in the 
United States, or the U.S. exchange rate (discussed in the next section) falls. Both adjust-
ments will make ­Chinese goods relatively more expensive and U.S. goods relatively 
cheaper, just as these adjustments did with countries such as Japan, Taiwan, and Korea in 
previous decades. Neither of these is especially pleasant for us, which is why we will likely 
hear continued calls for trade restrictions in the coming decade.
Transferable comparative  
advantages will tend to erode  
over time.
In the absence of specific policy by 
governments, or large private flows  
of capital, eventually any large trade 
imbalance will right itself.
Q-6  What are two likely adjustments 
that will reduce the trade deficit 
between China and the United States?

194	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
	
Unfortunately, as I will discuss in a later chapter, the trade restriction policies that 
governments can undertake will generally make things worse. In a globalized free trade 
economy, the U.S. wage advantage can be maintained only to the degree that the total 
cost of production of a good in the United States (with all the associated costs) is no 
more expensive than the total cost of producing that same good abroad (with all the 
­associated costs). The degree to which production shifts because of lower wages abroad 
depends on how transferable the U.S. comparative advantages are that we listed above. 
Some of them are generally nontransferable, and thus will support sustained higher 
relative U.S. wages. English as the language of business; the enormous wealth of the 
United States gained earlier; inertia; and U.S. political, social, and capital infrastructure 
will keep much production in the United States, and will maintain a comparative advan-
tage for U.S. production even with significantly higher U.S. wages.
	
But in the coming decades, we can expect a narrowing of the wage gap between the 
United States and China and India. Given these strong market forces that cannot be 
­prevented without undermining the entire international trading system, about the only 
available realistic strategy for the United States is to adapt to this new situation. Its best 
strategy is to work toward maintaining existing comparative advantages through 
investment in education and infrastructure, while continuing to provide an environment 
conducive to innovation so that we develop comparative advantages in new industries.
Determination of Exchange Rates and Trade
As mentioned above, transferable sources of comparative advantage aren’t the only 
way to eliminate trade imbalances. Exchange rates are another. An exchange rate is 
the rate at which one country’s currency can be traded for another country’s currency. 
The market for foreign currencies is called the foreign exchange (forex) market. It is 
this market that determines the exchange rates that newspapers report daily in tables 
such as the table below, which shows the cost of various currencies in terms of dollars 
and the cost of dollars in terms of those currencies.
Exchange Rates, April 2016
	
	
Currency 
	
U.S. $ Equivalent	
per U.S. $
Argentina (peso) 	
0.069	
14.47
Canada (dollar) 	
0.770	
1.30
China (yuan) 	
0.155	
6.46
Denmark (krone) 	
0.153	
6.53
European Union (euro) 	
1.140	
0.88
Israel (shekel) 	
0.265	
3.76
Japan (yen) 	
0.009	
108.04
Pakistan (rupee) 	
0.010	
104.75
Philippines (peso) 	
0.021	
46.10
Russia (ruble) 	
0.015	
67.11
Saudi Arabia (riyal) 	
0.267 	
3.75
U.K. (pound) 	
1.413	
0.71
The second column in this table reports the price of foreign currencies in terms of dol-
lars. For example, 1 Argentinean peso costs about 7 cents. The third column tells you 
the price of dollars in terms of the foreign currency. For example, 1 U.S. dollar costs 
14.47 Argentinean pesos.
The U.S. wage advantage can  
be maintained only to the degree that  
total cost of production of a good  
in the United States is no more than the 
total cost of that same good abroad.

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
195
	
People exchange currencies to buy goods or assets in other countries. For example, 
an American who wants to buy stock of a company that trades on the EU stock 
­exchange first needs to buy euros with dollars. If the stock costs 150 euros, he will 
need to buy 150 euros. With an exchange rate of $1.20 for 1 euro, he will need to pay 
$180 to buy 150 euros ($1.20 × 150). Only then can he buy the stock.
	
Let’s now turn to a graphical analysis of the forex market. At first glance,  
the graphical analysis of foreign exchange rates seems simple: You have an upward-
sloping supply curve and a downward-sloping demand curve. But what goes on the 
axes? ­Obviously price and quantity, but what price? And what quantity? Because you 
are talking about the prices of currencies relative to each other, you have to specify 
which currencies you are using.
	
Figure 9-2 presents the supply of and demand for euros in terms of dollars. Notice 
that the quantity of euros goes on the horizontal axis and the dollar price of euros goes 
on the vertical axis. When you are comparing currencies of only two countries, the sup-
ply of one currency equals the demand for the other currency. To demand one currency, 
you must supply another. In this figure, I am assuming that there are only two trading 
partners: the United States and the European Union. This means that the supply of euros 
is equivalent to the demand for dollars. The Europeans who want to buy U.S. goods or 
assets supply euros to buy dollars. Let’s consider an example. Say a European wants to 
buy a jacket made in the United States. She has euros, but the U.S. producer wants dol-
lars. So, to buy the jacket, she or the U.S. producer must somehow exchange euros for 
dollars. She is supplying euros in order to demand dollars. (The actual transaction is 
conducted by banks that have traders who buy and sell currencies as needed.)
	
The supply curve of euros is upward-sloping because the more dollars European citi-
zens get for their euros, the cheaper U.S. goods and assets are for them and the greater 
the quantity of euros they want to supply for those goods. Say, for example, that the 
­dollar price of 1 euro rises from $1.10 to $1.20. That means that the price of a dollar to a 
European has fallen from 0.91 euro to 0.83 euro. For a European, a good that cost 
$100 now falls in price from 91 euros to 83 euros. U.S. goods are cheaper, so the 
­Europeans buy more U.S. goods and more dollars, which means they supply more euros.
	
The demand for euros comes from Americans who want to buy European goods or 
­assets. The demand curve is downward-sloping because the lower the dollar price of euros, 
the more euros U.S. citizens want to buy, using the same reasoning I just described.
	
The market is in equilibrium when the quantity supplied equals the quantity 
­demanded. In my example, when supply is S0 and demand is D0, equilibrium occurs at 
a dollar price of $1.20 for 1 euro. 
To demand one currency, you must 
supply another currency.
Q-7  Show graphically the effect on 
the price of euros of an increase in the 
demand for dollars by Europeans.
FIGURE 9-2  The Supply of and 
Demand for Euros
As long as you keep quantities 
and prices of what straight, the 
determination of exchange rates 
is easy. Just remember that if 
you’re talking about the supply of 
and demand for euros, the price 
will be measured in dollars and 
the quantity will be in euros.
Price of euros (in dollars)
$1.20
1.10
 
QD
Quantity of euros
0
S0
S1
D1
D0

196	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
	
Suppose forces shift the supply and demand for euros; for example, say people lose 
faith in the euro, leading them to want to hold their assets in dollar-denominated assets. The 
supply of euros rises from S0 to S1. At the same time, Americans also lose faith in the 
euro and decide to buy fewer euros. This shifts the demand for euros from D0 to D1. 
Combined, the two shifts lead to a fall in the price of the euro as shown in Figure 9-2, 
decreasing the price from $1.20 to $1.10.
	
Because one euro buys fewer dollars, we say the euro has depreciated in value. A 
currency depreciation is a change in the exchange rate so that one currency buys fewer 
units of a foreign currency. For example, when the dollar price of euros falls from $1.20 
to $1.10, the euro is depreciating; 1 euro buys fewer dollars. The dollar, on the other 
hand, appreciated in value because 1 dollar can be exchanged for more euros. A cur-
rency appreciation is a change in the exchange rate so that one currency buys more 
units of a foreign currency.
Exchange Rates and Trade
The exchange rate plays an important role in the demand for a country’s domestic 
goods. We can see that by considering both the domestic supply of tradable goods—
those goods that can be produced in one country and sold in another—and the interna-
tional supply of tradable goods on the same graph. We do so in Figure 9-3. For 
simplicity we assume that the world supply of goods is perfectly elastic (horizontal) at 
P1. That is, foreign countries are willing to sell as much as is demanded at a single 
price. With free trade, if domestic producers of tradable goods want to sell any goods, 
they must match this world price. If consumers can buy all the goods they want at the 
world price, why pay more?
	
Domestic supply of tradable goods is determined by the wage and the productivity of 
workers in the United States—as quantity supplied rises, suppliers have to charge higher 
prices to cover higher costs of production. The supply curve, therefore, reflects the 
­comparative advantages of U.S. producers with respect to world producers. It is upward- 
sloping because as output increases, the cost of production rises relative to the cost of world 
production. If the world supply is SW1, the United States has a comparative advantage for 
Q-8  If one dollar can be exchanged 
for more euros, has the dollar 
appreciated or depreciated?
Net imports
Domestic
demand of goods
Domestic
supply of goods
Q1
Q0
SW0
SW1
Q2
P0
P1
Price
FIGURE 9-3  How International 
Trade Is Affected by Exchange Rates
The exchange rate plays an 
important role in international trade. 
If the world price of goods is less 
than the domestic price of tradable 
goods, domestic producers must 
match the world price level. If the 
world price level is P1, domestic 
producers will sell Q1 and domestic 
consumers demand Q2. The 
difference is made up by imports 
shown by the difference between Q2 
and Q1. A country will have a zero 
trade balance (net imports will be 
zero) when the world price level 
equals the domestic price level, P0.

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
197
goods up until Q1, where the domestic supply intersects the world supply. World producers 
have a comparative advantage in the production of goods to the right of Q1. 
	
Trade for an economy that faces global competition needs to take into account 
world supply, which is horizontal at the world price for tradable goods.2 If the world 
supply curve intersects domestic supply and demand at the ­domestic ­equilibrium price, 
as it does when the world supply curve is SW0, imports will be exactly offset by exports. 
If the world price is below the domestic equilibrium, as it is when the world supply 
curve is SW1, a country is running a trade deficit. In this figure the world price, is P1, 
which results in a trade deficit of Q2 − Q1. ­Indefinite trade deficits are not sustainable. 
A decrease in the domestic economy’s exchange rates, relative declines in wages, or 
improvements in comparative advantage can eliminate the trade deficit.
	
Let’s consider how exchange rate adjustment can eliminate a U.S. trade deficit with 
China. (We are using China to represent the rest of the world.) 
	
Exchange rates affect a trade balance through their impact on comparative advan-
tages. The reason is that as the exchange rate changes, the price of a country’s goods to 
people in other countries changes. In the case of dollars and yuan, if the ­dollar depreci-
ates, U.S. ­citizens will pay more U.S. dollars for each good they buy from China, 
which means that the relative price of foreign goods rises. So, a depreciation of the 
domestic country’s currency will shift the world supply curve up, making it easier for 
U.S. producers to compete. Similarly, an ­appreciation will shift the world supply curve 
down, making it harder for a country to compete globally. 
	
In theory, the exchange rate adjustment can bring two countries’ comparative advan-
tages into alignment, eliminating any trade imbalance. The assumption that exchange 
rates will adjust to bring trade into balance underlies the story economists tell about 
comparative advantages. That story assumes that comparative advantages net out so 
the trade deficit of both countries is zero. 
Some Complications in Exchange Rates
If the supply and demand for currencies applied only to tradable goods, trade among 
countries would generally be in balance, and countries would have roughly equal sectors 
of comparative advantages in producing goods. However, that doesn’t always happen. A 
major reason why is that the demand for a country’s currency not only reflects the 
­demand for a country’s produced goods but also reflects a demand for its assets. 
	
When the demand for a country’s assets is high, the value of its currency will also be 
high. With a higher exchange rate, the world price of produced goods will be low and the 
domestic country will have a comparative advantage in relatively fewer sectors compared 
to other countries. That has been the case in the United States over the past 30 years, and is 
one of the reasons so much manufacturing production has fared so poorly.
	
Another source of differences in comparative advantage is what is called the 
­resource curse—the paradox that countries with an abundance of resources tend to 
have lower economic growth and more unemployment than countries with fewer natu-
ral resources. What happens is that the country that has a comparative advantage in 
resources finds that the demand for its resources pushes its exchange rate up. A higher 
exchange rate reduces the comparative advantage of other tradable goods, shifting the 
world supply curve, and hence domestic production of these goods, down. In terms of 
­Figure 9-3, world supply for goods other than resources falls from SW0 to SW1 and 
Q-9  If the world supply of goods is 
at the domestic price level, what will be 
the level of net imports? Explain your 
answer.
Q-10  How can the discovery of  
a highly valuable resource lead to  
the appreciation of a currency and loss 
of comparative advantage in other 
goods?
2This is a discussion for a composite good made up of a weighted combination of all goods in an 
economy. Actual trade is in many different types of goods and services, and this position is consis-
tent with significant imports and exports of particular goods, as long as in the aggregate they bal-
ance out. It is the trade balance, not total trade, that is captured by the graph.

198	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
­domestic production falls from Q0 to Q1. The resource curse also tends to reduce 
­employment because a decline in employment in these other goods is not offset by an 
increase in employment in the resource sector. While the production of the resource 
often pays well, it does not require large numbers of workers. Because the Netherlands 
experienced this phenomenon when it discovered offshore oil, it is also sometimes 
called the Dutch disease. 
	
The resource curse is not tied to natural resources. It happens whenever there is a large 
increase in global demand for one sector of an economy’s goods. When one ­sector of an 
economy gains a comparative advantage, other sectors must lose their comparative 
­advantage or there will be a trade imbalance. This happened in the United States during 
the rise in globalization for technology, business organization, and finance sectors. 
­Globalization increased the demand for people providing logistical support, marketing, 
and financial expertise. These were high-paying jobs and, on ­average, it was an enormous 
boon to the United States economy. But that increase in demand meant that the low-wage 
U.S. workers in globally competitive industries lost their comparative advantage since the 
U.S. dollar did not depreciate to maintain it. So total income in the United States rose, but 
income and employment in the low-wage manufacturing tradable sector fell, causing 
­significant hardship and unemployment in these sectors.
Conclusion
International trade, and changing comparative advantages, has become more and more 
important for the United States in recent decades. With international transportation and 
communication becoming faster and easier, and with other countries’ economies growing, 
the U.S. economy will inevitably become more interdependent with the other economies of 
the world. Ultimately, this international trade will improve the lives of most Americans, 
and even more so for the world. However, the path there will likely be very difficult for 
those U.S. citizens in the competitive global sector.
When one sector of an economy  
gains a comparative advantage,  
other sectors must lose their 
comparative advantage or there  
will be a trade imbalance.
• According to the principle of comparative advantage, 
as long as the relative opportunity costs of producing 
goods (what must be given up in one good in order to 
get another good) differ among countries, there are 
potential gains from trade.  (LO9-1)
• Three insights into the terms of trade are:
1.  The more competition exists in international 
trade, the less the trader gets and the more the 
­involved countries get.
2.  Once competition prevails, smaller countries tend 
to get a larger percentage of the gains from trade 
than do larger countries.
3.  Gains from trade go to countries that produce 
goods that exhibit economies of scale.  (LO9-1)
• Economists and laypeople differ in their views on 
trade.  (LO9-2)
Summary
• The gains from trade in the form of low consumer 
prices tend to be widespread and not easily recog-
nized, while the costs in jobs lost tend to be concen-
trated and readily identifiable.  (LO9-2)
• The United States has comparative advantages based 
on its skilled workforce, its institutions, and its lan-
guage, among other things.  (LO9-3)
• Inherent comparative advantages are based on factors 
that are relatively unchangeable. They are not subject 
to the law of one price.  (LO9-3)
• Transferable comparative advantages are based on 
factors that can change relatively easily. The law 
of one price can eliminate these comparative 
­advantages.  (LO9-3)

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
199
• Concerns about trade for the United States are that 
U.S. relative wages will decline and the value of the 
dollar will decline as well.  (LO9-3)
• The prices of currencies—foreign exchange rates—can 
be analyzed with the supply and demand model in the 
same way as any other good can be. An ­appreciation of 
the dollar occurs when a single dollar can buy more for-
eign currency. A depreciation of the dollar occurs when 
a single dollar buys less foreign currency.  (LO9-4)
• An appreciation of a currency will shift the world 
supply of a good down and increase that country’s 
imports.  (LO9-4)
• The depreciation of a country’s currency makes that 
country’s goods more competitive.  (LO9-4)
• The resource curse occurs when significant 
amounts of natural resources are discovered. 
This raises foreign ­demand for the resource,  
raising the value of the ­domestic country’s 
­currency, making other sectors less competitive.  
A variation of the resource curse is one reason for  
a greater inequality of income ­distribution in the 
United States.  (LO9-4)
Key Terms
balance of trade
comparative  
advantage
currency appreciation
currency depreciation
exchange rate
inherent comparative 
advantage
resource curse
trade deficit
trade surplus
transferable comparative 
advantage
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Will a country do better importing or exporting a good for 
which it has a comparative advantage? Why?  (LO9-1)
	 2.	 Widgetland has 60 workers. Each worker can produce 
4 widgets or 4 wadgets. Each resident in Widgetland cur-
rently consumes 2 widgets and 2 wadgets. Wadgetland 
also has 60 workers. Each can produce 3 widgets or 
12 wadgets. Wadgetland’s residents each consume 1 wid-
get and 8 wadgets. Is there a basis for trade? If so, offer 
the countries a deal they can’t refuse.  (LO9-1)
	 3.	 Suppose there are two states that do not trade: Iowa and 
Nebraska. Each state produces the same two goods: corn 
and wheat. For Iowa the opportunity cost of producing 
1 bushel of wheat is 3 bushels of corn. For Nebraska the 
opportunity cost of producing 1 bushel of corn is 3 bushels 
of wheat. At present, Iowa produces 20 million bushels of 
wheat and 120 million bushels of corn, while Nebraska 
produces 20 million bushels of corn and 120 million 
bushels of wheat.  (LO9-1)
	a.	 Explain how, with trade, Nebraska can end up with 
40 million bushels of wheat and 120 million bushels 
of corn while Iowa can end up with 40 million 
bushels of corn and 120 million bushels of wheat.
	b.	 If the states ended up with the numbers given in a, 
how much would the trader get?
	 4.	 Suppose that two countries, Machineland and 
­Farmland, have the following production possibility 
curves:  (LO9-1)
Machines
Machines
B (50, 150)
A (20, 100)
Food
Machineland
100
Food
Farmland
D (150, 50)
C (150, 10)
200
100
0
200
100
0
200
100
200
	a.	 Explain how these two countries can move from points A 
and C, where they currently are, to points B and D.
	b.	 If possible, state by how much total production for the 
two countries has risen.
	c.	 If you were a trader, how much of the gains from trade 
would you deserve for discovering this trade?
	d.	 If the per-unit cost of production falls as output rises, 
how would the analysis change?

200	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
	 5.	 Suppose there are two countries, Busytown and 
­Lazyasiwannabe, with the following production 
­possibility tables:  (LO9-1)
	
Busytown
	 % of Resources	
	
Gourmet 
	
Devoted 	
Cars Produced	
Meals Produced 
	
to Cars	
(thousands)	
(thousands)
	
100%	
60	
  0
	
80	
48	
10
	
60	
36	
20
	
40	
24	
30
	
20	
12	
40
	
  0	
  0	
50
	
Lazyasiwannabe
	 % of Resources	
	
Gourmet 
	
Devoted 	
Cars Produced	
Meals Produced 
	
to Cars	
(thousands)	
(thousands)
	
100%	
50	
  0
	
80	
40	
10
	
60	
30	
20
	
40	
20	
30
	
20	
10	
40
	
  0	
  0	
50
	a.	 Draw the production possibility curves for each ­country.
	b.	 Which country has the comparative advantage in 
­producing cars? In producing gourmet meals?
	c.	 Suppose each country specializes in the production of 
one good. Explain how Busytown can end up with 
36,000 cars and 22,000 meals and Lazyasiwannabe 
can end up with 28,000 meals and 24,000 cars. 
	 6.	 Why does competition among traders affect how much of 
the gains from trade is given to the countries involved in 
the trade?  (LO9-1)
	 7.	 Why do smaller countries usually get most of the gains 
from trade?  (LO9-1)
	 8.	 What are some reasons why a small country might not get 
the gains of trade?  (LO9-1)
	 9.	 Country A can produce, at most, 40 olives or 20 pickles, 
or some combination of olives and pickles such as 
the 20 olives and 10 pickles it is currently producing. 
Country B can produce, at most, 120 olives or  
60 pickles, or some combination of olives and pickles 
such as the 100 olives and 50 pickles it is currently 
producing.  (LO9-1)
	a.	 Is there a basis for trade? If so, offer the two countries 
a deal they can’t refuse.
	b.	 How would your answer change if you knew that the 
per-unit cost of producing pickles and olives falls as 
more of each is produced? Why? Which country 
would you have produce which good?
	10.	 What are four reasons why economists’ and laypeople’s 
view of trade differ?  (LO9-2)
	11. 	True or false? Wages in China are lower than those 
in the United States. This means that China has a 
­comparative advantage in everything. Explain your 
­answer.  (LO9-2)
	12. 	How does the outsourcing of manufacturing  
production benefit production in the United 
States?  (LO9-2)
	13. 	How has globalization made the rich richer and poor 
poorer in the United States?  (LO9-2)
	14.	 List at least three sources of comparative advantage that 
the United States has and will likely maintain over the 
coming decade.  (LO9-3)
	15.	 How do inherent comparative advantages differ from 
transferable comparative advantages?  (LO9-3)
	16.	 From the standpoint of adjustment costs to trade, which 
would a country prefer—inherent or transferable compar-
ative advantage? Why?  (LO9-3)
	17.	 How does a depreciation of a currency change the price of 
imports and exports? Explain using the U.S. dollar and 
the Chinese yuan.  (LO9-4)
	18.	 Using the graph below, indicate domestic production and 
net imports.  (LO9-4)
t
S
D
SW
S
D
PW
Price
Quantity
	a.	 Would the United States want to raise or lower the 
world supply of the good? Why?
	b.	 How might that happen?
	19.	 Would you expect the resource curse to improve  
or worsen the distribution of income in a  
country?  (LO9-4)

	
Chapter 9 ■ Comparative Advantage, Exchange Rates, and Globalization	
201
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Evaluate the following statement: Comparative advantage 
will benefit all people because everyone has a compara-
tive advantage in something. Therefore, trade based on 
comparative advantage should be facilitated without un-
due government intervention. (Austrian)
	 2.	 In the 10th century B.C., King Solomon brought the Isra-
elites into great economic wealth through specialization 
and trade. It was difficult when faced with the practices 
and beliefs of their trading partners, however, for Israel to 
maintain its identity as a people of one God. King Solomon, 
for example, provided a place for each of his wives to 
worship the gods of her own people. If such syncretism 
(adoption of foreign practices and beliefs) is inevitable 
with increased globalization, should trade be encouraged, 
even today? (Religious)
	 3.	 Global outsourcing has cost the U.S. economy more than 
3 million jobs since 2001, three-quarters of which have 
been in the manufacturing industry.
	a.	 How does outsourcing affect the bargaining power 
of U.S. workers and the bargaining power of U.S. 
­employers?
	b.	 What will it likely do to the overall level of U.S.  
workers’ wages?
	c.	 What will it likely do to lawyers’ wages?
	d.	 If you stated that it affected lawyers’ wages 
­differently, do you believe that the U.S. policy 
­response to outsourcing would be different? 
­(Post-Keynesian)
	 4.	 In David Ricardo’s original example of comparative 
­advantage in his Principles of Political Economy, written 
in 1817, Portugal possesses an absolute advantage in both 
the production of cloth and the production of wine. But 
England has a comparative advantage in the production of 
cloth, while Portugal’s comparative advantage is in wine 
production. According to Ricardo, an English political 
economist, England should specialize in the production of 
cloth and Portugal in wine making.
	a.	 Was Ricardo’s advice self-serving?
	b.	 Knowing that light manufacturing, such as clothing 
and textile production, has led most industrialization 
processes, would you have advised 19th century 
­Portugal to specialize in wine making? (Radical)
	 5.	 In the Wealth of Nations Adam Smith claimed,  
“Servants, labourers and workmen of different kinds, 
make up the far greater part of every great political  
society. But what improves the circumstances of the 
greater part can never be regarded as an inconvenience  
to the whole. No society can surely be flourishing and 
happy, of which the far greater part of the members are 
poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they  
who feed, clothe and lodge the whole body of the people, 
should have such a share of the produce of their own  
labour as to be themselves tolerably well fed, cloathed  
and lodged.” In light of today’s economy, what argument 
can you give that supports this claim? What argument can 
you give that disputes this claim? (Austrian and Post-
Keynesian)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 How is outsourcing to China and India today different 
from U.S. outsourcing in the past?
	 2.	 One of the basic economic laws is the “law of one price.”  
Does it imply that the U.S. wage level will have to equal 
the Chinese wage level if free trade is allowed? Why or 
why not?
	 3.	 The normal textbook presentation of international trade does 
not include the international trader. How does including the 
trader in the model provide a different view of trade than one 
would get from a model that did not include the trader?
	 4.	 One way to equalize imports and exports would be to pass 
a law that (1) in order to import, importers must provide a 
certificate certifying that an equal value of exports had 
occurred; and (2) in order to export, exporters must 
provide a certificate certifying that an equal value of 
­imports had occurred.  
	a.	 If the trade is balanced, what would the price of these 
certificates be? 
	b.	 In the current U.S. situation, what would the price of 
these certificates be?
	c.	 In the current Chinese situation, what would the price 
of these certificates be?
	d.	 Would such a law make exchange rate adjustment 
more or less likely?
	 5.	 Assuming a law such as the one suggested in question 4 
were passed in the mid-1990s in the U.S., what subgroups 
of U.S. workers would have likely been helped, and what 
subgroups of U.S. workers would have likely been hurt?  

202	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 He should walk away because there is no basis for  
trade.  (LO9-1)
	 2.	 The percentage of gains from trade that goes to a country de-
pends upon the change in the price of the goods being traded. 
If trade led to no change in prices in a small country, then 
that small country would get no gains from trade. Another 
case in which a small country gets a small percentage of the 
gains from trade would occur when its larger trading partner 
was producing a good with economies of scale and the small 
country was not. In a third case, if the traders who extracted 
most of the surplus or gains from trade come from the larger 
country, then the smaller country would end up with few of 
the gains from trade.  (LO9-1)
	 3.	 Four reasons for the difference are: (1) gains from trade 
are often stealth gains, (2) comparative advantage is 
­determined by more than wages, (3) nations trade more 
than just manufactured goods, and (4) trade has 
­distributional effects.  (LO9-2)
	 4.	 The manufacturing sector produces tradable goods, which 
has made it vulnerable to international trade. Foreign 
­producers can produce these goods at a lower cost, putting 
downward pressure on wages and employment. Production 
in the education, health care, and government sectors is  
less tradable, making it less subject to pressure from  
globalization.  (LO9-2)
	 5.	 Transferable comparative advantage will be more  
affected because it is an advantage that is not tied to  
a particular country. Countries where prices are higher 
will face outflow of capital and technology to bring  
prices back in balance. This will transfer comparative  
advantage from the high-price countries to low-price  
countries.  (LO9-3)
	 6.	 Two likely adjustments that will reduce the trade deficit are a 
fall in the value of the dollar (U.S. exchange rate) and a rise 
in Chinese wages relative to U.S. wages.  (LO9-3)
	 7.	 An increase in the demand for dollars is the equivalent to an 
increase in the supply of euros, so an increase in the demand 
for dollars pushes down the price of euros in terms of dollars, 
as in the following diagram.  (LO9-4)
S0
S1
Demand
Price of euros (in dollars)
Quantity of euros
	 8.	 It appreciated because one dollar can buy more euros. 
Alternatively stated, it takes fewer dollars to buy the 
same number of euros.  (LO9-4)
	 9.	 There would be no imports since the price of imports is 
the same as the price of domestic goods. American 
­consumers would be indifferent between buying foreign 
and domestic goods.  (LO9-4)
	10.	 The discovery of the resource will increase the demand 
for the domestic currency, which leads to an appreciation 
of the currency. This appreciation makes domestic goods 
more expensive to foreigners, which leads to a loss in the 
comparative advantage in those goods.  (LO9-4)

“
”
Manufacturing and commercial 
monopolies owe their origin not to a 
tendency imminent in a capitalist 
economy but to governmental 
interventionist policy directed against  
free trade.
—Ludwig von Mises
Based on the theory of comparative advantage, most 
economists oppose trade restrictions. Not everyone 
agrees with economists; almost every day we hear calls 
from some sector of the economy to restrict foreign 
imports to save U.S. jobs and protect U.S. workers from 
unfair competition. In this chapter we consider the pat-
tern and nature of trade, the ­variety of trade restrictions that governments 
impose, and why economists generally oppose trade restrictions.
The Nature and Patterns of Trade
Let’s begin with some numbers to get a sense of the nature and dimensions of 
international trade.
Increasing but Fluctuating World Trade
In 1928, the ratio of world trade to U.S. GDP was almost 60 percent. In 1935, 
that ratio had fallen to less than 30 percent. In 1950 it was only 20 percent. Then 
it started rising. Today it is about 210 percent, with world trade amounting to 
about $38 trillion. As you can see, international trade has been growing, but 
with significant fluctuations in that growth.
	
There are two reasons why world trade fluctuates: (1) When output rises, 
international trade rises, and when output falls, international trade falls; and (2) 
countries impose trade restrictions from time to time. These two reasons often 
reinforce each other; for example, ­decreases in world income during the Depres-
sion of the 1930s caused a large decrease in trade and that decrease was exacer-
bated by a worldwide increase in trade restrictions.
Differences in the Importance of Trade
The importance of international trade to countries’ economies differs widely, as 
we can see in the table below, which presents the importance of the shares of 
International Trade Policy
chapter 10
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO10-1	 Summarize some important 
data of trade.
LO10-2	 Explain policies countries 
use to restrict trade.
LO10-3	 Summarize the reasons for 
trade restrictions  
and why economists 
generally oppose trade 
restrictions.
LO10-4	 Explain how free trade 
associations both help and 
hinder international trade.
© Mike Nelson/AFP/Getty Images

204	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
exports (the value of goods and services sold abroad) and imports (the value of goods 
and services purchased abroad) for various countries.
	
Total Output* 	
Exports to GDP Ratio	
Imports to GDP Ratio
Netherlands 	
$   879	
83%	
72%
Germany 	
3,869	
46	
39
Canada 	
1,785	
32	
33
Italy 	
2,141	
30	
27
France 	
2,829	
29	
31
United Kingdom 	
2,989	
28	
30
Japan 	
4,601	
16	
19
United States 	
17,874	
13	
15
*Numbers in billions.
Source: World Development Indicators, The World Bank.
	
Among the countries listed, the Netherlands has the highest exports compared 
to total output; the United States has the lowest. The Netherlands’ imports are also 
the highest as a percentage of total output. U.S. exports are the lowest. The 
­relationship between a country’s imports and its exports is no coincidence. For 
most countries, imports and exports roughly equal one another, though in any par-
ticular year that equality can be rough indeed. For the United States in recent years, 
imports have generally significantly exceeded exports, which means that a trade 
imbalance can continue for a long time. But that situation can’t continue forever, as 
I’ll discuss.
	
Total trade figures provide us with only part of the international trade picture.  
We must also look at what types of goods are traded and with whom that trade is  
conducted.
What and with Whom the United States Trades
The majority of U.S. exports and imports involve significant amounts of manufac-
tured goods. This isn’t unusual, since much of international trade is in manufactured 
goods.
	
Figure 10-1 shows the regions with which the United States trades. Exports to 
Canada and Mexico make up the largest percentage of total U.S. exports to indi-
vidual countries. Among the various regions, the largest regions to which the U.S. 
exports are the Pacific Rim and the European Union. Countries from which the United 
States imports major quantities include China, Canada, and Mexico and the regions of 
the European Union and the ­Pacific Rim. Thus, the countries we export to are also the 
countries we import from.
The Changing Nature of Trade 
The nature of trade is continually changing, 
both in terms of the countries with which the United States trades and the goods and 
services traded. For example, U.S. imports from China, India, and other East Asian 
countries have increased substantially in ­recent years. In the late 1980s goods from 
China accounted for 2.5 percent of all U.S. merchandise imports. Today they account 
for 20 percent. Imports from India have increased 20-fold over that time—from 
0.1 percent to 2 percent of all goods imported.
The primary trading partners of the 
United States are Canada, Mexico, the 
European Union, and the Pacific Rim 
countries.

	
Chapter 10 ■ International Trade Policy	
205
	
The kind of goods and services the United States imports also has changed. Thirty 
years ago, the goods the United States imported from China and India were primarily 
basic manufacturing goods and raw commodities. Technologically advanced goods 
were produced here in the United States. Today we are importing high-tech manufac-
tured goods from these countries, and they are even developing their own new ­products 
that require significant research and development.
	
The change in the nature of the goods that a country produces and exports up the 
technological ladder is typical for developing countries. It characterized Japan, Korea, 
and Singapore in the post–World War II era, and today characterizes China and India. 
As this movement up the technological ladder has occurred, foreign companies that 
had been subcontractors for U.S. companies become direct competitors of the U.S. 
companies. For example, the automaker Kia and the electronics producer Samsung 
have developed into major global firms, and in the future you can expect numerous 
Chinese companies to become household names.
	
We can expect the nature of trade to change even more in the future as numerous 
technological changes in telecommunications continue to reduce the cost of both voice 
and data communications throughout the world and expand the range of services that 
can be provided by foreign countries. Production no longer needs to occur in the geo-
graphic area where the goods are consumed. For example, financial accounting, com-
positing (typesetting) of texts, and research can now be done almost anywhere, and 
transferred with the click of a mouse. The customer service calls for a U.S. company 
can be answered almost anywhere in India, which has a sizable well-educated, 
­English-speaking population, and much lower wage rates. India even trains its 
­employees to speak with a Midwest U.S. accent to make it less apparent to customers 
that the call is being answered in India. This trade in services is what the press often 
refers to as ­outsourcing, but it is important to remember that outsourcing is simply a 
description of some aspects of trade.
Q-1  How has the nature of U.S. 
imports from China changed in  
recent years?
We can expect the nature of trade to 
change even more in the future.
(a)  Exports
(b)  Imports
OPEC
(6%)
Canada
(15%)
Mexico
(12%)
Central 
and South 
America
(6%)
OPEC
(5%)
Central 
and South 
America
(11%)
Other
(9%)
Paciﬁc
Rim
(14%)
European
Union
(18%)
China
(20%)
Canada
(19%)
European
Union
(17%)
Mexico
(15%)
Other
(8%)
China
(8%)
Paciﬁc 
Rim
(17%)
FIGURE 10-1 (A AND B)  U.S. Exports and Imports by Region
Major regions that trade with the United States include Canada, Mexico, the European Union, and the Pacific Rim.
Source: FT900 U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services U.S. Census Bureau (www.census.gov).

206	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
Is Chinese and Indian Outsourcing Different from Previous 
­Outsourcing? 
There has been a lot of discussion about outsourcing to China 
and India recently, and thus it is worthwhile to consider what is, and what is not, dif-
ferent about trade with China and India. First, what isn’t different is the existence of 
outsourcing. Manufacturers have used overseas suppliers for years. What is different 
about outsourcing to China and India today compared to earlier outsourcing to Japan, 
Singapore, and Korea in the 1980s and 1990s is the potential size of that outsourcing. 
China and India have a combined population of 2.7 billion people, a sizable number 
of whom are well educated and willing to work for much lower wages than U.S. 
workers. As technology opens up more areas to trade, and as India and China move 
up the technology ladder, U.S.-based firms will likely experience much more competi-
tion than they have experienced to date. How U.S. companies deal with this competition 
will be a key economic policy issue for the next decade. If they develop new tech-
nologies and new industries in which the United States has comparative ­advantages, 
then the United States’ future can be bright. If they don’t, significant, ­difficult adjust-
ment will need to occur.
	
The rising competitiveness of Asian economies with the U.S. economy is mani-
fested in the large deficit the United States is running on its balance of trade, as shown 
in Figure 10-2. A trade deficit means that U.S. imports exceed U.S. exports. The 
United States has been running trade deficits since the 1970s, and in 2006 the U.S. 
trade deficit reached over nearly $800 billion. It has decreased slightly since then, but 
it remains high. The U.S. trade deficit means that the United States is consuming a lot 
more than it is producing, and paying for ­current consumption with promises to pay in 
the future.
Debtor and Creditor Nations
Running a trade deficit isn’t necessarily bad. In fact, while you’re doing it, it’s rather 
nice. If you were a country, you probably would be running a trade deficit now since, 
most likely, you’re consuming (importing) more than you’re producing (exporting). 
How can you do that? By living off past savings, getting support from your parents or 
a spouse, or borrowing.
	
Countries have the same options. They can live off foreign aid, past savings, or 
loans. The U.S. economy is currently financing its trade deficit by selling off assets—
financial assets such as stocks and bonds, or real assets such as real estate and corpora-
How U.S. companies deal with new 
high-tech competition will likely be the 
defining economic policy issue  
for the next decade.
Running a trade deficit isn’t necessarily 
bad.
Billions of dollars
100
–900
–800
–700
–600
–500
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
2000
1995
2010
2005
2015 2020
Year
FIGURE 10-2  The U.S. Trade Balance
The United States has been running trade deficits 
since the 1970s as you can see in the figure.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, International Transactions (www.bea.gov).

207
tions. Since the assets of the United States total many trillions of dollars, it can 
continue to run trade deficits of a similar size for years to come, but in doing so it is 
reducing its wealth from what it would have been each year.
	
The United States has not always run a trade deficit. Following World War II it ran 
trade surpluses—an excess of exports over imports—with other countries, so it was an 
­international lender. Thus, it acquired large amounts of foreign assets. Because of the 
large trade deficits the United States has run since the 1980s, now the United States is 
a large debtor nation. The United States has borrowed significantly more from abroad 
than it has lent abroad.
	
As the United States has gone from being a large creditor nation to being the 
world’s biggest debtor nation, international considerations have been forced on the 
United States. The cushion of being a creditor—of having a flow of interest 
income—has been replaced by the trials of being a debtor and having to pay out 
Q-2  Will a debtor nation  
necessarily be running a trade  
deficit?
ADDED DIMENSION
period was an anomaly, and today’s economy is simply re-
turning international issues to the key role they’ve usually 
played.
	
Another aspect of trade that is important not to forget is 
that international trade has social and cultural dimensions. 
While much of the chapter deals with specifically economic 
issues, we must also remember the cultural and social impli-
cations of trade.
	
Let’s consider an example from history. In the Middle 
Ages, Greek ideas and philosophy were lost to Europe 
when hordes of barbarians swept over the continent. 
These ideas and that philosophy were rediscovered in 
the Renaissance only as a by-product of trade between 
the Italian merchant cities and the Middle East. (The 
Greek ideas that had spread to the Middle East were pro-
tected from European upheavals.) Renaissance means 
rebirth: a rebirth in Europe of Greek learning. Many of our 
traditions and sensibilities are based on those of the Re-
naissance, and that Renaissance was caused, or at least 
significantly influenced, by international trade. Had there 
been no trade, our entire philosophy of life might have 
been different.
	
In economics courses we do not focus on these 
broader cultural issues but instead focus on relatively 
technical issues such as the reasons for trade and the im-
plications of tariffs. But keep in the back of your mind 
these broader implications as you go through the various 
components of international economics. They add a di-
mension to the story that otherwise might be forgotten.
*The Native American standpoint was, I suspect, somewhat different.
International Issues in Perspective
Since the 1970s, international issues have become in-
creasingly important for the U.S. economy. That statement 
would be correct even if the reference period went back 
as far as the late 1800s. The statement would not be cor-
rect if the reference period were earlier than the late 
1800s. In the 1600s, 1700s, and most of the 1800s, interna-
tional trade was vital to the American economy—even 
more vital than now. The American nation grew from colo-
nial possessions of England, France, and Spain. These 
“new world” colonial possessions were valued for their 
gold, agricultural produce, and natural resources. From a 
­European standpoint, international trade was the colonies’ 
­reason for being.*
	
A large portion of the U.S. government’s income during 
much of the 1800s came from tariffs. U.S. technology was 
imported from abroad, and international issues played a 
central role in wars fought here. (Many historians believe 
that the most important cause of the U.S. Civil War was 
the difference of views about tariffs on manufactured 
goods. The South opposed them because it wanted 
cheap manufactured goods, while the North favored them 
because it wanted to protect its manufacturing industries.) 
Up until the 1900s, no one would have studied the U.S. 
economy independently of international issues. Not only 
was there significant international trade; there was also 
significant immigration. The United States is a country of 
immigrants.
	
Only in the late 1800s did the United States adopt an 
isolationist philosophy in both politics and trade. So in 
reference to that isolationist period, the U.S. economy has 
become more integrated with the world economy. How-
ever, in a broader historical perspective, that isolationist 

208	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
interest every year without currently getting anything for the payment of that interest 
by the debtor nation. 
	
One way countries try to reduce trade deficits is to reduce imports by restricting 
trade. These trade restrictions can keep a country from having to face the adjustments 
associated with improving its comparative advantage either by reducing wages or, as 
we saw in an earlier chapter, by allowing its currency to depreciate.
Varieties of Trade Restrictions
The policies countries can use to restrict trade include tariffs and quotas, voluntary 
restraint agreements, embargoes, regulatory trade restrictions, and nationalistic 
appeals. I’ll consider each in turn and also review the geometric analysis of each.
Tariffs and Quotas
A tariff is a tax that governments place on internationally traded goods—generally 
­imports. (Tariffs are also called customs duties.) Tariffs are the most-used and most-
familiar type of trade restriction. Tariffs operate in the same way a tax does: They make 
imported goods relatively more expensive than they otherwise would have been, and 
thereby encourage the consumption of domestically produced goods. On average, U.S. 
tariffs raise the price of imported goods by less than 3 percent. Figure 10-3(a) presents 
average tariff rates for industrial goods for a number of countries and Figure 10-3(b) 
shows the tariff rates imposed by the United States since 1920.
	
Probably the most infamous tariff in U.S. history is the Smoot-Hawley Tariff of 
1930, which raised tariffs on imported goods to an average of 60 percent. It was passed 
at the height of the Great Depression in the United States in the hope of protecting 
American jobs. It didn’t work. Other countries responded with similar tariffs. Partly as 
a result of these trade wars, international trade plummeted from $60 billion in 1928 to 
Three policies used to restrict trade are:
1.	 Tariffs (taxes on internationally 
traded goods).
2.	 Quotas (quantity limits placed on 
imports).
3.	 Regulatory trade restrictions 
(government-imposed procedural 
rules that limit imports).
Q-3  How are tariffs like taxes? 
Demonstrate with a supply and  
demand curve.
Country 	
Tariff	
Country 	
Tariff
Argentina 	
11.1%	
Norway	
3.6%
Australia 	
4.1	
Philippines 	
4.3
Canada 	
3.1	
Singapore 	
0.5
Colombia 	
9.0	
South Africa 	
5.7
European Union 	
3.6	
Sri Lanka 	
7.8
India	
6.2	
Thailand 	
6.6
Indonesia 	
4.4	
United States 	
2.2
Japan 	
2.1	
Venezuela 	
14.5
Mexico	
5.0	
Zimbabwe 	
13.6
FIGURE 10-3 (A AND B)  Selected Tariff Rates 
The tariff rates in (a) will be continually changing as the changes negotiated by the World Trade Organization come into effect. In (b) you 
see tariff rates for the United States since 1920.
Source: The World Bank (www.worldbank.org).
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Average tariﬀ rate (%)
1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Smoot-Hawley Tariﬀ
GATT established
Kennedy round
Tokyo round
Uruguay round
(b)  U.S. Tariﬀ Rates since 1920
2020
Year
(a)  Tariff Rates by Country

	
Chapter 10 ■ International Trade Policy	
209
$25 billion in 1938, unemployment worsened, and the international depression deep-
ened. These effects of the tariff convinced many, if not most, economists that free 
trade is preferable to trade restrictions.
	
The dismal failure of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff was the main reason the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), a regular international conference to 
reduce trade barriers, was established in 1947 immediately following World War II. In 
1995 GATT was replaced by the World Trade Organization (WTO), an organiza-
tion whose functions are generally the same as GATT’s were—to promote free and fair 
trade among countries. Unlike GATT, the WTO is a permanent organization with an 
enforcement system (albeit weak). Since its formation, rounds of negotiations have 
resulted in a decline in worldwide tariffs.
	
A quota is a quantity limit placed on imports. Quotas have the same effect on equi-
librium price and quantity as do the quantity restrictions discussed in Chapter 5, and 
their effect in limiting trade is similar to the effect of a tariff. Both increase price 
and reduce quantity. Tariffs, like all taxes on suppliers, shift the supply curve up by 
the amount of the tax, as Figure 10-4 shows. A tariff, T, raises equilibrium price 
from P0 to P1 by an amount that is less than the tariff, and equilibrium quantity 
declines from Q0 to Q1. With a quota, Q1, the equilibrium price also rises to P1.
	
There is, however, a difference between tariffs and quotas. In the case of the 
tariff, the government collects tariff revenue (the tariff, T, times the quantity 
imported) represented by the shaded region. In the case of a quota, the govern-
ment collects no revenue. The benefit of the increase in price goes to the importer 
as additional corporate revenue. So which of the two do you think import compa-
nies favor? The quota, of course—it means more profits as long as your company 
is the one to receive the rights to fill the quotas. In fact, once quotas are instituted, 
firms compete intensely to get them.
	
Tariffs affect trade patterns. For example, since the 1960s the United States has 
imposed a tariff on light trucks from Japan. The result is that the United States 
imports few light trucks from Japan. You will see Japanese-named trucks, but most 
of these are produced in the United States. Many similar examples exist, and by fol-
lowing the tariff structure, you can gain a lot of insight into patterns of trade.
	
The issues involved with tariffs and quotas can be seen in a slightly different way 
by assuming that the country being considered is small relative to the world economy 
and that imports compete with domestic producers. The small-country assumption 
means that the supply from the world to this country is perfectly elastic (horizontal) at 
the world price, $2, as in Figure 10-5(a).
	
The world price of the good is unaffected by this country’s supply. This assump-
tion allows us to distinguish the world supply from domestic supply. In the absence of 
any trade restrictions, the world price of $2 would be the domestic price. Domestic 
low-cost suppliers would supply 100 units of the good at $2. The remaining 100 units 
demanded are being imported.
	
In Figure 10-5(a) I show the effect of a tariff of 50 cents placed on all imports. 
Since the world supply curve is perfectly elastic, all of this tax, shown by the 
shaded region, is borne by domestic consumers. Price rises to $2.50 and quantity 
demanded falls to 175. With a tariff, the rise in price will increase domestic quan-
tity supplied from 100 to 125 and will reduce imports to 50. Now let’s compare 
this situation with a quota of 50, shown in Figure 10-5(b). Under a quota of 50, the 
final price would be the same, but higher revenue would accrue to foreign and 
domestic producers rather than to the government. One final difference: Any 
increase in demand under a quota would result in higher prices because it would 
have to be filled by domestic producers. Under a tariff, any increase in demand 
would not affect price.
Q-4  Why do importers prefer a quota 
to a tariff? Why does government prefer 
a tariff?
FIGURE 10-4  The Effects of Tariffs 
and Quotas
P1
P0
Q1 Q0
S0
S1
D
T = Tariﬀ
Quantity
Price

210	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
Voluntary Restraint Agreements
Imposing new tariffs and quotas is specifically ruled out by the WTO, but foreign 
countries know that WTO rules are voluntary and that, if a domestic industry brought 
sufficient political pressure on its government, the WTO rules would be forgotten. To 
avoid the imposition of new tariffs on their goods, countries often voluntarily restrict 
their exports. That’s why Japan has, at times, agreed informally to limit the number of 
cars it exports to the United States.
	
The effect of such voluntary restraint agreements is similar to the effect of quotas: 
They directly limit the quantity of imports, increasing the price of the good and help-
ing domestic producers. For example, when the United States encouraged Japan to 
impose “voluntary” quotas on exports of its cars to the United States, Toyota benefited 
from the quotas because it could price its limited supply of cars higher than it could if 
it sent in a large number of cars, so profit per car would be high. Since they faced less 
competition, U.S. car companies also benefited. They could increase their prices 
because Toyota had done so. As Chinese car companies develop in the next decade, we 
can expect similar pushes for Chinese voluntary restraints. 
Embargoes and Sanctions
An embargo or sanction is a restriction on the imports or exports of a country’s goods. 
Embargoes and sanctions are usually established for international political reasons rather 
than for primarily economic reasons.
Voluntary restraint agreements are 
often not all that voluntary.
An embargo or sanction is a restriction 
on imports or exports of a country’s 
goods.
t
Price
Quantity
$3.00
2.50
2.00
100 125
175 200
Initial
imports
Domestic
supply
World price
with tariﬀ
World price = 
World supply
(a)  With a Tariﬀ 
Price
Quantity
$3.00
2.50
2.00
Quota 
Domestic
supply
World supply
with quota
World price =
World supply
(b) With a Quota 
Domestic
demand
Domestic
demand
100 125
175 200
FIGURE 10-5 (A AND B)  Tariffs and Quotas When the Domestic Country Is Small
This exhibit shows the effects of a tariff in (a) and of a quota in (b) when the domestic country is small. The small-country assumption 
means that the world supply is perfectly elastic, in this case at $2.00 a unit. With a tariff of 50 cents, world supply shifts up by 50 cents. 
Domestic quantity demanded falls to 175 and domestic quantity supplied rises to 125. Foreign suppliers are left supplying the difference,  
50 units. The domestic government collects revenue shown in the shaded area. The figure in (b) shows how the same result can be achieved 
with a quota of 50. Equilibrium price rises to $2.50. Domestic firms produce 125 units and consumers demand 175 units. The difference 
between the tariff and the quota is that, with a tariff, the domestic government collects the revenue from the higher price. With a quota, the 
benefits of the higher price accrue to the foreign and domestic producers.

	
Chapter 10 ■ International Trade Policy	
211
	
An example was the U.S. embargo of trade with Iran. It was designed to put pressure 
on Iran to not develop a nuclear bomb; it was not imposed for economic reasons. That 
embargo led Iran to negotiate limits on its nuclear activity in exchange for lifting the trade 
sanctions.
Regulatory Trade Restrictions
Tariffs, quotas, and embargoes are the primary direct methods to restrict international 
trade. There are also indirect methods that restrict trade in not-so-obvious ways; these 
are called regulatory trade restrictions (government-imposed procedural rules that 
limit imports). One type of regulatory trade restriction has to do with protecting the 
health and safety of a country’s residents. For example, a country might restrict 
imports of all vegetables grown where certain pesticides are used, knowing full well 
that all other countries use those pesticides. The effect of such a regulation would be to 
halt the import of vegetables. Another example involves building codes. U.S. building 
codes require that plywood have fewer than, say, three flaws per sheet. Canadian build-
ing codes require that plywood have fewer than, say, five flaws per sheet. The different 
building codes are a nontariff barrier that makes trade in building materials between 
the United States and Canada difficult.
	
A second type of regulatory restriction involves making import and customs proce-
dures so intricate and time-consuming that importers simply give up. For example, at 
one time France required all imported electronics to be individually inspected in 
­Toulouse. Since Toulouse is a provincial city, far from any port and outside the normal 
route for imports after they enter France, the inspection process took months. That 
requirement essentially prevented imported electronics from taking market share from 
French companies.
	
Some regulatory restrictions are imposed for legitimate reasons; others are 
designed simply to make importing more difficult and hence protect domestic 
producers from international competition. It’s often hard to tell the difference. A 
good example of this difficulty began in 1988, when the EU disallowed all 
imports of meat from animals that had been fed growth-inducing hormones. As 
the box “Hormones and Economics” details, the debate about this issue has con-
tinued for decades.
Nationalistic Appeals and “Buy Domestic” Requirements
Finally, nationalistic appeals can help to restrict international trade. “Buy American” 
campaigns are examples. Many Americans, given two products of equal appeal, except 
that one is made in the United States and one is made in a foreign country, would buy 
the U.S. product. To get around this tendency, foreign and U.S. companies often go to 
great lengths to get a MADE IN THE U.S.A. classification on goods they sell in the 
United States. For example, components for many autos are made in Japan but shipped 
to the United States and assembled in Ohio or Tennessee so that the finished car can be 
called an American product. These “Buy American” ­policies can even be require-
ments. For example, the U.S. government stimulus ­package of 2009 included a “Buy 
American” clause that required recipients to spend the money they received on 
­American, not foreign, goods.
Reasons for and against Trade Restrictions
Let’s now turn to a different question: If trade is beneficial, as the theory of compara-
tive advantage tells us it is, why do countries restrict trade?
Q-5  How might a country benefit 
from having an inefficient customs 
agency?
Some regulatory restrictions are 
imposed for legitimate reasons; others 
are designed simply to make importing 
more difficult.

212
Unequal Internal Distribution of the Gains from Trade 
One reason is that the gains of trade are not equally distributed. In the example of the 
argument for trade discussed in a previous chapter, I.T. persuaded Saudi Arabia to special-
ize in the production of oil rather than food, and persuaded the United States to produce 
more food than oil. That means, of course, that some U.S. oil workers will have to become 
farmers, and in Saudi Arabia some farmers will have to become oil producers.
	
Often people don’t want to make radical changes in the kind of work they do—they 
want to keep on producing what they’re already producing. So when these people see 
the same kinds of goods that they produce coming into their country from abroad, they 
lobby to prevent the foreign competition.
	
Had I.T. been open about the difficulties of trading, he would have warned the 
countries that change is hard. It has very real costs that I.T. didn’t point out when he 
made his offers. Economists generally favor free trade because the costs of trade are 
temporary, whereas gains from trade are permanent. Once the adjustment has been 
made, the costs will be gone but the benefits will still be there.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Trade restrictions, in practice, are often much more compli-
cated than they seem in textbooks. Seldom does a country 
say, “We’re limiting imports to protect our home produc-
ers.” Instead the country explains the restrictions in a more 
politically acceptable way. Consider the fight between the 
European Union (EU) and the United States over U.S. meat 
exports. In 1988 the EU, in line with 
Union-wide ­internal requirements, 
banned imports of any meat from animals 
treated with growth-inducing hormones, 
which U.S. meat producers use exten-
sively. The result: The EU banned the 
meat exported from the United States.
	
The EU claimed that it had imposed the 
ban only because of public health con-
cerns. The United States claimed that the 
ban was actually a trade restriction, pointing 
out that its own residents ate this kind of meat with confidence 
because a U.S. government agency had certified that the lev-
els of hormones in the meat were far below any danger level. 
	
The United States retaliated against the EU by imposing 
100 percent tariffs on Danish and West German hams, Italian 
tomatoes, and certain other foods produced by EU member 
nations. The EU threatened to respond by placing 100 per-
cent tariffs on $100 million worth of U.S. walnuts and dried 
fruits, but instead entered into bilateral meetings with the 
United States. Those meetings allowed untreated meats into 
the EU for human consumption and treated meats that would 
be used as dog food. In response, the United States removed 
its retaliatory tariffs on hams and tomato sauce, but retained 
Hormones and Economics
its tariffs on many other goods. In the 1990s, Europe’s dog 
population seemed to be growing exponentially as Europe’s 
imports of “dog food” increased by leaps and bounds. In 1996 
the United States asked the WTO to review the EU ban. It did 
so in 1997, finding in favor of the United States. The EU ap-
pealed and in 1999 the WTO stood by its earlier ruling and the 
United States reimposed the 100 percent 
tariffs. Since then, the EU has stood firm 
and has conducted studies that, it says, 
show the use of growth hormones to be 
unsafe, but the WTO continues to rule that 
they are safe. In 2004, the EU replaced its 
ban on U.S. beef with a provisional ban un-
til it collected more information. It argued 
that making its ban provisional, not perma-
nent, met the WTO rules. The United States 
disagreed and continued its retaliatory tar-
iffs. In January 2009, for example, the U.S. government placed 
a 300 percent tariff on Roquefort cheese as one of its retalia-
tory measures but quickly removed it temporarily.
	
In 2013 a partial compromise was reached; the EU sig-
nificantly increased the amount of non-­hormone-treated 
U.S. beef that could be imported from the United States and 
the United States removed many of the retaliatory tariffs. A 
two-year compromise was reached and in 2016 the debate 
still had not been fully resolved.
	
Which side was right in this dispute? The answer is far 
from obvious. Both the United States and the EU have po-
tentially justifiable positions. As I said, trade restrictions 
are more complicated in reality than in textbooks.
© C. Sherburne/PhotoLink/Getty Images RF

	
Chapter 10 ■ International Trade Policy	
213
	
For most goods, the benefits for the large majority of the population so outweigh 
the costs to some individuals that, decided on a strict cost/benefit basis, international 
trade is still a deal you can’t refuse. The table below lists economists’ estimates of the 
cost to consumers of saving a job in some industries through trade restrictions.
	
Cost of Production 
Industry	
(per job saved)
Luggage	
$1,285,078
Sugar	
     826,104
Dairy	
     685,323
Canned tuna	
     257,640
Apparel	
      199,241
Source: Estimates by economists W. Michael Cox and Richard Alm.
With benefits so outweighing costs, it would seem that transition costs could be forgot-
ten. But they can’t.
	
Benefits of trade are generally widely scattered among the entire population. In 
contrast, costs of free trade often fall on small groups of people who loudly oppose the 
particular free trade that hurts them. This creates a political push against free trade.
	
It isn’t only in the United States that the push for trade restrictions focuses on the small 
costs and not on the large benefits. For example, the European Union (EU) places large 
restrictions on food imports from nonmember nations. If the EU were to remove those bar-
riers, food prices in EU countries would decline significantly—it is estimated that meat 
prices alone would fall by about 65 percent. Consumers would benefit, but farmers would be 
hurt. The farmers, however, have the political clout to see that the costs are considered and 
the benefits aren’t. The result: The EU places high duties on foreign agricultural products.
	
The cost to society of relaxing trade restrictions has led to a number of pro-
grams to assist those who are hurt. Such programs are called trade adjustment 
assistance ­programs—programs designed to compensate losers for reductions in 
trade restrictions.
	
Governments have tried to use trade adjustment assistance to facilitate free trade, 
but they’ve found that it’s enormously difficult to limit the adjustment assistance to 
those who are actually hurt by international trade. As soon as people find that there’s 
assistance for people injured by trade, they’re likely to try to show that they too have 
been hurt and deserve assistance. Losses from free trade become exaggerated and 
magnified. Instead of only a small portion of the gains from trade being needed for 
trade adjustment assistance, much more is demanded—often even more than the gains.
	
Telling people who claim to be hurt that they aren’t really being hurt isn’t good 
politics. That’s why offering trade adjustment assistance as a way to relieve the pres-
sure to restrict trade is a deal many governments can refuse.
Haggling by Companies over the Gains from Trade
Many naturally advantageous bargains aren’t consummated because each side is 
pushing for a larger share of the gains from trade than the other side thinks should 
be allotted.
	
To see how companies haggling over the gains of trade can restrict trade, let’s 
reconsider the original deal that I.T. proposed in an earlier chapter explaining com-
parative advantage. I.T. got 380 tons of food and 380 barrels of oil. The United States 
got an additional 100 tons of food and 60 barrels of oil. Saudi Arabia got an additional 
100 barrels of oil and 60 tons of food.
Benefits of trade are generally widely 
scattered among the entire population. 
In contrast, costs of free trade often fall 
on specific small groups.
Q-6  Who is likely to be more vocal 
when lobbying government to impose 
trade restrictions: producers or 
consumers? Explain your answer.
Telling people who claim to be hurt that 
they aren’t really being hurt isn’t good 
politics.

214	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
	
Suppose the Saudis had said, “Why should we be getting only 100 barrels of oil 
and 60 tons of food when I.T. is getting 380 barrels of oil and 380 tons of food? We 
want an additional 300 tons of food and another 300 barrels of oil, and we won’t deal 
unless we get them.” Similarly, the United States might have said, “We want an addi-
tional 300 tons of food and an additional 300 barrels of oil, and we won’t go through 
with the deal unless we get them.” If either the U.S. or the Saudi Arabian company that 
was involved in the trade for its country (or both) takes this position, I.T. might just 
walk—no deal. Tough bargaining positions can make it almost impossible to achieve 
gains from trade.
	
The side that drives the hardest bargain gets the most gains from the bargain, but it 
also risks making the deal fall through. Such strategic bargaining goes on all the time. 
Strategic bargaining means demanding a larger share of the gains from trade than 
you can reasonably expect. If you’re successful, you get the lion’s share; if you’re not 
successful, the deal falls apart and everyone is worse off.
Haggling by Countries over Trade Restrictions
Another type of trade bargaining that often limits trade is bargaining between coun-
tries. Trade restrictions and the threat of trade restrictions play an important role in 
that kind of haggling. Sometimes countries must go through with trade restrictions that 
they really don’t want to impose, just to make their threats credible.
	
Once one country has imposed trade restrictions, other countries attempt to get those 
restrictions reduced by threatening to increase their own restrictions. Again, to make the 
threat credible, sometimes countries must impose or increase trade restrictions simply to 
show they’re willing to do so. For example, China allowed significant illegal copying of 
U.S. software without paying royalties. The United States put pressure on China to stop 
such copying and felt that China was not responding effectively. To force compliance, the 
United States made a list of Chinese goods that it threatened with 100 percent tariffs 
unless China complied. The United States did not want to put on these restrictions but 
felt that it would have more strategic bargaining power if it threatened to do so. Hence 
the name strategic trade policies—threats to implement tariffs to bring about a reduc-
tion in tariffs or some other concession from the other country.
	
Ultimately, strategic bargaining power depends on negotiators’ skills and the 
underlying gains from trade that a country would receive. A country that would receive 
only a small portion of the gains from trade is in a much stronger bargaining position 
than a country that would receive significant gains. It’s easier for the former to walk 
away from trade.
	
The potential problem with strategic trade policies is that they can backfire. One rule 
of strategic bargaining is that the other side must believe that you’ll go through with your 
threat. Thus, strategic trade policy can lead a country that actually supports free trade to 
impose trade restrictions, just to show how strongly it believes in free trade.
Specialized Production
My discussion of comparative advantage took as a given that one country was inher-
ently more productive than another country in producing certain goods. But when one 
looks at trading patterns, it’s often not at all clear why particular countries have a pro-
ductive advantage in certain goods. There’s no inherent reason for Switzerland to spe-
cialize in the production of watches or for South Korea to specialize in the production 
of cars. Much in trade cannot be explained by inherent comparative advantages due to 
resource endowments. If they don’t have inherent advantages, why are countries and 
places often so good at producing what they specialize in? Two important explanations 
are learning by doing and economies of scale.
Strategic bargaining can lead to higher 
gains from trade for the side that drives 
the hardest bargain, but it also can 
make the deal fall through.
Q-7  True or false? In strategic trade 
bargaining, it is sometimes reasonable to 
be unreasonable. Explain.
Strategic trade policies are threats to 
implement tariffs to bring about a 
reduction in tariffs or some other 
concession from the other country.

215
Learning by Doing 
Learning by doing means becoming better at a task the 
more often you perform it. Take watches in Switzerland. Initially production of watches 
in Switzerland may have been a coincidence; the person who started the watch busi-
ness happened to live there. But then people in the area became skilled in producing 
watches. Their skill made it attractive for other watch companies to start up. As addi-
tional companies moved in, more and more members of the labor force became skilled 
at watchmaking and word went out that Swiss watches were the best in the world. That 
reputation attracted even more producers, so Switzerland became the watchmaking 
capital of the world. Had the initial watch production occurred in Austria, not Switzerland, 
Austria might be the watch capital of the world.
	
When there’s learning by doing, it’s much harder to attribute inherent comparative 
advantage to a country. One must always ask: Does country A have an inherent com-
parative advantage, or does it simply have more experience? Once country B gets the 
experience, will country A’s comparative advantage disappear? If it will, then country 
B has a strong reason to limit trade with country A in order to give its own workers 
time to catch up as they learn by doing.
Economies of Scale 
In determining whether an inherent comparative advan-
tage exists, a second complication is economies of scale—the situation in which costs 
per unit of output fall as output increases. Many manufacturing industries (such as 
steel and autos) exhibit economies of scale. The existence of significant economies of 
Learning by doing means becoming 
better at a task the more you perform it.
In economies of scale, costs per unit of 
output go down as output increases.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Often when the World Trade Organization or a similar 
type of organization promoting free trade hosts a meet-
ing, protests (sometimes violent ones) are held by a 
loosely organized collection of groups opposing global-
ization. The goals of these groups are 
varied. Some argue that trade hurts de-
veloped countries such as the United 
States; others argue that it hurts devel-
oping countries by exploiting poor work-
ers so that Westerners can get luxuries 
cheaply. Still others argue against a 
more subtle Western economic imperial-
ism in which globalization spreads Western 
cultural values and undermines devel-
oping countries’ social structures.
	
Each of these arguments has some appeal, although 
making the first two ­simultaneously is difficult because it 
says that voluntary trade hurts both parties to the trade. 
But the arguments have had little impact on the views of 
most policy makers and economists.
	
Supporting free trade does not mean that globalization 
has no costs. It does have costs, but many of the costs 
­associated with free trade are really the result of techno-
logical changes. The reality is that technological develop-
ments, such as those in telecommunications and 
The Antiglobalization Forces
transportation, are pushing countries closer together and 
will involve difficult social and cultural changes, regardless 
of whether trade is free or not. Restricting trade might tem-
porarily slow these changes but is unlikely to stop them.
Most empirical studies have found 
that, with regard to material goods, the 
workers in developing countries in-
volved in trade are generally better off 
than those not involved in trade. That’s 
why most developing countries work 
hard to encourage companies to move 
production facilities into their countries. 
From a worker’s perspective, earning 
$4 a day can look quite good when the 
alternative is earning $3 a day. Would 
the worker rather earn $10 a day? Of course, but the 
higher the wages in a given country, the less likely it is 
that firms are going to locate production there.
	
Many economists are sympathetic to various antiglo-
balization arguments, but they often become frustrated at 
the lack of clarity of the antiglobalization groups’ views. 
To oppose something is not enough; to effect positive 
change, one must both (1) understand how the thing 
one opposes works and (2) have a realistic plan for a 
better alternative.
© Paul Conklin/PhotoEdit

216	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
scale means that it makes sense (that is, it lowers costs) for one country to specialize in 
one good and another country to specialize in another good. But who should specialize 
in what is unclear. Producers in a country can, and generally do, argue that if only the 
government would establish barriers, they would be able to lower their costs per unit 
and eventually sell at lower costs than foreign producers.
	
Most countries recognize the importance of learning by doing and economies of 
scale. A variety of trade restrictions are based on these two phenomena. The most 
common expression of the learning-by-doing and economies-of-scale insights is the 
infant industry argument, which is that with initial protection, an industry will be 
able to become competitive. Countries use this argument to justify many trade restric-
tions. They argue, “You may now have a comparative advantage, but that’s simply 
because you’ve been at it longer, or are experiencing significant economies of scale. 
We need trade restrictions on our 
 industry to give it a chance to catch up. Once 
an infant industry grows up, then we can talk about eliminating the restrictions.”
	
This infant industry argument also has been used to justify tariffs on new high-tech 
products such as solar panels. U.S. firms have pushed for tariffs on Chinese solar pan-
els so that they can develop the technology here in the United States rather than have the 
technology developed in China.
Macroeconomic Costs of Trade
The comparative advantage argument for free trade assumes that a country’s resources 
are fully utilized. When countries don’t have full employment, imports can decrease 
domestic aggregate demand and increase unemployment. Exports can stimulate 
domestic aggregate demand and decrease unemployment. Thus, when an economy is 
in a recession, there is a strong macroeconomic reason to limit imports and encourage 
exports. These macroeconomic effects of free trade play an important role in the pub-
lic’s view of imports and exports. When a country is in a recession, pressure to impose 
trade restrictions increases substantially. We saw this in 2009 when, faced with the job 
losses due to the serious recession, there was significant pressure to design programs 
to keep spending in the United States where it would create jobs and not be spent on 
imports that would create jobs for other countries.
National Security
Countries often justify trade restrictions on grounds of national security. These restric-
tions take two forms:
1.	Export restrictions on strategic materials and defense-related goods.
2.	Import restrictions on defense-related goods. For example, in a war we don’t 
want to be dependent on oil from abroad.
	
For a number of goods, national security considerations make sense. For example, 
the United States restricts the sale of certain military items to countries that may be 
fighting the United States someday. The problem is where to draw the line about goods 
having a national security consideration. Should countries protect domestic agriculture? 
All high-technology items, since they might be useful in weapons? All chemicals? Steel? 
When a country makes a national security argument for trade, we must be careful to 
consider whether a domestic political reason may be lurking behind that argument.
International Politics
International politics frequently provides another reason for trade restrictions. Over the 
past decades, the United States restricted trade with Cuba to punish that country for 
trying to extend its Marxist political and economic policies to other Latin American 
Q-8  Is it efficient for a country to 
maintain a trade barrier in an industry 
that exhibits economies of scale?
The infant industry argument says  
that with initial protection, an industry 
will be able to become competitive.
Reasons for restricting trade include:
1.	 Unequal internal distribution of the 
gains from trade.
2.	 Haggling by companies over the 
gains from trade.
3.	 Haggling by countries over trade 
restrictions.
4.	 Specialized production: learning  
by doing and economies of scale.
5.	 Macroeconomic aspects of trade.
6.	 National security.
7.	 International politics.
8.	 Increased revenue brought in  
by tariffs.

	
Chapter 10 ■ International Trade Policy	
217
countries. The United States also placed trade restrictions on Iran for its reluctance to 
limit its nuclear enrichment activities. The list can be extended, but you get the argument: 
Trade helps you, so we’ll hurt you by stopping trade until you do what we want. So 
what if it hurts us too? It’ll hurt you more than it hurts us.
Increased Revenue Brought In by Tariffs
A final argument made for one particular type of trade restriction—a tariff—is that tar-
iffs bring in revenues. In the 19th century, tariffs were the U.S. government’s ­primary 
source of revenue. They are less important as a source of revenue today for many devel-
oped countries because those countries have instituted other forms of taxes. However, 
tariffs remain a primary source of revenue for many developing countries. They’re rela-
tively easy to collect and are paid by people rich enough to afford imports. These coun-
tries justify many of their tariffs with the argument that they need the ­revenues.
Why Economists Generally Oppose Trade Restrictions
Each of the preceding arguments for trade restrictions has some validity, but most 
economists discount them and support free trade. The reason is that, in their consid-
ered judgment, the harm done by trade restrictions outweighs the benefits. This is true 
even though, from the U.S. perspective, transferable comparative advantages are likely 
to place significant pressures on firms to outsource U.S. jobs abroad, and hold down 
U.S. wages in the coming decades. Most economists believe that the United States will 
be better off if it allows free trade. 
Free Trade Increases Total Output 
Economists’ first argument for free 
trade is that, viewed from a global perspective, free trade increases total output. From 
a national perspective, economists agree that particular instances of trade restrictions 
may actually help one nation even as most other nations are hurt. But they argue that 
the country imposing trade restrictions can benefit only if the other country doesn’t 
retaliate with trade restrictions of its own. Retaliation is the rule, not the exception, 
however, and when there is retaliation, trade restrictions cause both countries to lose. 
Thus, if the United States were to place a tariff on goods from China, those aspects of 
production that depend on Chinese goods would be hurt, and, as I discussed above, 
there are many such goods. Moreover, China would likely place tariffs on goods from 
the United States, hurting both countries. Such tariffs would cut overall production, 
making both countries worse off.
International Trade Provides Competition 
A second reason most 
economists oppose trade restrictions is that trade restrictions reduce international com-
petition. International competition is desirable because it forces domestic companies 
to stay on their toes. If trade restrictions on imports are imposed, domestic companies 
don’t work as hard and therefore become less efficient.
	
For example, in the 1950s and 1960s, the United States imposed restrictions on 
­imported steel. U.S. steel industries responded to this protection by raising their prices 
and channeling profits from their steel production into other activities. By the 1970s, 
the U.S. steel industry was using outdated equipment to produce overpriced steel. 
Instead of making the steel industry stronger, restrictions made it a flabby, uncompeti-
tive industry.
	
In the 1980s and 1990s, the U.S. steel industry became less and less profitable. 
Larger mills closed or consolidated, while nonunion minimills, which made new steel 
out of scrap steel, did well. By the late 1990s, minimills accounted for 45 percent of 
total U.S. steel production. In 2002 it looked as if a number of larger mills were going 
Economists generally oppose trade 
restrictions because:
1.	 From a global perspective, free 
trade increases total output.
2.	 International trade provides 
competition for domestic 
companies.
3.	 Restrictions based on national 
security are often abused or 
evaded.
4.	 Trade restrictions are addictive.

218	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
to declare bankruptcy, and enormous pressure was placed on the federal government to 
bail them out by taking over their pension debt and instituting tariffs. The U.S. govern-
ment responded by imposing 20 to 30 percent tariffs on foreign steel imports. Most 
economists opposed the tariffs and pointed out that they were unlikely to lead to a 
rebuilding of the U.S. steel industry because other countries had a comparative advan-
tage in steel production. Moreover, other countries would retaliate with tariffs on U.S. 
goods. Despite their opposition, the tariffs were instituted. Major U.S. trading partners—
including EU countries, Japan, and China—responded by threatening to implement 
tariffs on U.S. goods. The following year the U.S. government withdrew the tariffs. 
­Today, U.S. steel companies produce only a small fraction of the world’s steel, and 
almost all of that is from recycled steel. 
	
The benefits of international competition are not restricted to mature industries like 
steel; they can also accrue to young industries wherever they appear. Economists dis-
pose of the infant industry argument by referencing the historical record. In theory the 
argument makes sense. But very few of the infant industries protected by trade restric-
tions have ever grown up. What tends to happen instead is that infant industries become 
dependent on the trade restrictions and use political pressure to keep that protection. 
As a result, they often remain immature and internationally uncompetitive. Most econ-
omists would support the infant industry argument only if the trade restrictions 
included definite conditions under which the restrictions would end.
Restrictions Based on National Security Are Often Abused or 
Evaded 
Most economists agree with the national security argument for export 
restrictions on goods that are directly war-related. Selling bombs to Iran, whom the 
United States has called a member of the Axis of Evil, doesn’t make much sense. 
Economists point out that the argument is often carried far beyond goods directly 
­related to national security. For example, in the 1980s the United States restricted 
­exports of sugar-coated cereals to the Soviet Union purportedly for reasons of national 
security. Sugar-frosted flakes may be great, but they were unlikely to help the Soviet 
Union in a war.
	
Another argument that economists give against the national security rationale is 
that trade restrictions on military sales can often be evaded. Countries simply have 
another country buy the goods for them. Such third-party sales—called transshipments—
are common in international trade and limit the effectiveness of any absolute trade 
restrictions for national security purposes.
	
Economists also argue that by fostering international cooperation, international 
trade makes war less likely—a significant contribution to national security.
Trade Restrictions Are Addictive 
Economists’ final argument against 
trade restrictions is: Yes, some restrictions might benefit a country, but almost no 
country can limit its restrictions to the beneficial ones. Trade restrictions are 
­addictive—the more you have, the more you want. Thus, a majority of economists take 
the position that the best response to such addictive policies is “Just say no.”
Institutions Supporting Free Trade
As I have stated throughout the text, economists generally like markets and favor 
trade being as free as possible. They argue that trade allows specialization and the 
division of labor. When each country follows its comparative advantage, production 
is more efficient and the production possibility curve shifts out. These views mean 
that most economists, liberal and conservative alike, generally oppose international 
trade restrictions.
Very few of the infant industries 
protected by trade restrictions have 
ever grown up.
Yes, some restrictions might benefit  
a country, but almost no country  
can limit its restrictions to the  
beneficial ones.

219
	
Despite political pressures to restrict trade, governments have generally tried to 
follow economists’ advice and have entered into a variety of international agreements 
and organizations. The most important is the World Trade Organization (WTO), which 
has over 150 members and is the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT). You will still occasionally see references to GATT, even though the 
WTO has taken its place. One of the differences between the WTO and GATT is that 
the WTO includes some enforcement mechanisms.
	
Achieving agreement on trade barrier reductions is politically difficult, as is demon-
strated by the latest WTO negotiations, called the Doha Development Round. Begun in 
2001, it was meant to lead to fairer trade rules for developing countries, especially in 
agriculture. The round did not go well; the United States and Europe were unwilling to 
eliminate subsidies to their farmers that the developing countries said made it impossible 
for them to compete fairly, and hence would not reduce their tariffs on manufactured 
goods. The round was never concluded.
	
The push for free trade has a geographic dimension, which includes free trade 
associations—groups of countries that have reduced or eliminated trade barriers 
among themselves. The European Union (EU) is the most famous free trade associa-
tion. All barriers to trade among the EU’s member countries were removed in 1992, 
and over the next 20 years the EU expanded significantly. In 1993, the United States 
and Canada agreed to enter into a similar free trade union, and they, together with 
Mexico, created the North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA). Under 
NAFTA, tariffs and other trade barriers among these countries are being gradually 
reduced. Some other trading associations include Mercosur (among South American 
countries) and ASEAN (among Southeast Asian countries).
	
In 2016, the United States was negotiating two new trade agreements—the Trans-
atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) and the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(TPP). The TTIP would lower tariffs and trade restrictions between European coun-
tries and the United States; the TPP lowers tariffs and restrictions for 12 countries 
bordering on the Pacific, including the United States, Japan, Australia, and Canada. 
Talks for the TPP began in 2005, but it was only in 2015 that they were agreed upon by 
the heads of state. As of 2016 the U.S. Congress had yet to approve the TPP. The TTIP 
Q-9  What are two important 
international economic  
organizations? 
A free trade association is a group  
of countries that allows free trade 
among its members and puts up 
common barriers against all other 
countries’ goods.
ADDED DIMENSION
have on the importing country. Even if one believes that 
dumping is not a preliminary to predatory pricing, it can 
displace workers in the importing ­country, causing politi-
cal pressure on that government to institute trade restric-
tions. If that country’s economy is in a recession, the 
resulting unemployment will have substantial macroeco-
nomic ­repercussions, so pressure for trade restrictions 
will be amplified.
	
Determining whether dumping is taking place is extremely 
difficult; countries have different institutional structures, and 
determining costs of producing a good is complicated. Thus, 
invariably, there is legitimate debate about where dumping 
has occurred, and often politics, not economics, dominates 
the debate.
Dumping
The WTO allows countries to impose trade restrictions on 
imports if they can show that the goods are being dumped. 
Dumping is selling a good in a foreign country at a lower 
price than in the country where it’s produced. On the face of 
it, who could complain about someone who wants to sell 
you a good cheaply? Why not just take advantage of the 
bargain price? The first objection is the learning-by-doing 
argument. To stay competitive, a country must keep on pro-
ducing. Dumping by another country can force domestic 
producers out of business. Having eliminated the competi-
tion, the foreign producer has the field to itself and can raise 
the price. Thus, dumping can be a form of predatory pricing.
	
The second argument against dumping involves the 
short-term macroeconomic and political effects it can 

220	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
remains in the negotiating stages because of problems such as the meat hormone prob-
lem discussed in the “Hormones and Economics” box in this chapter.
	
Economists have mixed reactions to free trade associations. They see free trade as 
beneficial, but they are concerned about the possibility that regional free trade associa-
tions will impose significant trade restrictions on nonmember countries. They also 
believe that bilateral negotiations between member nations will replace multilateral 
efforts among members and nonmembers. Whether the net effect of these bilateral 
negotiations is positive or negative remains to be seen.
	
Groups of other countries have loose trading relationships because of cultural or 
historical reasons. These loose trading relationships are sometimes called trading 
zones. For example, many European countries maintain close trading ties with many 
of their former colonies in Africa where they fit into a number of overlapping trading 
zones. European companies tend to see that central area as their turf. The United 
States has close ties in Latin America, making the Western hemisphere another trad-
ing zone. Another example of a trading zone is that of Japan and its economic ties 
with other Far East countries; Japanese companies often see that area as their com-
mercial domain.
	
These trading zones overlap, sometimes on many levels. For instance, Australia 
and England, Portugal and Brazil, and the United States and Saudi Arabia are tied 
together for historical or political reasons, and those ties lead to increased trade 
between them that seems to deviate from the above trading zones. Similarly, as compa-
nies become more and more global, it is harder and harder to associate companies with 
particular countries. Let me give an example: Do you know who the largest exporters 
of cars from the United States are? The answer is: Japanese automobile companies 
with production facilities in the United States! Thus, there is no hard-and-fast specifi-
cation of trading zones, and knowing history and politics is important to understanding 
many of the relationships.
	
One way countries strengthen trading relationships among groups of countries is 
through a most-favored-nation status. The term most-favored nation refers to a country 
that will be charged as low a tariff on its exports as any other country. Thus, if the United 
States lowers tariffs on goods imported from Japan, which has most-favored-nation status 
with the United States, it must lower tariffs on those same types of goods imported from 
any other country with most-favored-nation status.
Conclusion
The difficulties that globalization and trade bring to a country—the effect on income 
distribution, and the wrenching structural changes it requires—lead many laypeople to 
support trade restrictions such as tariffs, quotas, and indeed anything to protect domes-
tic jobs. Such policies might alleviate some short-run problems, but they ultimately 
will be unlikely to work. Not only will other countries retaliate; they will also take 
advantage of trade. So if the United States closes off trade with China, other countries 
will emerge as competitors. 
	
The problem comes when we don’t face up to those problems and don’t deal with 
the political problems that an expansion of trade creates. The United States has 
avoided dealing with these problems for the last 20 years, and the problems have 
built up. One problem is the enormous increase in income inequality in the United 
States, with those workers facing global competition losing out, and those protected 
from it (or being in a position to take advantage of it) gaining. In short, the large 
trade deficits run up over the past 20 years have given us great benefits, but they also 
have had costs.
Q-10  What is economists’ view  
of limited free trade associations such 
as the EU or NAFTA?
A most-favored nation is a country that 
will pay as low a tariff on its exports as 
will any other country.

• The nature of trade is continually changing. The 
United States is importing more and more high-tech 
goods and services from India and China and other 
East Asian countries.  (LO10-1)
• Outsourcing is a type of trade. Outsourcing is a larger 
phenomenon today compared to 30 years ago because 
China and India are so large that enormous outsourcing 
is possible.  (LO10-1)
• Trade restrictions include tariffs and quotas, 
­embargoes, voluntary restraint agreements, 
­regulatory trade restrictions, and nationalistic  
appeals.  (LO10-2)
• Tariffs and quotas raise the price and reduce the quan-
tity of goods. The difference is who gets the revenue 
that results from higher price.  (LO10-2)
• Reasons that countries impose trade restrictions 
­include unequal internal distribution of the gains 
Summary
from trade, haggling by companies over the gains 
from trade, haggling by countries over trade restric-
tions, learning by doing and economies of scale, 
­macroeconomic costs of trade, national security, 
­international political reasons, and increased revenue 
brought in by tariffs.  (LO10-3)
• Economists generally oppose trade restrictions 
­because of the history of trade restrictions and their 
understanding of the advantages of free 
trade.  (LO10-3)
• Free trade associations help trade by reducing barriers 
to trade among member nations. Free trade associa-
tions could hinder trade by building up barriers to 
trade with nations outside the association; negotia-
tions among members could replace multilateral 
­efforts to reduce trade restrictions among members 
and nonmembers.  (LO10-4)
Key Terms
economies of scale
embargo
free trade association
General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT)
infant industry  
argument
learning by doing
most-favored nation
quota
regulatory trade 
restriction
sanction
strategic bargaining
strategic trade policy
tariff
trade adjustment 
assistance program
World Trade 
Organization (WTO)
Questions and Exercises
 1. How important is international trade in terms of its rela-
tionship to total U.S. production? What does this suggest 
about the importance of trade policies relative to other 
countries?  (LO10-1)
 2.  Which countries are the two greatest trading partners for 
the United States? With which countries is trade rapidly 
increasing?  (LO10-1)
 3. Demonstrate graphically how the effects of a tariff differ 
from the effects of a quota.  (LO10-2)
 4. How do the effects of voluntary restraint agreements 
­differ from the effects of a tariff?  (LO10-2)
 5. The world price of textiles is Pw, as in the accompanying 
figure of the domestic supply and demand for textiles. 
Price with tariﬀ
World price
Pt
Pw
t
S
D
Price
Quantity
 
 The government imposes a tariff t, to protect the domestic 
producers. For this tariff:  (LO10-2)
 
Chapter 10 ■ International Trade Policy 
221

222	
Microeconomics ■ International Economic Policy Issues
	a.	 Label the revenue gains to domestic producers.
	b.	 Label the revenue to government.
	c.	 Label the costs to domestic producers.
	d.	 Are the gains to domestic producers greater than the 
costs? Why? 
	 6.	 In 1964 President Lyndon B. Johnson imposed the Chicken 
Tax—a 25 percent tax on all imported light trucks in 
­retaliation for a tariff placed by Germany on chickens 
­imported from the United States. The ­light-truck tariff hurt 
Volkswagen van sales. Were these tariffs good or bad from 
the following ­perspectives?  (LO10-2)
	a.	 The U.S. government.
	b.	 German consumers of chickens.
	c.	 U.S. chicken producers.
	d.	 U.S. light truck producers.
	e. 	Economists.
	 7.	 On January 1, 2005, quotas on clothing imports to the 
United States first instituted in the 1960s to protect the 
U.S. garment industry were eliminated.  (LO10-2)
	a.	 Demonstrate graphically how this change affected 
equilibrium price and quantity of imported garments.
	b.	 Demonstrate graphically how U.S. consumers bene-
fited from the end of the quota system.
	c.	 What was the likely effect on profits of foreign com-
panies that sold clothing in the U.S. market?
	 8.	 What are three reasons countries restrict trade? Are they 
justified?  (LO10-3)
	 9.	 Why would a country have trade assistance programs? 
What makes them difficult to implement?  (LO10-3)
	10.	 How would a credible threat of trade restrictions lead to 
lower trade restrictions?  (LO10-3)
	11.	 How are economies of scale, comparative advantage, and 
trade restrictions related?  (LO10-3)
	12.	 Name three reasons economists support free  
trade.  (LO10-3)
	13. 	Why would a country want to be a most-favored  
nation? Why might it not want to be a most-favored 
­nation?  (LO10-4)
	14.	 What is the relationship between GATT and 
WTO?  (LO10-4)
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Frederic Bastiat wrote that “government is the great fiction 
through which everybody endeavors to live at the expense 
of everybody else.” Is this a correct way to understand the 
fight about tariffs? (Austrian)
	 2.	 Frederic Bastiat wrote: “It seems to me that this is theoretically 
right, for whatever the question under discussion—whether 
­religious, philosophical, political, or economic; whether it 
­concerns prosperity, morality, equality, right, justice, progress, 
responsibility, cooperation, property, labor, trade, capital, 
wages, taxes, population, finance, or government—at 
­whatever point on the scientific horizon I begin my researches, 
I invariably reach this one ­conclusion: The solution to the 
problems of human ­relationships is to be found in liberty.” 
What is problematic with this view? (Radical)
	 3.	 Frederic Bastiat wrote, “When goods do not cross 
­borders, soldiers will.” Discuss. (Religious) 
	 4.	 Who has benefited most from free trade? Who has been 
hurt most by it? Does that match the positions the various 
groups have about their support for free trade? Which 
group do economists align themselves with? Why? 
­(Post-Keynesian)
	 5.	 The text presents free trade as advantageous for develop-
ing countries. However, in its period of most rapid devel-
opment, the half century following the Civil War, the 
United States imposed tariffs on imports that averaged 
around 40 percent, a level higher than those in all but one 
of today’s developing economies.
	a.	 Why did so many of today’s industrialized countries 
not follow those policies as they were developing?
	b.	 What does this insight into economic history suggest 
about the doctrine of free trade and whose interests it 
serves? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 How does considering trade in the broader cultural 
­context change one’s analysis?
	 2.	 One of the basic economic laws is “the law of one price.” 
It says that given certain assumptions one would expect 
that if free trade is allowed, the price of goods in coun-
tries should converge.
	a.	 Can you list what three of those assumptions likely are?
	b.	 Should the law of one price hold for labor also? Why 
or why not?
	c.	 Should it hold for capital more so or less so than for 
labor? Why?
	 3.	 Suggest an equitable method of funding trade adjustment 
assistance programs.
	a.	 Why is it equitable?
	b.	 What problems might a politician have in implement-
ing such a method?
	 4.	 When the United States placed a temporary price floor on 
tomatoes imported from Mexico, a U.S. trade representative 

	
Chapter 10 ■ International Trade Policy	
223
said, “The agreement will provide strong relief to the tomato 
growers in Florida and other states, and help preserve jobs 
in the industry.” What costs did Americans bear from the 
price floor? 
	 5.	 Mexico exports many vegetables to the United States. These 
vegetables are grown using chemicals that are not allowed in 
U.S. vegetable agriculture. Should the United States restrict 
imports of Mexican vegetables? Why or why not? 
	 6.	 The U.S. government taxes U.S. companies for their 
­overseas profits, but it allows them to deduct from their 
U.S. taxable income the taxes that they pay abroad and 
­interest on loans funding operations abroad, with no 
­limits on the amount deducted. 
	a.	 Is it possible that the overseas profit tax produces no 
net revenue?
	b.	 What would you suggest to the government about this 
tax if its purpose were to increase corporate income 
tax revenue?
	c.	 Why might the government keep this tax even if it 
were not collecting any net revenue?
	 7.	 In the 1930s Clair Wilcox of Swarthmore College orga-
nized a petition by economists “that any measure which 
provided for a general upward revision of tariff rates be 
denied passage by Congress, or if passed, be vetoed.” It 
was signed by one-third of all economists in the United 
States at the time, of all political persuasions. A month 
later, the Smoot-Hawley Tariff was passed.
	a.	 Why did economists oppose the tariff?
	b.	 Demonstrate the effect of the tariff on the price of goods.
	c.	 How would the tariff help the economy if other coun-
tries did not institute a retaliatory tariff?
	d.	 What would be the effect on the macroeconomy if 
other countries did institute a retaliatory tariff?
	 8.	 If you were economic adviser to a country that was following 
your advice about trade restrictions and that country fell into a 
recession, would you change your advice? Why, or why not? 
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 The type of goods being imported has changed from 
­primarily low-tech goods to technologically advanced 
goods.  (LO10-1)
	 2.	 A debtor nation will not necessarily be running a trade 
deficit. Debt refers to accumulated past deficits. If a coun-
try had accumulated large deficits in the past, it could run 
a surplus now but still be a debtor nation.  (LO10-1)
	 3. 	Like tariffs, taxes shift the supply of a good up by the 
amount of the tariff. Equilibrium quantity falls and equi-
librium price rises.  (LO10-2)
S1
S0
D0
Tariﬀ
P1
P0
Price
Q1 Q0
Quantity
	 4.	 Importers prefer quotas because they receive higher 
prices. Government prefers a tariff because the tariff 
brings in revenue for government.  (LO10-2)
	 5.	 An inefficient customs agency can have the same effect 
as a trade restriction, and if trade restrictions would help 
the country, then it is possible that an inefficient customs 
agency could also help the country.  (LO10-2)
	 6. 	Production is concentrated among a small number of 
firms that stand to benefit from trade restrictions and thus 
are more likely to combine efforts to lobby government. 
Because the number of consumers is large and the cost of 
trade restrictions to each relatively small, consumers have 
less incentive to take joint action.  (LO10-3)
	 7.	 True. In strategic trade bargaining it is sometimes reasonable 
to be unreasonable. The belief of the other bargainer that 
you will be unreasonable leads you to be able to extract 
larger gains from trade. Of course, this leads to the logical 
paradox that if “unreasonable” is “reasonable,” unreason-
able really is reasonable, so it is only reasonable to be 
­reasonable. Sorting out that last statement can be left for 
a philosophy or logic class.  (LO10-3)
	 8.	 Whether or not it is efficient for a country to maintain 
barriers to trade in an industry that exhibits economies  
of scale depends upon the marginal costs and marginal 
­benefits of maintaining those barriers. Having significant 
economies of scale does mean that average costs of 
­production will be lower at higher levels of production; 
however, trade restrictions might mean that the industry 
is able to inflate its costs.  (LO10-3)
	 9.	 Two important international economic organizations  
are the WTO and GATT, which was replaced by the 
WTO.  (LO10-4)
	10.	 Most economists have a mixed view of limited free trade 
associations such as NAFTA or the EU. While they see 
free trade as beneficial, they are concerned about the 
­possibility that these limited trade associations will impose 
trade restrictions on nonmember countries. Whether the 
net effect of these will be positive or ­negative is a com-
plicated issue.  (LO10-4)

The ability of market economies to supply ­material goods 
and services to members of their ­societies is one of the 
strongest arguments for ­using the market as a means of orga-
nizing society. Just consider the coordination needed to pro-
vide you a freshly brewed Starbucks latte in the morning. 
Trees had to be harvested and made into paper; the paper 
had to be processed and made into cups and printed with the 
Starbucks logo. Coffee beans had to be grown, picked, 
roasted, and ground. The espresso maker parts had to be 
made and assembled. The ingredients were produced in 20 
different countries and shipped to a Starbucks near you at 
the right time and in the right quantities. Finally, a barista 
had to be paid enough to prepare coffee (and label it with the customer’s  misspelled 
name) when people want it—on the way to their jobs, in which they were ­producing 
goods that ­people from many other countries will end up consuming. Somehow 
markets are able to channel individuals’ imagination, creativity, and drive into the 
production of material goods and services that other people want. They do this by 
giving people incentives to supply goods and services to the market.
	
Ultimately all supply comes from individuals. Individuals control the factors 
of production such as land, labor, and capital. Why do individuals supply these 
factors to the market? Because they want something in return. This means that 
industry’s ability to supply goods depends on individuals’ willingness to supply 
the factors of production they control. This connection was obvious in the 
­formerly socialist countries such as Russia when consumer goods were ­often 
unavailable. People in those countries stopped working (supplying their labor). 
They reasoned: Why supply our labor if there’s nothing to get in return?
	
The analysis of supply is more complicated than the analysis of demand. In 
the supply process, people first offer their factors of production to the market. 
Then the factors are transformed by firms, such as GM or IBM, into goods that 
consumers want. Production is the name given to that transformation of ­factors 
into goods and services.
	
To simplify the analysis, economists separate out the consideration of the 
supply of factors of production (considered in detail in a later chapter) from the 
supply of produced goods. This allows us to assume that the prices of factors of 
production are constant, which simplifies the analysis of the supply of pro-
duced goods enormously. There’s no problem with doing this as long as you 
remember that behind any produced good are individuals’ factor supplies. Ulti-
mately people, not firms, are responsible for supply.
Production is not the application of tools 
to materials, but logic to work.
—Peter Drucker
“
”
chapter 11
Production and Cost Analysis I
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO11-1	
Explain the role of the firm 
in economic analysis.
LO11-2	 Describe the production 
process in the short run.
LO11-3	 Calculate fixed costs, 
variable costs, marginal 
costs, total costs, average 
fixed costs, average 
variable costs, and average 
total costs.
LO11-4	 Distinguish the various cost 
curves and describe the 
relationships among them.
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Jill Braaten, photographer

	
Chapter 11 ■ Production and Cost Analysis I	
225
	
Even with the analysis so simplified, there’s still a lot to cover—so much, in fact, 
that I devote two chapters (this chapter and the next) to considering production, costs, 
and supply. In this chapter, I introduce you to the production process and short-run 
cost analysis. Then, in the next chapter, I focus on long-run costs and how cost analysis 
is used in the real world.
The Role of the Firm
With goods that already exist, such as housing and labor, the law of supply is rather 
intuitive. Their supply to the market depends on people’s opportunity costs of keeping 
their houses and time for themselves and of supplying them to the market. But many of 
the things we buy (such as smartphones, cars, and jackets) don’t already exist; they must 
be conceived of and produced. The supply of such goods depends on production. Thus, 
for such goods, one needs a theory of production to underpin the theory of supply.
	
A key concept in production is the firm. A firm is an economic institution that 
transforms factors of production into goods and services. A firm (1) organizes factors 
of production and/or (2) produces goods and/or (3) sells produced goods to individuals, 
businesses, or government.
	
Which combination of activities a firm will undertake depends on the cost of 
undertaking each activity relative to the cost of subcontracting the work out to ­another 
firm. Some firms don’t have a physical location and don’t “produce” ­anything; they 
simply subcontract out all production. An example is Perdue chickens. Perdue does not 
raise any chickens itself. It hires farmers to raise chickens. It provides the farmers with 
chicks and a detailed set of directions about how to raise them into chickens. ­Perdue 
then hires another company to pick up the adult chickens for slaughter, puts its label 
on the processed chickens, and ships them to supermarkets. While most firms are not 
totally virtual, more and more of the organizational structures of businesses are being 
separated from the production process. As cost structures change because of techno-
logical advances such as the Internet, an increasing ­number of well-known firms will 
likely concentrate on organizational instead of production activities.
Firms Maximize Profit
Economists assume that firms maximize profit. Profit is defined as follows:
Profit = Total revenue − Total cost
In accounting, total revenue equals total sales times price; if a firm sells 1,000 pairs of 
earrings at $5 each, its total revenue is $5,000. For an accountant, total costs are the 
wages paid to labor, rent paid to owners of capital, interest paid to lenders, and actual 
payments to other factors of production. If the firm paid $2,000 to employees to make 
the earrings and $1,000 for the materials, rent, and interest, total cost is $3,000.
	
In determining what to include in total revenue and total costs, accountants focus 
on such explicit revenues and explicit costs. That’s because they must have quantifi-
able measures that go into a firm’s income statement. For this reason, you can think of 
accounting profit as explicit revenue less explicit cost. The accounting profit for the 
earring firm described above is $2,000.
The Difference between Economists’ Profits and 
Accountants’ Profits
Economists have different measures of revenues and costs and hence have a different 
measure of profit. The difference is that economists’ specification of revenues and 
costs is based on opportunity costs, not accounting costs. So, economists include in 
Firms:
1.	 Organize factors of production,  
and/or
2.	 Produce goods and services,  
and/or
3.	 Sell produced goods and  
services.
More and more of the organizational 
structures of business are being 
separated from the production  
process.
Accounting focuses on explicit costs 
and revenues; economics focuses on 
both explicit and implicit costs and 
revenues.

226
revenue and costs both explicit and ­implicit costs and revenues. Their measure of 
profit is both explicit and implicit ­revenue less both explicit and implicit costs. As 
discussed in Chapter 2, implicit costs are costs that you don’t directly pay but that are 
part of the opportunity costs of a decision. Implicit revenues are revenues that you 
don’t receive but that increase your net wealth. Economists’ measure of profit includes 
these implicit costs and implicit revenues.
	
Let’s consider some examples. Implicit costs include the opportunity costs of the 
factors of production provided by the owners of the business. Say that the owner of our 
earring firm could have earned $1,500 working elsewhere if she did not own the earring 
firm. The opportunity cost of working in her own business is $1,500. It is an implicit 
cost of doing business and would be included as a cost. For economists, total cost is 
explicit payments to the ­factors of production plus the opportunity cost of the factors 
provided by the owners of the firm. Total cost of the earring firm is $3,000 in explicit 
cost plus $1,500 in implicit cost, or $4,500. Generally, implicit costs must be estimated 
and are not directly ­measurable, which is why accountants do not include them.
	
Implicit revenues include the increase in the value of assets. Say the earring firm 
owns a kiosk whose market value rises from $10,000 to $11,000. The economic con-
cept of revenue would include the $1,000 increase in the value of the kiosk as part of 
total revenue. For economists, total revenue is the amount a firm receives for selling 
its product or service plus any increase in the value of the assets owned by the firm. 
Total revenue of the earring firm is $5,000 in explicit revenue plus $1,000 in implicit 
revenue, or $6,000. For economists,
Economic profit = (Explicit and implicit revenue) − (Explicit and implicit cost)
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
In Chapter 3, we discussed the types of firms that exist in 
real life, and explained how they are one of the most im-
portant of the economic institutions. They are the organi-
zations that translate factors of production into consumer 
goods. Types of real-world firms include sole proprietor-
ships, partnerships, corporations, for-profit firms, nonprofit 
firms, and cooperatives. Each type has its own problems, 
and organizational theory is a key area of ­research in eco-
nomics. One of those areas of research considers why the 
nature of firms changes over time.
	
Much of the research in organizational theory is based 
upon the work of Chicago economist Ronald Coase, who 
pointed out that in order to understand the firm, one must 
understand that how activities are organized in firms de-
pends on the transaction costs (costs of undertaking 
trades through the market) it faces. Production internal to 
the firm reduces transaction costs but also can increase 
costs since internal-to-the-firm production involves com-
mand and control and is not subject to the competition of 
the market. (Coase won a Nobel Prize for his work in 1991.)
	
The Internet has lowered transaction costs, significantly 
changing how firms are organized. It used to be that firms 
hired employees for the long term. The most significant 
Transaction Costs and the Internet
transaction cost was the hiring—finding an employee who 
matched a need, negotiating pay, paying for the employee 
to move, and then training that employee. After hiring, 
transaction costs were pretty low; when a firm had a need, 
it assigned the project in-house, providing additional train-
ing when necessary. The original transaction cost could be 
spread over a number of projects.
	
Now a firm can identify a need and outsource the work 
by posting it on Internet sites such as freelancer.com for 
freelancers to bid on. The firm has no obligation to the 
freelancer other than to pay for the service, which lowers 
the transaction cost enormously. The freelancer can be 
anywhere in the world, working in any time zone, and proj-
ect managers can oversee the work through online com-
munications such as WebEx or Skype. Setting up a clothing 
line and need a fashion designer? Need to develop a web-
site? Post the project online. 
	
The key point to remember is that as transaction costs 
change, the efficient structure of firms changes, which brings 
about a change in the nature of firms. Whereas large com-
mand and control companies such as IBM once arose to lower 
transaction costs, now in some industries the efficient firms 
are small, fragmenting production into ever smaller parts.

227
So in this case, economic profit is ($5,000 + $1,000) − ($3,000 + $1,500) = $1,500. The 
difference really has to do with measurability. Implicit costs must be estimated, and 
the estimations can sometimes be inexact. General accounting rules do not permit such 
inexactness because it might allow firms to misstate their profit, something accounting 
rules are designed to avoid.
The Production Process
As I stated at the beginning of the chapter, supply is the key to the market’s ability to 
provide the goods people want. Underlying supply is production; firms are important 
because they control the production process.
Q-1  What distinguishes accounting 
profit from economic profit?
ADDED DIMENSION
the firm’s total output less the 
cost of the inputs bought from 
other firms. For example, if a 
desk assembly firm spends 
$4,000 on component parts 
and sells its output for 
$6,000, its value added is 
$2,000, or 33⅓ percent of its 
revenue.
When you add up all the 
stages of production, the 
value added of all the firms in-
volved must equal 100 per-
cent, and no more, of the total 
output. When I discuss “a 
firm’s” production of a good in 
this book, to relate that dis-
cussion to reality, you should 
think of that firm as a compos-
ite of all the firms contributing 
to the production and distri-
bution of that product.
Why is it important to re-
member that there are various 
stages of production? Be-
cause it brings home to you 
how complicated producing a good is. If any one stage 
gets messed up, the good doesn’t get to the consumer. 
Producing a better mousetrap isn’t enough. The firm also 
must be able to get it out to consumers and let them know 
that it’s a better mousetrap. The traditional economic 
model doesn’t bring home this point. But if you’re ever 
planning to go into business for yourself, you’d better re-
member it. Many people’s dreams of supplying a better 
product to the market have been squashed by this reality.
Value Added and the Calculation of Total Production
This book (like all economics 
textbooks) treats production 
as if it were a one-stage  
process—as if a single firm 
transforms a factor of produc-
tion into a consumer good. 
Economists write like that to 
keep the analysis manage-
able. (Believe me, it’s compli-
cated enough.) But you 
should keep in mind that real-
ity is more complicated. Most 
goods go through a variety of 
stages of production.
	
For example, consider the 
production of desks. One firm 
transforms raw materials into 
usable raw materials (iron ore 
into steel); another firm trans-
forms usable raw materials 
into more usable inputs (steel 
into steel rods, bolts, and 
nuts); ­another firm transforms 
those inputs into desks, 
which it sells wholesale to a 
general distributor, which 
then sells them to a retailer, which sells them to consum-
ers. Many goods go through five or six stages of ­production 
and distribution. As a result, if you added up all the sales of 
all the firms, you would overstate how much total 
­production was taking place.
	
To figure out how much total production is actually tak-
ing place, economists use the concept value added. Value 
added is the contribution that each stage of production 
makes to the final value of a good. A firm’s value added is 
Top left: © GeoStock/Getty Images; 
top right: © Neil Beer/Getty Images; 
bottom left: © Ingram Publishing/
SuperStock; bottom right: © Ingram 
Publishing/SuperStock

228	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
The Long Run and the Short Run
The production process is generally divided into a long-run planning decision, in 
which a firm chooses the least expensive method of producing from among all possible 
methods, and a short-run adjustment decision, in which a firm adjusts its long-run 
planning decision to reflect new information.
	
In a long-run decision, a firm chooses among all possible production techniques. 
This means that it can choose the size of the plant it wants, the type of machines it 
wants, and the location it wants. The firm has fewer options in a short-run decision, 
in which the firm is constrained in regard to what production decisions it can make.
	
The terms long run and short run do not necessarily refer to specific periods of time 
independent of the nature of the production process. They refer to the degree of flexibility 
the firm has in changing its inputs. In the long run, by definition, the firm can vary the inputs 
as much as it wants. In the short run, some of the flexibility that existed in the long run no 
longer exists. In the short run, some inputs are so costly to adjust that they are treated as 
fixed. So in the long run, all inputs are variable; in the short run, some inputs are fixed.
Production Tables and Production Functions
How a firm combines factors of production to produce goods and services can be pre-
sented in a production table (a table showing the output resulting from various com-
binations of factors of production or inputs).
	
Real-world production tables are complicated. They often involve hundreds of inputs, 
hundreds of outputs, and millions of possible combinations of inputs and outputs. Studying 
these various combinations and determining which is best requires expertise and 
ex­perience. Business schools devote entire courses to it (operations research and produc-
tion analysis); engineering schools devote entire specialties to it (industrial engineering).
	
Studying the problems and answering the questions that surround production is 
much of what a firm does: What combination of outputs should it produce? What com-
bination of inputs should it use? What combination of techniques should it use? What 
new techniques should it explore? To answer these questions, the managers of a firm 
look at a production table.
	
Production tables are so complicated that in introductory economics we concentrate 
on short-run production analysis in which one of the factors is fixed. Doing so allows us 
to capture some important technical relationships of production without getting too tied up 
in numbers. The relevant part of a production table of earrings appears in Figure 11-1(c). 
In it the number of the assumed fixed inputs (machines) has already been determined. 
Columns 1 and 2 of the table tell us how output of earrings varies as the variable input 
(the number of workers) changes. For example, you can see that with 3 workers the firm 
can produce 17 pairs of earrings. Column 3 tells us workers’ marginal product (the 
additional output that will be forthcoming from an additional worker, other inputs 
constant). Column 4 tells us workers’ average product (output per worker).
	
It is important to distinguish marginal product from average product. Workers’ 
­average product is the total output divided by the number of workers. For example, 
let’s consider the case of 5 workers. Total output is 28, so average product is 5.6 (28 
divided by 5). To find the marginal product, we must ask how much additional output 
will be forthcoming if we change the number of workers. For example, if we change 
from 4 to 5 workers, the additional worker’s marginal product will be 5; if we change 
from 5 to 6, the additional worker’s marginal product will be 3. That’s why the mar-
ginal products are written between each level of output.
	
The information in a production table is often summarized in a production ­function. A 
production function is the relationship between the inputs (factors of production) and 
outputs. Specifically, the production function tells the maximum amount of output that 
A long-run decision is a decision in 
which the firm can choose among all 
possible production techniques.
A short-run decision is a decision in 
which the firm is constrained in regard 
to what production decisions it can 
make.
The marginal product is the additional 
output forthcoming from an additional 
input, other inputs constant; the 
average product is the total output 
divided by the quantity of the input.

	
Chapter 11 ■ Production and Cost Analysis I	
229
can be derived from a given number of inputs. Figure 11-1(a) is the production function 
that displays the information in the production table in Figure 11-1(c). The number of 
workers is on the horizontal axis and the output of earrings is on the vertical axis.
The Law of Diminishing Marginal Productivity
Figure 11-1(b) graphs the workers’ average and marginal productivities from the produc-
tion function in Figure 11-1(a). [Alternatively you can determine those graphs by plotting 
columns 3 and 4 from the table in Figure 11-1(c).] Notice that both marginal and average 
productivities are initially increasing, but that eventually they both decrease. Between 7 
and 8 workers, the marginal productivity of workers actually becomes negative.
	
This means that initially this production function exhibits increasing marginal pro-
ductivity and then it exhibits diminishing marginal productivity. Eventually it exhibits 
negative marginal productivity.
	
The same information can be gathered from Figure 11-1(a), but it’s a bit harder to 
interpret.1 Notice that initially the production function is bowed upward. Where it’s 
bowed upward there is increasing marginal productivity, as you can see if you extend 
Q-2  What are the normal shapes of 
marginal productivity and average 
productivity curves?
FIGURE 11-1 (A, B, AND C)  A Production Table and 
Production Function
The production function in (a) is a graph of the production 
table in (c). Its shape reflects the underlying production 
technology. The graph in (b) shows the marginal and 
average product. Notice that when marginal product is 
increasing, the production function is bowed upward; 
when marginal product is decreasing, the production 
function is bowed downward; when marginal product is 
zero, the production function is at its highest point. Firms 
are interested in producing where both average product 
and marginal product are positive and falling, which starts 
at 4 workers and ends at 7.5 workers.
Output
Output per worker
(a)
(b)
Highest output possible
Diminishing
marginal
productivity
Diminishing
absolute
productivity
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Increasing
marginal
productivity
Number of workers
Number of workers
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
MP
AP
TP
Increasing 
marginal 
productivity
Diminishing 
marginal 
productivity
Diminishing 
absolute 
productivity
  4
  6
  7
  6
  5
  3
  1
  0
−2
−5
	
(1)	
(2)	
(3)	
(4) 
	
	
	
	
Average 
	
	
	
Marginal	
Product 
	
	
	
Product	
(total product/ 
	 Number of	
Total	
(change in	
number of 
	
Workers	
Output	 total output)	
workers)
	
	
	
	
  1	
  4	
	
4
	
  2	
10	
	
5
	
  3	
17	
	
5.7
	
  4	
23	
	
5.8
	
  5	
28	
	
5.6
	
  6	
31	
	
5.2
	
  7	
32	
	
4.6
	
  8	
32	
	
4.0
	
  9	
30	
	
3.3
	
10	
25	
	
2.5
(c)
1Technically the marginal productivity curve is a graph of the slope of the total product curve.

230	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
a line down to Figure 11-1(b). Then, between 2.5 and 7.5 workers, the production 
function is bowed downward but is still rising. In this range, there’s diminishing mar-
ginal productivity, as you can see by extending a line down to Figure 11-1(b). Finally 
marginal productivity is negative.
	
The most important area of these relationships is the area of diminishing marginal 
productivity (between 2.5 and 7.5 workers). Why? Because a firm is most likely to oper-
ate in that area. If it’s in the first range and marginal productivity is increasing, a firm can 
increase its existing workers’ output by hiring more workers; it will have a strong incen-
tive to do so and get out of that range. Similarly, if hiring an ­additional worker actually 
cuts total output (as it does when marginal productivity is negative), the firm would be 
crazy to hire that worker. So it stays out of that range.
	
This range of the relationship between fixed and variable inputs is so important 
that economists have formulated a law that describes what happens in production 
­processes when firms reach this range—when more and more of one input is added to 
a fixed amount of another input. The law of diminishing marginal productivity 
states that as more and more of a variable input is added to an existing fixed input, 
eventually the additional output one gets from that additional input is going to fall.
	
The law of diminishing marginal productivity is sometimes called the flowerpot 
law because if it didn’t hold true, the world’s entire food supply could be grown in one 
flowerpot. In the absence of diminishing marginal productivity, we could take a flow-
erpot and keep adding seeds to it, getting more and more food per seed until we had 
enough to feed the world. In reality, however, a given flowerpot is capable of ­producing 
only so much food no matter how many seeds we add to it. At some point, as we add 
more and more seeds, each additional seed will produce less food than did the seed 
before it. That’s the law of diminishing marginal productivity in action. ­Eventually the 
pot reaches a stage of diminishing absolute productivity, in which the total output, not 
simply the output per unit of input, decreases as inputs are increased.
The Costs of Production
In any given firm, owners and managers probably discuss costs far more than anything 
else. Invariably costs are too high and the firm is trying to figure out ways to lower 
them. But the concept costs is ambiguous; there are many different types of costs and 
it’s important to know what they are. Let’s consider some of the most important cate-
gories of costs in reference to Table 11-1, which shows costs associated with making 
between 3 and 32 pairs of earrings.
Fixed Costs, Variable Costs, and Total Costs
Fixed costs are costs that are spent and cannot be changed in the period of time under 
consideration. There are no fixed costs in the long run since all inputs are variable and 
hence their costs are variable. In the short run, however, a number of costs will be 
fixed. For example, say you make earrings. You buy a machine for working with silver, 
but suddenly there’s no demand for silver earrings. Assuming that machine can’t be 
modified and used for other purposes, the money you spent on it is a fixed cost. So 
within this model, all fixed costs are assumed to be sunk costs.
	
Fixed costs are shown in column 2 of Table 11-1. Notice that fixed costs remain the 
same ($50) regardless of the level of production. As you can see, it doesn’t matter 
whether output is 3 or 32; fixed costs are always $50.
	
Besides buying the machine, the silversmith must also hire workers. These workers 
are the earring firm’s variable costs—costs that change as output changes. The 
­earring firm’s variable costs are shown in column 3. Notice that as output increases, 
Q-3  Firms are likely to operate  
on what portion of the marginal 
productivity curve?
The law of diminishing marginal 
productivity states that as more and 
more of a variable input is added  
to an existing fixed input, after  
some point the additional output  
one gets from the additional input  
will fall.

	
Chapter 11 ■ Production and Cost Analysis I	
231
variable costs increase. For example, when the firm produces 9 pairs of earrings, vari-
able costs are $100; when it produces 10, variable costs rise to $108.
	
All costs are either fixed or variable in the standard model, so the total cost is the 
sum of the fixed and variable costs:
TC = FC + VC
The earring firm’s total costs are presented in column 4. Each entry in column 4 is the 
sum of the entries in columns 2 and 3 in the same row. For example, to produce 16 pairs 
of earrings, fixed costs are $50 and variable costs are $150, so total cost is $200.
Average Costs
Total cost, fixed cost, and variable cost are important, but much of a firm’s discussion 
is about average cost. So the next distinction we want to make is between total cost and 
average cost. To arrive at the earring firm’s average cost, we simply divide the ­total 
amount of whatever cost we’re talking about by the quantity produced. Each of the 
three costs we’ve discussed has a corresponding average cost.
	
For example, average total cost (often called average cost) equals total cost divided 
by the quantity produced. Thus:
ATC = TCQ
Average fixed cost equals fixed cost divided by quantity produced:
AFC = FCQ
Average variable cost equals variable cost divided by quantity produced:
AVC = VCQ
TC = FC + VC
To arrive at the earring firm’s average 
cost, we simply divide the total amount 
of whatever cost we’re talking about by 
the quantity produced.
Q-4  If total costs are $400, fixed 
costs are 0, and output is 10, what are 
average variable costs?
TABLE 11-1  The Cost of Producing Earrings
	
(1)	
(2)	
(3)	
(4)	
(5)	
(6)	
(7)	
(8)	
	
	
	
	
	
Marginal Costs  
	
	
	
	
	
(MC) (change in  
	
	
	
	
	
total costs/	
Average	
Average Variable	
Average Total  
	
	
Fixed	
Variable	
Total Costs (TC)	
change in	
Fixed Costs (AFC)	
Costs (AVC)	
Costs (ATC)	
Output	
Costs (FC)	
Costs (VC)	
(FC + VC)	
output)	
(FC/Output)	
(VC/Output)	
(AFC + AVC)
	
  3	
$50	
$ 38	
$  88	
$12	
$16.67	
$12.66	
$29.33
	
  4	
  50	
   50	
 100	
	
  12.50	
  12.50	
  25.00
	
  9	
  50	
 100	
 150	
    8	
    5.56	
  11.11	
  16.67
	
10	
  50	
 108	
 158	
	
    5.00	
  10.80	
  15.80
	
	
16	
  50	
 150	
 200	
    7	
    3.12	
    9.38	
  12.50
	
17	
  50	
 157	
 207	
	
    2.94	
    9.24	
  12.18
	
	
22	
  50	
 200	
 250	
  10	
    2.27	
    9.09	
  11.36
	
23	
  50	
 210	
 260	
	
    2.17	
    9.13	
  11.30
	
	
27	
  50	
 255	
 305	
  15	
    1.85	
    9.44	
  11.29
	
28	
  50	
 270	
 320	
	
    1.79	
    9.64	
  11.43
	
	
32	
  50	
 400	
 450	
	
    1.56	
  12.50	
  14.06

232	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
	
Average fixed cost and average variable cost are shown in columns 6 and 7 of 
Table 11-1. The most important average cost concept, average total cost, is shown in 
column 8. Average total cost also can be thought of as the sum of average fixed cost 
and average variable cost:
ATC = AFC + AVC
	
As you can see, the average total cost of producing 16 pairs of earrings is $12.50. 
It can be calculated by dividing total cost ($200) by output (16).
Marginal Cost
All these costs are important to our earring firm, but they are not the most important 
costs it considers when deciding how many pairs of earrings to produce. That distinction 
goes to marginal cost, which appears in column 5.2 Marginal cost is the increase 
Marginal cost is the increase (decrease) 
in total cost from increasing (decreasing) 
the level of output by 1 unit.
2Since only selected output levels are shown, not all entries have marginal costs. For a marginal cost 
to exist, there must be a marginal change, a change by only 1 unit.
Thinking Like a Modern Economist
What “Goods” Do Firms Produce? The Costs of Producing Image
The textbook economic models are implicitly struc-
tured around the production of physical goods that 
require physical inputs. Such physical goods have 
become less important in the modern economy. In 
today’s economy, many of the goods that firms pro-
duce involve intangibles such as image and percep-
tion. For example, Starbucks is not only producing 
coffee; it is also producing an image of luxury, so 
when you buy a Frappuccino, you are actually  
buying something that makes you feel good about 
yourself—you see yourself as a quality person. Or 
when you buy a car—you are not just buying a car—you 
are buying an image for yourself. Modern firms 
spend enormous time and effort trying to associate 
whatever they are selling with an image that ­people 
want to associate with themselves.
	
Image is real, and has real effects. For example, 
­experimental economists have shown that people re-
spond better to medicine with a high price than to 
that same medicine with a low price. (This is a varia-
tion of the well-known placebo effect in medicine; 
people get better from taking a sugar pill if they think 
it is a medicine that is going to help them.)
	
Producing “image” rather than physical products 
­affects both the structure of costs and how costs 
are analyzed. Specifically, producing image tends 
to ­require large expenditures not directly related to 
production of any specific good that the firm pro-
duces. It might involve:
• Advertising that has little to do with the 
product. (“Just do it” could apply to any 
number of goods, not just sneakers.)
• Buying only the highest-price coffee beans 
even though lower-price coffee might taste 
just as good, or better. (Do you buy Dunkin’ 
Donuts, Starbucks, or Blue Bottle brand?)
• Associating the firm’s name with something 
positive, for example, underwriting the cost of a 
stadium. (Think of Busch Stadium in St. Louis.)
• Supporting a local sports team or public radio 
station. (According to one study, 88 percent 
of public radio listeners say their opinion of a 
company is more positive when they discover 
the company supports public radio.)
	
These expenditures might seem inconsistent with 
profit maximizing until one recognizes that the firm is 
selling its image. These indirect costs of creating 
­image are not quite fixed costs—since they must be 
made continually if the firm is to maintain its good’s 
image—but they are not variable costs either, since 
they do not vary with output of the product. Modern 
economists’ more advanced models of costs capture 
these distinctions.

	
Chapter 11 ■ Production and Cost Analysis I	
233
(decrease) in total cost from increasing (decreasing) the level of output by 1 unit. Let’s 
find marginal cost by considering what happens if our earring firm increases production 
by 1 unit—from 9 to 10. Looking again at Table 11-1, we see that the total cost rises 
from $150 to $158. In this case, the marginal cost of producing the 10th unit is $8.
Graphing Cost Curves
Let’s say that the owner of the earring firm sees things better in pictures and asks you 
(an economic consultant) to show her what all those numbers in Table 11-1 mean. To 
do so, you first draw a graph, putting quantity on the horizontal axis and a dollar mea-
sure of various costs on the vertical axis.
Total Cost Curves
Figure 11-2(a) graphs the total cost, total fixed cost, and total variable cost for all the 
levels of output given in Table 11-1.3 The total cost curve is determined by plotting the 
entries in column 1 and the corresponding entries in column 4. For example, point L 
corresponds to a quantity of 10 and a total cost of $158. Notice that the total cost curve 
is upward-sloping: Increasing output increases total cost.
	
The total fixed cost curve is determined by plotting column 1 and column 2 on the 
graph. The total variable cost curve is determined by plotting column 1 and column 3. 
As you can see, the total variable cost curve has the same shape as the total cost curve: 
Increasing output increases variable cost. This isn’t surprising, since the total cost 
curve is the vertical summation of total fixed cost and total variable cost. For ­example, 
3To keep the presentation simple, we focus only on the most important part of the total cost curve, 
that part that follows the simplest rules. Other areas of the total cost curve can be bowed downward 
rather than bowed upward.
Total cost
0
50
108
158
400
$450
O
M
(TC = VC + FC)
TC
VC
FC
10
32
Quantity of earrings
(a)  Total Cost Curves
(b)  Per-Unit Output Cost Curves
Cost
MC
ATC
AVC
AFC
Quantity of earrings
10
20
30
L
$30
20
10
0
FIGURE 11-2 (A AND B)  Total and Per-Unit Output Cost Curves
Total fixed costs, shown in (a), are always constant; they don’t change with output. All other total costs increase with output. As output gets 
high, the rate of increase has a tendency to increase. The average fixed cost curve, shown in (b), is downward-sloping; the average variable 
cost curve and average total cost curve are U-shaped. The U-shaped MC curve goes through the minimum points of the AVC and ATC curves. 
(The AFC curve is often not drawn since AFC is also represented by the distance between the AVC and ATC.)

234	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
at output 10, total fixed cost equals $50 (point M); total variable cost equals $108 
(point O); and total cost equals $158 (point L).
Average and Marginal Cost Curves
Figure 11-2(b) presents the average fixed cost curve, average total cost curve (or 
average cost curve, as it’s generally called), average variable cost curve, and 
­marginal cost curve associated with the cost figures in Table 11-1. As was the case 
with the total cost curves, all the firm’s owner needs to do is look at this graph to 
find the various costs associated with different levels of output, since the graphical 
­visualization of cost curves provides a good sense of what happens to costs as we 
change output. Let’s start our consideration with average fixed cost. Average fixed 
cost is decreasing throughout.
Downward-Sloping Shape of the Average Fixed Cost Curve 
The 
average fixed cost curve looks like a child’s slide: It starts out with a steep decline; 
then it becomes flatter and flatter. What this tells us about production is straightfor-
ward: As output increases, the same fixed cost can be spread over a wider range of 
output, so average fixed cost falls. Average fixed cost initially falls quickly but then 
falls more and more slowly. As the denominator gets bigger while the numerator stays 
the same, the increase has a smaller and smaller effect.
The U Shape of the Average Cost Curves 
Let’s now move on to the 
average cost curves. Why do they have the shapes they do? Or, expressed another way, 
how does our analysis of production relate to our analysis of costs? You may have 
already gotten an idea of how production and costs relate if you remembered Figure 11-1 
and recognized the output numbers that we presented were similar output numbers to 
those that we used in the cost analysis. Cost analysis is simply another way of consid-
ering production analysis. The laws governing costs are the same laws governing 
productivity.
	
In the short run, output can be raised only by increasing the variable input. But as 
more and more of a variable input is added to a fixed input, the law of diminishing 
marginal productivity enters in. Marginal and average productivities fall. The key 
insight here is that when marginal productivity falls, marginal cost must rise, and when 
average productivity falls, average variable cost must rise. So to say that productivity 
falls is equivalent to saying that cost rises.
	
It follows that if eventually the law of diminishing marginal productivity holds 
true, then eventually both the marginal cost curve and the average cost curve must be 
upward-sloping. And, indeed, in our examples they are. It’s also generally assumed 
that at low levels of production, marginal and average productivities are increasing. 
This means that marginal cost and average variable cost are initially falling. If they’re 
falling initially and rising eventually, at some point they must be neither rising nor fall-
ing. This means that both the marginal cost curve and the average variable cost curve 
are U-shaped.
	
As you can see in Figure 11-2(b), the average total cost curve has the same 
general U shape as the average variable cost curve. It has the same U shape ­because 
it is the vertical summation of the average fixed cost curve and the average vari-
able cost curve. Its minimum, however, is to the right of the minimum of the aver-
age variable cost curve. We’ll discuss why after we cover the shape of the average 
variable cost curve.
The marginal cost curve goes  
through the minimum point of  
the average total cost curve and 
average variable cost curve; each  
of these curves is U-shaped. The 
average fixed cost curve slopes  
down continuously.
Q-5  Draw a graph of both  
the marginal cost curve and the  
average cost curve.
As more and more of a variable input is 
added to a fixed input, the law of 
diminishing marginal productivity 
causes marginal and average 
productivities to fall. As these fall, 
marginal and average costs rise.
Q-6  What determines the distance 
between the average total cost and  
the average variable cost?

	
Chapter 11 ■ Production and Cost Analysis I	
235
	
Average total cost initially falls faster and then rises more slowly than average 
­variable cost. If we increased output enormously, the average variable cost curve and 
the average total cost curve would almost meet. Average total cost is of key importance 
to the firm’s owner. She wants to keep it low.
The Relationship between the Marginal Productivity and Mar-
ginal Cost Curves 
Let’s now consider the relationship between marginal prod-
uct and marginal cost. In Figure 11-3(a), I draw a marginal cost curve and average 
variable cost curve. Notice their U shape. Initially costs are falling. Then there’s some 
minimum point. After that, costs are rising.
	
In Figure 11-3(b), I graph the average and marginal productivity curves similar to 
those that I presented in Figure 11-1(b), although this time I relate average and 
­marginal productivities to output, rather than to the number of workers. This allows us 
to relate output per worker and output. Say, for example, that we know that the average 
If MP > AP, then AP is rising.
If MP < AP, then AP is falling.
FIGURE 11-3 (A AND B)  The Relationship between Productivity and Costs
The shapes of the cost curves are mirror-image reflections of the shapes of the corresponding 
productivity curves. (The corresponding productivity curve is an implicit function in which 
marginal productivity is related to output rather than inputs. At each output there is an implicit 
number of workers who would supply that output.) When one is increasing, the other is 
decreasing; when one is at a minimum, the other is at a maximum.
When marginal cost exceeds average 
cost, average cost must be rising. When 
marginal cost is less than average cost, 
average cost must be falling. This 
relationship explains why marginal cost 
curves always intersect the average 
cost curve at the minimum of the 
average cost curve.
Costs per unit
Output per worker
(a)
(b)
$16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1
7
 6
5
4
3
2
0
21
12
21
10
12
Output
Output
A
MC
AVC
AP of workers
MP of workers

236	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
product of 2 workers is 5, and that 2 workers can produce an output of 10. This means 
that when output is 10, the workers’ average productivity is 5. By continuing this 
­reasoning, we can construct the curves. Point A corresponds to an output of 10 and 
average productivity of 5.
	
 Now let’s compare the graphs in Figure 11-3 (a and b). If you look at the two 
graphs carefully, you’ll see that one is simply the mirror image of the other. The 
­minimum point of the average variable cost curve (output = 21) is at the same level 
of output as the maximum point of the average productivity curve; the minimum 
point of the marginal cost curve (output = 12) is at the same level of output as the 
maximum point on the marginal productivity curve. When the productivity curves 
are falling, the corresponding cost curves are rising. Why is that the case? Because 
as productivity falls, costs per unit increase; and as productivity increases, costs per 
unit decrease.
The Relationship between the Marginal Cost and Average Cost 
Curves 
Now that we’ve considered the shapes of each cost curve, let’s consider 
some of the important relationships among them—specifically the relationships 
between the marginal cost curve on the one hand and the average variable cost and 
average total cost curves on the other. These general relationships are shown graphi-
cally in Figure 11-4.
	
Let’s first look at the relationship between marginal cost and average total cost. In 
the green shaded and yellow shaded areas (areas A and B) at output below Q1, even 
though marginal cost is rising, average total cost is falling. Why? Because, in areas 
A and B, the marginal cost curve is below the average total cost curve. At point B, 
where average total cost is at its lowest, the marginal cost curve intersects the average 
total cost curve. In area C, above output Q1, where average total cost is rising, the marginal 
cost curve is above the ATC curve.
Q-7  When marginal cost equals the 
minimum point of average variable cost, 
what is true about the average 
productivity and marginal productivity of 
workers?
When the productivity curves are falling, 
the corresponding cost curves are 
rising.
FIGURE 11-4   
The Relationship of Marginal Cost 
Curve to Average Variable Cost  
and Average Total Cost Curves
The marginal cost curve goes 
through the minimum points of  
both the average variable cost  
curve and the average total cost 
curve. Thus, there is a small  
range where average total costs  
are falling and average variable 
costs are rising.
Costs per unit
Output
Q1
Q0
MC
ATC
AVC
Area A
Area C
Area B 
B
A

	
Chapter 11 ■ Production and Cost Analysis I	
237
	
The positioning of the marginal cost curve is not happenstance. The position of 
marginal cost relative to average total cost tells us whether average total cost is rising 
or falling.
If MC > ATC, then ATC is rising.
If MC = ATC, then ATC is at its low point.
If MC < ATC, then ATC is falling.
	
To understand why this is, think of it in terms of your grade point average. If you 
have a B average and you get a C on the next test (that is, your marginal grade is a C), 
your grade point average will fall below a B. Your marginal grade is below your aver-
age grade, so your average grade is falling. If you get a C+ on the next exam (that is, 
your marginal grade is a C+), even though your marginal grade has risen from a C to 
a C+, your grade point average will fall. Why? Because your marginal grade is still 
below your average grade. To make sure you understand the concept, explain the next 
two cases:
1.	If your marginal grade is above your average grade, your average grade will 
rise.
2.	If your marginal grade and average grade are equal, the average grade will 
­remain unchanged.
	
Marginal and average reflect a general relationship that also holds for marginal 
cost and average variable cost.
If MC > AVC, then AVC is rising.
If MC = AVC, then AVC is at its low point.
If MC < AVC, then AVC is falling.
	
This relationship is best seen in the yellow shaded area (area B) of Figure 11-4, 
when output is between Q0 and Q1. In this area, the marginal cost curve is above the 
average variable cost curve, so average variable cost is rising; but the MC curve is 
below the average total cost curve, so average total cost is falling. The intuitive expla-
nation for the relationship in this area is that average total cost includes average vari-
able cost, but it also includes average fixed cost, which is falling. As long as short-run 
marginal cost is only slightly above average variable cost, the average total cost will 
continue to fall. Put another way: Once marginal cost is above average variable cost, as 
long as average variable cost doesn’t rise by more than average fixed cost falls, average 
total cost will still fall.
Intermission
At this point I’m going to cut off the chapter, not because we’re finished with the sub-
ject, but because there’s only so much that anyone can absorb in one chapter. It’s time 
for a break.
	
Those of you with significant others, go out and do something significant. Those of 
you with parents bearing the cost of this education, give them a call and tell them that 
you appreciate their expenditure on your education. Think of the opportunity cost of that 
education to them; it’s not peanuts. Those of you who are married should go out and give 
your spouse a big kiss; tell him or her that the opportunity cost of being away for another 
minute was so high that you couldn’t control yourself. Those of you with kids, go out and 
read them a Dr. Seuss book. (My favorite is about Horton.) Let’s face it—Seuss is a bet-
ter writer than I, and if you’ve been conscientious about this course, you may not have 
paid your kids enough attention. We’ll return to the grind in the next chapter.
Q-8  If marginal costs are increasing, 
what is happening to average total 
costs?
Q-9  If marginal costs are decreasing, 
what must be happening to average 
variable costs?
Q-10  Why does the marginal  
cost curve intersect the average  
variable cost curve at the minimum 
point?

A REMINDER
A Review of Costs
Average variable cost
AVC = VC/Q
Average total cost
ATC = AFC + AVC
        = TC/Q
AFC = FC/Q
Fixed cost
Cost that is already spent and
cannot be recovered. It exists 
only in the short run.
FC
Average ﬁxed cost
Fixed costs per unit of production.
Variable cost
Costs that vary with production.
Variable costs per unit of
production.
VC
Total cost
The sum of all costs of inputs
used by a ﬁrm in production.
Total cost per unit of production.
TC = FC + VC
Marginal cost
The additional cost resulting from
a 1-unit increase in output.
MC = ΔTC
Term
Deﬁnition
Equation
• Accounting profit is explicit revenue less explicit cost. 
Economists include implicit revenue and cost in their 
determination of profit.  (LO11-1)
• Implicit revenue includes the increases in the value 
of assets owned by the firm. Implicit costs include the 
opportunity cost of time and capital provided by the 
owners of the firm.  (LO11-1) 
Summary
• In the long run, a firm can choose among all possible 
production techniques; in the short run, the firm is 
constrained in its choices.  (LO11-2)
• The law of diminishing marginal productivity states 
that as more and more of a variable input is added to 
a fixed input, the additional output the firm gets will 
eventually be decreasing.  (LO11-2)
238

	
Chapter 11 ■ Production and Cost Analysis I	
239
• Costs are generally divided into fixed costs, variable 
costs, and total costs.  (LO11-3)
• TC = FC + VC; MC = Change in TC;
	
AFC = FC/Q; AVC = VC/Q; ATC = AFC + AVC. 
(LO11-3)
• The average variable cost curve and marginal cost curve 
are mirror images of the average product curve and the 
marginal product curve, respectively.  (LO11-4)
• The law of diminishing marginal productivity causes 
marginal and average costs to rise.  (LO11-4)
• If MC > ATC, then ATC is rising.
	
If MC = ATC, then ATC is constant.
	
If MC < ATC, then ATC is falling.  (LO11-4)
• The marginal cost curve goes through the minimum 
points of the average variable cost curve and average 
total cost curve.  (LO11-4)
Key Terms
average fixed cost
average product
average total cost
average variable cost
economic profit
firm
fixed cost
law of diminishing 
marginal productivity
long-run decision
marginal cost
marginal product
production
production function
production table
profit
short-run decision
total cost
total revenue
variable cost
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 What costs and revenues do economists include when  
calculating profit that accountants don’t include? Give  
an example of each.  (LO11-1)
	 2.	 Peggy-Sue’s cookies are the best in the world, or so I 
hear. She has been offered a job by Cookie Monster, 
Inc., to come to work at $125,000 per year. Currently, 
she is producing her own cookies, and she has revenues 
of $260,000 per year. Her costs are $40,000 for labor, 
$10,000 for rent, $35,000 for ingredients, and $5,000 
for utilities. She has $100,000 of her own money 
­invested in the operation, which, if she leaves, can 
be sold for $400,000 that she can invest at 1 percent 
per year.  (LO11-1)
	a.	 Calculate her accounting and economic profits.
	b.	 Advise her as to what she should do. 
	 3.	 Economan has been infected by the free enterprise bug. 
He sets up a firm on extraterrestrial affairs. The rent of 
the building is $4,000, the cost of the two secretaries is 
$40,000, and the cost of electricity and gas comes to 
$5,000. There’s a great demand for his information, and 
his total revenue amounts to $100,000. By working in 
the firm, though, Economan forfeits the $50,000 he 
could earn by working for the Friendly Space Agency 
and the $4,000 he could have earned as interest had he 
saved his funds instead of putting them in this 
­business.  (LO11-1)
	a.	 What is his profit or loss by an accountant’s definitions?
	b.	 What is his profit or loss by an economist’s definitions? 
	 4.	 What distinguishes the short run from the long 
run?  (LO11-2)
	 5.	 What is the difference between marginal product and 
­average product?  (LO11-2)
	 6.	 Explain how studying for an exam is subject to the law of 
diminishing marginal productivity.  (LO11-2)
	 7.	 Find TC, AFC, AVC, AC, and MC from the following 
­table.  (LO11-3)
	
Units	
FC	
VC
	
0	
$100	
$    0
	
1	
  100	
  40
	
2	
  100	
  60
	
3	
  100	
  70
	
4	
  100	
  85
	
5	
  100	
130

240	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
	 8.	 For each of the following indicate what costs are being 
calculated:  (LO11-3)
	a. 	FC + VC
	b.	 TC/Q
	c.	 FC/Q
	d.	 VC/Q
	e.	 AFC + AVC
	 9.	 Classify each of the following as fixed or variable 
costs:  (LO11-3)
	a.	 Outsourced payroll services.	
	b.	 Leased offices.
	c.	 Company-owned building.
	d.	 Payroll taxes.
10. 	Which of the costs discussed in the chapter is the most 
important when a firm is deciding how much to 
­produce?  (LO11-3)
	11.	 Explain how each of the following will affect the 
­average fixed cost, average variable cost, average 
­total cost, and marginal cost curves faced by a steel 
manufacturer:  (LO11-3)
	a.	 New union agreement increases hourly pay.
	b.	 Local government imposes an annual lump-sum tax 
per plant.
	c.	 Federal government imposes a “stack tax” on emission 
of air pollutants by steel mills.
	d.	 New steelmaking technology increases productivity of 
every worker. 
	12.	 Graph the following table.  (LO11-4)
	14.	 If marginal cost is increasing, what do we know about 
­average cost?  (LO11-4)
	15.	 A firm has fixed costs of $100 and variable costs of the 
following:  (LO11-4)
Output 	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
Variable 
costs	
$35	 75	 110	 140	 175	 215	 260	 315	 390
	a.	 Show AFC, ATC, AVC, and MC in a table.
	b.	 Graph the AFC, ATC, AVC, and MC curves.
	c.	 Explain the relationship between the MC curve and the 
AVC and ATC curves.
	d.	 Say fixed costs dropped to $50. Which curves shifted? 
Why? 
	16.	 If average productivity falls, will marginal cost necessarily 
rise? How about average cost?  (LO11-4)
	17.	 An economic consultant is presented with the following total 
product table and asked to derive a table for average variable 
costs. The price of labor is $15 per hour.  (LO11-4)
Number of	
Total  
Workers	
Output
	
  0	
    0
	
  1	
  20
	
  2	
  60
	
  3	
150
	
  4	
260
	
  5	
350
	
  6	
420
	
  7	
455
	
  8	
420
	
  9	
375
	
10	
300
	a.	 What is marginal product and average product at each 
level of production?
	b.	 Graph marginal product and average product.
	c.	 Label the areas of increasing marginal productivity, 
­diminishing marginal productivity, and diminishing 
absolute productivity.
	13.	 If average product is falling, what is happening to short-
run average variable cost?  (LO11-4)
Labor	
TP
	
1	
  5
	
2	
15
	
3	
30
	
4	
36
	
5	
40
	a.	 Help him do so.
	b.	 Show that the graphs of the average productivity curve 
and average variable cost curve are mirror images of 
each other.
	c.	 Show the marginal productivity curve for labor inputs 
between 1 and 5.
	d.	 Show that the marginal productivity curve and mar-
ginal cost curve are mirror images of each other.
	18.	 Say that a firm has fixed costs of $100 and constant average 
variable costs of $25.  (LO11-4)
	a.	 Show AFC, VC, AVC, and MC in a table.
	b.	 Graph the AFC, ATC, AVC, and MC curves.
	c.	 Explain why the curves have the shapes they do.
	d.	 What law is not operative for this firm?
	19.	 Say a firm has $100 in fixed costs and its average variable 
costs increase by $5 for each unit, so that the cost of 1 is $25, 
the cost of 2 is $30, the cost of 3 is $35, and so on.  (LO11-4)
	a.	 Show VC, AFC, AVC, and MC in a table.
	b.	 Graph the AFC, ATC, AVC, and MC curves associated 
with these costs.
	c.	 Explain how costs would have to increase in order for 
the curves to have the “normal” shapes of the curves 
presented in the text.

	
Chapter 11 ■ Production and Cost Analysis I	
241
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 The text presents very detailed cost tables when it 
­considers the decisions of firms.
	a.	 Do entrepreneurs have such cost tables available to 
them when they enter a business?
	b.	 If not, how do they gather such information?
	c.	 If such information is gathered through trial and error, 
what implications does that have for government 
­intervention in the marketplace? (Austrian)
	 2.	 Say that a drug firm could increase its profit by marketing 
a drug that it knows might have serious side effects. Say 
also that it knows that it can never be prosecuted for  
­doing so.
	a.	 Would it?
	b.	 Should it? (Religious)
	 3.	 The analysis in the book suggests that firms hire inputs so 
that they hold costs as low as possible. Yet, as Gloria 
Steinem has pointed out, looking at reality one sees men 
selling refrigerators and women selling men’s underwear.
	a.	 Do you believe that that allocation of jobs reflects 
firms trying to minimize costs because of the relative 
expertise of women and men?
	b.	 If not, what does it reflect? (Feminist)
	 4.	 The text does not emphasize firms’ role in shaping the 
tastes and preferences of consumers even though this is a 
very important role with firms spending about $150 bil-
lion a year on advertising. If it is true that firms are 
­shaping consumer preferences, whose welfare are people 
maximizing when they make consumption ­decisions? 
­(Institutionalist)
	 5.	 Walmart, the nation’s largest retailer, has perfected a 
“just-in-time competitive strategy.” This retail giant relies 
on bar codes for instant inventory, distribution centers that 
purchase supplies at the last minute and deliver only when 
needed, a small core of suppliers that Walmart can pres-
sure for large discounts, routinized work that requires on 
average seven hours of training, and part-time workers 
who often work full-time hours without getting corre-
sponding benefits. How does this “just-in-time” approach 
change the mix of fixed and variable costs to the advan-
tage of Walmart? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 “There is no long run; there are only short and shorter 
runs.” Evaluate that statement. 
	 2.	 If you increase production to an infinitely large level, the 
average variable cost and the average total cost will 
merge. Why? 
	 3.	 The following cell phone offer by Sprint is typical of what 
one can get on a cell phone plan: 4,000 free minutes for 
$39.99 a month. The fine print says that only 350 of those 
minutes are anytime minutes; the remaining are ­restricted 
to evening and weekend usage. If you go over your allot-
ted time, you are charged 35 cents per minute for any ad-
ditional minutes.
	a.	 What is your marginal cost? Graph it.
	b.	 What would your average variable cost curve for peak 
time usage look like?
	c.	 If you do not keep track of your usage, how would 
you figure your marginal cost?
	d.	 Why do firms offer such confusing plans?
	e.	 Were firms that charged this way in favor of or 
against portability of phone numbers? 
	 4.	 Say that neither labor nor machines are fixed but that 
there is a 50 percent quick-order premium paid for both 
workers and machines for their delivery in the short run. 
Once you buy them, they cannot be returned, however. 
What do your short-run marginal cost and short-run aver-
age total cost curves look like? 
	 5.	 If machines are variable and labor fixed, how will the 
general shapes of the short-run average cost curve and 
marginal cost curve change?
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 Accounting profit measures explicit costs and revenues; 
economic profit includes implicit costs and revenues as 
well.  (LO11-1)
	 2.	 Normally the marginal productivity curve and  
average productivity curve are both inverted  
U shapes.  (LO11-2)

242	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
	 3.	 Firms are likely to operate on the downward-sloping 
­portion of the marginal productivity curve because on the 
upward-sloping portion, firms could increase workers’ 
output by hiring more workers. A firm will continue to 
hire more workers at least to the point where diminishing 
marginal productivity sets in.  (LO11-2)
	 4.	 Average variable costs would be $40.  (LO11-3)
	 5.	 As you can see in the graph, both these curves are  
U-shaped and the marginal cost curve goes through the 
average cost curve at the minimum point of the average 
cost curve.  (LO11-4)
Cost
Quantity
MC
Minimum
point
AC
	 6.	 The distance between the average total cost and the aver-
age variable cost is determined by the average fixed cost 
at that quantity. As quantity increases, the average fixed 
cost decreases, so the two curves get closer and closer 
­together.  (LO11-4)
	 7.	 Since the average productivity and marginal productivity 
of workers are the mirror images of average costs and 
marginal costs, and when the marginal costs and 
­average costs intersect the two are equal, it follows 
that the average productivity and marginal 
­productivity of workers must also be equal at that 
point.  (LO11-4)
	 8.	 It is impossible to say what is happening to average total 
costs on the basis of what is happening to marginal costs. 
It is the magnitude of marginal costs relative to average 
total costs that is important.  (LO11-4)
	 9.	 It is impossible to say because it is the magnitude of 
­marginal cost relative to average variable cost that 
­determines what is happening to average variable  
cost.  (LO11-4)
	10.	 The marginal cost curve intersects the average variable 
cost curve at the minimum point because once the 
­marginal cost exceeds average variable costs, the aver-
age variable costs must necessarily begin to rise, and 
vice versa.  (LO11-4)

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO12-1	 Distinguish technical 
efficiency from economic 
efficiency.
LO12-2	 Explain how economies 
and diseconomies of scale 
influence the shape of 
long-run cost curves.
LO12-3	 Explain the role of the 
entrepreneur in translating 
cost of production to supply.
LO12-4	 Discuss some of the 
problems of using cost 
analysis in the real world.
“ ”
Economic efficiency consists of making  
things that are worth more than they  
cost.
—J. M. Clark
Welcome back from your intermission. I hope you’ve rees-
tablished your relationship with the real world and are ready to 
return, with ­renewed vigor, to the world of economics. When we 
took our intermission in the last ­chapter, we had worked our way 
through the various short-run costs. The short run is a time 
period in which some inputs are fixed. In the first part of this 
chapter, we consider firms’ long-run decisions and the determi-
nants of the long-run cost curves. Then, in the second part, we’ll 
talk about ­applying cost analysis to the real world.
	
Firms have many more options in the long run than they do 
in the short run. They can change any input they want. Plant size 
is not given; neither is the technology available given.
	
To make their long-run decisions, firms look at the costs of 
the various ­inputs and the technologies available for combining 
those inputs, and then ­decide which combination offers the low-
est cost.
	
Say you’re opening a hamburger stand. One decision you’ll 
have to make is what type of stove to buy. You’ll quickly discover 
that many ­different types are available. Some use more gas than oth-
ers but cost less to buy; some are electric; some are self-cleaning and hence use 
less labor; some are big; some are little; some use microwaves; some use convec-
tion. Some have long-term guarantees; some have no guarantees. Each has a col-
orful brochure telling you how ­wonderful it is. After studying the ­various detailed 
specifications and aspects of the production technology, you choose the stove that 
has the combination of characteristics that you believe best fits your needs.
	
Next you decide on workers. Do you want bilingual workers, college-educated 
workers, part-time workers, experienced workers . . . ? You get the idea: Even 
simple production decisions involve complicated questions. These decisions are 
made on the basis of the expected costs, and expected usefulness, of inputs.
Technical Efficiency and Economic Efficiency
When choosing among existing technologies in the long run, firms are inter-
ested in the lowest cost, or most economically efficient, methods of production. 
They ­consider all technically efficient methods and compare their costs. The 
terms ­economically ­efficient and technically efficient differ in meaning. 
Production and Cost Analysis II
chapter 12
© D. Hurst/Alamy RF

244	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
­Technical efficiency means that a production process uses as few inputs as possible to 
produce a given level of output. When there are multiple inputs, many different 
­production processes can be technically efficient. For example, say that to produce 100 
bushels of wheat, one production process uses 10 workers and 1 acre and another pro-
duction process uses 1 worker and 100 acres; say also that these are the lowest number 
of inputs you can use with those production processes. Which of these two production 
techniques is more efficient? Both are technically efficient since neither involves less 
of both inputs. (A production process that uses 11 workers and 1 acre would be techni-
cally inefficient.) But that doesn’t mean that both of these production processes are 
equally economically efficient. That question can’t be answered unless you know the 
relative costs of the two inputs.
	
If renting an acre of land costs $100 and each worker costs $10, our answer likely 
will be different than if land rents for $10 an acre and each worker costs $100. The 
economically efficient method of production is the method that produces a given level 
of output at the lowest possible cost. With land at $100 an acre, you will use the pro-
duction process that uses lots of workers and less land. With land at $10 an acre you 
will use the production process that uses fewer workers but more land. Thus, all eco-
nomically efficient production processes are technically efficient, but not all techni-
cally efficient production processes are economically efficient.
	
In long-run production decisions, firms will look at all available production technolo-
gies and choose the technology that, given the available inputs and their prices, is the 
economically efficient way to produce. These choices will reflect the prices of the various 
factors of production. Those prices, in turn, will reflect the factors’ relative scarcities.
	
Consider the use of land by firms in the United States and in Japan. The United 
States has large amounts of land (8 acres) per person, so the price of land is lower than 
in Japan, which has only 0.73 acre per person. An acre of rural land in the United 
States might cost about $1,300; in Japan it costs over $10,000. Because of this differ-
ence in the price of inputs, production techniques use much more labor per acre of land 
in Japan than in the United States. Similarly with Bangladesh: Labor is more abundant 
and capital is scarcer, so production techniques in Bangladesh use much more labor 
per unit of capital than in the United States. Whereas Bangladesh would use hundreds 
of workers and very little machinery to build a road, the United States would use three 
or four people along with three machines. Both countries are being economically effi-
cient, but ­because costs of inputs differ, the economically efficient method of produc-
tion differs. Thus, the economically efficient method of production is the technically 
efficient method of production that has the lowest cost. (For a further, graphical analy-
sis of economic efficiency, see the Appendix at the end of this chapter.)
The Shape of the Long-Run Cost Curve
In the last chapter, we saw that the law of diminishing marginal productivity accounted 
for the shape of the short-run average cost curve. The firm was adding more of a 
­variable input to a fixed input. The law of diminishing marginal productivity doesn’t 
apply to the long run since, in the long run, all inputs are variable. The most important 
determinants of what is economically efficient in the long run are economies and 
­diseconomies of scale. Let’s consider each of these in turn and see what effect they 
will have on the shape of the long-run average cost curve.
Economies of Scale
We say that production exhibits economies of scale when long-run average total costs 
decrease as output increases. For example, if producing 40,000 high-definition 
TVs costs a firm $16 million ($400 each), but producing 200,000 costs the firm  
Q-1  True or false? If a process is 
economically efficient, it is also 
technically efficient. Explain your 
answer.
Q-2  Why does Bangladesh use 
production techniques that require 
more workers per acre of land than do 
the techniques used in the United 
States?
The shape of the long-run cost  
curve is due to the existence of 
economies and diseconomies of  
scale.

245
$40 million ($200 each), between 40,000 and 200,000 units, production exhibits 
significant economies of scale. One can also say that there are increasing returns 
to scale.
	
In real-world production processes, at low levels of production, economies of scale 
are extremely important because many production techniques require a certain 
­minimum level of output to be useful. For example, say you want to produce a pound 
of steel. You can’t just build a mini blast furnace, stick in some coke and iron ore, and 
come out with a single pound of steel. The smallest technically efficient blast furnaces 
have a production capacity measured in tons per hour, not pounds per year. The cost of 
the blast furnace is said to be an indivisible setup cost (the cost of an indivisible input 
for which a certain minimum amount of production must be undertaken before the input 
becomes economically feasible to use).
	
Indivisible setup costs are important because they create many real-world 
­economies of scale: As output increases, the costs per unit of output decrease. As an 
example, consider this book. Preparing the book for publishing is an indivisible setup 
cost; it is a cost that must be incurred if any production is to take place, but it is not a 
cost that increases with the number of books produced. That means that the more 
copies of the book that are produced, the lower the cost per book. That’s why it costs 
more per book to produce a textbook for an upper-level, low-enrollment course than 
it does for a lower-level, high-enrollment course. The same amount of work goes into 
both (both need to be written, edited, and composited), and the printing costs differ 
only slightly. The actual production or print-run costs of printing a book (the costs to 
print and bind the book after it is all prepared) are only about $3 to $8 per book. The 
other costs are indivisible setup costs. Prices of ­produced goods, including books, 
reflect their costs of production. As you move to upper-level academic courses, where 
print runs are smaller, you’ll likely discover that the books are smaller and less color-
ful but are priced the same as, or more than, this introductory text.
In the production of steel, the cost  
of a blast furnace is an indivisible setup 
cost that requires a minimum level of 
production to be economically feasible.
Q-3  Why are larger production runs 
often cheaper per unit than smaller 
production runs?
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
In the late 1980s, the normal production run of a U.S. auto-
maker was 200,000 units. Why was it so high? Because of 
­indivisible setup costs of the then-current production tech-
nology. In order to reduce those indivisible setup costs to an 
acceptable level, the production level per year had to equal 
at least 200,000, or the car was consid-
ered an economic failure. Small-sports-car 
sales did not meet that sales level, and so, 
in the 1980s, small, low-cost sports cars 
faded from the scene. For example, the 
Pontiac Fiero, a small American sports car, 
was dropped in 1988.
	
But what is an indivisible setup cost 
­depends on the structure of production. 
In the 1980s, Japanese companies 
changed the nature of automobile production by organiz-
ing assembly lines so that many cars with different sizes 
and shapes could share the same ­assembly line, allowing 
Changing Technology in Automobile Production
economies of scope (discussed later in the chapter). This 
redesign lowered the indivisible setup costs for each type 
of car, and made the Japanese companies’ minimum prof-
itable production level 30,000, not 200,000. The Mazda 
Miata was one of the first cars developed using this new 
assembly-line ­approach, and it was a big 
success. In ­response to the challenge, 
other car companies switched their as-
sembly lines to this alternative, and, over 
the past 30 years, there has been an 
enormous increase in the number of rea-
sonably priced sporty two-seaters.
These changes are ongoing. Auto 
companies are designing their various 
lines of cars so that the components of 
one are easily interchangeable with the components  
of another, allowing more shared assembly lines and lower 
indivisible setup costs.
© Transtock/Corbis

246	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
	
In the long-run planning decisions about the cost of producing this book, the 
expected number of copies to be sold was an important element. That figure influenced 
the number of books produced, which in turn affected the expected cost per unit. This 
will be the case any time there are economies of scale. With economies of scale, cost 
per unit of a small production run is higher than cost per unit of a large production run.
	
Figure 12-1(a) demonstrates a long-run production table; Figure 12-1(b) shows 
the related typical shape of a long-run average cost curve. (Notice that there are no 
fixed costs. Because we’re in the long run, all costs are variable.) Economies of 
scale account for the downward-sloping part. Cost per unit of output is decreasing.
	
Because of the importance of economies of scale, businesspeople often talk of a 
minimum efficient level of production. What they mean by minimum efficient level of 
production is that, given the price at which they expect to be able to sell a good, the 
indivisible setup costs are so high that production runs of less than a certain size don’t 
make economic sense. Thus, the minimum efficient level of production is the amount 
of production that spreads setup costs out sufficiently for a firm to undertake produc-
tion profitably. At this point, the market has expanded to a size large enough for firms 
to take advantage of all economies of scale. The minimum efficient level of production 
is where the average total costs are at a minimum.
Diseconomies of Scale
Notice that on the right side of Figure 12-1(b) the long-run average cost curve is 
­upward-sloping. Average cost is increasing. We say that production exhibits ­diseconomies 
of scale when long-run average total costs increase as output ­increases. For ­example, if 
producing 200,000 high-definition TVs costs the firm $40 million ($200 each) and pro-
ducing 400,000 high-definition TVs costs the firm $100 million ($250 each), there are 
diseconomies of scale associated with choosing to produce 400,000 rather than 200,000. 
One also can say there are ­decreasing ­returns to scale. Diseconomies of scale usually, but 
not always, start ­occurring as firms get large. It is important to remember that diminishing 
marginal productivity is not the cause of diseconomies of scale.
In the long run, all inputs are variable, 
so only economies of scale can 
influence the shape of the long-run cost 
curve.
Diminishing marginal productivity refers 
to the decline in productivity caused  
by increasing units of a variable input 
being added to a fixed input. 
Diseconomies of scale refer to the 
decreases in productivity that occur 
when there are equal percentage 
increases of all inputs (no input is fixed).
FIGURE 12-1 (A AND B)  A Typical Long-Run Average Total Cost Table and Curve
In the long run, average costs initially fall because of economies of scale; then they are constant for a while, and finally they tend to rise due 
to diseconomies of scale.
Costs per unit
$64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
A
Economies
of scale
Constant
returns to
scale
B
Diseconomies
of scale
C
Average
total cost
Quantity
(b)  Long-Run Average Cost Curve
Minimum eﬃcient 
level of production
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
	
	
Total Costs	
Total Costs	
Total Costs	
Average Total
Quantity	
of Labor	
of Machines	
= TCL + TCM	
Costs = TC/Q
11	
$381	
$254	
$   635	
$58
12	
390	
260	
650	
54
13	
402	
268	
670	
52
14	
420	
280	
700	
50
15	
450	
300	
750	
50
16	
480	
320	
800	
50
17	
510	
340	
850	
50
18	
549	
366	
915	
51
19	
600	
400	
1,000	
53
20	
666	
444	
1,110	
56
(a)  Long-Run Production Table

247
	
Diseconomies of scale could not occur if production relationships were only tech-
nical relationships. If that were the case, the same technical process could be used over 
and over again at the same per-unit cost. In reality, however, production relationships 
have social dimensions, which introduce the potential for important diseconomies of 
scale into the production process in two ways:
1.	As the size of the firm increases, monitoring costs generally increase.
2.	As the size of the firm increases, team spirit or morale generally decreases.
Monitoring costs are the costs incurred by the organizer of production in seeing to it 
that the employees do what they’re supposed to do. If you’re producing something 
yourself, the job gets done the way you want it done; monitoring costs are zero. How-
ever, as the scale of production increases, you have to hire people to help you produce. 
This means that if the job is to be done the way you want it done, you have to monitor 
(supervise) your employees’ performance. The cost of monitoring can increase sig-
nificantly as output increases; it’s a major contributor to diseconomies of scale. Most 
big firms have several layers of bureaucracy devoted simply to monitoring employees. 
The job of middle managers is, to a large extent, monitoring.
	
The other social dimension that can contribute to diseconomies of scale is the loss 
of team spirit (the feelings of friendship and being part of a team that bring out peo-
ple’s best efforts). Most types of production are highly dependent on team spirit. When 
the team spirit or morale is lost, production slows considerably. The larger the firm is, 
the more difficult it is to maintain team spirit.
	
Another important reason why diseconomies of scale can come about is that the 
bigger things get, the more checks and balances are needed to ensure that all the various 
components of production are coordinated. The larger the organization, the more checks 
and balances and the more paperwork.
	
Some large firms manage to solve these problems and avoid diseconomies of scale. 
But problems of monitoring and loss of team spirit often limit the size of firms. They 
underlie diseconomies of scale in which less additional output is produced for a given 
increase in inputs, so that per-unit costs of output increase.
Q-4  If production involved only 
technical relationships and had no 
social dimension, what would the long-
run average total cost curve look like?
As firms become larger, monitoring 
costs increase and achieving team spirit 
is more difficult.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
The T-shirt said “Made in China,” but when economist ­Pietra 
Rivoli, in her delightful book The Travels of a T-Shirt in the 
Global Economy, tracked down the process of making the 
T-shirt that she bought in Florida, she discovered that it’s a 
lot more complicated than that. True, the 
company that sewed the shirt was in 
Shanghai, China. But guess where the cot-
ton for the shirt came from? West Texas, 
USA, at a farm like the Reinsch family farm 
that is highlighted in Rivoli’s book.
	
Now here’s an exam question for you: 
Why, if China’s labor cost is 1/20 that of U.S. 
labor costs, is the cotton for a T-shirt grown 
in the United States, shipped across the 
ocean to China to be woven and sewn into a T-shirt, and 
shipped back again to the United States to be sold?
Travels of a T-Shirt and Economies of Scale
	
Answer: Economies of scale (and some U.S. subsidies, 
but you aren’t expected to know that yet). In fact, the 
United States leads the world in the production of cotton, 
and has done so for over 200 years. Farms in Africa average 
8 acres and in China average less than 
1 acre. The Reinsch’s farm is 1,000 acres 
and can produce about 500,000 pounds 
of ­cotton, enough for 1.3 million T-shirts. 
Size makes a difference; cotton farmers 
outside the United States almost exclu-
sively handpick their cotton. Because 
U.S. farmers have such large farms, they 
can use large machinery to do all the 
picking, and thereby take advantage of 
economies of scale, countering the much higher labor 
costs in the United States.
© Kent Knudson/PhotoLink/Getty Images RF

248
Constant Returns to Scale
Sometimes in a range of output, a firm does not experience either economies of scale 
or diseconomies of scale. In this range, there are constant returns to scale where 
long-run average total costs do not change with an increase in output. Constant ­returns 
to scale are shown by the flat portion of the average total cost curve in Figure 12-1(b). 
Constant returns to scale occur when production techniques can be replicated again 
and again to increase output. This occurs before monitoring costs rise and team spirit 
is lost.
	
The long-run and the  short-run average cost curves have similar U shapes. But it’s 
important to remember that the reasons why they have this U shape are quite different. 
The assumption of initially increasing and then eventually diminishing marginal 
­productivity (as a variable input is added to a fixed input) accounts for the shape of the 
short-run average cost curve. Economies and diseconomies of scale account for the 
shape of the long-run average total cost curve; initially economies of scale drive aver-
age costs down, then diseconomies of scale drive average costs up.
The Importance of Economies and Diseconomies of Scale
Economies and diseconomies of scale play important roles in real-world long-run 
­production decisions. Economies of scale are an important reason why firms attempt 
to expand their markets either at home or abroad. If they can make and sell more at 
lower per-unit costs, they will make more profit. Diseconomies of scale prevent a firm 
from expanding and can lead corporate raiders to buy the firm and break it up in the 
hope that the smaller production units will be more efficient, thus eliminating some of 
the diseconomies of scale.
Envelope Relationship
Since in the long run all inputs are flexible, while in the short run some inputs are 
not flexible, long-run cost will always be less than or equal to short-run cost at 
the same level of output. To see this, let’s consider a firm that had planned to pro-
duce 100 units but now adjusts its plan to produce more than 100. We know that in 
Q-5  Why is the short-run average 
cost curve a U-shaped curve?
Q-6  Why is the long-run  
average total cost curve generally 
considered to be a U-shaped curve?
Economies and diseconomies of scale 
play important roles in real-world long-
run production decisions.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Companies are continually searching for 
ways to avoid diseconomies of scale, 
and there are hundreds of management 
fads that claim to avoid them, which 
have come (and gone). One recent fad is 
holacracy (the term is a play on the word 
bureaucracy), which is an organizational 
structure in which roles are defined 
around work, not people, authority is dis-
tributed to teams, decisions are made lo-
cally, and everyone is bound (the CEO and maintenance 
person alike) by the same set of highly visible rules.
	
One company to recently adopt this structure is the 
shoe company Zappos, an online shoe and clothing 
Holacracy, Diseconomies of Scale, and Zappos
­company. Leaders at Zappos argue that 
the holacracy structure is far more effi-
cient than other methods of organiza-
tion. Many observers have their doubts 
about whether the holacracy organiza-
tional structure will make Zappos more 
efficient and, if it does, whether it can be 
adapted to more traditional companies. 
Most companies have found that a blend 
of top-down and bottom-up control inevi-
tably evolves into the system firms actually use. But if hol-
acracy at Zappos is successful, we will expect other firms 
to adopt it, since they are always looking for ways to im-
prove efficiency.
© mikewaters/123RF

	
Chapter 12 ■ Production and Cost Analysis II	
249
the long run the firm chooses the lowest-cost method of production. In the short run, 
it faces an ­additional constraint: All expansion must be done by increasing only 
the variable input. That constraint must increase average cost (or at least not 
decrease it) ­compared to what average cost would have been had the firm planned 
to produce that level to begin with. If it didn’t, the firm would have chosen that 
new combination of inputs in the long run. Additional constraints increase cost. 
The envelope ­relationship is the relationship between long-run and short-run aver-
age total costs. It tells us that, at the planned output level, short-run average total 
cost equals long-run average total cost, but at all other levels of output, short-run 
average total cost is higher than long-run average total cost. This relationship is 
shown in Figure 12-2.
	
Why it is called an envelope relationship should be clear from the figure. Each 
short-run average total cost curve touches (is tangent to) the long-run average total cost 
curve at one, and only one, output level; at all other output levels, short-run ­average 
cost exceeds long-run average cost. The long-run average total cost curve is an enve-
lope of short-run average total cost curves.
	
The intuitive reason why the short-run average total cost curves always lie above or 
tangent to the long-run average cost curve is simple. In the short run, you have chosen 
a plant; that plant is fixed, and its costs for that period are part of your average fixed 
costs. Changes must be made within the confines of that plant. In the long run, you can 
change everything, choosing the combination of inputs in the most efficient manner. 
The more options you have to choose from, the lower the costs of production. Put 
­another way: Additional constraints always raise costs (or at least won’t lower them). 
So in the long run, costs must be the same or lower.
	
Another insight to note about this envelope relationship is the following: When 
there are economies of scale and you have chosen an efficient plant size for a given 
output, your short-run average costs will fall as you increase production. Technically, 
this must be the case because the short-run marginal cost (SRMC) curve goes through 
the minimum point of the short-run average total cost (SRATC) curve, and the mini-
mum point of the SRATC curve is to the right of the efficient level of production in the 
long run. That means that at output Q2, SRMC2 has to be below SRATC2 and short-run 
average total cost has to be falling. Intuitively, what’s happening is that at output Q2, 
your fixed costs are high. Now demand increases and you increase production. Your 
average fixed costs are high; your marginal costs are low; and initially the fall in 
The envelope relationship tells us that 
at the planned output level, short-run 
average total cost equals long-run 
average total cost, but at all other levels 
of output, short-run average total cost is 
higher than long-run average total cost.
Additional constraints always raise costs 
(or at least won’t lower them).
FIGURE 12-2  Envelope of 
Short-Run Average Total Cost 
Curves
The long-run average total 
cost curve is an envelope of 
the short-run average total 
cost curves. Each short-run 
average total cost curve 
touches the long-run average 
total cost curve at only one 
point. (SR stands for short 
run; LR stands for long run.)
Costs per unit
0
Quantity
Q2
Q3
SRATC1
SRATC2 SRATC3
LRATC
SRMC1
SRMC2
SRMC3

250
­average fixed costs more than offsets the increased marginal cost. Once marginal cost 
­exceeds SRATC, that no longer is the case.1
	
Only when the firm is at the minimum point of the long-run average total cost 
(LRATC) curve (at output Q3) is the SRATC3 curve tangent to the LRATC curve at a 
point where the SRMC curve intersects both the curves. For large markets, this point is 
the least-cost production level of a firm.
Entrepreneurial Activity and the Supply Decision
In this chapter and the preceding one, we have discussed the technical nature of costs 
and production. In the next chapter, we will formally relate costs of production to the 
1The above reasoning depends on the curves being smooth (i.e., having no kinks), a standard  
assumption of the model. If we give up the smoothness assumption, the SRATC curve could 
be kinked and the SRMC curve could be discontinuous. In that case, the SRATC curve might be  
tangent to the LRATC curve from the left, but not from the right, and it might not decrease. This 
would make movement from the long to the short run a discrete jump, whereas the ­existing model 
and smoothness assumption make it a smooth continuous movement. So if your intuition doesn’t 
lead you to understand the model, you are probably thinking of a model with different assumptions. 
You’ll be in good company, too. When an economist by the name of Jacob Viner first created this 
model, his intuition led him to a different result ­because his intuition was basing the analysis on  
different assumptions than he was using in his formal model.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Understanding costs and 
their structure will help you 
understand why intro eco-
nomics textbooks are so 
long—and why their length 
is to your advantage.
	
The majority of the 
costs of a book are fixed 
costs in relation to the 
length of the book. The 
initial costs in terms of 
length are about 20 per-
cent of the total price of 
the book. So increasing 
the length of the book in-
creases costs slightly. But 
the longer length allows 
the writer to ­include more 
issues that some professors want and many professors 
­require to even consider using the book. That means that 
greater length can ­allow publishers to sell more books, al-
lowing the fixed costs to be divided over more output. This 
decrease in fixed cost per unit can lower average total 
cost more than increasing the length of the book ­increases 
average total costs per unit. So if the added length 
Why Are Textbooks So Long?
­increases the number of 
users, the ­additional 
length can lower the aver-
age cost of the book.
Length does lower the 
costs of the book—up to a 
point. Textbook publish-
ers are continually look-
ing for  that point. They 
direct ­authors to shorten 
their books but also to in-
clude ­almost all issues 
that ­various groups want. 
The latter ­direction—in fa-
vor of inclusion—often 
takes ­precedence, which 
is why textbooks are so 
long. This doesn’t mean 
that textbooks will continue to become longer. Recently, 
economics textbooks have become smaller because 
students began to complain that the texts were getting 
too heavy to carry. There has also been technological 
change; books are now placing more and more of the 
less-used chapters on the web, and some are ­coming 
out with ­e-book versions.
© McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Mark Dierker, photographer

	
Chapter 12 ■ Production and Cost Analysis II	
251
supply of goods. As a bridge between the two chapters, let’s consider the entrepreneur, 
who establishes the relationship between costs and the supply decision, and discuss 
some of the problems of using cost analysis in the real world.
	
In thinking about the connection between cost and supply, one fundamental insight 
is that the revenue received for a good must be greater than the planned cost of produc-
ing it. Otherwise why would anyone supply it? The difference between the expected 
price of a good and the expected average total cost of producing it is the supplier’s 
expected economic profit per unit. It’s profit that underlies the dynamics of production 
in a market economy.
	
Cost curves do not become supply curves through some magic process. To move 
from cost to supply, entrepreneurial initiative is needed. An  entrepreneur is an 
­individual who sees an opportunity to sell an item at a price higher than the average 
cost of producing it. The entrepreneur is the organizer of production and the one who 
visualizes the demand and convinces the individuals who own the factors of produc-
tion that they want to produce that good. Businesses work hard at maintaining the 
entrepreneurial spirit in their employees. The greater the difference between price and 
average total cost, the greater the entrepreneur’s incentive to tackle the organizational 
problems and supply the good.
	
The role of the entrepreneur is not easily captured in models but should not be 
underestimated. Entrepreneurs are the visionaries who turn new technologies into 
usable goods and services. They are the hidden element of supply that is essential to 
the continued growth of an economy. While financial reward plays a role in entrepre-
neurial effort, it is not always the central motivation. People are motivated by many 
desires, including recognition, fame, and just the pleasure of seeing something done 
efficiently and well. 
	
In recent years we have seen an increase of social entrepreneurship—where 
­entrepreneurs turn their focus on achieving social, rather than just economic, ends. 
These social entrepreneurs are blending profit motives with other motives into the 
charters of the corporations, making them for-benefit, not for-profit, corporations. 
Novo Nordisk is an example. It is a pharmaceutical company whose goal is more than 
just profit. Instead of a profit bottom line, it has what it calls a triple bottom line. It 
tries to be profitable, responsible, and valuable for patients, employees, and society. 
For-benefit institutions provide a way in which people can join together to simultane-
ously fulfill their social goals as well as their material welfare goals. Advocates argue 
that for-benefit corporations will become a new “fourth sector” in the U.S. economy. 
Using Cost Analysis in the Real World
All too often, students walk away from an introductory economics course thinking that 
cost analysis is a relatively easy topic. Memorize the names, shapes, and relationships 
of the curves, and you’re home free. In the textbook model, that’s right. In real life, it’s 
not, because actual production processes are marked by economies of scope, learning 
by doing and technological change, many dimensions, unmeasured costs, joint costs, 
indivisible costs, uncertainty, asymmetries, and multiple planning and adjustment 
­periods with many different short runs. And this is the short list!
Economies of Scope
The cost of production of one product often depends on what other products a firm is 
producing. Economists say that in the production of two goods, there are economies of 
scope when the costs of producing products are interdependent so that it’s less costly 
for a firm to produce one good when it’s already producing ­another. For example, 
The expected price must exceed the 
average total costs of supplying the 
good for a good to be supplied.
Q-7  Why is the role of the 
entrepreneur central to  
the production process in the  
economy?
In recent years there has been an 
increase in social entrepreneurship.

252	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
once a firm has set up a large marketing 
department to sell cereal, the department 
might be able to use its expertise in mar-
keting a different product—say, dog food. 
A firm that sells gasoline can simultane-
ously use its gas station attendants to sell 
soda, milk, and incidentals. The minimarts 
so common along our highways and neigh-
borhood streets developed because gaso-
line ­companies became aware of economies 
of scope.
Economies of scope play an important 
role in firms’ decisions about what combi-
nation of goods to produce. They look for 
both economies of scope and economies of 
scale. When you read about firms’ mergers, 
think about whether the combination of 
their products will ­generate economies of 
scope. Many otherwise unexplainable merg-
ers between seemingly incompatible firms 
can be explained by economies of scope.
By allowing firms to segment the pro-
duction process, globalization has made 
­economies of scope even more important 
to firms in their production decisions. 
­Low-cost labor in other countries has led 
U.S. firms to locate their manufacturing ­processes in those countries and to concen-
trate domestic activities on other aspects of production. As I have stressed through-
out this book, production is more than simply manufacturing; the costs of marketing, 
advertising, and distribution are ­often larger components of the cost of a good than 
are manufacturing costs. Each of these involves special knowledge and expertise, 
and U.S. companies are specializing in the marketing, advertising, and distribution 
aspects of the production process. By concentrating on those aspects, and by mak-
ing themselves highly competitive by taking advantage of low-cost manufacturing 
elsewhere, U.S. firms become more competitive and expand, increasing demand for 
U.S. labor. Often they expand into new areas, taking advantage of economies of 
scope in distribution and marketing.
	
Consider Nike—it produces shoes and sportswear, right? Wrong. It is primarily a 
U.S. marketing and distribution company; it outsources its production to affiliate com-
panies. Nike expanded its product line from just shoes to a broader line of sports cloth-
ing in order to take advantage of economies of scope in its marketing and distribution 
specialties.
	
Nike is only one of many examples. The large wage differentials in the global 
economy are causing firms to continually reinvent themselves—to shed aspects of 
their business where they do not have a comparative advantage, and to add new busi-
nesses where their abilities can achieve synergies and economies of scope.
Learning by Doing and Technological Change
The production terminology that we’ve been discussing is central to the standard 
­economic models. In the real world, however, other terms and concepts are also important. 
The production techniques available to real-world firms are constantly changing 
Q-8  What is the difference between 
an economy of scope and an economy 
of scale?
Thinking Like a Modern Economist
Social Norms and Production
The traditional economic model presents the production decision 
as a cost-based decision. The firm calculates the cost of inputs and 
chooses the lowest-price input. Modern economists believe that 
these costs are important, but they also believe that a number of 
other elements come into play. They are working to devise models 
that incorporate them. One of the most important of those other 
elements is social norms, and the choices a firm makes so that 
they fit the social norms of society. Behavioral economist Dan Ariely 
argues that social norms play a far greater role in a firm’s decisions 
than the traditional ­economic model includes. He argues both that 
firms should include social norms in their decision making and that 
economists should develop new ­models of the firms that incorpo-
rate social norms in their decision process. He writes:
If corporations started thinking in terms of social norms, they 
would realize that these norms build loyalty and—more impor-
tant—make people want to extend themselves to the degree 
that corporations need today: to be flexible, concerned, and 
willing to pitch in. That’s what a social relationship delivers.

	
Chapter 12 ■ Production and Cost Analysis II	
253
­because of learning by doing and technological change. These changes occur over 
time and cannot be accurately predicted.
	
Unlike events in the standard economic model, all events in the real world are 
­influenced by the past; people learn by doing. But to keep the model simple, learning by 
doing isn’t a part of the traditional economic model. Learning by doing simply means 
that as we do something, we learn what works and what doesn’t, and over time we become 
more proficient at it. Practice may not make perfect, but it certainly makes ­better and 
more efficient. Many firms estimate that output per unit of input will ­increase by 1 or 2 
percent a year, even if inputs or technologies do not change, as ­employees learn by doing.
	
The concept of learning by doing emphasizes the importance of the past in trying 
to predict performance. Let’s say a firm is deciding between two applicants for the job 
of managing its restaurant. One was a highly successful student but has never run a 
restaurant; the other was an OK student who has run a restaurant that failed. Which 
one does the firm hire? The answer is unclear. The first applicant may be brighter, but 
the lack of experience will likely mean that the person won’t be hired. Businesses give 
enormous weight to experience. So this firm may reason that in failing, the ­second 
applicant will have learned lessons that make her the better candidate. U.S. firms faced 
such a choice when they were invited to expand into the new market economies of 
Eastern Europe in the early 1990s. Should they hire the former communist managers 
who had failed to produce efficiently, or should they hire the ­reformers? (Generally 
they decided on the former communist managers, hoping they had learned by failing.)
	
Technological change is an increase in the range of production techniques that 
leads to more efficient ways of producing goods as well as the production of new and 
better goods. That is, technological change offers an increase in the known range of 
production. For example, at one point automobile tires were made from rubber, cloth-
ing was made from cotton and wool, and buildings were made of wood. As a result of 
technological change, many tires are now made from ­petroleum distillates, much cloth-
ing is made from synthetic fibers (which in turn are made from petroleum distillates), 
and many buildings are constructed from steel.
	
The standard long-run model takes technology as a given. From our experience, we 
know that technological change affects firms’ decisions and production. Technological 
change can fundamentally alter the nature of production costs.
Q-9  Does learning by doing  
cause the average cost curve to be 
downward-sloping?
Many firms estimate worker productivity 
to grow 1 to 2 percent a year because of 
learning by doing.
Technological change can 
fundamentally alter the nature of 
production costs.
Left: © Bettmann/Corbis; right: © Photodisc/Getty Images RF
The nature of production has changed considerably in the last 70 years. The picture on the left shows a 1933 production line in which people 
did the work as the goods moved along the line. The picture on the right shows a modern production line. Robots do much of the work.

254	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
	
In some industries, technological change is occurring so fast that it overwhelms all 
other cost issues. The digital electronics industry is a good example. The expectation 
of technological change has been built into the plans of firms in that industry. The 
industry has followed Moore’s law, which states that the cost of computing will fall by 
half every 18 months. Indeed, that has happened since the computer was first offered 
to the mass retail market. With costs falling that fast because of learning by doing and 
technological change, all other cost components are overwhelmed, and, instead of 
costs increasing as output rises significantly, as might be predicted because of disec-
onomies of scale, costs keep going down.
	
Increased computational power (decreased cost) has affected other industries as well. 
Technological change has been so dramatic that we no longer talk about changes in a 
good, but rather the development of entirely new goods and ways of doing things. Con-
sider consumer goods. Telephone land lines have been replaced by cell phones, which in 
turn have been replaced by smartphones that are effectively computers with voice and 
messaging capabilities. VCRs have been replaced by wireless video streaming. Music 
isn’t played from CDs as it once was, but is streamed online, chosen by you or for you by 
programs such as Spotify. You don’t buy paper books but download bits and bytes trans-
formed into online multimedia products, which have written components.
	
Computational technology has also revolutionized automobiles, making them more 
­reliable and of much higher quality per dollar spent. In the 1960s, I could work on my  
own car, changing the points or modifying the carburetor. Modern cars have no such  
parts; they have been replaced by electronic parts. When a car isn’t running right, its 
owner must now take it to a garage, which hooks up the car to a diagnostic computer 
that reports what is wrong. No more lifting the hood. It is not only the engine in the 
car that is changing. So too is the driving. Driverless cars are on the road, and many 
expect that in the coming decade, they will be the norm. Automobiles have fundamen-
tally changed; they are much more efficient and reliable and their price has fallen 
because of the introduction of computer technology. As these examples point out, 
technological change drives costs down and can overwhelm diseconomies of scale, 
causing prices to fall more and more.
	
Don’t think of technological change as occurring only in high-tech industries. Con-
sider chicken production. The price of chickens has fallen enormously over the past 
50 years. Why? Because of technological change. At one time, chickens were raised in 
farmyards. They walked around, ate scraps and feed, and generally led a chicken’s life. 
Walking around had definite drawbacks—it took space (which cost money); it made 
standardization (a requirement of taking advantage of economies of scale) difficult, 
which prevented lowering costs; it used energy, which meant more feed per pound of 
chicken; and sometimes it led to disease, since chickens walked in their own manure.
	
The technological change was to put the chickens in wire cages so that the ­manure 
falls through to a conveyor belt and is transferred outside. Another ­conveyor belt feeds 
the chickens food laced with antibiotics to prevent disease. Soft music is played to 
keep them calm (they burn fewer calories). Once they reach the proper weight, they are 
slaughtered in a similar automated process. How the chickens feel about this techno-
logical change is not clear. (When I asked them, all they had to say was cluck.)
	
This method of raising chickens will likely be replaced in the next couple of 
decades by another technological change—genetic engineering that will allow chicken 
parts to be produced directly from single cells. Only the breasts and drumsticks will be 
produced (and wings if you live in Buffalo) as what is known as “in vitro meat.” All 
low-efficiency, low-profit-margin parts such as necks, feet, and heads will be elimi-
nated from the “efficient chicken.”
	
In many businesses, the effect of learning by doing and technological change on 
prices is built into the firm’s pricing structure. If they expect their costs to fall with 
more experience, or if they expect technological advances to lower costs in the future, 
Technological change occurs in all 
industries, not only high-tech industries.
© Digital Vision/PunchStock
Image Source/Getty Images

	
Chapter 12 ■ Production and Cost Analysis II	
255
businesses might bid low for a big order to give themselves the chance to lower their 
costs through learning by doing or technological change.
	
Technological change and learning by doing are intricately related. The ­efficient 
chicken production we now have did not come about overnight. It ­occurred over a 
20-year period as firms learned how to do it. Chickens respond to Mozart better than 
to hip-hop. That had to be learned. Similarly, genetic reproduction of chicken parts 
will evolve as scientists and firms learn more about cloning and DNA.
Many Dimensions
The only dimension of output in the standard model is how much to produce. Many, if 
not most, decisions that firms make are not the one-dimensional decisions of the tradi-
tional model, such as “Should we produce more or less?” They’re multidimensional 
questions such as “Should we change the quality? Should we change the wrapper? 
Should we improve our shipping speed? Should we increase our inventory?” Each of 
these questions relates to a different dimension of the production decision and each has 
its own marginal costs. Thus, there isn’t just one marginal cost; there are 10 or 20 of 
them. Good economic decisions take all relevant margins into account.
	
The reason that the traditional model is important is that each of these questions 
can be analyzed by applying the same reasoning used in the traditional model. But you 
must remember, in applying the analysis, it’s the reasoning, not the specific model, 
that’s important.
Unmeasured Costs
If asked “In what area of decision making do businesses most often fail to use eco-
nomic insights?” most economists would say costs. The relevant costs are generally 
not the costs you’ll find in a firm’s accounts.
	
Why the difference? Economists operate conceptually; they include in costs ­exactly 
what their theory says they should. They include all opportunity costs. Accountants 
who have to measure firms’ costs in practice and provide the actual dollar figures take 
a much more pragmatic approach; their concepts of costs must reflect only explicit 
costs—those costs that are reasonably precisely measurable.
	
To highlight the distinction, let me review the difference between explicit and 
implicit costs (discussed in the previous chapter) and introduce another difference—
how economists and accountants measure depreciation of capital.
Economists Include Opportunity Cost 
First, say that a business ­produces 
1,000 widgets2 that sell at $4 each for a total revenue of $4,000. To produce these wid-
gets, the business had to buy $1,200 worth of widgetgoo, which the owner has hand-
shaped into widgets. An accountant would say that the total cost of producing 1,000 
widgets was $1,200 and that the firm’s profit was $2,800. That’s because an accoun-
tant uses explicit costs that can be measured.
	
Economic profit is different. An economist, looking at that same example, would 
point out that the accountant’s calculation doesn’t take into account the time and effort 
that the owner put into making the widgets. While a person’s time involves no explicit 
cost in money, it does involve an opportunity cost, the forgone income that the owner 
could have made by spending that time working in another job. If the business takes 
400 hours of the person’s time and the person could have earned $8 an hour working 
for someone else, then the person is forgoing $3,200 in income. Economists include 
Technological change and learning  
by doing are intricately related.
Good economic decisions take all 
relevant margins into account.
Q-10  As the owner of the firm, Jim 
pays himself $1,000. All other expenses 
of the firm add up to $2,000. What 
would an economist say are the total 
costs for Jim’s firm?
2What’s a widget? It’s a wonderful little gadget that’s the opposite of a wadget. (No one knows what 
they look like or what they are used for.) Why discuss widgets? For the same reason that scientists 
­discuss fruit flies—their production process is simple, unlike most real-world ­production processes.

256	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
that implicit cost in their concept of cost. When that implicit cost is included, what 
looks like a $2,800 profit becomes a $400 economic loss.
Economic Depreciation versus Accounting Depreciation 
Deprecia-
tion is a measure of the decline in value of an asset that occurs over time. Say a firm 
buys a machine for $10,000 that’s meant to last 10 years. After 1 year, ­machines like 
that are in short supply, so instead of falling, its value rises to $12,000. An accountant, 
looking at the firm’s costs that year, would use historical cost (what the machine cost 
in terms of money actually spent) depreciated at, say, 10 percent per year, so the 
machine’s depreciation for each of its 10 years of existence would be $1,000. An econ-
omist would say that since the value of the machine is rising, the machine has no 
depreciation; it has appreciation and provides a revenue of $2,000 to the firm. The 
standard model avoids such messy, real-world issues of measuring depreciation costs 
and instead assumes that all costs are measurable in a single time period.
The Standard Model as a Framework
The standard model can be expanded to include these real-world complications. Mod-
ern production is data-intensive, and, as computing and information processing costs 
fall, cost accounting and production decisions are becoming more and more integrated 
with the economist’s analysis. Just about every industry has industry-­specific software 
that tailors economic analysis to its particular needs. For example, Robert Kaplan of 
the Harvard Business School argues that cost accounting systems based on traditional 
concepts of fixed and variable costs lead firms consistently to make the wrong deci-
sions. He argues that in today’s manufacturing, direct labor costs have fallen substan-
tially—in many industries to only 2 or 3 percent of the total cost—and ­overhead costs 
have risen substantially. This change in costs facing firms requires a much more care-
ful division among types of overhead costs, and a recognition that what should and 
should not be assigned as a cost to a particular product differs with each decision.
	
I don’t discuss these real-world complications because I suspect that even with its 
simplifications, the standard model has been more than enough to learn in an introduc-
tory course. Learning the standard model, however, provides you with only the rudi-
ments of cost analysis, in the same way that learning the rules of mechanics provides 
you with only the basics of mechanical engineering. In addition to a knowledge of the 
laws of mechanics, building a machine requires years of experience. Similarly for eco-
nomics and cost analysis. Introductory economics provides you with a superb frame-
work for starting to think about real-world cost measurement, but it can’t make you an 
expert cost analyst.
Conclusion
We’ve come to the end of our discussion of production, cost, and supply. The two 
chapters we spent on them weren’t easy; there’s tons of material here, and, quite 
frankly, it will likely require at least two or three reads and careful attention to your 
professor’s lecture before your mind can absorb it. So if you’re planning to sleep 
through a lecture, the ones on these chapters aren’t the ones for that.
	
These chapters will provide a framework for considering costs, and as long as you 
remember that it is only a framework, it will allow you to get into interesting real-
world issues. But you’ve got to know the basics to truly understand those ­issues. So, 
now that you’ve come to the end of these two chapters, unless you ­really feel comfort-
able with the analysis, it’s probably time to review them from the beginning. (Sorry, 
but remember, there ain’t no such thing as a free lunch.)
Despite its limitations, the standard 
model provides a good framework  
for cost analysis.

	
Chapter 12 ■ Production and Cost Analysis II	
257
• An economically efficient production process  
must be technically efficient, but a technically 
­efficient ­process need not be economically 
­efficient.  (LO12-1)
• The long-run average total cost curve is U-shaped. 
Economies of scale initially cause average total cost 
to decrease; diseconomies eventually cause average 
total cost to increase.  (LO12-2)
• Production is a social, as well as a technical, 
­phenomenon; that’s why concepts like team spirit 
are important—and that’s why diseconomies of scale 
occur.  (LO12-2)
• The marginal cost and short-run average cost 
curves slope upward because of diminishing 
­marginal productivity. The long-run average cost 
curve slopes ­upward because of diseconomies of 
scale.  (LO12-2)
Summary
• There is an envelope relationship between short-
run average cost curves and long-run average cost 
curves. The short-run average cost curves are 
­always above the long-run average cost 
curve.  (LO12-2)
• An entrepreneur is an individual who sees an oppor-
tunity to sell an item at a price higher than the average 
cost of producing it. (LO12-3)
• Once we start applying cost analysis to the real  
world, we must include a variety of other dimensions 
of costs that the traditional model does not 
cover.  (LO12-4)
• Costs in the real world are affected by economies 
of scope, learning by doing and technological 
change, the many dimensions to output, and 
­unmeasured costs such as opportunity 
costs.  (LO12-4)
Key Terms
constant returns to  
scale 
depreciation 
diseconomies of  
scale 
economically  
efficient 
economies of scale 
economies of scope 
entrepreneur 
indivisible setup cost 
learning by doing 
minimum efficient level 
of production 
monitoring cost 
team spirit 
technical efficiency 
technological change 
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 What is the difference between technical efficiency and 
economic efficiency?  (LO12-1)
	 2.	 One farmer can grow 1,000 bushels of corn on 1 acre  
of land with 200 hours of labor and 20 pounds of seed. 
Another farmer can grow 1,000 bushels of corn on  
1 acre of land with 100 hours of labor and 20 pounds  
of seed.  (LO12-1)
	a.	 Could both methods be technically efficient?
	b.	 Is it possible that both of these production processes 
are economically efficient?
	 3.	 A dressmaker can sew 800 garments with 160 bolts of 
fabric and 3,000 hours of labor. Another dressmaker can 
sew 800 garments with 200 bolts of fabric and 2,000 hours 
of identical labor. Fabric costs $100 a bolt and labor costs 
$10 an hour.  (LO12-1)
	a.	 Is it possible for both methods to be technically efficient? 
Why or why not?
	b.	 Is it possible for both methods to be economically 
­efficient? Why or why not?
	 4.	 A student has just written on an exam that, in the long 
run, fixed cost will make the average total cost curve 
slope downward. Why will the professor mark it 
­incorrect?  (LO12-2)
	 5.	 Why could diseconomies of scale never occur if 
­production relationships were only technical 
­relationships?  (LO12-2)

258	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
	 6.	 In the early 2000s car makers began to design vehicles’ 
chassis, engine, and transmissions so that different models 
could be produced on the same assembly line. Within the 
first year of implementing the plan, Ford cut production 
costs by $240 per car.  (LO12-2)
	a.	 What cost concept was Ford taking advantage of to 
produce its savings?
	b.	 What effect did the plan likely have on Ford’s 
­short-run average total cost curve?
	 7.	 Draw a long-run average total cost curve.  (LO12-2)
	a.	 Why does it slope downward initially?
	b.	 Why does it eventually slope upward?
	c.	 How would your answers to a and b differ if you had 
drawn a short-run cost curve?
	d.	 How large is the fixed-cost component of the long-run 
cost curve?
	e.	 If there were constant returns to scale everywhere, 
what would the long-run cost curve look like?
	 8.	 Sea lions have been depleting the stock of steelhead trout. 
One idea to scare sea lions off the Washington state coast 
was to launch fake killer whales, predators of sea lions. 
The cost of making the first whale is $16,000—$5,000 
for materials and $11,000 for the mold. The mold can be 
­reused to make additional whales, so additional whales 
would cost $5,000 apiece.  (LO12-2)
	a.	 Make a table showing the total cost and average total 
cost of producing 1 to 10 fake killer whales.
	b.	 Does production of fake whales exhibit diseconomies of 
scale, economies of scale, or constant returns to scale?
	c.	 What is the fixed cost of producing fake whales?
	d.	 What is the variable cost of producing fake whales? 
	 9.	 Why are long-run costs always less than or equal to 
­short-run costs?  (LO12-2)
	10. 	Draw a short-run marginal cost curve, short-run average 
cost curve, and long-run average total cost curve for an  
efficient firm producing where there are diseconomies 
of scale.  (LO12-2)
	11. 	Where along the long-run average total cost curve will an 
efficient firm try to produce in the long run?  (LO12-2)
	12.	 What is the role of the entrepreneur in translating cost of 
production into supply?  (LO12-3)
	13.	 Your average total cost is $40; the price you receive for 
the good is $12. Should you keep on producing the good? 
Why?  (LO12-3)
	14.	 True or false? Because entrepreneurs are motivated by  
opportunities to sell an item at a price higher than the 
­average cost of producing it, they do not start for-benefit 
firms. Explain your answer.  (LO12-3)
	15.	 A student has just written on an exam that technological 
change will mean that the cost curve is downward-sloping. 
Why did the teacher mark it wrong?  (LO12-4)
	16.	 How does learning by doing affect average total 
costs?  (LO12-4)
	17. 	If a firm is experiencing learning by doing, what is likely 
true about the long-run average total cost curve? Explain 
your answer.  (LO12-4)
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 The text presents costs as if a firm could look them up in 
a book.
	a.	 How do you believe a firm’s true costs are revealed?
	b.	 Is this an optimal method of finding out costs? 
­(Austrian)
	 2.	 The chapter points out that “businesses give enormous 
weight to experience,” or learning by doing. Empirical 
­evidence suggests that, in surveys and applications, 
women tend to report the nature of their jobs in far less 
detail than do men.
	a.	 How might this contribute to differences in “experience” 
between men and women?
	b.	 In what other ways might women’s real-world experi-
ences be undervalued when they go to look for jobs? 
(Feminist)
	 3.	 Adam Smith argued that at birth most people were simi-
larly talented, and that differences in individual abilities, 
and hence productivity, are largely the effect of the divi-
sion of labor, not its cause. What implications does that 
insight have for economic policy, and for the way we 
should treat others who receive less income than we do? 
(Religious)
	 4.	 Firms have an incentive to “externalize” their costs, that 
is, to make others face the opportunity costs of their 
­actions while firms reduce their own accounting costs.
	a.	 Give some examples of firms doing this.
	b.	 What implications for policy does it have? 
­(Institutionalist)
	 5.	 A major survey conducted by economists David Levine 
and Laura Tyson found that “in most reported cases the 
introduction of substantive shop floor participation (job 
redesign and participatory work groups) leads to some 
combination of an increase in satisfaction, commitment, 
quality and productivity, and a reduction in turnover and 
absenteeism.” Despite that evidence of real cost savings of 
participatory work groups, only a few U.S. corporate em-
ployers (for instance, Xerox and Scott Paper) have taken 
this high road to labor relations, while many ­continue to 
pursue the low road Walmart-like approach to cost saving. 
Why is that? (Radical)

	
Chapter 12 ■ Production and Cost Analysis II	
259
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 A pair of shoes that wholesales for $28.79 has approxi-
mately the following costs:
	
Manufacturing labor	
$  2.25
	
Materials	
4.95
	
Factory overhead, operating 
	
expenses, and profit	
8.50
	
Sales costs	
4.50
	
Advertising	
2.93
	
Research and development	
2.00
	
Interest	
.33
	
Net income to producer	
3.33
	
    Total	
$28.79
	a.	 Which of these costs would likely be a variable cost?
	b.	 Which would likely be a fixed cost?
	c.	 If output were to rise, what would likely happen to  
average total costs? Why? 
 	2.	 What inputs do you use in studying this book? What 
would the long-run average total cost and marginal cost 
curves for studying look like? Why?
	 3.	 If you were describing the marginal cost of an additional 
car driving on a road, what costs would you look at? What 
is the likely shape of the marginal cost curve?
	 4.	 A major issue of contention at many colleges concerns the 
cost of meals that is rebated when a student does not sign 
up for the meal plan. The administration usually says that 
it should rebate only the marginal cost of the food alone, 
which it calculates at, say, $1.25 per meal. Students say 
that the marginal cost should include more costs, such as 
the saved space from fewer students using the facilities 
and the reduced labor expenses on food preparation. This 
can raise the marginal cost to $6.00. 
	a.	 Who is correct, the administration or the students?
	b.	 How might your answer to a differ if this argument 
were being conducted in the planning stage, before the 
dining hall is built?
	c.	 If you accept the $1.25 figure of a person not eating, 
how could you justify using a higher figure of about 
$6.00 for the cost of feeding a guest at the dining hall, 
as many schools do? 
	 5.	 When economist Jacob Viner first developed the envelope 
relationship, he told his draftsman to make sure that all 
the marginal cost curves went through both (1) the 
­minimum point of the short-run average cost curve and 
(2) the point where the short-run average total cost curve 
was tangent to the long-run average total cost curve. The 
draftsman told him it couldn’t be done. Viner told him to 
do it anyhow. Why was the draftsman right?
	 6.	 The cost of setting up a steel mill is enormous. For exam-
ple, a Gary, Indiana, hot-strip mill would cost an esti-
mated $1.5 billion to build. Using this information and the 
cost concepts from the chapter, explain the following quo-
tation: “To make operations even marginally profitable, 
big steelmakers must run full-out. It’s like a car that is 
more efficient at 55 miles an hour than in stop-and-go 
traffic at 25.” 
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 True. Since an economically efficient method of produc-
tion is that method that produces a given level of output at 
the lowest possible cost, it also must use as few inputs as 
possible. It is also technically efficient.  (LO12-1)
	 2.	 Bangladesh uses more labor-intensive techniques than does 
the United States because the price of labor is much lower 
in Bangladesh relative to the United States. Both countries 
are producing economically efficiently.  (LO12-1)
	 3.	 Larger production runs are generally cheaper per unit 
than smaller production runs because of indivisible  
setup costs, which do not vary with the size of the  
run.  (LO12-2)
	 4.	 Because the same technical process could be used over and 
over again at the same cost, the long-run average cost curve 
would never become upward-sloping.  (LO12-2)
	 5.	 The short-run average cost curve initially slopes down-
ward because of increasing marginal productivity and 
large average fixed costs, and then begins sloping upward 
­because of diminishing marginal productivity, giving it a 
U shape.  (LO12-2)
	 6.	 The long-run average total cost curve is generally consid-
ered to be U-shaped because initially there are economies 
of scale and, for large amounts of production, there are 
diseconomies of scale.  (LO12-2)
	 7.	 Economic activity does not just happen. Some dynamic, 
driven individual must instigate production. That dynamic 
individual is called an entrepreneur.  (LO12-3)
	 8.	 Economies of scale are economies that occur because of 
increases in the amount of one good a firm is producing. 
Economies of scope occur when producing different 

APPENDIX
Isocost/Isoquant Analysis
In the long run, a firm can vary more than one factor of 
production. One of the decisions firms face in this long 
run is which combination of factors of production to use. 
Economic efficiency involves choosing those factors to 
minimize the cost of production.
	
In analyzing this choice of which combination of factors 
to use, economists have developed a graphical technique 
called isocost/isoquant analysis. In this technique, the 
analyst creates a graph placing one factor of production, 
say labor, on one axis and another factor, say machines, 
on the other axis, as I have done in Figure A12-1. Any 
point on that graph represents a combination of machines 
and labor that can produce a certain amount of output, 
say 8 pairs of earrings. For example, point A ­represents 3 
machines and 4 units of labor being used to produce 
8 pairs of earrings. Any point in the blue shaded area re­
presents more of one or both factors and any point in the 
brown shaded area represents less of one or both factors.
The Isoquant Curve
The firm’s problem is to figure out how to produce its 
output—let’s say it has chosen an output of 60 pairs of 
earrings—at as low a cost as possible. That means somehow 
we must show graphically the combinations of machines 
and labor that can produce 60 pairs of earrings as cheaply 
as possible. We do so with what is called an isoquant 
curve. An isoquant curve is a curve that represents com-
binations of factors of production that result in equal 
amounts of output. (Isoquant is a big name for an “equal 
quantity.”) At all points on an isoquant curve, the firm 
can produce the same amount of output. So, given a level 
of output, a firm can find out what combinations of the 
factors of production will produce that output. Suppose a 
firm can produce 60 pairs of earrings with the following 
combination of labor and machines:
	
Labor	
Machines	
Pairs of Earrings
A	
  3	
20	
60
B	
  4	
15	
60
C	
  6	
10	
60
D	
10	
  6	
60
E	
15	
  4	
60
F	
20	
  3	
60
260	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
types of goods lowers the cost of each of those ­ 
goods.  (LO12-4)
	 9.	 No. Learning by doing causes a shift in the cost curve 
­because it is a change in the technical characteristics 
of production. It does not cause the cost curve to  
be downward-sloping—it causes it to shift  
downward.  (LO12-4)
	10.	 An economist would say that he doesn’t know what total 
cost is without knowing what Jim could have earned  
if he had undertaken another activity instead of running 
his ­business. Just because he paid himself $1,000  
doesn’t mean that $1,000 is his opportunity  
cost.  (LO12-4)
FIGURE A12-1  The Isocost/Isoquant Graph
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Units of machines
Units of labor
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
A

	
Chapter 12 ■ Production and Cost Analysis II	
261
	
This table shows the technical limits of production. It 
shows that the firm can use, for example, 3 units of labor 
and 20 machines or 20 units of labor and 3 machines to 
produce 60 pairs of earrings. The isoquant curve is a 
graphical representation of the table. I show the isoquant 
curve for producing 60 pairs in Figure A12-2. Points A to 
F represent rows A to F in the table.
	
To be sure you understand it, let’s consider some 
points on the curve. Let’s start at point A. At point A, the 
firm is producing 60 pairs of earrings using 20 machines 
and 3 workers. If the firm wants to reduce the number of 
machines by 5, it must increase the number of units of 
labor by 1 to keep output constant. Doing so moves the 
firm to point B. At point B, the firm is also producing 
60 pairs of earrings, but is doing it with 15 machines and 
4 workers. Alternatively, if the firm were at point D, and 
it wants to reduce the number of machines from 6 to 4, it 
must increase the number of units of labor from 10 to 15 
to keep output constant at 60. At any point on this iso-
quant curve, the firm is being technically efficient—it is 
using as few resources as possible to produce 60 pairs of 
earrings. It would never want to produce 60 at a point like 
G because that point uses more inputs. It is a technically 
inefficient method of production.
	
The numbers in the production table and the shape of 
the curve were not chosen randomly. They were chosen to 
be consistent with the law of diminishing marginal pro-
ductivity, which means the curve is bowed inward. That is 
because as the firm increases the use of one factor more 
and more, it must use fewer and fewer units of the other 
factor to keep output constant. This reflects the technical 
considerations embodied in the law of diminishing mar-
ginal productivity. Thus, the chosen numbers tell us that 
if a firm wants to keep output constant, as it adds more 
and more of one factor (and less of the other factor), it has 
to use relatively more of that factor. For example, ini-
tially it might add 1 machine to replace 1 worker, hold-
ing output constant. If it continues, it will have to use 
1.5 machines, then 2 machines, and so on.
	
The rate at which one factor must be added to com-
pensate for the loss of another factor, to keep output 
constant, is called the marginal rate of substitution. 
To say that there is diminishing marginal productivity is 
to say that there is a diminishing marginal rate of substi-
tution. It is because the table assumes a diminishing 
marginal rate of substitution that the isoquant curve is 
bowed inward.
	
Graphically, the slope of the isoquant curve is the 
marginal rate of substitution. To be exact, the absolute 
value of the slope at a point on the isoquant curve equals 
the ratio of the marginal productivity of labor to the mar-
ginal productivity of machines:
∣ Slope ∣=
MPlabor
MPmachines
=
Marginal
rate of
substitution
With this equation, you can really see why the isoquant 
is downward-sloping. As the firm moves from point A 
to point F, it is using more labor and fewer machines. 
­Because of the law of diminishing marginal productiv-
ity, as the firm moves from A to F, the marginal pro-
ductivity of labor decreases and the marginal 
productivity of ­machines increases. The slope of the 
isoquant falls since the marginal rate of substitution is 
decreasing.
	
Let’s consider a specific example. Say in Figure A12-2 
the firm is producing at point B. If it cuts its input by 
5 machines but also wants to keep output constant, it must 
increase labor by 2 (move from point B to point C). So the 
marginal rate of substitution of labor for machines between 
points B and C must be 5/2, or 2.5.
	
The firm can complete this exercise for many differ-
ent levels of output. Doing so will result in an isoquant 
map, a set of isoquant curves that shows technically effi-
cient combinations of inputs that can produce different 
levels of output. Such a map for output levels of 40, 60, 
and 100 is shown in Figure A12-3.
	
Each curve represents a different level of output. 
­Isoquant I is the lowest level of output, 40, and isoquant 
III is the highest level of output. When a firm chooses an 
output level, it is choosing one of those isoquants. The 
chosen isoquant represents the technically efficient 
­combinations of resources that can produce the desired 
output.
FIGURE A12-2  Isoquant Curve for 60 Pairs of Earrings
Units of machines
Units of labor
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
B
A
G
C
D
E
F
Isoquant
(60 pairs 
of earrings)

262	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
	
To see that this is indeed the case, say the firm starts 
with 20 machines and no labor. If the firm wants to use 
some combination of labor and machinery, it can give up 
some machines and use the money it saves by using fewer 
machines to purchase units of labor. Let’s say it gives up 
5 machines, leaving it with 15. That means it has $15 to 
spend on labor, for which it can buy 3 units of labor. That 
means 15 machines and 3 units of labor is another combi-
nation of labor and machines that cost the firm $60. This 
means that point C is also a point on the isocost line. You 
can continue with this exercise to prove to yourself that 
the line connecting points A and B does represent various 
combinations of labor and machinery the firm can buy 
with $60. Thus, the line connecting A and B is the $60 
isocost line.
	
To see that you understand the isocost line, it is useful 
to go through a couple of examples that would make it 
shift. For example, what would happen to the isocost line 
if the firm chooses to increase its spending on production 
to $90? To see the effect, we go through the same exercise 
as before: If it spent it all on labor, it could buy 18 units 
of labor. If it spent it all on machines, it could buy 
30 units of machinery. Connecting these points will give 
us a curve to the right of and parallel to the original 
curve. It has the same slope because the relative prices of 
the factors of production, which determine the slope, have 
not changed.
	
Now ask yourself, What happens to the isocost line if 
the price of labor rises to $10 a unit? If you said the iso-
cost curve becomes steeper, shifting along the labor axis 
to point D while remaining anchored along the machinery 
axis until the slope is −10/3, you’ve got it. In general, the 
The Isocost Line
So far I have only talked about technical efficiency. To 
move to economic efficiency, we have to bring in the 
costs of production. We do so with the isocost line—a 
line that represents alternative combinations of factors of 
production that have the same costs. (Isocost is a fancy 
name for “equal cost.”) Each point on the isocost line rep-
resents a combination of factors of production that, in to-
tal, cost the firm an equal amount.
	
To draw the isocost line, you must know the cost per 
unit of each input as well as the amount the firm has 
­chosen to spend on production. Say labor costs $5 a unit, 
machinery costs $3 a unit, and the firm has chosen to 
spend $60. What is the greatest number of earrings it can 
produce with that $60? To answer that question, we need 
to create a curve representing the various amounts of 
­inputs a firm can get with that $60. We do so in the fol-
lowing manner. Say the firm decides to spend the entire 
$60 on labor. Since labor costs $5 a unit, it can buy 
12 units of labor. This alternative is represented by point 
A in Figure A12-4.
	
Alternatively, since machines cost $3 a unit, if the 
firm chooses to spend all of the $60 on machines, it can 
buy 20 machines (point B in Figure A12-4). This gives 
us two points on the isocost curve. Of course, the as-
sumption of diminishing marginal rates of substitution 
makes it highly unlikely that the firm would want to 
produce at either of these points. Instead, it would likely 
use some combination of inputs. But these extreme 
points are useful nonetheless because by connecting 
them (the line that goes from A to B in Figure A12-4), 
we can see the various combinations of inputs that also 
cost $60.
FIGURE A12-3  An Isoquant Map
Units of machines
Units of labor
III (100 pairs of earrings)
I (40 pairs of earrings)
II (60 pairs of earrings)
FIGURE A12-4  Isocost Curves
Units of machines
Units of labor
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
B
A
C
D
Slope = – 
= 
Plabor
Pmachines
5
3
Increase amount 
available to spend
–

	
Chapter 12 ■ Production and Cost Analysis II	
263
But say the firm has an efficient manager—one who 
has taken introductory economics. As opposed to 
­reducing the number of workers as the other manager 
did, she increases the number of workers to 6 and re-
duces the number of machines to 10. Doing so still pro-
duces 60 pairs of earrings, since C is a point on the 
isoquant curve, but the strategy reduces the cost from 
$65 at point A to $60 (10 machines at $3 = $30 and 
6 workers at $5 = $30). So she is producing 60 pairs of 
earrings at a cost of $60. She is operating at the eco-
nomically efficient point—point C.
	
Let’s talk about the characteristics of point C. Point C 
is the point where the isoquant curve is tangent to the iso-
cost curve—the point at which the slope of the isoquant 
curve (−MPL/MPM) equals the slope of the isocost curve 
(−PL/PM). That is, −MPL/MPM = −PL/PM. This can be 
rewritten as
MPL/PL = MPM /PM
	
What this equation says is that when the additional 
output per dollar spent on labor equals the additional 
­output per dollar spent on machines, the firm is operating 
efficiently. It makes sense. If the additional output 
per dollar spent on labor exceeded the additional output 
per dollar spent on machines, the firm would do better by 
increasing its use of labor and decreasing its use of 
­machines.
	
Point C represents the combination of labor and ma-
chines that will result in the highest output given the iso-
cost curve facing the firm. To put it in technical terms, 
the firm is operating at an economically efficient point 
where the marginal rate of substitution equals the ratio of 
the factor prices. Any point other than C on the isocost 
curve will cost $60 but produce fewer than 60 pairs of 
earrings. Any other point than C on the isoquant curve 
will produce 60 pairs of earrings but cost more than $60. 
Only C is the economically efficient point given the fac-
tor costs.
	
To see that you understand the analysis, say that the 
price of labor falls to $3 and you still want to produce 
60. What will happen to the amount of labor and ma-
chines you hire? Alternatively, say that the price of 
machines rises to $5 and you want to spend only $60. 
What will happen to the amount of labor and machines 
you hire?
	
If your answers are (1) you hire more workers and 
fewer machines and (2) you reduce production using 
fewer machines and, maybe, less labor, you’ve got the 
analyses down. If you didn’t give those answers, I sug-
gest rereading this appendix, if it is to be on the exam, 
and working through the questions and exercises.
absolute value of the slope of the isocost curve is the ratio 
of the price of the factor of production on the x-axis to the 
price of the factor of production on the y-axis. That means 
that as the price of a factor rises, the endpoint of the iso-
cost curve shifts in on the axis on which that factor is 
measured.
Choosing the Economically 
Efficient Point of Production
Now let’s move on to a consideration of the economically 
efficient combination of resources to produce 60 pairs of 
earrings with $60. To do that, we must put the isoquant 
cost curve from Figure A12-2 and the isocost curve from 
Figure A12-4 together. We do so in Figure A12-5.
	
The problem for the firm is to produce as many pairs 
of earrings as possible with the $60 it has to spend. Or, 
put another way, given a level of production it has chosen, 
it wants to produce at the least-cost combination of the 
factors of production.
	
Let’s now find the least-cost combination of inputs 
to produce 60 pairs of earrings. Let’s say that, initially, 
the firm chooses point A on its isoquant curve—that’s at 
15 machines and 4 workers. That produces 60 pairs of 
earrings, but has a cost of $45 + $20 = $65. The firm 
can’t produce 60 pairs of earrings unless it is willing to 
spend more than $60. If it fires a worker to bring its cost 
in line, moving it to point B, it moves down to a lower 
isoquant—it is producing only 40 pairs.
	
If the firm has a less-than-competent manager, that 
manager will conclude that you can’t produce 60 for $60. 
FIGURE A12-5  Combining Isoquant and Isocost Curves
Units of machines
Units of labor
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
B
A
C
Slope =
MPlabor
MPmachines
Slope =
Plabor
Pmachines
(Q = 60)
(Q = 40)
–
–

264	
Microeconomics ■ Production and Cost Analysis
Key Terms
isocost line
isoquant curve
isoquant map
marginal rate of substitution
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 What happens to the marginal rate of substitution as a 
firm increases the use of one input, keeping output 
­constant? What accounts for this?
	 2.	 Draw an isocost curve for a firm that has $100 to spend 
on producing jeans. Input includes labor and materials. 
Labor costs $8 and materials cost $4 a unit. How does 
each of the following affect the isocost curve? Show your 
answer graphically.
	a.	 Production budget doubles.
	b.	 Cost of materials rises to $10 a unit.
	c.	 Cost of labor and materials each rises by 25 percent.
	 3.	 Show, using isocost/isoquant analysis, how firms in the 
United States use relatively less labor and relatively more 
land than Japan for the production of similar goods, yet 
both are behaving economically efficiently.
	 4.	 Demonstrate the difference between economic efficiency 
and technical efficiency, using isocost/isoquant analysis.
	 5.	 Draw a hypothetical isocost curve and an isoquant curve 
tangent to the isocost curve. Label the combination of 
­inputs that represents an economically efficient use of 
­resources.
	a.	 How does a technological innovation affect your 
­analysis?
	b.	 How does the increase in the price of the input on the 
x-axis affect your analysis?
	 6.	 Show graphically the analysis of the example in Figure 
A12-5 if the price of labor falls to $3. Demonstrate that 
the firm can increase production given the same budget.
	 7.	 Show graphically the analysis of the example in  
Figure A12-5 if the price of machines rises to $5.  
Demonstrate that the firm must reduce production if it 
keeps the same budget.

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO13-1	
Explain how perfect 
competition serves as a 
reference point.
LO13-2	 Explain why producing an 
output at which marginal 
cost equals price 
maximizes total profit  
for a perfect competitor.
LO13-3	 Determine the output  
and profit of a perfect 
competitor graphically  
and numerically.
LO13-4	 Explain the adjustment 
process from short-run 
equilibrium to long-run 
equilibrium.
“
”
There’s no resting place for  
an enterprise in a competitive  
economy.
—Alfred P. Sloan
The concept competition is used in two ways in eco-
nomics. One way is as a process. Competition as a process 
is a rivalry among firms and is prevalent throughout our 
economy. It involves one firm trying to figure out how to 
take away market share from another firm. An example is 
my publishing firm ­giving me a contract to write a great 
book like this in order for the firm to take market share 
away from other publishing firms that are also selling eco-
nomics textbooks. The other use of competition is as a per-
fectly competitive market structure. It is this use that is the 
subject of this chapter. 
Perfect Competition as a Reference Point
Although perfect competition has highly restrictive assumptions, it provides us 
with a reference point for thinking about various market structures and 
­competitive processes. Why is such a reference point important? Think of the 
following analogy.
	
In physics when you study the laws of gravity, you initially study what 
would happen in a vacuum. Perfect vacuums don’t exist, but talking about 
what would happen if you dropped an object in a perfect vacuum makes the 
analysis easier. So too with economics. Our equivalent of a perfect vacuum 
is perfect competition. In perfect competition, the invisible hand of the mar-
ket operates unimpeded. In this chapter, we’ll consider how perfectly com-
petitive markets work and see how to apply the cost analysis developed in 
the previous two chapters.
Conditions for Perfect Competition
A perfectly competitive market is a market in which economic forces 
­operate unimpeded. For a market to be called perfectly competitive, it must 
meet some ­stringent conditions. Some of them are: Both buyers and sellers 
are price ­takers. The number of firms is large. There are no barriers to entry. 
Firms’ products are identical. There is complete information. Selling firms 
are profit-maximizing entrepreneurial firms. These and other similar conditions 
Perfect Competition
chapter 13
© JP Laffont/Sygma/Corbis

266	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
are needed to ensure that economic forces operate instantaneously and are unim-
peded by political and social forces. 
	
To give you a sense of these conditions, let’s consider some of these ­conditions a 
bit more carefully.
1.	Both buyers and sellers are price takers. A price taker is a firm or ­individual 
who takes the price determined by market supply and ­demand as given. When 
you buy, say, toothpaste, you go to the store and find that the price of tooth-
paste is, say, $2.33 for the medium-size tube; you’re a price taker. The firm, 
however, is a price maker since it set the price at $2.33. So even though the 
toothpaste industry is highly competitive, it’s not a perfectly competitive market. 
In a perfectly competitive market, market supply and demand determine the 
price; both firms and consumers take the market price as given.
2.	There are no barriers to entry. Barriers to entry are social, political, or 
economic impediments that prevent firms from entering a market. They 
might be legal barriers such as patents for products or processes. Barriers 
might be technological, such as when the minimum efficient level of produc-
tion allows only one firm to produce at the lowest average total cost. Or 
­barriers might be created by social forces, such as when bankers will lend 
only to individuals with specific racial characteristics. Perfect competition 
can have no barriers to entry.
3.	Firms’ products are identical. This requirement means that each firm’s output 
is indistinguishable from any other firm’s output. Corn bought by the bushel is 
relatively homogeneous. One kernel is indistinguishable from any other kernel. 
In contrast, you can buy 30 different brands of many goods—soft drinks, for 
instance: Pepsi, Coke, 7UP, and so on. They are all slightly different from one 
another and thus not identical.
	
Generally these conditions aren’t met and firms are less than perfectly competitive.
Demand Curves for the Firm and the Industry
The market demand curve is downward-sloping, but each individual firm in a com-
petitive industry is so small that it perceives that its actions will not affect the price it 
can get for its product. Price is the same no matter how much the firm produces. Think 
of an individual firm’s actions as removing one piece of sand from a beach. Does that 
lower the level of the beach? For all practical, and even most impractical, purposes, we 
can assume it doesn’t. Similarly for a perfectly competitive firm. That is why we con-
sider the demand curve facing the firm to be perfectly elastic (horizontal).
	
The price the firm can get is determined by the market, and the competitive firm takes 
the market price as given. This difference in perception is extremely important. It means that 
firms will increase their output in response to an increase in market demand even though 
that increase in output will cause the market price to fall and can make all firms collectively 
worse off. But since, by the assumptions of perfect competition, they don’t act collectively, 
each firm follows its self-interest. Let’s now consider that self-interest in more detail.
The Profit-Maximizing Level of Output
The goal of a firm is assumed to be maximizing profits—to get as much for itself as pos-
sible. So when it decides what quantity to produce, it will continually ask, “How will profit 
change with changes in the quantity I produce?” Since profit is the difference between total 
revenue and total cost, what happens to profit in response to a change in output is 
­determined by marginal revenue (MR), the change in total revenue associated with a 
change in quantity, and marginal cost (MC), the change in total cost associated with 
Q-1  Why is the assumption of no 
barriers to entry important for the 
existence of perfect competition?
Q-2  How can the demand curve for 
the market be downward-sloping but 
the demand curve for a competitive firm 
be perfectly elastic?

	
Chapter 13 ■ Perfect Competition	
267
a change in quantity. That’s why marginal revenue and marginal cost are key concepts in 
determining the profit-maximizing or loss-minimizing level of output of any firm.
	
To emphasize the importance of MR and MC, those are the only cost and revenue 
figures shown in Figure 13-1. Notice that we don’t illustrate profit at all. We’ll calcu-
late profit later. All we want to determine now is the profit-maximizing level of output. 
To do this, you need only know MC and MR. Specifically, a firm maximizes profit 
when MC = MR. To see why, let’s look at MC and MR more closely.
Marginal Revenue
Let’s first consider marginal revenue. Since a perfect competitor accepts the market 
price as given, marginal revenue is simply the market price. In the example shown in 
Figure 13-1, if the firm increases output from 2 to 3, its revenue rises by $35 (from $70 to 
$105). So its marginal revenue is $35, the price of the good. Since at a price of $35 it 
can sell as much as it wants, for a competitive firm, MR = P. Marginal revenue is given 
in column 1 of Figure 13-1(a). As you can see, MR equals $35 for all levels of output. 
Marginal Cost
Now let’s move on to marginal cost. I’ll be brief since I discussed marginal cost in 
detail in an earlier chapter. Marginal cost is the change in total cost that accompanies a 
change in output. Figure 13-1(a) shows marginal cost in column 3. Notice that initially 
in this example, marginal cost is falling, but after the fifth unit of output, it’s increas-
ing. This is consistent with our discussion in earlier chapters.
	
Notice also that the marginal cost figures are given for movements from one quan-
tity to another. That’s because marginal concepts tell us what happens when there’s a 
change in something, so marginal concepts are best defined between numbers. The 
numbers in column 3 are the marginal costs. So the marginal cost of increasing output 
from 1 to 2 is $20, and the marginal cost of increasing output from 2 to 3 is $16. The 
marginal cost right at 2 (which the marginal cost graph shows) would be between $20 
and $16, at approximately $18.
To determine the profit-maximizing 
output, all you need to know is MC  
and MR. Firms maximize profits where 
MC = MR.
For a competitive firm, MR = P.
FIGURE 13-1 (A AND B)  Marginal Cost, Marginal Revenue, and Price
The profit-maximizing output for a firm occurs where marginal cost equals marginal revenue. Since for a competitive firm P = MR, its 
profit-maximizing output is where MC = P. At any other output, it is forgoing profit.
Costs
Quantity
(b)        /Price Graph
P = D = MR
MC
0
1 2 3 4 5
7 8 9 10
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
$70
A
A
B
C
C
MC
	
(1)	
(2)	
(3) 
	
	
Quantity	
Marginal 
Price = MR	
Produced	
Cost
	
$35.00	
  0	
$28.00
	
  35.00	
  1	
  20.00
	
  35.00	
  2	
  16.00
	
  35.00	
  3	
  14.00
	
  35.00	
  4	
  12.00
	
  35.00	
  5	
  17.00
	
  35.00	
  6	
  22.00
	
  35.00	
  7	
  30.00
	
  35.00	
  8	
  40.00
	
  35.00	
  9	
  54.00
	
  35.00	
10	
(a)  MC/Price Table

268
Profit Maximization: MC = MR
As I noted above, to maximize profit, a firm should produce where marginal cost 
equals marginal revenue. Looking at Figure 13-1(b), we see that a firm following that 
rule will produce at an output of 8, where MC = MR = $35. Now let me try to con-
vince you that 8 is indeed the profit-maximizing output. To do so, let’s consider three 
different possible quantities the firm might look at.
	
Let’s say that initially the firm decides to produce 5 widgets, placing it at point A in 
Figure 13-1(b). The firm receives $35 for each widget, so the marginal revenue for 
­producing the fifth unit is $35. The marginal cost of doing so is $12. By producing 
5 rather than 4 units, profit has increased by $23 ($35 − $12). So it makes sense 
to have produced 5 units rather than 4. Notice that we don’t know total profit, just 
the change in total profit as we change production levels. Should the firm increase 
production to 6? Again, marginal revenue is $35. This time marginal cost is $17. 
Profit increases by $18. Again it makes sense to increase production. As long as MC < 
MR, it makes sense to increase production. The blue shaded area (A) represents the 
entire increase in profit the firm can get by increasing output beyond 5 units.
	
Now let’s say that the firm decides to produce 10 widgets, placing it at point C. 
Here the firm gets $35 for each widget. The marginal cost of producing that 10th unit 
is $54. So, MC > MR. If the firm decreases production by 1 unit, its cost decreases by 
$54 and its revenue decreases by $35. Profit increases by $19 ($54 − $35 = $19), so at 
point C, it makes sense to decrease output. This reasoning holds true as long as the 
marginal cost is above the marginal revenue. The redish shaded area (C) represents the 
increase in profits the firm can get by decreasing output.
	
At point B (output = 8) the firm gets $35 for each widget, and its marginal cost is 
$35, as you can see in Figure 13-1(b). The marginal cost of increasing output by 1 unit 
Q-3  What are the two things you 
must know to determine the profit-
maximizing output?
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Recent technological developments are making the per-
fectly competitive model more directly relevant to our 
economy. Specifically, the Internet has eliminated the spa-
tial dimension of competition (except for shipping), allow-
ing individuals to compete globally rather than locally. 
When you see a bid on the Internet, you don’t care where 
the supplier is (as long as you do not have 
to pay ­shipping fees). Because it allows ac-
cess to so many buyers and sellers, the In-
ternet ­reduces the number of seller-set 
posted price markets (such as found in 
­retail stores), and replaces them with auc-
tion markets.
	
The Internet has had its biggest im-
pact in firms’ buying practices. Today, 
when firms want to buy standardized 
products, they will often post their tech-
nical requirements for desired components on the Net and 
allow suppliers from all over the world to bid to fill their 
orders. Firms have found that buying in this fashion over 
The Internet and the Perfectly Competitive Model
the Internet has, on average, lowered the prices they pay 
by over 10 percent.
	
Similar changes are occurring in consumer markets. With 
sites like Priceline.com, individuals can set the price they are 
willing to pay for goods and services (such as hotel rooms 
and airline ­tickets) and see if anyone wants to supply them. 
(Recently, I successfully bid $150 for a 
$460 retail price hotel room in New York 
City.) With sites such as eBay, you can buy 
and sell almost anything. The Internet 
even has its own payment systems, such 
as PayPal.
In short, with the Internet, entry and 
exit are much easier than in traditional 
brick-and-mortar business, and that 
makes the market more like a perfectly 
competitive market. As Internet search 
engines become better designed for commerce, and as 
more people become Internet savvy, the economy will more 
and more closely resemble the perfectly competitive model.
Source: priceline.com

	
Chapter 13 ■ Perfect Competition	
269
is $40 and the marginal revenue of selling 1 more unit is $35, so its profit falls by $5. 
If the firm decreases output by 1 unit, its MC is $30 and its MR is $35, so its profit falls 
by $5. Either increasing or decreasing production will decrease profit, so at point B, an 
output of 8, the firm is maximizing profit.
	
Since MR is just market price, we can state the profit-maximizing condition of a 
competitive firm as MC = MR = P. So, if MR > MC, increase production; if MR < 
MC, decrease production. If MR = MC, the firm is maximizing profit. 
 	
You should commit this profit-maximizing condition to memory. You should also 
be sure that you understand the intuition behind it. If marginal revenue isn’t equal to 
marginal cost, a firm obviously can increase profit by changing output. If that isn’t 
obvious, the marginal benefit of an additional hour of thinking about this condition 
will exceed the marginal cost (whatever it is), meaning that you should . . . right, you 
guessed it . . . study some more.
The Marginal Cost Curve Is the Supply Curve
Now let’s consider again the definition of the supply curve as a schedule of quantities 
of goods that will be offered to the market at various prices. Notice that the upward-
sloping portion of the marginal cost curve fits that definition. It tells how much the 
firm will supply at a given price. Figure 13-2 shows the various quantities the firm will 
supply at different market prices beginning at the upward-sloping portion at point A. If 
the price is $35, we showed that the firm would supply 8 (point C). If the price had 
been $19.50, the firm would have supplied 6 (point B); if the price had been $61, the 
firm would have supplied 10 (point D). Because the marginal cost curve tells us how 
much of a produced good a firm will supply at a given price, the marginal cost curve 
is the firm’s supply curve. The MC curve tells the competitive firm how much it should 
produce at a given price. (As you’ll see later, there’s an addendum to this statement. 
Specifically, the marginal cost curve is the firm’s supply curve only if price exceeds 
average variable cost.)
Profit-maximizing condition for a 
competitive firm: MC = MR = P.
If marginal revenue does not equal 
marginal cost, a firm can increase profit 
by changing output.
Because the marginal cost curve tells 
us how much of a produced good a 
firm will supply at a given price, the 
marginal cost curve is the firm’s 
supply curve.
FIGURE 13-2  The Marginal Cost 
Curve Is a Firm’s Supply Curve
Since the marginal cost curve tells 
the firm how much to produce, the 
marginal cost curve is the perfectly 
competitive firm’s supply curve. 
This exhibit shows four points on a 
firm’s supply curve; as you can see, 
the quantity the firm chooses to 
supply depends on the price. For 
example, if market price is $19.50, 
the firm produces 6 units.
Cost
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 10
Quantity
$70
61
35
19.50
13.00
C
D
Marginal
cost
B
A

270	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Firms Maximize Total Profit
Notice that when you talk about maximizing profit, you’re talking about maximizing total 
profit, not profit per unit. Profit per unit would be maximized at a much lower output level 
than is total profit. Profit-maximizing firms don’t care about profit per unit; as long as an 
increase in output will increase total profits, a profit-maximizing firm should increase 
output. That’s difficult to grasp, so let’s consider a concrete example.
	
Say two people are selling T-shirts that cost $4 each. One sells 2 T-shirts at a price 
of $6 each and makes a profit per shirt of $2. His total profit is $4. The second person 
sells 8 T-shirts at $5 each, making a profit per unit of only $1 but selling 8. Her total 
profit is $8, twice as much as the fellow who had the $2 profit per unit. In this case, $5 
(the price with the lower profit per unit), not $6, yields more total profit.
	
An alternative method of determining the profit-maximizing level of output is to 
look at the total revenue and total cost curves directly. Figure 13-3 shows total cost and 
total revenue for the firm we’re considering so far. The table in Figure 13-3(a) shows 
total revenue in column 2, which is just the number of units sold times market price. 
Total cost is in column 3. Total cost is the cumulative sum of the marginal costs from 
Figure 13-1(a) plus a fixed cost of $40. Total profit (column 4) is the difference between 
total revenue and total cost. Looking down column 4 of Figure 13-3(a), you can quickly 
see that the profit-maximizing level of output is 8, since total profit is highest at an 
­output of 8. This is also where MR = MC.
	
In Figure 13-3(b) we plot the firm’s total revenue and total cost curves from the 
table in Figure 13-3(a). The total revenue curve is a straight line; each additional unit 
sold increases revenue by the same amount, $35. The total cost curve is bowed upward 
at most quantities, reflecting the increasing marginal cost at different levels of output. 
The firm’s profit is represented by the distance between the total revenue curve and the 
total cost curve. For example, at output 5, the firm makes $45 in profit.
Q-4  Why do firms maximize total 
profit rather than profit per unit?
Total cost, total revenue
$385
280
199
175
130
Maximum
proﬁt
TC
Loss
TR
$81
Loss
Quantity
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12
$45
(b)  Total Revenue and Total Cost Curves
FIGURE 13-3 (A AND B)  Determination of Profits by Total Cost and Total Revenue Curves
The profit-maximizing output level also can be seen by considering the total cost curve and the total revenue curve. Profit is maximized at 
the output where total revenue exceeds total cost by the largest amount. This occurs at an output of 8.
    (1)	
(2)	
(3)	
(4) 
	
Total	
Total	
Total	
Quantity	
Revenue	
Cost	
Profit
	
  0	
$    0	
$  40	
$−40
	
  1	
  35	
68	
−33
	
  2	
  70	
88	
−18
	
  3	
105	
104	
1
	
  4	
140	
118	
22
	
  5	
175	
130	
45
	
  6	
210	
147	
63
	
  7	
245	
169	
76
	
  8	
280	
199	
81
	
  9	
315	
239	
76
	
10	
350	
293	
57
(a)  Total Revenue and Total Cost Table

	
Chapter 13 ■ Perfect Competition	
271
	
Total profit is maximized where the vertical distance between total revenue and 
total cost is greatest. In this example, total profit is maximized at output 8, just as in 
the alternative approach. At that output, marginal revenue (the slope of the total 
­revenue curve) and marginal cost (the slope of the total cost curve) are equal.
Total Profit at the Profit-Maximizing  
Level of Output
In the initial discussion of the firm’s choice of output, given price, I carefully pre-
sented only marginal cost and price. We talked about maximizing profit, but nowhere 
did I mention what profit, average total cost, average variable cost, or average fixed 
cost was. I mentioned only marginal cost and price to emphasize that marginal cost is all 
that’s needed to determine a competitive firm’s supply curve (and a competitive firm 
is the only firm that has a supply curve) and to determine the output that will maxi-
mize profit. Now that you know that, let’s turn our attention more closely to profit.
Determining Profit from a Table of Costs and Revenue
The P = MR = MC condition tells us how much output a competitive firm should pro-
duce to maximize profit. It does not tell us the profit the firm makes. Profit is deter-
mined by total revenue minus total cost. Table 13-1 expands Figure 13-1(a) and 
presents a table of all the costs relevant to the firm. Going through the columns and 
reminding yourself of the definition of each is a good review of the two previous chapters. 
If the definitions don’t come to mind immediately, you need a review. If you don’t know the 
definitions of MC, AVC, ATC, FC, and AFC, go back and reread those chapters.
	
The firm is interested in maximizing profit. Looking at Table 13-1, you can quickly 
see that the profit-maximizing position is 8, as it was before, since at an output of 8, 
total profit (column 10) is highest.
	
Using the MC = MR = P rule, you can also see that the profit-maximizing level of 
output is 8. Increasing output from 7 to 8 has a marginal cost of $30, which is less than 
$35, so it makes sense to do so. Increasing output from 8 to 9 has a marginal cost of 
$40, which is more than $35, so it does not make sense to do so. The output 8 is the 
profit-maximizing output. At that profit-maximizing level of output, the profit the firm 
earns is $81, which is calculated by subtracting total cost of $199 from total revenue of 
Marginal cost is all that is needed  
to determine a competitive firm’s supply 
curve.
Profit is determined by total revenue 
minus total cost.
TABLE 13-1  Costs Relevant to a Firm
	
(1)	
(2)	
(3)	
(4)	
(5)	
(6)	
(7)	
(8)	
(9)	
(10) 
Price =	
	
Total	
Average	
Total	
Average	
	
	
Average	
	
Marginal	
Quantity	
Fixed	
Fixed	
Variable	
Variable	
Total	
Marginal	
Total	
Total	
Total 
Revenue	
Produced	
Cost	
Cost	
Cost	
Cost	
Cost	
Cost	
Cost	
Revenue	
Profit
	 $35.00	
0	
$40.00	
—    	
0      	
—    	
$  40.00	
$28.00	
—    	
0      	 $−40.00
	 35.00	
1	
40.00	
$40.00	
$  28.00	
$28.00	
68.00	
20.00	
$68.00	
$  35.00	
−33.00
	 35.00	
2	
40.00	
20.00	
48.00	
24.00	
88.00	
16.00	
44.00	
70.00	
−18.00
	 35.00	
3	
40.00	
13.33	
64.00	
21.33	
104.00	
14.00	
34.67	
105.00	
1.00
	 35.00	
4	
40.00	
10.00	
78.00	
19.50	
118.00	
12.00	
29.50	
140.00	
22.00
	 35.00	
5	
40.00	
8.00	
90.00	
18.00	
130.00	
17.00	
26.00	
175.00	
45.00
	 35.00	
6	
40.00	
6.67	
107.00	
17.83	
147.00	
22.00	
24.50	
210.00	
63.00
	 35.00	
7	
40.00	
5.71	
129.00	
18.43	
169.00	
30.00	
24.14	
245.00	
76.00
	 35.00	
8	
40.00	
5.00	
159.00	
19.88	
199.00	
40.00	
24.88	
280.00	
81.00
	 35.00	
9	
40.00	
4.44	
199.00	
22.11	
239.00	
54.00	
26.56	
315.00	
76.00
	 35.00	
10	
40.00	
4.00	
253.00	
25.30	
293.00	
	
29.30	
350.00	
57.00

272	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
$280. Notice also that average total cost is lowest at an output of about 7, and the average 
variable cost is lowest at an output of about 6.1 Thus, the profit-maximizing ­position 
(which is 8) is not necessarily a position that minimizes either average variable cost or 
average total cost. It is only the position that maximizes total profit.
Determining Profit from a Graph
These relationships can be seen in a graph. In Figure 13-4(a) I add the average total 
cost and average variable cost curves to the graph of marginal cost and price first 
­presented in Figure 13-1. Notice that the marginal cost curve goes through the lowest 
points of both average cost curves. (If you don’t know why, it would be a good idea to 
go back and review the previous chapters.)
Find Output Where MC = MR 
The way you find profit graphically is first to 
find the point where MC = MR (point A). That intersection determines the quantity the 
firm will produce if it wants to maximize profit. Why? Because the vertical ­distance 
between a point on the marginal cost curve and a point on the marginal revenue curve 
represents the additional profit the firm can make by changing output. For example, if 
it increases production from 6 to 7, its marginal cost is $22 and its marginal revenue is 
$35. By increasing output it can increase profit by $13 (from $63 to $76). The same 
reasoning holds true for any output less than 8. For outputs higher than 8, the opposite 
reasoning holds true. Marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue, so it pays to decrease 
output. So, to maximize profit, the firm must see that marginal revenue equals mar-
ginal costs, which occurs where the two curves intersect.
The profit-maximizing output can be 
determined in a table (as in Table 13-1) 
or in a graph (as in Figure 13-4).
Q-5  If the firm described in  
Figure 13-4 is producing 4 units,  
what would you advise it to do,  
and why?
Price
Price
Price
$55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
$55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
$55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
Quantity
Quantity
(a)  Proﬁt Case
(b)  Zero-Proﬁt Case
D
MC
MC
MC
A
P = MR
B ATC
AVC
E
Proﬁt
C
P = MR
ATC
AVC
P = MR
ATC
AVC
Loss
Quantity
(c)  Loss Case
FIGURE 13-4 (A, B, AND C)  Determining Profits Graphically
The profit-maximizing output depends only on where the MC and MR curves intersect. The total amount of profit or loss that a firm makes 
depends on the price it receives and its average total cost of producing the profit-maximizing output. This exhibit shows the case of (a) a 
profit, (b) zero profit, and (c) a loss.
1I say “about 6” and “about 7” because the table gives only whole numbers. The actual minimum 
point occurs at 5.55 for average variable cost and 6.55 for average total cost. The nearest whole 
numbers to these are 6 and 7.

	
Chapter 13 ■ Perfect Competition	
273
Find Profit per Unit Where 
MC = MR 
After having determined 
the profit-maximizing quantity, drop a ver-
tical line down to the horizontal axis and 
see what average total cost is at that output 
level (point B). Next extend a line back to 
the vertical axis (point C). That tells us that 
the average total costs per unit are $25. 
Next go up the price axis to the price that 
the firm receives (point D). For a competi-
tive firm, that price is the marginal reve-
nue as well as its average revenue, since 
the price is constant. The difference 
between this price and ­average cost is profit 
per unit. Connecting these points gives us 
the shaded rectangle, ABCD, which is the 
total profit earned by the firm (the total 
quantity times the profit per unit).
 	
Notice that at the profit-maximizing 
position, the profit per unit isn’t at its 
highest because average total cost is not 
at its minimum point. Profit per unit of 
output would be highest at point E. A 
common mistake that students make is to 
draw a line up from point E when they 
are finding profits. That is wrong. It is 
important to remember: To determine 
maximum profit, you must first determine 
what output the firm will choose to pro-
duce by seeing where MC equals MR 
and then determine the average total cost 
at that quantity by dropping a line down 
to the ATC curve. Only then can you 
determine what maximum profit will be.
Zero Profit or Loss Where 
MC = MR 
Notice also that as the 
curves in Figure 13-4(a) are drawn, ATC at 
the profit-maximizing position is below the 
price, so the firm makes a profit. The 
choice of short-run average total cost curves 
was arbitrary and doesn’t affect the firm’s profit-maximizing condition: MC = MR. It 
could have been assumed that fixed cost was higher, which would have shifted the ATC 
curve up. In ­Figure 13-4(b) it’s assumed that fixed cost is $81 higher than in Figure 13-4(a). 
Instead of $40, it’s $121. The appropriate average total cost curve for a fixed cost of 
$121 is drawn in Figure 13-4(b). Notice that in this case economic profit is zero and the 
marginal cost curve intersects the minimum point of the average total cost curve at an 
output of 8 and a price of $35. (Remember from the last chapter that even though 
economic profit is zero, all resources, including entrepreneurs, are being paid their 
opportunity cost.)
	
In Figure 13-4(c), fixed cost is even higher. Profit-maximizing output is still 8, but 
now at an output of 8 average total cost is $41 and the firm is making an economic 
When the ATC curve is below the 
marginal revenue curve, the firm 
makes a profit. When the ATC curve  
is above the marginal revenue curve,  
the firm incurs a loss.
Thinking Like a Modern Economist 
Profit Maximization and Real-World Firms
Most real-world firms do not have profit as their only goal. The rea-
son is that, in the real world, the decision maker’s income is part of 
the cost of production. For example, a paid manager has an incen-
tive to hold down costs but has little incentive to hold down his in-
come, which, for the firm, is a cost. Alternatively, say that a firm is a 
worker-managed firm. If workers receive a share of the profits, they’ll 
push for higher profits, but they’ll also see to it that in the process of 
maximizing profits they don’t hurt their own interest—maximizing 
their wages. In short, real-world 
firms will hold down the costs of 
factors of production except the 
cost of the decision maker.
In real life, this problem of 
the lack of incentives to hold 
down costs is important. For 
example, firms’ managerial ex-
penses often balloon even as 
firms are cutting “costs.” Simi-
larly, CEOs and other high-
ranking officers of the firm 
often have enormously high 
salaries. How and why the lack 
of incentives to hold down 
costs affects the economy is 
best seen by first considering 
the nature of an economy with 
incentives to hold down all 
costs. That’s why we use as our standard model the traditional profit-
maximizing firm. (Standard model means the model that economists 
use as our basis of reasoning; from it, we branch out.) Using what 
are called game theory models, modern economists work with firms 
to devise ­incentive-compatible contracts that align the goals of deci-
sion makers in the firm with the goals of the owners of firms.
© Comstock Images/Alamy

274	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
loss of $6 on each unit sold. The loss is given by the shaded rectangle. In this case, the 
profit-maximizing condition is actually a loss-minimizing condition. So MC = MR = P 
is both a profit-maximizing condition and a loss-minimizing condition.
	
I draw these three cases to emphasize to you that determining the profit-maximizing 
output level doesn’t depend on fixed cost or average total cost. It depends only on where 
marginal cost equals price.
The Shutdown Point
Earlier I stated the supply curve of a competitive firm is its marginal cost curve. More 
specifically, the supply curve is the part of the marginal cost curve that is above the 
average variable cost curve. Considering why this is the case should help the analysis 
stick in your mind.
	
Let’s consider Figure 13-5(a)—a reproduction of Figure 13-4(c)—and the firm’s 
decision at various prices. At a price of $35, it’s incurring a loss of $6 per unit. If it’s 
making a loss, why doesn’t it shut down? The answer lies in the fixed costs. There’s no 
use crying over spilt milk. In the short run, a firm knows these fixed costs are sunk 
costs; it must pay them regardless of whether or not it produces. The firm considers 
only the costs it can save by stopping production, and those costs are its variable costs. 
As long as a firm is covering its variable costs, it pays to keep on producing. By 
­producing, its loss is $48; if it stopped producing, its loss would be all the fixed costs 
($169). So it makes a smaller loss by producing.
	
However, once the price falls below average variable costs (below $17.80), it will 
pay to shut down [point A in Figure 13-5(a)]. In that case, the firm’s loss from producing 
would be more than $169, and it would do better to simply stop producing temporarily 
and avoid paying the variable cost. Thus, the point at which price equals AVC is the 
shutdown point (that point below which the firm will be better off if it temporarily 
shuts down than it will if it stays in business). When price falls below the shutdown 
point, the average variable cost the firm can avoid paying by shutting down exceeds 
the price it would get for selling the good. When price is above average variable cost, 
in the short run a firm should keep on producing even though it’s making a loss. As 
long as a firm’s total revenue is covering its total variable cost, temporarily producing 
Q-6  What is wrong with the following 
diagram?
Q-7  In the early 2000s, many airlines 
were making losses, yet they continued 
to operate. Why?
The shutdown point is the point below 
which the firm will be better off if it shuts 
down than it will if it stays in business.
If P > minimum of AVC, the firm will 
continue to produce in the short run.  
If P < minimum of AVC, the firm will  
shut down.
Price
MC
ATC
P = MR
Quantity
Proﬁt
What is
wrong here?
Price
Price
0
0
$35
$41
35
8
8
Quantity
(a)  The Shutdown Decision
MC
A
P = MR
ATC
AVC
Loss
Quantity
(b)  Long-Run Equilibrium
MC
P = MR
SRATC
LRATC
17.80
FIGURE 13-5  The Shutdown 
Decision and Long-Run Equilibrium
A firm should continue to produce 
as long as price exceeds average 
variable cost. Once price falls below 
that, it will do better by temporarily 
shutting down and saving the 
variable costs. This occurs at  
point A in (a). In (b), the long-run 
equilibrium position for a firm in a 
competitive industry is shown. In 
that long-run equilibrium, only 
normal profits are made.

	
Chapter 13 ■ Perfect Competition	
275
at a loss is the firm’s best strategy because it’s making a smaller loss than it would 
make if it were to shut down.
Short-Run Market Supply and Demand
Most of the preceding discussion focused on supply and demand analysis of a firm. 
Now let’s consider supply and demand in an industry. We’ve already discussed ­industry 
demand. Even though the demand curve faced by the firm is perfectly elastic, the industry 
demand curve is downward-sloping.
	
How about the industry supply curve? We previously demonstrated that the sup-
ply curve for a competitive firm is that portion of a firm’s marginal cost curve that is 
above the average variable cost curve. To discuss the industry supply curve, we must 
use a market supply curve. In the short run when the number of firms in the market 
is fixed, the market supply curve is just the horizontal sum of all the firms’ mar-
ginal cost curves, taking account of any changes in input prices that might occur. To 
move from individual firms’ marginal cost curves or supply curves to the market 
supply curve, we add the quantities all firms will supply at each possible price. Since 
all firms in a ­competitive market have identical marginal cost curves, a quick way of 
summing the quantities is to multiply the quantities from the marginal cost curve of 
a representative firm at each price by the number of firms in the market. As the short 
run evolves into the long run, the number of firms in the market can change. As 
more firms enter the market, the market supply curve shifts to the right because 
more firms are supplying the quantity indicated by the representative marginal cost 
curve. Likewise, as the ­number of firms in the market declines, the market supply 
curve shifts to the left. Knowing how the number of firms in the market affects the 
market supply curve is important to understanding long-run equilibrium in perfectly 
competitive markets.
Long-Run Competitive Equilibrium: Zero Profit
The analysis of the competitive firm consists of two parts: the short-run analysis just 
­presented and the long-run analysis. In the short run, the number of firms is fixed and 
the firm can either earn economic profit or incur economic loss. In the long run, firms 
enter and exit the market and neither economic profits nor economic losses are 
­possible. In the long run, firms make zero economic profit. Thus, in the long run, only 
the zero-profit equilibrium shown in Figure 13-5(b) is possible. As you can see, at that 
long-run equilibrium, the firm is at the minimum of both the short-run and the ­long-run 
average total cost curves.
	
Why can’t firms earn economic profit or make economic losses in the long run? 
Because of the entry and exit of firms: If there are economic profits, firms will enter 
the market, shifting the market supply curve to the right. As market supply increases, 
the market price will decline and reduce profits for each firm. Firms will continue to 
enter the market and the market price will continue to decline until the incentive of 
economic profits is eliminated. At that price, all firms are earning zero profit. 
­Similarly, if the price is lower than the price necessary to earn a profit, firms incurring 
losses will leave the market and the market supply curve will shift to the left. As mar-
ket supply shifts to the left, market price will rise. Firms will continue to exit the mar-
ket and ­market price will continue to rise until all remaining firms no longer incur 
losses and earn zero profit. Only at zero profit do entry and exit stop.
	
Zero profit does not mean that entrepreneurs get nothing for their efforts. The 
­entrepreneur is an input to production just like any other factor of production. In order to 
stay in the business, the entrepreneur must receive his opportunity cost, or normal profit 
The market supply curve is the 
horizontal sum of all the firms’ marginal 
cost curves, taking account of any 
changes in input prices that might occur.
Since profits create incentives  
for new firms to enter, output will 
increase, and the price will fall until 
zero profits are being made.
Q-8  If a competitive firm makes zero 
profit, why does it stay in business?

276
(the amount the owners of business would have received in the next-best alternative). 
That normal profit is built into the costs of the firm; economic profits are profits above 
normal profits.
	
Another aspect of the zero-profit position deserves mentioning. What if one firm 
has superefficient workers or machinery? Won’t the firm make a profit in the long run? 
The answer is, again, no. In a long-run competitive market, other firms will see the 
value of those workers and machines and will compete to get them for themselves. As 
firms compete for the superefficient factors of production, the prices of those special-
ized inputs will rise until all profits are eliminated. Those factors will receive what are 
called rents for their specialized ability. For example, say the average worker receives 
$400 per week, but Sarah, because she’s such a good worker, receives $600. So $200 
of the $600 she receives is a rent for her specialized ability. Either her existing firm 
matches that $600 wage or she will change employment.
	
The zero-profit condition is enormously powerful; it makes the analysis of com-
petitive markets far more applicable to the real world than can a strict application of 
The zero-profit condition is enormously 
powerful; it makes the analysis of 
competitive markets far more applicable 
to the real world than would otherwise 
be the case.
A REMINDER
Finding Output, Price, and Profit
To find a competitive firm’s price, level of output, and 
profit given a firm’s marginal cost curve and average total 
cost curve, use the following four steps:
1.	 Determine the market price at which market supply 
and demand curves intersect. This is the price the 
­competitive firm accepts for its products.
2.	 Draw the horizontal marginal revenue (MR) curve at 
the market price.
3.	 Determine the profit-maximizing level of output by 
finding the level of output where the MR and MC 
curves intersect.
4.	 Determine profit by subtracting average total costs 
at the profit-maximizing level of output from the 
price and multiplying by the firm’s output.
	
If you are demonstrating profit graphically, find the 
point at which MC = MR. Extend a line down to the ATC 
curve. Extend a line from this point to the vertical axis. 
To complete the box indicating profit, go up the vertical 
axis to the market price.
MC
ATC
MR
Price
D
S
QM
Price
QC
PM
PM
ATCC
Market quantity
Individual ﬁrm quantity
1. Find price where
market demand and
supply meet
3. Find quantity
where MC = MR
2. Draw horizontal
MR at market price
4. PM – ATCC
times QC is proﬁt

	
Chapter 13 ■ Perfect Competition	
277
the assumption of perfect competition. If economic profit is being made, firms will 
enter and compete that profit away. Price will be pushed down to the average total cost 
of production as long as there are no barriers to entry. As we’ll see in later chapters, in 
their analysis of whether markets are competitive, many economists focus primarily on 
whether barriers to entry exist.
Adjustment from the Short Run to the Long Run
Now that we’ve been through the basics of the perfectly competitive supply and 
­demand curves, we’re ready to consider the two together and to see how the adjustment 
to long-run equilibrium will likely take place for the firm and in the market.
An Increase in Demand
First, in Figure 13-6 (a and b), let’s consider a market that’s in equilibrium but that 
suddenly experiences an increase in demand. Figure 13-6(a) shows the market 
­reaction. Figure 13-6(b) shows a representative firm’s reaction. Originally market 
equilibrium occurs at a price of $7 and market quantity supplied of 700 thousand 
units [point A in (a)], with each of 70 firms producing 10 thousand units [point a in 
(b)]. Firms are making zero profit because they’re in long-run equilibrium. If 
­demand increases from D0 to D1, the firms will see the market price increasing and 
will ­increase their output until they’re once again at a position where MC = P. This 
­occurs at point B at a market output of 840 thousand units in (a) and at point b at a 
firm output of 12 thousand in (b). In the short run, the 70 existing firms each makes 
FIGURE 13-6 (A AND B)  Market Response to an Increase in Demand
Faced with an increase in demand, which it sees as an increase in price and hence profits, a competitive firm will respond by increasing 
output (from A to B) in order to maximize profit. The market response is shown in (a); the firm’s response is shown in (b). As all firms 
increase output and as new firms enter, price will fall until all profit is competed away. Thus, the long-run market supply curve will be 
perfectly elastic, as is SLR in (a). The final equilibrium will be the original price but a higher output. The original firms return to their 
original output (A), but since there are more firms in the market, the market output increases to C.
Price
Price
(a)  Market
$9
7
0
B
A
S0
(short run)
S1
(short run)
C
SLR
(long run)
D1
D0
700   840   
Quantity (in thousands)
$9
7
0
 10 12
Quantity (in thousands)
(b)  Firm
Proﬁt
b
a
MC
AC
1,200

278
an economic profit [the shaded area in Figure 13-6(b)]. Price has risen to $9, but 
average cost is only $7.10, so if the price remains $9, each firm is making a profit of 
$1.90 per unit. But price cannot remain at $9 since new firms will have an incentive 
to enter the market.
	
As new firms enter, if input prices remain constant, the short-run market supply 
curve shifts from S0 to S1 and the market price returns to $7. The entry of 50 new firms 
provides the additional output in this example, bringing market output to 1.2 million 
units sold for $7 apiece. The final equilibrium will be at a higher market output but at 
the same price.
Long-Run Market Supply
The long-run market supply curve is a schedule of quantities supplied when firms 
are no longer entering or exiting the market. This occurs when firms are earning 
zero profit. In this case, the long-run supply curve is created by extending to the 
right the line connecting points A and C in Figure 13-6(a). Since equilibrium price 
remains at $7, the long-run supply curve is perfectly elastic. The long-run supply 
curve is horizontal because factor prices are constant and there are constant returns 
to scale. That is, factor prices do not increase as industry output increases. Econo-
mists call this market a constant-cost industry. Two other possibilities exist: an 
increasing-cost industry (in which factor prices rise as more firms enter the market 
and existing firms expand production) and a decreasing-cost industry (in which fac-
tor prices fall as industry output expands), but we will leave a discussion of those to 
upper level courses.
Q-9  If berets suddenly became  
the “in” thing to wear, what would you 
expect to happen to the price  
in the short run? In the long run?
In the long run, firms earn zero profits.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
The previous two chapters emphasized that it is vital to 
choose the relevant costs to the decision at hand. Dis-
cussing the shutdown decision gives us a chance to dem-
onstrate the importance of those choices. Say the firm 
leases the office it operates in. The rental cost of that of-
fice is a fixed cost for most decisions, since the rent must 
be paid whether or not the office is used. 
However, if the firm can end the rental 
contract, and thereby save the rental 
cost, the office is not a fixed cost. But 
neither is it a normal variable cost. 
Since the firm can end the rental con-
tract and save the cost only if it shuts 
down, that rental cost of the office is an 
indivisible setup cost. For the shutdown 
decision, the rent is a variable cost. For 
other decisions about changing quantity, 
it’s a fixed cost.
	
The moral: The relevant cost can change with the deci-
sion at hand, so when you apply the analysis to real-world 
The Shutdown Decision and the Relevant Costs
situations, be sure to think carefully about what the rele-
vant cost is.
	
Consider the problem facing GM and other U.S. auto pro-
ducers before they were reorganized after a government 
bailout. In their contracts with their workers, they had agreed 
to pay their workers whether they worked or not, making la-
bor costs, in large part, fixed. This meant 
that GM actually saved much less when 
cutting production than it would if it did not 
have to pay idle workers. The implication 
of these contracts was that when demand 
fell, GM had a strong incentive to keep on 
producing, and then to sell the cars at a 
loss. Why sell at a loss? Because the loss 
was less than if GM had shut down pro-
duction. GM ultimately restructured its 
contracts when the government bailed the 
company out. This restructuring changed 
many of its fixed costs to variable costs, so that its production 
can respond more quickly to changes in demand.
© Bob Krist/Corbis

279
 	
There are two aspects of long-run equilibrium that you should remember. The first 
is that in long-run equilibrium, zero profit is being made. ­Long-run equilibrium is 
defined by zero economic profit. The second is that the long-run supply curve is more 
elastic than the short-run supply curve. That’s because output changes are much less 
costly in the long run than in the short run. In the short run, the price does more of the 
adjusting. In the long run, more of the adjustment is done by quantity.
An Example in the Real World
The perfectly competitive model and the reasoning underlying it are extremely 
powerful. With them you have a simple model to use as a first approach to predict 
the effect of an event, or to explain why an event occurred. For example, consider 
Walmart’s decision to close all of its express stores after experiencing years  
of losses.
	
Figure 13-7 shows what happened. Initially, Walmart saw the losses it was ­suffering 
as temporary. In the years prior to the shutdown decision, Walmart’s cost curves 
looked like those in Figure 13-7. Since price exceeded average variable cost, Walmart 
continued to produce even though it was making a loss.
Q-10  In the early 2000s, demand for 
burkhas (the garment the Taliban had 
required Afghani women to wear) 
declined when the Taliban were ousted. 
In the short run, what would you expect 
to happen to the price of burkhas? How 
about in the long run?
A REMINDER 
A Summary of a Perfectly Competitive Industry
Four things to remember when considering a perfectly 
competitive industry are:
1.	 The profit-maximizing condition for perfectly com-
petitive firms is MC = MR = P.
2.	 To determine profit or loss at the profit-maximizing 
level of output, subtract the average total cost at that 
level of output from the price and multiply the result 
by the output level.
3.	 Firms will shut down production if price falls below the 
minimum of their average variable costs.
4.	 A perfectly competitive firm is in long-run equilib-
rium only when it is earning zero economic profit, 
or when price equals the minimum of long-run  
average total costs.
FIGURE 13-7  A Real-World Example:  
A Shutdown Decision
Supply/demand analysis can be applied to 
a wide variety of real-world examples. This 
exhibit shows one, but there are many more. 
As you experience life today, a good exercise 
is to put on your supply/demand glasses and 
interpret everything you see in a supply/
demand framework.
Price
Quantity
MC
ATC
AVC
P = MR
Loss

280	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
But after years of losses, Walmart’s perspective changed. The ­company 
moved from the short run to the long run. Walmart began to believe that 
­demand at these express stores wasn’t temporarily low but rather perma-
nently low. It began to ask: What costs are truly fixed and what costs are 
simply indivisible costs that we can save if we close down completely, sell-
ing our buildings and reducing our overhead? Since in the long run all 
costs are variable, the ATC became its relevant AVC. Walmart recognized 
that prices had fallen below these long-run average costs. At that point, it 
shut down those stores for which P < AVC.
There are hundreds of other real-world examples to which the perfectly 
competitive model adds insight. That’s one reason why it’s important to keep 
it in the back of your mind.
Conclusion
We’ve come to the end of the presentation of perfect competition. It 
was tough going, but if you went through it carefully, it will serve you 
well, both as a basis for later chapters and as a reference point for how 
real-world economies work. But like many good things, a complete 
understanding of the chapter doesn’t come easy.
• The necessary conditions for perfect competition 
­include: Buyers and sellers are price takers, there  
are no barriers to entry, and firms’ products are 
­identical.  (LO13-1)
• The profit-maximizing position of a competitive 
firm is where marginal revenue equals marginal 
cost.  (LO13-2)
• The supply curve of a competitive firm is its marginal 
cost curve. Only competitive firms have supply 
curves.  (LO13-2)
• To find the profit-maximizing level of output for a ­perfect 
competitor, find that level of output where MC = MR. 
Profit is price less average total cost times output at the 
profit-maximizing level of output.  (LO13-3)
• In the short run, competitive firms can make a profit or 
loss. In the long run, they make zero ­profits.  (LO13-3)
• Profit equals total revenue less total cost. Graphically, 
profit is the vertical distance between the price of the 
good and the ATC curve at the profit-maximizing 
level of output times that level of output.  (LO13-3)
Summary
• The shutdown price for a perfectly competitive firm is 
a price below average variable cost.  (LO13-3)
• The short-run market supply curve is the horizontal 
summation of the marginal cost curves for all 
firms in the market. An increase in the number 
of firms in the market shifts the market supply 
curve to the right, while a decrease shifts it to the 
left.  (LO13-3)
• Perfectly competitive firms make zero profit in the long 
run because if profit were being made, new firms would 
enter and the market price would decline, eliminating the 
profit. If losses were being made, firms would exit and 
the market price would rise.  (LO13-3)
• The long-run supply curve is a schedule of quantities 
supplied where firms are making zero profit.  (LO13-4)
• The slope of the long-run supply curve depends 
on what happens to factor prices when output 
­increases.  (LO13-4)
• Constant-cost industries have horizontal long-run 
supply curves.  (LO 13-4)
© Brian Cahn/ZUMA Press/Corbis

	
Chapter 13 ■ Perfect Competition	
281
Key Terms
barriers to entry
marginal cost (MC)
marginal revenue (MR)
market supply curve
normal profit 
perfectly competitive 
market 
price taker 
profit-maximizing 
condition 
shutdown point 
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Why must buyers and sellers be price takers for a market 
to be perfectly competitive?  (LO13-1)
	 2.	  List three conditions for perfect competition.  (LO13-1)
	 3. 	If the conditions for perfect competition are generally not 
met, why do economists use the model?  (LO13-1)
	 4.	 You’re thinking of buying one of two firms. One has 
a profit margin of $8 per unit; the other has a profit  
margin of $4 per unit. Which should you buy? Why? (Dif-
ficult)  (LO13-2)
	 5.	 A perfectly competitive firm sells its good for  
$20. If marginal cost is four times the quantity ­produced, 
how much does the firm produce? Why? 
­(Difficult)  (LO13-2)
	 6.	 Draw marginal cost, marginal revenue, and average total 
cost curves for a typical perfectly competitive firm and 
­indicate the profit-maximizing level of output and total 
profit for that firm. Is the firm in long-run equilibrium? 
Why or why not?  (LO13-3)
	 7.	 State what is wrong with each of the graphs.  (LO13-3)
	 8.	 What will be the effect of a technological development 
that reduces marginal costs in a competitive market on 
short-run price, quantity, and profit?  (LO13-3)
	 9.	 Draw marginal cost, marginal revenue, and average  
total cost curves for a typical perfectly competitive  
firm in long-run equilibrium and indicate the  
profit-maximizing level of output and total profit for  
that firm.  (LO13-3)
	10.	 Each of 10 firms in a given industry has the costs given in 
the left-hand table. The market demand schedule is given 
in the right-hand table.  (LO13-3)
	
	
Total	
 	
Quantity 
	
Quantity	
Cost	
Price	
Demanded
	
0 	
12 	
$24 	
  0
	
1 	
24 	
  20	
10
	
2 	
27 	
  16	
20
	
3 	
31 	
  12	
30
	
4 	
39 	
    8	
40
	
5 	
53 	
     4	
50
	
6 	
73 	
    0	
60
	a.	 What is the market equilibrium price and the price 
each firm gets for its product?
	b.	 What is the equilibrium market quantity and the 
­quantity each firm produces?
	c.	 What profit is each firm making?
	d.	 Below what price will firms begin to exit the  
market?
	11.	 Graphically demonstrate the quantity and price of a 
­perfectly competitive firm.  (LO13-3)
	a.	 Why is a slightly larger quantity not preferred?
	b.	 Why is a slightly lower quantity not preferred?
	c.	 Label the shutdown point in your diagram.
	d.	 You have just discovered that shutting down means 
that you would lose your land zoning permit, which 
is required to start operating again. How does that 
change your answer to c?
Price
Price
Q
Q
Quantity
Quantity
MC
MC
ATC
ATC
AVC
AVC
P
D = MR
D
What’s
wrong?
What’s
wrong?
(c)
(d)
Price
Price
P
Q
MC
AFC
D = MR
Quantity
Q
Quantity
MC
P
D
What’s
wrong?
What’s
wrong?
(a)
(b)

282	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	12.	 How is a firm’s marginal cost curve related to the market 
supply curve?  (LO13-3)
	13.	 Draw the ATC, AVC, and MC curves for a typical firm. 
Label the price at which the firm would shut down 
­temporarily and the price at which the firm would exit the 
market in the long run.  (LO13-3)
	14.	 Under what cost condition is the shutdown point  
the same as the point at which a firm exits the  
market?  (LO13-3)
	15.	 A profit-maximizing firm is producing where MR = MC 
and has an average total cost of $4, but it gets a price of 
$3 for each good it sells.  (LO13-3)
	a.	 What would you advise the firm to do?
	b.	 What would you advise the firm to do if you knew 
­average variable costs were $3.50?
	16.	 A farmer is producing where MC = MR. Say that half 
of the cost of producing wheat is the rental cost of land 
(a fixed cost) and half is the cost of labor and machines 
(a variable cost). If the average total cost of producing 
wheat is $8 and the price of wheat is $6, what would you 
advise the farmer to do? (“Grow something else” is not 
allowed.)  (LO13-3)
	17.	 Based on the following table:  (LO13-4)
Output	
Price	
Total Costs
	
0	
$10	
$   31
	
1	
10	
40
	
2	
10	
45
	
3	
10	
48
	
4	
10	
55
	
5	
10	
65
	
6	
10	
80
	
7	
10	
100
	
8	
10	
140
	
9	
10	
220
	
10	
10	
340
	a.	 What is the profit-­maximizing output?
	b.	 What will happen to the market price in the long run?
	18.	 Why is the long-run market supply curve horizontal in a 
constant-cost industry?  (LO13-4)
	19.	 Use the accompanying graph, which shows the  
marginal cost and average total cost curves for the  
shoe store ­Zapateria, a perfectly competitive  
firm.  (LO13-4)
	a.	 How many pairs of shoes will Zapateria produce if the 
market price of shoes is $70 a pair?
	b.	 What is the total profit Zapateria will earn if the 
­market price of shoes is $70 a pair?
	c.	 Should Zapateria expect more shoe stores to enter this 
market? Why or why not?
	d.	 What is the long-run equilibrium price in the shoe 
market assuming it is a constant-cost industry? 
Price per pair
Pairs of shoes
$100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
MC
ATC
100 200 300 400 500 600
	20.	 A Wall Street Journal headline states: “A Nation of  
Snackers Snubs Old Favorite: The Beloved Cookie.” As 
U.S. consumers adopted more carbohydrate-conscious  
diets, the number of cookie boxes sold declined 5.4 percent 
that year, the third consecutive year of decline.  (LO13-4)
	a.	 Assuming the cookie industry is perfectly competitive, 
demonstrate using market supply and demand curves 
the effect of this decline in demand on equilibrium 
price and quantity in the short run.
	b.	 Assuming a cookie firm was in equilibrium before the 
change in demand, and it is a constant-cost industry, 
­demonstrate the effect of the decline on equilibrium 
price for an individual cookie firm in the short run.
	c.	 How might your answer to a change if you are consider-
ing the long run?
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 The book presents the perfectly competitive model as the 
foundation for economic analysis.
	a.	 How well does the theory of perfect competition re-
flect the real world?
	b.	 What role, if any, does the government have in pro-
moting perfectly competitive markets?
	c.	 What is the danger in the government’s intervening to 
promote competitive markets? (Austrian)

	
Chapter 13 ■ Perfect Competition	
283
	 2.	 This chapter discusses perfect competition as a benchmark 
to think about the economy.
	a.	 Can labor market discrimination—hiring someone on the 
basis of race or gender rather than capability— exist in a 
perfectly competitive industry?
	b.	 Can the elimination of discrimination increase 
­efficiency? (Feminist)
	 3.	 Perfect competition is analytically elegant.
	a.	 What percentage of an economy’s total production do 
you think is provided by perfectly competitive firms?
	b.	 Based on your answer to a, why does the text spend so 
much time on perfect competition? (Institutionalist)
	 4.	 The perfectly competitive model assumes that firms know 
when marginal revenue equals marginal costs.
	a.	 If a firm doesn’t have this information, can it produce 
at the profit-maximizing level of output?
	b.	 If firms don’t have such knowledge, how might the 
theory of perfect competition be changed to better 
­reflect reality? (Post-Keynesian)
	 5.	 As the chapter points out, the Internet has made the U.S. 
economy more competitive by lowering barriers to entry 
and exit from industries.
	a.	 To what extent is the Internet itself competitive?
	b.	 Can competitive conditions develop from information 
technology, a technology that was created initially by 
centralized planning, that depends on agreed-upon 
rules to conduct business, and that has notoriously low 
marginal costs? (Think of the cost of downloading a 
song off the Internet.) (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 If a firm is owned by its workers but otherwise meets all 
the qualifications for a perfectly competitive firm, will its 
price and output decisions differ from the price and output 
decisions of a perfectly competitive firm? Why? 
	 2.	 The milk industry has a number of interesting aspects. 
Provide economic explanations for the following: 
	a.	 Fluid milk is 87 percent water. It can be dried and re-
constituted so that it is almost indistinguishable from 
fresh milk. What is a likely reason that such reconsti-
tuted milk is not produced?
	b.	 The United States has regional milk-marketing 
­regulations whose goals are to make each of the 
­regions self-sufficient in milk. What is a likely 
­reason for this?
	c.	 A U.S. senator from a milk-producing state has been 
quoted as saying, “I am absolutely convinced . . . that 
simply bringing down dairy price supports is not a 
way to cut production.” Is it likely that he is correct? 
What is a probable reason for his statement? 
	 3.	 A California biotechnology firm submitted a tomato that 
will not rot for weeks to the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration. It designed such a fruit by changing the genetic 
structure of the tomato. What effect will this technologi-
cal change have on: 
	a.	 The price of tomatoes?
	b.	 Farmers who grow tomatoes?
	c.	 The geographic areas where tomatoes are grown?
	d.	 Where tomatoes are generally placed on salad bars in 
winter?
	 4.	 Hundreds of music stores have been closing in the face of 
stagnant demand for CDs and new competitors—online 
music vendors and discount retailers.
	a.	 How would price competition from these new sources 
cause a retail store to close?
	b.	 In the long run, what effect will new entrants have on 
the price of CDs?
	 5.	 In 2004 FAO Schwartz closed its 89 Zany Brainy stores.
	a.	 Demonstrate graphically the relationship between 
ATC, AVC, and price faced by Zany Brainy stores 
when they decided to close.
	b.	 Assuming the market is perfectly competitive and is a 
constant-cost industry, what will happen in this market 
in the long run? Demonstrate with market supply and 
demand curves.
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 Without the assumption of no barriers to entry, firms 
could make a profit by raising price; hence, the demand 
curve they face would not be perfectly elastic and, hence, 
perfect competition would not exist.  (LO13-1)
	 2.	 The competitive firm is such a small portion of the total 
market that it can have no effect on price. Consequently it 
takes the price as given, and, hence, its perceived demand 
curve is perfectly elastic.  (LO13-1)
	 3.	 To determine the profit-maximizing output of a 
­competitive firm, you must know price and marginal 
cost.  (LO13-2)

284	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	 4.	 Firms are interested in getting as much for themselves as 
they possibly can. Maximizing total profit does this. 
Maximizing profit per unit might yield very small total 
profits.  (LO13-2)
	 5.	 If the firm in Figure 13-4 were producing 4 units, I would 
explain to it that the marginal cost of increasing output is 
only $12 and the marginal revenue is $35, so it should sig-
nificantly expand output until 8, where the marginal cost 
equals the marginal revenue, or price.  (LO13-3)
	 6.	 The diagram is drawn with the wrong profit-maximizing 
­output and, hence, the wrong profit. Output is determined 
where marginal cost equals price, and profit is the difference 
between the average total cost and price at that output, not at 
the output where marginal cost equals average total cost. The 
correct diagram is shown here.  (LO13-3)
Price
MC
ATC
P = MR
Proﬁt
Quantity
	 7. 	The marginal cost for airlines is significantly below 
­average total cost. Since they’re recovering their average 
variable cost, they continue to operate. In the long run, 
if this continues, some airlines will be forced out of 
­business.  (LO13-3)
	 8.	 The costs for a firm include the normal costs, which in 
turn include a return for all factors of production. Thus, it 
is worthwhile for a competitive firm to stay in business, 
since it is doing better than, or at least as well as, it could 
in any other activity.  (LO13-3)
	 9.	 Suddenly becoming the “in” thing to wear would cause 
the demand for berets to shift out to the right, pushing 
the price up in the short run. In the long run, the mar-
ket is probably not perfectly competitive and it would 
likely push the price down because there probably are 
considerable economies of scale in the production of 
berets.  (LO13-4)
	10.	 A decline in demand pushed the short-run price of these 
burkhas down. In the long run, however, once a number 
of burkha makers go out of business, the price of  
burkhas should eventually move back to approximately 
where it was before the decline, assuming a constant-
cost industry.  (LO13-4)

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO14-1	
Summarize how and why 
the decisions facing a 
monopolist differ from the 
collective decisions of 
competing firms.
LO14-2	 Determine a monopolist’s 
price, output, and profit 
graphically and numerically.
LO14-3	 Show graphically the 
welfare loss from 
monopoly.
LO14-4	 Explain why there would 
be no monopoly without 
barriers to entry.
LO14-5	 Explain how monopolistic 
competition differs from 
monopoly and perfect 
competition.
“
”
Monopoly is business at the end of its  
journey.
—Henry Demarest Lloyd
In the last chapter we considered perfect competition. 
We now move to the other end of the spectrum: monopoly. 
Monopoly is a market structure in which one firm makes 
up the entire market. It is the polar opposite of competi-
tion. It is a market structure in which the firm faces no 
competitive pressure from other firms.
Monopolies exist because of barriers to entry into a 
market that prevent competition. These can be legal bar-
riers (as in the case where a firm has a patent that pre-
vents other firms from entering); sociological barriers, 
where entry is prevented by custom or tradition; natural 
barriers, where the firm has a unique ability to produce what other firms can’t 
duplicate; or technological barriers, where the size of the market can support 
only one firm.
The Key Difference between a Monopolist 
and a Perfect Competitor
A key question we want to answer in this chapter is: How does a monopo-
list’s decision differ from the collective decision of competing firms (i.e., 
from the competitive solution)? Answering that question brings out a key 
difference between a competitive firm and a monopoly. Since a competitive 
firm is too small to affect the price, it does not take into account the effect of 
its output decision on the price it receives. A competitive firm’s marginal 
revenue (the additional revenue it receives from selling an additional unit of 
output) is the given market price. A monopolistic firm takes into account 
that its output decision can affect price; its marginal revenue is not its price. 
A monopolistic firm will reason: “If I increase production, the price I can 
get for each unit sold will fall, so I had better be careful about how much I 
increase production.”
	
Let’s consider an example. Say your drawings in the margins of this book 
are seen by a traveling art critic who decides you’re the greatest thing since 
Rembrandt, or at least since Andy Warhol. Carefully he tears each page out of the 
book, mounts the pages on special paper, and numbers them: Doodle Number 1 
(Doodle While Contemplating Demand), Doodle Number 2 (Doodle While 
Contemplating Production), and so on.
Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition
chapter 14
© Julia Ewan/The Washington Post/Getty Images

286	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	
All told, he has 100. He figures, with the right advertising and if you’re a hit on the 
art circuit, he’ll have a monopoly in your doodles. He plans to sell them for $20,000 
each: He gets 50 percent; you get 50 percent. That’s $1 million for you. You tell him, 
“Hey, man! I can doodle my way through the entire book. I’ll get you 500 doodles. 
Then I get $5 million and you get $5 million.”
	
The art critic has a pained look on his face. He says, “You’ve been doodling when 
you should have been studying. Your doodles are worth $20,000 each only if they’re 
rare. If there are 500, they’re worth $1,000 each. And if it becomes known that you can 
turn them out that fast, they’ll be worth nothing. I won’t be able to limit quantity at all, 
and my monopoly will be lost. So obviously we must figure out some way that you 
won’t doodle anymore—and study instead. Oh, by the way, did you know that the price 
of an artist’s work goes up significantly when he or she dies? Hmm?” At that point you 
decide to forget doodling and to start studying, and to remember always that increasing 
production doesn’t necessarily make suppliers better off.
	
As we saw in the last chapter, competitive firms do not take advantage of that 
insight. Each individual competitive firm, responding to its self-interest, is not 
doing what is in the interest of the firms collectively. In competitive markets, as one 
supplier is pitted against another, consumers benefit. In monopolistic markets, the 
firm faces no competitors and does what is in its best interest. Monopolists can see 
to it that the monopolists, not the consumers, benefit; perfectly competitive firms 
cannot.
A Model of Monopoly
How much should the monopolistic firm choose to produce if it wants to maximize 
profit? To answer that we have to consider more carefully the effect that changing 
output has on the total profit of the monopolist. That’s what we do in this section. First, 
we consider a numerical example; then we consider that same example graphically. 
The relevant information for our example is presented in Table 14-1.
Determining the Monopolist’s Price and Output Numerically
Table 14-1 shows the price, total revenue, marginal revenue, total cost, marginal cost, 
average total cost, and profit at various levels of production. It’s similar to the table in 
Q-1  Why should you study rather 
than doodle?
Monopolists see to it that monopolists, 
not consumers, benefit.
Doodle Number 27: Contemplating 
Costs
TABLE 14-1  Monopolistic Profit Maximization
	
(1)	
(2)	
(3)	
(4)	
(5)	
(6)	
(7)	
(8) 
	
	
	
Total	
Marginal	
Total	
Marginal	
Average 
	Quantity	
Price	
Revenue	
Revenue	
Cost	
Cost	
Total Cost	
Profit
	
0	
$36	
$  0	
 $33	
$  47	
 $  1	
	
$−47
	
1	
  33	
  33	
   27	
    48	
 
2	
$48.00	
 −15
	
2	
  30	
  60	
   21	
    50	
 
4	
25.00	
   10
	
3	
  27	
    81	
   15	
    54	
 
8	
18.00	
   27
	
4	
  24	
    96	
     9	
     62	
  16	
15.50	
   34
	
5	
  21	
  105	
     3	
    78	
  24	
15.60	
   27
	
6	
  18	
  108	
  −3	
  102	
  40	
17.00	
     6
	
7	
  15	
  105	
 −9	
  142	
  56	
20.29	
  −37
	
8	
  12	
    96	
−15	
  198	
  80	
24.75	
−102
	
9	
    9	
     81	
	
  278	
	
30.89	
−197

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
287
the last chapter where we determined a competitive firm’s output. The big difference 
is that marginal revenue changes as output changes and is not equal to the price. Why?
	
First, let’s remember the definition of marginal revenue: Marginal revenue is the 
change in total revenue associated with a change in quantity. In this example, if a 
monopolist increases output from 4 to 5, the price it can charge falls from $24 to $21 
and its revenue increases from $96 to $105, so marginal revenue is $9. Marginal reve-
nue of increasing output from 4 to 5 for the monopolist reflects two changes: a $21 
gain in revenue from selling the 5th unit and a $12 decline in revenue because the 
monopolist must lower the price on the previous 4 units it produces by $3 a unit, from 
$24 to $21. This highlights the key characteristic of a monopolist—its output decision 
affects its price. Because an increase in output lowers the price on all previous units, a 
monopolist’s marginal revenue is always below its price. Comparing columns 2 and 4, 
you can confirm that this is true.
	
Now let’s see if the monopolist will increase production from 4 to 5 units. The 
marginal revenue of increasing output from 4 to 5 is $9, and the marginal cost of doing 
so is $16. Since marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue, increasing production from 
4 to 5 will reduce total profit and the monopolist will not increase production. If it 
decreases output from 4 to 3, where MC < MR, the revenue it loses ($15) exceeds the 
reduction in costs ($8). It will not reduce output from 4 to 3. Since it cannot increase 
total profit by increasing output to 5 or decreasing output to 3, it is maximizing profit 
at 4 units.
	
As you can tell from the table, profits are highest ($34) at 4 units of output and a 
price of $24. At 3 units of output and a price of $27, the firm has total revenue of $81 
and total cost of $54, yielding a profit of $27. At 5 units of output and a price of $21, 
the firm has a total revenue of $105 and a total cost of $78, also for a profit of $27. The 
highest profit it can make is $34, which the firm earns when it produces 4 units. This 
is its profit-maximizing level.
Determining Price and Output Graphically
The monopolist’s output decision also can be seen graphically. Figure 14-1 graphs the 
table’s information into a demand curve, a marginal revenue curve, and a marginal cost 
A monopolist’s marginal revenue is 
always below its price.
Q-2  In Table 14-1, explain why 4 is 
the profit-maximizing output.
Price
$48
42
36
30
24
18
12
6
0
–6
–12
Monopolist
price
MC
Competitive price
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10
D
5.17
Quantity
MR
20.50
FIGURE 14-1  Determining the Monopolist’s Price and 
Output Graphically
The profit-maximizing output is determined where the 
MC curve intersects the MR curve. To determine the 
price (at which MC = MR) that would be charged if this 
industry were a monopolist with the same cost structure 
as that of firms in a competitive market, we first find 
the profit-maximizing level of output for a monopolist 
and then extend a line to the demand curve, in this case 
finding a price of $24. This price is higher than the 
competitive price, $20.50, and the quantity, 4, is lower 
than the competitor’s quantity, 5.17.

288
ADDED DIMENSION
A Trick in Graphing the Marginal Revenue Curve
Here’s a trick to help you graph the marginal revenue 
curve. The MR line starts at the same point on the price 
axis as does a linear demand curve, but it intersects 
the quantity axis at a point half the distance from where 
the demand curve intersects the quantity axis. (If the 
demand curve isn’t linear, you can use the same trick if 
you use lines tangent to the curved demand curve.) So 
you can extend the demand curve to the two axes and 
measure halfway on the quantity axis (3 in the graph on 
the right). Then draw a line from where the demand curve 
intersects the price axis to that halfway mark. That line is 
the marginal revenue curve.
curve. The marginal cost curve is a graph of the change in the firm’s total cost as it 
changes output. It’s the same curve as we saw in our discussion of perfect competition. 
The marginal revenue curve tells us the change in total revenue when quantity changes. 
It is graphed by plotting and connecting the points given by quantity and marginal 
revenue in Table 14-1.
	
The marginal revenue curve for a monopolist is new, so let’s consider it a bit more 
carefully. It tells us the additional revenue the firm will get by expanding output. It is a 
downward-sloping curve that begins at the same point as the demand curve but has a 
steeper slope. In this example, marginal revenue is positive up until the firm produces 
6 units. Then marginal revenue is negative; after 6 units the firm’s total revenue 
decreases when it increases output.
	
Notice specifically the relationship between the demand curve (which is the  
average revenue curve) and the marginal revenue curve. Since the demand curve is 
downward-sloping, the marginal revenue curve is below the average revenue curve. 
(Remember, if the average curve is falling, the marginal curve must be below it.)
	
Having plotted these curves, let’s ask the same questions as we did before: What 
output should the monopolist produce, and what price can it charge? In answering 
those questions, the key curves to look at are the marginal cost curve and the marginal 
revenue curve.
MR = MC Determines the Profit-Maximizing Output 
The 
monopolist uses the general rule that any firm must follow to maximize profit: Produce 
the quantity at which MC = MR. If you think about it, it makes sense that the point 
where marginal revenue equals marginal cost determines the profit-maximizing output. 
If the marginal revenue is below the marginal cost, it makes sense to reduce production. 
Doing so decreases marginal cost and increases marginal revenue. When MR < MC, 
reducing output increases total profit. If marginal cost is below marginal revenue, you 
should increase production because total profit will rise. If the marginal revenue is 
equal to marginal cost, it does not make sense to increase or reduce production. So the 
monopolist should produce at the output level where MC = MR. As you can see, the 
Q-3  In the graph below, indicate the 
monopolist’s profit-maximizing level of 
output and the price it would charge.
0
3
6
Price
MR
D
3
3
Quantity
Price
Marginal 
cost
Demand
Quantity

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
289
output the monopolist chooses is 4 units, the same output that we determined 
­numerically.1 This leads to the following insights:
If MR > MC, the monopolist gains profit by increasing output.
If MR < MC, the monopolist gains profit by decreasing output.
If MC = MR, the monopolist is maximizing profit.
The Price a Monopolist Will Charge 
The MR = MC condition deter-
mines the quantity a monopolist produces; in turn, that quantity determines the price 
the firm will charge. A monopolist will charge the maximum price consumers are will-
ing to pay for that quantity. Since the demand curve tells us what consumers will pay 
for a given quantity, to find the price a monopolist will charge, you must extend the 
quantity line up to the demand curve. We do so in Figure 14-1 and see that the profit-
maximizing output level of 4 allows a monopolist to charge a price of $24.
Comparing Monopoly and Perfect Competition
For a competitive industry, the horizontal summation of firms’ marginal cost curves is 
the market supply curve.2 Output for a perfectly competitive industry would be 5.17, 
and price would be $20.50, as Figure 14-1 shows. The monopolist’s output was 4 and 
its price was $24. So, if a competitive market is made into a monopoly, you can see 
that output would be lower and price would be higher. The reason is that the monopo-
list takes into account the effect that restricting output has on price.
	
Equilibrium output for the monopolist, like equilibrium output for the competitor, 
is determined by the MC = MR condition, but because the monopolist’s marginal rev-
enue is below its price, its equilibrium output is different from a competitive market.
An Example of Finding Output and Price
We’ve covered a lot of material quickly, so it’s probably helpful to go through an 
example slowly and carefully review the reasoning process. Here’s the problem:
Say that a monopolist with marginal cost curve MC faces a demand curve D in 
Figure 14-2(a). Determine the price and output the monopolist would choose.
	
The first step is to draw the marginal revenue curve, since we know that a monopo-
list’s profit-maximizing output level is determined where MC = MR. We do that in 
Figure 14-2(b), remembering the trick in the box on the previous page of extending our 
demand curve back to the vertical and horizontal axes and then bisecting the horizon-
tal axis (half the distance from where the demand curve intersects the x-axis).
	
The second step is to determine where MC = MR. Having found that point, we 
extend a line up to the demand curve and down to the quantity axis to determine the 
output the monopolist chooses, QM. We do this in Figure 14-2(c). Finally we see where 
the quantity line intersects the demand curve. Then we extend a horizontal line from that 
point to the price axis, as in Figure 14-2(d). This determines the price the monopolist 
will charge, PM.
The general rule that any firm must 
follow to maximize profit is: Produce at 
an output level at which MC = MR.
Q-4  Why does a monopolist produce 
less output than would perfectly 
competitive firms in the same industry?
1This could not be seen precisely in Table 14-1 since the table is for discrete jumps and does not tell 
us the marginal cost and marginal revenue exactly at 4; it only tells us the marginal cost and mar-
ginal revenue ($8 and $15, respectively) of moving from 3 to 4 and the marginal cost and marginal 
revenue ($16 and $9, respectively) of moving from 4 to 5. If small adjustments (1/100 of a unit or 
so) were possible, the marginal cost and marginal revenue precisely at 4 would be $12. 
2The above statement has some qualifications best left to intermediate classes.

290	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Price
QM
MC
Price
D
MR
MC
Price
D
MR
MC
Price
D
MR
PM
MC
Quantity
Quantity
Quantity
Quantity
QM
D
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 14-2 (A, B, C, AND D)  Finding the Monopolist’s Price and Output
Determining a monopolist’s price and output can be tricky. The text discusses the steps shown in this figure. To make sure you understand, 
try to go through the steps on your own, and then check your work with the text.
Profits and Monopoly
The monopolist’s profit can be determined only by comparing average total cost to 
price. So before we can determine profit, we need to add another curve: the average 
total cost curve. As we saw with a perfect competitor, it’s important to follow the correct 
sequence when finding profit:
•	 First, draw the firm’s marginal revenue curve.
•	 Second, determine the output the monopolist will produce by the intersection 
of the marginal cost and marginal revenue curves.
•	 Third, determine the price the monopolist will charge for that output. (Remem-
ber, the price it will charge depends on the demand curve.)
•	 Fourth, determine the monopolist’s profit (loss) by subtracting average total 
cost from average revenue (P) at that level of output and multiplying by the 
chosen output.
	
If price exceeds average total cost at the output it chooses, the monopolist will 
make a profit. If price equals average total cost, the monopolist will make no profit 
(but it will make a normal return). If price is less than average cost, the monopolist 
will incur a loss: Total cost exceeds total revenue.
A Monopolist Making a Profit 
I consider the case of a monopolist making 
a profit in Figure 14-3, going through the steps slowly. The monopolist’s demand, 
marginal cost, and average total cost curves are presented in Figure 14-3(a). Our first 
step is to draw the marginal revenue curve, which has been added in Figure 14-3(b). 
The second step is to find the output level at which marginal cost equals marginal rev-
enue. From that point, draw a vertical line to the horizontal (quantity) axis. That inter-
section tells us the monopolist’s output, QM in Figure 14-3(b). The third step is to find 
what price the monopolist will charge at that output. We do so by extending the verti-
cal line to the demand curve (point A) and then extending a horizontal line over to the 
price axis. Doing so gives price, PM. Our fourth step is to determine the average total 
cost at that quantity. We do so by seeing where our vertical line at the chosen output 
intersects the average total cost curve (point B). That tells us the monopolist’s average 
cost at its chosen output.
Q-5  Indicate the profit that the 
monopolist shown in the graph  
below earns.
Price
MC
ATC
Demand
Quantity

291
To determine profit, we extend lines from where the quan-
tity line intersects the demand curve (point A) and the average 
total cost curve (point B) to the price axis in Figure 14-3(c). 
The resulting shaded rectangle in Figure 14-3(c) represents the 
monopolist’s profit.
A Monopolist Breaking Even and Making a 
Loss 
A monopolist doesn’t always make a profit. In  
Figure 14-4 we consider two other average total cost curves to 
show you that a monopolist may make a loss or no profit as 
well as an economic profit. In Figure 14-4(a) the ­monopolist is 
making zero profit; in Figure 14-4(b) it’s ­making a loss. 
Whether a firm is making a profit, zero profit, or a loss depends 
on average total costs relative to price. So clearly, in the short 
run, a monopolist can be making either a profit or a loss, or it 
can be breaking even.
Most of you, if you’ve been paying attention, will say, 
“Sure, in the model monopolists might not make a profit, but 
in the real world monopolists are making a killing.” And it is 
true that numerous monopolists make a killing. But many 
more monopolists just break even or lose money. Each year 
the U.S. Patent Office issues about 500,000 patents. A patent 
is legal protection of a technical innovation that gives the person holding it sole right 
to use that innovation—in other words, it gives the holder a monopoly to produce a 
good. Most patented goods make a loss; in fact, the cost of getting the patent often 
exceeds the revenues from selling the product.
	
Let’s consider an example—the self-stirring pot, a pot with a battery-operated stir-
rer attached to its lid. The stirrer was designed to prevent the bottom of the pot from 
burning. The inventor tried to get the Home Shopping Network to sell it. Unfortu-
nately for the inventor, HSN considered the cost (even after economies of scale 
were taken into account) far higher than what people would be willing to pay and there-
fore decided not to include the pot in its offerings. The inventor had a monopoly on 
A REMINDER
Finding a Monopolist’s  
Output, Price, and Profit
To find a monopolist’s level of output, price, and profit, 
­follow these four steps:
1.	 Draw the marginal revenue curve.
2.	 Determine the output the monopolist will pro-
duce: The profit-maximizing level of output is 
where the MR and MC curves intersect.
3.	 Determine the price the monopolist will charge: 
­Extend a line from where MR = MC up to the  
demand curve. Where this line intersects the 
demand curve is the ­monopolist’s price.
4.	 Determine the profit the monopolist will earn: Sub-
tract the ATC from price at the profit-maximizing 
level of ­output to get profit per unit. Multiply profit 
per unit by quantity of output to get total profit.
Price
Price
Price
PM
0
0
Quantity
Quantity
Quantity
QM
PM
CM
Proﬁt
0
QM
MC
ATC
Demand
A
B
MR
Demand
MC
ATC
MC
ATC
MR
A
B
Demand
(b)
(a)
(c)
FIGURE 14-3 (A, B, AND C)  Determining Profit for a Monopolist 

292	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Price
Welfare
loss
P
MR
Q
Quantity
D
MC
the production and sale of the self-stirring pot, but only a loss to show for it. Examples 
like this can be multiplied by the thousands. The reality for many monopolies is that 
their costs exceed their revenues, so they make a loss.
Welfare Loss from Monopoly
As we saw above, monopolists aren’t guaranteed a profit. Thus, profits can’t be the pri-
mary reason that the economic model we’re using sees monopoly as bad. If not ­because 
of profits, then what standard is the economic model using to conclude that monopoly is 
undesirable? One reason can be seen by looking at consumer and ­producer surplus for 
the normal monopolist equilibrium and perfectly competitive equilibrium. 
The Normal Monopolist
Producer and consumer surplus for both monopoly and perfect competition is shown in 
Figure 14-5. In a competitive equilibrium, the total consumer and producer surplus is 
the area below the demand curve and above the marginal cost curve up to market 
­equilibrium quantity QC. The monopolist reduces output to QM and raises price to PM. 
The benefit lost to society from reducing output from QC to QM is measured by the 
area under the demand curve between output levels QC and QM. That area is repre-
sented by the shaded areas labeled A, B, and D. Area A, however, is regained by 
­society. Society gains the opportunity cost of the resources that are freed up from 
­reducing production—the value of the resources in their next-best use indicated by the 
shaded area A. So the net cost to society of decreasing output from QC to QM is 
­represented by areas B and D. (Area C simply represents a transfer of surplus from 
­consumers to the monopolist. It is neither a gain nor a loss to society. Since both 
­monopolist and consumer are members of society, the gain and loss net out.) The 
­triangular areas B and D are the net cost to society from the existence of monopoly.
	
As discussed in an earlier chapter, the area designated by B and D is often called 
the deadweight loss or welfare loss triangle. That welfare cost of monopoly is one of 
the reasons economists oppose monopoly. That cost can be summarized as follows: 
Because monopolies charge a price that is higher than marginal cost, people’s deci-
sions don’t reflect the true cost to society. Price exceeds marginal cost. Because price 
exceeds marginal cost, people’s choices are distorted; they choose to consume less of 
The welfare loss from monopoly is a 
triangle, as is shown in the graph below. 
It is not the loss that most people 
consider. Most people are often 
interested in normative losses that the 
graph does not capture.
FIGURE 14-4 (A AND B)  Other 
Monopoly Cases
Depending on where the ATC curve 
falls, a monopolist can make a profit, 
break even [as in (a)], or make a loss 
[as in (b)] in the short run. In the long 
run, a monopolist who is making a 
loss will go out of business.
Price
Price
PM
MC
ATC
Demand
MR
QM
0
Quantity
$10
8
MC
ATC
MR
QM
0
(b)  Loss
(a)  Zero Proﬁt
Quantity
Demand

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
293
the monopolist’s output and more of some other output than they would if markets 
were competitive. That distinction means that the marginal cost of increasing output is 
lower than the marginal benefit of increasing output, so there’s a welfare loss.
The Price-Discriminating Monopolist
So far we’ve considered monopolists that charge the same price to all consumers. 
Let’s consider what would happen if our monopolist suddenly gained the ability to 
price-discriminate—to charge different prices to different individuals or groups of 
individuals (for example, students as compared to businesspeople). If a monopolist 
can identify groups of customers who have different elasticities of demand, separate 
them in some way, and limit their ability to resell its product between groups, it can 
charge each group a different price. Specifically, it could charge consumers with less 
elastic demands a higher price and individuals with more elastic demands a lower 
price. By doing so, it will increase total profit. Suppose, for instance, Megamovie 
knew that at $10 it would sell 1,000 movie tickets and at $5 a ticket it would sell 
1,500 tickets. Assuming Megamovie could show the film without cost, it would 
maximize profits by charging $10 to 1,000 moviegoers, earning a total profit of 
$10,000. If, however, it could somehow attract the additional 500 viewers at $5 a 
ticket without reducing the price to the first 1,000 moviegoers, it could raise its 
profit by $2,500, to $12,500. As you can see, the ability to price-discriminate allows 
a monopolist to increase its profit.
	
We see many examples of price discrimination in the real world:
1.	Movie theaters give discounts to senior citizens and children. Movie theaters 
charge senior citizens and children a lower price because they have a more 
elastic demand for movies.
2. 	Airlines charge more to fly on Fridays and Sundays. Businesspeople who work 
far from home fly out on Sunday and back on Friday. Their demand is inelas-
tic. Tourists and leisure travelers are far more flexible in their travel plans and 
can fly any day of the week. Tuesday, Wednesday, and Saturday flights are 
­typically the cheapest.
3.	Tracking consumer information and pricing accordingly. Two people buying 
something on the Internet are not necessarily presented with the same price. 
Firms collect data about individuals with tracking devices called cookies, 
Q-6  Why is area C in Figure 14-5 not 
considered a loss to society from 
monopoly?
When a monopolist price-discriminates, 
it charges individuals high up on the 
demand curve higher prices and those 
low on the demand curve lower prices.
FIGURE 14-5  The Welfare Loss from Monopoly
The welfare loss from a monopoly is 
represented by the triangles B and D. The 
rectangle C is a transfer from consumer surplus 
to the monopolist. The area A represents the 
opportunity cost of diverted resources. This is 
not a loss to society since the resources will be 
used in producing other goods.
Price
PM
PC
0
C
D
Marginal cost
B
A
MR
Demand
QM
QC
Quantity
© Vincent Hobbs/SuperStock
Automobiles are seldom sold at  
list price.

294	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
which are deposited on buyers’ computer hard drives, and offer prices accord-
ing to their estimated elasticity of demand. Thus, when you are searching the 
Internet for something to buy, you might be presented with a different price 
than someone else visiting the same site.
	
It might seem unfair for a monopolist to charge different people different prices, 
but doing so eliminates welfare loss from monopoly. The reason is that for a price-
discriminating monopolist, the marginal revenue curve is the demand curve. So it will 
produce where MC = MR = D; in other words, it will produce the same output as 
would be produced in a perfectly competitive market. You can see this in Figure 14-6. 
The monopolist chooses to produce QPM. Since the supply curve in a perfectly com-
petitive market is the sum of all marginal cost curves and equilibrium is where the 
supply and demand curves intersect, output in a competitive market will also be QPM. 
Both are producing where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded and there is no 
welfare loss. 
	
What could be seen as unfair is what happens to consumer and producer surplus. In 
a perfectly competitive market, consumers pay and producers receive one price, PC. Con-
sumer surplus is the area above market price (area A) and producer surplus is the area 
below market price above the marginal cost curve (area B). For a price-discriminating 
monopolist, because it can charge what consumers are willing to pay, all consumer 
s­urplus is captured by the monopolist. Producer surplus for a price-discriminating 
­monopolist is areas A and B. 
Barriers to Entry and Monopoly
The standard model of monopoly just presented is simple, but, like many simple 
things, it hides some issues. One issue the standard model of monopoly hides is in 
this question: What prevents other firms from entering the monopolist’s market? 
You should be able to answer that question relatively quickly. If a monopolist exists, 
it must exist due to some type of barrier to entry (a social, political, or economic 
impediment that prevents firms from entering the market). Three important barriers 
to entry are natural ability, economies of scale, and government restrictions. In the 
absence of barriers to entry, the monopoly would face competition from other 
firms, which would erode its monopoly profit. Studying how these barriers to entry 
are established enriches the standard model and lets us distinguish different types 
of monopoly.
Q-7  Why does a price-discriminating 
monopolist make a higher profit than a 
normal monopolist?
If there were no barriers to entry, profit-
maximizing firms would always compete 
away monopoly profits.
FIGURE 14-6  A Price-Discriminating Monopolist
A price-discriminating monopolist produces the 
same output as the combination of all firms in a 
competitive market. Total surplus is maximized 
in both cases. The difference is that the price-
discriminating monopolist captures all of the 
surplus represented by areas A and B while all 
firms in the perfectly competitive market 
capture only area B.
D
PC
A
MC
QPM = QC
B

295
ADDED DIMENSION
charging price PC and increasing output to QC. As you can 
see from the figure, the price ceiling causes output to rise 
and price to fall.
	
If, when there is monopoly, price controls can increase 
efficiency, why don’t economists advocate price controls 
more than they do? Let’s review four reasons why.
1.	 For price controls to increase output and lower 
price, the price has to be set within the right price 
range—below the monopolist’s price and above the 
price where the monopolist’s marginal cost and 
marginal revenue curves intersect. It is unclear  
politically that such a price will be chosen. Even  
if regulators could pick the right price initially,  
markets may change. Demand may increase or  
decrease, putting the controlled price outside the 
desired range.
2.	 All markets are dynamic. The very existence of  
monopoly profits will encourage other firms in 
other industries to try to break into that market, 
keeping the existing monopolist on its toes. Be-
cause of this dynamic element, in some sense no 
market is ever a pure textbook monopoly.
3.	 Price controls create their own deadweight loss in 
the form of rent seeking. Price controls do not elim-
inate monopoly pressures. The monopolist has a 
big incentive to regain its ability to set its own price 
and will lobby hard to remove price controls. Econ-
omists see resources spent to regain their monop-
oly price as ­socially wasteful.
4.	 Economists distrust government. Governments 
have their own political agendas—there is no  
general belief among economists that govern-
ments will try to set the price at the competitive 
level. Once one opens up the price control gates 
in cases of monopoly, it will be ­difficult to stop 
government from using price controls in competi-
tive markets.
	
The arguments are, of course, more complicated, and 
will be discussed in more detail in later chapters, but this 
should give you a good preview of some of the policy ar-
guments that occur in real life.
Can Price Controls Increase Output and Lower Market Price?
In an earlier chapter, you learned how effective price 
­ceilings increase market price, reduce output, and reduce 
the welfare of society. With any type of price control in a 
competitive market, some trades that individuals would 
like to have made are prevented. Thus, with competitive 
markets, price controls of any type are seen as generally 
bad (though they might have some desirable income 
­distribution effects).
	
When there is monopoly, the argument is not so simple. 
The monopoly price is higher than the marginal cost and 
society loses out; monopolies create their own dead-
weight loss. In the monopoly case, price controls can 
­actually lower price, increase output, and reduce dead-
weight loss. Going through the reasoning why provides a 
good review of the tools.
	
The figure below shows you the argument.
The monopoly sets its quantity where MR = MC. Output 
is QM and price is PM; the welfare loss is the blue shaded 
triangle A. Now say that the government comes in and 
places a price ceiling on the monopolist at the competitive 
price, PC. Since the monopolist is compelled by law to 
charge price PC, it no longer has an incentive to restrict 
output. Put another way, the price ceiling—the dashed line 
PC—becomes the monopolist’s demand curve and mar-
ginal revenue curve. (Remember, when the demand curve 
is horizontal, the marginal revenue curve is identical to the 
demand curve.) Given the law, the monopolist’s best 
­option still is to produce where MC = MR, but that means 
PM
PC
Quantity
Price
A
D
MC
QM         QC
MR

296	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Natural Ability
A barrier to entry that might exist is that a firm is better at producing a good than any-
one else. It has unique abilities that make it more efficient than all other firms. The 
barrier to entry in such a case is the firm’s natural ability. The defense attorneys in an 
antitrust case against Microsoft argued that it was Microsoft’s superior products that 
led to its capture of 90 percent of the market.
	
Monopolies based on ability usually don’t provoke the public’s ire. Often in the 
public’s mind such monopolies are “just monopolies.” The standard economic model 
doesn’t distinguish between a “just” and an “unjust” monopoly. The just/unjust distinc-
tion raises the question of whether a firm has acquired a monopoly based on its ability 
or on certain unfair tactics such as initially pricing low to force competitive companies 
out of business but then pricing high. Many public debates over monopoly focus on 
such normative issues, about which the economists’ standard model has ­nothing to say.
Natural Monopolies
An alternative reason why a barrier to entry might exist is that there are significant 
economies of scale. If sufficiently large economies of scale exist, it would be ineffi-
cient to have two producers since if each produced half of the output, neither could 
take advantage of the economies of scale. Such industries are called natural monopo-
lies. A natural monopoly is an industry in which a single firm can produce at a lower 
cost than can two or more firms. A natural monopoly will occur when the technology 
is such that indivisible setup costs are so large that average total costs fall within the 
range of possible outputs. I demonstrate that case in Figure 14-7(a).
	
If one firm produces Q1, its cost per unit is C1. If two firms each produce half that 
amount, Q½, so that their total production is Q1, the cost per unit will be C2, which is 
significantly higher than C1. In cases of natural monopoly, as the number of firms in 
the industry increases, the average total cost of producing a fixed number of units 
increases. For example, if each of three firms in an industry had a third of the market, 
each firm would have an average cost of C3.
	
Until the 1990s local telephone service was a real-world example of such a natural 
monopoly. It made little sense to have two sets of telephone lines going into people’s 
houses. I say “until recently” because technology changes and now, with wireless 
In a natural monopoly, a single firm can 
produce at a lower cost than can two or 
more firms.
FIGURE 14-7 (A AND B)  A Natural 
Monopolist
The graph in (a) shows the average 
cost curve for a natural monopoly. 
One firm producing Q1 would have 
a lower average cost than a 
combination of firms would have. 
For example, if three firms each 
produced Q1/3, the average cost for 
each would be C3.
	
The graph in (b) shows that a 
natural monopolist would produce 
QM and charge a price PM. It will 
earn a profit shown by the orange 
shaded box. If the monopolist were 
required to charge a price equal to 
marginal cost, PC, it would incur a 
loss shown by the blue shaded box.
Price, Cost
MR
D
PM
PC
CC
CM
Average Cost
C3
C2
C1
0
0
Quantity
Quantity
QM
QC
Q
ATC
Q
Q 1
3
1
2
1
ATC
MC
(b)  Proﬁt of Natural Monopolist
(a)  Average Cost for Natural Monopolist

297
­communications and cable connections, the technical conditions that made local tele-
phone service a natural monopoly are changing. Such change is typical; natural 
monopolies are only natural given a technology.
	
A natural monopoly also can occur when a single industry standard is more ­efficient 
than multiple standards, even when that standard is owned by one firm. An example is 
the operating system for computers. A single standard is much more efficient than mul-
tiple standards because the communication among computer users is easier.
	
From a welfare standpoint, natural monopolies are different from other types of 
monopolies. In the case of a natural monopoly, even if a single firm makes some 
monopoly profit, the price it charges may still be lower than the price two firms mak-
ing normal profit would charge because its average total costs will be lower. In the case 
of a natural monopoly, not only is there no welfare loss from monopoly, but there can 
actually be a welfare gain since a single firm producing is so much more efficient than 
many firms producing. Such natural monopolies are often organized as public utilities. 
For example, most towns have a single water department supplying water to residents.
	
Figure 14-7(b) shows the profit-maximizing level of output and price that a natural 
monopolist would choose. To show the profit-maximizing level of output, I’ve added a 
marginal cost curve that is below the average total cost curve. (If you don’t know why 
this must be the case, a review of costs is in order.) A natural monopolist uses the same 
MC = MR rule that a monopolist uses to determine output. The natural monopolist 
will produce QM and charge a price PM. Average total costs are CM and the natural 
monopolist earns a profit shown by the orange shaded box.
ADDED DIMENSION
called Monopoly. A number of variations of the game  
developed.
	
In the 1930s Charles Darrow was taught the game and 
had some friends write up the rules, which they copy-
righted. (They couldn’t patent the game because they 
didn’t invent it.) In 1935 Darrow made an agreement with 
Parker Brothers, a firm that sold games, that gave the firm 
the right to produce this monopoly game 
in exchange for royalties. As Parker 
Brothers discovered the history of the 
­monopoly game and of the particular 
games that preceded it, Parker Brothers 
bought the rights to the previous games 
so that the firm would secure its full 
rights to Monopoly. It paid the various 
people between $500 and $10,000 for 
those rights. In 1974, an economics pro-
fessor, Ralph Anspach, created an “Anti-
Monopoly” game that pitted monopolists against 
competitors. To protect its monopoly, in 1974 Parker Brothers 
sued Anspach. In 1985 after suits and countersuits they 
came to an agreement. Anspach assigned the rights to the 
“Anti-Monopoly” trademark to Parker Brothers, but kept 
the rights to use it under license.
Monopolizing Monopoly
Have you ever played Monopoly? Probably you have. And 
in the process, you have made money for Parker Brothers, 
the firm that has the monopoly on Monopoly. How the firm 
got it is an interesting story of actual events following 
games and vice versa. The beginnings of the Monopoly 
game go back to a Quaker woman named Lizzie Magie, 
who was part of the one-tax movement of populist econo-
mist Henry George. That movement, 
which was a central populist idea in the 
late 1800s, wanted to put a tax on all 
land rent to finance government. George 
argued that there would be no need for 
an income tax; the tax on the land mo-
nopoly would finance it all. Lizzie Magie 
created a game, called the Landlord’s 
Game, as a way of teaching George’s 
ideas, and showing how monopoly 
caused problems. She patented the 
game in 1904.
	
Despite the patent, people copied the game with her 
approval, since her desire was to spread George’s ideas. 
As the game spread, it kept changing form and rules, and 
eventually acquired the property names associated with 
Atlantic City, which the game now uses, and came to be 
© Ralph Anspach

298
	
Where a natural monopoly exists, the perfectly competitive solution is impossible, 
since average total costs are not covered where MC = P. A monopolist required by 
government to charge the competitive price PC, where P = MC, will incur a loss shown 
by the blue shaded box because marginal cost is always below average total cost. ­Either 
a government subsidy or some output restriction is necessary in order for production to 
be feasible. In such cases, monopolies are often preferred by the public as long as they 
are regulated by government. I will discuss the issues of regulating natural monopolies 
in the chapter on real-world competition.
Government-Created Monopolies
A final reason monopolies can exist is that they’re created by government. The support 
of laissez-faire by Classical economists such as Adam Smith and their opposition to 
monopoly arose in large part in reaction to those government-created monopolies, not 
in reaction to any formal analysis of welfare loss from monopoly.
Government Policy and Monopoly: AIDS Drugs
Let’s now consider how economic theory might be used to analyze monopoly and to 
suggest how government might deal with that monopoly. Specifically, let’s consider 
the problem of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and the combination of 
medicinal drugs to fight AIDS. These drugs were developed by a small group of phar-
maceutical companies, which own patents on them, giving the companies a monopoly. 
Patents are given on medicine to encourage firms to find cures for various diseases. 
Q-8  Why is the competitive price 
impossible for an industry that exhibits 
strong economies of scale?
Possible economic profits from 
monopoly lead potential monopolists to 
spend money to get government to give 
them a monopoly.
ADDED DIMENSION
­normative views help determine society’s policy toward 
monopoly) doesn’t like. This distributional effect of monop-
oly based on normative views of who deserves income is 
another reason many laypeople oppose monopoly: They 
believe it transfers income from “deserving” consumers to 
“undeserving” monopolists.
	
A third normative reason people oppose government- 
created monopoly that isn’t captured by the standard model 
of monopoly is that the possibility of government-created 
monopoly encourages people to spend a lot of their time in 
political ­pursuits trying to get the government to favor them 
with a monopoly, and less time doing “productive” things.  
It causes rent-seeking activities in which people spend  
resources to gain monopolies for themselves.
	
Each of these arguments probably plays a role in the 
public’s dislike of monopoly. As you can see, these real-
world arguments blend normative judgments with objec-
tive analysis, making it difficult to arrive at definite 
conclusions. Most real-world problems require this blend-
ing, making applied economic analysis difficult. The econ-
omist must interpret the normative judgments about what 
people want to achieve and explain how public policy can 
be designed to achieve those desired ends.
Normative Views of Monopoly
Many laypeople’s views of government-created monopoly 
reflect the same normative judgments that Classical econo-
mists made. Classical economists considered, and much of 
the lay public considers, such monopolies unfair and incon-
sistent with liberty. Monopolies prevent people from being 
free to enter whatever business they want and are undesir-
able on normative grounds. In this view, government-created 
monopolies are simply wrong.
	
This normative argument against government-created 
­monopoly doesn’t extend to all types of government-created 
monopolies. The public accepts certain types of government-
created monopoly that it believes have overriding social 
value. An example is patents. To encourage research and 
development of new products, government gives out pat-
ents for a wide variety of innovations, such as genetic engi-
neering, Xerox machines, and cans that can be opened 
without a can opener.
	
A second normative argument against monopoly is that 
the public doesn’t like the income distributional effects of 
monopoly. Although, as we saw in our discussion of mo-
nopoly, monopolists do not always earn an economic 
profit, they often do, which means that the monopoly 
might transfer income in a way that the public (whose 

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
299
The monopoly the patent gives them lets them charge a high price so that the firms can 
expect to make a profit from their research. Whether such patents are in the public 
­interest isn’t an issue, since the patent has already been granted.
	
The issue is what to do about these drugs. Currently demand for them is highly inelas-
tic, so the price pharmaceutical companies can charge is high even though their marginal 
cost of producing them is low. Whether they are making a profit depends on their cost of 
development. But since that cost is already spent, that’s irrelevant to the current marginal 
cost; development cost affects their ATC curve, not their marginal cost curve. Thus, the 
pharmaceutical companies are charging an enormously high price for drugs that may help 
save people’s lives and that cost the companies a very small amount to produce.
	
What, if anything, should the government do? Some people have suggested that the 
government regulate the price of the drugs, requiring the firms to charge only their 
marginal cost. This would make society better off. But most economists point out that 
doing so will significantly reduce the incentives for drug companies to research new 
drugs. One reason drug companies spend billions of dollars for drug research is their 
expectation that they’ll be able to make large profits if they’re successful. If drug com-
panies expect the government to come in and take away their monopoly when they’re 
successful, they won’t search for cures. So forcing these pharmaceutical companies to 
charge a low price for their AIDS drugs would help AIDS victims, but it would hurt 
people suffering from diseases that are currently being researched and that might be 
researched in the future. So there’s a strong argument not to regulate.
	
But the thought of people dying when a cheap cure—or at least a partially effective 
treatment—is available is repulsive to me and to many others. In the 1990s Sub-Saharan 
African countries, which accounted for more than 75 percent of all AIDS deaths in 
the world, threatened to license production of these drugs to local manufacturers and 
make the drugs available at cost. U.S. pharmaceutical companies initially pressured 
the United States to cut off foreign aid if the African countries carried out their threat, 
but because of the bad public relations that the drug firms were getting, they stopped 
enforcing their patents in developing countries, making drugs for AIDS available to 
AIDS patients in poor nations at a much lower price than they do to others (an example 
of price discrimination).
	
An alternative policy suggested by economic theory to deal with such drug prob-
lems is for the government to buy the patents and allow anyone to make the drugs so 
their price would approach their marginal cost. Admittedly, this would be expensive. It 
would cause negative incentive effects because the government would have to increase 
taxes to cover the buyout’s costs. But this approach would avoid the problem of the 
regulatory approach and achieve the same ends. However, it also would introduce new 
problems, such as determining which patents the government should buy.
	
Whether such a buyout policy makes sense remains to be seen, but in debating such 
issues the power of the simple monopoly model becomes apparent.
Monopolistic Competition
So far I have introduced you to the two extremes of market structure: perfect competi-
tion and monopoly. Most real-world market structures fall somewhere between the 
two—in what is called monopolistic competition and oligopoly. In this section I discuss 
monopolistic competition. In the next chapter I discuss oligopoly. 
Characteristics of Monopolistic Competition
Monopolistic competition is a market structure in which there are many firms selling 
differentiated products and few barriers to entry.

300	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	
The four distinguishing characteristics of monopolistic competition are:
1.	Many sellers.
2.	Differentiated products.
3.	Multiple dimensions of competition.
4.	Easy entry of new firms in the long run.
Let’s consider each in turn.
Many Sellers 
When there are only a few sellers, it’s reasonable to explicitly 
take into account your competitors’ reaction to the price you set. When there are many 
sellers, it isn’t. In monopolistic competition, firms don’t take into account rivals’ reac-
tions. Here’s an example. There are many types of soap: Ivory, Irish Spring, Yardley’s 
Old English, and so on. So when Ivory decides to run a sale, it won’t spend a lot of 
time thinking about Old English’s reaction. There are so many firms that one firm 
can’t concern itself with the reaction of any specific firm. The soap industry is charac-
terized by monopolistic competition. 
Product Differentiation 
The “many sellers” characteristic gives monopolis-
tic competition its competitive aspect. Product differentiation gives it its monopolistic 
aspect. In a monopolistically competitive market, the goods that are sold aren’t homo-
geneous, as in perfect competition; they are differentiated slightly. Irish Spring soap is 
slightly different from Ivory, which in turn is slightly different from Yardley’s Old 
English. 
	
So in one sense each firm has a monopoly in the good it sells. But that monopoly 
is fleeting; it is based on advertising to convince people that one firm’s good is differ-
ent from the goods of competitors. The good may or may not really be different. Bleach 
differs little from one brand to another, yet buying Clorox makes many people feel that 
they’re getting pure bleach. I generally don’t buy it; I generally buy generic bleach. 
Ketchup, however, while made from the same basic ingredients, differs among brands 
(in my view). For me, only Heinz ketchup is real ketchup. (However, recently, my wife 
switched and put Hunt’s ketchup in a Heinz bottle, and pointed out to me that I didn’t 
notice. She’s right; I didn’t notice. But I still want Heinz ketchup; it’s what my mother 
gave me, and seeing the Heinz bottle and believing that there is Heinz ketchup in it 
makes me feel good—so much for my economist’s rationality.)
	
Because a monopolistic competitor has some monopoly power, advertising to 
increase that monopoly power (and hence increase the firm’s profits) makes sense as 
long as the marginal benefit of advertising exceeds the marginal cost. Despite the fact 
that their goods are similar but differentiated, to fit economists’ monopolistically com-
petitive model, firms must make their decisions as if they had no effect on other firms.
Multiple Dimensions of Competition 
In perfect competition, price is the 
only dimension on which firms compete; in monopolistic competition, competition 
takes many forms. Product differentiation reflects firms’ attempt to compete on 
perceived attributes; advertising is another form competition takes. Other dimen-
sions of competition include service and distribution outlets. These multiple dimen-
sions of competition make it much harder to analyze a specific industry, but the 
alternative methods of competition follow the same two general decision rules as 
price competition:
•	 Compare marginal costs and marginal benefits; and
•	 Change that dimension of competition until marginal costs equal marginal 
benefits.
In monopolistic competition, 
competition takes many forms.

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
301
Ease of Entry of New Firms in the Long Run 
The last condition a 
monopolistically competitive market must meet is that entry must be relatively easy; 
that is, there must be no significant entry barriers. Barriers to entry create the potential 
for long-run economic profit and prevent competitive pressures from pushing price 
down to average total cost. In monopolistic competition, if there were long-run eco-
nomic profits, other firms would enter until no economic profit existed.
Advertising and Monopolistic Competition
While firms in a perfectly competitive market have no incentive to advertise (since 
they can sell all they want at the market price), monopolistic competitors have a strong 
incentive. That’s because their products are differentiated from the others; advertising 
plays an important role in providing that differentiation.
Goals of Advertising 
Goals of advertising include shifting the firm’s demand 
curve to the right. Advertising works by providing consumers with information about 
the firm’s product and by making people want only a specific brand. That allows the 
firm to sell more, to charge a higher price, or to enjoy a combination of the two.
	
When many firms are advertising, the advertising might be done less to shift the 
demand curve out than to keep the demand curve where it is—to stop consumers from 
shifting to a competitor’s product. In either case, firms advertise to move the demand 
curve further out than it would be if the firms weren’t advertising.
	
Advertising has another effect; it shifts the average total cost curve up. Thus, in 
deciding how much to advertise, a firm must consider advertising’s effect on both rev-
enue and cost. It is advantageous to the firm if the marginal revenue of advertising 
exceeds the marginal cost of advertising.
Does Advertising Help or Hurt Society? 
Our perception of products 
(the degree of trust we put in them) is significantly influenced by advertising. Think of 
the following pairs of goods:
Rolex	
Cheerios	
Clorox bleach	
Bayer
Timex	
Oat Circles	
generic bleach	
generic aspirin
Each of these names conveys a sense of what it is and how much trust we put in the 
product, and that determines how much we’re willing to pay for it. For example, most 
people would pay more for Cheerios than for Oat Circles. Each year firms in the 
United States spend about $220 billion on advertising. A 30-second commercial dur-
ing the Super Bowl can cost more than $3.5 million. That advertising increases firms’ 
costs but also differentiates their products.
	
Are we as consumers better off or worse off with differentiated products? That’s 
difficult to say. There’s a certain waste in much of the differentiation. That waste shows 
up in the graph by the fact that monopolistic competitors don’t produce at the minimum 
point of their average total cost curve. But there’s also a sense of trust that we get from 
buying names we know and in having goods that are slightly different from one another. 
I’m a sophisticated consumer who knows that there’s little difference between generic 
aspirin and Bayer aspirin. Yet sometimes I buy Bayer aspirin even though it costs more.
	
Edward Chamberlin, who, together with Joan Robinson, was the originator of the 
description of monopolistic competition, believed that the difference between the cost 
of a perfect competitor and the cost of a monopolistic competitor was the cost of what 
he called “differentness.”3 If consumers are willing to pay that cost, then it’s not a 
waste but, rather, it’s a benefit to them.
Goals of advertising include shifting the 
firm’s demand curve to the right and 
making it more inelastic.
Q-9  Why do monopolistically 
competitive firms advertise while 
perfect competitors do not?
3Joan Robinson, a Cambridge, England, economist, called this the theory of imperfect competition, 
rather than the theory of monopolistic competition.

302	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	
We must be careful about drawing any implications from this analysis. Average 
total cost for a monopolistically competitive firm includes the cost of advertising and 
product differentiation. Whether we as consumers are better off with as much 
­differentiation as we have, or whether we’d all be better off if all firms produced a 
generic product at a lower cost, is debatable.
Output, Price, and Profit of a Monopolistic Competitor
Although a full analysis of the multiple dimensions of monopolistic competition can-
not be compressed into two dimensions, a good introduction can be gained by consid-
ering it within the standard two-dimensional (price, quantity) graph.
	
To do so we simply consider the characteristics of monopolistic competition and 
see what implication they have for the analysis. The firm has some monopoly power; 
therefore, a monopolistic competitor faces a downward-sloping demand curve. The 
downward-sloping demand curve means that in making decisions about output, the 
monopolistic competitor will, as will a monopolist, face a marginal revenue curve that 
is below price. At its profit-maximizing output, marginal cost will be less than price 
(not equal to price as it would be for a perfect competitor). We consider that case in 
Figure 14-8(a).
	
The monopolistic competitor faces the demand curve D, marginal revenue curve 
MR, and marginal cost curve MC. This demand curve is its portion of the total mar-
ket demand curve. Using the MC = MR rule discussed in the last chapter, you can 
see that the firm will choose output level QM (because that’s the level of output at 
which marginal revenue intersects marginal cost). Having determined output, we 
extend a dotted line up to the demand curve and see that the firm will set a price 
equal to PM. This price exceeds marginal cost. So far all we’ve done is reproduce the 
monopolist’s decision.
	
Where does the competition come in? Competition implies zero economic profit in 
the long run. [If there’s profit, a new competitor will enter the market, decreasing the 
existing firms’ demand (shifting it to the left).] In long-run equilibrium, a perfect com-
petitor makes only a normal profit. Economic profits are determined by ATC, not by 
MC, so the competition part of monopolistic competition tells us where the average 
total cost curve must be at the long-run equilibrium output. It must be equal to price, 
Q-10  How does the equilibrium for a 
monopoly differ from that for a 
monopolistic competitor?
FIGURE 14-8 (A AND B)  Monopolistic 
Competition
In (a) you can see that a 
monopolistically competitive firm 
prices in the same manner as a 
monopolist. It sets quantity where 
marginal revenue equals marginal 
cost. In (b) you can see that the ­ 
mono­polistic competitor is not only  
a monopolist but also a competitor. 
Competition implies zero economic 
profit in the long run.
Price
Price
MC
MR
D
QM
Quantity
PM
MC
ATC
MR
D
QM
Quantity
(a)
(b) Zero Proﬁt
Equilibrium Price and Quantity
PM

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
303
and it will be equal to price only if the ATC curve is tangent to (just touching) the 
­demand curve at the output the firm chooses. We add that average total cost curve to 
the MC, MR, and demand curves in Figure 14-8(b). Profit or loss, I hope you remem-
ber, is determined by the difference between price and average total cost at the quantity 
the firm chooses.
	
To give this condition a little more intuitive meaning, let’s say, for instance, that the 
monopolistically competitive firm is making a profit. This profit would set two adjust-
ments in motion. First, it would attract new entrants. Some of the firm’s customers 
would then defect, and its portion of the market demand curve would shift to the left. 
Second, to try to protect its profits, the firm would likely increase expenditures on 
product differentiation and advertising to offset that entry to shift the demand curve 
back to the right. (There would be an All New, Really New, Widget campaign.) These 
expenditures would shift its average total cost curve up. These two adjustments would 
continue until the profits disappeared and the new demand curve is tangent to the new 
average total cost curve. A monopolistically competitive firm can make no long-run 
economic profit.
Comparing Monopoly, Monopolistic Competition,  
and Perfect Competition
If both the monopolistic competitor and the perfect competitor make zero economic 
profit in the long run, it might seem that, in the long run at least, they’re identical. 
They aren’t, however. The perfect competitor perceives its demand curve as perfectly 
elastic, and the zero economic profit condition means that it produces at the minimum 
of the average total cost curve where the marginal cost curve equals price. We demon-
strate that case in Figure 14-9(a).
Price
Price
MC
ATC
PC
D
QC
Quantity
PM
MC
ATC
D
MR
QC
QM
Quantity
0
PC
0
(a) Perfect Competition
(b) Monopolistic Competition
FIGURE 14-9 (A AND B)  A Comparison of Perfect and Monopolistic Competition
The perfect competitor perceives its demand curve as perfectly elastic, and zero economic profit means that it produces at the minimum of 
the ATC curve, as represented in (a). A monopolistic competitor, on the other hand, faces a downward-sloping demand curve and produces 
where marginal cost equals marginal revenue, as represented in (b). In long-run equilibrium, the ATC curve is tangent to the demand curve 
at that level, which is not at the minimum point of the ATC curve. The monopolistic competitor sells QM at price PM. A perfect competitor 
with the same marginal cost curve would produce QC at price PC.

304	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	
The monopolistic competitor faces a downward-sloping demand curve for its dif-
ferentiated product. It produces where the marginal cost curve equals the marginal 
revenue curve, and not where MC equals price. In equilibrium, price exceeds marginal 
cost. The average total cost curve of a monopolistic competitor is tangent to the 
­demand curve at the profit maximizing level of output, which cannot be at the minimum 
point of the average total cost curve since the demand curve is sloping downward. The 
minimum point of the average total cost curve (where a perfect competitor produces) 
is at a higher output (QC) than that of the monopolistic competitor (QM). I demonstrate 
the monopolistically competitive equilibrium in Figure 14-9(b) to allow you to compare 
monopolistic competition with perfect competition.
	
The perfect competitor in long-run equilibrium produces at a point where MC =  
P = ATC. At that point, ATC is at its minimum. A monopolistic competitor produces 
at a point where MC = MR. Price is higher than marginal cost. For a monopolistic 
competitor in long-run equilibrium:
(P = ATC) ≥ (MC = MR)
At that point, ATC is not at its minimum.
	
What does this distinction between a monopolistically competitive industry and a 
perfectly competitive industry mean in practice? It means that for a monopolistic com-
petitor, since increasing output lowers average cost, increasing market share is a rele-
vant concern. If only the monopolistic competitor could expand its market, it could 
raise its profit. For a perfect competitor, increasing output offers no benefit in the form 
of lower average cost. A perfect competitor would have no concern about market share 
(the firm’s percentage of total sales in the market).
	
Finally, let’s think about the difference between monopolistic competition and 
monopoly. They are almost the same, except for one important difference. For a monop-
olist, the average total cost curve can be, but need not be, at a position below price 
so that the monopolist can make a long-run economic profit. In contrast, the average 
total cost curve for a monopolistic competitor must be tangent to the demand curve at 
the price and output chosen by the monopolistic competitor. No long-run economic 
profit is possible, which means that a monopolistic competitor is simply a monopolist 
that makes zero profit.
Conclusion
We’ve come to the end of the presentation of the formal models of perfect compe-
tition, monopoly, and monopolistic competition. As you can see, the real world 
gets very complicated very quickly. I’ll show you just how complicated in the 
chapter on real-world competition and technology. But don’t let the complicated 
real world get you down on the theories presented here. It’s precisely because the 
real world is so complicated that we need some framework, like the one presented 
in this chapter. That framework lets us focus on specific issues—and hopefully the 
most important.
	
Working through the models takes a lot of effort, but it’s effort well spent. In Chap-
ter 1, I quoted Einstein: “A theory should be as simple as possible, but not more so.” 
This chapter’s analysis isn’t simple; it takes repetition, working through models, and 
doing thought experiments to get it down pat. But it’s as simple as possible. Even so, 
it’s extremely easy to make a foolish mistake, as I did in my PhD oral examination 
when I was outlining an argument on the blackboard. (“What did you say the output 
would be for this monopolist, Mr. Colander?”) As I learned then, it takes long hours of 
working through the models again and again to get them right.
For a monopolistic competitor in  
long-run equilibrium,  
(P = ATC) ≥ (MC = MR)
An important difference between a 
monopolist and a monopolistic 
competitor is in the position of the 
average total cost curve in long-run 
equilibrium.

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
305
• A monopolist takes into account how its output affects 
price; a perfect competitor does not.  (LO14-1)
• The price a monopolist charges is higher than the  
competitive market price due to the restriction of  
output; a monopolist can make a profit in the long 
run.  (LO14-2)
• A monopolist’s profit-maximizing output is where 
marginal revenue equals marginal cost.  (LO14-2)
• A monopolist can charge the maximum price 
­consumers are willing to pay for the quantity the 
­monopolist produces.  (LO14-2)
• To determine a monopolist’s profit, first determine its 
output (where MC = MR). Then determine its price 
and average total cost at that output level. The differ-
ence between price and average total cost at the 
profit-maximizing level of output is profit per unit. 
Multiply this by output to find total profit.  (LO14-2)
• Because monopolists reduce output and charge a price 
that is higher than marginal cost, monopolies create a 
welfare loss to society.  (LO14-3)
• If a monopolist can (1) identify groups of customers 
who have different elasticities of demand, (2) separate 
them in some way, and (3) limit their ability to  
resell its product between groups, it can price-­
discriminate.  (LO14-3)
• A price-discriminating monopolist earns more profit 
than a normal monopolist because it can charge a higher 
Summary
price to those with less elastic demands and a lower 
price to those with more elastic demands.  (LO14-3)
• Price discrimination eliminates welfare loss from 
­monopoly.  (LO14-3)
• Three important barriers to entry are natural  
ability, economies of scale, and government 
­restrictions.  (LO14-4)
• Natural monopolies exist in industries with strong 
economies of scale. Because their average total costs 
are always falling, it is more efficient for one firm to 
produce all the output.  (LO14-4)
• The competitive price is impossible in a natural 
­monopoly because marginal cost is always below 
­average total cost. No firm would enter an industry 
where not even normal (zero economic) profit can  
be made.  (LO14-4)
• Monopolistic competition is characterized by  
(1) many sellers, (2) differentiated products,  
(3) multiple dimensions of competition, and  
(4) ease of entry for new firms.  (LO14-5)
• Monopolistic competitors differ from perfect 
­competitors in that the former face a downward-­
sloping demand curve.  (LO14-5)
• A monopolistic competitor differs from a 
­monopolist in that a monopolistic competitor 
makes zero ­economic profit in long-run 
­equilibrium.  (LO14-5)
Key Terms
monopolistic  
competition 
monopoly 
natural monopoly 
patent 
price-discriminate 
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 What is the key difference between a monopolist and a 
­perfect competitor?  (LO14-1)
 	2. 	Does a monopolist take market price as given? Why or 
why not?  (LO14-1)
	 3.	 Why is marginal revenue below average revenue for a 
­monopolist?  (LO14-2)

306	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	 4.	 State what’s wrong with the following graphs:  (LO14-2)
	13.	 In the late 1990s, the Government Accounting Office 
­reported that airlines block new carriers at major 
­airports.  (LO14-4)
	a.	 What effect does this have on fares and the number of 
flights at those airports?
	b.	 How much are airlines willing to spend to control the 
use of gates to block new carriers?  
	14.	 How is efficiency related to the number of firms in an indus-
try characterized by strong economies of scale?  (LO14-4)
	15.	 During the 2001 anthrax scare, the U.S. government 
threatened to disregard Bayer’s patent of ciprofloxacin, 
the most effective drug to fight anthrax, and license the 
production of the drug to American drug companies to 
stockpile the drug in case of an anthrax epidemic. While 
the policy would lower costs to the U.S. government of 
stockpiling the drug, it also would have other costs. What 
are those costs? (Difficult)  (LO14-4)
	16.	 Econocompany is under investigation by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice for violating antitrust laws. The government 
decides that Econocompany has a natural monopoly and 
that, if it is to keep the government’s business, it must sell 
at a price equal to marginal cost. Econocompany says that it 
can’t do that and hires you to explain to the government 
why it can’t.  (LO14-4)
	a.	 Explain why in reference to the following graph.
	b.	 What price would it charge if it were unregulated?
	c.	 What price would you advise that it should be allowed 
to charge?
Price
ATC
MR
D
Quantity
Price
Quantity
MC
D
(a)
(b)
What’s
wrong?
What’s
wrong?
Q
Q
P
P
MR
Price
MC
ATC
D
Quantity
Price
Proﬁt
MC
ATC
D
Quantity
(c)
(d)
What’s
wrong?
What’s
wrong?
Q
P
P
Q
MR
	 5.	 Say you place a lump-sum tax (a tax that is treated as a 
fixed cost) on a monopolist. How will that affect its 
­output and pricing decisions?  (LO14-2)
	 6.	 A monopolist is selling fish. But if the fish don’t sell, they 
rot. What will be the likely elasticity at the point on the 
demand curve at which the monopolist sets the price? 
(Difficult)  (LO14-2)
	 7.	 Demonstrate graphically the profit-maximizing positions 
for a perfect competitor and a monopolist. How do they 
differ?  (LO14-2)
	 8.	 True or false? Monopolists differ from perfect competitors 
because ­monopolists make a profit. Why?  (LO14-2)
	 9.	 A monopolist with a straight-line demand curve finds that 
it can sell 2 units at $12 each or 12 units at $2 each. Its 
fixed cost is $20 and its marginal cost is constant at  
$3 per unit.  (LO14-2)
	a.	 Draw the MC, ATC, MR, and demand curves for this 
monopolist.
	b.	 At what output level would the monopolist produce?
	c.	 At what output level would a perfectly competitive 
firm produce? 
	10.	 Demonstrate the welfare loss created by a monopoly.   
(LO14-3)
	11.	 Will the welfare loss from a monopolist with a perfectly 
elastic marginal cost curve be greater or less than the 
­welfare loss from a monopolist with an upward-sloping 
marginal cost curve?  (LO14-3)
	12.	 What three things must a firm be able to do to price-
discriminate?  (LO14-3)
Price
AC
MC
D
Quantity
0
MR
	17.	 What are the ways in which a firm can differentiate its 
product from that of its competitors? What is the overriding 
objective of product differentiation?  (LO14-5)
	18.	 What are the “monopolistic” and the “competitive” 
­elements of monopolistic competition?  (LO14-5)
	19.	 Suppose a monopolistic competitor in long-run equilib-
rium has a constant marginal cost of $6 and faces the 
­demand curve given in the following table:  (LO14-5)
Q	
20	
18	
16	
14	
12	
10	
8	
6
P	
$  2	
4	
6	
8	
10	
12	
14	
16

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
307
	a.	 What output will the firm choose?
	b.	 What will be the monopolistic competitor’s average 
fixed cost at the output it chooses? 
	20.	 If a monopolistic competitor is able to restrict output, why 
doesn’t it earn economic profits?  (LO14-5)
	21.	 You’re the manager of a firm that has constant marginal 
cost of $6. Fixed cost is zero. The market structure is 
­monopolistically competitive. You’re faced with the 
­following demand curve:  (LO14-5)
	a.	 Determine graphically the profit-maximizing price and 
output for your firm in the short run. Demonstrate what 
profit or loss you’ll be making.
	b.	 What happens in the long run?
	22.	 Manufacturers often pay “slotting fees,” payments to 
­retailers to provide their product prime shelf space. These 
fees range from $25,000 for one item in one store to  
$3 million for a chain of stores. An example is placing 
­Doritos within a football display before Super Bowl 
­Sunday.  (LO14-5)
	a.	 In what type of market structure would this behavior 
likely be prevalent?
	b.	 What does this behavior accomplish for the firm? 
­Relate your answer to the observation that a typical su-
permarket stocks about 30,000 products.
	c.	 Demonstrate the likely long-term profit in this market 
structure.
	d.	 Firms have complained to the FTC that this practice is 
unfair. What is their likely argument?
	e.	 What is an argument on the other side of that ­presented 
in d?
	23.	 Both a perfect competitor and a monopolistic competitor 
choose output where MC = MR, and neither makes a profit 
in the long run. How is it, then, that the monopolistic com-
petitor produces less than a perfect competitor?  (LO14-5)
Price
$12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Quantity
Demand
100 200 300 400 500 600
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Austrian economists observe that most lasting monopolies 
are the result of government and that any attempt to make 
government strong enough to control monopolies may result 
in an abuse of government power to protect and create more 
monopolies. What cautionary advice could we draw from 
this observation? (Austrian)
	 2.	 Do men have a monopoly over the best jobs in the United 
States? If so, how is that monopoly protected? (Feminist)
	 3.	 When analyzing the conduct of “modern” industry, Thorstein 
Veblen argued that captains of industry succeeded by 
­eliminating their rivals through predatory exploitation and 
thus sabotaging production efficiency for personal fortune.
	a.	 How does John D. Rockefeller’s late-19th-century view 
that he liked to give competitors “a good sweating” and 
Bill Gates’ “We will crush them” approach to Java fit 
into Veblen’s argument?
	b.	 What are the policy implications of predatory 
­exploitation? (Institutionalist)
	 4.	 Large pharmaceutical firms use monopoly power granted 
by patents to sell drugs at prices that far exceed marginal 
costs. Evidence from countries without effective patent 
protections suggests that these drugs could sell for as 
little as 25 percent of their patent-protected prices. That 
­difference costs U.S. consumers (including the government) 
nearly four times what pharmaceutical corporations spend 
on research each year.
	a.	 How should we deal with these disturbing abuses of 
the patent system?
	b.	 Should the government buy back patents as your 
­textbook discusses, or should it not issue them in the 
first place?
	c.	 Should patents be granted in some industries but not 
others?
	d.	 If so, how should we encourage research in areas with 
no patent protection? (Radical)
	 5.	 The original language for patent law comes from Thomas 
Jefferson. He wrote that patents can be obtained for “any 
new and useful art, machine, manufacture, or composition 
of matter, or any new or useful improvement thereof.” 
These words remain at the core of U.S. patent law.
	a.	 Do they allow life forms to be patented?
	b.	 Should they?

308	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	c.	 If humans can create life forms, does that undermine 
the existence of God? (Religious)
	 6.	 Firms in a monopolistically competitive market depend on 
differentiating their products.
	a.	 How do firms differentiate their products?
	b.	 Aside from commodities such as gold and grain, how 
many homogeneous products can you name?
	c.	 What does your answer to b suggest about market 
structure in the real world?
	d.	 Does the existence of monopolistically competitive 
markets imply that government should intervene in 
these markets? (Austrian)
	 7.	 Any large grocery store carries at least seven different 
kinds of corn chips—baked, fried, salsa-flavored, white, 
yellow, blue, and lime-flavored.
	a.	 When is product differentiation real and when is it an 
illusion?
	b.	 Is there an objective universal answer to a?
	c.	 Are there any individually objective answers to a and b?
	d.	 Does your answer to c tell you anything about the 
­economic implication of the benefit of markets? (Hint: Is 
the assumption of rational consumers with well-ordered 
preference functions necessary to the ­argument that mar-
kets benefit society?) ­(Institutionalist)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 Explain the effects on college education of the develop-
ment of a teaching machine that you plug into a student’s 
brain and that makes the student understand everything. 
How would your answer differ if a college could monopo-
lize production of this machine? 
	 2.	 Assume your city government has been contracting with a 
single garbage collection firm that has been granted an 
exclusive franchise, the sole right, to pick up trash within 
the entire city limits. However, it has been proposed that 
companies be allowed to compete for business with 
­residents on an individual basis. The city government has 
estimated the price residents are willing to pay for various 
numbers of garbage collections per month and the total 
costs facing the garbage collector per resident as shown in 
the following table.
collections residents receive per month and the 
price charged residents for each collection? What is the 
­economic profit received from each resident by the 
­monopoly firm?
	c.	 If competitive bidding were allowed and therefore a 
competitive market for garbage collection services 
­developed, what would be the number of collections 
per month and the price charged residents per collection? 
What is the economic profit received from each resident 
by the competitive firms?
	d.	 Based on the above analysis, should the city  
government allow competitive bidding? Why?  
Would you ­expect there to be any quality ­differences 
between the monopolistic and ­competitive trash  
collection firms? 
	 3.	 When you buy a cheap computer printer or home fax, you 
can sometimes get it for free after the rebate. Why would 
a firm sell you something for a zero price? (The answer 
isn’t that it wants to be nice.) 
	 4.	 Oftentimes, gas stations a couple of miles apart will differ 
in price by as much as 5 to 10 cents per gallon because 
oil companies use a pricing system called zone pricing. 
For example, gas is sold wholesale to stations in Pleasanton, 
California, at about a 13 percent discount from the 
­wholesale price in nearby Palo Alto. 
	a.	 Why might oil companies do this?
	b.	 The FTC has been reviewing the practice. What poli-
cies might you suggest for the FTC to consider to stop 
the practice, and what are the potential problems with 
those policies?
	c.	 Would such a policy lower the overall price of gas? 
	 5.	 Most magazines offer enormous subscription deals for 
college students. For example, Time magazine offers a 
one-year subscription for $29.95, when the cover price is 
$3.95 per issue. This is an 85 percent discount.
	a.	 Why do magazines offer special deals to students?
	
	
Price	
	
	
	
	
Average 
	
	
per	
Total	
Marginal	 Total	 Marginal	
Total 
Pickup	
Pickup	
Revenue	 Revenue	 Cost	
Cost	
Cost 
	 (Q)	
(demand)	
(TR)	
(MR)	
(TC)	
(MC)	
(ATC)
	
0	
$4.20	
0	
—	
$ 3.20	
—	
—
	
1	
3.80	
_____	
_____	
4.20	 _____	
_____
	
2	
3.40	
_____	
_____	
5.60	 _____	
_____
	
3	
3.00	
_____	
_____	
7.80	 _____	
_____
	
4	
2.60	
_____	
_____	 10.40	 _____	
_____
	
5	
2.20	
_____	
_____	 13.40	 _____	
_____
	
6	
1.90	
_____	
_____	 16.80	 _____	
_____
	a.	 What are the fixed costs per month of garbage collection 
per resident?
	b.	 Considering that the current garbage collection firm the 
city has contracted with has a monopoly in garbage 
­collection services, what is the current number of 

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
309
	b.	 How would your answer change if you are told 
that most subscribers get enormous discounts, and 
that Time’s subscription revenue does not cover 
its costs?
	c.	 What is a likely reason why magazines sell their 
­subscriptions so cheaply? 
	 6.	 Copyrights provide authors with a monopoly.
	a.	 What effect would eliminating copyrights have on the 
price and output of textbooks?
	b.	 Should copyrights be eliminated? 
	 7.	 Colleges give financial aid to certain students. Is this 
price discrimination? If so, should it be against the law?
	 8.	 A best-selling horror book, Duma Key by Stephen King, 
was sold in hardback for $28 when it was first released. One 
year later, the publisher issued a soft-cover edition for $9.99. 
What accounts for the difference in price? (Note: The mar-
ginal cost of printing a book with a soft cover is not much 
less than the cost of a hardcover book.)
	 9.	 Does the product differentiation in monopolistic competi-
tion make us better or worse off? Why?
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 If you doodle too much, your doodles will become 
worthless. Besides, if you want to pass the next test, 
you have to study.  (LO14-1)
	 2.	 At output 4, the marginal cost of $12 (between $8 and 
$16) equals the marginal revenue of $12 (between $15 
and $9), making it the profit-maximizing output. It has 
the highest total profit, $34.  (LO14-2)
	 3.	 To determine the profit-maximizing price and output, one 
must determine where the marginal revenue curve equals 
marginal cost. So one must first draw the marginal reve-
nue curve and see where it intersects marginal cost. That 
intersection determines the quantity, as in the accompany-
ing graph. Carrying the line up to the demand curve deter-
mines the price.  (LO14-2)
that price to the price axis, (4) determine the average total 
cost at Q* shown by C* and extend a horizontal line from 
the ATC curve at that cost to the price axis. The box created 
is the monopolist’s profit. The profit is the shaded box shown 
in the graph below.  (LO14-2)
Price
P*
Quantity
MR
D
MC
Q*
	 4.	 A monopolist produces less output than a perfectly 
­competitive firm because a monopolist takes into account 
the fact that increasing output will lower the price of all 
previous units.  (LO14-2)
	 5.	 To determine profit, follow these four steps:  
(1) Draw the marginal revenue curve, (2) find the level of 
output where MC = MR indicated in the graph below by Q*, 
(3) find the price the monopolist would charge indicated by 
P* and extend a horizontal line from the demand curve at 
	 6.	 Area C represents the profit going to a monopolist. It is 
not considered a loss to society since, while consumers lose 
area C, monopolists gain it. It is a redistribution of re-
sources rather than an efficiency loss.  (LO14-3)
	 7.	 A price-discriminating monopolist makes a greater profit 
than a normal monopolist because a price-discriminating 
monopolist is able to charge a higher price to those con-
sumers who have less elastic demands.  (LO14-3)
	 8.	 The marginal cost curve for an industry that exhibits 
strong economies of scale is always below average total 
costs. Therefore, the competitive price, where P = MC, 
will always result in losses for firms. Firms would not 
­enter into such an industry and there would be no  
supply.  (LO14-4)
	 9.	 Monopolistically competitive firms advertise because 
their products are differentiated from others. Advertising 
can convince people that a firm’s product is better than 
that of other firms and increase demand for its product. 
Price
P*
C*
MR
Q*
Quantity
D
MC
ATC

APPENDIX
The Algebra of Competitive and Monopolistic Firms
In the appendix to Chapter 5, I presented the algebra rel-
evant to supply and demand. To relate that algebra to 
competitive firms, all you must remember is that the mar-
ket supply curve equals the marginal cost curve for the 
competitive industry. Let’s review it briefly.
	
Say that marginal costs, and thus market supply, for 
the industry is given by
P = 2QS + 4
Let’s also say that the market demand curve is:
QD = 28 −1⁄4 P
	
To determine equilibrium price and quantity in a com-
petitive market, you must equate quantity supplied and 
quantity demanded and solve for price. First, rewrite the 
marginal cost equation with quantity supplied on the left:
QS = 1⁄2 MC −2
	
Then set quantity demanded equal to quantity supplied 
and MC = P. Then solve for equilibrium price:
 QS = QD ⇒28 −1⁄4 P = 1⁄2 P −2
 112 −P = 2P −8
 3P = 120
 P = 40
Thus, the equilibrium price is $40. Competitive firms 
take this price as given and produce up until their mar-
ginal cost equals price. The industry as a whole produces 
18 units.
	
Now let’s consider the algebra relevant for a monopo-
listic firm. In the monopolistic case, supply and demand 
are not enough to determine where the monopolist will 
produce. The monopolist will produce where marginal 
revenue equals marginal cost. But, for the monopolist, the 
industry demand curve is the demand curve, which means 
that in order to determine where the monopolist will 
­produce, we must determine the marginal revenue curve 
that goes along with the above demand curve. There are 
two ways to do that.
	
First, if you know calculus, you can determine the 
marginal revenue curve in the following manner: Since 
marginal revenue tells us how much total revenue will 
change with each additional unit produced, you first specify 
the demand curve in terms of quantity produced.
P = 112 −4Q
Since TR = PQ we can multiply this by Q to get total rev-
enue. Doing so gives us:
TR = PQ = 112Q −4Q2
To find marginal revenue, take the first derivative of total 
revenue with respect to Q:
P = 112 −8Q
	
Second, if you don’t know calculus, all you need to 
remember is the trick shown in the box in this chapter on 
how to graph the marginal revenue curve. Remember, 
the marginal revenue curve starts at the same price as the 
demand curve and bisects the quantity axis at one-half 
the value of the quantity-axis intercept of the ­demand 
curve. The marginal revenue curve, because it bisects the 
quantity axis at one-half the value of the quantity-axis 
intercept of the accompanying demand curve, must fall 
twice as fast as the market demand curve. That is, its 
slope is twice the slope of the market demand curve.
310	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Perfect competitors, in contrast, have no incentive to ad-
vertise since their products are the same as every other 
firm’s product and they can sell all they want at the mar-
ket price.  (LO14-5)
	10.	 Both a monopoly and a monopolistic competitor produce 
where marginal cost equals marginal revenue. The 
­difference is the position of the average total cost curve. 
For a monopolistic competitor, the average total cost curve 
must be tangent to the demand curve because a monopolistic 
competitor makes no economic profits in the long run. A 
monopoly can make economic profits in the long run, so its 
average total cost can be below the price.  (LO14-5)

	
Chapter 14 ■ Monopoly and Monopolistic Competition	
311
	
Knowing that its slope is twice the market demand 
curve slope, you can write the marginal revenue curve 
with the same price-axis intercept as the demand curve and 
a slope of two times the slope of the demand curve. 
(Warning: This works only with linear demand curves.) 
The price-axis intercept of the demand curve is the value 
of P where Q equals 0: 112. The quantity-axis intercept 
of the demand curve is the value of Q where P equals 0: 
28. So, the marginal revenue curve has a price-axis inter-
cept at 112 and a quantity-axis intercept at 14. Mathemat-
ically, such a curve is represented by:
P = 112 −(112/14)P
or
P = 112 −8Q
	
Now that we’ve determined the monopolist’s mar-
ginal revenue curve, we can determine its equilibrium 
quantity by setting MR = MC and solving for Q. Doing 
so gives us:
 112 −8Q = 2Q + 4
 −10Q = −108
 Q = 10.8
The monopolist then charges the price consumers are 
willing to pay for that quantity. Mathematically, sub-
stitute 10.8 into the demand equation and solve for 
price:
 P = 112 −4(10.8)
 P = $68.80
Comparing the price and quantity produced by a monop-
olist and those of a competitive industry shows that the 
monopolist charges a higher price and produces a lower 
output.
	 1.	 The market demand curve is QD = 50 − P. The marginal 
cost curve is MC = 4Q + 6.
	a.	 Assuming the marginal cost curve is for a competitive 
industry as a whole, find the profit-maximizing level 
of output and price.
	b.	 Assuming the marginal cost curve is for only one 
firm that comprises the entire market, find the profit-
maximizing level of output and price.
	c.	 Compare the two results.
	 2.	 The market demand curve is QD = 160 − 4P. A monopo-
list’s total cost curve is TC = 6Q2 + 15Q + 50.
	a.	 Find the profit-maximizing level of output and price 
for a monopolist.
	b.	 Find its average cost at that level of output.
	c.	 Find its profit at that level of output.
Questions and Exercises
	 3.	 Suppose fixed costs for the monopolist in question 2 
­increase by 52.
	a.	 Find the profit-maximizing level of output and price 
for a monopolist.
	b.	 Find its average cost at that level of output.
	c.	 Find its profit at that level of output.
	 4.	 The market demand curve is QD = 12 −1⁄
 3 P. Costs do not 
vary with output.
	a.	 Find the profit-maximizing level of output and price 
for a monopolist.
	b.	 Find the profit-maximizing level of output and price 
for a competitive industry.

“
”
© Anton Havelaar/123RF RF
In business, the competition will  
bite you if you keep running;  
if you stand still, they  
will swallow you. 
—Victor Kiam
Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy
In previous chapters we discussed competition, 
monopoly, and a blend of the two—monopolistic 
­competition. In this chapter we discuss another blend: 
oligopoly—a market structure in which there are only 
a few firms and firms explicitly take other firms’ likely 
response into account. 
The Distinguishing Characteristics  
of Oligopoly
The central element of oligopoly is that there are a small number of firms in an 
industry so that, when making decisions, a firm must take into account the 
expected reaction of other firms. Oligopolistic firms are mutually interdepen-
dent and can be collusive or noncollusive.
	
This mutual interdependence is the big difference between monopolistic 
competition and oligopoly. In oligopoly, firms explicitly take other firms’ 
actions into account. In monopolistic competition, there are so many firms 
that individual firms tend not to explicitly take into account rival firms’ 
likely responses to their decisions. Collusion is difficult. In oligopoly there 
are fewer firms, and each firm is more likely to explicitly engage in strate-
gic decision making—taking explicit account of a rival’s expected response 
to a decision you are making. In oligopolies all decisions, including pricing 
decisions, are strategic decisions. Also, in oligopolies collusion is much eas-
ier. Thus, one distinguishes between monopolistic competition and oligopoly 
by whether or not firms explicitly take into account competitors’ reactions to 
their decisions.
 	
Why is the distinction important? Because it determines whether econo-
mists can model and predict the price and output of an industry. Nonstrategic 
decision making can be predicted relatively accurately if individuals behave 
rationally. Strategic decision making is much more difficult to predict, even if 
people behave rationally. What one person does depends on what he or she 
expects other people to do, which in turn depends on what others expect the 
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO15-1	
Explain the distinguishing 
characteristics of oligopoly. 
LO15-2	 Distinguish two models of 
oligopoly.
LO15-3	 Describe two empirical 
methods of measuring 
market structure.
LO15-4	 Explain what antitrust 
policy is and give a brief 
history of it.
chapter 15 

	
Chapter 15 ■ Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy	
313
one person to do. Consistent with this distinction, economists’ model of monopolistic 
competition has a definite prediction. A model of monopolistic competition will tell 
us: Here’s how much will be produced and here’s how much will be charged. Econo-
mists’ models of oligopoly don’t have a definite prediction. There are no unique price 
and output decisions at which an oligopoly will rationally arrive; there are a variety of 
rational oligopoly decisions, and a variety of oligopoly models.
	
Most industries in the United States have some oligopolistic elements. If you ask 
almost any businessperson whether he or she directly takes into account rivals’ likely 
response, the answer you’ll get is “In certain cases, yes; in others, no.”
	
Most retail stores that you deal with are oligopolistic in your neighborhood or 
town, although, if the market is seen to extend beyond your neighborhood, they may be 
quite competitive. For example, how many grocery stores do you shop at? Do you 
think they keep track of what their competitors are doing? You bet. They keep a close 
eye on their competitors’ prices and set their own accordingly.
Models of Oligopoly Behavior
No single general model of oligopoly behavior exists. The reason is that an oligopolist 
can decide on pricing and output strategy in many possible ways, and there are no 
compelling grounds to characterize any of them as the oligopoly strategy. Although 
there are five or six formal models, I’ll focus on two informal models of oligopoly 
behavior that give you insight into real-world problems. The two models we’ll con-
sider are the cartel model and the contestable market model. These should give you a 
sense of how real-world oligopolistic pricing takes place.
	
Why, you ask, can’t economists develop a simple formal model of oligopoly? The 
reason lies in the interdependence of oligopolists. Since there are few competitors, 
what one firm does specifically influences what other firms do, so an oligopolist’s 
plan must always be a contingency or strategic plan. If my competitors act one way, I’ll 
do X, but if they act another way, I’ll do Y. Strategic interactions have a variety of 
potential outcomes rather than a single outcome such as in the formal models we dis-
cussed. An oligopolist spends enormous amounts of time guessing what its competi-
tors will do, and it develops a strategy of how it will act accordingly. As we will 
discuss in Chapter 20, an entire theory called game theory has developed that consid-
ers interdependent decisions. The appendix to Chapter 20 shows how game theory can 
be applied to oligopoly decisions.
The Cartel Model
A cartel is a combination of firms that acts as if it were a single firm; a cartel is a 
shared monopoly. If oligopolies can limit entry by other firms, they have a strong 
incentive to cartelize the industry and to act as a monopolist would, restricting output 
to a level that maximizes profit for the combination of firms. Thus, the cartel model 
of oligopoly is a model that assumes that oligopolies act as if they were monopolists 
that have assigned output quotas to individual member firms of the oligopoly so that 
total output is consistent with joint profit maximization. All firms follow a uniform 
pricing policy that serves their collective interest.
	
Since a monopolist makes the most profit that can be squeezed from a market, car-
telization is the best strategy for an oligopoly. It requires each oligopolist to hold its 
production below what would be in its own interest were it not to collude with the oth-
ers. Such explicit formal collusion is against the law in the United States, but informal 
collusion is allowed and oligopolies have developed a variety of methods to collude 
implicitly. Thus, the cartel model has some relevance.
Oligopolistic firms are mutually 
interdependent.
Oligopolies take into account the 
reactions of other firms; monopolistic 
competitors do not.
Q-1  Your study partner, Jean, has just 
said that monopolistic competitors use 
strategic decision making. How would 
you respond?
If oligopolies can limit the entry of other 
firms and form a cartel, they increase 
the profits going to the combination of 
firms in the cartel.

314	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
 	
The model has some problems, however. For example, various firms’ interests 
often differ, so the collective interest of the firms in the industry isn’t clear. In many 
cases a single firm, often the largest or dominant firm, takes the lead in pricing and 
output decisions, and the other firms (which are often called fringe firms) follow suit, 
even though they might have preferred to adopt a different strategy.
	
This dominant-firm cartel model works only if the smaller firms face barriers to 
entry or the dominant firm has significantly lower cost conditions. If that were not the 
case, the smaller firms would pick up an increasing share of the market, eliminating 
the dominant firm’s monopoly. An example of such a dominant-firm market was the 
copier market in the 1960s and 1970s, in which Xerox set the price and other firms 
followed. That copier market also shows the temporary nature of such a market. As the 
firms became more competitive on cost and quality, Xerox’s market share fell and the 
company lost its dominant position. The copier market is far more competitive today 
than it used to be.
 	
In other cases the various firms meet—sometimes only by happenstance, at the 
golf course or at a trade association gathering—and arrive at a collective decision. In 
the United States, meetings for this purpose are illegal, but they do occur. In yet other 
cases, the firms engage in implicit collusion—multiple firms make the same pricing 
decisions even though they have not explicitly consulted with one another. They “just 
happen” to come to a collective decision.
Implicit Price Collusion 
Implicit price collusion, in which firms just happen 
to charge the same price but didn’t meet to discuss price strategy, isn’t against the law. 
Oligopolies often operate as close to the fine edge of the law as they can. For example, 
many oligopolistic industries allow a price leader to set the price, and then the others 
follow suit. The airline and steel industries take that route. Firms just happen to charge 
the same price or very close to the same price.
	
It isn’t only in major industries that you see such implicit collusion. In small towns, 
you’ll notice that most independent carpenters charge the same price. There’s no 
explicit collusion, but were a carpenter to offer to work for less than the others, he or 
she would feel unwelcome at the local breakfast restaurant.
	
Or let’s take another example: the Miami fish market, where sport fishermen sell 
their catch at the dock. When I lived in Miami, I often went to the docks to buy fresh 
fish. There were about 20 stands, all charging the same price. Price fluctuated, but it 
was by subtle agreement, and close to the end of the day the word would go out that 
the price could be reduced.
	
I got to know some of the sellers and asked them why they priced like that when it 
would be in their individual interest to set their own price. Their answer: “We like our 
boat and don’t want it burned.” They may have been talking in hyperbole, but social 
pressures play an important role in stabilizing prices in an oligopoly.
Cartels and Technological Change 
Even if all firms in the industry coop-
erate, other firms, unless they are prevented from doing so, can always enter the market 
with a technologically superior new product at the same price or with the same good at a 
lower price. It is important to remember that technological changes are constantly 
­occurring, and that a successful cartel with high profits will provide incentives for sig-
nificant technological change, which can eliminate demand for its monopolized product.
Why Are Prices Sticky? 
Informal collusion happens all the time in U.S. busi-
nesses. One characteristic of informal collusive behavior is that prices tend to be 
sticky—they don’t change frequently. Informal collusion is an important reason why 
prices are sticky. But it’s not the only reason.
Q-2  Why is it difficult for firms in an 
industry to maintain a cartel?
In some cases, firms collude implicitly—
they just happen to make the same 
pricing decisions. This is not illegal.

	
Chapter 15 ■ Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy	
315
	
Another possible reason is that firms don’t collude, but do have certain expecta-
tions of other firms’ reactions, which changes their perceived demand curves. Specifi-
cally, they perceive that the demand curve they face is kinked. This kinked demand 
curve is used especially to explain why firms often do not use lower-price strategies to 
increase sales.
	
Let’s go through the reasoning behind the kinked demand curve. If a firm increases 
its price, and the firm believes that other firms won’t go along, its perceived demand 
curve for increasing price will be very elastic (D1 in Figure 15-1). It will lose lots of 
business to the other firms that haven’t raised their price. The relevant portions of its 
demand curve and its marginal revenue curve are shown in blue in Figure 15-1.
 	
If it decreases its price, however, the firm assumes that all other firms would imme-
diately match that decrease, so it would gain very few, if any, additional sales. A large 
fall in price would result in only a small increase in sales, so its demand is very inelas-
tic (D2 in Figure 15-1). This less elastic portion of the demand curve and the corre-
sponding marginal revenue curve are shown in red in Figure 15-1.
	
Notice that when you put these two curves together, you get a rather strange demand 
curve (it’s kinked) and an even stranger marginal revenue curve (one with a gap). I didn’t 
make a mistake in drawing the curves; that’s the way they come out given the assumptions. 
When the demand curve has a kink, the marginal revenue curve must have a gap. Shifts in 
marginal cost (such as MC0 to MC1) will not change the firm’s profit maximization 
­position. A large shift in marginal cost is required before firms will change their price. Why 
should this be the case? The intuitive answer lies in the reason behind the kink. If the firm 
raises its price, other firms won’t go along, so it will lose lots of market share. However, 
when the firm lowers price, other firms will go along and the firm won’t gain market share. 
Thus, the firm has strong reasons not to change its price in either direction.
	
I should emphasize that the kinked demand curve is not a theory of oligopoly 
­pricing. It does not say why the original price is what it is; the kinked demand curve is 
simply a theory of sticky prices.
The Contestable Market Model
A second model of oligopoly is the contestable market model. The contestable 
market model is a model of oligopoly in which barriers to entry and barriers to exit, 
not the structure of the market, determine a firm’s price and output decisions. Thus, it 
Q-3  Is the demand curve as 
perceived by an oligopolist likely to be 
more or less elastic for a price increase 
or a price decrease?
When the demand curve has a kink,  
the marginal revenue curve must  
have a gap.
FIGURE 15-1  The Kinked Demand Curve
One explanation for why prices are sticky 
is that firms face a kinked demand curve. 
When we draw the relevant marginal 
revenue curve for the kinked demand, we 
see that the corresponding MR curve is 
discontinuous. It has a gap in it. Shifts in 
marginal costs between c and d will not 
change the price or the output that 
maximizes profits.
Price
a
b
MC0
MC1
D1
c
d
D2
Q
MR
Quantity
0
P

316	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
emphasizes entry and exit conditions, and says that the price that an oligopoly will 
charge will exceed the cost of production only if new firms cannot exit and enter the 
market. The higher the barriers, the more the price exceeds cost. Without barriers to 
entry or exit, the price an oligopolist sets will be equal to the competitive price. Thus, 
an industry that structurally looks like an oligopoly could set competitive prices and 
output levels.
Comparison of the Contestable Market Model  
and the Cartel Model
Because of the importance of social pressures in determining strategies of oligopolies, 
no one “oligopolistic model” exists. Oligopolies with a stronger ability to collude (that 
is, more social pressures to prevent entry) are able to get closer to a monopolist 
­solution. Equilibrium of oligopolies with weaker social pressures and less ability to 
prevent new entry is closer to the perfectly competitive solution. That’s as explicit as 
we can be.
 	
An oligopoly model can take two extremes: (1) the cartel model, in which an 
oligopoly sets a monopoly price, and (2) the contestable market model, in which an oli-
gopoly with no barriers to entry sets a competitive price. Thus, we can say that 
an oligopoly’s price will be somewhere between the competitive price and the 
­monopolistic price. Other models of oligopolies give results in between these two.
	
Much of what happens in oligopoly pricing is highly dependent on the specific 
legal structure within which firms interact. In Japan, where large firms are spe-
cifically allowed to collude, we see Japanese goods that do not face international 
competition selling for a much higher price than those same Japanese goods sell 
for in the United States. For example, before increased international competition, 
Japanese televisions sold in Japan cost as much as twice the amount as the same 
televisions in the United States. From the behavior of Japanese firms, we get a 
sense of what pricing strategy U.S. oligopolists would follow in the absence of the 
restrictions placed on them by law.
New Entry as a Limit on the Cartelization Strategy 
One of the 
things that limits oligopolies from acting as a cartel is the threat from outside competition. 
The threat will tend to be more effective if this outside competitor is much larger than 
the firms in the oligopoly.
	
For example, small-town banks have a tendency to collude (implicitly, of course), 
offering lower interest to savers and charging higher interest to borrowers than big 
banks charge, even though their average costs aren’t significantly higher. When I ask 
small-town banks why this is, they tell me that my perceptions are faulty and that I 
should mind my own business. But if a big bank, which couldn’t care less about 
increasing the wealth of a small-town banker, enters the town and establishes a branch 
office, interest rates to savers seem to go up and interest rates to borrowers seem to go 
down. The big bank can add significant competition—competition that couldn’t come 
from within the town.
	
On a national scale, the outside competition often comes from international firms. 
For example, implicit collusion among U.S. automobile firms led to foreign firms’ 
entry into the U.S. automobile market. There are many such examples of this outside 
competition breaking down cartels with no barriers to entry. Thus, a cartel with no 
barriers to entry faces a long-run demand curve that’s very elastic. This means that its 
price will be very close to its marginal cost and average cost. This is the same predic-
tion that came from the contestable market theory.
In the contestable market model of 
oligopoly, pricing and entry decisions 
are based only on barriers to entry and 
exit, not on market structure. Thus, even 
if the industry contains only one firm, it 
could still be a competitive market if 
entry is open.
Q-4  What are the two extremes an 
oligopoly model can take?
On a national scale, the outside 
competition comes from  
international firms.

	
Chapter 15 ■ Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy	
317
Price Wars 
With oligopolies, there’s always the possibility of a price war. The 
­reasons for such wars are varied. Since oligopolistic firms know their competitors, they 
can personally dislike them; sometimes a firm’s goal can be simply to drive a disliked 
­competitor out of business, even if that process hurts the firm itself. Passion and anger 
play roles in oligopoly pricing because interpersonal and interfirm relations are important.
	
Alternatively, a firm might follow a predatory pricing strategy—a strategy of push-
ing the price down temporarily to drive the other firm out of business to increase long-
term profits. Some argue that Microsoft followed a predatory pricing strategy by 
virtually giving away its Office suites on new computer systems to make its software 
the industry standard. If the predatory pricing strategy is successful, the firm can 
charge an even higher price because potential entrants know that the existing firm will 
drive them out if they try to enter. It’s this continual possibility that strategies can 
change that makes oligopoly prices so hard to predict. (In a later chapter we will dis-
cuss game theory in detail, since it is an important tool that economists use to study 
strategic pricing by oligopolies.)
	
Since we have come to the end of our presentation of the analytics of market struc-
ture, a review is in order. The box “A Comparison of Various Market Structures” on 
the next page provides that review. It lists the four central market structures, and the 
similarities and differences among them. It is worth a careful review.
Classifying Industries and Markets in Practice
An industry seldom fits neatly into one category or another. Inevitably, numerous arbi-
trary decisions must be made as to what the appropriate market is, and whether the 
industry comes closest to the characteristics of one or the other market structure. So to 
classify actual industries, a variety of procedures and measures have been developed, 
and in this section we review those procedures and measures.
	
To see the problems that arise in classifying industries, consider the banking 
industry. There are about 5,000 commercial banks in the United States, and banking 
is considered reasonably competitive. However, a particular small town may have 
only one or two banks, so there will be a monopoly or oligopoly with respect to 
banks in that town. Is the United States or the town the relevant market? The same 
argument exists when we think of international competition. Many firms sell in 
international markets and, while a group of firms may compose an oligopoly in the 
United States, the international market might be more accurately characterized by 
monopolistic competition.
	
Another dimension of the classification problem concerns deciding what is to be 
­included in an industry. If you define the industry as “the transportation industry,” there 
are many firms. If you define it as “the urban transit industry,” there are fewer firms; if 
you define it as “the commuter rail industry,” there are still fewer firms. Similarly with 
the geographic dimension of industry. There’s more competition in the global market 
than in the local market. The narrower the definition, the fewer the firms.
	
One of the ways in which economists classify markets in practice is by ­cross-price 
elasticities (the responsiveness of a change in the demand for a good to a change in the 
price of a related good). Industrial organization economist F. M. Sherer has suggested 
the following rule of thumb: When two goods have a cross-price elasticity greater than 
or equal to 3, they can be regarded as belonging to the same market.
The North American Industry Classification System
The North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) is an industry 
­classification that categorizes industries by type of economic activity and groups firms 

318
with like production processes. In the NAICS, all firms are placed into 20 broadly 
­defined two-digit sectors. These two-digit sectors are further subdivided into three-
digit subsectors, four-digit industry groupings, five-digit industries, and six-digit 
national industry groupings. Each subgrouping becomes more and more narrowly 
defined. ­Table 15-1 lists the 20 sectors and shows some subgroupings for one sector, 
Information, to give you an idea of what’s included in each.
	
When economists talk about industry structure, they generally talk about industries 
in the four- to six-digit subsector groupings in the United States. This is a convention. 
Economists are often called on to give expert testimony in court cases, and if an 
­economist wants to argue that an industry is more competitive than its opponents say it 
is, he or she challenges this convention of using a four- to six-digit classification of 
industry, asserting that the classification is arbitrary (which it is) and that the relevant 
market should be the two- to three-digit classification.
Q-5  Which would have more output: 
the two-digit industry 21 or the four-digit 
industry 2111? Explain your reasoning.
A REMINDER
A Comparison of Various Market Structures
P and MC
Proﬁt
Interdependence
Output Decisions
Pricing Decisions
Barriers to Entry
Structure
Characteristics
P > MC
MC = MR
Possibility of long-run
economic proﬁt
Only ﬁrm in market, 
not concerned about
competitors
Most output restriction
Signiﬁcant
Monopoly
One
P > MC
Strategic pricing, 
between monopoly
and perfect competition
Output somewhat
restricted
Interdependent strategic 
pricing and output
decision
Some long-run
economic proﬁt
possible
Signiﬁcant
Oligopoly
Few
P > MC
MC = MR
Output restricted
somewhat by
product diﬀerentiation
Each ﬁrm acts
independently
No long-run
economic proﬁt
possible
Few
Monopolistic
Competition
Many
P = MC
MC = MR = P
No output restriction
Each ﬁrm acts
independently
No long-run
economic proﬁt
possible
Almost inﬁnite
Perfect
Competition
Number of Firms
None

	
Chapter 15 ■ Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy	
319
Empirical Measures of Industry Structure
To empirically measure industry structure, economists use one of two methods: the 
concentration ratio or the Herfindahl index.
	
A concentration ratio is the value of sales by the top firms of an industry stated as 
a percentage of total industry sales. The most commonly used concentration ratio is 
the four-firm concentration ratio. For example, a four-firm concentration ratio of 
60 percent tells you that the top four firms in the industry produce 60 percent of the 
industry’s output. The higher the ratio, the closer the industry is to an oligopolistic or 
monopolistic type of market structure.
	
 The Herfindahl index is an index of market concentration calculated by adding 
the squared value of the individual market shares of all the firms in the industry. For 
example, say that 10 firms in the industry each has 10 percent of the market:
Herfindahl index = 102 + 102 + 102 + 102 + 102 + 102 + 102 + 102 + 102 + 102  
= 1,000
The Herfindahl index weights the largest firms in the industry more heavily than does 
the concentration ratio because it squares market shares.
	
The two measures can differ because of their construction, but generally if the con-
centration ratio is high, so is the Herfindahl index. Table 15-2 presents the four-firm 
concentration ratio and the Herfindahl index of selected industries.
	
The Herfindahl index plays an important role in government policy; it is used as a 
rule of thumb by the U.S. Department of Justice in determining whether an industry is 
The Herfindahl index is a method  
used by economists to classify how 
competitive an industry is.
Because it squares market shares, the 
Herfindahl index gives more weight to 
firms with large market shares than does 
the concentration ratio measure.
Q-6  If the four-firm concentration 
ratio of an industry is 60 percent, what 
is the highest Herfindahl index that 
industry could have? What is the lowest?
TABLE 15-1  Industry Groupings in the North American Industry Classification System
Two-Digit Sectors	
Three- to Five-Digit Subsectors
11	
Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting	
21	
Mining	
22	
Utilities	
23	
Construction	
31–33	Manufacturing	
42	
Wholesale trade	
44–45	Retail trade	
48–49	Transportation and warehousing	
51  Information
51	
Information	
	
511  Publishing Industries (except Internet)
52	
Finance and insurance	
	
	
5111  Newspaper, Periodical, Book, and Directory Publishers
53	
Real estate and rental and leasing	
	
	
	 51111  Newspaper Publishers
54	
Professional, scientific, and technical services	
55	
Management of companies and enterprises	
56	
Administrative and support, and waste  
	
management and remediation services	
61	
Educational services	
62	
Health care and social assistance	
71	
Arts, entertainment, and recreation	
72	
Accommodation and food services	
81	
Other services (except public administration)	
92	
Public administration	
Source: U.S. Census Bureau (www.census.gov/eos/www/naics).
 ⎛
 ⎜
⎨
 ⎜
 ⎝

320	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
sufficiently competitive to allow a merger between two large firms. If the Herfindahl 
index is less than 1,000, the Department of Justice generally assumes the industry is 
sufficiently competitive, and it doesn’t look more closely at the merger. This policy 
may change in the future.
Conglomerate Firms and Bigness
Neither the four-firm concentration ratio nor the Herfindahl index gives us a picture of 
corporations’ bigness. That’s because many corporations are conglomerates—companies 
that span a variety of unrelated industries. For example, a conglomerate might produce 
both shoes and automobiles.
	
To see that concentration ratios are not an index of bigness, say the entire United 
States had only 11 firms, each with a 9 percent share of each industry. Both indexes 
would classify the U.S. economy as unconcentrated, but many people would seriously 
doubt whether that were the case. Little work has been done on classifying conglomerates 
or in determining whether they affect an industry’s performance.
Oligopoly Models and Empirical Estimates  
of Market Structure 
To see how empirical measures of market structure relate to oligopoly models, let’s 
consider the cartel and contestable market models of oligopoly. The cartel model fits 
best with these empirical measurements of market concentration because it assumes 
that the structure of the market (the number of firms) is directly related to the price a 
firm charges. It predicts that oligopolies charge higher prices than do monopolistic 
competitors, who in turn charge higher prices than competitive firms charge.
	
The contestable market model gives far less weight to the empirical estimates of 
market structure. According to it, markets that structurally look highly oligopolistic 
could actually be highly competitive—much more so than markets that structurally 
look less competitive. This contestable market model view of judging markets by 
performance, not structure, has had many reincarnations. Close relatives of it have 
Q-7  The Herfindahl index is 1,500. 
Using a contestable market approach, 
what would you conclude about this 
industry?
TABLE 15-2  Empirical Measures of Industry Structure
 	
Four-Firm	
Herfindahl 
Industry	
Concentration Ratio	
Index
Poultry	
46	
773
Soft drinks	
52	
896
Breakfast cereal	
78	
2,999
Women’s and misses’ dresses	
21	
186
Book printing	
38	
492
Stationery	
51	
976
Soap and detergent	
38	
664
Men’s footwear	
44	
734
Women’s footwear	
64	
1,556
Pharmaceuticals	
34	
506
Computer and peripheral equipment	
49	
1,183
Radio, TV, wireless broadcasting	
42	
583
Burial caskets	
73	
2,965
Source: Census of Manufacturers (http://factfinder2.census.gov).

	
Chapter 15 ■ Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy	
321
previously been called the barriers-to-entry model, the stay-out pricing model, and 
the limit-pricing model. These models provide a view of competition that doesn’t 
depend on market structure.
	
To see the implications of the contestable market approach, let’s consider an 
­oligopoly with a four-firm concentration ratio of 60 percent and a Herfindahl index of 
1,500. Using the structural approach, we would say that, because of the multiplicity of 
oligopoly models, we’re not quite sure what price firms in this industry would charge, 
but that it seems reasonable to assume that there would be some implicit collusion and 
that the price would be closer to a monopolist price than to a competitive price. If that 
same market had a four-firm concentration ratio of 30 percent and a Herfindahl index 
of 700, the industry would be more likely to have a competitive price.
	
A contestable market model advocate would disagree, arguing that barriers to entry 
and exit are what’s important. If no significant barriers to entry exist in the first case 
but significant barriers to entry exist in the second case, the second case would be more 
monopolistic than the first. An example is the Miami fish market mentioned earlier, 
where there were 20 sellers (none with a large percentage of the market) and significant 
barriers to entry (only fishers from the pier were allowed to sell fish there and the slots 
at the pier were limited). Because of those entry limitations, the pricing and output 
decisions would be close to the monopolistic price. If you took that same structure but 
had free entry, you’d get much closer to competitive decisions.
	
As I presented the two views, I emphasized the differences in order to make the distinc-
tion clear. However, I must also point out that there’s a similarity in the two views. Often 
barriers to entry are the reason there are only a few firms in an industry. And when there 
are many firms, that suggests that there are few barriers to entry. In such situations, which 
make up the majority of cases, the two approaches come to the same conclusion.
Antitrust Policy
Now that we’ve gone over the four major market structures in theory, and the way in 
which industries are classified in practice, let’s consider government’s role in affecting 
market structure. That role goes under the name antitrust policy in the United States 
and competition policy in some other countries.
Judgment by Performance or Structure?
Antitrust policy is the government’s policy toward the competitive process. It’s the 
government’s rulebook for carrying out its role as referee. In volleyball, for instance, 
the rulebook would answer such questions as: When should a foul be called? When 
has a person caught and thrown rather than hit the ball over the net? In business a ref-
eree is needed for such questions as: When can two companies merge? What competi-
tive practices are legal? When is a company too big? To what extent is it fair for two 
companies to coordinate their pricing policies? When is a market sufficiently com-
petitive or too monopolistic?
	
The United States has seen wide swings in economists’ prescriptions concerning 
such questions, depending on which of the two views of competition has held sway. 
The two competing views are:
1.	Judgment by performance: We should judge the competitiveness of markets 
by the performance (behavior) of firms in that market.
2.	Judgment by structure: We should judge the competitiveness of markets by 
the structure of the industry.
Two examples illustrate the difference. 
Q-8  The Herfindahl index is 1,500. 
Using a structural analysis of markets 
approach, what would you conclude 
about this industry?
At different times, U.S. antitrust law 
has been based on two competing 
views: judgment by performance and 
judgment by structure.

322	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Standard Oil: Judging Market Competitiveness  
by Performance
In the late 1880s, a number of trusts (cartels) in the railroad, steel, tobacco, and oil 
industries were created by what were sometimes called robber barons (organizers of 
trusts who engaged in the ­exploitation of natural resources and other unethical behavior). 
The trusts were seen as making enormous profits, preventing competition, and in gen-
eral bullying everyone in sight. One such cartel was the Standard Oil Trust, created by 
John D. Rockefeller, which used its monopoly power to close refineries, raise prices, and 
limit the production of oil. In response the U.S. Congress passed the Sherman ­Antitrust 
Act of 1890—a law designed to regulate the competitive process. 
	
In 1908 the government brought a lawsuit against Standard Oil for violating the  
Sherman Antitrust Act. In 1911 the U.S. Supreme Court handed down its opinion. It 
was determined that Standard Oil controlled 90 percent of the market and thus was 
definitely a monopoly. However, the Court decided that the monopolistic market struc-
ture did not violate the Sherman Antitrust Act. To be guilty of antitrust violations there 
had to be evidence that the firm used its monopoly power to its benefit, and the court 
found that Standard Oil was indeed guilty of “unfair business practices.” The resolution 
was to break up Standard Oil, which made the distinction between judgment by perfor-
mance and judgment by structure academic. In 1914 the Sherman Antitrust Act was 
clarified and strengthened with the Clayton Antitrust Act, which identified specific 
practices as illegal and monopolistic.
	
The structure/performance distinction was important in a case involving U.S. Steel 
in 1920. Here the Supreme Court ruled that although U.S. Steel controlled a majority of the 
market and was therefore a structural monopoly, it was not a monopoly in performance. 
That is, it had not used unfair business practices to become a monopolist or once it was 
a monopolist, and thus it was not in violation of antitrust law. Unlike Standard Oil, 
U.S. Steel was not required to break up into small companies. 
The ALCOA Case: Judging Market  
Competitiveness by Structure
Judgment by performance was the primary criterion governing antitrust policy until 
1945, when the U.S. courts changed their interpretation of the law with the Aluminum 
Company of America (ALCOA) case. ALCOA was the only producer of aluminum in 
the United States, a position it built by using its knowledge of the market to expand its 
capacity before any competitors had a chance to enter the market. Like U.S. Steel it 
had not used unfair business practices to become a monopolist. This time, however, the 
courts focused on the structure of the market and ruled ALCOA to be in violation of 
antitrust laws, even though it was not guilty of monopoly behavior. 
Judging Markets by Structure and Performance: The Reality
Both judgment by structure and judgment by performance have their problems. 
­Judgment by structure seems unfair on a gut level. After all, in economics the pur-
pose of competition is to motivate firms to produce better goods than their com-
petitors are producing, and to do so at lower cost. If a firm is competing so 
successfully that all the other firms leave the industry, the successful firm will be a 
monopolist, and on the basis of judgment by structure will be guilty of antitrust 
violations. Under the judgment-by-structure criterion, a firm is breaking the law if 
it does what it’s supposed to be doing: producing the best product it can at the low-
est possible cost.
The outcome of the Standard Oil case 
was determined by performance. The 
ALCOA case was determined by market 
structure.
Q-9  How was market 
competitiveness judged in the Standard 
Oil and ALCOA cases?
Both judgment by structure and 
judgment by performance have  
their problems.

323
	
Supporters of the judgment-by-structure criterion recognize this problem but none-
theless favor the structure criterion. An important reason for this is practicality.
	
Judgment by performance requires that each action of a firm be analyzed on a case-
by-case basis. Doing that is enormously time-consuming and expensive. In some inter-
pretations, actions of a firm might be considered appropriate competitive behavior; in 
other interpretations, the same actions might be considered inappropriate. For example, 
say that an automobile company requires that in order for its warranty to hold, owners 
of its warranteed vehicles must use only the company’s parts and service centers. Is 
this requirement of the automobile company intended to create a monopoly position 
for its parts and service center divisions or to ensure proper maintenance? The answer 
depends on the context of the action.
	
The problem is that judging each case contextually is beyond the courts’ capabilities. 
There are so many firms and so many actions that the courts can’t judge all industries on 
their performance. To solve this problem the courts limit the cases they look at using 
­market share, even though it is firms’ performance that will ultimately be judged. 
	
Judging by market structure also has difficulties. As you saw in the discussion 
of monopolistic competition, it’s difficult to determine the relevant geographic 
market (local, national, or international) and the relevant industry (three-digit or 
five-digit NAICS code) necessary to identify the structural competitiveness of 
any industry. 
An important reason supporting the 
structure criterion is practicality.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
It isn’t only the federal government that has laws regulat-
ing competition. States do also. One such state law is  
Arkansas’ Unfair Practices Act, which prohibits selling, or 
advertising for sale, items below cost “for the purpose of 
injuring competitors and destroying competition.” In the 
early 1990s, three ­Arkansas pharmacies sued Walmart for 
violating this law by selling its goods at “too low” a price.
	
Walmart initially lost the suit in Arkansas; 
however, in 1995 the Arkansas Supreme 
Court overturned the lower court decision 
and held that Walmart’s pricing was not part 
of a strategy to price below cost over a 
­prolonged period.
	
We may see more such suits, espe-
cially in the pricing of prescription phar-
maceuticals, since Walmart introduced a 
$4 price for a 30-day prescription of a 
variety of generic drugs (including 14 of 
the top 20 best-selling ­prescription drugs) and other dis-
count stores followed suit. However, these suits are likely 
to fail for two reasons. First, Walmart now takes into ac-
count state laws, and the $4 program is not available in 
states where its lawyers see the state laws as a potential 
problem. And second, the competition has changed. 
Back in the 1990s, Walmart was competing with local 
Walmart, State Laws, and Competition
drug stores that had high profit margins but low volume. 
Now it’s competing with other chains—Kmart, Target, 
BJ’s, Sam’s Club—that have entered the prescription 
drug market and established their own low-cost ­generic 
programs.
	
All of these chains argue that when they charge a low 
price, they are not doing it to “destroy competition” or  
“injure competitors,” but rather to 
maintain low prices for consumers. 
They claim that their pricing policies 
promote, not destroy, ­competition.
In principle, most economists agree 
with Walmart and other chains; new 
competition, by its very nature, hurts 
­existing businesses—that’s the way 
the competitive process works. Those 
who don’t sell for the lowest price 
lose, and those who do gain. But most 
economists also recognize that Walmart’s brand of com-
petition can ­affect the social fabric of small-town econo-
mies. A new Walmart store can undermine the town 
centers and replace them with commercial sprawl on the 
outskirts of these towns. Whether these externalities are 
a reason to limit Walmart’s aggressive pricing policies is a 
debatable question.
© David McNew/Getty Images

324	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	
The relevant industry question played a large part in the Department of Justice’s 
opposition to a merger between Gillette and Parker Pens in 1993. The government 
argued that the combined firm would control about 40 percent of the premium-fountain-pen 
market. The Court, however, allowed the merger, arguing that the relevant market was 
much larger—the market for premium writing instruments, which also included 
mechanical pencils, ballpoint pens, and rollerballs. The premium-writing-instruments 
market had many more competitors than the premium-fountain-pen market.
	
Similar ambiguities exist with the decision about the relevant geographic market. In the 
Pabst Brewing case (1966), the definition of the market played a key role. Pabst wanted to 
merge with the Blatz Brewing Company. On a national scale, both companies were rela-
tively small, accounting together for about 4.5 percent of beer sales in the United States as 
a whole. Pabst argued that the United States was the relevant market. The Court, however, 
decided that Wisconsin, where Pabst had its headquarters, was the relevant market, and 
since the two firms held a 24 percent share of that market, the merger was not allowed.
	
What should one make of debates regarding relevant markets? The bottom line is 
that both structure and performance criteria have ambiguities, and in the real world 
there are no definitive criteria for judging whether a firm has violated the antitrust 
statutes. A firm isn’t at fault or in the clear until the courts make the call.
The Role of Antitrust in Today’s Economy
In the early 2000s the U.S. government became more lenient in its interpretation of 
antitrust laws and has brought few major antitrust cases to the courts. One of the rea-
sons for this is that a century of experience has taught businesses what the law allows, 
which means that antitrust laws work as a preventive measure. Often the threat of an 
antitrust case is sufficient. An example occurred in 2015 when Comcast Cable aban-
doned a proposed merger with Time Warner Cable when the Justice Department stated 
that it would likely oppose the merger on antitrust grounds.
	
A second reason is a change in American ideology. Whereas in the 1950s and 
1960s the prevailing ideology saw big business as “bad,” starting in the 1980s big 
business became seen as a combination of good and bad. In this new ideological 
framework, the political pressure to push antitrust enforcement waned.
	
A third reason why U.S. antitrust enforcement has been less active in recent years 
is that as the United States has become more integrated into the global economy, big 
business is facing significant international competition, and hence the U.S. market 
structure has become less of an indicator of monopoly power. 
	
While U.S. antitrust authorities have been less active, other countries’ antitrust 
agencies have been more aggressive, and global companies must now take into account 
likely antitrust implications of multiple jurisdictions, such as China and the EU. For 
example, Google recently faced antitrust litigation in Europe because European anti-
trust authorities felt that Google’s search engine favored its comparative shopping ser-
vice, even though that search engine passed muster with U.S. antitrust authorities.
	
A fourth reason why is that technologies have become more complicated. As they 
have, the issues in antitrust enforcement have also become more complicated for the 
courts to handle. Often, by the time the legal system has resolved a case, the technol-
ogy has changed so much that the issues in that case are no longer relevant. An exam-
ple can be seen in the famous Microsoft case of the 1990s.
The Microsoft Case 
One of the major antitrust cases brought in the 1990s was 
the Microsoft case; it is worth a review because it raises many of the difficult ques-
tions about competition, the competitive process, and government’s role in that com-
petitive process that have changed the way the government undertakes antitrust policy.
Both structure and performance criteria 
have ambiguities, and in the real world 
there are no definitive criteria for judging 
whether a firm has violated the antitrust 
statutes.

325
	
When the antitrust case was brought against Microsoft, sales of Microsoft soft-
ware accounted for about 50 percent of the world’s software market, and about 90 per-
cent of the world’s computer operating system software market.
	
Since all software must be compatible with an operating system, the widespread 
use of Windows gives Microsoft enormous power within the personal computer industry—
power that competitors claimed was used to gain competitive advantage for its other 
divisions. Competitors’ calls for action, and reports of monopolistically abusive acts by 
Microsoft, led the U.S. Department of Justice in 1998 to charge Microsoft with violating 
antitrust laws.
	
The government suit against Microsoft charged the company with being a monop-
oly and using that monopoly power in a predatory way. Specifically, it charged 
­Microsoft with:
1.	Possessing monopoly power in the market for personal computer operating 
systems.
2.	Tying other Microsoft software products to its Windows operating system.
3.	Entering into agreements that keep computer manufacturers that install 
­Windows from offering competing software.
Microsoft had dominated the market for PC operating systems for about a decade. The 
U.S. Department of Justice argued that this long-standing monopoly position was 
the result of unfair business practices. Microsoft argued that Windows sold so well 
­because it was a superior product. Microsoft further argued that, because it faced 
­competition from technological change, it was not a monopolist.
	
Competition came from open-source (free) operating systems such as Linux 
and Java and more recently “cloud computing” services such as those provided by 
Whether one sees Microsoft as  
a monopolist depends in part on 
whether one views it in a static or 
dynamic framework.
© Radu Bercan/Shutterstock.com
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
In a secretly recorded comment during a price-fixing meet-
ing, the former president of Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), 
a major supplier of food and grain, stated, “Our competi-
tors are our friends and our customers are our enemies.”
	
The U.S. antitrust laws concern far 
more than mergers and market struc-
ture; they also place legal restrictions 
on certain practices of businesses such 
as price-fixing. By law, firms are not al-
lowed to explicitly collude in order to 
fix prices above the competitive level. 
A key aspect of the law is the explicit 
nature of the collusion that is disal-
lowed. Airlines, gas ­stations, and firms 
in many other industries have prices 
that generally move in tandem—when 
one firm changes its price, others seem to follow. Such 
practices would suggest that these firms are implicitly 
colluding, but they are not violating the law unless there 
is explicit collusion.
Nefarious Business Practices
	
To prove explicit collusion is difficult—there must be a 
smoking gun, and there is seldom sufficient evidence of ex-
plicit collusion to prosecute businesses. There are excep-
tions, ­however. In 1996, ADM was caught red-handed when 
one of its former officials gave prosecutors 
tapes of meetings in which price-fixing oc-
curred. Meeting secretly around the world, 
in countries like Mexico, France, Canada, 
and Japan, ADM executives tried to fix 
prices of Lysine, a feed additive, and citric 
acid. One of ADM’s officials, working un-
dercover for the FBI, secretly recorded 
these meetings. Faced with the taped evi-
dence against it, ADM agreed to pay $100 
million in fines—the largest criminal anti-
trust fine in history up to that year. Since 
that time, fines have risen to even greater sums, with LG, 
Sharp, and Hitachi paying a fine of $860 million for price-­
fixing. The largest fines, however, have been paid by banks 
who were fined $5.8 billion for fixing interest rates.
© ADRIAN DENNIS/AFP/Getty Images

326	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Internet browser Chrome. Cloud computing provides software services to cell 
phones, ­computers, and ­tablets over the Internet, which eliminates the need for 
compatibility between hardware and software. Microsoft argued that each of these 
changes had eroded Microsoft’s monopoly ­advantage. 
	
In 2000 a judge concluded that Microsoft had violated the Sherman Antitrust Act 
and proposed breaking Microsoft into two companies. ­Microsoft appealed and eventu-
ally the Department of Justice and Microsoft reached an agreement. Microsoft would 
not be broken up, but its practices would be regulated to prevent predatory behavior 
that served to raise barriers to entry. This regulation ­reduced Microsoft’s dominance 
but the development of new technologies has played a larger role in reducing that 
dominance. As many of the functions of the PC have been ­replaced by mobile apps, 
many of which were not Windows-based, Microsoft’s ­monopoly over operating sys-
tems has been reduced. Today, Microsoft is no longer seen as a monopoly, even with 
its control of the Windows operating system, but instead as a company that faces sig-
nificant competition on multiple dimensions.
 	
An important lesson learned from this and other cases is that rapid technological 
change often alters the nature of industries and introduces competition in ways that 
previously had not been possible. The slow-moving antitrust laws governing mergers 
are usually years behind. That said, politics and ideological mood can shift, leading 
government to take a more active antitrust role. In the second half of President 
Obama’s presidency such a shift occurred, as the U.S. government began challenging 
more proposed mergers.
Assessment of U.S. Antitrust Policy
Economic scholars’ overall assessment of antitrust policy is mixed. In certain cases, 
such as the ALCOA case, most agree that antitrust prosecution went too far. But most 
believe that other decisions (as in the 1911 Standard Oil case) set a healthy precedent 
by encouraging a more competitive U.S. business environment. Almost all agree that 
antitrust enforcement has not reduced the size of firms below the minimally efficient 
level, the level at which a firm can take full advantage of economies of scale. But they 
are mixed in their judgments as to whether the enforcement was needed. Performance 
advocates generally believe that it was not, while structural advocates generally 
believe that it was. They are also mixed in their judgment about whether any type of 
antitrust action is feasible in a technologically dynamic industry such as computers or 
telecommunications.
Conclusion
We’ve come to the end of our discussion of market structure and government policy 
toward the competitive process. What conclusion should we reach? That’s a tough 
question ­because the problem has so many dimensions. What we can say is that market 
structure is important, and generally more competition is preferred to less competi-
tion. We can also say that, based on experience, government-created and protected 
monopolies have not been the optimal solution, especially when industries are expe-
riencing technological change. But how government should deal with monopolies 
that develop as part of the competitive process is less clear. Competition has both 
dynamic elements and market structure ­elements, and often monopolies that develop 
as part of the competitive process are ­temporary—and they will be overwhelmed by 
other monopolies. Thus, the debate about government entering into the market to 
protect competition has no single answer, which makes cases like the Microsoft 
­antitrust case difficult to resolve.
Q-10  What was the resolution  
of the Microsoft case?
Rapid technological change alters the 
nature of industries and introduces 
competition in ways that previously had 
not been possible.
Economists’ judgment on antitrust  
policy is mixed.
The debate about government entering 
into the market to protect competition 
has no single answer.

	
Chapter 15 ■ Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy	
327
• The two distinguishing characteristics of an 
­oligopolistic market are (1) there are a small number  
of firms and (2) firms engage in strategic decision 
making.  (LO15-1)
• A contestable market theory of oligopoly judges an 
­industry’s competitiveness more by performance and 
barriers to entry than by structure. Cartel models of 
­oligopoly concentrate on market structure.  (LO15-2)
• An oligopolist’s price will be somewhere between 
the competitive price and the monopolistic 
price.  (LO15-2)
• Industries are classified by economic activity in the 
North American Industry Classification System 
(NAICS). Industry structures are measured by concen-
tration ratios and Herfindahl indexes.  (LO15-3)
• A concentration ratio is the sum of the market shares 
of individual firms with the largest shares in an 
­industry.  (LO15-3)
Summary
• A Herfindahl index is the sum of the squares of the 
individual market shares of all firms in an 
­industry.  (LO15-3)
• Antitrust policy is the government’s policy toward the 
competitive process.  (LO15-4)
• There is a debate about whether markets should be 
judged on the basis of structure or on the basis of 
­performance.  (LO15-4)
• Judgment by performance means judging the competi-
tiveness of markets by the behavior of firms in that 
market. Judgment by structure means judging the 
competitiveness of markets by how many firms oper-
ate in the industry and their market shares.  (LO15-4)
• In 2000 the courts found that Microsoft had a 
­monopoly that was protected by barriers to entry 
and that Microsoft engaged in practices to maintain 
that ­monopoly power. Microsoft agreed to stop 
some practices.  (LO15-4)
Key Terms
antitrust policy 
cartel 
cartel model of oligopoly 
concentration ratio 
contestable market model 
Herfindahl index 
implicit collusion 
judgment by performance 
judgment by structure 
North American Industry 
Classification System 
(NAICS) 
oligopoly 
strategic decision  
making 
Questions and Exercises
 	1. 	What distinguishes oligopoly from monopolistic 
­competition?  (LO15-1)
	 2.	 Is an oligopolist more or less likely to engage in 
­strategic decision making compared to a monopolistic 
competitor?  (LO15-1)
	 3.	 What is the difference between the contestable market 
model and the cartel model of oligopoly?  (LO15-2)
	 4.	 How are the contestable market model and the cartel 
model of oligopoly related?  (LO15-2)
	 5.	 Robert Crandell, former CEO of American Airlines, phoned 
the Braniff Airways CEO and said, “Raise your fares 
20 percent and I’ll raise mine the next morning.”  (LO15-2)
	a.	 Why would he do this?
	b.	 If you were the Braniff Airways CEO, would you have 
gone along?
	c.	 Why should Crandell not have done this?
	 6.	 Kellogg’s, which controls 32 percent of the breakfast  
cereal market, cut the prices of some of its best-selling 
brands of cereal to regain market share lost to Post, 
which controls 20 percent of the market. General Mills 
has 24 percent of the market. The price cuts were ex-
pected to trigger a price war. Based on this information, 
what market structure best ­characterizes the market for 
breakfast cereal?  (LO15-2)
	 7.	 In the 1990s Mattel proposed acquiring Fisher-Price for 
$1.2 billion. At the time, Mattel was a major player in  
the toy industry with 11 percent of the market. Fisher-
Price had 4 percent. The other two large firms were Tyco, 
with a 5 percent share, and Hasbro, with a 15 percent 
share. In the infant/preschool toy market, Mattel had  
an 8 percent share and Fisher-Price had a 27 percent 
share, the largest. The other two large firms were Hasbro, 

328	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
with a 25 percent share, and Rubbermaid, with a  
12 percent share.  (LO15-3)
	a.	 What were the approximate Herfindahl and four-firm 
concentration ratios for these industries? (Assume all 
other firms in each industry had 1 percent of the 
­market each.)
	b.	 If you were Mattel’s economist, which industry 
­definition would you suggest using in court if you 
were challenged by the government?
	c.	 Give an argument why the merger might decrease 
competition.
	d.	 Give an argument why the merger might increase 
competition.
	 8.	 Which industry is more highly concentrated: one with a 
Herfindahl index of 1,200 or one with a four-firm 
­concentration ratio of 55 percent?  (LO15-3)
	 9.	 The pizza market is divided as follows:  (LO15-3)
Pizza Hut	
20.7%
Domino’s	
17.0
Little Caesars	
6.7
Pizza Inn/Pantera’s	
2.2
Round Table	
2.0
All others	
51.4
	a.	 How would you describe its market structure?
	b.	 What is the approximate Herfindahl index?
	c.	 What is the four-firm concentration ratio?
	10.	 If you were an economist for a firm that wanted to merge, 
would you argue that the three-digit or five-digit NAICS 
industry is the relevant market? Why?  (LO15-3)
	11.	 Suppose you are an economist for Mattel, manufacturer 
of the doll Barbie, which was making an unsolicited 
bid to take over Hasbro, manufacturer of the doll  
G.I. Joe.  (LO15-4)
	a.	 Would you argue that the relevant market is dolls, 
­preschool toys, or all toys including video games? Why?
	b.	 Would your answer change if you were working for 
Hasbro?
	12.	 What is the difference between judgment by performance 
and judgment by structure?  (LO15-4)
	13.	 Is a contestable model or cartel model more likely to judge an 
industry by performance? Explain your answer.  (LO15-4)
	14.	 Distinguish the basis of judgment for the Standard Oil and 
the ALCOA cases.  (LO15-4)
	15.	 Demonstrate graphically how regulating the price of a 
monopolist can both increase quantity and decrease price. 
(Difficult)  (LO15-4)
	a.	 Why did the regulation have the effect it did?
	b.	 How relevant to the real world do you believe this 
­result is in the contestable markets view of the 
­competitive process?
	c.	 How relevant to the real world do you believe this result 
is in the cartel view of the competitive process?
	16.	 Discuss the effect of antitrust policy in the:  (LO15-4)
	a.	 Monopolistic competition model.
	b.	 Cartel model of oligopoly.
	c.	 Contestable market model of oligopoly.
	17.	 In what market did Microsoft have a monopoly in the late 
1990s and early 2000s?  (LO15-4)
	18.	 What technological advances threatened Microsoft’s 
­monopoly?  (LO15-4)
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 In the past two chapters you have learned much about 
market power: how it is used, the efficiency implications, 
and how society has responded. Yet this power remains, 
albeit minimally checked from time to time. The econo-
mist Thorstein Veblen would not be surprised by this. He 
would argue that firms use market power because they 
can. How do monopolists use “power” to manipulate 
­outcomes? (Institutionalist)
	 2.	 Alexis de Tocqueville once stated, “The Americans have 
applied to the sexes the great principle of political economy 
which governs the manufacturers of our age, by carefully 
dividing the duties of men from those of women, in order 
that the great work of society may be the better carried on.”
	a.	 Do you agree with his statement?
	b.	 What problems might his argument have? (Feminist)
	 3.	 In which market structure would women likely be most 
successful? Why? (Feminist)
	 4.	 Does market structure determine firm behavior or does firm 
behavior determine market structure? (Post-Keynesian)
	 5.	 A Businessweek magazine study of mergers and acquisi-
tions between 1990 and 1995 found that 83 percent of these 
deals achieved, at best, marginal returns, and 50 percent 
­recorded a loss.
	a.	 If such mergers are not especially profitable, why do 
they occur?
	b.	 U.S. antitrust policy has changed dramatically since the 
1960s when the government regularly blocked mergers 
among companies in the same industry. Today, the 
­federal government is much less active; it allows almost 
all mergers. Is this new approach justified, or has 
­government just given in to the powers that be?
	c.	 What antitrust policies would work best in today’s 
U.S. economy? (Radical)

	
Chapter 15 ■ Oligopoly and Antitrust Policy	
329
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 A firm is convinced that if it lowers its price, no other firm in 
the industry will change price; however, it believes that if it 
raises its price, some other firms will match its increase, 
making its demand curve more inelastic. The current price is 
$8 and its marginal cost is constant at $4. 
	a.	 Sketch the general shape of the firm’s MR, MC, and 
demand curves and show why there are two possible 
equilibria.
	b.	 If there are two equilibria, which of the two do you 
think the firms will arrive at? Why?
	c.	 If the marginal cost falls to $3, what would you ­predict 
would happen to price?
	d.	 If the marginal cost rises to $5, what would you 
­predict would happen to price?
	e.	 Do a survey of five or six firms in your area. Ask 
them how they believe other firms would respond 
to their increasing or decreasing price. Based on 
that survey, discuss the relevance of this kinked 
­demand model compared to the one presented in 
the book.
	 2.	 Private colleges of the same caliber generally charge 
roughly the same tuition. Would you characterize these 
colleges as a cartel type of oligopoly?  
	 3.	 In the 1990s, the infant/preschool toy market four-firm 
concentration ratio was 72 percent. With 8 percent of the 
market, Mattel was the fourth-largest firm in that market. 
Mattel proposed to buy Fisher-Price, the market leader 
with 27 percent.
	a.	 Why would Mattel want to buy Fisher-Price?
	b.	 What arguments can you think of in favor of allowing 
this acquisition?
	c.	 What arguments can you think of against allowing this 
acquisition?
	d.	 How do you think the four-firm concentration ratio for 
the entire toy industry would compare to this infant/
preschool toy market concentration ratio?
	 4.	 How would the U.S. economy likely differ today if Stan-
dard Oil had not been broken up? 
	 5.	 In 1992 American Airlines offered a 50-percent-off sale 
and cut fares. In 1993 Continental Airlines and Northwest 
Airlines sued American Airlines over this action. 
	a.	 What was the likely basis of the suit?
	b.	 How does the knowledge that Continental and Northwest 
were in serious financial trouble play a role in the suit? 
	 6.	 You’re working at the Department of Justice. Ms. Ecofame 
has just developed a new index, the Ecofame index, which 
she argues is preferable to the Herfindahl index. The 
­Ecofame index is calculated by cubing the market share of 
the top 10 firms in the industry.
	a.	 Calculate an Ecofame guideline that would correspond 
to the Department of Justice guidelines.
	b.	 State the advantages and disadvantages of the ­Ecofame 
index as compared to the Herfindahl index.
	 7.	 What did Adam Smith mean when he wrote, “Seldom do 
businessmen of the same trade get together but that it results 
in some detriment to the general public”?
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 I would respond that monopolistic competitors, by 
­definition, do not take into account the expected 
­reactions of competitors to their decisions; therefore, 
they cannot use strategic decision making. I would tell 
Jean she probably meant, “Oligopolies use strategic 
­decision making.”  (LO15-1)
	 2.	 Maintaining a cartel requires firms to make decisions 
that are not in their individual best interests. Such 
­decisions are hard to enforce unless there is an 
explicit enforcement mechanism, which is difficult  
in a ­cartel.  (LO15-2)
	 3.	 The demand curve perceived by an oligopolist is more elastic 
above the current price because it believes that others will 
not follow price increases. If it increased price, its quantity 
demanded would fall by a lot. The opposite is true below the 
current price. The demand curve below current price is less 
elastic. Price declines would be matched by competitors and 
the oligopolist would see little change in quantity demanded 
with a price decline.  (LO15-2)
	 4.	 The two extremes an oligopoly model can take are (1) a 
cartel model, which is the equivalent of a monopoly, 
and (2) a contestable market model, which, if there are 
no barriers to entry, is the equivalent of a competitive 
industry.  (LO15-2)
	 5.	 The smaller the number of digits, the more inclusive the 
classification. Therefore, the two-digit industry would 
have significantly more output.  (LO15-3)
	 6.	 The highest Herfindahl index for this industry would 
­occur if one firm had the entire 60 percent, and all 
other firms had an infinitesimal amount, making the Her-
findahl index slightly over 3,600. The lowest ­Herfindahl 
index this industry could have would ­occur if each of the 
top four firms had 15 percent of the market, yielding a 
­Herfindahl index of 900.  (LO15-3)

330	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	 7.	 The contestable market approach looks at barriers to 
­entry, not structure. Therefore, we can conclude  
nothing about the industry from the Herfindahl  
index.  (LO15-3)
	 8.	 In a market with a Herfindahl index of 1,500, the largest 
firm would have, at most, slightly under 38 percent of the 
market. The least concentrated such an industry could be 
would be if seven firms each had between 14 and 15 per-
cent of the market. In either of these two cases, the industry 
would probably be an oligopolistic industry and could 
border on monopoly.  (LO15-3)
	 9.	 The Court decided that Standard Oil had engaged in 
­systematic abuse and unfair business practices, and there-
fore was guilty of antitrust violations and must be broken 
up. It was judged by performance. In the ALCOA case, 
the Supreme Court decided the structure of the market, 
not the company’s performance, was the appropriate 
­standard by which to judge cases.  (LO15-4)
	10.	 The resolution of the Microsoft case was that it  
wouldn’t be broken up, but its practices would be 
­regulated.  (LO15-4)

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO16-1	
Define the monitoring 
problem and state its 
implications for economics.
LO16-2	 Discuss why competition 
should be seen as a 
process, not a state.
LO16-3	 Summarize how firms 
protect monopoly.
LO16-4	 Explain why oligopoly is 
the best market structure 
for technological change.
“
”
It is ridiculous to call this an industry. 
This is rat eat rat; dog eat dog. I’ll kill 
’em, and I’m going to kill ’em before 
they kill me. You’re talking about the 
American way of survival of  
the fittest.
—Ray Kroc  
(founder of McDonald’s)
When Microsoft was trying to compete with Apple’s 
iPod, it created a digital media player it called the Zune. 
The then CEO of Apple, Steve Jobs, disparaged Micro-
soft, stating “The only problem with Microsoft is that 
they have no taste—Absolutely no taste.” Instead of just 
letting the comment fade away, Microsoft sent a link of the 
statement to all its employees. Its goal was to infuriate the Microsoft workers 
so that they would show that not only do they have taste but they can bury 
Apple and its iPod. It was to make the competition with Apple personal. It 
didn’t work, and Apple went public with its “no taste” view of Microsoft in a 
series of TV ads that portrayed the Apple computer as the tasteful computer 
compared to a rather stodgy PC. Digital media players soon became incorpo-
rated into iPhones and the competition moved to other areas, but the personal 
rivalry between Microsoft and Apple continued. Real-world competition isn’t 
just about curves shifting and supply and demand intersecting; it is personal 
and focused on beating one’s competitors.
	
In earlier chapters we’ve seen some nice, neat models, but as we discussed 
in a previous chapter, often these models don’t fit reality directly. Real-world 
markets aren’t perfectly monopolistic; they aren’t perfectly competitive either. 
They’re somewhere between the two. The monopolistic competition and oli-
gopoly models in previous chapters come closer to reality and provide some 
important insights into the “in-between” markets, but, like any abstraction, 
they, too, fail to capture aspects of the actual nature of competition.
	
In this chapter, I give you a sense of what actual firms, markets, and compe-
tition are like. This chapter also discusses an issue that is very much in the 
news—technology—and relates it to the models we developed earlier and shows 
how economists’ modern models differ from the traditional textbook models.
	
When reading this chapter, think about the two understandings of competition 
discussed in the chapter on perfect competition: competition as a process, the 
end state of which is zero profits, and competition as market structure. In this 
Real-World Competition and Technology
chapter 16
© AP Photo/John Froschauer

332	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
chapter the focus is on competition as a process—it is a rivalry between firms and 
between individuals. This competitive process is active in all market forms and is key 
to understanding real-world competition.
The Goals of Real-World Firms  
and the Monitoring Problem
Maybe the best place to start is with the assumption that firms are profit maximizers. 
There’s a certain reasonableness to this assumption; firms definitely are concerned 
about profit, but are they trying to maximize profit? The answer is: It depends.
Short-Run versus Long-Run Profit
The first insight is that if firms are profit maximizers, they aren’t just concerned with 
short-run profit; most are also concerned with long-run profit. Thus, even if they can, 
they may not take full advantage of a potential monopolistic situation now in order to 
strengthen their long-run position. For example, many stores have liberal return policies: 
“If you don’t like it, you can return it for a full refund.” Similarly, many firms spend 
millions of dollars improving their reputations or building up a brand. Most firms want 
to be known as good citizens. Such expenditures on reputation and goodwill can 
­increase long-run profit, even if they reduce short-run profit.
The Problem with Profit Maximization
A second insight into how real-world firms differ from the model is that in the real 
world the decision makers’ income is often a cost of the firm. Most real-world produc-
tion doesn’t take place in owner-operated businesses; it takes place in large corpora-
tions with eight or nine levels of management, thousands of stockholders whose stock 
is often held in trust for them, and a board of directors, chosen by management, over-
seeing the company by meeting eight to ten times a year. Signing a proxy statement is 
as close as most stockowners get to directing “their company” to maximize profit.
Managers’ Incentives 
Why is the structure of the firm important to the 
­analysis? Because economic theory tells us that, unless someone is seeing to it that 
they do, self-interested decision makers have little incentive to hold down their pay. 
But their pay is a cost of the firm. And if their pay isn’t held down, the firm’s profit 
will be lower than ­otherwise. Most firms put some pressure on managers to make at 
least a predesignated level of profit. (If you ask managers, they’ll tell you that they 
face ­enormous pressure.) So the profit motive certainly plays a role—but to say that 
profit plays a role is not to say that firms maximize profit. Having dealt with many 
companies, I’ll go out on a limb and say that there are enormous wastes and inefficien-
cies in many U.S. businesses.
	
This structure presents a problem in applying the model to the real world. The 
­textbook economic model assumes that individuals are utility maximizers—that 
they’re motivated by self-interest. Then, in the textbook model of the firm, the assumption 
is made that firms, composed of self-interest-seeking individuals, are profit-seeking 
firms, without explaining how self-interest-seeking individuals who manage ­real-world 
corporations will find it in their interest to maximize profit for the firm. Economists 
recognize this problem, which was introduced in an earlier chapter. It’s an example of 
the monitoring problem—the need to oversee employees to ensure that their actions 
are in the best interest of the firm.
Q-1  What are two reasons why real-
world firms are not pure profit 
maximizers?
Most real-world production doesn’t take 
place in owner-operated businesses; it 
takes place in large corporations.
The monitoring problem is that 
employees’ incentives differ from  
the owner’s incentives.

333
ADDED DIMENSION
80 percent of the largest 200 corporations in the United 
States are essentially controlled by managers and have 
little effective stockholder control.
	
Why is the question of who controls a firm important? 
­Because economic theory assumes the goal of business 
owners is to maximize profits, which would be true of corpo-
rations if stockholders made the deci-
sions. Managers don’t have the same 
incentives to maximize profits that owners 
do. There’s pressure on managers to 
maximize profits, but that ­pressure can of-
ten be weak or ineffective. An example of 
how firms deal with this problem involves 
stock options. Many companies give their 
managers stock options—rights to buy 
stock at a low price—to encourage them 
to worry about the price of their company’s stock. But these 
stock options dilute the value of company ownership, de-
crease profits per share, and can give managers an incen-
tive to overstate profits through accounting gimmicks, as 
happened at Enron, Xerox, and a number of other firms in 
the early 2000s.
Who Controls Corporations?
When a corporation is formed, it issues stock, which is 
sold or given to individuals. Ownership of stock entitles 
you to vote in the election of a corporation’s directors, so 
in theory holders of stock control the company. In prac-
tice, however, in most large corporations, ownership is 
separated from control of the firm. Most stockholders 
have little input into the decisions a cor-
poration makes. Instead, most corpora-
tions are controlled by their managers, 
who often run them for their own benefit 
as well as for the owners’. The reason is 
that the owners’ control of management 
is limited.
	
A large percentage of most corpora-
tions’ stock is not even controlled by the 
owners; instead, it is controlled by finan-
cial institutions such as mutual funds (financial institutions 
that invest individuals’ money for them) and by pension 
funds (financial institutions that hold people’s money for 
them until it is to be paid out to them upon their retire-
ment). Thus, ownership of corporations is ­another step 
­removed from individuals. Studies have shown that  
© Stephen Brashear/Getty Images
Need for Monitoring 
Monitoring is required because employees’ incentives 
differ from the owner’s incentives, and it’s costly to see that the employee does the 
­owner’s bidding. The monitoring problem is now a central problem focused on by econ-
omists who specialize in industrial organization. They study internal structures of firms 
and look for a contract that managers can be given: an incentive-compatible contract in 
which the incentives of each of the two parties to the contract are made to correspond as 
closely as possible. The specific monitoring problem relevant to firm structure is that 
often owners find it too costly to monitor the managers to ensure that managers do what’s 
in the owners’ interest. And self-interested managers are interested in maximizing the 
firm’s profit only if the structure of the firm requires them to do so.
	
When appropriate monitoring doesn’t take place, high-level managers can pay 
themselves very well. For example, in 2015 the CEO of Capital One Financial was paid 
$249 million. But are these salaries such as this too high? That’s a difficult question.
	
One way to get an idea about an answer is to compare U.S. managers’ salaries with 
those in Japan, where the control of firms is different. Banks in Japan have significant 
control over the operations of firms, and they closely monitor firms’ performance. The 
result is that, in Japan, high-level managers on average earn about one-fifth of what 
their U.S. counterparts make, while wages of low-level workers are comparable to 
those of low-level workers in the United States. Given Japanese companies’ success in 
competing with U.S. companies, this suggests that high managerial pay in the United 
States reflects a ­monitoring problem inherent in the structure of corporations common 
Self-interested managers are interested 
in maximizing firm profit only if the 
structure of the firm requires them to 
do so.

334
to all third-party-payer systems. There are, of course, other perspectives. Considering 
what some sports, film, and music stars ­receive places the high salaries of U.S. manag-
ers in a different light.
What Do Real-World Firms Maximize?
If firms don’t maximize profit, what do they maximize? What are their goals? The 
answer again is: It depends.
	
Real-world firms often have a set of complicated goals that reflect the organiza-
tional structure and incentives built into the system. Clearly, profit is one of their 
goals. Firms spend a lot of time designing incentives to get managers to focus on 
profit.
Q-2  Why would most economists be 
concerned about third-party-payer 
systems in which the consumer and the 
payer are different?
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
CEOs are paid more today than they were 30 years ago—
a lot more. Today, CEOs’ pay at top companies is about 
250 times that of what an average worker receives, while 
30 years ago, CEOs received only 40 times as much. Why 
the change? Some have suggested that it’s just that CEOs 
are greedy. That’s probably true, but it doesn’t explain why 
CEOs are paid so much more today than 
before, unless they’ve become a lot 
greedier, which is ­unlikely; they’ve 
­always been greedy. So we have to look 
elsewhere for an answer.
	
One thing that’s changed in the past 
30  years is the bargaining power of 
­workers. Workers’ pay is now being 
held down by competition and out-
sourcing. (If workers ask for a raise, the 
company responds “No way” and 
threatens to shift production to China; 
the workers are forced to give in to 
save their jobs.) But CEOs’ pay is not restrained by out-
sourcing. (At least not yet.) This means that back in the 
1980s, high CEO compensation created labor unrest; to-
day, it does not.
	
Economists Xavier Gabaix and Augustin Landier of New 
York University have argued that the rise in CEOs’ pay is the 
result of supply and demand forces. They argue that, to-
day, unconstrained supply and demand forces determine 
pay of CEOs, whereas back in the 1980s, the bargaining 
considerations of workers partially prevented supply and 
demand forces from fully operating.
Why Are CEOs Paid So Much?
	
To explain why CEOs are paid so much more today 
than they were earlier, they argue that the demand for top 
CEOs has increased significantly in recent years because 
there are more large firms today than there were 30 years 
ago, making small differences in CEO performance matter 
a lot. They further argue that CEO talent is in short supply, 
which means that the supply curve for 
top-rate CEOs is highly inelastic, just like 
the supply curve for top football players, 
who also get very high pay. Replacing a 
top CEO by a CEO ranked 250th, they 
calculate, would reduce a ­company’s 
market value by 0.016 percent, which for 
a large firm they calculated to be about 
$60 million. This means that today large 
firms are competing for the highly 
­inelastic supply of high-quality CEOs, 
and the high demand pushes the pay up. 
So their answer to the question of why 
CEOs are paid so much more now is that the number of 
large firms has increased, which has shifted out the de-
mand for CEOs ­enormously.
	
This explanation, if correct, offers a policy suggestion 
for those who feel that the CEOs aren’t deserving of their 
high pay: Make the income tax more progressive. A high 
tax on an inelastic supply will not decrease the quantity 
supplied significantly, so if one makes the income tax 
more progressive, it will have little effect on the quantity of 
CEO effort supplied and thus will have minimal negative 
effects on efficiency.
© Roy McMahon/Corbis RF

	
Chapter 16 ■ Real-World Competition and Technology	
335
	
But often intermediate goals become the focus of firms. For example, many real-
world firms focus on growth in sales; at other times they institute a cost-reduction 
program to increase long-run profit. At still other times they may simply take it easy 
and not push hard at all, enjoying the position they find themselves in—being what 
British economist Joan Robinson called lazy monopolists—firms that do not push for 
efficiency, but merely enjoy the position they are already in. This term describes many, 
but not all, real-world corporations. When Robinson coined the term, firms faced 
mostly domestic competition. Today, with firms facing more and more global competition, 
firms are a bit less lazy than they were.
The Lazy Monopolist and X-Inefficiency
Lazy monopolists are not profit maximizers; they see to it that they make enough profit 
so that the stockholders aren’t squealing, but they don’t push as hard as they could to 
hold their costs down. They perform as efficiently as is consistent with keeping their 
jobs. The result is what economists call X-inefficiency (firms operating far less effi-
ciently than they could technically). Such firms have monopoly positions, but they don’t 
make large monopoly profits. Instead, their costs rise because of inefficiency; they may 
simply make a normal level of profit or, if X-inefficiency becomes bad enough, a loss.
	
The standard model avoids dealing with the monitoring problem by assuming that 
the owner of the firm makes all the decisions. The owners of firms who receive the 
profit, and only the profit, would like to see that all the firm’s costs are held down. 
Unfortunately, very few real-world firms operate that way. In reality, owners seldom 
make operating decisions. They hire or appoint managers to make those decisions. The 
managers they hire don’t have that same incentive to hold costs down. Therefore, it 
isn’t surprising to many economists that managers’ pay is usually high and that high-
level managers see to it that they have “perks” such as chauffeurs, jet planes, ritzy 
offices, and assistants to do as much of their work as possible.
	
The equilibrium of a lazy monopolist is presented in Figure 16-1. A monopolist 
would produce at price PM and quantity QM. Average total cost would be CM, so the 
monopolist’s profit would be the entire shaded rectangle (areas A and B). The lazy 
monopolist would allow costs to increase until the firm reached a minimally accept-
able level of profit. In Figure 16-1, costs rise to CLM. The profit of the lazy monopolist 
is area B. The remainder of the potential profit is eaten up in cost inefficiencies.
Although profit is one goal of a  
firm, often firms focus on other 
intermediate goals such as cost and 
sales.
Q-3  Why doesn’t a manager  
have the same incentive to hold  
costs down as an owner does?
FIGURE 16-1  True Cost 
Efficiency and the Lazy 
Monopolist
A monopolist producing 
efficiently would have costs CM 
and would produce at price PM 
and quantity QM. A lazy 
monopolist, in contrast, would 
let costs rise until the minimum 
level of profit is reached—in 
this example at CLM. Profit for 
the monopolist is represented by 
the entire shaded area, whereas 
profit for the lazy monopolist is 
squeezed down to area B.
PM
ATC
(producing
ineﬃciently)
ATC
(producing
eﬃciently)
MC
Demand
MR
B
A
CLM
CM
0
Cost per unit
QM
Quantity

336	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	
What places a limit on firms’ laziness is the degree of competitive pressures they 
face. All economic institutions must earn sufficient revenue to cover costs, so all 
­economic institutions have a limit on how lazy and inefficient they can get—a limit 
imposed by their monopoly position. They can translate the monopoly profit into 
X-inefficiency, thereby benefiting the managers and workers in the firm, but once 
they’ve done so, they can’t be more inefficient. They would go out of business.
How Competition Limits the Lazy Monopolist 
If all individuals in the 
industry are lazy, then laziness becomes the norm and competitive pressures don’t 
reduce their profits. Laziness is relative, not absolute. But if a new firm comes in all 
gung-ho and hardworking, or if an industry is opened up to international competition, 
the lazy monopolists can be squeezed and must undertake massive restructuring to 
make themselves competitive. Many U.S. firms have been undergoing such restructur-
ing in order to make themselves internationally competitive.
	
A second way in which competitive pressure is placed on a lazy monopolist is by a 
corporate takeover, in which another firm or a group of individuals issues a tender 
offer (that is, offers to buy up the stock of a company) to gain control and to install its 
own managers. In recent years many of these takeovers were done by private equity 
firms, which are firms that are not listed on the stock exchange. Most of these private 
equity firms are primarily investment vehicles, whose expertise is in finance, not in 
production. They buy up firms that have not been performing well financially and 
push them to improve their financial payout by becoming more efficient. Usually such 
tender offers are financed by large amounts of debt, which means that if the takeover 
is successful, the private equity firm will need to make large profits just to cover the 
interest payments on the debt.
	
Managers generally don’t like takeovers. A takeover may cost them their jobs and 
the perks that go along with those jobs, so they’ll often restructure the company on 
their own as a preventive measure. Such restructuring frequently means incurring large 
amounts of debt to finance a large payment to stockholders. These payments put more 
pressure on management to operate efficiently. Thus, the threat of a corporate takeover 
places competitive pressure on firms to maximize profits.
	
Were profit not a motive at all, one would expect the lazy monopolist syndrome 
to take precedence. In fact, it’s not surprising that nonprofit organizations often dis-
play lazy monopolist tendencies. For example, some colleges, schools, libraries, 
jails, and nonprofit hospitals have a number of rules and ways of doing things that, 
upon reflection, benefit the employees of the institution rather than the customers. 
At most colleges, students aren’t polled about what time they would prefer classes to 
meet; instead, the professors and administrators decide when they want to teach. I 
leave it to you to ­figure out whether your college exhibits these tendencies and 
whether you’d prefer that your college, library, or hospital change to a for-profit 
institution. Studying these incentive-compatible problems is what management 
courses are all about.
Motivations for Efficiency Other Than the Profit Incentive
I’m not going to discuss management theory here other than to stimulate your thinking 
about the problem. However, I’d be remiss in presenting you this broad outline of the 
monitoring problem without mentioning that the drive for profit isn’t the only drive 
that pushes for efficiency. Some individuals derive pleasure from efficiently run 
­organizations. Such individuals don’t need to be monitored. Thus, if administrators are 
well intentioned, they’ll hold down costs even if they aren’t profit maximizers. In such 
cases, monitoring (creating an organization and structure that gives people profit 
incentives) can actually reduce efficiency! It’s amazing to some economists how some 
The competitive pressures a firm faces 
limit its laziness.
A corporate takeover, or simply the 
threat of a takeover, can improve a 
firm’s efficiency.
Q-4  In what way does the threat of a 
corporate takeover place competitive 
pressures on a firm?

	
Chapter 16 ■ Real-World Competition and Technology	
337
nonprofit organizations operate as efficiently as they do—some libraries and colleges 
fall into that category. Their success is built on their employees’ pride in their jobs, not 
on their pure self-interest.
 	
Most economists don’t deny that such inherently efficient individuals exist, and 
that most people derive some pleasure from efficiency, but they believe that it’s hard to 
maintain that push for efficiency year in, year out, when some of your colleagues are 
lazy monopolists enjoying the fruits of your efficiency. Most people derive some plea-
sure from efficiency, but, based on their observation of people’s actions, economists 
believe that holding down costs without the profit motive takes stronger willpower 
than most people have.
The Fight between Competitive and 
Monopolistic Forces
Even if all the assumptions for perfect competition could hold true, it’s unlikely that 
real-world markets would be perfectly competitive. The reason is that perfect 
­competition assumes that individuals accept a competitive institutional structure—
political and social forces that support competition—even though changing that 
structure could result in significant gains for sellers or buyers. The simple fact is 
that self-interest-seeking individuals don’t like competition for themselves (although 
they do like it for others), and when competitive pressures get strong and the invis-
ible hand’s push turns to shove, individuals often shove back, using either social or 
political means. That’s why you can understand real-world competition only if you 
understand how the invisible hand, social forces, and political pressures push 
against each other to create real-world economic institutions. Real-world competi-
tion should be seen as a process—a fight between the forces of monopolization and 
the forces of competition.
How Monopolistic Forces Affect Perfect Competition
Let’s consider some examples. During the Depression of the 1930s, competition was 
pushing down prices and wages. What was the result? Individuals socially condemned 
firms for unfair competition, and numerous laws were passed to prevent it. Unions 
were strengthened politically and given monopoly powers so they could resist the pres-
sure to push down wages. The Robinson-Patman Act was passed, making it illegal for 
large retailers to lower prices to the detriment of local mom-and-pop stores. ­Individual 
states passed similar laws, and in the 1990s it was under one of these that Walmart 
Stores, Inc., lost a court case in which it was accused of charging too-low prices in 
its pharmacies.
	
As another example, consider agricultural markets, which have many of the con-
ditions for almost perfect competition. To my knowledge, not one country in the 
world allows a competitive agricultural market to exist. The United States has myr-
iad laws, regulations, and programs that prevent agricultural markets from working 
competitively. U.S. agricultural markets are characterized by price supports, acre-
age limitations, and quota systems. Thus, where perfectly competitive markets 
could exist, they aren’t allowed to. An almost infinite number of other examples can 
be found. Our laws and social values and customs simply do not allow perfect com-
petition to work ­because government emphasizes other social goals besides effi-
ciency. When competition negatively affects these other goals (which may or may 
not be goals that most people in society hold), government prevents competition 
from operating.
Individuals have complicated  
motives; some simply have a taste  
for efficiency.
Competition is a process—a  
fight between the forces of 
monopolization and the forces of 
competition.
The United States has myriad laws, 
regulations, and programs that prevent 
agricultural markets from working 
competitively.

338	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Economic Insights and Real-World Competition
The extreme rarity of perfectly competitive markets should not make you think that 
economics is irrelevant to the real world. Far from it. In fact, the movement away from 
perfectly competitive markets could have been predicted by economic theory.
	
Consider Figure 16-2. Competitive markets will exist only if suppliers or ­consumers 
don’t collude. If the suppliers producing 0L can get together and restrict entry, prevent-
ing suppliers who would produce LM from entering the industry, the remaining suppli-
ers can raise their price from PM to PL, giving them the shaded area A in additional 
income. If the cost of their colluding and preventing entry is less than that amount, 
economic theory predicts that these individuals will collude. The suppliers kept out of 
the market lose only area C, so they don’t have much incentive to fight the restrictions 
on entry. Consumers lose the areas A plus B, so they have a strong incentive to fight. 
However, often their cost of organizing a protest is higher than the suppliers’ cost of 
collusion, so consumers accept the restrictions.
	
Suppliers introducing restrictions on entry seldom claim that the reason for the 
­restrictions is to increase their incomes. Usually they couch the argument for restric-
tions in terms of the general good, but, while their reasons are debatable, the net effect 
of restricting entry into a market is to increase suppliers’ income to the detriment of 
­consumers.
How Competitive Forces Affect Monopoly
Don’t think that because perfect competition doesn’t exist, competition doesn’t exist. 
In the real world, competition is fierce; the invisible hand is no weakling. It holds its 
own against other forces in the economy.
	
Competition is so strong that it makes the other extreme (perfect monopolies) as 
rare as perfect competition. For a monopoly to last, other firms must be prevented 
from entering the market. In reality it’s almost impossible to prevent entry, and 
­therefore it’s almost impossible for perfect monopoly to exist. Monopoly profits send 
out signals to other firms that want to get some of that profit for themselves.
Breaking Down Monopoly 
To get some of the profit, firms will break down 
a monopoly through political or economic means. If the monopoly is a legal monopoly, 
high profit will lead potential competitors to lobby to change the law underpinning that 
Q-5  Explain, using supply  
and demand curves, why most 
agricultural markets are not  
perfectly competitive.
Q-6  Why is it almost impossible for a 
perfect monopoly to exist?
Price
PL
PM
0
A
B
C
L
M
Quantity
Demand
Supply
FIGURE 16-2  Movement Away from 
Competitive Markets
Where suppliers of 0L can restrict 
suppliers of LM from entering the 
market, they can raise the price of the 
good from PM to PL, giving the 
suppliers of 0L area A in additional 
income. The suppliers kept out of the 
market lose area C. The consumers, 
however, lose both areas A and B. 
Often the costs of organizing for 
consumers are higher than the costs for 
the suppliers, so consumers accept the 
market restrictions.

	
Chapter 16 ■ Real-World Competition and Technology	
339
monopoly. If the law can’t be changed—say, the monopolist has a patent (which, as I 
discussed in the chapter on monopoly, is a legal right to be the sole supplier of a 
good)—potential competitors will generally get around the obstacle by developing a 
slightly different product or by working on a new technology that avoids the monopoly 
but satisfies the relevant need.
	
Say, for example, that you’ve just discovered the proverbial better mousetrap. You 
patent it and prepare to enjoy the life of a monopolist. But to patent your mousetrap, 
you must submit to the patent office the technical drawings of how your better mouse-
trap works. That gives all potential competitors (some of whom have better financing 
and already existing distribution systems) a chance to study your idea and see if they 
can think of a slightly different way (a way sufficiently different to avoid being ­accused 
of infringing on your patent) to achieve the same end. They often succeed—so in some 
cases firms don’t apply for patents on new products because the information in the 
­patent application spells out what’s unique about the product. That information can 
help competitors more than the monopoly provided by the patent would hurt them. 
Instead many firms try to establish an initial presence in the market and rely on inertia 
to protect what little monopoly profit they can extract.
Reverse Engineering 
Going to the patent office isn’t the only way competitors 
gather information about competing products. One of the other ways routinely used by 
firms is called reverse engineering—the process of a firm buying other firms’ prod-
ucts, disassembling them, figuring out what’s special about them, and then copying 
them within the limits of the law.
	
Variations on reverse engineering go on in all industries. Consider the clothing 
industry. One firm I know of directs its workers to go to top department stores on their 
lunch hour and buy the latest fashions. The workers bring the clothes back and, that 
afternoon, the seamstresses and tailors dismantle each garment into its component 
parts, make a pattern of each part, and sew the original up again. The next day the 
worker who chose that garment returns it to the department store, saying, “I don’t really 
like it.”
	
Meanwhile the firm has e-mailed the patterns to its Hong Kong office, and two 
weeks later its shipment of garments comes in—garments that are almost, but not per-
fectly, identical to the ones the workers bought. The firm sells this shipment to other 
department stores at one-fourth the cost of the original.
	
If you ask businesspeople, they’ll tell you that competition is fierce and that profit 
opportunities are fleeting—which is a good sign that competition does indeed exist in 
the U.S. economy.
Competition and Natural Monopoly
The view one takes of the fight between competitive and monopolistic forces influences 
one’s view of what government policy should be in relation to natural monopolies—
industries whose average total cost is falling as output increases. We saw in the chapter 
on monopolies that natural monopolies can make large profits and that consequently 
there have been significant calls for government regulation of these monopolies to 
prevent their “exploitation” of the consumer.
	
Over the past decade, economists and policy makers have become less support-
ive of such regulation. They argue that even in these cases of natural monopoly, 
competition works in other ways. High monopoly profits lead to research on 
­alternative ways of supplying the product, such as sending TV signals through elec-
trical lines or sending phone messages by satellite. New technologies provide 
Establishing an initial presence in a 
market can be more effective than 
obtaining a patent when trying to 
extract monopoly profit.
New technologies can compete  
with and undermine natural monopolies.

340	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
­competition to existing firms. When this technological competition doesn’t work 
fast enough, people direct their ­efforts toward government, and political pressure is 
brought to bear either to control the monopoly through regulation or to break up the 
monopoly.
Regulating Natural Monopolies 
In the past, the pressure to regulate natu-
ral monopolies has been stronger than competitive pressure that lowers prices. Regu-
lated natural monopolies have been given the exclusive right to operate in an ­industry 
but, in return, they’ve had to agree to have the price they charge and the services they 
provide regulated. Regulatory boards control the price that natural monopolies charge so 
that it will be a “fair price,” which they generally define as a price that ­includes all 
costs plus a normal return on capital investment (a normal profit, but no economic 
profit). Most states have a number of regulatory boards.
	
When firms are allowed to pass on all cost increases to earn a normal profit on those 
costs, they have little or no incentive to hold down costs. In such cases, X-inefficiency 
develops with a passion, and such monopolies look for capital-intensive projects that 
will increase their rate bases. To fight such tendencies, regulatory boards must screen 
every cost and determine which costs are appropriate and which aren’t—an almost 
impossible job. For example, nuclear power is an extremely capital-intensive method 
of producing electric power, and regulated electric companies favored nuclear power 
plants until they were told that some nuclear power plant construction costs could not 
be passed on.
	
Once regulation gets so specific that it’s scrutinizing every cost, the regulatory 
process becomes extremely bureaucratic, which itself increases the cost. Moreover, to 
regulate effectively, the regulators must have independent information and must have a 
sophisticated understanding of economics, cost accounting, and engineering. Often 
regulatory boards are made up of volunteer laypeople who start with little expertise; 
they are exhausted or co-opted by the political infighting they have had to endure by 
the time they develop some of the expertise they need. As is often the case in econom-
ics, there’s no easy answer to the problem.
	
It is because of the problems with regulation that more and more economists argue 
that even in the case of natural monopoly, no explicit regulation is desirable, and that 
society would be better off relying on direct competitive forces guided by broader 
regulatory guidelines emphasizing free entry into the industry. They argue that regu-
lated monopolies inevitably inflate their costs so much and are so inefficient and lazy 
that a monopoly right should never be granted.
Deregulating Natural Monopolies 
In the 1980s and 1990s, such views 
led to the deregulation and competitive supply of both electric power and telephone 
services. Regulators are making these markets competitive by breaking down the 
layers of the industry into subindustries and deregulating those subindustries that 
can be competitive. For example, the phone industry can be divided into the phone 
line industry, the caller service industry, the cellular phone industry, and the direc-
tory information industry. By dividing up the industry, regulators can carve out the 
part that has the characteristics of a natural monopoly and open the remaining parts 
to competition.
	
Let’s take a closer look at the electrical industry. It used to be that electricity was 
supplied by independent local firms, each providing electricity for its own local customers. 
Today, however, electricity is supplied through a large grid that connects many regions 
of the country. With this grid, electricity generated in one area can easily be sent all 
over the country, and suppliers can compete for customers in a variety of regions. The 
When firms are allowed to pass on  
all cost increases to earn a normal profit 
on those costs, they have little or no 
incentive to hold down costs.
Q-7  What is the problem with 
regulations that set prices relative  
to costs?

	
Chapter 16 ■ Real-World Competition and Technology	
341
grid makes competition in power supply feasible, and many states have adopted provisions 
to open their electricity markets to multiple providers.
	
The power line industry, however, is not competitive. It would be extremely costly 
for each company to run a separate power line into your house. That is, the power line 
industry exhibits economies of scale. Because of the economies of scale, the power 
line industry is the natural monopoly aspect of electrical power supply. The deregulation 
of electricity involves splitting off the production of electricity from the maintenance 
of the line—and choosing an appropriate charge for electric line maintenance. While 
in the newspapers you will likely read that the electrical power industry is being 
­deregulated, that is not quite correct. Only those portions of the market where competition 
is likely to exist are being deregulated.
How Firms Protect Their Monopolies
The image I’ve presented of competition being motivated by profits is a useful one. It 
shows how a market economy adjusts to ever-changing technology and demands in the 
real world. Competition is a dynamic, not a static, force.
	
Firms do not sit idly by and accept competition. They fight it. How do monopolies 
fight real-world competition? By spending money on maintaining their monopoly. By 
advertising. By lobbying. By producing products that are difficult to copy. By not 
­taking full advantage of their monopoly position, which means charging a low price 
that discourages entry. Often firms could make higher short-run profits by charging a 
higher price, but they forgo the short-run profits in order to strengthen their long-run 
position in the industry.
Cost/Benefit Analysis of Creating and  
Maintaining Monopolies
Preventing real-world competition costs money. Monopolies are expensive to create 
and maintain. Economic theory predicts that if firms have to spend money on creating 
and protecting their monopoly, they’re going to “buy” less monopoly power than if it 
were free. How much will they buy? They will buy monopoly power until the marginal 
cost of such power equals the marginal benefit. Thus, they’ll reason:
•	 Does it makes sense for us to hire a lobbyist to fight against this law that will 
reduce our monopoly power? Here is the probability that a lobbyist will be 
­effective, here is the marginal cost, and here is the marginal benefit.
•	 Does it make sense for us to buy this machine? If we do, we’ll be the only one 
to have it and are likely to get this much business. Here is the marginal cost, 
and here is the marginal benefit.
•	 Does it make sense for us to advertise to further our market penetration? 
Here are the likely various marginal benefits; here are the likely marginal 
costs.
	
Examples of firms spending money to protect or create monopolies are in the news 
all the time. The farm lobby fights to keep quotas and farm support programs. Drug 
companies spend a lot of resources to discover new drugs they can patent. A vivid 
­example of the length to which firms will go to create a monopoly position is Owens 
Corning’s fight to trademark its hue of pink Fiberglas. Owens Corning spent more 
than $200 million to advertise and promote its color “pink” and millions more in the 
court to protect its right to sole use of that hue. Owens Corning weighed the costs and 
Economies of scale can create natural 
monopolies.
Firms do not sit idly by and accept 
competition. They fight it.
Q-8  What decision rule does a firm 
use when deciding whether to create or 
maintain a monopoly?

342
benefits and believed that its pink provided sufficient brand recognition to warrant 
spending millions to protect it.
Establishing Market Position
Some economists, such as Robert Frank at Cornell University, have argued that today’s 
economy is becoming more and more like a monopoly economy. Modern competition, 
he argues, is a winner-take-all competition. In such a competition, the winner (estab-
lished because of brand loyalty, patent protection, or simply consumer laziness) 
achieves a monopoly and can charge significantly higher prices than its costs without 
facing competition. The initial competition, focusing on establishing market position, 
is intense.
	
To see how important establishing a market position is in today’s economy, 
­consider the initial public offering (IPO) of new Internet firms that are often highly 
valued by Wall Street. Many of these firms have no profits and no likelihood of 
profits for a number of years, but they sell at extraordinarily high stock prices. 
Why? The reasoning is that these companies are spending money to establish 
brand names. As their names become better known, they will establish a monopoly 
position, and eventually their monopoly positions will be so strong that they can’t 
help but make a profit. With the dot-com stock market crash in the early 2000s, 
this argument was shown to be wrong for most Internet firms. For one or two 
lucky firms that established their brands, it was true. The problem is that most 
­people have no way of deciding which firms will be successful.
In winner-take-all markets, the initial 
competition is on establishing  
market position.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
One of the important ways in which firms try to maintain 
a monopoly position is called branding. U.S. firms spend 
about $220 billion a year to advertise their products, 
trying to produce brand names and create a pleasant 
image in the minds of consumers. Here 
are a few food-related brand names. I’m 
sure you know about most, but a couple 
are still in the process of forming brand 
recognition.
• Coffee: When you think of coffee, 
you think of Starbucks and 
inexpensive extravagance. You 
might not be able to afford a Lexus, 
but you can afford a Starbucks cup 
of coffee.
• Chicken: Perdue doesn’t produce 
any chicken, but it does do a lot of 
advertising, and it brands the 
chickens it sells, so when you think of chicken, 
you think of Perdue. 
Branding
• Bananas: A banana is a banana is a banana, but only if 
you haven’t been influenced by Miss Chiquita. At its 
peak, the Chiquita banana jingle was played 376 
times a day on radio stations across the United States.
• Steak: Most steaks are currently sold 
generically. Firms such as Omaha 
Steaks are trying to change that. 
Don’t just buy a steak—buy an 
Omaha steak.
• Water: Firms take water from the tap (or 
possibly from a spring), run it through 
some filters, and sell the image of purity 
by creating a nice-sounding name—
Dasani, Vermont Pure . . .  Well, it’s 
better for you than soda.
• Pork: Pork tends to be associated with  
	
pigs and does not carry a “good-for-you” 
image. A national association of pork producers is 
trying to change that image: “Pork—the other 
white meat.”
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Jill 
Braaten, photographer

	
Chapter 16 ■ Real-World Competition and Technology	
343
Technology, Efficiency, and Market Structure
Technological development—the discovery of new or improved products or methods 
of production—has been a driving force in the economy in recent years. As we saw in 
an earlier chapter on production and cost analysis, technological advance lowers the 
costs of production and makes economies more efficient—producing more output 
with the same number of inputs.
	
Technological advance is a natural outcome of specialization because it requires large 
investments of time and money in very specialized areas. Specialization allows producers 
to learn more about the particular aspects of production in which they specialize. As they 
learn more, they become not only more productive but also more likely to produce tech-
nological advances because they gain a deeper understanding of their specialty.
	
For example, instead of producing an entire line of clothing, companies might spe-
cialize in the production of certain types of carbon-based fibers and explore ways of 
making more useful material. The result of such specialization can be a technological 
advance such as Gore-Tex—a material that insulates but also “breathes” and thus 
keeps individuals dry and cool on warm rainy days, and dry and warm on cold rainy or 
snowy days. Instead of spreading resources to the entire process of making a jacket, a 
company can concentrate on just one aspect—fibers.
 	
Given the significance of technology, an important question is: What causes technol-
ogy to grow? Market incentives are an important part of the answer. Before markets existed, 
economies grew slowly. After markets came into existence in the 1700s, technology 
advanced more rapidly because individuals gained incentives, in the form of profits, to 
discover new and cheaper ways of doing things. Globalization of our economy provides an 
even greater incentive to develop new technologies because the revenue that can be cap-
tured from a global market with over 7.5 billion people (world population) is much greater 
than the revenue that can be generated from about 330 million people (U.S. population).
	
Are some market structures more conducive to growth than others? The answer 
economists have come to is a tentative yes, and it is an answer that makes certain 
­market structures look better than the way they were presented earlier. Let’s review 
what we’ve learned about market structure. In the basic supply/demand framework, 
­perfect competition is seen as the benchmark—it leads to efficient outcomes. All 
other market structures lead to some deadweight loss. But the supply/demand frame-
work does not consider technological issues. It implicitly assumes that technology is 
unchanging or is unaffected by market structure. If market structure does affect tech-
nological advance, another type of efficiency must be considered. This efficiency 
might be called dynamic efficiency. Dynamic efficiency refers to a market’s ability 
to promote cost-reducing or product-enhancing technological change. Market 
­structures that best promote technological change are dynamically efficient. 
­Oligopoly provides the best market structure for technological advance. To see why, 
let’s look at the four market structures: perfect competition, monopolistic competition, 
monopoly, and oligopoly. Let’s see which have the profit and incentive to innovate.
Perfect Competition and Technology
Perfectly competitive firms have no incentive to develop new technologies. Moreover, 
perfect competitors earn no profits and consequently may not be able to acquire the 
funds to devote to research and development that leads to technological change. Even 
if they did, they would gain little from it. A perfectly competitive market would quickly 
transfer the gains of the innovation to other firms, making it difficult for the innovating 
firm to recoup the costs of developing the new technology.
Technological development has  
been a driving force in the economy  
in recent years.
In considering market structures, 
dynamic efficiency must be  
considered as well as static  
efficiency.
Q-9  Why isn’t perfect competition a 
good market structure for technological 
advance?

344	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Monopolistic Competition and Technology
Monopolistic competition is somewhat more conducive to technological change 
because firms have some market power. The promise of gaining additional market 
power provides the incentive to fund research in new technologies. But, as we 
learned earlier, monopolistic competitors also lack long-run profits. Easy entry 
limits their ability to recoup their investment in technological innovation. Eventually, 
their increased market share will deteriorate and they will return to earning normal 
profits.
	
Through its support of patents, the United States does provide incentives to inno-
vate. Patents allow the development of new products through the promise of monopoly 
profits for a specified period of time. Of course, a firm with a patent will change the 
market structure into a monopoly.
Monopoly and Technology
On the other end of the spectrum is pure monopoly. Monopolies may earn the profits 
needed for research and development, but they seldom have the incentive to innovate. 
Since a monopolist’s market is protected from entry, the easiest path is the lazy 
­monopolist path. Since many monopolies are created by government (the government 
gives a monopoly to a specific company), pure monopolists don’t face the threat of 
new competitors. Until recently, European telephone companies and European domes-
tic airlines were monopolies. These industries developed far fewer innovations than 
did the equivalent U.S. firms that faced more competition, and European industry 
prices were much higher than those in the United States.
	
In response to these observations, European governments have moved toward 
privatization and more competition. Both telecommunications and domestic airlines 
have been privatized, and their monopolies are being removed. The result has been a 
fall in prices of their products and expanding new technologies in the telecommunica-
tions industries. For example, you can now fly between major European cities on air-
lines such as easyJet or Ryanair for as low as $25.
Oligopoly and Technology
That leaves oligopoly. Oligopoly is the market structure that is most conducive to tech-
nological change. Since the typical oligopolist realizes ongoing economic profit, it has 
the funds to carry out research and development. Moreover, the belief that its com-
petitors are innovating also forces it to do so. Oligopolists are constantly searching for 
ways to get an edge on competitors, so significant technological advance takes place in 
­oligopolistic industries.
	
The computer industry is an example of an oligopolistic market that has demon-
strated tremendous innovation. Technological progress has been rapid, until recently, 
following Moore’s law—every 18 months the cost of computing power is cut by half. 
Another example is the telecommunications industry, which has been experiencing 
enormous technological change, and will continue to do so in the coming decade.
	
Some economists, especially those who favor a model in which the threat of 
­competition is enough to keep a firm behaving competitively (a contestable market 
approach), argue that market structure does not matter for technological progress. It is 
the conditions of entry that matter. They argue that it is primarily developments in 
pure science that lead to technological advance. Businesses sample technological 
advances and develop those that have market potential. They argue that technological 
advances lead to the formation of oligopolies; oligopolies don’t necessarily lead to 
Oligopoly tends to be most conducive to 
technological change because it has the 
profits and incentives to innovate.
Q-10  Why is oligopoly the best 
market structure for technological 
advance?

	
Chapter 16 ■ Real-World Competition and Technology	
345
technological advances. The cigarette industry and the aluminum industry are highly 
oligopolistic but have had little technological advance. In the steel industry, companies 
outside the group of existing producers started minimills that led to technological 
advance. The process did not originate with the oligopolistic steel companies.
Network Externalities, Standards, and  
Technological Lock-In
In support of the view that technology determines market structure, economists have 
focused on those aspects of production that involve network externalities. An exter-
nality, as discussed in earlier chapters, is an effect of a decision on a third party that 
is not taken into account by the decision maker. A network externality occurs when 
greater use of a product increases the benefit of that product to everyone. Social 
networks such as Facebook exhibit network externalities. If you were the only per-
son in the world on Facebook, it would be pretty useless. As the number of people 
on Facebook increases, Facebook’s value to communication grows enormously. 
­Another example of a product with network externalities is the Windows operating 
system. It is of much more use to you if many other people use it too, because you 
can then easily communicate with other Windows users and purchase software based 
on that platform.
	
Network externalities are important to market structure because they lead to the 
development of industry standards. Standards become important because network 
­externalities involve the interaction among individuals and processes. Many examples 
of the development of industry standards exist. Some are television broadcast ­standards 
(they differ in the United States and Europe, which is why U.S. TVs cannot be used in 
Europe), building standards (there is a standard size of doors), and electrical current 
standards (220 or 110; AC or DC). One debate over standards is involved with 
­communication devices and what the 6G and 7G networks will look like.
Standards and Winner-Take-All Industries 
Network externalities have 
two implications for the economic process. First, they increase the likelihood that an 
industry becomes a winner-take-all industry. Early in the development of new ­products, 
there may be two or three competing standards, any one of which could be a signifi-
cant improvement over what existed before. As network externalities broaden the use 
of a product, the need for a single standard becomes more important and ­eventually 
one standard wins out. The firm that gets its standard accepted as the industry standard 
gains an enormous advantage over the other firms. This firm will ­dominate the mar-
ket. Google and the Google search engine is an example of how ­getting your prod-
uct accepted as the standard can do wonders for the firm. Facebook is ­another example. 
By getting people to accept Facebook as their social network, it undermines the 
development of alternative social networks.
	
Once a standard develops, even if other firms try to enter with a better technological 
standard, they will have a hard time competing because everyone is already committed to 
the existing industry standard. Deviating from that standard will reduce the benefits of the 
network externality.
	
Firms in an industry developing a standard will have a strong incentive to be the 
first to market with the product; they will be willing to incur large losses initially in 
their attempt to set the industry standard. The “first-mover advantage” helps explain 
why the stock of small technology companies sold for extremely high prices even 
though they were having large losses. The large losses were created because the 
firms were spending money to gain market share so that their products would become 
the industry standard. If the firm is ­successful in getting its product accepted as the 
Network externalities lead to  
market standards and affect market 
structure.
The first-mover advantage helps  
explain the high stock prices of  
start-up technology companies.

346	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
standard, the demand for the product will rise and it will have enormous profits in 
the future.
Technological Lock-In 
The second implication of network externalities is 
that the market might not gravitate toward the most efficient standard. ­Economists 
debate the degree to which standards can be inefficient and yet be maintained by 
the first-mover ­advantage. Some economists argue that the inefficiency can be quite 
large; others argue that it is small. One aspect of the debate has centered around the 
QWERTY ­keyboard on computers. Research by Stanford economist Paul ­David 
showed that the arrangement of the keys in the QWERTY keyboard was designed 
to slow ­people’s ­typing down so that the keys would not stick on the early mechan-
ical ­typewriters. As the technology of typewriters improved, the need to slow down 
­typing soon ended, but because the QWERTY keyboard was ­introduced first, it had 
become the standard. Other, more efficient, keyboards have been proposed but 
not adopted. The QWERTY keyboard has remained, even with its built-in ineffi-
ciencies. David suggested that QWERTY is a metaphor for ­technological lock-
in—when prior use of a technology makes the adoption of subsequent technologies 
difficult.
	
David’s technological lock-in argument suggests that many of our institutions and 
technologies may be inefficient. Other economists argue that the QWERTY keyboard 
was not that inefficient and if it had been, other keyboards would have been adopted. I 
am not sure who is right in this debate, but it may soon be made obsolete by another 
technological development: voice recognition software, which will make keyboarding 
a relic of the past.
	
The QWERTY debate is a part of a larger debate about the competitive process and 
government involvement in that process. The issues are somewhat the same as they 
were in the earlier discussion of government regulation of natural monopolies. Many 
economists see government involvement as necessary to protect the economy and the 
consumer. They advocate what economist Brian Arthur calls “a nudging hand” 
­approach, in which the government keeps the competition fair.
	
Other economists see monopoly as part of the competitive process—something 
that will be eliminated as competitive forces act against it. Standards will develop, 
but they will be temporary. If the standards are sufficiently inefficient, they will be 
replaced, or an entirely new product will come along that makes the old stan-
dard irrelevant. For such economists, neither natural monopoly nor technological 
lock-in is a reason for government interference. Government interference, even 
the nudging hand, would slow or stop the competitive process and make society 
worse off.
	
Who is right? My own view leans toward the competitive process view with a 
nudge here or there, but one cannot be dogmatic about it; each case must be decided on 
its own merits. Moreover, even in those cases where explicit regulation is not called 
for, the government must set up appropriate rules and property rights to see that the 
competitive playing field is reasonably level.
Conclusion
The stories of competition and monopoly have no end. Both are continuous processes. 
Monopolies create competition. Out of the competitive struggle, other monopolies 
emerge, only to be beaten down by competition. Technology is a big part of that strug-
gle. Individuals and firms, motivated by self-interest, try to use the changes brought by 
technology to their benefit. By doing so, they change both the nature of the economy 
and the direction of technological change itself.
QWERTY is a metaphor for 
technological lock-in.
Modern debates about policy  
regarding competition take  
dynamic issues into account, but  
still leave open a debate about  
what the role of government  
should be.

	
Chapter 16 ■ Real-World Competition and Technology	
347
• The goals of real-world firms are many. Profit plays a 
role, but the actual goals depend on the incentive struc-
ture embodied in the structure of the firm.  (LO16-1)
• The monitoring problem arises because the incentives 
faced by managers are not always to maximize the 
profit of the firm. Economists have helped design 
­incentive-compatible contracts to help alleviate the 
monitoring problem.  (LO16-1)
• Monopolists facing no competition can become lazy 
and not hold down costs as much as they are able.  
X-inefficiency refers to firms operating less 
­efficiently than they could technically.  (LO16-1)
• X-inefficiency can be limited by the threat of 
­competition or takeovers. Corporate takeovers often 
mean change in management.  (LO16-1)
• The competitive process involves a continual fight 
­between monopolization and competition. Suppliers are 
willing to pay an amount equal to the additional profit 
gained from the restriction. Consumers are ­willing to 
pay an amount equal to the additional cost of products to 
avoid a restriction. Consumers, ­however, face a higher 
cost of organizing their ­efforts.  (LO16-2)
Summary
• Firms compete against patents that create monopo-
lies by making slight modifications to existing 
­patents and engaging in reverse engineering to 
copy other firms’ products within the limits of 
the law.  (LO16-2)
• The U.S. government is deregulating natural monop-
olies by dividing the firms into various subindustries, 
carving out those parts that exhibit the characteristics 
of a natural monopoly, and opening the remaining 
parts to competition.  (LO16-2)
• Firms will spend money on monopolization 
­until the marginal cost equals the marginal 
­benefit. They protect their monopolies by such 
means as ­advertising, lobbying, and producing 
products that are difficult for other firms to 
copy.  (LO16-3)
• Oligopoly provides the best market structure for 
­technological advance because oligopolists have an 
incentive to innovate in the form of additional profits 
and because they have the profits to devote to 
­investing in the research and development of new 
technologies.  (LO16-4)
Key Terms
corporate takeover
dynamic efficiency
incentive-compatible 
contract
lazy monopolist
monitoring  
problem
network externality
reverse engineering
technological 
development
technological  
lock-in
X-inefficiency
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 True or false? It is obvious that all for-profit busi-
nesses in the United States will maximize profit. 
Why?  (LO16-1)
	 2.	 Describe the monitoring problem. How does an 
­incentive-compatible contract address the monitoring 
problem?  (LO16-1)
	 3.	 Define X-inefficiency. Can a perfect competitor be  
X-inefficient? Explain why or why not.  (LO16-1)
	 4.	 Some analysts have argued that competition will eliminate 
X-inefficiency from firms. Will it? Why?  (LO16-1)
	 5.	 True or false? If it were easier for consumers to collude 
than for suppliers to collude, there would often be 
­shortages of goods. Why?  (LO16-2)
	 6.	 Demonstrate graphically the net gain to producers and 
the net loss to consumers if suppliers are able to 
­restrict their output to Qr in the accompanying graph. 

348	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
Demonstrate the net deadweight loss to 
­society.  (LO16-2)
Price
Supply
Demand
0
Quantity
Qe
Qr
	 7.	 Up to how much is the monopolist depicted in the accompa-
nying graph willing to spend to protect its market position? 
Demonstrate your answer graphically.  (LO16-3)
Price
Demand
Marginal 
cost
0
Quantity
MR
	 8.	 True or false? Natural monopolies should be broken up to 
improve ­competition. Why?  (LO16-3)
	 9.	 True or false? Monopolies are bad; patents give firms mo-
nopoly; ­therefore, patents are bad. Why?  (LO16-3)
	10.	 Discuss each of the following market structures in terms 
of static and dynamic efficiency:  (LO16-4)
	a.	 Perfect competition.
	b.	 Monopolistic competition.
	c.	 Oligopoly.
	d.	 Monopoly. 
	11.	 What two characteristics does a market structure need to 
have for firms in that industry to engage in technological 
advance? What market structure best meets these 
­criteria?  (LO16-4)
	12.	 Taking into consideration changing technologies, why 
might the basic supply/demand framework not lead to the 
most efficient outcome?  (LO16-4)
	13.	 How do network externalities increase the winner-take-all 
nature of a market?  (LO16-4)
	14.	 True or false? Technically competent firms will succeed. 
Why?  (LO16-3)
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Some economists have compared managers to politicians.
	a.	 How do the incentives facing managers resemble those 
of politicians?
	b.	 How do they differ?
	c.	 What does your answer say about the relative value of 
each to society? (Austrian)
	 2.	 Think of the pay of various groups in society.
	a.	 How does the compensation awarded to heads of 
­religious organizations compare to the salary of CEOs 
in profit-making organizations?
	b.	 What is the explanation for this difference?
	c.	 Should there be a difference? (Religious)
	 3.	 How many of the 10 highest paid CEOs are women? 
(To find out, you can go to the paywatch source,  
www.paywatch.org, on the web.) What is the likely  
reason for your finding? (Feminist)
	 4.	 While some assets, such as forests, can provide benefits to 
society in perpetuity, some firms see forests as ­consumable 
assets. One example occurred when corporate raider James 
Goldsmith forcibly acquired Crown Zellerbach in 
­Washington State. After doing so, he cut all of Crown 
Zellerbach’s trees, including one 12,000-acre clear-cut, and 
then sold off all the ­company’s remaining assets piecemeal, 
a practice called “junk bond forestry.” What does this 
­suggest about the long-term environmental sustainability 
of free market decisions? (Institutionalist)
	 5.	 Because the future is inherently uncertain, firms often 
­follow “rules of thumb” to make decisions such as how 
much capital (factories and machinery for production) to 
buy and how to price their products. Examples are 
­financial ratios and markup pricing.
	a.	 Does this behavior make sense?
	b.	 How does uncertainty that firms face encourage firms 
to use “rules of thumb”?
	c.	 What implications for economic analysis does firms’ 
use of rules of thumb have? (Post-Keynesian)
	 6.	 Large corporations spend tremendous sums in an effort 
to influence public policy. Some corporations fund 

	
Chapter 16 ■ Real-World Competition and Technology	
349
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 Airlines and hotels have many frequent-flyer and 
­frequent-visitor programs in which individuals who fly 
the airline or stay at the hotel receive bonuses that 
are the equivalent of discounts.
	a.	 Give two reasons why these companies have such 
­programs rather than simply offering lower prices.
	b.	 Can you give other examples of such programs?
	c.	 What is a likely reason why firms don’t monitor these 
programs?
	d.	 Should the benefits of these programs be taxable?
	 2.	 Are managers and high-level company officials paid high 
salaries because they’re worth it to the firm, or because 
they’re simply extracting profit from the company to give to 
themselves? How would you tell whether you’re ­correct? 
	 3.	 True or false? Nonprofit colleges must be operating 
­relatively ­efficiently. Otherwise for-profit colleges would 
force ­existing colleges out of ­business. Why? 
	 4.	 Author Charles Murray has argued that museums actually 
­inhibit rather than foster the appreciation of art. He points 
out that the technology exists to make essentially “perfect” 
copies of any major artwork that even the best-trained ­artistic 
eye could not differentiate from the original. 
	a.	 What would the introduction of this technology do to 
art museums?
	b.	 If that is true, why do you believe that the technology 
is not used?
	c.	 How are reproductions of music symphonies handled 
legally?
	d.	 What would the prohibition of making recordings of 
music performances do to the demand for musicians 
and for symphony halls?
	e.	 Why are music symphonies handled differently 
from art? 
	 5.	 Find a prescription drug that you, someone in your ­family, 
or a friend normally takes.
	a.	 What is the price you (they) pay for it?
	b.	 What is the lowest online U.S. price for that drug? 
(Costco is a good place to look.)
	c.	 If the online price (with shipping) is cheaper, why 
don’t you (they) buy it online?
	d.	 Now that you have that price information, will you buy 
the drug online in the future?
	e.	 What does this process tell you about the competitiveness 
of the drug market? 
	 6.	 In 2008, the wholesale price of the generic drug fluox-
etine (the generic for Prozac) was $3.60 per 100.
	a.	 Given that the cost of dispensing this drug was about 
$5 to $10 per prescription, how much would you ex-
pect the drug to sell for?
	b.	 A prescription for 100 tablets of fluoxetine sold for $54 
at DrugStore.com and sold for ­similar prices at other 
pharmacies. What would you conclude about the market 
structure, given that ­information?
	c.	 At Pharmnet.com one could buy 100 fluoxetine tablets 
for $26. If this was true, what can we say about drug 
market imperfections? 
	 7.	 Why would a company want to sacrifice short-run profits 
to establish market position? 
	 8.	 The title of an article in The Wall Street Journal was 
­“Pricing of Products Is Still an Art, Often Having Little 
Link to Costs.” In the article, the following cases 
were cited:
 • Vodka pricing: All vodkas are essentially 
­indistinguishable—colorless, tasteless, and odorless—
and the cost of producing vodka is independent of 
brand name, yet prices differ substantially.
 • Perfume: A $100 bottle of perfume may contain $4 to 
$6 worth of ingredients.
 • Jeans and “alligator/animal” shirts: The “plain pocket” 
jeans and the Lacoste knockoffs often cost 40 percent 
less than the brand-name items, yet the knockoffs are 
essentially identical to the brand-name items.
	a.	 Do these differences undermine economists’ analysis 
of pricing? Why or why not?
	b.	 What does each of these examples likely imply about 
fixed costs and variable costs?
	c.	 What do they likely imply about costs of production 
versus costs of selling?
	d.	 As what type of market would you characterize each 
of the above examples? 
	 9.	 Soft-drink companies pay universities for the exclusive 
“pouring rights” to sell their products on campus. In a 
­recent deal, UCLA signed a contract with Pepsi for  
$1.5 million per year limiting on-campus soft-drink  
sales to only Pepsi.
	a.	 Why would Pepsi agree to pay such a fee?
	b.	 What would likely happen if there were no pouring 
rights on campus?
­“citizens’” groups to push policies that the corporations 
want. Giant drug companies fund scientists to prove that 
the companies’ drugs work. Large businesses even hire 
economists to come up with theories that show why huge 
businesses and mega-mergers could be beneficial (or at 
least not harmful).
	a.	 What are some likely results if corporations control 
“the marketplace of ideas”?
	b.	 What, if anything, should be done about this control? 
(Radical)

350	
Microeconomics ■ Market Structure
	c.	 Is the sale of pouring rights beneficial to students or 
harmful to them? 
	10.	 Monsanto Corporation lost its U.S. patent protection for 
its highly successful herbicide Roundup in the year 2000. 
What do you suppose was Monsanto’s strategy for 
Roundup in the short run? In the long run? 
	11.	 One of the things that is slowing the development of 
­nanotechnology is the legal morass of patents that ­anyone 
working with new ideas must deal with. Some have argued 
that the government should give prizes for new discoveries, 
such as was offered for the first private flight in space, or as 
was offered by Napoleon for the discovery of how to store 
vegetables for long periods, rather than award patents, such 
as are awarded to drugs.
	a.	 What is the advantage of prizes over patents?
	b.	 What is the cost? 
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 Firms are not interested in just short-run profits. They are 
also interested in long-run profits. So a firm might sacri-
fice short-run profits for higher long-run profits. Also, 
those making the decisions for the firm are not always 
those who own the firm.  (LO16-1)
	 2.	 Most economists are concerned about third-party-payer 
systems because of the problems of monitoring. It is the 
consumers who have the strongest incentive to make 
sure that they are getting value for their money. Any 
­third-party-payer system reduces the consumers’ ­vigilance 
and therefore puts less pressure on holding  
costs down.  (LO16-1)
	 3.	 A manager does not have the same incentive to hold costs 
down as an owner does because when an owner holds 
costs down, the owner’s profits are increased, but when a 
manager holds costs down, the increased profits accrue to 
the owner, not the manager. Thus, the manager has less 
direct motivation to hold costs down than an owner does. 
This is especially true if the costs being held down are the 
manager’s perks and pay.  (LO16-1)
	 4.	 The threat of a corporate takeover places competitive 
pressures on firms because it creates the possibility that 
the managers will be replaced and lose all their perks and 
above-market-equilibrium pay.  (LO16-1)
	 5.	 Most agricultural markets are not perfectly competitive 
because the gains to producers from moving away from 
competitive markets are fairly large and, for small devia-
tions from competitive markets, the costs are fairly small 
to those suppliers and consumers who are kept out. This 
can be seen in the accompanying graph.
Price
A
B
C
Supply
Demand
M
L
Quantity
0
PM
PL
	
	 If suppliers producing 0L got together and limited ­supply 
to L, they could push the price up to PL and could gain 
the rectangle A for themselves. Consumers and suppliers 
who are kept out of the market lose triangles B and C re-
spectively, which, in the diagram, not only are each 
smaller than A but also when combined are smaller than A. 
Of course, the area A is lost to the consumers, but the 
costs of organizing those consumers to fight and protect 
competition are often prohibitively large.  (LO16-2)
	 6.	 It is almost impossible for perfect monopoly to exist be-
cause preventing entry is nearly impossible. Monopoly 
profits are a signal to potential entrants to get the barriers 
to entry removed.  (LO16-2)
	 7.	 The problem with regulation that sets prices relative to 
costs is that this removes the incentive for firms to hold 
down costs and can lead to X-inefficiency. While, in 
­theory, regulators could scrutinize every cost, in practice 
that is impossible—there would have to be a regula-
tory board duplicating the work that a firm facing 
­direct ­market pressure undertakes in its normal  
activities.  (LO16-2)
	 8.	 If the additional benefits of creating or maintaining a 
­monopoly exceed the cost of doing so, do it. If they don’t, 
don’t.  (LO16-3)
	 9.	 Perfect competition is not conducive to technological 
­advance because firms don’t earn the profits needed to 
­invest in research and development. It also doesn’t have 
the promise of future above-normal profits needed to 
­motivate researchers to innovate.  (LO16-4)
	10.	 Oligopoly is the best market structure for technological 
advance because oligopolists have the profits to devote to 
research and development and have the incentive to inno-
vate. Innovation may provide the oligopolist with a way to 
increase market share.  (LO16-4)

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO17-1	 Explain how the supply of 
labor is determined. 
LO17-2	 Explain how the demand 
for labor is determined. 
LO17-3	 Explain how wages are 
determined by both the 
supply and demand for 
labor in combination with 
social forces. 
LO17-4	 Contrast four types of 
discrimination that occur in 
labor markets. 
LO17-5	 Summarize the evolving 
labor laws and the 
implications of the labor 
market analysis for you.
“
”
Work banishes those three  
great evils: boredom, vice,  
and poverty.
—Voltaire
Most of us earn our living by working. We supply 
labor (get a job) and get paid for doing things that other 
people tell us they want done. Even before we get a job, 
work is very much a part of our lives. We spend a large 
portion of our school years preparing for work. Proba-
bly many of you are taking this economics course 
because you’ve been told that it will help prepare you for 
a job—or that it will get you more pay than you’re get-
ting in your present job. For you, this course is invest-
ment in human capital (skills embodied in workers 
through experience, education, and on-the-job training). 
If work in the marketplace isn’t already familiar to you, once you get out of 
school it will become so (unless you’re sitting on a hefty trust fund or marry 
somebody who is).
	
Your job will likely occupy at least a third of your waking hours. To a great 
extent, it will define you. When someone asks, “What do you do?” you won’t 
answer, “I clip coupons, go out on dates, visit my children . . .” Instead you’ll 
answer, “I work for the Blank Company” or “I’m an economist” or “I’m a 
teacher.” Defining ourselves by our work means that work is more than the way 
we get income. It’s a part of our social and cultural makeup. If we lose our jobs, 
we lose part of our identity.
	
There’s no way I can discuss all the social, political, cultural, and economic 
dimensions of work and labor in one chapter, but it’s important to begin by at 
least pointing them out in order to put my discussion of labor markets in 
­perspective. A labor market is a factor market in which individuals supply labor 
services for wages to other individuals and to firms that need (demand) labor ser-
vices. Because social and political pressures are particularly strong in labor 
markets, we can understand the nature of such markets only by considering how 
social and political forces interact with economic forces to determine our economic 
situation.
	
If the invisible hand were the only force operating, wages would be 
determined entirely by supply and demand. There’s more to it than that, as 
you’ll see, but it shouldn’t surprise you that my discussion of the invisible 
hand and the labor market is organized around the concepts of supply and 
demand.
Work and the Labor Market
chapter 17
© iStockphoto.com/kupicoo RF

352
The Supply of Labor
The labor supply choice facing an individual (that is, the decisions of whether, how, 
and how much to work) can be seen as a choice between nonmarket activities and legal 
market activities. Nonmarket activities include sleeping, dating, studying, playing, 
cooking, cleaning, gardening, and black market trading. Legal market activities include 
taking some type of paid job or working for oneself, directly supplying products or 
services to consumers.
	
Many considerations are involved in individuals’ choices of whether and how much 
to work and at what kind of job to work. Social background and conditioning are espe-
cially important, but the factor economists focus on is the incentive effect (how much 
a person will change his or her hours worked in response to a change in the wage 
rate). The incentive effect is determined by the value of supplying one’s time to legal 
market activities relative to the value of supplying one’s time to nonmarket ­activities. 
The normal relationship is:
The higher the wage, the higher the quantity of labor supplied.
	
This relationship between the wage rate and the quantity of labor supplied is shown 
in the figure in the margin. The wage rate is measured on the vertical axis; the quantity 
of labor supplied is measured on the horizontal axis. As you can see, the supply curve’s 
upward slope indicates that as the wage rate increases, the quantity of labor supplied 
increases. Why is that the normal relationship? Because work involves opportunity 
cost. By working one hour more, you have one hour less to devote to nonmarket 
­activities, which often are simply called leisure. Alternatively, if you devote the hour 
to nonmarket activities, you lose one hour’s worth of income from working.
	
Say, for example, that by working you make $10 per hour. If you ­decide to work 
two hours less, you’ll have $20 less to spend but two hours more available for other 
activities (including spending the smaller amount of money). When the wage rises, say 
to $12 per hour, an hour of leisure has a higher opportunity cost. As the cost of leisure 
goes up, you buy less of it, meaning that you work more.
	
As I noted in my general discussions of supply and demand, the incentive effects 
represented by the market supply curve come from individuals’ either/or decisions to 
Economists focus on the incentive 
effect when considering an individual’s 
choice of whether and how much to 
work.
The supply curve for labor is upward-
sloping; the higher the wage, the higher 
the quantity of labor supplied.
ADDED DIMENSION
plays an important role in the amount of rent and the dis-
tribution of that rent. Whereas most people would agree 
that people deserve the fruits of their labor, there is less 
agreement about rent.
	
Second, capital is much more difficult to analyze than 
labor or land. In fact, capital is one of the most difficult as-
pects of economics, and we do not have a good theory of 
the rate of interest or profit income that is the result of 
capital. The ­modern theory of capital focuses on human 
capital, intellectual capital, and social capital as well as fi-
nancial and physical capital. A full analysis of these various 
elements and the income that derives from their use is far 
beyond an introductory course.
Other Factors of Production
The factors of production are sometimes classified as 
land, ­labor, and capital, and income from these factors is 
rent, wages, and interest and profits, respectively. We fo-
cus on ­labor because it is the most important source of 
income for most of you, and given the limited time in a 
principles course, choices have to be made. (Opportunity 
cost rears its head. You can find a discussion of these 
other factors in the online Chapter 17W, “Nonwage and As-
set Income: Rents, Profits, and Interest,” among the library 
resources in McGraw-Hill Connect®.) I should, however, note 
a couple of issues about these other factors of production. 
First, land as a factor of production depends on property 
rights. How property rights are determined and structured 
Wage rate
0
Supply
Quantity of labor

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
353
enter, or leave, the labor market and from individuals’ decisions to work more, or 
fewer, hours. Given the institutional constraints in the labor market, which require 
many people to work a fixed number of hours if they work at all, much of the incentive 
effect of higher wages influences the either/or decisions of individuals. This affects 
the labor force participation rate (the number of people employed or looking for work 
as a percentage of people able to work) rather than adjusting the number of hours 
worked. For example, when wages rise, retired workers may find it worthwhile to go 
back to work, and many teenagers may choose to find part-time jobs.
Real Wages and the Opportunity Cost of Work
The upward-sloping supply curve of labor tells you that, other things equal, as wages go 
up, the quantity of labor supplied goes up. But if you look at the historical record, you 
will see that over the last century, real wages in the United States increased ­substantially, 
but the average number of hours worked per person fell. This difference is partly 
explained by the income effect. Higher incomes make people richer, and richer people 
can afford to choose more leisure. (See the box “Income and Substitution Effects.”)
	
Given that people are far richer today than they were 100 years ago, it isn’t surpris-
ing that they work less. What’s surprising is that they work as much as they do—eight 
hours a day rather than the two or so hours a day that would be enough to give people 
the same income they had a century ago.
	
The explanation for why people haven’t reduced their hours of work more substan-
tially can be found in how leisure has changed. A century ago, conversation was an art. 
People could use their time for long, leisurely conversations. Letter writing was a skill 
all educated people had, and cooking dinner was a three-hour event. If today people 
were satisfied with leisure consisting of long conversations, whittling, and spending 
quality time with their families rather than skiing, golfing, or traveling, they could get 
by with working perhaps only four or five hours per day instead of eight hours. But 
that isn’t the case.
	
Today leisurely dinners, conversations about good books, and witty letters have 
been replaced by “efficient” leisure: a fast-food supper, a home video, and the instant 
analysis of current events. Microwave ovens, frozen dinners, Pop-Tarts, smartphones, 
the Internet—the list of gadgets and products designed to save time is endless. All 
these gadgets that increase the “efficiency” of leisure (increase the marginal utility per 
hour of leisure spent) cost money, which means people today must work more to enjoy 
their leisure! In the United States, one reason people work hard is so that they can play 
hard (and expensively).
	
The fast pace of modern society has led a number of people to question whether 
we, as a society, are better off working hard to play hard. Are we better off or simply 
more harried? Most economists don’t try to answer this normative question; but they 
do point out that people are choosing their harried lifestyle, so to argue that people are 
worse off, one must argue that people are choosing something they don’t really want. 
That may be true, but it’s a tough argument to prove.
The Supply of Labor and Nonmarket Activities
In addition to leisure, labor supply issues and market incentives play an important role 
in other nonmarket activities. For example, a whole set of illegal activities, such as 
selling illegal drugs, are alternatives to taking a legal job.
	
Let’s say that an 18-year-old street kid figures he has only two options: He can 
­either work at a minimum wage job or deal drugs illegally. Let’s say that dealing drugs 
risks getting arrested or shot, but it also means earning $50 or $75 an hour. Given that 
Q-1  Under the usual conditions  
of supply, what would you expect would 
happen to the amount of time you study 
if the wage of your part-time job rises?
Modern gadgets increase the efficiency 
of leisure but cost money, which means 
people must work more to enjoy their 
leisure.
Economists do not try to answer  
the normative question of whether 
people are better off today, working 
hard to play hard, or simply are more 
harried.

354
choice, many risk takers opt to sell drugs. When an emergency room doctor asked a 
shooting victim in New York City why he got involved in selling drugs, he responded, 
“I’m not going to work for chump change. I make $3,000 a week, tax-free. What do 
they pay you, sucker?” The doctor had to admit that even he wasn’t making that kind 
of money.
	
As we discussed in Chapter 1, most low-level drug dealers don’t earn anywhere 
near that pay, but dealing drugs offers a few the chance to advance and earn that and 
more. For middle-class individuals who have prospects for good jobs, the cost of being 
arrested can be high—an arrest can destroy their future prospects. For poor street kids 
with little chance of getting a good job, an arrest makes little difference to their future. 
For them the choice is heavily weighted toward selling drugs. This is especially true 
for the entrepreneurial types—the risk takers—the movers and shakers who might 
have become the business leaders of the future. I’ve asked myself what decision I 
would have made had I been in their position. And I suspect I know the answer.
	
Prohibiting certain drugs leads to potentially high income from selling those drugs 
and has significant labor market effects. The incentive effects that prohibition has on 
the choices of jobs facing poor teenagers is a central reason why some economists 
­support the legalization of currently illegal drugs.
Income Taxation, Work, and Leisure
It is after-tax income, not before-tax income, that determines how much you work. 
Why? Because after-tax income is what you give up by not working. The government, 
not you, forgoes what you would have paid in taxes if you had worked. This means that 
when the government raises your marginal tax rate (the tax you pay on an ­additional 
dollar of income), your incentive to work falls. Really high marginal tax rates—say 60 
or 70 percent—can significantly reduce individuals’ incentive to work and earn income.
	
One main reason why the U.S. government reduced marginal income tax rates in 
the 1980s was to reduce the negative incentive effects of high taxes. Whereas in the 
1950s and 1960s the highest federal U.S. marginal income tax rate was 70 percent, 
Q-2  Why do income taxes  
reduce your incentive to work?
ADDED DIMENSION
you decide to work more—as the economic decision rule 
says; but the effect of the higher wage is overwhelmed by 
the effect of the higher income that allows you to decide 
to work less.
	
To distinguish between these two effects, econo-
mists have given them names. The decision by a worker 
to work more hours when his or her pay goes up is 
called the substitution effect. A worker substitutes work 
for leisure because the price of ­leisure has risen. The 
decision to work fewer hours when your pay goes up, 
based on the fact that you’re richer and therefore can 
live a better life, is called the income effect.
	
It’s possible that the income effect can exceed the substi-
tution effect, and a wage increase can cause a person to 
work less, but that possibility does not violate the economic 
decision rule, which refers to the substitution effect only.
Income and Substitution Effects
Because labor income is such an important component of 
most people’s total income, when wages change other 
things often do not stay equal, and at times the effect can 
seem strange. For example, say that you earn $10 an hour 
and you decide to work eight hours per day. Suddenly de-
mand for your services goes up and you find that you can 
receive $40 an hour. Will you decide to work more hours? 
According to the economic decision rule, you will, but you 
also might decide that at $40 an hour you’ll work only six 
hours a day—$240 a day is enough; the rest of the day you 
want leisure time to spend your money. In such a case, a 
higher wage means working less, and the measured supply 
curve of labor would be backward-bending.
	
Does this violate the economic decision rule? The an-
swer is no, because other things—specifically your 
­income—do not ­remain equal. The higher wage makes 

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
355
today the highest federal marginal income tax rate is about 40 percent. European coun-
tries, which have ­significantly higher marginal tax rates than the United States, are cur-
rently struggling with the problem of providing incentives for people to work.
	
Reducing the marginal tax rate in the United States hasn’t completely eliminated 
the problem of negative incentive effects on individuals’ work effort. The reason is 
that the amount people receive from many government redistribution programs is tied 
to earned income. When your earned income goes up, your benefits from these pro-
grams go down.
	
Say, for example, that you’re getting welfare and you’re deciding whether to take a 
$10-an-hour job. Income taxes and Social Security taxes reduce the amount you take 
home from the job by 20 percent, to $8 an hour. But you also know that the Welfare 
Department will reduce your welfare benefits by 50 cents for every dollar you take 
home. This means that you lose another $4 per hour, so the marginal tax rate on your 
$10-an-hour job isn’t 20 percent; it’s 60 percent. By working an hour, you’ve increased 
your net income by only $4. When you consider the transportation cost of getting to 
and from work, the expense of getting new clothes to wear to work, the cost of child 
care, and other job-associated expenses, the net gain in income is often minimal. Your 
implicit marginal tax rate is almost 100 percent! At such rates, there’s an enormous 
incentive either not to work or to work off the books (get paid in cash so you have no 
recorded income that the government can easily trace).
	
The negative incentive effect can sometimes be even more indirect. For example, 
college scholarships are generally given on the basis of need. A family that earns more 
gets less in scholarship aid; the amount by which the scholarship is reduced as a 
­family’s income increases acts as a marginal tax on individuals’ income. Why work 
hard to provide for yourself if a program will take care of you if you don’t work hard? 
Hence, the irony in any need-based assistance program is that it reduces the people’s 
incentive to prevent themselves from being needy. These negative incentive effects on 
labor supply that accompany any need-based program present a public policy dilemma 
for which there is no easy answer.
The Elasticity of the Supply of Labor
Exactly how these various incentives affect the amount of labor an individual supplies 
is determined by the elasticity of the individual’s labor supply curve.
	
The elasticity of the market supply curve is determined by the elasticity of indi-
viduals’ supply curves and by individuals entering and leaving the labor force. Both of 
these, in turn, are determined by individuals’ opportunity cost of working. If a large 
number of people are willing to enter the labor market when wages rise, then the market 
labor supply will be highly elastic even if individuals’ supply curves are inelastic.
	
The elasticity of supply also depends on the type of market being discussed. For 
example, the elasticity of the labor supply facing one firm of many in a small town will 
likely be far greater than the elasticity of the labor supply facing all firms combined in 
that town. If only one firm raises its wage, it will attract workers away from other 
firms; if all the firms in town raise their wages, any increase in labor must come from 
increases in labor force participation, increases in hours worked per person, or immi-
gration (the movement of new workers into the town’s labor market).
	
Existing workers prefer inelastic labor supplies because that means an increase in 
demand for labor will raise their wage by more. Employers prefer elastic supplies 
­because that means an increase in demand for labor doesn’t require large wage 
­increases. These preferences can be seen in news reports about U.S. immigration laws, 
their effects, and their enforcement. Businesses such as hotels and restaurants often 
oppose strict immigration laws. Their reason is that jobs such as janitor, hotel 
European countries, which have 
relatively high marginal tax rates,  
are struggling with the problem of 
providing incentives for people to work.
Q-3  What is the irony of any need-
based program?
Elasticity of market supply depends on:
1.	 Individuals’ opportunity cost of 
working.
2.	 The type of market being discussed.
3.	 The elasticity of individuals’  
supply curves.
4.	 Individuals entering and leaving  
the labor market.

356	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
­housekeeper, and busperson are frequently filled by new immigrants or undocumented 
workers who have comparatively low wage expectations.
	
Because of the importance of the elasticity of labor supply, economists have spent 
a great deal of time and effort estimating it. Their best estimates of labor ­supply elas-
ticities to market activities are about 0.1 for heads of households and 1.1 for secondary 
workers in households. These elasticity figures mean that a wage increase of 10 per-
cent will increase the quantity of labor supplied by 1 percent for heads of households 
(an inelastic supply) and 11 percent for secondary workers in households (an elastic 
supply). Why the difference? Institutional factors. Hours of work are only slightly flex-
ible. Since most heads of households are employed, they cannot significantly change 
their hours worked. Many secondary workers in households are not employed, and the 
higher elasticity reflects new secondary workers entering the labor market.
Immigration and the International Supply of Labor
International limitations on the flow of people, and hence on the flow of labor, play an 
important role in elasticities of labor supply. In many industries, wages in developing 
countries are 1/10 or 1/20 the wages in the United States and Europe. This large wage 
differential means that many people from those low-wage countries would like to 
move to the United States and Europe to earn the higher wages. Because they cannot 
always meet the legal ­immigration restrictions that limit the flow, many people come 
into the United States and Europe illegally. About 1 million legal and illegal immi-
grants enter the United States each year. Illegal immigrants take a variety of jobs at 
lower wages and worse conditions than U.S. citizens and legal immigrants are willing 
to take. The result is that the actual supply of labor is more elastic than the measured 
supply, especially in those jobs that cannot be easily policed.
The Derived Demand for Labor
The demand for labor follows the basic law of demand:
The higher the wage, the lower the quantity of labor demanded.
This relationship between the wage rate and the quantity of labor demanded is shown 
in the graph in the margin. Its downward slope states that as the wage rate falls, the 
quantity of labor demanded rises. The reason for this relationship differs between the 
demand for labor by self-employed individuals and the demand for labor by firms.
	
When individuals are self-employed (work for themselves), the demand for their 
labor is the demand for the product or service they supply—be it cutting hair, 
­shampooing rugs, or filling teeth. You have an ability to do something, you offer to do 
it at a certain price, and you see who calls. You determine how many hours you work, 
what price you charge, and what jobs you take. The income you receive depends on the 
demand for the good or service you supply and your decision about how much ­labor 
you want to supply. In analyzing self-employed individuals, we can move ­directly from 
demand for the product to demand for labor.
	
When a person is not self-employed, determining the demand for labor isn’t as ­direct. 
It’s a two-step process: Consumers demand products from firms; firms, in turn, demand 
labor and other factors of production. The demand for labor by firms is a ­derived 
demand—the demand for factors of production by firms, which depends on consum-
ers’ demands. In other words, it’s derived from consumers’ demand for the goods that 
the firm sells. Thus, you can’t think of demand for a factor of production such as labor 
separately from demand for goods. Firms translate consumers’ demands into a demand 
for factors of production.
The higher the wage, the lower the 
quantity of labor demanded.
Derived demand is the demand  
for factors of production by firms, which 
depends on consumers’ demands.
Wage
Demand
Quantity of labor

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
357
Factors Influencing the Elasticity of Demand for Labor
The elasticity of the derived demand for labor, or for any other input, depends on a 
number of factors. One of the most important is (1) the elasticity of demand for the firm’s 
good. The more elastic the demand for a firm’s goods, the more elastic the derived 
demand. Other factors influencing the elasticity of derived demand include (2) the 
relative importance of labor in the production process (the more important the factor, 
the less elastic is the derived demand); (3) the possibility, and cost, of substitution in 
production (the easier substitution is, the more elastic is the derived demand); and 
(4) the degree to which marginal productivity falls with an increase in labor (the faster 
productivity falls, the less elastic is the ­derived demand).
	
Each of these relationships follows from the definition of elasticity (the ­percentage 
change in quantity divided by the percentage change in price) and a knowledge of pro-
duction. To be sure you understand, ask yourself the following question: If all I knew 
about two firms was that one was a perfect competitor and the other was a monopolist, 
which firm would I say is likely to have the more elastic derived demand for labor? If 
your answer wasn’t automatically “the ­competitive firm” (because its demand curve is 
perfectly elastic and hence more elastic than a monopolist’s), I would suggest that at 
this point you review the ­discussion of ­factors influencing demand elasticity in the 
chapter on elasticities and relate that to this discussion. The two discussions are similar 
and serve as good reviews for each other.
Labor as a Factor of Production
The traditional factors of production are land, labor, capital, and entrepreneurship. 
When economists talk of the labor market, they’re talking about two of these factors: 
labor and entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship is labor that involves high degrees of 
organizational skills, concern, oversight responsibility, and creativity. It is a type of 
creative labor.
	
The reason for distinguishing between labor and entrepreneurship is that an hour of 
work is not simply an hour of work. If high degrees of organizational skill, concern, 
oversight responsibility, and creativity are exerted (which is what economists mean by 
entrepreneurship), one hour of such work can be the equivalent of days, weeks, or even 
years of nonentrepreneurial labor. That’s one reason why pay often differs ­between 
workers doing what seems to be the same job. It’s also why one of the important deci-
sions a firm makes is what type of labor to hire. Should the firm try to hire high-wage 
entrepreneurial labor or low-wage nonentrepreneurial labor?
	
In the appendix to this chapter, I formally develop the firm’s derived demand. Here 
in the chapter itself I will simply point out that the demand for labor follows the basic 
law of demand—the lower the price, the higher the quantity demanded. Figure 17-1 
shows a demand-for-labor curve combined with a supply-of-labor curve. As you would 
expect, equilibrium is at wage We and quantity supplied Qe.
Shift Factors of Demand
Factors that shift the demand curve for labor will put pressure on the equilibrium wage 
to change. Let’s consider some examples. Say the cost of a competing factor of produc-
tion, such as a machine that also could do the job, rises. That would shift the demand 
for this factor out to the right, and in doing so put pressure on the wage to rise.
	
Alternatively, say a new technology develops that requires skills different from 
those currently being used—for instance, requiring knowing how to use a computer 
rather than knowing how to use a slide rule. The demand for individuals knowing how 
to use slide rules will decrease, and their wage will tend to fall.
Four factors that influence the elasticity 
of demand for labor are:
1.	 The elasticity of demand for the 
firm’s good.
2.	 The relative importance of labor in 
the production process.
3.	 The possibility, and cost, of 
substitution in production.
4.	 The degree to which marginal 
productivity falls with an increase in 
labor.
Q-4  Name at least two factors  
that influence the elasticity of a  
firm’s derived demand for labor.
Entrepreneurship is labor that involves 
high degrees of organizational skills, 
concern, oversight responsibility, and  
creativity.

358	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	
Another example: Say an industry becomes more monopolistic. What will that do 
to the demand for labor in that industry? Since monopolies produce less output, the 
answer is that it would decrease the demand for workers, since the industry would hire 
fewer of them. The demand for workers would shift in and wages would tend to fall.
	
Finally, say the demand for the firm’s good increases. It’s clear that the firm’s demand 
for labor will also increase. The way in which these shift factors work is developed in 
more detail in the appendix to this chapter.
Technology and the Demand for Labor 
How will a change in ­technology 
affect the demand for labor? This question has often been debated, and it has no unam-
biguous answer. What economists do know is that the simple reasoning often used by 
laypeople when they argue that new technology will decrease the demand for labor is 
wrong. That simplistic reasoning is as follows: “Technology makes it possible to 
replace workers with machines, so it will decrease the demand for labor.” This is 
­sometimes called Luddite reasoning because it’s what drove the Luddites (19th-century 
English weavers) to go around smashing machines in early-19th-century England.
	
What’s wrong with Luddite reasoning? First, look at history. Technology has 
increased enormously, yet the demand for labor has not decreased; instead it has increased 
as output has increased. In other words, Luddite reasoning doesn’t take into account the 
fact that total output can change. A second problem with Luddite reasoning is that labor 
is necessary for building and maintaining the machines, so increased demand for machines 
increases the demand for labor.
	
Luddite reasoning isn’t all wrong. Technology can decrease the demand for certain 
skills. The computer has decreased demand for calligraphers; the automobile reduced 
demand for carriage makers. New technology changes the types of labor demanded. If 
you have the type of labor that will be made technologically obsolete, you will be hurt 
by technological change. However, technological change hasn’t reduced the overall 
demand for labor; it has instead led to an increase in total output and a need for even 
more laborers to produce that output.
	
In the 21st century we’re likely to see a continued increase in the use of robots to 
do many repetitive tasks that blue-collar workers formerly did. Thus, demand for low-
skilled manufacturing labor will likely continue to decline, but it will be accompanied 
by an increase in demand for service industry labor—designing and repairing robots 
and designing activities that will fill up people’s free time.
Q-5  What would happen to a firm’s 
demand for labor if its product became 
more popular?
Wage
W
Q
Demand
Supply
Quantity of labor
e
e
FIGURE 17-1  Equilibrium in the  
Labor Market
When the supply and demand curves 
for labor are placed on the same graph, 
the equilibrium wage, We, is where the 
quantity supplied equals quantity 
demanded. At this wage, Qe laborers 
are supplied.

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
359
	
Technological change not only impacts physical labor; it also impacts mental labor. 
The computer revolution is replacing what might be called routine mental labor (labor 
that involves a repetition of some action) with nonroutine mental labor requiring more 
creativity and innovation. This change has already taken place; knowing how to add, 
multiply, and spell used to be skills that were highly valued, and millions of jobs 
involved using those skills. Over the past 30 years those skills have become far less 
important; calculators and automated spell checkers can to do much of the work.
	
As computational technology becomes faster, and as computational software 
becomes more sophisticated, what computers can do more efficiently than individuals 
will increase substantially. Some economists have estimated that in the coming decades 
over 60 percent of the jobs currently done by individuals will in large part be done 
cheaper and better by computers and robots.
	
The computational technology replacing routine mental activities goes under the 
name artificial intelligence, which is developing exponentially. As it does, the artificial 
intelligence revolution will continue to change the nature of mental skills people need 
for jobs. For example, driving will be replaced by self-driving cars; teaching will be 
replaced by automated learning systems; diagnosing disease will be replaced by auto-
mated diagnostic systems; writing will be replaced by automated writing systems. 
There are many more examples that we cannot even imagine. These changes will likely 
take decades to occur. But they will occur, and as they do, they will change the nature 
of the demand for labor, causing upheaval in our economic system. There will still be 
jobs—they just won’t be the same jobs that exist now. 
International Competitiveness and a Country’s Demand for 
Labor 
Many of the issues in the demand for labor concern one firm’s or industry’s 
demand for labor relative to another firm’s or industry’s demand. When we’re talking 
about the demand for labor by the country as a whole—an issue fundamentally impor-
tant to many of the policy issues being discussed today—we have to consider the coun-
try’s overall international competitiveness. A central determinant of a country’s 
competitiveness is the relative wage of labor in that country compared to the relative 
wage of labor in other countries.
	
Wages vary considerably among countries. For example, in 2016 workers in the 
manufacturing industry earned an average of about $40 an hour in the United States, 
$50 an hour in Germany, and $8 an hour in Mexico. Multinational corporations are 
continually making decisions about where to place production facilities, and labor 
costs—wage rates—play an important role in these decisions.
	
But why produce in the United States when the hourly rate in Taiwan, for example, 
is only 1/3 that in the United States? Or in Mexico, where the hourly rate is only about 
1/5 that in the United States? The reasons are complicated, but include (1) differences in 
­workers—U.S. workers may be more productive; (2) transportation costs—producing 
in the country to which you’re selling keeps transportation costs down; (3) potential 
trade ­restrictions; and (4) compatibility of production techniques with social institutions—
production techniques must fit with a society’s social institutions. If they don’t, 
production will fall significantly. 
	
Number (5) is the focal point phenomenon—a situation where a company chooses 
to move, or expand, production to another country because other companies have 
already moved or expanded there. A company can’t consider all places, and it costs a 
lot of money to explore a country’s potential as a possible host country. For example, 
Japanese businesses know what to expect when they open a plant in the United States; 
they don’t know in many other countries. So the United States and other countries that 
Japanese businesses have knowledge about become focal points. They are considered 
as potential sites for business, while other, possibly equally good, countries are not. 
Combined, these reasons lead to a “follow-the-leader” system in which countries fall 
Other factors besides wages play  
an important role in a firm’s  
decision on where to locate.
Q-6  Name two factors besides 
relative wages that determine the 
demand for labor in one country 
compared to another.

360	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
in and out of global companies’ production plans. The focal point countries expand 
and develop; the others don’t.
	
As I have discussed in a number of chapters, the outsourcing that is currently 
­occurring is a reflection of the relative cost differential that firms calculate as they are 
deciding where to place production units. Initially, that cost differential included large 
setup costs, making U.S. production cost-effective in many industries despite lower 
wages elsewhere. As firms have spent the setup costs to establish production facilities 
abroad, that cost differential relevant to their decisions is increasing, which means that 
U.S.-based production will continue to experience strong pressure to move offshore in 
the coming decade. Unless offset by new jobs in other industries, the resulting increase 
in demand for foreign-based workers and decrease in demand for U.S.-based workers 
will likely put upward pressure on foreign wages and keep strong downward pressure 
on U.S. wages, limiting wage increases.
Determination of Wages
Supply and demand forces strongly influence wages, but they do not fully determine 
wages. Real-world labor markets are filled with examples of individuals or firms that 
resist these supply and demand pressures through organizations such as labor unions, 
professional associations, and agreements among employers. But, as I’ve emphasized 
throughout the book, supply/demand analysis is a useful framework for considering 
such resistance.
	
For example, say that you’re advising a firm’s workers on how to raise their wages. 
You point out that if workers want to increase their wages, they must figure out some 
way either to increase the demand for their services or to limit the labor supplied to the 
firm. One way to limit the number of workers the firm will hire (and thus keep existing 
workers’ wages high) is to force the firm to pay an above-equilibrium wage, as in 
­Figure 17-2(a). Say that in their contract negotiations the workers get the firm to agree 
to pay a wage of W1. At wage W1, the quantity of labor supplied is QS and the quantity 
of labor demanded is QD. The difference, QS − QD, represents the number of people 
who want jobs at wage W1 but will not be employed. In such a case, jobs must be 
Supply and demand forces strongly 
influence wages, but they do not  
fully determine wages.
Wage
Wage
(a)  Maintaining Excess Supply
(b)  An Increase in Supply
W1
Excess supply of labor
QD
QS
Demand
Supply
Quantity of labor
W0
D
Q0
Q1
Quantity of labor
W1
S0
S1
FIGURE 17-2 (A AND B)   
The Labor Market in Action
In (a) you can see the effect of an 
above-equilibrium wage: If workers 
force the firm to pay them a wage of 
W1, more workers will be supplied 
(QS) than demanded (QD). With an 
excess supply of labor, jobs must be 
rationed. In (b) you can see the 
effect of an increase in the supply of 
labor. Assuming the demand for 
labor remains the same, the increase 
in the supply of labor will cause the 
wage level to drop from W0 to W1.

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
361
­rationed. Whom you know, where you come from, or the color of your skin may play 
a role in whether you get a job with that firm.
	
As a second example, consider what would happen if U.S. immigration laws were 
liberalized. If you say the supply curve of labor would shift out to the right and the 
wage level would drop, you’re right, as shown in Figure 17-2(b). In it the supply of 
labor increases from S0 to S1. In response, the wage falls from W0 to W1 and the quan-
tity of labor demanded increases from Q0 to Q1.
	
In analyzing the effect of such a major change in the labor supply, however, 
­remember that the supply and demand framework is relevant only if the change in the 
supply of labor doesn’t also affect the demand for labor. In reality, a liberalization of 
U.S. immigration laws might increase the demand for products, thereby increasing 
the demand for labor and raising wages. When you look at the overall effect of a 
change, you will often find that the final result is less clear-cut. That’s why it’s important 
always to remember the assumptions behind the model you’re using. Those assumptions 
often add qualifications to the simple “right” answer.
Imperfect Competition and the Labor Market
Just as product markets can be imperfectly competitive, so too can labor markets. For 
example, there might be a monopsony (a market in which a single firm is the only 
buyer). An example of a monopsony is a “company town” in which a single firm is the 
only employer. Whereas a monopolist takes into account the fact that if it sells more it 
will lower the market price, a monopsonist takes into account the fact that it will raise 
the market prices if it buys more. Thus, it buys less and pays less than would a market 
with an equivalent number of competitive buyers.
	
Alternatively, laborers might have organized together in a union that allows workers 
to operate as if there were only a single seller. In effect, the union could operate as a 
monopoly. Alternatively again, there might be a bilateral monopoly (a market with 
only a single seller and a single buyer). Let’s briefly consider these three types of 
­market imperfections.
Monopsony 
When there’s only one buyer of labor services, it makes sense for 
that buyer to take into account the fact that if it hires another worker, the equilibrium 
wage will rise and it will have to pay more to all workers. The choice facing a monop-
sonist can be seen in Figure 17-3, in which the supply curve of labor is upward-sloping 
so that the marginal factor cost (the additional cost to a firm of hiring another 
worker) is above the supply curve since the monopsonist takes into account the fact 
that hiring another worker will increase the wage rate it must pay to all workers.
	
Instead of hiring Qc workers at a wage of Wc, as would happen in a competitive labor 
market, the monopsonist hires Qm workers and pays them a wage of Wm. (A good exercise 
to see that you understand the argument is to show that where there’s a monopsonist, a 
minimum wage simultaneously can increase employment and raise the wage.)
Union Monopoly Power 
When a union exists, it will have an incentive to act as 
a monopolist, restricting labor supply to increase its members’ wages. To do so it must 
have the power to restrict both supply and union membership. A union would have a 
strong tendency to act like a monopolist and to move to an equilibrium somewhat similar 
to the monopsonist case, except for one important difference. The wage the union would 
set wouldn’t be below the competitive wage; instead, the wage would be above the 
­competitive wage at Wu, as in Figure 17-3. Faced with a wage of Wu, competitive firms 
will hire Qu workers. Thus, with union monopoly power, the benefits of restricting 
­supply accrue to the union members, not to the firm as in the monopsonist case.
Q-7  How could an increase in  
the supply of labor lead to an  
increase in the demand for labor?
A monopsony is a market in which  
a single firm is the only buyer.
A monopsonist takes into account  
the fact that hiring another worker will 
increase the wage rate it must pay all 
workers.

362	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
Bilateral Monopoly 
As our final case, let’s consider a bilateral monopoly in 
which a monopsonist faces a union with monopoly power. In this case, we can say that the 
equilibrium wage will be somewhere between the monopsonist wage Wm and the union 
monopoly power wage Wu. The equilibrium quantity will be somewhere between Qu 
and Qm in Figure 17-3. Where in that range the wage and equilibrium quantity will be 
depends on the two sides’ negotiating skills and other noneconomic forces.
Political and Social Forces and the Labor Market
Let’s now consider some real-world characteristics of U.S. labor markets. For example:
1.	English teachers are paid close to what economics teachers are paid even 
though the quantity of English teachers supplied significantly exceeds the 
quantity of English teachers demanded, while the quantity of economics 
­teachers supplied is approximately equal to the quantity demanded.
2.	On average, women earn about 85 cents for every $1 earned by men.
3.	Certain types of jobs are undertaken primarily by members of a single ethnic 
group. For example, a large percentage of construction workers on high-rise 
buildings are Mohawk Indians. They have an uncanny knack for keeping their 
balance on high, open building frames.
4.	Firms often pay higher than “market” wages.
5.	 Firms often don’t lay off workers even when demand for their products decreases.
6.	It often seems that there are two categories of jobs: dead-end jobs and jobs 
with potential for career advancement. Once in a dead-end job, a person finds 
it almost impossible to switch to a job with potential.
7.	The rate of unemployment among blacks is more than twice as high as the rate 
among whites.
	
Supply/demand analysis alone doesn’t explain these phenomena. Each of them can, 
however, be explained as the result of market, political, and social forces. Thus, to 
understand real-world labor markets, it is necessary to broaden the analysis of labor 
markets to include other forces that limit the use of the market. These include legal and 
social limitations on the self-interest-seeking activities of firms and individuals. Let’s 
A bilateral monopoly is a market in 
which a single seller faces a single 
buyer.
To understand real-world labor markets, 
one must broaden the analysis.
FIGURE 17-3  Monopsony, Union 
Power, and the Labor Market
A monopsonist hires fewer  
workers and pays them less than 
would a set of competitive firms. 
The monopsonist determines  
the quantity of labor, Qm, to hire  
at the point where the marginal 
factor cost curve intersects the 
demand curve. The monopsonist 
pays a wage of Wm. A union has a 
tendency to push for a higher  
wage, Wu, and a lower quantity  
of workers, Qu.
Wage
Marginal factor cost
Supply
Wu
Wc
Wm
MR
Qu
Qc
Demand
Qm
Quantity of labor

363
consider a couple of the central issues of interaction among these forces and see how 
they affect the labor market.
Fairness and the Labor Market
People generally have an underlying view of what’s fair. That view isn’t always consistent 
among individuals, but it’s often strongly held. The first lesson taught in a personnel or 
­human resources course is that people aren’t machines. They’re human beings with ­feelings 
and emotions. If they feel good about a job, if they feel they’re part of a team, they will 
work hard; if they feel they’re being taken advantage of, they can be highly disruptive.
	
On some assembly-line jobs, it is relatively easy to monitor effort, so individuals 
can be—and in the past often were—treated like machines. Their feelings and ­emotions 
were ignored. Productivity was determined by the speed of the assembly line; if workers 
couldn’t or wouldn’t keep up the pace, they were fired.
ADDED DIMENSION
appropriated by individuals, and these individuals became 
landholders who could determine the use of the land and 
could receive rent for allowing other individuals to use that 
land. Supply and demand can explain how much rent will 
accrue to a landholder; it cannot explain the initial set of 
property rights.
	
For many issues, such as ownership of land, questions 
about the underlying property rights are in large part aca-
demic for Western societies. The property rights that exist, 
and the contractual legal system under which markets op-
erate, are given. You’re not going to see somebody going 
out and introducing a new alternative set of property rights 
in which the ownership of property is transferred to some-
one else. The government may impose shifts at the mar-
gin; for example, new zoning laws—laws that set limits on 
the use of one’s property—will modify property rights and 
create fights about whether society has the right to im-
pose such laws. But there will be no wholesale change in 
property rights. That’s why most economic thinking simply 
takes property rights as given.
	
For other areas, such as intellectual property rights, 
which are being affected by technological change, assum-
ing unchanging property rights does not make sense. 
Technological change forces the underlying property 
rights to change, and how they change plays a big role in 
how technological change affects the distribution of in-
come. Property rights determine how the benefits of tech-
nological change are spread among the population. In 
recent years, institutional economists have redirected their 
analysis to look more closely at the underlying legal and 
philosophical ­basis of supply and demand. As they do so, 
they are extending and modifying the economic theory of 
income distribution.
Nonwage Income and Property Rights
The four traditional categories of income are wages, rent, 
profits, and interest. Wages, discussed in the text, are de-
termined by economic factors (the forces of supply and 
demand), with strong influences by political and social 
forces, which often restrict entry or hold wages higher 
than what they would be in a truly competitive market.
	
The same holds true for nonwage income: payments for 
use of land (rent), capital (profit), and financial assets (interest). 
The forces of supply and demand also determine these 
forms of ­income. But, as we have emphasized, supply and 
demand are not necessarily the end of the story. Supply 
and demand determine price and income, given an insti-
tutional structure that includes property rights (the rights 
given to people to use specified property) and the contrac-
tual legal system (the set of laws that govern economic be-
havior of the society). If you change property rights, you 
change the distribution of income. Thus, in a larger sense, 
supply and demand don’t determine the distribution of 
income; the distribution of property rights does.
	
The system of property rights and the contractual legal sys-
tem that underlie the U.S. economy evolved over many 
years. Many people believe that property rights were unfairly 
distributed to begin with; if you believe that, you’ll also be-
lieve that the distribution of income and the returns to those 
property rights are unfair. In other words, you can favor mar-
kets but object to the underlying property rights. Many po-
litical fights about income distribution concern fights over 
property rights, not fights over the use of markets.
	
Such distributional fights have been going on for a long 
time. In feudal times, much of the land was held commu-
nally; it ­belonged to everyone, or at least everyone used it. 
It was common land—a communally held resource. As the 
economy evolved into a market economy, that land was 

364	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
Efficiency Wages 
Most modern jobs, however, require workers to make ­decisions 
and to determine how best to do a task. Today’s managers are aware that workers’ emo-
tional state is important to whether they make sound decisions and do a good job. So most 
firms, even if they don’t really care about anything but profit, will try to keep their workers 
happy. It’s in their own interest to do so. That might mean paying workers more than the 
going market wage, not laying them off even if layoffs would make sense economically, 
providing day care so the workers aren’t worried about their children, or keeping wage 
­differentials among workers small to limit internal rivalry. Such actions can often 
make long-run economic sense, even though they might cost the firm in the short run. 
They are common enough that they have acquired a name—efficiency wages (wages 
paid above the going market wage to keep workers happy and productive).
	
Views of fairness also enter into wage determination through political channels. Social 
views of fairness influence government, which passes laws to implement those views. 
­Minimum wage laws, comparable worth laws, and antidiscrimination laws are examples.
Comparable Worth Laws 
Let’s consider one of those, comparable worth 
laws, which are laws mandating comparable pay for comparable work—that is, 
­mandatory “fairness.” The problem in implementing these laws is in defining what is 
comparable. Do you define comparable work by the education it requires, by the effort 
the worker puts out, or by other characteristics? Similarly with pay: Compensation has 
many dimensions and it is not at all clear which are the relevant ones, or whether the 
political system will focus on the relevant ones.
	
Economists who favor comparable worth laws point out that social and intrafirm 
political issues are often the determining factors in setting pay. In fact, firms often 
have their own implicit or explicit comparable worth systems built into their structure. 
For example, seniority, not productivity, often determines pay. Bias against women 
and minorities and in favor of high-level management is sometimes built into firms’ 
pay-setting institutions. In short, within firms, pay structure is influenced by, but is not 
determined by, supply and demand forces. Comparable worth laws are designed to 
­affect those institutional biases and thus are not necessarily any less compatible with 
supply and demand forces than are current pay-setting institutions.
	
The federal government is not the only government agency that establishes labor 
laws. State and local governments also do. For example, recently a number of local govern-
ments have established “living wage” laws, which are a type of minimum wage law that 
requires specified employers to pay a “living wage.” “Living wage” is most often defined 
as that wage that would allow one worker, working 40 hours a week, to support a family of 
four at the poverty level. The analysis of these laws is similar to that of the minimum wage.
Discrimination and the Labor Market
Discrimination exists in all walks of life: On average, women are paid less than men, 
and blacks are often directed into lower-paying jobs. Economists have done a lot of 
research to understand discrimination and what can be done about it. The first problem 
is to determine how people are treated differently and get an idea of how much of the 
difference is caused by discrimination. Let’s consider discrimination against women.
	
On average, women receive somewhere around 85 percent of the pay that men 
­receive. That has increased from about 60 percent in the 1970s. This pay gap suggests 
that discrimination is occurring. The economist’s job is to figure out how much of this 
is statistically significant and, of the portion that is caused by discrimination, what the 
nature of that discrimination is.
	
Analyzing the data, economists have found that somewhat more than half of the 
pay difference can be explained by causes other than discrimination, such as length of 
Q-8  Why might efficiency wages 
make sense in the long run?
Q-9  True or false? Economic theory 
argues that discrimination should be 
eliminated. Why?

365
time on the job. But that still leaves a relatively large difference that can be attributed 
to discrimination.
Three Types of Direct Demand-Side Discrimination
In analyzing discrimination, it’s important to distinguish three types. The three types 
are: (1) discrimination based on individual characteristics that will affect job perfor-
mance, (2) discrimination based on correctly perceived statistical characteristics of the 
group, and (3) discrimination based on individual characteristics that don’t affect job 
performance or are incorrectly perceived. Let’s look first at demand-side discrimina-
tion based on relevant individual characteristics. Firms commonly make decisions about 
employees based on individual characteristics that will affect job performance. For 
Three types of demand-side 
discrimination are:
1.	 Discrimination based on  
individual characteristics that  
will affect job performance.
2.	 Discrimination based on  
correctly perceived statistical 
characteristics of the group.
3.	 Discrimination based on  
individual characteristics that  
don’t affect job performance or are 
incorrectly perceived.
ADDED DIMENSION
and for another group—the regular workers—to have no 
say, is immoral in the same way that not having a demo-
cratic government is immoral. According to this view, work 
is as large a part of people’s lives as is national or local 
politics, and a country can call itself a democracy only if it 
has democracy in the workplace.
	
As with most grandiose ideas, this one is complicated, 
but it’s worth considering because it’s reflected in certain 
laws. Consider, for example, a federal law that limits firms’ 
freedom to close plants without giving advance notice to 
their workers. The view that workers have certain inalien-
able rights played a role in passing that law.
	
For those of you who say “Right on!” to the idea of in-
creasing workers’ rights, let me add a word of caution. 
Increasing workers’ rights has a cost. It makes it less 
likely that firms and individuals who can think up things 
that need doing will do so, and thus will decrease the 
number of jobs available. It also will increase firms’ desire 
to discriminate. If you know you must let a person play a 
role in decisions once you hire that person, you’re going 
to be much more careful about whom you hire.
	
None of these considerations means that democracy in 
the workplace can’t work. The Brazilian firm Semco is an 
­example. There are various examples of somewhat demo-
cratic “firms.” Universities are run as partial democracies, 
with the faculty deciding what policies should be set. 
(There is, ­however, serious debate about how well universi-
ties are run.) But as soon as you add worker democracy to 
production, more questions come up: What about consum-
ers? Shouldn’t they, too, have a voice in decisions? What 
about the community within which the firm is located?
	
Economics can’t answer such questions. Economics 
can, however, be used to predict and analyze some of the 
difficulties such changes might bring about.
Democracy in the Workplace
In the United States, slavery is illegal. You cannot sell your-
self to someone else, even if you want to. It’s an unen-
forceable contract. But work, which might be considered a 
form of partial slavery, is legal. You can sell your labor ser-
vices for a specific, limited period of time.
	
Is there any inherent reason that such partial slavery 
should be seen as acceptable? The answer to that ques-
tion is complicated. It deals with the rights of workers and 
is based on value judgments. You must answer it for your-
self. I raise it because it’s a good introduction to Karl Marx’s 
analysis of the labor market (which deals with alienation) 
and to some recent arguments about democracy in the 
workplace.
	
Marx saw selling labor as immoral, just as slavery was 
­immoral. He believed that capitalists exploited workers by 
alienating them from their labor. The best equivalent I can 
think of is the way most people today view the selling of 
sex. Most people see selling sex as wrong because it 
alienates a person from his or her own body. Marx saw all 
selling of labor that same way. A labor market makes work-
ers see themselves as objects, not as human beings.
	
The underlying philosophical issues of Marx’s concern 
are outside economics. Most people in the United States 
don’t agree with Marx’s philosophical underpinnings. But it’s 
nonetheless a useful exercise to think about this issue and 
ask yourself whether it helps explain why we treat the labor 
market as different from other markets and limit by law the 
right of ­employers to discriminate in the labor market.
	
Some of Marx’s philosophical tenets are shared by the 
modern democracy-in-the-workplace movement. In this 
view, a business isn’t owned by a certain group; it is an as-
sociation of individuals who have come together to pro-
duce a certain product. For one group—the owners of 
stock—to have all the say as to how the business is run, 

366	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
example, restaurants might discriminate against (avoid hiring) ­applicants with sour-
puss personalities. Another example might be a firm hiring more young salespeople 
because its clients like to buy from younger rather than older ­employees. If that char-
acteristic can be an identifying factor for a group of individuals, the discrimination 
becomes more visible.
	
The second type of demand-side discrimination is discrimination based on group 
characteristics. This occurs when firms make employment decisions about individuals 
because they are members of a group who on average have particular characteristics 
that affect job performance. A firm may correctly perceive that young people in gen-
eral have a lower probability of staying on a job than do older people and therefore 
may discriminate against younger people.
	
The third type of demand-side discrimination is discrimination based on irrelevant 
individual characteristics. This discrimination is based either on individual characteristics 
that do not affect job performance or on incorrectly perceived statistical characteristics 
of groups. A firm might not hire people over 50 because the supervisor doesn’t like 
working with older people, even though older people may be just as productive as, or 
even more productive than, younger people.
	
Of the three types, discrimination based on irrelevant individual characteristics 
will be easiest to eliminate; it doesn’t have an ­economic motivation. In fact, discrimi-
nation based on individual characteristics that don’t affect job performance is costly to 
a firm. Competing firms will hire these people and be in a better competitive position 
because they did so. Market forces will work toward eliminating this type of 
­discrimination.
	
An example of the success of a firm’s policy to reduce discrimination is the 
­decision by McDonald’s to create a special program to hire workers with learning 
­disabilities. Individuals who have learning disabilities often make good employees. 
They tend to have lower turnover rates and follow procedures better than do many of 
the more transient employees McDonald’s hires. Moreover, through its advertising, 
McDonald’s helped change some negative stereotypes about people with disabilities. 
So in this case market forces and political forces are working together.
	
If the discrimination is of either of the first two types (that is, based on characteris-
tics that do affect job performance, either directly or statistically), the discrimination 
will be harder to eliminate. In these cases, not discriminating can be costly to the firm, 
so political forces to eliminate discrimination will be working against market forces to 
keep discrimination.
	
Whenever discrimination saves the firm money, the firm will have an economic 
incentive to use subterfuges to get around an antidiscrimination law. These subterfuges 
will make the firm appear to be complying with the law, even when it isn’t. An exam-
ple would be a firm that finds some other reason besides age to explain why it isn’t 
hiring an older person.
Institutional Discrimination
Institutional discrimination is discrimination in which the structure of the job makes it 
difficult or impossible for certain groups of individuals to succeed. Institutional dis-
crimination does not come from the demand side, but is built into the institutional 
structure. Consider colleges and universities. To succeed in the academic market, one 
must devote an enormous amount of effort during one’s 20s and 30s. But these are 
precisely the years when, given biology and culture, many women have major family 
responsibilities, making it difficult for women to succeed. Were academic institutions 
different—say, a number of positions at universities were designed for high-level, part-time 
work during this period—it would be easier for women to advance their careers.
Q-10  Why is discrimination based 
on characteristics that affect job 
performance difficult to eliminate?

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
367
	
Requiring peak time commitment when women are also facing peak family 
­responsibilities is the norm for many companies, too. Thus, women face significant 
institutional discrimination.
	
Whether this institutional discrimination is embodied in the firm’s structure or in 
the family is an open question. For example, sociologists have found that in personal 
relationships women tend to move to be with their partners more than men move to be 
with their partners. In addition, women in two-parent relationships generally do much 
more work around the house and take a greater responsibility for child rearing than 
men do even when both are employed.
	
How important are these sociological observations? In discussing discrimination 
I ask the members of my class if they expect their personal relationships with their 
partners to be fully equal. The usual result is the following: 80 percent of the women 
expect a fully equal relationship; 20 percent expect their partner’s career to come first. 
Eighty percent of the men expect their own careers to come first; 20 percent expect an 
equal relationship. I then point out that somebody’s expectations aren’t going to be 
fulfilled. Put simply, most observers believe that the institutional discrimination that 
occurs in interpersonal relationships is significant.
	
Economists have made adjustments for these sociological factors, and have found 
that institutional factors explain a portion of the lower pay that women receive but that 
other forms of workplace discrimination also explain a portion.
	
Whether prejudice should be allowed to affect the hiring decision is a normative 
question for society to settle. In answering these normative questions, our ­society has 
passed laws making it illegal for employers to discriminate on the ­basis of race, reli-
gion, sex, age, disability, or national origin. The reason society has made it illegal is its 
ethical belief in equal opportunity for all, or at least most, individuals.
The Evolution of Labor Markets
Now that we’ve briefly considered how noneconomic forces can influence labor 
­markets, let’s turn our attention to how labor markets developed.
	
Labor markets as we now know them developed in the 1700s and 1800s. Given the 
political and social rules that operated at that time, the invisible hand was free to push 
wage rates down to subsistence level. Workweeks were long and working conditions 
were poor. Laborers began to turn to other ways—besides the market—of influencing 
their wage. One way was to use political power to place legal restrictions on employers 
in their relationship with workers. A second way was to organize together—to unionize. 
Let’s consider each in turn.
Evolving Labor Laws
Over the years, government has responded to workers’ political pressure with numerous 
laws that limit what can and what cannot be done in the various labor markets. For 
­example, in many areas of production, laws limit the number of normal hours a person 
can work in a day to eight. The laws also prescribe the amount of extra pay an employee 
must receive when working more than the normal number of hours. (Generally it’s 
time-and-a-half.) Similarly, the number and length of workers’ breaks are defined by 
law (one break every four hours).
	
Child labor laws mandate that a person must be at least 16 years old to be hired. 
The safety and health conditions under which a person can work are regulated by laws. 
(For example, on a construction site, all workers are required to wear hard hats.) 
­Workers can be fired only for cause, and employers must show that they had cause to 
fire a worker. (For example, a 55-year-old employee cannot be fired simply because he 
Institutions can have built-in 
discrimination.
Laws play an important role in the 
structure of labor markets.

368	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
or she is getting old.) Employers must not allow sexual harass-
ment in the workplace. (Bosses can’t make sexual advances to 
employees, and firms must make a good-faith attempt to see 
that employees don’t sexually harass their co-workers.)
	
Combined, these laws play an enormously important role in 
the functioning of the labor market.
Unions and Collective Bargaining
Some of the most important labor laws concern workers’ right 
to organize together in order to bargain collectively with 
employers. These laws also specify the tactics workers can use 
to achieve their ends. In the latter part of the 1800s, workers 
had few rights to organize themselves. The Knights of Labor 
was formed in 1869, and by 1886 it had approximately 800,000 
members. But a labor riot in 1886 turned public opinion against 
these workers and led to the organization’s breakup. In its place, the American Federa-
tion of Labor developed and began to organize strikes to achieve higher wages.
	
Business opposed unions’ right to strike, and initially the government supported 
business. Police and sometimes the army were sent in to break up strikes. Under the 
then-existing legal structure of the economy, unions were seen as monopolistic restraints 
on trade and an intrusion into management rights.
	
In the 1930s, society’s view of unions changed (in part as a backlash to the strong-
arm tactics used by firms to break up unions), and laws such as the National Labor 
Relations Act (also called the Wagner Act) were passed guaranteeing workers the right 
to form unions, to strike, and to engage in collective bargaining. As Figure 17-4 shows, 
from 1935 to the mid-1950s unions grew significantly in size and importance and 
­remained strong until the late 1970s.
	
Businesses weren’t happy with unions’ increasing strength, and in 1947 they managed to 
get the Taft-Hartley Act passed. That act placed limitations on union activities. It 
allowed states to pass “right-to-work” laws forbidding union membership to be made a 
requirement for continued employment. Moreover, it made closed shops, firms where 
the union controls hiring, illegal. Before anyone can be hired in a closed shop, he or she 
must be a member of the particular union. Federal law does permit union shops—firms 
in which all workers must join the union. Individuals are required to join a union after 
A closed shop is a firm in which the 
union controls hiring.
A union shop is a firm in which all 
workers must join the union.
© Bettmann/Corbis
In the late 1800s, many workers 
worked in sweatshops; they often 
had quotas that required them to 
work 60 or more hours a week. 
Fines were imposed for such 
indiscretions as talking or smiling.
FIGURE 17-4  Change in Union Membership
The graph shows union membership from 
1930. As can be seen, after the Depression 
in the 1930s, unions grew in importance. 
Since the mid-1970s the membership of 
unions has declined. (Note: The series 
from 1930 to 1981 excludes members 
of professional and public employee 
associations. The series from 1983 and 
beyond is from Current Population 
Statistics.)
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov).
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2020
2010
Year
Percent of the labor force

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
369
working for the firm for a period of time. The Taft-Hartley Act also outlawed sec-
ondary boycotts. In a secondary boycott, in order to strengthen its bargaining posi-
tion, a union gets unions at other firms to force their firms to refuse to buy a firm’s 
products, under threat of a strike.
	
Union power weakened considerably in 1981, when, in response to a strike by air 
traffic controllers, President Ronald Reagan fired all the controllers and refused to hire 
them back. Private firms similarly won the right to hire permanent replacements for 
striking workers. That stance significantly changed the atmosphere within which 
unions operate. In 2010, new federal rules strengthened unions by limiting an employer’s 
ability to slow worker elections to establish a union.
	
As Figure 17-4 shows, the percentage of workers who belong to unions has 
­declined since the 1970s, as unions have lost their bargaining power. Because of 
that decline, unions don’t have the political or economic clout they once had. Part 
of the reason, ironically, is their success. By pressuring the government to pass laws 
that protected workers, unions made themselves less necessary. Another part of the 
reason is the changing nature of production in the United States. Labor unions were 
especially strong in manufacturing industries. As the relative number of manufac-
turing jobs has declined in the United States and the number of service jobs has 
increased, the base of union membership has been reduced. Unions have somewhat 
compensated for this change by pushing unionization drives among government 
employees. Today, about 50 percent of union members work for the government. 
These unions are becoming stronger and will likely be exerting their influence.
The Labor Market and You
This chapter is meant to give you a sense of how the labor market works. But what 
does it all mean for those of you who’ll soon be getting a job or are in the process of 
changing jobs? I’ll try to answer that question in this last section.
	
Table 17-1 shows a variety of useful statistics about the labor market. Let’s 
­consider how some of them might affect you. For example, consider relative pay of 
Part of the reason labor union 
membership has declined in recent 
years is the unions’ successes.
TABLE 17-1 (A AND B)  Some Typical Starting Salaries
Occupation	
Private or Public
Physician assistant	
$83,000
Dentist	
68,000
Actuarial analyst	
54,000
Management analyst	
43,000
Economist	
50,000
Secondary school teacher	
40,000
Technical maintenance	
30,000
Maintenance and grounds	
30,000
Administrative assistant	
28,000
Flight attendant	
20,000
Retail sales associate	
20,000
Radio announcer	
18,000
Taco technician	
18,000
Sources: Author’s estimates based on various sources (pay varies significantly by 
region).
Degree	
Annual Salary*
Law (3 years)
Large firms	
$160,000
Small firms	
70,000
Engineering
Bachelor’s degree	
70,000
Master’s degree	
80,000
Business
Bachelor’s degree	
45,000
Master’s (MBA) degree (2 years)	
95,000
M.D. (4 years and 3-year internship)	
115,000
PhD (5 years)
In economics	
85,000
In humanities	
60,000
*These figures are rough estimates based on data from various published sources 
and informal surveys of author.
(a)  Some Typical Starting Salaries of BAs
(b)  Starting Salaries for Selected Professional Degrees

370	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
jobs requiring a college degree compared to jobs requiring only a high school 
diploma. Jobs requiring a college degree pay significantly more, on average, than 
do jobs requiring only a high school diploma. In recent years the income gap 
between the two groups has noticeably increased. So the answer to the question of 
whether it’s worthwhile to stick college out for another couple of years and get a 
degree is probably yes.
	
Next, consider the salaries of PhDs compared to the salaries of MBAs. A PhD is a 
person who has gone to graduate school after college, usually for a number of years, 
and earned an advanced degree called a Doctorate of Philosophy—even though one 
can earn a PhD in many subjects besides philosophy (such as economics). As you can 
see, PhDs’ starting salaries are lower than salaries of MBAs (masters of business 
administration) and professionals with other kinds of advanced degrees. Does this 
mean that PhDs are discriminated against? Not necessarily. It’s possible that PhDs’ 
lower pay suggests that PhDs derive a “psychic income” from their work in addition to 
the amount of money they earn.
 	
Since PhDs are often quite smart, their willingness to accept psychic income as a 
substitute for higher pay suggests that there’s much more to consider in a job than the 
salary. What’s most important about a job isn’t the wage, but whether you like what 
you’re doing and the life that job provides. (Of course, their lower salaries also could 
imply that PhDs really aren’t so smart.)
	
So my suggestion to you is definitely to finish college, especially if you enjoy it. 
(And with books like this, how could you help but enjoy it?) But go to graduate 
school only if you really enjoy learning. In picking your job, first and foremost pick 
a job that you enjoy (as long as it pays you enough to live on). Among jobs you like, 
choose a job in a field in which the supply of labor is limited, or the demand for 
­labor is significantly increasing. Either of those trends is likely to lead to higher 
wages. After all, if you’re doing something you like, you might as well get paid as 
much as possible for it.
	
Jobs in which the supply will likely be limited are those in which social or political 
forces have placed restrictions on entry or those requiring special abilities. If you have 
some special ability, try to find a job you enjoy in which you can use that ability. You 
might also look for a job in which entry is restricted, but beware: Jobs that are ­restricted 
in supply must be rationed, so while such jobs pay higher wages, you may need personal 
connections to obtain one of them.
	
I’m sure most of you are aware that your choice of jobs is one of the most 
important choices you’ll be making in your life. So I’m sure you feel the pressure. 
But you should also know that a job, unlike marriage, isn’t necessarily supposed to 
be for life. There’s enormous flexibility in the U.S. labor market. Many people 
change jobs six or seven times in their lifetimes. So while the choice is important, 
a poor choice can be remedied; don’t despair if the first job you take isn’t perfect. 
Good luck.
Conclusion
We’ve come to the end of our discussion about the labor market. As I said at the beginning, 
most people are defined by their job. Thus the labor market is important, and economic 
forces play a central role in its operation. But it is also important to remember, precisely 
because work is so significant to us all, that the labor market is not governed by economic 
forces alone. Cultural, political, and social forces are central issues in labor markets and in 
how economic forces play out. So whenever you consider issues involving labor markets, 
think supply and demand, but also think of people fighting against those forces with politi-
cal and social pressures to see that economic forces work for, not against, them.

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
371
• Incentive effects are important in labor supply deci-
sions. The higher the wage, the higher the quantity 
supplied.  (LO17-1)
• Elasticity of market supply of labor depends on (1) in-
dividuals’ opportunity cost of working, (2) the type of 
market being discussed, (3) the ­elasticity of individu-
als’ supply curves, and (4) individuals ­entering and 
leaving the labor ­market.  (LO17-1)
• The demand for labor by firms is derived from the 
­demand by consumers for goods and services. It 
­follows the basic law of demand—the higher the 
wage, the lower the quantity demanded.  (LO17-2)
• Elasticity of market demand for labor depends on  
(1) the elasticity of demand for the firm’s good, 
(2) the relative importance of labor in production,  
(3) the possibility and cost of substitution in produc-
tion, and (4) the degree to which marginal productivity 
falls with an increase in ­labor.  (LO17-2)
• Technological advances and changes in interna-
tional competitiveness shift the demand for labor. 
Both have reduced demand for some types of labor 
and increased demand for other types. The net 
­effect has been an increase in the demand for 
­labor.  (LO17-2)
Summary
• A monopsony is a market in which a single firm is the 
only buyer. A monopsonist hires fewer workers at a 
lower wage compared to a competitive firm.  (LO17-3)
• A bilateral monopoly is a market in which there is a 
single seller and a single buyer. The wage and number 
of workers hired in a bilateral monopoly ­depend on 
the relative strength of the union and the monopso-
nist.  (LO17-3)
• Firms are aware of workers’ well-being and will 
sometimes pay efficiency wages to keep workers 
happy and productive.  (LO17-3)
• Views of fairness in the labor market have led to  
laws that mandate comparable pay for comparable 
work.  (LO17-4)
• Discrimination may be based on (1) relevant 
­individual characteristics, (2) relevant group charac-
teristics, or (3) irrelevant individual characteristics. 
The easiest to eliminate is ­discrimination based on 
irrelevant ­individual ­characteristics. The others are 
­motivated by market incentives.  (LO17-4)
• Labor laws have evolved and will continue to evolve. 
Since the 1980s, labor unions have been declining in 
importance.  (LO17-5)
Key Terms
bilateral monopoly
closed shops
comparable worth laws
derived demand
efficiency wages
entrepreneurship
incentive effect
labor market
marginal factor cost
monopsony
union shops
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Why are social and political forces more active in the 
­labor market than in most other markets?  (LO17-1)
	 2.	 Economist Edward Prescott observed that while ­Americans 
worked 5 percent fewer hours per week than the French in 
the 1970s, they worked 50 percent more hours per week in 
the early 2000s. He found that taxes ­accounted for nearly all 
of the difference. What was his likely argument?  (LO17-1)
	 3. 	How is opportunity cost related to the supply of  
labor?  (LO17-1)
	 4. 	Using the economic decision rule and opportunity cost, 
explain why an increase in the wage rate increases 
­quantity of labor supplied?  (LO17-1)
	 5.	 Is an increase in the marginal income tax rate reflected 
by a shift in the after-tax supply of labor or a ­movement 
along the supply curve when the pretax wage rate is on 
the vertical axis? Explain your ­answer.  (LO17-1)
	 6. 	Using the concept of opportunity cost, explain why ­welfare 
programs might increase the number of poor.  (LO17-1)

372	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	 7.	 If the wage goes up 20 percent and the quantity of labor 
supplied increases by 5 percent, what’s the elasticity of la-
bor supply?  (LO17-1)
	 8.	 List four factors that contribute to the elasticity of labor 
demand.  (LO17-2)
	 9. 	List four shift factors of demand and their effect on 
­demand.  (LO17-2)
	10.	 The president of the United States receives an annual 
salary of $400,000, while some top baseball players earn 
more than $30 million ­annually.  (LO17-2)
	a.	 Based on marginal productivity theory, what does this 
say about their contributions to society?
	b.	 What qualifications to your answer might you 
­suggest about their relative contributions, and what 
do your adjustments have to say about marginal 
­productivity theory?
	11.	 Economists Mark Blaug and Ruth Towse studied the 
­market for economists in Britain and found that the ­quantity 
demanded was about 150 to 200 a year, and that the quan-
tity supplied was about 300 a year.  (LO17-3)
	a.	 What did they predict would happen to economists’ 
salaries?
	b.	 What likely happens to the excess economists?
	c.	 Why doesn’t the price change immediately to bring the 
quantity supplied and the quantity demanded into 
equilibrium?
	12.	 Demonstrate graphically the effect of a minimum wage 
law. Does economic theory tell us such a law would be a 
bad idea?  (LO17-3)
	13.	 As telecommunications improve, performers can reach 
larger and larger audiences. In the past, one could only 
perform in a concert hall; today one can perform for the 
entire world. How might that change in technology affect 
the relative pay of performers?  (LO17-3)
	14. 	New websites such as iFreelance.com have developed 
a place for companies to post projects for which ­freelancers 
can bid. What is the likely effect of this new market on 
market demand for freelancers? Wages?  (LO17-3)
	15. 	The town of Oberlin, Ohio, has one hospital. How 
would you classify this market structure, and what 
­effect will this market structure likely have on wages of 
nurses in Oberlin compared to a perfectly competi-
tive market ­structure? Demonstrate your answer 
­graphically.  (LO17-3)
	16.	 “Eight cents of every dollar spent at retail stores in America 
is spent at Walmart. With such market power, Walmart is 
able to name the price at which it is willing to buy goods 
from suppliers.”  (LO17-3)
	a.	 Could this happen if Walmart’s suppliers were operat-
ing in a perfectly competitive market?
	b.	 What if it were operating in an imperfectly competitive 
market, specifically a monopsonistic market?
	c.	 What would be the lower limit of the price Walmart 
could name?
	17.	 Show graphically how a minimum wage can 
­simultaneously increase employment and raise the 
wage rate.  (LO17-3)
	18.	 Explain each of the following phenomena using the 
­invisible hand or social or political forces:  (LO17-3)
	a.	 Firms often pay higher than market wages.
	b.	 Wages don’t fluctuate much as unemployment rises.
	c.	 Pay among faculty in various disciplines at colleges 
does not vary much although market conditions among 
disciplines vary significantly. 
	19.	 The International Labor Organization estimates that 250 
million children in developing ­countries between the ages 
of 5 and 14 are working either full- or part-time. The esti-
mate of the percentage of ­children working within partic-
ular countries is as high as 42 percent in Kenya. Among 
the reasons cited for the rise in child labor are population 
increases and ­poverty.  (LO17-3)
	a.	 Why do firms hire children as workers?
	b.	 Why do children work?
	c.	 What considerations should be taken into account by 
countries when deciding whether to implement an inter-
national ban on trade for products made with child labor?
	20. 	a.	 List three types of demand discrimination. 
	b.	 Which is the most difficult to eliminate? Why?
	c.	 Which is the easiest to eliminate? Why?  (LO17-4)
	21.	 Which type of discrimination is easier to address 
­legally—demand side or institutional? Explain your 
­answer.  (LO17-4)
	22.	 A recent study reported that the average male CEO of 
Fortune 500 firms is 6 feet, about 2.5 inches more than 
the average male. Why might this be difficult to eliminate 
through laws that restrict companies from hiring based on 
height?  (LO17-4)
	23. 	According to a study by economists Muriel Niederle and 
Lise Vesterlund, women are less willing to participate in 
competitive environments.  (LO17-4)
	a.	 What is the potential impact on the number of women 
in high-level management positions?
	b.	 If this were the cause of fewer women working in 
­high-level management, would you characterize it as 
discrimination? If so, what type? If not, why not? 
	24.	 Comparable worth laws require employers to pay the 
same wage scale to workers who do comparable work or 
have comparable training. What likely effect would these 
laws have on the labor market?  (LO17-5)
	25.	 A teen subminimum training wage law allows 
­employers to pay teenagers less than the minimum 
wage.  (LO17-5)
	a.	 What effect would you predict this law has, based on 
standard economic theory?
	b.	 In analyzing the effects of the law, Professors Michael 
Card and Alan Kreuger of Princeton University found 
that few businesses used it and that it had little effect. 
Why might that have been the case?

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
373
	26. 	In 1993 Congress passed the Family and Medical Leave 
Act (FMLA), which requires firms with more than 50 
employees grant a 12-week unpaid leave of ­absence for 
family and medical reasons. What is the likely effect on 
the demand for female ­employees?  (LO17-5)
	27. 	What has happened to union membership in the United 
States since the 1960s?  (LO17-5)
	28. 	What is the difference between a union shop and a 
closed shop? Which did the Taft-Hartley Act make 
­illegal? How have more recent laws changed the role 
of unions?  (LO17-5)
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 How might the minimum wage lead to greater racial and 
gender discrimination in the labor market? (Austrian)
	 2.	 In his book Forbidden Grounds, University of Chicago 
Professor Richard Epstein argues that federal employment 
antidiscrimination laws ought to be abolished. [Hint: 
Reading Westmont College economist Edd ­Noell’s paper 
“Racial Discrimination, Police Power and the 1964 Civil 
Rights Act in Richard Epstein’s Forbidden Grounds: An 
Evaluation of The Case Against Discrimination Laws” 
(available on the web at ACE, www.gordon.edu/ace) will 
be helpful in answering this question.]
	a.	 How might a Christian economist evaluate the need 
for federal laws prohibiting racial discrimination?
	b.	 Why should a Christian economist think more carefully 
than another economist about the relation between 
economic liberty and tolerance of the taste for 
­discrimination? (Religious)
	 3.	 Gloria Steinem pointed out the following: “I’ve yet to be 
on any campus where women weren’t worried about some 
aspect of combining marriage, children, and a career. I’ve 
yet to find one where many men were worrying about the 
same thing.”
	a.	 What does this insight suggest about the working of 
the labor market in the United States?
	b.	 Does this male bias in the labor market affect the ef-
ficiency of the economy? (Feminist)
	 4.	 Table 17-1 provides data about starting salaries for selected 
professional degrees; in it you can see that PhD economists 
are paid less than MBAs. If economists are rational, why are 
they economists? (Institutionalist)
	 5.	 Radical economists argue that labor markets are governed 
by nonmarket forces such as discrimination as well as by 
the supply and demand for labor. As they see it, poverty 
and inequality are not aberrations but systematic labor 
market outcomes. They also believe that unions are much-
needed equalizers that help low-wage workers.
	a.	 How does the radical view of the workings of labor 
markets and role of unions differ from that presented 
in your textbook?
	b.	 In your opinion, how fairly do labor markets operate?
	c.	 Do labor market outcomes need redress through col-
lective action? (Radical)
	 6.	 In firms, the manager is assumed to hold down workers’ 
wages in order to maximize his profits. Who holds down 
the pay of managers? (Institutionalist)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 “Welfare laws are bad, not for society, but for the people 
they are meant to help.” Discuss. 
	 2.	 Which would you choose: selling illegal drugs at $75 an 
hour (20 percent chance per year of being arrested) or a 
$10-an-hour factory job? Why?
	 3.	 Some economists have argued against need-based scholar-
ships because they work as an implicit tax on parents’ 
­salaries and hence discourage saving for college. 
	a.	 If the marginal tax rate parents face is 20 percent, and 
5 percent of parents’ assets will be deducted from a 
­student’s financial aid each year for the four years a 
child is in school, what is the implicit marginal tax on 
that ­portion of income that is saved? (For simplicity 
­assume the interest rate is zero and the parents’ 
­contribution is paid at the time the child enters college.)
	b.	 How would your answer differ if parents had two 
­children with the second entering college right after 
the first one graduated? (How about three?) (Remem-
ber that the assets will likely decrease with each child 
graduating.)
	c.	 When parents are divorced, how should the contribu-
tion of each parent be determined? If your school has 
need-based scholarships, how does it determine the 
expected contributions of divorced parents?

374	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	d.	 Given the above, would you suggest moving to an 
ability-based scholarship program? Why or why not? 
	 4.	 According to economist Colin Camerer of the California In-
stitute of Technology, many New York taxi drivers decide 
when to finish work for the day by setting an income goal for 
themselves. Once they reach it, they stop working. 
	a.	 Is that what you would expect if the drivers are rational?
	b.	 Prospect theory suggests that people gain less utility 
from winning a certain sum of money than the utility 
they would lose if they lost that same sum. How can 
prospect theory explain the behavior of taxi drivers? 
	 5.	 In 1997, a Dutch charity sponsored an incentive program 
in which teachers received prizes equal to about 30 per-
cent of their salary if their students improved their scores 
on a standardized test.
	a.	 What effect would you expect the program to have on 
test scores?
	b.	 If not all the teachers’ students were required to take 
the test, how would the program have to treat students 
who did not take the exam?
	c.	 What would be the most likely way in which the 
­program would change what teachers did? 
	 6.	 Why might it be inappropriate to discuss the effect of immi-
gration policy using supply and demand analysis? 
	 7.	 Why is unemployment nearly twice as high among blacks as 
among whites? What should be done about the situation? 
	 8.	 Give four reasons why women earn less than men. Which 
reasons do you believe are most responsible for the wage gap?
	 9.	 Interview three married female and three married male 
professors at your college, asking them what percentage 
of work in the professor’s household each adult household 
member does.
	a.	 Assuming your results can be extended to the popula-
tion at large, what can you say about the existence of 
institutional discrimination?
	b.	 If gender-related salary data for individuals at your 
­college are available, determine whether women or men 
of equal rank and experience receive higher ­average pay.
	c.	 Relate your findings in a and b. 
	10.	 In an article in the Journal of Human Resources titled 
“The Economic Reality of the Beauty Myth,” economists 
Susan Averett and Sanders Korenman found that family 
income of obese women is about 17 percent lower than 
that of women who are of recommended weight. The dif-
ferential was less for men than for women.
	a.	 What conclusions can you draw from these findings?
	b.	 Do the findings necessarily mean that there is a 
“beauty” discrimination?
	c.	 What might explain the larger income penalty for women?
 	11. 	More than half of agricultural workers in the United 
States are undocumented immigrants. Some Americans 
support strong enforcement of immigration laws that limit 
the number of workers from Central and South America 
coming to the United States so that U.S. citizens can get 
those jobs, while others argue that without them, the jobs 
that they take will be left unfilled. Who is right? 
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 Under usual conditions of supply, one would expect that if 
the wage of my part-time job rises, the quantity of labor I 
supply in that part-time job also rises. Institutional 
­constraints such as tax considerations or company rules 
might mean that the quantity of labor I supply doesn’t 
change. However, under the usual conditions of supply, I will 
study less if the wage of my part-time job rises.  (LO17-1)
	 2.	 Taxes reduce the opportunity cost, or relative price, of 
nonwork activities. So you will substitute leisure for labor 
as marginal tax rates increase.  (LO17-1)
	 3.	 The irony of any need-based program is that such a 
­program reduces people’s incentive to prevent themselves 
from becoming needy.  (LO17-1)
	 4.	 Some factors that influence the elasticity of a firm’s ­derived 
demand for labor include (1) the elasticity of ­demand for the 
firm’s good; (2) the relative importance of labor in the pro-
duction process; (3) the possibility, and cost, of substitution 
in production; and (4) the degree to which marginal produc-
tivity falls with an increase in ­labor.  (LO17-2)
	 5.	 The demand for laborers at that firm would shift out to the 
right.  (LO17-2)
	 6.	 Differences among countries in productivity, transporta-
tion costs, trade restrictions, and social institutions all de-
termine the relative demand for labor in one country 
compared to another country.  (LO17-2)
	 7.	 If the increase in labor supply leads to an increase in the 
­demand for products in general, the increase in labor 
­supply also will lead to an increase in labor  
demand.  (LO17-3)
	 8.	 Firms might pay workers higher-than-competitive wages 
in the long run to cultivate worker loyalty and get workers 
to work harder.  (LO17-3)
	 9.	 False. Economic theory does not argue that discrimination 
should be eliminated. Economic theory tries to stay posi-
tive. Discrimination is a normative issue. If one’s norma-
tive views say that discrimination should be eliminated, 
economic theory might be useful to help do that most 
­efficiently.  (LO17-4)
	10. 	Whenever discrimination saves the firm money, the firm 
will be pressured to discriminate to lower costs to remain 
competitive.  (LO17-4)

375
at the change in the total product due to this person’s 
work. For example, if the firm is currently employing 30 
workers and it hires one more, the firm’s total product or 
output will rise from 294 to 300, so the marginal product 
of moving from 30 to 31 workers is 6.
	
Notice that workers’ marginal product decreases as 
more workers are hired. Why is this? Remember the 
­assumption of fixed capital: More and more workers are 
working with the same amount of capital and there is 
­diminishing marginal productivity.
	
Column 4 shows labor productivity—the average 
output per worker, which is a statistic commonly 
­referred to in economic reports. It’s determined by 
­dividing the total output by the number of workers. 
­Column 5 shows the additional worker’s marginal 
­revenue product, which, since the firm is assumed to be 
competitive, is determined by multiplying the price the 
firm receives for the product it sells ($2) by the ­worker’s 
marginal physical product.
	
Column 5, the marginal revenue product, is of cen-
tral importance to the firm. It tells the firm how much 
additional money it will make from hiring an additional 
worker. That marginal revenue product represents a 
competitive firm’s demand for labor.
	
Figure A17-1(b) graphs the firm’s derived demand for 
labor, based on the data in column 5 of Figure A17-1(a). 
The resulting curve is the firm’s derived demand curve 
for labor, which shows the maximum amount of labor, 
measured in labor-hours, that a firm will hire. To see this, 
let’s assume that the wage is $9 and that the firm is hiring 
30 workers. If it hires another worker so it has 31 workers, 
workers’ marginal revenue product of $12 exceeds their 
wage of $9, so the firm can increase profits by doing so. It 
increases output and profits since the additional revenue 
the firm gets from increasing workers from 30 to 31 is $12 
and the additional cost the firm ­incurs is the wage of $9.
	
Now say the firm has hired 4 additional workers so 
it has 34 workers. As the firm hires more workers, the 
marginal product of workers declines. As you can see 
from the graph in Figure A17-1(b), the marginal 
­revenue product of decreasing from 34 to 33 workers is 
$6. Since the workers’ marginal revenue product of $6 
is less than their wage of $9, now the firm can increase 
profits by laying off some workers. Doing so decreases 
output but ­increases profit because it significantly 
­increases the ­average product of the remaining ­workers.
This appendix considers the issues of derived demand in 
more detail. Although it focuses on the derived ­demand 
for labor, you should note that the formal analysis of the 
firm’s derived demand for labor ­presented in the chapter 
is quite general and carries over to the derived demand 
for capital and for land. Firms translate consumers’ de-
mands for goods into ­derived demands for any and all of 
the factors of production. Let’s start our consideration by 
looking at the firm’s decision to hire.
The Firm’s Decision to Hire
What determines a firm’s decision to hire someone? The 
answer is simple. A profit-maximizing firm hires some-
one if it thinks there’s money to be made by doing so. 
Unless there is, the firm won’t hire the person. So for a 
firm to decide whether to hire someone, it must compare 
the worker’s marginal revenue product (MRP) (the 
marginal revenue it expects to earn from selling the 
­additional worker’s output) with the wage that it expects 
to pay the additional worker. For a competitive firm (for 
which P = MR), that marginal revenue product equals the 
worker’s value of marginal product (VMP)—the worker’s 
marginal physical product (MPP) (the additional units 
of output that hiring an additional worker will bring 
about) times the price (P) at which the firm can sell the 
additional product.
Marginal revenue product = MPP × P
Say, for example, that by hiring another worker a firm can 
produce an additional 6 widgets an hour, which it can sell 
at $2 each. That means the firm can pay up to $12 per 
hour and still expect to make a profit. Notice that a key 
question for the firm is: How much additional product 
will we get from hiring another worker? A competitive 
firm can increase its profit by hiring ­another worker as 
long as the value of the worker’s marginal product (which 
also equals her marginal ­revenue product) (MPP × P) is 
higher than her wage.
	
To see whether you understand the principle, consider 
the example in Figure A17-1(a). Column 1 shows the 
number of workers, all of whom are assumed to be identi-
cal. Column 2 shows the total output of those workers. 
Column 3 shows the marginal physical product of an 
­additional worker. This number is determined by looking 
Derived Demand
APPENDIX

376	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	
Only when a worker’s wage of $9 equals the mar-
ginal revenue product does the firm have no incentive 
to change the number of employees. In this example, 
the wage ($9) equals workers’ marginal revenue prod-
uct at 32 workers. When the firm is hiring 32 workers, 
either hiring another worker or laying off 1 worker will 
­decrease profits. Decreasing from 32 to 31 workers 
loses $10 in revenue, but increasing from 32 to 33 work-
ers gains $8 in revenue but costs $9 in wages. Since 
the  marginal revenue product curve tells the firm, 
given a wage, how many workers it should hire, the 
marginal revenue product curve is the firm’s demand 
curve for labor.
	
The fact that the demand curve for labor is downward-
sloping means that as more workers are hired, workers’ 
marginal product falls. This might tempt you to think 
that the last worker hired is inherently less productive 
than the first worker hired. But that simply can’t be 
­because, by assumption, the workers are identical. 
Thus, the marginal product of any worker must be identical 
to the marginal product of any other worker, given that 
a specified number of workers are working. What the 
falling marginal product means is that when 30 rather 
than 25 workers are working, the marginal product of 
any one of those 30 workers is less than the marginal 
product of any one of 25 of those workers when only 
25 are working. When the other inputs are constant, 
hiring an additional worker lowers the ­marginal product 
not only of the last worker but also of any of the other 
workers.
	
To understand what’s going on here, you must 
­remember that when marginal product is calculated, all 
other inputs are held constant—so if a firm hires another 
worker, that worker will have to share machines or tools 
with other workers. When you share tools, you start run-
ning into significant bottlenecks, which cause production 
to fall. That’s why the marginal product of workers goes 
down when a new worker is hired. This assumption that 
all other factors of production are held constant is an 
­important one. If all other factors of production are 
FIGURE A17-1 (A AND B)  Determining How Many Workers to Hire and the Firm’s Derived Demand for Labor
The marginal revenue product is any firm’s demand curve for labor. Since for a competitive firm P = MR, a competitive firm’s derived 
demand curve for labor is its value of the marginal product curve (P × MPP). This curve tells us the additional revenue the firm gets from 
having an additional worker. From the chart in (a) we can see that when the firm increases from 27 to 28 workers, the marginal product per 
hour for each worker is 9. If the product sells for $2, then marginal revenue product is $18, which is one point on the demand curve for 
labor [point A in (b)]. When the firm increases from 34 to 35 workers, the value of the marginal product decreases to $4. This is another 
point on the firm’s derived demand curve [point B in (b)]. By connecting the two points, as I have done in (b), you can see that the firm’s 
derived demand curve for labor is downward-sloping.
	
(1)	
(2)	
(3)	
(4)	
(5) 
	
	
	
Marginal	
	
Marginal	
	
	
Total	
Physical	
Average	
Revenue	
Number of	
Product	
Product	
Product	
Product	
Workers	
per Hour	
per Hour	
per Hour	
(MRP)
	
27	
270	
9.00	
10.00	
$18
	
28	
279	
8.00	
  9.96	
  16
	
29	
287	
7.00	
  9.90	
  14
	
30	
294	
6.00	
  9.80	
  12
	
31	
300	
5.00	
  9.68	
  10
	
32	
305	
4.00	
  9.53	
    8
	
33	
309	
3.00	
  9.36	
    6
	
34	
312	
2.00	
  9.18	
    4
	
35	
314	
	
  8.97
Wage (per hour)
$26.00
24.00
22.00
20.00
18.00
16.00
14.00
12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
0
4 
8 
12 
16 
20 24 28 32 
36 40 44
A
B
Marginal 
revenue product
Number of workers
(b)
(a)

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
377
­increased, it is not at all clear that workers’ productivity 
will fall as output increases.
	
Why does a firm hire another worker if doing so will 
lead to a fall in other workers’ productivity and, possibly, 
a fall in the average productivity of all workers? Because 
the firm is interested in total profit, not productivity. As 
long as hiring an extra worker increases revenue by more 
than the worker costs, the firm’s total profit increases. A 
profit-maximizing firm would be crazy not to hire an-
other worker, even if by doing so it lowers the marginal 
product of the workers.
	
The economic model of labor markets assumes that 
marginal productivities can be determined relatively 
­easily. In reality they can’t. They require guesses and 
­estimates that are often influenced by a worker’s interac-
tion with the person doing the guessing and estimating. 
Thus, social interaction plays a role in determining wages. 
If you get along with the manager, his estimate of your 
marginal productivity is likely to be higher than if you 
don’t. And for some reason, managers’ estimates of their 
own marginal productivity tend to be high. In part be-
cause of difficulties in estimating marginal productivities, 
actual pay can often differ substantially from ­marginal 
productivities.
Factors Affecting the Demand 
for Labor
There are many technical issues that determine how the 
demand for products is translated through firms into a de-
mand for labor (and other factors of production), but we 
need not go into them in detail. I will, however, state three 
general principles:
1.	Changes in the demand for a firm’s product will 
be reflected in changes in its demand for labor.
2.	The structure of a firm plays an important role in 
determining its demand for labor.
3.	A change in the other factors of production that a 
firm uses will change its demand for labor.
Let’s consider each of these principles in turn.
Changes in the Firm’s Demand
The first principle is almost self-evident. An increase 
in the demand for a product leads to an increase in de-
mand for the laborers who produce that product. The 
increase in demand pushes the price up, raising the 
marginal revenue product of labor (which, you’ll re-
member, for a competitive firm is the price of the 
firm’s product times the marginal physical product of 
labor).
	
The implications of this first principle, however, are 
not so self-evident. Often people think of firms’ inter-
ests and workers’ interests as being counter to one 
­another, but this principle tells us that in many ways 
they are not. What benefits the firm also benefits its 
workers. Their interests are in conflict only when it 
comes to deciding how to divide up the total revenues 
among the owners of the firm, the workers, and the 
other inputs. Thus, it’s not uncommon to see a firm and 
its workers fighting each other at the bargaining table, 
but also working together to prevent imports that might 
compete with the firm’s product or to support laws that 
may benefit the firm.
	
An example of such cooperation occurred when 
union workers at a solar energy firm helped fight for an 
extension of government subsidies for solar energy. 
Why? Because their contract included a clause that if 
the solar energy subsidy bill passed, the union workers’ 
wages would be significantly higher than if it didn’t. 
This cooperation between workers and firms has led 
some economists to treat firms and workers as a single 
entity, out to get as much as they can as a group. These 
economists argue that it isn’t helpful to separate out fac-
tor markets and goods markets. They argue that bargain-
ing power models, which combine factor and goods 
markets, are the best way to analyze at what level wages 
will be set. In other words, the cost of labor to a firm 
should be modeled as if it is determined at the same 
time that its price and profitability are determined, not 
separately.
The Structure of the Firm and Its  
Demand for Labor
The way in which the demand for products is translated 
into a demand for labor is determined by the structure of 
the firm. For example, let’s consider the difference be-
tween a monopolistic industry and a competitive industry. 
For both, the decision about whether to hire is based on 
whether the wage is below or above the marginal ­revenue 
product. But the firms that make up the two industries cal-
culate their marginal revenue products differently.
	
The price of a competitive firm’s output remains con-
stant regardless of how many units it sells. Thus, its mar-
ginal revenue product equals the value of the marginal 
product. To calculate its marginal revenue product we sim-
ply multiply the price of the firm’s product by the worker’s 
marginal physical product. For a competitive firm:
Marginal revenue product of a worker =
Value of the worker’s marginal product =
MPP × Price of product

378	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	
The price of a monopolist’s product decreases as more 
units are sold since the monopolist faces a downward-
sloping demand curve. The monopolist takes that into 
­account. That’s why it focuses on marginal revenue rather 
than price. As it hires more labor and produces more out-
put, the price it charges for its product will fall. Thus, for 
a monopolist:
Marginal revenue product of a worker = 
MPP × Marginal revenue
Since a monopolist’s marginal revenue is always less than 
price, a monopolistic industry will always hire fewer 
workers than a comparable competitive industry, which is 
consistent with the result we discussed in the chapter on 
monopoly: a monopolistic industry will always produce 
less than a competitive industry, other things equal.
	
To ensure that you understand the principle, let’s con-
sider the example in Table A17-1, a table of prices, wages, 
marginal revenues, marginal physical products, and marginal 
revenue products for a firm in a competitive industry and a 
monopolistic industry.
	
A firm in a competitive industry will hire up to the 
point where the wage equals MPP × P (columns 5 × 3). 
This occurs at 6 workers. Hiring either fewer or more 
workers would mean a loss in profits for a firm in a com-
petitive industry.
	
Now let’s compare the competitive industry with an 
equivalent monopolistic industry. Whereas the firm in the 
competitive industry did not take into account the effect 
an increase in output would have on prices, the monopo-
list will. It takes into account the fact that to sell the ad-
ditional output of an additional worker, it must lower the 
price of the good. The relevant marginal revenue product 
for the monopolist appears in column 7. At 6 workers, the 
worker’s wage rate of $2.85 exceeds the worker’s mar-
ginal revenue product of $1.95, which means that the mo-
nopolist would hire fewer than 6 workers—5 full-time 
workers and 1 part-time worker.
	
As a second example of how the nature of firms af-
fects the translation of demand for products into demand 
for labor, consider what would happen if workers rather 
than independent profit-maximizing owners controlled 
the firms. You saw before that whenever another worker 
is hired, other inputs constant, the marginal physical 
product of all similar workers falls. That can contribute 
to a reduction in existing workers’ wages. The profit-
maximizing firm doesn’t take into account that effect on 
existing workers’ wages. It wants to hold its costs down. 
If existing workers are making the decisions about hir-
ing, they’ll take that wage decline into account. If they 
believe that hiring more workers will lower their own 
wage, they have an incentive to see that new workers 
aren’t hired. Thus, like the monopolist, a worker-controlled 
firm will hire fewer workers than a competitive profit-
maximizing firm.
	
There aren’t many worker-controlled firms in the United 
States, but a number of firms include existing workers’ wel-
fare in their decision processes. Moreover, with the growth 
of the team concept, in which workers are seen as part of a 
team with managers, existing workers’ input into managerial 
decision making is increasing. In many U.S. firms, workers 
have some say in whether additional workers will be hired 
and at what wage they will be hired. Other firms have an 
implicit understanding or a written contract with existing 
workers that restricts hiring and firing decisions.
	
The top five companies to work for based on salary, 
perks, and fun in 2016 were:
1.	Google.
2.	ACUITY Insurance.
3.	The Boston Consulting Group.
4.	Wegmans Food Markets.
5.	Quicken Loans.
Among the reasons Google is on the list is its climbing 
wall and nap pods. (And its pay includes significant bo-
nuses of stock options.)
	
Why do firms consider workers’ welfare? They do so 
to be seen as “good employers,” which makes it easier 
for them to hire in the future. Given the strong social and 
TABLE A17-1  The Effect of Monopoly and Firm Structure on the Demand for Labor
	
(1)	
(2)	
(3)	
(4)	
(5)	
(6)	
(7)
	
	
	
	
Marginal Revenue	
Marginal Physical	
Marginal Revenue Product
	Number of	
	
Price	
(Monopolist)	
Product	
Competitive	
Monopolist 
	 Workers	
Wage	
(P)	
(MR)	
(MPP)	
(MPP × P)	
(MPP × MR)
	
5	
$2.85	
$1.00	
$0.75	
5	
$5.00	
$3.75
	
6	
  2.85	
0.95	
 0.65	
3	
  2.85	
   1.95
	
7	
  2.85	
0.90	
 0.55	
1	
  0.90	
    0.55

	
Chapter 17 ■ Work and the Labor Market	
379
­legal limitations on firms’ hiring and firing decisions, 
one cannot simply apply marginal productivity theory to 
the real world. One must first understand the institutional 
and legal structures of the labor market. However, the 
­existence of these other forces doesn’t mean that the 
­economic forces represented by marginal productivity 
don’t exist. Rather, it means that firms struggle to find a 
wage policy that accommodates both economic and 
­social forces in their wage-setting process. For example, 
in 2011 the United Autoworkers Union negotiated multi-
tier wage contracts with auto companies. The companies 
­continued to pay their existing workers a higher wage, 
but paid new workers a lower wage, even though old and 
new workers were doing identical jobs. These multitier 
wage contracts were the result of the interactions of the 
­social and market forces.
Changes in Other Factors of 
Production
A third principle determining the derived demand for la-
bor is the amount of other factors of production that the 
firm has. Given a technology, an increase in other factors 
of production will increase the marginal physical product 
of existing workers. For example, let’s say that a firm 
buys more machines so that each worker has more ma-
chines with which to work. The workers’ ­marginal physi-
cal product increases, and the cost per unit of output for 
the firm decreases. The net effect on the demand for labor 
is unclear; it depends on how much the firm increases 
output, how much the firm’s price is affected, and how 
easily one type of input can be substituted for another—
or whether it must be used in conjunction with others.
	
While we can’t say what the final effect on demand 
will be, we can determine the firm’s cost minimization 
condition—where the ratio of marginal product to the 
price of an input is equal for all inputs.1 When a firm is 
using resources as efficiently as possible, and hence is 
minimizing costs, the marginal product of each factor of 
production divided by the price of that factor must equal 
that of all the other factors. Specifically, the cost minimi-
zation condition is
MPl
w
= MPm
Pm
= MPx
Px
where
	w = Wage rate
	 l = Labor
	m = Machines
	x = Any other input
If this cost minimization condition is not met, the firm 
could hire more of the input with the higher marginal 
product relative to price, and less of other inputs, and 
produce the same amount of output at a lower cost.
	
Let’s consider a numerical example. Say the marginal 
product of labor is 20 and the wage is $4, while the mar-
ginal product of machines is 30 and the rental price of ma-
chines is $4. You’re called in to advise the firm. You say, 
“Fire one worker, which will decrease output by 20 and 
save $4; spend that $4 on machines, which will increase 
output by 30.” Output has increased by 10 while costs 
have remained constant. As long as the marginal products 
divided by the prices of the various inputs are unequal, 
you can make such recommendations to lower cost.
Conclusion
Changes in these factors make demand for labor shift 
around a lot. This shifting introduces uncertainty into peo-
ple’s lives and into the economic system. Often ­people at-
tempt to build up institutional barriers to reduce 
uncertainty—through either social or political forces. Thus, 
labor markets function under an enormous volume of regu-
lations and rules. We need to remember that while eco-
nomic factors often lurk behind the scenes to ­determine pay 
and hiring decisions, these are often only part of the picture.
Key Terms
cost minimization 
condition
derived demand curve  
for labor
labor productivity
marginal physical 
product (MPP)
marginal revenue product 
(MRP)
value of marginal product 
(VMP)
1This condition was explicitly discussed in terms of isocost/isoquant 
analysis in the appendix to Chapter 12.

380	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Using the information in Figure A17-1, answer the 
­following questions:
	a.	 If the market wage were $7 an hour, how many work-
ers would the firm hire?
	b.	 If the price of the firm’s product fell to $1, how would 
your answer to a change?
	 2.	 If firms were controlled by workers, would they likely 
hire more or fewer workers? Why?
	 3.	 In the 1980s and the 1990s farmers switched from small 
square bales, which they hired students on summer break 
to stack for them, to large round bales, which can be 
handled almost entirely by machines. What is the likely 
reason for the switch?
	 4.	 Should teachers be worried about the introduction of 
computer- and video-based teaching systems? Why or 
why not?
	 5.	 A competitive firm gets $3 per widget. A worker’s aver-
age product is 4 and marginal product is 3. What is the 
maximum the firm should pay the worker?
	 6.	 How would your answer to question 5 change if the firm 
were a monopolist?
	 7.	 Fill in the following table for a competitive firm that has a 
$2 price for its goods.
Number of 
	 Workers	
TP	
MPP	
AP	
MRP
	
1	
10	
	
_____	
	
	
	
_____	
	
_____
	
2	
19
	
	
	
8	
	
_____
	
3	
_____	
	
_____
	
	
	
	
	
_____
	
4	
_____	
	
8.5	
	
	
	
_____	
	
$12
	
5	
_____	
	
_____	
	 8.	 Your manager comes in with three sets of proposals for a 
new production process. Each process uses three inputs: 
land, labor, and capital. Under proposal A, the firm would 
be producing an output where the MPP of land is 30, la-
bor is 42, and capital is 36. Under proposal B, at the out-
put produced the MPP would be 20 for land, 35 for labor, 
and 96 for capital. Under proposal C, the MPP would be 
40 for land, 56 for labor, and 36 for capital. Inputs’ cost 
per hour is $5 for land, $7 for labor, and $6 for capital.
	a.	 Which proposal would you adopt?
	b.	 If the price of labor rises to $14, how will your answer 
change?

”
The first man to fence in a piece of 
land, saying “This is mine,” and who 
found people simple enough to 
believe him, was the real founder  
of civil society.
—Jean-Jacques Rousseau
“
Nonwage and Asset Income:  
Rents, Profits, and Interest
This web chapter can be found  
among the library resources in  
McGraw-Hill Connect®
chapter 17W
After reading this chapter, 
you should be able to:
LO17W-1	 Distinguish rent from 
other types of income and 
explain the relationship 
between rent seeking 
and property rights.
LO17W-2	 Define profit and explain 
its relationship to 
entrepreneurship.
LO17W-3	 Define interest and 
demonstrate how it is  
used in determining  
present value.
LO17W-4	 Explain the marginal 
productivity theory of 
income distribution.
© Jack Star/PhotoLink/Getty Images RF
Chapter Outline
Rent
The Effect of a Tax on Land
Quasi Rents
Rent Seeking and Institutional Constraints
Profit
Profit, Entrepreneurship, and Disequilibrium Adjustment
Market Niches, Profit, and Rent
Interest
The Present Value Formula
Some Rules of Thumb for Determining Present Value
The Annuity Rule
The Rule of 72
The Importance of Present Value
The Marginal Productivity Theory of Income Distribution
Conclusion

“
”
The first man to fence in a piece of land, 
saying “This is mine,” and who found 
people simple enough to believe him, 
was the real founder of civil society.
—Jean-Jacques Rousseau
The four traditional categories of income are 
wages, rent, profits, and interest. Wages, discussed in 
Chapter 17, are determined by economic factors (the 
forces of supply and demand), with strong influences 
by political and social forces that often ­restrict entry or 
hold wages at non-market-clearing levels.
	
The same holds true for nonwage income: rent, 
profits, and interest. These forms of income are 
­determined by the forces of supply and demand. But, as I emphasize throughout 
the book, supply and demand are not ­necessarily the end of the story. Supply and 
demand determine price and income, given an institutional structure that 
includes property rights (the rights given to people to use specified property 
as they see fit) and the contractual legal system (the set of laws that govern 
economic behavior) of the society. If you change ­property rights, you change the 
distribution of income. Thus, in a larger sense, supply and demand don’t deter-
mine the distribution of income; the distribution of property rights does.
	
The system of property rights and the contractual legal system that underlie 
the U.S. economy evolved over many years. Many people believe that property 
rights were unfairly distributed to begin with; if you believe that, you’ll also 
believe that the distribution of income and the returns to those property rights 
are unfair. In other words, you can favor markets but object to the underlying 
property rights. Many political fights about income distribution concern fights 
over property rights, not fights over the use of markets.
	
Such distributional fights have been going on for a long time. In feudal 
times much of the land was held communally; it belonged to everyone, or at 
least everyone used it. It was common land—a communally held resource. As 
the economy evolved into a market economy, that land was appropriated by 
individuals, and these individuals became landholders who could determine the 
use of the land and could receive rent for allowing other individuals to use that 
land. Supply and demand can explain how much rent will accrue to a land-
holder; it cannot explain the initial set of property rights.
Nonwage and Asset Income:  
Rents, Profits, and Interest
chapter 17W
After reading this chapter, 
you should be able to:
LO17W-1	 Distinguish rent from 
other types of income and 
explain the relationship 
between rent seeking 
and property rights.
LO17W-2	 Define profit and explain 
its relationship to 
entrepreneurship.
LO17W-3	 Define interest and 
demonstrate how it is 
used in determining 
present value.
LO17W-4	 Explain the marginal 
productivity theory of 
income distribution.
© Jack Star/PhotoLink/Getty Images RF

17W-2	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	
The type of issues raised by looking at the underlying property rights for land are in 
large part academic for Western societies. The property rights that exist, and the 
­contractual legal system under which markets operate, are given. You’re not going to 
see somebody going out and introducing a new alternative set of property rights in which 
the ownership of property is transferred to someone else. The government may impose 
shifts at the margin; for example, new zoning laws (laws that set limits on the use of 
one’s property) will modify property rights and create fights about whether society has 
the right to impose such laws. But there will be no wholesale change in property rights. 
That’s why most economic thinking simply takes property rights as given.
	
But taking property rights on land as given isn’t a reasonable assumption for the devel-
oping countries. Hernando DeSoto, in The Mystery of Capital, argues that in countries 
where property rights are determined by physical possession, instead of transferable legal 
rights, individuals cannot get loans using property rights as collateral and once they take 
possession cannot transfer the property to others who could put it into more productive 
uses. When property rights are determined by physical possession instead of legal owner-
ship, the financial economy cannot function efficiently. To unleash the economic potential 
of these assets, developing economies must decide what structure of property rights they 
want. Who should be allowed formal property rights? Do those societies want land to be 
given to individuals in perpetuity, or do they want it given to individuals for, say, 100 years? 
As these questions were raised, economists redirected their analysis to look more closely at 
the underlying legal and philosophical basis of supply and demand. As they did so, they 
extended and modified the economic theory of income distribution, as we’ll discuss shortly.
	
Similarly, taking property rights for intellectual property rights as given is not a 
­reasonable assumption, even in a developed country such as the United States. The 
reason is that, unlike property rights in land, intellectual property rights are significantly 
affected by new technologies, so the laws that protect them must change. For example, 
­before e-commerce was made possible by the Internet, business practices were not 
­patented. When Amazon developed its 1-Click shopping cart, it was able to patent the 
process as a new business practice, keeping others from using their own one-click carts  
unless they paid Amazon a fee. (The patent expires in 2017.) 
	
Not just any business process can be patented. It must be created by humans, useful, 
novel, and not obvious to the average person. ­In practice each of these is hard to define, 
and there are usually different views about what is patentable. For example, Amazon’s 
1-Click patent application was rejected in Europe. 
	
Another example of property rights protection is antipiracy laws. Individuals are con-
tinually figuring out ways to share material by getting around existing laws that were 
designed with a different technology in mind. That technology would spread the gains of 
the new technology to the general public. Government often prevents that from happen-
ing. For example, when technology was developed that made books, movies, and music 
easy to share, the government passed antipiracy laws that limited the use of that technol-
ogy, thereby protecting the wealth of the copyright holders. How ­government interprets 
and enforces the laws makes a big difference to the distribution of income.
	
Despite the redirection of economists’ analysis away from the traditional catego-
ries, it’s helpful to consider the three traditional income categories besides wages (rent, 
profits, and interest) because doing so provides useful insight into forces that make our 
economy work and that determine who gets what.
Rent
Rent is the income from a factor of production that is in fixed supply. Traditionally 
rent was associated with land, which was assumed to be a totally fixed factor of 
­production. When the supply of a factor is fixed, all we need to know to determine 
Although zoning laws modify property 
rights, you’re not going to see someone 
introducing a new set of property rights 
in the United States.
Rent is the income from a factor of 
production that is in fixed supply.

	
Chapter 17W ■ Nonwage and Asset Income: Rents, Profits, and Interest	
17W-3
what the price of land (rent) will be is the amount of land and the demand curve. 
­Figure 17W-1 shows how the price of land is determined. In it you can see that since the 
supply of land is perfectly inelastic, the level of demand determines the rent on land.
The Effect of a Tax on Land
To check whether you understand the concept of rent, let’s try a couple of questions. Say 
the government places a tax on the user of land. What will that tax do to the quantity of 
land supplied? What will that tax do to the price of the land? And who will end up bearing 
the burden of that tax? (Before proceeding, think, and try to answer these questions.)
	
The answers you should have given are that the quantity of land supplied will not 
change; the price that the buyer of the land pays will not change; the owner of the land 
will bear the entire burden of the tax even though the user of the land will actually pay the 
tax. In terms of Figure 17W-1, the tax shifts the demand curve for land down from D0 to 
D1. Now the user simply pays part of the rental payment (t) to the government. So if the 
landowner had been getting $100 per year in rent, after a tax of $30 per year the land-
owner would get only $70 per year. This follows immediately from the diagram: Given 
the quantity of land supplied, demanders will pay no more than the equilibrium price.  
By assumption, suppliers will supply the same amount of land regardless of the price they 
receive, so they must bear the entire burden of the tax. If they didn’t, the price of land 
would have to rise and it cannot; demanders won’t pay more for that quantity.
	
If you’ve followed the analysis, the preceding conclusion was obvious, but now 
let’s extend it to the real world. Say the government increases the property tax. Should 
people who rent apartments worry that such a tax is going to raise rents? The analysis 
tells us no, they shouldn’t; in reality, they do worry about it a lot. Part of the reason is 
that the assumptions don’t fit reality. The supply of land isn’t perfectly inelastic; new 
land can be created by landfills and a variety of methods can convert useless land to 
useful land. The supply of apartments is even more elastic since rental apartments have 
other uses. So the consumers are partially right.
	
But the model is partially right too, because even taking these provisos into 
account, most economists see the supply of apartments as rather inelastic. And as long 
as the supply of apartments is less elastic than the demand for apartments, more of the 
property tax will fall on the apartment owner and most of an increase in the property 
tax won’t be passed on to the consumer. It can look as if it’s being passed on since 
As long as land is perfectly inelastic  
in supply, landowners will pay the entire 
burden of a tax on land, as in the graph 
below.
Price
P0
P1
t
S
Q
Quantity
D0
D1
Tax lowers price
supplier receives.
FIGURE 17W-1  Rent
A tax on any factor with a perfectly 
inelastic supply will fall only on 
the supplier. A tax of t will shift 
the demand curve down from D0 
to D1, leaving the after-tax price 
that the demander pays constant 
at P0 but lowering the after-tax 
price that the supplier receives  
by t—from P0 to P1.
P0 – t
P0
Tax
Rent after tax
Q
Dwith tax
D0
Sland

17W-4	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
actual rents sometimes rise in jumps, and often the actual rent paid can deviate from the 
supply/demand-determined rent. Property owners often find it convenient to blame raises 
in rent on increased costs, even though they would have increased rent even if taxes had not 
risen. Blaming the government is much easier than saying, “Look, apartments are in tight 
supply. Somebody else will pay me more, so I’m increasing your rent.”
	
The inelastic supply of land and the knowledge that ultimately most of the tax on 
land will be paid by the owner has led to a number of taxation proposals. One such 
­proposal was put forward by Henry George, who argued that the government should 
­replace all other taxes with a land tax. His proposal enjoyed significant political ­influence 
in the late 19th century; an economic institute dedicated to his ideas still ­exists today.
Quasi Rents
The concept of rent was extended in the 1900s to include any payment to a resource 
above its opportunity cost—that is, above the amount it would receive in its next-best 
use. This broader concept of rent is shown in Figure 17W-2. In it you can see that the 
supply curve is upward-sloping. Equilibrium is at price P0 and quantity Q0. Consider a 
person on the supply curve at point A. That person will receive price P0, but would 
have been willing to supply his or her resource at P1. The difference, P0 − P1, is the 
person’s rent. (To distinguish this difference from pure rent, in which the opportunity 
cost of supplying the factor is zero, sometimes the difference is called producer sur-
plus or quasi rent—any payment to a resource above the amount that the resource 
would receive in its next-best use.)
	
Let’s consider an example: basketball player Lebron James. The demand for his ser-
vices as a ­basketball player is high so he earns a multimillion-dollar salary. His salary likely 
­significantly ­exceeds his opportunity cost (the wage he could get at the next-best job). The 
difference between the two would be the quasi rent component of his salary.
	
This broader concept of rent applies to all types of income. For example, wage 
income can include a considerable rent component, as can profits and interest. As long 
as a supply curve is upward-sloping, some suppliers are receiving some rent.1
Q-1  If the demand for a good is 
perfectly elastic and the supply is 
elastic, who will bear the burden of  
a tax on the good paid by consumers, 
and why?
Q-2  How does a quasi rent  
differ from a rent?
Price
P0
P1
Q0
Quantity
Quasi rent to 
individual A
S
D
A
FIGURE 17W-2  Quasi Rent
Quasi rent is the payment to  
a supplier above his or her 
opportunity cost. In this example, 
an individual represented by 
point A on the supply curve 
would be willing to supply the 
good at P1, but the market 
equilibrium price is P0. The 
difference P0 − P1 is his or her 
quasi rent.
1One could also say that as long as the demand curve is downward-sloping, some demander is 
­receiving rent. One doesn’t say that, however. The difference between what a demander would be 
willing to pay and what the demander actually pays is called consumer surplus. As was discussed  
in earlier chapters, consumer surplus is the demand-side equivalent of rent.

17W-5
Rent Seeking and Institutional Constraints
The broadened definition of rent led to the insight that if individuals could somehow 
restrict supply, the rent they received would be higher. Rent seeking is the name 
given to the restricting of supply in order to increase the price suppliers receive. It 
is an ­attempt to change the institutional structure and hence the underlying property 
rights. The concept of rent seeking ties back into our earlier discussion of property 
rights. If you own something, you can get a rent for owning it. Thus, rent seeking is 
an attempt to create either ownership rights or institutional structures that favor you. 
Rent seeking is an activity in which self-interest doesn’t necessarily lead to societal 
interest. The property rights you get might simply take away property rights from 
another person.
	
Of course, it is a legitimate activity for people to try to structure property rights 
to benefit themselves. Sometimes it can have positive social consequences, so 
there’s no easy answer about what the appropriate social policy is to deal with rent 
seeking. All rent seeking isn’t bad, but there’s no simple way to separate the bad 
from the good.
	
Let’s consider a final hypothetical example, from the biotechnology field, which 
demonstrates one of the problems in making value judgments about rent seeking. Say 
a firm has created a new organism (a new life form) that eats nuclear waste and trans-
forms it into humus soil. (OK, so I’m a dreamer; it could happen.) The firm will likely 
spend enormous amounts of money on trying to ensure that it will “own” that life form 
because otherwise it won’t make any income from it. In other words, it will engage in 
rent seeking. But the rent seeking has a positive side. Unless a firm can expect to own 
the life form, it is unlikely to expend money on developing it. Society may well be bet-
ter off if property rights in such life forms exist.
Rent seeking is the restricting of supply 
in order to increase its price. It is an 
attempt to change the institutional 
structure and hence the underlying 
property rights.
There’s no easy answer about what  
the appropriate social policy is to  
deal with rent seeking.
Q-3  Rent seeking causes waste. 
Should rent seeking be prohibited?
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Many kinds of market niches exist, and competition works  
because people search out these market niches and ex-
ploit them. In doing so, they eliminate the niches. That’s 
what competition is.
	
The most likely place to find a temporary market niche 
may be at your current job. Say you’re working for a con-
struction firm and notice that the firm is having trouble reach-
ing high places where it needs to work. The firm doesn’t 
often work on high places, so it isn’t worthwhile for it to buy 
an aerial lift truck; but when it does need to work up high, it 
could save enormous amounts of time and money if it had 
such a lift. You check out other construction firms and find 
they’re in a similar situation. You quit your job, buy an aerial 
lift truck, and start your own firm, renting out your services. 
For a while, at least, you’ll have a market niche. 
	
That is the strategy I followed with this book. Most of 
the other introductory economics textbooks I read were 
Where to Find a Market Niche
staid and boring. I believed there was room in the market 
for a book with pizzazz—a book in which the author 
wouldn’t be afraid to allow his true style to show through. 
This book exists in part because of market incentives 
that led me to exploit a market niche. It’s the invisible 
hand at work.
	
But market incentives aren’t the only reason I wrote this 
book. I wrote this book because I didn’t like the way I was 
taught introductory economics. Given my ego, I thought I 
could do better—that I could make economics come alive. 
The desire to “do it right” was the most important reason I 
wrote this book. (That isn’t to say that the expectation of 
profit didn’t play a role.)
	
The lesson is simple: To understand the economy, it’s  
important to remember that, while the profit motive drives 
people, so too do other motives.

17W-6	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
Profit
A second component of nonwage income is profit. Profit is a return on entrepreneur-
ial activity and risk taking. As discussed in earlier chapters, profits are generally 
divided into normal profits and economic profits. Normal profits are payments to 
entrepreneurs as the return on their risk taking. They are an amount that an entrepre-
neur could get if he or she supplied entrepreneurship to the market. It is the marginal 
entrepreneur—the entrepreneur whose opportunity cost equals his or her expected 
gain—who receives a normal profit. Others receive a quasi rent in addition to profit.
	
Because normal profits include returns on risk taking, profits aren’t normally nor-
mal. Sometimes normal profits are high; sometimes they’re nonexistent; and some-
times they’re negative (that is, there are losses). However, it is expected, not actual, 
profits that guide the entrepreneur.
Profit, Entrepreneurship, and Disequilibrium Adjustment
Economic profits are a return on entrepreneurship above and beyond normal profits. 
Economic profits are a sign of disequilibrium and are a signal to other entrepreneurs 
that it may be worthwhile to enter that market. Economic profits are the driving force 
of the invisible hand. The expectation of economic profit leads to innovation and cre-
ates incentives for entrepreneurs to enter into new markets. As entrepreneurs enter, 
they drive the price down to an equilibrium price and eliminate economic profits. In this 
way, the expectations of profits are the dynamic force in the economy, unleashing the 
competitive forces that will eliminate the profits.
	
To drive this important point home, let’s relate this discussion of profit to our ­earlier 
analysis. One of the lessons you have learned (or should have learned) from the ­theoretical 
analysis of supply and demand is that competition drives the price in a ­market down to 
equal average total costs. In the long run, perfectly competitive ­suppliers make normal 
returns on their investments—that is, zero economic profits. To remind you of that 
point, I show a perfectly competitive firm in long-run equilibrium in Figure 17W-3(a).
	
Equilibrium isn’t something that just exists. It’s brought about by competition—by 
other suppliers entering into the market. Entrepreneurs avoid highly competitive mar-
kets that are in equilibrium. Why? Because there aren’t a whole lot of profits to be 
made in such markets. What they look for are not-so-competitive markets—markets in 
disequilibrium with price greater than average cost. In disequilibrium, you can make a 
lot of profits. Consider Figure 17W-3(b). It represents a market in disequilibrium. 
­Notice that the price is P0, but the costs per unit are only C0, which means that the 
­supplier makes an economic profit represented by the shaded rectangle.
Market Niches, Profit, and Rent
What kind of markets are in disequilibrium? Ones in which competition isn’t working 
or is working slowly. A market niche is an area in which competition is not working. 
Entrepreneurs search for market niches. The best type of market niche to have is a 
monopoly, in which you’re the sole supplier and you face no competition.
	
Such pure monopolies are rare, but temporary disequilibrium is not rare. In fact, the 
competitive conditions that push economic profit all the way down to zero often don’t 
exist. For example, if no one knows you’re making a profit, competitors won’t enter the 
market to drive the price down; a disequilibrium can continue indefinitely. Bright 
­entrepreneurs who have found a profitable market niche don’t advertise the fact.
	
Often after an entrepreneur has made an innovation and is enjoying his above-
normal economic profits, his income can look a lot like rent. This leads some people to 
think that society can simply tax it away with no consequence; the entrepreneur’s 
­actions won’t change. That’s true—if one considers those above-normal profits without 
Normal profits are the amount that an 
entrepreneur can get by supplying 
entrepreneurship to the market. 
Economic profits are the entrepreneur’s 
return above and beyond normal profits.
Economic profits are the driving  
force of the invisible hand.
An entrepreneur seeks market  
niches because within those niches  
lie economic profits.
Q-4  You’re at a party of suppliers. 
Ms. A is telling everyone how wonderful 
her business is; Ms. B is saying nothing. 
You’re thinking of entering either Ms. A’s  
or Ms. B’s business. Which should you 
investigate first? Why?

	
Chapter 17W ■ Nonwage and Asset Income: Rents, Profits, and Interest	
17W-7
historical perspective. But with historical perspective, there is a major difference. One 
of the driving forces behind the entrepreneur was probably the expectation of ­future 
profit. That’s an important reason why she did her entrepreneurial thing.
	
It’s true that after she’s done her entrepreneurial thing, if you take what she got for 
doing it away from her, it won’t change the past. But it will most likely change the 
future. Other entrepreneurs will draw the inference that their profits will be taken away 
from them and they won’t do their entrepreneurial thing. But entrepreneurial activity 
is what drives the economy to equilibrium and leads to many of the innovations. ­If 
entrepreneurial incentives are removed, society may well be worse off.
Interest
The third traditional component of nonwage income is interest. Interest is the income 
paid to savers—individuals who produce now but don’t consume now. Instead they 
lend out the proceeds of their production, allowing others to invest or consume now. In 
return they get a promise to pay back that loan, together with whatever interest they 
negotiated. Whereas profits and rents accrue to the individuals who are supplying 
some resource to the economy, interest is what businesses and entrepreneurs pay to 
those who make loans to them. High profits encourage entrepreneurial action; high 
interest rates discourage it.
	
Present value is a method of translating a flow of future income or savings into its 
current worth. For example, say a smooth-talking, high-pressure salesperson is wining 
and dining you. “Isn’t that amazing?” the salesman says. “My company will pay $10 a 
year not only to you, but also to your great-great-great-grandchildren, and more, for 
500 years—thousands of dollars in all. And I will sell this annuity—this promise to 
pay money at periodic intervals in the future—to you for a payment to me now of only 
$800, but you must act fast. After tonight the price will rise to $2,000.”
	
Do you buy it? My rhetoric suggests that the answer should be no—but can you 
explain why? And what price would you be willing to pay?
Q-5  Why is it often difficult to 
distinguish rent from profit?
Interest is the income paid to  
savers—individuals who produce  
now but do not consume now.
Present value is a method of  
translating a flow of future income  
or savings into its current worth.
FIGURE 17W-3 (A AND B)  Long-Run Equilibrium and Disequilibrium
In a competitive market, all profit is competed away in long-run equilibrium as it is in (a): P = MC = ATC. When there is a market niche, 
profit can remain and price can deviate from ATC, leaving profit of the shaded area in (b).
Price
Pe
Price
MC
ATC
D = MR
Quantity
Qe
P0
C0
MC
ATC
D = MR
Q0
Quantity
(a)  Long-Run Equilibrium
(b)  Disequilibrium

17W-8	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	
To decide how much an annuity is worth, you need some way of valuing that $10 
per year. You can’t simply add up the $10 five hundred times. Doing so is wrong. 
­Instead you must discount all future dollars by the interest rate in the ­economy. 
­Discounting is required because a dollar in the future is not worth a ­dollar now.
	
If you have $1 now, you can take that dollar, put it in the bank, and in a year you 
will have that dollar plus interest. If the interest rate you can get from the bank is 
5 percent, that dollar will grow to $1.05 a year from now. That means also that if the 
interest rate in the economy is 5 percent, if you have 95¢ now, in a year it will be worth 
$0.9975 (5% × $0.95 = $0.0475). Reversing the reasoning, $1 one year in the future is 
worth 95¢ today. So the present value of $1 one year in the future at a 5 percent 
interest rate is 95¢.
	
A dollar two years from now is worth even less today. Carry out that same ­reasoning 
and you’ll find that if the interest rate is 5 percent, $1 two years from now is worth 
­approximately 90¢ today. Why? Because you could take 90¢ now, put it in the bank at 
5 percent interest, and in two years have $1.
The Present Value Formula
Carrying out such reasoning for every case would be a real pain. But luckily, there’s a 
­formula and a table that can be used to determine the present value (PV) of future income. 
The formula is:
PV = A1∕(1 + i) + A2∕(1 + i)2 + A3∕(1 + i)3 + . . . + An∕(1 + i)n
where
An = the amount of money received n periods in the future
	 i = the interest rate in the economy (assumed constant)
Solving this formula for any time period longer than one or two years is complicated. 
To deal with it, people either use a business computer or a present value table like that 
in Figure 17W-4.
	
Figure 17W-4(a) gives the present value of a single dollar at some time in the 
­future at various interest rates. Notice a couple of things about the chart. First, the ­further 
into the future one goes, the lower the present value. Second, the higher the interest 
rate, the lower the present value. At a 12 percent interest rate, $1 fifty years from now 
has a present value of essentially zero.
	
Figure 17W-4(b) is an annuity table; it tells us how much a constant stream of 
­income for a specific number of years is worth. Notice that as the interest rate rises, the 
value of an annuity falls. At an 18 percent interest rate, $1 per year for 50 years has a 
present value of $5.55. To get the value of amounts other than $1, one simply ­multiplies 
the entry in the table by the amount. For example, $10 per year for 50 years at 18 percent 
interest is 10 × $5.55, or $55.50.
	
As you can see, the interest rate in the economy is a key to present value. You must 
know the interest rate to know the value of money over time. The higher the current 
(and assumed constant) interest rate, the more a given amount of money in the present 
will be worth in the future. Or alternatively, the higher the current ­interest rate, the less 
a given amount of money in the future will be worth in the present.
Some Rules of Thumb for Determining Present Value
Sometimes you don’t have a present value table or a business computer handy. For 
those times, there are a few rules of thumb and simplified formulas for which you 
don’t need either a present value table or a calculator. Let’s consider two of them: the 
infinite annuity rule and the rule of 72.
Interest plays an essential role in  
the present value formula.
Q-6  An 8 percent bond will pay you 
$1,080 one year from now. The interest 
rate in the economy is 10 percent. How 
much is that bond worth now?
You must know the interest rate to know 
the value of money over time.

	
Chapter 17W ■ Nonwage and Asset Income: Rents, Profits, and Interest	
17W-9
The Annuity Rule 
To find the present value of an annuity that will pay $1 for 
an infinite number of years in the future when the interest rate is 5 percent, we simply 
divide $1 by 5 percent (0.05). Doing so gives us $20. So at 5 percent, $1 a year paid to 
you forever has a present value of $20. The annuity rule is that the present value of 
any annuity is the annual income it yields divided by the interest rate. Our general 
­annuity rule for any annuity is expressed as
PV = X∕i
That is, the present value of an infinite flow of income, X, is that income divided by 
the interest rate, i.
	
Most of the time, people don’t offer to sell you annuities for the infinite future. A 
typical annuity runs for 30, 40, or 50 years. However, the annuity rule is still useful. 
As you can see from the present value table, in 30 years at a 9 percent interest rate, 
the ­present value of $1 isn’t much (it’s 8¢), so we can use this infinite flow formula 
as an approximation of long-lasting, but less than infinite, flows of future income. 
We simply subtract a little bit from what we get with our formula. The longer the 
time period, the less we subtract. For example, say you are wondering what $200 a 
year for 40 years is worth when the interest rate is 8 percent. Dividing $200 by .08 gives 
$2,500, so we know the annuity must be worth a bit less than $2,500. (It’s ­actually 
worth $2,411.)
	
The annuity rule allows us to answer the question posed at the beginning of this 
section: How much is $10 a year for 500 years worth right now? The answer is that it 
depends on the interest rate you could earn on a specified amount of money now. If the 
PV = X∕i states the annuity rule:  
Present value of any annuity is the 
annual income it yields divided by  
the interest rate.
Q-7  You are to receive $100 a  
year for the next 30 years. How  
much is it worth now if the current 
interest rate in the economy is  
3 percent? (Use the annuity table.)
Interest Rate
Year	
3%	
4%	
6%	
9%	
12%	
15%	
18%
	 1	 $0.97	 $0.96	 $0.94	 $0.92	 $0.89	 $0.87	 $0.85
	 2	
0.94	
0.92	
0.89	
0.84	
0.80	
0.76	
0.72
	 3	
0.92	
0.89	
0.84	
0.77	
0.71	
0.66	
0.61
	 4	
0.89	
0.85	
0.79	
0.71	
0.64	
0.57	
0.52
	 5	
0.86	
0.82	
0.75	
0.65	
0.57	
0.50	
0.44
	 6	
0.84	
0.79	
0.70	
0.60	
0.51	
0.43	
0.37
	 7	
0.81	
0.76	
0.67	
0.55	
0.45	
0.38	
0.31
	 8	
0.79	
0.73	
0.63	
0.50	
0.40	
0.33	
0.27
	 9	
0.77	
0.70	
0.59	
0.46	
0.36	
0.28	
0.23
	 10	
0.74	
0.68	
0.56	
0.42	
0.32	
0.25	
0.19
	 15	
0.64	
0.56	
0.42	
0.27	
0.18	
0.12	
0.08
	 20	
0.55	
0.46	
0.31	
0.18	
0.10	
0.06	
0.04
	 30	
0.41	
0.31	
0.17	
0.08	
0.03	
0.02	
0.01
	 40	
0.31	
0.21	
0.10	
0.03	
0.01	
0.00	
0.00
	 50	
0.23	
0.14	
0.05	
0.01	
0.00	
0.00	
0.00
(a)  Present Value Table (value now of $1 to be received x years in 
the future)
The present value table converts a future amount into a present amount.
Interest Rate
Number  
of Years	
3%	
4%	
6%	
9%	
12%	
15%	
18%
	
1	
$ 0.97	 $ 0.96	 $ 0.94	 $ 0.92	 $0.89	 $0.87	 $0.85
	
2	
1.91	
1.89	
1.83	
1.76	
1.69	
1.63	
1.57
	
3	
2.83	
2.78	
2.67	
2.53	
2.40	
2.28	
2.17
	
4	
3.72	
3.63	
3.47	
3.24	
3.04	
2.85	
2.69
	
5	
4.58	
4.45	
4.21	
3.89	
3.60	
3.35	
3.13
	
6	
5.42	
5.24	
4.92	
4.49	
4.11	
3.78	
3.50
	
7	
6.23	
6.00	
5.58	
5.03	
4.56	
4.16	
3.81
	
8	
7.02	
6.73	
6.21	
5.53	
4.97	
4.49	
4.08
	
9	
7.79	
7.44	
6.80	
6.00	
5.33	
4.77	
4.30
	
10	
8.53	
8.11	
7.36	
6.42	
5.65	
5.02	
4.49
	
15	
11.94	
11.12	
9.71	
8.06	
6.81	
5.85	
5.09
	
20	
14.88	
13.59	 11.47	
9.13	
7.47	
6.26	
5.35
	
30	
19.60	
17.29	 13.76	
10.27	
8.06	
6.57	
5.52
	
40	
23.11	
19.79	 15.05	
10.76	
8.24	
6.64	
5.55
	
50	
25.73	
21.48	 15.76	
10.96	
8.30	
6.66	
5.55
(b)  Annuity Table (value now of $1 per year to be received for  
x years)
The annuity table converts a known stream of income into a present amount.
FIGURE 17W-4 (A AND B)  Sample Present Value and Annuity Tables

17W-10
interest rate is 10 percent, the maximum you should be willing to pay for that 500-year 
$10 annuity is $100:
$10∕.10 = $100
	
If the interest rate is 5 percent, the most you should pay is $200 ($10∕.05 = $200). 
So now you know why you should have said no to that supersalesman who offered it to 
you for $800 unless the interest rate is close to 1 percent.
The Rule of 72 
A second rule of thumb for determining present values of shorter 
time periods is the rule of 72, which states:
The number of years it takes for a certain amount to double in value is equal to 
72 divided by the rate of interest.
	
Say, for example, that the interest rate is 4 percent. How long will it take for your 
$100 to become $200? Dividing 72 by 4 gives 18, so the answer is 18 years. ­Conversely, 
the present value of $200 at a 4 percent interest rate 18 years in the future is about 
$100. (Actually it’s $102.67.)
	
Alternatively, say that you will receive $1,000 in 10 years. Is it worth paying $500 
for that amount now if the interest rate is 9 percent? Using the rule of 72, we know that 
at a 9 percent interest rate, it will take about eight years for $500 to double:
72∕9 = 8
so the future value of $500 in 10 years is more than $1,000. It’s probably about $1,200. 
(Actually it’s $1,184.) So if the interest rate in the economy is 9 percent, it’s not worth 
paying $500 now in order to get that $1,000 in 10 years. By investing that same $500 
today at 9 percent, you can have $1,184 in 10 years.
The Importance of Present Value
Many business decisions require present value calculations. In almost any business, 
you’ll be looking at flows of income in the future and comparing them to present costs 
or to other flows of money in the future. That’s why understanding present value is a 
necessary tool.
The rule of 72 states that 72 divided by 
the interest rate is the number of years 
in which a certain amount of money will 
double in value.
Q-8  You are to receive $400 
10 years from now. About how much  
is it worth now? (The interest rate is 
3 percent.)
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
The failure to understand the concept of present value 
­often shows up in the popular press. Here are three 
­examples.
Headline: COURT SETTLEMENT IS $40,000,000
Inside story: The money will be paid out over a 40-year 
­period.
Actual value: $11,925,000 (8 percent interest rate).
Headline: DISABLED WIDOW WINS $25 MILLION 
LOTTERY
Inside story: The money will be paid over 20 years.
The Press and Present Value
Actual value: $13,254,499 (8 percent interest rate).
Headline: BOND ISSUE TO COST TAXPAYERS $68 
MILLION
Inside story: The $68 million is the total of interest and 
principal payments. The interest is paid yearly; the 
principal won’t be paid back to the bond purchasers 
until 30 years from now.
Actual cost: $20,000,000 (8 percent interest rate).
	
Such stories are common. Be on the lookout for them 
as you read the newspaper or watch the evening news.

	
Chapter 17W ■ Nonwage and Asset Income: Rents, Profits, and Interest	
17W-11
The Marginal Productivity Theory  
of Income Distribution
We’ve completed our brief survey of rent, profit, and interest. Let’s now consider how 
these categories of income combine with wage income to fit into a theory of income 
distribution.
	
The traditional economic theory of the distribution of income is ­marginal 
­productivity theory, which states that factors are paid their marginal revenue product 
(what they ­contribute at the margin to revenue). We saw how the marginal revenue prod-
uct of labor was determined in Chapter 17. In marginal productivity theory, that same 
reasoning is used to explain the income going to the other three factors. If that factor is 
entrepreneurship, then the income the person receives can be called profit; if that fac-
tor is a fixed factor, the ­income the person receives can be called rent; if the factor is 
current production that is not consumed, the income that person receives can be called 
interest. Marginal productivity theory essentially says that supply and demand deter-
mine who gets what.
	
Modern economists are in the process of extending this functional theory. One 
­extension is to look at the theory of income distribution more abstractly than did early 
Classical economists. Modern-day economists focus their analysis on what “unspecified” 
factors of production will be paid, not on what labor or capital or entrepreneurs will be 
paid. Whether an unspecified factor income is interest, rent, profit, or wages doesn’t 
matter to the analysis since the forces of supply and demand are the same in each case. 
Modern economists argue that what factors will be paid depends upon (1) the supply 
of that factor and (2) the derived demand for that factor, which in turn depends upon 
the marginal productivity of that factor. Thus, they still use the marginal productivity 
theory, but they use it more abstractly.
	
Modern-day economists stopped looking at the functional distribution of income 
among rent, profit, interest, and wages, and started to look at the issue more abstractly 
because the social reality had changed. The marginal productivity theory of the 
­functional distribution of income was developed to reflect a social reality that had 
­distinct classes of people. One class represented the workers; another represented a 
group of gentrified landowners who received rent; another represented a group of 
­energetic industrialists; and the fourth represented a group who controlled much of the 
financial wealth of the society. The wage, rent, profit, and interest categories fit that 
social reality nicely.
	
Modern society is much more complicated and far less class-oriented, which means 
that the wage/rent/profit/interest components of income are often mixed. When the 
president of a huge corporation earns $10,000,000 a year, few economists would see 
that as wage income. Even the terminology describing income forms that modern 
economists use is different. They often don’t talk about labor income as wage income. 
Instead they use the concept human capital for “labor” to emphasize the profit and rent 
components of wage income.
	
A second extension modern economists are making to the marginal productivity 
theory of the functional distribution of income is that they are looking behind it. 
­Marginal productivity theory explains the distribution of income, given property 
rights. It does not explain why property rights are what they are. As we discussed at 
the beginning of this chapter, modern economists are going beyond the marginal 
­productivity theory of income and are trying to explain why property rights are what 
they are. This doesn’t mean that modern economists don’t accept marginal ­productivity 
theory; it simply means that they are trying to get at a deeper understanding of the 
distribution of income.
Marginal productivity theory states that 
factors of production are paid their 
marginal revenue product.
Q-9  It is only fair that a person is 
paid his or her marginal product.  
True or false? Why?
Modern economists call labor  
human capital to emphasize the  
profit and rent components of  
wage income.
Q-10  Why have economists  
moved away from studying the 
functional distribution of income?
© Bleichroeder Print Collection, Kress 
Collection, Baker Library, Harvard Business 
School (CA g2 x)
Society’s view of individuals  
who receive their income from 
investments has often been less 
than admiring, as seen in the ­ 
18th-century etching by Brichet  
of “The Financier.”

17W-12	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
Conclusion
Despite the fact that modern economists are currently expanding the theory of income 
distribution and are viewing the traditional categories of factors as less important, 
there is still much to be gained from a knowledge of the traditional theory of income 
distribution. For example, it tells us that factors in inelastic supply will bear the burden 
of a large portion of any tax on that factor. Similarly it highlights some key elements 
of the economic forces that determine who gets what—how the forces of supply and 
demand work. The trick is to understand that, and simultaneously to understand the 
role that political and social forces play in determining what the underlying property 
rights are, and how those forces interact with economic forces. These questions are 
high on modern economists’ research agendas. Their analysis of rent seeking will 
likely yield new insights in the years to come.
• Rent is the income paid to a factor of production that 
is perfectly inelastic in supply.  (LO17W-1)
• Rent seeking is an attempt to create ownership rights 
and institutional structures that favor you.  (LO17W-1)
• Normal profits are payments to entrepreneurs and the 
return on their risk taking. Economic profits are a 
­return on entrepreneurship above and beyond normal 
profits.  (LO17W-2)
• Entrepreneurs search out market niches in order to 
earn above-normal profits. Successful search by 
­entrepreneurs tends to eliminate those above-normal 
profits.  (LO17W-2)
Summary
• Interest is the income paid to savers—individuals  
who produce now but do not consume 
now.  (LO17W-3)
• The annuity rule and the rule of 72 are useful rules of 
thumb for determining present value.  (LO17W-3)
• The marginal productivity theory of distribution is 
the theory that factors of production are paid their 
marginal revenue product.  (LO17W-4)
• Property rights determine the distribution of income; 
supply and demand forces distribute income, given 
property rights.  (LO17W-4)
Key Terms
annuity rule
contractual legal system
economic profit
interest
marginal productivity 
theory
market niche
normal profit
present value
profit
property rights
quasi rent
rent
rent seeking
rule of 72
zoning laws
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 List the four traditional categories of income and explain 
why they have become less important to modern eco-
nomic analysis.  (LO17W-1)
	 2.	 Demonstrate graphically how the price of land is  
determined.  (LO17W-1)
	a.	 Show the effect of a tax on that land.
	b.	 Explain why that tax won’t cause the price of land to rise.
	c.	 Based on this analysis, would you support more 
­extensive use of land and property taxes in the  
United States? Why?

	
Chapter 17W ■ Nonwage and Asset Income: Rents, Profits, and Interest	
17W-13
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Pierre Joseph Proudhon is famous for the saying “All 
property is theft.” What do you think he meant by this 
statement? (Radical)
	 2.	 How do you believe women’s right to own property 
­affects domestic violence? (Feminist)
	 3.	 In what way can zoning laws be considered illegal 
­appropriation of property by the government? Should  
it be ­legal? (Austrian)
	 4.	 In the Bible, every 50th year is said to be a Jubilee year, in 
which all debts are forgiven. What would be the purpose of 
such a tradition, and should we establish something like it 
in our economy? (Religious)
	 5.	 The government is a strong supporter of intellectual prop-
erty rights. How does that support affect the distribution 
of income? Would society be better off with much weaker 
intellectual property rights? (Institutionalist)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 Some people argue that zoning laws are immoral. Based 
on your understanding of property rights, explain how 
they likely justify this position.  (LO17W-1)
	 2.	 In divorce cases, a common debate concerns whether  
an advanced degree should be considered marital 
­property in which the academic-advanced-degree-
holder’s spouse should be given an interest.   
(LO17W-1)
	a.	 What are the arguments in favor of seeing it as marital 
property?
	b.	 What are the arguments against?
	 3.	 “In perfect competition no one would get rich quick,  
but the economy would stagnate.” Evaluate this 
­statement.  (LO17W-2)
	 4.	 How can the absence of property rights hurt poor people 
instead of help them?  (LO17W-4)
	 3.	 The U.S. Reindeer Act of 1937 gives the Inupiat and other 
native Alaskans exclusive rights to possess reindeer. What’s 
the probable effect of the law on the price of reindeer meat? 
On profits to those licensed to own reindeer? Is this law 
fair?  (LO17W-1)
	 4.	 A team of scientific engineers has designed a new method 
of generating electricity and of desalinating water. It’s a 
desert wind tower—a hollow cylinder 3,300 feet high. Sea 
water is pumped into the top of the tower, where it evapo-
rates rapidly. As the air in the tower is cooled by the evapo-
ration, it falls faster and faster (much like the downdraft of 
a chimney) and by the time it reaches the bottom of the 
tower, it is going hundreds of miles per hour—fast enough 
to turn turbines. The cost of electricity from this process is 
predicted to be 2 cents per kilowatt hour—one-fourth the 
cost of generating electricity by oil. The evaporated water 
could also be condensed and used as fresh water since the 
salt will have been removed.  (LO17W-1)
	a.	 If this concept proves feasible, what would likely 
­happen to the value of desert land near an ocean?
	b.	 What effect would it have on the price of oil?
	c.	 If you were a major oil-producing country, would you 
encourage development of this new technology? Why 
or why not?
	 5.	 Differentiate normal profits from economic ­profits.   
(LO17W-2)
	 6.	 A salesperson calls you up and offers you $100 a  
year for life. If the interest rate is 9 percent, how  
much should you be willing to pay for that annuity?   
(LO17W-3)
	 7.	 The same salesperson offers you a lump sum of 
$20,000 in 30 years. How much should you be  
willing to pay? (The interest rate is still 9 percent.)   
(LO17W-3)
	 8.	 What is the present value of a cash flow of $200 per year 
forever (a perpetuity), assuming:  (LO17W-3)
	 	 The interest rate is 18 percent.
	 	 The interest rate is 12 percent.
	 	 The interest rate is 6 percent.
	a.	 Working with those same three interest rates, what are 
the future values of $200 today in one year? How 
about in two years?
	b.	 Working with those same three interest rates, how long 
will it take you to double your money?
	 9.	 Define human capital and explain why modern economists’ 
use of the term makes the functional distribution of  
income analysis less useful.  (LO17W-4)
	10.	 “If all people were paid their marginal product, there 
would be true justice in the economy.” Evaluate this  
statement.  (LO17W-4)

17W-14	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 If the demand for a product is perfectly elastic, suppliers 
must pay the burden of the tax, as in the ­accompanying 
diagram. The tax shifts the after-tax demand from D0 to 
Dwith tax, causing quantity to decrease from Q0 to Q1 and 
the price suppliers receive to decrease from P0 to P1.  
The tax revenue is shown in the shaded part of the dia-
gram. As you can see, the tax revenue comes entirely out 
of producer surplus. The reason is that with a perfectly 
elastic demand curve there was no consumer surplus to 
begin with.  (LO17W-1)
P
P0
P1
Tax
Q1
Q0
Q
S
D0
Dwith tax
	 2.	 Pure rent is a return to a factor whose supply is perfectly 
inelastic. Thus, the opportunity cost of supplying such a 
factor is zero. A quasi rent is the difference between the 
price a seller receives for a good and his or her opportu-
nity cost of supplying that good in those cases when the 
opportunity cost is positive (i.e., when the supply curve 
is upward-sloping).  (LO17W-1)
	 3.	 It depends. There’s no easy answer to most policy 
­questions, including this question about whether rent 
seeking should be prohibited. Certain rent-seeking 
­activities cause significant waste, but others lead to 
positive social consequences and changes in institu-
tions. Thus, like most questions in the art of 
­economics, whether rent seeking should be prohibited 
depends on the particular instances and historical 
­circumstances.  (LO17W-1)
	 4.	 The answer to the question of which business I should 
­investigate first depends upon specific psychological 
knowledge of the individuals. Without specific knowl-
edge, I would probably investigate Ms. B’s business first. 
Successful market niches depend on information not being 
generally available; thus, I would interpret Ms. B’s silence as 
suggesting that she is protecting her market niche—­
recognizing, of course, that the reality could be that 
she’s about to go broke and for that reason simply doesn’t 
want to discuss business.  (LO17W-2)
	 5.	 It is often difficult to distinguish rent from profit because 
returns for activities are often spread out over long peri-
ods of time. For example, a textbook author may have 
spent an enormous amount of effort and time in develop-
ing a readable and fun text. The textbook then comes on 
the market and is highly successful. The author moves to 
the Bahamas and snorkels the rest of his or her life away, 
living off royalties from the textbook. Are those royalties 
rent, since they are received independently of the 
­author’s current effort, or profit—a return to the author’s 
entrepreneurial effort?  (LO17W-2)
	 6.	 Substituting into the present value formula, PV = $1,080∕1.1, 
I find that the bond is worth $982 now.  (LO17W-3)
	 7.	 Using Figure 17W-4(b), the annuity table, I find that a 
­dollar a year for 30 years with a 3 percent interest rate  
is worth $19.60 now. Thus, $100 would be worth  
$1,960.  (LO17W-3)
	 8.	 Using Figure 17W-4(a), the present value table, I see that 
at a 3 percent interest rate, $1 ten years from now is worth 
74¢ now, so $400 ten years from now would be worth 
$296 now.  (LO17W-3)
	 9.	 Marginal product does not necessarily have anything to do 
with fairness, so the answer to this question is “False.” 
Marginal product is simply a technical relationship; 
whether the person deserves the attributes that led to that 
marginal product is a normative question upon which the 
assessment of “fairness” depends.  (LO17W-4)
	10.	 Economists have moved away from studying the func-
tional distribution of income because the institutional and 
social structure of society have changed and those func-
tional classes of income are no longer the distinguishing 
factors. Instead, economists tend to focus on socioeco-
nomic factors determining distribution of income, such as 
gender and minority status.  (LO17W-4)

”
“
© Comstock/PunchStock RF; © Design Pics/Con Tanasiuk RF
“God must love the poor,” said  
Lincoln, “or he wouldn’t  
have made so many of them.”  
He must love the rich, or he  
wouldn’t divide so much  
mazuma among so few  
of them.
—H. L. Mencken
Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income
In 2015, Richard D. Fairbank, CEO of Capital One 
Financial, earned $250 million (base pay plus stock 
options); that’s about $4.8 million per week. Assuming he 
worked 70 hours per week (you have to work hard to earn 
that kind of money), that’s more than $68,000 per hour.
Today, the average family doctor earns $190,000 per 
year; that’s $3,654 per week. Assuming she works 
70 hours per week (she’s conscientious, makes house 
calls, and spends time with her hospitalized patients), 
that’s $52 per hour.
	
Joe Smith, a cashier in a fast-food restaurant, earns $10 per hour. But to 
earn enough for his family to be able to eat, he works a lot of overtime, for 
which he is paid time-and-a-half, or $15 per hour. So he makes about $42,000 
per year, or $807 per week, by working 70 hours per week.
	
Hama Manout, a peasant in the Central African Republic, earns $250 a 
year; that’s $4.80 per week. Assuming he works 70 hours per week (you have 
to work hard when you are truly poor just to keep from starving), that’s 7 cents 
per hour.
	
Are such major differences typical of how income is distributed among 
people in general? Are such differences fair? And if they’re unfair, what can be 
done about them? This chapter addresses such issues. (I should warn you, how-
ever: If you’re looking for answers, this chapter won’t provide them; it will 
simply make the assumptions on both sides clear.)
	
The issues addressed in these questions play a fundamentally important role 
in policy debates today. The reason why is that in the last 20 years the income 
distribution in the United States has changed considerably. Many formerly mid-
dle-income people have moved into the upper-income levels; their wealth and 
their control of real assets have grown considerably. But simultaneously, many 
lower-income people’s income has stagnated or fallen. This change is bringing 
income distribution issues to center stage in modern policy debates.
After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO18-1	 Explain how income, wealth, 
and poverty are measured, 
and how their real-world 
measures changed over time. 
LO18-2	 Summarize the socio­
economic tensions that 
high income and wealth 
inequalities can cause. 
LO18-3	 Explain why there are so 
many philosophical debates 
about equality and fairness, 
and summarize some of  
the debates. 
LO18-4	 Discuss the practical and 
theoretical problems of 
redistributing income.
chapter 18

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
383
Measuring the Distribution of Income,  
Wealth, and Poverty
There are several different ways to look at income distribution. In the 1800s, econo-
mists were concerned with how income was divided among the owners of businesses 
(for whom profits were the source of income), the owners of land (who received rent), 
and workers (who earned wages). That concern reflected the relatively sharp distinc-
tions among social classes that existed in capitalist societies at that time. Landowners, 
workers, and owners of businesses were separate groups, and few individuals moved 
from one group to another.
	
Time has changed that. Today workers, through their pension plans and invest-
ments in financial institutions, are owners of over 50 percent of all the shares issued on 
the New York Stock Exchange. Landowners as a group receive a relatively small por-
tion of total income. Companies are run not by capitalists, but by managers who are, in 
a sense, workers. In short, the social lines have blurred.
	
This blurring of the lines between social classes doesn’t mean that we can forget 
the question “Who gets what?” It simply means that our interest in who gets what has 
a different focus. We no longer focus on classification of income by source. Instead we 
look at how total income is distributed among income groups. How much income do 
the top 5 percent get? How much do the top 15 percent get? How much do the bottom 
10 percent get? Share distribution of income is the relative division of total income 
among income groups.
	
A second distributional issue economists are concerned with is the socioeconomic 
distribution of income (the allocation of income among relevant socioeconomic group-
ings). How much do blacks get relative to whites? How much do the old get compared 
to the young? How much do women get compared to men?
The Lorenz Curve
To get a sense of the distribution of income in the United States consider Figure 18-1. 
It ranks people by their income and tells how much the richest 20 percent (a quintile) 
and the poorest 20 percent receive. For example, the poorest 20 percent might get 5 per-
cent of the income and the richest 20 percent might get 40 percent. In it you can see 
that the 20 percent of Americans receiving the lowest level of income got 3.1 percent 
of the total income. The top 20 percent of Americans received 48.8 percent of the total 
income. The ratio of the income of the top 20 percent compared to the income of the 
bottom 20 percent was about 16:1.
	
The same information can be seen graphically in what is called a Lorenz curve—a 
geometric representation of the share distribution of income among families in a given 
country at a given time. The Lorenz curve measures the cumulative percentage of 
families on the horizontal axis, arranged from poorest to richest, and the cumulative 
percentage of family income on the vertical axis. Since the figure presents cumulative 
percentages (all of the families with income below a certain level), both axes start at 
zero and end at 100 percent.
	
A perfectly equal distribution of income would be represented by a diagonal line like 
the one in Figure 18-1(b). That is, the poorest 20 percent of the families would have 
20 percent of the total income (point A); the poorest 40 percent of the families would 
have 40 percent of the income (point B); and 100 percent of the families would have 100 
percent of the income (point C). An unequal distribution of income is represented by a 
Lorenz curve that’s below the diagonal line. All real-world Lorenz curves are below the 
diagonal because in the real world income is always distributed unequally.
The share distribution of income is the 
relative division of total income among 
income groups.
The socioeconomic distribution of 
income is the relative division or 
allocation of total income among 
relevant socioeconomic groups.
A Lorenz curve is a geometric 
representation of the share distribution 
of income among families in a given 
country at a given time.
Q-1  When drawing a Lorenz curve, 
what do you put on the two axes?

384	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	
The blue line in Figure 18-1(b) represents a Lorenz curve of the U.S. income dis-
tribution presented in Figure 18-1(a)’s table. From Figure 18-1(a) you know that, in 
2014, the bottom 20 percent of the families in the United States received 3.1 percent 
of the income. Point F in Figure 18-1(b) represents that combination of percentages 
(20 percent and 3.1 percent). To find what the bottom 40 percent received, we must 
add the income percentage of the bottom 20 percent and the income percentage of the 
next 20 percent. Doing so gives us 11.3 percent [3.1 plus 8.2 percent from column 2 of 
­Fig­ure 18-1(a)]. Point G in Figure 18-1(b) represents the combination of percentages 
(40 percent and 11.3 percent). Continuing this process for points H, I, and C, you get a 
Lorenz curve that shows the share distribution of income in the United States in 2014.
U.S. Income Distribution over Time
Lorenz curves are most useful in visual comparisons of income distribution over time 
and between countries. Figure 18-2 presents Lorenz curves for the United States in 
1929, 1970, and 2014. They show that from 1929 to 1970 the share distribution of 
income became more equal. (The curve for 1970 is closer to being a diagonal line than 
the curve for 1929.) Income of the bottom fifth of families rose by a much higher pro-
portion than did income of the top fifth. That was a continuation of a trend that had 
begun in the 1920s. In the 1970s that trend stopped and began to reverse. As you can 
see, from 1970 to 2014 income distribution became less equal. (The curve for 2014 is 
further from being diagonal than is the curve for 1970.) The income of the bottom fifth 
of families fell by over 10 percent, while the income of the top fifth rose significantly.
	
Important reasons for the initial increase in equality are the redistribution measures 
instituted by the U.S. government between the 1930s and the 1970s, including welfare 
programs, unemployment insurance, Social Security, progressive taxation (taxation of 
higher income at higher rates, lower income at lower rates), and improved macroeco-
nomic performance of the economy.
From 1929 to 1970, income inequality in 
the United States decreased. From 1970 
to 2014, it increased.
Cumulative percentage of income
Cumulative percentage of families
100%
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10 
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90   100%
A
B
F
G
H
I
J
C
(b)
Line of
absolute
equality
FIGURE 18-1 (A AND B)  A Lorenz Curve of U.S. Income
If income were perfectly equally distributed, the Lorenz curve would be a diagonal line. In (b) we see the U.S. Lorenz curve based on the 
numbers in (a) compared to a Lorenz curve reflecting a perfectly equal distribution of income.
Source: Current Population Reports, U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2012 (www.census.gov).
(a)
	
	
Cumulative	
	
Percentage	
Percentage of 
Income	
of Total Family	
Total Family 
Quintile	
Income	
Income
Lowest fifth	
3.1%	
3.1%
Second fifth	
8.2	
11.3
Third fifth	
14.3	
25.6
Fourth fifth	
23.2	
51.2
Highest fifth	
48.8	
100.0

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
385
	
The trend back toward greater inequality starting in the 1970s was caused by a fall in 
the real income of the poor, when their wage increases didn’t keep up with price 
­increases. Part of the reason was globalization; another part is that taxes have become 
less progressive, government funding for social programs has fallen, and the wages of 
unskilled and medium-skilled workers have been squeezed by an influx of immigrants 
into the United States who are willing to work for low wages.
	
While wages have fluctuated with the business cycle since then, the trend toward 
greater inequality continued until about 2014 when pressures pushing for rising 
inequality seemed to be decreasing.
	
The distribution of income over time is not only affected by business cycles, 
­government policy, and competitive pressures; it is also affected by demographic 
and technological factors. Many families have relatively low income in their early 
years, relatively higher income in their middle years, and then relatively low 
income again in their retirement years. The Lorenz curve reflects these differ-
ences, so even if lifetime income were equally distributed, income in any one year 
would not be. Moreover, when the percentages of these groups change, the Lorenz 
curve will change. For ­example, as the baby-boom generation retires and no lon-
ger works, their collective income will fall. That decline in overall income rela-
tive to the income of the smaller number of working families will affect the 
Lorenz curve.
	
The effect of technology is a bit different; that effect is easiest to convey with an 
example. Before the development of radio, TV, records, tapes, CDs, and MP3 players, 
the number of people who could listen to a performer was limited by how many people 
could fit in a concert hall. Without recordings or broadcasting to satisfy the demand 
for entertainment, that meant lots of local singers could earn a decent, but not phenom-
enal, wage. As recording, broadcasting, and transportation technology progressed, the 
number of people who could listen to a performance was nearly unlimited and “super-
stars” were born. The “almost superstars” lost out and were destined to sing for low 
wages at weddings, bar mitzvah parties, and church recitals, while the superstars 
became multimillionaires. Similar changes occurred in sports and other performance 
activities. The point of the example is that technology can significantly influence 
Technology has played a role in 
increasing income inequality.
FIGURE 18-2  Lorenz Curves for the 
United States: 1929, 1970, and 2014
The amount of inequality of income 
distribution has fluctuated in the 
United States. Until about 1970,  
it decreased; since then it has 
increased.
Source: Current Population Reports, U.S. 
Bureau of the Census (www.census.gov).
Cumulative percentage of income
100%
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100%
Cumulative percentage of population
Line of
absolute
equality
1970
2014
1929

386	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
income distribution. University of Chicago economist Kevin Murphy argues that as 
global competition continues to grow, and as telecommunications networks expand, 
the pressure for income inequality to increase will continue.
Defining Poverty
Much of the government’s concern with income distribution has centered on the poor-
est group—those in poverty. Defining poverty is not easy. Do we want to define it as 
an absolute amount of real income that does not change over time? If poverty were 
defined as an absolute amount of real income, few in the United States would be in 
poverty today; just about all of today’s poor have higher real incomes than did the 
middle class 50 or 60 years ago. Or do we want to define it as a relative concept that 
rises as the average income in the society rises? For example, anyone with an income 
of less than one-fifth of the average income could be defined as living in poverty. If 
that relative concept of poverty were chosen, then the proportion of people classified 
as poor would always be the same.
The Official Definition of Poverty 
The United States uses a definition of 
poverty that is a combination of a relative and an absolute measure. Thus, it satisfies 
neither those who favor an absolute measure nor those who favor a relative measure, 
and there are calls to increase and calls to decrease the poverty threshold—the ­income 
below which a family is considered to live in poverty. The official definition of poverty 
is the following:
A family is in poverty if its income is equal to or less than three times an average 
family’s minimum food expenditures as calculated by the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture.
The minimum weekly food budget includes 4 eggs, 1½ pounds of meat, 3 pounds of 
potatoes, about 4 pounds of vegetables, and other foods; the cost is about $39 per 
person per week. By the latest calculations, that means that for a family of four, the 
poverty line is $24,418.
	
As Table 18-1 shows, using the official poverty measure, the number of people in 
poverty decreased in the 1960s and then began increasing in the 1970s. In 2014, 
46.7 million Americans lived below the poverty threshold.
Poverty can be defined as a relative or 
absolute concept.
Q-2  Is the U.S. definition of poverty 
an absolute or a relative definition?
Poverty is defined by the U.S. 
government as an income equal to or 
less than three times an average 
family’s minimum food expenditures as 
calculated by the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture.
TABLE 18-1  Number and Percentage of Persons in Poverty
	
	
	
Poverty Income 
	
Number of People 	
Percentage of	
of Family of 4* 
	
(in millions)	
Population	
(in current dollars)
1960	
39.9	
22.2%	
$  3,022
1970	
24.4	
12.6	
3,986
1980	
29.3	
13.0	
8,414
1990	
33.6	
13.5	
13,359
2000	
31.6	
11.3	
17,603
2005	
37.0	
12.6	
19,971
2010	
46.2	
15.1	
22,314
2014	
46.7	
14.8	
$24,418
*Family of 4 with 2 related children.
Source: Current Population Reports, U.S. Bureau of the Census (www.census.gov).

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
387
Debates about the Definition of Poverty 
The minimum food budget 
used to determine the poverty line was determined in the 1960s and has not been recal-
culated to account for rising standards of living. Thus, it is in principle an absolute 
measure. Starting in 1969, however, the amount needed to buy that food is adjusted by 
the rate of inflation rather than by the rise in the price of the originally selected foods. 
Since food prices have risen by less than the rise in the general price level, the poverty 
threshold has gone up by more than it would have had food prices been used. That 
means the definition includes significant aspects of relativity; had a purely absolute 
measure been used, the poverty rate would be considerably lower.
	
Those who favor a relative measure of poverty argue that our current poverty mea-
sure is too low. They point out that food is now closer to one-seventh of a family’s total 
budget, so that food is no longer a good basis for determining the poverty level. House-
holds spend much more now on housing, utilities, health care, and expenses related to 
work. A poverty threshold that takes different expenses into account raises the poverty 
threshold and raises the poverty rate from about 15 percent to 23 percent, with millions 
more people on the poverty roll. 
	
Those who favor an absolute measure of poverty argue that the current measure is 
too high. They point out that U.S. poverty figures do not include in-kind (noncash) 
transfers such as food stamps and housing assistance. Nor does the current poverty 
measure take into account underreporting of income, or the savings people have. 
(Many elderly people may have low incomes but significant wealth, which they could 
choose to spend.) If we make adjustments for in-kind transfers and underreporting of 
income, the official number of people in poverty decreases to about 60 percent of the 
official number. University of Texas economist Daniel Slesnick takes it further and 
points out that, since the price of food has increased at less than the rate of inflation, a 
much lower level of expenditures than the amount used to calculate the poverty thresh-
old will provide a “nutritionally adequate diet.” Slesnick calculated that when one 
takes the decrease in the relative price of food into account, the number of people in 
poverty would have fallen to one-seventh the official count.
	
The moral of this debate: Like most economic statistics, poverty statistics should 
be used with care.
The Costs of Poverty and Social Mobility 
People who favor policies 
aimed at achieving equality of income argue that poverty brings significant costs to 
society. One is that society suffers when some of its people are in poverty, just as the 
entire family suffers when one member doesn’t have enough to eat. Most people derive 
pleasure from knowing that others are not in poverty.
	
Another cost of poverty is that it increases incentives for crime. People with little 
income have little to lose. As people’s incomes increase they have more to lose by 
committing crimes, and therefore fewer crimes are committed. Consistent with this 
argument, the crime rate has largely declined in the 1990s and early 2000s, as the 
economy grew. When the economy entered a severe recession in 2008, crime rates 
were expected to rise. They didn’t. Instead they fell, bringing into question the 
­importance of poverty for crime. 
	
While crime rates didn’t rise, general dissatisfaction with the income distribution 
did. The sense of fairness that previously existed is giving way to increasing concern 
about the lack of fairness. Some observers argued that an economic system that led to 
such large inequalities in income, and left millions without a job or source of income, 
was unfair. Their complaints often concerned a lack of opportunity for many, and a 
sense of ­entitlement of a few. Our society was founded on the belief that if one worked 
hard one would be rewarded with increasing income and better job prospects for 
one’s children than one’s parents had. That belief is being tested, with continued 
There are arguments that the poverty 
line is both too high and too low.
Like most economic statistics,  
poverty statistics should be used  
with care.

388
high unemployment and the pressure of globalization holding down wages of jobs in 
the tradable sectors. 
	
Before, most people accepted that individuals who worked hard could escape pov-
erty, and individuals who didn’t work hard would end up, or remain, in poverty. While 
everyone knew that the poor had it harder, and the rich easier, the United States was 
seen as a meritocracy, where hard work and ability were key to ­advancing both eco-
nomically and socially. In the 1960s and 1970s, studies found that the United States 
had significant upward and downward mobility, confirming this ­belief. Recent studies, 
however, have questioned this view.
	
Specifically, a recent study by economist Bernt Bratsberg and his colleagues 
­discovered that income mobility has significantly declined in the United States, and 
that now, the United States has less mobility than Europe. They determined this by 
ranking countries on a scale of 0 to 1, with 0 meaning perfect mobility (a child’s 
ADDED DIMENSION
	
The following table gives Gini coefficients for a number 
of other countries. The Gini coefficients for transitional 
economies such as the Slovak Republic have risen over the 
last few years because they are now market economies 
and their incomes are less equally distributed.
The Gini Coefficient
A second measure economists use to talk about the de-
gree of income inequality is the Gini coefficient of inequal-
ity. The Gini coefficient is derived from the Lorenz curve by 
comparing the area between (1) the Lorenz curve and the 
diagonal (area A) and (2) the total area of the triangle be-
low the diagonal (areas A and B). That is:
Gini coefficient = Area A ̸(Areas A + B)
	
A Gini coefficient of zero would be perfect equality, 
since area A is 0 if income is perfectly equally distributed. 
The highest the Gini coefficient can go is 1. So all Gini coef-
ficients must be between 0 and 1. The lower the Gini coef-
ficient, the closer the income distribution is to being equal. 
The Gini coefficient for the United States was 0.48 in 2015.
Gini Coefficients for  
Selected Countries
Algeria	
.353
Bangladesh	
.311
Brazil	
.550
Canada	
.326
China	
.415
Czech Republic	
.258
Germany	
.283
Greece	
.343
Guatemala	
.337
Hungary	
.273
Indonesia	
.376
Iran	
.383
Latvia	
.363
Norway	
.258
Panama	
.594
Philippines	
.440
Romania	
.321
Slovak Republic	
.258
South Africa	
.578
Thailand	
.432
United States	
.480
Source: StatWorld, www.statsilk.com 
Cumulative percentage of income
100%
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
 0
Cumulative percentage of population
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100%   
A
B

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
389
income bears no relation to its parent’s income) and 1 meaning no mobility (a child’s 
income is identical to its parent’s income). They found that, for sons, ­Sweden scored a 
.2, Britain scored a .36, and the United States scored a .54, suggesting that the United 
States had only about half as much social mobility as did Sweden and Britain. The 
situation was worse at the bottom; children born to a family in the bottom fifth of the 
U.S. income distribution were the least likely to move up. Other studies have con-
firmed this finding; it is harder for people today to surpass their parents on the income 
scale than it was a generation ago, and it is much harder for someone in the United 
States compared to someone in Europe to move up the income scale.
International Dimensions of Income Inequality
When considering income distribution, we usually are looking at conditions within a 
single country. For example, an American among the richest 5 percent of the U.S. 
population earns approximately 30 times what an American who is among the poorest 
20 percent of the American people gets.
	
There are other ways to look at income. We might judge income inequality in the 
United States relative to income inequality in other countries. Is the U.S. distribution 
of income more or less equal than another country’s? We could also look at how 
­income is distributed among countries. Even if income is relatively equally distributed 
within countries, it may be unequally distributed among countries.
Comparing Income Distribution across Countries 
Figure 18-3 gives 
us a sense of how the distribution of income in the United States compares to that in 
other countries. We see that the United States has significantly more income inequality 
than Sweden, but somewhat less than Brazil (and many other developing and newly 
industrialized countries).
	
An important reason why the United States has more income inequality than Sweden 
is that Sweden’s tax system is more progressive. Sweden has a top marginal tax rate on 
the highest incomes of 60 percent, compared to about 40 percent in the United States. 
Given this difference, it isn’t surprising that Sweden has less income inequality.
The United States has less income 
inequality than most developing 
countries but more income inequality 
than many developed countries.
FIGURE 18-3  U.S. Income 
Distribution Compared to That of 
Other Countries
Among countries of the world, the 
United States has neither the most 
equal nor the most unequal 
distribution of income.
Sources: Income and Poverty in the 
United States, United States Census 
Bureau and World Bank. 2016. World 
Development Indicators 2016. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.
doi:10.1596/978 -1-4648 -0683 -4.  
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC 
BY 3.0 IGO
Cumulative percentage of income
100%
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
      0
Sweden
Brazil
United
States
Cumulative percentage of population
20
10
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100%

390	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
Income Distribution among Countries 
When we consider the distribu-
tion of world income, the picture becomes even more unequal than the picture we see 
within countries. The reason is clear: Income is highly unequally distributed among 
countries. The average per capita income of the richest countries in the world is more 
than 100 times the average income of the poorest countries of the world. Thus, a 
Lorenz curve of world income would show much more inequality than the Lorenz 
curve for a particular country. Worldwide, income inequality is enormous. A minimum 
level of income in the United States would be a wealthy person’s income in a poor 
country like Bangladesh.
The Total Amount of Income in Various Countries 
To gain a 
­better picture of income distribution problems, you need to consider not only the 
division of income but also the total amounts of income in various countries. 
­Figure 18-4 ­presents per capita income (gross national income) for various coun-
tries. Looking at the enormous differences of income among countries, we must ask 
which is more important: the distribution of income or the absolute level of income. 
Which would you rather be: one of four members in a family that has an income of 
$3,000 a year, which places you in the top 10 percent of Bangladesh’s income dis-
tribution, or one of four members of a family with an income of $12,000 (four times 
as much), which places you in the bottom 10 percent of the income earners in the 
United States?
Q-3  How does the income 
distribution in the United States 
compare with that in other  
countries?
FIGURE 18-4  Per Capita Income 
(Gross National Income) in Various 
Countries
Income is unequally distributed 
among the countries of the world. 
These estimates are calculated 
using the purchasing power  
parity method.
Source: World Economic Outlook 
Database, April 2016, International 
Monetary Fund. www.imf.org.  
Accessed April 2016.
Per capita income (GDP)
50,000
45,000
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
1 5,000
10,000
5,000
0
Hungary
Brazil
Congo,
Dem. Rep.
Kenya
Uganda
United
States
$55,805
$26,222
$15,615
$770
$3,208
$2,002
Switzerland
$58,551
$41,159
Japan
United
Kingdom
$38,054
$60,000
$55,000

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
391
The Distribution of Wealth
In considering equality, two measures are often used: equality of wealth and equality 
of income. Because of space limitations, my focus will be on income, but I want to 
mention wealth. Wealth is the value of the things individuals own less the value of 
what they owe. It is a stock concept representing the value of assets such as houses, 
buildings, and machines. For example, a farmer who owns a farm with a net worth of 
$1 million is wealthy compared to an investment banker with a net worth of $225,000.
	
 Income is payments received plus or minus changes in value in a person’s assets 
in a specified time period. In contrast to wealth, income is a flow concept. It’s a stream 
through time. That farmer with the $1 million net worth might have an income of 
$20,000 a year while the investment banker might have an income of $95,000 a year. 
The farmer, with $1 million worth of assets, is wealthier than the investment banker, 
but the investment banker has a higher income.
A Lorenz Curve of the Distribution of Wealth 
Figure 18-5 ­compares the 
Lorenz curve for wealth in the United States with the Lorenz curve for income in the 
United States. You can see that wealth in the United States is more ­unequally distributed 
than income and that the bottom 40 percent of the U.S. ­population has close to zero wealth.
How Much Wealth Do the Wealthy Have? 
Relative comparisons such 
as those depicted by Lorenz curves don’t give you a sense of how much wealth it takes 
to be “wealthy.” The following numbers provide you with a better sense. Bill Gates, 
who founded Microsoft and became the richest person in the United States, had a net 
worth of about $76 billion in 2015. Four of the 15 wealthiest people in the United 
States were from the Walton family (whose father founded Walmart), each with over 
$30 billion. Most of us have little chance of joining that group; in fact, most of us have 
little possibility of becoming one of the top 5 percent of the wealthholders in the 
United States, which would require total wealth of at least $4 million. Once there was 
a time when people’s ultimate financial goal was to be a millionaire. In the 2000s, the 
ultimate financial goal for the wealthiest people is to be a billionaire. The millionaire’s 
club is no longer highly exclusive.
Wealth is the value of assets individuals 
own less the value of what they owe.
Income is payments received plus  
or minus changes in value of a person’s 
assets in a specified time period.
In the United States, wealth is 
significantly more unequally distributed 
than is income.
Billionaires often lose a billion here, 
gain a billion there; sometimes they 
even become multibillionaires. Seldom 
do they become poor.
The millionaire’s club is no longer highly 
exclusive.
FIGURE 18-5  Wealth Distribution 
in the United States and Wealth 
Compared to Income
Wealth is much more unequally 
distributed than income in the 
United States. In fact, the lowest 
40 percent of the population has 
only .4 percent of the wealth; these 
people have borrowed nearly as 
much as they own.
Sources: Income and Poverty in the 
United States, United States Census 
Bureau and Survey of Consumer 
Finances, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Cumulative percentage of wealth/income
100%
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100%
Cumulative percentage of families/households
Household
wealth
Family
income
Bottom ﬁfth
Second ﬁfth
Third ﬁfth
Fourth ﬁfth
Top ﬁfth
.1%
   .3
   4.4
 11.7
 84.6
Wealth
Quintile
Percentage of
Total Household
Wealth

392	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	
Of course, people in the club don’t always stay there; the club is constantly chang-
ing. For example, a number of families who were in the club earlier are no longer in it. 
Many billionaires lost billions when the world stock market collapsed in 2008 and fell 
off the list of the world’s wealthiest people. Today, some of these people and families 
might only be multimillionaires.
Socioeconomic Dimensions of Income  
and Wealth Inequality
The share distribution of inequality is only one of the dimensions that inequality 
of income and wealth can take. As I mentioned before, the distribution of income 
according to source of income (wages, rents, and profits) was once considered 
important. Today’s focus is on the distribution of income based on race, ethnic 
background, geographic region, and other socioeconomic factors such as gender 
and type of job.
Income Distribution According to  
Socioeconomic Characteristics 
Table 18-2 gives an idea of the distribution of income according to socioeconomic 
characteristics.
TABLE 18-2  Various Socioeconomic Income Distribution Designations
Median Income, 2015
By Occupational Category	
Male	
Female
Financial analysts	
$87,360	
$60,892
Management	
$77,272	
$59,228
Healthcare practitioners and technical	
$66,144	
$51,532
Protective services	
$44,252	
$34,060
Installation, maintenance, and repair	
$43,784	
$39,572
Sales and office	
$40,404	
$32,604
Construction and extraction	
$39,052	
$36,608
Production	
$37,908	
$26,988
Production, transportation, and material moving	
$36,608	
$26,624
Office and administrative support	
$36,036	
$33,592
Personal care and service	
$31,044	
$24,700
Building and grounds cleaning and maintenance	
$26,884	
$21,788
Food preparation and serving	
$25,012	
$21,528
Farming, fishing, and forestry	
$24,804	
$22,724
Median Income
By Sex	
1990	
2000	
2010	
2014
Male	
$20,293	
$28,343	
$32,137	
$36,302
Female	
10,070	
16,063	
20,831	
22,240
Source: Current Population Reports, Consumer Income, U.S. Bureau of the Census (www.census.gov).
By Age,	
Median	
	 2014	
Individual Income
15–24	
$10,420
25–34	
31,219
35–44	
38,680
45–54	
40,000
55–64	
34,498
Over 65	
22,248
By Race,	
Median	
	 2014	
Individual Income
Asian	
$74,297
White	
60,256
Hispanic origin	
42,491
Black	
35,391

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
393
	
You can see that income differs substantially by type of job, leading some 
­economists to argue that a new professional/nonprofessional class distinction is arising 
in the United States. Substantial differences also exist between the incomes of women 
and men, and between whites and blacks.
Income Distribution According to Class
Early economists focused on the distribution of income by wages, profits, and rent because 
that division corresponded to their class analysis of society. Landowners received rent, 
capitalists received profit, and workers received wages. Tensions among these classes 
played an important part in economists’ analyses of the ­economy and policy.
	
Even though class divisions by income source have become blurred, other types of 
socioeconomic classes have taken their place. The United States has a kind of upper 
class. In fact, a company in the United States publishes the Social Register, containing 
the names and pedigrees of about 25,000 socially prominent people who might be 
categorized “upper class.” Similarly, it is possible to further divide the U.S. population 
into a middle class and a lower class.
	
Class divisions are no longer determined solely by income source. For ­example, 
upper-class people do not necessarily receive their income from rent and profits. 
CEOs of major companies are generally considered upper class, and they receive 
much of their income as payment for their services. Today we have “upper-class” 
people who derive their income from wages and “lower-class” people who derive 
their ­meager income from profits (usually in the form of pensions, which depend 
on profits from the investment of pension funds in stocks and bonds). Of course, 
once people become rich, they earn interest and profits on their wealth as well as 
income from wages.
The Importance of the Middle Class 
What has made the most 
­difference in today’s class structure in the United States compared to its class structure 
in earlier periods and to the structure in today’s developing countries is the tremendous 
growth in the relative size of the middle class. Economists used to see the class 
­structure as a pyramid. From a base composed of a large lower class, the pyramid 
­tapered upward through a medium-size middle class to a peak occupied by the upper 
class [Figure 18-6(a)]. The class structure is still pyramidal in most developing 
­countries. However, in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s, the middle class 
The United States has socioeconomic 
classes with some mobility among 
classes. This is not to say such classes 
should exist; it is only to say that they 
do exist.
In the United States, the middle  
class is the largest class.
FIGURE 18-6 (A, B, AND C)  The Class System as a Pyramid, a Diamond, and a Pentagon
The class structure in developing countries is a pyramid; in the United States the class structure is more like a pentagon.
Upper
class
Middle
class
Lower
class
(a)  A Pyramid Class Structure
(b)  A Diamond Class Structure
(c)  A Pentagonal Class Structure
Lower
class
Middle
class
Upper
class
Upper
class
Middle
class
Lower
class

394	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
grew, and the geometric portrayal of the U.S. class structure changed from a pyramid 
in Figure 18-6(a) to the diamond shape in Figure 18-6(b) with a small upper class, a 
large middle class, and a small lower class. In the last 20 years, that diamond geometric 
portrayal has become less appropriate; the middle class itself became split. Some in 
the middle class have done well and moved into the upper middle class, while others 
have done poorly, expanding the number at the bottom. 
	
If your job was in a tradable sector such as manufacturing, or was a service that 
could be outsourced, globalization pushed your wage down or left you unemployed. 
Those in nontradable sectors such as government workers or semiskilled service work-
ers such as teachers, whose jobs could not be outsourced or easily replaced with immi-
grant workers, remained in the middle class. This process, which is continuing, is 
expanding the lower class to ­include many formerly in the middle class. Exacerbating the 
division between the rich and the poor is that those in the lower class are less likely to move 
up the ladder into the ­middle class and those in the upper class are also less likely to 
move down the ladder into the middle class, splitting the upper from the lower class. 
	
Today, the pentagonal shape shown in Figure 18-6(c) seems a more appropriate 
description of the class ­structure in the United States. The middle class is still ­relatively 
large, but the bottom, what some have described as an underclass—a group of people 
at the bottom who are just getting along and, while they may temporarily escape 
­poverty, are always on the edge of the poverty line—has gotten larger too. This bottom 
group includes a ­disproportionate percentage of blacks, and has been expanded by a 
significant number of undocumented immigrants. These, combined with those formerly 
in the middle class who lost their “middle-class” jobs, have expanded the bottom group. 
And the difference is significant. Median wealth of white households, for example, is 
about 20 times that of black and Hispanic households. The typical Hispanic and black 
­household has about $6,000 in wealth, whereas the typical white family has over 
$100,000. With the decline of social mobility in the United States, the lower class and 
their children have only a slight chance of entering into the middle class.
	
Whatever the best geometric portrayal of the class system, the increase in the 
­relative size of the middle class in developed countries has significantly blurred the 
distinction between capitalists and workers. In early capitalist society, the distribu-
tional fight (the fight over relative income shares) was largely between workers and 
capitalists. In modern market-based societies, the distributional fight is among 
­various types of individuals. Union workers are pitted against nonunion workers; 
salaried workers are pitted against workers paid by the hour; government workers 
are pitted against manufacturing workers. The old are pitted against the young; 
women are pitted against men; blacks are pitted against Hispanics and Asians, and 
all three groups are pitted against whites. Such a system exacerbates what is some-
times called class warfare. In the past few years blacks and Hispanics have faced 
more job losses and housing foreclosures than whites. Nevertheless, according to 
Pew Research, blacks and Hispanics were more optimistic about their future prospects 
than whites.
Distributional Questions and Tensions in Society 
While ­mainstream 
economists tend to focus on the share distribution of income, nonmainstream economists 
tend to emphasize class and group structures in their analysis. Radical ­economists empha-
size the control that the upper class has over the decision process and the political process. 
Libertarian economists emphasize the role of special interests of all types in shaping gov-
ernment policy. Both radical and libertarian analyses bring out the tensions among classes 
in society much better than does the mainstream, classless analysis.
	
When people identify with a particular class or group, they will often work to 
­further the interests of that class or group. They also generally have stronger feelings 
Class ­structure today in the United 
States has a pentagonal shape.
Q-4  How have distributional  
fights about income changed over time?
Both radical and libertarian analyses 
bring out the tensions among classes in 
society much better than does 
mainstream classless analysis.

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
395
about inequalities among classes or groups than when they lack that sense of class or 
group identity. Using a classless analysis means overlooking the implications of class 
and group solidarity in affecting the tensions in society.
	
Until recently those tensions showed up every day in political disputes over the tax 
system, in the quiet fuming of individuals seeing someone else earning more for doing 
the same job, and in strikes and even riots. Such tensions exist in all countries. In some 
transitional and developing countries, they break out into the open as armed insurrec-
tions or riots over food shortages.
	
Those tensions have been kept to a minimum in American society. A majority of 
Americans believe that income distribution is sufficiently fair for them to accept their 
share more or less contentedly. To remedy the unfairness that does exist, they don’t 
demand that the entire system be replaced. Instead they work for change within the 
present system. They look to affirmative action laws, comparable worth laws, mini-
mum wage laws, and social welfare programs for any improvement they perceive to be 
necessary or desirable. There’s much debate about whether these government actions 
have achieved the desired ends, but the process itself reduces tensions and has worked 
toward maintaining the entire system.
	
In the past several years individuals on both sides of the political spectrum have 
become less compromising in their approach. On the right the Tea Party conservatives 
have called for large cuts in government redistribution programs as part of overall cuts 
in government. Similarly, on the left, the progressive Occupy movement reflected a 
discontent about how income distribution is highly skewed toward the top 1 percent 
of the population.
Income Distribution and Fairness
People’s acceptance of the U.S. economic system is based not only on what the 
­distribution of income is but also on what people think it should be and what they 
­consider fair. It is to that question that we now turn. Judgments about whether the 
­distribution of income is fair, or should be changed, are normative ones, based on the 
values the analyst applies to the situation. Value judgments necessarily underlie all 
policy prescriptions.
Philosophical Debates about Equality and Fairness
Depending on one’s values, any income distribution can be justified. For example, 
­Friedrich Nietzsche, the 19th-century German philosopher, argued that society’s goal 
should be to support its supermen—its best and brightest. Lesser individuals’ duty 
should be to work for the well-being of these supermen. Bertrand de Juvenal, a 
­20th-century philosopher, has argued that a high level of income inequality is neces-
sary to sustain the arts, beauty, education, and civilization. He and others say that a 
world of equally distributed income would be a world without beauty. Even if we don’t 
personally own beautiful, expensive homes, or aren’t devoted opera fans, these phi-
losophers argue that our lives are improved because some people do own such homes 
and because opera performances exist. Inequality creates diversity that enriches the 
lives of everyone.
	
Other philosophers disagree strongly. They argue that equality itself is the overrid-
ing goal. That view is embodied in the Declaration of Independence: “We hold these 
truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.” And for many people the 
­inherent value of equality is not open to question—it is simply self-evident.
	
Believing that equality is an overriding goal does not necessarily imply that 
­income should be equally distributed. For example, John Rawls (a Harvard University 
Value judgments necessarily  
underlie all policy prescriptions.
Q-5  Is it self-evident that greater 
equality of income would make the 
society a better place to live? Why?

396	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
professor who believed that equality is highly desirable and that society’s goal 
should be to maximize the welfare of the least well-off) agreed that to meet that goal 
some inequality is necessary. Rawls argued that if, in pursuing equality, you actually 
make the least well-off worse off than they otherwise would have been, then you 
should not pursue equality any further. For example, say under one policy there 
would be perfect equality and everyone would receive $10,000 per year. Under 
­another policy, the least well-off person receives $12,000 per year and all others 
­receive $40,000. Rawls argued that the second policy is preferable to the first even 
though it involves more inequality.
	
Economists, unlike philosophers, are not concerned about justifying any particular 
distribution of income. In their objective role, economists limit themselves to explain-
ing the effects that various policies will have on the distribution of income; they let the 
policy makers judge whether those effects are desirable.
	
However, in order to judge economic policies, you, in your role as a citizen who 
elects policy makers, must make certain judgments about income distribution because 
all real-world economic policies have distribution effects. Accordingly, a brief discus-
sion of income distribution and fairness is in order.
Fairness and Equality
The U.S. population has a strong general tendency to favor equality—equality is 
­generally seen as fair. Most people, including me, share that view. However, in some 
instances equality of income is not directly related to people’s view of fairness. For 
example, consider this distribution of income between John and Fred:
John gets $50,000 a year.
Fred gets $12,000 a year.
Think a minute. Is that fair?
	
The answer I’m hoping for is that you don’t yet have enough information to make 
the decision.
	
Here’s some more information. Say that John gets that $50,000 for holding down 
three jobs, while Fred gets his $12,000 for sitting around doing nothing. At this point, 
many of us would argue that it’s possible John should be getting even more than 
$50,000 and Fred should be getting less than $12,000.
	
But wait! What if we discover that Fred is an invalid and unless his income 
­increases to $15,000 a year he will die? Most of us would change our minds again and 
argue that Fred deserves more, regardless of how much John works.
	
But wait! How about if, after further digging, we discover that Fred is an 
­invalid because he squandered his health on alcohol, drugs, and fried foods? In 
that case some people would likely change their minds again as to whether Fred 
deserves more.
	
By now you should have gotten my point. Looking only at a person’s income masks 
many dimensions that most people consider important in making value judgments 
about fairness.
Fairness as Equality of Opportunity
When most people talk about believing in equality of income, they often mean they 
believe in equality of opportunity for comparably endowed individuals to earn income. 
If equal opportunity of equals leads to inequality of income, then the inequality of 
income is fair. Unfortunately, there’s enormous latitude for debate on what constitutes 
equal opportunity of equals.
Q-6  You are dividing a pie among 
five individuals. What would be a fair 
distribution of that pie?
Fairness has many dimensions and it is 
often difficult to say what is fair and 
what isn’t.
Three problems in determining whether 
an equal income distribution is fair are:
1.	 People don’t start from equivalent 
positions.
2.	 People’s needs differ.
3.	 People’s efforts differ.

397
	
In the real world, needs differ, desires differ, and abilities differ. Should these dif-
ferences be considered relevant differences in equality? You must answer that question 
before you can judge any economic policy because to make a judgment on whether an 
economic policy should or should not be adopted, you must make a judgment about 
whether a policy’s effect on income is fair. In making those ­judgments, most people 
rely on their immediate gut reaction. I hope what you have gotten out of the discussion 
about John and Fred and equality of opportunity is the resolve to be cautious about 
trusting your gut reactions. The concept of fairness is crucial and complicated, and it 
deserves deeper consideration than just a gut reaction.
The Problems of Redistributing Income
Let’s now say that we have considered all the issues discussed so far in this chapter and 
have concluded that some redistribution of income from the rich to the poor is necessary 
if society is to meet our ideal of fairness. How do we go about redistributing income?
	
First, we must consider what programs exist and what their negative side effects 
might be. The side effects can be substantial and can subvert the intention of the 
­program so that far less money is available overall for redistribution and inequality is 
reduced less than we might expect.
Three Important Side Effects of Redistributive Programs
Three important side effects that economists have found in programs to redistribute 
income are:
1.	A tax may result in people working less (a switch from labor to leisure).
2.	People may attempt to avoid or evade taxes, leading to a decrease in measured 
income.
3.	Redistributing money may cause people to make themselves look as if they’re 
more needy than they really are.
The concept of fairness is crucial and 
complicated, and it deserves deeper 
consideration than just a gut reaction.
Three side effects of redistribution of 
income are:
1.	 The labor/leisure incentive effect.
2.	 The avoidance and evasion 
incentive effect.
3.	 The incentive effect to look more 
needy than you are.
ADDED DIMENSION
	
Recently, Nobel Prize–winning economist Amartya 
Sen has argued against that utilitarian approach, pointing 
out that normative elements are unavoidable in policy 
analysis. He ­argues that using income as a measure of 
welfare is not the best approach and has suggested re-
placing it with a “capabilities” measure. For Sen, the goal 
of economic policy should be to increase a society’s capa-
bilities, which he defines as an individual’s freedom within 
that society to achieve a particular life. For Sen, capabili-
ties are best measured by basic indicators such as life 
expectancy, literacy, and infant mortality rates—not by 
income. Poor ratings on such indicators impede people 
from leading good and happy lives. Sen’s work is contro-
versial, but it is important in reminding us that the goals 
of economic policy should always be kept in mind and 
that we should not simply accept the goal as being an 
increase in total income.
What Should Be the Goal of Economic Policy?
Today, most discussions of economic policy focus on a 
goal of increasing income: Policies that achieve higher in-
come are good; policies that do not are bad. Historically, 
that has not always been the goal. In the 1800s the eco-
nomic policy ­focused on basic goods—distinguishing ne-
cessities from luxuries. Only policies that increased basic 
goods were good; the welfare ­implications of policies that 
increased luxuries were much more problematic.
	
The 1930s marked a major change in how economic 
policy was conceived. Economics began focusing much 
more on ­the utility of all goods, downplaying the distinction 
between luxuries and basic goods. With this change, the 
goal of economic policy focused much more on total 
­income, regardless of how that income was divided. The 
division of goods into necessities and luxuries was seen 
as adding a normative element to policy that was outside 
the purview of positive economics.

398	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	
All economists believe that people will change their behavior in response to 
changes in taxation and income redistribution programs. These responses, called 
­incentive effects of taxation, are important and must be taken into account in policy 
making. But economists differ significantly on the size of incentive effects, and 
­empirical evidence doesn’t resolve the question. Some economists believe that incen-
tive effects are so high that little taxation for redistribution should take place. They 
argue that when the rich do well, the total pie is increased so much that the spillover 
benefits to the poor are greater than the proceeds the poor would get from redistribution. 
For example, supporters of this view argue that the growth in capitalist economies was 
made possible by entrepreneurs. Because those entrepreneurs invested in new technology, 
income in society grew. Moreover, those entrepreneurs paid taxes. The benefits resulting 
from entrepreneurial action spilled over to the poor, making the poor far better off than 
any redistribution would. The fact that some of those entrepreneurs became rich is 
­irrelevant because their actions made all society better off.
	
Other economists believe that there should be significant taxation for redistribu-
tion. While they agree that sometimes the incentive effects are substantial, they see the 
goal of equality overriding these effects.
Politics, Income Redistribution, and Fairness
We began this discussion of income distribution and fairness by assuming that our value 
judgments should determine the way in which taxes are structured—that if our values lead 
us to the conclusion that the poor deserve more income, we could institute policies that 
would get more to the poor. Reality doesn’t necessarily work that way. ­Often politics, not 
value judgments, play a central role in determining what taxes ­individuals will pay. The 
group that can deliver the most votes will elect lawmakers who will enact tax policies 
that benefit that group at the expense of groups with fewer votes.
	
On the surface, the democratic system of one person/one vote would seem to 
­suggest that the politics of redistribution would favor the poor, but it doesn’t. One 
would expect that the poor would use their votes to make sure income was redistributed 
to them from the rich. Why don’t they? The answer is complicated.
	
One reason is that many of the poor don’t vote because they assume that one vote 
won’t make much difference. As a result, poor people’s total voting strength is ­reduced. 
A second reason is that the poor aren’t seen by most politicians as a solid voting bloc. 
There’s no organization of the poor that can deliver votes to politicians. A third reason 
is that those poor people who do vote often cast their votes with other issues in mind. 
An anti-income-redistribution candidate might have a strong view on abortion as well, 
and for many the abortion view is the one that decides their vote.
	
A fourth reason is that elections require financing. Much of that financing comes 
from the rich. The money is used for advertising and publicity aimed at convincing the 
poor that it’s actually in their best interests to vote for a person who supports the rich. 
People are often influenced by that kind of biased publicity.
	
Reasonable-sounding arguments can be made to support just about any position, 
and the rich have the means to see that the arguments supporting their positions get the 
publicity. Of course, some of their arguments are also correct. The issues are usually 
sufficiently complicated that a trained economist must study them for a long time to 
determine which arguments make sense.
Income Redistribution Policies
The preceding discussion should have provided you with a general sense of the difficulty 
of redistributing income. Let’s now consider briefly how income redistribution policies and 
programs have worked in the real world. In considering this, it is helpful to keep in mind 
Q-7  When determining the effects of 
programs that redistribute income, can 
one reasonably assume that other 
things will remain equal?
Often politics, not value judgments,  
play a central role in determining what 
taxes an individual will pay.

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
399
­that government has ­two direct methods and one indirect method to redistribute income. The 
direct methods are (1) taxation (policies that tax the rich more than the poor) and (2) expen-
ditures (programs that help the poor more than the rich). The indirect method ­involves 
establishing, changing, and protecting property rights. Let’s first consider direct methods.
Taxation to Redistribute Income 
The U.S. federal government gets its 
revenue from a variety of taxes. The three largest sources of revenue are the personal 
income tax, the corporate income tax, and the Social Security tax.
	
State and local governments get their revenue from income taxes, sales taxes, and 
property taxes. The rates vary among states.
	
Tax systems can be progressive, proportional (sometimes called flat rate), or 
regressive. A progressive tax is one in which the average tax rate increases with 
income. (A progressive income tax schedule might tax individuals at a rate of 15 per-
cent for income up to $20,000; at 25 percent for income between $20,000 and $40,000; 
and at 35 percent for every dollar earned over $40,000.) It redistributes income from 
the rich to the poor. A proportional tax is one in which the average rate of tax is con-
stant regardless of income level. Such a tax might be 25 percent of every dollar earned. 
It is neutral in regard to income distribution. A regressive tax is one in which the aver-
age tax rate decreases as income increases. It redistributes income from poor to rich. 
The United States has chosen a somewhat progressive income tax, while the Social 
­Security tax is a proportional tax up to a specified earned income.
Federal Income Taxes  In the early 1940s, the federal personal income tax was made 
highly progressive, with a top tax rate of 90 percent on the highest incomes. The degree of 
progressivity went down significantly through various pieces of legislation after World 
War II until 1986, when the income tax system was amended to provide for an initial rate 
of 15 percent and a top rate of 28 percent. (The U.S. income tax also has an earned income 
tax credit where heads of households earning below a certain amount get a tax credit from 
government, reducing their taxes, and sometimes providing them with an income subsidy.)
	
The changes did not reduce the actual progressivity of the personal income tax as 
much as they seemed to because the 1986 reforms eliminated many of the loopholes in 
the U.S. Tax Code. Some loopholes had allowed rich people to legally reduce their 
reported incomes and to pay taxes on those lower incomes at lower rates. The top 
­personal income tax rate on high-income individuals today is 39.6 percent.
	
Whereas the personal income tax is progressive, the Social Security tax is initially 
proportional. All individuals pay the same tax rate on wage income (7.65 percent for 
employer and 7.65 percent for employee; 15.3 percent for self-employed) up to a cap 
of about $118,500. Above that income cap, no Social Security tax is due (except for 
the Medicare portion, which has no cap on the amount to which it is applied). At this 
income cap, the Social Security tax becomes regressive: Higher-income individuals 
pay a lower percentage of their total income in Social Security taxes than do lower-
income individuals. (They also receive relatively less in Social Security benefits, com-
pared to what they put in. So, while the Social Security tax is regressive, taken as a 
whole the Social Security system is progressive.)
State and Local Taxes   State and local governments get most of their income from 
the following sources:
1.	Income taxes, which are generally somewhat progressive.
2.	Sales taxes, which tend to be proportional (all people pay the same tax rate on 
what they spend) or slightly regressive. (Since poor people often spend a 
higher percentage of their incomes than rich people, poor people pay higher 
average sales taxes as a percentage of their incomes than rich people.)
Direct methods of redistribution are 
taxation and expenditures programs.
Q-8  True or false? A progressive tax 
is preferable to a proportional tax. Why?

400	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
3.	Property taxes, which are taxes paid on the value of people’s property (usually 
real estate, but sometimes also personal property like cars). Since people with 
higher incomes tend to have significantly more property than people with 
lower incomes, the property tax is considered to be somewhat progressive.
	
When all the taxes paid by individuals to all levels of governments are combined, 
the conclusion that most researchers come to is that little income redistribution takes 
place on the tax side. The progressive taxes are offset by the regressive taxes, so the 
overall tax system is roughly proportional. That is, on average the tax rates individuals 
pay are roughly equal.
Expenditure Programs to Redistribute Income 
Taxation has not 
proved to be an effective means of redistributing income. However, the government 
expenditure system has been quite effective. The federal government’s expenditures 
that contribute to redistribution include the following.
Social Security 
The program that redistributes the most money is the Social 
Security system, a social insurance program that provides financial benefits to the 
elderly and ­disabled and to their eligible dependents and/or survivors. Social Secu-
rity also has a ­component called Medicare, which is a multibillion-dollar medical 
insurance system.
	
The amount of an individual’s Social Security retirement, disability, or survivors’ 
monthly cash benefits depends on a very complex formula, which is skewed in favor of 
lower-income workers. The program is not a pension program that pays benefits in 
proportion to the amount paid in. Many people will get much more than they paid in; 
some who never paid anything in will get a great deal; and others who paid in for years 
will get nothing. (No benefits are payable if you die before you retire and leave no 
survivors eligible for benefits due to your work.) On the whole, the program has been 
successful in keeping the elderly out of poverty. In addition, Social Security benefits 
have helped workers’ survivors and the disabled.
	
Today, more than 65 million people receive cash Social Security benefits, many of 
whom also receive Medicare payments. Total benefits paid, including Medicare, come 
to over $1 trillion each year.
Public Assistance  Public assistance programs are means-tested social programs 
targeted to the poor, providing financial, nutritional, medical, and housing ­assistance. 
(These programs are more familiarly known as welfare payments.) Public assistance 
programs exist in every state of the union, although the amount paid varies greatly 
from state to state. The main kinds of general public assistance are:
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). Provides temporary financial 
assistance to needy families with children under age 19.
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP). Provides nutritional 
­assistance in the form of coupons redeemable at most food stores.
General assistance. State assistance to poor people when emergencies arise that 
aren’t taken care of by any of the other programs.
By far the largest proportion of payments goes to needy families with dependent 
­children, especially since these families are usually so poor that, in addition to qualifying 
for TANF, they meet the eligibility requirements for SNAP.
	
TANF was instituted by the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
­Reconciliation Act of 1996 to replace Aid to Families with Dependent Children 
(AFDC). It has a number of provisions that distinguish it from earlier programs. One 
important provision is that it establishes a lifetime limit of no more than 60 months 
Expenditure programs have been 
more successful than taxation for 
redistributing income.
Q-9  True or false? The U.S. Social 
Security system is only a retirement 
system. 

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
401
(not necessarily consecutive) of benefits. The purpose of the law is to direct welfare 
recipients to work, and another provision in the law requires welfare recipients to take 
a job within two years. The law also gives states significant latitude in determining 
benefits and ­eligibility criteria. These changes are major ones; they raise many ques-
tions about job training and child care. The effects of this law are discussed in the box 
“From Welfare to Work.”
Medical Programs  Government also provides significant medical care assistance 
for lower income individuals. About 12 million individuals are insured through 
­government-created on-line insurance markets with almost 90 percent receiving some 
government assistance. Another 11 million are covered under Medicaid and the Chil-
dren’s Health Insurance Program.
Supplemental Security Income  Hundreds of thousands more people would be 
receiving public assistance if it weren’t for Supplemental Security Income (SSI), a 
federal program that pays benefits, based on need, to the elderly, blind, and dis-
abled. Although SSI is administered through the Social Security offices, it is unlike 
Social Security benefits because eligibility for SSI payments is based solely on need. 
Again unlike Social Security, the recipients pay nothing toward the cost of the pro-
gram. To be eligible, though, people must have very low incomes and almost no 
resources ­except a home, if they are fortunate enough to own one, a wedding ring 
and engagement ring, and an automobile. Today, nearly $60 billion is paid in SSI 
benefits each year.
Unemployment Compensation 
Unemployment compensation is short-term 
­financial assistance, regardless of need, to eligible individuals who are temporarily 
out of work. It is limited financial assistance to people who are out of work through no 
fault of their own and have worked in a covered occupation for a substantial number of 
weeks in the period just before they became unemployed.
	
Normally a person can receive unemployment benefits for only about six months in 
any given year, and the amount of the benefit is always considerably less than the 
amount the person earned when working.
	
A person can’t just quit a job and live on unemployment benefits. While receiving 
unemployment benefits, people are expected to actively search for work. Lower-income 
workers receive unemployment payments that are more nearly equal to their working 
wage than do higher-income workers, but there is no income eligibility test. 
­Today, about $33 billion is paid in unemployment benefits each year, although this 
amount fluctuates with the state of the economy.
Housing Programs  Federal and state governments have many different programs 
to improve housing or to provide affordable housing. While many of these programs 
are designed to benefit low-income persons, there are also programs for moderate-income 
persons and lower-income persons (people whose incomes are lower than moderate 
but higher than low).
	
The federal agency overseeing most of these programs, the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development (HUD), has been criticized for abuse and mis-
management. Hundreds of millions of dollars that could have benefited the poor 
went instead to ­developers of housing and other projects, to consultants, and to 
others who skimmed off money before—or instead of—building or rehabilitating 
housing. In part because of these problems, federal funding for housing was 
steadily reduced during the 1980s. Today, about $60 billion is allocated to housing 
programs each year.

402
How Successful Have Income Redistribution Programs Been?
After including the effect of both taxes and government programs on the redistribution 
of income, the after-transfer income is somewhat closer to being equally distributed. 
Thus government programs have a slight effect on income equality, but it is very small. 
But because of the incentive effects of collecting and distributing the money, that 
­redistribution has come at the cost of a reduction in the total amount of income earned 
by the society. The debate about whether the gain in equality of income is worth the 
cost in reduction of total income is likely to continue indefinitely.
	
While the direct methods of redistributing income get the most press and discussion, 
perhaps the most important redistribution decisions that the government makes involve 
an indirect method, the establishment and protection of property rights. Let’s take an 
example: intellectual property rights. Intellectual property consists of things like a book 
you’ve written, a song you’ve composed, or a picture you’ve drawn. How these property 
rights are structured plays a fundamental role in determining the distribution of income.
	
For example, if strict private property rights are given for, say, a design for a com-
puter screen (e.g., a neat little trash can in the corners and icons of various files), 
any user other than the designer herself will have to pay for the right to use it. The 
designer (or the person who gets the legal right to the design) becomes very rich. If no 
property rights are given for the design, then no payment is made and income is much 
more equally distributed. Of course, without a promise of high returns to designing a 
computer screen device, fewer resources will be invested in finding the ideal design. 
While most people agree that some incentive is appropriate, there is no consensus on 
whether the incentives embodied in our current property rights structure are too large. 
Most government redistribution works 
through its expenditure programs, not 
through taxes.
Q-10  Why are property rights 
important in the determination of 
whether any particular income 
distribution is fair?
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
In an effort to reduce the negative incentive effects of 
welfare, in 1996 Congress passed the Personal Respon-
sibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act. The act 
required recipients of welfare assistance to work after 
two years on assistance and limited welfare assistance 
to a total of five years over a lifetime. Part of the act was 
also designed to offset the taxation im-
plicit in moving from welfare to work, 
which could be as high as 90 percent 
or more, since under the old law wel-
fare recipients who earned income 
above a certain level often lost almost 
all their welfare benefits.
	
The act extended funding to the work-
ing poor; for example, it provided funding 
for child care to help mothers move into 
the workforce and extended Medicaid to 
include the first year of work. With the 
changes, the implicit tax on income was reduced to about 
40 percent: For every dollar of additional income, people lost 
40 cents of benefits. Congress also promised monetary 
From Welfare to Work
rewards to states that were successful in moving people off 
the welfare rolls.
	
This act played an important role in reducing the number 
of people on welfare from its peak of 14 million in 1994 to 
about 3.3 million in 2015, in reducing the average stay on wel-
fare from over eight to under four years, and in reducing the 
unemployment rate among single mothers.
The largest reduction occurred in the 
late 1990s and early 2000s, when the 
economy was booming and one could ex-
pect the number of welfare recipients to 
fall anyway. But the ­reductions continued 
into the recession.
The major slowdown that began in 
2008, accompanied by the fall in home 
values, pushed more people into poverty, 
including many who previously were con-
sidered ­middle class. But that increase in 
poverty was primarily due to the downturn, and the general 
feeling in government was that the law has significantly in-
creased the ­incentives to get off, and stay off, welfare. 
© Jack Star/PhotoLink/Getty Images RF

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
403
I suspect that the trash can (recycling bin) design, while ingenious, would have been 
arrived at with a much smaller incentive.
	
The point of the above example is not that property rights in such ideas should not be 
given out. The point is that decisions on property rights issues have enormous 
­distributional consequences that are often little discussed, even by economists. 
­Ultimately, we can answer the question of whether income redistribution is fair only ­after 
we have answered the question of whether the initial property rights distribution is fair.
Conclusion
Much more could be said about the issues involved in income redistribution. But limi-
tations of time and space pressure us to move on. I hope this chapter has ­convinced 
you that income redistribution is an important but difficult question. ­Specifically, I 
hope I have given you the sense that income distribution questions are integrally 
­related to questions about the entire economic system. Supply and demand play a 
­central role in the determination of the distribution of income, but they do so in an 
­institutional and historical context. Thus, the analysis of income distribution must 
­include that context as well as the analyst’s ethical judgments about what is fair.
The fairness of income depends on the 
fairness of property rights.
• The Lorenz curve is a measure of the distribution of 
income among families in a country. The farther 
the Lorenz curve is from the diagonal, the more 
­unequally income is distributed.  (LO18-1)
• The official poverty measure is an absolute measure 
because it is based on the minimum food budget for a 
family. It is a relative measure because it is adjusted 
for average inflation.  (LO18-1)
• Economic and social mobility in the United States has 
decreased over the past decades.  (LO18-1)
• Income is less equally distributed in the United States 
than in some countries such as Sweden, but more 
equally distributed than in other countries such as Brazil. 
There is more income inequality among countries than 
income inequality within a country.  (LO18-1)
• Wealth is distributed less equally than  
income.  (LO18-1)
Summary
• Income differs substantially by class and by other 
­socioeconomic characteristics such as age, race, and 
gender.  (LO18-2)
• Fairness is a philosophical question. People must judge 
a program’s fairness for themselves.  (LO18-3)
• Income is difficult to redistribute because of incentive 
effects of taxes, avoidance and evasion effects of 
taxes, and incentive effects of redistribution 
­programs.  (LO18-4)
• On the whole, the U.S. tax system is roughly 
­proportional, so it is not very effective as a means  
of ­redistributing income.  (LO18-4)
• Government spending programs are more effective 
than tax policy in reducing income inequality in the 
United States.  (LO18-4)
Key Terms
income
Lorenz curve
Medicare
poverty threshold
progressive tax
proportional tax
public assistance
regressive tax
Social Security  
system
Supplemental Security 
Income (SSI)
unemployment 
compensation
wealth

404	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 The Lorenz curve for Bangladesh looks like this:
58.7%
37.4
21.3
8.9
20
40
60
80
100%
Cumulative percentage
of population
Cumulative percentage
of income
	
	 How much income do individuals in the top income 
­quintile in Bangladesh receive?  (LO18-1)
	 2.	 What would the Lorenz curve for lawyers 
­represent?  (LO18-1)
	 3.	 Why are we concerned with the distribution of income 
­between whites and blacks, but not between redheads and 
blondes?  (LO18-1)
	 4.	 The accompanying table shows income distribution data 
for three countries.  (LO18-1)
	
Percentage of Total Income
Income Quintile	
India	
Czech Republic	
Mexico
Lowest 20%	
8.6%	
10.2%	
   4.4%
Second quintile	
12.2	
14.3	
  8.9
Third quintile	
15.8	
17.5	
13.3
Fourth quintile	
21.0	
21.7	
20.4
Highest 20%	
42.4	
36.3	
53.0
	a.	 Using this information, draw a Lorenz curve for each 
country.
	b.	 Which country has the most equal distribution of income?
	c.	 Which country has the least equal?
	d.	 By looking at the three Lorenz curves, can you tell 
which country has the most progressive tax system? 
Why or why not?
	 5.	 Should poverty be defined absolutely or relatively? 
Why?  (LO18-1)
	 6.	 How does social mobility in the United States compare to 
that in Britain? Why do you think this is so?  (LO18-1)
	 7.	 Would the Lorenz curve for the world be more or less 
bowed out compared to the Lorenz curve for the United 
States?  (LO18-1)
	 8.	 How has the median income of women compared to 
men changed since 1980? What do you think is the 
cause?  (LO18-2)
	 9.	 Is the class system in the United States more like a pyramid, 
diamond, or pentagon? Why is this so?  (LO18-2)
	10.	 How is the distribution of income related to the emergence 
of the Tea Party and the Occupy movement?  (LO18-2)
	11.	 Why did Bertrand de Juvenal argue for a high level of 
­income inequality?  (LO18-3)
	12.	 In what instance would John Rawls support greater 
­income inequality?  (LO18-3)
	13.	 In Taxland, the first $10,000 earned per year is exempt 
from taxation. Between $10,000.01 and $30,000, the tax 
rate is 25 percent. Between $30,000.01 and $50,000, it’s 
30 percent. Above $50,000, it’s 35 percent. You’re ­earning 
$75,000 a year.  (LO18-4)
	a.	 How much in taxes will you have to pay?
	b.	 What is your average tax rate?
	c.	 What is your marginal tax rate? 
	14.	 Some economists have proposed making the tax rate 
­progressivity depend on the wage rate rather than the 
­income level. Thus, an individual who works twice as 
long as another but who receives a lower wage would 
face a lower marginal tax rate.  (LO18-4)
	a.	 What effect would this change have on incentives to 
work?
	b.	 Would this system be fairer than our current system? 
Why or why not?
	c.	 If, simultaneously, the tax system were made re-
gressive in hours worked so that individuals who 
work longer hours faced lower marginal tax rates, 
what ­effect would this change have on hours 
worked?
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 In a recent study the top 20 percent of Americans had 
49.7 percent of the income before taxes and transfers and 
48.3 percent after taxes and transfers. The same figures 
for the bottom 20 percent were 3.4 percent and 4.3 percent 
respectively.
	a.	 How much do taxes and transfers “cost” the upper 
quintile?
	b.	 How much discretionary income should they be 
­willing to invest to change this situation?
	c.	 How much discretionary income does the bottom quin-
tile have to prevent such a change? (Institutionalist)

	
Chapter 18 ■ Who Gets What? The Distribution of Income	
405
	 2.	 In the Old Testament, God promised riches to Israel if Israel 
kept God’s commandments. But in the New Testament, Jesus 
says that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a 
needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.
	a.	 Considering the wealth distribution in Figure 18-5, 
what does this suggest about Americans?
	b.	 Should government do anything about it?
	c.	 What do the Old and New Testament teachings suggest 
about what private individuals ought to do? (Religious)
	 3.	 In 2014 the poverty level for a family of four was $24,418.
	a.	 If one-third of the total income of lower-income 
households is typically used for food, estimate the 
amount of money per day per person available for food 
for a person living at or below the poverty rate.
	b.	 How much does that leave for this family per month 
for everything else: rent, utilities, taxes, auto, medical, 
clothing, and education? (Radical)
	 4.	 Say you earn $200, and the government takes $75 from 
you in taxes to give to someone else.
	a.	 How would you feel about that?
	b.	 What would that transfer likely do to your incentive to 
work?
	c.	 What would the government transfer of $75 likely do 
to the incentive to work of the person who receives the 
payment?
	d.	 Would the effect be different if you voluntarily gave 
$75 to someone else? (Austrian)
	 5.	 Antipoverty programs in the United States since the 
­mid-1990s have focused on welfare-to-work programs 
that compel welfare recipients to take paid jobs. Some 
economists argue that these programs place women who 
are not “ready for work” into jobs that are not “ready for 
mothers” and move them from the ranks of the welfare 
poor to the working poor.
	a.	 What policies would be necessary to make U.S. 
­antipoverty programs far more effective?
	b.	 How could public policy be used to make jobs more 
“mother-ready” and more likely to lift these women 
above the poverty line? (Feminist)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 Some economists argue that a class distinction should 
be made between managerial decision makers and 
other workers. Do you agree? Why or why not?
	 2.	 If a garbage collector earns more than an English teacher, 
does that mean something is wrong with the economy? 
Why or why not? 
	 3.	 List four conditions you believe should hold before you 
would argue that two individuals should get the same 
amount of income.
	a.	 How would you apply the conditions to your views on 
welfare?
	b.	 How would you apply the conditions to your views on 
how progressive the income tax should be?
	c.	 If the income tax were made progressive in wage rates 
(tax rates increase as wage rates increase) rather than 
progressive in income, would your conditions be better 
met? Why?
	 4.	 Is it ever appropriate for society to:
	 	 Let someone starve?
	 	 Let someone be homeless?
	 	 Forbid someone to eat chocolate?
	 5.	 The dissident Russian writer A. Amalrik has written:
	 	 The Russian people . . . have . . . one idea that appears 
positive: the idea of justice . . . In practice, “justice” 
involves the desire that “nobody should live better than 
I do” . . . The idea of justice is motivated by hatred of 
everything that is outstanding, which we make no ef-
fort to imitate but, on the contrary, try to bring down 
to our level, by hatred of any sense of initiative, of any 
higher or more dynamic way of life than the life we 
live ourselves.
	
	 What implications would such a worldview have for the 
economy? 
	 6.	 If you receive a paycheck, what percentage of it is with-
held for taxes? What incentive effect does that have on 
your decision to work?
	 7.	 “There are lies, damned lies, and statistics. Then, there are 
annual poverty figures.” Both liberal and conservative 
economists believe U.S. poverty statistics are suspect. 
Here are some reasons:
	
	 (1)  They do not take into account in-kind benefits such as 
food stamps and tax credits.
	
	 (2)  They do not consider regional cost-of-living 
­differences.
	
	 (3)  They do not take into account unreported income.
	
	 (4)  Food accounts for about one-seventh of a family’s 
budget, not one-third.
	
	 (5)  Ownership of assets such as homes, cars, and 
­appliances is not taken into account.
	a.	 What would the effect of correcting each of these be 
on measured poverty?
	b.	 Would making these changes be fair?

406	
Microeconomics ■ Factor Markets
	 8.	 In “Why Higher Real Wages May Reduce Altruism for 
the Poor,” Ball State economist John B. Horowitz considers 
whether redistribution of income is a public good or a 
public bad. 
	a.	 How might income redistribution be considered a 
­public good?
	b.	 How might income redistribution be considered a 
­public bad?
	c.	 What is the likely effect of higher real wages on 
whether income redistribution is perceived to be a 
public good or bad?
	 9.	 There are many more poor people in the United States 
than there are rich people. If the poor wanted to, they 
could exercise their power to redistribute as much money 
as they please to themselves. They don’t do that, so they 
must see the income distribution system as fair. Discuss.
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 When drawing a Lorenz curve, you put the cumulative 
percentage of income on the vertical axis and the 
­cumulative percentage of families (or population) on the 
horizontal axis.  (LO18-1)
	 2.	 The U.S. definition of poverty is an absolute measure, but 
the way poverty is calculated means that some relativity is 
included in the definition.  (LO18-1)
	 3.	 The United States has significantly more income inequal-
ity than Sweden and Japan, but significantly less than 
Brazil.  (LO18-1)
	 4.	 In early capitalist society, the distributional fight was 
­between workers and capitalists. In modern capitalist 
­society, the distributional fight is more varied. For 
­example, in the United States minorities are pitted 
against whites and males against females.  (LO18-2)
	 5.	 No, it is not self-evident that greater equality of income 
would make society a better place to live. Unequal ­income 
distribution has its benefits. Still, most people would pre-
fer a somewhat more equal distribution of ­income than 
what currently exists.  (LO18-3)
	 6.	 What is fair is a very difficult concept. It depends on 
­people’s needs, people’s wants, to what degree people are 
deserving, and other factors. Still, in the absence of any 
more information than is given in the question, I would 
divide the pie equally.  (LO18-3)
	 7.	 No, one cannot reasonably assume other things remain 
constant. Redistributive programs have important side 
­effects that can change the behavior of individuals and 
subvert the intent of the program. Three important side 
­effects are substituting leisure for labor, a decrease in 
measured income, and attempts to appear more  
needy.  (LO18-4)
	 8.	 As a general statement, “A progressive tax is preferable to 
a proportional tax” is false. A progressive tax may well be 
preferable, but that is a normative judgment (just as its op-
posite would be). Moreover, taxes have incentive ­effects 
that must be considered.  (LO18-4)
	 9.	 False. The U.S. Social Security system includes many 
other aspects, such as disability benefits and survivors’ 
benefits.  (LO18-4)
	10.	 The distribution of initial property rights underlies the 
distribution of income. Those with the property rights 
will reap the returns from those rights. Ultimately, we can 
answer the question whether income distribution is fair 
only after we have answered whether the initial property 
rights distribution is fair.  (LO18-4)

After reading this chapter, 
you should be able to:
LO19-1	 Discuss the principle of 
diminishing marginal utility 
and the principle of rational 
choice.
LO19-2	 Explain the relationship 
between marginal utility 
and price when a consumer 
is maximizing total utility.
LO19-3	 Summarize how the 
principle of rational choice 
accounts for the laws of 
demand and supply.
LO19-4	 Name three assumptions of 
the theory of choice and 
discuss why they may not 
reflect reality.
“
”
The theory of economics must  
begin with a correct theory of 
consumption.
—Stanley Jevons
It’s Friday night and you’ve managed to scrimp and 
save $50 to take a break from classes and buy two tickets, 
one for yourself and one for a friend, to see the rock 
­concert at the field house. But then you think about it; 
maybe going to a movie and having a hot fudge sundae 
after for the two of you would make more sense. Or 
maybe a big steak dinner just for yourself. Or maybe 
­ordering Chinese. Or maybe studying and giving the 
money to the homeless shelter. Choices, choices; they are 
around you all the time.
	
How individuals make choices is central to microeco-
nomics. It is the foundation of economic reasoning and it gives economics 
much of its power. The first part of this chapter shows you that foundation and 
leads you through some exercises to make sure you understand the reasoning. 
The second part of the chapter relates that analysis to the real world, giving you 
a sense of when the model is useful and when it’s not.
	
As you go through this chapter, think back to Chapter 1, which set out the 
goals for this book. One goal was to get you to think like an economist. This 
chapter, which formally develops the reasoning process behind economists’ 
cost/benefit approach to problems, examines the underpinnings of how to think 
like an economist.
Rational Choice Theory
Different sciences have various explanations for why people do what they do. For 
example, Freudian psychology tells us we do what we do because of an internal 
fight between the id, ego, and superego plus some hangups we have about our 
bodies. Other psychologists tell us it’s a search for approval by our peers; we want 
to be OK. Economists agree that these are important reasons but argue that if we 
want an analysis that’s simple enough to apply to policy problems, these heavy 
psychological explanations are likely to get us all mixed up. At least to start with, 
we need an easier underlying psychological foundation. And economists have 
one—self-interest. People do what they do because it’s in their self-interest.
The Logic of Individual Choice: The 
Foundation of Supply and Demand
chapter 19
© Fancy Collection/SuperStock RF

408	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
Economists’ traditional analysis of 
individual choice doesn’t deny that most of 
us have our quirks. That’s obvious in what 
we buy. On certain items we’re penny­
pinchers; on others we’re big spenders. For 
example, how many of you or your parents 
clip coupons to save 40 cents on cereal but 
then spend $40 on a haircut? How many 
save 50 cents a pound by buying a low 
grade of meat but then spend $20 on a bot-
tle of wine, $75 on dinner at a restaurant, 
or $60 for a concert ticket?
But through it all comes a certain 
­rationality. Much of what people do 
­reflects their rational self-interest. That’s 
why economists start their analysis of 
­individual choice with a relatively simple, 
but powerful, underlying ­psychological 
foundation.
Using that simple theory, two things 
determine what people do: utility—the 
pleasure or satisfaction people get from 
doing or consuming something, and the 
price of doing or consuming that some-
thing. Price is the tool the market uses to 
bring the quantity supplied equal to the 
quantity demanded. Changes in price provide incentives for people to change what 
they’re doing. Through those incentives, the invisible hand guides us all. To understand 
economics, you must understand how price affects our choices. That’s why we focus on the 
effect of price on the quantity demanded. We want to understand the way in which a 
change in price will affect what we do.
	
In summary, economists’ theory of rational choice is a simple and powerful theory 
that shows how these two things—pleasure and price—are related.
Total Utility and Marginal Utility
In thinking about utility, it’s important to distinguish between total utility and ­marginal 
utility. Total utility refers to the total satisfaction one gets from consuming a product. 
Marginal utility refers to the satisfaction one gets from consuming one additional unit 
of a product above and beyond what one has consumed up to that point. For example, 
eating a whole pound of Beluga caviar might give you 4,700 units of utility.1 Consuming 
the first 15 ounces may have given you 4,697 units of utility. Consuming the last ounce 
of caviar might give you an additional 3 units of utility. The 4,700 is total utility; the 3 is 
the marginal utility of eating that last ounce of caviar.
	
An example of the relationship between total utility and marginal utility is given in 
Figure 19-1. Let’s say that the marginal utility of the first slice of pizza is 14, and since 
Utility is the pleasure or satisfaction that 
people get from doing or consuming 
something.
It is important to distinguish between 
marginal and total utility.
Thinking Like a Modern Economist
The Traditional Models as Stepping Stones
A group of economists, called behavioral economists, are begin-
ning to explore consistent deviations from rationality and self-­
interest, and in doing so they are expanding the building blocks of 
economics. But ­doing so has a cost—it complicates the model 
enormously, and a more complicated model is much more difficult 
to use. The advantage of ­using traditional building blocks is that 
doing so leads to black-and-white conclusions—and then lets you 
decide whether the model is or is not applicable.
Behavioral economists recognize the cost and are trying to 
characterize types of decisions that fit the traditional model and 
types of ­decisions that don’t. Unfortunately, the work is still in an 
early stage and they have a long way to go. That’s why, at this time, 
when it comes to teaching economics, almost all economists—­
including behavioral economists—agree that the best place to start 
is with models based on the traditional building blocks. That’s why 
this book is structured like it is—it focuses on models with the tra-
ditional building blocks, but lets you know that, in their research, 
modern economists are going ­beyond the traditional models.
1Throughout the book I choose specific numbers to make the examples more understandable and to 
make the points I want to make. Economists don’t use actual numbers to discuss utility. At the 
­principles level, they use such numbers to make the presentation easier. A useful exercise is for you 
to choose different numbers and reason your way through the same analysis. In this chapter’s 
appen­dix, I go through the same analysis without using actual numbers.

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
409
you’ve eaten only 1 slice, the total utility is also 14. Let’s also say that the marginal 
utility of the second slice of pizza is 12, which means that the total utility of 2 slices of 
pizza is 26 (14 + 12). Similarly for the third, fourth, and fifth slices of pizza, whose mar-
ginal utilities are 10, 8, and 6, respectively. The total utility of your eating those 5 
pieces of pizza is the sum of the marginal utilities you get from eating each of the 5 slices. 
The sixth row of column 2 of Figure 19-1(a) shows that sum.
	
Notice that marginal utility shows up between the rows. That’s because it is the 
utility of changing consumption levels. For example, the marginal utility of changing 
from 1 to 2 slices of pizza is 12. The relationship between total and marginal utility 
also can be seen graphically. In Figure 19-1(b), we graph total utility (column 2 of the 
utility table) on the vertical axis and the number of slices of pizza (column 1 of the 
utility table) on the horizontal axis. As you can see, total utility increases up to 7 slices 
of pizza; after 8 slices it starts decreasing—after 8 pieces of pizza, you’re so stuffed 
that you can’t stand to look at another slice.
	
In Figure 19-1(c), we graph marginal utility (column 3 of the utility table) on the 
vertical axis and slices of pizza (column 1) on the horizontal axis. Notice how marginal 
utility decreases while total utility increases. When total utility stops increasing 
Q-1  If the total utility curve is a 
straight line—that is, does not exhibit 
diminishing marginal utility—what will 
the marginal utility curve look like?
© Chris Hondros/Getty Images
Eating contests are proof that, at 
some point, utility becomes zero.
FIGURE 19-1 (A, B, AND C)  Marginal and Total Utility
Marginal utility tends to decrease as consumption of a good increases. 
Notice how the information in the table (a) can be presented 
graphically in two different ways. The two different ways are, 
however, related. The downward slope of the marginal utility curve 
(c) is reflected in the total utility curve bowed downward in  
(b). Notice that marginal utility relates to changes in quantity so  
the marginal utility line is graphed at the halfway point. For example, 
in (c), between 7 and 8, marginal utility becomes zero.
Units of utility
(b)  Total Utility
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1 
 2 
 3 
4  5 
6  7 
8 
9
Slices of pizza per hour
Units of utility
(c)  Marginal Utility
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
1 
2  3 
4  5 
6  7  
8 
9
Slices of pizza per hour
Marginal 
utility
Total utility
	
(1)	
(2)	
(3) 
	Number of 	
Total	
Marginal 
	Pizza Slices	
Utility	
Utility
	
0	
0	
14
	
1	
14	
12
	
2	
26	
10
	
3	
36	
8
	
4	
44	
6
	
5	
50	
4
	
6	
54	
2
	
7	
56	
0
	
8	
56	
−2
	
9	
54
(a) Utility Table

410	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
­(between 7 and 8 slices), marginal utility is zero. Beyond this point, total utility decreases 
and marginal utility is negative. An additional slice of pizza will actually make you 
worse off.
Diminishing Marginal Utility
Now let’s consider the shapes of these curves a bit more carefully: What are they 
­telling us about people’s choices? As we’ve drawn the curves, the marginal utility that 
a person gets from each additional slice of pizza decreases with each slice of pizza 
eaten. Economists believe that the shape of these curves is generally a reasonable 
­description of the pattern of people’s enjoyment. They call that pattern the principle 
of diminishing marginal utility:
As you consume more of a good, after some point, the marginal utility received from 
each additional unit of a good decreases with each additional unit consumed, other 
things equal.
	
As individuals increase their consumption of a good, at some point, consuming 
another unit of the product will simply not yield as much additional pleasure as did 
consuming the preceding unit.
	
Consider, for example, that late-night craving for a double-cheese-and-pepperoni 
pizza. You order one and bite into it. Ah, pleasure! But if you’ve ordered a large pizza 
and you’re eating it all by yourself, eventually you’ll enjoy each additional slice less. In 
other words, the marginal utility you get is going to decrease with each additional slice 
of pizza you consume. That’s the principle of diminishing marginal utility.
	
Notice that the principle of diminishing marginal utility does not say that you don’t 
enjoy consuming more of a good; it simply states that as you consume more of the 
good, you enjoy the additional units less than you did the previous units. A fourth slice 
of pizza still tastes good, but it doesn’t match the taste of the third slice. At some point, 
however, marginal utility can become negative. Say you had two large pizzas and only 
two hours in which to eat them. Eating the last slice could be pure torture. But in most 
situations, you have the option not to consume any more of a good. When consuming 
a good becomes torture (meaning its utility is negative), you simply don’t consume any 
more of it. If you eat a slice of pizza (or consume an additional unit of a good), that’s 
a good indication that its marginal utility is still positive.
Rational Choice and Marginal Utility
The analysis of rational choice is the analysis of how individuals choose goods within their 
budget in order to maximize total utility, and how maximizing total utility can be accom-
plished by considering marginal utility. That analysis begins with the premise that rational 
individuals want as much satisfaction as they can get from their available resources. The 
term rational in economics means, specifically, that people prefer more to less and will 
make choices that give them as much satisfaction as possible. The problem is that people 
face a budget constraint. They must choose among the alternatives. How do they do that?
Some Choices 
Let’s start by considering three choices. (Answer each choice as 
you read it.)2
Choice 1:  Between spending another dollar on a slice of pizza that gives you an 
additional 41 units of utility, or spending another dollar on a hero sandwich that 
gives you an additional 30 units of utility.
The principle of diminishing marginal 
utility states that, after some point, the 
marginal utility received from each 
additional unit of a good decreases with 
each additional unit consumed, other 
things equal.
Q-2  True or false? Consuming more 
of a good generally increases its 
marginal utility. Why?
Because people face a budget 
constraint, they must choose among 
alternatives.
2To keep the analysis simple in this example, I consider either/or decisions. Below, I show how to 
extend the analysis to marginal choices.

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
411
Choice 2:  Between reading an additional chapter in this book that gives you an 
additional 200 units of utility at a cost of one hour of your time, or reading an 
­additional chapter in psychology that gives you an additional 100 units of utility 
at a cost of 40 minutes of your time.
Choice 3:  Between having your next date with that awesome guy Jerry, which 
gives you an additional 2,000 units of utility and costs you $70, or taking out 
plain Jeff on your next date, which gives you an additional 200 units of utility and 
costs you $10.
The correct choices, in terms of marginal utility, are (1) the pizza, (2) a chapter of this 
book, and (3) Jerry.
	
If you answered all three correctly, either you’re lucky or you have a good intuitive 
understanding of the principle of rational choice. Now let’s explore the principle of 
rational choice more thoroughly by considering each of the three examples.
Choice 1  Since the slice of pizza and the hero sandwich both cost $1, and the pizza 
gives you more units of utility than the hero, the pizza is the rational choice. If you 
spend $1 on the hero rather than the pizza, you’re losing 11 units of utility and not 
making yourself as happy as you could be. You’re being irrational. Any choice (for the 
same amount of money) that doesn’t give you as much utility as possible is an irratio-
nal choice.
	
But now let’s say that the price of heroes falls to 50 cents so that you can buy two 
heroes for the same price you previously had to pay for only one. Let’s also say that 
two heroes would give you 56 units of utility (not 2 × 30 = 60—remember the prin-
ciple of diminishing marginal utility). Which would now be the more rational choice? 
The two heroes, because their 56 units of utility are 15 more than you would get from 
that dollar spent on one slice of pizza.
	
Another way of thinking about your choice is to recognize that essentially what 
you’re doing is buying units of utility. Obviously you want to get the most for your 
money, so you choose goods that have the highest units of utility per unit of cost. 
Let’s see how this way of thinking about a decision works by considering our second 
choice.
Choice 2  Here the two alternatives have a cost in time, not money. The analysis, 
however, is the same. You calculate the marginal utility (additional units of utility) of 
the choice facing you and divide that by the costs of the activity; that gives you the 
marginal utility per unit of cost. Then choose the activity that has the higher marginal 
utility per unit of cost or lower cost per unit of utility. When you do that, you see that 
this chapter gives you 31/3 units of utility per minute (200/60 = 313), while the 
­psychology chapter gives you 213 units of utility per minute. So you choose to read 
another chapter in this book.3
Choice 3  Taking out Jerry gives you 28½ units of utility per dollar (2,000/$70), 
while taking out Jeff gives you 20 units of utility per dollar (200/$10). So you choose 
to take out Jerry.4
Q-3  Which is the rational choice: 
watching one hour of CNN that gives 
you 20 units of utility or watching a two-
hour movie that gives you 30 units of 
utility?
3As I’ve pointed out before, I choose the numbers to make the points I want to make. A good 
­exercise for you is to choose different numbers that reflect your estimate of the marginal utility you 
get from a choice, and see what your rational choices are.
4In these examples, I am implicitly assuming that the “goods” are divisible. Technically, this 
­assumption is needed for marginal utilities to be fully specified.

412	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
The Principle of Rational Choice 
The principle of rational choice is as 
follows: Spend your money on those goods that give you the most marginal utility 
(MU) per dollar. The principle of rational choice is important enough for us to restate.
If MUx
Px
>
MUy
Py
, choose to consume an additional unit of good x.
If MUx
Px
<
MUy
Py
, choose to consume an additional unit of good y.
By substituting the marginal utilities and prices of goods into these formulas, you can 
always decide which good it makes more sense to consume. Consume the one with the 
highest marginal utility per dollar.
Simultaneous Decisions 
So far in discussing our examples, we’ve considered 
the choices separately. But in real life, choices aren’t so neatly separated. Say you were 
presented with all three choices simultaneously. If you make all three of the decisions 
given in the examples, are you being rational? The answer is no. Why? The pizza gives 
you 41 units of utility per dollar; taking out Jerry gives you 28½ units of utility per 
dollar. You aren’t being rational; you aren’t maximizing your utility. It would clearly 
make sense to eat more pizza, paying for it by cutting the date with Jerry short. (Skip 
the coffee at the end of the meal.)
	
But what about the other choice: studying psychology or economics? We can’t ­compare 
the costs of studying to the costs of the other goods because, as I noted earlier, the costs of 
both studying alternatives are expressed in terms of time, not money. If we can assign a 
money value to the time, however, we can make the comparison. Let’s say you can earn 
$6 per hour, so the value of your time is 10 cents per minute. This allows us to think about 
both alternatives in terms of dollars and cents. Since a chapter in economics takes an hour 
to read, the cost in money of reading a chapter is 60 minutes × 10 cents = $6. Similarly, 
the cost of the 40 minutes you’d take to read the psychology chapter is $4.
	
With these values, we can compare our studying decisions with our other ­decisions. 
The value in units of utility per dollar of reading a chapter of this book is
200
$6 = 3313 units of utility per dollar
So forget about dating Jerry with its 28½ units of utility per dollar. Your rational 
choice is to study this chapter while stuffing yourself with pizza.
	
But wait. Remember that, according to the principle of diminishing marginal 
­utility, as you consume more of something, the marginal utility you get from it falls. So 
as you consume more pizza and spend more time reading this book, the marginal utili-
ties of these activities will fall. Thus, as you vary your consumption, the marginal 
utilities you get from the goods are changing.
Maximizing Utility and Equilibrium
When do you stop changing your consumption? The principle of rational choice says 
you should keep adjusting your spending within your budget if the marginal utility per 
dollar (MU/P) of two goods differs. The only time you don’t adjust your spending is 
when there is no clear winner. When the ratios of the marginal utility to price of the 
two goods are equal, you’re maximizing utility; this is the utility-maximizing rule:
If MUx
Px
=
MUy
Py
, you’re maximizing utility.
The principle of rational choice  
tells us to spend our money on  
those goods that give us the most 
marginal utility per dollar.
The utility-maximizing rule:
MUx
Px
=
MUy
Py

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
413
	
When you’re maximizing utility, you’re in equilibrium. To understand how you can 
achieve equilibrium by adjusting your spending, it’s important to remember the 
­principle of diminishing marginal utility. As we consume more of an item, the ­marginal 
utility we get from the last unit consumed decreases. Conversely, as we consume less 
of an item, the marginal utility we get from the last unit consumed increases. (The 
principle of diminishing marginal utility operates in reverse.)
	
Achieving equilibrium by maximizing utility (juggling your choices, adding a bit 
more of one and choosing a bit less of another) requires more information than I’ve so 
far presented. We need to know the marginal utility of alternative amounts of con-
sumption for each choice and how much we have to spend on all those items. With that 
information, we can choose among alternatives, given our available resources.
An Example of Maximizing Utility
Table 19-1 offers an example in which we have the necessary information to make 
­simultaneous decisions and maximize utility. In this example, we have $7 to spend on 
ice cream cones and Big Macs. The choice is between ice cream at $1 a cone and Big 
Macs at $2 apiece. In the table, you can see the principle of diminishing marginal util-
ity in action. The marginal utility (MU) we get from either good decreases as we con-
sume more of it. MU becomes negative after 5 Big Macs or 6 ice cream cones.
	
The key columns for your decision are the MU/P columns. They tell you the MU 
per dollar spent on each of the items. By following the rule that we choose the good 
with the higher marginal utility per dollar, we can quickly determine the optimal 
choice.
	
Let’s start by considering what we’d do with our first $2. Clearly we’d only eat ice 
cream. Doing so would give us 29 + 17 = 46 units of utility, compared to 20 units of 
utility if we spent the $2 on a Big Mac. How about our next $2? Again the choice is 
clear; the 10 units of utility per dollar from the Big Mac are plainly better than the 
7 units of utility per dollar we can get from ice cream cones. So we buy 1 Big Mac and 
2 ice cream cones with our first $4.
	
Now let’s consider our fifth and sixth dollars. The MU/P for a second Big Mac is 7. 
The MU/P for a third ice cream cone is also 7, so we could spend the fifth dollar on 
either—if McDonald’s will sell us half a Big Mac. We ask McDonald’s if it will, and 
Q-4  True or false? You are 
maximizing total utility only when  
the marginal utility of all goods is zero. 
Explain your answer.
TABLE 19-1  Maximizing Utility
This table provides the information needed to make simultaneous decisions. Notice that 
the marginal utility we get from another good declines as we consume more of it. To 
maximize utility, adjust your choices until the marginal utility of all goods is equal.
	
Big Macs 	
Ice Cream 
	
(P = $2)	
(P = $1)
Q	
TU	
MU	
MU/P	
Q	
TU	
MU	
MU/P
0	
0	
20	
10	
0	
0	
29	
29
1	
20	
14	
7	
1	
29	
17	
17
2	
34	
10	
5	
2	
46	
7	
7
3	
44	
3	
1.5	
3	
53	
2	
2
4	
47	
0	
0	
4	
55	
1	
1
5	
47	
−5	
−2.5	
5	
56	
0	
0
6	
42	
−10	
−5	
6	
56	
−4	
−4
7	
32	
	
	
7	
52	

414	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
it tells us no, so we must make a choice between either two additional ice cream cones 
or another Big Mac for our fifth and sixth dollars. Since the marginal utility per dollar 
of the fourth ice cream cone is only 2, it makes sense to spend our fifth and sixth dol-
lars on another Big Mac. So now we’re up to 2 Big Macs and 2 ice cream cones and we 
have one more dollar to spend.
	
Now how about our last dollar? If we spend it on a third ice cream cone, we get 
7 additional units of utility. If McDonald’s maintains its position and only sells 
whole Big Macs, this is our sole choice since we only have a dollar and Big Macs 
sell for $2. But let’s say that McDonald’s wants the sale and this time offers to sell 
us half a Big Mac for $1. Would we take it? The answer is no. One-half of the next 
Big Mac gives us only 5 units of utility per dollar, whereas the third ice cream cone 
gives us 7 units of utility per dollar. So we spend the seventh dollar on a third ice 
cream cone.
	
With these choices and $7 to spend, we’ve arrived at equilibrium—the marginal 
utilities per dollar are the same for both goods and we’re maximizing total utility. Our 
total utility is 34 from 2 Big Macs and 53 units of utility from the 3 ice cream cones, 
making a total utility of 87.
	
Why do these two choices make sense? Because they give us the most total utility for 
the $7 we have to spend. We’ve followed the utility-maximizing rule: Maximize utility 
by adjusting your choices until the marginal utilities per dollar are the same. These 
choices make the marginal utility per dollar between the last Big Mac and the last ice 
cream cone equal. The marginal utility per dollar we get from our last Big Mac is:
MU
P
= 14
$2 = 7
The marginal utility per dollar we get from our last ice cream cone is:
MU
P
= 7
$1 = 7
The marginal utility per dollar of each choice is equal, so we know we can’t do any 
better. For any other choice, we would get less total utility, so we could increase our 
total utility by switching to one of these two choices.
Extending the Principle of Rational Choice
Our example involved only two goods, but the reasoning can be extended to the choice 
among many goods. Our analysis has shown us that the principle of rational choice 
among many goods is simply an extension of the principle of rational choice applied to 
two goods. That general principle of rational choice is to consume more of the good 
that provides a higher marginal utility per dollar.
When MUx
Px
> MUz
Pz
, consume more of good x.
When 
MUy
Py
> MUz
Pz
, consume more of good y.
Stop adjusting your consumption when the marginal utilities per dollar are equal.
	
So the general utility-maximizing rule is that you are maximizing utility when the 
marginal utilities per dollar of the goods consumed are equal.
When 
MUx
Px
=
MUy
Py
= MUz
Pz
, you are maximizing utility.

415
When this rule is met, the consumer is in equilibrium; the 
cost per additional unit of utility is equal for all goods and 
the consumer is as well off as it is possible to be.
	
Notice that the rule does not say that the rational con-
sumer should consume a good until its marginal utility 
reaches zero. The reason is that consumers don’t have 
enough money to buy all they want. They face a budget con-
straint and do the best they can under that constraint—that 
is, they maximize utility. To buy more goods, a person has to 
work more, so she should work until the marginal utility of 
another dollar earned just equals the marginal utility of 
goods purchased with another dollar. According to econo-
mists’ analysis of rational choice, a person’s choice of how 
much to work is made simultaneously with the person’s 
decision of how much to consume. So when you say you 
want a Porsche but can’t afford one, economists ask whether 
you’re working two jobs and saving all your money to buy a 
Porsche. If you aren’t, you’re demonstrating that you don’t 
really want a Porsche, given what you would have to do to 
get it.
Rational Choice and the  
Laws of Demand and Supply
Now that you know the rule for maximizing utility, let’s see how it relates to the laws 
of demand and supply. We begin with demand. The law of demand says that quantity 
demanded is inversely related to price. That is, when the price of a good goes up, the 
quantity we consume of it goes down.
The Law of Demand
Now let’s consider the law of demand in relation to our principle of rational choice. When 
the price of a good goes up, the marginal utility per dollar we get from that good goes 
down. So when the price of a good goes up, if we were initially in equilibrium, we no 
­longer are. Therefore, we choose to consume less of that good. The principle of rational 
choice shows us formally that following the law of demand is the rational thing to do.
	
Let’s see how. If
MUx
Px
=
MUy
Py
and the price of good y goes up, then
MUx
Px
>
MUy
Py
Our utility-maximizing rule is no longer satisfied. Consider the preceding example, 
in which we were in equilibrium with 87 units of utility (34 from 2 Big Macs and 
53 from 3 ice cream cones) with the utility-maximizing rule fulfilled:
Big Mac
14 units of utility
$2
=
Ice cream
7 units of utility
$1
= 7
According to the principle of rational 
choice, if there is diminishing marginal 
utility and the price of a good goes up, 
we consume less of that good. Hence, 
the principle of rational choice leads to 
the law of demand.
A REMINDER
Choices at the Margin
Remember that an individual is maximizing utility if the 
marginal utilities per dollar for each good are equal:
MUx
Px
=
MUy
Py
If MUx/Px < MUy/Py, then good x isn’t providing enough 
marginal utility to be in equilibrium, so reduce the 
amount of good x and increase the amount of good y. 
Because of diminishing marginal utility, doing this will 
raise the marginal utility of x and lower the marginal util-
ity of y.
	
If MUx/Px = MUy/Py, but then the price of good x 
rises, good x will no longer provide enough marginal 
utility to be in equilibrium. MUy/Py will exceed MUx/Px. 
So again, reduce the amount of good x and increase 
the amount of good y to return to equilibrium.

416	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
If the price of an ice cream cone rises from $1 to $2, the marginal utility per dollar for 
Big Macs (whose price hasn’t changed) exceeds the marginal utility per dollar of ice 
cream cones:
Big Mac > Ice cream
14
$2 	 >	
7
$2
To satisfy our utility-maximizing rule so that our choice will be rational, we must 
somehow raise the marginal utility we get from the good whose price has risen. Fol-
lowing the principle of diminishing marginal utility, we can increase marginal utility 
only by decreasing our consumption of the good whose price has risen. As we con-
sume fewer ice cream cones and more Big Macs, the marginal utility of ice cream rises 
and the marginal utility of a Big Mac falls.
	
This example can be extended to a general rule: If the price of a good rises, you’ll 
increase your total utility by consuming less of it. When the price of a good goes up, 
consumption of that good will go down. Our principle of rational choice underlies the 
law of demand:
Quantity demanded rises as price falls, other things constant.
Or alternatively:
Quantity demanded falls as price rises, other things constant.
Income and Substitution Effects
So far I haven’t said precisely how much the quantity demanded would decrease with 
an increase in the price of an ice cream cone from $1 to $2. I didn’t because of a 
­certain ambiguity that arises when one talks about changes in nominal prices. To 
understand the cause of this ambiguity, notice that if the price of an ice cream cone has 
risen to $2, with $7 we can no longer consume 2 Big Macs and 3 ice cream cones. 
We’ve got to cut back for two reasons: First, we’re poorer due to the rise in price. The 
reduction in quantity demanded because the increase in price makes us poorer is 
called the income effect. Second, the relative prices have changed. The price of ice 
cream has risen relative to the price of Big Macs. The reduction in quantity demanded 
because relative price has risen is called a substitution effect. Technically the law of 
demand is based only on the substitution effect.
	
To separate the two effects, let’s assume that somebody compensates us for the rise 
in the price of ice cream cones. Since it would cost $10 [(2 × $2 = $4) + (3 × $2 = $6)] to 
buy what $7 bought previously, we’ll assume that someone gives us an extra $3 to 
compensate us for the rise in price. Since we are not any poorer because of the price 
change, this eliminates the income effect. We now have $10, so we can buy 2 Big 
Macs and the 3 ice cream cones as we did before. If we do so, our total utility is once 
again 87 (34 units of utility from 2 Big Macs and 53 units of utility from 3 ice cream 
cones). But will we do so? We can answer that with the following table.
	
Big Macs (P = $2)	
Ice Cream (P = $2)
Q	
TU	
MU	
MU/P	
Q	
TU	
MU	
MU/P
0	
  0	
20	
10	
0	
  0	
29	
14.5
1	
20	
14	
  7	
1	
29	
17	
  8.5
2	
34	
10	
  5	
2	
46	
  7	
  3.5
3	
44	
	
	
3	
53	
Q-5  If you are initially in equilibrium 
and the price of one good rises, how 
would you adjust your consumption to 
return to equilibrium? 
Q-6   What are two effects that 
generally cause the quantity demanded 
to fall when the price rises?

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
417
	
We see that the second Big Mac gives us more MU per dollar than the third cone. 
What happens if we exchange an ice cream cone for an additional Big Mac, so instead 
of buying 3 ice cream cones and 2 Big Macs, we buy 3 Big Macs and 2 ice cream 
cones? The MU per dollar of Big Macs falls from 7 to 5 and the MU per dollar of the 
ice cream cone (whose price is now $2) rises from 3.5 to 8.5. Our total utility rises to 
44 from 3 Big Macs and 46 from 2 ice cream cones, for a total of 90 units of utility 
rather than the previous 87. We’ve increased our total utility by shifting our consump-
tion out of ice cream, the good whose price has risen. The price of ice cream went up 
and, even though we were given more money so we could buy the same amount as 
before, we did not; we bought fewer ice cream cones. That’s the substitution effect in 
action: It tells us that when the relative price of a good goes up, the quantity purchased 
of that good decreases, even if you’re given money to compensate you for the rise.
The Law of Supply
The above discussion focused on demand and goods we consume, but this analysis of 
choice holds for the law of supply of factors of production, such as labor, that 
­individuals supply to the market, as well as for demand. In supply decisions, you are 
giving up something—your time, land, or some other factor of production—and 
­getting money in return. To show you how this works, let’s consider one final example: 
how much labor you should supply to the market.
	
Say that working another hour at your part-time job pays you another $8 and that 
you currently work 20 hours per week. That additional income from the final hour of 
work gives you an additional 24 units of utility. Also assume that your best alternative 
use of that hour—studying economics—gives you another 24 units of utility. (You 
didn’t know economics gave you so much pleasure, did you?) So what should you do 
when your boss asks you to work an extra hour? Tell her no, you are already satisfying 
the utility-maximum rule MUwW = MUsW.
Studying
24 units of utility
$8
=
Working
24 units of utility
$8
The price of studying an additional hour is also your wage per hour because that wage 
is the opportunity cost of studying.
	
But now say that your boss offers to raise your wage to $8.50 per hour for work you 
do over 20 hours. That means that both your wage at work and the price of studying 
have increased. But now you can get more goods for working that additional hour. 
Let’s say that those additional goods raise the marginal utility you get from an addi-
tional hour of work to 32 additional units of utility. Now the marginal utility of work-
ing an additional hour exceeds the marginal utility of studying an additional hour:
Studying
24 units of utility
$8.50
<
Working
32 units of utility
$8.50
So you work the extra hour.
	
Now say your boss comes to you and asks what it would take to get you to work 
five hours more per week. After running the numbers through your computer-mind, 
you solve the utility-maximizing rule and tell her, “$12.00 an hour for overtime 
work and you’ve got your worker.” Combining these hours and wages gives you 
the supply curve shown in the margin, which demonstrates the law of supply. 
As you have seen, factor supply curves can be derived from a comparison of 
marginal utilities for various activities in relation to work.
According to the principle of rational 
choice, if there is diminishing marginal 
utility and the price of supplying a good 
goes up, you supply more of that good.
Q-7  Use the principle of rational 
choice to explain how you would 
change your quantity of work supplied 
if your employer raised your wage by  
$1 per hour.
$12.00
8.50
8.00
Hours per week
Supply
Wages per hour
26
20
21

418	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
	
To see that you have the reasoning down, say that an exam is coming and you 
haven’t studied. This will likely raise the marginal utility of studying sufficiently, so 
you will choose to work less, if you have a choice. What will that change do to your 
supply curve of labor?
	
If you answered that it will shift it in to the left, you’re in good shape.
Opportunity Cost
Before we leave the principle of rational choice, let’s consider how it relates to the 
­opportunity cost concept that I presented in earlier chapters. Opportunity cost was the 
benefit forgone of the next-best alternative. Now that you’ve been through the ­principle 
of rational choice, you have a better sense of what is meant by opportunity cost of a 
forgone opportunity: It is essentially the marginal utility per dollar you forgo from the 
consumption of the next-best alternative.
	
To say MUxPx > MUyPy is to say that the opportunity cost of not consuming good 
x is greater than the opportunity cost of not consuming good y. So you consume x.
	
When the marginal utilities per dollar spent are equal, the opportunity costs of the 
alternatives are equal. In terms of opportunity cost, the principle of rational choice can 
be stated in the following way: To maximize utility, choose goods until the opportunity 
costs of all alternatives are equal. In reality, people don’t use the utility terminology, 
and, indeed, a specific measure of utility doesn’t exist. But the choice based on the 
price of goods relative to the benefit they provide is used all the time. Instead of utility 
terminology, people use the “really need” terminology. They say they will work the 
extra hour rather than study because they really need the money. To say you are work-
ing because you “really need” the money is the equivalent of saying the marginal util-
ity of working is higher than the marginal utility of other choices. So the general rule 
fits decisions about supply, even if most people don’t use the word utility. The more 
you “really, ­really need” something, the higher its marginal utility.
Applying Economists’ Theory of Choice  
to the Real World
Understanding a theory involves more than understanding how a theory works; it also 
involves understanding the limits the assumptions underlying the theory place on the 
use of the theory. As I’ve noted above, behavioral economists are questioning some of 
the ­assumptions on which traditional economists’ analysis of choice is based. These 
assumptions include: (1) Decisions are costless; (2) tastes are given; and (3) individu-
als maximize utility. Let’s consider some of their questions. The first assumption we’ll 
consider is the implicit ­assumption that decisions can be made costlessly.
The Cost of Decision Making
The principle of rational choice makes reasonably good intuitive sense when we limit 
our examples to two or three choices, as I did in this chapter. But in reality, we make 
hundreds of thousands of choices simultaneously. It simply doesn’t make intuitive 
sense that we’re going to apply rational choice to all those choices at once. That would 
exceed our decision-making abilities. This cost of decision making means that it is 
only rational to be somewhat irrational—to do things without applying the principle of 
rational choice. Thinking about decisions is one of the things we all economize on.
	
How real-world people make decisions in real-world situations is an open question 
that modern economists are spending a lot of time researching. Following the work of 
Nobel Prize–winner Herbert Simon, a number of economists have come to believe that, 
The principle of rational choice  
states that, to maximize utility, choose 
goods until the opportunity costs of all 
alternatives are equal.
Q-8  If the opportunity cost of 
consuming good x is greater than  
the opportunity cost of consuming  
good y, which good has the higher 
marginal utility per dollar?

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
419
to make real-world decisions, most people use bounded rationality—rationality based 
on rules of thumb—rather than using the principle of rational choice. They argue that 
many of our decisions are made with our minds on automatic pilot. This view of ratio-
nality has significant implications for interpreting and predicting economic events. For 
example, one rule of thumb is “You get what you pay for,” which means that ­something 
with a high price is better than something with a low price. Put technically, we rely on price 
to convey information about quality. This reliance on price for information changes the 
inferences one can draw from the analysis, and can lead to upward-sloping demand curves.
	
A second rule of thumb that people 
sometimes use is “Follow the leader.” If 
you don’t know what to do, do what you 
think smart people are doing. Consider the 
clothes you’re wearing. I suspect many of 
your choices of what to wear reflect this 
and the previous rule of thumb. Suppliers 
of clothing certainly think so and spend 
enormous amounts of money to exploit 
these rules of thumb. They try to steer your 
automatic pilot toward their goods. The 
suppliers emphasize these two rules (“You 
get what you pay for” and “Follow the 
leader”) to convince people their product is 
the “in” thing to buy. If they succeed, 
they’ve got a gold mine; if they fail, they’ve 
got a flop. Advertising is designed to mine 
these rules of thumb.
	
In technical terms, the “Follow the 
leader” rule leads to focal point equilibria, in 
which a set of goods is consumed, not 
because the goods are objectively ­preferred 
to all other goods, but simply because, 
through luck, or advertising, they have 
become focal points to which people have 
gravitated. Once some ­people started con-
suming a good, others followed.
Given Tastes
A second assumption that behavioral econo-
mists are questioning is that our preferences 
are given and are not shaped by society. In 
reality, our preferences are determined not 
only by nature but also by our experiences—
by nurture. Let’s ­consider an example: Until 
it was recently banned, numerous major 
league baseball players chewed tobacco, but 
close to zero percent of college professors 
chewed ­tobacco. Why? Were major league 
­baseball players somehow born with a 
tobacco-chewing gene while college profes-
sors were not? I doubt it. Tastes often are 
significantly influenced by society.
Q-9  True or false? Bounded 
rationality violates the principle of 
rational choice.
Advertising is designed to mine  
rules of thumb.
Thinking Like a Modern Economist
Mental Accounting
If some of the analysis in this chapter doesn’t sit well with you, 
you’re not alone. It assumes that people make decisions on the 
margin and are able to make mental calculations easily. Behavioral 
economists, over the past 10 years, have been exploring exactly 
how people make decisions. The chapter considers a few of those 
explorations. Here’s another.
Consider the following scenario. You buy a $100 ticket to a 
­concert and lose it on the way. If you had another $100, would you 
buy a replacement ticket and 
still go to the concert? Most 
people answer “no.” But con-
sider this second scenario. 
You’re on your way to buy a 
$100 concert ticket and you 
lose $100 in cash on the way. 
You still have enough cash to 
buy the ticket. Do you? Most 
people answer “yes.”
Why the difference even 
though the financial situation 
is equivalent in both situa-
tions? Behavioral economists 
suggest that people make 
choices within particular men-
tal categories, instead of over 
all categories. In the first sce-
nario, the ticket was in the 
“concert” category. Adding 
another $100 places too much 
in that mental category. So 
people decline doing so. In 
the second scenario, the $100 
cash wasn’t in the “concert” 
category, so spending another 
spare $100 doesn’t add to 
that “concert” category. 
© Royalty-Free/Corbis RF and © RubberBall/
SuperStock

420	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
Conspicuous Consumption 
Another aspect of taste that has been described by 
economists is conspicuous consumption—the consumption of goods not for one’s 
direct pleasure, but simply to show off to others. The term was created approximately 
100 years ago by the famous institutional economist Thorstein Veblen. Veblen argued 
that, just as some animals strut around to show their abilities, humans consume to 
show that they can “afford it.” For Veblen, mansions, designer clothing, and $300 ap-
petizers were all examples of conspicuous consumption. He further argued that male 
industrialists (which were all industrialists at the time) were so busy with business that 
they didn’t have time to show off enough, so they married a trophy spouse whose pur-
pose was to spend their money in a way that showed off their wealth.
Tastes and Individual Choice 
One way in which economists integrate the 
above insights into economics is by emphasizing that the analysis is conducted on the 
assumption of “given tastes.” As discussed above, in reality, economists agree that 
often forces besides price and marginal utility play a role in determining what people 
demand. They fully recognize that a whole other analysis is necessary to supplement 
theirs—an analysis of what determines taste.
	
Ask yourself what you ate today. Was it health food? Pizza? Candy? Whatever it 
was, it was probably not the most efficient way to satisfy your nutritional needs. The 
most efficient way to do that would be to eat only soybean mush and vitamin supple-
ments at a cost of about $300 per year. That’s less than one-tenth of what the average 
individual today spends on food per year. Most of us turn up our noses at soybean 
mush. Why? Because tastes are important.
	
I emphasize this point because some economists have been guilty of forgetting 
their simplifying assumption. Some economists in the 1800s thought that society’s 
economic needs eventually would be fully met and that we would enter a golden age of 
affluence where all our material wants would be satisfied. They thought there would 
be surpluses of everything. Clearly that hasn’t happened. Somehow it seems that 
whenever a need is met, it’s replaced by a want, which soon becomes another need.
	
There are, of course, examples of wants being temporarily satisfied, as a U.S. com-
pany on a small island in the Caribbean is reported to have discovered. Employees weren’t 
showing up for work. The company sent in a team of efficiency experts who discovered 
the cause of their problem: The firm had recently raised wages, and workers had decided 
they could get all they wanted (warm weather, a gorgeous beach, plenty of food, and a 
little bit of spending money) by showing up for work once, maybe twice, a week. Such a 
situation was clearly not good for business, but the firm found a solution. It sent in thou-
sands of Sears catalogs (back when Sears sent catalogs), and suddenly the workers were 
no longer satisfied with what they already had. They wanted more and went back to work 
to get it. When they were presented with new possibilities, their wants increased. Compa-
nies know that tastes aren’t constant, and they spend significant amounts of money on 
advertising to make consumers have a taste for their goods. It works, too.
	
Tastes are also important in explaining differences in consumption among countries. 
For example, a Japanese person wouldn’t consider having a meal without rice. Rice has 
a ceremonial, almost mystical value in Japan. In many parts of the United States, supper 
means meat and potatoes. In Germany, carp (a large goldfish) is a ­delicacy; in the United 
States, many people consider carp inedible. In the United States, corn is a desirable veg-
etable; in parts of Europe, until recently, it was ­considered pig food.
	
To say we don’t analyze tastes in the core of economic theory doesn’t mean that we 
don’t take them into account. Think back to Chapter 4, when we distinguished shifts in 
demand (the entire demand schedule shifts) from movements along the demand curve. 
Those movements along the demand curve were the effect of price. Tastes were one of 
the shift factors of demand. So economists do include tastes in their analysis; a change 
in tastes makes the demand curve shift.
Somehow, whenever a need is met,  
it’s replaced by a want, which soon 
becomes another need.
Q-10  Using the principle of rational 
choice, explain why a change in tastes 
will shift the demand curve.
Economists take into account changes 
in tastes as shift factors of demand.

421
Utility Maximization
A third assumption that behavioral economists question is that individuals maximize a util-
ity function that involves getting more for themselves. In experiments, behavioral econo-
mists have found that many people don’t behave that way—at least in laboratory experiments.
	
Let’s consider one example: the ultimatum game. Say that two people are given 
the opportunity to split $10. One person is allowed to make the decision as to how to 
divide it. He can keep whatever portion he wants, say $9.90, and give 10 cents to the 
other, or he could give a 50–50 split. But in the ultimatum game, the first person only 
gets the money if the other person accepts the offer. If the second person does not 
­accept, they both get nothing.
	
From a purely selfish rationality standpoint, the first individual would keep most of 
the money, giving only a small amount to the other. Moreover, since the other person 
comes out better if he accepts even the small amount, he should accept any offer (even one 
cent) because it makes him better off in terms of his income. So the prediction from the 
standard economic model is that the first person will keep most of the $10 and the second 
person will accept whatever amount is offered. But when people play this game, this is not 
what happens. Instead, generally the first person offers something close to 50–50, which 
is almost always accepted. However, in instances where the first person offers only a small 
amount, the offer is generally rejected. It seems that people have a sense of fairness in 
their decisions, and are willing to pay money (reduce their income) to enforce that sense 
of fairness.
Behavioral economics is the study of 
economic choice that is based on 
realistic psychological foundations.
Three assumptions of the theory  
of rational choice are:
1.	 Decisions are costless.
2.	 Tastes are given.
3.	 Individuals maximize utility.
ADDED DIMENSION
	
In the real world, parents and teachers spend enormous 
effort to teach children what is rational, reasonable, and 
­“appropriate.” Children’s decision-making process reflects 
that teaching. But parents and teachers 
teach more than a decision-making pro-
cess; they also teach children a moral 
code that often includes the value of honor 
and the value of selflessness. These teach-
ings shape their children’s decision-­
making process (although not always in 
the way that parents or teachers think or 
hope) and modify their preferences. So our 
decision-making process and our prefer-
ences are, to some degree, taught to us.
Recognizing that preferences and 
­decision-making processes are, to some 
degree, taught, not inherent, eliminates 
the fixed point by which to judge peo-
ple’s decisions: Are they making deci-
sions that reflect their true needs, or are they simply 
reflecting what they have been taught? Eliminating that 
fixed point makes it difficult to draw unambiguous policy 
implications from economists’ model of rational choice.
Making Stupid Decisions
It is hard to make good decisions. You need lots of 
­training—in math, in economics, in logic. Think of kids—
do five-year-olds make rational decisions? Some dyed-
in-the-wool utilitarians might argue that 
whatever decision one makes must, by 
definition, be rational, but such usage 
makes the concept tautological—true 
by definition.
	
When applying the theory of rational 
choice, most economists agree that 
some decisions people make can be ir-
rational. For example, they will concede 
that five-year-olds make a lot of what 
most parents would call stupid (or irratio-
nal) decisions. By a stupid decision, they 
mean a decision with expected conse-
quences that, if the child had logically 
thought about them, would have caused 
the child not to make that particular deci-
sion. But five-year-olds often haven’t learned how to think 
logically about expected consequences, so even tradi-
tional economists don’t assume decisions made by five-
year-olds reflect the rational choice model.
DILBERT © Scott Adams. Used By permission 
of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.

422	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
	
In other experiments, behavioral economists have found a strong status quo 
bias—an individual’s actions are very much influenced by the current situation, even 
when that reasonably does not seem to be very important to the decision. An example 
of this in the real world occurred when Sweden privatized its social security system. 
When privatizing retirement, Sweden offered its citizens 456 funds from which to 
choose to invest. Even though the Swedish government encouraged participants to 
actively choose their own portfolio, it also offered one of the funds as a default. Even 
with over 450 other funds from which to choose, 33 percent chose the default fund, a 
far higher percentage than would be expected if the fund had not been identified as 
the default. 
	
Given that reality, arguing that people are rationally choosing among all alterna-
tives is difficult. As we will discuss in Chapter 22, some behavioral economists have 
suggested that policy makers can take advantage of this status quo bias when they 
design policy by structuring programs so that choices are framed in ways that lead 
people to do what policy makers want them to do. Since individuals are freely choos-
ing, they argue that such policy design does not violate consumer sovereignty.
	
There are many more such experiments and behavioral economic insights that are 
changing the face of modern economics. But these insights should be seen as comple-
ments to, rather than substitutes for, standard economic reasoning.
Conclusion
This chapter began with a discussion of the simplifying nature of the economists’ 
analysis of rational choice. Now that you’ve been through it, you may be wondering if 
it’s all that simple. In any case, I’m sure most of you would agree that it’s complicated 
enough. When we’re talking about formal analysis, I’m in total agreement.
	
But if you’re talking about informal analysis and applying the analysis to the real 
world, most economists also would agree that this theory of choice is in no way 
­acceptable. Economists believe that there’s more to life than maximizing utility. We 
believe in love, anger, and doing crazy things just for the sake of doing crazy things. 
We’re real people.
	
But, we argue, simplicity has its virtue, and often people hide their selfish motiva-
tions. Few people like to go around and say, “I did this because I’m a self-interested, 
calculating person who cares primarily about myself.” Instead they usually emphasize 
other motives: “Society conditioned me to do it”; “I’m doing this to achieve fairness”; 
“It’s my upbringing.” And they’re probably partially right, but often they hide and 
obscure their self-interested motives in their psychological explanations. The beauty of 
the simple traditional economic psychological assumption is that it cuts through many 
obfuscations (that’s an obfuscating word meaning “smokescreens”) and, in doing so, 
often captures a part of reality that others miss. Let’s consider a couple of examples.
	
Why does government restrict who’s allowed to practice law? The typical layper-
son’s answer is “to protect the public.” The traditional economic answer is that many 
of the restrictions do little to protect the public. Instead their primary function is to 
restrict the number of lawyers and thereby increase the marginal utility of existing 
lawyers and the price they can charge.
	
Why do museum directors almost always want to increase the size of their collec-
tions? The layperson’s (and museum directors’) answer is that they’re out to preserve 
our artistic heritage. The traditional economic answer is that it often has more to do 
with maximizing the utility of the museum staff. (Economist William Grampp made 
this argument in a book about the economics of art. He supported his argument by 
pointing out that more than half of museums’ art is in storage and not accessible to the 
public. Acquiring more art will simply lead to more art going into storage.)
Economists use their simple self- 
interest theory of choice because it  
cuts through many obfuscations and,  
in doing so, often captures a part of 
reality that others miss.

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
423
	
Now in no way am I claiming that the traditional economic answer based on pure 
self-interest is always the correct one. But I am arguing that approaching problems by 
asking the question “What’s in it for the people making the decisions?” is a useful 
­approach that will give you more insight into what’s going on than many other 
­approaches. It gets people to ask tough, rather than easy, questions. After you’ve asked 
the tough questions, then you can see how to modify the conclusions by looking deeply 
into the real-world institutions.
	
All too often, students think of economics and economic reasoning as establish-
ment reasoning. That’s not true. Economic reasoning can be extremely subversive to 
existing establishments. But whatever it is, it is not subversive in order to be subver-
sive, or proestablishment to be proestablishment. It’s simply a logical application of a 
simple idea—individual choice theory—to a variety of problems.
Approaching problems by asking  
the question “What’s in it for the people 
making the decision?” is a useful 
approach that will give you more insight 
than many other approaches.
• Total utility is the satisfaction obtained from consum-
ing a product; marginal utility is the satisfaction 
­obtained from consuming one additional unit of a 
product.  (LO19-1)
• The principle of diminishing marginal utility states 
that after some point, the marginal utility of consum-
ing more of the good will fall.  (LO19-1)
• The principle of rational choice is:
	
If MUx
Px
>
MUy
Py
, choose to consume more of good x.
	
If MUx
Px
<
MUy
Py
, choose to consume more of good y. 
	
(LO19-1)
• The utility-maximizing rule says:
	
If MUx
Px
=
MUy
Py
, you’re maximizing utility; you’re 
	
indifferent between good x and good y.  (LO19-2)
• Unless MUx/Px = MUy/Py, an individual can ­rearrange his 
or her consumption to increase total utility.  (LO19-2)
• The law of demand can be derived from the principle 
of rational choice.  (LO19-3)
• If you’re in equilibrium and the price of a good rises, 
you’ll reduce your consumption of that good to 
­reestablish equilibrium.  (LO19-3)
• The law of demand is based on the income effect 
and the substitution effect. The income effect is the 
Summary
reduction in quantity demanded when price rises 
because the price rise makes one poorer. The 
­substitution effect is the reduction in quantity 
­demanded when price rises because you substitute 
a good whose price has not risen.  (LO19-3)
• The law of supply can be derived from the principle 
of rational choice.  (LO19-3)
• If your wage rises, the marginal utility of the goods you 
can buy with that wage will rise and you will work more 
to satisfy the utility-maximizing rule.  (LO19-3)
• Opportunity cost is essentially the marginal utility per 
dollar one forgoes from the consumption of the next-
best alternative.  (LO19-3)
• To apply economists’ analysis of choice to the real 
world, we must carefully consider, and adjust for, the 
underlying assumptions, such as costlessness of 
­decision making and given tastes.  (LO19-4)
• The theory of choice assumes decision making is 
costless, tastes are given, and individuals maximize 
utility.  (LO19-4)
• Behavioral economics is the study of economic 
choice that is based on realistic psychological 
­foundations.  (LO19-4)
• The ultimatum game suggests that people care 
about fairness as well as total income. The status 
quo bias suggests that actions are based on 
­perceived norms.  (LO19-4)

424	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
Key Terms
conspicuous consumption
income effect
marginal utility
principle of diminishing 
marginal utility
principle of rational choice
status quo bias
substitution effect
total utility
ultimatum game
utility
utility-maximizing rule
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Explain how marginal utility differs from total  
utility.  (LO19-1)
	 2.	 According to the principle of diminishing marginal 
­utility, how does marginal utility change as more  
of a good is consumed? As less of a good is  
consumed?  (LO19-1)
	 3.	 Complete the following table of Scout’s utility from drinking 
cans of soda and answer the questions below.  (LO19-1)
Cans of Soda	
Total Utility	
Marginal Utility
	
0	
—	
10
	
1	
—	
12
	
2	
22	
—
	
3	
32	
8
	
4	
—	
4
	
5	
—	
—
	
6	
44	
—
	
7	
42
	a.	 At what point does marginal utility begin to fall?
	b.	 Will Scout consume the seventh can of soda? Explain 
your answer.
	c.	 True or false? Scout will be following the utility-
maximizing rule by consuming two cans of soda. 
­Explain your answer.
	 4.	 What key psychological assumptions do economists make 
in their theory of individual choice?  (LO19-1)
	 5.	 The following table gives the price and total utility of 
three goods: A, B, and C.
	
Total Utility
Good   	 Price	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
	 A	
$10	
200	 380	 530	 630	 680	 700	 630	 430
	 B	
  2	
  20	   34	   46	   56	   64	   72	   78	   82
	 C	
  6	
  50	   60	   70	   80	   90	 100	   90	   80
	
	 As closely as possible, determine how much of the three 
goods you would buy with $20. Explain why you chose 
what you did.  (LO19-2)
	 6.	 The following table gives the marginal utility of John’s 
consumption of three goods: A, B, and C.  (LO19-2)
Units of Consumption	
MU of A	
MU of B	
MU of C
	
1	
20	
25	
45
	
2	
18	
20	
30
	
3	
16	
15	
24
	
4	
14	
10	
18
	
5	
12	
  8	
15
	
6	
10	
  6	
12
	a.	 Good A costs $2 per unit, good B costs $1, and 
good C costs $3. How many units of each should  
a consumer with $12 buy to maximize his or her 
utility?
	b.	 How will the answer change if the price of B rises 
to $2?
	c.	 How about if the price of C is 50 cents but the other 
prices are as in a? 
	 7.	 The total utility of your consumption of widgets is 40; it 
changes by 2 with each change in widgets consumed. 
The total utility of your consumption of wadgets is also 
40 but changes by 3 with each change in wadgets con-
sumed. The price of widgets is $2 and the price of 
wadgets is $3. How many widgets and wadgets should 
you consume?  (LO19-2)
	 8.	 Early Classical economists found the following ­“diamond/
water” paradox perplexing: “Why is water, which is so 
useful and necessary, so cheap, when ­diamonds, which 
are so useless and unnecessary, so ­expensive?” ­Using the 
utility concept, explain why it is not really a paradox. 
(Difficult)  (LO19-2)
	 9.	 State the law of demand and explain how it relates to the 
principle of rational choice.  (LO19-3)

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
425
	10.	 Suppose a large cheese pizza costs $10 and a calzone 
costs $5. You have $40 to spend. The marginal utility 
(MU) that you derive from each is as ­follows:  (LO19-3) 
Number	
MU of Pizza	
MU of Calzone
	
0	
60	
30
	
1	
40	
28
	
2	
30	
24
	
3	
20	
20
	
4	
10	
10
	
5	
	a.	 How many of each would you buy?
	b.	 Suppose the price of a calzone rises to $10. How many 
of each would you buy?
	c.	 Use this to show how the principle of rational choice 
leads to the law of demand.
	11.	 Your study partner tells you that if you are compensated 
for the impact on your budget of a rise in the price of a 
good, your purchase choices won’t change. Is he right? 
Explain.  (LO19-3)
	12.	 State the law of supply and explain how it relates to op-
portunity cost.  (LO19-3)
	13.	 If the supply curve is perfectly inelastic, what is the op-
portunity cost of the supplier?  (LO19-3)
	14.	 There is a small but growing movement known as “volun-
tary simplicity,” which is founded on the belief in a sim-
ple life of working less and spending less. Do Americans 
who belong to this movement follow the principle of ra-
tional choice?  (LO19-3)
	15.	 According to Thorstein Veblen, what is the purpose of 
conspicuous consumption? Does the utility derived from 
the consumption of these goods come from their price or 
functionality? Give an example of such a good.  (LO19-4)
	16.	 Say that the ultimatum game described in the chapter was 
changed so that the first individual could keep the money 
regardless of whether the offer was accepted by the sec-
ond individual or not.  (LO19-4)
	a.	 What would you expect would likely happen to the 
­offers?
	b.	 What would happen to the acceptances?
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 The book seems to suggest that all decisions are economic 
decisions.
	a.	 Would you agree?
	b.	 How would tithing fit into the decision-making calcu-
lus? (Religious)
	 2.	 In his book Why Perestroika Failed: The Politics and Eco-
nomics of Socialist Transformation, Austrian economist 
­Peter Boettke argues that Soviet-style socialist countries 
had to fail because they could not appropriately reflect indi-
viduals’ choices. What was his likely argument? (Austrian)
	 3.	 This textbook discusses the issue of decision making in 
reference to the individual, but generally households, not 
individuals, make decisions.
	a.	 How do you think decisions are actually made about 
issues such as consumption and allocation of time 
within the household?
	b.	 Does bargaining take place?
	c.	 If so, what gives an individual power to bargain effec-
tively for his or her preferences?
	d.	 Do individuals act cooperatively within the family and 
competitively everywhere else? (Feminist)
	 4.	 Often, people buy a good to impress others and not 
­because they want it.
	a.	 What implications would such actions have for the 
­application of economic analysis?
	b.	 How many goods are bought because people want 
them and how many goods are bought because of 
­advertising and conspicuous consumption?  
(Post-Keynesian)
	 5.	 Most people believe that marginal utility diminishes with 
each additional dollar of income (or one more dollar is 
worth more to a poor person than a rich one).
	a.	 If that is true, how would you design an income tax 
that imposes an equal burden in lost utility on rich and 
poor households?
	b.	 How would your answer differ if the marginal utility 
of income did not diminish?
	c.	 How would your answer differ if your goal was to 
leave households with equal levels of utility from their 
last dollar of income? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 How would the world be different than it is if the 
­principle of diminishing marginal utility seldom held 
true? 
	 2.	 True or false? It is sometimes said that an economist is a 
person who knows the price of everything but the value of 
nothing. Why? 

426	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
	 3.	 Assign a measure of utility to your studying for various 
courses. Do your study habits follow the principle of ra-
tional choice?
	 4.	 Explain your motivation for four personal decisions you 
have made in the past year, using economists’ model of 
individual choice.
	 5.	 Nobel Prize–winning economist George Stigler explains 
how the famous British economist Phillip Wicksteed de-
cided where to live. His two loves were fresh farm eggs, 
which were more easily obtained the farther from London 
he was, and visits from friends, which decreased the far-
ther he moved away from London. Given these two loves, 
describe the decision rule that you would have expected 
Wicksteed to follow. 
	 6.	 Although the share of Americans who say they are “very 
happy” hasn’t changed much in the last five decades, the 
number of products produced and consumed per person 
has risen tremendously. How can this be? 
	 7.	 Give an example of a recent purchase for which you used a 
rule of thumb in your decision-making process. Did your 
decision follow the principle of rational choice? Explain.
	 8.	 Economic experiments have found that individuals prefer 
an outcome where no one is made better off to an out-
come where the welfare of only some is improved if that 
improvement in welfare is unequally distributed. Why do 
you think this is so?
	 9.	 You are buying your spouse, significant other, or close 
friend a ring. You decide to show your reasonableness and 
buy a cubic zirconium ring that sells at 1⁄50 the cost of a 
mined diamond and that any normal person could not tell 
from a mined diamond just by looking at it. In fact, the 
zirconium will have more brilliance and fewer occlusions 
(imperfections) than a mined diamond.
	a.	 How will your spouse (significant other, close friend) 
likely react?
	b.	 Why?
	c.	 Is this reaction justified?
	10.	 Joseph Gallo, the founder of the famous wine company 
that bears his name, said that when he first started selling 
wine right after Prohibition (laws outlawing the sale of al-
cohol), he poured two glasses of wine from the same bot-
tle and put a price of 10 cents a bottle on one and 5 cents 
a bottle on the other. He let people test both and asked 
them which they wanted. Most wanted the 10-cent bottle, 
even though they were the same wine. 
	a.	 What does this tell us about people?
	b.	 Can you think of other areas where that may be the case?
	c.	 What does this suggest about pricing?
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 If the total utility curve is a straight line, the marginal utility 
curve will be flat with a slope of zero since marginal utility 
would not change with additional units.  (LO19-1)
	 2.	 False. The principle of diminishing marginal utility is that 
as one increases consumption of a good, the good’s mar-
ginal utility decreases.  (LO19-1)
	 3.	 Given a choice between the two, the rational choice is to 
watch CNN for one hour since it provides the higher mar-
ginal utility per hour.  (LO19-1)
	 4.	 False. You are maximizing total utility when the marginal 
utilities per dollar are the same for all goods. This does not 
have to be where marginal utility is zero.  (LO19-2)
	 5.	 If I am initially in equilibrium, then MUxPx = MUyPy = 
MUzPz for all goods I consume. If the price of one good 
goes up, I will decrease my consumption of that good and 
increase the consumption of other goods until the 
­equilibrium is met again where MUxPx = MUyPy = 
MUzPz.  (LO19-3)
	 6.	 The two effects are the income effect and the substitution 
effect.  (LO19-3)
	 7.	 If offered one more dollar per hour, I would choose to 
­substitute labor for leisure since the price of leisure (pay 
per hour of work) has increased. Following the principle of 
­rational choice, I would work more to lower the marginal 
utility of work so that MUwPw = MUlPl.  (LO19-3)
	 8.	 Good y has the higher marginal utility per dollar since the 
opportunity cost of consuming good x is the marginal util-
ity per dollar of consuming good y.  (LO19-3)
	 9.	 This could be true or false. It depends on how you inter-
pret bounded rationality. If it is interpreted within a cost-
less decision-making environment, it does violate the 
principle of rational choice since there is no reason to be 
less than rational. If, however, it is interpreted within a 
costly decision-making environment, then you can be 
making decisions within a range if the marginal cost of in-
creasing the range of choices exceeds the marginal benefit 
of doing so. In that case bounded rationality is consistent 
with the principle of rational choice. Information is not 
costless.  (LO19-4)
	10.	 If a person is in equilibrium and a change in tastes leads 
to an increase in the marginal utility for one good, he will 
increase consumption of that good to reestablish equilib-
rium. A change in tastes will shift a demand curve be-
cause it will cause a change in quantity consumed without 
a change in the good’s price.  (LO19-4)

427
on cans of soda. Since a chocolate bar costs $1, if she 
spends it all on chocolate bars, she can get 10 bars (point 
A in Figure A19-1). If she spends it all on cans of soda, 
she can get 20 cans of soda (point B). This gives us two 
points.
	
But what if she wants some combination of soda and 
chocolate bars? If we draw a line between points A and 
B, we’ll have a graphical picture of her budget constraint 
and can answer that question because a budget con-
straint is a curve that shows us the various combina-
tions of goods an individual can buy with a given 
amount of money. The line is her budget constraint in 
Graphish.
	
To see that it is, say Sophie is spending all her money 
on chocolate bars. She then decides to buy one fewer 
chocolate bar. That gives her $1 to spend on soda, which, 
since those cans cost 50 cents each, allows her to buy 2 
cans. Point C (9 chocolate bars and 2 cans of soda) repre-
sents that decision. Notice how point C is on the budget 
constraint. Repeat this exercise from various starting 
points until you’re comfortable with the fact that the line 
does indeed represent the various combinations of soda 
and chocolate bars Sophie can buy with the $10. It’s a 
line with a slope of −½ and intersects the chocolate-bars 
axis at 10 and the cans-of-soda axis at 20.
	
To be sure that you’ve got it, ask yourself what would 
happen to the budget constraint if Sophie got another $4 
to spend on the two goods. Going through the same rea-
soning should lead you to the conclusion that the budget 
constraint will shift to the right so that it will intersect the 
cans-of-soda axis at 28 (point D), but its slope won’t change. 
(I started the new line for you.) Make sure you can 
­explain why.
	
Now what if the price of a can of soda goes up to $1? 
What happens to the budget line? (This is a question 
many people miss.) If you said the budget line becomes 
steeper, shifting in along the cans-of-soda axis to point E 
while remaining anchored along the chocolate-bars axis 
until the slope equals −1, you’ve got it. If you didn’t say 
that, go through the same reasoning we went through at 
first (if Sophie buys only cans of soda . . .) and then draw 
the new line. You’ll see it becomes steeper. Put another 
way, the absolute value of the slope of the curve is the 
ratio of the price of cans of soda to the price of chocolate 
bars; the absolute value of the slope becomes greater with 
a rise in the price of cans of soda.
As I stated in the chapter, analyzing individual choice us-
ing actual numbers is unnecessary. In the chapter, I asked 
you to make a deal with me: You’d remember that actual 
numbers are unnecessary and I’d use them anyway. This 
appendix is for those who didn’t accept my deal (and for 
those whose professors want them to get some practice in 
Graphish). It presents an example of a more formal analy-
sis of individual choice.
Sophie’s Choice
Sophie is a junk food devotee. She lives on two goods: 
chocolate bars, which cost $1 each, and cans of soda, 
which sell for 50 cents apiece. Sophie is trying to get as 
much pleasure as possible, given her resources. Alterna-
tively expressed, Sophie is trying to maximize her utility, 
given a budget constraint.
	
By translating this statement of Sophie’s choice into 
graphs, I can demonstrate the principle of rational choice 
without ever mentioning any specific amount of utility.
	
The graph we’ll use will have chocolate bars on the 
vertical axis and cans of soda on the horizontal axis, as in 
Figure A19-1.
Graphing the Budget Constraint
Let’s begin by asking: How can we translate her budget 
constraint (the $10 maximum she has to spend) into Gra-
phish? The easiest way to do that is to ask what would 
happen if she spends her $10 all on chocolate bars or all 
Indifference Curve Analysis
APPENDIX
Psoda
Pchocolate
Slope = –                = –
Chocolate bars
0
1
23
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2 4 
6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
Cans of soda
Budget
 constraint
E
B
D
A
C
1
2
FIGURE A19-1  Graphing the Budget Constraint

428	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
Graphing the Indifference Curve
Now let’s consider the second part of Sophie’s choice: the 
pleasure part. Sophie is trying to get as much pleasure as 
she can from her $10. How do we deal with this in 
­Graphish?
	
To see, let’s go through a thought experiment. Say 
­Sophie had 14 chocolate bars and 4 cans of soda (point A 
in Figure A19-2). Let’s ask her, “Say you didn’t know the 
price of either good and we took away 4 of those choco-
late bars (so you had 10). How many cans of soda would 
we have to give you so that you would be just as happy as 
before we took away the 4 chocolate bars?”
	
Since she’s got lots of chocolate bars and few cans of 
soda, her answer is probably, “Not too many; say, 1 can of 
soda.” This means that she would be just as happy to have 
10 chocolate bars and 5 cans of soda (point B) as she 
would to have 14 chocolate bars and 4 cans of soda (point 
A). Connect those points and you have the beginning of a 
“just-as-happy” curve. But that doesn’t sound impressive 
enough, so, following economists’ terminology, we’ll call 
it an indifference curve—a curve that shows combina-
tions of goods among which an individual is indifferent. 
She’s indifferent between points A and B.
	
If you continue our thought experiment, you’ll get a 
set of combinations of chocolate bars and cans of soda 
like that shown in the table in Figure A19-2.
	
If you plot each of these combinations of points on the 
graph in Figure A19-2 and connect all these points, you 
have one of Sophie’s indifference curves: a curve repre-
senting combinations of cans of soda and chocolate bars 
among which Sophie is indifferent.
	
Let’s consider the shape of this curve. First, it’s 
­downward-sloping. That’s reasonable; it simply says that 
if you take something away from Sophie, you’ve got to 
give her something in return if you want to keep her indif-
ferent between what she had before and what she has 
now. The absolute value of the slope of an indifference 
curve is the marginal rate of substitution—the rate at 
which one good must be added when the other is taken 
away in order to keep the individual indifferent between 
the two combinations.
	
Second, it’s bowed inward. That’s because as Sophie 
gets more and more of one good, it takes fewer and fewer 
of another good to compensate for the loss of the good 
she incurred in order to get more of the other good. The 
underlying reasoning is similar to that in our discussion 
of the law of diminishing marginal utility, but notice we 
haven’t even mentioned utility. Technically the reasoning 
for the indifference curve being bowed inward is called 
the law of diminishing marginal rate of substitution—
which tells us that as you get more and more of a good, if 
some of that good is taken away, then the marginal addi-
tion of another good you need to keep you on your indif-
ference curve gets less and less.
	
Even more technically, we can say that the absolute 
value of the slope of the indifference curve equals the ra-
tio of the marginal utility of cans of soda to the marginal 
utility of chocolate bars:
| Slope| =
MUsoda
MUchocolate
= Marginal rate of substitution
That ratio equals the marginal rate of substitution of 
cans of soda for chocolate bars. Let’s consider an ex-
ample. Say that in Figure A19-2 Sophie is at point A 
and that the marginal utility she gets from an increase 
from 4 to 5 cans of soda is 10. Since we know that she 
was willing to give up 4 chocolate bars to get that 1 can 
of soda (and thereby move from point A to point B), 
that 10 must equal the loss of utility she gets from the 
loss of 4 chocolate bars out of the 14 she originally had. 
So the marginal rate of substitution of cans of soda for 
chocolate bars between points A and B must be 4. That’s 
the absolute value of the slope of that curve. Therefore, 
her MU of a chocolate bar must be about 2.5 (10 for 
4 chocolate bars).
Chocolate bars
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
MUsoda
MUchocolate
Slope =
= Marginal rate of
substitution of
soda for chocolate
Indiﬀerence curve
A
C
B
D
E
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 22
Cans of soda
FIGURE A19-2  Sophie’s Indifference Curve
Chocolate Bars	
Cans of Soda
	
14	
  4	
A
	
10	
  5	
B
	
  8	
  6	
C
	
  6	
  8	
D
	
  5	
12	
E

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
429
	
You can continue this same reasoning, starting with 
various combinations of goods. If you do so, you can get 
a whole group of indifference curves like that in Figure 
A19-3. Each curve represents a different level of happi-
ness. Assuming she prefers more to less, Sophie is better 
off if she’s on Curve II than if she’s on Curve I, and even 
better off if she’s on Curve III. Her goal in life is to get 
out to the furthest indifference curve she can.
	
To see whether you’ve followed the reasoning, ask 
yourself the following question: “Assuming Sophie pre-
fers more of a good to less (which seems reasonable), can 
any two of Sophie’s indifference curves cross each other 
as the ones in Figure A19-4 do?”
	
The answer is no, no, no! Why? Because they’re in-
difference curves. If the curves were to cross, the 
­“prefer-more-to-less” principle would be violated. Say we 
start at point A: Sophie has 8 chocolate bars and 6 cans of 
soda. We know that since A (8 chocolate bars and 6 so-
das) and B (6 chocolate bars and 8 cans of soda) are on 
the same indifference curve, Sophie is indifferent be-
tween A and B. Similarly with points B and C: Sophie 
would just as soon have 9 chocolate bars and 7 cans of 
soda as she would 6 chocolate bars and 8 cans of soda.
	
It follows by logical deduction that point A must be 
indifferent to C. But consider points A and C carefully. At 
point C, Sophie has 7 cans of soda and 9 chocolate bars. 
At point A she has 6 cans of soda and 8 chocolate bars. At 
point C she has more of both goods than she has at point 
A, so to say she’s indifferent between these two points 
violates the “prefer-more-to-less” criterion. Ergo (that’s 
Latin, meaning “therefore”), two indifference curves can-
not intersect. That’s why we drew the group of indiffer-
ence curves in Figure A19-3 so that they do not intersect.
Combining Indifference Curves 
and Budget Constraints
Now let’s put the budget constraint and the indifference 
curves together and ask how many chocolate bars and 
cans of soda Sophie will buy if she has $10, given the 
psychological makeup described by the indifference 
curves in Figure A19-3.
	
To answer that question, we must put the budget line of 
Figure A19-1 and the indifference curves of Figure A19-3 
together, as we do in Figure A19-5.
FIGURE A19-3  A Group of Indifference Curves
Chocolate bars
16
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2  4  6 
8  10 12 14 16 18 20 22
Cans of soda
III
II
I
FIGURE A19-4  Why Indifference Curves Cannot Cross
Chocolate bars
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Cans of soda
A
B
I
II
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18 20 22
C
FIGURE A19-5  Combining Indifference Curves  
and Budget Constraint
Chocolate bars
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Cans of soda
B
C
D
A
Slope = – MUsoda
MUchocolate
Slope =
– Psoda
Pchocolate
III
II
I

430	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
	
As we discussed, Sophie’s problem is to get to as high 
an indifference curve as possible, given her budget con-
straint. Let’s first ask if she should move to point A 
(8 chocolate bars and 10 cans of soda). That looks like a 
good point. But you should quickly recognize that she 
can’t get to point A; her budget line won’t let her. (She 
doesn’t have enough money.) Well then, how about point 
B (7 chocolate bars and 6 cans of soda)? She can afford 
that combination; it’s on her budget constraint. The prob-
lem with point B is the following: She’d rather be at point 
C since point C has more chocolate bars and the same 
amount of soda (8 chocolate bars and 6 cans of soda). 
But, you say, she can’t reach point C. Yes, that’s true, but 
she can reach point D. And, by the definition of indiffer-
ence curve, she’s indifferent between point C and point 
D, so point D (6 chocolate bars and 8 cans of soda), which 
she can reach given her budget constraint, is preferred to 
point B.
	
The same reasoning holds for all other points. The 
reason is that the combination of chocolate bars and cans 
of soda represented by point D is the best she can do. It is 
the point where the indifference curve and the budget line 
are tangent—the point at which the slope of the budget 
line (−Ps/Pc) equals the slope of the indifference curve 
(−MUs/MUc). Equating those slopes gives (−Ps/Pc) = 
(MUs/MUc), or
MUc/Pc = MUs/Ps
This equation, you may remember from the chapter, is the 
equilibrium condition of our principle of rational choice. 
So by our Graphish analysis we arrived at the same con-
clusion we arrived at in the chapter, only this time we did 
it without using actual numbers. This means that even 
without a utilometer, economists’ principle of rational 
choice is internally logical.
Deriving a Demand Curve  
from the Indifference Curve
Not only can we derive the principle of rational choice 
with indifference curve/budget line analysis, we also can 
derive a demand curve. To do so, ask yourself what a de-
mand curve is. It’s the quantity of a good that a person will 
buy at various prices. Since the budget line gives us the 
relative price of a good, and the point of tangency of the 
indifference curve gives us the quantity that a person 
would buy at that price, we can derive a demand curve 
from the indifference curves and budget lines. To derive a 
demand curve, we go through a set of thought experiments 
asking how many cans of soda Sophie would buy at vari-
ous prices. We’ll go through one of those experiments.
	
We start with the analysis we used before when 
­Sophie started with $10 and chose to buy 8 cans of soda 
when the price of a can of soda was 50 cents [point A in 
Figure A19-6(a)]. That analysis provides us with one 
point on the demand curve. I represent that by point A in 
Figure A19-6(b). At a price of 50 cents, Sophie buys 
8 cans of soda.
	
Now say the price of a can of soda rises to $1. That 
rotates the budget line in, from budget line 1 to budget 
line 2 as in Figure A19-6(a). She can’t buy as much as she 
could before. But we can determine how much she’ll 
buy by the same reasoning we used previously. She’ll 
choose a point at which her lower indifference curve is 
tangent to her new budget line. As you can see, she’ll 
choose point B, which means that she buys 6 cans of soda 
when the price of a can of soda is $1. Graphing that point 
(6 cans of soda at $1 each) on our price/quantity axis in 
Figure A19-6(b), we have another point on our demand 
curve, point B. Connect these two together and you can 
see we’re getting a downward-sloping demand curve, just 
as the law of demand said we would. To make sure you 
Chocolate bars
(a)
Price
(b)
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Cans of soda
$1.00
.75
.50
.25
0
Cans of soda
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Derived demand curve
for soda
A
B
2
1
B
A
FIGURE A19-6 (A AND B)  From Indifference Curves to Demand 
Curves

	
Chapter 19 ■ The Logic of Individual Choice: The Foundation of Supply and Demand	
431
understand, continue the analysis for a couple of addi-
tional price changes. You’ll see that the demand curve 
you derive will be downward-sloping.
	
There’s much more we can do with indifference curves. 
We can distinguish income effects and substitution effects. 
(Remember, when the price of a can of soda rose, Sophie 
was worse off. So to be as well off as before, as is required 
by the substitution effect, she’d have to be compensated for 
that rise in price by an offsetting fall in the price of choco-
late bars.) But let’s make a deal. You tentatively believe me 
when I say that all kinds of stuff can be done with indiffer-
ence curves and budget constraints, and I’ll leave the fur-
ther demonstration and the proofs for you to experience in 
the intermediate microeconomics courses.
Key Terms
budget constraint
indifference curve
law of diminishing marginal rate of 
substitution
marginal rate of substitution
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Zachary has $5 to spend on two goods: video games and 
hot dogs. Hot dogs cost $1 apiece while video games cost 
50 cents apiece.
	a.	 Draw a graph of Zachary’s budget constraint, placing 
video games on the y axis.
	b.	 Suppose the price of hot dogs falls to 50 cents apiece. 
Draw the new budget constraint.
	c.	 Suppose Zachary now has $8 to spend. Draw the new 
budget constraint using the prices from b.
	 2.	 Zachary’s indifference curves are shown in the following 
graph. Determine on which indifference curve Zachary 
will be, given the budget constraints and prices in a, b, 
and c from question 1.
Video games
1 2  3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Hot dogs
III
II
I
	a.	 Given a choice, which budget constraint would 
­Zachary prefer most? Least?
	b.	 What is the marginal rate of substitution of hot dogs 
for video games at each of the combinations chosen 
with budget constraints a, b, and c in question 1?
	 3.	 What would an indifference curve look like if the 
­marginal rate of substitution were zero? If it were 
­constant?
	 4.	 What might an indifference curve look like if the law of 
diminishing marginal utility did not hold?

chapter 20
1I am only reporting, not condoning, the portrayal in the movie. I fully agree that Nash’s 
EQ (emotional quotient) and sense of what is socially appropriate can be questioned. If you 
saw the movie, you probably agree, too.
2The reasoning attributed to Nash in the film can also be questioned. (Economists have 
pointed out that the movie gets the reasoning about the men’s best strategy mixed up.  
Chalk these inaccuracies up to artistic license; it made for a better scene, so the filmmakers 
didn’t care about its being wrong. Their reasoning was probably: Except for economists  
and mathematicians, no one will notice or care.)
All men can see the tactics whereby I conquer, 
but what none can see is the strategy out of 
which victory is evolved.
—Sun Tzu
“
”
Game Theory, Strategic 
Decision Making, and 
Behavioral Economics
In the movie A Beautiful Mind, John Nash and some friends walk into 
a bar with the idea of meeting some women. They see some women, one 
of whom is blonde, and discuss their strategy to meet them. Nash tells his 
friends that if each were to approach the problem on his own, they might 
all initially go for the blonde (whom they consider the most beautiful—
OK, so it’s a bit clichéish—movies generally are). Nash tells his friends:
If everyone competes for the blonde, we block each other and no one 
gets her. So then we all go for her friends. But they give us the cold 
shoulder, because no one likes to be second choice. Again, no winner. 
But what if none of us go for the blonde? We don’t get in each other’s 
way; we don’t insult the other girls. That is the only way we win. That’s 
the only way we all get a girl. (From A Beautiful Mind: The Shooting 
Script, Akiva Goldsman, © 2002.)1
In the movie this is Nash’s eureka moment: Each person, acting in his or her 
own best interest, will not necessarily arrive at the best of all possible outcomes. 
Adam Smith is wrong.
Game Theory and the Economic  
Way of Thinking
The general reasoning process that Nash is portrayed as using captures a central 
element of the modern economic way of thinking.2 That central element is stra-
tegic thinking. Whenever the decisions being analyzed involve ­interdependent 
After reading this chapter, 
you should be able to:
LO20-1	 Explain what game theory 
is and give an example of a 
game and a solution to a 
game.
LO20-2	 Discuss how strategic 
reasoning and backward 
induction are used in 
solving games.
LO20-3	 Distinguish informal game 
theory from formal game 
theory. 
LO20-4	 Describe how the results of 
game theory experiments 
challenge some standard 
economic assumptions. 
© Twentieth Century Fox/Photofest

	
Chapter 20 ■ Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and Behavioral Economics	
433
decisions, the decision makers’ strategy needs to be considered. Since all types of deci-
sions are interdependent, the study of such interdependent decision-making processes 
is central to modern economics. In fact, in recent years an entire theory of strategic 
thinking, called game theory—formal economic reasoning applied to situations in 
which decisions are interdependent—has developed.
	
Game theory is a broad-based approach to understanding human interaction, and is 
not solely a tool used by economists. All social scientists—political scientists, sociolo-
gists, and anthropologists as well as economists—are using game theory more and 
more as a tool of analysis. Thus, you can see political scientists discussing war strategy 
and sociologists discussing social relationships in game theoretic terms. In many ways, 
game theory is the underlying model of the social sciences.
	
More and more, game theory is becoming the basic tool of modern economics, in 
many cases replacing supply and demand as economists’ core model of choice. 
­Today, when graduate students study microeconomics, they spend more time learning 
game theory than they spend learning the intricacies of supply and demand models. 
Game theory has become so important because it is a highly flexible tool that can be 
applied to many situations without making the restrictive assumptions of the supply/
demand model.
Game Theory and Economic Modeling
Before we analyze some specific games, let’s step back and reflect on modern econo-
mists’ modeling method—their way of thinking—and consider where game theory fits 
within that method. Nobel Prize–winning economist Bob Solow has nicely summa-
rized economists’ way of thinking as follows: “You look at a problem; you create a 
simple model that captures its essence; you empirically test how well that model fits 
the data, and if it fits, you use that model as a guide to understanding the problem and 
devising a solution.” This method sometimes gets lost as introductory students learn 
how to apply the models that have already been developed, rather than learning how to 
develop their own models.
	
I suspect that oftentimes when you have learned a model, you sensed that it was a 
stretch to make the model fit real-world situations. Economists share that concern, and 
are continually tweaking the existing models and developing other models that help us 
understand real-world problems and issues. That’s why game theory developed; it 
offers a new set of models with which to approach economic issues. Game theory models 
can be better tailored to fit the actual problem, and thus are more flexible than the 
standard models. The cost of that flexibility is that individual game theory models are 
not as broad as the standard models. A different game theory model must be developed 
for each different situation and for each different set of assumptions. So rather than 
having a single model with a single equilibrium solution, in game theory there are 
many models that often have multiple equilibrium solutions. Hence, game theory is 
really a framework—a method—rather than a finished set of models to mechanisti-
cally use in understanding real-world events.
The Game Theory Framework
To introduce you to the game theory framework, let’s consider a variation of a story 
told by economists Avinash Dixit and Susan Skeath, in their excellent book on 
game theory, Games of Strategy. In it, four students, who all had A averages, had 
partied the night before the exam (yes, partying happens) and had slept through 
the exam. Since they were “A” students, and they felt the professor liked them, 
they decided to make up a sad sob story and convince her that they should be 
Game theory is formal economic 
reasoning applied to situations in  
which decisions are interdependent.
Q-1  True or false? Game theory is 
inconsistent with supply/demand 
analysis. Explain your answer.
Game theory models are more flexible 
than the standard economic models.

434	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
­allowed to take the exam late. So they went to the professor all apologetic, explaining 
how they had meant to come to the exam, but when they were returning from visiting 
a sick brother of one of them (who lived 100 miles away), they had had a flat tire. 
­Unfortunately, there was no spare, and it took them five hours to get the flat fixed, 
making them late for the exam. They knew it wasn’t the best story but they figured it 
was worth a try.
	
To their surprise the professor agreed with no problem to let them take the exam 
two days later. So they studied hard, figuring they were a shoo-in for A’s. The pro-
fessor put them each in separate rooms and gave them the exam. The first page, 
worth 10 points, was an easy question, which they all were sure they aced. The sec-
ond page, however, had just one question, but it was worth 90 points. The question 
was: “Which tire?”
	
This is an example of a screening question, which is meant to reveal strategic 
information about the person who answers. A screening question is a question 
structured in such a way as to reveal strategic information about the person who 
answers. If they had actually had a flat, the question would be easy to answer, and 
they would get their A’s. But if they didn’t have a flat (and didn’t coordinate their 
stories beforehand), it is highly unlikely that they would all pick the same answer, 
and the professor would know that they were lying. Of course, if they had been 
bright, or had studied game theory, they would have expected that the professor 
would use such a screening device and would have figured out which tire to say went 
flat before they went in. But of course, if the professor had taught them game theory, 
or knew they were even better-than-“A” students, she would have assumed that they 
would have coordinated their stories about which tire, and she would have worked 
out an even more elaborate testing strategy to get them to reveal the truth. Game 
theory studies such issues. Devising such strategies and understanding the strategic 
interaction of individuals when they take into account the expected reaction of ­others 
are the essence of game theory.
	
You have already seen some of the games that comprise game theory—for exam-
ple, the ultimatum game in the earlier chapter on individual choice. In the remainder 
of the chapter, we introduce you to some other games and game theory concepts. 
The goal of the chapter is not to make you game theorists, but to give you a sense of 
the way in which economists think and try to understand the many puzzles that are 
out there.
The Prisoner’s Dilemma
Let’s begin with the most famous of all games—the prisoner’s dilemma, a 
­well-known two-person game that demonstrates the difficulty of cooperative 
­behavior in certain circumstances. The standard prisoner’s dilemma can be seen in 
the following example: Two people suspected of committing a crime are brought 
into the police station and interrogated separately. They know that if neither of 
them confesses, the police have only enough evidence to charge each with a minor 
crime for which each will serve 6 months. The police know that too, but they also 
know that the criminals are guilty of a more serious felony. The police, however, 
have insufficient evidence to prosecute for the more serious crime. In order to 
make their case, the police offer each prisoner the following deal if he confesses to 
the more serious crime:
“If both you and the other prisoner confess, instead of being sentenced to the 
maximum 10 years in prison, the two of you will each serve only 5 years in jail. 
Further, if you confess but the other prisoner doesn’t confess, in exchange for 
your serving as a witness for the prosecution, we will drop the charges for the 
A screening question is a question 
structured in such a way as to reveal 
strategic information about the person 
who answers.

	
Chapter 20 ■ Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and Behavioral Economics	
435
lesser ­felony, and you will be set free. If, however, you don’t confess and the other 
suspect does, you will be sentenced to the maximum 10 years in prison. If neither 
confesses, both will be charged with the lesser felony and serve 6 months.”
The choice each suspect faces is: Do I confess or not confess? The outcome of each 
choice can be presented in what is called a payoff matrix—a table that shows 
the outcome of every choice by every player, given the possible choices of all other 
players—shown in Figure 20-1. The payoff matrix shows the three elements of any 
game: the players (in this case, two of them, A and B), their possible strategies (in 
this case, to confess or not confess), and the contingent payoffs (in this case, their 
sentences) for each possible outcome.
	
What strategy will each choose? The combined best option for them, if they could 
coordinate their actions, is most likely for neither to confess; each gets a short sentence 
of 6 months. But will they choose that option if they use strategic reasoning? To see 
whether they do, consider the possibilities each faces. Prisoner A’s choices are shown 
in the rows of Figure 20-1. The blue triangle shows Prisoner A’s punishment and the 
green triangle shows Prisoner B’s punishment for each possible outcome. Say that 
Prisoner A does not confess, putting us in the bottom row of the payoff matrix. He now 
uses the payoff matrix to consider what options Prisoner B faces. If Prisoner B also 
does not confess, they both get 6 months in jail (the bottom right corner of the matrix). 
But if Prisoner B confesses while Prisoner A has not confessed, then Prisoner B will 
go free. So Prisoner B’s best strategy, if Prisoner A does not confess, is to confess; 
instead of serving a 6-month sentence, he goes free.
	
Now say that Prisoner A confesses, putting us in the top row of the payoff matrix. 
In this case, if Prisoner B does not confess, Prisoner B gets 10 years, and if he con-
fesses, 5 years. Again, confessing is Prisoner B’s best strategy. Prisoner A concludes 
that regardless of what he does, Prisoner B’s best strategy is to confess, so Prisoner A 
has to assume that if Prisoner B is following his best options, Prisoner B will confess.
	
The same reasoning holds for Prisoner B, so each of their optimal strategies (the 
ones that maximize the expected benefits) is to confess, placing them in the upper left 
corner of the matrix. Since neither can count on the other not to confess, which would 
lead to the combined best outcome for them, the optimal strategy will be for each to 
confess because each must assume the other will do the same. Confessing is the ratio-
nal thing for each prisoner to do. That’s why it’s called the prisoner’s dilemma.
A payoff matrix is a table that shows  
the outcome of every choice by every 
player, given the possible choices of  
all other players.
Q-2  In the payoff matrix in 
Figure 20-1, what is B’s best strategy  
if A confesses?
Q-3  In the payoff matrix in  
Figure 20-1, what is B’s best strategy  
if A does not confess?
FIGURE 20-1   
Prisoner’s Dilemma
This payoff matrix 
illustrates the prisoner’s 
dilemma. If the prisoners 
could agree not to confess, 
each would get a light 
sentence. But each prisoner 
is offered the chance to go 
free if he confesses to the 
crime and agrees to serve 
as a witness against the 
other prisoner. With this 
incentive, both will likely 
confess and each will be 
sentenced to 5 years in jail.
Prisoner A:
10 years
Prisoner B:
Goes free
Prisoner A:
6 months
Prisoner B:
6 months
Prisoner A:
5 years
Prisoner B:
5 years
Prisoner A:
Goes free
Prisoner B:
10 years
A Does not confess
A Confesses
B Confesses
B Does not confess

436	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
	
Let’s consider the reasoning and assumptions of game theory that led us to the 
outcome. First, we assumed that the prison sentences capture all the relevant costs and 
benefits of their decisions. Second, we assumed that no cooperation was possible. The 
prisoner’s dilemma is an example of what is called a noncooperative game—a game 
in which each player is out for him- or herself and agreements are either not possible 
or not enforceable. If the prisoners could have trusted each other to choose the action 
that helps them both jointly, not only themselves, the optimal strategy is “not to con-
fess,” and they both get only a light sentence. Thus, if people’s utility functions are 
interdependent so that each cares about the other person and him- or herself equally, or 
if the two of them can enter into binding contracts to act that way before they are ques-
tioned, then they can escape the dilemma. The “Code of Silence” that is often attrib-
uted to the Mafia is an example of such a binding contract; they know that they must 
do what is in the best interest of the group, or they will be “taken out.”
	
Such binding contracts are seldom possible, which makes the dilemma real for 
many prisoners, and for many individuals and firms. What is possible is what econo-
mists call cheap talk—communication that occurs before the game is played that car-
ries no cost and is backed up only by trust, and not any enforceable agreement. If 
standard game theory assumptions hold, cheap talk does not influence the results, 
since the players cannot trust the other players to follow through on what they say. As 
producer Samuel Goldwyn said, and baseball star Yogi Berra is famous for repeating, 
“A verbal contract isn’t worth the paper it’s written on.” But economists have shown 
that cheap talk might not be so cheap. In many experiments, cheap talk does influence 
the outcome of a game, especially ones where players have significant difficulty figur-
ing out their optimal strategy. These empirical findings suggest that, to some degree, 
people do have interdependent utility functions, where each person cares about others 
as well as him- or herself.
Dominant Strategies and Nash Equilibrium
In analyzing the prisoner’s dilemma, notice that the analysis is based on the assump-
tion that the players figure out the other player’s best strategy and build into his or 
her decision the assumption that the other player will choose that best strategy, 
while taking into account the fact that the first player is doing the same analysis in 
reverse. In this prisoner’s dilemma case, each player has a single best strategy. A 
strategy that is preferred by a player regardless of the opponent’s move is called a 
dominant strategy.
	
A key concept in analyzing games is a concept called a Nash equilibrium, in honor 
of John Nash, who first proposed it as a solution concept for strategic games. Specifi-
cally, a Nash equilibrium is a set of strategies for each player in the game in which no 
player can improve his or her payoff by changing strategy unilaterally.3 A Nash equi-
librium is the predicted outcome of a noncooperative game if each player follows his 
best strategy and assumes that the other players are following their best strategies. The 
solution to the prisoner’s dilemma is a Nash equilibrium.
	
Notice that the Nash equilibrium doesn’t have to be the solution that is jointly 
best for all players. The solution that is jointly best for both prisoners in the prison-
er’s dilemma is that neither prisoner confesses. But without the possibility of 
enforceable cooperation, “not confessing” independently is not the best strategy for 
either prisoner.
Q-4  In the payoff matrix in Figure 20-1, 
if Prisoners A and B are in love and  
care for each other as they care for 
themselves, what is the expected 
outcome of the prisoner’s dilemma 
game?
Q-5  In formal game theory, should 
cheap talk influence the results?
A Nash equilibrium is a set of strategies 
for each player in the game in which no 
player can improve his or her payoff by 
changing strategy unilaterally.
3The concept of a Nash equilibrium has a long history and goes back to August Cournot, a French 
economist in the 1800s, and is sometimes called a Cournot Nash equilibrium. Nash’s specific 
contribution was to prove that all finite games have such equilibria.

437
An Overview of Game Theory as a Tool 
in Studying Strategic Interaction
There are many different assumptions that can be made about the nature of the strate-
gic interaction, and in formal game theory, different assumptions about the nature of 
those interactions lead to different kinds of games. For example, in the prisoner’s 
dilemma game discussion, we were careful to point out that cooperation was not 
allowed. In many real-world situations, cooperation is possible, so economists have 
also developed an analysis of cooperative games—games in which players can form 
coalitions and can enforce the will of the coalition on its members. The possibility for 
cooperation is often greater when a game will be repeated. Because players have the 
opportunity to communicate, reward, and punish one another in a repeated game, the 
outcome of a repeated game can often be different from the outcome of a game played 
just once.
	
Yet another assumption relates to the order in which players make their decisions. 
In sequential games, players make decisions one after another, so one player 
A REMINDER 
The Austan Goolsbee Check-a-Box Method for Finding Dominant 
Strategies and Nash Equilibria
Getting used to thinking in terms of payoff matrices is hard 
for some students, and economist Austan Goolsbee has 
pointed out a neat way of finding both dominant strategies 
and Nash equilibria. It works by marking the best strate-
gies for each player. Here’s how you do it:
1. 	 Put a  for each of B’s best strategies.
2.	 Put an  for each of A’s best strategies.
3.	 Compare ’s and ’s:
	
a.  A column with two ’s or a row with two ’s is a 
dominant ­strategy.
	
b.  A box with both a  and an  is a Nash equilibrium.
Let’s see how it works with an example. Start by looking at 
the choices facing individual A—confess or not confess—
and ask yourself: What is her best strategy if B confesses? 
What is her best strategy if B does not confess?
• If B confesses, we are in column 1, and A’s best 
strategy is to confess. Put an  in the upper-left-
hand box.
• If B does not confess (column 2), then A’s best 
strategy is to confess, so put an  in the upper-
right-hand box.
Continue by asking the same questions for individual B.
• If A confesses, we are in the top row, and B’s best 
strategy is to confess, so put a  in the upper-left-
hand box.
• If A does not confess (bottom row), B’s best 
strategy is to confess. So put a  in the lower- 
left-hand box.
Prisoner A:
10 years
Prisoner B:
Goes free
Prisoner A:
6 months
Prisoner B:
6 months
Prisoner A:
5 years
Prisoner B:
5 years
Prisoner A:
Goes free
Prisoner B:
10 years
A Does not confess
A Confesses
B Confesses
B Does not confess
By looking at the pattern of ’s and ’s, you can make the 
following conclusions:
• Do any rows have two ’s? Yes. Confessing is a 
dominant strategy for A.
• Do any columns have two ’s? Yes. Confessing is a 
dominant strategy for B.
• Do any boxes have both a  and an ? Yes. Both A 
and B confessing is a Nash equilibrium.

438	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
responds to the known decisions of other players. Sequential games stand in contrast to 
simultaneous move games, where players make their decisions at the same time as 
other players without knowing what choices the other players have made. Tic-tac-toe 
is an example of a sequential game; the prisoner’s dilemma and rock-paper-scissors are 
examples of simultaneous move games.
	
Often in sequential games, the order makes a big difference. For example, some 
games have first-mover advantage; tic-tac-toe, for instance. Other games have second-
mover advantage. Say Todd and Jenifer both attend the same school. Todd isn’t wild 
about Jenifer, but Jenifer is wild about Todd. They both eat in the same dining hall, 
which has two tables. If Todd is the first mover, then he ends up sitting with Jenifer 
since she will always sit at the table with him. If Jenifer is the first mover and chooses 
a table, Todd will always sit at another table. In this game, the second mover has the 
advantage.
Some Specific Games
Let’s now discuss how game theory can be used as a tool to study strategic interac-
tions by looking at specific games. Let’s start with an easy game—tic-tac-toe. Tic-tac-toe 
is not a very interesting strategic game because it has a clear-cut answer that, I suspect, 
most of you know. Assuming people want to win and that they behave rationally—that 
is, they play a strategy that gives them the best chance of winning—tic-tac-toe will 
always end in a tie.
	
Formal game theory predicts that any tic-tac-toe game (or similar game) will end 
in a tie because formal game theory assumes all players (1) are fully forward-looking, 
(2) always behave in a manner that gives them the highest payoff, and (3) expect all 
other players to behave in that same manner. This is what we mean when we say that 
players are rational.
	
It is this assumption of rationality that allows us to give precise answers to game 
theoretic situations. Of course, people aren’t always rational, and it is important to 
remember that formal game theory only provides a prediction about the outcome of a 
game. Actual behavior may deviate from the formal game theoretic predictions and 
modern behavioral economists use games in their experiments to discover where peo-
ple’s behavior is predictably irrational.
	
To compare the theoretical and empirical results, the real-world games that provide 
the empirical results must correspond to the assumptions of the theoretical model. 
Unfortunately, real-world games seldom do, which is why economists are turning more 
and more toward controlled experiments to test the predictions of games. These con-
trolled experiments—either in the field, seeing what actually happens in real life when 
the games are played under various circumstances, or in the laboratory, where the game 
is structured to match the assumptions of the theory—are increasing, and the experi-
mental economics branch of economics is increasing in importance. (Two economists, 
Vernon Smith and Daniel Kahneman, received the Nobel Prize for their work in exper-
imental economics in 2002.) There is much debate about how much we can rely on such 
experiments since the controls are never, and often far from, ­perfect.
Strategies of Players
The analysis of games is often conducted by using a method called backward induction, 
where you begin with a desired outcome and then determine the decisions that will 
lead you to that outcome. With sequential decisions, you continue the backward 
induction until you arrive at the best strategy for your first move. The tic-tac-toe game 
is easy to analyze because it is a sequential game with a complete set of choices that 
can be determined by working backward from the desired outcome (winning the 
Behavioral economics examines the 
deviations between formal game 
theoretic predictions and actual 
outcomes of games.
In backward induction, you begin  
with a desired outcome and then 
determine the decisions that will 
lead you to that outcome.
Formal game theory predicts that any 
tic-tac-toe game will end in a tie.

439
game) to the initial decision of where to place your X or O. Sometimes backward induc-
tion leads you to an optimal rollback strategy. Optimal rollback strategies are based on 
assuming your opponent follows her best strategy, which is based on assuming you fol-
low your best strategy, which . . . Optimal rollback strategies are much harder to deter-
mine in simultaneous move games because you have to figure out what the person is 
likely to do when you are making your move. (As your hand flies out in a rock-paper-
scissors game, you can’t base your choice on your opponent’s choice in the game.)
Dominant Strategy 
As you saw in the prisoner’s dilemma game, in some 
games, a player will prefer a strategy regardless of the opponent’s move. No matter 
what choice one prisoner makes, assuming the other player is rational, the other pris-
oner’s best strategy is to confess. As I discussed above, such a strategy is called a 
dominant strategy. So, even though the prisoner’s dilemma is a simultaneous game, 
there is a dominant strategy, with both players “knowing” (given the assumptions of 
the model) what the other person will do.
Mixed Strategy 
Many simultaneous games don’t have a single dominant strat-
egy. Again, consider rock-paper-scissors. Whether you choose rock, paper, or scissors 
depends on what your opponent chooses. What you don’t want to happen is for your 
opponent to figure out a pattern in your choices. It makes sense to vary your choices 
randomly so that your opponent has no pattern on which to base his strategy. This strat-
egy is called a mixed strategy—a strategy of choosing randomly among moves.
	
Even if a sequential game has an optimal solution, we may not be able to figure out 
that solution. Sequential move games can involve so many sequential moves that figur-
ing out a rollback strategy is impossible. Chess is an example. Technically chess has a 
A dominant strategy is a strategy that is 
preferred by a player regardless of the 
opponent’s move.
A mixed strategy is a strategy of 
choosing randomly among moves.
ADDED DIMENSION
result than are nonposted- or uncertain-price markets, 
where actual sale prices are not known. Experiments in 
game theory are used extensively in designing auctions for 
allocating such things as telecom licenses or oil leases. 
Seeing how these auctions were designed gives you a 
good sense of how game theory, experiments, and real-
world experience are combined to design policy.
	
The policy makers started with the results of the formal 
game and integrated those into the regulations of the ac-
tual bidding process. Then, game theorists pointed out 
how bidders could exploit loopholes in the regulations. 
Policy makers then modified the regulations and went 
through the process again, with game theorists pointing 
out potential loopholes. Eventually policy makers arrived at 
the best regulations they could design; then they turned to 
experimental economists who ran experimental auctions to 
see if the designs worked—much like airplane designs are 
tested in wind tunnels before they are actually built. Then 
the auctions were redesigned, and reconsidered by the 
game theorists, and, eventually, used as the regulations 
in auctions.
Game Theory and Experimental Economics
Game theory has offered significant insight into the structure 
of economic problems but arrives at the conclusion that a 
number of alternative solutions are possible. A new branch 
of economics—experimental economics—has developed 
that offers insight into which outcome will be forthcoming. 
Let’s consider an example.
	
When game theorists have done experiments, they 
have found that people believe that the others in the game 
will work toward a cooperative solution. Thus, when the 
gains from cheating are not too great, often people do not 
choose the individual utility-maximizing position but in-
stead choose a more cooperative strategy, at least initially. 
Such cooperative solutions tend to break down, however, 
as the benefits of cheating become larger. Additionally, as 
the number of participants gets larger, the less likely it is 
that the cooperative solution will be chosen and the more 
likely it is that competitive solutions will be chosen.
	
Experimental economists also have found that the structure 
of the game plays an important role in deciding the solution. 
For example, posted-price markets, in which the prices are 
explicitly announced, are more likely to reach a collusive 

440	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
full rollback strategy—once the first move is made, if one had a sufficiently powerful 
and fast computing ability, that person is the winner. But our computing ability is not 
sufficient to compute that rollback strategy; chess grand masters have beat computers 
whose calculations were based on a rollback strategy. But computer chess moves do 
not have to be based solely on rollback strategies; they can be based on patterns ascer-
tained by studying previous winning strategies. Computers whose strategy is based 
on a combination of rollback strategies and patterns of human play are able to beat 
grand masters in chess. Most games that people play in real life are far more compli-
cated than chess, and thus require a combination of intuition, calculation, and 
­common sense.
	
Strategies in games can change dramatically with just a single change in the 
rules. Consider the effect of moving from a game played only once to a game 
played repeatedly. Say you are playing the ultimatum game. As I discussed in an 
earlier chapter, in the ultimatum game, two players are offered $10 to split between 
the two of them, as long as they both agree to accept the money. One player is 
allowed to decide how to split up the $10, and the other player has the choice of 
accepting the deal or not accepting the deal.
	
In a single-play ultimatum game, the optimal strategy, assuming people are only 
concerned with how much money they receive, is clear. The first player’s optimal strat-
egy is to give himself almost all the money, say $9.99, offering the second player 1 
cent. The second player is clearly better off receiving the 1 cent rather than nothing, so 
his optimal strategy is to accept. In a repeated-play ultimatum game—a game that will 
be played a number of times with the same players—the strategy is not so clear-cut. By 
refusing the 1 cent, the second player can send a signal to the first player that if he 
wants to keep any of the money, he had better raise his offer. So repeated games offer 
more possibilities for implicit cooperation than do single-play games. The empirical 
evidence bears this out.
An Example of Strategy: The Two-Thirds Game 
Let’s now consider 
another game, called the two-thirds game, that demonstrates how backward induction 
and rollback reasoning work. The two-thirds game is the following: You, and all mem-
bers of your class, are to choose a number between 0 and 100. You win if the number 
you have chosen is two-thirds of the average chosen by the class. Before you proceed 
with reading the chapter, write down your choice.
	
Now, let’s consider your reasoning. First, if you chose a number greater than 67, you 
were daydreaming rather than thinking. Even if all the other students chose 100, you would 
still lose, since 2/3 of 100 is 67. Now, let’s say you thought a bit and assumed that people 
would choose randomly, which means that the average would be 50, and 2/3 of it would be 
33. That would be a more likely answer, but John Nash wouldn’t have thought much of it as 
an answer. Why? Because don’t you think other people are as smart as you—and would 
use the same reasoning? That’s the standard game theory assumption—that people will 
assume that others will use the best deductive reasoning possible. Making the assumption 
that people choose the best, we see that it makes sense to assume that people would not 
initially choose randomly, but instead would reason as you did—and choose 33, 2/3 of 
which would be 22, so it would make more sense to choose 22. However, even if you chose 
22, you are still only partway toward thinking strategically.
	
I say partway to strategic thinking because 22 would not be the solution John Nash 
would have arrived at. He would have pointed out that if other people were following 
that same reasoning, they would have arrived at the same conclusion as you did, and 
would not have put down 22, but would have put down 2/3 of 22, or 14.7, so to choose 
any number higher than 14.7 is unreasonable. But that is not the end of the rollback 
reasoning. In fact, one can carry the reasoning back further and further, until finally 
Q-6  In a single-play ultimatum game, 
what is the optimal strategy for the first 
player?
Q-7  What is the Nash equilibrium in 
the two-thirds game?

441
the number you choose approaches zero. In fact, any number other than zero would 
lose to a smaller number. (This is the rollback strategy in action because the full set of 
choices is considered in light of the consequences for decisions of all players.) For this 
game, the Nash equilibrium is zero.
Informal Game Theory and Modern  
Behavioral Economics
Some games have no Nash equilibrium, and other games have an infinite number of 
them. Moreover, the probability of all people following their best strategy is highly 
unlikely, and thus, choosing the Nash equilibrium for the above game would almost 
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
In analyzing a game, it is important to know how much 
players know about the game being played, and whether 
that knowledge is symmetrical—all players have equal 
­information—or asymmetrical—one player has more infor-
mation than the others. The implications of asymmetrical 
knowledge can be seen by considering a game played in 
the movie The Princess Bride. The game is a battle of wits, 
with the winner getting the heroine, Buttercup. In it, the 
hero, Westley, offers the villain, the Sicilian Vizzini, this chal-
lenge. Westley places two glasses of wine on the table and 
states that one contains a deadly poison. The game is for 
Vizzini to choose a glass, and then for them both to drink. 
Vizzini accepts the challenge. The scene goes as follows:
Westley: All right: where is the poi-
son? The battle of wits has begun. It 
ends when you decide and we both 
drink, and find out who is right and 
who is dead.
At this point, Vizzini babbles on in order 
to get Westley to turn around; when 
Westley does so, Vizzini switches the 
glasses so that what Westley thinks is his 
glass is actually the glass that he thinks 
Vizzini is getting. By this move Vizzini fig-
ures he can win the game by changing it to a sequential 
game—he plans only to drink after Westley has drunk. 
Since he has switched the glasses, he figures that Westley 
will only drink if Westley believes that his is not the poi-
soned glass. Since the glasses are switched, that decision 
to drink will mean that Vizzini has the nonpoisoned glass, 
and thus Vizzini can drink safely. (He has switched the 
game into an asymmetric sequential game where he has 
the advantage.) The scene continues as follows.
What Game Is Being Played?
Vizzini: Let’s drink—me from my glass, and you from yours. 
[Allowing Westley to drink first, he swallows his wine.]
Westley: You guessed wrong.
Vizzini (roaring with laughter): You only think I guessed 
wrong—that’s what’s so funny! I switched glasses when 
your back was turned. You fool. You fell victim to one 
of the classic blunders. The most famous is “Never get 
involved in a land war in Asia.” But only slightly less 
well known is this: “Never go in against a Sicilian when 
death is on the line.”
[He laughs and roars and cackles and whoops until he 
falls over dead.]
[At this point the heroine, Buttercup, enters the scene]
Buttercup: To think—all that time it was 
your cup that was poisoned.
Westley: They were both poisoned. I 
spent the last few years building up an 
immunity to iocane powder.
The scene makes for some comic relief in 
the movie, but our interest is in the strategy. 
Given what Vizzini thought he knew, Vizzi-
ni’s strategy was sound. But in this case, 
the game he thought he was playing was 
not the game he was playing. The game he 
was actually playing was a game in which he could only lose. 
This presents another lesson from game theory—often when 
another individual presents you with a choice, particularly one 
that seems especially beneficial, the choice you are making 
will often not be the choice you think you are making, and the 
game will often be rigged to your disadvantage (you don’t 
have full information). Hence, the general rule of thumb: If it 
sounds too good to be true, most likely it is.
Source: The Princess Bride © 1987, Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation.
© Twentieth Century Fox/Photofest

442	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
always cause you to lose. (Actually, in first-time plays of the two-thirds game, the 
usual answer comes out with an average of about 30 to 40.) But then, if we play it 
again, after we have seen the answer to the first game, the average falls. Figure 20-2 
shows the typical outcomes of multiple rounds of play. Initially the average guess is 
about 35, and it decreases with each additional time played.4
	
Notice that, as the game was played the second time, after the reasoning was 
explained, the average number chosen by students decreased, and hence moved toward 
the Nash equilibrium. These results demonstrate another aspect of game theory: Play-
ers learn, which means that, in practice, repeated games often have different results 
than one-time games.
	
Even after the reasoning of the two-thirds game is fully explained to students, the 
average number they choose never reaches zero, so here we have an example of a game 
with a Nash equilibrium that, in practice, is not reached. One reason why the Nash 
equilibrium is not reached is that people’s reasoning process is more complicated than 
assumed by Nash. People do not assume that all other people behave rationally; instead 
they are making complicated estimates of other people’s behavior based on their past 
behavior and their sense of other people. This means that to apply game theory to real-
world problems, game theory must be accompanied by a combination of reasoning, 
intuition, and empirical study about how people actually behave.
Informal Game Theory
While formal game theory can quickly become very complicated and mathematically 
intimidating, much of the power of game theory does not lie in its formal application, 
but rather in its informal application, which simply involves setting up a study of 
human interactions in a game theoretic or strategic framework. Informal game theory 
is often called behavioral game theory because it relies on empirical observation, not 
deductive logic alone, to determine the likely choices of individuals. Instead of assum-
ing that people are high-powered calculating machines who can figure out their opti-
mal strategy, no matter how complicated it may be (that’s the Nash equilibrium), 
To apply game theory to real-world 
problems, game theory must be 
accompanied by a combination of 
reasoning, intuition, and empirical study 
about how people actually behave.
4For a discussion of evidence about playing the two-thirds game, see Virtudes Alba-Fernández, 
Pablo Brañas-Garza, Francisca Jiménez-Jiménez, and Javier Rodero-Cosano, “Teaching Nash  
Equilibrium and Dominance: A Classroom Experiment on the Beauty Contest,” Journal of 
Economic Education 37, no. 3 (Summer 2006), pp. 305–22.
FIGURE 20-2   The Two-Thirds Game
Although when using an optimal ­rollback 
strategy the solution to the two-thirds game 
is zero, most people do not choose zero. 
Instead, as they play the game over and over 
again, their guesses fall from about 35 in the 
initial round to the 20s in the third and 
fourth rounds as this graph illustrates.
Average guess
40
35
28
25
23
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
Number of times played

443
informal game theory looks at how people actually think and behave and is thus 
­empirically based. Informal game theory doesn’t provide definite answers; instead, it 
provides a framework for approaching questions.
	
This approach to game theory was developed by Nobel Prize–winner Thomas 
Schelling, who argued that much of the power of game theory comes in the framework 
it provides for thinking about problems, rather than from formal solutions. The power 
of game theory comes from simply structuring a problem as a strategic interaction 
problem and writing down a payoff matrix. The box “The Segregation Game and 
Agent-Based Modeling” explores one of Schelling’s informal models.
Real-World Applications of  
Informal Game Theory
In their book The Art of Strategy, economists Avinash Dixit and 
Barry Nalebuff describe a number of examples of real-world 
­applications of informal game theory. Let’s discuss a couple of 
them. The first involves the long-running TV show Survivor—a 
show that gains much of its interest by creating strategic prob-
lems for ­contestants that are mixed with games of skill. Each 
week one contestant is eliminated until two are left, at which time 
all the eliminated contestants get to vote on who wins the grand 
million-dollar prize. This means that contestants must be ruthless 
(think about how to get other people thrown off), but also be con-
sidered fair and nice in order to get people to vote for them in the 
final choice. That’s the show’s hook.
ADDED DIMENSION
has been computerized and can be explored on the 
web (www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/demos/schelling/
schellhp.htm).
	
As you play this game, notice that although the game 
has no single solution, it does give you insight into the 
process through which segregation comes about. When 
Schelling first devised his game, powerful computers 
were still in their infancy. That has now changed. 
Schelling’s approach has led to a whole field of econom-
ics, called agent-based modeling, in which agents are 
“created” in the computer and then allowed to interact. 
The researchers then look at the resulting patterns that 
are created and try to use those patterns to understand 
complex economic phenomena. Ultimately, agent-based 
computational economics (ACE) modelers hope to create 
virtual economies, in which one can pretest the effects of 
policy in the “virtual economy” before one adopts it in 
practice. We are a long way from that goal, but it has al-
ready had some interesting uses. For example, Disney-
land has used agent-based modeling to keep its lines as 
short as possible.
The Segregation Game and Agent-Based Modeling
To see the power of Schelling’s informal approach to game 
theory, let us consider one of his thought experiments that 
uses the game theory framework. In this example, the 
question he was interested in was why our society is so 
segregated when much of the population seems to have 
only slight tendencies toward segregation. As he was 
thinking of this question, he imagined a society with two 
types of individuals. Both types had only a slight prefer-
ence for living next to individuals from their group, but that 
preference was not strong. His question was: Would that 
slight preference lead to significant segregation on the ag-
gregate level?
	
To answer the question, he created a model that 
consists of a grid. On this grid he assumed people 
have a slight ­preference for living next to people with 
their same ­characteristics. He then went through a vari-
ety of experiments that explored what the result of that 
slight preference would be. What he discovered was 
that a slight preference on the individual level could 
lead to significant aggregate ­segregation with each 
group living in segregated areas. Schelling’s “game” 
© Bill Inashita/CBS Archive via Getty Images

444	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
	
The situation Dixit and Nalebuff describe is probably the most famous episode of 
the show in which eventually the three players left were Rudy, a former Navy Seal, 
who was seen as honest and fair and was most people’s favorite; Richard, a corporate 
consultant who was seen as a cold and calculating “pudgy nudist”; and Kelly, a 
23-year-old river guide who was also seen as cold and calculating, although maybe 
a bit less than Richard, and definitely not pudgy. In the final challenge, the three of 
them had to stand on a pole with one hand on something called the immunity idol for 
as long as they could. The one who stayed on the longest would win the challenge and 
would get to decide which two went into the final.
	
Both Kelly and Richard knew that if Rudy made it to the final, he would win since 
he was the other players’ favorite. So they both wanted Rudy off. The problem for 
Richard was that he had an alliance with Rudy, and if he won the challenge and kicked 
Rudy off, he would have to violate the alliance and would likely lose to Kelly in the 
voting. Thus, the options as seen by Richard:
•	 Rudy wins—he would pick Richard to continue, but Rudy would beat Richard 
in the final.
•	 Kelly wins—she would pick Richard to continue, and it is unclear who  
would win.
•	 Richard wins—he would either pick Rudy to continue, but then would lose in the 
final, or he would pick Kelly to continue, in which case, because he had broken 
his alliance with Rudy, he would almost certainly lose in the final voting.
Given these options, Dixit and Nalebuff point out that Richard has a dominant 
strategy—to lose, hoping that Kelly wins. Richard did precisely that—he quit the immu-
nity challenge early; Kelly won the challenge, chose Richard to continue, and, in the 
final voting, Richard won the million-dollar prize. Rudy cast the deciding vote for 
Richard, even though Richard’s losing on purpose had effectively cost Rudy the game.
	
A second example they give involves a proposal by American billionaire Warren 
Buffett to get a strict campaign finance reform bill passed. In an op-ed piece in the 
New York Times, ­Buffett proposed banning many types of campaign contributions 
that most people believe should be banned; such a ban would make it more difficult 
for incumbents to win elections. The problem is that incumbents are the ones who 
vote on campaign reform bills and they have little incentive to vote for effective cam-
paign finance reform since that would make it hard for them to win elections. Thus, 
while incumbents want to portray themselves as being in favor of campaign finance 
reform, they don’t really want the bill to pass. To get around the problem, Buffett put 
forward the following suggestion:
Well just suppose some eccentric billionaire (not me, not me!) made the following 
offer: If the bill was defeated, this person—the EB—would donate $1 billion in an 
allowable manner (soft money makes all possible) to the political party that had 
delivered the most votes to getting it passed. Given this diabolical application of 
game theory, the bill would sail through Congress and thus cost our EB nothing 
(establishing him as not so eccentric after all).5
	
The proposal places both Democrats and Republicans in a prisoner’s dilemma. Con-
sider their options. If they vote against the bill and the bill is successful, they will deliver 
$1 billion to the other party, which will give the other party an enormous advantage in 
the next election, offsetting their advantage in fund-raising. Thus, there is no gain in 
5 Warren Buffett, New York Times, September 10, 2000. This material is copyrighted and used 
with permission of the author. 

	
Chapter 20 ■ Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and Behavioral Economics	
445
opposing the bill for a party if the other party supports it. This means that the dominant 
strategy for both sides would be to support the bill. So the bill would pass.
	
As a bonus, Buffett noted that the effectiveness of the plan “would highlight the 
absurdity of claims that money doesn’t influence Congressional votes.” Unfortunately no 
eccentric billionaire has come forward with the offer, and with the increase in political 
party fund-raising, it will likely take an eccentric multibillionaire today to implement it.
	
There are many more applications of the ideas in informal game theory to the real 
world, and much of modern economic thinking involves posing problems as strategic 
games, analyzing the strategic decision-making problem facing both sides, and design-
ing an institutional structure that achieves the goals one wants to achieve.
An Application of Game Theory: Auction Markets
Game theory has highlighted the importance of strategy in individuals’ decision mak-
ing. Looking at problems with this approach has resulted in extraordinarily powerful 
solutions to economic problems. Let’s consider one example that was devised by 
Nobel Prize–winning economist William Vickrey.
	
He analyzed the strategies of people in a standard sealed-bid auction where par-
ticipants are not aware of other bids. In a standard auction, the person who bids the 
highest gets the good. Let’s say that you are bidding on a computer that you really 
want, for which you would be willing to pay $500. In this auction, if you were fully 
rational and Nash-like, would you bid $500? The answer is no; that’s not your best 
strategy; your best strategy is to lower your bid enough so that it is slightly higher than 
what you expect the next highest bidder to bid. If you believe that to be very low, you 
can do much better than paying your full price.
	
Vickrey suggested what is now called the Vickrey auction—a sealed-bid auction 
where the highest bidder wins but pays the price bid by the next-highest bidder. He 
demonstrated that this second-price auction changes the strategy of the bidders, giving 
them an incentive to bid their true valuation for the good since by bidding his or her 
true value, a bidder will win the auction without paying the higher amount.
	
In a highest-bid auction, a bidder’s strategy is to not bid the highest, but rather to bid 
slightly higher than the next-highest bidder. Say you would be willing to pay $500, but 
you think the next-highest bidder will only bid $220. You might bid $230 since if you bid 
$500 you would be paying $270 more than you had to pay. In a Vickrey auction, your 
strategy changes. Since you are not paying your bid, but rather the second-highest bid, you 
could bid $500, and if the second-highest bidder only bid $220, you would only pay $220.
	
The advantage of the Vickrey auction bid becomes more apparent when you incor-
rectly guessed the second-highest bidder’s bid. Say that second-highest bid was $300, 
but you thought it was only going to be $220, so you bid $250. In the standard auction, 
you would not win—the other bidder would win, even though you were willing to pay 
more for it. In the Vickrey auction bid, the person who wants it most wins. Vickrey 
auctions are now often used in auctions for oil lease rights, radio spectrums, and 
Google’s online advertisement program AdWords.
Game Theory and the Challenge to Standard 
Economic Assumptions
While formal game theory relies upon precise definitions of rationality, informal game 
theory is used to explore what rationality is and the nature of individuals’ utility func-
tions. Modern behavioral economists use an approach that builds on the traditional 
economics that you’ve been presented with in earlier chapters—utility maximization, 
equilibrium, and efficiency—but instead of stopping there, and assuming that the 
­theory has to be right, extends the theory to fit the observations in the real world, 
Q-8  How does a Vickrey auction 
differ from a standard sealed-bid 
auction?

446	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
modifying the theory where necessary to achieve the fit. This means that instead of 
exploring the theoretical results of a formal model with a set of assumptions, behav-
ioral economists use experiments in which people actually play the formal games to 
explore the validity of the assumptions in formal game theory and how they might be 
revised. Work in behavioral economics has led to significant advances in our under-
standing of the nature of preferences and choice.
	
For example, one of the basic assumptions of economics is that people are self-
interested, and they do what benefits them. In some ways, this assumption is true by defini-
tion. One can assume that altruistic people help others because other people’s welfare is a 
component of their utility function. Such a tautological approach to the analysis of choice 
is not especially helpful, since it is true by definition. Game theory allows us to explore 
the degree to which, and the nature in which, individuals are concerned with others.
Fairness
Consider a variation of the ultimatum game called the trust game. As with the ultima-
tum game, the trust game has two players. The first player is given $10 and the choice 
about how to split it. The difference is that she can either keep it all for herself or 
“invest” some portion, which is tripled and given to the other player. The second per-
son, called the “trustee,” can either keep the now tripled amount or return some 
portion of it to the first person. At this point the game ends. The Nash equilibrium of 
this game—what would happen if people are only concerned with themselves, and are 
fully “rational”—is for the first player to keep the entire $10.
	
The rollback reasoning (beginning with the last choice) goes like this: The dominant 
strategy of the “trustee” is to keep any money that is shared since there is no possibility 
for the first player to reciprocate. Knowing that, the dominant strategy for the first per-
son is to share nothing in the first place. No gains from cooperation are possible.
	
Experimental evidence shows that, on average, individuals invest about $5 and, on 
average, trustees return a little less than the investment. It is as if people want to trust and 
to reward trust. In other experiments, it has been found that people will even spend money 
of their own to punish others who do not respond “fairly” to offers. So, if people feel 
someone is being unfair, people will reduce their own income to make that person pay.
Endowment Effects
Another example of empirical work suggesting that people do not behave as the traditional 
model predicts concerns how people value things. Standard economic theory assumes that 
value is independent of what you have; that is, preferences are independent of endowment. 
To test whether this is true, Stanford neuropsychologist Brian Knutson did an experiment 
where he offered people either an iPod or $100. When given the opportunity to choose 
between the two, most people chose $100. But when participants were initially given an 
iPod, but then were offered $100 in exchange for the iPod, most chose to keep the iPod. 
This is called the endowment effect—the tendency of people to value an item that they 
possess  more than they would value that item if they did not possess it. That ownership 
increases the value of a good is even confirmed by brain scans that show increased brain 
activity associated with fear of loss when a good is acquired. Experiments suggest that the 
traditional assumptions about economic behavior do not always reflect actual behavior.
Framing Effects
Another of the findings of behavioral economics is the importance of framing effects—
the tendency of people to base their choices on how the choice is presented. The classic 
example of framing effects was presented by Columbia psychologist Amos Tversky and 
Princeton psychologist Daniel Kahneman. They asked people how they would respond 
Framing effects are the tendency of 
people to base their choices on how  
the choice is presented.
The endowment effect is the tendency 
of people to value an item that they 
possess more than they would value 
that item if they did not possess it.

	
Chapter 20 ■ Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and Behavioral Economics	
447
in the following situations regarding 600 people who were threatened by a disease. 
Subjects were given the following two undesirable options. In the first experiment, the 
options were: (A) a guarantee of saving 200 lives for sure but losing the others or (B) a 
1∕3 chance of saving all 600, but a 2∕3 chance of saving no one. Most people chose A 
over B. Then, they offered the same people the following choices: (A) guaranteed out-
come of losing 400 lives for sure but saving the others or (B) a 2∕3 chance of 600 dying 
and a 1∕3 chance of no one dying. Most people chose B over A. Now consider the two 
choices—they are exactly the same, but people responded differently if the choice was 
presented in the negative rather than the positive frame. This result has been widely 
duplicated and framing effects are an important part of modern economics. 
Behavioral Economics and the Traditional Model
There are many more such findings, and behavioral economists are attempting to inte-
grate those findings with traditional economic reasoning. As they do this, the methods 
of economics are changing. As I stated above, game theory is growing enormously in 
importance. Why? Because game theory allows a wider range of assumptions than 
does standard theory—which allows us to state the economic result more precisely. 
But, as we saw in the example of the two-thirds game, game theory alone does not 
provide answers. Thus, economists are doing much more in the way of empirical work 
and incorporating experimental work into their methodology.
	
Experimental economics is a burgeoning field. It includes laboratory experiments 
in which assumptions of the economic model are carefully followed, to see how sub-
jects actually respond, and field experiments, in which the precise conditions are not 
as carefully controlled, but subjects are provided a more realistic setting. Behavioral 
economists also use computer simulations and even brain scans. One of the branches 
of behavioral economics is called neuroeconomics, which relies on CAT scans of indi-
viduals’ brains to study individual choices.
	
What comes out of behavioral economics is a much more nuanced view of humans. 
They are purposeful, rather than fully rational; they demonstrate enlightened self-
interest rather than greed; and they are boundedly rational rather than fully “Nash-
style” rational.
The Importance of the Traditional Model:  
Money Is Not Left on the Table
The fact that people do not act as the traditional economic model predicts does not mean 
that the traditional assumptions and model are irrelevant—quite the contrary. People act-
ing differently than they would if the standard rationality assumptions hold true creates 
potential profit opportunities for individuals to take advantage of people’s actual behavior. 
It means that “money is being left on the table.” Whenever “money is left on the table,” 
we can expect firms and individuals who understand the economic model to develop busi-
nesses and schemes to take that money off the table—to transfer money from those who 
are acting “irrationally” to those who are acting “rationally.” What this means is that the 
findings of behavioral economics make understanding the logic of the traditional model 
even more important than it would be if everyone acted according to its assumptions. If 
you don’t understand it, you can expect to lose money to those who do. The point is that 
the traditional economic model doesn’t require everyone, or even a majority of people, to 
behave in accordance with its assumptions for its predictions to come true. All it takes is 
a few people to behave rationally because those few can develop businesses and institu-
tions that make people pay for their “irrationality” and lack of self-interest.
	
Advertising mutual funds is an example. Those advertisements emphasize past 
performance, and in selling actively managed mutual funds (which have higher 
Behavioral economics provides a more 
nuanced view of human behavior than 
does standard economics.
Whenever “money is left on the table,” 
we can expect firms and individuals 
who understand the economic model  
to develop businesses and schemes  
to take that money off the table.
Q-10  If 90 percent of people 
operate as behavioral economics 
suggests, does that mean that the 
standard economic model is no  
longer applicable?
Q-9  If a firm wants to increase the 
number of employees who participate 
in a savings plan, should the enrollment 
form ask whether the employee  
wants an automatic withdrawal from  
a paycheck to retirement or an 
automatic deposit to retirement  
from a paycheck?

448	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
management fees) firms strongly emphasize past performance, even though past 
performance of a mutual fund often has little or no predictive power of future earnings of 
that mutual fund. Often investment companies have many actively managed mutual funds, 
some of which do well in a specific time period, and some of which do poorly, just because 
of random variation. With a variety of such funds, they can always have some that have 
done better than average. When the mutual fund salesman calls his clientele, he will push 
the actively managed funds that have done well, taking advantage of people’s tendency to 
think that past history is more relevant to future behavior than it often is. Investment sales-
men and fund managers make a good living selling such funds—that’s the transfer of 
money from the unwise (in an economic sense) to the wise (in an economic sense). Most 
economists suggest that the way around this is to buy indexed mutual funds, which are 
mutual funds that contain a broad set of stocks that reflect the broader market, and are not 
actively managed. These index funds have much smaller fees and avoid “leaving money on 
the table” that can be transferred to those who understand the economic model.
Conclusion
Let me now conclude. I hope that this chapter shows you that if you had concerns about 
whether the traditional models learned in earlier chapters fit reality, they were legitimate 
concerns. Economic models don’t tell you how people should behave, or how they do 
behave. They aren’t meant to do that. Instead, they give insights into how people behave, 
and how to think strategically. Any economic model must be used with judgment. As 
Alfred Marshall, an economist whose approach I have followed, said, “The economic 
model is not a tool that gives answers to questions; it is an apparatus of the mind that 
helps its possessor come to reasonable conclusions.” The overall logic of the economic 
model provides insight even if most people do not behave as the assumptions predict. 
Money is not left on the table, and when people act differently than the economic model, 
we can expect people and firms to figure out ways to take advantage of their behavior.
	
Those concerns that you had about the relevance of the traditional economic mod-
els are also concerns that economists have, and are the basis of current research. In 
their research economists are pushing the boundaries of the traditional model and are 
developing new models to include such concerns. Don’t think of economic theory as a 
static, unchanging theory; think of it as a dynamic theory, which is continually taking 
into account new discoveries and incorporating those discoveries into the model.
The economic model is an apparatus of 
the mind that helps its possessor come 
to reasonable conclusions.
• Game theory is a highly flexible modeling approach 
that can be used to study a variety of situations in 
which decisions are interdependent.  (LO20-1)
• A prisoner’s dilemma game is one in which both play-
ers have a dominant strategy that leads them to a 
jointly undesirable outcome.  (LO20-1)
• A payoff matrix provides a summary of each 
­player’s strategies and how the outcomes of  
their choices depend on the actions of other  
players.  (LO20-1)
Summary
• A Nash equilibrium is an equilibrium of a game that 
results from a noncooperative game when each player 
plays his or her best strategy. With a Nash equilib-
rium, no player can improve his or her payoff by 
changing strategy unilaterally.  (LO20-1)
• A dominant strategy is one that is preferred regardless 
of one’s opponent’s move. A mixed strategy is choos-
ing randomly.  (LO20-1)
• The strategies of players are different in simultaneous 
and sequential games.  (LO20-2)

	
Chapter 20 ■ Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and Behavioral Economics	
449
• Sometimes people follow a mixed-strategy of  
choosing randomly among moves.  (LO20-2)
• Behavioral economics examines deviations between 
formal game theoretic predictions and actual outcomes 
of games.  (LO20-3)
• Insights from behavioral economics can be applied 
to real-world decision making such as in auctions. 
(LO20-3)
• Endowment and framing effects are examples of  
findings in behavioral economics that challenge the 
traditional model’s predictions.  (LO20-4)
• The traditional model remains relevant because it 
takes only a few people to realize that money has  
been left on the table for the results of the standard 
model to hold.  (LO20-4)
Key Terms
backward induction
cheap talk
cooperative game
dominant strategy
endowment effect
framing effect
game theory
mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium
noncooperative game
payoff matrix
prisoner’s dilemma
screening question
sequential game
simultaneous move game
Vickrey auction
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Define the prisoner’s dilemma game.  (LO20-1)
	a.	 What assumptions lead to the dilemma?
	b.	 What creates the possibility of escaping it?
	c.	 What does the standard model say about your answer 
to b? What does experimental economics say?
	 2.	 In the following payoff matrix, Player A announces that 
she will cooperate.  (LO20-1)
	a.	 How is this likely to change the outcome compared to 
when neither cooperates?
	b.	 What does your answer to a suggest about the value of 
cheap talk?
	c.	 How could Player A make her pronouncement 
believable? 
	 3.	 Is the solution to the prisoner’s dilemma game a Nash 
equilibrium? Why?  (LO20-1)
	 4.	 If a player does not have a dominant strategy, can the 
game still have a Nash equilibrium?  (LO20-1)
	 5.	 Two firms have entered an agreement to set prices. The 
accompanying payoff matrix shows profit for each firm in 
a market depending upon whether the firm cheats on the 
agreement by reducing its prices.  (LO20-1)
	a.	 What is the dominant strategy for each firm, if any?
	b.	 What is the Nash equilibrium, if any?
A: 1
B: 2
  Defect
  Cooperate
Player B
Player A
  Defect
  Cooperate
A: 0.5
A: 0
A: 1
B: 1
B: 0.5
B: 1
Firm A:
$0
Firm B:
$0
A Does not cheat
A Cheats
B Cheats
B Does not cheat
Firm A:
$100
Firm A:
$50
Firm A:
$50
Firm B:
$50
Firm B:
$100
Firm B:
$50
	 6.	 Two people are arrested and charged with the same 
crime. Each is given the opportunity to accuse the  
other of the crime. The payoff matrix shows how much 

450	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
time each will serve depending on who rats out 
whom.  (LO20-1)
	a.	 What is the dominant strategy for each, if any?
	b.	 What is the Nash equilibrium, if any?  
	 7.	 For each of the following, state whether Player A and 
Player B have a dominant strategy and, if so, what each 
player’s dominant strategy is.  (LO20-1)
 	8.	 Would the results of the prisoner’s dilemma game be 
­different if it were a sequential rather than a simultaneous 
game?  (LO20-2)
	 9.	 State whether each of the following situations is a  
simultaneous or sequential game. Explain your  
answer.  (LO20-2)
	a.	 A congressional vote by roll call.
	b.	 The ultimatum game.
	c.	 The Civil War.
	d.	 The segregation game (requires reading the box “The 
Segregation Game and Agent-Based Modeling”).
	10.	 Can a player have a rollback strategy in a simultaneous 
move game?  (LO20-2)
	11.	 True or false? If a game has a Nash equilibrium, that equi-
librium will be the equilibrium that we expect to observe 
in the real world.  (LO20-2)
	12.	 Why might the multiple-play ultimatum game have  
a different result than the single-play ultimatum 
game?  (LO20-2)
	13.	 Why do sellers generally prefer a Vickrey auction to a 
regular sealed bid if sellers don’t receive the highest bid in 
the Vickrey auction?  (LO20-3)
	14.	 Say that you are bidding in a sealed-bid auction and that 
you really want the item being auctioned. Winning it 
would be worth $250 to you. Say you expect the next-
highest bidder to bid $100.  (LO20-3)
	a.	 In a standard “highest-bid” auction, what bid would a 
rational person make?
	b.	 In a Vickrey auction, what bid would he make?
	15.	 When consumers were given the opportunity to select a 
package of ground beef labeled “75% lean” or a package 
of ground beef labeled “25% fat,” most consumers chose 
“75% lean.” Why? What concept from the chapter does 
this illustrate?  (LO20-4)
	16.	 Why does it take just a few people to act rationally for the 
standard model to hold?  (LO20-4)
Prisoner A:
2 years
Prisoner B:
2 years
A Remains silent
A Accuses B
B Accuses A
B Remains silent
Prisoner A:
Goes free
Prisoner A:
10 years
Prisoner A:
Goes free
Prisoner B:
10 years
Prisoner B:
Goes free
Prisoner B:
Goes free
A: $5
B: $5
  Y
  X
Player B
Player A
X
Y
A: $10
A: $2
A: $8
B: $2
B: $10
B: $8
	a.	
A: $2
B: $1
    Y
    X
Player B
Player A
X
Y
A: $1
A: $1
A: $3
B: $2
B: $1
B: $1
	c.	
A: $8
B: $8
   Y
   X
Player B
Player A
X
Y
A: $4
A: $10
A: $5
B: $4
B: $10
B: $5
	b.	

	
Chapter 20 ■ Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and Behavioral Economics	
451
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Do you believe people with religious training will arrive 
at different outcomes than others in a strategic game? 
Why? Which interaction is preferable? (Religious)
	 2.	 Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises defined economics 
as “the science of human action.” Does game theory  
or standard supply/demand analysis better fit with that 
definition? Why? (Austrian)
	 3.	 Do you believe that women will arrive at different  
outcomes than men when playing a strategic game?  
Why? Which is preferable? (Feminist)
	 4.	 How does game theory demonstrate the importance of 
­institutions? (Institutionalist)
	 5.	 In the opening to this chapter, the author describes a scene 
in the movie A Beautiful Mind. What is disturbing about 
that scene? Is John Nash representative of economic  
sensibility? (Feminist)
	 6.	 How do the findings of behavioral economics undermine 
the assumptions of the standard model as to the nature of 
human beings? (Radical)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 How is the fact that employers look to see that applicants 
took difficult courses in college, even though the subject 
matter has no bearing on the work they will likely do, an 
example of screening? 
	 2.	 How is investing in the stock market similar to playing the 
two-thirds game?
	 3.	 In 1950, economists Merrill Flood and Melvin Dresher 
devised an experiment to challenge the Nash equilibrium. 
They presented the following payoff matrix to two 
­economists and asked them to play the following game 
100 times in succession:
	c.	 In 60 of the 100 games, the players cooperated. Why 
do you think this was so?
	d.	 What do you suppose the players chose for the 100th 
play? Why? 
	 4.	 In 1970 economist Martin Shubik proposed the following 
game that involved auctioning off a one-dollar bill with 
the following rules:
1.  The highest bidder wins the dollar bill and pays his 
bid.
2.  The second-highest bidder also has to pay the 
amount of his last bid—and gets nothing in return.
3.  Each new bid has to be higher than the current  
high bid.
4.  The game ends when there is no new bid within a 
specified time limit.
	a.	 When the dollar was auctioned off, do you suppose that 
the highest bid was less than or greater than a dollar? 
Why?
	b.	 Can a rational player ever lose the auction once he has 
started bidding?
	c.	 Is it rational to begin bidding?
	 5.	 Suppose the two-thirds game described in the chapter 
were changed to the “average” game, so that the class 
had to guess a number between 0 and 100, and the 
person who wins is the person who guesses closest 
to the average number.
	a.	 What would the Nash equilibrium likely be?
	b.	 If your class played this “average” game, would 
you expect the equilibrium to approach the Nash 
equilibrium?
	c.	 If the equilibrium in playing the real-world game is 
not the Nash equilibrium, what might explain the 
­difference?
A: $1
B: $2
    Defect
    Cooperate
Player B
Player A
Defect
Cooperate
A: $0.5
A: $0
A: $1
B: $1
B: $0.5
B: $1
	 a.	 What is the Nash equilibrium of this payoff matrix?
	 b.	 Is the payoff matrix symmetric? If not, who has the ad-
vantage? Do you think this affected the strategy of the 
players? If so, how?

APPENDIX
	 6.	 Say that 90 percent of the people in a market demonstrate 
the endowment effect and 10 percent are “rational.” Say 
that, initially, all people have equal wealth.
	a.	 How would you expect the wealth distribution to 
change over time?
	b.	 Would you expect the traditional model’s predictions, 
which are based on the assumption of rationality, to be 
correct? Why?
	c.	 How might you determine the percentage of “rational” 
people needed for the standard model to give accurate 
aggregate predictions? 
 	7.	 In a Vickrey auction how would a person’s bid differ if he 
knew that the seller had someone at the auction submit-
ting a bid for the seller?
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 False. The two are not inconsistent. Game theory is a 
more flexible framework than supply/demand analysis 
because it can account for less restrictive assumptions 
compared to supply/demand analysis.  (LO20-1)
	 2.	 If A confesses, B’s best strategy is also to confess.  (LO20-1)
	 3.	 If A does not confess, B’s best strategy is to confess.   
(LO20-1)
	 4.	 Assuming that love means they trust one another, both are 
more likely to choose to not confess. Each person is will-
ing to do what is necessary to show their love and care for 
the other.  (LO20-1)
	 5.	 Because cheap talk carries no cost and is unenforceable, 
it is not expected to influence the results of a game.   
(LO20-1)
	 6.	 The optimal strategy for the first player of a single-play 
ultimatum game is to offer as little as possible to the 
­second player because the second player is better off with 
any amount greater than zero.  (LO20-2)
	 7.	 The Nash equilibrium in the two-thirds game is zero.   
(LO20-2)
	 8.	 In a Vickrey auction, the highest bidder wins but pays 
the second-highest bid, while in a standard sealed-bid 
­auction, the highest bidder wins and pays the highest  
bid.  (LO20-3)
	 9.	 Assuming positive framing effects, the question should 
be framed as a contribution to retirement rather than a 
withdrawal from a paycheck.  (LO20-4)
	10.	 No, it does not. The remaining 10 percent of rational 
­people will develop businesses to make the remaining 
90 percent pay for their irrationality and lead the  
overall economy to the results of the traditional 
model.  (LO20-4)
Game Theory and Oligopoly
This chapter discussed game theory and its ability to shed 
light on a broader set of issues than the traditional model. 
You can see the power of game theory by applying it to 
oligopoly. As discussed in Chapter 15, oligopoly involves 
strategic interaction in which the firms take into account 
the decisions of the other firms. In all the other basic 
­models—supply/demand, perfect competition, monopolis-
tic competition, and monopoly—firms did not take into 
account the decisions of other firms. In those models, 
firms assumed that their decisions had no effect on other 
firms’ decisions. In perfect competition and monopolistic 
competition, the argument justifying that assumption was 
that the firms were so small that their decisions didn’t 
matter to others in the industry; in monopoly, the argu-
ment justifying that assumption was that the firm faced no 
competitors, so there was no other firm to consider. In 
452	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making

	
Chapter 20 ■ Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and Behavioral Economics	
453
­oligopoly that wasn’t the case, which meant that we could 
not develop a neat formal geometric model of firm behavior.
	
Game theory allows us to develop more precise mod-
els of oligopolistic markets, and of all situations that in-
volve strategic interaction. Thus, game theory can be seen 
as a complement to, not a replacement for, the supply/­
demand model. In fact if the game is structured to reflect 
the assumptions of the supply/demand model, the reasoning 
in game theory is consistent with supply/demand analysis. 
Given the same assumptions, game theory comes to the 
same conclusions as supply/demand analysis.
Prisoner’s Dilemma and a 
Duopoly Example
The easiest application of game theory to oligopoly involves 
the prisoner’s dilemma. To keep the analysis easy, we will 
assume there are only two firms in the market, which makes 
the oligopoly what is called a duopoly—an oligopoly with 
only two firms. So let us consider the strategic decisions fac-
ing a “foam peanut” (packing material) company in a duo-
poly. Let us assume that the average total cost and marginal 
cost of producing foam peanuts are the same for both firms. 
These costs are shown in Figure A20-1(a).
	
Assume that a production facility with a minimum ef-
ficient scale of 4,000 tons is the smallest that can be built. 
In Figure A20-1(b), the marginal costs are summed and 
the industry demand curve is drawn in a way that the 
competitive price is $500 per ton and the competitive out-
put is 8,000 tons. The relevant industry marginal revenue 
curve is also drawn.
	
If the firms can coordinate their actions (fully collude), 
they will act as a joint monopolist setting total output at 
6,000 tons where MR = MC (3,000 tons each). As you can 
see in Figure A20-1(a), this gives each a price of $600 with 
a cost of $575 per ton, for a joint economic profit of 
$150,000, or $75,000 each. If the firms do not coordinate 
their actions, they will produce where the MC curve 
­intersects the demand curve, setting output at 8,000 tons, 
producing 4,000 tons each. At this level of output, price is 
$500 a ton. With average costs of $500, neither earns an 
economic profit. The firms prefer fully colluding to the situ-
ation where they do not coordinate their actions (the com-
petitive equilibrium), where they earn zero economic profit.
	
If they can ensure that they will both abide by the 
agreement, the monopolist output will be the joint profit-
maximizing output. But the strategic reasoning doesn’t 
end there. What if one firm reasons that it can earn more 
by cheating on the deal? What if one firm produces 4,000 
tons (1,000 tons under the counter)? The additional 1,000 
tons in output will cause the price to fall to $550 per ton. 
The cheating firm’s average total costs fall to $500 as its 
output rises to 4,000, so its profit rises to $200,000. How-
ever, the noncheating firm’s profit moves in the opposite 
Price
Price
575
$800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
$800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1   2  3  4  5  6  7  8
Quantity (in thousands)
MC ATC
1  2  3  4  5  6
 7  8  9
10    11
Monopolist
solution
MR
D
Competitive
solution
MC
Quantity (in thousands)
(a) Firm’s Cost Curves
(b) Industry: Competitive and Monopolist Solutions
FIGURE A20-1 (A AND B)  Firm and Industry Duopoly Cooperative Equilibrium
In (a) I show the marginal and average total cost curves for either firm in the duopoly. To get the average and marginal costs for the 
industry, you double each. In (b) the industry marginal cost curve (the horizontal sum of the individual firms’ marginal cost curves) is 
combined with the industry demand and marginal revenue curves. At the competitive solution for the industry, output is 8,000 and price is 
$500. As you can see in (a), at that price economic profits are zero. At the monopolistic solution, output is 6,000 and price is $600. As you 
can see in (a), ATC is $575 at an industry output of 6,000 (firm output of 3,000), so each firm’s profit is $25 × 3,000 = $75,000 [the  
shaded area in (a)].

454	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
direction. Its average total costs remain $575, but the 
price it receives falls to $550, so it loses $75,000 instead 
of making $75,000. The division of profits and output is 
shown in Figure A20-2.
	
In Figure A20-2(a), you can see that the firm that 
abides by the agreement and produces 3,000 units makes 
a loss of $75,000; its average total costs are $575 and the 
price it receives is $550. In Figure A20-2(b), you can see 
that the cheating firm makes a profit of $200,000; its av-
erage costs are $500, so it is doing much better than when 
it did not cheat. The combined profit of the cheating and 
the noncheating firms is $125,000 ($200,000 − $75,000 = 
$125,000), which is lower than if they cooperated. By 
cheating, the firm has essentially transferred $125,000 of 
the other firm’s profit to itself and has reduced their com-
bined profit by $25,000. Figure A20-2(c) shows how out-
put is split between the two firms.
	
Once the other firm realizes that the first firm will ben-
efit by cheating and cannot enforce the agreement, it will 
do better by cheating too. By cheating, it eliminates its loss 
and the other firm’s profit. Output moves to the competi-
tive output, 8,000, and both of the firms make zero profit.
	
It is precisely to provide insight into this type of 
strategic situation that game theory was developed. It 
does so by analyzing the strategies of both firms under 
all circumstances and placing the combination in a 
­payoff matrix.
Duopoly and a Payoff Matrix
The duopoly presented above is a variation of the prison-
er’s dilemma game. The results can also be presented in a 
payoff matrix that captures the essence of the prisoner’s 
dilemma. In Figure A20-3, each square shows the payoff 
from a pair of decisions listed in the columns and rows.
	
The blue triangles show A’s profit; the green triangles 
show B’s profit. For example, if neither cheats, the result 
for both is shown in the lower-right square, and if they 
both cheat, the result is shown in the upper-left square.
	
Notice the dilemma they are in if cheating cannot be 
detected. If they can’t detect whether the other one 
cheated and each believes the other is maximizing profit, 
each must expect the other one to cheat. But if firm A 
expects firm B to cheat, the relevant payoffs are in the 
first column. Given this expectation, if firm A doesn’t 
cheat, it loses $75,000. So firm A’s optimal strategy is to 
cheat. Similarly for firm B. If it expects firm A to cheat, 
its relevant payoffs are in the first row. Firm B’s optimal 
strategy is to cheat. But if they both cheat, they end up in 
the upper-left square with zero profit.
	
In reality, of course, cheating is partially detectable, 
and even though explicit collusion and enforceable con-
tracts are illegal in the United States, implicit collusive 
contracts are not. Moreover, in markets where similar 
conditions hold time after time, the cooperative solution 
Price
Price
Price
$800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
$800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
$900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
550
550
550
1  2  3  4  5  6  7
1  2  3  4  5  6  7
1  2  3  4  5  6  7
8
A
MC ATC
Quantity (in thousands)
A
MC ATC
Quantity (in thousands)
A
B
C
Quantity (in thousands)
Non-
cheating
ﬁrm's
output
Cheating
ﬁrm's
output
Demand
(a) Noncheating Firm's Loss
(b) Cheating Firm's Proﬁt
(c) Cheating Solution
FIGURE A20-2 (A, B, AND C)  Firm and Industry Duopoly Equilibrium When One Firm Cheats
Figures (a) and (b) show the noncheating and the cheating firms’ output and profit, respectively, while (c) shows the industry output and 
price. Say they both cheat. The price is $500 and output is 8,000 (4,000 per firm) [point A in (c)]. Both firms make zero profit. If neither 
cheats, the industry output is 6,000, the price is $600, and their ATC is $575. This outcome gives them a profit of $75,000 each and would 
place them at point C in (c). If one firm cheats and the other does not, the output is 7,000 and the industry price is $550 [point B in (c)]. The 
noncheating firm’s $75,000 loss is shown by the shaded area in (a). The cheating firm’s $200,000 profit is shown by the shaded area in (b).

	
Chapter 20 ■ Game Theory, Strategic Decision Making, and Behavioral Economics	
455
is more likely since each firm will acquire a reputation 
based on its past actions, and firms can retaliate against 
other firms that cheat. But the basic dilemma remains for 
firms and tends to push oligopolies toward a zero-profit 
competitive solution.
	
The push toward a zero-profit equilibrium can be 
seen in a price war between Amazon.com and Buy.com. 
When Amazon.com lowered its threshold for free ship-
ping from $99 to $49, Buy.com responded by offering 
free shipping on all sales the very next day and then 
added to that an offer to beat Amazon.com prices by 
10 percent. Amazon responded by further reducing its 
free shipping threshold to $25. Another example is in 
­airline pricing. When a low-fare airline enters a market, 
the existing airlines generally match, or even go below, 
the low-fare airline’s fare.
Low-Price Guarantees:  
The Advantage of Rules  
or Precommitment
Game theory also sheds light on institutional arrange-
ments of oligopolistic firms. One that has now become 
standard practice for many oligopolistic firms is the 
low-price guarantee, in which a store, such as Walmart, 
states that it will guarantee that the price it charges is 
lower than the price at any other store in the area. To 
back up that guarantee, the store offers any customer 
who finds a lower price a “double the difference back 
guarantee.” One’s initial thought likely is that such low-
price guarantees are good for consumers—they guaran-
tee consumers low prices. But when considering the 
low-price guarantee within a game theoretic framework, 
that conclusion is not so clear.
	
Notice what the low-price guarantee does for 
Walmart: It provides information about the pricing of 
competing firms, and warns the other firms that Walmart 
will have that information very quickly. Second, consider 
what this low-price guarantee does to a competitor’s, 
such as Kmart’s, strategy. With the low-price guarantee, 
Kmart knows that if it tries to charge a lower price than 
Walmart, Walmart will quickly and automatically reduce 
its price to one even lower. This changes Kmart’s strat-
egy since it now makes little sense to try to outcompete 
Walmart on price. With the guarantee in place, both 
Walmart’s and Kmart’s best strategy is not to compete 
on price. So, paradoxically, the net effect of the “low-
price guarantee” can be to raise the overall price that 
consumers pay.
FIGURE A20-3  The Payoff Matrix of Strategic Pricing Duopoly
The strategic dilemma facing each firm in a duopoly can be shown 
in a payoff matrix that captures the four possible outcomes. A’s 
strategies are listed vertically; B’s strategies are listed horizontally. 
The payoffs of the combined strategies for both firms are shown in 
the four boxes of the matrix, with B’s payoff shown in the green 
shaded triangles and A’s payoff shown in the blue shaded triangles. 
For example, if A cheats but B doesn’t, A makes a profit of 
$200,000, but B loses $75,000.
	
Their combined optimal strategy is to cartelize and achieve the 
monopoly payoff, with both firms receiving a profit of $75,000. 
However, each must expect that if it doesn’t cheat and the other 
does cheat, it will lose $75,000. To avoid losing that $75,000, both 
firms will cheat, which leads them to the payoff in the upper-left 
corner—the competitive solution with zero profit for each firm.
B Cheats
B Does not cheat
A Does not cheat
A Cheats
Firm A:
0
Firm A:
+$200,000
Firm B:
0
Firm B:
$75,000
Firm A:
$75,000
Firm A:
+$75,000
Firm B:
+$200,000
Firm B:
+$75,000
Key Term
duopoly

456	
Microeconomics ■ Choice and Decision Making
	 1.	 Netflix and Hulu each expects profit to rise by $100,000 
in the coming year. Netflix, thinking that it would like its 
net profit to rise by more, considers advertising during the 
Super Bowl. An advertisement on the Super Bowl will 
cost $80,000. If Netflix advertises, and Hulu does not, it 
expects its profit to rise by $230,000 instead of $100,000, 
while Hulu’s profit will rise by only $50,000. Netflix  
also knows that if it does not advertise, but Hulu does, its 
profit will rise by only $50,000 while Hulu’s profit will 
rise by $230,000 instead of just $100,000. If both firms 
advertise, their profit will rise by the same as if neither 
had advertised, except each will have spent $80,000  
for the ad.
	a.	 Develop the payoff matrix for the decision facing 
­Netflix and Hulu.
	b.	 Is there a dominant strategy?
	c.	 If so, what is it?
Questions and Exercises
	 2.	 Two firms, TwiddleDee and TwiddleDum, make up the 
entire market for widgets. They have identical costs. They 
are currently colluding explicitly and are making $2 mil-
lion each. TwiddleDee has a new CEO, Mr. Notsonice, 
who is considering cheating and producing more than he 
has agreed to produce. He has been informed by his able 
assistant that if he cheats, he can increase the firm’s profit 
by $1 million at the cost of TwiddleDum losing $1 million 
of its profits. If both cheat, their profits are $1.5 million 
each. (TwiddleDum faces the same option.) You have 
been hired to advise Mr. Notsonice.
	a.	 Construct a payoff matrix for him that captures the 
essence of the decision.
	b.	 If the game is only played once, what strategy would 
you advise?
	c.	 How would your answer to b change if the game were 
to be played many times?

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO21-1	 Differentiate traditional 
economic building  
blocks from behavioral 
economic building blocks.
LO21-2	 Explain what heuristic 
models are and how 
traditional and behavioral 
heuristic economic  
models differ.
LO21-3	 Distinguish an empirical 
model from a formal model 
and list some formal models 
used by modern economists.
LO21-4	 Discuss how modern 
economics and traditional 
economics differ in their 
policy prescriptions.
“
”
Economics is what  
economists do.
—Jacob Viner
My son doesn’t think much of economists. I know that it’s rather 
common for kids not to have high regard for their parents, but it still 
hurts. A while ago, however, when I attended a conference at which 
I was on a panel with Steve Levitt, my ranking moved up. In fact my 
son asked me, “Can you get his autograph for me? He’s cool.” Steve 
Levitt’s book, Freakonomics (written jointly with Stephen Dubner), 
had hit a chord with my son, and judging from its, and its sequel’s, 
sales, with lots of other people as well.
	
I raise this issue here not to sell more copies of Levitt’s book (he’s 
sold plenty), but instead to introduce you to what modern economists 
do, and how what modern economists do relates to the supply and ­demand 
model. I include this chapter to disabuse you from thinking that the supply and 
demand model is the holy grail of economics. Remember Carlyle’s comment, 
“Teach a parrot the words ‘supply’ and ‘demand,’ and you have an economist.” 
He’s wrong; as I stated in an earlier chapter, economists are not parrots, and to 
understand modern economics you have to know that modern economics uses 
supply and demand analysis only as a stepping-stone. It’s an important stepping-
stone, but still just a stepping-stone.
	
Freakonomics makes the point nicely because if you look in its index, you 
won’t find any entries under supply or demand. The reason isn’t because the 
indexer goofed—it’s because Levitt didn’t use the formal supply and demand 
model. Instead, he applied the general ideas behind supply and demand within 
a variety of other models; most of his conclusions derive from his creative abil-
ity to collect data and analyze them with statistical tools. His approach is typi-
cal of how modern applied economists approach problems—they collect data, 
or use data collected by others, and analyze them. The purpose of this chapter 
is to give you a sense of what modern economists do, and how what you will 
learn in principles of economics relates to what modern economists do.
	
A key lesson of this chapter is that supply and demand is not the glue that 
holds modern economics together. Rather, modeling is the glue. When you 
present a problem or question to an economist, he or she will automatically 
­attempt to reduce that question to a model—a simplified representation of the 
problem or question that captures the essential issues—and then work with 
that model and empirical evidence to understand the problem. The modeling 
­approach is the modern economics approach.
Thinking Like a Modern 
Economist
chapter 21
Photo © Roberts Publishing Services.
Book cover of Freakonomics by Steven D. Levitt and Stephen 
J. Dubner, William Morrow Publishers.

458	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
	
No single model characterizes modern economic models. Modern economists are 
a highly diverse group of social scientists. What ties them together is their training in 
modeling and their shared view that incentives are important, and that their models 
have to capture the importance of incentives.
The Nature of Economists’ Models
Economists aren’t the only people who use models. Most everyone does. An architect 
will often create a computer model or a small wooden model of a house he is building. 
­Similarly, an engineer will test a new design with a model. So modeling alone does not 
distinguish an economist from other scientists and engineers. What does differentiate 
economists are:
1.	The building blocks that economists use in their models, and
2.	The structure of formal models that economists find acceptable.
By building blocks I mean the assumptions that form the basis of economic models. 
All economists’ models hold that incentives are important, but they differ in how they 
picture people reacting to incentives. For example, you can assume that individuals are 
selfish, or that individuals care about other people; the models would be different in 
each instance. By structure, I mean the form of the model—for example, a model can 
be verbal, ­graphical (for example, the supply/demand model), algebraic with simple 
equations (for example, q = 4 − 2P), or algebraic with highly complex equations1 [for 
example,
  δtuk(t)
δtvk(t)  = −k2  Duuk(t)
Duvk(t)  + R′   uk(t)
vk(t)  
requiring mind-spinning graduate-level mathematics]. The TV show Numb3rs was in 
many ways a description of how modern economists approach problems. In fact, many 
of the episodes of the show were built around models that modern economists have 
­developed and use in their analyses.
	
Models don’t have to be mathematical; economists also use more informal 
­verbal or heuristic models—models that are expressed informally in words. 
­Models can be physical or they can be virtual models embodied in computer simulations. 
Computer simulation models also can be interactive, where ­individuals become 
part of the model. For example, the online virtual world, ­Second Life, can be 
thought of as a model of society, and its economy can provide insight for the real-
world economy. (Check out how the central authority in ­Second Life changes the 
money supply to affect the exchange rate of Second Life ­currency.) Just like these 
models, economic models come in many different forms with many different 
building blocks.
	
The building blocks and structures of models that economists use have evolved 
over time. Early economists tended to use a highly restricted set of building blocks 
and a narrow set of relatively simple (at least compared to their modern alterna-
tives) formal models. Modern economists are economists who are willing to use a 
wider range of models than did earlier economists. A major change is that modern 
economists use a much more inductive approach to modeling. An inductive 
­approach is an approach to understanding a problem or question in which understanding 
Q-1  What is the glue that holds 
modern economics together?
Building blocks are the assumptions of 
a model. The structure of a model is the 
form it takes—verbal, graphical, or 
algebraic.
(          )          (           )         (       )
Heuristic models are informal models 
expressed in words.
1In case you were wondering, this is a reaction diffusion equation expressed in simplifying vector 
notation. What’s a reaction diffusion equation? It’s probably better not to ask.

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
459
is developed ­empirically from statistically analyzing what is observed in the data. Models 
based on an inductive approach are developed by how well they fit the data. ­Earlier 
economists were much more likely to use a ­deductive ­approach—an approach 
that begins with certain self-evident principles from which implications are deduced 
(logically determined).
Scientific and Engineering Models
Models can have many purposes. There are models primarily designed to provide an 
understanding of what is happening for the sake of understanding—these are scientific 
models. Other models can be designed to provide insight into policy issues—these are 
applied-policy or engineering models. Still other models fall somewhere in between; 
there is no firm line distinguishing science from engineering. Most of the models you 
are presented within this book fall more within the applied-policy models. They are 
designed to provide insight into what is happening in a way that serves as a foundation 
for a discussion of policy.
Behavioral and Traditional Building Blocks
The traditional building blocks of microeconomics are the assumptions that people are 
rational and self-interested. What we have called traditional economists are econo-
mists who study the logical implications of rationality and self-interest in ­relatively 
simple algebraic or graphical models such as the supply and demand model. (Yes, it is 
true; by a mathematician’s standards, supply and demand models are very simple mod-
els. But I agree with you; these simple models are often complicated enough.) Modern 
economists use supply and demand models, but they also use much more sophisticated 
models that integrate dynamics and strategic interactions into the analysis.
	
How much modern economists are willing to deviate from the traditional ­approach 
differs among modern economists. For example, some modern ­economists such as 
Nobel Prize–winner Gary Becker advocate limiting economic models to these 
­traditional building blocks. He writes: “The combined assumptions of maximizing 
­behavior [note: maximizing behavior is how economists ­interpret rationality], market 
equilibrium, and stable preferences, used relentlessly and unflinchingly, form the heart 
of the economic approach.” Up until the end of the 1970s, Becker’s view predominated 
among economists. Since the 1980s, ­however, a group of modern economists has been 
edging away from these traditional building blocks.
Behavioral Economic Models
The study of models with alternative building blocks has grown so much in recent 
years that it has acquired a name: behavioral economics—microeconomic analysis 
that uses a broader set of building blocks than the rationality and self-interest used in 
traditional economics. Instead of deductively assuming rationality and self-interest, 
behavioral economists inductively study people’s behavior and use those behaviors in 
their models. Based on these inductive studies, they argue that the assumptions of both 
rationality and self-interest should be broadened somewhat. Rationality should be 
broadened to ­purposeful behavior—behavior reflecting reasoned but not necessarily 
rational ­judgment—and self-interest, to enlightened self-interest in which people 
care about other people as well as themselves.
	
Behavioral economics is a leading field of research in economics today. The two 
important differences between traditional and behavioral building blocks are presented 
in Table 21-1.
Q-2  Are modern economists  
more likely to use inductive models than 
were earlier economists?
Traditional economists tend to use 
simple models based on assumptions  
of rationality and ­self-interest.
Q-3  If an economist argues that 
people tend to be purposeful and  
follow their enlightened self-interest, 
would you most likely characterize that 
economist as a behavioral or a traditional 
economist?

460	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
	
Let’s consider another example of behavioral economists’ building blocks. Economists 
Matt Rabin and Ernst Fehr have developed models in which people care about fairness 
­independently of what they themselves get. As discussed in an earlier chapter, they have 
found that when dividing up a sum of money, people try to divide the sum up fairly 
rather than giving it all to themselves, even though they could keep it all. In these modern 
­models, the individuals would not be considered solely self-interested but, rather, 
­enlightened ­self-interested; they care about fairness for its own sake. Economists Herbert 
Simon and Thomas Schelling have developed models in which people do not behave 
­rationally, at least not in the traditional sense. For example, they have found that people 
will make choices based on rules of thumb such as “Do what you see others doing” 
without rationally weighing the costs and benefits of each decision. ­Instead, people 
follow habit, which is purposeful behavior that reduces the costs of making decisions. 
Behavioral ­economists design their models accordingly.
	
Building blocks are important: They affect how one interprets the results of an 
­analysis; they influence the patterns one sees in a picture. For example, say you 
­observe a firm not taking advantage of its market position. Using traditional building 
blocks of rationality and self-interest, this would seem very strange. You would look 
for some hidden reason why the firm isn’t taking advantage of that position and keep 
searching until you find the selfish motive underlying the behavior.
	
Models based on behavioral building blocks, in which people and firms have goals 
beyond self-interest, allow researchers to consider the possibility that the firm is not 
taking advantage of its market position for reasons other than self-interest. Pharmaceutical 
companies, for example, sell AIDS drugs in African countries at prices far below market 
price. This could be because of political pressure, but it could also be out of a sense of 
fairness. A traditional economist would focus on the first; a behavioral ­economist 
would consider both possibilities and use empirical data to decide which it is. The 
point of this example is that an economist who is willing to use a wider set of building 
blocks sees different information in data than does an economist who uses the 
­traditional building blocks. In modern ­economics there is a lively debate about what 
building blocks economists should use.
Predictable Irrationality 
The key to understanding the difference 
­between behavioral economics and modern traditional economics is to recognize that 
behavioral economists are not just arguing that people are irrational; they are arguing 
that people are predictably irrational and that actions that traditional economists call 
irrational might not be irrational when considered in context.2 For a behavioral 
­economist, rationality comes in many forms, and what’s important is that the model 
captures how people actually behave. Capturing this real-world nature of humans 
The assumptions of a model affect the 
patterns that one sees in the data.
For behavioral economists, universality 
is less important than the fact that the 
model captures how people actually 
behave.
TABLE 21-1  The Different Building Blocks of Traditional and Behavioral Models
Traditional Economics	
Behavioral Economics
People are completely rational	
People behave purposefully
People are self-interested	
People follow their enlightened self-interest
2An entire book could be written on what is meant by rationality and self-interest, and in some ways, all 
types of behavior can be considered rational and selfish. So it can be argued that behavioral economists 
are not arguing that purposeful behavior includes irrational behavior, but only that it includes a differ-
ent type of rationality than is allowed within traditional economics.

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
461
­requires giving up some of the universality and power of models based on the 
­traditional assumptions. Instead of having one model, one has a collection of models 
from which to choose for a variety of situations.
	
Let’s consider an example of the difference. Say you are given a choice between 
two income streams. In the first scenario, you will earn $30,000 the first year, $27,000 
the second, and $24,000 the third. In the second scenario, you will earn $24,000 the 
first year, $27,000 the second, and $30,000 the third. Which would you choose? A 
model based on traditional rationality predicts you would choose the first, since you 
will be able to save the additional $6,000 earned the first year, put it in the bank, and 
end up with more than $30,000 of income in the third year. Since you get more total 
income with the first stream of income ($24,000 plus the $6,000 from the first year, 
plus two years of interest on that $6,000), it is “rationally” preferred to the second. But 
when economists have asked people which stream of income they preferred, economists 
have found that most people choose the second stream, even when it is explained that 
they could be better off by choosing the first.
	
What’s going on? Behavioral economists argue that most people recognize that 
they don’t have complete self-control; people believe that they will spend the extra 
$6,000 earned in the first year rather than save it. Thus, while it may be possible for 
people to switch the first income stream into an income stream that is preferred to 
the second, they don’t believe that they have the discipline to do so. Thus, they 
actually prefer the second to the first because it precommits them to saving, and 
thereby constrains them from doing something they believe they will do, but which 
they actually don’t want to do. They have developed what is called a precommit-
ment strategy—a strategy in which people consciously place limitations on their 
future actions, thereby limiting their choices. The behavior is irrational because 
people tend to choose the stream that results in less total income; it’s predictable 
because in experiments time and time again, people make the same choice. This 
seemingly irrational choice is not unique to this example but occurs in a variety of 
contexts.
Are You Predictably Irrational? 
Economist Dan Ariely, from whose 
book Predictably Irrational many of these examples have been developed, has created a 
test as a fun way to introduce people to these ideas and to determine whether they exhibit 
predictably irrational tendencies.
•	 Does how happy you are with your salary depend on how much you make rela-
tive to what your friends, family members, and neighbors make?
•	 When you are facing a decision to buy something, do you make your decision 
by considering the pleasure that this item will bring to you and contrast it with 
all the other possible things that you could buy for the same amount of money, 
now and in the future?
•	 Have you ever planned to skip the dessert at the end of a nice meal out, but 
once the waiter stopped by with the dessert cart, you ended up ordering the 
chocolate soufflé?
•	 Have you ever had a romantic partner in whom you started to lose interest, 
but when he or she all of a sudden began to grow more distant, your interest 
rekindled?
Most people answer these questions yes, no, yes, and yes. These answers are the oppo-
site of what an economist using the traditional building blocks would predict people 
would answer. Behavioral economics says that we must develop additional economic 
models that take these predictable behaviors into account.
Q-4  Can adding a constraint on 
people make them better off?
Photo © Roberts Publishing Services.
Book cover of Predictably Irrational by 
Dan Ariely, HarperCollins Publishers.

462	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
The Advantages and Disadvantages of Modern Traditional  
and Behavioral Models
While it may seem that economists would want models that most closely reflect people’s 
behavior, that is not so obvious—models that reflect people’s actual behavior don’t provide 
significant insight. For example, a pool player probably does not calculate the angles and 
spin of a ball to determine how to hit it, but it may make the most sense to assume that she 
does if one were modeling her behavior. That model may be easier to solve, and may be a 
better predictor of what will happen, than a model built on her actual behavior. Modern 
traditional economists emphasize the advantage of simplicity and ease of testing. Having 
one model means that you can test it and see if it fits reality. With many models, you have 
to do much more testing. For policy purposes, modern traditional economists argue that a 
single model that is easy to apply and test is the most useful model.
The Difficulty with Behavioral Building Blocks: Testing 
Modern 
traditional economists point out that formally moving away from the traditional building 
blocks is difficult because following one’s enlightened self-interest rather than self-interest 
and acting purposefully rather than rationally lead to much less clear-cut models and 
­results. By their nature, behavioral models depend on the specific context of the choices 
involved; so instead of a single model, there are many. This means that the broader build-
ing blocks allow many more patterns to be discerned in the data. That’s both an advan-
tage and a disadvantage because it is hard to know which pattern to focus on.
	
The behavioral economists’ answer to this problem is that economists can use 
­laboratory and field experiments, or what is called experimental economics, to test 
­alternative building blocks and find those that best describe how people actually 
­behave. Let’s consider an example: In an experiment, half the participants were given 
a mug and the other half were given a pen, each of approximately the same value. The 
­participants were then allowed to exchange one for the other simply by returning the 
first item. Since who got the pen or the mug was random, the rationality building block 
would suggest that about half of each group would choose to trade the gift they had for 
the other. In fact, only 10 percent of each group chose to trade, suggesting that what 
one has ­influences what one wants—in contradiction to the traditional building block 
of ­rationality. A behavioral economist would then include endowment effects (people 
value something more just because they have it) in their building blocks for models. 
Endowment effects fit the broader “behaving purposefully” building block; they do not 
fit the narrower “rationality” building block.
	
Behavioral economists using evolutionary models—models of how an individual’s 
preferences are determined on the basis of natural selection of what is useful for 
­survival—argue that the endowment effect is hardwired into people’s brains because it 
serves a very useful evolutionary function. It makes people happier with what they 
have, which decreases the social conflict over who gets what. The endowment effect 
probably makes it possible for parents to put up with their children, and to actually 
believe that they are close to perfect, even though, to an objective observer, they are far 
from perfect. In fact, without the endowment effect, we would probably have an online 
market in children where you could trade yours for someone else’s.
Traditional Models Provide Simplicity and Insight 
Modern 
­traditional economists don’t agree with the direction that behavioral economics is 
heading in terms of giving up the old building blocks; they strongly prefer staying with 
the narrower building blocks of rationality and self-interest. The reason is the simplicity 
and clarity that come from models with these traditional building blocks; these 
Endowment effects—the observation 
that what one has affects what one 
wants—are an example of a modern 
behavioral economics building block.
Courtesy of Robert Bloomfield’s 
Mentanomics™

463
traditional models give clear-cut results that nicely highlight issues in ways that the 
­modern building blocks do not. It was this view that was expressed by economist Gary 
Becker when he said that traditional building blocks, used unflinchingly, are the essence of 
the economic approach. He would argue that behavioral economists have flinched.3
	
Because Becker and other similarly minded economists taught at the University of 
Chicago, until recently, this unflinching approach was associated with what was called 
the Chicago approach to economics. Recently, however, a number of University of 
Chicago school economists such as Richard Thaler have begun using a broader set of 
building blocks, and, as I will discuss below, have been in the forefront of drawing 
policy implications from models based on modern building blocks.
Behavioral Economic Models Reflect Observed Behavior 
Behav-
ioral economists’ response to Becker and others who advocate sticking with the 
­traditional building blocks is that they agree that the traditional model provides 
­enormous insights, and that they do not advocate discarding the supply/demand model 
Traditional models provide simple and 
clear results, which can highlight issues 
that behavioral models cannot.
ADDED DIMENSION
the inconsistency, but, instead, the result 
of different electrochemical processes 
occurring in the brain. ­People are essen-
tially hardwired to be inconsistent. In a 
sense, more than one “you” is making 
decisions. There are the “emotional you” 
when your emotions hold sway and the 
“rational you” when the rational side of 
your brain holds sway. Depending on 
which “you” is being ­affected, the choice 
that “you” prefer can be quite different. 
And when both you’s are ­affected, the 
result is often confusion. (This is a rea-
son why advertisers appeal to both emo-
tion and rationality simultaneously.)
This supports the behavioral economists’ argument that 
we need to use building blocks that are different from the 
traditional ones. It also opens up a whole new set of possi-
bilities about controlling behavior, such as the precommit-
ment savings ­strategy discussed in the text. Another 
example of that precommitment strategy is not keeping 
dessert in the refrigerator to avoid temptation. Such pre-
commitment strategies allow the ­“rational you” to win out 
over the “emotional you.”
Neuroeconomics and Microeconomics
Both traditional and behavioral econom-
ics ­generally assume that the most basic 
building block of economic analysis is 
the individual. Where the two groups dif-
fer is in the ­assumptions they make 
about how the ­individual ­behaves. 
Some economists, such as  Caltech 
economist Colin Camerer and ­University 
of Zurich economist Ernst Fehr, have 
questioned whether economists should 
study building blocks more basic than 
the ­individual. They ­argue that individu-
als are made up of cells, and that behav-
ior is the ­result of chemical and ­electrical 
processes in the brain. By studying these 
brain processes, we can better understand an individual’s 
behavior. To do this they ­perform CT scans of people’s 
brains under a ­variety of ­controlled conditions and see 
what part of the brain is ­reacting. Their work goes under 
the name ­neuroeconomics.
	
What they have found is that choice is a very compli-
cated electrochemical phenomenon. For example, incon-
sistent decisions are often not the result of a mistake that 
would have been corrected if someone had pointed out 
© Brand X Pictures/PunchStock RF
3Some economists, called evolutionary economists, believe that even this group of building blocks 
does not go far enough. They advocate for thinking about individuals as reflecting their evolutionary 
tendencies and being shaped by the market into the type of individuals that traditional economists 
­assume are their inherent natures. Others, called econophysicists because they are often trained as 
physicists, argue that for many aggregate issues individual behavior is irrelevant; what happens in 
the aggregate reflects statistical properties of interactions that are independent of agents and that are 
independent of the building blocks used within the model.

464	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
or the traditional building blocks, especially when teaching economics. Their argument 
is not that models built on the traditional building blocks—such as supply and demand—
are irrelevant; it is simply that the traditional building blocks do not explain everything, 
and that attempts to use them to explain everything actually undermine our understanding 
of what models using the traditional building blocks do explain. Behavioral economists 
argue that empirical work has convincingly shown that people are predictably irrational 
in some of their behaviors, and modern economics must take that into account.
	
Eventually, the hope of modern economics is that economists will have a set of 
models that “explain” the decisions we observe, along with a guide that explains which 
models fit what situations. Alas, you’re not going to get that guide in this book (or in 
any other textbook). Economists are just not there yet. In fact, we’re far from it, and 
even those who use the new building blocks do not believe that the behavioral models 
are sufficiently developed to replace the traditional models as the pedagogical core of 
economics. That’s why I focused on the traditional building blocks and the standard 
supply/demand model throughout the book. But that focus should not lead you to think 
of the supply/demand model and its assumptions as anything more than a beginning of 
an introduction to modern economics.
Behavioral and Traditional Informal  
(Heuristic) Models
As I stated above, economists have many types of models—verbal, empirical, and 
formal models. Modern economists use all of them. Thus, to understand modern eco-
nomics, you need to know the various types and their advantages and disadvantages. 
Let’s consider each briefly, starting with heuristic models.
	
Most of the time when laypeople hear about the results of an economist’s analysis, 
they don’t see the underlying formal model. Instead, all they see is a heuristic or verbal 
discussion that conveys the essence of the model. But if you search deeper into the 
discussion, you can generally extract the model and see whether the economist is using 
behavioral or traditional building blocks.
	
To show you the difference between heuristic models based on traditional building 
blocks and ones based on broader behavioral building blocks, let’s consider some dis-
cussions in two popular books that apply economic reasoning to everyday events. That 
consideration will help clarify the difference between an economist using traditional 
building blocks and one using behavioral building blocks.
The Armchair Economist: Heuristic Models  
Using Traditional Building Blocks
Let’s begin with a consideration of a model of University of Rochester economist Steven 
Landsburg. Landsburg calls himself an “armchair economist,” by which he means that he 
provides heuristic models to explain everyday events. For the most part, Landsburg’s heuris-
tic models use traditional economic building blocks; he unflinchingly and ­happily pulls 
out unexpected implications from models built on those assumptions. Thus, Landsburg is 
an excellent example of a modern economist who sticks to traditional building blocks.
	
The particular model of his that I will consider deals with a sometimes taboo 
topic—sex. His model is designed to make the reader think, and to see how economic 
reasoning can come to counterintuitive conclusions. Coming to such highly counterin-
tuitive ideas is seen as a strong plus for these models based on traditional building 
blocks because it gets people to think of questions in a different way than they ­normally 
do, and in the process provides important insights.
Q-5  Which are better—models 
based on traditional building blocks or 
models based on behavioral building 
blocks?
Book cover of The Armchair Economist by 
Steven E. Landsburg, The Free Press, 
Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc. Photo © 
Roberts Publishing Services.

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
465
More Sex Is Safer Sex 
In one of his more provocative models (available on 
Slate, www.slate.com/id/2033), Landsburg considered the problem facing Martin, “a 
charming and generally prudent young man with a limited sexual history, who has 
been gently flirting with his coworker Joan.” Landsburg described a situation in which 
Martin and Joan were both thinking that they might go home together after an office 
party that would be held the next day. However, on the way to the party, Martin notices 
a Center for Disease Control subway advertisement advocating the virtues of absti-
nence. Feeling guilty about his thoughts, he decides to stay home rather than to tempt 
himself. He is being virtuous.
	
Joan shows up at the party and, in Martin’s absence, she hooks up with an “equally 
charming but considerably less prudent Maxwell.” Maxwell is rather careless in prac-
ticing safe sex, and the end result of this hookup is that Joan ends up with AIDS—all 
because Martin was virtuous. (Economic models conveying these parables of the prob-
lems with being virtuous have a long history in economics, going back to Bernard 
Mandeville, who wrote The Fable of the Bees back in the 1700s.)
	
Landsburg then argued that this story demonstrates that Martin’s withdrawal from 
the mating game made the mating game more dangerous for others. He argued that it 
follows that the world would have been better off (specifically, we could have slowed 
the spread of AIDS) if “the Martins of the world would loosen up a little.” He then 
reported some empirical estimates by a Harvard professor that if everyone with fewer 
than about 2.25 partners per year had had a few more partners, we could actually have 
slowed the spread of AIDS. Landsburg argued the following: “To an economist, it’s 
crystal clear why people with limited sexual pasts choose to supply too little sex in the 
present: their services are underpriced.”
	
Landsburg’s model was meant to shock, which it did. But it was also meant to hone 
people’s reasoning ability, which it also did. It captured the economic insight that 
when the effects of one’s decisions on others are not included in a person’s decision-
making process—that is, where there are externalities—the decision may not lead 
to the aggregate outcome that most people would prefer. But they were the decisions 
that Landsburg thought people would make. Landsburg’s model was based on the tra-
ditional building block of strong self-interest.
Why Car Insurance Costs More Some Places than Others  
While Landsburg is traditional in his building blocks, he is not always traditional in the 
formal models he uses, and in some of the issues he studies, he goes far beyond the 
simple supply/demand model. For example, in another model, he considers the issue 
of why car insurance costs three times as much in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, than in 
Ithaca, New York, even though the theft and accident rates are not significantly differ-
ent between the two cities. The model he uses is a “path-dependent tipping-point” 
model with two, rather than one, equilibria. In a tipping-point model, the model can 
arrive at quite different results depending on people’s initial choice. The results are 
path-dependent, and without knowing the path, one cannot predict the equilibrium. 
Tipping-point models are a type of a broader group of models called path-dependent 
models—models in which the path to equilibrium affects the equilibrium. Path-dependent 
models require a knowledge of the relevant history to reach a conclusion. Were the 
supply/demand model a path-dependent model, it would not lead to a unique equilib-
rium price.
	
The argument Landsburg gives is the following. In the pricing of insurance, 
there is a feedback effect of the initial choices people make of whether to buy insur-
ance that affects the cost of insurance. If a few people decide not to buy insurance, 
the costs of insurance to others who do buy insurance will be higher since, if they 
have an accident with an uninsured driver, their insurance will have to pay. Because 
Decisions about sexual activity may 
have externalities, and therefore what is 
best for the individuals involved may not 
be best for society.

466
insurance costs are higher, even more people drive without insurance, further 
increasing the rates for those who do buy insurance. Landsburg argues that that is 
what happened in Philadelphia. In Ithaca, however, the situation went the other way—
many initially bought insurance, which meant that insurance costs for everyone were 
lower, which led others to buy ­insurance, which led to even lower rates. Both equilib-
ria are self-reinforcing, and, once chosen, are very difficult to change, without a 
major intervention by government.
	
Such government interventions go against Landsburg’s (and most traditional 
economists’) intuition. Traditional models based on the traditional building blocks 
without externalities almost inevitably lead to a laissez-faire policy. He states, “For 
ideological free marketers (like myself), theories (like this one) can be intellectually 
jarring. We are accustomed to defending free markets as the guarantors of both liberty 
and prosperity, but here’s a case where liberty and prosperity are at odds: By forcing 
people to act against their own self-interest in the short run, governments can make 
everybody more prosperous in the long run. . . . Is it worth sacrificing a small amount 
of freedom for cheaper auto insurance? I am inclined to believe that the answer is yes, 
but the question makes me squirm a bit.”
	
Here we see a heuristic model based on reasoning that people are rational and 
­self-interested, as in the supply/demand model. But because it is not a supply/demand 
model with a single equilibrium, it leads to a quite nontraditional result of two possible 
equilibria. It also leads to a potential policy solution—one requiring all individuals to 
get insurance. 
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
The two arguments that I present in the text 
are examples of Landsburg’s provocative 
­approach, which is characteristic of modern 
traditional economists. Below are some of 
his other ­provocative conclusions based on 
traditional building blocks. See if you can 
figure out what the implicit model is that 
leads to that conclusion. If you can’t figure 
out the model, or want to check your rea-
soning, his arguments can be found in his 
book More Sex Is Safer Sex, and brief sum-
maries of his reasoning can be found among 
the library resources available via McGraw-
Hill Connect®.
1.	 Daughters cause divorce.
2.	 A taste for revenge is healthier than 
a thirst for gold.
3.	 A ban on elephant hunting is bad 
news for elephants.
Can You Explain Landsburg’s Provocative Insights?
4.	 Disaster assistance is bad news for the 
people who receive it.
5.	 Malicious computer hackers should be 
­executed.
6.	 The most charitable people support the 
fewest charities.
7.	 Writing books is socially irresponsible.
8.	 Elbowing your way to the front of  
the water-fountain line is socially 
­responsible.
Many of these are presented a bit in jest  
(I think)—they are meant to shock and get 
you to think. But that is precisely how the 
best ­advocates of the traditional building 
blocks use their heuristic models based on 
traditional building blocks. The models pro-
vide you with a different view of an issue, 
and thereby increase your understanding of 
what’s really going on.
Photo © Roberts Publishing Services.
Book cover of More Sex is Safer Sex: 
The Unconventional Wisdom of 
Economics by Steven E. Landsburg, 
The Free Press, Division of Simon & 
Schuster, Inc. 

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
467
The Economic Naturalist: Heuristic Models  
Using Behavioral Building Blocks
Let’s now turn to some models from another popular book, this one by Cornell econo-
mist Robert Frank, entitled The Economic Naturalist. Frank’s approach is very similar 
to Landsburg’s. He observes the events around him and tries to understand them using 
economic building blocks. The difference between Frank and Landsburg is that Frank 
is much more willing than Landsburg to go beyond the traditional building blocks. He 
assumes that people are only purposeful, not rational, and that they follow enlightened 
self-interest rather than being only self-interested. This allows for a much wider range 
of models and set of explanations, as well as a much wider range of policy interven-
tions that follow from the model. We can see the difference by considering two of the 
models he presents.
Why Are People More Likely to Return Cash than a 
­Lampshade? 
The first of his models that we will consider is designed to 
­explain why people are more likely to return cash to a store when given too much 
change by a cashier than to return merchandise for which they were not charged. 
He begins by reporting the results of a survey in which 90 percent of the respon-
dents said they would return $20 to a store if given that amount extra in change, 
but only 10 percent said they would return a $20 lampshade if the cashier had ne-
glected to charge for it. If people took only their own interests into account, they 
shouldn’t return either.
	
He explains this difference in behavior by arguing that people take into account 
who will be hurt by the action. In the case of the cash, the “cashier will have to pay out 
of her own pocket.” Thus, he reasons most people will not want her to be penalized. In 
the case of the lampshade, it is the store, not the individual, that will suffer the loss, 
and people are much less worried about hurting stores than they are about hurting 
people. Notice the difference in Frank’s assumption as compared to Landsburg’s. In 
Frank’s model, people are somewhat self-interested (they keep the $20 lampshade), 
but not totally self-interested (they return the $20). Using a model with traditional 
building blocks, the prediction would be that no one would return the money. Frank’s 
behavioral model allows for the possibility that individuals care about the impact of 
their actions on others.
Why Don’t More People Wear Velcro Shoes? 
A second model found 
in Frank’s book deals with why people continue to wear shoes with shoelaces, even 
though Velcro shoes are more practical, and, according to Frank, “offer clear advan-
tages over laces” because lace shoes can become untied, causing people to trip and 
fall. He argues that the reason why shoelaces are still predominant is that the very 
young (who don’t know how to tie shoes) and the very old (who are too feeble to bend 
down and tie shoes) wear Velcro shoes, and therefore they have become associated 
with what Frank calls “incompetence and fragility”—characteristics with which most 
people don’t want to be associated.
	
Where this explanation deviates from the traditional building blocks is the rational-
ity assumption. Using a technology that is less efficient than another (shoelaces over 
Velcro) is irrational, and thus doesn’t make sense. The behavioral assumption in 
Frank’s model is that people care about what other people think about them and thus 
take social issues, not just economic issues, into account when making their decisions. 
Behavioral economic models take social dimensions of problems into account; traditional 
economic models don’t.
Behavioral models take social 
considerations into account; traditional 
models do not.
© Panama7/iStock/Getty Images Plus RF

468
	
I should include an addendum (confession?) to this model; I’ve worn Velcro shoes 
for the last 30 years, much to the horror of my children, who asked me not to be seen 
with them when I wear them. Why do I wear them? I suspect because of my training in 
traditional economic models. That training has shaped me so that I value efficiency for 
its own sake. By wearing Velcro shoes I am making a statement to society (I am as much 
a social creature as others) that I am not driven by social norms about dressing (anyone 
who has seen my standard attire can attest to the fact that I am not). I consciously do it (at 
least in the sense of not allowing my wife to put out the clothes she wants me to wear) 
and, to some degree, I revel in the looks I get because it means that I am free, and 
­efficient, allowing me to consider others slaves of some designer. I tell my kids that some 
day the world will follow me. They tell me, “Don’t hold your breath.”
	
My behavior represents another dimension of behavior that behavioral economists 
have discovered. Studying a model and using its assumptions can lead you to adopt its 
assumptions as your own; thus, the models you choose to use to look at the world can 
influence your behavior. This means that studying economics may not only provide 
you with insights; it also may change you.
The Limits of Heuristic Models
I could go on with hundreds of these vignettes; they are entertaining, fun, and good 
practice for the mind. If my sole purpose were to entertain you, I’d include a lot more. 
But the principles course is meant to do more than entertain; it is meant to teach, and 
except when they are writing for laypeople, most economists see heuristic models as 
simply a stepping-stone to a more formal model. The reason is that heuristic models 
are not sufficiently precise, making their validity impossible to test. Think back to the 
heuristic models we presented and ask yourself how convinced you were by the argu-
ments. Each was relatively easy to modify to come to a different conclusion.
Q-6  Does the author’s tendency to 
wear Velcro shoes demonstrate that he 
is beyond social pressures?
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
The text recounts two heuristic models that 
are found in Robert Frank’s The Economic 
­Naturalist. In his review of Frank’s book, 
­Vanderbilt economist John Siegfried listed 
the questions that led to 10 other models in 
Frank’s book. Below is Siegfried’s list; I 
leave it to you to develop the model that 
would ­explain the questions.
  1.	Why does a light come on when you 
open a refrigerator, but not a  
freezer?
  2.	Why do dry cleaners charge  
more for women’s shirts than	
for men’s?
  3.	Why are brown eggs more expen-
sive than white ones?
  4.	Why do women endure the discom-
fort of high heels?
Can You Explain Frank’s Observations?
  5.	Why are whales in danger of extinction, 
but not chickens?
  6.	If we have Blockbuster video, why don’t  
we have Blockbuster book?
  7.	 Why is there so much mathematical 
­formalism in economics?
  8.	Why do stores post signs saying that  
guide dogs are permitted inside?
  9.	Why do most U.S. department stores  
put men’s fashions on the ground floor?
10.	 Why is it easier to find a partner when 
you already have one?
If you want to see the models Frank came up 
with, see his book The Economic Naturalist. 
Short summaries of the explanations Frank 
­followed can be found among the library re-
sources available via McGraw-Hill Connect®. 
Photo © Roberts Publishing Services.
Book cover of The Economic Naturalist 
by Robert H. Frank, Basic Books. 

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
469
	
For example, what if Joan had chosen not to hook up with anyone? Or what if she 
had seen the same abstinence ad as had Martin? Then the argument would have been 
reversed. Would that mean that the Martins of the world should have less sex? Or what 
if Velcro shoes suddenly became “in.” Would that mean that the more practical solution 
wins out? So, while the heuristic models embodied in the vignettes are entertaining, it 
is a fair question to ask whether we really know anything more about the world after 
learning about the models than we did before. To a scientist the answer is no, we don’t, 
at least in a scientific sense. That’s why science is not based on heuristic models.
Empirical and Formal Models
Scientists are very hesitant to base any knowledge on anecdotes or heuristic models, 
even highly convincing ones. The reason is that they have found that the human mind 
is extremely good at creating convincing stories that make sense within its own world 
view or frame, but not necessarily outside it. They have found that the human mind is 
what psychologists call a fast pattern completer. Heuristic models exploit this ten-
dency in humans that gives people a sense of understanding, but not necessarily a sci-
entific understanding. Scientists argue that to extend a heuristic model to true 
understanding, you have to quantify and empirically test your arguments.
The Importance of Empirical Work in Modern Economics
This leads us to a second important element of modern economics: It is highly empirical. 
That is, modern economics is based on experiments that can be replicated, or on statistical 
analysis of real-world observations. While the importance of empirical work has a long 
history in economics, going back to William Petty in the 1600s, up until the 1940s, 
­economics primarily concentrated on deductive, not inductive, reasoning. That occurred 
because of the lack of data and the lack of computational power to analyze data.
	
With the development of econometrics—the statistical analysis of economic 
data—in the 1940s, that started to change. But because of limited data and computing 
power, empirical work in economics did not move to the forefront in economics until 
the late 1980s when computer power had expanded enough to begin making such an 
empirical approach useful. At that point, induction started to supplement deduction as 
the economist’s method for understanding the real world. Since the late 1980s this 
movement toward induction has accelerated, so that today it is fair to say that the 
­development of computing power has fundamentally changed the way economic 
­research is done.
	
The strong reliance on empirical work is true of all modern economists—both those 
who use traditional building blocks and those who use behavioral building blocks. 
Today, much empirical work in economics is not based on formal deductive models, 
but rather on heuristic models—relatively simple and informal models that capture a 
possible insight, such as those we discussed above by Frank and Landsburg.
	
The difference between an economic scientist’s heuristic model and those of Frank 
and Landsburg presented above is that the economic scientist doesn’t stop with the 
heuristic model, as did Frank’s and Landsburg’s presentations. He or she builds an 
empirical model around that heuristic model and supports the argument with empirical 
evidence. Essentially, what he or she does is take relationships found in the heuristic 
model and see if these relationships can be generalized subject to scientifically based 
statistical studies. Economists call this approach “letting the data speak.” To let the 
data speak, you collect data and analyze them with statistical and econometric tools.
	
To analyze an issue with an empirical model—a model that statistically discovers a 
pattern in the data—researchers empirically study the relationship arrived at in their 
Q-7  Why are economists very 
hesitant to base knowledge on  
heuristic models?
Modern economics—models based  
on both traditional and behavioral 
building blocks—relies on experiments 
and statistical analysis of real-world 
observations.

470	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
heuristic models. That’s what Steve Levitt did with enormous creativity and success. He 
looked at a variety of issues: Do sumo wrestlers throw matches? Do basketball teams 
cheat? And why do drug dealers often live with their mothers? He looks at the data, cre-
ates simple informal models and hypotheses, and uses those models to structure his 
empirical study. For example, he reasoned that if who won sumo wrestling matches did 
not involve cheating, whether a wrestler was close to winning enough matches to raise 
his ranking would make no difference as to whether he won a match or not. But he rea-
soned further that if wrestlers are self-interested and rational, they will have an incentive 
to agree to quid pro quo arrangements to cheat and throw a match, allowing opponents to 
win a match in exchange for their throwing a future match. So now he had a testable 
hypothesis. His hypothesis was: The closer a wrestler is to raising his rank, the more 
often his opponent will intentionally lose. He then collected and statistically analyzed the 
data. What he discovered was that how close a wrestler was to elimination did make a 
difference, which allowed him to conclude that sumo wrestlers “cheat.”
Regression Models 
A primary tool of an empirical economist is a regression 
model, an empirical model in which one statistically relates one set of variables to 
another, and the statistical tools that accompany it. For example, say you are wonder-
ing if a professor giving higher grades increases the number of students in his class. 
You would collect data about two variables—the grades he normally gives and enrollment 
in his classes—giving you a relationship shown in Figure 21-1. Then you would “run a 
regression,” which essentially means that you use a statistical package to find a line that 
“best fits” the data, where “best fit” means making the distances between that line and the 
points as small as possible. If the “best fit” line is upward-sloping, as it would be here, then 
the regression model’s answer to the question is a tentative yes, subject to all the things that 
were held constant and an assumption that causation goes from grades to enrollment.
	
The “goodness of fit” between the two variables is described by the coefficient of 
determination, which is a measure of the proportion of the variability in the data that 
is accounted for by the statistical model. The larger the coefficient of determination, 
the better the fit, and if it is a perfect fit, then every point will be on the “best fit” line. 
This isn’t a statistics class so I won’t go into further explanation, but that short descrip-
tion should give you a sense of how empirical regression models work. Regression 
models are the workhorses of much of what applied microeconomists do, and modern 
economists become almost magicians at pulling information out from data.
A regression model is a model that 
statistically relates one set of variables 
to another.
FIGURE 21-1  Grades versus Class Size
A regression finds a line that best fits a 
combination of points such as the one  
shown here. It appears from this scatter  
plot that class size is related to average  
grade.
400
0
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.0
3.0
2.0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Class size
Grades versus class size
Average grade
© Nice One Productions/Corbis RF
Do sumo wrestlers cheat?

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
471
	
Often economists’ empirical models explore issues far from the standard domain of 
economics. One example recounted in Yale professor Ian Ayres’ book Super Crunchers 
(a book that nicely explains the importance of data analysis to modern society) is by 
Princeton ­professor Orley Ashenfelter. He developed a model that predicted whether a 
particular year’s wine would be a good vintage. He hypothesized that the quality of a wine 
in a ­particular year depended on rainfall, weather, and similar elements in that year. He 
­collected all the ­appropriate data, and then related those data to the price of wine by ­running 
a regression. He then developed the following relationship from his regression model:
Wine quality = 12.145 + 0.001 (Winter rainfall) + 0.06 (Average growing-season  
temperature) − 0.004 (Harvest rainfall)
This relationship tells us that the quality of a Bordeaux wine depends upon rainfall and 
temperature. He upset “wine connoisseurs” by arguing that his simple regression 
model does a better job at determining a good year for wine than they do through tast-
ing. Moreover, he argued that his model can determine quality long before wine con-
noisseurs could even start tasting the wine. So when choosing a wine, forget about 
sniffing, swirling, and tasting; just get your computer out, collect the data, plug in the 
numbers, and solve the equation. Is he right? I’m no wine connoisseur, but the people 
I talk to (admittedly, they tend to be economists) believe that he is.
	
Another regression model has been used by baseball teams to determine how valu-
able a prospect is. Econometrically trained specialists collected data on young baseball 
recruits and ran regressions, finding how different skills are correlated with a team’s 
success. When these specialists did this, they found that bases on balls were almost as 
important as hits. Thus, they argued that a person’s ability to draw a walk should be 
one of the variables considered in choosing a recruit, something that previously wasn’t 
done. They then used that regression model to predict which young recruit would most 
likely help a team win. The strategy worked, as discussed by Michael Lewis in Moneyball; 
after using the model, the Oakland Athletics won their division, despite their low pay-
roll. Oakland’s success did not go unnoticed; when the Boston Red Sox, a team with a 
high payroll, started using the model, they won the World Series.
	
These empirical models are sometimes called data-mining models, but I prefer to 
call them pattern-finding models. They play an important role in the modern micro-
economist’s tool kit and have become more important because of the enormous 
­increase in computing power and statistical software. This increase in computer power 
allows economic researchers to find stable patterns in data much more easily than 
­before. With sophisticated econometric software, computers can automatically find 
patterns and turn those patterns into models.
	
Summarizing: The development of computer power and these empirical models 
has led to an enormous change in how modern microeconomics is done. For example, 
when I asked top graduate students as part of an interview what differentiated an 
­economist from another social scientist, they did not say that they differed from other 
social scientists in the building blocks they used. Instead, they said that the difference 
was the economist’s reliance on formal empirical methods.4
Simple Data Models: Charts, Graphs, and Quantitative 
­Argumentation 
As a principles student, you will likely not be developing 
­regression models, but you will be building models based on data by developing a 
chart or a graph that demonstrates how something is changing over time or a pattern 
Regression models can reveal all  
sorts of relationships from the effect  
of weather on the quality of wine to  
the contribution of a player’s ability  
to draw a walk toward a team’s  
season record.
4That may change in the future since other social sciences are becoming much more empirical as 
well, but for the next decade they will likely still lag behind economics.

472	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
that captures the co-movement of two variables. These charts and graphs might not 
have the full scientific look of a regression model, but they are often more useful. 
What characterizes the modern economic way of thinking is not the regression model 
per se, but using quantitative data to make an argument, often by presenting those data 
with a simple chart or graph.
The Role of Formal Models
Were economic modeling only a matter of data mining, empirical models would replace 
all other types of modeling, but it is not, and they haven’t. Data, by themselves, have no 
meaning; they have to be interpreted and given meaning, and how one interprets the data 
depends on the model and the building blocks one has in mind. Either implicitly or 
­explicitly, one’s model guides how one organizes the data. That’s why theory remains 
important, and an important part of this principles course is meant to give you practice in 
understanding the theoretical structure of economic thinking.
	
You can see the importance of theory by thinking about a magic eye picture—as 
you change your focus, what you see will change. (You can see a magic eye picture at 
www.magiceye.com.) A simpler example is the figure of the old woman shown here. 
Did you see an “old woman”? Most of you will have because that’s how I described it. 
But what if I had said “beautiful young woman” rather than “old woman”? If I had, I 
suspect you might have seen the picture in a different light. The moral: Which pattern 
your eye sees in pictures, and even more so in data, depends on the implicit model or 
frame that you bring to the picture or the data. (If you only see one, keep looking; the 
eye of the “old woman” is the ear of the beautiful young woman.)
	
I raise this issue of framing because it highlights the difficulty of pulling informa-
tion from an empirical model. Two different economists may well see different results 
even with the same empirical model. Let’s consider an example of such a recent debate 
in economics. The debate concerns the deterrent effect of the death penalty.
	
In natural science one would determine whether the death penalty has a deterrent 
effect by doing a controlled experiment that isolates specific variables and changing 
one variable to see if it causes another to change. But in economics such controlled 
experiments are generally impossible. An economist can’t suggest that we try out the 
death penalty to see what its deterrent effect would be. So instead of using controlled 
experiments, economists need to be creative and search for what they call a natural 
experiment (an event created by nature that can serve as an experiment) that may 
help to shed light on an issue.
	
Doing such a study with existing data, economists Isaac Ehrlich and Joanna Shep-
herd have found a statistical relationship between the death penalty and the number of 
murders. In one statistical study, Ehrlich found that an increase in the number of exe-
cutions by 1 percent is associated with a decrease in the murder rate by 0.5 percent, 
while Shepherd found that one execution deterred seven to eight murders. These statis-
tical relationships have been contested by a number of economists. They pointed out 
that how the variables are specified and the equations mattered. For example, using the 
same data, economists John Donohue and Justin Wulfers came to quite different 
­conclusions. They stated: “The view that the death penalty deters is still the product of 
belief, not evidence.”
	
I’m not going to get into the debate here; I don’t claim to know who is right. I 
recount it merely to give you a sense that given the limited ability economists have to 
conduct controlled experiments, letting the data speak will not necessarily provide the 
definitive answer. This means that economists, and other social scientists, must rely on 
their theoretical models to guide them in interpreting data and in drawing out policy 
implications from their work.
The same pattern can be interpreted in 
multiple ways. Economists rely on 
theoretical models to help them interpret 
the data.
Q-8  True or false? Debates in 
modern economics will be resolved by 
letting the data speak.
Original image from an anonymous 
German postcard, circa 1888
Source: Anonymous German postcard, 
circa 1888

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
473
Different Types of Formal Models That Economists Use 
The 
above discussion leads us to a third characteristic of modern economics. Earlier economists 
used models with relatively simple relationships among variables; the supply/demand 
model is an example of such a simple model. Modern economists—both modern ­traditional 
and modern behavioral economists—still use simple models, but they also use models that 
allow for much more complex relationships among variables than do the simple models. 
These analytically sophisticated models cannot be expressed in the two-dimensional graphs 
used by earlier economists. 
	
An example of the difference between earlier economists and modern economists can 
be seen by considering the “tipping-point” model that Landsburg used to analyze differ-
ences in car insurance prices. As I stated earlier, that model is a path-dependent model, 
which technically means that any decision feeds back into the model. In a ­path-dependent 
model, you can only know what will happen if you know the path the model takes. Math-
ematically, specifying path-dependent models is much more ­complicated than specifying 
supply/demand models; you have to use an advanced-calculus, differential-equations 
model rather than a standard algebraic model, or you have to solve it computationally.
	
The reason why formal models have evolved from simple models to more complex 
and highly technical mathematical models, again, is that technology has changed. In 
this case, the technology is mathematics. Today’s economists are much better trained 
in mathematics than were earlier economists, which allows economists to go far 
beyond the interrelationships allowed in supply/demand models. With advances in 
mathematics, for example, you can have:
•	 Models with many equilibria, so it is difficult to know what an equilibrium is.
•	 Models in which not only are the variables related, but so too are the changes 
in variables and the changes in changes in variables.
•	 Models in which systemic equilibrium involves enormous continual change in 
the parts so that even though the system is in equilibrium, the individual parts 
are not.
•	 Models in which relationships are nonlinear on various levels, and in which an 
infinitely small change can lead to drastically different results.
	
The potential interrelationships that can be captured in modern formal models are 
almost unending, and when one studies the broad range of models with all these 
­potential interrelationships, the number of potential outcomes in the economy is awe-
some. There is a formal theoretical model that can arrive at just about any possible 
conclusion.
	
Which theoretical model is right? Do you choose models with more complex build-
ing blocks, as argued by behavioral economists? Or do you choose models with more 
limiting traditional building blocks? Do you not worry about building blocks? Or do 
you just worry about which model best fits the empirical evidence? Such questions are 
the grist of the modern economists’ debates. (And you thought we economists were 
boring people; if my kids only understood how wildly interesting these questions are—
would you believe?)
The Trade-Off between Simplicity and Completeness 
You might 
think that one should use the most complex model with the broadest building blocks 
because that would give you the broadest approach. But that doesn’t necessarily ­follow. 
Each new interrelationship involves adding an additional level of technical ­difficulty, 
and the more complex the model, the harder it is to arrive at a conclusion. Thus, in 
their modeling, economists make a continual trade-off between simplicity and com-
pleteness. At the principles level, the choice is clear: KISS (Keep It Simple ­Stupid) 
Q-9  Is the supply and demand 
model a path-dependent model?

474	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
rules, which is why the graphical supply/demand model is the workhorse of principles 
of economics. That’s why, even though modern economics goes far beyond supply 
and demand, the principles course focuses on supply and demand and teaches 
­students the traditional model.5 Almost all economists agree that for introducing 
principles students to economic reasoning, used appropriately with sufficient 
­caveats, the supply/demand model is a really neat and useful model. It is the 
­perfect calisthenics of the mind for moving on to models with more complicated 
behavioral building blocks.
	
Let me give an example of where the model one uses matters: the state of the 
­aggregate economy in 2008. The question at issue was: Should we be worried about 
the economy going into a depression or not? The traditional aggregate-supply/aggregate-
demand model, which was the standard textbook model, suggested that we should 
not be concerned. In it, the economy is close to equilibrium, and policies exist to 
move it to equilibrium if it isn’t. That isn’t the case for some of the more complex 
formal ­models. In these more complex models, the aggregate economy could suddenly 
change depending on what people believe. You can have what is called a self-confirming 
­equilibrium—an equilibrium in a model in which people’s beliefs become self-fulfilling—
so if people think the economy will go into a depression, it will. In some models, what 
people believe might not even matter; you can have strange attractor models, some-
times called butterfly effect models—models in which a small change causes a large 
effect. For example, a butterfly flapping its wings in China can cause the output of the 
U.S. economy to fall significantly. In these models, a small change could tip the 
­economy into a low-growth, high-unemployment equilibrium that would be difficult to 
escape. In these models, therefore, we had reason to be seriously concerned about 
the U.S. economy going into a depression. Unfortunately, the slow growth since 
then suggest that the more complicated ­models were correct.
Other Formal Models 
There are many other types of formal models as 
well. For example, set theory models are models based only on formal logical rela-
tionships. Yet another is a game theory model—a model in which one analyzes the 
strategic interaction of individuals when they take into account the likely response 
of other people to their actions. Game theory models form the core of much of 
what is studied in graduate microeconomics today. Thus, the standard graduate mi-
croeconomics text has only three supply and demand diagrams in an entire 
1,000-plus-page book.
	
More complicated models often yield no analytic solution—that is, you can’t solve 
the set of equations to discover the equilibrium in the model. These complicated ana-
lytic models were unusable for a traditional economist because a model that you 
couldn’t solve analytically didn’t provide any insight. That isn’t the case for a modern 
economist. If a modern economist can’t solve a model analytically, he or she will esti-
mate the solution by simulating the model with a computer. Computational power 
replaces analytic elegance. Thus, computer simulation is an important tool of modern 
Game theory models analyze the 
strategic interaction among individuals.
5I discuss the justification for why the textbooks focus on the supply/demand model and the 
­traditional model, even as the economists in their research have moved from them, in The Stories 
Economists Tell and a Journal of Economic Education article, “What Economists Teach and 
What We Believe.” While the supply/demand model captures these ideas, for mathematically 
­inclined students, as Harold Kuhn, a famous mathematical economist, once told his students, the 
lessons can be generalized into a set of constrained optimization models assuming convex 
­functions, and if principles students were strongly mathematically inclined, many of the models 
could be presented in calculus format.

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
475
economists (both those using behavioral and those using traditional assumptions), and 
in his or her research a modern economist will often go from struggling with analyti-
cally solving a model to simulating it on the computer, and then back to trying to solve 
it analytically.
	
Economists use a number of different types of computer simulations. The one 
described above was a simulation designed to solve a model with a specified set of 
equations that can’t be solved analytically. In those types of simulations, the computer 
is a computational assistant that can arrive at estimated solutions to complicated ana-
lytic sets of equations. This approach is widespread. A more novel approach to com-
puter simulation is designed to deal with problems that are so difficult that you don’t 
even know how to specify the equations. How do economists model when they can’t 
specify the equations that describe the relationships in the model? They use the com-
puter to guide them in specifying the model itself.
	
This alternative approach to modeling is called the agent-based computational 
­economic (ACE) model—a culture dish approach to the study of economic phenomena in 
which agents (encapsulated collections of data and methods representing an entity residing 
in that environment on the computer) are allowed to interact in a computationally con-
structed environment and the researcher observes the results of that interaction. (For 
more information about ACE models, see www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/ace.htm.) 
ACE modeling is fundamentally different from standard modeling. It is computer-based, 
and it has no equations that have to be solved. Instead, ACE researchers simply try to 
create virtual computer models that capture the essence of the interdependencies, and 
then observe the results. So rather than solve a model, you build a computer model 
with computer agents; you then run the model thousands of times and keep track of the 
results.
	
This is a fascinating new approach to modeling complex systems because it allows 
for all types of interactions. It has the possibility of fundamentally changing the way 
economists model and how they understand the economy because it allows research-
ers to consider much more complicated interactions than they could if they had to 
“solve” the model on their own. For example, ACE models can allow multiple equi-
libria and the possibility of many levels of path dependency—complications that are 
beyond traditional models. Recognizing that the models may reflect path dependency, 
the ACE modeler doesn’t run the program once; he or she runs it thousands of times 
and sees the range of results. So just like engineers are now using virtual computer 
modeling to design planes and cars, economists are now using virtual computer mod-
els to understand how the economy works and to devise policies that might make it 
work better.
Empirically Testing Formal Models 
With so many different models, one 
must ask the question: How do you decide which model to use? To decide, economists 
empirically test alternative models and try to see which one fits best. Essentially this 
reverses the process used in heuristic empirical modeling, where the data are collected 
and analyzed before the hypothesis is determined and are then used to determine the 
hypothesis. With empirically tested formal models, the hypothesis is formulated 
first—without knowledge of the data—and then the hypothesis is tested to see if the 
data fit the model. Obviously, formulating hypotheses without knowing the data is dif-
ficult, and thus economists try to test hypotheses on “out-of-sample” data—data that were 
not used in the formulation of the hypothesis. If they don’t have such data, they try to 
develop the data, or something close to them, with experiments and clever observation 
of events.
	
Today, fitting the models to the data is much of what modern economists do. 
“Bringing the model to the data” is a phrase you hear all the time from modern economists. 
The ACE model is like a petri dish  
of individual economic actors deployed 
with specific behaviors. Economists 
watch and study the relationships and 
behaviors that develop.

476
Economists are continually asking questions such as: “How does the model work in 
out-of-sample data?” “Do we have a natural experiment that we can use to test the 
model?” “Can we develop a randomized experiment that will test the model?” “Can 
we design a lab experiment that will test the model?” and “Can we design a field 
­experiment to test the model?”
	
Such empirical testing requires precision, which means that to truly bring the 
model to the data, one needs a formal model where all relationships are precisely 
specified, rather than a heuristic model where relationships are imprecise. Thus, the 
“empirical models” discussed earlier are quite different from the “empirically tested 
formal models” that form the foundation of economic science. Empirical models based 
on heuristic models are fine for policy analysis and for guiding real-world policy 
­decisions that have to be made before one has a full scientific understanding of an 
­issue. These models are absolutely necessary. But before one elevates the insights of 
the model to the level of full scientific knowledge, one needs much more precise models. 
As I stated at the beginning of the chapter, most of this book is concerned with engi-
neering models, not scientific models, which is why we will not explore the intricacies 
of testing formal models.
	
The difference between the empirical models discussed earlier and the empirically 
tested formal models described here is a subtle, but important, difference. In a heuris-
tic empirical model, one has only an informal model that lets the data speak first, as 
heard through your general worldview embodied in your building blocks. After you’ve 
heard the data, you can provide an explanation for what you have heard. That explana-
tion will be based on your implicit formal model, but the empirical model cannot be an 
explicit test of the model since the actual model came from the data; there is no formal 
model to test. To empirically test a formal model or a formalized empirical model 
developed from a data set, the process is different. Here, one carefully develops the 
implications of the formal model as they relate to the issue. Then one empirically tests 
this model’s implications against another set of data.
Application: Why Did the Price of Chocolate Rise? 
To see how for-
mal models can make a difference in how one thinks about real-world problems, let’s 
A REMINDER
Modern Traditional and Behavioral Economists
	
Earlier Economics	
Modern Economics
	
Modern Behavioral	
Modern Traditional 
	
Economists 	
Economists
Assumptions
Approach
Types of models 
 
Rationality
Self-interest
Deduction
Simple supply/demand 
models
Purposeful behavior
Enlightened self-interest
Induction and deduction; 
emphasis on experimental 
economics and empirical 
models
All types including highly 
complex mathematical 
models and ACE models
Rationality
Self-interest
Induction and deduction; 
emphasis on empirical 
models
All types including highly 
complex mathematical 
models and ACE models

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
477
consider an example of a puzzle that economists faced. This example gives you a sense 
of why modern economists have moved to these more complicated models and how 
the results of the two models differ—even with the same data. The puzzle is the 
­following—the price of chocolate. From 2006 to 2009, the price of chocolate went up 
to $3,500 a ton from $1,500 a ton. The question is why.
	
You should be able to give the traditional economic analysis of what likely 
­happened from the analysis of earlier chapters—that explanation would involve supply 
falling, demand rising, or a combination of the two. (A good exercise is to graph these 
to see why that would be the explanation.) In a principles course, that would be the 
right answer. For real-world researchers it is not enough. The problem is that the data 
don’t reveal any apparent shifts in either supply or demand. So why did the price 
change when supply and demand did not?
	
Exploring the situation further, economists discovered that there was a structural 
change in the market. Hedge funds—investment funds representing rich investors 
which had few constraints on what they could buy—that had access to large amounts 
of credit were moving their investments out of real estate and into commodities over 
this time period. Chocolate was one of these commodities, but commodities whose 
prices rose also included oil and grains, both of which also experienced sudden large 
increases in price during this same time period. These hedge funds did not want 
the chocolate, and they did not buy chocolate and store it. Instead, they were buying 
what are called chocolate futures—the right to buy chocolate at a specified point in the 
­future at a specified price—in large amounts. Specifically, they increased their demand 
for chocolate futures from 260 thousand tons to 706 thousand tons over a couple of 
years, which amounts to an increase from less than 10 percent to more than 20 percent 
of the total market demand. Prices of chocolate rose to their highest level in more than 
30 years.
	
The question that policy makers posed to economists was whether this hedge fund 
activity in the futures market was the cause of the rise in the price of chocolate (and 
other commodities), and if it were the cause, would the rise in price be permanent or 
temporary? The supply/demand model doesn’t directly answer that question. The answer 
requires an analysis that includes inventories and that captures the relationship between 
future expected prices—the futures prices of chocolates—and the current price of 
chocolate. That means that you need a model of intertemporal (across time periods) 
equilibrium with heterogeneous agents (agents that are not exactly alike).
	
You also need to figure out how the new behavioral economics building blocks 
might be playing a role in determining the outcome. For example, one key concept of 
behavioral economics is an anchor point. Anchor points are points toward which peo-
ple gravitate. The existence of anchor points can lead to multiple equilibria for the 
model. It is possible that the hedge funds increased other participants’ anchor point for 
chocolate prices, which in turn led them to increase their inventory of chocolate. The 
demand increases and ratifies the increase in price, even though there was no need for 
price to increase had the anchor point not changed. (I should also point out that hedge 
funds pay economists large amounts of money to model the economy and to decide 
where they should invest their funds. So if hedge funds were doing this, it may be 
because they hired a modern economist who developed a model that showed them how 
they might do it.)
	
The analysis quickly becomes complicated, but what is clear is that one needs a 
more advanced formal model than the supply/demand model to deal with the question. 
Essentially, the answer economists arrived at was that the hedge fund purchases could 
have temporarily pushed up the price of chocolate, but did not do so permanently. 
Later, chocolate prices fell nearly 40 percent amid bumper crops and a continued decline 
in consumer demand due to a weak global economy.

478	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
	
However, that result isn’t much comfort to chocoholics since the models also sug-
gested that the system might take three or four years to adjust, and in the meantime, 
significant disruption could continue in the chocolate market. Moreover, by then it is 
possible that the hedge funds could have sold their positions in chocolate futures to 
others, pocketing their gains. As they do so, one would expect a sudden fall in the price 
of chocolate significantly below its long-run average. Related puzzles exist in various 
markets, and economists are hard at work on them. The lesson of this example: Supply 
and demand are just the beginning for a modern economist.
What Difference Does All This Make to Policy?
Let me now turn to a consideration of what difference these modeling considerations 
have for policy. The answer is: a lot. Let me briefly distinguish the differences. An 
economist who concentrates on a single frame tends to be more consistent in his or 
her policy recommendation. In the past, the framework was that the market is likely 
the best way to deal with a problem, and that, left alone, the market will guide people 
toward doing the best they, and society, can, given the constraints. Steven Landsburg 
nicely summed up what a traditional economist expects in his discussion of the insur-
ance markets.
	
Modern economists, with their multiple frames, are less sure of the conclusion that 
the market will solve every problem. They accept that the market has nice properties, 
but they also find that it has limitations. They know that there are many models where 
there exists a potential role for public policy in dealing with those limitations. That’s 
why for a modern economist who uses multiple frames, policy does not follow directly 
from a model. As I discussed in the introductory chapter, models provide theorems—
results that follow logically from a model—not precepts—general rules for public 
policy. Precepts are developed from theorems that follow from various models, along 
with knowledge of history and of limitations of the models. 
	
Let’s consider three examples where a modern economist’s precepts might differ 
from a traditional economist’s precepts.
How much emphasis should be given to benefits of economic growth?
The traditional economist’s precept is that more is preferred to less, and that more 
output is generally good; thus, policies directed at achieving more growth make 
society better off. The behavioral economic precept is that growth should be ques-
tioned. They point out that people’s happiness depends on their relative, not their 
absolute, income after an annual per capita income of about $75,000 is reached. 
That means that more growth will not necessarily benefit society, and suggests 
that more focus should be given to how the existing income is distributed, rather than 
just focusing on total income.
Should the government have done something about the dramatic rise in housing 
prices in the early 2000s?
The earlier precept is that no, government probably shouldn’t have. The rise in 
housing prices that occurred represented people’s valuation of the worth of the 
house. They may have made a mistake in this instance, but there is no reason to 
believe that the government would have gotten it right, and you can only tell 
whether houses are overvalued after the fact, not before.
	
The modern precept (based on dynamic models of interacting agents) for both 
modern traditional and behavioral economists is that financial bubbles, where 
prices of assets significantly exceed their sustainable prices, are possible, and that 
the housing market in the early 2000s had all the signs of a bubble, which means 
that the government might have usefully intervened. The bursting of the housing 
Supply and demand are just the 
beginning for a modern economist.
Q-10  If a model tells you that  
price controls will reduce people’s 
welfare, does it follow that economists 
will advise governments not to impose 
price controls?

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
479
bubble was something that was predictable, and something that policy could have 
eliminated the need for.
Are people saving enough?
The earlier precept is that people make rational decisions and if they are ­choosing 
to save little, that reflects their desires and best estimates of their future needs. 
The behavioral economics precept is that how much people save depends on the 
institutional structure, and with so much of the institutional structure ­designed to 
get people to spend, people likely save far too little. But this does not mean that 
government has to tell people to save more. Instead, government can change the 
institutional structure so that people will save more. For example, as opposed to 
having to check a box to have some income devoted to savings, saving would 
become the default option, and people would have to check a box if they don’t 
want to save. By changing the default option on retirement savings plans, one can 
significantly change the amount people choose to save, leaving people free to 
make their own decision in both cases.
I could give many more such examples.
Conclusion
This has been a wide-ranging survey of what economists do, and what it means to think 
like a modern economist. Summarizing, briefly, modern economics goes far beyond 
­supply and demand. Modern microeconomics is open to a wider range of building blocks 
and models, and is highly empirical. Thinking like a modern economist means 
­approaching problems through modeling, and then relating the results of the model to 
the empirical evidence. Ultimately, the choice of models is made by empirically testing 
those models and choosing the one that does the best job of predicting.
	
The distinction between modern and traditional economists can be overdone. In 
many ways, the difference is just in when to put real-world complications into the 
model. Traditional economists use the traditional building blocks, and then adjust 
the model to fit the more complicated real world. That has the advantage of keeping 
the basic model clean and as simple as possible, but has the cost of not fitting many 
­real-world situations. Modern economists use more complicated models so that 
fewer adjustments need to be made. The advantage is that the models better fit more 
­real-world situations, but the disadvantage is that the models are not as clean and 
clear-cut as the traditional approach.
	
For teaching purposes, KISS reigns, and most economists, including me, continue 
to emphasize the traditional micro- and macroeconomic models. Modern insights are 
added as addenda and modifications.
Modern economics goes far beyond 
supply and demand.
KISS reigns.
• Models are the glue that holds economics together. 
But economists differ in the models that they 
use.  (LO21-1)
• A deductive approach is to begin with principles 
and logically deduce the implications of those 
Summary
­principles. An inductive approach is to develop a 
model based on patterns in observed data. Modern 
economists tend to approach models inductively, 
while traditional economists approach models 
­deductively.  (LO21-1)

480	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
• Behavioral economists replace the traditional assump-
tion of rationality with purposeful behavior and 
­replace self-interest with enlightened self-interested 
behavior.  (LO21-1)
• While models based on modern building blocks ­often 
better fit observed behavior, they often do not generalize 
to contexts outside the one being studied.  (LO21-1)
• Heuristic models are models expressed informally in 
words. They can be based on either traditional ­building 
blocks like the models of Landsburg or ­modern building 
blocks like the models of Frank.  (LO21-2)
• The validity of models often is determined based on 
their ability to explain real-world data. Thus, models 
must be tested against the data. This is part of the 
­scientific method.  (LO21-2)
• An empirical model is a model that statistically 
­discovers a pattern in the data. For such a model to 
be scientifically tested, it must be tested against 
­another set of data. A regression model is an example 
of an empirical model.  (LO21-3)
• Two types of models used by modern economists are 
game-theory models and agent-based computational 
models.  (LO21-3)
• Traditional economists tend to concentrate on a 
­single frame and offer more policy recommendations 
based on the assumption of a well-functioning 
­market.  (LO21-4)
• Modern economists use multiple frames and 
­carefully distinguish theorems that follow from 
models from precepts that rely on theorems, but 
also rely on judgments about history and 
­institutions.  (LO21-4)
Key Terms
agent-based computational 
economic (ACE) model
behavioral economics
butterfly effect model
coefficient of 
determination
deductive approach
econometrics
empirical model
endowment effects
enlightened self-interest
game theory model
heuristic model
inductive approach
model
modern economist
natural experiment
path-dependent model
precommitment strategy
purposeful behavior
regression model
self-confirming 
equilibrium
traditional economist
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 How is a model different from the reality that it repre-
sents? Give an example.  (LO21-1)
	 2.	 How does an inductive approach to economics differ from 
a deductive approach?  (LO21-1)
	 3.	 What are the two main building blocks for traditional 
economists? How do they differ from the building blocks 
of behavioral economists?  (LO21-1)
	 4.	 How does enlightened self-interest differ from  
self-interest?  (LO21-1)
	 5.	 One rule of thumb many people follow is “Eat until your 
plate is clean.” How does this rule of thumb violate the 
rationality assumption?  (LO21-1)
	 6.	 Name two advantages and two disadvantages of the tradi-
tional model.  (LO21-1)
	 7.	 Name two advantages and two disadvantages of the 
­behavioral model.  (LO21-1)
	 8.	 In a recent study, when asked to choose between an iPod 
and $100, people were more likely to choose the money. 
But when they were given an iPod and then asked if they 
would trade it for $100, they were more likely to choose 
the iPod.  (LO21-2)
	a.	 What effect does this reflect?
	b.	 Is this behavior rational? 

	
Chapter 21 ■ Thinking Like a Modern Economist	
481
	 9.	 What is a heuristic model? Can a heuristic model be 
­traditional? Why or why not?  (LO21-2)
	10.	 Why might government intervention make sense in a 
model of path-dependency but not a supply/demand 
model?  (LO21-2)
	11.	 According to economist Robert Frank, why are people more 
likely to return $20 they’d been given in error in change than 
a lampshade that had not been scanned at checkout? What 
does this say about traditional building blocks?  (LO21-2)
	12.	 Why do economists rely more on empirical evidence 
­today than they did 100 years ago?  (LO21-3)
	13.	 What does it mean to “let the data speak”?  (LO21-3)
	14.	 What is a regression?  (LO21-3)
	15.	 What characteristics would you look for in data to use as a 
natural experiment?  (LO21-3)
	16.	 What is an agent-based computational model?  (LO21-3)
	17.	 Why is “out-of-sample” data important for testing inductive 
models?  (LO21-3)
	18. 	True or false? Models provide both theorems and 
­precepts. Explain your answer.  (LO21-4)
	19. 	State whether each of the policy recommendations is an 
example of a modern economist’s precepts or a traditional 
economist’s precepts.  (LO21-4)
	a. 	More goods are preferred to fewer goods.
	b.	 Banks ought to be required to get approval for new 
­financial instruments.
	c.	 Firms can decide what information to put on food 
­labels because consumers will demand that relevant 
information be listed.
	d. 	Utility companies ought to provide consumers a chart 
comparing their electricity usage with the average in 
their neighborhood.
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 How might modeling itself frame an economist’s analysis, 
making the economist unable to see basic truths about the 
way in which society subjugates women? (Feminist)
	 2.	 Was Mother Teresa rational? (Religious)
	 3.	 It is sometimes said that modern economists pose little 
questions that can be answered while sociologists pose 
large questions that cannot be answered. How might that 
description be related to the economist’s modeling 
­approach? (Radical)
	 4.	 The book talks as if modern economists have made a 
large break from traditional assumptions; many 
­heterodox economists see the two as simply minor 
modifications of the same approach. In what way is 
that true? (Austrian)
	 5.	 If modern economics focuses on empirical models, does 
that mean that those aspects of life that cannot be quanti-
fied are shortchanged? (Institutionalist)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 What does it mean to assume that people are purposeful 
in their behavior instead of rational?
	 2.	 In one study, a group of Asian-American women were asked 
to take a math exam. First they were divided into two groups. 
Before taking the test, individuals in the first group were 
asked their opinions about coed dorms while the second 
were asked their family history. Those who had been re-
minded by the questions that they were women performed 
worse than those who were reminded that they were Asian. 
How is this an example of predictably irrational behavior?
	 3.	 Is the supply/demand model a path-dependent model? 
Why or why not?
	 4.	 Can an economist who bases her models on traditional 
building blocks be a modern economist? Why or why not?
	 5.	 What might an economist do if he cannot solve a model 
analytically? (Give up is not an option.)
	 6.	 A student is given the option of selecting two homework 
schedules—one in which three five-page papers and one 
one-page paper are due at the end of the semester and 
­another in which the first three papers are due the third, 
sixth, and ninth weeks of the semester and the last paper is 
due at the end. 
	a.	 Why might a student choose the first option?
	b.	 Why might a student choose the second option?
	c.	 Which is the rational choice?

482	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 Modeling, not supply and demand, is the glue that holds 
modern economics together.  (LO21-1)
	 2.	 Because of technological changes in computing, modern 
economists are more likely to use inductive models 
­compared to earlier economists, who gave more weight 
to deductive models.  (LO21-1)
	 3.	 These are both assumptions associated with behavioral 
economists.  (LO21-1)
	 4.	 It depends on what model you use. In a traditional model 
it cannot because people choose what is best for them. 
Thus a constraint upon choice must make them worse 
off. In a behavioral model, it may make them better off 
­because people are not assumed to have complete 
­self-control.  (LO21-1)
	 5.	 It depends. Both have their advantages and disadvan-
tages, and a choice can be made only when one knows 
the purpose of the model.  (LO21-1)
	 6.	 No, it simply demonstrates that he is affected by them in 
different ways than are other people.  (LO21-2)
	 7.	 Economists are hesitant to base knowledge on heuristic 
models because they are only suggestive, and are subject 
to people’s tendency to be fast pattern completers. ­Science 
involves slow, and precise, pattern completion. The rules 
of scientific models are in many ways rules ­designed to 
slow people down and make sure the patterns they com-
plete really do fit together.  (LO21-3)
	 8.	 False. While it would be nice if that were the case, the 
data speak very softly and what one hears depends upon 
one’s frame. Thus, in economics the data seldom provide 
definitive answers, and economists must rely on their 
­theoretical models to guide them.  (LO21-3)
	 9.	 No. In a path-dependent model the path to equilibrium 
­affects the equilibrium. The supply/demand model 
­assumes that is not the case.  (LO21-4)
	10.	 No. One derives theorems (logical implications) from 
models; policy is based on precepts. Thus, the fact that most 
economists oppose price controls is based on both a 
model and judgments about the appropriateness of that 
model.  (LO21-5)

© Roberts Publishing Services
After reading this chapter, 
you should be able to:
LO22-1	 Explain the relationship 
between behavioral 
economic policy and 
mechanism design.
LO22-2	 Define nudge and choice 
architecture and explain 
how they are related to 
behavioral economic policy.
LO22-3	 Discuss the problems of 
implementing nudges and 
how the behavioral 
economic frame changes 
how policy is viewed.
LO22-4	 Discuss the concerns many 
traditional economists have 
about nudge and push 
policies.
Behavioral Economics and 
Modern Economic Policy
When Dutch economist Aad Kieboom was put in charge of the 
men’s restroom at the Amsterdam Airport, he instructed the builders 
to etch an image of a black housefly on each urinal. As we will see 
later in the chapter, that directive was an application of modern 
behavioral economic theory to policy. In this chapter, you will learn 
why it is, and many other ways in which behavioral economics 
changes the way economists approach policy.
	
I begin the chapter by putting the developments in behavioral eco-
nomic policy in historical perspective, explaining why they developed. 
I then briefly review the policy implications of the traditional supply/
demand models that have been the core of this book’s presentation. 
Finally, I turn to the core of this chapter—behavioral economic policy 
and how it differs from more traditional economic policy.
Behavioral Economic Policy in Perspective
As discussed in the last chapter behavioral economics is that branch of ­modern 
economics that broadens the assumptions about behavior from rationality and 
self-interest to purposeful behavior and enlightened self-interest. As behavioral 
economists have broadened the building blocks of their models, they have also 
started to explore the implications of those broader building blocks for policy. 
Thus, today a behavioral economic policy—economic policy based upon 
models using behavioral economic building blocks that take into account 
­people’s predictable irrational behavior—is emerging that complements traditional 
economic policy.
Behavioral Economics and Economic Engineering
Behavioral economic policy has developed as part of a broader change in the 
way that economists see their role in policy making. As their understanding of 
markets has increased, modern economists have moved more heavily into what 
might be called economic engineering—economics devoted not only to study-
ing markets but also to designing markets and other coordinating mechanisms. 
Economic engineers don’t just try to understand the way the economy works as 
economic scientists do. Economic engineers ask: Can we design mechanisms 
to better coordinate people’s actions?
chapter 22
Nobody’s ever gone broke underestimating the 
intelligence of the general public.
—H. L. Mencken
“
”

484	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
	
As modern economists have moved more toward engineering, they have begun to 
explore a broad range of mechanisms and institutions that solve coordination problems. 
These mechanisms and institutions are called coordination mechanisms—methods of 
coordinating people’s wants with other people’s desires. All markets are a type of coor-
dination mechanism. There are auction markets, posted-price markets, and markets 
where firms set prices. Each of these mechanisms coordinates wants in a slightly differ-
ent way. What this means is that there is not a single market solution, but hundreds of 
them. The economic policy debate is not about whether to have a market solution; the 
policy debate is what coordinating mechanism will best solve the problem at hand.
	
Economists began studying coordinating mechanisms by studying markets with 
money prices. They soon discovered that coordinating mechanisms that don’t involve 
money prices can be modeled as if they do involve prices. To study these coordinating 
mechanisms, they developed formal models based on shadow prices—prices that 
aren’t paid directly, but instead are paid in terms of opportunity cost borne by the 
demander, and thus determine his or her choices indirectly. In these shadow price mod-
els, every choice has an associated implicit shadow price, regardless of whether money 
is exchanged or not. Shadow price models convert opportunity costs to shadow prices.
	
Shadow price analysis is extremely powerful. For example, it allows you to take 
morals and social pressure into account in your model. Take stealing, for example. A 
shadow price of stealing is violating your moral code. If this shadow price is too high, 
you will choose not to steal. Shadow price models allow you to indirectly measure the 
price of violating your morals.
	
Let me give an example of the power of shadow price analysis. In his book 
Freedomnomics: Why the Free Market Works and Other Half-Baked Theories Don’t, 
economist John Lott gives an example of the number of batters hit by a ball when up at 
bat in the American and National Leagues. Starting in 1973, more batters were being 
hit in the American League than in the National League. The question was why. Lott 
developed a shadow price model that determined the cost to a pitcher of throwing a 
beanball (a pitch aimed at the batter’s head). He pointed out that in 1973, the American 
League instituted the designated ­hitter (pitchers were exempt from batting). The new 
rule meant that the pitcher no longer could be hit by a ball thrown by the opposing 
team’s pitcher in retaliation. In his model for American League pitchers that rule 
change lowered the shadow price of throwing a beanball. The model gave him an 
explanation: The increase in beanballs in 1973 occurred because the cost of throwing 
a beanball fell for an American League pitcher. (Applying this insight to policy sug-
gests that to reduce the number of ­beanballs, the league might raise the money price of 
pitching a beanball, perhaps by instituting a $10,000 fine for every hit batsman.) 
Shadow price analysis is central to the way in which economists think about the effect 
of incentives on an individual’s actions and how institutions interact with incentives.
	
The introduction of models incorporating shadow price analysis has allowed 
economists to expand the scope of economics and study a wider range of social coor-
dinating mechanisms, including a number of social problems far removed from tradi-
tional economic concerns. For example, a computer program that matches the classes 
you want to take with the classes that are available would be a coordination mecha-
nism based on shadow prices. Such a program would develop a shadow price for each 
course and then allocate the classes on the basis of a student’s willingness to pay, as 
determined by the priorities the student listed in his or her requested courses.
Economists as Mechanism Design Engineers
The focus on shadow prices has led to the development of a new branch of economics, 
called mechanism design, which is explicitly interested in designing mechanisms to 
Q-1  How does economic engineering 
differ from economic science?
There is not a single market solution; 
there are hundreds of them.
Q-2  How does a shadow price differ 
from a normal price?
Shadow price analysis allows you to 
take morals and social pressures into 
account in your models.
Shadow price analysis has allowed 
economists to expand the scope of 
economics.

	
Chapter 22 ■ Behavioral Economics and Modern Economic Policy	
485
achieve specific ends. Mechanism design involves identifying a goal and then 
­designing a mechanism such as a market, social system, or contract to achieve that end.
	
Economists who use mechanism design engineering to develop policy use economic 
theory as a type of backward induction or reverse engineering process. Instead of build-
ing from scratch, taking an existing mechanism apart with the intention of improving it, 
they begin with the desired outcome and consider what coordinating mechanism will 
best achieve that outcome. Mechanism design economic engineers use laboratory exper-
iments, field experiments, game theory models, computer simulations, and a variety of 
other tools to come up with coordinating mechanisms that achieve the desired ends. This 
branch of modern economics has been extraordinarily influential, and in 2007 and 2012 
the Nobel Prize for Economics was awarded for work in mechanism design.
	
Taking this engineering approach to economics also led to a change in the type of 
models modern economists needed to study markets. Because they were designing 
mechanisms that had to work, they needed models with assumptions that more pre-
cisely matched the institutions they were modeling. As opposed to studying just the 
simple supply/demand model, modern economists study whether the assumptions of 
their models match real-world market incentives. Often, they do not.
	
For example, the supply/demand model assumes that firms maximize profits. But 
real-world firms’ decisions are made by individuals whose incentives may differ from the 
firm’s incentives. When a decision maker’s income is not the same as the firm’s profit, as 
is generally the case, the firm’s and the decision maker’s incentives may be incompatible, 
and the individual is more likely to make decisions that don’t maximize profits. For exam-
ple, an employee may choose to fly first class with an airline that gives him more fre-
quent-flyer miles rather than fly on a low-cost airline, which would have saved the firm 
money. This behavior shows up as “irrationality” in the traditional supply/demand model 
because the assumptions don’t match the institutional realities. Economists found these 
“irrationalities” caused by institutional factors throughout the economy.
	
All types of institutional realities impede the effectiveness of the incentives 
assumed in economists’ models, which changes the way a system works most effi-
ciently. Modern economists call these impediments incentive compatibility problems. 
An ­incentive compatibility problem is a problem in which the incentive facing the 
decision maker does not match the incentive needed for the mechanism to achieve its 
desired end. Modern economists have used their insights about incentive compatibility 
problems to design mechanisms to align incentives with desired ends.
 	
The adoption of this mechanism design approach has transformed economic mod-
els into an enormously powerful tool for firms and governments. For example, when 
policy makers needed to figure out how to reduce CO2 emissions, they turned to econ-
omists who designed cap-and-trade for CO2 emissions. Similarly, when the British 
government wanted to allocate rights to the radio spectrum, it turned to economists 
who designed an auction mechanism.
	
Coordinating mechanisms don’t have to be based on money prices. As mentioned 
above, economists have developed shadow prices that reflect value and costs of con-
straints in a market. For example, Harvard economist Al Roth used a shadow price 
model to design the National Residency Matching Program that matches medical 
­students to residency programs. Mechanism design economists also have played an 
important role in modifying some of the online dating services, and in creating the 
search algorithms used by Google and Yahoo. All are “coordinating mechanisms” that 
try to anticipate what the person wants and to match it with what is being offered. These 
programs have made the systems work better. For example, the New York City Public 
School Match program that matches students to schools helped increase ­graduation 
rates by 13 percentage points. Through shadow price models, all types of allocating and 
coordinating mechanisms come under the purview of modern economics.
Modern economists study whether the 
assumptions of their models match real-
world market incentives.
Q-3  Does grading in courses involve 
an incentive compatibility problem?
The adoption of this mechanism design 
approach has transformed economic 
models into an enormously powerful 
tool for firms and governments.

486
Behavioral Economics and Mechanism Design
Mechanism design is important to this chapter because economists’ interest in behav-
ioral economics grew out of this engineering approach to economics. As economists 
started working on real-world problems, they saw that coordination mechanisms did not 
always work as predicted even when they adjusted for institutional realities. The reason 
was that their traditional assumptions about human behavior did not always fit reality. 
So mechanism design economists began to take into account people’s ­predictable 
Q-4  Why did economists’ work in 
mechanism design lead to a greater 
interest in behavioral economics?
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
As economists have begun designing markets, they have 
discovered that they can take advantage of another useful 
function of markets—markets’ ability to reveal people’s col-
lective wisdom. A price in a market represents the collective 
judgment of what people in the market are willing to pay for 
a good. Using that insight, economists reasoned: Why not 
create markets as a way of extracting information from peo-
ple, that is, to design markets as an information-gathering 
mechanism? For example, say you were wondering who 
would win the Republican presidential primary. To make a 
prediction, economists from a number of universities de-
signed an “election futures” market that allowed people to 
buy and sell futures in the outcome. (A future is the promise 
to buy and sell an item that will be delivered in the future.) 
As you can see in the graph on February 4, 2016, you could 
have bought a $100 Donald Trump future for $30. On that 
Markets as Information-Gathering Mechanisms
day, people thought the probability that Donald Trump was 
going to win was sufficient to pay $30 for the possibility of 
being paid $100 should he win. In early May 2016, after he 
became the presumptive nominee, the price of that future 
had risen to $96. Below is the price history in the market. 
	
The goal of this market is not to provide an opportunity 
for people to bet. The goal is to predict what candidate is 
going to win the election. The prices of the futures reflect 
the collective wisdom of market participants—their predic-
tions of the likelihood of a candidate winning. Thus, if a 
candidate’s $100 future is selling for $20, most people 
think he is going to lose. You can check out the PredictIt 
market at www.predictit.org. Do these information markets 
work? Election futures markets such as this one have done 
much better at predicting the winners of elections than 
have the many public opinion polls.
Predicting the Republican Nominee
Prediction market, probability of winning the Republic presidential nomination %
South Carolina
primary
February
March
April
May
2016
Super Tuesday
Trump
Cruz
Kasich
Florida primary,
Rubio drops out
Wisconsin
primary
New York
primary
100
75
50
25
0
Indiana primary
Cruz drops out

	
Chapter 22 ■ Behavioral Economics and Modern Economic Policy	
487
­irrationalities when designing coordination mechanisms. In order to do that, they had to 
better understand how people’s behavior deviated from the model’s predicted behavior, 
which led to the emergence of behavioral economics. Behavioral economic policies 
developed as a way of tweaking existing coordinating mechanisms to make them work 
better, given people’s actual behavior.
	
Let’s consider an example of a policy that didn’t work as expected and see what 
behavioral economists say it means for mechanism design. The example involves find-
ing a solution for late pickups at a day care center. It seems that a number of day care 
centers were having a problem getting parents to pick up their kids on time. To solve 
the problem, the centers followed the traditional economic solution: They imposed a 
fine for parents who picked up the kids late. The fine established a monetary price for 
picking up the kids late and was expected to decrease the number late pickups. How-
ever, that wasn’t the result. Instead, the problem worsened; late pickups rose.
	
Why did that happen? Behavioral economists argued that the fine “commoditized” the 
choice. Once a social infraction, late pickups became a service parents could buy. Without 
a fine, the parents felt a moral obligation to pick up the kids on time. There was a high 
moral shadow price on picking up kids late. The introduction of a fine replaced the moral 
obligation (shadow price) with a market payment, so the relevant price went down, not up.
	
Behavioral economists argue that because people are social creatures, the coordi-
nating mechanism that economists design must take into account much more than 
simple price incentives. It must also include social and moral incentives and the econo­
mist’s models must include these additional elements as shadow prices. Failure to do 
so can worsen, rather than improve, the situation. Santa Fe Institute behavioral econo-
mist Sam Bowles summarizes the implications behavioral economists drew from this 
and similar experiments when he argued that traditional economics incorrectly 
assumes that “policies that appeal to economic self-interest do not affect the salience 
[importance] of ethical, altruistic, and other social preferences.”
	
The interaction between markets and social and moral incentives is complicated. 
For example, Bowles also finds that individuals from more market-oriented societies 
tend to be more moral, which he explains by arguing that “fair-mindedness is essential 
to the exchange process and that in market-oriented societies individuals engaging in 
mutually beneficial exchanges with strangers represent models of successful behavior 
who are then copied by others.” The problem for behavioral mechanism design econo-
mists is to find the right combination of market, social, and moral incentives that work 
to solve the particular problem at hand. Knowing the right combination requires taking 
the existing practices and mores in each society and situation into account.
Policy Implications of Traditional Economics
Now that I’ve given you the context for the development of behavioral economic pol-
icy, let’s review the policy implications that follow from traditional assumptions to 
give us a starting point for our consideration of behavioral economic policy. In tradi-
tional economics, voluntary trade (without externalities) makes people involved in the 
trade better off. When people have made all the trades they can, they will be as well off 
as they can possibly be. If that weren’t the case, they would make another trade. The 
policy implication of the traditional model is that government should stay out of peo-
ple’s way and let them trade. It should step in only to adjust trades that affect people 
not involved in the exchange—discouraging trades with negative externalities and 
encouraging trades with positive externalities. The model directs economists toward 
laissez-faire—keep government out of the market, and let people do their own thing.
	
Of course, economists know that reality is more complicated and that the theorems 
(logical implications of a model, given all assumptions) about the benefits of trade that 
Behavioral economic policies developed 
as a way of tweaking existing coordinating 
mechanisms to make them work better, 
given people’s actual behavior.
The problem for behavioral mechanism 
design economists is to find the right 
combination of market, social, and 
moral incentives.
The policy implication of the traditional 
model is that government should stay 
out of people’s way and let them trade.

488	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
follow from the model do not immediately transfer to a precept (policy implication of 
the model as it relates to the real world) of laissez-faire. The precept of laissez-faire is 
based on more than the model; it is based on value judgments and judgments about 
how well the model fits reality. For most economists, that laissez-faire precept has lots 
of exceptions and includes a wide variety of ideas about policy.
	
These exceptions are, however, exceptions, and, for a traditional economist, the 
thrust of thinking like an economist means first to expect that the market will solve the 
problem, and then, if that doesn’t seem to be happening, to check why. If the reason 
why the market isn’t working as the model predicted is important, then one modifies 
the policy precept. Thus, in his Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith listed a large number 
of areas where he believed government should regulate the economy even though his 
overall model led to laissez-faire.
	
Behavioral economics complicates the traditional story based on the supply/demand 
model because it gives up the underlying assumption that people are fully rational and 
self-interested. Without this assumption, voluntary trade doesn’t necessarily make peo-
ple better off. Instead of focusing economists’ thinking on people’s rational selves, 
behavioral economics focuses economists’ thinking on people’s predictable irrational-
ity and designs policies that take people’s predictable irrationality into account.
Choice Architecture and Behavioral  
Economic Policy
One of the findings of behavioral economics is that choice architecture—how choices 
are presented—impacts people’s decisions. Traditional economic models assume that 
choice architecture doesn’t matter; thus, for example, the models assume that the order in 
which choices are presented does not matter to a person’s choice. If order does matter, 
then, in the traditional model, the person is being irrational, and if the effect shows up 
sufficiently so that it is predictable, he is being predictably irrational. If a traditional 
economist finds that people are predictably irrational, he or she will have to modify the 
policy implications of his or her theorems as he or she moves to policy precepts.
	
Behavioral economists argue that modifying precepts after the fact to take predict-
able irrationality into account isn’t enough. They argue that people are predictably 
irrational in so many areas that economists’ models and policy recommendations have 
to include those predictable irrationalities in both models and policies. Behavioral eco-
nomic policy—a policy designed to influence people’s choice architecture in a way 
that directs people to make decisions that make them better off under the assumption 
that they are predictably irrational—does just that.
	
Two economists leading the charge in creating a separate behavioral economic 
policy are Chicago professors Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein.1 Their book Nudge 
gives a variety of examples of how choice architecture influences decisions and how to 
design choice architecture to influence behavior. Let’s consider a simplification of one 
of their examples: Carolyn, the director of food services for a large city school system, 
must choose how to present the food to the students; she has two options:
1.	Arrange the food so that the student chooses a healthy lunch, all things 
­considered.
2.	Arrange the food so that the students pick the same foods they would choose 
on their own.
Q-5  True or false? A traditional 
economist believes people are always 
rational.
Behavioral economics focuses 
economists’ thinking on people’s 
predictable irrationality and designs 
policies that take people’s predictable 
irrationality into account.
One of the findings of behavioral 
economics is that choice architecture 
impacts people’s decisions.
Q-6  If an economist believes that 
choice architecture is important, is he or 
she more likely to be a traditional 
economist or a behavioral economist?
1Much of the discussion in this chapter is based on Thaler and Sunstein’s presentation, including the 
urinal description that opened the chapter.

	
Chapter 22 ■ Behavioral Economics and Modern Economic Policy	
489
 	
Thaler and Sunstein say that a traditional economist would likely choose option 2, 
following the premise that free choice is best. But they argue that traditional econo-
mists cannot claim that option 2 reflects free choice because “what they would choose 
on their own” depends on how choices are presented. Thaler and Sunstein argue that a 
behavioral economist would choose option 1. Option 1 gives the students free choice 
but nudges them to use that free choice to make a “better” selection. Students are still 
free not to choose healthy food but will be faced with an arrangement of food that will 
lead more of them to choose healthy food. Thaler and Sunstein call this a nudge—a 
deliberate design of the choice architecture that alters people’s behavior in predictably 
positive ways.
	
Now that I’ve explained what a nudge is, let’s return to the urinal at Amsterdam 
Airport. What was going on? It turns out that men are not very careful when they 
relieve themselves and can make quite a mess. They tend to splash a lot. But what Aad 
Kieboom noticed was that by changing the urinal slightly, the splashing can be 
reduced. It seems that if men see a fly when they are relieving themselves, they aim for 
it. If the image of the fly is placed slightly off center in the urinal, the choice architec-
ture is right, and the mess is reduced considerably. His staff found that the “fly-in-the-
urinal” reduced spillage by about 85 percent.2
	
Nudges are not a new discovery. Private firms use nudges all the time to guide their 
customers to make choices that benefit the firm. Grocery stores position their highly 
profitable goods that you are likely to buy on impulse at just the right height and place 
to get you to buy them—think of the candy at the checkout counter. They also place 
higher-priced organic foods in a separate section (it reduces price comparison) and 
place milk at the back of the store (it requires people to walk past, and likely buy, other 
products along the way). Advertising is another way in which firms nudge their cus-
tomers. Advertising frames a firm’s product in a positive way that the firm’s psycholo-
gists have found will lead people to develop a desire and need for that product. 
Advertising nudges seem to be successful since firms spend billions on advertising.
Nudge Policy and Libertarian Paternalism
While the existence of nudges has been well known, what’s new in behavioral eco-
nomic policy suggested by Thaler and Sunstein is the argument that government 
should use nudges as a policy tool. (We will call the government use of nudges nudge 
policy.) In nudge policy, government structures choices so that people are free to 
choose what they want, but also more likely to choose what is best for them.3
	
Nudge policy advocates claim that nudge policy meets what they call a criterion of 
libertarian paternalism. By libertarian, they mean people are still free to choose. They 
argue that a nudge policy does not go against traditional economics since government 
is not interfering with people’s freedom of choice. By paternalism, they mean people 
are likely to make better decisions (as judged by an outside beneficent decision maker). 
Thus, a libertarian paternalistic policy is a policy that leaves people free to choose, 
but nonetheless guides them toward a choice that a paternalistic observer would see as 
good for them. Thaler and Sunstein see their nudge policies as libertarian paternalistic 
policies. For example, in the spirit of libertarianism, a nudge policy would leave peo-
ple free to smoke cigarettes, eat lots of candy, or not save for the future (all of which 
Thaler and Sunstein consider bad) if that’s what people really want. But, in the spirit of 
paternalism, a nudge policy would frame people’s choices to engage less often in these 
activities.
A nudge is a deliberate design of the 
choice architecture that alters people’s 
behavior in predictably positive ways.
Q-7  A policy designed to structure 
choices so that people make a certain 
choice is called what type of policy?
Libertarian paternalistic policy is a policy 
that leaves people free to choose, but 
nonetheless guides them toward a 
choice that a paternalistic observer 
would see as good for them.
2There is now a fly-in-the-urinal decal company. You can see it on the web at www.urinalfly.com.
3I will discuss the problem of deciding what is “best for them” below.

490	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
	
To give you a sense of how nudge policy would work, let’s consider an example. 
Say you are presented with a retirement savings plan that allows you to save 10 percent 
of your income. If you choose to save 10 percent, your company will supplement your 
savings by another 10 percent. To get the company’s 10 percent contribution, you have 
to check a box on the employee savings plan form. Given that choice, economists have 
found that, even though it seems like a very good deal, often only 50 percent of the 
employees will choose to participate in the savings plan. For traditional economists, 
that would be the end of the story; they would conclude that 50 percent of the people 
decided that participating in the savings plan does not make them better off.
	
For behavioral economists, that is not the end of the story. They point out that 
people’s choices depend on how the choices are framed and, in this case, it depends on 
what the default option is. What if, instead of having to check a box to opt into the sav-
ings plan, people had to check a box in order to opt out of the savings plan? When 
framed in this way, a larger percentage of people will choose to participate and a 
smaller percentage will decline. Behavioral economists ask: Which group is rational: 
the 50 percent that choose not to participate when they have to opt into the savings 
plan, or the larger percentage that choose to participate when they have to opt out?
When Are Nudges Needed?
Thaler and Sunstein list various types of choices where they believe that nudges can be 
useful. Below we consider three: (1) choices in which benefits and costs are separated 
by time, (2) complicated choices with many dimensions, and (3) infrequent choices.
Choices in Which Benefits and Costs Are Separated by Time  
Behavioral economists have found that people tend to make what behavioral econo-
mists consider less-than-optimal choices when the benefits and costs of those choices 
are separated by time. People tend to weight the immediate costs and benefits more, 
and future costs and benefits less, than if they were given time to reflect on the deci-
sion. Such choices present a possibility for policy nudges. Consider weight loss. Many 
people have a hard time losing weight. Losing weight requires facing an upfront cost 
(less food and more exercise) and delayed gain (slimmer physique). Many Americans 
agree that they are overweight and claim to want to lose weight, so designing their 
choices to make it easier to say no to eating excess food may be warranted. 
	
Similarly, saving requires consuming less now for a delayed benefit of consuming 
more later. Most people believe that they save too little, and when they look back, they 
wish that they had saved more. But, of course, by the time they decide they’d made a 
mistake, it’s too late to fix it. So again, here is an opportunity for a useful nudge. 
	
Other examples are exercise and studying. Reflecting back, most of us would have 
chosen to exercise or study more than we actually did. But when we were making  
the decision to exercise or study, somehow we just couldn’t do it. The elliptical looked 
like so much work; the textbook (not this one, obviously) was so boring, and the TV 
show looked so good that we decided to watch it rather than study or exercise. All 
these are examples of choices in which the benefits and costs are separated by time, 
and that Thaler and Sunstein see open to nudges.
Complicated Choices with Many Dimensions 
Complicated choices are 
another type of choice that people are not good at making, and that are therefore good 
candidates for a nudge. Say you are trying to decide about what type of loan to get for 
school. You look on the Internet and you find six or seven different options, some of 
which involve origination fees, some of which don’t, some of which involve having 
your parents cosign the loan, others not, some of which have flexible interest rates and 
some of which have fixed interest rates, some of which involve immediate payback, 
Behavioral economists point out that 
people’s choices depend on how the 
choices are framed.

	
Chapter 22 ■ Behavioral Economics and Modern Economic Policy	
491
others that involve payback starting six months after graduation. After spending hours 
struggling with them all, your mind swirls. Which one makes sense? Many students 
decide that there’s no good way to figure it out; it’s just too complicated. They could 
use a nudge—giving them some guidance about which is the likely best option. The 
nudge doesn’t preclude them from choosing a different option, but if they can’t figure 
it out, this is the option they are advised to choose.
Infrequent Choices 
An infrequent choice is a third type of decision in which 
nudge policies may be useful. Infrequent decisions provide little opportunity to practice 
making choices, evaluate feedback, or explore one’s preferences. Making a particular 
decision for the first time is probably difficult, but if you make a similar set of decisions 
again and again, through trial and error, you will likely get better, and, eventually, you 
will get pretty good. Take food shopping: The first time you went to choose a melon, 
you probably had trouble. But after some practice—sometimes choosing a not-yet-ripe 
melon and other times hitting the mark—you have gotten pretty good at identifying  
the feel and smell of a good melon. Repetitive decisions such as these tend to be much 
more rational and capture what people actually want. Infrequent decisions—such as 
what college to go to, whom to marry, or what house to buy—are much more difficult.
	
To learn from frequently made decisions, a person needs feedback—information 
about the consequences of one’s choices. Imagine how difficult it would be to learn 
how to play the piano on a keyboard that makes no sound. Hearing that wrong note 
provides immediate feedback on one’s playing. Feedback means experiencing the con-
sequences of making a decision.
	
Frequently made choices also give one a chance to learn about one’s preferences or 
what the advantages of alternative decisions might be. How would you know if you like a 
caramel Frappuccino until you’ve tasted one? Trying various flavors of Frappuccino and 
deciding which one you like is possible, but trying out lots of different mortgages is not. 
You have to choose a mortgage and predict the outcome based on little to no experience 
or information. Not surprisingly, people don’t make especially good decisions about what 
type of mortgage to take out. Advocates of nudge policy argue that if people had had 
nudges telling them the risks of taking out a mortgage based on expected large increases 
in house prices, the recent subprime mortgage fiasco might have been less of a fiasco.
Two Types of Nudges
The nudges that Thaler and Sunstein propose can be classified as either advantageous 
default option nudges or information and encouragement nudges. Let’s consider 
both briefly.
Advantageous Default Options Nudges 
The first is advantageous default 
option policy. We have already seen an example of how default options influence peo-
ple’s behavior in the savings example discussed earlier. When faced with a choice, 
people are predisposed to select the default option. By taking advantage of that ten-
dency, economic policy makers can direct people to do what they think is better for 
them, while still leaving people free to make their own choice. Another example 
involves health insurance. If employees had to opt out of purchasing health insurance, 
they would be much more likely to buy it, which is presumably the more rational 
choice. A more controversial example of the default option involves organ donation. If, 
when people apply for driver’s licenses, they had to request that their organs not be 
donated, Thaler and Sunstein argue that more organs would be available for transplant.
Information and Encouragement Nudges 
Another type of policy that 
Thaler and Sunstein recommend can be classified as information and encouragement 
Three types of choices where nudges 
may be useful are:
1.	 Choices in which benefits and costs 
are separated by time.
2.	 Complicated choices with many 
dimensions.
3.	 Infrequent choices.

492	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
policy. With these policies, government encourages people to make certain choices 
that government has decided are good for them. An example of an encouragement 
nudge would be for the government to actively inform people how their energy use 
compares to the average as a way to encourage people to conserve energy. For exam-
ple, a number of households in San Marcos, California, were sent a letter telling them 
how their home energy use compared to the norm. In addition, the letters sent to those 
who used more-than-average energy were stamped with a frowning emoticon ☹ while 
the letter to those who had below-average energy use were stamped with a smiling 
emoticon ☺. The letters reduced energy usage by above-average energy users without 
affecting the below-average energy users. So the government got people to reduce their 
energy use without requiring energy conservation.
	
Information nudges come in many forms. One such nudge instituted by colleges to 
reduce alcohol consumption is advertising the actual drinking habits of college stu-
dents. This sounds counterintuitive. Wouldn’t advertising how much alcohol students 
drink, when it is illegal for most college students to do so, encourage drinking? Not so. 
Researchers found that the widespread perception is that college students drink exces-
sively, and that that perception was leading college students to drink to fit in. Such 
behavior is often referred to as herding—behavior in which people mimic what they 
think other people are doing. The perception that college students drink excessively is 
inaccurate; students actually drink relatively moderate amounts of alcohol. At the Uni-
versity of Arizona (considered by many as a top party school), for example, the aver-
age student drinks one alcoholic beverage a week. By publicizing the fact that most 
college students don’t drink excessively, the herding behavior pushing students toward 
drinking can be offset and colleges can nudge students to drink less.
	
Another form of information nudge is designed to guide a person through compli-
cated decisions. The argument for such nudges can be seen with an example. If you are 
like me, you have a very hard time trying to understand your current cell phone bill. In 
fact, cell phone bills appear to be designed to confuse. When looking at my bill, I often 
have no idea how the cost relates to decisions I make about phone calls or whether 
some other pricing structure or alternative provider would be better. My state of confu-
sion makes it all the harder to decide to change my plan.
	
Thaler and Sunstein argue that if firms send their customers a complete listing of 
all the ways they use the phone and all the fees that are charged in a way that can be 
compared to the pricing plans of other cell phone companies on a comparison website, 
individuals can make better decisions. They call such nudges RECAP (record, evaluate, 
and compare alternative prices) nudges.
The Problems of Implementing Nudges
Firms, because they aren’t inherently paternalistic, don’t necessarily have an incentive to 
implement the nudges that Thaler and Sunstein advocate. A profit-maximizing firm is out 
to maximize profit, not to make its customers and employees better off. Sometimes nudges 
both increase a firm’s profits and make a firm’s customers and employees better off. But 
the two goals don’t always match. If government is going to consider nudge policies, some 
method must exist to decide (1) what nudges to implement and (2) how to get the nudge 
implemented. Should behavioral economists decide what nudges are appropriate? Should 
businesses? Or should government? If the decision maker is different from the one imple-
menting the policy, then some method must exist to get the nudge implemented.
	
The most likely decision maker will be the political process, which means govern-
ment. The most likely group to implement many of the nudges that Thaler and Sunstein 
suggest will be private firms. This presents a problem for nudge policy since it isn’t 
clear that, if it will reduce profits, business will want to implement the nudge in a way 
that will help the consumer. For example, the likely reason the cell phone bill is so 
Two types of nudges are:
1.	 Advantageous default option 
nudges. 
2.	 Information and encouragement 
nudges.
If the decision maker is different from 
the one implementing the policy, then 
some method must exist to get the 
nudge implemented.

	
Chapter 22 ■ Behavioral Economics and Modern Economic Policy	
493
complicated is not that firms don’t know that customers would like the information to 
compare prices—it is because the complication makes it hard for customers to com-
pare prices. Thaler and Sunstein recognize this, and accept that many of the nudges 
they seek to be implemented will require what they call “a very mild form of regula-
tion,” which, for many economists, makes the nudge something more like a push.
Distinguishing a Nudge from a Push
In thinking about implementing nudge policies, I find it useful to separate the nudges 
suggested by behavioral economics into two categories: nudge policy and push policy. 
If government can institute the behavioral economic policy directly, or if a private firm 
chooses to implement a policy on its own, it’s a nudge. However, if government has to 
develop a regulation and requires firms to implement a particular nudge, the nudge no 
longer meets the criteria of libertarian paternalism; the nudge is not a nudge, but a 
push. Thus, in my terminology, the RECAP policy discussed above, when imposed 
upon firms, is not a nudge; it is a push. Push policies restrict free choice by the firm for 
the greater good. A push policy is a regulatory or tax policy to get firms or individu-
als to use “appropriate” nudges. Such policies involve nudges for the person targeted 
by the policy but a push for the firm that has to implement the nudge. For example, a 
push policy might involve government requiring firms to present information in a cer-
tain way (as in RECAP), or requiring them to avoid certain actions they currently take.
	
Once one accepts the potential desirability of implementing the insights of behav-
ioral economics through push policies, rather than just through nudge policies, the 
possibilities for behavioral economic policies increase enormously. For example, push 
policy might involve government intervening in the market to change incentives 
through taxation. It could also involve preventing firms from using many of the nudges 
that they currently use for their advantage. By that I mean that while government may 
not have yet used the insights of behavioral economics, private firms sure have, and 
many of the practices that they follow are designed to take advantage of these insights 
for their own profit, not necessarily to the benefit of the consumer. Firms use their 
knowledge that people gravitate toward the default option all the time.
	
For example, when ordering something on the web, you will find that firms often 
ask whether you want to be included on their mailing list. Often, the box is checked 
already. To be excluded you have to uncheck the box. Firms can argue that you have a 
choice whether to be on the list or not. But they know that while you have a choice 
whether to be on the mailing list, far fewer people would choose to be on the list if the 
box were left unchecked. Government could require firms to frame the choice so that 
buyers have to check a box to be included in the mailing list.
	
Mailing options are another example. Amazon offers free mailing for orders over 
$49, which it advertises heavily. The default option is the “standard” mailing charge 
rather than the free mailing option. To get the free mailing, you have to override the 
default. Moreover, Amazon states that free shipping takes five to eight days rather than 
four to five days for standard mailing, even though the items are likely sent via the same 
mailing service. Government could require firms to set the default as the least-cost 
method of shipment and state shipping time based on actual shipping performance.
	
Another example of a firm taking advantage of the default option is the lure of free 
goods when subscribing for a service. For example, wine clubs offer you a half dozen bot-
tles of wine free in exchange for joining, leaving you free to drop out any time. It’s a great 
deal if you drop out, but you can be sure that a sufficient number of people take the default 
option (staying in the plan), even though they may have wanted to drop out, to warrant wine 
clubs making that offer. Here, government could make wine clubs drop new subscribers 
unless they actively choose to continue beyond the free period. Each of these cases is an 
example of a push policy because government is regulating the behavior of firms.
Many nudges are mild forms of 
regulation.
Q-8  If the government tells a 
company how to structure the bills it 
issues, is the policy a nudge policy?
A push policy is a regulatory or tax 
policy to get firms or individuals to use 
“appropriate” nudges.

494	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
Behavioral and Traditional Economic Policy Frames
As you can see, adopting the behavioral economic framework opens up many ways in 
which government can usefully intervene in the market. Traditional economists say 
desires are inherent in each person. Behavioral economists say that desires are affected 
by context. In fact, one could argue that in order to allow people to express their true 
desires, all those nudges firms take to benefit themselves would have to be prevented, 
or countered, by government. For example, if advertising leads people to want things that 
don’t make them happy, on behavioral economic policy grounds, it can be argued that 
government should implement an information nudge, providing “counteradvertising”  
that warns people about how firms are trying to change their desires. Countering all 
nudges by firms would involve a large regulatory presence by government.
	
Traditional economists say that having more makes you happier. Some behavioral 
economists suggest that having more is not what makes people happy. Often what 
makes them happy is having more than other people. Relative, not absolute, income 
matters. That proposition has potentially radical implications for economic policy. 
Specifically, it introduces the possibility that government can improve society’s overall 
welfare by changing the way in which income is distributed.
	
Cornell behavioral economist Robert Frank has pushed this argument the furthest in 
terms of implications for behavioral economic policy. He argues that after societies pass 
a certain threshold level of income, a threshold all Western societies have passed, certain 
types of material goods don’t matter a whole lot to our well-being, and crowd out those 
goods that do matter. He argues that the problem in Western economies is that “people 
don’t spend their extra money in ways that yield significant and lasting increases in mea-
sured satisfaction.” Instead they spend it on what institutionalist economist Thorstein 
Veblen called conspicuous consumption goods—goods that are bought to show off to the 
neighbors, rather than for their inherent value. Veblen argued that the rich spend their 
money on goods such as gigantic mansions and elaborate jewelry that they don’t really 
want for themselves, but want to have as a way of showing off their wealth to others. 
What matters for the rich is not what they have, but that they outdo the others. As we 
mentioned before, sometimes rich men even married someone (a trophy wife) whose job 
was to spend their money in a way that would show off their wealth even more.
	
Let’s consider an example of how relative, not absolute, materialism matters. When 
we get that super-duper, all-stainless-steel barbecue grill with Internet connection and 
built-in iPod speakers, we are better off. But when the neighbors get the same one, we 
slip back to being no better off. And if the neighbors get one with a built-in TV too, we 
are worse off (until we get one with a bigger built-in TV). Society ends up in a type of 
consumption war in which everyone is trying to outdo the other and no one is better 
off. (According to some, we might actually be worse off if the additional expenditures 
required additional work effort and less leisure.)
	
Frank argues that such consumption wars happen in many areas of our society. An 
example is houses—they get bigger and bigger, eventually turning into McMansions 
when much smaller houses would satisfy our needs. Cars are another example—they 
get bigger and bigger and turn into McHummers when a much less powerful car would 
do. He calls this push for goods to show off luxury fever.
	
At the same time that people are undertaking this conspicuous consumption, Frank 
argues that other types of goods—social goods that can be considered inconspicuous con-
sumption (goods that are not physical but nevertheless experienced)—are being crowded 
out. For example, as more people drive bigger cars, traffic becomes ­congested, noise 
becomes excessive, the air becomes polluted, and social needs become short-changed. His 
policy solution is to heavily tax those goods whose consumption value depends on 
showing off—thereby discouraging their consumption—and use the tax revenue to provide 
Adopting the behavioral economic 
framework opens up many ways in 
which government can usefully 
intervene in the market.
The proposition that relative, not 
absolute, income matters has potentially 
radical implications for policy.
Q-9  Do more conspicuous 
consumption goods make society 
better off?

495
the social amenities that make society better off. He argues that we should structure 
the economy so that people work a lot less—say three days a week on average—and 
vacation a lot more. In Luxury Fever Frank argues that “reallocations of our time and 
money in these ways would result in healthier, longer, and more satisfying lives.”
Concerns about Behavioral Economic Policies
As you can see, once one opens the gate to using behavioral economic insights, one can 
easily arrive at a number of policies that extend far beyond traditional economic precepts 
and nudges. Needless to say, traditional economists have expressed serious misgivings 
about these behavioral economic policies. In this section I present some of those ­concerns.
Few Policies Meet the Libertarian Paternalism Criterion 
The first concern has already been discussed: The possibility for true nudge policy that 
meets the libertarian paternalism criterion is very small. Many examples of nudges 
that advocates of libertarian paternalism give involve government regulation. For 
example, say the government believes that a particular default option, such as the sav-
ing option, will benefit people. If government passes a law that requires firms to make 
­saving the default option, the policy does not meet the libertarian criterion, and thus is 
more than a nudge. Government is telling the firm what to do. Traditional economists 
argue that true nudge policies are too small a category to warrant a separate analysis.
Designing Helpful Policies Is Complicated
A second concern is that designing nudge policies quickly becomes complicated, 
requiring more information than government has. To see the difficulties that even a 
simple informational policy presents, consider requiring firms to label BST-free milk. 
Traditional economists have expressed 
serious misgivings about these 
behavioral economic policies.
ADDED DIMENSION
might be called “shove” policy. To stop people from being 
one-dimensional, and to help them escape from their mate-
rial good fetishes, Marxists argued that we needed a revolu-
tion to overthrow the bourgeois capitalist government that 
legitimized capitalist institutions, and to replace it with a com-
munist government committed to fulfilling humans’ true de-
sires. He argued that eventually the communist government 
would wither away; once people’s true desires were fulfilled, 
government would just no longer be necessary. People’s true 
cooperative selves would overcome their competitive selves. 
These views led to the communist revolution, and are still 
held by a number of people throughout the world.
	
By almost all accounts, communism was not a success. 
Instead of fulfilling people’s true desires, it created short-
ages and unfairness. Communist governments became 
seen as the oppressor, and people ultimately decided to 
overthrow the communist economies and replace them 
with market economies. This experience soured many 
economists, and other people, on government policies 
­designed to fill people’s “true” wants.
Karl Marx and Shove Policy
The arguments for push policy have been suggested by 
economists in the past. Perhaps the strongest advocate of 
the general ideas was Karl Marx. Marx argued that the 
market had a tendency to alienate people from their “true” 
selves. He argued that people are not born with a collec-
tion of inherent wants and desires, but instead develop a 
collection of wants and needs that reflect the institutions of 
society. For example, if firms need workers, society creates 
wants in people that will lead them to work. Thus, many of 
the wants that people have are created [artificial, not inher-
ent (true) needs]. For example, Marx argued that capitalist 
society created strong tendencies toward wanting material-
istic goods. He argued that markets made people competi-
tive, not cooperative; they alienated people from their true 
selves. Markets made people, in the words of Marxist phi-
losopher Herbert Marcuse, one-dimensional people—peo-
ple who think of life only in terms of material goods, and not 
in terms of spiritual and social goods.
	
Those arguments lead to strong policy conclusions that 
go far beyond nudges, or even pushes. Marx favored what 

496	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
(BST is a cow growth hormone.) That could be seen as simply an information policy, 
and thus not a strong nudge, despite the fact that labeling would be a government regu-
lation. However, many economists oppose such labeling since most scientific tests 
have found that milk that comes from cows given the growth hormone BST is no dif-
ferent from milk that does not; they argue that people’s concern about BST is itself 
predictably irrational—people cannot deal with complicated issues. Other economists 
argue that regardless of what science may conclude, if people believe that BST milk is 
bad for them, they should be given the information needed to avoid milk with BST; the 
regulation is simply providing feedback.
	
The problem is that placing the statement on the milk carton will likely raise peo-
ple’s concerns about the issue and lead some to choose higher-priced milk than they 
otherwise would. Should the government require such labeling or not, and if so, what 
other information should be included on the labels? Should people be informed of the 
antibiotic treatment cows receive, along with many other facts about how cow milk is 
produced? Where does one draw the line?
It Isn’t Clear Government Knows Better
A third concern is that behavioral economic policies (whether true nudge policies or push 
policies) require government to decide, on the advice of behavioral economists, what is 
best for people, and what people truly want. For example, a “luxury tax,” a policy that 
Frank and others advocate, involves determining what is a luxury and what is a necessity. 
	
For example, Pennsylvania taxes bathing suits because it consider them luxuries. 
Even though policies to tax luxuries may seem to resonate with the sense of frustration 
that many of us feel about perceived excesses of modern society, implementing such a 
policy requires the government to decide which goods make people truly happy and 
which goods don’t. Doing that isn’t easy. If people truly cared about relative, not abso-
lute, income, people would be happy to give up some percentage of their income as 
long as everyone else did so as well. They are not.
	
How can we be sure behavioral economists, or whoever is the decision maker about 
what nudges and pushes to implement, are right about what is best for people? Even if 
economists could agree that people do not always act in their own self-interest, it isn’t 
clear government can determine what’s in people’s best interest either.
Government Policy May Make the Situation Worse
A fourth concern is that nudge policy substantially increases the potential for govern-
ment failure—where government, in dealing with a problem, actually makes the prob-
lem worse. Will government have the willpower to limit its nudges to the set that 
behavioral economists, or some other group, determine is appropriate? Or will it use 
nudges in other ways—perhaps to win an election, or to benefit one group over 
another? Just as traditional economists are concerned with government failure in 
implementing traditional economic policies to correct for externalities, traditional 
economists are concerned with government failure in implementing nudge policies.
	
Traditional economists argue that accepting behavioral economic policy will start 
the government sliding along a slippery slope. Since the government has a monopoly 
on power, somehow that monopoly has to be kept in check if it is to benefit the people, 
not members of the government or its friends. For that reason, early classical econo-
mists argued that government power had to be kept under control, even when the 
appropriate use of power could improve the situation, because one cannot assume that 
government will appropriately use its power. Because of the fear of an oppressive gov-
ernment, earlier economists felt that, for all its problems, the market with minimal 
government intervention was often the better alternative. Economics’ laissez-faire set 
Even if economists could agree that 
people do not always act in their own 
self-interest, it isn’t clear government 
can determine what’s in people’s best 
interest either.
Q-10  What are four concerns about 
behavioral economic policies?
Traditional economists argue that 
accepting behavioral economic policy 
will start the government sliding along a 
slippery slope.

	
Chapter 22 ■ Behavioral Economics and Modern Economic Policy	
497
of policy precepts arose as part of a liberal tradition that was based upon certain 
inalienable rights of the individual that government could not violate. These argu-
ments fit in political philosophy and are outside the confines of this text but they are 
the ones that a consideration of behavioral economic policy raises.
A Changing View of Economists: From Pro-market  
Advocates to Economic Engineers
I have defined economic efficiency as achieving a goal as cheaply as possible and said 
that economists advise government on how to achieve economic efficiency. The tradi-
tional economic model made a shorthand adjustment to interpret the goal of society as 
designing the economy to maximize people’s consumption. Markets tend to do that, 
and hence the traditional economic model tended to support markets.
	
Traditional economics justified its concentration on maximizing people’s con-
sumption by arguing that people knew what they wanted better than anyone else, and 
their actions revealed their desires. Consumer sovereignty was not to be questioned. 
Behavioral economics questions consumer sovereignty and thus opens up a Pandora’s 
box of issues that the traditional economic model keeps out of sight.
	
Behavioral economics is part of a broader movement in modern economics where 
economists see themselves as mechanism design engineers. They solve problems by 
building coordination mechanisms that achieve predetermined goals. Traditional econ-
omists’ models focus on economic incentives and people’s tendency to respond to 
price incentives. Behavioral economists’ models modify that by taking into account 
people’s tendency to be predictably irrational. In doing this, behavioral economics 
opens up the policy discussion of economics from the traditional economic view that 
prices and incentives matter to a broader view that everything matters. For a behav-
ioral economist, modern economic policy making involves complicated issues, and we 
need to take into account those complications when designing policy.
	
Who can argue with the truism that everything matters? Who better than a traditional 
economist using a behavioral economist’s argument? Behavioral economics tells us that 
people are not good at making decisions when issues are complicated. Economic policy 
involves very complicated decisions, and the general population and policy makers need 
a nudge to get them to make good decisions. The traditional model gives them that nudge 
by concentrating on the most important aspects of choice—price incentives—and not 
distracting the analysis as behavioral economics does by concentrating on the many irra-
tionalities that people exhibit. Furthermore, the traditional model protects individual lib-
erty and prevents the state from trying to shape people’s wants. By taking the focus away 
from that most important incentive, models based on behavioral economic insights fail 
to give people that nudge to concentrate on the most important element—price 
incentives—and, therefore, are likely to do more harm than good.
	
I leave it to you to decide which argument is right.
Conclusion
I am a big fan of complexity theory, which pictures the economy as a complex evolv-
ing system. But not only is the economy evolving, so too is the economics profession. 
This chapter gives you a sense of that evolution, and the implications of those changes 
for policy. As you can see, behavioral economics opens up a new set of policy ques-
tions and new ways of looking at the world through an economic lens. It shows you 
that economics is not a single lens, but a set of lenses that recognize that incentives are 
important, but also recognize that the way in which incentives work is far more com-
plicated than any simple model can capture.
Behavioral economics questions 
consumer sovereignty and thus opens 
up a Pandora’s box of issues that the 
traditional economic model keeps out 
of sight.

498	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
• Mechanism design is an engineering approach to eco-
nomic problems in which one identifies a goal and 
then designs a mechanism such as a market, social 
system, or contract to achieve that goal.  (LO22-1)
• Behavioral economics is an outgrowth of the mecha-
nism design approach to economics.  (LO22-1)
• Choice architecture is the context in which decisions 
are presented. A nudge is designed to influence 
choice architecture in a way that directs people to 
make choices that make them better off.  (LO22-2)
• Nudges are libertarian because people remain free to 
make choices. They are paternalistic because they 
change the structure of choices with the intention of 
influencing people’s behavior in a way that improves 
their choices.  (LO22-2)
• Nudges can be useful for (1) choices where benefits 
and costs are separated by time, (2) complicated 
choices with many dimensions, and (3) infrequent 
choices.  (LO22-2)
Summary
• Two categories of nudge polices are (1) advantageous 
default option policies and (2) information and 
­encouragement policies.  (LO22-2)
• A true nudge policy leaves everyone free to choose 
and does not have to be imposed through regulation 
or taxation. Push policies are government policies 
­requiring firms or individuals to use certain types  
of nudges. They do not meet the libertarian 
­criterion.  (LO22-3)
• Government regulation may be required if firms do 
not want to implement a nudge. Such nudges become 
pushes.  (LO22-3)
• Behavioral economic policy is controversial. It is not 
clear that government can decide what is best for peo-
ple or, even if it knew what was best, would imple-
ment the policy. Government is subject to ­failure just 
as is the market.  (LO22-4)
Key Terms
behavioral economic 
policy
choice architecture
coordination mechanism
economic  
engineering
incentive compatibility 
problem
libertarian paternalistic 
policy
mechanism design
nudge
nudge policy
push policy
shadow price
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 What is a coordination mechanism? Give an example.   
(LO22-1)
	 2.	 True or false? For a market to have a coordination  
mechanism, money must be exchanged. Explain.   
(LO22-1)
	 3.	 True or false? Only money prices affect incentives; 
shadow prices do not. Explain.  (LO22-1)
	 4.	 What is the incentive compatibility problem? Give an 
­example.  (LO22-1)
	 5.	 What is the primary task of a mechanism design 
­economist?  (LO22-1)
	 6.	 How did mechanism design lead to behavioral 
­economics?  (LO22-1)
	 7.	 Can a model that includes just money price miss relevant 
prices? Why or why not?  (LO22-1)
	 8.	 How is choice architecture related to behavioral econom-
ics and mechanism design?  (LO22-2)
	 9.	 Behavioral economics is a new field in economics. Are 
nudges new too?  (LO22-2)
	10.	 What is a nudge policy? Give an example.  (LO22-2)
	11.	 How can a nudge be defined as libertarian?  (LO22-2)

	
Chapter 22 ■ Behavioral Economics and Modern Economic Policy	
499
	12.	 In what way is nudge policy paternalistic?  (LO22-2)
	13.	 Two people are given the choice to participate in a retire-
ment program in which the firm matches contributions. 
Person A is given a form in which she must check a box 
to opt into the retirement program. Person B is given a 
form in which she must check a box to opt out of the re-
tirement program. According to studies, which person is 
more likely to participate? Or are both equally likely to 
participate? Explain your answer.  (LO22-2)
	14.	 What are three types of choices in which nudges are use-
ful?  (LO22-2)
	15.	 Why is a nudge useful for choices where benefits and 
costs are separated by time?  (LO22-2)
	16.	 Why, in the traditional model, is a nudge unnecessary but 
potentially helpful in the behavioral model?  (LO22-2)
	17.	 Classify the following nudges as either a “potentially ad-
vantageous default nudge,” an “information or encourage-
ment nudge,” or “not a nudge.”  (LO22-2)
	a.	 A firm redesigns its health enrollment form so that 
employees must explicitly choose to forgo health in-
surance.
	b.	 Your local city sends you an annual report of average 
water usage per resident with your actual usage along 
with tips for conserving water.
	c.	 Government raises the taxes on gasoline to reduce pol-
lution.
	d.	 A consumer-advocacy group sets up a site with a side-
by-side comparison of auto-insurance cost based on 
estimated risk of drivers. 
	18. 	Government has provided a way for people to file their 
tax returns on the Internet to make filing easier and raise 
compliance. Is this an example of a libertarian paternalis-
tic policy? Explain your answer.  (LO22-2)
	19.	 What distinguishes a nudge from a push?  (LO22-3)
	20. 	Why would push instead of nudge policies be required?   
(LO22-3)
	21.	 Identify the following as either a nudge, a push, or neither.
	a.	 The cover of your state tax forms reports that 90 per-
cent of residents pay taxes on time.
	b.	 If your friends gain weight, you are likely to gain 
weight too.
	c.	 Amazon is required by government to set the default 
mail option as the standard mail rate.
	d.	 Government taxes in part to redistribute income.
	e.	 A health insurer issues participants credits for exercis-
ing and eating healthy foods that they can use to buy 
products. 
	22.	 How is conspicuous consumption an example of the 
­importance of relative materialism to one’s 
­happiness?  (LO22-3)
	23.	 How might conspicuous consumption lower total 
­happiness?  (LO22-3)
	24.	 What are four reasons to be cautious about 
nudges?  (LO22-4)
	25. 	Why aren’t there many libertarian nudge 
­policies?  (LO22-4)
	26. 	Assume that government proposes that all employees 
must be presented with the choice of opting out of a 
­retirement saving program. What assumptions are 
­necessary for this to be a true nudge? Are they reasonable 
assumptions?  (LO22-4)
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Behavioral economics seems to suggest that the “long-
term self” rather than the “short-term self” is rational. 
How do we know that? (Austrian)
	 2.	 There is an implicit view in the chapter that if a policy 
meets the libertarian paternalistic goal, it is a good policy. 
Is that necessarily the case? (Radical)
	 3.	 How does behavioral economics undermine the standard 
supply/demand model? (Institutionalist)
	 4.	 Behavioral economics acknowledges that cultural norms 
impact people’s behavior, something that feminist econo-
mists have long included in their analysis. What risks does 
nudge policy pose for using cultural norms to affect be-
havior of those in society who have comparatively less 
power? (Feminist)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 What mechanism might be developed to determine 
whether it is appropriate for government to give a 
nudge? 
	 2.	 Why were more batters being hit in the American League 
than in the National League starting in 1973? (Be sure 
your answer uses shadow prices.)

500	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
	 3.	 To offset the effect of the designated hitter system, what 
might the American League do to reduce the number of 
beanballs thrown?
	 4.	 In which of the following cases might a nudge be helpful? 
Explain why or why not.
	a.	 Deciding what mortgage is affordable.
	b.	 Deciding whether to exercise or not on a particular day.
	c.	 Deciding whether to fill your gas tank.
	d.	 Deciding whom to marry.
	 5.	 Do we as society focus too much on consumption, and, if 
so, how would one change that focus? 
	 6.	 Describe five nudges that firms currently use to get you to 
do what they want you to do. 
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 Economic science tries to understand how the economy 
works; economic engineering tries to design mechanisms 
to better coordinate people’s actions.  (LO22-1)
	 2.	 A shadow price is an implicit price of an action whose 
value is measured in opportunity costs. It does not involve 
a payment to another person but is estimated by analyzing 
people’s actions.  (LO22-1)
	 3.	 Yes, it does. The goal of college is generally thought to be 
learning. Grading gives one an incentive to learn what is 
likely to be on the test, not what is necessarily the most 
useful or important knowledge.  (LO22-1)
	 4.	 Economists’ work in mechanism design led to a greater 
interest in behavioral economics because they discovered 
that people were predictably irrational, and that by taking 
that predictable irrationality into account, they could de-
sign more effective coordination mechanisms.  (LO22-1)
	 5.	 False. They believe that people are sometimes irrational but 
are generally not irrational in a predictable way, and that if 
they are predictably irrational, that irrationality can be ac-
counted for as an adjustment to the general model.  (LO22-1)
	 6.	 He or she is more likely to be a behavioral economist.  
(LO22-2)
	 7.	 A policy designed to structure choices so that people 
make a certain choice is called a nudge policy.  
(LO22-2)
	 8.	 It depends. From the perspective of the firm, it definitely 
is not a nudge policy since the firm is being told what to 
do. It is a push policy. From the perspective of the indi-
vidual, it can be seen as a nudge policy.  (LO22-3)
	 9.	 Not necessarily. Increasing conspicuous consumption 
goods makes the owner of the good feel better off but 
makes others feel worse off, and thus does not necessarily 
make society as a whole better off.  (LO22-3)
	10.	 Four concerns are: (1) There are very few true nudge poli-
cies; (2) nudge policies quickly become complicated; 
(3) governments do not necessarily know what is best; and 
(4) nudge policies increase the potential for government 
failure.  (LO22-4)

After reading this chapter,  
you should be able to:
LO23-1	 List three reasons why 
economists sometimes 
differ and sometimes agree 
in their views on social 
policy.
LO23-2	 Explain the cost/benefit 
approach the typical 
economist takes to analyze 
regulations.
LO23-3	 Describe three types of 
failure of market outcomes.
LO23-4	 Explain why most 
economists are doubtful 
government can correct 
failure of market outcomes.
“
”
If an economist becomes certain of  
the solution of any problem, he can  
be equally certain that his solution  
is wrong.
—H. A. Innis
One important job of economists is to give advice to 
politicians and other policy makers on a variety of ques-
tions relating to social policy: How should unemployment 
be dealt with? How can society distribute income fairly? 
Should the government redistribute income? Would a pro-
gram of equal pay for jobs of comparable worth (a pay 
equity program) make economic sense? Should the mini-
mum wage be increased? These are tough questions.
	
In previous chapters, I discussed the formal frame-
works that modern economists use to think about such 
issues. In this chapter I consider economic reasoning in a 
broader context.
	
The reason for doing so is that economic reasoning and the supply/demand 
model are tools, not rules. To draw policy implications from it, the supply/
demand model has to be placed in context. Used in the proper context, the supply/
demand model is enormously strong, something no one should be without. Used 
out of context, it can lead to conclusions that don’t seem right, and that maybe are 
not right. Consider the assembly-line chicken-production example in Chapter 12. 
Some of you may have felt that the assembly-line production of chickens was 
somehow not right—that the efficiency of the production process somehow did 
not outweigh the chickens’ suffering. Yet the economic model, which focuses on 
efficiency, directs production toward that assembly line. This chapter considers 
when you might want to use economic reasoning, and when you might not.
	
The chapter is divided into two parts. The first part of the chapter extends the 
supply/demand model to a broader cost/benefit framework, tying together the 
discussion we had about economic reasoning in the introductory chapters with 
the chapters that developed the foundations of the supply/demand model. It 
shows you how economic reasoning is used in practice. The second part of the 
chapter turns economic reasoning back upon itself, considering not only the 
benefits (which are considerable) but also the costs of using economic reason-
ing. In doing so, I discuss how markets that are working perfectly may still lead 
to outcomes that are undesirable.
Microeconomic Policy, Economic  
Reasoning, and Beyond
chapter 23
© Zhang Jun/Xinhua Press/Corbis

502	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
Economists’ Differing Views about Social Policy
Economists have many different views on social policy because:
1.	  Economists’ suggestions for social policy are determined by their subjective value 
judgments (normative views) as well as by their objective economic analyses.
2.	Policy proposals must be based on imprecise empirical evidence, so there’s 
considerable room for differences of interpretation not only about economic 
issues but also about how political and social institutions work. Economic pol-
icy is an art, not a science.
3.	Policy proposals are based on various models that focus on different aspects of 
a problem.
	
All three reasons directly concern the role of ideology in economics. However, any 
policy proposal must embody both economic analysis and value judgments because 
the goals of policy reflect value judgments. When an economist makes a policy pro-
posal, it’s of this type: “If A, B, and C are your goals, then you should undertake poli-
cies D, E, and F to achieve those goals most efficiently.” In making these policy 
suggestions, the economist’s role is much the same as an engineer’s: He or she is sim-
ply telling someone else how to achieve desired ends most efficiently. Ideally the econ-
omist is as objective as possible, telling someone how to achieve his or her goals 
(which need not be the economist’s goals).
How Economists’ Value Judgments Creep  
into Policy Proposals
Even though economists attempt to be as objective as possible, value judgments still 
creep into their analyses in three ways: interpretation of policy makers’ values, inter-
pretation of empirical evidence, and choice of economic models.
Interpretation of the Policy Maker’s Values 
In practice, social goals 
are seldom so neat that they can be specified A, B, and C; they’re vaguely understood 
and vaguely expressed. An economist will be told, for instance, “We want to make the 
poor better off” or “We want to see that middle-income people get better housing.” It 
isn’t clear what poor, better off, and better housing mean. Nor is it clear how judg-
ments should be made when a policy will benefit some individuals at the expense of 
others, as real-world policies inevitably do.
	
Faced with this problem, some academic economists have argued that economists 
should recommend only Pareto optimal policies—policies that benefit some people 
and hurt no one. The policies are named in honor of the famous Italian economist 
Vilfredo Pareto, who first suggested that kind of criterion for judging social change.1 
It’s hard to object to the notion of Pareto optimal policies because, by definition, they 
improve life for some people while hurting no one.
	
I’d give you an example of a real-world Pareto optimal policy if I could, but 
unfortunately I don’t know of any. Every policy inevitably has some side effect of 
hurting, or at least seeming to hurt, somebody. In the real world, Pareto optimal 
policies don’t exist. Any economist who has advised governments on real-world 
problems knows that all real-world policies make some people better off and some 
people worse off.
Economists’ views on social policy differ 
widely because: 
1.	 They have different underlying 
values.
2.	 They interpret empirical evidence 
differently. 
3.	 They use different underlying 
models.
Pareto optimal policies are policies  
that benefit some people and hurt no 
one.
Q-1  If someone suggests that 
economists should focus only on  
Pareto optimal policies, how would  
you respond?
1Pareto, in his famous book Mind and Society, suggested this criterion as an analytic approach  
for theory, not as a criterion for real-world policy. He recognized the importance of the art of 
­economics and that real-world policy has to be judged by much broader criteria than this.

	
Chapter 23 ■ Microeconomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and Beyond	
503
	
But that doesn’t mean that economists have no policy role. In their policy propos-
als, economists try to spell out the effects of a policy and whether the policy is consis-
tent with the policy maker’s value judgments. Doing so isn’t easy because the policy 
maker’s value judgments are often vague and must be interpreted by the economist. In 
that interpretation, the economist’s own value judgments often slip in.
Interpretation of Empirical Evidence 
Value judgments also creep into 
economic policy proposals through economists’ interpretations of empirical evidence, 
which is almost always imprecise. For example, say an economist is assessing the elastic-
ity of a product’s demand in the relevant price range. She can’t run an experiment to 
isolate prices and quantities demanded; instead she must look at events in which hun-
dreds of other things changed, and do her best to identify what caused what. In selecting 
and interpreting empirical evidence, our values will likely show through, try as we might 
to be objective. People tend to focus on evidence that supports their position. Economists 
are trained to be as objective as they can be, but pure objectivity is impossible.
	
Let’s consider the example of a debate in which some economists proposed that a 
large tax be imposed on sales of disposable diapers, citing studies that suggested dis-
posable diapers made up between 15 and 30 percent of the garbage in landfills. Others 
objected, citing studies that showed disposable diapers made up only 1 or 2 percent of 
the refuse going into landfills. Such differences in empirical estimates are the norm, 
not the exception. Inevitably, if precise estimates are wanted, more studies are neces-
sary. (In this case, the further studies showed that the lower estimates were correct.) 
But policy debates don’t wait for further studies. Economists’ value judgments influ-
ence which incomplete study policy makers choose to believe is more accurate.
Choice of Economic Models 
Similarly with the choice of models. A model, 
because it focuses on certain aspects of economic reality and not on others, necessarily 
reflects certain value judgments, so economists’ choice of models must also reflect 
certain value judgments. Albert Einstein once said that theories should be as simple as 
possible, but not more so. To that we should add a maxim: Scientists should be as ob-
jective and as value-free as possible, but not more so.
	
This book presents primarily mainstream economic models. This includes the standard 
supply/demand model and the new behavioral models. These models direct us to certain 
conclusions. Two other general models that some economists follow are a Marxian 
­(radical) model, which is a model that focuses on equitable distribution of power, rights, 
and income among social classes, and a public choice model, which is a model that 
focuses on economic incentives as applied to politicians. These two models, by emphasizing 
different aspects of economic interrelationships, sometimes direct us to other conclusions.
	
Let’s consider an example. Mainstream economic analysis directs us to look at how the 
invisible hand achieves harmony and equilibrium through the market. Thus, when main-
stream economists look at labor markets, they generally see supply and demand forces lead-
ing to equilibrium. When Marxist economists look at labor markets, their model focuses on 
the tensions among the social classes, and they generally see exploitation of workers by 
capitalists. When public choice economists look at labor markets, they see individuals using 
government to protect their monopolies. Their model focuses on political restrictions that 
provide rents to various groups. Each model captures different aspects of reality. That’s why 
it’s important to be as familiar with as many different models as possible.
The Need for a Worldview
John Maynard Keynes, an economist who gained fame in the 1930s, once said that 
economists should be seen in the same light as dentists—as competent technicians. 
Scientists should be as objective as 
possible, but not more so.
Q-2  How does a radical analysis of 
labor markets differ from a mainstream 
analysis?
Each model captures different aspects 
of reality. That’s why it’s important to be 
as familiar with as many different 
models as possible.

504	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
He was wrong, and his own experience contradicts that view. In dealing with real-
world economic policy, Keynes was no mere technician. He had a definite worldview, 
which he shared with many of the policy makers he advised. An economist who is to 
play a role in forming policy must be willing to combine value judgments and techni-
cal knowledge. That worldview determines how and when the economic model will 
be applied.
Agreement among Economists about Social Policy
Despite their widely varying values, both liberal and conservative economists agree 
more often on policy prescriptions than most laypeople think they do. They’re econo-
mists, after all, and their models focus on certain issues—specifically on incentives 
and individual choice. They believe economic incentives are important, and most 
economists tend to give significant weight to individuals’ ability to choose reasonably. 
This leads economists, both liberal and conservative, to look at problems differently 
than other people do.
	
Many people think economists of all persuasions look at the world coldheartedly. 
In my view, that opinion isn’t accurate, but it’s understandable how people could reach 
it. Economists are taught to look at things in an “objective” way that takes into account 
a policy’s long-run incentive effects as well as the short-run effects. Many of their 
policy proposals are based on these long-run incentive effects, which in the short run 
make the policy look coldhearted. The press and policy makers usually focus on short-
run effects. Economists argue that they aren’t being coldhearted at all, that they’re 
simply being reasonable, and that following their advice will lead to less suffering than 
following others’ advice will. This is not to say that all advice economists give will 
lead to significant benefits and less suffering in the long run. Some of it may be simply 
misguided.
	
The problem economists face is similar to the one parents face when they tell their 
children that they can’t eat candy or must do their homework before they can play. 
Explaining how “being mean” is actually “being nice” to a six-year-old isn’t easy.
	
A former colleague of mine, Abba Lerner, was well known for his strong liberal 
leanings. The government of Israel asked him what to do about unemployment. He 
went to Israel, studied the problem, and presented his advice: “Cut union wages.” The 
government official responded, “But that’s the same advice the conservative econo-
mist gave us.” Lerner answered, “It’s good advice, too.” The Israeli Labor government 
then went and did the opposite; it raised wages, thus holding on to its union support in 
the short run.
	
Another example comes from a World Bank economist. She had to advise a hospital 
in a developing country to turn down the offer of a free dialysis machine because the 
marginal cost of the filters it would have to buy to use the machine significantly 
exceeded the costs of life-saving medicines that would save even more lives. Economic 
reasoning involves making such hard decisions.
	
The best way to see the consistency and the differences in economists’ policy advice 
is to consider some examples. Let’s start with a general consideration of economic 
views on government regulation.
Economists’ Cost/Benefit Approach to  
Government Regulation
Say that 200 people die in a plane crash. Newspaper headlines trumpet the disaster 
while news magazines are filled with stories about how the accident might have been 
caused, citing speculation about poor maintenance and lack of government regulation. 
Liberal and conservative economists 
agree on many policy prescriptions 
because they use the same models, 
which focus on incentives and  
individual choice.
Q-3  When can “being mean” actually 
be “being nice”?

	
Chapter 23 ■ Microeconomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and Beyond	
505
The publicity spreads the sense that “something must be done” to prevent such trage-
dies. Politicians quickly pick up on this, feeling that the public wants action. They 
introduce a bill outlawing faulty maintenance, denounce poor regulatory procedures, 
and demand an investigation of sleepy air controllers. In short, they strike out against 
likely causes of the accident and suggest improved regulations to help prevent any 
more such crashes.
	
Economists differ in their views on government regulation of airlines and other 
businesses, but most find themselves opposing some of the supposedly problem-solving 
regulations proposed by politicians. They generally adopt a cost/benefit approach to 
problems—assigning costs and benefits, and making decisions on the basis of the rel-
evant costs and benefits—that requires them to determine a quantitative cost and bene-
fit for everything, including life. What’s the value of a human life? All of us would like 
to answer, “Infinite. Each human life is beyond price.” But if that’s true, then in a cost/
benefit framework, everything of value should be spent on preventing death. People 
should take no chances. They should drive at no more than 30 miles per hour with air-
bags, triple-cushioned bumpers, double roll bars—you get the picture.
	
It might be possible for manufacturers to make a car in which no one would die as 
the result of an accident. But people don’t want such cars. Many people don’t buy the 
auto safety accessories that are already available, and many drivers ignore the present 
speed limit. Instead, many people want cars with style and speed.
The Value of Life
Far from regarding human life as priceless, people make decisions every day that 
reflect the valuations they place on their own lives. The table below presents a number 
of estimates that various economists have made of some of those decisions.
Basis for Calculation	
Value of Human Life 
Automobile safety features	
$5,020,000–7,130,000
Bicycle helmets	
  1,580,000–5,680,000
Smoke detector purchases	
  1,010,000–3,380,000
Seat belt usage	
  1,320,000
Car seats	
  1,100,000
These values are calculated by looking at people’s revealed preferences (the choices 
people make when they must pay the costs). To find them, economists calculate how 
much people will pay to reduce the possibility of their death by a certain amount. If 
that’s what people will pay to avoid death, the value of life can be calculated by multi-
plying the inverse of the reduction in the probability of death by the amount they pay. 
(What is relevant for these calculations is not the actual probabilities but the decision 
makers’ estimate of the probabilities.)
	
For example, say someone will buy a smoke detector for $25 but won’t buy one if 
it costs more than $25. Also say that the buyer believes that a smoke detector will 
reduce the chance of dying in a fire by 1/80,000. That means that to increase the likeli-
hood of surviving a house fire by 1/80,000, the buyer will pay $25. That also means that 
the buyer is implicitly valuing his or her life at roughly $2,000,000 (80,000 × $25 = 
$2,000,000).
	
Alternatively, say that people will pay an extra $60 for a set of premium tires that 
reduces the risk of death by 1/100,000. As opposed to having a 3/100,000 chance per 
year of dying in a skid on the highway, people driving cars with premium tires have a 
Many regulations are formulated for 
political expediency and do not reflect 
cost/benefit considerations.
Cost/benefit analysis is analysis  
in which one assigns a cost and  
benefit to alternatives, and draws a 
conclusion on the basis of those  
costs and benefits.
Q-4  If the text correctly describes the 
valuation individuals place on life with 
regard to smoke detector purchases 
and premium tire usage, how would you 
advise them to alter their behavior in 
order to maximize utility?
© Royalty-Free/Corbis RF
Car crashes are evidence human 
life is not beyond price.

506
2/100,000 chance of dying (3/100,000 − 2/100,000 = 1/100,000). Multiplying 100,000 
(the inverse of the reduction in probability) by $60, the extra cost of the set of premium 
tires, you find that people who buy these tires are implicitly valuing their lives at 
$6,000,000.2 Another way of determining the value that society places on life is to 
look at awards juries give for the loss of life. One study looking at such awards found 
that juries on average value life at about $3.5 million.
	
No one can say whether people know what they’re doing in making these valua-
tions, although the inconsistencies in the valuations people place on their lives suggest 
that to some degree they don’t, or that other considerations are entering into their deci-
sions. But even given the inconsistencies, it’s clear that people are placing a finite 
value on life. Most people are aware that in order to “live” they must take chances on 
losing their lives. Economists argue that individuals’ revealed preferences are the best 
estimate that society can have of the value of life, and that in making policy society 
shouldn’t pretend that life is beyond value.
	
Placing a value on human life allows economists to evaluate the cost of a crash. Say 
each life is valued at $2 million. If 200 people die in that plane accident and a $200 
million plane is destroyed, the cost of the crash is $600 million.
	
Right after the accident, or even long after the accident, tell a mother and father 
you’re valuing the life of their dead daughter at $2 million and the plane at $200 mil-
lion, and you’ll see why economists have problems with getting their views across. 
Even if people can agree rationally that they implicitly place a value on their own lives, 
it’s not something they want to deal with emotionally, especially after an accident. 
Using a cost/benefit approach, an economist must be willing to say, if that’s the way 
Economists argue that individuals’ 
revealed choices are the best estimate 
that society can have of the value of 
life, and that in making policy society 
shouldn’t pretend that life is beyond 
value.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Valuing life is more than just an academic ex-
ercise. These valuations play an important 
role in court cases on wrongful death in which 
one individual sues another for having caused 
a wrongful death. How do you put a value on 
the person’s life? The courts have to do that—­
determine how much the defendant will have 
to pay the plaintiff if the court decides it was a 
“wrongful death.” A court can’t simply say that 
a life is priceless; it relies on economic expert 
witnesses to provide values.
	
One way to value life is the method pre-
sented in the text—deduce how much peo-
ple value life from their willingness to take 
risks. This sounds like a reasonable method, 
but it has problems that have been much discussed in the 
literature and in the courtroom. Some of these problems 
include: Small risk values are irrelevant to large risk 
­issues; the variance of estimates is too high to give a rea-
sonable estimate; anonymous lives are irrelevant in 
Economists in the Courtroom
specific cases; people’s risk preferences 
differ; and people’s decisions are not fully 
rational but reflect many other issues such 
as awareness of the problem and shock 
value. In fact, there is a whole branch of 
­economics—forensic economics—that 
looks at such issues.
	
Another method economists use for 
valuing life is to calculate the lost earnings 
and pleasure that someone would have 
had in his or her remaining lifetime. But this 
method also has problems since it is diffi-
cult to specify either precisely. For example, 
is a depressed person’s life worth less than 
a happy person’s life? Is an investment bank-
er’s life worth more than a trainee’s life? What is the appro-
priate discount rate to use to value earnings in different 
years? Courts have to sort through these many problems, 
and economists’ testimony as expert witnesses often plays 
a key role in these cases.
© Royalty-Free/Corbis RF
2For simplicity of exposition, I’m not considering risk preferences or other benefits of these deci-
sions, such as lowering the chance of injury.

	
Chapter 23 ■ Microeconomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and Beyond	
507
the analysis turns out, “It’s reasonable that my son died in this accident because the 
cost of preventing the accident by imposing stricter government regulations would 
have been greater than the benefit of preventing it.”
	
Economists take the emotional heat for making such valuations. Their cost/benefit 
approach requires them to do so.
Comparing Costs and Benefits of Different Dimensions
After the marginal cost and marginal benefit data have been gathered and processed, 
one is ready to make an informed decision. Will the cost of a new regulation outweigh 
the benefit, or vice versa? Here again, economists find themselves in a difficult position in 
evaluating a regulation about airplane safety. Many of the costs of regulation are small 
but occur in large numbers. Every time you lament some “bureaucratic craziness” 
(such as a required weekly staff meeting or a form to be signed ensuring something has 
been done), you’re experiencing a cost. But when those costs are compared to the 
­benefits of avoiding a major accident, the dimensions of comparison are often wrong.
	
For example, say it is discovered that a loose bolt was the probable cause of the 
plane crash. A regulation requiring airline mechanics to check whether that bolt is 
tightened and, to ensure that they do so, requiring them to fill out a form each time the 
check is made might cost $1. How can we compare $1 to the $600 million cost of the 
crash? Such a regulation obviously makes sense from the perspective of gaining a 
$600 million benefit from $1 of cost.
	
But wait. Each plane might have 4,000 similar bolts, each of which is equally likely 
to cause an accident if it isn’t tightened. If it makes sense to check that one bolt, it 
makes sense to check all 4,000. And the bolts must be checked on each of the 4,000 
flights per day. All of this increases the cost of tightening bolts to $16 million per day. 
But the comparison shouldn’t be between $16 million and $600 million. The compari-
son should be between the marginal cost ($16 million) and the marginal benefit, which 
depends on how much tightening bolts will contribute to preventing an accident.
	
Let’s say that having the bolts checked daily reduces the probability of having an 
­accident by 0.001. This means that the check will prevent one out of a thousand accidents 
that otherwise would have happened. The marginal benefit of checking a particular bolt 
isn’t $600 million (which it would be if you knew a bolt was going to be loose), but is
0.001 × $600 million = $600,000
That $600,000 is the marginal benefit that must be compared to the marginal cost of 
$16 million.
	
Given these numbers, I leave it to you to decide: Does this hypothetical regulation 
make sense?
Putting Cost/Benefit Analysis in Perspective
The numbers in our plane crash example are hypothetical. The numbers used in real-
world decision making are not hypothetical, but they are often ambiguous. Measur-
ing costs, benefits, and probabilities is difficult, and economists often disagree on 
specific costs and benefits. Costs have many dimensions, some more quantifiable 
than others. Cost/benefit analysis is often biased toward quantifiable costs and away 
from nonquantifiable costs, or it involves enormous ambiguity as nonquantifiable 
costs are quantified.
	
The subjectivity and ambiguity of costs are one reason why economists differ in 
their views of regulation. In considering any particular regulation, some economists 
will favor it and some will oppose it. But their reasoning process—comparing ­marginal 
costs and marginal benefits—is the same; they differ only on the estimates they calculate.
Cost/benefit analysis sometimes  
leads one to uncomfortable results.
Q-5  Why should you be very careful 
about any cost/benefit analysis?
Cost/benefit analysis is often biased 
toward quantifiable costs.

508	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
The Problem of Other Things Changing
A major reason why economists come to different conclusions about policies involves 
the “other things equal” assumption discussed in Chapter 4. Supply/demand analysis 
assumes that all other things remain equal. But in a large number of issues it is obvious 
that other things do not remain equal. However, it is complicated to sort out how they 
change, and the sorting-out process is subject to much debate. The more macro the 
­issue, the more other things change, and hence the more debate.
	
Let’s consider the minimum wage example we discussed in earlier chapters. 
­Suppose you can estimate the supply and demand elasticities for labor. Is that enough 
to enable you to estimate the number of people who will be made unemployed by a 
minimum wage? To answer that, ask yourself: Are other things likely to remain 
­constant? The answer is: No; numerous things will change. Say the firm decides to 
replace these workers with machines. So it will buy some machines. But machines are 
made by other workers, and so the demand for workers in the machine-making industry 
will rise. So the decrease in employment in the first industry may be offset by an increase 
in employment elsewhere.
	
But there are issues on the other side too. For example, if other things change, work-
ers who get the higher wage may not receive a net benefit. Say you had a firm that was 
paying a wage lower than the minimum wage but was providing lots of training, which 
was preparing people for much better jobs in the future. Now the minimum wage goes 
into effect. The firm keeps hiring workers, but it eliminates the training. Its workers 
actually could be worse off.
	
How important are such issues? That’s a matter of empirical research, which is 
why empirical research is central to economics. Unfortunately, the data aren’t very 
good, which is why there is so much debate about policy issues in economics.
	
There are many more examples of “other things changing,” but the above should be 
sufficient to give you an idea of the problem.
The Cost/Benefit Approach in Context
Economics teaches people to be reasonable—sickeningly reasonable, some people would 
say. I hope that you have some sense of what I mean by that. The cost/benefit approach to 
problems (which pictures a world of individuals whose self-interested ­actions are limited 
only by competition) makes economists look for the self-interest behind individuals’ 
actions, and for how competition can direct that self-interest into the public interest.
	
In an economist’s framework,
•	 Well-intentioned policies often are prevented by individuals’ self-interest-­
seeking activities.
•	 Policies that relieve immediate suffering often have long-run consequences 
that create more suffering.
•	 Politicians have more of an incentive to act fast—to look as if they’re doing 
something—than to do something that makes sense from a cost/benefit point 
of view.
	
The marginal cost/marginal benefit approach is telling a story. That story is embod-
ied in the supply/demand framework. Supply represents the marginal costs of a trade, 
and demand represents the marginal benefits of a trade. Equilibrium is where quantity 
supplied equals quantity demanded—where marginal cost equals marginal benefit. That 
equilibrium maximizes the combination of consumer and producer surplus and leads 
to an efficient, or Pareto optimal, outcome. The argument for competitive markets 
within that supply/demand framework is that markets allow the society to achieve 
Q-6  When using marginal cost/
marginal benefit analysis, do “other 
things remain constant”? Explain.
Economics teaches people to be 
“reasonable.”
The marginal cost/marginal benefit story 
is embodied in the supply/demand 
framework.

	
Chapter 23 ■ Microeconomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and Beyond	
509
economic efficiency—achieving a goal, in this case producing a specified amount of 
output, at the lowest possible cost. Alternatively expressed, the story is that, given a set of 
resources, markets produce the greatest possible output. When the economy is ­efficient, it 
is on its production possibility curve, producing total output at its lowest opportunity cost.
	
The supply/demand framework is logical, satisfying, and (given its definitions and 
assumptions) extraordinarily useful. That’s why we teach it. It gives students who 
understand it the ability to get to the heart of many policy problems. It tells them that 
every policy has a cost, every policy has a benefit, and if the assumptions are met, 
competition sees to it that the benefits to society are achieved at the lowest possible 
cost. Applied to policy issues, the framework gets you to face trade-offs that you would 
often rather avoid, and that you likely wouldn’t see if you didn’t use it. It is what 
“thinking like an economist” is all about.
Failure of Market Outcomes
A good story emphasizes certain elements and deemphasizes others to make its point. 
When the moral of the story is applied, however, we have to be careful to consider all 
the relevant elements—especially those that the story didn’t emphasize. That’s why in 
the second part of this chapter I will discuss some implicit assumptions that the ­supply/
demand framework pushes to the back of the analysis and that therefore often don’t get 
addressed in principles courses. I classify these as failures of market outcomes. A failure 
of market outcome occurs when, even though the market is functioning properly (there 
are no market failures), it is not achieving society’s goals.
	
Three separate types of failures of market outcomes will be considered:
1.	 Failures due to distributional issues: Whose surplus is the market maximizing?
2.	Failures due to rationality problems of individuals: What if individuals don’t 
know what is best for themselves?
3.	Failures due to violations of inalienable or at least partially inalienable rights 
of individuals: Are there certain rights that should not be for sale?
	
I’ll discuss an example of each of the three failures of market outcomes and con-
trast them with market failures. Then I will conclude with a brief discussion of why, 
even though most economists recognize these failures of market outcomes, they still 
favor the use of markets for the large majority of goods that society produces.
Distribution
Say that the result of market forces is that some people don’t earn enough income to be 
able to survive—the demand for their labor intersects the supply for their labor at a 
wage of 25 cents an hour. Also assume there are no market failures. (Information is 
perfect, trades have no negative externalities, and all goods are private goods.)
	
The market solution to a wage that is so low the worker can’t survive is starvation—
people who don’t earn enough die. Not all low-wage workers must die, however. As some 
low-wage workers die, the supply of labor shifts back to the left, raising the wage for the 
survivors. This process takes time, but eventually all remaining workers will receive a 
­subsistence wage. This is the long-run market solution. Implicit within the supply/demand 
framework is a Darwinian “survival of the fittest” approach to ­social policy. Most people 
would regard the market solution—starvation—as an undesirable outcome. Even though 
the market is doing precisely what it is supposed to be doing—equating quantity 
supplied and quantity demanded—most people would not find the outcome acceptable.
Distribution of Total Surplus 
Let me now relate this distributional issue to 
the supply/demand framework by considering distribution of consumer and producer 
Q-7  True or false? The goal of 
society is efficiency.
Failure of market outcome occurs  
when, even though it is functioning 
properly, the market is not achieving 
society’s goals.
Implicit within the supply/demand 
framework is a “survival of the fittest” 
approach to social policy.

510
surplus. For most discussions of economic policy, an implicit assumption is that the 
goal of policy is to create as much total surplus as possible. In a world of only one 
good and one person, that goal would be clear. But with many goods and many people, 
what is meant by total surplus in terms of social welfare can be unclear. One reason is 
that society does not value all surplus equally. In the above starvation example, the 
reason most people do not like the market outcome is that they care about not only the 
size of the total surplus but also how total surplus is distributed. The supply/demand 
framework does not distinguish among those who get producer and consumer surplus, 
and thus avoids that distribution issue.
Examples of Distributional Issues 
Let’s consider two real-world exam-
ples where distributional issues are likely to play a significant role in value judgments 
about the market outcome. Our economy produces $200-an-ounce olive oil, but it does 
not provide a minimum level of health care for all. This happens because income dis-
tribution is highly unequal. The high income of the wealthy means there is demand for 
$200-an-ounce bottles of olive oil. (It’s all the rage in Silicon Valley.) Businesses es-
tablish production facilities to produce it (or any one of a million other luxury items), 
and it is sold on the market. Selling $200-an-ounce bottles of olive oil is efficient if 
one’s goal is to maximize total consumer and producer surplus. However, given the dis-
tribution of income, it would be inefficient to produce health care for the poor. The poor 
just don’t have sufficient income to demand it. Since they have little income, the poor are 
given little weight in the measure of consumer surplus.
	
A second example of where distribution of income likely makes a big difference in 
our normative judgments, and where we would likely not apply the consumer and pro-
ducer surplus reasoning, concerns the demand for the AIDS drug cocktail. The cocktail 
can stop AIDS from killing people; thus, the desire for the AIDS cocktail among 
individuals with AIDS is high. The demand for the drug among those without AIDS is 
minimal.
	
In some African countries, almost 30 percent of the population has AIDS. Since 
consumer surplus reflects desire, one might think that in Africa the consumer surplus 
from the desire for the AIDS drug cocktail would be enormous. But it isn’t. Most peo-
ple in Africa have relatively little income; in fact, most have so little income that they 
cannot afford the cocktail at all if it were priced at the U.S. price. Since the price of the 
cocktail is above their total income, they get no consumer surplus from the cocktail at 
all in the supply/demand framework: It would be “inefficient” to supply the drugs to 
them. In the supply/demand framework you can only have a demand for a good if you 
have the desire and the income to pay for it. So, despite the fact that it is inefficient to 
provide AIDS drugs to low-income Africans, the prices of AIDS drugs to African 
nations were significantly reduced. Distributional issues trumped efficiency issues.
ADDED DIMENSION
income people have. Each of the three failures of market out-
comes that we discuss in this section represents a situation in 
which the goals of society cannot be captured by a single 
measure—where society’s goal is more complicated than to 
maximize total utility—and thus the assumed goal of efficiency 
(maximizing total utility) is not the only goal of society.
Economic Efficiency and the Goals of Society
Economic efficiency means achieving a goal at the lowest 
­possible cost. For the definition to be meaningful, the goal 
must be specified. Efficiency in the pursuit of efficiency is 
­meaningless. Thus, when we talk about economic efficiency, 
we must have some goal in mind. In the supply/demand frame-
work, we assume the goal is to maximize total utility given the 

	
Chapter 23 ■ Microeconomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and Beyond	
511
	
The point of these examples is not to convince you that the consumer surplus 
­concept is useless. Far from it. For the majority of goods, it is a useful shorthand 
that demonstrates the power of competitive markets. The point of the examples is 
to show you the type of case where overriding the supply/demand framework in 
policy considerations may be socially desirable and efficient if society’s goals 
­include a particular distribution of consumer surplus. The sole purpose of society 
is not to maximize consumer and producer surplus. Society also has other goals. 
Once these other goals are taken into account, the competitive result may not be 
the one that is desired.
	
Societies integrate other goals into market economies by establishing social safety 
nets (programs such as welfare, unemployment insurance, and Medicaid). When 
­individuals earn less than a certain income, what they receive does not depend solely 
on what they earn in the market. How high to set a given social safety net is a matter of 
debate, but favoring the market outcome in most cases is not inconsistent with favoring 
a social safety net in others.
Consumer Sovereignty and Rationality Problems
John Drunk drinks more than is good for him; he just has to have another drink. He 
buys liquor voluntarily, so that means buying it makes him better off, right? Not neces-
sarily. Even when they have full information, individuals sometimes do not do what is 
in their own best interest. If they don’t do what’s best for themselves, then the market 
solution—let people enter freely into whatever trades they want to—is not necessarily 
the best solution. Again, the market is working, but the outcome may be a failure.
	
This problem is sometimes called rationality failure of individuals. The supply/demand 
framework starts with the proposition that individuals are completely rational—that what 
individuals do is in their own best interest. Reflecting on this, however, as we did in earlier 
chapters, we see that that is not always the case. Most of us are irrational at times; we 
sometimes can “want” something that we really “don’t want.” Think of smoking, choc-
olate, or any other of our many vices. We know those potato chips are bad for us, but 
they taste so good.
	
Even if we don’t have serious addictions, we may have minor ones; often we don’t 
know what we want and we are influenced by what people tell us we want. Businesses 
spend over $200 billion every year on advertising in the United States to convince us 
that we want certain things. Individuals can be convinced they want something that, if 
they thought further about it, they would not want. The fact that individuals don’t 
know what they want can be a second reason for government intervention—getting 
people to want what is good for them.
	
Let’s look at an example: The U.S. government has taken the position that if people 
could be induced to stop smoking, they would be better off. Sin taxes—taxes that 
­discourage activities society believes are harmful (sinful)—are meant to do just this. 
Based on the consumer surplus argument, a tax on smoking would create deadweight 
loss; it would reduce the combination of consumer and producer surplus. But in this 
case, government has decided that consumer surplus does not reflect individuals’ welfare.
	
Notice the difference between the argument for taxes to change behavior (sin taxes) 
and the argument for taxes to raise revenue discussed in Chapter 7. When government 
wants to raise revenue, it takes into account how much deadweight loss is created by 
the tax. With sin taxes, government is trying to discourage the use of the good that is 
being taxed and does not take into account deadweight loss. When society takes the 
position that individuals’ demands in the marketplace do not reflect their true welfare, 
it is not at all clear that the market result is efficient. (See the box “Elasticity and 
­Taxation to Change Behavior.”)
For many goods, maximizing total 
surplus is a useful shorthand.
Q-8  A cocaine addict purchases  
an ounce of cocaine from a drug  
dealer. Since this was a trade both 
individuals freely entered, is society 
better off?

512
Inalienable Rights
Nice Guy wants to save his son, who needs an operation that costs $300,000. He 
doesn’t have that kind of money, but he knows that Slave Incorporated, a newly ­created 
company, has been offering $300,000 to the first person who agrees to ­become a slave 
for life. He enters into the contract, gets his money, and saves his son. Again, the mar-
ket is working just as it is supposed to. There’s no negative externality, and there’s no 
information problem—Nice Guy knows what he’s doing and Slave Inc. knows what 
it’s doing. Both participants in the trade believe that it is ­making them better off.
	
Many people’s view of the trade will likely be different; they would regard such a 
market outcome—an outcome that allows slavery—as a market outcome failure. That 
is why governments have developed laws that make such trades illegal.
	
As Amartya Sen pointed out (and won a Nobel Prize for doing so), most societies 
regard certain rights as inalienable. By definition, inalienable rights cannot be sold or 
given away. There can be no weighing of costs and benefits. For example, the right to 
freedom is an inalienable right, so slavery is wrong, and any trade creating slavery 
should not be allowed, regardless of any issues of consumer and producer surplus.
The Need to Prioritize Rights 
To understand why market outcomes might 
be undesirable, we have to go back and consider markets in a broader perspective. Mar-
kets develop over time as individuals trade to make themselves better off. But markets 
don’t just come into existence—they require the development of property rights for 
both suppliers and consumers. Each side must know what precisely is being traded. So 
markets can exist only if there are property rights.
	
Property rights, in turn, are included in a broader set of rights that are part of 
­society’s constitution—the right to vote, the right to free speech, the right to the ­pursuit 
of happiness, the right to life. Property rights are subrights to the right to pursue 
­happiness. If property rights conflict with other rights, society must make a judgment 
Q-9  True or false? If someone 
chooses to sell himself into slavery,  
the individual, and thus society, is  
better off.
Markets require the development of 
property rights.
ADDED DIMENSION
	
Now consider the case in which the government wants 
to raise revenue. In this case an inelastic demand would 
be better. That’s why most states rely on ­general sales 
taxes for revenue—such taxes allow them to raise reve-
nue with relatively little effect on the efficiency of the 
market.
	
The following table provides a quick review of when 
a tax will be most effective, given a particular goal of 
government.
Demand or supply is elastic
Goal of Government
Raise revenue, limit 
 eﬃciency loss
Change behavior
Demand or supply is inelastic
Most Eﬀective When
Elasticity and Taxation to Change Behavior
A good way to see how economists view the difference be-
tween the effect of a sin tax and the effect of a tax to raise 
revenue is to ask: Would a policy maker rather have an elas-
tic or an inelastic demand curve for the good being taxed? If 
the purpose is to raise revenue while creating only a minimal 
amount of deadweight loss, an inelastic demand is prefera-
ble. If the purpose is to change behavior, as it is in the ex-
ample of an alcohol-dependent individual, a more elastic 
demand curve is better because a relatively small tax can 
cause a relatively large reduction in purchases.
	
Consider an example of taxation to reduce consump-
tion. If government believes that smoking is bad for peo-
ple, it can decrease the amount people smoke by placing 
a tax on ­cigarettes. If the demand for cigarettes is inelastic, 
then the tax will not significantly decrease smoking; but if 
the demand is elastic, then it will. If demand is inelastic, 
government may choose alternative methods of affecting 
behavior, such as ­advertising campaigns. 

513
about which right has priority. Thus, within the written or unwritten constitution of a 
society, rights needs to be prioritized.
Examples of Inalienable Rights 
Let’s consider a couple of examples. Say 
I come up to you with a gun and offer you this deal: Your money or your life. This can 
be viewed as a trade. Because I have the gun, I control whether you live or die. You 
control the money you have. If we make the “trade,” you’ll be better off because I don’t 
shoot you and I’ll be better off because I’ll have more money. But it is not an accept-
able trade because the right to your life was inalienable—no one but you owns it; I 
cannot claim to own it. So, even if the gun gave me the power over your life, it did not 
give me the right to it. Other moral prohibitions that are related to inalienable rights 
include those against prostitution, selling body parts, and selling babies.
	
My point is not that the moral judgments our society has made about these rights 
are correct; they may or may not be correct. Nor is my point that such trades should 
not be subjected to the market. My point is that society must make these judgments. 
Such issues are moral questions and therefore do not have to stand up to the consumer 
and producer surplus arguments. If something is wrong, it is wrong; whether it is 
­efficient is irrelevant.
	
Moral judgments must be made about where markets should exist, and someone 
might decide that the market should be allowed everywhere (that is the libertarian 
view). Such moral judgments can override consumer surplus arguments about ­markets 
achieving efficiency. Consider again the efficient-chicken-farming example ­discussed 
in Chapter 12. If you believe that it is immoral to treat chickens the way ­“efficient” 
Moral judgments underlie all policy 
prescriptions.
REAL-WORLD APPLICATION
Larry Summers, an MIT-trained economist and former 
president of Harvard University, often carries economic 
reasoning to its logical conclusion, and talks about it in 
public, or at least lets it leak out to the public. These 
traits often get him in hot water. When Larry Summers 
was chief economist at the World Bank, 
he signed a memo that argued that the 
World Bank should encourage more mi-
gration of dirty industries to the LDCs 
(least-developed countries). Part of the 
memo stated the following:
The measurements of the costs of 
health-impairing pollution depend 
on the forgone earnings from in-
creased morbidity and mortality. 
From this point of view a given 
amount of health-impairing pollution should be done 
in the country with the lowest cost, which will be the 
country with the lowest wages. I think the economic 
logic behind dumping a load of toxic waste in the 
­lowest-wage country is impeccable and we should 
face up to that.
Where to Locate Polluting Industries
Based upon cost/benefit analysis and calculations of the 
“value of life,” this reasoning follows, but it is not neces­
sarily the correct reasoning, nor is it reasoning that most 
people will accept. Here is the response it ­provoked from 
Brazil’s secretary of the environment:
Your reasoning is perfectly logical 
but totally insane . . . Your thoughts 
­[provide] a concrete example of the 
unbelievable alienation, reductionist 
thinking, social ruthlessness and the 
­arrogant ignorance of many conventional 
“economists” concerning the nature of 
the world we live in . . . If the World 
Bank keeps you as vice president it will 
lose all credibility. To me it would con-
firm what I often said . . . the best thing 
that could happen would be for the Bank to 
­disappear.
I leave it to you to sort out which, if any, view is the cor-
rect one.
© Comstock Images/Alamy RF

514	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
farming requires them to be treated, then the fact that the farming is ­efficient may be 
irrelevant to you.
Government Failure
Distributional issues, issues of rationality, and the existence of inalienable rights are 
representative of the types of problems that can arise in the market. For most econo-
mists these issues play a role in interpreting the policy results that follow from the 
economic model presented, even when there is no market failure. But it is important to 
remember that even these failures of market outcomes do not necessarily call for 
­government action. The reason is government failure.
	
As I discussed in Chapter 8, if a failure is to be corrected, someone must formulate 
and enact the policy, and if we believe that government’s attempt to correct a failure 
will do more harm than good, then we can still support the market as the lesser of two 
evils. For the government to correct the problem, it must:
1.	Recognize the problem.
2.	Have the will to do something positive about the problem.
3.	Have the ability to do something positive about the problem.
Government seldom can do all three of these well. Often the result is that government 
action is directed at the wrong problem at the wrong time.
	
Probably the most vocal group of economists on the subject of government failure 
is public choice economists. This group, started by James Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, 
has pointed out that politicians are subject to the laws of supply and demand, like 
everyone else. Often the result of politics is that the redistribution that takes place does 
not go from rich to poor, but from one group of the middle class to another group of 
the middle class. Public choice economists argue that when the government enters the 
market, its incentives are not to achieve its goal in the least-cost manner; its incentives 
are to provide a policy that its voting constituency likes. The result is larger and larger 
government, with little benefit for society, and public choice economists ­advocate as 
little government intervention as possible regardless of whether there are market fail-
ures or failures of market outcomes.
	
Economic policy is, and must be, applied within a political context. This means 
that political elements must be taken into account. Politics enters into the ­determination 
of economic policy in two ways, one positive and one negative. Its positive contribu-
tion is that politicians take market failures and failures of market outcomes into 
­account when formulating policy. Ultimately the political system decides what 
­externalities should be adjusted for, what a desirable distribution is, what rights are 
above the market, and when people’s revealed demand does not reflect their true 
­demand. To the extent that the government’s political decisions reflect the will of 
­society, government is making a positive contribution.
	
The negative contribution is that political decisions do not always reflect the will 
of society.3 The political reality is that, in the short run, people are often governed by 
emotion, swayed by mass psychology, irrational, and interested in their own rather 
than the general good. Politicians and other policy makers know that; the laws and 
regulations they propose reflect such calculations. Politicians don’t get elected and 
reelected by constantly saying that all choices have costs and benefits. What this means 
is that while policy makers listen to the academic economists from whom they ask 
For the government to correct a 
problem, it must:
1.	 Recognize the problem.
2.	 Have the will to deal with it.
3.	 Have the ability to deal with it.
Economic policy is, and must be, 
applied in a political context.
Q-10  In what way does government 
positively contribute to economic 
policy? In what way does it negatively 
contribute to economic policy?
3By even discussing the “will of society” I am avoiding a very difficult problem in political philosophy 
of what that will is, and how it is to be determined. I leave it to your political science courses to discuss 
such issues.

515
advice, and with whom in private they frequently agree, in practice they often choose 
to ignore that advice.
	
Because government attempts to adjust for failures of market outcomes and is subject to 
short-run political pressures, the way in which economic reasoning influences policy can be 
subtle. Sometimes we see elaborate charades acted out: Politicians put forward bills that 
from a cost/benefit viewpoint don’t make sense but that make the politicians look good. 
They hope the bills won’t pass, but they also hope that presenting them will allow enough 
time to pass so that emotions can cool and a more reasonable bill can be put forward. Other 
times, compromise bills are proposed that incorporate as much cost/benefit policy as 
­possible, but also appeal to voters’ emotional sense. In short, economic policy made in the 
real world reflects a balancing of cost/benefit analysis and special interest desires.
Conclusion
Adam Smith, the creator of modern economics, was a philosopher; his economics was 
part of his philosophy. Before he wrote the Wealth of Nations, in which he set out his 
argument for markets, he wrote a book called The Theory of Moral Sentiments, in 
ADDED DIMENSION
conducted within a constitutional setting, and that means 
that inalienable rights come before market efficiency.
	
There are, of course, areas of ambiguity—allowing the 
regulated sale of body parts from individuals who have 
died is one such area. Let’s consider it. There is currently a 
shortage of organs for transplants. When someone dies, 
from a medical perspective his or her organs can usually 
be “harvested” and used by someone else—but only if the 
deceased had signed a donor card. If the family of the de-
ceased donor were given $5,000 for burial expenses, 
some economists argue, the shortage of transplant ­organs 
would disappear and everyone would be better off—the 
family could give the deceased a much nicer funeral and 
people needing the organs could live. My feeling is that 
economists are more open to such market solutions than 
the general public, but there is nothing in economics that 
­requires such solutions.
	
The argument about problems arising from rationality 
­issues is also accepted by most economists, but they 
downplay it for most nonaddictive goods. The reason is 
that while it is true that individuals may not know what 
they want, it is far less likely that the government will 
know better. Based on that view, on average, the accep-
tance of consumer sovereignty, and the market result, is 
probably warranted. Exceptions include children and 
some elderly. How to deal with addictive goods is still 
very much in debate among economists, and there is no 
conventional wisdom.
The Conventional Policy Wisdom among Economists
Where do economists come out on whether government can 
correct a failure of market outcomes? The easy answer is that 
they conclude that to make a policy decision, we must weigh 
the costs of market failure against the costs of government 
failure. But those costs are often poorly specified and difficult 
to estimate. Thus, policy considerations require subjective 
judgments. Let me give you my interpretation of how econo-
mists fit these broader considerations into their analysis.
	
Most economists downplay the distribution ­issues for 
the majority of goods, and use distri­bution in their policy 
consideration only for the extreme examples, such as 
those I presented in the text. They believe that it is far bet-
ter to be open about the distributional goals and to give 
money directly to individuals, rather than to hide the 
­redistribution by changing the pricing structure through 
subsidizing goods. Let’s take an example: The European 
Union’s agricultural policy currently provides large 
amounts of price supports for European ­agricultural pro-
duction. To keep farmers in business, the prices of agricul-
tural goods are kept high. If the social decision were to 
keep farmers in business, most economists, however, 
would prefer to see the EU provide direct subsidies to 
farmers. Then the policy of redistribution is clear to every-
one, and is far less costly in terms of both efficiency and 
implementation.
	
The “rights argument” plays a role in all economists’ pol-
icy arguments. Almost all economists oppose selling citizen-
ship. All oppose slavery. All see economic policy as being 

516	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
which he laid out his broader philosophy. That foundation, in turn, was part of the 
Scottish Enlightenment, which spelled out what was meant by a “good” society and 
how individuals’ and society’s rights should be considered. Any economic policy issue 
must be interpreted within such a broad philosophical framework. Clearly, an introduc-
tory course in economics cannot introduce you to these broader philosophical and 
political issues. But it can point out to you their importance, and that economic policy 
arguments must fit within that broader context.
	
This chapter was written to give you a sense of that broader context—economics 
provides the tools, not the rules, for policy. Cost/benefit analysis and the supply/­
demand framework are powerful tools for analyzing issues and coming up with policy 
conclusions. But to apply them successfully, they must be applied in context.
	
Thomas Carlyle, who, as we saw in the introductory quotation to Chapter 4, argued that 
all you have to do is teach a parrot the words supply and demand to create an economist, 
was wrong. Economics involves the thoughtful use of economic insights and empirical 
evidence. If this chapter gave you a sense of the nature of that thoughtful application along 
with the core of economic reasoning, then it succeeded in its purpose.
Economics provides the tools, not  
the rules, for policy.
Applying economics is much more  
than muttering “supply and demand.” 
Economics involves the thoughtful  
use of economic insights and  
empirical evidence.
• Economists differ because of different underlying 
value judgments, because empirical evidence is 
­subject to different interpretations, and because their 
underlying models differ.  (LO23-1)
• Value judgments inevitably work their way into ­policy 
advice, but good economists try to be 
­objective.  (LO23-1)
• Economists tend to agree on certain issues because 
their training is similar. Economists use models  
that focus on economic incentives and 
­rationality.  (LO23-1)
• The economic approach to analyzing issues is a cost/
benefit approach. If the marginal benefits exceed the 
marginal costs, do it. If the marginal costs exceed the 
marginal benefits, don’t do it.  (LO23-2)
• People make choices every day that reveal the value 
that they place on their lives. The value of life is cal-
culated by multiplying the inverse of the reduction in 
the probability of death by the amount individuals pay 
for that reduction.  (LO23-2)
• Collecting and interpreting empirical evidence is 
­difficult, which contributes to disagreements among 
economists.  (LO23-2)
• The cost/benefit approach and the supply/demand 
framework deemphasize the possibility that  
Summary
market outcomes may be undesirable to­ 
­society.  (LO23-2)
• Three failures of market outcomes are (1) failures due 
to distributional issues, (2) failures due to rationality 
­problems of individuals, and (3) failures due to 
­violations of inalienable rights.  (LO23-3)
• Although an implicit assumption in most policy 
­discussions is that the goal of policy is to 
­maximize consumer and producer surplus, society 
does care about how that total surplus is 
­distributed.  (LO23-3)
• The supply/demand framework assumes that 
­individuals are rational. Individuals are not  
always rational in practice. Their actions are 
swayed by addictions, advertising, and other 
­pressures.  (LO23-3)
• Some rights, called inalienable rights, cannot be 
bought and sold. What rights are inalienable are 
moral judgments that do not have to stand up to the 
same cost/benefit framework.  (LO23-3)
• Economics provides the tools, not the rules, for 
­policy.  (LO23-4)
• Economics involves the thoughtful use of economic 
insights and empirical evidence.  (LO23-4)

	
Chapter 23 ■ Microeconomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and Beyond	
517
Key Terms
cost/benefit approach
economic efficiency
failure of market outcome
Marxian (radical) model
Pareto optimal policy
public choice model
rational
sin tax
Questions and Exercises
	 1.	 Could anyone object to a Pareto optimal policy?  
Why?  (LO23-1)
	 2.	 Would it be wrong for economists to propose only Pareto 
optimal policies?  (LO23-1)
	 3.	 Would all economists oppose price controls? Why or 
why not?  (LO23-1)
	 4.	 In the early 1990s, the 14- to 17-year-old population 
fell because of low birth rates in the mid-1970s. 
­Simultaneously the combined decisions of aging baby 
boomers to have kids resulted in an increase in the 
­number of babies and hence in an increase in the number 
of parents needing baby-sitters. What effect will these 
two events likely have on:  (LO23-2)
	a.	 The number of times parents go out without their 
­children?
	b.	 The price of baby-sitters?
	c.	 The average age of baby-sitters?
d.	 Should government require a minimum wage and age 
of baby-sitters?
	 5.	 Should the buying and selling of body organs be allowed 
Why or why not?  (LO23-2)
	 6.	 In the 1970s legislators had difficulty getting laws passed 
requiring people to wear seat belts. Now not only do most 
people wear seat belts, but many cars have air bags too. 
Do people value their lives more today?  (LO23-2)
	 7.	 Economist Steven D. Levitt estimated that, on average, for 
each additional criminal locked up in the United States, 15 
crimes are eliminated. In addition, although it costs about 
$30,000 a year to keep a prisoner incarcerated, the average 
prisoner would have caused $53,900 worth of damage to 
society per year if free. If this estimate is correct, does it 
make economic sense to build more prisons?  (LO23-2)
	 8.	 If one uses a willingness-to-pay measure in which life is 
valued at what people are willing to pay to avoid risks that 
might lead to death, the value of a U.S. citizen’s life is 
$2.6 million, a Swede’s life is worth $1.2 million, and a 
Portuguese’s life is worth $20,000.   (LO23-2)
	a.	 What policy implications does this value schedule have?
	b.	 Say you operate an airline. Should you spend more on 
safety precautions in the United States than you do in 
Portugal?
	 9.	 In “Valuing Reduced Risks to Children: The Case of 
­Bicycle Safety Helmets,” economists Robin R. Jenkins, 
­Nicole Owens, and Lanelle Bembenek Wiggins estimate the 
value of the lives of children by using ­parents’ ­willingness 
to purchase bicycle helmets. Wearing a ­helmet reduces the 
probability of death from bicycling by .0000041. The an-
nualized cost of a helmet is $6.51.  (LO23-2)
	a.	 What economic concept is their study based on?
	b.	 Assuming helmets are worn 100 percent of the time, 
what is the value of life parents place on a child as 
­revealed by their purchase of a bicycle helmet?
	c.	 What happens to the value-of-life estimate if parents 
expect their children to wear the helmets less than 
100 percent of the time? 
	10.	 What are three ways in which a well-functioning market 
might result in undesirable results?  (LO23-3)
	11.	 Until recently, China had a strict one-child-per-family 
policy. For cultural reasons, families favor boys and there 
are now many more male than female children born in 
China. How is this likely to affect who pays the cost of 
dates in China in 15 to 20 years? Explain.  (LO23-3)
	12.	 As organ transplants become more successful, scientists are 
working on ways to transplant animal organs to ­humans. 
Pigs are the odds-on favorites as “donors” since their or-
gans are about the same size as human organs.  (LO23-3)
	a.	 What would the development of such organ farms 
likely do to the price of pigs?
	b.	 If you were an economic adviser to the government, 
would you say that such a development would be 
­Pareto optimal (for humans)?
	c.	 Currently, there is a black market in human organs. 
What would this development likely do to that market?
	13.	 Why are economists’ views of politicians cynical?  (LO23-4)
	14.	 Anthony Zielinski, a former member of the Milwaukee 
Board of Supervisors, proposed that the county government 
sell the organs of dead welfare recipients to help pay off the 
­welfare recipients’ welfare costs and burial expenses. What 
was the likely effect of that proposal? Why?  (LO23-4)
	15. 	What is the basis for the opinions of public choice 
­economists about government’s ability to correct  
market failures?  (LO23-4)

518	
Microeconomics ■ Modern Economic Thinking
Questions from Alternative Perspectives
	 1.	 Even though a policy’s stated goals may be laudable, its 
actual outcome can often cause serious problems.
	a.	 How much does it matter to an economist how closely 
a policy’s goals match its outcome?
	b.	 How much does it matter to a politician? (Austrian)
	 2.	 In standard textbook economic analysis, institutions are 
often portrayed as creating market failures.
	a.	 Give an example of market failure caused by an 
­institution not discussed in the text.
	b.	 What would a free market advocate likely say should 
be done about the failure?
	c.	 How would an Institutionalist likely respond? 
­(Institutionalist)
	 3.	 The text deemphasizes the fact that people are social crea-
tures who feel a need to conform to norms; Post-Keynesians 
emphasize norms.
	a.	 Who shapes these social norms?
	b.	 Does society as a whole benefit from these norms?
	c.	 How does the existence of these norms affect the anal-
ysis presented in the text about the way markets work? 
(Post-Keynesian)
	 4.	 Critics have pointed out a number of flaws in cost/benefit 
analysis: It assigns a dollar value to things that are not 
commodities such as human life; it places a price on 
­public goods that we consume collectively (such as air 
quality); it downgrades the importance of the future 
through its discount rates; and it ignores distributional 
­issues and issues of fairness.
	a.	 How reliable do you consider cost/benefit analysis as a 
policy analysis tool?
	b.	 Does cost/benefit analysis work better in some situations 
and worse in others? (Be sure to give some examples and 
to explain your overall position.) (Radical)
	 5.	 In his paper “Why Did the Economist Cross the Road? The 
Hierarchical Logic of Ethical and Economic Reasoning,” 
economist Andrew Yuengert of Pepperdine University 
­argues that “economists often give truncated justifications for 
their activities as economists out of fear that ‘ethical’ consid-
erations will render their conclusions unscientific.”
	a.	 Do you agree with this view?
	b.	 How might the presentation of economics change if 
economists did not have that fear? (Religious)
Issues to Ponder
	 1.	 In cost/benefit terms, explain your decision to take an 
economics course.
	 2.	 How much do you value your life in dollar terms? Are 
your decisions consistent with that valuation?
	 3.	 If someone offered you $1 million for one of your kidneys, 
would you sell it? Why or why not?
	 4.	 The technology is now developing so that road use can be 
priced by computer. A computer in the surface of the road 
picks up a signal from your car and automatically charges 
you for the use of the road.
	a.	 How could this technological change contribute to 
ending bottlenecks and rush-hour congestion? Demon-
strate graphically.
	b.	 How will people likely try to get around the system?
	c.	 If people know when the prices will change, what will 
likely happen immediately before? How might this be 
avoided?
	 5.	 According to U.S. government statistics, the cost of averting 
a premature death differs among various regulations. 
Car seat belt standards cost $100,000 per premature death 
avoided, while hazardous waste landfill disposal bans cost 
$4.2 trillion per premature death avoided. If these figures 
are correct, should neither, one, the other, or both of these 
regulations be implemented?
	 6.	 Technology will soon exist such that individuals can 
choose the sex of their offspring. Assume that technology 
has now arrived and that 70 percent of the individuals 
choose male offspring.
	a.	 What effect will that have on social institutions such as 
families?
	b.	 What effect will it have on dowries—payments made 
by the bride’s family to the groom—which are still 
used in a number of developing countries?
	c.	 Why might an economist suggest that if 70 percent 
male is the expectation, families would be wise to have 
daughters rather than sons?
	 7.	 In a study of hospital births, the single most important pre-
diction factor of the percentage of vaginal births as ­opposed 
to caesarean (C-section) births was ownership status of 
hospitals—whether they were for-profit or nonprofit. 
	a.	 Which had more C-sections, and why?
	b.	 What implications about the health care debate can 
you draw from the above results?
	c.	 How might the results change if the for-profit hospital 
received a fixed per-patient payment—as it would in a 
managed care system?
	 8. 	Why might an economist propose a policy that has little 
chance of adoption?

	
Chapter 23 ■ Microeconomic Policy, Economic Reasoning, and Beyond	
519
	 9.	 The number of auto accidents per year is the equivalent 
of a 737-plane crash every day. In the book Why Not? 
Yale professors Barry Nabalof and Ian Ayres suggest that 
­computers that record driver behavior (similar to the black 
boxes in planes that record crashes) be installed in cars. In 
trials where such computers were installed in cars, crash 
rates fell by one-third.
	a.	 If these boxes cost $100 each, and their installation 
­reduces the probability of a crash that costs an average 
of $30,000 in damage to persons and vehicles, do such 
boxes make sense?
	b.	 If they do make sense, what is a reason they are not 
­installed?
	c.	 In what cars will they likely be installed first?
	d.	 What will their installation likely do to driving habits?
	10.	 According to economists Henry Saffer of Kean Univer-
sity, Frank J. Chaloupka of the University of Illinois at 
Chicago, and Dhaval Dave of CUNY Graduate Center, 
­using the criminal justice system to deter one person from 
using drugs costs $1,733, and using treatment centers 
costs $1,206.
	a.	 Which of the two programs would you recommend?
	b.	 What additional information do you need to determine 
whether either is worth pursuing?
	c.	 The authors estimated that the social cost to society of 
a person using drugs is $897. Based on this informa-
tion alone, should the government spend the money on 
drug control?
	11.	 Michael Tanner and Stephen Moore of the Cato Institute 
recently calculated the hourly wage equivalent of welfare 
for a single mother with two children for each of the 
50 United States. Their estimates ranged from $17.50 an 
hour for Hawaii to $5.33 in Mississippi. What do you sup-
pose were their policy recommendations? What arguments 
can be made to oppose those prescriptions? 
Answers to Margin Questions
	 1.	 I would respond that in the real world, Pareto optimal 
­policies don’t exist, and all real-world policies designed to 
make someone better off will make someone worse off. In 
making real-world policy judgments, one cannot avoid the 
difficult distributional and broader questions. It is those 
more difficult questions, which are value-laden, that 
make economic policy an art rather than a  
science.  (LO23-1)
	 2.	 A radical analysis of the labor market differs from the 
mainstream analysis in that it emphasizes the tensions 
among social classes. Thus, a radical analysis will likely 
see exploitation built into the institutional structure. 
­Mainstream analysis is much more likely to take the 
­institutional structure as given and not question  
it.  (LO23-1)
	 3.	 Oftentimes being “mean” in the short run can actually 
­involve being “nice” in the long run. The reason is that of-
ten policy effects that are beneficial in the long run have 
short-run costs, and people focusing on those short-run 
costs see the policy as “mean.”  (LO23-1)
	 4.	 To maximize utility, one would expect that the marginal 
value per dollar spent should be equal in all activities. 
Thus, if the text is correct, it would suggest that you 
should be far less concerned about premium tire usage 
and far more concerned about whether your house has 
smoke detectors or not.  (LO23-1)
	 5.	 Costs and benefits are ambiguous. Economists often 
­disagree enormously on specific costs and benefits, or 
the costs and benefits are difficult or impossible to 
­quantify. Thus, you should be extremely careful about 
­using a cost/benefit analysis as anything more than an aid 
to your analysis of the situation.  (LO23-2)
	 6.	 Other things do not always remain constant. The more 
macro the issue, the more things are likely to change. 
These changes must be brought back into the analysis, 
which complicates things enormously.  (LO23-2)
	 7.	 False. Efficiency is achieving a goal as cheaply as 
­possible. Stating efficiency as a goal does not make 
sense.  (LO23-3)
	 8.	 No. The cocaine addict may be responding to the 
­cravings created from the addiction, and not from any 
­rational desire for more cocaine. Society may not be ­better 
off.  (LO23-3)
	 9.	 False. Society may find that personal freedom is an 
­inalienable right. Selling such a right may make society 
worse off.  (LO23-3)
	10.	 Government makes a positive contribution by adjusting 
for market failures and failures of market outcomes. 
­Government may make a negative contribution 
­because government is swayed by short-run political 
­pressures.  (LO23-4)


G-1
Cartel  A combination of firms that acts as if it were a sin-
gle firm.
Cartel Model of Oligopoly  A model that assumes that 
oligopolies act as if they were monopolists that have 
­assigned output quotas to individual member firms of the 
­oligopoly so that total output is consistent with joint profit 
maximization.
Cheap Talk  Communication that occurs before a game is 
played that carries no cost and is backed up only by trust, 
and not any enforceable agreement.
Choice Architecture  The context in which decisions are 
presented.
Closed Shop  A firm where unions control the hiring.
Coefficient of Determination  A measure of the propor-
tion of the variability in the data that is accounted for by the 
statistical model.
Comparable Worth Laws  Laws mandating comparable 
pay for comparable work.
Comparative Advantage  The ability to be better suited to 
the production of one good than to the production of another 
good.
Complements  Goods that are used in conjunction with 
other goods.
Concentration Ratio  The value of sales by the top 
firms of an industry stated as a percentage of total ­industry 
sales.
Conspicuous Consumption  The consumption of goods not 
for one’s direct pleasure, but simply to show off to others.
Constant Returns to Scale  A situation in which long-
run average total costs do not change with an increase in 
output.
Consumer Sovereignty  The principle that the consumer’s 
wishes determine what’s produced.
Consumer Surplus  The difference between what con-
sumers would have been willing to pay and what they actu-
ally pay. Also, the value the consumer gets from buying a 
product less its price.
Contestable Market Model  A model of oligopoly in 
which barriers to entry and barriers to exit, not the structure 
of the market, determine a firm’s price and output decisions.
Contractual Legal System  The set of laws that govern 
economic behavior.
Cooperative Game  A game in which players can form 
coalitions and can enforce the will of the coalition on its 
members.
Coordinate System  A two-dimensional space in which 
one point represents two numbers.
Coordination Mechanisms  Methods of coordinating 
­people’s wants with other people’s desires.
A
Adverse Selection Problem  A problem that occurs when 
buyers and sellers have different amounts of information 
about the good for sale.
Annuity Rule  The present value of any annuity is the 
­annual income it yields divided by the interest rate.
Antitrust Policy  The government’s policy toward the 
competitive process.
Art of Economics  The application of the knowledge 
learned in positive economics to the achievement of the 
goals one has determined in normative economics.
Average Fixed Cost  Fixed cost divided by quantity 
produced.
Average Product  Output per worker.
Average Total Cost  Total cost divided by the quantity 
produced.
Average Variable Cost  Variable cost divided by quantity 
produced.
B
Backward Induction  You begin with a desired outcome 
and then determine the decisions that will lead you to that 
outcome.
Balance of Trade  The difference between the value of the 
goods and services a country imports and the value of the 
goods and services it exports.
Bar Graph  A graph where the area under each point is 
filled in to look like a bar.
Barriers to Entry  Social, political, or economic impedi-
ments that prevent firms from entering a market.
Behavioral Economic Policy  Economic policy based upon 
models using behavioral economic building blocks that take 
into account people’s predictable irrational behavior.
Behavioral Economics   Microeconomic analysis that uses a 
broader set of building blocks than rationality and self-interest 
used in traditional economics. The study of economic choice 
that is based on realistic psychological foundations.
Bilateral Monopoly  A market with only a single seller 
and a single buyer.
Budget Constraint  A curve that shows us the various 
combinations of goods an individual can buy with a given 
amount of money.
Business  A private producing unit in our society.
C
Capitalism  An economic system based on the market in 
which the ownership of the means of production resides 
with a small group of individuals called capitalists.
Glossary

G-2	
■ Glossary ■
Duopoly  An oligopoly with only two firms.
Dynamic Efficiency  A market’s ability to promote cost-
reducing or product-enhancing technological change.
E
Econometrics  The statistical analysis of economic data.
Economic Decision Rule  If the marginal benefits of doing 
something exceed the marginal costs, do it. If the marginal 
costs of doing something exceed the marginal benefits, don’t 
do it.
Economic Efficiency  Achieving a goal at the lowest pos-
sible cost.
Economic Engineering  Economics devoted not only to 
studying markets, but also to designing markets and other 
coordinating mechanisms.
Economic Force  The necessary reaction to scarcity.
Economic Model  A framework that places the generalized 
insights of a theory in a more specific contextual ­setting.
Economic Policy  An action (or inaction) taken by govern-
ment to influence economic actions.
Economic Principle  A commonly held economic insight 
stated as a law or general assumption.
Economic Profit  Explicit and implicit revenue minus ex-
plicit and implicit cost. Also, a return on entrepreneurship 
above and beyond normal profits.
Economically Efficient  A method of production that 
­produces a given level of output at the lowest possible cost.
Economics  The study of how human beings coordinate 
their wants and desires, given the decision-making 
­mechanisms, ­social customs, and political realities of the 
­society.
Economies of Scale  Situation when long-run average total 
costs decrease as output increases.
Economies of Scope  Situation when the costs of pro-
ducing products are interdependent so that it’s less costly 
for a firm to produce a good when it’s already producing 
another.
Efficiency  Achieving a goal as cheaply as possible. Also: 
Using as few inputs as possible.
Efficiency Wages  Wages paid above the going-market 
wage to keep workers happy and productive.
Efficient  Achieving a goal at the lowest cost in total 
­resources without consideration as to who pays those costs.
Effluent Fees  Charges imposed by government on the 
level of pollution created.
Elastic  The percentage change in quantity is greater than 
the percentage change in price (E > 1).
Embargo  A total restriction on the import or export of a 
good.
Empirical Model  A model that statistically discovers a 
pattern in the data.
Corporate Takeover  An action in which another firm or a 
group of individuals issues a tender offer (that is, offers to 
buy up the stock of a company) to gain control and to install 
its own managers.
Corporation  A business that is treated as a person, legally 
owned by its stockholders. Its stockholders are not liable for 
the actions of the corporate “person.”
Cost Minimization Condition  A situation where the ratio 
of marginal product to the price of an input is equal for all 
inputs.
Cost/Benefit Approach  Assigning costs and benefits, and 
making decisions on the basis of the relevant costs and 
­benefits.
Cross-Price Elasticity of Demand  The percentage 
change in demand divided by the percentage change in the 
price of a related good.
Currency Appreciation  A change in the exchange rate so 
that one currency buys more units of a foreign ­currency.
Currency Depreciation  A change in the exchange rate so 
that one currency buys fewer units of a foreign currency.
D
Deadweight Loss  The loss of consumer and producer sur-
plus from a tax.
Deductive Approach  An approach that begins with cer-
tain self-evident principles from which implications are 
­deduced (logically determined).
Demand  A schedule of quantities of a good that will be 
bought per unit of time at various prices, other things 
­constant.
Demand Curve  The graphic representation of the rela-
tionship between price and quantity demanded.
Demerit Good or Activity  A good or activity that govern-
ment believes is bad for people even though they choose to 
use the good or engage in the activity.
Depreciation  A measure of the decline in value of an 
asset that occurs over time through use.
Derived Demand  The demand for factors of production 
by firms, which depends on consumers’ demands.
Derived Demand Curve for Labor  A curve that shows 
the maximum amount of labor, measured in labor hours, that 
a firm will hire.
Direct Regulation  A program in which the amount of a 
good people are allowed to use is directly limited by the 
­government.
Direct Relationship  A relationship in which when one 
variable goes up, the other goes up too.
Diseconomies of Scale  Situation when the long-run aver-
age total costs increase as output increases.
Dominant Strategy  A strategy that is preferred by a 
player regardless of the opponent’s move.

	
■ Glossary ■	
G-3
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)  A 
regular international conference to reduce trade barriers held 
from 1947 to 1995. It has been replaced by the World Trade 
Organization (WTO).
General Rule of Political Economy  When small groups 
are helped by a government action and large groups are hurt 
by that same action, the small group tends to lobby far more 
effectively than the large group.
Global Corporation  A corporation with substantial op-
erations on both the production and sales sides in more than 
one country.
Globalization   The increasing integration of economies, 
cultures, and institutions across the world.
Good/Bad Paradox  The phenomenon of doing poorly 
­because you’re doing well.
Government Failure  A situation in which the government 
intervention in the market to improve market failure actually 
makes the situation worse.
Grandfather  To pass a law affecting a specific group but 
providing that those in the group before the law was passed 
are exempt from some provisions of the law.
Graph  A picture of points in a coordinate system in which 
points denote relationships between numbers.
H
Herfindahl Index  An index of market concentration cal-
culated by adding the squared value of the individual market 
shares of all firms in the industry.
Heuristic Model  A model that is expressed informally in 
words.
Households  Groups of individuals living together and 
making joint decisions.
I
Implicit Collusion  A type of collusion in which multiple 
firms make the same pricing decisions even though they 
have not explicitly consulted with one another.
Implicit Costs  Costs associated with a decision that often 
are not included in normal accounting costs.
Incentive Compatibility Problem  A problem in which 
the incentive facing the decision maker does not match the 
incentive needed for the mechanism to achieve its desired 
ends.
Incentive-Compatible Contract  A contract in which the 
incentives of each of the two parties to the contract are made 
to correspond as closely as possible.
Incentive Effect  How much a person will change his or 
her hours worked in response to a change in the wage rate.
Income  Payments received plus or minus changes in the 
value of a person’s assets in a specified time period.
Endowment Effects  People value something more just 
because they have it.
Enlightened Self-Interest  People care about other people 
as well as themselves.
Entrepreneur  An individual who sees an opportunity to 
sell an item at a price higher than the average cost of 
­producing it.
Entrepreneurship  The ability to organize and get some-
thing done. Also: Labor services that involve high degrees 
of organizational skills, concern, oversight responsibility, 
and creativity.
Equilibrium  A concept in which opposing dynamic forces 
cancel each other out.
Equilibrium Price  The price toward which the invisible 
hand drives the market.
Equilibrium Quantity  The amount bought and sold at the 
equilibrium price.
Excess Demand  Situation when quantity demanded is 
greater than quantity supplied.
Excess Supply  Situation when quantity supplied is greater 
than quantity demanded.
Exchange Rate  The price of one country’s currency in 
terms of another currency.
Excise Tax  A tax that is levied on a specific good.
Experimental Economics  A branch of economics that 
studies the economy through controlled laboratory 
­experiments.
Externality  An effect of a decision on a third party not 
taken into account by the decision maker.
F
Failure of Market Outcome  A situation in which, even 
though the market is functioning properly (there are no 
­market failures), it is not achieving society’s goals.
Fallacy of Composition  The false assumption that what is 
true for a part will also be true for the whole.
Firm  An economic institution that transforms factors of 
production into goods and services.
Fixed Costs  Costs that are spent and cannot be changed in 
the period of time under consideration.
Framing Effect  The tendency of people to base their 
choices on how the choice is presented.
Free Rider Problem  Individuals’ unwillingness to share 
in the cost of a public good.
Free Trade Association  A group of countries that have 
reduced or eliminated trade barriers among themselves.
G
Game Theory  Formal economic reasoning applied to situ-
ations in which decisions are interdependent.

G-4	
■ Glossary ■
J–K
Judgment by Performance  To judge the competitiveness 
of markets by the performance (behavior) of firms in that 
market.
Judgment by Structure  To judge the competitiveness of 
markets by the structure of the industry.
L
Labor Market  The factor market in which individuals 
supply labor services for wages to other individuals and to 
firms that need (demand) labor services.
Labor Productivity  The average output per worker.
Laissez-Faire  An economic policy of leaving the coordi-
nation of individuals’ actions to the market.
Land Bank Program  A program in which government 
supports prices by giving farmers economic incentives to 
­reduce supply.
Law of Demand   Quantity demanded rises as price falls, 
other things constant. Also can be stated as: Quantity 
­demanded falls as price rises, other things constant.
Law of Diminishing Marginal Productivity  As more 
and more of a variable input is added to an existing fixed 
input, eventually the additional output one gets from that 
­additional input is going to fall.
Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution  As 
you get more and more of a good, if some of that good is taken 
away, then the marginal addition of another good you need to 
remain on the same indifference curve gets less and less.
Law of One Price  The wages of workers in one country 
will not differ significantly from the wages of (equal) work-
ers in another institutionally similar country.
Law of Supply  Quantity supplied rises as price rises, 
other things constant. Also can be stated as: Quantity sup-
plied falls as price falls, other things constant.
Lazy Monopolist  A monopolist that does not push for 
efficiency, but merely enjoys the position it is already in.
Learning by Doing  As we do something, we learn what 
works and what doesn’t, and over time we become more pro-
ficient at it.
Libertarian Paternalistic Policy  A policy that leaves people 
free to choose, but nonetheless guides them toward a choice 
that a paternalistic observer would see as good for them.
Line Graph  A graph where the data are connected by a 
continuous line.
Linear Curve  A curve that is drawn as a straight line.
Long-Run Decision  A decision in which a firm chooses 
among all possible production techniques.
Lorenz Curve  A geometric representation of the share 
distribution of income among families in a given country at 
a given time.
Luxury  A good that has an income elasticity greater than 1.
Income Effect  The reduction in quantity demanded 
­because price increases make us poorer.
Income Elasticity of Demand  The percentage change in 
demand divided by the percentage change in income.
Indifference Curve  A curve that shows combinations of 
goods among which an individual is indifferent.
Indivisible Setup Cost  The cost of an indivisible input for 
which a certain minimum amount of production must be 
­undertaken before the input becomes economically feasible 
to use.
Inductive Approach  An approach to understanding a 
problem or question in which understanding is developed 
empirically from statistically analyzing what is observed in 
the data.
Industrial Revolution  A time when technology and ma-
chines rapidly modernized industrial production and mass-
produced goods replaced handmade goods.
Inefficiency  Getting less output from inputs that, if de-
voted to some other activity, would produce more ­output.
Inefficient  Achieving a goal in a more costly manner than 
necessary.
Inelastic  The percentage change in quantity is less than 
the percentage change in price (E < 1).
Infant Industry Argument  The argument that with ­initial 
protection, an industry will be able to become competitive.
Inferior Good  Good whose consumption decreases when 
income increases.
Inherent Comparative Advantage 
Comparative 
­advantage that is based on factors that are relatively un-
changeable.
Institutions  The formal and informal rules that constrain 
human behavior.
Interest  The income paid to savers—individuals who 
produce now but don’t consume now.
Interpolation Assumption  The assumption that the rela-
tionship between variables is the same between points as it 
is at the points.
Inverse Relationship  A relationship between two vari-
ables in which when one goes up, the other goes down.
Invisible Hand  The price mechanism; the rise and fall of 
prices that guide our actions in a market.
Invisible Hand Theorem  A market economy, through 
the price mechanism, will tend to allocate resources 
­efficiently.
Isocost Line  A line that represents alternative combina-
tions of factors of production that have the same costs.
Isoquant Curve  A curve that represents combinations 
of factors of production that result in equal amounts of 
­output.
Isoquant Map  A set of isoquant curves that show techni-
cally efficient combinations of inputs that can produce 
­different levels of output.

	
■ Glossary ■	
G-5
Market Force  An economic force that is given relatively 
free rein by society to work through the market.
Market Incentive Plan  A plan requiring market partici-
pants to certify that they have reduced total consumption—
not necessarily their own individual consumption—by a 
specified amount.
Market Supply Curve  The horizontal sum of all individ-
ual supply curves. Also: Horizontal sum of all the firms’ 
marginal cost curves, taking account of any changes in input 
prices that might occur.
Marxian (Radical) Model  A model that focuses on equi-
table distribution of power, rights, and income among social 
classes.
Mechanism Design  Identifying a goal and then designing 
a mechanism such as a market, social system, or contract to 
achieve that end.
Medicare  A multibillion-dollar medical insurance ­system.
Merit Good or Activity  A good or activity that govern-
ment believes is good for you, even though you may 
not choose to consume the good or engage in the activity.
Microeconomics  The study of individual choice, and how 
that choice is influenced by economic forces.
Minimum Efficient Level of Production  The amount of 
production that spreads setup costs out sufficiently for a firm 
to undertake production profitably.
Minimum Wage Law  A law specifying the lowest wage a 
firm can legally pay an employee.
Mixed Strategy  A strategy of choosing randomly among 
moves.
Model  A simplified representation of the problem or ques-
tion that captures the essential issues.
Modern Economists  Economists who are willing to use a 
wider range of models than did earlier economists.
Monitoring Costs  Costs incurred by the organizer of pro-
duction in seeing to it that the employees do what they’re 
supposed to do.
Monitoring Problem  The need to oversee employees to 
ensure that their actions are in the best interest of the firm.
Monopolistic Competition  A market structure in which 
many firms sell differentiated products; there are few barri-
ers to entry.
Monopoly  A market structure in which one firm makes up 
the entire market.
Monopsony  A market in which a single firm is the only 
buyer.
Most-Favored Nation  A country that will be charged as 
low a tariff on its exports as any other country.
Movement along a Demand Curve  The graphical repre-
sentation of the effect of a change in price on the quantity 
demanded.
Movement along a Supply Curve  The graphical representa-
tion of the effect of a change in price on the quantity supplied.
M
Macroeconomic Externality  An externality that affects 
the levels of unemployment, inflation, or growth in the 
economy as a whole.
Macroeconomics  The study of the economy as a whole, 
which includes inflation, unemployment, business cycles, 
and growth.
Marginal Benefit  Additional benefit above the benefits 
already derived.
Marginal Cost (MC)  Additional cost over and above the 
costs already incurred. Also: Increase (decrease) in total cost 
from increasing (or decreasing) the level of output by one 
unit. Also: The change in total cost associated with a change 
in quantity.
Marginal Factor Cost  The additional cost to a firm of 
hiring another worker.
Marginal Physical Product (MPP)  The additional units 
of output that hiring an additional worker will bring about.
Marginal Product  The additional output that will be 
forthcoming from an additional worker, other inputs 
­constant.
Marginal Productivity Theory  Factors are paid their 
marginal revenue product (what they contribute at the mar-
gin to revenue).
Marginal Rate of Substitution  The rate at which one 
good must be added when the other is taken away to keep 
the individual indifferent between the two combinations. 
Also: The rate at which one factor must be added to 
­compensate for the loss of another factor to keep output 
­constant.
Marginal Revenue (MR)  The change in total revenue 
associated with a change in quantity.
Marginal Revenue Product (MRP)  The marginal ­revenue 
a firm expects to earn from selling an additional worker’s 
output.
Marginal Social Benefit  The marginal private benefit of 
consuming a good plus the benefits of the positive externali-
ties resulting from consuming that good.
Marginal Social Cost  The marginal private costs of pro-
duction plus the cost of the negative externalities associated 
with that production.
Marginal Utility  The satisfaction one gets from consum-
ing one additional unit of a product above and beyond what 
one has consumed up to that point.
Market Demand Curve  The horizontal sum of all indi-
vidual demand curves.
Market Economy  An economic system based on private 
property and the market in which, in principle, individuals 
decide how, what, and for whom to produce.
Market Failure  A situation in which the invisible hand 
pushes in such a way that individual decisions do not lead to 
socially desirable outcomes.

G-6	
■ Glossary ■
Opportunity Cost  The benefit you might have gained 
from choosing the next-best alternative.
Optimal Policy  A policy in which the marginal cost of 
­undertaking the policy equals the marginal benefit of that 
policy.
P
Pareto Optimal Policy  A policy that benefits some peo-
ple and hurts no one.
Partnership  A business with two or more owners.
Patent  The legal protection of a technical innovation that 
gives the person holding it sole right to use that innovation. 
(Note: A patent is good for only a limited time.)
Path-Dependent Model  A model in which the path to 
equilibrium affects the equilibrium.
Payoff Matrix  A table that shows the outcome of every 
choice by every player, given the possible choices of all 
other players.
Perfectly Competitive Market  A market in which eco-
nomic forces operate unimpeded.
Perfectly Elastic  Quantity responds enormously to 
changes in price (E = ∞).
Perfectly Inelastic  Quantity does not respond at all to 
changes in price (E = 0).
Pie Chart  A circle divided into “slices of pie,” where the 
undivided pie represents the total amount and the pie slices 
reflect the percentage of the whole pie that the various com-
ponents make up.
Political Forces  Legal directives that direct individuals’ 
actions.
Positive Economics  The study of what is and how the 
economy works.
Positive Externality  When the effects of a decision not 
taken into account by the decision maker are beneficial to 
others.
Poverty Threshold  The income below which a family is 
considered to live in poverty.
Precepts  Policy rules that conclude that a particular 
course of action is preferable.
Precommitment Strategy  A strategy in which people 
consciously place limitations on their future actions, thereby 
limiting their choices.
Present Value  A method of translating a flow of future 
income or savings into its current worth.
Price Ceiling  A government-imposed limit on how high a 
price can be charged. In other words, a government-set price 
below the market equilibrium price.
Price-Discriminate  To charge different prices to different 
individuals or groups of individuals.
Price Elasticity of Demand  The percentage change in 
quantity demanded divided by the percentage change in 
price.
N
Nash Equilibrium  A set of strategies for each player in 
the game in which no player can improve his or her payoff 
by changing strategy unilaterally.
Natural Experiment  A naturally occurring event that ap-
proximates a controlled experiment where something has 
changed in one place but has not changed somewhere else. 
That is, an event created by nature that can serve as an 
experiment.
Natural Monopoly  An industry in which a single firm can 
produce at a lower cost than can two or more firms. Also: 
An industry in which significant economies of scale make 
the existence of more than one firm inefficient.
Necessity  A good that has an income elasticity less than 1.
Negative Externality  The adverse effect of a decision on 
others not taken into account by the decision maker. When 
the effects of a decision not taken into account by the deci-
sion maker are detrimental to others.
Network Externality  The phenomenon that the greater 
use of a product increases the benefit of that product to 
­everyone.
Noncooperative Game  A game in which each player is 
out for him- or herself and agreements are either not possi-
ble or not enforceable.
Nonlinear Curve  A curve that is drawn as a curved line.
Nonrecourse Loan Program  A program in which gov-
ernment “buys” goods in the form of collateral on defaulting 
loans.
Normal Good  A good whose consumption increases with 
an increase in income.
Normal Profit  The amount the owners of business would 
have received in the next-best alternative. Also: Payments to 
entrepreneurs as the return on their risk taking.
Normative Economics  The study of what the goals of the 
economy should be.
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)  
An industry classification that categorizes industries by type 
of economic activity and groups firms with like production 
processes.
Nudge  A deliberate design of the choice architecture that 
alters people’s behavior in predictably positive ways.
Nudge Policy  Policy in which government structures 
choices facing people so that they are free to choose what they 
want, but also more likely to choose what is best for them.
O
Oligopoly  A market structure in which there are only a 
few firms and firms explicitly take other firms’ likely 
­response into account; there are often significant barriers 
to entry.

	
■ Glossary ■	
G-7
Proportional Tax  A tax whose rates are constant at all 
­income levels, no matter what a taxpayer’s total annual 
­income is.
Public Assistance  Means-tested social programs targeted 
to the poor and providing financial, nutritional, medical, and 
housing assistance.
Public Choice Economist  An economist who integrates 
an economic analysis of politics with an analysis of the 
economy.
Public Choice Model  A model that focuses on economic 
incentives as applied to politicians.
Public Good  A good that if supplied to one person must 
be supplied to all and whose consumption by one individual 
does not prevent its consumption by another individual. That 
is, a good that is nonexclusive and nonrival.
Purposeful Behavior  Behavior reflecting reasoned but 
not necessarily rational judgment.
Push Policy  A regulatory or tax policy to get firms or in-
dividuals to use “appropriate” nudges.
Q
Quantity Demanded  A specific amount that will be 
demanded per unit of time at a specific price, other things 
constant.
Quantity Supplied  A specific amount that will be 
­supplied at a specific price, other things constant.
Quasi Rent  Any payment to a resource above the amount 
that the resource would receive in its next-best use.
Quota  A quantity limit placed on imports.
R
Rational  An adjective used to describe behavior individu-
als undertake in their own best interest.
Regression Model  An empirical model in which one set 
of variables is statistically related to another.
Regressive Tax  A tax whose rates decrease as income 
rises.
Regulatory Trade Restrictions  Government-imposed 
procedural rules that limit imports.
Rent  The income from a factor of production that is in 
fixed supply.
Rent Control  A price ceiling on rents, set by government.
Rent Seeking  The restricting of supply in order to ­increase 
the price suppliers receive.
Rent-Seeking Activity  Activity designed to transfer sur-
plus from one group to another.
Resource Curse  The paradox that countries with an abun-
dance of resources tend to have lower economic growth and 
more unemployment than countries with fewer natural 
resources.
Price Elasticity of Supply  The percentage change in 
quantity supplied divided by the percentage change in 
price.
Price Floor  A government-imposed limit on how low a 
price can be charged. In other words, a government-set price 
above equilibrium price.
Price Stabilization Program  A program designed to 
eliminate short-run fluctuations in prices, while allowing 
prices to follow their long-run trend line.
Price Support Program  A program designed to maintain 
prices at higher levels than the market prices.
Price Taker  A firm or individual who takes the price de-
termined by supply and demand as given.
Principle of Diminishing Marginal Utility  As you con-
sume more of a good, after some point, the marginal utility 
received from each additional unit of a good ­decreases with 
each additional unit consumed, other things equal.
Principle of Rational Choice  Spend your money on 
those goods that give you the most marginal utility (MU) 
per dollar.
Prisoner’s Dilemma  A well-known game that demon-
strates the difficulty of cooperative behavior in certain 
­circumstances.
Private Good  A good that, when consumed by one indi-
vidual, cannot be consumed by another individual.
Private Property Right  Control a private individual or 
firm has over an asset.
Producer Surplus  Price the producer sells a product for 
less the cost of producing it.
Production  The transformation of factors into goods and 
services.
Production Function  The relationship between the inputs 
(factors of production) and outputs.
Production Possibility Curve (PPC)  A curve measuring 
the maximum combination of outputs that can be obtained 
from a given number of inputs.
Production Possibility Table  A table that lists a choice’s 
opportunity costs by summarizing what alternative outputs 
can be achieved with given inputs.
Production Table  A table showing the output resulting 
from various combinations of factors of production or ­inputs.
Productive Efficiency  Achieving as much output as 
­possible from a given amount of inputs or resources.
Profit  What’s left over from total revenues after all 
the appropriate costs have been subtracted. That is, Total 
revenue − Total cost. Also: A return on entrepreneurial 
activity and risk taking.
Profit-Maximizing Condition  MR = MC = P.
Progressive Tax  A tax whose rates increase as a person’s 
income increases.
Property Rights  The rights given to people to use speci-
fied property as they see fit.

G-8	
■ Glossary ■
Socialism  An economic system based on individuals’ 
goodwill toward others, not on their own self-interest, and in 
which, in principle, society decides what, how, and for 
whom to produce.
Sole Proprietorship  A business that has only one 
owner.
Sovereign Wealth Funds  Investment funds held by 
governments.
Status Quo Bias  An individual’s actions are very much 
influenced by what the current situation is, even when 
that reasonably does not seem to be very important to the 
decision.
Stock  A certificate of ownership in a company.
Strategic Bargaining  Demanding a larger share of the 
gains from trade than you can reasonably expect.
Strategic Decision Making  Taking explicit account of a 
rival’s expected response to a decision you are making.
Strategic Trade Policy  Threatening to implement tariffs 
to bring about a reduction in tariffs or some other conces-
sion from the other country.
Substitute  A good that can be used in place of another 
good.
Substitution Effect  The reduction in quantity demanded 
because relative price has risen.
Sunk Cost  Cost that has already been incurred and cannot 
be recovered.
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)  A federal pro-
gram that pays benefits, based on need, to the elderly, 
blind, and disabled.
Supply  A schedule of quantities a seller is willing to sell 
per unit of time at various prices, other things constant.
Supply Curve  A graphical representation of the relation-
ship between price and quantity supplied.
T
Tariff  An excise tax on an imported (internationally 
traded) good.
Tax Incentive Program  A program using a tax to create 
incentives for individuals to structure their activities in a 
way that is consistent with the desired ends.
Team Spirit  The feelings of friendship and being part of a 
team that bring out people’s best efforts.
Technical Efficiency  A situation in which as few inputs as 
possible are used to produce a given output.
Technological Change  An increase in the range of produc-
tion techniques that leads to more efficient ways of producing 
goods as well as the production of new and better goods.
Technological Development  The discovery of new or 
improved products or methods of production.
Technological Lock-In  The prior use of a technology 
makes the adoption of subsequent technologies difficult.
Reverse Engineering  The process of a firm buying other 
firms’ products, disassembling them, figuring out what’s 
special about them, and then copying them within the limits 
of the law.
Rule of 72  The number of years needed for a certain 
amount to double in value is equal to 72 divided by the rate 
of interest.
S
Scarcity  The goods available are too few to satisfy indi-
viduals’ desires.
Screening  An action taken by an uninformed party that 
induces the informed party to reveal information.
Screening Question  A question structured in a way to 
­reveal strategic information about the person who ­answers.
Self-Confirming Equilibrium  An equilibrium in a model 
in which people’s beliefs become self-fulfilling.
Sequential Game  A game where players make decisions 
one after another, so one player responds to the known 
­decisions of other players.
Shadow Price  A price that isn’t paid directly, but instead 
is paid in terms of opportunity cost borne by the demander, 
and thus determines his or her action indirectly.
Share Distribution of Income  The relative division of 
total income among income groups.
Shift in Demand  The graphical representation of the 
effect of anything other than price on demand.
Shift in Supply  The graphical representation of the effect 
of a change in a factor other than price on supply.
Short-Run Decision  A decision in which the firm is 
constrained in regard to what production decisions it can 
make.
Shutdown Point  The point below which the firm will be 
better off if it temporarily shuts down than it will if it stays 
in business.
Signaling  An action taken by an informed party that 
reveals information to an uninformed party and thereby 
partially offsets adverse selection.
Simultaneous Move Game  A game where players make 
their decisions at the same time as other players without 
knowing what choice the other players have made.
Sin Tax  A tax that discourages activities society believes 
are harmful (sinful).
Slope  The change in the value on the vertical axis divided 
by the change in the value on the horizontal axis.
Social Forces  Forces that guide individual actions even 
though those actions may not be in an individual’s selfish 
interest.
Social Security System  A social insurance program that 
provides financial benefits to the elderly and disabled and to 
their eligible dependents and/or survivors.

	
■ Glossary ■	
G-9
Unit Elastic  The percentage change in quantity is equal to 
the percentage change in price (E = 1).
Utility  The pleasure or satisfaction that one expects to get 
from consuming a good or service.
Utility-Maximizing Rule  Utility is maximized when 
the ratios of the marginal utility to price of two goods are 
equal.
V
Value of Marginal Product (VMP)  An additional work-
er’s marginal physical product multiplied by the price at 
which the firm could sell that additional product.
Variable Costs  Costs that change as output changes.
Vickrey Auction  A sealed-bid auction where the high-
est bidder wins but pays the price bid by the next-highest 
b­idder.
W
Wealth  The value of the things individuals own less the 
value of what they owe.
Welfare Loss Triangle  A geometric representation of the 
welfare cost in terms of misallocated resources caused by a 
deviation from a supply/demand equilibrium.
X–Y
X-inefficiency  The underperformance of a firm that has a 
monopoly position. The firm operates far less efficiently 
than it could technically.
Z
Zoning Laws  Laws that set limits on the use of one’s 
property.
Theorems  Propositions that are logically true based on the 
assumptions in a model.
Third-Party-Payer Market  A market in which the person 
who receives the good differs from the person paying for 
the good.
Total Cost  The explicit payments to the factors of 
­production plus the opportunity cost of the factors provided 
by the owners of the firm.
Total Revenue  The amount a firm receives for selling its 
product or service plus any increase in the value of the assets 
owned by the firm.
Total Utility  The total satisfaction one gets from consum-
ing a product.
Trade Adjustment Assistance Programs  Programs de-
signed to compensate losers for reductions in trade 
­restrictions.
Trade Deficit  When imports exceed exports.
Trade Surplus  When exports exceed imports.
Traditional Economists  Economists who study the logi-
cal implications of rationality and self-interest in relatively 
simple algebraic or graphical models such as the supply and 
demand model.
Transferable Comparative Advantage  Comparative ad-
vantage based on factors that can change relatively easily.
U
Ultimatum Game  A game in which the person only gets 
the money if the other person accepts the offer. If the second 
person does not accept, they both get nothing.
Unemployment Compensation  Short-term financial as-
sistance, regardless of need, to eligible individuals who are 
temporarily out of work.
Union Shop  A firm in which all workers must join the 
union.


CG-1
Bidding (or Bid) (verb sometimes used as a noun)  Has 
two different meanings. (1) Making an offer, or a series of 
offers, to compete with others who are making offers. Also 
the offer itself. (2) Ordering or asking a person to take a 
specified action.
Big Bucks (noun)  Really, really large sum of money.
Big Mac (proper noun)  Brand name of a kind of ham-
burger sold at McDonald’s restaurants.
Bind (noun)  To “be in a bind” means to be in a situation 
where one is forced to make a difficult decision one does not 
want to make—where any decision seems as if it would be 
wrong, or at least undesirable.
Blow Off (verb)  To treat as inconsequential; to deal su-
perficially with something.
Blue-Collar (adjective)  Description of manufacturing 
work, contrasted with white-collar or administrative work.
Blue-Collar America (noun)  That portion of the U.S. 
population that works in manufacturing and in manual la-
bor jobs.
Booming (adjective)  Being extraordinarily and quickly 
successful.
Boost (verb and noun)  To give a sudden impetus, or 
boost, to something or someone.
Boston Red Sox (compound noun)  A U.S. baseball team.
Botched (adjective)  Operated badly; spoiled.
Brick-and-Mortar (adjective)  A company that has a 
­physical presence such as a building. Brick-and-mortar 
­contrasts with companies with a presence only on the 
­Internet.
Bring Home (verb)  To emphasize or convince.
Bronco Bull  A bull ridden in a rodeo. The rider’s objec-
tive is to stay on the bull until he wrestles it to the ground or 
is thrown off.
Buffalo (adjective, as used in this book)  “Buffalo 
chicken wings” are a variety of tempting food developed in, 
and hence associated with, the city of Buffalo. (Not all 
chicken wings are Buffalo chicken wings.)
Busch Stadium (name of a stadium)  Anheuser-Busch is 
a firm that produces widely consumed brands of beer. Its 
home offices are in St. Louis. It bought naming rights to 
Busch Stadium in St. Louis, MO.
C
Cachet (noun)  Prestige, distinction, high quality. This word 
is borrowed from French and is pronounced “ca-SHAY.”
Call (verb)  In sports refereeing, one meaning of “to call” 
is for the referee to announce his or her decision on a ­specific 
point.
A
Ads (noun)  Short for “advertisements.”
Ain’t (verb)  An ungrammatical form of “isn’t,” some-
times used to emphasize a point although the speaker knows 
that “isn’t” is the correct form.
All the Rage (descriptive phrase)  Extremely popular, but 
the popularity is likely to be transitory.
American League (name of an organization)  An asso-
ciation of baseball teams. The United States has two base-
ball associations—the other is the National League.
Andy Warhol (proper name)  American artist who flour-
ished in the period 1960–1980. He was immensely popular 
and successful with art critics and the intelligentsia, but, 
above all, he gained worldwide recognition in the same way 
and of the same quality as movie stars and athletes do. His 
renown has continued even after his death.
Automatic Pilot (noun)  To be on automatic pilot is to be 
acting without thinking.
B
Baby Boom (noun)  Any period when more than the 
­statistically predicted number of babies are born. Originally 
­referred to a specific group: those born in the years 1945–1964.
Baby Boomers (descriptive phrase)  Americans born in the 
years 1945 through 1964. An enormous and influential group 
of people whose large number is attributed to the “boom” in 
babies that occurred when military personnel, many of whom 
had been away from home for four or five years, were dis-
charged from military service after the end of World War II.
Backfire (verb)  To injure a person or entity who intended 
to inflict injury.
Balloon (verb)  To expand enormously and suddenly.
Barista (noun)  The name given to a worker at a “high-class” 
coffee shop.
Bases on Balls (descriptive phrase)  A strategy in the 
game of baseball. If a pitcher throws a long enough succes-
sion of defective throws, the batter gets to run—or walk—to 
first base without having hit any balls.
Bean (noun)  A person’s head; also a person’s mind or in-
tellectual ability. (“Bean” is American slang for “head.”)
Beanball (noun)  A ball thrown with the intention of hit-
ting the opponent on the head.
Beluga Caviar (noun)  The best, most expensive, caviar.
Benchmark (noun)  A point of reference from which 
­measurement of any sort may be made.
Better Mousetrap (noun)  Comes from the proverb 
­“Invent a better mousetrap and the world will beat a path to 
your door.”
Colloquial Glossary

CG-2	
■ Colloquial Glossary ■
Doritos (proper noun)  Brand name of a type of snack in 
chip form. The label lists its principal ingredient as corn, but it 
contains at least 30 other ingredients, many of them chemical.
Dr. Seuss Book (noun)  A book by a favorite U.S. children’s 
author.
Drop in the Bucket (noun)  Insignificant quantity com-
pared to the total amount available.
Dyed-in-the-Wool (adjective)  Irretrievably convinced of 
the value of a particular course of action or of the truth of an 
opinion. Literally, wool that is dyed after it is shorn from the 
sheep but before it is spun into thread.
E
Elmo (proper noun)  Character in the television show 
Sesame Street. (Also see “Cookie Monster.”)
’Em (pronoun)  Careless way of pronouncing “them.” 
Written out, it reproduces the sound the speaker is making.
Emotional Quotient (EQ) (noun)  The ability to relate to 
others. It is a play on the concept IQ or intelligence quotient. 
There is no EQ measure or test.
Establishment (noun and adjective)  Noun: the prevail-
ing theory or practice. Adjective: something that is used by 
people whose views prevail over other people’s views.
Eureka Moment (noun)  “Eureka” is Greek for “I have 
found it!” Means having a sudden insight. Aristophanes is 
said to have cried out “Eureka,” jumped out of his bath, and 
run down the street crying “Eureka!” when it struck him 
suddenly that the weight of water displaced by a submerged 
body is the same as the weight of the body being displaced.
F
Fake (verb)  To fake is to pretend or deceive; to try to 
make people believe that you know what you’re doing or 
talking about when you don’t know or aren’t sure.
Fiberglas (proper noun)  A brand of insulating material.
Fire (verb)  To discharge an employee permanently. It’s 
different from “laying off” an employee, an action taken 
when a temporary situation makes the employee superflu-
ous, but the employer expects to take the employee back 
when the temporary situation is over.
Fix (verb)  To prepare, as in “fixing a meal.” This is only 
one of the multiplicity of meanings of this verb.
Fleeting (adverb)  This word’s usage is elegant and cor-
rect, but rare. It means transitory or short-lived.
Flipside (noun)  The other side of a two-sided object or of 
a two-sided argument or situation. Origin: In the days before 
tape and DVD, music was recorded on large disks, made of 
vinyl or other material. Both sides of the disk were used, 
thus—the flipside. 
Flop (noun)  A dismal failure.
Calvin Coolidge (proper name)  President of the United 
States 1923–1929.
Catch (noun)  A proviso; an unexpected complication.
Central Park West (proper noun)  A fashionable and 
­expensive street in New York City.
CEO (noun)  Abbreviation of “chief executive officer.”
Charade (noun)  A pretense, usually designed to convince 
someone that you are doing something that you are ­definitely 
not doing.
Chit (noun)  Type of IOU (see IOU) or coupon with a 
­designated value that can be turned in toward the purchase 
or acquisition of some item.
Chump Change (noun)  Insignificant amount of money 
earned by or paid to a person who is not alert enough to 
­realize that more money could rather easily be earned.
Clear-cut (adjective)  Precisely defined.
Clip Coupons (verb)  To cut coupons out of newspapers 
and magazines. The coupons give you a discount on the 
price of the item when you present the item and the coupon 
at the cashier’s counter in a store. It can also mean 
­collecting interest on bonds. (In earlier times, bonds had 
coupons ­attached. The holders clipped them and sent them 
in to the bond issuer to collect the bond’s interest.)
Clout (noun)  Influence or power.
Coined (verb)  Invented or originated.
Coldhearted (adjective)  Without any sympathy; ­aloof; 
inhuman.
Cookie Monster (proper noun)  Character in the television 
show Sesame Street. (Also see “Elmo.”)
Co-opted (adjective)  Overwhelmed.
Cornrows (noun)  Hair style in which hair is braided in 
shallow, narrow rows over the entire head.
Corvette (noun)  A type of expensive sports car.
Costco (proper noun)  Name of a chain of big stores sell-
ing groceries and other items at a sharp discount. Usually 
the items are packaged in large quantities—for example, 
50-pound bags of flour.
Couch (verb)  To construct and present an argument.
Crack (noun)  A strong form of cocaine.
D
Deadbeat (noun)  Lazy person who has no ambition, no 
money, and no prospects.
Deadweight (noun)  Literally, the unrelieved weight of 
any inert mass (think of carrying a sack of bricks); hence, 
any oppressive burden.
Decent (adjective)  One of its specialized meanings is “of 
high quality.”
Doodle (noun and verb)  Idle scribbles, usually nonrepre-
sentational and usually made while actively thinking about 
something else, such as during a phone conversation or 
­sitting in a class.

	
■ Colloquial Glossary ■	
CG-3
Groucho Marx (proper name)  A famous U.S. comedian 
(1885–1977).
Gung-ho (adjective)  Full of energy and eager to take 
action.
Guns and Butter (descriptive phrase) 
Metaphor 
­describing the dilemma whether to devote resources to war 
or to peace.
Guzzle, Guzzler (verb and noun)  Verb: to consume 
something greedily, wastefully, and rapidly. Noun: an object 
(or a person) that guzzles.
H
Haggling (noun)  Bargaining, usually in a petty and con-
frontational manner.
Hangover (noun)  The queasy feeling, usually accompa-
nied by a headache, that can afflict a person who has gotten 
drunk. The feeling can last for hours after the person is no 
longer actually drunk.
Hard Hit (adjective)  Affected in a negative way, often 
­severely.
Hard Liquor (noun)  Alcoholic beverages with a high 
content of pure alcohol. Beer and wine are not “hard liquor,” 
but most other alcoholic drinks are.
Hassle (noun and verb)  Noun: unreasonable obstacle. 
Verb: to place unreasonable obstacles or arguments in the 
way of someone.
Hawking (adjective)  Selling aggressively and widely.
Hefty (adjective)  Large; substantial.
Hero Sandwich (noun)  A type of very large sandwich.
Highfalutin (adjective)  American slang term meaning 
pretentious, self-important, supercilious.
Hitting the Mark (expression)  Achieving your purpose.
Holds Its Own (descriptive phrase)  Refuses to give up, 
even in the face of adversity or opposition.
Home Free (descriptive phrase)  Safe and successful.
Hook (noun)  Strategy to engage your attention.
Hot Dog (noun)  A type of sausage.
I
“In” (preposition sometimes used as an adjec-
tive)  Placed within quotation marks to show it is used with 
a special meaning. Here it is used as an adjective, to indicate 
“fashionable or popular, usually just for a short period.” To 
be “in” means to be associated with highly desirable people 
(the “in” people).
Incidentals (noun)  Blanket term covering the world of 
small items a person uses on a daily basis as the need 
­happens to arise—that is, needed per incident occurring. Ex-
amples are aspirin, combs, and picture postcards.
Follow Suit (verb)  To do the same thing you see others 
do. Comes from card games where if a card of a certain suit 
is played, the other players must play a card of that suit, if 
they have one.
Follow the Leader (noun)  Name of a children’s game. 
Metaphorically, it means to do what others are doing, usu-
ally without giving it much thought.
Form Follows Function (description)  A phrase borrowed 
from architecture, where it means that the architect determines 
what a building is to be used for, and then designs the building 
to meet the demands of that use, or function.
Fourth Sector (noun)  An additional sector in the U.S. 
economy in addition to the typical three: government, 
­private business, and nonprofit. 
Front (noun and verb)  Activity undertaken to divert at-
tention from what is.
Funky (adjective)  Eccentric in style or manner.
G
Gadget (noun)  Generic term for any small, often novel, 
mechanical or electronic device or contrivance, usually de-
signed for a specific purpose. For instance, the small wheel 
with serrated rim and an attached handle used to divide a 
pizza pie into slices is a gadget.
Gas-Guzzling (adjective)  Describes motor vehicles that 
use a noneconomical or excessive amount of gasoline.
Gee (expletive)  Emphatic expression signaling surprise or 
enthusiasm.
Get You Down (descriptive phrase)  Make you depressed 
about something or make you dismiss something altogether. 
(Do not confuse with “get it down,” which means to under-
stand fully.)
G.I. Joe (noun)  A toy in the form of a boy (as “Barbie” is 
a girl). The original meaning was “government issue”—i.e., 
an item such as a uniform issued by the U.S. government to 
a member of the U.S. armed forces, and, by extension, the 
person to whom the item was issued.
Giveaways (noun)  Something, usually valuable, that you 
confer without receiving anything tangible in return. In this 
book, it refers to Congress enacting tax cuts that are insig-
nificant to all but people who are already rich.
GM (noun)  The General Motors automobile company.
Go-Cart (noun)  A small engine-powered vehicle that is 
used for racing and recreation.
Gold Mine (noun)  Metaphorically, any activity that re-
sults in making you a lot of money.
GOP  This acronym stands for “Grand Old Party.” The 
GOP is the Republican political party.
Got It Made (descriptive phrase)  Succeeded.
Grind (noun)  Slang for necessary intense effort that may 
be painful but will likely benefit your understanding.

CG-4	
■ Colloquial Glossary ■
MBA (noun)  An academic degree: master of business 
­administration.
Medicaid (proper noun)  Health insurance program for 
low-income people. It is administered jointly by the U.S. 
government and the individual states.
Medicare (proper noun)  U.S. government health insur-
ance program for people who are disabled or age 65 and 
over. There is no means test.
Messed Up (adjective)  Damaged or badly managed.
Mother of Necessity  A witty remark that reverses the 
terms of a famous saying, “Necessity is the mother of 
­invention.”
Mousetrap (noun)  Producing a better mousetrap is part of 
the saying, “Make a better mousetrap and the world will beat 
a path to your door.” Metaphorically, producing a better 
mousetrap stands for doing anything better than it has previ-
ously been done.
N
NA (abbreviation)  “Not available.”
NATO (noun)  North American Treaty Organization. 
Western alliance for joint economic and military coopera-
tion. It includes the United States, Canada, and several 
­European nations.
National League (name of an organization)  An association 
of U.S. baseball teams. The United States has two baseball 
­associations—the other is the American League.
Nature of the Beast (descriptive phrase)  Character of 
whatever you are describing (need not have anything to do 
with a “beast”).
Nerd (noun)  An insignificant and uninteresting person or 
a person so absorbed in a subject that he or she thinks of 
nothing else and is therefore boring.
Nickel-and-Dimed (adjective)  Worried over every expen-
diture, even of tiny sums like nickels and dimes; also having 
the last tiny sum of money extracted.
Nirvana (noun)  This word is adopted from Buddhism. Its 
religious meaning is complicated, but it is used colloquially 
to mean salvation, paradise, harmony, perfection.
No Way (exclamation)  Emphatic expression denoting 
refusal, denial, or extreme disapproval.
Nobel Prize (adjective/noun)  A prestigious money 
prize awarded annually from a fund set up in 1901 by the 
will of Alfred Nobel, the inventor of dynamite. The prizes 
are in several categories: physics, chemistry, physiology 
and medicine, literature, and economics. Nobel also 
­established the Nobel Peace Prize, distinguished by the 
word “peace.”
Nudge (noun and verb)  Noun: little push. Verb: to give a 
little push.
IOU (noun)  A nickname applied to a formal acknowledg-
ment of a debt, such as a U.S. Treasury bond. Also an infor-
mal but written acknowledgment of a debt. Pronounce the 
letters and you will hear “I owe you.”
iPod (proper name)  A compact digital music player de-
signed by Apple Inc.
It’ll (contraction)  “It will.”
J
Jarring (adjective)  Extremely surprising and unexpected 
occurrence, usually slightly unpleasant.
JetBlue (proper name)  A low-cost U.S. airline, which is 
actively entering new markets.
Junk Food (noun)  Food that tastes good but has little nu-
tritional value and lots of calories. It is sometimes cheap, 
sometimes expensive, and it’s quick and easy to buy and eat.
Just Say No (admonition)  Flatly refuse. This phrase 
­became common in the 1980s after Nancy Reagan, the wife 
of the then-president of the United States, popularized it in a 
campaign against the use of addictive drugs.
K
Ketchup (noun)  Spicy, thick tomato sauce used on, 
among other foods, hot dogs.
Knockoff (noun)  A cheap imitation.
L
Laetrile (noun)  Substance derived from peach pits, 
thought by some people to be a cure for cancer.
Lay Off (verb)  To discharge a worker temporarily.
Lemon (noun)  Slang term for an object that is irreparably 
faulty. It’s usually something for which you have paid a sub-
stantial amount of money and by whose performance you 
feel cheated.
Levi’s (noun)  Popular brand of jeans.
Like Greek (descriptive phrase)  Incomprehensible (be-
cause in the United States, classical Greek is considered to 
be a language that almost no one learns).
Lion’s Share (noun)  By far the best part of a bargain.
Lobby (verb and noun)  Verb: to attempt by organized  
effort to influence legislation. Noun: an organized group 
formed to influence legislation. A lobbyist is a member of  
a lobby.
Lousy (adjective)  Incompetent or distasteful.
M
Mazuma (noun)  U.S. slang term for money. It was used in 
the first half of the 20th century but is now rare, to say the 
least.

	
■ Colloquial Glossary ■	
CG-5
Practice Makes Perfect (expression)  The grammar of 
this phrase is illogical but the meaning is clear.
Premium Tires All Round (descriptive phrase)  Pre-
mium tires are tires of superior quality. When all the tires on 
your vehicle are premium tires, you have them “all round.”
Proxy (noun)  A stockholder can give a “proxy” to the 
firm. It is an authorization that permits the firm’s officials to 
vote for the proposition that the stockholder directs them to 
vote for. By extension, proxy means a substitute.
Ps and Qs  See under Mind.
Pub (noun)  Short for “public house,” a commercial estab-
lishment where alcoholic drinks are served, usually with re-
freshments and occasionally with light meals.
Q
Quip (noun and verb)  Noun: a jocular remark. Verb: to 
make a jocular remark.
R
Raise Your Eyebrows (verb)  To express surprise, usually 
by a facial expression rather than vocally.
Red Flag (noun)  A red flag warns you to be very alert to 
a danger or perceived danger. (Ships in port that are loading 
fuel or ammunition raise a red flag to signal danger.)
Red-Handed (adjective)  Indisputably guilty. Comes from 
being found at a murder or injury scene with the blood of the 
victim on one’s hands.
Relief (noun)  This term was an informal one, applied spe-
cifically to the financial assistance people in the United 
States received from the government during the Great  
Depression (1929 until about 1941). It arose because of a 
government program administered by the Works Prog-
ress  Administration (WPA) formed to create jobs, and  
hence to employ people who otherwise would have been  
unemployed.
Right On! (exclamation)  Expression of vigorous, often 
revolutionary, approval and encouragement.
Ritzy (adjective)  Very expensive, fashionable, and os-
tentatious. Comes from the entrepreneur Caesar Ritz, a 
Swiss developer of expensive hotels, active in the first 
quarter of the 20th century. Upscale, fancy. Has overtones 
of ostentation.
Rock Bottom (noun)  To reach the absolute limit of one’s 
endurance or resources.
Rule of Thumb (complex noun)  Judgment based on prac-
tical experience rather than on scientific knowledge. Comes 
from habit of using the space between the tip to the first joint 
of your thumb as being about an inch—good enough for the 
task at hand but not precise.
O
Oakland Athletics (adjective/noun)  A U.S. major league 
baseball team.
Occupy Movement (proper noun)  A protest movement 
against income inequality that started with an occupation of 
Zuccotti Park in Wall Street, New York City.
Off-the-Cuff (adjective)  A quick, unthinking answer for 
which the speaker has no valid authority (comes from the 
alleged practice of writing an abbreviated answer on the 
cuff of your shirt, to be glanced at during an examination).
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. (proper name)  A justice of 
the U.S. Supreme Court, famous for his wit, his wisdom, his 
literary ability, his advocacy of civil rights, and his long life 
(1841–1935).
On Their Toes (descriptive phrase)  Alert; ready for any 
eventuality.
P
Pandora’s Box (complex noun)  An allusion to a Greek 
myth. To release a cloud of troubles. Pandora, a figure in Greek 
mythology, was given a box but told not to open it. She could 
not resist, and the opened it. It was filled with all the problems 
of the universe, which escaped to plague us forever.
Park Avenue (noun)  An expensive and fashionable street 
in New York City.
Part and Parcel (noun)  An integral element of a concept, 
action, or item.
Peanuts (noun)  Slang for a small amount, usually money 
but sometimes anything with a small value.
Peer Pressure (descriptive phrase)  Push to do what ev-
eryone else in your particular group is doing.
Perks (noun)  Short for “perquisites.”
Pie (noun)  Metaphor for the total amount of a specific 
item that exists.
Piecemeal (adverb)  To do something bit by bit instead of 
all at once.
Pitcher (noun)  In the game of baseball, the player who 
throws—or “pitches”—the ball to the player who is waiting 
to strike it.
Pop-Tart (noun)  Brand name of a type of junk food. 
It’s a sweet filling enclosed in pastry that you pop into the 
toaster and when the pastry is hot, it pops out of the 
toaster.
Populist (noun and adjective)  Noun: a member of a po-
litical party that purports to represent the rank and file of the 
people. Adjective: a political party, a group, or an individual 
that purports to represent rank and file opinion.
Pound (noun)  Unit of British currency.
Powers That Be (expression)  People or institutions that 
have power such that there is nothing one can do to influ-
ence those people or institutions—or at least nothing easy.

CG-6	
■ Colloquial Glossary ■
Soft Drink (noun)  Nonalcoholic beverage.
Sourpuss (noun)  Dour; sulky; humorless. Derives from sour, 
which is self-explanatory, and puss, a slang word for “face.”
Spoils (noun)  Rewards or advantages gained through 
­illegal or unethical activity.
Squash (verb)  To crush or ruin.
Stay on Their Toes (idiom)  To be alert.
Steady (noun)  A person to whom you are romantically 
committed and with whom you spend a lot of time, espe-
cially in social activities.
Stealth Gains (noun)  Gains that occur unbeknownst to you.
Sticky (adjective)  Resistant to change, as if glued on.
Sucker (noun)  A gullible person.
Super Bowl (noun)  Important football game played annu-
ally that attracts millions of viewers (most of them see the 
game on TV).
Sweetheart Contract (noun)  A contract where one party 
to the contract is given all, or almost all, the advantage; spe-
cifically, a contract between an employer and the workers’ 
union where the employer gains the advantage and the con-
tract on the workers’ side has been arranged by a union of-
ficial who secretly gives up advantages for the workers in 
return for significant advantage for the ­official.
T
Tables Were Turned (descriptive phrase)  The advantage 
of one side over the other reverses so that now the winner is 
the loser and the loser is the winner.
Tacky (adjective)  In very poor taste.
Taco Technician (noun)  A name given to a worker at a 
fast-food restaurant specializing in Mexican foods.
Take a Flier (expression)  To take a chance; to undertake 
a risky action in the hope that you will be lucky.
Take the Heat (verb)  To accept all criticism of one’s ac-
tion or inaction, whether or not one is actually the person 
that should be blamed.
Time-and-a-Half (noun)  In labor law, 150 percent of the 
normal hourly wage.
To Be in Hot Water (descriptive phrase)  To be in trouble.
Ton (noun)  A ton weighs 2,000 pounds and an English 
ton (often spelled “tonne”) weighs 2,240 pounds. In this 
book the term is used most frequently to mean simply “a 
large quantity.”
Tough (adjective)  Very difficult.
Trendy (adjective)  A phenomenon that is slightly ahead 
of traditional ways and indicates a trend. Something trendy 
may turn into something traditional, or it may fade away 
without ever becoming mainstream.
Trophy Spouse (noun)  A spouse (usually the wife) who is 
young, beautiful, and perhaps famous and/or rich who has 
been married to an older—sometimes much older—very 
S
Saks (proper name)  A midsize department store that sells 
expensive, fashionable items. There are very few stores in 
the Saks chain, and Saks stores are considered exclusive.
Savvy (adjective)  Slang term meaning very knowledgeable. 
Adaptation of the French verb savoir, meaning “to know.”
Scab (noun)  Person who takes a job, or continues in a job, 
even though workers at that firm are on strike.
Scraps (noun)  Little pieces of leftover food. Also little 
pieces of anything that is left over: for example, steel that is 
salvaged from a wrecked car.
Scrooge (proper name)  Character in Charles Dickens’ A 
Christmas Carol, an English story written in the mid 1850s. 
He was unbelievably miserly and disagreeable (but in the 
story he reformed).
Sears Catalog (noun)  Sears, Roebuck and Co. is a large 
chain of stores that sells a wide variety of goods. Before 
shopping malls, interstate highways, and the Internet, Sears 
used to have a huge mailing list to which it sent enormous 
catalogs. A person receiving such a catalog would have in-
formation about, and access to, thousands of items, many of 
which the person might not have known existed before the 
catalog provided the prospect.
Set Up Shop (verb)  To go into business.
Shivering in Their Sandals (descriptive phrase)  Ad-
aptation of standard English idiom shivering in their 
shoes, which means being afraid.
Shoo-in (noun)  Highly probable (as in “you are a shoo-in” 
to get an A).
Shorthand (noun)  Any of several systems of abbreviated 
writing or writing that substitutes symbols for words and 
phrases. Shorthand was widely used in business until the 
introduction of mechanical and electronic devices for trans-
mitting the human voice gradually made shorthand obsolete. 
Today it means to summarize very briefly or to substitute a 
short word or phrase for a long description.
Show-off (verb and noun)  To be blatant and vulgar in 
displaying a possession or accomplishment. The person who 
is a show-off is displaying conspicuous consumption.
Significant Other (noun)  A person with a close relationship 
with an individual, often a romantic interest.
Sixpence (noun)  A British coin that is no longer in use. It 
represented six British pennies; its U.S. equivalent in the 
2000s would be about a nickel.
Skin of One’s Teeth (descriptive phrase)  To succeed by 
the skin of one’s teeth means to just barely succeed. A mi-
cromeasure less and one would not have succeeded.
Smoke Screen (noun)  Metaphorically, anything used in-
tentionally to hide one’s true intentions.
Smoking Gun (noun)  This term has come to stand for any 
indisputable evidence of guilt or misdeeds.

White Elephant (noun)  Property requiring expensive 
care but yielding little profit; trinket without value to most 
people but esteemed by a few. There are real white elephants, 
which are albinos. They are rare and therefore expensive and 
high-maintenance.
White Knight (noun)  A company that comes to the rescue 
of another company. The term comes from the game of 
chess—some chess sets have white pieces and black pieces—
and from the children’s book Alice Through the Looking 
Glass, where the story is structured as a game of chess and a 
chess piece, the white knight, tries to rescue Alice.
Whopper (proper noun)  Brand name of a kind of ham-
burger sold at Burger King restaurants.
Widget (noun)  The opposite of a wadget. (See wadget.)
Wild About (descriptive phrase)  Extremely enthusiastic 
about undertaking a particular action or admiring a particu-
lar object or person.
Wind Up (descriptive phrase)  To discover that you have 
reached a particular conclusion or destination.
With It (descriptive phrase)  Highly popular. 
With-It (adjective)  Current in one’s knowledge.
Workhorse (noun)  Common, everyday method of accom-
plishing a task—nothing fancy. A “workhorse” in actuality 
is a strong horse of no particular beauty or attraction but is 
useful for pulling heavy loads in situations where using a 
­machine is impractical.
World Series (complex noun)  At the end of the baseball 
season the two opposing teams left after the season’s con-
tests have eliminated all the other teams meet each other. 
The winner in this “World Series” wins the season.
World War I (proper noun)  1914–1918. The United 
States did not enter until 1917.
World War II (proper noun)  1938–1945. The United 
States did not enter until 1941.
Wound Up (past tense of verb wind up)  To have found 
oneself in a particular situation after having taken particular 
actions.
Writ Large (adjective)  Strongly emphasized; defined 
broadly. (“Writ” is an obsolete form of the word “written.”)
Writing on the Wall (descriptive phrase)  To see the writing 
on the wall is to realize that a situation is inevitably going to end 
badly. It comes from the Biblical story that ­Nebuchadnezzar, 
king of Babylon, saw a fatal prediction written on a wall.
Z
Zune (proper name)  A compact digital music player 
­designed by Microsoft to compete with the iPod.
successful and rich person, usually after divorcing one or 
more previous spouses. The trophy spouse is just that—a 
trophy. (See “show-off.”)
Truck (verb)  To exchange one thing for another. This was 
Adam Smith’s definition in 1776 and it is still one of the 
meanings of the verb.
Truth (noun)  When capitalized (other than at the start of 
a sentence) true beyond any doubt (as opposed to “truth”—
the best truth we have at the moment).
Tune In (verb)  To become familiar with.
Turf (noun)  Territory, especially the figurative territory 
of a firm.
Turn of the Century (expression)  The few years at the 
end of an expiring century and the beginning of a new cen-
tury. For example: 1998–2002.
Turn Up One’s Nose (verb)  To reject.
Twinkies (noun)  Brand name of an inexpensive small cake.
U
Union Jack (noun)  Nickname for the British flag.
Up at Bat (expression)  From the sport of baseball. A 
player (the “batter”) who is in the position (“home plate”) 
where a player from the opposing team (the “pitcher”) will 
throw the ball to him. The player to whom the ball is thrown 
is “up at bat.” Thus, to be up at bat can mean being ready to 
meet an impending emergency or other situation.
Up in Arms (adjective)  Furious and loudly protesting. 
Comes from the use of arms to stand for firearms.
V
Vanity License Plate (descriptive phrase)  One-of-a-kind 
motor vehicle license plate issued to your individual specifi-
cation. It might have your name, your profession, or any in-
dividual set of letters and numbers you choose that will fit 
on the plate.
Vignette (noun)  Short little story that uses a few words to 
illustrate or reinforce a point.
W–Y
Wadget (noun)  Term used by economists to stand for any 
manufactured good except goods designated as widgets. 
(See widget.)
Walmart (proper name)  A very large store that sells 
thousands of inexpensive items. There are thousands of 
Walmarts in the United States and the company has ex-
panded into foreign markets.
Wheaties (proper noun)  Name of a brand of dry break-
fast cereal.
	
■ Colloquial Glossary ■	
CG-7


IND-1
Index
Page numbers followed by n refer to 
notes.
A
Absolute poverty, 386
Accounting depreciation, unmeasured 
cost, 256
Accounting for total revenue, 225
Accounting fraud, 59
Accounting profit, 225
Accounting profit vs. economic profit, 
255–256
Accounting statements, 59
ACE; see Agent-based computational 
economic model
Acquisitions, corporate takeovers, 336
Adams, Frank A., III, 112
Addictions, 511
Advantageous default options nudge, 491
Adverse selection problem, 172–173
resolved by signaling, 173
Advertising
and monopolistic competition
costs increased by, 301
goals, 301
harm or benefit to society, 301–302
and product differentiation, 302
monopoly based on, 300
mutual funds, 447–448
as nudge, 489
Africa
AIDS crisis, 299
After-tax income, 354
Age, median income by, 392
Agent-based computational economic 
model, 475
Agent-based computational  
economics, 443
Age of Revolutions, 73
Aggregate economy, 474
Agricultural markets, 337
AIDS, in Africa, 299
AIDS drugs and government policy,  
298–299
Aid to Families with Dependent 
Children, 400–401
Airline industry, price discrimination,  
134–135, 293
Air traffic controllers strike, 369
Alba-Fernandéz, Vertudes, 442n
Alcoa antitrust case, 322
Algebraic representation
competitive and monopolistic firms, 
310–311
determination of equilibrium, 116–118
excise taxes, 118
law of demand, 116
law of supply, 116
movement along demand or supply 
curves, 116–117
price ceilings, 118
price floors, 118
quotas, 118–119
shifts of demand or supply schedule,  
117–118
subsidies, 118
Almost-continuous-sale phenomenon,  
134–135
Amazon.com, 455
American Federation of Labor, 368
American League, 484
Anchor points, 477
Android phones, 135
Anspach, Ralph, 297
Antiglobalization forces, 215
Anti-Monopoly Game, 297
Antitrust policy, 321
and Archer Daniels Midland, 325
Clayton Antitrust Act, 322
competing views
judgment by performance, 321
judgment by structure, 321
economists’ views, 326
judgment by performance
reality of, 322–324
Standard Oil case, 322
judgment by structure
Alcoa case, 322
reality of, 322–324
and Walmart, 323
recent enforcement
Microsoft case, 296, 324–326
relevant market theory, 324
Sherman Antitrust Act, 322
and Walmart, 323
Apple iPhone, 135
Apple iPod, 331
Apple market, 100, 101
Archer Daniels Midland, 325
Ariely, Dan, 128, 156, 252, 461
Arkansas, Unfair Practices Act, 321
Arkwright, Richard, 74
Armchair Economist (Landsburg), 464
Arrow, Kenneth, 163
Arthur, Brian, 346
Art of economics, 17
value judgments of economics, 18
Ashenfelter, Orley, 471
Asiana, 325
Assets
and value of money, 197
Association of Southeast Asian  
Nations, 219
Astor, Nancy, 12
Auction markets
standard sealed-bid, 445
Vickrey auction, 445
Automobile industry
government bailout, 278
implicit collusion, 314
price discrimination, 134–135
technological change in, 245
Average cost, of natural monopoly, 296
Average cost curve, 234
relation to marginal cost curve,  
236–237
U-shaped, 234–235
Average fixed cost, 231
equation, 238
Average fixed cost curve, 234
Average product, 228
diminishing marginal productivity, 230
versus marginal product, 229
Average total cost, 231
envelope relationship, 248–249
equation, 238
Average total cost curve
effects of advertising, 304
of monopolistic competition, 304
of monopoly, 291–292
Average variable cost, 231
equation, 238
and shutdown point, 274
Averett, Susan, 374
Ayres, Ian, 141, 471, 519
B
Backward induction, 438
Balance of trade, 188
effect of exchange rates on, 197
methods of equalizing, 193–194
of United States 1970–2012, 206

IND-2	
■ Index ■
Buffett, Warren, 444–445
Building blocks
basis of models, 458
behavioral, 459, 462
of behavioral economic policy, 483
and econophysicists, 463n
in evolutionary economics, 463n
evolution over time, 458–459
in heuristic models
behavioral, 467–469
traditional, 464–466
importance of, 460
in Landsburg model, 464
in neuroeconomics, 463
tested in experimental economics, 462
traditional, 459
in traditional models, 462–463
Building codes, 211
Burden of taxation, 144; see also Tax 
incidence
on consumer and producer surplus,  
144–146
and government goals, 146
Burns, Robert, 48
Business, 56
consumer sovereignty, 57–58
distribution by, 57
economic decisions, 56–57
entrepreneurship, 57
and finance, 59
forms of
corporations, 58–59
partnerships, 58–59
sole proprietorships, 58–59
home-based, 57
laws regulating, 62
nefarious practices, 325
number started annually, 57
opposed to unions, 368, 369
production by, 57
and profit, 57
as sector of economy, 55
service economy, 57
views on competition, 64
Butterfly effect models, 474
Buy American campaigns, 211
Buy.com, 455
Buyers, price takers, 265
C
Camerer, Colin, 374, 463
Campaign finance reform proposal, 444
Canada
U.S. trade with, 205
Capital
as factor of production, 352
Behavioral economists, 15, 459
on deviations from rationality, 408
on endowment effects, 462
on experimental economics, 462
on financial crises, 666
on mental accounting, 419
and neuroeconomics, 463
on reactions to price changes, 128
on social norms and production 
decisions, 252
use of evolutionary models, 462
view of economic policies, 156
Behavioral models
building blocks, 459–460
enlightened self-interest, 459
fairness in, 460
precommitment strategy, 461
predictable irrationality, 460–461
purposeful behavior, 459
reflection of observed behavior,  
463–464
for social policy, 503
testing difficulty, 462
versus traditional models, 460, 462–463
Behavior change, 512
Bembenek, Lanelle, 517
Benefit corporations, 58
Berra, Yogi, 436
Berry, Chuck, 23
Biased technological change, 29
Bigness, 320
Bilateral monopoly, 361
Billionaires, 391
Black households, median wealth, 394
Blatz Brewing Company, 324
Blaug, Mark, 372
Blockbuster, 279–280
Blue-collar workers, 189
Boat industry, effect of luxury tax, 107, 148
Boettke, Peter, 425
Bond market expectations, 710
Bonner, Raymond, 181
Boston Consulting Group, 377
Boston Red Sox, 471
Bounded rationality, 419
Bowles, Sam, 487
Brañas-Garza, Pablo, 442n
Branding, to create monopoly, 342
Bratsberg, Bernt, 388
Breaking even by monopoly, 291–292
BST growth hormone, 496
Buchanan, James, 514
Budget, and elasticity of demand, 130
Budget constraint, 410, 427
combined with indifference curve,  
429–430
graphing, 427
Bangladesh, 34
Banks
collusion among, 316
number of, 317
Barbie doll, 35
Bargaining power
of labor unions, 368–369
of workers, 333
Bar graph, 47
Barnett, A. H., 112
Barriers to entry, 266
in cartels, 314
contestable market model, 315–316
insignificant in monopolistic 
competition, 302
lacking in perfect competition, 266
licensing requirement, 108–109
for monopoly
government-created monopolies, 298
natural ability, 296
natural monopoly, 296–298
monopoly and government policy,  
298–299
reason for monopolies, 285
types of, 266
Bastiat, Frédéric, 224
B-corporations, 58
Beautiful Mind, 432
Becker, Gary, 93, 459, 463
Beef import ban, European Union, 211, 212
Behavior, taxation to change, 146
Behavioral economic policy, 483
building blocks, 483
and choice architecture, 488–492
concerns about
complications, 495–497
government as decision maker, 496
government failure, 496–497
libertarian paternalism criterion, 495
and economic engineering, 483–484
economists as design engineers, 484–486
leading economists, 488
mechanism design, 486–487
policy frames, 494–495
and policy implications of traditional 
economics, 487–488
problem of implementing nudges,  
492–495
and push policy, 493
Behavioral economics
versus consumer sovereignty, 497
definition, 421
and informal game theory
Nash equilibrium, 441–442
real-world applications, 443–445
two-thirds game, 442
and traditional model, 447–448

	
■ Index ■	
IND-3
distribution and productive efficiency,  
28–30
dividing up gains from trade, 186–187
from division of labor, 31
economists vs. laypeople, 188–190
effect of law of one price, 37
and efficiency, 28
and exchange rate adjustments, 197
and exchange rates, 35–37
gains from trade, 184–186
and globalization, 34–36
inherent, 192
from labor costs, 34
law of one price, 37
and opposition to trade restrictions, 203
pressure to find, 34
and resource curse, 197–198
Ricardo on, 796n
timing benefits of trade and  
globalization, 37
trade, 30–34
transferable, 192
of United States, 36
concerns about future, 192
equalizing balance of trade, 193–194
gain and loss of sources, 193
law of one price, 192–193
sources, 190–191
and value of currency, 197
Compensation, in aggregate income, 552
Competition
dimensions in monopolistic 
competition, 300
effect of government interference, 346
eliminated by Internet, 268
in Europe, 344
fought by firms, 341
and gains from trade, 187
during Great Depression, 337
increased by globalization, 34–35
from international trade, 217–218
as limit on lazy monopolists
restructuring threat, 336
takeover threat, 336
as market structure, 331
for Microsoft, 325
and natural monopoly, 339–341
deregulation, 340–341
regulation, 340
opposed to self-interest, 337
and Pareto optimality, 163
as perfectly competitive market  
structure, 265
as process, 265, 331
role of government in, 64
in winner-take-all markets, 342
workable vs. perfect, 163
Chiquita bananas, 342
Chocolate futures, 475–476
Choice architecture, 488
framing choices, 490
nudges
advantageous default option, 491
common use of, 489
complicated choices, 490–491
costs and benefits separated in 
time, 490
information and encouragement, 
491–492
infrequent choices, 491
problems of implementing nudges
government and private firms,  
492–493
push policy, 493
shove policy, 495
Choices, 29
complicated, 490–491
costs and benefits separated by  
time, 490
framing, 490
infrequent, 491
Churchill, Winston, 12
Clark, J. M., 243
Class system, 393
Clayton Antitrust Act, 322
Closed shop, 368
Cloud computing, 325–326
Coase, Ronald, 226
Coefficient of determination, 470
Coercion, 5
Colbert, John Baptiste, 142
Collective bargaining, 367–368
by United Auto Workers, 379
College costs, third-party-payer  
market, 111
Collusion
difficult in monopolistic  
competition, 313
easier in oligopoly, 313
explicit, 314
formal, 314
implicit, 314
informal, 315
in Japan, 317
Columbus, Christopher, 73
Communism, 495
Communist Party, 76
Company town, 361
Comparable worth laws, 364
Comparative advantage, 27, 184
argument for free trade, 216
balance of trade assumption, 188
convergence hypothesis, 192
distributional effects of trade, 190
Capital flows, 56
and balance of trade, 193
Capitalism, 53
early stages of, 73–74
economic safety net, 75
failure of revolution against, 74–75
Industrial Revolution, 74
and lives of the poor, 60
Marxian analysis, 74
need for coordination, 73
out of favor as a term, 55
in today’s Western societies, 75
transition to welfare capitalism, 74–75
Card, David, 13, 373
Cargolux, 325
Car insurance, 465–466
Carlyle, Thomas, 77, 88, 457, 516
Carnegie, Andrew, 184
Cartel, 313
Cartel model of oligopoly, 313
dominant-firm model, 314
and estimates of industry structure, 320
fringe firms, 314
implicit collusion on prices, 314
production requirements, 313
sticky prices, 314–315
and technological change, 314
Cash return, 467
Centers for Disease Control, 465
Central America, U.S. trade with, 205
Central economic planning, 76
CEO compensation, 273
Japan vs. United States, 334
reasons for size of, 334
selected companies, 333
Chaloupka, Farid J., 519
Chamberlin, Edward, 301
Chapman, Stephen, 143
Charts, models based on, 471–472
Chavez, Hugo, 54
Cheap talk, 436
Cheating, in duopoly, 453–455
Chicago approach to economics, 463
Child labor laws, 75, 367
Children, supply and demand for, 93
China
abundant labor supply, 244
challenge to U.S. in technology, 36
cost advantage, 193
illegal copying of software, 214
loss of comparative advantage, 193
outsourcing to, 193, 206
production in, 35
socialism in, 76
statistics on, 65
versus U.S. in wages, 188
Chinese yuan; see Yuan

IND-4	
■ Index ■
technological change, 253–254
unmeasured costs
economic vs. accounting 
depreciation, 255–256
opportunity cost, 255
Cost/benefit approach, 505
of regulation, 504–509
comparison of dimensions, 507
in context, 508–509
definition, 505
in perspective, 507
problem of other things  
changing, 508
value of life, 505–507
self-interest assumption, 508
Cost curve graphs
average cost curve, 234
downward-sloping average fixed cost  
curve, 234
marginal cost and average cost curves,  
236–237
marginal cost curve, 234
marginal productivity and marginal cost 
curves, 235–236
per-unit cost curve, 233
per-unit output cost curve, 233
total cost curve, 233–234
U-shaped average cost curve, 234–235
Cost minimization condition, 379
Costs of production
average costs, 231–232
changes in, 256
cost curve graphs, 233–237
decision maker’s income in, 273
equations, 240
fixed costs, 230, 231
implicit costs, 226–227
isocost/isoquant analysis, 260–263
marginal cost, 232–233
related to productivity, 235
review of, 238
total cost, 231
unmeasured
economic vs. accounting  
depreciation, 256
opportunity cost, 255–256
variable costs, 230–231
Cotton production, 247
Cournot, August, 436n
Cowen, Tyler, 23
Craft, Erik, 139
Craft guilds, 73
Creditor nations, 206–208
Crime
drug dealers, 353–354
poverty as incentive for, 387
Coolidge, Calvin, 56, 142, 159
Cooperative games, 437
Coordinate system, 42
Coordination, 3–4
in early capitalism, 73
need for, 73
by price mechanism, 77–78
Coordination mechanisms, 484
and shadow prices, 485–486
Coordination problems, 24
Corporate takeover, 336
Corporations, 58, 225
advantages and disadvantages, 59
control of, 333
and economic growth, 602
flexible-purpose, 58
for-benefit, 251
global, 66
L3C, 58
percent of business firms, 58
production decisions, 60
responsiveness to stockholders, 59
Cost(s)
to consumer of saving jobs by trade 
restrictions, 213
of decision making, 418–419
of free trade, 215
of global warming, 177
of guaranteed-jobs program, 730
lack of incentive to hold down, 273
of lazy monopolists, 335, 336
of poverty and social mobility, 387–389
relevant to firms, 271
relevant to shutdown decision, 278
to society of relaxing trade  
restrictions, 213
subjectivity and ambiguity of, 507
of taxation, 145, 146
Cost accounting, criticism of, 256
Cost analysis; see also Costs of 
production
automobile industry, 245
economically efficient level of  
production, 246
economically efficient methods, 244
economies of scope, 251–252
indivisible setup costs, 245
isocost/isoquant analysis, 260–263
land prices, 244
learning by doing, 252–253
monitoring costs, 247
multiple production decisions, 254–255
shape of long-run cost curve, 244–250
standard model as framework, 256
supply decisions, 250–251
technical efficiency, 244
Competitive firm
demand for labor in, 377–379
marginal revenue product, 377–378
Competitive forces
effect on monopoly 
breakdown, 338–339
reverse engineering, 339
versus monopolistic forces, 337–341
Competitive markets
conditions for, 338
movement away from, 338
rarity of, 338
Competitiveness
of Asian economies, 206
Complements, 135, 136
Computational technology, 254
Computer simulations, 475
Concentration ratio, 319
Conglomerate firms, 320
Conspicuous consumption, 420, 494
Constant-cost industry, 278
Constant returns to scale, 248
Consumer Protection Safety  
Commission, 173
Consumers
costs of tariffs, 108
Consumer sovereignty, 57, 60
and global corporations, 66
and medical licensure, 174
and rationality problems, 511
rejected by behavioral economics, 497
Consumer surplus, 142
distribution of, 509–510
effect of price controls, 150–151
effect of rent-seeking activities, 151–156
effect of taxation, 144–146
from monopoly, 292–293
from perfect competition, 292–293
and price-discriminating  
monopolist, 294
and sin taxes, 516
Consumption
diminishing marginal utility, 410
examples of utility maximization,  
413–414
and marginal utility, 408–410
and total utility, 408–410
utility-maximizing rule, 412–413
Consumption wars, 494
Contestable market model, 315
barriers to entry, 316
entry and exit conditions, 315–316
and estimates of industry structure, 
320–321
Controlled experiment, 438
versus natural experiments, 472

	
■ Index ■	
IND-5
Demand table, demand curve in, 81–82
Demerit goods or activities, 65
Democracy, in workplace, 365
Demographics
and income distribution, 384
Denmark
flat tax, 146
Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, 401
Department of Justice, 320
merger opposed by, 324
Microsoft case, 324–326
Depreciation, 256
economic vs. accounting, 256
Deregulation of natural monopolies,  
340–341
Derived demand, 356
for labor, 375–380
factors affecting firm’s decisions,  
378–380
factors influencing elasticity, 357
hiring decision of firms, 375–377
labor as factor of production, 357
shift factors, 358–360
Derived demand curve for  
labor, 375
Developing countries
better off with trade, 215
class structure, 393–394
perspective on globalization, 36
wages in, 356
Dhaval, Dave, 139
Diamond class structure, 393
Diminishing absolute productivity, 229
Diminishing marginal productivity
and addition of variable inputs, 234
diseconomies of scale, 246–248
inapplicable in long run, 244
law of, 229–230
Diminishing marginal utility, 410
Direct regulation, 165–166
to deal with externalities, 165–166
Direct relationship, 44
Discrimination in labor market
direct demand-side
based on group characteristics, 366
based on individual characteristics,  
365–366
based on irrelevant characteristics, 366
institutional, 366–367
pay gap for women,364
Diseconomies of scale, 246
importance in production  
decisions, 248
monitoring costs, 247
and team spirit, 247
decreased by lower consumption, 819
elastic, 123
inelastic, 123
law of, 78
market response to increase in,  
277–278
shift factors
economists’ view of, 81
income, 80
prices of other goods, 80–81
taste and expectations, 80
taxes and subsidies, 81
shifts in, 79–80
substitution factors
degree of luxury, 130
market definition, 130
proportion of one’s budget, 130
time period, 130
unit elastic, 126–127
Demand curve, 78
of cartels, 314
change in elasticity along, 126–128
in demand table, 81–82
derived from indifference curve,  
430–431
effects of advertising, 301
individual, 82–83
kinked, 315
marginal private benefit, 165
market, 82–83
in monopolistic competition, 302
of monopoly, 288
movement along, 79–80
in perfect competition, 163, 266
for private goods, 170–171
for public goods, 170–171
summary on, 84
and surplus, 143–144
total revenue along, 132–133
Demand for labor
as derived demand, 357
factors influencing
changes in factors of  
production, 379
changes in firm’s demand, 377
structure of the firm, 377–379
factors influencing elasticity
demand for firm’s goods, 357
importance in production  
process, 357
marginal productivity, 357
possibility of substitution, 357
and law of demand, 356
and self-employment, 356
shift factors, 357–360
wage rates and quantity demanded, 356
Cross-price elasticity of demand,  
134–135
calculating, 135
and complements, 135
and substitutes, 135
Cuba, 216
Cultural trendsetter, 191
Currency appreciation, 196
Currency depreciation, 196
Currency stabilization, 766
Customs duties, 208; see also Tariffs
D
Daily Tar Heel, 147
Darrow, Charles, 297
Dasani, 342
Data, real-world, 46–49
Data mining models, 471
Dave, Dhaval, 519
David, Paul, 346
Deadweight loss, 145
from monopoly
normal monopolist, 292–293
price-discriminating monopolist, 
293–294
from price controls, 296
of sin taxes, 511
Death penalty, 472
Debtor nations, 207–208
Decision making; see also Models
alternative choices, 410–411
behavioral economists on, 419
and budget constraint, 410
choice architecture, 488–492
effect of substitution factors,  
130–131
and endowment effects, 446
follow-the-leader, 419
framing effects, 446–447
nonstrategic, 312
simultaneous decisions, 412
strategic, 312–313
strategic thinking, 432–433
stupid, 431
in trust game, 446
using bounded rationality, 418–419
Decisions, contextual nature of, 29
Decision trees, 29
Declaration of Independence, 395
Decreasing-cost industry, 278–279
Deductive approach, 459
Demand, 79
changes in, for firms,377
characteristics of, 77–78
coordinated by price mechanism, 77–78

IND-6	
■ Index ■
political context, 514–515
relevance of models, 478–479
rent-seeking activities, 151–156
strategic trade policies, 214
and tax incidence
sales taxes, 149–150
Social Security taxes, 148–149
trade adjustment assistance  
programs, 213
Economic principle, 13
Economic profit, 226–227
versus accounting profit, 255
Economic reasoning
characteristics, 6–7
economic decision rule, 8
in Freakonomics, 6
marginal benefits, 7
marginal costs, 7
no-free-lunch theory, 7
opportunity cost, 9–11
reasonableness vs. passion, 8–9
Economics, 4
art of, 17–18
basic assumptions vs. behavioral 
economics, 445–446
Chicago approach, 463
as dismal science, 38, 88
engineering approach to, 485
experimental, 13, 439, 447
historical perspective, 10
impossibility of controlled  
experiments, 472
macroeconomics, 5–6
Marshallian, 10
mathematical, 121
microeconomics, 5
normative, 17
positive, 17
role of game theory in, 433
Economic stability, government role, 64
Economic systems
evolution and change in, 55
history of
capitalism, 73–74
feudalism, 71–72
from feudalism to socialism, 75–76
mercantilism, 72–73
need for coordination, 73–74
welfare capitalism, 74–75
market economy in U.S., 51
Marx on, 74
operation of markets, 52
and private property rights, 52
Economic theory
versus economic institutions, 15
and economic models, 13
from specialization, 32
over two millennia, 32
Economic incentives, 12
Economic insights
economic institutions, 15
economic models, 13
economic principles, 13
experimental economics, 13
invisible hand theory, 14–15
natural experiments, 14
precepts, 14
theory and stories, 15
Economic institutions
country differences, 15
versus economic theory, 15
global, 66–67
in market economy
businesses, 55–59
government, 61–66
households, 59–60
operation of policies within, 16
types of, 15
Economic modeling; see also Models
approach, 457
and game theory, 433
Economic Naturalist (Frank), 467–468
Economic policies, 16; see also 
Behavioral economic policy; 
Fiscal policy; Macroeconomic 
policy; Monetary policy
for agriculture, 337
based on normative economics, 17
behavioral economists on, 156
behavioral vs. traditional frames,  
494–495
conventional wisdom of economists, 515
to create total surplus, 510
to deal with externalities
direct regulation, 165–166
incentive policies, 166–168
optimal policy,168–169
voluntary reductions, 168
effect of political forces, 19
effect of social forces, 19
effects of, 16
and failure of market outcomes,  
509–514
and global warming, 177
goals related to income  
redistribution, 397
and government failure, 514–515
government’s role, 63–65
invisible hand framework, 162
laws regulating business, 62
objective analysis, 17–19
perfect competition benchmark, 163
Dismal science, 38, 88Distribution, 57
failure of market outcome, 509–511
and productive efficiency, 28–30
real-world examples, 510–511
of total surplus, 509–510
unequal, of gains from trade, 212–213
Distributional effects of trade,  
189–190
Division of labor, 32
and globalization, 34–35
Dixit, Avinash, 443–444
Doha Development Round, 219
Dominant-firm model of cartels, 314
Dominant strategy, 436, 439
and Nash equilibrium, 436–437
in trust game, 446
Donohue, John, 472
Downward-sloping, 44
Dr. Seuss, 237
Dresher, Melvin, 451
Drucker, Peter F., 224
Drug dealers, 353–354
Dubner, Stephen J., 457
Dumping, 219
Dunkin’ Donuts, 232
Duopoly, 453
cheating in, 453–455
cooperative equilibrium, 453–454
payoff matrix, 454–455
Dynamic efficiency, 343
E
eBay, 268
Econometrics, 469
Economically efficient, 244
Economically efficient point of  
production, 263
Economic decision rule, 8
in work, 354
Economic depreciation, unmeasured cost,  
255–256
Economic efficiency, 497, 509
and goals of society, 510
Economic engineering, 483
coordination mechanisms, 484
shadow price analysis, 484
Economic engineers, 483–484
Economic forces, 11, 93
law of one price, 192–193
political and legal influences, 11–12
and social forces, 11
Economic growth, 478; see also Long-
term economic growth
government role, 64
from international trade, 190

	
■ Index ■	
IND-7
summary of, 136
in supply of labor, 355–356
and tax incidence, 146–148
and total revenue and demand, 131–133
Elastic labor supply, 355–356
Election futures market, 486
Electrical industry deregulation, 340–341
Elizabeth, Queen, 60
Embargo, 210–211
on Cuba, Iran, and Libya, 211
on Iraq in 2001, 211
Emotional states, 156
Empirical evidence, interpretation of, 503
Empirical models, 469–470
and empirically tested formal models,  
475–476
in modern economics, 469–472
Empirical tests of formal models,  
475–476
Employees
bases of hiring decisions, 375–379
hired via Internet, 226
Employment
effects of resource curse on, 198
Employment Act of 1946, 64
Endowment effects, 446, 462
in evolutionary models, 462
Endpoint problem, 124–125
Engineering models, 459
English, international language of 
business, 191
Enlightened self-interest, 459, 467
Enlightenment, 10
Enron Corporation, 333
Entrepreneurs, 251, 398
social entrepreneurship, 251
supply decisions, 250–251
Entrepreneurship, 57, 357
Entry
contestable market model, 315–316
ease of, in monopolistic  
competition, 301
limited by licensing, 108
as limit on cartelization, 316
long-run profits or losses, 275
Envelope relationship, 248–250
Environmentalists, elimination of  
pollution, 169
Epstein, Richard, 373
Equality
and fairness, 398
of opportunity, 396–397
Equations
costs of production, 240
determination of equilibrium, 116–118
and graphs, 46
from pro-market advocates to 
engineers, 497
public choice, 153
reasons for differing views on social 
policy, 502
rejection of infant industry  
argument, 218
on unmeasured costs, 255
use of computer simulation, 475
and value judgments of policy makers,  
502–503
varying views on income  
redistribution, 395
view of the world, 4
views on antitrust, 326
views on monopoly, 346
views on regulation, 339, 340
Economy
central problems of, 5
coordination in, 5
coordination problems, 24
dealing with scarcity, 5
globalized, 34–36
laissez-faire, 32
world, 65
Econophysicists, 463n
Edible oils market, 100, 101
Education
and labor market, 369–370
as positive externality, 167
Efficiency, 14, 28
and technological change, 29
Efficiency wages, 364
Efficient, 166
Effluent fees, 167
Ehrlich, Isaac, 472
Einstein, Albert, 15, 304, 503
Elastic, 123, 128
Elastic demand, 123
Elasticity/Elasticities, 122
as absolute value of a number, 123
calculating, 124–125
and changes in behavior, 512
cross-price elasticity of demand,  
134–135
and government intervention,  
151–156
graph, 125
income elasticity of demand, 133–134
independent of units, 123–124
measured empirically, 134
as measure of percentages, 123–124
versus slope, 126
and substitution factors, 128–131
demand, 129–130
effects on decision making, 130–131
economic principle, 13
efficiency, 14
and experiments, 13
invisible hand, 14–15
pricing mechanism, 14
simplifying assumptions, 14–15
and stories, 15
Economic thinking, Solow on, 433
Economies of scale, 215–216, 244–245
graph, 246
importance in production decisions, 248
indivisible setup costs, 246
infant industry argument, 216
at low levels of production, 245
minimum efficient level of  
production, 246
in power line industry, 341
in specialized production, 215–216
in T-shirt production, 247
Economies of scope, 251
in auto industry, 245
and globalization, 252
in production decisions, 251–252
Economists; see also Classical 
economists; Keynesian 
economists; Modern economists; 
Traditional economists
advice to policy makers, 501
agreement on social policy, 504
conventional policy wisdom, 515
cost/benefit analysis of regulation,  
504–509
in courtrooms, 506
differences on regulation, 505
disagreements on minimum wage, 105
distrust of government, 295
and economic policies, 18
evolutionary, 463n
on free trade, 19
on free trade associations, 219
versus laypeople on trade
distributional effects, 189–190
gains as stealth gains, 188
opportunity cost relative, 188
trade broader than manufacturing, 
188–189
on national security argument, 218
need for worldview, 503–504
opposition to steel tariff, 218
opposition to trade restrictions, 203
abuse of national security  
argument, 218
addictive nature of restrictions, 218
competition from trade, 217–218
increased output from trade, 217
on pollution problem, 169

IND-8	
■ Index ■
isocost/isoquant analysis, 260–263
labor, 357
land, 352
in long-run production decisions, 244
marginal rate of substitution, 260
Failure of market outcome, 509
consumer sovereignty and rationality, 511
distribution, 509–511
economists on, 515
and goals of society, 510
inalienable rights, 512–514
Fair Labor Standards Act, 105
Fairness, 52
in behavioral models, 460
in game theory, 446
and income redistribution, 395–397
equality of opportunity, 397
equally issue, 396–397
philosophical debates about, 396
of income redistribution, 398–399
in labor market, 361–363
comparable worth laws, 363
efficiency wages, 362–363
living wage laws, 363
Fallacy of composition, 94
Farm Board, 153
Farm lobby, 153
Farm subsidies, 63
Farrow, Mia, 104, 105
Fast pattern completer, 469
Federal government
income and expenditures, 61–62
income tax, 399–400
Federal Trade Commission, 173
Fehr, Ernst, 460, 463
Ferdinand, King of Spain, 73
Feudalism
characteristics of, 71–72
transition to socialism, 75–76
Finance, salary increases in, 189–190
Financial assets, 59
Financial markets, 59
Financial sector salary increases in, 189–190
Fines for price-fixing, 325
Fine-tuning, 589
Firms, 225
best, to work for, 378
consideration of workers’ welfare, 378
cost-minimization condition, 379
cost of producing image, 231
effects of globalization, 34
factors affecting demand for labor
changes in demand, 377
changes in factors of production,  
377–379
structure of the firm, 377–379
demand for assets and value of 
money, 186
resource curse, 197–198
currency appreciation, 196
currency depreciation, 196
determination of, 194–196
European Union, 65
and trade, 196–197
United States, 65
Excise tax, 107, 146
on boats, 107
supply and demand analysis, 107–108
Excludability, 171–172
Exit
contestable market model, 315–316
long-run profits or losses, 275
Experimental economics, 13, 447
and game theory, 439
to test building blocks, 462
Explicit collusion, 314
Exporters, largest, from U.S., 220
Exports
China, 65
European Union, 65
United States, 65
of U.S. by region, 205
Express Scripts, 333
Externalities, 63, 162–165, 163
macroeconomic, 64
methods of dealing with
direct regulation, 165–166
market incentive policies, 167–168
optimal policy, 168–169
tax incentive policies, 166–167
voluntary reductions, 168
negative, 63, 64, 163–164
polluting industries, 513
positive, 63–64, 163, 165
taxation of, 167
F
Fable of the Bees (Mandeville), 465
Facebook, 57
initial public offering, 342
network externalities from, 345
Factor market, 55
Factor prices
holding down costs, 273
increase or decline in, 278
Factors of production, 84
capital, 352
controlled by individuals, 224
demand for labor and changes in, 379
holding down costs, 273
increase in prices of, 278
Equilibrium, 89
consumer and producer surplus  
with, 143
determination of
law of demand, 116
law of supply, 116
movements along demand or supply 
curves, 116–117
shifts of demand or supply  
schedules, 117
effect of social and political forces,  
91–92
in labor market, 358
of lazy monopolists, 335, 336
limitations of, 90–91
by maximizing utility, 413
perfect competition, 163
self-confirming, 474
when markets not in
excess demand, 89
excess supply, 89
price adjustments, 89–90
Equilibrium price, 89
in competitive markets, 310
and consumer surplus, 142–143
effect of excise tax, 107
effect of price ceilings, 150–151
effect of price floors, 151
effect of supply shift on, 137
in monopoly, 310–311
price ceilings below, 103
and producer surplus, 142–143
Equilibrium quantity, 89
in competitive markets, 310
in monopoly, 310–311
Europe
income mobility, 388
postwar trade deficits, 193
European Union, 67
agricultural policy, 515
ban on beef imports, 212 
free trade association, 219
restrictions on food imports, 213
statistics on, 65
U.S. trade with, 205
Evolutionary economists, 463n
Evolutionary models, 462
Excess demand, 89
effect on prices, 93
Excess supply, 11, 89
Exchange rates, 194
on April, 2016, 194
China, 65
and comparative advantage,  
36–37
complications in

	
■ Index ■	
IND-9
and oligopoly, 452–455
duopoly and payoff matrix,  
454–455
duopoly and prisoner’s dilemma, 
453–454
low-price guarantees, 455
payoff matrix, 435
prisoner’s dilemma, 434–436
screening questions, 434
segregation game, 443
strategies of players
backward induction, 438–439
dominant strategy, 439
and experimental economics, 439
mixed strategy, 439–440
optimal rollback strategy, 439
with rule changes, 440
two-thirds game, 440–441
ultimatum game, 440
to study strategic interaction
controlled experiment, 438
cooperative games, 437
rationality assumptions, 438
sequential games, 437–438
simultaneous move games, 438
specific games, 438
as tool of modern economics, 433
trust game, 446
to understand human interaction, 433
Game theory framework, 433–434
Game theory model, 273, 474
Gas price increases, 100, 101
Gates, Bill, 144, 307, 391
General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade, 209, 219
General assistance, 400
General Motors, 224, 278
General rule of political economy, 153
George, Henry, 297
Gillette Company, 324
Gini coefficient
definition, 388
national comparisons, 388
Given tastes, 419
Gladden, Washington, 97, 180
Global corporations, 66
Global income equality, 190
Global institutions
coordination issues, 66–67
global corporations, 66
Group of Eight, 67
international institutions, 67
regional, 67
United Nations, 66, 67
World Bank, 67
World Court, 67
Frank, Robert, 342, 467–468, 469, 480, 
481, 494–495, 496
Freakonomics (Levitt & Dubner),  
6, 457
Freed, Alan, 22–23
Freedomnomics (Lott), 484
Free goods, 128
Freelancers, 226
Free markets, 466
Free rider problem, 168
for public goods, 171
Free trade
comparative advantage argument  
for, 216
costs of, 215
increase of output from, 217
institutions supporting, 218–220
free trade associations, 219
most-favored nation status, 220
trading zones, 219–220
World Trade Organization, 219
losses exaggerated, 213
trade adjustment assistance to  
facilitate, 213
Free trade associations, 219
Friedman, Milton, 17n, 174–175
Fringe firms, 314
Fullerton, Don, 179
G
Gabaix, Xavier, 334
Gains from trade
determinants, 187
diverted to traders, 189
dividing up, 186–187
economists vs. laypeople, 188–190
general rule on, 187
haggling by companies over,  
213–214
permanence of, 212
as stealth gains, 188
strategic bargaining over, 214
two-country example, 32–34
unequal internal distribution, 212–213
U.S. vs. Saudi Arabia, 184–186
and value-added chain, 816–817
Gallo, Joseph, 426
Games of Strategy (Dixit & Skeath), 433
Game theory, 433
challenge to economic assumptions, 
445–448
dominant strategy, 436
and economic modeling, 433
Nash equilibrium, 436
noncooperative games, 436
focal point phenomenon, 359
long-run production decisions, 244
modeling as tool for, 485
protecting monopolies, 341–342
real-world types, 226
role in production
economic profit, 226–227
location options, 225
profit maximization, 225–226
transaction costs, 226
short- vs. long-run options, 243
virtual, 225
First-mover advantage, 345
Fixed costs, 230, 231
average, 231–232
equation, 238
as sunk costs, 274
Flat tax, in Denmark, 146
Flexible-purpose corporations, 58
Flood, Merrill, 451
Flower pot law, 230
Flow of goods, 56
Focal point equilibria, 419
Focal point phenomenon, 359
Fogel, Robert, 134
Follow-the-leader decision making, 419
Food and Drug Administration, 172
problems with, 173
Food budget and poverty line, 386–387
Food stamps, 401
For-benefit corporations, 251
Foreign exchange market, 194
Formal collusion, 313
Formal models
agent-based computational, 475
application, 476–478
butterfly effect models, 474
chocolate futures example, 478
econometrics, 469
empirically tested, 475–476
game theory models, 474–475
importance of empirical work,  
469–472
regression models, 470–471
relevance to policy, 478–479
role of, 472
simple data models, 471–472
simplicity-completeness trade-off,  
473–474
types, 473
Four-firm concentration ratio, 319, 320
Fourth sector of economy, 251
Framing effects, 446–447
France
foreign aid by, 841
government debt, 695

IND-10	
■ Index ■
state and local, 61
during unemployment, 64
in United States, 75
Grampp, William, 422
Graphish, 42
Graphs, 42
avoiding mistakes, 48
bar graph, 47
constructing, 42–43
coordinate systems, 42
of cost curves, 233–234
demand curve, 78
demand table, 82
for determining profit, 272
direct relationship, 44
of elasticities, 125
equations and, 46
importance of scales, 42
individual and market supply  
curves, 83
interpolation assumption, 44
inverse relationship, 44
isocost/isoquant, 260
linear curve, 44
line graphs, 47
maximum and minimum points, 45
models based on, 471–472
nonlinear curves, 44
pie chart, 47
to present real-world data, 46–49
production function, 229
production table, 229
shifts in demand vs. change in quantity 
demanded, 80
shifts in supply and demand, 92
shifts in supply vs. movement along 
supply curve, 86
slope, 44–45
supply and demand interactions,  
90, 91
supply curve, 85
supply table, 88
uses in economic modeling,  
43–44
Gray market, 12n
Great Depression, 55
collapse of trade, 205–206, 211
competition during, 337
wages and prices in, 337
Gross domestic product
trade’s percentage of, 203
Gross domestic product per capita
China, 65
European Union, 65
United States, 65
Group of Eight, 67
correct for externalities, 63–64
early capitalism, 73
effective competition, 63
ensuring stability and growth, 64
increasing, 55
under mercantilism, 72–73
provision of public goods, 64
as referee, 62
regulating household-business  
interaction, 62
regulation of capitalism, 75
stable institutional framework, 63
as sector of economy, 55–56
solar energy subsidies, 377
stability in United States, 191
trade adjustment assistance, 213
Government-created monopoly, 
normative arguments against, 298
Government employee unions, 369
Government failure, 66, 162; see also 
Government intervention
economists on, 515
and nudge policy, 496–497
political decisions, 514–515
public choice economists on, 514
reasons for
bureaucracy, 176
complexity, 176
lack of incentive, 176–177
lack of information, 176–177
leading to more intervention, 176–177
short-run political pressures, 515
Government intervention, 103–109; see 
also Government failure
excise taxes and tariffs, 107–108
ongoing debate about, 162
price ceilings, 103–105, 150–151
price controls vs. taxation, 151
price floors, 105–107, 151
quantity restrictions, 108–109
rent-seeking activities, 151–156
sin taxes, 511
versus traditional economics, 466
Government policy; see also Economic 
policies; Social policy
and monopoly, 298–299
use of Herfindahl index, 320
Government spending (expenditures), 
545
component of GDP, 545
Democrats vs. Republicans, 715
federal government, 62
for income redistribution
Medicare, 400
public assistance programs, 400
Social Security, 400
Globalization, 34
and antiglobalization forces, 215
and comparative advantage, 34–36
consumer benefits from, 823
and developing countries, 36
distributional effects
financial sector in U.S., 189–190
income of intellectual property 
holders, 189
manufacturing wages in U.S., 190
nontradable services, 190
professional service jobs, 189–190
effect on production in U.S., 35–36
effects on firms, 34
incentive for new technologies, 343
increase in competition from, 34–35
lowest-cost producers, 35
timing benefits of trade, 37
Global warming, 18
and economic policies, 177
Goals of real-world firms, 332
Goldsman, Akiva, 432
Goldsmith, James, 348
Goldwyn, Samuel, 436
Goodness of fit variables, 470
Goods; see also Products
commonly owned, 167
degree of publicness or privateness, 171
inferior, 80, 135
luxuries, 134–135
necessities, 135
normal, 80, 134
Goods market, 55
Goodwill, 332
Google, Inc., 57, 342, 345, 485
Goolsbee, Austan, 437
Gore-Tex, 343
Government
as decision maker, 496
distrusted by economists, 295
federal system, 61
functions in market economy, 56
goals in taxation, 146
and international institutions, 67
modeling as tool for, 485
nudge vs. push policy, 493
number of employees, 61
percent of consumption, 61
problem of global corporations, 66
provision of public goods, 169–172
regulatory agencies, 173–174
rent-seeking activities, 151–156
role in economy
as actor, 61
adjust undesirable market results, 
64–65

	
■ Index ■	
IND-11
defining poverty, 386–389
and demographics, 385
distribution of wealth, 391–392
effect of financial crisis of 2008, 383
effect of technology, 385
effects of monopoly, 298
and fairness, 395–397
debate about, 395
equality of opportunity, 396–397
inequality issue, 396
fights over, 363
general dissatisfaction with, 389
intellectual property holders, 189–190
international dimensions of inequality,  
389–390
Lorenz curve of U.S. 1929, 1970, and 
2010, 384–385
as market failure, 509
measures of
Gini coefficient, 388
Lorenz curve, 383–384
median income, 392
occupational categories, 392
opposing forces in fight for, 394
and property rights, 402
quintiles of income in U.S., 383–384
share distribution, 383
socioeconomic dimensions of 
inequality, 392–395
socioeconomic distribution, 383
total income of selected countries, 390
in United States over time, 384–386
variations in income, 382
Income effect, 416
and supply of labor, 354
Income elasticity of demand, 133, 136
calculating, 135
and inferior goods, 134
and luxuries, 133–134
and necessities, 134
and normal goods, 133
short-run vs. long-run, 134
Income inequality
Europe vs. United States, 388
Gini coefficient, 388
global, 192
international dimensions
income distribution across  
countries, 389
income distribution among  
countries, 390
total income of selected countries, 390
quintiles of U.S. income, 384
socioeconomic dimensions, 392–393
and tax system, 389
in U.S. in 1928, 1970, and 2010, 385
Imperfect competition in labor markets
bilateral monopoly, 362
monopsony, 361
union monopoly power, 361
Imperfect information; see Informational 
problems
Implicit collusion, 314
in auto industry, 316
by banks, 316
examples, 314
legality of, 314
price leaders, 314
and sticky prices, 314
Implicit costs, 226
Implicit revenue, 226–227
Import/export contingent, 187
Imports
China, 65
European Union, 65
United States, 65
of U.S. by region, 205
Inalienable rights
examples, 513–514
need to prioritize, 512–513
Incentive compatibility problem, 485
Incentive-compatible contract, 333
Incentive effect, 352
determination of, 352
and marginal tax rate, 355
and market supply of labor, 352–353
of taxation, 398
Incentive policies to deal with 
externalities
market incentives, 167–168
tax incentives, 166–167
Incentives to supply goods and services, 224
Income, 391
after-tax, 354
and consumer surplus, 144
of federal government, 61–62
nonwage, 363
and shift in demand, 80
of state and local governments, 61
traditional categories, 363
Income distribution, 382–406
according to class
blurred class distinctions, 393
importance of middle class, 393–394
tensions in society over, 394–395
upper and lower classes, 393
according to socioeconomic  
characteristics, 392
across countries, 389
among countries, 390
and business cycles, 385
changing views over time, 383
H
Hargreaves, James, 74
Hayek, Friedrich, 51
Health care, third-party-payer market, 
110–111
Hedge funds, 477–478
Heise, Paul, 160
Herfindahl index, 319
Hershey’s chocolate, 128
Heuristic models, 458
with behavioral building blocks
cash return example, 467
Velcro shoes example, 467–468
distrusted by scientists, 469
limits of, 468–469
with traditional building blocks
car insurance example, 465–466
safe sex example, 465
Hiring, by Internet, 226
Hiring decision
labor productivity, 375
marginal physical product, 375
marginal revenue product, 375
Hispanic households, median wealth, 394
Hitachi, 325
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 53
Home-based businesses, 57
Home Shopping Network, 291
Horowitz, John B., 406
Hours of work, 356
laws on, 75, 367
Households, 59
median income, 60
median wealth by race, 394
power of, 59–60
as sector of economy, 55–56
suppliers of labor, 60
Housing price bubble, 478–479
Housing programs, 401
Hulu, 123
Hurricane Irene, 100
Hurricane Katrina, 86
I
IBM, 224, 226
Illegal activities, and supply of labor,  
353–354
Illegal immigration, 356
Image, cost of producing, 232
Immigration
open borders policy, 356
and supply of labor, 356
Immigration laws, opposition to,  
355–356
Immigration policy, 191

IND-12	
■ Index ■
real-world applications
auction markets, 445
campaign reform proposal, 444
Survivor TV show, 443–444
Information
market in, 174
provided by price elasticity, 123
Informational problems
adverse selection problem, 172–173
moral hazard problem, 173
policies to deal with
licensure problem, 174–175
market for information, 174
regulatory agencies, 173–174
in real-world markets, 172
resolved by signaling and  
screening, 173
in used car buying, 172
Information and encouragement nudge, 
491–492
Information technology, transferable 
advantage, 193
Infrastructure, of United States, 191
Infrequent choices, 491
Inherent comparative advantage, 192
Initial public offering
to establish market position, 342
Innis, H. A., 501
Innovation
patents as incentive for, 344
as positive externality, 163
technological, 607, 608
Inputs
and diminishing marginal  
productivity, 234
isocost/isoquant analysis, 260–263
Institutions, 51
types of, 51
Insurance companies
adverse selection problem, 172–173
moral hazard problem, 173
Intellectual property holders, income, 
189–190
Intellectual property rights, 402
held in United States, 191
International competitiveness, and 
demand for labor
focal point phenomenon, 359
outsourcing, 360
social institutions, 359
trade restrictions, 359
transportation costs, 359
wage variations, 359
International Monetary Fund, 67
International politics, reason for trade 
restrictions, 216–217
Industrial Revolution, 74
Industry
constant-cost, 278–279
decreasing-cost, 278–279
increasing-cost, 278–279
market supply curve, 275–279
supply and demand analysis, 275–279
Industry classification
conglomerates, 320
empirical measures
concentration ratio, 319–320
Herfindahl index, 319–320
in North American Industry 
Classification System, 317–318
oligopoly models, 320–321
problems in, 317
Industry standards
examples, 345
Moore’s law, 344
network externalities, 345
single vs. multiple, 297
technological lock-in, 346
and winner-take-all industries, 345–346
Industry structure
concentration ratio, 319–320
conglomerates and bigness, 320
Herfindahl index, 319–320
oligopoly models and estimates of, 
320–321
Inefficiency, 28
and technological change, 29
Inefficient, 166
Inelastic, 123, 127
Inelastic demand, 123
and incentive to restrict supply, 153–154
and price increase, 136
Inelastic supply
and incentive to restrict prices, 154
of labor, 355–356
Infant industry argument, 216
dismissed by economists, 218
Inferior goods, 80, 134, 136
Inflation–unemployment trade-off; see  
Phillips curve
Informal collusion, 314
Informal game theory
and behavioral economics, 441–445
as behavioral game theory,  
442–443
Nash equilibrium, 441–442
segregation game, 443
two-thirds game, 442
endowment effects, 446
fairness, 446
framing effects, 446–447
rationality, 445–446
Income mobility, 388
Income redistribution, 64, 144
by inflation, 834
policies
expenditure programs, 400–401
side effects, 397
success of, 402–403
taxation, 399–400
politics and fairness, 398
Income tax
federal, 399
and work incentives, 354–355
Inconspicuous consumption, 494–495
Increasing-cost industry, 278–279
Increasing marginal productivity, 229
Indexed mutual funds, 448
India
challenge to U.S. in technology, 36
outsourcing to, 195, 206
Indifference curve, 428
combined with budget constraint,  
429–430
graphing, 428–429
and law of diminishing marginal rate of 
substitution, 428
and marginal rate of substitution, 428
Indifference curve analysis
budget constraint, 427
combining indifference curve and 
budget constraint, 429–430
deriving demand curve, 430–431
indifference curve, 428–429
law of diminishing marginal rate of 
substitution, 428
marginal rate of substitution, 428
Individual choice
example of utility maximization,  
413–414
extending principle of rational choice, 
414–415
rational choice theory, 407–412
real-world applications
costs of decision making, 418–419
supply and demand, 415–418
tastes, 419–420
utility maximization, 421–422
and tastes, 420
utility-maximizing rule, 412–413
Individual decisions, 14
Individual demand curve, 82–83
and elasticity, 132–133
Individual supply curve, 87–88
Indivisible setup cost, 245
in auto industry, 245
Inductive approach, 458–459
Industrialists, in early capitalism, 73

	
■ Index ■	
IND-13
Jobs, Steve, 331
Johnson, Lyndon B., 222
Judgment by performance, 321
reality of, 322–324
Standard Oil case, 322
Judgment by structure, 321
Alcoa case, 322
reality of, 322–324
United States Steel case ruling, 322
Juvenal, Bertrand de, 395
K
Kahneman, Daniel, 438, 446
Kaplan, Robert S., 256
Kaseman, David L., 112
Kay, James, 74
Ken doll, 35
Key money, 104, 105
Keynes, John Maynard, 17n, 122,  
503–504
Keynes, John Neville, 17n
Keynesian AS/AD model; see  
AS/AD model
Kia, 205
Kiam, Victor, 312
Kieboom, Aad, 483, 489
Kinked demand curve, 315
Kinnaman, Thomas C., 179
Kmart, 455
Knights of Labor, 368
Knutson, Brian, 446
Korenman, Sanders, 374
Kosovo, 187
Kroc, Ray, 331
Kruger, Alan, 14, 372
Kuhn, Harold, 474
L
Labor
derived demand for, 375–379
and entrepreneurship, 357
as factor of production, 357
households as suppliers of, 60
Marx’s view, 365
Laboratory experiments, 13
Labor costs
comparative advantage from, 34
decline in, 256
Labor force, 535
skilled in United States, 191
Labor force participation rate, 353
Labor laws
child labor, 75, 367
National Labor Relations Act, 368
Taft-Hartley Act, 368, 369
Internet, 36
as perfectly competitive market, 265
for tracking consumer information, 
293–294
Internet sales taxes, 149
Interpolation assumption, 44
Inventories
and accounting fraud, 59
Inverse relationship, 44
Invisible hand, 11, 73
framework for economic policy
government failures, 162
market failure, 162
in perfect competition, 265
Invisible hand theorem, 14–15
Iran, 217
Isabella, Queen of Spain, 73
Isocost/isoquant analysis
definition, 260
economically efficient point of 
production, 263
isocost line, 262–263
isoquant curve, 260–262
isoquant map, 261
marginal rate of substitution, 261
Isocost line, 262
Isoquant curve, 260
Isoquant map, 261
iTunes, 134
J
Japan
CEO compensation, 334
changes in auto industry, 245
collusion in, 316
land prices, 244
voluntary trade agreements, 210
Java, 325
Jefferson, Thomas, 307
Jenkins, Robert R., 517
Jevons, Stanley, 407
Jimenéz-Jimenéz, Francisca, 442n
Job creation from trade, 189
Job losses
in manufacturing, 369
in recession of 2009, 216
Jobs
and college degrees, 369–370
cost of saving, by trade restrictions, 213
effects of globalization in U.S., 189
increased in service sector, 189–190
in information technology  
transferable, 193
middle class, 394
outsourcing, 190
requiring special abilities, 370
International supply of labor, 356
International trade; see also Balance of 
trade; Trade restrictions
antiglobalization forces, 215
and comparative advantage, 30–34
benefits, 32–34
exchange rates, 36–37
law of one price, 37
markets, specialization and  
growth, 32
timing benefits of trade, 37
comparative advantage of U.S.
concerns about future, 192
equalizing balance of trade,  
193–194
gain and loss of sources of, 193
inherent or transferable 
advantages, 192
and law of one price, 192–193
sources of, 190–191
creditor and debtor nations, 206–208
and determinants of exchange rates, 
194–198
dividing up gains from trade,  
186–187
dumping, 219
economists’ view of, 184
effects of resource curse, 197–198
and exchange rates, 36–37
expanded by globalization, 814, 815
gains from trade, 184–186
and globalization, 34–36
historical perspective, 207
importance attached by nations to, 204
import/export contingent, 187
increase in value 1928–2012, 203
increasing but fluctuating, 203
institutions supporting free trade,  
218–220
laypeople vs. economists on,  
188–190
under mercantilism, 72–73
national comparisons, 203–204
with partially flexible rates, 776
principle of comparative advantage, 
184–187
restrictions opposed by economists, 
217–218
social and cultural dimensions, 207
strategic trade policies, 214
timing benefits of, 37
trade adjustment assistance  
programs, 213
trading companies, 189
transshipments, 218
of United States, 204–208

IND-14	
■ Index ■
Local taxes
income taxes, 399
property taxes, 400
sales taxes, 399
Long run
adjustments from short run to
increase in demand, 277–278
long-run market supply curve, 278–279
income elasticity in, 134
options for firms, 246
problem of price controls in, 155
production decisions in, 228
Long-run average total cost, and envelope 
relationship, 248–249
Long-run average total cost curve, 249
Long-run competitive equilibrium,  
275–277
Long-run cost curve
constant returns to scale, 248
diminishing marginal productivity 
inapplicable, 244
diseconomies of scale, 246–247
economies of scale, 244–246
envelope relationship, 248–249
importance of economies and 
diseconomies of scale, 248
indivisible setup costs, 245
minimum efficient level of  
production, 246
monitoring costs, 247
table and graph, 246
U shape, 248
Long-run decisions, 228, 243
importance of economies and 
diseconomies of scale, 248
isocost/isoquant analysis, 260–262
Long-run equilibrium
monopolistic competition, 303
perfect competition, 303
Long-run market supply curve, 278–279
Long-run profit, 332
Lorenz curve, 383–384
of U.S. income, 384
for U.S. in 1929, 1970, and 2010,  
384–386
of wealth distribution, 391
of world income, 390
Loss, by monopoly, 291–292
Lott, John, 484
Louis XIV, 142
Lower class, 393
Low price guarantees, 455
L3C corporations, 58
Luddite reasoning, 358
Luxuries, 133, 136
substitution factor, 130
Luxury fever, 494
Law of diminishing marginal 
productivity, 229–230
with addition of variable inputs, 230
inapplicable in long run, 244
Law of diminishing marginal rate of 
substitution, 428
Law of one price, 37
effect on comparative advantage, 192
Law of supply, 84
equations for, 116
and rational choice, 417–418
Lazy monopolists, 335
limited by competition
restructuring threat, 335–336
takeover threat, 336
and technological development, 347
and X-inefficiency, 335
Learning by doing, 215, 253
and comparative advantage, 215
infant industry argument, 216
related to technological change, 254
Swiss watches, 215
Legal influences, 12
Legal market activities, 352
Leisure, 352
changes over time, 353
versus work, 354–355
Lerner, Abba, 504
Levine, David, 258
Levitt, Steven D., 457, 517
Lewis, Michael, 471
LG Corporation, 325
Libertarian economists, on 
incomeredistribution, 394
Libertarian paternalistic criterion, 495
Libertarian paternalistic policy, 489
Licensing, 108–109
of doctors, 174–175
inadequacy of current laws on, 176
informational alternative,  
175–176
and surgery, 175
Limited liability, 58n
Lindt Chocolate, 128
Linear curve, 44
slope of, 44
Line graph, 47
Linux, 325
Living wage laws, 364
Living-wage movement, 107
Lloyd, Henry Demarest, 285
Lobbying, 151–152
and general rule of political  
economy, 153
Local government
income and expenditures, 61
number of employees, 61
Labor market, 351; see also Demand for 
labor; Supply of labor
derived demand, 356–360, 375–379
discrimination in
direct demand-side, 365–366
institutional, 366–367
education and earnings, 369–370
equilibrium, 358
evolution of, 367–370
labor laws, 367–368
unions and collective bargaining, 
368–369
factors affecting demand,  
377–379
imperfect competition
bilateral monopoly, 362
monopsony, 361
union monopoly power, 361
institutional constraints on, 353
and marginal productivities, 377
political and social forces, 362
starting salaries for selected 
occupations, 369
supply of labor, 352–356
unskilled, and minimum wage, 105
wage determination, 360–364
Labor productivity, 375
Labor theory of value, 74
Labor unions
American Federation of Labor, 368
closed shop, 368
government employees in, 369
Knights of Labor, 368
loss of bargaining power, 369
membership changes 1930–2010, 368
monopoly power, 340, 361
opposed by business, 368
secondary boycotts forbidden, 369
union shop, 368
United Auto Workers, 379
weakened in 1980s, 369
Laissez-faire, 32, 73, 487, 496
Laissez-faire policy, 466
Land
as factor of production, 352
Landier, Augustin, 334
Landlord’s Game, 297
Landsburg, Steven, 22, 464, 465, 466, 
467, 469, 473, 478
LAS; see Long-run aggregate supply 
curve
Law of demand, 78
bases of, 86
and demand curve, 78–79
equations for, 117
other things constant assumption, 79
and principle of rational choice, 415

	
■ Index ■	
IND-15
diagrammatic representation, 56
economic institutions
businesses, 56–59
government, 61–66
households, 59–60
sectors, 55–56
fairness issue, 52
global institutions, 66–67
and socialism, 53–55
transition from socialism to, 76
Market failure, 65–66, 162
dealing with externalities from
direct regulation, 165–166
incentive policies, 166–168
optimal policy, 168–169
voluntary reductions, 168
externalities, 162–165
negative, 164
positive, 165
handling informational problems
in licensing, 174–176
market for information, 174
regulatory agencies, 173–174
imperfect information
adverse selection problem, 172–173
moral hazard problem, 173
in real-world markets, 172
resolved by signaling and  
screening, 173
insufficient provision of positive 
externalities, 165
polluting industries, 513
Market forces, 11, 93
political and legal influences, 11–13
and social forces, 11–13
Market incentive plan, 167
to deal with externalities, 167–168
Market position
by initial public offering, 342
in winner-take-all markets, 342
Market price
effect of price controls, 295
as marginal revenue, 267
in perfect competition, 266
and value of total output, 544–545
Market structure
comparisons of, 318
competition as, 331
duopoly, 453
monopolistic competition, 299–300
monopoly, 285
network externalities, 345
oligopoly, 312
perfectly competitive markets/
industries, 265
and technological development,  
343–345
Marginal productivity
diminishing, 607
relation to marginal cost curve,  
235–236
Marginal rate of substitution, 261, 428
Marginal revenue, 266–267
equal to marginal cost, 268–269
for monopoly, 287
in perfect competition, 267
and price controls, 295
Marginal revenue curve
determining, 310–311
graphing, 288
of monopoly, 286–289
Marginal revenue product, 375–376
Marginal social benefit, 164, 165
Marginal social cost, 164
Marginal tax rates, 354–355
Marginal total cost curve, in duopoly, 453
Marginal utility, 408
diminishing, 410
and rational choice, 410–412
related to total utility, 408–409
Market(s)
based on institutions, 51
benefits of, 53
dynamic nature of, 295
economic efficiency, 508–509
effect of disasters or shocks
for apples, 100, 101
for edible oils, 100, 101
for SUVs, 100, 101
government adjustments of, 64–65
in information, 174
informational, 172
information-gathering mechanisms, 486
and law of one price, 192
as means of organizing society, 224
nature of, 32
not in equilibrium
excess demand, 89
excess supply, 89
price adjustments, 89–90
and Pareto optimality, 163
real-world, 331
social and moral incentives, 487
theory of, 14
and tragedy of the commons, 167
Market definition, substitution factor, 
129–130
Market demand curve, 82
and elasticity, 132
for private goods, 170–171
for public goods, 170–171
Market economy, 52
benefits, 53
capitalism, 53
Luxury Fever (Frank), 495
Luxury tax, 496
impact on boat industry, 148
M
Macroeconomic costs of trade, 216
Macroeconomic externalities, 64
Macroeconomics, 5–6
and fallacy of composition, 94
pattern-finding models, 471
relation to microeconomics, 6
Maddison, Angus, 32
Magie, Lizzie, 297
Maine’s Own Organic Milk Company, 58
Mali, 187
Malthus, Thomas, 10
Managers
incentive-compatible contracts, 333
lack of incentives for maximizing 
profit, 333
stock options, 333
views on takeovers, 336
Mandeville, Bernard, 465
Mansard roofs, 145
Manufacturing
decline of demand for labor, 359
effects of globalization in U.S., 189
by global corporations, 66
job losses in, 369
multicountry contributions, 35
and supply of labor, 356
trade broader than, 188–189
Mao Zedong, 76
Marcuse, Herbert, 495
Marginal benefits, 7
and economic decision rule, 8
Marginal cost, 7, 231, 232–233, 266–267
and economic decision rule, 8
equal to marginal revenue, 268–269
equation, 238
for monopoly, 287
in perfect competition, 267
and price controls, 295
Marginal cost curve, 234
in duopoly, 453
of monopoly, 288
relation to average cost curve, 236–237
relation to marginal productivity,  
235–236
as supply curve, 269
upward-sloping, 234
Marginal factor cost, 361
Marginal physical product, 375, 376
Marginal private cost, 164
Marginal product, 228
versus average product, 228

IND-16	
■ Index ■
data mining, 472
deductive approach, 459
demand-side, 596
of economists vs. textbooks, 331
empirical, 469–470
empirical and formal
agent-based computational, 475
application, 476–477
butterfly effects, 474
game theory, 474–475
importance of, 469–472
regression models, 470–471
role of, 472–478
simple data models, 471–472
simplicity-completeness trade-off, 
473–475
testing, 475–476
types, 473
engineering, 459
evolutionary, 462
fiscal policy, 584
game theory, 273, 433
globalized AS/AD model, 807–812
government reliance on, 706
heuristic, 458
limits of, 468–469
using behavioral building blocks, 
467–468
using traditional building blocks, 
464–466
inductive approach, 458–459
of monopoly, 285–292
multiplier model, 569
path-dependent, 465–466, 473
pattern-finding, 471
relevance for policy, 478–480
scientific, 459
with shadow price analysis, 484
for social policy
Marxian (radical), 503
public choice, 503
structure, 458
supply-side, 594
tipping-point, 473, 475
using graphs, 42–43
Modern behavioral economists, 476
Modern economics
deviations from traditional  
approach, 459
importance of empirical work, 469–472
Modern economists, 458
contrasted with traditional  
economists, 476
and economic policies, 478–479
as mechanism design engineers,  
484–485
Medicare tax, 149
Mencken, H. L., 382, 483
Mental accounting, 419
Mercantilism, 72–73
Mercosur, 219
Merger
opposed by courts, 324
opposed by Justice Department,  
324–325
Merit goods or activities, 65
Meritocracy, 389
Mexico
U.S. trade with, 205
Microeconomics, 5
and neuroeconomics, 463
relation to macroeconomics, 6
traditional building blocks, 459
Microsoft Corporation, 64, 317, 391
antitrust case, 296, 324
Microsoft Zune, 331
Middle class, 393–394
Military draft, 152
Mill, John Stuart, 10
Mind and Society (Pareto), 502n
Minimum efficient level of  
production, 246
Minimum wage
economic reasoning, 6
disagreements among economists, 107
general discussion of, 105–107
increases since 1938, 105–106
Krueger-Card study of, 14
and living-wage movement, 106
monopsony, 361
nonmarket activities, 353–354
other things changing, 508
and price elasticity of supply, 126
winners and losers, 105–106
Minimum wage laws, 75, 105
effect on unskilled labor, 106
income distribution, 395
living wage laws, 364
origin of, 106
Mises, Ludwig von, 203, 451
Mixed strategy, 439
Models, 13, 457; see also Supply/demand 
model
from advances in mathematics, 473
agent-based computational  
economics, 443
for aggregate economy, 474
anchor points, 477
based on traditional rationality, 461
in behavioral economics, 459–464
building blocks, 459
Classical growth model, 607
Market supply curve, 87–88, 275
and incentive effects, 352–353
Marshall, Alfred, 4, 10, 121, 448
Marshallian economics, 10
Marshall Plan, 193
Martin, William, 647
Marx, Groucho, 40
Marx, Karl, 10
critique of capitalism, 74
failure of revolution predicted by,  
74–75
on shove policy, 495
view of labor, 364
on wants and needs, 495
Marxian (radical) model, 501
Maskin, Eric, 485
Materialism, relative vs. absolute, 494
Mathematical economics, 121
Mathematics
to improve models, 473
mistakes in, 48
Mazda Miata, 245
MC; see Marginal cost
McCain, John, 486
McDonald’s, 60, 366, 413–414
McGoldrick, Kim Marie, 48
McKesson, 333, 382
MC = MR, 268–269
profit determinationcost per unit, 273
output, 272
zero profit or loss, 273–274
profit-maximizing output of monopoly, 
288–289
Measurement problems; see Consumer 
price index
Mechanism design, 486
behavioral economics, 486–487
coordinating mechanisms, 485
economic policy theory, 485
incentive compatibility problem, 485
information-gathering, 486
models used, 485
policy implications of traditional 
economics, 487–488
shadow prices, 489
tool for firms and government, 485
Mechanism design engineers,  
484–485, 497
Median income, 60
by age, 392
by race, 392
by sex, 392
Median pay, 60
Medicaid, 110, 111
Medical licensure, 174–175
Medicare, 110, 111, 400

	
■ Index ■	
IND-17
National defense, 170
Nationalistic appeals, 211
National Labor Relations Act, 368
National League, 484
National Residency Matching  
Program, 485
National security argument
abuse of, 218
export restrictions, 216
import restrictions, 216
Nations
comparing income distribution  
across, 389
debtor vs. creditor, 206–207
differing importance of trade  
among, 203
haggling over trade restrictions, 213
income distribution among, 389
per capita income comparisons, 390
total income in selected countries, 390
value of money and assets, 197
NATO, 187
Natural ability, monopoly based on, 297
Natural experiments, 14, 472
Natural monopoly, 296
average cost, 296
and competition
deregulation, 340–341
regulation, 340
impossibility of perfect competition, 298
passing on all costs, 340
profit-maximizing level of output, 297
profit of, 296
single vs. multiple standards, 297
in telephone service, 296–297
welfare gain from, 297
Natural resources
China, 65
European Union, 65
United States, 65, 190
NBER; see National Bureau of Economic 
Research
Necessities, 130, 133
Needs, Marxian view of, 495
Negative externalities, 63, 64, 163, 164
example, 164
Negative incentive effect, 354
Netflix, 123
Network externalities, 345
development of standards, 345
from Facebook, 345
and market structure, 345
and technological lock-in, 346
and winner-take-all industries, 345–346
Neuroeconomics, 463
Neutral technological change, 29
output and price
determined graphically, 287–289
determined numerically, 286–287
producer surplus, 292–293
profit determination, 290
protection of
cost/benefit analysis of  
maintaining, 341
establishing market position, 342
reasons for existence, 285
regulated, 326
and technological development, 343
welfare loss from
normal monopolist, 292–293
price-discriminating monopolist, 
293–294
Monopoly Game, 297
Monopoly power of labor unions,  
337, 361, 362
Monopsony, 361
Moore, Stephen, 519
Moore’s law, 252, 344
Moral hazard problem, 172
Moral incentives, 487
More Sex Is Safer Sex (Landsburg), 465
Most-favored nation, 220
Motivation, for efficiency vs. profit,  
336–337
Movement along a demand curve, 79
equations for, 117
Movement along a supply curve, 86
equations for, 117
Movie theaters, price discrimination, 293
MR; see Marginal revenue
Multitiered wage contracts, 379
Murphy, Kevin, 386
Murray, Charles, 349
Music downloads, 172
Mutual funds, 333
advertising of, 447–448
Mutual interdependence in oligopoly, 312
Myerson, Roger, 485
N
Nalebuff, Barry, 442–444, 519
Nanotechnology, 36
Napoleon, 350
Napster, 172
Nash, John, 432, 442
Nash equilibrium, 436, 441–442
in trust game, 446
National Bureau of Economic Research
Business Cycle Committee, 531
on dates of contractions and 
expansions, 531
modeling approach, 457
models used by, 473
move toward engineering, 484
Modern traditional economists, 476
Moneyball (Lewis), 471
Monitoring costs, 247
Monitoring problem, 332
Monopolistic competition, 299–300
advertising and
benefits or harm to society, 301
goals, 301
compared to monopoly, 301
compared to other market structures, 318
difficulty of collusion in, 312
distinguishing characteristics
compared to perfect competition, 301
competitive dimensions, 299
ease of entry in long run, 300
many sellers, 299
output, prices, and profit, 301–302
product differentiation, 299
production element, 313
and technological development, 344
Monopolistic forces
versus competitive forces, 337–341
effect on perfect competition, 337
Monopoly, 64, 288
algebraic representation, 310–311
and barriers to entry, 294
based on advertising, 299
based on natural ability, 296
by branding, 342
breaking even of making a loss,  
291–292
compared to monopolistic competition,  
299–300
compared to other market  
structures, 317
compared to perfect competition,  
285–286, 289
consumer surplus, 292–294
cost of creating and maintaining, 341
created by government, 298
demand for labor in, 377–378
effect of competitive forces on
breakdown, 338–339
reverse engineering, 339
effect of price controls, 295
example of output and price, 289
and government policy, 298–299
making a profit, 290–291
marginal cost, 287
marginal revenue, 287
marginal revenue product, 375
natural monopoly, 296–298
normative arguments against, 298

IND-18	
■ Index ■
Organ transplants, 517
Ostrom, Elinor, 166
Other things changing, 509
Other things constant
in law of demand, 79, 80
in law of supply, 85
Output; see also Potential output 
aggregate
effect of price controls, 295
finding, for monopoly, 289–290
increased by free trade, 217
isocost/isoquant analysis, 260–263
in monopolistic competition, 302–303
of monopoly
determined graphically, 287–289
determined numerically, 286–287
of normal monopolist, 292–293
oligopoly decisions on, 313
profit-maximizing level in perfect 
competition, 266–271
variable cost increase, 230–231
Outsourcing, 190
changing nature of, 206
to China and India, 195, 206
and demand for labor, 359–360
of production and services, 205
via Internet, 226
Overfishing problem, 167
Owens, Nicole, 517
Owens Corning, 314
P
Pabst Brewing case, 324
Pacific Rim, U.S. trade with, 204
Pareto, Vilfredo, 502
Pareto optimal policies, 502, 508
criticisms of, 162
Paris, France
experience with rent control, 101
property tax effects, 145
Parker Brothers, 298
Parker Pens, 324
Partnerships, 58, 226
advantages and disadvantages, 59
percent of business firms, 58
Patents, 292, 606
getting around, 340
incentive for innovation, 344
and reverse engineering, 340
Path-dependent models, 465, 473
Pattern-finding models, 471
Pay gap, 364
Payoff matrix, 435, 437
PayPal, 268
Pension funds, 333
Pentagonal class structure, 396
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, 171
Oil supply, and Hurricane Katrina, 86
Oligopoly, 312
cartel model, 313–316
compared to other market structures, 318
comparison of models
new entry as limit on cartels, 316
price wars, 317
pricing extremes, 316
contestable market model, 315–316
distinguishing characteristics
retail stores, 313
small number of firms, 312
strategic decision making, 312–313
and game theory, 452–455
duopoly and payoff matrix, 452–453
low price guarantees, 457
precommitment rules, 457
prisoner’s dilemma and duopoly, 
453–455
lacking production element, 313
models and estimates of industry 
structure, 320–321
mutual interdependence, 312
precommitment rules, 455
and technological development,  
344–345
two extremes on pricing, 316
Omaha Steaks, 342
Open borders policy, European  
Union, 356
Opportunity, equality of, 397
Opportunity cost, 9
and government decisions, 9
implications, 10
and no-free-lunch theory, 9
of not supplying, 84–85
in production possibilities curve, 25–27
and rational choice, 418
relative among nations, 186
of Saudi production, 182–183
unmeasured cost, 255
Opportunity cost of work, 352–353
Optimal level of pollution, 169
Optimal policy, 168
to deal with externalities, 168–169
Optimal rollback strategy, 440
Orange County, NC, Board of  
Commissioners, 149
Organizational buyers, effect of Internet 
on, 267
Organizational structure
and manager incentives, 332
monitoring problem, 332–334
Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries, U.S. trade with, 205
New York City
effects of rent control, 154
experience with rent control, 103
Public School Match program, 485
taxi medallion costs, 108–109
New York Stock Exchange, 59, 383
New York Times, 444
Niederle, Muriel, 372
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 100, 395
Nippon, 325
Nirvana criticism of perfect  
competition, 163
Noell, Ed, 373
Noncooperative game, 436
Nonlinear curve, 43
maximum and minimum points, 44
slope of, 44–45
Nonmarket activities, 352
and supply of labor, 353–354
Nonprice rationing, 105
Nonprofit organizations as lazy 
monopolists, 335
Nonstrategic decision making, 311
Nonwage income and property rights, 363
Normal goods, 80, 133, 136
Normal monopolist, welfare loss from, 
292–293
Normal profit, 275
Normative economics, 17
arguments against monopoly, 298
criticism of perfect competition, 161
in policy analysis, 399
North, Douglass, 51
North American Free Trade Agreement, 
67, 219
North American Industry 
Classification System, 317–318
industry groupings, 317
North Korea, 13
Novo Nordisk, 251
Nudge, 489
advertising as, 489
RECAP, 488
Nudge policy, 489
government as decision maker, 496
and government failure, 496–497
and libertarian paternalism, 489–490
libertarian paternalistic criterion, 495
RECAP, 492
versus shove policy, 495
Nudge (Thaler & Sunstein), 388
Numb3rs, 458
O
Oakland Athletics, 471
Obama, Barack, 486, 501

	
■ Index ■	
IND-19
Presley, Elvis, 150
Price(s)
basis of rational choice, 410
as collective judgment, 487
cream-skimming, 326
determination of quantity demanded, 
73–78
determination of quantity supplied,  
79–84
effect of excess demand, 89
effect of tariffs and quotas, 209
effects of government intervention
excise taxes and tariffs, 106–107
price ceilings, 103–104
price floors, 105–106
quantity restrictions, 107–108
of factors of production, 278
finding, for monopoly, 290–291
implicit collusion, 313
income effect, 422
irrational reaction to, 124
kinked demand curve, 314
and law of one price, 33
lowered in Great Depression, 338
and marginal revenue and marginal 
cost, 265
in monopolistic competition,  
305–306
of monopoly
determined graphically, 287–289
determined numerically, 286–287
of normal monopolist, 292–293
oligopoly decisions on, 312
in oligopoly models, 315
in perfect competition, 263
and quantity demanded, 415–416
as rationing mechanism, 10–11
set at zero, 122
and shutdown point, 273
sticky in cartels, 314
substitution effect, 416–417
supply and demand analysis of, 87–88
Price ceilings, 104, 150, 295
equations for, 115
in military draft, 155
rent control, 104–105
Price changes
effect on quantity demanded, 76
effect on quantity supplied, 82
Price controls
compared to taxation, 150
effect on output and market  
price, 295
with inelastic supplies, 155
price ceilings, 150
price floors, 151
Price-discriminate, 293
real-world example, 279–280
and technological development, 344
Perfectly elastic, 126, 128
Perfectly inelastic, 126, 128
Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Act, 400
Per-unit output cost curve, 232
Petr, Jerry L., 48
Petty, William, 469
Physical infrastructure, 190
Pickett, Ben, 98
Pickett, Bill, 98
Pie chart, 40
Policy makers
and government failure, 515–516
value of, 506–507
Political economy, 15
Political forces
effect on economic policies, 19
effect on equilibrium, 91–92
and labor market, 361
Political influences, 11–12
Politics of income redistribution, 398
Polluting industries, 513
Pollution
environmentalists vs. economists, 169
optimal level, 169
Pontiac, 245
Poor, the
benefits of capitalism for, 60
fall in income of, 386
Population
China, 65
European Union, 65
United States, 65
Positive economics, 17
Positive externalities, 63–64, 165, 165
example, 166
Poverty
absolute vs. relative, 391
absolute vs. relative measures, 392
costs of, 392–393
debates about definition, 391–392
incentive for crime, 389
number and percentages of persons  
in, 392
official definition, 391
Poverty initiatives, 16
Poverty threshold, 391
and food budget, 391–392
Precepts, 13, 479
Precommitment rules, 456
Precommitment strategy, 464
Predatory pricing, dumping as, 222
Predictable irrationality, 461–462, 488
Predictably Irrational (Ariely), 464
Prescott, Edward, 158, 371
Per capita income
national comparisons, 392
Perdue, 224, 342
Perfect competition; see also Perfectly 
competitive industry; Perfectly 
competitive markets
invisible hand unimpeded in, 265
nirvana criticism, 161
normative criticism, 161
reference point for market structure, 264
second-best criticism, 161
Perfectly competitive industry
adjustments from short run to long run
increase in demand, 277–278
long-run market supply, 278–279
long-run competitive equilibrium,  
275–277
versus monopolistic competition,  
303–304
short-run market supply and  
demand, 275
summary on, 279
Perfectly competitive markets, 265
adjustments from short to long run
increase in demand, 277–278
long-run profit or loss, 278–279
algebraic representation, 310–311
compared to monopolistic  
competition, 289
compared to other market  
structures, 318
conditions of, 264–265
identical products, 265
no barriers to entry, 265
price takers, 265
consumer surplus, 292–293
demand curves, 265
effect of monopolistic forces, 341
effect of price controls, 295
impossible with natural monopoly, 299
Internet as, 271
producer surplus, 292–293
profit-maximizing condition, 272
profit-maximizing level of output
long-run competitive equilibrium, 
275–277
marginal cost, 267
marginal cost curve as supply  
curve, 269
marginal revenue, 267
MC = MR, 268–269
profit determination from,  
271–274
short-run supply and demand,  
273–274
shutdown point graph, 273
total profit maximization, 269–270

IND-20	
■ Index ■
role of firms in, 225–227
specialized, 214–216
technical efficiency, 248
technological change, 253
technology changes in auto industry, 
249
time and costs to change or move, 192
value added in stages of, 225
wealth from past, 190
Production decisions
importance of economies and 
diseconomies of scale, 248
long-run, 244
multiple dimensions of, 258–259
role of economies of scope, 251–252
Production function, 228–229
graph, 229
Production possibilities curve, 24–25
and comparative advantage, 28–30
conclusions on, 37–38
creation of, 25
and decision trees, 29
examples of shifts in, 30
and gains from trade, 32
meaning of efficiency, 29
and productive efficiency, 28
Saudi Arabia, 183
for scarcity, 25–27
summary of, 29
trade and comparative advantage,  
30–34
trade-offs, 34
United States, 184
Production possibilities table, 25
creation of production possibilities 
curve, 26
increasing opportunity cost of trade-offs, 
26–27
production possibilities curve for 
individuals, 25–26
Production process; see also Costs of 
production
average product, 229
law of diminishing marginal 
productivity, 230–231
long- vs. short-run, 228
marginal product, 228
production function, 232
production tables, 232
Production tables, 228
graph, 229
real-world applications, 229
Productive efficiency, 28
and distribution, 31–32
from division of labor, 31
relation to costs, 236
Principle of rational choice, 412
extending, 414–415
and law of demand, 415–416
and law of supply, 423
Principles of Economics (Marshall),  
10, 121
Prisoner’s dilemma, 434
campaign finance reform proposal, 446
cheap talk, 441
dominant strategy, 441
duopoly example, 453–454
example, 434–436
Nash equilibrium, 436
noncooperative game, 436
payoff matrix, 435
strategic options, 435
Private equity firms, 336
Private goods, 64
excludability of cost of pricing,  
171–172
Private property rights, 50
Privatization, in Europe, 343
Producer surplus, 142
effect of rent-seeking activities,  
151–156
effect of taxation, 147
from monopoly, 292
from perfect competition, 292
and price-discriminating  
monopolist, 298
Product(s)
changes in demand for, 378
identical in perfect competition, 264
Product differentiation
from advertising, 308
benefits to consumers, 308
in monopolistic competition, 301
Production, 57, 224; see also Long-run  
cost curve
changes since 1933, 251
cost advantage of China, 192
economically efficient, 243
economically efficient point of, 261
economies of scope in, 252–253
and land prices, 244
learning by doing, 253
location options, 223
long- vs. short-run options for  
firms, 243
low levels of
long-run planning decisions, 244
minimum efficient level, 247
many components of, 251
negative externalities from, 161
real-world, 333
requirements in cartels, 317
Price discrimination
by airlines, 293
definition, 133
elimination of welfare loss, 294
examples of, 134
by movie theaters, 293
Price elasticity, information provided  
by, 118
Price elasticity of demand, 122
calculating, 124–125
and endpoint problem, 124–125
examples, 126
factors determining substitutes,  
128–131
geometric tricks for estimating, 129
and price discriminating  
monopolists, 293
total revenue and, 131–133
Price elasticity of supply, 122
calculating, 124–125
examples, 126
and minimum wage, 124–126
Price-fixing
by Archer Daniels Midland, 324
fines for, 324
Price floors, 106, 151
and elasticity of supply and demand,  
154, 156
equations for, 115
minimum wage, 106–107
Price increase, supply and demand  
analysis, 138
Price leaders, 315
Price level
and law of demand, 79
and substitutes, 72
Priceline.com, 266, 332
Price mechanism, 53
to coordinate demand, 77–78
distortions of
excise taxes and tariffs, 107–108
price ceilings, 104–105
price floors, 108
quantity restrictions, 109–110
Price-setting
and elasticities, 133
and price controls, 296
by retailers, 133
Prices of other goods, 80–81
Price taker, 268
Price wars, in oligopoly, 317
Pricing mechanism, 13
Pricing policies
public vs. private goods, 171–172
Principle of diminishing marginal  
utility, 410

	
■ Index ■	
IND-21
follow-the-leader approach, 419
income effect, 416–417
indifference curve analysis, 427–431
and law of demand, 415–416
and law of supply, 417–418
and marginal utility, 410–412
opportunity cost, 417
principle of, 412
real-world applications  
cost of decision making, 418–420
given tastes, 420
utility maximization, 421–422
simultaneous decisions, 412
substitution effect, 416–417
using bounded rationality, 419
utility-maximizing rule, 412–413
Rational choice theory
diminishing marginal utility, 410
marginal utility, 408–411
reasons for choices, 407
and self-interest, 407–408
based on price, 408
based on utility, 408
total utility, 408–410
Rationality
assumption in game theory, 438
in behavioral economics, 445, 447
failure of individuals, 511
Rationing, nonprice, 105
Rationing mechanism, 10–11
Rawls, John, 395–396
Reagan, Ronald W., 369
Real wage, and opportunity cost of  
work, 353
Real-world competition
costs of preventing, 341
economic insights and, 338
as process, 337
Real-world data, on graphs, 46–49
Real-world firms
goals, 332
and lazy monopolists, 335–336
motivation for efficiency vs. profit, 
336–337
profit-maximization problem
manager incentives, 332
need for monitoring, 333–334
short- vs. long-run, 332
and X-inefficiency, 335
Real-world markets, 331, 337
Real-world production, 332
RECAP nudge, 492
Recession
reason for trade restrictions, 216
Regional free trade associations, 220
Regression model, 470–471
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance 
Program, 403
Temporary Assistance for Needy  
Families, 403
Public choice economists, 153
on farm lobby, 153
on government failure, 516
Public choice model, 504
Public goods, 64, 169
effect of technology on, 169
excludability of cost of pricing,  
171–172
free rider problem, 171
market value, 169–171
national defense, 169
Public School Match program,  
New York City, 486
Purposeful behavior, 460, 467
Push policy, 493
Pyramid class structure, 393
Q
Quantitative literacy, 48
Quantity demanded, 77, 79
and demand curve, 79
income effect, 416–417
in law of demand, 78
and market demand curve, 82–83
substitution effect, 416–417
time dimension, 81–82
Quantity of labor demanded, 356
Quantity supplied, 85
effect of price changes, 86
effect of price elasticity, 123
in law of supply, 84–85
Quintiles of income, 383
Quotas, 209
compared to tariffs, 209
equations for, 118
quantity restrictions, 108–109
small-country assumption, 210
QWERTY keyboard, 346
R
Rabin, Matt, 460
Race, median income by, 394
Radical economists, on income 
redistribution, 394–395
Rational, 511
Rational choice
behavioral economists on, 408
and budget constraint, 410–411
extending principle of, 414–415
focal point equilibria, 419
Professional degrees, 370
Profit, 57, 225
accounting, 225, 255
determination of
from graphs, 275
output where MC = MR, 275
per unit MC = MR, 276
from table of costs, 274
by total cost and revenue curves, 273
zero profit or loss where MC = MR,  
273–274
economic, 225–227, 255
of lazy monopolists, 335, 336
in monopolistic competition, 302–303
of monopoly
breaking even or making a loss,  
292–293
making a profit, 295
motivation for efficiency other than,  
337–338
of natural monopoly, 295
normal, 275
zero, 273–274, 275–277
Profit maximization, 225–226
lack of manager incentives for, 332
MC = MR, 269–270
problems with
manager incentives, 336
need for monitoring, 336–338
in real-world firms, 273
short- vs. long-run, 332
total, 270–271
Profit-maximizing condition, 269
Profit-maximizing level of output
in monopolistic competition, 301
in natural monopoly, 298
in perfect competition
marginal cost, 263
marginal cost curve as supply  
curve, 269
marginal revenue, 266
MC = MR, 269–270
total profit maximization, 270–271
Progressive tax, 399
and income inequality, 391
Property rights, 512–513
and income distribution, 402–403
and nonwage income, 363
Property taxes, 145, 400
effect on rents, 147
Proportional tax, 399
Protectionism; see Trade restrictions
Psychic income, 370
Public assistance, 403
general assistance, 403
Medicaid, 403

IND-22	
■ Index ■
Services, 57
job increases, 189
nontradable types, 190
Sex, median income by, 392
Sexual activity decisions, 465
Sexual harassment, 368
Shadow prices, 484
Shampanies, Kristina, 128
Share distribution of income, 383
Sharp Corporation, 325
Shepherd, Joanne, 472
Sherman Antitrust Act, 322
and Microsoft case, 326
Shift factors
in demand for labor
costs of competing factors, 357
demand for firm’s goods, 358
focal point phenomenon, 359
international competitiveness,  
359–360
monopoly, 358
new technology, 358–359
Shift factors of demand, 80–81
Shift factors of supply, 86–87
Shift in demand, 79–80, 92
and elasticity, 137
equations for, 117–118
Shift in supply, 85–86, 92
and elasticity, 137
equations for, 117–118
Shifts in supply and demand, 92–93,  
101–103, 137
Shortages, created by rent control, 151
Short run
adjustments to long run from,  
277–278
income elasticity in, 134
options for firms, 243
output fixed in, 595
problem of price controls in,  
154–159
production decisions in, 227–229
Short-run average total cost, and envelope 
relationship, 249
Short-run average total cost curve, 249
Short-run cost curve, U shape, 248
Short-run decision, 228
Short-run marginal cost curve, 249
Short-run market supply,  
275–277
Short-run profit, 332, 341
Shove policy, 495
Shutdown decision
and long-run equilibrium, 277–278
real-world example, 279
relevant costs, 278
Russia
Marxism in, 55, 75–76
Ryanair, 344
S
Safety net, 75, 511
Saffer, Henry, 139, 519
Sales, corporations’ percent of, 58
Sales taxes, 404
and economic policy, 149–150
Samsung Electronics, 205
Santa Fe Institute, 487
SAS; see Short-run aggregate  
supply curve
Saudi Arabia, 212–213, 220
production possibilities curve, 185
trade with United States, 185–187
Savings, 479, 490
Scales, 47
Scarcity, 5
changing degree of, 5
coercion to deal with, 5
and economic forces, 11
elements of, 5
and invisible hand, 11, 14–15
and market forces, 11
and rationing mechanism, 11
Schelling, Thomas, 441, 443, 460
Schuhmann, Peter, 48
Schumann, Robert, 156
Schumpeter, Joseph, 60
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 98
Scientific models, 459, 476
Scottish Enlightenment, 516
Screening, 173
Screening question, 434
Secondary boycotts, 369
Second-best criticism of perfect 
competition, 163
Second Life, 458
Segregation game, 443
Self-confirming equilibrium, 474
Self-employment, 356
Self-interest
in cost/benefit analysis, 508
opposed to competition, 337
Sellers
many, in monopolistic competition, 300
price takers, 266
Semco, 365
Sen, Amartya, 397, 512
Separation of ownership and control,  
58, 333
Sequential games, 437–438
mixed strategy, 439–450
Regressive tax, 399
Regulation
cost/benefit analysis, 505, 507
of natural monopolies, 340
views of economists on,  
339–340
Regulatory trade restrictions, 211
Reinsch family farm, 247
Relative poverty, 386
Relevant market, in antitrust  
policy, 324
Rembrandt, 285
Rent control, 103
effect on New York City, 154
effects of, 104–105
and key money, 105
in New York City, 104
in Paris, 104
shortages created by, 154
Rents
impact of property taxes, 149
Rent-seeking activities, 151
government reasons, 150–151
inelastic demand and incentive to 
restrict supply, 153–154
inelastic supply and incentive to restrict 
prices, 154
long- and short-run problem of price 
controls, 154–156
Reputation, of firms, 332
Resource curse, 197–198
Resources
effect of rent-seeking on, 151, 153
and tragedy of the commons, 166
Restructuring
of lazy monopolists, 336
Revenue, implicit, 226
Reverse engineering, 339
Ricardo, David, 10, 192, 201
Rich, the, 60
Rights agreement, 515
Right to work laws, 368
Rivoli, Pietra, 247
Robber barons, 322
Robbins, Lionel, 17n
Robinson, Joan, 301, 335
Robinson-Patman Act, 337
Rockefeller, John D., 307, 322
Rodero-Cosano, Javier, 442n
Rogers, Will, 162
Rollback strategy, 439–442
in trust game, 446
Romer, Paul, 171
Romney, Mitt, 60
Roth, Al, 485
Rule of 72

	
■ Index ■	
IND-23
Status quo bias, 422
Steel imports, effect of trade  
restrictions, 218
Steel tariff, 218
Steinem, Gloria, 241, 373
Stern, Nicholas, 18
Sticky prices, 315
Stigler, George, 426
Stock options, 333
Stories Economists Tell (Colander), 474n
Strategic bargaining, 214
Strategic decision making, 312
Strategic interaction
in duopoly, 453
game theory as tool to study
cooperative game, 437–438
sequential games, 438–439
simultaneous move games,  
438–439
strategies of players, 438–441
Strategic thinking, 432
Strategic trade policies, 214
Structure, form of models, 458
Structure of production, auto  
industry, 245
Structure of the firm, and demand for 
labor, 377–378
Stupid decisions, 421
Subsidies
effect on demand, 81
equations for, 118
for solar energy, 377
Substitutes, 78, 135, 136
and elasticities, 128–131
demand, 130
effects on decision making,  
130–131
factors affecting number of
degree of luxury, 130
market definition, 130
proportion of one’s budget, 130
time period, 130
and prices of other goods, 80–81
Substitution effect, 416
and supply of labor, 354
Summers, Lawrence, 513
Sumo wrestlers, 470
Sunk costs, 7
fixed costs as, 230, 274
Sunstein, Cass, 488–489,  
490–493
Sun Tzu, 432
Super Crunchers (Ayres), 471
Supplemental Nutritional Assistance  
Program, 400
Supplemental Security Income, 401
differing views of economists, 502
interpretation of empirical  
evidence, 503
need for worldview, 503–504
and policy makers’ values, 502–503
survival of the fittest approach, 509
Social Register, 393
Social responsibility for employment, 728
Social Security system, 400
privatized in Sweden, 422
Social Security taxes, 61, 355, 399
and economic policy, 149
Society, economic efficiency and goals  
of, 510
Socioeconomic distribution of  
income, 383
Socrates, 522
Solar energy subsidies, 377
Sole proprietorships, 58, 226
advantages and disadvantages, 59
percent of business firms, 58
Solomon, 201
Solow, Robert, 433
Somalia, 63
South America, U.S. trade with, 205
South Korea, 214
Special interests, lobbying by, 151
Specialization
and gains from trade, 32–34
and globalization, 34–35
leading to technological change, 343
Specialized production, 214–216
economies of scale, 215–216
infant industry argument, 216
learning by doing, 215
Stable institutional framework, 63
Stages of production, value added  
in, 226
Stalin, Joseph, 75–76
Standard model, 256
of cost analysis, 243–249
definition, 273
with real-world complications, 256
Standard Oil Trust case, 322
Starbucks, 224, 232, 342
State government
income and expenditures, 61
number of employees, 61
State laws
on competition, 323
right to work laws, 368
State socialism, 75–76
State taxes
income tax, 399
property taxes, 400
sales taxes, 399
Shutdown point, 274
Signaling, 173
Simon, Herbert, 418, 460
Simultaneous decisions, 412
Simultaneous move games, 438
Singapore, 79–80
Single-tax movement, 297
Sin taxes, 168, 511
SIRIUS Satellite Radio, 171
Skeath, Susan, 433
Skype, 226
Slavery, partial, 365
Slesnick, Daniel, 387
Sloan, Alfred P., 265
Slope, 44
of average fixed cost curve, 234
of demand curve, 78
versus elasticity, 123
of linear curves, 44
of nonlinear curves, 44–45
of supply curve, 85
Small-country assumption, and trade 
restrictions, 209, 210
Smith, Adam, 10, 17, 22, 24, 31, 34, 40,  
73, 201, 258, 298, 329, 432, 488,  
515–516
Smith, Vernon, 438
Smoot-Hawley Tariff of 1930, 208
Social classes, 383
lower class, 393
middle class, 393–394
upper class, 393–394
Social entrepreneurship, 251
Social forces, 11, 266
effect on economic policies, 19
effect on equilibrium, 91–92
and labor market, 362–363
Social goals, 502
Social incentives, 487
Socialism, 53
central economic planning, 75
and China, 55
development in 20th century, 54
out of favor as a term, 55
and Soviet Union collapse, 55
theoretical ideas of, 54
transition from feudalism, 75–76
transition to market economy  
from, 76
as welfare system, 54
in Western Europe, 54
Social norms, and production  
decisions, 252
Social policy
agreement among economists, 504
choice of models for, 503

IND-24	
■ Index ■
on imported steel, 108
national rate comparisons, 208
reason for trade restrictions, 217
retaliatory, 212
small-country assumption, 209, 210
Smoot-Hawley Act of 1930, 209
on steel imports, 218
and strategic trade policies, 214
supply and demand analysis, 107–108
U.S. rates 1920–2012, 208
and World Trade Organization, 209
Tastes
and conspicuous consumption, 420
given, 419
individual choice, 420
Taxation
allocation of, 147
to change behavior, 512
Colbert on, 142
compared to price controls, 151
costs of, 145
deadweight loss, 145
deciding on objects of
distributional issues, 146
government goals, 146
effect on demand, 81
effluent fees, 167
equations for, 116
flat tax, 146
impact on consumer and producer 
surplus, 144–146
incentive effects, 397
for income redistribution
federal income tax, 399
state and local taxes, 399–400
types of rates, 399
luxury tax, 148
sin taxes, 168, 511, 512
by state and local government, 61
supply and demand analysis, 107–108
welfare loss triangle, 145
Taxi medallions, 108–109
Tax incentive program, 168
Tax incidence
and relative elasticity, 146–148
sales taxes, 149–150
Social Security taxes, 149
Tax rates
flat rate, 397
marginal rate, 354–355
progressive, 397
proportional, 397
regressive, 397
Team spirit, 247
Technical efficiency, 244
Technological change, 253
in auto industry, 245
biased, 29
Supply chain, T-shirt production, 247
Supply curve, 85
change in elasticity along, 126–128
individual, 87–88
of labor, 353, 362
long-run, 278–279
marginal cost curve as, 269
market, 87–88
movement along, 86
in perfect competition, 163
summary on, 89
in supply table, 87
Supply decisions, by entrepreneurs,  
250–251
Supply/demand model, 474n
versus behavioral model, 485
chocolate futures example, 477–478
and cost/benefit analysis, 508–509
distributional issues, 509–511
logic of, 509
rationality aspect, 511
for social policy, 503
used in context, 501
Supply of labor in China
elasticity of, 355–356
immigration, 356
incentive effect, 352–353
and income effect, 354
income taxes, work, and leisure,  
354–355
as individual choice, 352
international, 356
and nonmarket/illegal activities,  
353–354
real wage and opportunity cost, 353
and substitution effect, 354
in United States, 244
Supply table, and supply curve, 87, 88
Surgery, licensing for, 175
Surplus value, 74
Survival of the fittest approach to social  
policy, 509
Survivor, 443
SUVs, 101
market for, 100–101
Sweden
privatization of Social Security, 422
T
Taft-Hartley Act, 368
Tanner, Michael, 519
TANSTAAFL (no-free-lunch theory), 7
Tariffs, 64, 107, 208
compared to quotas, 209
effect on prices, 209
effect on trade patterns, 209
and GATT, 209
Supply, 84
characteristics, 84
derived from individuals, 224
of factors of production, 224–225
law of, 84–85
pressure to limit, 153–154
of produced goods, 224–225
shift factors, 87
labor supply, 87
technology, 87
shifts in, 86
Supply and demand, 77
for children, 93
and consumer surplus, 142
and fallacy of composition, 94
versus modeling, 458
other things constant assumption, 94
problem of other things changing, 508
and producer surplus, 142
short run, 274–275
Supply and demand analysis
CEO compensation, 334
characteristics of, 92–93
effect of disasters or shocks
edible oils market, 101–103
and elasticities
price increases, 136
and shifts in demand/supply, 137
of exchange rates, 195–196
government intervention, 103–109
excise taxes and tariffs, 107–108
price ceilings, 103–105
price floors, 105–107
quantity restrictions, 108–109
of industry, 274–279
limitations of, 94
of military draft, 152
of prices, 89–90
of rent-seeking activities
government reasons, 151–152
inelastic demand and incentive to 
restrict supply, 153–154
inelastic supply and incentive to 
restrict prices, 154–155
long- and short-run problem of price 
controls, 155–156
of tariffs and quotas, 209–210
of tax incidence, 143–149
third-party-payer markets, 110–111
of trade and exchange rates, 194–195
of wage determination, 360–364
Supply and demand interactions, 88–93
equilibrium, 89–90
graphical illustration, 90, 91
limitations of equilibrium, 90–91
political and social forces and 
equilibrium, 91–92
shifts in, 92–93

	
■ Index ■	
IND-25
Traditional economics
policy frames, 494–495
policy implications, 487–488
Traditional economists, 14, 459; see 
also Classical economists
contrasted with modern economists, 476
critique of behavioral economics and 
government failure, 496–497
critique of behavioral models, 462
versus economic engineers, 497
opposition to government-created  
monopoly, 298
Traditional model
advantages of behavioral models over,  
463–464
and behavioral economics, 447
endowment effects, 446
fairness/trust game, 446
framing effects, 446–447
challenge to standard assumptions
endowment effects, 446
on fairness, 446
framing effects, 446–447
on rationality, 445–446
compared to behavioral models, 460
versus government intervention, 466
importance of, 447–448
simplicity and insight from, 462–463
Traditional societies, 53
problems of, 72
Tragedy of the commons, 166
Transaction costs, lowered by Internet, 226
Transferable comparative  
advantage, 192
effect of law of one price, 192–193
Transportation costs
and demand for labor, 359
Transshipments, 218
Travels of a T-Shirt in the Global 
Economy (Rivoli), 247
Triple bottom line, 251
Trust game, 446
Tullock, Gordon, 514
Turner, Robert W., 181
Tversky, Amos, 446
Two-thirds game, 440–441
Tyson, Laura, 258
U
Ultimatum game, 421
single-play, 440
Unemployment
and government spending, 64
Unemployment compensation, 401
Unfair Practices Act, Arkansas, 323
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 75–76
collapse of, 76
Total surplus, 144
Total utility, 408
related to marginal utility,  
408–409
Towse, Ruth, 372
Toyota Motor Corporation, 210
Trade adjustment assistance  
program, 213
Trade balance; see Balance of trade
Trade deficits, 188, 193, 197
reduced by trade restrictions, 208
of U.S. 1970–2012, 206
Trade-offs, in production possibilities 
curve, 24–27
Trade restrictions, 194
costs to society of relaxing, 213
cost to consumers of saving jobs, 213
and demand for labor, 359
on dumping, 219
by European Union on food  
imports, 213
opposed by economists, 203
abuse of national security  
argument, 218
addictive nature of restrictions, 218
competition increased by trade,  
217–218
output increased by trade, 217
reasons for, 211–218
haggling by companies over gains 
from trade, 213–214
haggling by countries over  
restrictions, 214
infant industry argument, 216
international politics, 216–217
macroeconomic costs of trade, 216
national security, 216
recession, 216
revenues from tariffs, 217
specialized production, 214–216
unequal distribution of gains from 
trade, 212–213
retaliation, 217
on steel imports, 217–218
varieties of
embargoes, 210–211
nationalistic appeals, 211
quotas, 209–210
regulation, 211
tariffs, 208–210
voluntary restraint agreements, 210
Trade surplus, 193
of U.S. after World War II, 207
Trade wars, 208–209
Trading blocs, 65
Trading companies, 73, 187
in United States, 189
Trading zones, 219–220
and cartels, 314
and declining costs, 254
effect on supply, 87
effect on trade patterns, 205
and efficiency or inefficiency, 29
Moore’s law, 254
neutral, 29
new products from, 255
positive externalities from, 609
Technological development, 343
causes, 343
dynamic efficiency of, 343
and market structures, 343–346
Moore’s law, 344
outcome of specialization, 343
Technological infrastructure, 191
Technological lock-in, 346
Technology, 5
challenge of China and India, 36
in chicken production, 254
computational, 254
and demand for labor
decline in manufacturing, 359
Luddite reasoning, 358
effect on demand for labor, 378
effect on income distribution, 385
related to learning by doing, 254
Telephone industry, 340
Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families, 400
Textbook publishing
costs of production and length of, 250
indivisible setup costs, 245
Textile industry, 34
Thaler, Richard, 463, 488
Thatcher, Margaret, 160
Theorems, 12–13, 478, 487–488
Theory; see Economic theory
Theory of Moral Sentiments (Smith),  
515–516
Third-party-payer markets, 109
in college costs, 110–111
in health care, 109–110
Third-party sales, 218
Tic-tac-toe game, 438
Time period for substitutes, 128
Tipping-point models, 465
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 328
Total cost, 225, 226, 231
and average costs, 231
decrease in, 135
equation, 238
Total cost curve, 233–234
Total profit maximization, 270–271
Total revenue, 225, 226
along demand curve, 132–133
and elasticity of demand, 131–134
increase in, 137

IND-26	
■ Index ■
Utility-maximizing rule, 412–413
following, 413–414
and law of demand, 415–416
and law of supply, 417–418
V
Value added, 227
Value judgments of policy makers, 502–503
Value of life, 505–507
Value of marginal product, 375–376
Values of policy makers, 502–503
Variable costs, 230–231
average, 231–232
equation, 238
Variables, goodness of fit, 470
Vault cash, 648
Veblen, Thorstein, 40, 307, 328, 420,  
425, 494
Velcro shoes, 469
Venezuela, 55, 76
Vermont Pure, 342
Vesterlund, Lise, 372
Vickrey, William, 445
Vickrey auction, 445
Viner, Jacob, 250n, 259
Voltaire, 351
Voluntary reductions, to deal with 
externalities
free rider problem, 168
operation of, 168
during times of crisis, 168
Voluntary trade agreements, 32, 215
W
Wage gap, narrowing, 194
Wage rates
and quantity of labor, 352
and quantity of labor demanded, 359
Wages
in China, 601
China vs. United States, 188
and derived demand curve for labor, 375
determination of
comparable worth laws, 364
efficiency wages, 364
living wage laws, 364
in developing countries, 356
effects of globalization in U.S., 189
imperfect competition, 361–362
and law of one price, 37
median pay, 60
multitiered contracts, 379
political and social forces, 362
and Social Security taxes, 149
larger government role, 55
largest exporters, 220
and law of one price, 37
median income, 60
narrowing wage gap, 194
postwar trade surpluses, 193
production possibilities curve, 185
reactions to globalization, 35–36
recent trade deficits, 193
role of tradition, 54
sectors of
businesses, 56–59
government, 61–66
households, 59–60
interconnections, 55–56
size of labor force, 60
sources of comparative advantage, 
190–191
infrastructure, 191
intellectual property rights, 191
natural resources, 191
production location advantage, 191
skilled labor force, 191
wealth from past production, 191
stagnant wages, 190
strength of, 51
technology leadership challenged, 36
trade conflict with European Union, 212
trade with Saudi Arabia, 184–186
trading companies, 189
United States Patent Office, 291
United States Postal Service, 11
United States Steel, 218
antitrust case, 322
United States Supreme Court
Standard Oil case, 322
United States Steel case, 322
United States Tax Code, 399
Unit elastic, 126–127
Unit elastic demand, 126–127
University of North Carolina, 149
University of Phoenix, 32
Unlimited liability, 58
Unskilled labor
effect of minimum wage, 106
Upper class, 393
Upward-sloping, 44
Used car market, 101, 180
U shape
of average cost curve, 234–235
of long- and short-run cost curves, 249
Utility, 408
Utility maximization
example, 413–414
status quo bias, 422
ultimatum game, 421
Union shop, 368
United Nations, 66–67
United States
amount of government spending, 75
class structure, 383
cultural trendsetter, 191
as debtor nation, 207–208
English as language of business, 191
immigration policy, 191
labor supply, 244
land prices, 244
as meritocracy, 388
number and percentages of persons in 
poverty, 388–389
open immigration policy, 191
property rights, 363
stable institutions, 191
statistics on, 65
tariff on steel imports, 218
tension over income redistribution, 
394–395
wealth distribution, 391
United States economy
balance of trade, 188
CEO compensation, 334
changing nature of outsourcing,  
192–193
versus China in wages, 188
comparative advantage
concerns about future, 192
equalizing trade balance, 193–194
gain and loss of advantage, 193
inherent vs. transferable, 192
and law of one price, 192–193
control of distribution and market, 35
decline in wage premium, 36–37
disappearing comparative advantage, 34
distributional effects of globalization,  
189–190
fourth sector, 251
income distribution across time,  
383–384
income mobility, 388
international competitors, 65
and international trade
balance of trade 1970–2012, 205
change in kinds of imports, 205
changing nature of, 204–205
effect of technological change, 205
exports and imports by region, 205
historical perspective, 206
main trading partners, 204
outsourcing of services, 205–206
outsourcing to China and India, 206
job losses in manufacturing, 370
labor market characteristics, 362

	
■ Index ■	
IND-27
ruling on EU ban on beef imports, 212
support for free trade, 215
and voluntary trade agreements, 210
Worldview, 503–504
Wulfers, Justin, 472
X
Xerox Corporation, 314, 333
X-inefficiency, 335
in natural monopolies, 340
Y
Yahoo!, 485
Yuan, 65
Yuengert, Andrew M., 21, 518
Z
Zero price, 128
Zero-profit condition, 276
Zero profit or loss, 275–277, 292
in long run, 278
in long run for monopolistic  
competition, 304
Zielinski, Anthony, 517
Welfare versus work, 355
Western Europe, 54, 75
growth rate 1940–2010, 529
Whitney, Eli, 74
Wicksteed, Phillip, 426
Wilcox, Claire, 223
Winner-take-all industries, 345–346
Women
pay gap, 364
Work
and income tax, 354–355
versus leisure, 354–355
Workers
bargaining power, 334
country differences, 359–360
firm’s consideration of welfare of,  
378–379
interests of the firm and, 377
Workers’ rights, 365
Workplace democracy, 365
Workweek, 60
World Bank, 67, 180, 504, 513
World Court, 65
World economy, 65
World Trade Organization, 67, 209
on dumping, 219
protests against, 215
stagnant in U.S., 190
trend toward inequality, 384
Wagner Act, 368
Walmart, 23, 241, 258, 279–280, 337,  
391, 455
state laws on competition, 323
Walton family, 391
Wants, 5
Marxian view of, 495
Warhol, Andy, 285
Watt, James, 74
Wealth, 394
billionaires, 391
distribution of, 391–392
Lorenz curve, 391
nominal, 558
from past production, 191
Wealth of Nations (Smith), 10, 22, 31, 34, 
73, 201, 488, 515
Wegmans Food Markets, 378
Welfare capitalism, development of, 74–75
Welfare gain, from natural monopoly, 297
Welfare loss, of monopoly eliminated by 
price discrimination, 293–294
Welfare loss triangle, 145, 292
military draft, 152
Welfare of society, 163, 295

