Migrating Big 
Data Analytics 
into the Cloud
Mike Barlow

Make Data Work
strataconf.com
Presented by O’Reilly and Cloudera, 
Strata + Hadoop World is where 
cutting-edge data science and new 
business fundamentals intersect—
and merge.
n Learn business applications of 
data technologies
n Develop new skills through 
trainings and in-depth tutorials
n Connect with an international 
community of thousands who 
work with data
Job # 15420

Mike Barlow
Migrating Big Data
Analytics into the Cloud

Migrating Big Data Analytics into the Cloud
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938
or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Holly Bauer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
October 2014:
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2014-10-01: First release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Migrating Big Data
Analytics into the Cloud and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod‐
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and
O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed
in caps or initial caps.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author(s) disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to open
source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility to
ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.
ISBN: 978-1-491-91698-8
[LSI]

Table of Contents
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service”
Models for Analytics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Into the Cloud                                                                                      1
Current and Planned Use of Analytics                                             2
Cloud Applications                                                                              4
As-a-Service Models                                                                            5
Areas Where Additional Help Might be Necessary                        5
Reasons for Reluctance                                                                       5
Unexpected Costs                                                                                7
iii


Survey Reveals Perceived
Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-
Service” Models for Analytics
Editor’s Note: This report contains proprietary statistical, anecdotal,
and observational research on the current state of big data analytics in
the cloud. We are sharing the information for the benefit of users,
decision-makers, and suppliers operating within the big data analytics
community. For the purposes of this paper, we are including all frame‐
works for managing big data (e.g., relational, non-relational, NoSQL),
regardless of the underlying architecture.
Into the Cloud
Despite the steady migration of numerous IT capabilities into the
cloud, many organizations have been reluctant to embrace the idea of
“big data-as-a-service.” On one hand, cloud-based big data analytics
squarely address ongoing issues of scale, speed, and cost. On the other
hand, they also create new issues around privacy, latency, and veracity.
Oftentimes, the best way to gain insight into a complex technology
problem is by digging beneath the surface and surveying the percep‐
tions of the user community. John King, a data analyst at O’Reilly Me‐
dia, designed and conducted a survey of the O’Reilly community,
which typically includes software developers, systems architects, en‐
gineers, data scientists, and data analysts. The survey was conducted
from July 9 through August 3, 2014. There were 312 respondents from
various industries including technology, healthcare, finance, and tel‐
ecom.
1

One of the main takeaways from the survey is that after an organization
has gained some experience using big data in the cloud, it is more likely
to expand its use of similar big data services. In other words, once
they’ve tested the waters, they’re more likely to jump into the pool.
That insight is neither surprising nor illogical. Humans are hard-wired
to be suspicious of novelty, and many executives still regard the cloud
as something new and largely unexplored. For suppliers of big data in
the cloud solutions, the primary challenge is helping customers take
the first steps.
According to our survey, the market seems ready for that kind of ap‐
proach. The survey shows that roughly 40% of respondents who iden‐
tify themselves as big data practitioners currently use cloud services
for analytics, slightly more than 30% are not, and slightly less than 30%
are planning to in the future.
Moreover, the survey shows that roughly 55% of respondents who plan
to become big data practitioners also plan to use cloud services for
analytics, compared to roughly 45% who said they would not.
Current and Planned Use of Analytics
The survey also showed that more than 70% of respondents currently
use or plan to use predictive analytics and business intelligence/
reporting capabilities. Roughly 60% currently use or plan to use big
data analytics for text mining or machine learning, and slightly less
than 50% currently use or plan to use big data analytics for hypothesis
testing. The poll results correspond with anecdotal research suggest‐
ing that big data is perceived mainly as a platform for advanced ana‐
lytics and enhanced BI.
Interestingly, only about 40% of respondents indicated they currently
use or plan to use big data for social network analysis, which seems
counterintuitive based on the sheer volume of media coverage around
social media topics.
2 
| 
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service” Models for Analytics

The survey also revealed that more than 80% of respondents who cur‐
rently use or intend to deploy cloud-based analytics solutions cite
“flexibility to scale up or down” as a reason for choosing a service
model over an on-premises delivery model. The next most popular
reason cited was faster deployments, followed by reduced capital ex‐
penditures, access to advanced technologies, and lack of skills required
for managing on-premises analytics.
Those findings correspond with the expressed needs of IT executives
and other corporate-level decision-makers, who are often quoted as
saying the cloud offers the freedom to test new technologies quickly
and inexpensively. It also plays to the seasonality of industries such as
retail and energy, which often handle vastly different amounts of data
at different times of the year.
About 60% of respondents said that within the next 18 months, they
planned to deploy a discovery environment for data mining or other
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service” Models for Analytics 
| 
3

forms of statistical analysis. Slightly more than 50% said they would
deploy an open source Hadoop framework or NoSQL database, while
slightly less than 50% indicated they were planning to deploy a rela‐
tional database. Clearly, users and decision-makers are still hedging
their bets.
Cloud Applications
Drilling down into the big data stack, slightly more than 65% of re‐
spondents indicated they were currently using or planned to use
cloud-based data storage and management applications. Slightly more
than 60% indicated they are using or plan to use analytic sandboxes,
while slightly more than 50% said they would use cloud-based services
for testing and development.
About 40% of respondents said they use or plan to use the cloud for
production data warehousing, while slightly more than 30% said they
would use the cloud for data marts. Only about 12% said they would
use the cloud for disaster recovery, which is somewhat surprising and
signals a potential opportunity for cloud vendors.
4 
| 
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service” Models for Analytics

As-a-Service Models
In a ranking of cloud-based “as-a service” models, respondents cited
platform-as-a-service, 
followed 
by 
infrastructure-as-a-service,
software-as-a-service, and database-as-a-service. Again, this seems to
follow larger IT trends, in which organizations follow paths of least
resistance to achieve the highest perceived value at any given time.
Areas Where Additional Help Might be
Necessary
Respondents who indicated they were planning to use cloud-based
data analytics in the future were also asked to rank areas in which they
would require help moving analytics into the cloud. The survey results
showed concern around daily data management activities (e.g., secu‐
rity administration, performance and workload management, and
backup); ongoing application development; daily data integration is‐
sues; and daily management of business intelligence environments.
Reasons for Reluctance
Respondents who indicated they do not use cloud-based analytics
were asked to choose the main reasons for their reluctance. Most chose
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service” Models for Analytics 
| 
5

data and privacy requirements as the primary reason, followed by ex‐
isting on-premises capabilities, connectivity and bandwidth issues,
and performance concerns.
Those findings correspond with anecdotal and observational research.
It seems clear that balancing the benefits and risks of a big data cloud
strategy can be a daunting task. Based on our interviews with users
and subject matter experts, advantages include scalability, elasticity,
agility, lower cost, and rapid innovation. The areas of most concern
are performance, security, bandwidth, and data accuracy.
Table 1. Benefits and challenges of moving big data into the cloud.
Benefits/Advantages
Obstacles/Concerns
Scalability/elasticity
Performance
Agility
Security
Cost
Bandwidth
Time to market
Data accuracy/veracity
“With the cloud, you’re always going to be cutting edge with the push
of a button or the swipe of a credit card,” said Marc Clark, director of
cloud strategy and deployment at Teradata. “Cloud vendors will con‐
tinue adding new features to keep ahead of their competitors, which
means that even smaller companies can use the latest technology. You
just cannot do that with on-premises solutions. I know of many com‐
panies with on-premises technology that is two or three generations
behind what’s currently available through the cloud.”
Flexibility is a main driver of cloud adoption, according to Clark. “The
cloud lets you weigh the advantages and disadvantages of a system
without committing the resources that would be required if you were
6 
| 
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service” Models for Analytics

going to buy it or enter into a multi-year licensing deal with a vendor,”
he said. “That’s the beauty of the cloud. You can test something for two
or three weeks and see if it’s right for you, without having to give up
your right arm.”
The ability to test systems in the cloud, in much the same way that a
consumer test drives a new car before buying it, helps companies
overcome their reluctance to adopt cloud-based data warehouse serv‐
ices. “Some companies worry that performance levels will be com‐
promised in the cloud. The best way to find out is by trying out a cloud-
based service for a couple of weeks. Then you get to test your assump‐
tions and discover for yourself if the cloud makes sense for your or‐
ganization,” said Clark.
Some companies might discover they have bandwidth issues that
would prevent them from taking advantage of a cloud-based service.
Some might decide to upgrade their network connectivity, while oth‐
ers might decide to stick with their on-premises solution. “What’s im‐
portant is that you find out in minutes or hours, instead of finding out
in weeks or months,” said Clark. “You will know very quickly whether
the cloud is meeting your performance needs.”
For some IT executives, moving workloads into the cloud represents
a potential loss of control. “If you feel the need to tuck your servers in
at night and tell them a bedtime story, then there might be a problem,”
said Clark. “Some people see a disadvantage in not owning the hard‐
ware and the software. They feel as though they are losing control. Or
they hear about someone who moved workloads into the cloud, and
then moved them back on premises. The cloud is not the right solution
for everybody.”
Unexpected Costs
Stories about organizations encountering unexpected costs when
moving into the cloud are common. Unrealistic expectations gener‐
ated by endless media hype about the unparalleled virtues of the cloud
can set the stage for disappointment. “If your primary motivation is
cost reduction, don’t move into the cloud,” said Clark. “Lots of people
think cost is the number-one reason to choose the cloud, but that’s the
wrong way to look at it, especially if you’re planning on moving your
big data analytics into the cloud.”
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service” Models for Analytics 
| 
7

When you’re building a business case for the cloud, your primary
considerations should be speed, scalability, and flexibility. “The cloud
enables business agility. The cloud is elastic, so if your business sud‐
denly grows you can respond very quickly if you’re in the cloud. The
same holds true if your market shrinks. You can move in either direc‐
tion much more rapidly and with much more freedom,” said Clark.
Paul Barsch, a services marketing director at Teradata, recommends
taking the time to perform due diligence reviews with potential cloud
vendors before moving forward with a services plan. “Make sure the
supplier provides basic cloud infrastructure functions and walk the
supplier through an itemized checklist of your requirements,” he said.
A typical checklist would include:
1. Hardware/software monitoring and maintenance
2. Security administration
3. Resource provisioning
4. Networking
5. On-boarding
6. Data center management
7. Backup and recovery
8. System availability
9. DBA support
10. Daily operational management
Ideally, cloud-service suppliers should also provide high-level logical
and physical data models, industry report templates, consulting (when
necessary), data integration management, data migration, and other
capabilities required for launching successful cloud implementations.
In a 2013 article coauthored with Ed White, general manager for Ter‐
adata Cloud Solutions, Barsch advised against focusing solely on “low‐
est cost per terabyte” solutions and noted that “it’s important to rec‐
ognize that not all cloud infrastructures are created equal.” Some kinds
of cloud infrastructures are better at handling data analytics than oth‐
ers, so make sure the supplier has the appropriate infrastructure for
supporting your analytic workloads.
Since analytics tend to be CPU- and I/O-intensive, “it does not make
sense to run analytic workloads on cloud infrastructures that are pro‐
8 
| 
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service” Models for Analytics

visioned for general-purpose computing one day and for data ware‐
housing the next,” according to Barsch and White. “Business users
expect top-tier performance, which is why a cloud environment dedi‐
cated and engineered specifically for analytic workloads is imperative.”
For CIOs and other IT leaders who are looking to forge closer ties to
the business side of their companies, big data in the cloud offers the
promise of compressed development cycles for IT and faster time-to-
market for the business. By default, however, IT leaders also would
have to run interference for the business, since moving data into the
cloud would likely require sign-offs from the chief corporate counsel
and the CFO, as well as various internal boards and committees of the
corporation.
Survey Reveals Perceived Challenges and Benefits of “As-a-Service” Models for Analytics 
| 
9

About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has represented major organizations in numerous indus‐
tries.
Mike is coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media
Strategy (Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The Future of IT
Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers (Wiley, 2007). He
is also the writer of many articles, reports, and white papers on mar‐
keting strategy, marketing automation, customer intelligence, busi‐
ness performance management, collaborative social networking,
cloud computing, and big data analytics.
Over the course of a long career, Mike was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns ap‐
peared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies.
Mike is a graduate of Hamilton College. He is a licensed private pilot,
an avid reader, and an enthusiastic ice hockey fan. Mike lives in Fair‐
field, Connecticut, with his wife and two children.

