WHOSE IMAGE? 
by Mike Combs 
mikecombs@aol.com  
Copyright © 1990 
        As far as I knew, it was merely continuing to mist heavily the way it had done all through the day.
What I did not realize was that the mist was really ice, and it was accumulating on the road as I drove.
Not until the car began to spin. 
        There is no feeling quite so terrifying as the one you get when your car is moving in a direction other
than the one you are pointing it in. I was helplessly sliding off the side of the road and straight at an
inconveniently-placed tree. 
        It's true what they tell you in those public service announcements about auto accidents: your body is
going just as fast as your car. That's how fast I went through the windshield. I had time enough for only
one thought: "This is going to kill me." 
        Later, I found out I was right. 
        I would like to say I had one of those much-talked-about "out of body" experiences, to say I glided
up and out of myself, gazing down with curious detachment at my bloody, mangled body. Or to say I had
the most powerful sensation of being rapidly propelled up a narrow tunnel with a brilliant light at the end.
But unfortunately the sensation of dying was nothing that dramatic. More like falling asleep and then
awakening after about half an hour: merely a short nap. I awoke (as I had confidently counted on all my
life) in Heaven. 
        No mist on the floor. But I must admit everything did seem brilliantly illuminated and... well...
glittery. I turned my head to see what appeared to be a normal-looking man at my side. 
        Figuring all this business about halos and wings was probably pure hokum, I hazarded a guess. "Are
you an angel?" 
        "Only in the same sense that you're an angel now." 
        "In other words..." 
        "Yes, I once lived on the Earth. I'm dead and now I live here. Well, if you're though with your
disorientation now, please come with me. God is waiting to see you." 
        I reeled briefly. "God is waiting to see me?" 
        "Of course," the angel/man said with casual annoyance. "Doesn't everybody count on getting to see
God when they reach the other side? Isn't 'Gone to meet his maker' synonymous with croaking? Don't
tell me you weren't expecting this." 
        "I guess if I ever thought about it," (and I wasn't even sure that I had), "I thought God must be an
awfully busy man, and he wouldn't have the time to welcome everyone personally." 
        "The boss always schedules an appointment with each new arrival." My guardian angel's face

screwed up as he thought intently. "With the world's population the way it is now, surely there must be
several people kicking the bucket every second. It must be true what they always said about him being in
more than one place at once." He resumed tugging at me. "Well all the same, it ain't good to keep the big
guy waiting. Come with me." 
        I will not even attempt to describe the (literally) heavenly vistas I saw on our journey to the mansion
of the Almighty. Nor will I attempt to describe said mansion. There are simply no Earthly references that
work. But a description of God himself, well, that's the crux of my story. 
        I suppose if I had any preconceived notions of what God looked like, then they were pretty much
the standard ones: a big guy (about eight feet I guess), Anglo-Saxon, with long, flowing white hair and
beard, wearing a robe. Turns out the only part of this stereotype on target was the eight-foot-tall part.
Whenever it occurred to me that this image was most probably wrong, I had struggled to envision some
noncoporeal form; perhaps a sphere of brilliant light something like the sun. It turns out our heavenly
father has a coporeal form alright but... 
        Jehova did not so much resemble my mental picture of God as... Godzilla. 
        He had scaly lizard skin and green slitpupil eyes like those of an alligator. Pointy teeth. Claws.
Threetoed feet. There was a division down the back of his throne to accommodate his long, tapering tail.
He looked very much like science book illustrations I had seen (when I was alive back on Earth) of
dinosaurs of the smaller, two-legged variety, but with one difference. Although the head was definitely
reptillian in shape, the top was high and domed: A brainy dinosaur. 
        God looked me up and down appraisingly, forked tongue darting out and in rapidly. I knew enough
about animals to know this was the lizard's equivalent of a dog sniffing at a new, unfamiliar person. 
        "Not what you exsssspected, huh?" he intoned. 
        "To say the least," I stammered. "I was expecting something more... more... " 
        "Like yoursssself," he finished. "Of which religion were you in your mortal life?" 
        "Well, I tried to view all of the world's religions as at least partly descriptive of a much larger....." 
        "Hell, boy, just tell me what country you were born in!" 
        "America." 
        "JudeoChrissstian then. Hah, they're the worssst. 'God created Man in hiss own image' isss one of
your most dearly cherished beliefsss. I know you have a lot of questions in your mind right now, ssso let
me tell you about the firssst Genesisssss." He stopped to glare at me. "The one before yours." 
        "My original plan was to create Man in my own image. I built the sssun and the sssolar syssstem. I
evolved life on the Earth, ssstarting out with sssimple sssinglecelled organisms and then working my way
up to more and more complex creatures until finally I created a life form that represented the very
pinnacle of evolution!" 
        "Man?", I interrupted the Almighty. 
        "Nooooo imbecile!!" he bellowed, tail twitching in annoyance. "The dinosssaurs!!!" 
        "They were fruitful and multiplied. They filled the earth and the ssskies and the waters. I had high
hopesss for the one you call sssaurornithoid. I was busy working out an opposable thumb, ssstereo

vision, and a bigger brain for him and all hiss ssseed. Then came an errant asteroid which had essscaped
my attention. It fell like a giant flaming mountain into the sssea. Great quantities of the dussst of the earth
and a great flood were churned up into the heavens and ssspread on the four winds to all corners of the
Earth. The waters became as bitter as wormwood, the moon as red as blood, and the sssun as black as
sssack cloth. My dinosaurs were cassst into darknesss and there was a great wailing and gnashing of
teeth. Nowadays, I think that you call thisss the greenhoussse effect." 
        "Uh, I believe that's nuclear winter," I corrected his Omniscience. 
        "I don't sssee what your power plants have to do with any of thisss," he sniffed. "Well, almost all of
my beautiful dinosaurs perished in thisss time of great tribulation. The only thing I could make out of the
pitiful sssurvivors was the birds. When the dussst finally cleared, all I had left to work with were these
furry little rodents who, by sssome perversssity of fate, had sssomehow managed to sssurvive." 
        "A God has to make do with what he has, ssso I ssstarted over again, trying to guide these mammal
thingies into the roles I had originally created for my marvelous sssaurians: herbivore and carnivore, sssea
ssswimmer and plains gallopper. I finally realized that nothing better than the primates was going to come
along for a creature out of which I could make Man. The bipedal part was what almossst drove me
nutsss! With the dinosaurs it had been no problem at all; many of them had already been upright for tens
of millions of years. I had to chase your ancestors up into the trees and then back down again to make it
work. And now here you are: in charge of the world and putting pictures of my magnificent thunder
lizardsss on (sssssigh) children's Tshirts." 
        By now the creator of the universe was slumping in his throne. He was trapped in a world he had
made, alright, but which hadn't quite come off the way he had hoped. He curled his long tail up and
around into his lap and idly played with it as he spoke. I distractedly noted a detail on it which was
missing from the artist's conceptions of dinosaurs: a small barb at the end. 
        "I see you're confused and disssillusioned. Good. Ssso am I and misery loves company. Puncturing
your kind's pleasantly self-reflective God stereotypes is the only kick I'm allowed up here." He leaned
over and rested his iguana jaw on one claw, looking petulantly off to the side. "I create the Earth for the
dinosaurs and in the end it winds up being overrun by furry little titsssuckers!" 
        I must have blanched at that, for God lifted his saurian head and went on to say, "Didn't mean to be
crude. Try not to take it ssso persssonal. Geeez, I mean, I did go ahead and build heaven for you
anyway, didn't I? I mean you're here, right? I think I'm being pretty magnanimous about thisss whole thing
considering the sssituation." 
        "Wait a minute. If you are God almighty, then surely you could have kept that asteroid from hitting
the Earth in the first place," I asked his Omnipotence. 
        "Nope. No can do. Once you ssset a sssolar sssystem into motion, you cannot interfere. It'sss
against the rules." 
        I blinked. "The rules? Whose rules?" 
        "Once you've had a few millennia to ssstudy theology, you may be sssufficiently well educated to
dissscuss sssuch matters," God replied. 
        Rather testily, I thought. 

The End 
Return to 

