
With his lightning-quick wit, unbridled 
creativity and his ear for the absurd, Milligan 
revolutionized British comedy by turning 
everything he encountered on its head. Whether 
on radio, on screen, on the page or in person, his 
clowning antics and cut-throat quips left a trail 
of outrage, bewilderment and total hilarity in his 
wake, as well as a legacy that stretches from 
Monty Python’s Flying Circus to the work of self- 
confessed acolytes such as Eddie Izzard and 
Stephen Fry today. 
Throughout his life, Milligan wrote prolifically:' 
scripts, poetry, cartoon sketches, parodies and 
fiction, as well as several volumes of memoir, 
in which he took an entirely idiosyncratic 
approach to the truth. In this ground-breaking 
work, Norma Fames, his long-time manager, 
companion, counsellor and confidante, gathers 
together the loose threads, reads between the 
lines and draws on the full breadth of his 
writing to present his life in his own words: 
an autobiography - of sorts. 
From his childhood in India,‘where every day 
was like a Kipling story’, through his early career 
as a jazz musician and sketch-show entertainer, 
his spells in North Africa and Italy with the 
Royal Artillery, to that fateful first broadcast of 
The Goon Show and beyond into the annals of 
comedy history, this is the autobiography Milligan 
never wrote. As he put it, ‘I was determined to 
pursue the matter to its illogical conclusion.’ 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life does exactly that. 

3 0116 01748560 6 
i l C&-.& 
$$g1 * 

N 

Milligans Meaning of Life 

N 

Milligans Meaning of Life 
An Autobiography of Sorts 
SPIKE MILLIGAN 
Edited by Norma Fames 
VIKING 
an imprint of 
PENGUIN BOOKS 

VIKING 
Published by the Penguin Group ^ 
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R orl, England 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, Newt York, New York 100x4, USA 
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) 
Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) 
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia 
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi -110 017, India 
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632, New Zealand 
(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) 
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, 
Johannesburg 2196, South Africa 
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R orl, England 
www.penguin.com 
First published 2011 
Text copyright © Spike Milligan Productions Ltd, 2011 
Introductions copyright © Norma Farnes Management, 2011 
The moral right of the copyright holders hasffieen asserted 
Picture on p. 302 courtesy of Paul Thomas/Dai/y Express 
All rights reserved 
Without limiting the rights under copyright 
reserved above, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior 
written permission of both the copyright owner and 
the above publisher of this book 
Set in Minion Pro 12/14.75 pt 
Typeset by Palimpsest Book Production Limited, Falkirk, Stirlingshire 
Printed in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, St Ives pic 
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
HARDBACK ISBN: 978-O-67O-92076-I 
TRADE PAPERBACK ISBN: 978-O-67O-92077-8 
www.greenpenguin.co.uk 
FSC 
wwwfsc.org 
MIX 
Paper from 
responsible sources 
FSC" C018179 
Penguin Books is committed to a sustainable 
future for our business, our readers and our 
planet. This book is made from paper certified 
by the Forest Stewardship Council. 

This book is dedicated to 
Bill Kenwright, 
piece of gold in showbusiness* 
* Borrowed from Spike 

■> 
s 

Contents 
Acknowledgements ix 
Introduction 1 
1 Beginnings 11 
2 Boys with Guns 51 
3 Earning a Living 123 
4 Taking Ones Place in Society 191 
5 Tender(ish) Moments 241 
6 Final Curtain 287 


Acknowledgements 
I wish to thank Will Hammond, my editor, aka Billy Liar, for his 
tremendous help and advice and that wonderful sense of humour. 
(Spike would have liked him.) 
Eric Sykes for his support. 
Niki Charlton, who believes in me and thinks I can do no wrong. 
Mary (from the dairy) Kalemkarian for all her encouragement. 
Jack Clarke, my old man, who puts up with me. 
Lastly, that very special lady Janet Spearman, who organizes my 
life, for her undying loyalty. 

s 

Introduction 
A sort of autobiography.’ Yes, Spike would have liked that. I can 
hear him saying, ‘Yes, well, I suppose I’ve had a sort of life.’ 
The concept of this book was to tell Spike’s life story through his 
writings, using extracts not just from his many memoirs, scripts, 
sketches and works of fiction but incorporating letters that he wrote 
to the world, complaining or campaigning about his many causes, 
and his poetry, which in many cases shows a different side of the 
man. His many followers will, no doubt, find gaps, but it wasn’t my 
intention to give a complete account - rather, an impressionistic 
journey. I did my best, but as Spike used to say to me: ‘That’s what 
worries me.’ 
Spike was born into a loving, wonderfully eccentric family. His 
grandfather, Sergeant Trumpeter Kettleband, fought in the Boer 
War and was awarded the South African medal with Johannesburg 
Orange Free State Cape Colony clasp as well as a long service medal. 
Spike was proud of his military background and told anybody who 
would listen that he came from a long line of ‘military men’. 
His father, Leo Alphonso, was an original, extremely talented 
Irish romantic. His parents had chosen the name Percy Marmaduke 
for him, but just before the baptism at Sligo Cathedral the priest 
said, ‘Why not name him after the dear Pope?’ And so it was. His 
mother, equally talented, was a strong-willed, powerful woman. 
The first time I met Grandma Milligan I remarked to Spike, ‘If you 
had a vision of one woman that built the British Empire it would 
be your mother.’ 
Spike inherited their talent and more. Author of over eighty 
books, a musician who played four instruments professionally, a 
scriptwriter of twelve television series and, memorably, of radio’s 
The Goon Show. An artist of many paintings, he had his own exhi¬ 
bition at the Whitechapel Gallery. One of his paintings was hung 

2 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
in a summer exhibition at the Royal Academy. Illustrator - well, 
not really. A cartoonist - not really! A quirky drawer? Yes! His 
drawings have been turned into greetings cards that have sold over 
one and a quarter million, calendars and also a line of stationery. 
The man with all this talent was a very complex character; mean, 
generous, lovable, hateful, kind, hurtful, calm, mercurial, and all 
on the same day. He was anti-violence, yet he shot a boy in his 
garden. An explanation? Vandals* had damaged his garden quite 
considerably on several occasions. Each time, Spike telephoned the 
police to make a complaint and have if logged. Finally the vandals 
did unspeakable things in his daughter Jane’s Wendy house. That 
was it. According to Spike the police did nothing, so he decided he 
would catch the offenders. He did, and with his air rifle shot the boy 
in the shoulder. This from a man who was anti-violence. The case 
went to court. I offered to get him a'good barrister. ‘No thank you, 
I’ll defend myself.’ I thought, ‘God help us all.’ But the magistrate at 
Highgate Crown Court lived in the area, was aware of the vandalism 
and Spike was given a twelve-month conditional discharge. The 
luck of the Irish! 
Spike had been in court before. It was 1937. He was desperate for 
money to buy a new trumpet. He was working for the Spiers & 
Pond tobacco company in the stockroom, packing cigarettes for 
delivery to local shops. He figured no one would miss a few packs, 
so he loaded them into his overcoat pockets. Now the new trumpet 
was in sight, but what was also in sight was the senior stockman, 
Mr Ripler, and his sidekick, Mr Leighy, who caught Spike in the 
act. Another trip to the local court, but this time he was to be 
defended by a romantic, theatrical Irishman who had kissed the 
Blarney Stone. His father! 
Leo spent several days rehearsing at home the defence he would 
deliver for his unfortunate son. ‘Look at him, a young lad. His crime 
was his love of music. He needed the money to buy a violin and 
study classical music, but he was so poor he could never - you hear, 
N-E-V-E-R - afford one. His only way was to pilfer stockroom 
goods and sell them. This has afforded him a second-hand violin, 
which even now he is learning to play. Have pity on this boy because, 

Introduction 
3 
as a result of this action, he could become a virtuoso!’ He did, on 
the trumpet, playing in the Harlem Club Band in Lewisham, and 
the case was dismissed. Yet again, the luck of the Irish! 
Like father like son..Spike was amoral. He would tell you a story 
you knew wasn’t the truth, and when you questioned him he would 
say, There, but it made you laugh, didn’t it?’ This all stems from 
the first he his father told him, when Spike was eight years old. His 
father was relating a story to him of how he had shot a tiger. Spike 
said to him, ‘Father, that’s a lie,’ to which his father replied, ‘Now, 
son, would you rather have an exciting lie or the boring truth?’ And 
so it was for the rest of Spike’s life. By the way, he repeated that story 
all his life. 
The 1970s and 1980s was Spike’s prolific period: his television shows 
and his books; a tireless campaigner to save the planet and for animal 
rights. But it was in the early 1970s that he also fell in love with 
pantomime. Up until this time he had only performed Treasure 
Island, as a pantomime at the Mermaid Theatre. He had a ball. He 
turned his dressing room into a cave and filled it with ‘treasure’, 
including hundreds of gold coin chocolates. He invited children 
backstage to ‘enter the treasure cave’. He loved it. The rest of the 
cast thought it was a nightmare, dozens of little horrors running 
around backstage. And so it was ‘Get me a pantomime for next 
year!’ for many, many years. 
Then, suddenly, ‘I’m not doing any more pantos. I cant do thir¬ 
teen performances a week. What do you think I am? You are killing 
me!’ So for a couple of years I stopped killing him - until... ‘Every¬ 
one is working at Christmas. You never get me a pantomime. You 
are keeping me unemployed!’ And so the killing game started once 
more, and continued until 1989, when he appeared in Snow White 
at the Assembly Hall, Tunbridge Wells, an hour’s drive from his 
home in Rye. (His love of panto didn’t stop his ‘conditions’, and one 
condition was, ‘If I’m going to do thirteen performances a week, I 
need to get home every night and sleep in my own bed.’) 
In the early 1990s Spike’s health started to deteriorate. I had 
already completed negotiations for the 1990 pantomime, posters 

4 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
had been printed, contracts signed and exchanged, but he became 
ill, and it had to be cancelled. This was a severe ‘black dog’. His 
mother had died on 3 July 1990. It left him devastated. He had been 
depressed before her death; not getting out of bed, totally lacklustre 
in his voice. It was as though all the emotion had been sucked out 
of him, and for the first time in about twenty years he asked for 
ECT (electro-convulsive therapy). I begged him not to have it. 
‘Please, Spike, its not good for you. It fries^your brain.’ He wouldn’t 
listen. He became obsessed with having it, and in October 1990 he 
went into the Godden Green Clinic and had ECT for the last time. 
Later he confessed to me that he knew it was damaging but it was 
the only thing that got him out of the depths that he was in. ‘Norm,’ 
he said, ‘it’s terrible to be your own murderer.’ I’ve never forgotten 
that despairing look in his eyes as he said it. 
In 1993 he had a triple heart bypass that didn’t go according 
to plan. Twelve hours after the operation a valve failed and he 
had to have a second operation. Two doses of anaesthetic left 
him very weak and his recuperation took many months. He was 
getting low - not depressed but low because the recuperation 
wasn’t quick enough for him. I was desperate for him to continue 
his writing and encouraged him to write some poetry. He wasn’t 
having any of it and became quite grumpy, and I told him so. 
Then what a put-down: ‘I’m not grumpy, I’m going to rewrite the 
Bible.’ 
‘Of course you are, Spike, just get on with it.’ I thought it was a 
joke. 
But that year saw the publication of The Bible According to Spike 
Milligan, and several classics followed which became the ‘According 
to’ series. Even so, 1993 was a depressing time for him. In Novem¬ 
ber that year his two great friends Jack Hobbs and Alan Clare died 
within a week of each other. 
The next year, 1994, was a better one for him, and as it drew 
to a close the spark was ignited again when he was given a Life¬ 
time Achievement Award at the British Comedy Awards. Over 
the years different versions have been recounted of what happened 
that night. I was there, so let me put the record straight. Prince 

Introduction 
5 
Charles had sent a tribute to be read out at the ceremony. It did 
go on a bit, and Spike became impatient. He interrupted the 
reading with ‘The grovelling little bastard.’ The whole room 
erupted with laughter.. 
The next day Spike and I were laughing about it when he said, 
Til send him a telegram.’ It read: ‘I suppose now a knighthood is 
out of the question.’ Prince Charles’s equerry rang that afternoon 
to say they had been watching it together and it was one of the 
funniest things they had seen. The true version, folks. 
That same year, I got a call from a dear friend of mine, Malcolm 
Morris, who was a producer and director of This Is Your Life for 
over twenty-five years. He rang me to arrange a dinner. ‘It’s part 
business, but please bring Jack [my partner], and we’ll have food, 
wine, nostalgia and a few laughs along the way.’ Jack and Malcolm 
had worked together for many years at Tyne Tees Television. Of 
course, it was to tell me he wanted to do a second This Is Your Life 
on Spike. He had already done one in 1973, and he thought Milligan 
warranted another. I was delighted and promised to give him all 
the help he needed, but there was one condition: he must invite 
Toni Pontani from Rome to be on the show. 
I told him the story of Spike and Toni, whom he had met and 
fallen in love with in Italy in 1944, so it was Malcolm’s turn to be 
delighted. When Toni appeared I don’t think I’d ever seen Spike so 
stunned and lost for words. Did I really write that? Spike Milligan 
lost for words! Well, he was when, on 24 January 1995, Michael 
Aspel announced ‘Toni Pontani’. 
Several years later, in 1999,1 went down to Rye, where Spike was 
living, to show him the cover of Spike Milligan: The Family Album. 
We were discussing some of the photographs he had chosen for the 
book. He stopped talking, looked up from a photograph and said, 
‘Toni was the love of my life.’ She hadn’t been mentioned. We hadn’t 
even been talking about the army or Italy. It came from his soul 
unaided. 
The Eurostar was a bonus for Spike. Although Toni lived in Rome, 
her daughter lived in Paris. Until two years before he died he would 
take the Eurostar to Paris to have lunch with Toni, whenever she 

6 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
was visiting. I don’t know why but it always made me smile when 
he told me he was having lunch with her in Paris. I’m smiling now 
as I write this. 
For me 1998 was possibly the last year that he had that wonder¬ 
ful sparkle. After nagging ‘Can we have a poetry hook?’ for months, 
he rang me to say he had finished it. He hadn’t bothered to tell me 
he had started one in the first place! It was A Mad Medley of Milli¬ 
gan. ‘Why didn’t you tell me you had started a poetry book?’ I asked. 
He said, ‘You like to nag, so I thought I’d let you get on with it.’ Spike 
at his best. 
Spike loved to tell everyone he was Irish. He wasn’t and had never 
lived there, but he loved the Irish and wanted to be one of them. 
So to him he was Irish. So when I suggested to him it was time he 
returned to Dublin with his one-man show, it was the best idea I’d 
ever had! When I suggested the Gaiety Theatre: ‘You really are my 
sunshine girl.’ 
On 14 June 1998 he performed at the Gaiety to a sell-out. He 
pulled out all the stops; he was at his best. The standing ovation 
lasted for what seemed forever, and they wouldn’t let him leave the 
stage. He knew he had ‘gone okay’ - his comment when he had 
been a great success. I had arranged dinner after the show. Everyone 
was in high spirits - although only Champagne and wine were 
consumed. Jack said he had never seen Spike so happy. Spike’s reply: 
‘Oh Jack, it’s because I’ve come home!’ 
I thought his performance there was worthy of a night at the 
London Palladium and arranged one for 20 December 1998, but a 
very different Spike appeared at the theatre. He looked tired, but I 
wasn’t too concerned because, after years of experience, I knew 
when he went on stage the tiredness would disappear and he would 
deliver. He did - but it wasn’t the anarchic, cheeky, mischievous 
Milligan. I stood in the wings and watched. A sadness came over 
me. I knew it was the beginning of the end of his one-man shows. 
He did, in fact, perform again - at Hull and Chichester - reading 
his poetry and telling anecdotes. But his timing had gone. On reflec¬ 
tion I should never have arranged these performances. He persuaded 
me he could do it. I shouldn’t have listened. 

Introduction 
7 
Again he turned to his writing. The result: A Childrens Treasury 
of Milligan, a compilation of his wonderful poetry for children and 
one of his most successful poetry books. 
I forgot to mention, in 1999 he was voted funniest person of 
the millennium in a BBC News online survey. And in 2000 his 
poem ‘On the Ning Nang Nong’ was voted the Nation’s Favourite 
Poem. In September 2000 the BBC released Volume 19 of the 
Goon Shows on CD, and still the same reaction from Spike: ‘When 
I die they’ll say, “Fie wrote the Goon Shows and died!”’ How many 
times did I hear that. (To date the BBC have released nine more 
volumes. Currently I’m working on Volume 29 and the fifth 
compilation.) , 
But that month Spike was admitted to the Conquest Hospital in 
Hastings. He had developed septicaemia after some injections, and 
went in as an emergency patient. Jack and I visited him on 23 
September. He looked frail and tired, but as Jack I were leaving he 
got hold of my hand and said, ‘Norm, remember, life is one long 
hell. I know you won’t, but don’t let the bastards grind you down.’ 
Jack looked at me and said, ‘His fighting spirit is still there,’ and I 
was happy to leave him knowing Jack was right. As I kissed him 
goodbye he said very quietly, ‘Norm, look after Eric. He’s very 
special.’ I thought it must have occurred to him he was not going 
to see Eric Sykes again. A friendship that had lasted nearly sixty 
years. 
A sad year for Spike was 2001. ‘My mate’ Harry Secombe died, 
and it broke his heart. He was too ill to attend the memorial serv¬ 
ice for Harry, which took place on 26 October 2001 in Westminster 
Abbey. He sent his tribute: ‘Harry was the sweetness of Wales.’ 
Four months later, on 26 February 2002, he joined his mates Pete 
and Harry. I remember Eric writing, ‘On 26 February 2002 one of 
the jewels fell from the comedy crown. It was the day Spike Milligan, 
with whom I’d shared an office for over fifty years, passed away. I 
use the phrase “passed away”, for that is exactly what he did. Spike 
will never die in the hearts of millions of us who were uplifted by 
his works. For me and Norma, his manager, he still prowls the 
building in unguarded moments. He will always be welcome. As 

8 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Hattie was my sister, so he was my brother. Rest in peace, Spike, 
and say hello to Peter and Harry.’ 
I wonder if they are causing havoc up there, with Pete, as always, 
asking Spike to write another Goon Show ‘just so we can have some 
laughs’. 
I would like to think so. } 
Norma Fames 
May 2011 

I am the pen, 
without me this paper 
cannot live. 
- Open Heart University 
Its a small world,’ he said. 
‘Yes, I nearly fell off.’ 
- Spike on Spike', Memories of Milligan 

V 
\ 

1 
Beginnings 
My father had a profound influence on me -- he was a lunatic. 
- ‘Spike on Spike’, Memories of Milligan 

t 
\ 

Spikes mother, Florence Mary Winifred Kettleband, was born 
in Woolwich in 1893. Her father, Alfred, had been born in Agra, 
India, and enlisted as a boy soldier in the Royal Artillery. Her 
mother, Margaret, had been born at Gosport, England, the daugh¬ 
ter of a Regimental Sergeant Major in the Royal Artillery. The family 
were interested in music, theatre and music hall, so it followed that 
they visited Woolwich Empire to see Alfred’s favourite acts, G. H. 
Elliott, Eugene Stratton and Dan Leno. At the end of the Boer War, 
Alfred was sent to a military depot in Ahmednagar, India, where 
Florence and Margaret joined him. In 1903 they moved to Alfreds 
new posting in Kirkee. 
Spike’s father, Leo Alphonso, was born in Sligo, Ireland, in 1890. 
Leo’s father William was also in the Royal Artillery. In 1896 the 
family moved to Poplar, London. William was captivated by the 
theatre and got an evening job as a stage hand at the Poplar Hippo¬ 
drome, which led to his appearing as an extra, eventually taking on 
major roles at the Queen’s Theatre in Poplar. He enrolled Leo into 
the Steadman School of Dancing and encouraged him to play the 
trumpet. He then forced him to join the army as a boy soldier in 
1904, enlisting him in the Royal Artillery at Shrapnel Barracks, 
Woolwich. In 1906, Leo was promoted to trumpeter and took part 
in army concerts, dancing and singing, and became a champion at 
the soft-shoe shuffle. He adopted the stage name Leo Gann after 
he had won several talent contests. On 14 December 1911 he sailed 
on the SS Plassey, having been posted to India. He arrived in 
Bombay and travelled to Kirkee. 
So Kirkee became the meeting point for Spike’s parents. There 
Florence and Leo fell in love, eloped and were married by registrar 
in Room 13 of the Poona Hotel. Florence’s family were appalled, 
and when Leo returned from Mesopotamia a year later they insisted 

14 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
on a church wedding at St Patrick’s Church in Poona. This took 
place on 19 August 1915. By then Florence had become an accom¬ 
plished organist and trained contralto. Leo was appearing in army 
concerts and together they formed a duo entertaining the troops. 
In 1917 Leo was posted to Ahmednagar, and there, on 16 April 
1918, Florence gave birth to Terence Alan Milligan. 
Spike looked back on his boyhood in India with great fondness: 
‘It was an ideal childhood. I love'd the Jakes, the beautiful colours 
and the gentle people.’ 
It was here, too, that Spike got his taste for the military. Spike 
loved the army life, as he would, as the fourth generation of Royal 
Artillery soldiers. 
In 1924 Leo Milligan was posted to Rangoon in Burma, and the 
following year, on 3 December, Spike’s brother, Desmond Patrick, 
was born. 
In 1926 Leo gave Spike a birthday present of his first gun-belt, 
and in 1930, at the age of twelve, Spike started his own ‘army’. It 
consisted of five soldiers: himself, his brother Desmond, Sergeant 
Taylor’s son, the Havaldar’s son and their servant’s son, whose name, 
truly, was Hari Krishna. Spike named his afmy the ‘Lamanian Army’ 
and wrote an anthem, ‘Fun in the Sun’. 
That same year he joined the 14th Machine Gun Company. 
According to his brother, Spike could dismantle a Vickers .303 
machine gun and reassemble it. After practising it a hundred times 
he drove everybody mad, so to take his mind off the gun his father 
bought him a banjo, which he practised a hundred times, driving 
everybody mad. It was the beginning of his love of music. 
His ‘ideal childhood’ continued. Leo gave Spike and Desmond 
a pair of old muskets, with which they pretended to shoot birds, 
cats, dogs, lions and tigers. In fact, the whole family were interested 
in guns: the boys had their muskets, Leo had three or four pistols 
and Florence had her .44 Winchester rifle. As late as 1967, when 
Spike visited his parents in Woy Woy, Australia, one of the high¬ 
lights of his visit was to spend time with his father in his gun room. 

from The Bible According to Spike Milligan 
The Creation According to the Trade Unions 
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. 
2. And darkness was upon the face of the deep; this was due to a 
malfunction at Lots Road Power Station. 
3. And God said, Let there be light; and there was light, but East¬ 
ern Electricity Board said He would have to wait until Thursday 
to be connected. 
1 
4. And God saw the light and it was good; He saw the quarterly 
bill and that was not good. 
5. And God called the light Day, and the darkness He called Night, 
and so passed His GCSE. 
6. And God said, Let there be a firmament and God called the 
firmament heaven, Freephone 999. 
7. And God said, Let the waters be gathered together unto one 
place, and let the dry land appear, and in London it went on the 
market at six hundred pounds a square foot. 
8. And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, and the earth 
brought forth grass and the Rastafarians smoked it. 
9. And God said, Let there be lights in heaven to give light to the 
earth, and it was so, except over England where there was heavy 
cloud and snow on high ground. 
10. And God said, Let the seas bring forth that that hath life, flood¬ 
ing the market with fish fingers, fishburgers and grade-three 
salmon. 

16 Milligans Meaning of Life 
11. And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the 
sea, and let fowl multiply on earth where Prince Charles and 
Prince Philip would shoot them. 
12. And God said, Let the earth bring forth cattle and creeping 
things, and there came cows, and the BBC Board of Governors. 
13. And God said, Let us make man in .our own image, but woe 
many came out like Spitting Image. < 
14. And He said, Let man have dofninion over fish, fowl, cattle and 
every creepy thing that creepeth upon the earth. 
15. And God said, Behold, I have given you the first of free yielding 
seed, to you this shall be meat, but to the EC it will be a Beef 
Mountain. 
from It Ends with Magic 
Bombardier Leo Sparrow was a very smart soldier in the Royal 
Regiment of Artillery. He was also a talented amateur stage 
performer; he could do the American Negro ‘buck and wing’ dance, 
and would black up to do coon songs like ‘Lily of Laguna. He was 
a good comic and clown and he had a pleasant singing voice. He 
had joined the Artillery when the family moved from Holborn 
Street, Sligo, in Ireland, at the time his father Sergeant William 
Sparrow was posted to Woolwich. Leo wrote in his journal: 
My early recollections are of life in London. We settled into 
a flat in Grosvenor Buildings, 426 Manisty Street, Poplar, 
overlooking the Blackwall Tunnel, which was just being 
started. From our second-storey window, we watched the 
workmen in the street below cooking their eggs and bacon 
for breakfast on shovels over coke braziers and, from time to 
time, we would see a man who worked in compressed air 

Beginnings 
17 
conditions being carried on a stretcher from the tunnel to the 
Poplar Hospital. 
By day my father was a gunnery wheelwright instructor at 
the RA Barracks. He obtained weekend employment as a jani¬ 
tor on the maintenance staff of the Grosvenor Buildings; he 
also worked part time, hauling up scenery in the flies of the 
Queen’s Palace of Varieties in High Street, Poplar. The stage 
door was in Manisty Street and we youngsters were intrigued 
watching the artists arrive and depart in horse-drawn carriages. 
Such performers as Kate Carney, Marie Lloyd and Esta Stella 
were favourites, as also were Alec Hurley, Eugene Stratton, 
Chirgwin the White-eyed Kaffir, Pat Rafferty, Tom Leamore, 
Bob Hutt and numerous others of that day. 
It seems only yesterday that we went to Wade Street School 
run by headmaster McGynty and, in the evenings, we became 
lamplighters and galloped up and down the stairs of Grosvenor 
Buildings with a perforated brass lamplighter igniting the gas 
jets, as Dad Sparrow turned on the gas in the basement. We 
used to delight in this job and would race a bloke named 
Mickey who did the other half. There was a friendly rivalry 
between us as to who could finish first. We never got paid for 
this job; I can’t remember ever getting a penny. 
Despite his extra janitor’s wage it was hard going trying to support 
a family of four unruly Irish boys and their sister; so, Leo, the eldest, 
now fourteen, was forced by his father to join the Royal Artillery. 
He was heart-broken, for he had set his heart on being a variety 
performer. The back door to the Sparrows’ family home was dead 
opposite the stage door of the Queen’s Palace of Varieties. At night, 
arriving in their carriages, young Leo watched the performers ador¬ 
ingly, yearning to be like them. He had a moment of glory when 
the theatre manager sought out local boys to play the part of supers’ 
in some of the visiting acts. 
I remember too, our various jobs as supers: one bloke I 
remember used to sing ‘Playing the Game of Soldiers’ as we 

i8 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
all marched round with our paper hats and toy guns. Then 
there was Arthur Bright with his ‘Susie’s Band’ when we 
played the Star Music Hall in Bermondsey, or some such 
place. We all played old brass instruments. I remember also 
Kate Carney when we were among her costermongers in ‘Liza 
Johnson, You Are My Donah’. I can ;also remember playing 
the lame kid with a crutch with Loonar Mortimer in ‘Paying 
the Penalty’. * v 
But alas, no further; one chill winter’s day in 1881 his father took 
him to the RA enlisting office at Shrapnel Barracks, Number One 
Depot, Woolwich. 
* 
Everything was done to a trumpet call. You were awakened 
by the trumpeter sounding the reveille which was followed by 
the quarter, and then the five minutes and finally the fall-in. 
There was the warning for parade (‘boots and saddles’ as it 
was called) sounded by the trumpeter half an hour before. 
There was even a trumpet call to bring up the urine tubs at 
0900 hrs. 
Despite his yearning for the stage, he became a very good soldier. 
He passed his Third-Class Certificate of Education, was promoted 
trumpeter and, though initially frightened of horses, became a first- 
class horseman specializing in dressage; but all the while he 
organized entertainment for his comrades and their families. He 
even got leave from his commanding officer, Major Sheppard, to 
appear in an amateur talent concert at the Imperial Palace, Canning 
Town, which he won! On the strength of this he was offered a week’s 
contract to appear for the incredible sum of £5.00. For this he was 
again given permission by his Officer Commanding. For his appear¬ 
ance on the bill he called himself Leo Gann. ‘Sparrow looks too 
silly,’ he said. 
From then on, as is usual with the British Army, he was posted 

Beginnings 
19 
to various parts of the British Isles. In time he was promoted to 
Bombardier, all the while keeping up his troop entertainments. It 
was in the course of these postings that he arrived at Fermoy in 
Ulster; there he put on a show at the New Barracks. For one of his 
song presentations he needed a lady to help, he put up a notice to 
this effect. It was answered by a Miss Florence Kettleband. Kettle- 
band? What a funny name, he thought. She turned out to be the 
daughter of Trumpet-Sergeant-Major Alfred Kettleband, who 
brought his daughter along. 
CHILD SONGS 
There is a song in man 
There is a song in woman 
And that is the child’s song 
When that song comes 
There will be no words 
Do not ask where they are 
Just listen to the song 
Listen to it - 
Learn it - 
It is the greatest song of all. 
London 
12 April 1973 
0200 hours 
- from Open Heart University 

20 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
from It Ends with Magic 
Now wedding bells! Ex-Trumpet-Sergeant-Major Alfred Kettleband 
announced that his daughter, Florence Winifred, was to be married 
to Bombardier Leo Alphonso Sparrow at St John’s Church, New 
Road, Woolwich.* It was a real Artillery wedding with members from 
Bombardier Sparrows 76th Battery and from Alfred Kettleband’s 
regiment, 18th Royal Field Artillery. The groom arrived in full dress- 
uniform, riding on a spit and polished gun-carriage; he stood 
nervously adjusting his blue Melton jacket with its polished brass 
buttons and his gold chevron stripes. His best man was his brother, 
Trooper William Sparrow of the North Irish Horse. Alas, Leo’s father 
Sergeant William Sparrow couldn’t attend as he and his battery were 
stationed in South Africa because the colony was still unsettled, so 
Leo’s mother Elizabeth attended, so they hid all the bottles. 
St John’s Church (built by Pugin) was packed with relatives, all in 
their best Sunday clothes - the ladies wearing big, wide-brimmed 
hats with ostrich feathers and spotted lace veils. Bombardier Sparrow 
and his best man sat in the front pew nervously awaiting the arrival 
of the bride; there were hushed whispers and giggles from young 
girls as the verger lit the long, yellow candles on the main altar. 
Suddenly, at a signal from Father Rudden, the organist, Miss Eileen 
Breech, started to pedal the pump organ furiously and play ‘The 
Wedding March’. All the congregation stood up as Florence, on her 
father’s arm, came slowly down the aisle. She was in a stunning white 
satin and silk gown, and he wasn’t; over her head was a white veil 
held in place by a crown of small, embroidered wild flowers. Her 
father was in his service dress, complete with his gold trumpet-major 
badges, his gold service stripes, along with his medals from the 
Indian Mutiny; on one was an oak leaf which meant he had been 
* The names Leo Alphonso were inflicted on him by the idiot priest who baptized 
him. His parents had been going to inflict a worse name - Percy Marmaduke 
- but the idiot priest insisted he be named after the ‘dear Pope’. 

Beginnings 
21 
mentioned in despatches for gallantry.1 Bombardier Sparrow arose 
and took his place beside his bride at the Caen stone altar. They 
sneaked each other a glance, he smiled, she giggled, putting her hand 
over her mouth; the Reverend Father Rudden called them forward 
and commenced the ceremony; in a castrated-adenoidal voice the 
priest droned on, and the couple made their replies. 
‘If any man see why they should not be joined in holy matrimony 
will he now speak or for ever hold his peace.’ Whoever it was, didn’t 
speak up and for ever held his peace. The ring: the best man handed 
it over, the bridegroom dropped it, it bounced across the floor down 
a heating grille. There followed the small ceremony of lifting up 
half a ton of iron grille and rupture; lots of giggling accompanied 
the efforts. Finally, the ring in place, and ‘I pronounce you and the 
heating system man and wife,’ Leo kissed his wife through her veil, 
bringing it back on his teeth. 
The reception was held in the Sergeants’ Mess at Woolwich Garri¬ 
son Headquarters (why are there never any Hindquarters?). Army 
trestle tables covered in clean, white cloths were laid out for the 
thirty guests, with gunner mess waiters in attendance. It was a plain 
but wholesome meal: roast beef, Yorkshire pudding, roast potatoes 
and Brussels sprouts; followed by a Mrs Beeton-style trifle nearly 
a foot high, then the wedding cake with a small icing sugar model 
of a bride and a gunner bridegroom mounted on the top surrounded 
by lots of silver cashew nuts. 
* 
Back in London the newlyweds rented a house at 22 Gabriel Street 
- a Victorian terraced house in Honor Oak Park, London, SE26. 
Florence Sparrow kept the little home lovely and clean: the doorstep 
was always white - the brass knocker and letterbox on the front 
door were polished every morning with Brasso - the fireplace was 
black-leaded with Zebo every day and the brass coal scuttle shone 
like the sun. The lace window curtains were washed once a week 
with Sunlight soap and rinsed in Reckitts blue. 
t In the storming of the Kashmir Gate. 

22 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Every morning Mrs Sparrow got up at half past five to stoke up 
the iron stove in the kitchen and put the big black iron kettle on the 
hob to boil. In wintertime, when it was a dark morning, shed light 
the gas mantle while she cooked Leo Sparrow’s breakfast of porridge 
and toast, and he shaved with his cut-throat razor in the kitchen sink; 
in those days, there were no bathrooms and the toilet was outside in 
the garden, so in cold weather nobody stayed in there very long! 
Mrs Sparrow was a very good Catholic:, so before they ate break¬ 
fast she would always say grace. ‘Bless us, O Lord, and these Thy 
gifts, which we are about to receive.’ 
After breakfast Sparrow would get out of his nightshirt and put 
on his khaki Royal Artillery uniform. He had two bombardier chev¬ 
rons in gold braid on each sleeve, a round wheelwright’s badge, and 
shiny brass buttons down the front of his jacket, each button 
stamped with a cannon. Then he put bn his big blue Melton overcoat 
with a red flannel lining so he was nice and warm and would kiss 
Florence goodbye. He would walk down the street, to the main 
road, and catch a horse-drawn tram to Woolwich. He would go 
upstairs - it was cheaper because it was an open top, if it rained 
you got wet. Bombardier Sparrow worked as a wheelwright in the 
farriers’ shop at the Woolwich Garrison. His job was to mend gun- 
carriage wheels - in those days, the guns were towed by six horses, 
and the streets of London were cobbled - so the wheels used to get 
lots of wear and tear. Bombardier Sparrow’s friend was Bombardier 
Alan Mills - he was the blacksmith who shoed the horses. Bombar¬ 
dier Sparrow was teaching young recruits how to maintain wheeled 
vehicles. 
In those days the British Army was very big, with regiments and 
garrisons all around the world - India, Burma, Africa, China, Belize, 
Malta, Gibraltar, Aden - and soon these young recruits would be 
posted there. One day Bombardier Sparrow was called in by his 
Commanding Officer, Major Skipton Climo. At ease, Sparrow,’ he said 
as the Bombardier saluted. ‘Look, how would you like to go to India?’ 
‘By boat, sir,’ he said. 
The Major groaned and repeated the question. 
Bombardier Sparrow’s heart missed a beat - India, he thought, 

Beginnings 
23 
how marvellous! In his life he’d never been further than South- 
end. India! He’d never been to an India. Sparrow was lost for 
words. 
‘Well, Sparrow,’ said the Major, ‘lost yer tongue, man?’ 
‘No, sir, just the words. Yes, I’d love to go to India.’ 
The Major smiled. ‘Good,’ he said, ‘you’ll leave on ...’ he flicked 
through his diary ‘Ah, here we are, you sail from Tilbury on 14 
December, so you’ve a month to get ready.’ 
Sparrow saluted, and knocked his hat off. 
When Bombardier Sparrow went home that night, it was very, 
very foggy; the tram was very, very slow and Bombardier Sparrow, 
on the top deck, was freezing. 
‘My, you’re late tonight, Leo,’ said Mrs Sparrow. ‘I was getting 
worried.’ 
‘While you were getting worried, I was getting cold,’ he said as 
he took his greatcoat off. ‘Terrible fog - had a man with a brand 
walking in front of the tram half the way.’ 
Leo opened the stove’s fire-box, showing a red glow - he held his 
hands in front and rubbed them together. He faced Florence, who 
was doing something in the sink. ‘How’d you like to go to India, 
Kiddy?’ 
She turned with a bemused smile on her face. ‘India,’ she said. 
‘India?’ 
‘India,’ he repeated, then told her. 
‘Well, blow me down,’ she said. 
Bombardier Sparrow didn’t try to blow her down as he knew she 
was too heavy. Over their supper of boiled halibut, potatoes and 
spinach they talked and planned their new adventure. ‘It’ll be hot 
out there,’ said Leo, who right then was cold in here. 
So they prepared for their great trip. They stored all their furni¬ 
ture with Florence’s brother, Bertram, who owned a warehouse. 
‘How long are we going to be out there?’ said Florence. 
Leo shrugged his shoulders. ‘I don’t know. I’d say about two years, 
that’s about the normal time - unless you ask to stay longer.’ 
‘We’ll have to see if we like it out there.’ 
The weeks that followed saw the first snow in November. Florence 

24 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
>* 
spent the days packing for the trip. At weekends they went and said 
goodbye to friends and relatives. 
‘You’ll like it in India,’ said Alfred Kettleband. ‘Nice sunshine but 
it can get hot.’ 
Mrs Kettleband poured the tea from the big brown stoneware 
teapot. 
‘And you can get servants cheap.’ 
Mrs Sparrow smiled. ‘Servants?’ she said. ‘What - like to look 
after things?’ 
‘Oh yes,’ said Alfred Kettleband, sipping tea from a moustache 
cup. ‘We had two when I was stationed in Kirkee. Did everything 
- cooking, washing, stealing.’ 
‘House cleaning as well,’ added Mrs Kettleband, handing round 
the home-made fruit cake. 
‘Can you trust ’em?’ said Bombardier Sparrow. 
‘Well,’ said Mr Kettleband, ‘you have to watch ’em.’ He emptied 
his cup into the white slops bowl, then held his cup out. 
‘A drop more, Mother,’ he said. 
‘Is it expensive out there?’ said Florence. 
‘No. Oh no,’ said Mrs Kettleband, ‘a lot cheaper.’ 
‘And,’ added Alfred Kettleband, ‘you’ll be getting an overseas 
allowance.’ 
At that Bombardier Sparrow laughed. ‘Sounds better before we 
even get there.’ 
There was a pause in the conversation as Alfred shovelled more 
coal on the fire; what a pity, setting fire to that lovely coal, he 
thought. Florence Sparrow admired the coloured tile slips on the 
burnished iron fireplace, green with white magnolias. 
‘Mind you, it’s not all milk and honey out there,’ Alfred was 
saying. ‘You got to look out for mosquitoes, always put yer mossy 
net up before sunset and,’ here he sipped his tea, then squeezed the 
drops from his moustache back into the cup, ‘never drink the milk 
or water without boiling it.’ 
Mrs Kettleband chipped in, ‘Oh yes, and you must keep food 
under cover - the flies are terrible.’ 

Beginnings 
25 
The tea finished with the Kettlebands concluding all the remain¬ 
ing advice on India. It Was getting dark, Mrs Kettleband lit a taper 
and ignited the bracket gas lamps each side of the over-mantel mirror 
as Alfred lowered the wooden slatted blind, then drew the blue velvet 
curtains. He didn’t want people looking in at his moustache. 
‘Well,’ said Bombardier Sparrow, standing up, ‘time we were 
going, Flo.’ They entered the brown lino-covered hall with its smell 
of Mansion polish. 
‘You need every bit of that,’ said Mr Kettleband as he helped his 
daughter on with her heavy Paisley shawl, while Bombardier Spar¬ 
row tightened his web belt and adjusted his pillbox hat at a jaunty 
angle. 
Alfred opened the door on to the cold gaslit street. ‘Oh, it’s ’taters 
out there,’ he said. Leo looked but couldn’t see any potatoes. Alfred 
Kettleband must be imagining. Bidding their good-nights, the Spar¬ 
rows left with Florence fastening her bonnet ribbon. As the 74 tram 
trundled them along, the Sparrows debated what future lay for 
them in that distant, mysterious land. 
The Voyage 
Early on 14 December the Sparrows loaded their three suitcases 
and hand baggage on to a Hackney carriage drawn by a black horse. 
‘Where to, sir?’ said the driver. 
‘Well,’ said Leo, ‘eventually India. Right now, Waterloo Station 
will do.’ 
‘You sure?’ said the driver. The Sparrows climbed into the cosy, 
upholstered, buttoned interior. 
Through the roof hatch the driver said, ‘What time you got to be 
there?’ 
‘We have to catch the nine-fifteen boat train to Tilbury.’ 
The driver shook his reins, cracked his whip and the horse started 
to trot - down Brockley Rise he trotted past the Brockley Jack - 
down New Cross past the Marquis of Granby. The morning mixture 
of horse-drawn and early motor traffic was getting heavier - by the 

2 6 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
time they drove over Waterloo Bridge the rush hour was at its peak. 
At Waterloo a policeman was controlling the traffic and his temper. 
Through the window Bombardier Sparrow saw a porter and called 
him over; the porter said his name wasn’t ‘Over’, it was Sebastian. 
‘Which platform, sir?’ said Sebastian. 
‘Tilbury boat train,’ said Bombardier Sparrow springing open 
his fob watch; the Roman numerals on its enamelled face said eight- 
forty-six. The driver handed down the luggage. 
‘How much, driver?’ said Sparrow. 
‘Six and threepence, sir.’ s 
Bombardier Sparrow dipped into-his pocket and handed the 
driver two half crowns, a shilling and a threepenny bit. The driver 
took it, raised his top hat, displacing the hackle which fell into the 
street. 
‘You dropped something,’ said Bombardier Sparrow grinning 
and handing it back to him. 
‘I’m coming to pieces,’ laughed the driver. What he meant to say 
was what about a bloody tip. 
‘This way,’ said Sebastian trundling his iron trolley. ‘Mind yer 
backs,’ he shouted, killing people as he went. 
The station was crowded with commuters hurrying to work and 
men from Her Majesty’s Services catching the boat train - among 
them Bombardier Sparrow recognized Bombardier George Mill¬ 
ington and his wife, Sophie. 
‘Hi, George,’ called Sparrow. 
‘Oh, Leo! Don’t tell me you’re on the same draft!’ 
‘All right,’ joked Bombardier Sparrow, ‘I won’t tell you!’ 
He turned to Florence. ‘Look who’s here, Flo,’ he said, so she 
looked who was here. Florence threw her hands up in surprise and 
caught them as they came down. ‘Fancy, you two and your daugh¬ 
ter, Saria.’ The little girl, all embarrassed, hid behind her mother. 
They jostled through the crowd carrying hand luggage with the 
big P&O labels ‘wanted on voyage’. They passed through the 
barrier, the inspector scanned each green ticket, then clipped a ‘V’ 
in them with his clippers. At the platform, the Great Southern 
Railway train stood shining in its green, yellow and black livery. 

Beginnings 
27 
They searched for the third-class compartment marked ‘reserved 
FOR RA PERSONNEL? 
‘Here we are,’ shouted Bombardier Millington, opening the 
carriage door. As they entered the carriage with its black leather 
seats, they felt the warmth of the steam heating coming from 
under the seats. They piled their luggage on to the racks above. 
‘Well,’ said Bombardier Sparrow, plonking himself down on the 
seat, ‘so far so good.’ He loosened his belt and slipped his pillbox 
hat off. 
‘Paper - morning paper!’ a Cockney news vendor was walking 
rapidly along the platform. 
‘Here, son,’ shouted Bombardier Millington out the window. ‘The 
Morning Post. What would you like, Leo?’ he said back through the 
window. 
‘Oh, I’ll have - I’ll have - er - what would you like, Flo?’ Flo 
would like the Family Herald. 
‘The Family Herald and Tit-bits, son,’ said Millington. 
With expertise the lad withdrew the two papers from under 
his arm and with a flick handed them up. ‘Oh,’ said the lad taking 
the two-shilling piece, "aven’t you got anything smaller, it’s 
tuppence?’ 
Millington fingered through the loose change in his hand. ‘Here,’ 
he said, ‘I’ve only got a threepenny bit, keep the change.’ 
The lad did a pretend spit on it. ‘Oh, good luck, guvnor,’ he 
said. 
As he did a porter ran along the platform slamming the open 
doors - the guard at the end was looking at his big chrome watch, 
a green flag in his hand, ready to go. 
‘We’re nearly off,’ informed Bombardier Millington. 
There followed a shrill whistle from the guard - the carriage 
lurched forward as the driver eased the throttle forward, the great 
train, hissing gouts and gushes of steam from its burnished sides, 
pluming throats of black smoke from its tall brass funnel, eased 
forward. 
‘We’re on our way,’ said Florence with an excited upward 
inflection; all faces in the carriage were radiant with expectation. 

28 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Slowly they pulled from the busy station; the great journey had 
started. 
RACHMANINOV’S 3RD*PIANO CONCERTO 
We are drinking cupped Sonatas like wine, 
The red glow, the cut throat of Sunset. 
Like a tungsten locked Icarus 
I charge my mind with heaven fermented grape 
that grow to Caesar’s Royal Purple in my brain, 
Trim my logic as I may 
The tyrant Onos unbraids my thoughts 
like maidens’ tresses at eve 
I am wafting across mindless heavens 
‘Where am I,’ I ask the Lotus maiden, 
She says ‘Singapore Air Lines - 
Economy Class’. 
- from Open Heart University 
from It Ends with Magic 
Voyage of the SS Plassey 
On board the SS Plassey, Florence kept a diary which her mother 
and father gave to her as a going-away present; inside they had 
written ‘To our fond daughter, Florence’. 

Beginnings 
29 
14 December 1885 
Boarded SS Plassey at Tilbury, lots and lots of noisy soldiers 
and their wives boarding as well, Leo was glad to see some 
friends from his battery sailing with us. We have a nice, clean 
cabin. We are sharing it with Bombardier Bill Eggit and his 
wife Emily. The women will sleep in the lower bunks and the 
men in the upper. Our Cabin B111 is one deck below the main 
deck - it is an outside cabin so we have a porthole. To start 
with it was very confusing with everyone looking for the right 
cabin. At six o’clock a man went round shouting ‘All visitors 
ashore’, at six-thirty they took in the gang plank, then they let 
go the hawsers and two black tugs started to push the Plassey 
into midstream. Then the gong went and a steward went round 
saying, ‘First sitting for tea.’ That meant us so we eventually 
found the dining room, it was very crowded. We had bread, 
butter, apricot jam and tea. Surprise, at our table was George 
Millington and his wife. 
As the night closed in, the Plassey moved slowly downstream; 
past Canvey Island, Southend-on-Sea and Shoeburyness, passen¬ 
gers stood on deck watching the black shapes and lights ashore as 
they slid past, the ship was vibrating now as the engines went slow 
ahead, everyone seemed excited at the coming trip. Up on the bridge 
the Captain, Donald Chaterjack, called, ‘Steady as you go’; the lead¬ 
ing seaman shouted down the speaking tube to the engine room, 
‘Steady ahead.’ 
‘Steady ahead it is,’ came the reply. At first the ship travelled very 
smoothly down river, but then it started to roll a little as they 
reached the open sea. 
‘We’re in the Channel, I think,’ said Leo to Flo as he peered down 
at the black foam-topped waves. It was getting chilly so most people 
went down to the lounge, which just had long wooden tables with 
benches, but it was lit by the new electric lights. Some passengers 
were standing close to them examining the new-fangled bulbs and 
puzzling out how they worked; some of the men played cards or 

30 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
dominoes, while the women talked or knitted. At eight-thirty the 
gong went. ‘First sitting for dinner,’ shouted the steward as he 
walked briskly around the ship’s corridors. 
SS 1Plassey 14 December 1885 
Menu 
\ 
Potato Soup' 
and Mutton Stew 
Polled Potatoes 
Carrots - Peas 
arid 
Poly Poly Pudding 
Pea - Coffee 
\ 
The sleeping arrangements were pretty hysterical. So that the 
ladies could prepare themselves for bed, the men had to wait outside 
in the corridor, looking very silly to passing passengers, to whom 
Leo said, ‘We’re - we’re waiting, aren’t we, Bill?’ The man was a fool. 
Indeed, when George Millington came by, he said, ‘What in God’s 
name are you doing?’ 
Sure enough, Leo said, ‘We’re waiting, aren’t we, Bill?’ The man 
was a fool. 
When the ladies were in their night-clothes the men had to 
undress. For this they turned the lights off; in the dark there were 
thuds and groans as the two men collided while taking off their 
trousers, accompanied by stifled laughs from the ladies. ‘Go on, 
laugh,’ said frustrated Leo, and so they went on and laughed. In the 
middle of the night, when Bombardier Sparrow fell from the top 
berth, they had another good laugh. 

Beginnings 
3i 
TEETH 
English Teeth, English Teeth! 
Shining in the sun 
A part of British heritage 
Aye, each and every one. 
English Teeth, Happy Teeth! 
Always having fun 
Clamping down on bits of fish 
And sausages half done. 
English Teeth! HEROES’ Teeth! 
Hear them click! and clack! 
Let’s sing a song of praise to them - 
Three Cheers for the Brown Grey and Black. 
, - from Silly Verse for Kids 
from It Ends with Magic 
Just then the dark lady arrived with a tray on which was a big, brown 
Worcester-ware teapot and two of the blue and white teacups. In a 
silver-plated rack were six slices of hot toast, a pat of butter and 
another pink pot containing strawberry jam. ‘Just the job,’ said Leo 
rubbing his hands together. 
‘I’ll be mother,’ said Florence, pouring the tea through a large 
mesh strainer. 
‘That must be quite a strain,’ said that fool of a man. 
‘Oh, I forget the milk,’ said the dark lady, hurrying off. She 

32 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
returned with a little white fluted milk jug. ‘There you are,’ she said. 
‘Anything else,’ she said, ‘you call me.’ What they should call her, 
she never said. Leo and Florence sipped their tea and talked about 
their day on the rock. 
‘How did those monkeys get there?’ said Florence. 
‘Well,’ said Leo, ‘there’s a story that they were brought here when 
the Moors invaded; then, there’s another story, that they came from 
Africa in a tunnel that runs under the sea and comes out in the big 
caves in the rock.’ 
‘Big caves?’ said Florence. s 
‘Yes, big,’ said Leo and for some reason spread his arms. ‘There’s 
big caves on the rock, it says here,’ and he turned the pages of his 
P&O guidebook. ‘Look,’ he said showing a page with illustrations. 
‘Oh, they do look interesting,’ she said. 
‘Yes, the illustrations look interesting,’ he repeated. Why? 
Leo there and then decided that the caves would be more inter¬ 
esting than the illustrations. It was the place to visit, Leo said. ‘The 
only way to see them is go there.’ 
He’s getting worse, thought Florence. 
They finished up their tea and toast; Leo,paid the bill. ‘Not bad,’ 
he said, ‘one and sixpence.’ 
Outside they caught another landau. Ah, you like the caves,’ said 
the driver. His horse was done up in a straw hat, coloured ribbons, 
and lots of decorations on his harness. Unlike the last landau, all 
the brass and harness were brightly polished and the driver wore 
a crisp, white, well-ironed jacket. 
‘You have a very smart turnout here,’ said Bombardier Sparrow 
admiringly. 
‘Yes, I first class,’ said the driver with a Spanish accent. ‘I like keep 
my horse and carriage very clean.’ At that point, unfortunately, the 
horse did a steaming wee. 
‘Oh, dear,’ said Leo. ‘I’m sorry.’ 
‘Why,’ said Flo, ‘you’re not doing it.’ Leo was embarrassed. That 
horse! ‘The poor thing can’t help it,’ said Flo. 
‘Oh, he doesn’t need any help, he can do it on his own,’ said 
Leo. 

Beginnings 
33 
The incident over, the horse plodded on to the great caves. The 
driver gave them some more information. 
‘This place first called by Arabs, Djbel Altar, that mean, tall 
mountain. But now not Djbel Altar, Gibraltar, English call Gi-bral¬ 
tar! He laughed as though it was a great joke, which, of course, it 
wasn’t - ask any Spaniard. 
Arriving at the cave mouth the landau pulled over. ‘Shall I wait 
for you for some anything, you bloody fool?’ said the driver raising 
his top hat and letting out the steam. 
Bloody fool? Where did he learn that? He had learned that from 
soldiers who had told him it meant ‘sir’. 
‘Yes, I think we better keep you,’ said Leo. 
‘Thank you - you bloody fool,’ said the driver. 
A military guide was at the entrance to the cave, a fellow gunner, 
it was admission free but, ‘If you want a guide,’ said the gunner, ‘it’s 
sixpence for half an hour.’ Actually, the guide was free, but we all 
have to make a living; all right, they’d have a guide. 
‘Raymondo,’ the gunner called over to three guides sitting on a 
bench. 
One stood up and came across. He smiled and said, ‘Yes, I am 
Raymondo, you bloody fool.’ He’d met the soldiers too. He was a 
small man aged about forty-five with a black moustache hung 
under his nose like a coat hanger; he wore a Panama with a band 
that had the letters ‘Girl Guide’. Into a long, rocky passage he led 
them along some duck boards over a deep gorge. ‘However did 
ducks get over these?’ said Leo. The inside of the cave was lit by 
gas with tinfoil reflectors behind each of the quadruple mantles; 
it cast a fitting, eerie glow. The guide carried a brand which he lit 
with a box of Captain Webb matches. As they went deeper in, the 
cave opened out into a huge size with great stalactites hanging 
from the roof, like stone organ pipes; water dripped slowly from 
them to the floor. 
Raymondo pointed to them. ‘It take million years for them to 
form,’ he said. How the hell did he know? He was only forty-five. 
At one point in the cave he stopped and said ‘Listen’ and shouted 
out ‘Helloooo . . . !’ There was a pause and then his voice echoed 

34 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
back ten times, ‘Helloooo... helloooo... helloooo,’ each one getting 
fainter and fainter. ‘You try,’ he said. Leo tried and he became fainter 
and fainter. Florence cupped her hands to her mouth. ‘Hellooo!’ 
she said, back came the amazing echo. 
‘Let me try again,’ said Leo; he shouted ‘hello’, then ‘stand easy’, 
then he called his name, his inside leg measurement, a receipt for 
jelly. Finally, Florence sang a few notes - all came floating back; it 
was a new experience for them. Deep in the cave they reached a 
railed-off gallery, from which the great cave descended hundreds 
of feet into total darkness. s 
‘Here we don’t know how deep, people go in there many years 
ago - never come back.’ It was like Brixton. ‘Very dangerous, now 
government say no one allowed.’ He held up his lighted brand as 
the Sparrows peered into the great unknown depths. ‘They say,’ said 
Raymondo, ‘that through here come the apes from Africa.’ 
‘They must have been trying to avoid customs’ 
In half an hour the tour was over; it was cold in there and they 
were glad to get out into the warm evening sunshine where their 
landau awaited, albeit with the driver asleep in the back. Leo gave 
him a light poke in the belly. He stayed asleep, so Leo gave him a 
heavy poke in the belly, then the knee, then the chest, the buttock, 
the spine, the pelvis etc.... The man finally screamed. 
‘Sorry, I asleep. Sun very hot, make you tired,’ he said. ‘Ayeup- 
pahh!’ he shouted to his horse, cracked his whip vigorously. 
Suddenly, with a terrible noise, the horse broke wind, reducing 
Florence and Leo into helpless laughter. 

Beginnings 
35 
5 Climo Road 
Old Sappers Lines 
Poona 
India 
May 1892 
My dear Mum and Dad, 
Well, by now you know that you're both going to become grandpar¬ 
ents, I hope you don 't mind! I'm now on a sergeant's rhino, so that 
will help with the extra mouth to feed, though I must say, life out 
here is so much better than serving in England.* The Indian Army 
are very lenien t about working conditions. I get quite a bit of time 
off to do gaffs, otherwise we start work at the dufta early m ornings 
while it's cool, then we have the afternoon off when it’s hot, then do 
a few hours in the even ing.T 
As a sergeant I am allowed a horse and a syce. Every morning 
my syce, Pushram, brings me my horse Kitty, she is an Australian 
whaler, a horse they breed in Queensland especially for the Indian 
Army, so before work I have a lovely gallop to Ganishkind, then 
ride to the Southern Command Offices where another syce stables 
my horse. These days we have a most pleasant social life, we have 
tennis courts, a racecourse, polo, hockey and football matches, 
hockey seems to be the favourite game among the Indians. The 
current champions are the Poona Rifles, formed from Anglo- 
Indians with British Officers. My only sport is boxing where 
exercise consists of getting your face punched in, then waiting 
for it to come out again. When I arrived here my fame had gone 
ahead of me, it must have travelled on a faster boat, yes, they 
knew I had boxed for the Artillery back in Wonderful Woolwich. 
Last month they asked me to enter the Southern Command 
championships where for three months men clout each other 
and whoever is left alive wins. By ducking frequently I survived 
* Rhino = Rhinofelt = Gelt, 
t Dufta = office. 

36 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
■ 
the preliminaries, then came the semi-finals. This was open to 
those left alive. Now I weigh ten stone six pounds, I stand five 
foot eight, my God when my opponent got in the ring he was 
six foot and weighed thirteen stone. For three rounds I ran 
backward screaming help, then he caught me with a right 
cross. When I regained consciousness the lights were out 
and everybody had gone home. Well that’s about all for 
now. 
V 
Love to all 
S 
Leo 
\ 
PS. Fm thinking of becoming a Mason l 
‘Ah, Mrs Sparrow,’ said Doctor Tookram in that sing-song Indian 
accent, wagging his head like it was on a spring. ‘With the baby 
coming, I am thinking you are too thin with thinness. Oh dear, no, 
you must building yourself up, now. I am knowing that from what 
soldiers say that the drinking of the Guinness is good for you, so if 
you are finding some, you must be taking it into your body, like 
that!’ He charged Florence five rupees. So, for many evenings to 
come, Florence sat with Leo in front of their house and drank ‘the 
Guinness into your body, like that’. She went on for a month drink¬ 
ing the stuff, she never got any fatter just drunker and drunker as 
the Guinness ‘went into the body like that’. 
‘Look,’ said Leo, ‘you’ll drown the bloody baby, I can’t let you go 
on, you’re becoming an alcoholic.’ 
‘It’s all right, dear,’ said Florence, staggering naked around the 
front garden. ‘I confessed it to the priest.’ 
‘What does he say?’ said Leo. 
‘He said where can he get it.’ 
The RAMC doctor, Captain Parkinson, had a different cure for 
Florence’s thinness. ‘Arrowroot,’ he said. ‘Have some at bedtime.’ 
So at night, while Leo sipped his shandy, Florence was eating cold 

Beginnings 
37 
arrowroot. One evening they were visited by friends. It was dark 
when they arrived. Florence said, ‘What would you like?’ 
They said, ‘Oh, whatever you’re having’, so they had cold arrow- 
root - they never came again. 
ME 
Born screaming small into this world - 
Living I am 
Occupational therapy twixt birth and death - 
What was I before? 
What will I be next? 
What am I now? 
Cruel answer carried in the jesting mind 
of a careless God. 
I will not bend and grovel 
When I die. If He says my sins are myriad 
I will ask why He made me so imperfect 
And he will say ‘My chisels were blunt’. 
I will say ‘Then why did you make so 
many of me. 
Bethlehem Hospital 
Highgate 1966 
- from Small Dreams of a Scorpion 

38 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
BAD REPORT - GOOD MANNERS 
My daddy said, ‘My son, my son, 
This school report is bad.’ 
I said, ‘I did my best I did, 
My dad my dad my dad.’ 
‘Explain, my son, my son,’ he said, 
‘Why bottom of the class?* 
‘I stood aside, my dad my dad, 
To let the others pass.’ 
- from Unspun Socks from a Chicken’s Laundry 
THE ABC 
T’was midnight in the schoolroom 
And every desk was shut, 
When suddenly from the alphabet 
Was heard a loud ‘Tut-tut!’ 
Said A to B, ‘I don’t like C; 
His manners are a lack. 
For all I ever see of C 
Is a semi-circular back!’ 
‘I disagree,’ said D to B, 
‘I’ve never found C so. 
From where I stand, he seems to be 
An uncompleted O’ 
t 

Beginnings 
39 
C was vexed, ‘I’m much perplexed, 
You crititize my shape. 
I’m made like that, to help spell Cat 
And Cow and Cool and Cape.’ 
‘He’s right,’ said E; said F, ‘Whoopee!’ 
Said G, ”Ip, ’ip, ’ooray!’ 
‘You’re dropping me,’ roared H to G. 
‘Don’t do it please I pray!’ 
‘Out of my way,’ LL said to K. 
‘I’ll make poor I look ILL.’ 
To stop this stunt, J stood in front, 
And presto! ILL was JILL. 
‘U know,’ said V, ‘that W 
Is twice the age of me, 
For as a Roman V is five 
I’m half as young as he.’ 
X and Y yawned sleepily, 
‘Look at the time!’ they said. 
‘Let’s all get off to beddy byes.’ 
They did, then, ‘Z-z-z.’ 
or 
alternative last verse 
X and Y yawned sleepily, 
‘Look at the time!’ they said. 
They all jumped in to beddy byes 
And the last one in was Z! 
from Silly Verse for Kids 

40 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
from Indefinite Articles and Scunthorpe 
Eccentrics 
\ 
According to Cassell’s three-page dictionary for computerized 
idiots, the word eccentric means: ‘Deviating from the centre; an 
oddity; a mechanical contrivance for coiiverting circular into recip¬ 
rocating rectilinear motion, especially that operating the side valve 
of a steam engine.’ Having been accused by the Boulting Brothers 
of being an eccentric, I am puzzled as to why they didn’t give me 
my correct title, i.e. a mechanical contrivance for converting circu¬ 
lar into reciprocating etc. etc. etc...'. 
So ... when Willy Davis said, ‘Milligan, kneel down, I the God of 
Punch dub thee Writer, go, write something about Eccentrics,’ I began 
to wonder just why I was one and had never noticed it. I mean, when 
I read Oliver St John Gogarty’s description of a gentleman waiting 
to cross Sackville Street dressed in a top hat, a'football jersey, evening 
dress jacket, cricket pads, a girdled cavalry sword and holding a red 
guard’s van flag, I thought that was an eccentric - but no, apparently 
nobody even noticed him, so who were the eccentrics - him, or the 
passing pedestrians? It’s difficult to say; however, racing back through 
my boyhood I realized that my whole family were, as I said, mechan¬ 
ical contrivances for converting circular into etc. etc.... 
Let’s start with my father. For a start I thought every football fan 
who listened to his team (Arsenal) on the wireless, like my father 
wore a red and white football jersey, and carried a football rattle 
and took swigs from a beer bottle. When TV started and he could 
see the game, he added a referee’s whistle. Even on that he had a 
variant; he would turn off the TV sound, blindfold himself and 
listen to the radio commentary, every now and then stealing a 
glance at the screen to see if the commentary tied up with the game. 
The night before the match he would unroll a small plan of a 
football pitch, and, using sugar lumps dipped in red ink for Arsenal, 

Beginnings 
4i 
he would lock himself in the parlour. We could hear him shouting 
out instructions. ‘It’s the long ball down the middle that will do it 
... forget flank penetration, there’s too many in the goalmouth, it’s 
the headed ball overthe defence ... 3 goals and you’re on to a bonus 
of 10 shillings a man ... you can live it up ...’ and so on. For econ¬ 
omy’s sake my mother had to use the inked sugar cubes, and all 
through the soccer season I drank red tea. 
My mother’s side, the Kettlebands, were also mechanical contriv¬ 
ances etc., especially my late Uncle Hughie, who would try and see 
how far he could walk without opening his eyes. He once managed 
three-quarters of a mile. For this he chose a large, barren, treeless plain 
in Hyderabadsind, but it took him so long he was stricken with 
sunstroke. He moved to London where there were no large treeless 
plains; trying to break his record he was knocked down by a tram in 
Catford, SE6. When he was discharged from Lewisham Hospital, he 
took up another test of self-control, holding his breath underwater. 
He calculated the less pressure on the body the less exertion and 
therefore a longer duration of breath retention, so he would lie on his 
bed face down, his head hanging over the foot of the bed. He also 
believed that cold water absorbed body energy (true), consequently 
the water had to be at body temperature, 98.4 degrees. So that he could 
time it to perfection, he bought a waterproof stop-watch that he placed 
at the bottom of the bucket; this was so that no time was lost in having 
to take head from water to look at stop-watch. He managed up to two 
minutes but this brought on nosebleeds and terminated his attempts. 
He then settled for seeing if it was possible to sleep in the upright 
position, and many’s the night I awoke to see him standing on his bed 
at three in the morning. After two weeks he still hadn’t managed it. 
He persisted and then one night, in the early hours, I heard a terrible 
THUD and a groan; he had fallen asleep, his legs had collapsed and 
he had been catapulted to the concrete floor which split his head open. 
‘Must have lost control,’ he said as we bandaged his head. 
This, dear reader, is not all. His mother, the late Margaret Burnside- 
Kettleband (my grandmother), who looked the epitome of 
normality, left behind her a trail of yellow powder. She swore she had 
never had arthritis in her legs because every morning she poured 

42 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
two ounces of sulphur into her socks. When she and grandpa did 
the Lancers at the gallop at the Governors Ball (Poona) they were 
soon swirling in a knee-high yellow dust. My grandpa, Trumpet- 
Major Alfred Henry Kettleband MM, was all in the same mould. 
A respectable, rich Hindu lad, one Percy Lalkaka (Urdu transla¬ 
tion: ‘Red Dung’) fell madly in love with my Auntie Eileen, but he 
was frightened off. My grandfather would frequently appear in his 
wife’s floral nightgown. Holding a boiled egg in a spoon, he would 
glide past them, grinning and saying. ‘There’s going to be frost tonight 
in Quetta,’ and disappear into the bathroom where he could be heard 
pouring buckets of water into the WD bath. A pause, then he would 
reappear, clad in shorts, now holding a spoonful of curry powder: 
‘But... it’s going to be damned hot tonight.’ It terminated the romance. 
All that I have told you I accepted as normal. I was five at the 
time. I became personally involved in eccentricity (that’s off-peak 
electricity), when my father, owing to his strange behaviour in India, 
was posted to Rangoon as a Sergeant in the Port Defence. One day 
he came to me. ‘Son,’ he said, ‘the jungles are full of Dacoits, you 
must learn to defend yourself, come with me.’ He placed me behind 
a rock and gave me an old Lee-Enfield filled with blanks, while he, 
wearing a dragon mask, plunged into the undergrowth. ‘When you 
see me, fire, and I will judge if you have scored a hit.’ As he ran 
hither and thither I blazed away. Occasionally he would shout, ‘A 
hit, a hit,’ and then stick a red adhesive spot on his body or face. 
Came three o’clock, he was a mass of red spots and exhausted, 
but worse was to come. A nursing mother kite-hawk (wing span 
five feet) dove on him and clawed off his wig and flew away. It was 
a puzzled coolie who saw a man covered in red spots, with a bald 
and bleeding head, shouting up at the sky and throwing rocks in 
the air. The next day my father decided not to be the target, so he 
got several puzzled coolies to surround him holding lathis (police 
sticks) and, wielding two blank cartridge pistols, he blazed away, 
forcing the victims to stick on red spots when ‘hit’. 
Many of you may think that all I tell you is lies, but a picture was 
taken of the last incident. I leave you now to return to my life as a 
mechanical contrivance for converting circular etc. etc. Oh yes, the 

Beginnings 
43 
caption on the back of the photo, which is my father’s own, reads, 
‘Picture taken in Burma in 1930 shows Captain Leo Milligan prac¬ 
tising “Custer’s Last Stand”, which he learnt in New Mexico as a 
boy, using his own Lascars as the enemy and shooting soap bullets 
with a reduced charge’,’ Any questions? 
INDIA! INDIA! 
As a boy 
I watched India through fresh Empirical eyes. 
Inside my young khaki head 
I grew not knowing any other world. 
My father was a great warrior 
My mother was beautiful 
and never washed dishes, 
other people did that, 
I was only 4,1 remember 
they cleaned my shoes, 
made my bed. 
‘Ither ow’ 
‘Kom Kurrow’ 
Yet, in time I found them gentler 
than the khaki people 
They smiled in their poverty 
After dark, when the khaki people 
were drunk in the mess 
I could hear Minnima and 
her family praying in their godown. 
In the bazaar the khaki men 
are brawling 
No wonder they asked us to leave. 
- from Open Heart University 

44 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
I ONCE - AS A CHILD 
I once - as a child - saw Mahatma Ghandi 
Walk past the Old Sappers Lines, Climo Road - 
He was on his way to Yeroda Gaol. ‘He’s not 
As black as he’s painted’ said my kind Grandmother - 
But I found out he was not painted - 
It was his real colour. 
- from Small Dreams of a Scorpion 
GROWING UP I 
Even tho’ they are my tomorrows 
Do they know my yesterdays 
are wrapped up in them? 
Those golden yesterdays. 
Was there ever a sound 
like child laughter, 
Was there ever such talk 
as theirs, 
That lily pure truth on their lips? 
Grown you are, yet I only see 
the child in you. 
It is past reality, it is a haunting, 
I cannot live without the 
memory of it. 
At the going of those yesterdays 
my todays ended. 
-from The Mirror Running 

Beginnings 
45 
# 
from Depression and How to Survive It 
My father and mother loved theatricals. They were given time in 
the army in those days. But they rowed - the sound of rows always 
upset me. I can remember my mother and father having a row in 
Rangoon which upset me. I can still hear it ringing in my ears, this 
terrible screaming and shouting. I have always been hypersensitive 
to noise. We had just come from Poona to Rangoon, where my 
father had already been posted in advance of us, and I think he 
had been having an affair with an Anglo-Indian girl, a slant-eyed 
temple maiden of Kipling, and he was saying ‘I only took her out 
dancing’ and this screaming match went on which frightened me 
very much. 
[Mother] was always either hugging me close and loving me to death 
or hating me and screaming at me. I couldn’t understand it. I didn’t 
understand the extremes of temperament. I couldn’t cope with it at 
all. 
When I stopped going to Church - I was eighteen at the time - she 
started an unending attack on me every Sunday as to why I wouldn’t 
go to Church such that eventually I left home and went to stay with 
Harold Fagg [a friend]. She could be very demanding. 
I was about six and a picnic was going on. She was very beautiful 
and I remember one of the chaps who was with her pulled her head 
right back and it upset me so much that I ran inside the house and 
cried, I don’t know why. Did I love her? Was she my girlfriend deep 
down? I was jealous. 
She seemed to fuss over me all the time. In fact I wasn’t able to take 
responsibility. She did it all, everything. She used to make my bed 

46 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
in the morning, clean my shoes, make my breakfast and I used to 
take it as normal. 
[Father] was a soldier and he was away a lot from home. My mother 
was very highly strung and not cruel but used to beat me sometimes 
quite violently, and I think there was this resentment that I didn’t 
have anybody to go to. I thought when you got beaten by your 
mother you went to your father and vice versa. I don’t know - it’s 
a mystery. I’d like to be put to sleep one,day and asked about it. 
I don’t know what it was all about. I believe I wished my father was 
with me more. I think I wanted some extra attention. I remember 
it was very awful lying there all wet. And then I remember being 
picked up and dried and powder being put on and clean pyjamas, 
and then being tucked up again in fresh sheets, and it was a very 
wonderful thing indeed to be put back to sleep again, clean and 
dry and warm. 
He would come back and we would all have a jolly time shooting 
deer. Actually I didn’t like that. I remember one was pregnant 
and it was like an arrow in my head. I think that is why I am a 
vegetarian. 
I suppose I was four or five. I remember being given a chota bazri 
- the Indian for small breakfast - on a tennis court where our beds 
had been taken out at night because of the great heat. And I 
remember the toys my father gave me, he had them carved out of 
wood for me by his Indian carpenter - but I had one toy I really 
loved, he was called Mickey, a huge donkey - a caricature of a 
donkey - who used to sit up at the front whenever we all went for 
a ride in a gharry or a Victoria or a tonga. I don’t know what 
happened to him. My parents always threw everything out, gave 
everything away. I’m surprised they never threw me away. That’s 
why I’ve always kept my children’s things. My parents had no feel¬ 
ings for belongings. 

Beginnings 
47 
I remember leaving Rangoon, I was fourteen, and I stood on the 
deck of the ship and I burst into tears but my mother never knew 
nor my father, nobody ever knew. I didn’t let on. I kept that sort of 
thing to myselt. Odd thing but the only other time I remember 
crying like that was when I was on the boat that was going to take 
us on the invasion of North Africa. It was late night in Liverpool 
and all the soldiers had gone down below deck to their hammocks 
and I stayed on deck looking at the water and I burst into uncon¬ 
trollable fits of crying. Perhaps I recalled the previous trip. I am not 
very good at leaving things. 
from Scunthorpe Revisited, Added Articles 
and Instant Relatives 
Christmas in India 1923 
My own particular memory of Christmas was more fragrant: it had 
curry smells. My first recollection was when I was four and living 
in the Cantonment of Poona, a well-known wog-beating area. In 
the baking heat of 120 degrees in the shade I observed my parents 
sticking little blobs of white cotton wool on the windows. Never 
having seen any, I never knew it was meant to be snow. On reflec¬ 
tion, how much more appropriate to have dotted the windows with 
curry paste and slicked banana portions. 
My little questioning mind asked my parents how Father Christ¬ 
mas came and was told ‘Down the chimney’. When I pointed out 
we hadn’t any they changed tack. Ah yes, no, this Father Christmas 
would come via the back door. That’s why they left the back door 
open, and that, dear reader, is why we were burgled. Alas, the thief, 
being a Hindu, had no idea that in the early hours my parents would 
be actively placing the presents at the bed end. They both collided 

48 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
in the parlour, my father grabbed the thief, naked except for a loin¬ 
cloth, while my mother phoned the police. Hearing the noise, I and 
my brother arose from our beds to see turbaned policemen manacling 
and hitting the unfortunate Hindu with their fists until he apparently 
told them he was a Harijan (Untouchable). When they reverted to 
sticks, the Hindu fell to his knees clutching my father’s legs. 
My little brother said to me, ‘Is that Father Kwismus?’ I didn’t 
know. 
Seeing us, my mother shushed us back to our beds with the story 
that a naughty man had tried to steal all Father Christmas’s toys, 
and on that we went to sleep again. 
I tell this story because the following year, by which time the 
family were in Rangoon (The Rangoon Show), come Christmas my 
little brother said, ‘Are the hitting men coming tonight?’ 
My mother, who had forgotten the incident, said, ‘What hitting 
men, dear?’ 
‘You know, Mummy, the hitting men and the man with no clothes 
on who cried!’ 
Should she take him to a child psychiatrist? No, no hitting men 
came that year. Instead, at five minutes to midnight on Christmas 
Eve, the earthquake came. My parents leapt from their beds and 
rushed us into the garden as the crows, disturbed from the trees, 
sent up a great cawing. Yes, that was another Merry Christmas. 
from Indefinite Articles and Scunthorpe 
Some Like It Hot 
There are many ways of keeping warm. It all depends on how much 
money you have. Let’s start at the bottom, that is the bottom of the 
social scale. There are those gentlemen of the road who at midnight 

Beginnings 
49 
can be seen sleeping peacefully on the embankment in cold weather. 
The secret is the English Newspaper, which is wrapped around the 
inside of the outergarments, the Financial Times being a favourite; 
as one tramp said, ‘Like bein' wrapped in dreams’ 
I myself was working*-class and keeping warm was different in 
each room. The outside WC in winter was a formidable affair, so 
when I saw my father putting on long underwear, a heavy sweater, 
overcoat, muffler and gloves I knew what his next function was. 
My brother had his own method: he would do vigorous exercises 
until he was boiling hot, then rush to the WC, abort at speed and 
get back before he grew cold. The only room with heat was the 
kitchen where a great iron stove glowed red, fed with all the rubbish 
in the house; on its hot plate kettles steamed and whistled, pots 
boiled, conkers hardened, chestnuts popped and socks and under¬ 
wear steamed in the scarlet heat, and grandmas shins scorched in 
the inferno. No, there was no heating problem for the poor in the 
kitchen, but the rest of the home was clutched in Stygian ice. 
The habit of staying up late only came into being when people 
stopped sleeping in the kitchen or, to be exact, in pre-industrial 
times the kitchen, bedroom and living-room were all one room. 
But came the age of the separate bedroom and late nights started. 
My own family would start to disrobe in the kitchen, start putting 
on flannelette nightshirts, pyjamas, bed socks, etc., and finally, each 
one clutching a hot water bottle, we would get on our marks and 
at a signal run screaming to our freezing beds, from where we would 
all groan and scream, ‘O Christ I’m freezin’, cor stone a crow, 
Brrrrrrrrr, etc., etc.,’ until the bed became warm. Winter mornings 
were agony; the thought of getting out of bed was as pleasant as 
hara-kiri. So I would pull my suit into bed and, when it was warm, 
undress and dress under the bedclothes; mind you my suit looked 
like a concertina, but I was warm. 
Now the article is about keeping warm, so let’s bring it into the 
present. I give up. I don’t know how to keep warm. Keeping warm 
with central heating is very difficult, because most of the time is 
spent roasting. As a result one spends the evening adjusting the 
thermostat, opening and closing windows, taking off jackets or 

50 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
pullovers, so there is as much difficulty keeping warm with central 
heating as if you were in a freezing room. If it were up to me, I 
would abolish all central heating; it destroys furniture, floors, walls, 
and your respiratory system. No, a big cosy armchair, a pair of thick 
woollen socks, carpet slippers and a roaring coal fire (or logs) are 
the answer. In the street, people only get cold if they walk like crip¬ 
ples (as most of the English do). I walk very fast; as a result I arrive 
at work warm as toast and exhausted for the day. 

2 
Boys with Guns 
I’m a hero ... 
... with cowards legs. 
- ‘Spike on Spike’, Memories of Milligan 

\ 
S 
N 

In 1933 the family returned to England. Spike’s first job, at the age 
of fourteen, was as a clerk to a book-keeper at Stone’s Engineer¬ 
ing Company. Meanwhile, he joined a local band, the New Era 
Rhythm Boys, where he learned to play the bass. He was sacked 
from Stone’s Engineering but soon got a job as a van boy delivering 
confectionery and sweets. 
‘After eating so many Bassett’s liquorice allsorts I had the shits 
for a whole week, so I left.’ 
Evenings he played in local bands, and then joined Tommy Bret- 
tell’s New Ritz Revels, playing every week at St Cyprian’s Hall, 
Brockley. By this time, he’d found another day job as a work-hand 
at the Chislehurst Laundry. 
Like his father he started to enter talent contests and won a ‘Bing 
Crosby Singing Contest’. Now seriously practising his trumpet, he 
was promoted to solo trumpet player. 
Back to the day job as shop assistant in S. Straker’s stationery 
shop on Queen Victoria Street. He was fired for unpunctuality. His 
next day job was as a stockroom assistant at Keith Prowse in Bond 
Street. 
‘It was soul destroying, and all that kept my sanity was playing 
evenings with the New Ritz Revels. I’d started to croon with the 
band.’ 
Another day job was as a skilled labourer at the Woolwich Ar¬ 
senal, while playing evenings on his illegally obtained Besson 
trumpet with the Harlem Club Band. He said he had started to earn 
good money. 
By now it was 1939. Alas, came the Adolf Hitler Show. 
For me, Spike was the original free spirit, which I could never 
quite square with his love of the army and all its discipline. Yet he 
dearly loved its camaraderie and his army life. June 1940 was the 

54 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
beginning of that love affair when he attended the Yorkshire Grey 
pub in Eltham for Ins medical. Grade 1 saw him on his way to 
Bexhill, home of the army cadets. 
Of course, he took his trumpet with him and soon he formed 
‘D Battery Band’. These musicians became lifelong friends: Doug 
Kidgell on drums, Harry Edgington on piano, Alf Fildes on guitar 
and Milligan on trumpet. This quartet played all through the war. 
A memorable year was 1943 in Italy, when he first met Harry 
Secombe. Later that year, in a concert party with Army Welfares 
‘Central Pool of Artists’, they met again when Spike was performing, 
playing his trumpet and guitar. Instant rapport. 
January 1944, Spike was wounded, labelled ‘Battle Fatigue’ and 
sent to see a psychiatrist. ‘This was a time of my life that I was very 
demoralized. I was not really me any more.’ 

from Adolf Hitler: My Part in His Downfall 
One day an envelope marked OHMS fell on the mat. Time for my 
appendicitis, I thought. 
‘For Christ’s sake don’t open it,’ said Uncle, prodding it with a 
stick. ‘Last time I did, I ended up in Mesopotamia, chased by Turks 
waving pots of Vaseline and shouting “Lawrence we love you” in 
Ottoman.’ 
Father looked at his watch. ‘Time for another advance,’ he said 
and took one pace forward. Weeks went by, several more OHMS 
letters arrived, finally arriving at the rate of two a day stamped 
URGENT. 
‘The King must think a lot of you son, writing all these letters,’ said 
Mother as she humped sacks of coal into the cellar. One Sunday, 
while Mother was repointing the house, as a treat Father opened one 
of the envelopes. In it was a cunningly worded invitation to partake 
in World War 2, starting at seven and sixpence a week, all found. ‘Just 
fancy,’ said Mother as she carried Father upstairs for his bath, ‘of all 
the people in England, they’ve chosen you, it’s a great honour, son.’ 
Laughingly I felled her with a right cross. 
I managed to delay the fatal day. I’ll explain. Prior to the war, I 
was a keep-fit addict. Every morning you could see people count¬ 
ing the bones in my skinny body at Ladywell Recreation Track, as 
I lifted barbells. Sometimes we were watched by admiring girls from 
Catford Labour Exchange; among them was one with a tremendous 
bosom. She looked like the Himalayas on their side. The sight of 
this released some kind of sex hormones into my being that made 

56 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
me try to lift some impossible weight to impress her. Loading the 
barbell to one hundred and sixty pounds (about $70) I heaved at 
the weights, Kerrrrrrissttt!! an agonized pain shot round my back 
into my groin, down my leg, and across the road to a bus stop. 
Crippled and trying to grin, I crawled, cross-eyed with agony, 
towards the shower rooms. Screams of laughter came from the girls. 
‘Ohhh yes,’ said our neighbour Mrs Windust, you’ve got a rupture 
cornin’. My ’usband ’ad one from birth. Orl fru our courtin’ days e 
managed to keep it a secret, course, on our ’oneymoon e ’ad to show 
me, and then I saw e was eld together wiv a Gathorne and Olins 
advanced leather truss. ’E ’ad to ’ave it remodelled before we could 
\ 
’ave sectional intercourse.’ 
Terrified, I hied me to my Hearts of Oak Sick Benefit Hindu 
Doctor, who had a practice in Brockley Rise. ‘Oh yes Milligan! You 
are getting a rupture! I can feel it!’ he said inserting curry-stained 
fingers like red hot pokers in my groin. That diagnosis from a son 
of the BMA was thirty-five years ago. I’m not ruptured yet. Perhaps 
I’m a late starter. Rupture! the thought filled me with lumps of fear, 
why? For three years I had been trumpet player with the Ritz Revels, 
a bunch of spotty musicians held together with hair oil. They paid 
ten shillings a gig;* of this I gave Mother nine, who in turn gave 
seven to the church for the Poor of the Parish. I couldn’t understand 
it, we were the Poor of the Parish. 
Blowing a trumpet puts a strain on the groin up to chest height, 
so, every time we did a gig I improvised a truss. I stuffed rags into 
an old sock until it was packed tight. I then placed it in the predicted 
rupture spot and attached it to my groin with lengths of tape and 
string; this gave me a bulge in my trousers that looked like the 
erection of a stallion. Something had to be done, I mean, if some 
woman saw it, I could never live up to it, so I tried to reduce the 
bulge by putting leather straps round me and pulling them tight; 
nothing happened except my voice went up an octave. It still 
looked obscene, but Mother came to the rescue; she sewed on an 
additional length of dyed black curtain which covered the bulge 
* A one night stand. 

Boys with Guns 
57 
but brought the jacket half way down my thighs. Embarrassed, I 
explained it away by saying, ‘This is the latest style from America, 
Cab Calloway wears one.’ ‘He must be a cunt,’ said the drummer. 
I had bought the evening dress from my Uncle Alf of Catford for 
thirty-eight shillings; the suit was tight, but so was money, so I 
bought it. For weeks I played in my leather harness trussed up like 
a turkey. 
After a month I got saddle sores and went to the doctor, who 
passed me on to a vet; in turn, he reported me to the police as a 
Leather Pervert. The pain in my back persisted, sometimes I couldn’t 
move for it. What I had was a slipped disc, a condition then 
unknown to the world of medicine. But to get a ‘bad back’ at the 
same time as your, call-up rings as hollow as a naked wife in bed 
with the lodger saying the laundry’s late. (In my case it was true, 
the laundry was late.) I was put in Lewisham General Hospital 
under observation. I think a nurse did it through a hole in the ceil¬ 
ing. Specialists seeking security in numbers came in bunches of 
four to examine me. They prodded me, then stepped back to see 
what happened. ‘He’s still alive,’ said one. They then hit me all over 
with rubber mallets and kept saying to each other, ‘what do you 
think?’ Days later a card arrived saying ‘Renal Colic’. 
The old man in the next bed leaned over and said in a hoarse 
voice, ‘Git aht of here son. I come in ere wiv vericose veins and they 
took me ’pendix aht.’ 
‘Thanks,’ I said, ‘my name’s Milligan.’ 
‘Mine’s Ethel Martin,’ he said. 
‘Ethel? It says Dick on your chart.’ 
‘I was when I come in, somewhere between there and ere.’ He 
pointed in an obvious direction. 
‘The unkindest cut of all?’ 
‘They got me mixed up with someone who wanted to be steri¬ 
lized. How do you tell your wife you ain’t what she thinks you are?’ 
‘Don’t tell her, show her!’ 
‘I’ll think about it.’ 
‘From now on that’s all you will be able to do about it.’ 
Those sons of fun at the hospital, having failed to diagnose my 

58 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
ailment, discharged me with a letter recommending electrical treat¬ 
ment, and headed ‘To whom it may concern -1 suppose that meant 
me. It was now three months since my call-up. To celebrate I hid 
under the bed dressed as Florence Nightingale. Next morning I 
received a card asking me to attend a medical at the Yorkshire Grey, 
Eltham. ‘Son,’ said Father, ‘I think after all you better go, were 
running out of disguises, in any case when they see you, they’re 
bound to send you home.’ Tbe card said I was to report at 9.30 a.m. 
‘Please be prompt.’ I arrived prompt at 9-.30 and was seen promptly 
at 12.15. We were told to strip. This revealed a mass of pale youths 
with thin, white, hairy legs. A press photographer was stopped by 
the recruiting sergeant. ‘For Christ’s sake don’t! If the public saw a 
photo of this lot they’d pack it in straight away.’ I arrived in the 
presence of a grey-faced, bald doctor. 
‘Flow do you feel?’ he said. 
‘All right,’ I said. 
‘Do you feel fit?’ 
‘No, I walked here.’ 
Grinning evilly, he wrote Grade 1 (One) in blood red ink on my 
card. ‘No black cap?’ I said. ‘It’s at the laundry,’ he replied. 
The die was cast. It was a proud day for the Milligan family as I 
was taken from the house. ‘I’m too young to go,’ I screamed as 
Military Policemen dragged me from my pram, clutching a dummy. 
At Victoria Station the RTO gave me a travel warrant, a white 
feather and a picture of Hitler marked ‘This is your enemy.’ I 
searched every compartment, but he wasn’t on the train. At 4.30, 
2 June 1940, on a summer’s day all mare’s tails and blue sky, we 
arrived at Bexhill-on-Sea, where I got off. It wasn’t easy. The train 
didn’t stop there. 

Boys with Guns 
59 
[The organizers of the Lewisham Jazz Festival wrote to Spike asking 
him for a letter of support for their jazz festival.] 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
18 July 1983 
Dear Jazzers, 
It’s a long time since that day in 1936/7, when at the Lewisham 
Town Hall I was given a silver medal by Benny Carter for the best 
jazz soloist in the Melody Maker Dance Band contest. 
So, it’s almost a complete circle to be asked to write a letter 
supporting this occasion. 
Of course, jazz is a great and happy music, even the blues are 
good news. Everything about jazz I love, except when they put it 
through ten microphones and 50,000 watt amplifiers and deafen 
you, so 1 do hope you are not doing this on this particular occasion. 
Nevertheless, even if you are, I wish the occasion great happiness. 
From an old jazzer, still blowing a lonely JVflal cornet in the 
corners of dark pubs, to barmaids with big boobs, hoping they have 
a key to A flat. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 
0 

6o 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
CONKERER 
I’m going to march on Poland 
And then I’ll march on France,' 
Next I’ll march on Germany, 
I’ll lead them such a danCe. 
v 
I’ll smash my way through Russia, 
I’ll storm all over Spain, 
Then I’ll go back to Poland 
And do it all again\ 
I’ll conquer all of Asia 
From Sweden to the Med. 
And then I’ll really have to stop, 
Mum says it’s time for bed. 
Hadley Wood 
' September 1980 
- from Unspun Socks from a Chickens Laundry 
from ‘Rommel?’ ‘Gunner Who?’ 
Algeria 
The ground was like rocks. The nights were rent with gunners 
groaning, swearing, twisting, turning and revolving in their tents. 
Temperatures fluctuated. You went to sleep on a warm evening, 
by dawn it dropped to freezing. We had to break our tents with 
hammers to get out. Dawn widdles caused frost-bitten appendages, 

Boys with Guns 
61 
the screams! ‘Help, I’m dying of indecent exposure!’ We solved the 
problem. I stuffed rrjy Gas cape with paper and made a mattress. 
Gunner Forest wrapped old Daily Mirrors round his body, ‘I always 
wanted to be in the News,’ he said, and fainted. Others dug holes 
to accommodate hips and shoulders. 
At night we wore every bit of clothing we had, then we rolled 
ourselves into four blankets. ‘We look nine months gone,’ said 
Edgington. ‘Any advance on nine,’ I cried. 
We slept warmly, but had overlooked the need to commune with 
nature; it took frantic searching through layers of clothing to locate 
one’s willy, some never did and had to sleep with a damp leg. Gunner 
Maunders solved the problem! He slid a four foot length of bicycle 
inner tube over his willy, secured it round his waist with string, he 
just had to stand and let go. Jealous, Gunner White sabotaged it. 
As Maunders slept, fiend White tied knots in the bottom of the 
tube. 
* 
23 Jan. 
19 Bty 
56 Heavy Regiment, RA 
BNAF 
My dear Des, 
In Africa we are all playing silly buggers. We are on a course 
teaching us how to ‘Leap’ anything that stands in our way. I think 
this could be introduced at home to encourage fitness among the 
Wartime civilian population. For example ‘Leaping Stones ’ could be 
installed in the home. The stone, about three feet high by two feet 
wide, could be cemented in all the doorways in the home, including 
one at the foot of the stairs. 
A Leapo-meter is attached to the ankle of every member of the 
family, which records the number of leaps per person, per day. 
Those who show disinterest can have a small explosive charge fixed 

62 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
to the groin, which detonates should the person try climbing round 
the stone, this will cause many a smoke-blackened crotch, but with 
our new spray-on ‘Crotcho !’ — a few squirts leaves the groins 
gleaming white, and free offowl pest. Think of the enervating joys 
of the Leaping stones! Sunday morn - and the whole household 
rings with shouts of Hoi Hup! Ho la! Grannies, uncles, mothers, 
cripples all leaping merrily from one roomto another for wartime 
England - ah, there's true patriotism! We have high hopes that 
more progressive young politicians with an eye to eliminating 
senile MPs intend to have a ‘Great Westminster Leaping Stone ’ 
that will be placed dead centre of the great entrance doors on 
open ing day. Mr Churchill could start the leaping, those failing 
will of course be debarred. You can try and assist the failed 
member over the leaping stone by applying hot pokers to the seat, 
thus the smell of scorched flesh, burning hairs and screams can 
bring a touch of colour to an otherwise dull wartime England. I 
don't know when I will post this letter, I might deliver it tomorrow 
by hand, ankle, foot and clenched elbow. 
As ever, 
Your loving brother 
Terry 
* 
27 January 1943: The services of the Battery Band were called for. 
‘There’s ten acts on the bill and we’d like yeow to do a twurn!’ 
said the District Entertainments Officer. He had a very high 
effeminate voice. ‘I used to be counter-tenor at the Gwarden,’ he 
said. ‘It must have been Welwyn Garden,’ whispered Edge. That 
evening, a highly polished staff car calls for us. ‘Don’t touch it,’ I 
cautioned, ‘it’s a trap, it’s only for our instruments, we’re supposed 
to run alongside.’ 
We were driven at great speed to a massive French Colonial 
Opera House where at one time, massive French colonials sang. A 
sweating Sergeant was waiting. 

Boys with Guns 
63 
‘Ah,’ he said with obvious relief. ‘I’m Sergeant Hope.’ 
‘What a good memory you’ve got,’ I said. 
‘I’m the compere. You are the Royal Artillery Orchestra?’ 
‘Yes,’ I said. 
‘Where’s the rest of yOu?’ 
‘This is all there is of me, I’m considered complete by the MO.’ 
We had been expecting a full orchestra.’ 
‘We are full - we just had dinner.’ 
"That will do,’ he said leading us to the wings. 
On stage an Army PT Instructor was doing a series of hand 
stands, leaps, and somersaults; the conclusion of each trick was 
standing to attention and saluting. ‘You don’t salute without yer ’at 
on, cunt,’ said a voice from the khaki rabble. Sgt Hope took down 
details of our ‘act’. 
‘Name?’ 
‘Milligan.’ 
‘Rank?’ 
‘Gunner.’ 
‘Regiment?’ 
‘Pm sorry,’ I said, ‘under the Geneva Convention of 1921 all I need 
give is my name, rank and number.’ 
‘Look son, I’ve had a bloody awful day, I’m at the end of my 
tether,’ he said. ‘Save the jokes for the stage, I was told you were 
a twenty-piece regimental orchestra and you were going to play 
Elgar’s Pomp and Circumstances.’ He walked away holding his 
head. 
The PT Sergeant finished his leaping act, and was given a recep¬ 
tion that he had never had before or since. He came into the wings 
grinning with triumph. ‘I think I’ll turn pro after the war,’ he 
triumphed. The next time I saw him was 1951, he was a furniture 
remover in Peckham. ‘Changed your mind?’ I said. He threw a 
cupboard at me. 
The worried compere was now the other side of the curtain 
saying ‘Thank you, the next act is - er - the 19th “Battalion”, Royal 
Artillery Dance Band, under its - er - conductor Gunner Spine 
Millington!’ Behind the curtain we were rupturing ourselves 

6 4 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
trying to get a massive French colonial piano on the stage. I 
shouted ‘Were not bloody well ready.’ ‘Well,’ said the sweating 
Sergeant, ‘as you can hear they’re not quite bloody well ready yet 
ha-ha but - er - they ha-ha - er - won’t be long now, and then -’ 
he put his head through the curtain. ‘Hurry up for Christ’s sake!’ 
‘Keep ad libbing,’ I said, ‘you’re a natural.’ He continued ‘Well, 
they’re - er - nearly - er - not quite - ready, ha-ha and soon we’ll 
be...’ 
Not waiting for him to finish, we launched into our up tempo 
signature tune, ‘The Boys From Battery D’, which Harry Edgington 
had written. 
We’re the boys from Battery D 
Four Boys from Battery D 
We make a rhythmic noise 
We give you dancing joys 
And sing the latest melody. 
Now we make the darndest sounds 
As we send you Truckin’ on down 
And if it’s sweet or hot 
We give it all we’ve got 
And boy! we got enough to go around. 
We’ll set your feet tapping with a quick step 
We’ve a waltz that’ll make you sigh 
And then the tempo we’ve got 
For a slow fox-trot 
Would make a wallflower wanna try. 
Come on along you he and she 
It’s the dancers’ jamboree 
Come on and take a chance 
Come on and have a dance 
To the band of Battery D. 

Boys with Guns 
65 
Not exactly Cole Porter, but we weren’t getting his kind of money. 
To our amazement we got an ovation. Three more jazz numbers 
and they wouldn’t let us go; to cool them off I got Doug Kidgell our 
drummer to sing Toselli’s Serenade. When he came to the line: 
‘Deep in my heart there is Rapture’ 
forgetfully we sang our customary version: 
‘Deep in my guts I’ve got Rupture 
But for that dear 
I’d have upped yer.’ 
We realized our mistake too late, and a great roar of laughter 
stopped the song in its tracks. We finished up with me imperson¬ 
ating Louis Armstrong doing the St Louis Blues, and took 
unending curtain calls. Old soldiers reading this may remember 
that occasion. 
Driving back in the staff car, we sat silent in the aura of our 
unexpected success. To. our left the Bay of Algiers was bathed in 
moonlight. ‘I never dreamed,’ said Harry, ‘that one day, I would be 
driven along the Bay of Algiers by moonlight.’ 
‘Didn’t you?’ I said. ‘The first time I saw you I said, “One day that 
man is going to be driven along the Bay of Algiers by moonlight.’” 
‘You’re asking for a thud up the hooter,’ he said. 
‘No I wasn’t! What I said was, “The first time I saw you I...’” 
‘All right Milligan, stick this in yer dinner manglers.’ He gave me 
a cigarette. Old sweats will shudder and fall faint when I mention 
the brand, ‘V’s’! They had appeared in our rations when we landed 
in Algiers. ‘This is,’ I said, ‘living proof that the British soldier will 
smoke shit, and that goes from Sanitary Orderly Geordie Liddel to 
General Alexander.’ 
Alf Fildes, our guitarist, disagreed. ‘Liddel, yes, he lives near it, 
he’d smoke shit, yes, but I bet a bloke like Alexander wouldn’t wear 
it.’ 
There followed a classical argument on smoking shit, that resolved 

66 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
in the agreement that General Alexander would smoke shit provided 
it was offered him by the King. The story went round that ‘Vs’ were 
India’s contribution to the war. Churchill asked Ghandi if there was 
a natural commodity that was going to waste, and Ghandi said, ‘Yes, 
we got plenty of cows’ shit.’ ‘Right,’ said Churchill, ‘we’re sending 
you a million rupees to turn it into tobacco.’ 
Two years went by; Churchill, anxious for news, phones Ghandi: 
Churchill: ‘Ghandi? How’s the Ersatz tobacco coming along?’ 
ghandi: ‘All right but we need more money.’ 
churchill: ‘Good God, you’ve had a million!’ 
ghandi: ‘Yes, you see, so far it looks like tobacco - it smokes 
like tobacco - but -’ 
churchill: ‘But what?’ 
ghandhi: ‘It still smells like shit.’ 
DIVERTISSEMENT SEPTEMBER 1973 
As I sit in a suite on the 13th Floor of the Eurobuilding in Madrid, 
writing this volume, I reflect on that time thirty years ago, and the 
emotional analysis of those khaki days, have left such a deeply etched 
impression, that the whole spectrum actually re-inhabits my being 
with such remarkable freshness that the weight of the nostalgia is 
almost too much to bear, feelings that I had incurred in those days, 
towards people, incidents, nature, which I thought of as almost 
trivial, were really of Titanic proportions, and ones, that I now real¬ 
ize were to stay fresh, and become more poignant as the years passed, 
and the desire to experience them all once again, be they good, bad 
or indifferent, became a haunting spectre that suddenly, during the 
course of a day, takes you unawares, a particular word, a scent, a 
colour, or song could trigger it off. It could be at, say, Ronnie Scott’s 
Club with a companion. Without warning someone plays a tune, and 
immediately, the surroundings and the companion become total 
strangers, and you long for those yester-ghosts to snatch you and 
rush you back to that magic day it happened. I used to scoff at my 
father’s looking forward to his annual World War 1 reunions, but now 
I know, you have to have them! In fact I was instrumental in getting 

Boys with Guns 
67 
our own D Battery reunions started, and lo and behold, the attend¬ 
ance increases every year. 
Despite the friendships I have made since the war, it is always 
those early ones that have weight, understanding, confidence and 
mutual experience that I cling to. Though my best friend Harry 
Edgington has emigrated to New Zealand, we are closer than ever, 
I know that a particular tune will automatically make him think 
of the time we played it together, and the same applies to me. Our 
correspondence is prodigious, his letters fill three boxfiles, likewise 
recorded tapes, in which he sends his latest compositions, asking 
my opinions. He sends me tapes that send me into gales of laugh¬ 
ter and yet all these occasions are not really happy, and yet I 
welcome them, they give a most soul-warming effect, it savours 
of satisfaction, and yet is emotionally inconclusive, it has become, 
like cocaine, addictive. Is it because with the future unknown, the 
present traumatic, that we find the past so secure? 
* 
I yawned one of those, yawns that makes the back of your head 
touch your shoulder blades and push your chest out. Tomorrow 
the new Gun Position. Oh no! not tomorrow ... at midnight we 
were beaten awake with rifle butts, our erections smashed down 
with shovels. We were to move now. 
‘This isn’t war,’ screamed Edgington, ‘it’s Sadism. S-a-d-e-s-e- 
a-m’ etc. The convoy crawled along in pitch darkness, the moon 
having waned. ‘Where are we going, sir?’ I asked. 
‘It’s a place called Map Ref. 517412,’ said Lt Goldsmith. 
‘They don’t write numbers like that any more, sir.’ 
We passed the bombed shattered village of Toukabeur, full of Booby 
Traps. Seven Sappers were killed during clearing. Outside the village 
was our new position. At night it looked like the surface of the 
moon, or Mae West’s bum the moment the corsets came off. 
In front of us was a rocky multi-surfaced outcrop eighty feet 
high and 100 yards long, behind us a ledge dropping sheer fifty 

68 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
feet to a granite plateau fifty yards long, then another thirty-foot 
drop into a valley, in fact two giant steps. The canvas command 
post erected, I pitched my tent on the edge of the first drop, 
because shells falling behind me would drop fifty feet down and 
I would avoid being subdivided by the Third Reich. However, if 
shells landed in front of me, Id suffer the quincequonces. The 
guns were pulled, heaved and sworn into position. Wireless 
network opened with 78 Div. HQ and.q.6 Div. OP line laid and 
contact made. Jerry dropped an occasional Chandelier flare. 
Kerrashboom-kerak! Our first rounds went off at 22.00 hours. I 
was on Command Post duty all night. 
In between fire orders a running argument developed between 
Lt Beauman Smythe, Gnr Thornton and self. 
thornton: ‘There’s been heavy casualties on Bou Diss.’ 
me: ‘I’m glad it’s not me.’ 
b-smythe: ‘That’s a selfish view.’ 
me: ‘Selfish, sir? All I said was I’m glad it wasn’t me that died.’ 
b-smythe: ‘That’s not something to be glad about!’ 
thornton: ‘I think -’ 
me: ‘Sir! You want me to say, “I’m sorry it wasn’t me that got killed”?’ 
b-smythe: ‘It’s better than being not sorry. Someone’s got to get 
killed in wars.’ 
me: ‘Well, someone was, it’s just that it wasn’t me.’ 
thornton: ‘I think -’ 
b-smythe:‘I still say your attitude to death was selfish.’ 
me: ‘Look, sir, mother went thru’ a lot of pain to have me, I was 
a 12 lb baby, 11 lb was my head, me father spent a fortune for a 
Sergeant on my education, some days it was up to threepence a day, 
I’m not throwing all that away. My father still goes round with a 
begging bowl.’ 
thornton: ‘I think -’ 
b-smythe: ‘I still say your attitude to death was selfish.’ 
milligan: ‘Shellfish?’ 
thornton: ‘I think -’ 
me: ‘Sell? What do you think?’ 

Boys with Guns 
69 
THORNTON: ‘ .. Oh Christ - I’ve forgotten.’ 
me: ‘Well be a good boy, go outside and get killed to cheer up Lt 
Smythe.’ 
Off duty at 06.00 hours, went straight to bed and I think I died. 
LONGSTOP HILL, 22 APRIL 1943 
That April day 
Seems far away 
The day they decided to kill 
Lieutenant Tony Goldsmith RA 
On the slopes of Longstop Hill. 
At Toukabeur 
The dawn lights stir, 
Whose blood today will spill? 
Today it’s Tony Goldsmith’s 
Seeping out on Longstop Hill. 
One can’t complain 
Nor ease the pain 
Or find someone to fill 
The place of Tony Goldsmith 
Lying dead on Longstop Hill. 
In Germany 
There still might be 
A Joachim, Fritz or Will 
Who did for Tony Goldsmith 
That day - on Longstop Hill. 
- from The Mirror Running 

70 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
THERE WAS A YOUNG SOLDIER CALLED EDSER 
There was a young soldier called Edser 
When wanted was always in bed sir: 
One morning at one 
They fired the gun 
And Edser, in bed sir, was dead sir. 
- from Silly Verse for Kids 
from Mussolini: His Part in My Downfall 
Salerno 
Thursday, 23 September 1943 
My diary: Still at war! Early closing in Catford. Read letter from 
Mother saying Chiesmans of Lewisham are so short of stock, the 
manager and staff sit in the shop miming the words ‘Sold Out’. 
Dear Reader, the beds in the Dorchester Hotel are the most 
comfortable in England. Alas! neither Driver Kidgell nor Lance- 
Bombardier Milligan are in a bed at the Dorchester - no! they are 
trying to sleep on a ten-ton Scammell lorry, parked on the top 
deck of 4,000-ton HMS Boxer, inside whose innards are packed 
19 Battery, 56th Heavy Regiment, all steaming in the hold; from 
below comes the merry sound of men retching and its all from 
Gunner Edgington. We are bound for Sunny Salerno. For thirteen 
days since the 5th Army landing, a ferocious battle had ensued on 
the beach-head. Even as we rode the waves we knew not what to 

Boys with Guns 
7i 
expect when our turn came. Hie dawn comes up like Thinder. 
TTimder? Yes, that’s Thin Thunder. ‘Shhhhhh,’ we all shout. The 
chill morning air touches the khaki somnambulists sleeping hero¬ 
ically for their King and Country. We are awakened by Gunner 
Woods in the driving cab, who has fallen asleep on the motor horn. 
A puzzled ship’s Captain is wondering why he can hear the sound 
of a lorry at sea. Kidgell gives a great jaw-cracking yawn and that’s 
him finished for the day. He stretches himself but doesn’t get any 
longer. Deep in his eyes I see engraved the word, ‘TEA’. ‘Wakey 
wakey,’ he said, but didn’t. The ship is silent. The helmsman’s face 
shows white through the wheel-house. 
‘It is Dawn,’ yawns Kidgell. 
‘My watch says twenty past,’ I yawned. 
‘Yes! It’s exactly twenty past Dawn,’ he yawned. 
We yawned. Like a comedy duo, we both stand and pull our 
trousers on; mistake! he has mine and vice versa. The light is grow¬ 
ing in the Eastern sky, it reveals a great grey convoy of ships, 
plunging and rising at the dictation of the sea. LCTs. LCTs, some 
thirty of them, all flanked by navy Z-Class destroyers. The one on 
our port bow is stencilled B4. Imagine the confusion of a wireless 
conversation with it. 
‘Hello B4, are you receiving me?’ 
PAUSE. 
‘Hello B4 answering.’ 
PAUSE. 
‘Hello B4, why didn’t you answer B4?’ 
‘Because we didn’t hear you before.’ 
In the early light the sea is blue-black like ink. Kidgell is care¬ 
fully folding his blankets into a mess, ‘I haven’t slept that well for 
years.’ 
‘How do you know?’ I said. ‘You were asleep.’ 
He chuckled. ‘Well, it feels like I slept well.’ 
‘Where did you feel it, in the legs? the elbows? teeth?’ I was 
determined to pursue the matter to its illogical conclusion; I mean 
if sane people are going around saying ‘I slept well last night’, what 
would lunatics say? ‘I stayed awake all night so I could see if I slept 

7 2 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
well’? I mean - we are interrupted by the shattering roar of aircraft!! 
‘Spitfires!’ someone said, and we all got up again. 
‘Thank God they weren’t German,’ says Kidgell. 
‘Why thank him,’ I said. ‘He doesn’t run the German air force, 
thank Hitler.’ 
‘All right, clever Dick.’ He giggled. ‘This is going to sound silly 
- thank Hitler they weren’t Germans.’ 
The helmsman’s face showed white through the wheel-house. 
I produce a packet of Woodbines. I offer one to Kidgell. I have to 
... he’s got the matches. My watch says *2.20; that means it’s about 
seven o’clock. We stow our gear into a lorry full of sleeping Gunners 
with variable pitch snoring; three of them are snoring the chord of 
C Minor. We decide to walk ‘forrard’ The Boxer makes a frothy 
swathe as her flat prow divides the waters. The sky is turning into 
post-dawn colours - scarlet, pink, lemon. It looked like the ending 
of a treacly MGM film where John Wayne joins his Ghost Riders in 
the sky. (Personally I can’t wait for him to.) It’s chilly; we wear over¬ 
coats with the collars up. Kidgell looks pensively out towards Italy. 
‘I was wondering about the landing.’ 
‘Don’t worry about the landing, I’ll hoover it in the morning.’ 
He ignored me, but then everybody did. ‘I’ve been thinking.’ 
‘Thinking? This could mean promotion,’ I said. 
‘I was thinking, supposing they land us in six foot of water.’ 
‘Then everyone five foot eleven and three quarters will drown.’ 
‘That’s the end of me, then.’ 
‘I thought you were a champion swimmer!’ 
‘You can’t swim in army boots.’ 
‘You’re right, there is not enough room.’ 
‘What are you talking about?’ 
‘I’m talking about ten words to the minute.’ 
A merry matelot approaches with a Huge Brown Kettle. ‘You lads 
like some cocoa?’ 
We galloped at the speed of light to our big packs and returned 
to meet the merry matelot as he descended from the Bridge. He 
pours out the thick brown remaining sludge. The gulls in our wake 
scream as they dive-bomb the morning garbage. We sip the cocoa, 

Boys with Guns 
73 
holding the mug with both hands to warm them. A change from 
holding the mug to warm the Naafi tea. Another cigarette, what a 
lunatic habit! ‘Here we are,’ I said. ‘We go to these bastards who 
make this crap and we say ‘We will give you money for twenty of 
those fags’, we smoke them, we make the product disappearl Ha! 
Supposing you bought a piano on the same basis? Suddenly, in the 
middle of a concert it disappears, you have to belt out and buy 
another one to finish the concerto. It’s lunacy.’ 
In the deck-house, a red-faced officer scans the horizon ahead. 
‘I wonder exactly where we are,’ says Kidgell. 
‘I think we’re on the ancient sea of Tyrrhenum Sive Inferum.’ 
That finishes him. 
‘When we reach Sicily we will hug the coast to afford us air cover 
and the way things are, I’d say we could just afford it.’ 
We are travelling one of the most ancient trade routes in history, 
Carthaginians, Greeks, Romans, Mamelukes, Turks and Mrs Doris 
Hare. ‘Fancy us being part of history,’ I said. ‘I don’t fancy it,’ said 
Kidgell. 
The Tannoys crackle. ‘Attention, please.’ 
A Gunner faints. ‘What’s up?’ we ask. 
‘I thought I heard someone say please.’ 
‘Attention . . . This is the Captain speaking . . . (What a good 
memory he had) ... In three minutes the Ack-Ack guns will be 
firing test bursts ... this is only a practice, repeat, practice.’ 
Soon the sky was festooned with erupting shells, black puffs of 
smoke with a red nucleus from the barrels of the multiple Pom 
Poms. The Tannoy again. 
‘Hello this is your -’ a burst of amplified coughing follows. 
‘It’s the resident consumptive,’ I said. 
The coughing ceases. ‘Attention, that practice firing will be repeated 
every morning at -’ Coughing - coughing - ‘at’ - coughing ... 
The helmsman’s face showed white through the wheel-house. 
‘I feel a sudden attack of roll-call coming on,’ I said. 
I was right. Sgt King lines us up on deck. We answer our names 
and anyone’s that isn’t there; even if they called ‘Rasputin’ a voice 
answers ‘Sah.’ 

74 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
‘Milligan?’ 
‘Sah!’ 
‘Devine?’ 
‘Sah!’ 
‘Edgington?... Edgington?’ 
From the deck below comes a weak voice ‘Sah!' followed by retch¬ 
ing. 5 
Britannia rules the waves, but in this case, she waives the rules. 
A roar of engines, the Spitfires return, we all get up again. They 
repeat roaring back and forth through the day, we get used to it, 
we get so used to it that when a Focke Wolfe shoots us up, we’re all 
standing up, aren’t we? Breakfast is happening in the galley. 
‘I have been a slave to breakfast all my life but breakfast and a 
galley slave never!’ says Kidgell. 
We lined up head on to a trio of Navy cooks, who doled out Spam 
Fritters, Bread, Marge, Jam and Tea and avoided looking at it when 
they did. We ate on top deck enjoying the sea breeze, the pleasant 
weather ... were we really going to war or were we on our way to 
Southend for the day? 
24 September 1943 
I was awake at first light, and I heard gunfire. I sat bolt upright, we 
were down to about three knots, very slow, granny-knots. We were 
pulling into the Bay of Salerno! All the beaches look remarkably 
peaceful. Good! we’d have a quiet landing. The still waters of the 
Bay were a carnival of ships, some 200, all shapes and sizes rode at 
anchor. The amazing American Amphibian DWKs were ferrying 
supplies ashore. Looming large among all this was HMS Valiant 
and HMS War spite. Suddenly one let fly a devastating salvo which 
thundered around the bay and rocked the warship some fifteen 
degrees off her axis. 
‘That’s not going to do Jerry any good,’ said a sailor and added, 
‘It’s not doing the Warspite any good either.’ 
In the morning mistiness we make out hyper-activity on the 
beaches - lorries, tanks, half-tracks, beach-masters waving flags, 

Boys with Guns 
75 
pointing, lifting, lowering, signalling, shouting - all involved in the 
logistics of the war. The shells from Warspite were bursting inland 
on the hills behind Pontecagnano, which dominated the landing 
beaches. Why wasn’t Jerry replying? We drop anchor; immediately 
trouble, the chain has wrapped around the propeller shaft, fun and 
high jinks. We cheer as a diver goes down. A boat from the beach 
approached with a purple-faced Officer who shouted rude things 
through a bull-horn at our Captain, whose face incidentally showed 
white through the wheel-house. To make it more difficult for our 
Captain, the destroyers lay a smoke-screen around us, and the 
Tannoy crackles; ‘Hello - click - buzz-crackle - its - click-buzz- 
crackle - later.’ End of message. 
‘It’s all getting a bit silly,’ said Harry. ‘All we had was the view and 
now that’s been bloody obscured!’ 
Now is the time for action! I take my trumpet from its case. There 
must be men still alive who remember the sound of‘The Last Post’ 
from the smoke-shrouded Boxer. The Tannoy crackles. 
‘Whoever is playing that bugle, please stop,’ said a piqued Navy 
voice. 
The anchor chain is finally freed. The smoke-screen lifts to show 
we are now facing away from the beach. 
‘They’re takin’ us back again,’ says Gunner Devine. 
‘Of course not, you silly Gunner, no, the Captain has turned his 
ship around in the smoke to show us how clever he is.’ 
There are laconic cheers as the diver surfaces. 
‘Caught any fish?’ someone says. 
He holds up two fingers. 
‘Is that all?’ 
The engines start up again, the ship swings slowly round and 
points toward Italy, I mean, he couldn’t miss it. Sub-Section 
Sergeants are going around telling us to ‘Get ready to disembark.’ 
Drivers are unchaining the restraining cables that secure the vehi¬ 
cles to the deck. The day is now a delightful mixture of sun and a 
cool wind. The Warspite lets off another terrifying salvo. It thunders 
around the bay. We watch it erupt among the hills. 
‘That’ll make the bastards sit up,’ says Sgt ‘Jock’ Wilson. 

76 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
‘I’d have thought’, I said, ‘it would have the opposite effect!’ 
‘Oh hello, Spike,’ he says. ‘How you bin enjoying the sea trip?’ 
‘Well, Sarge, Yes and No.’ 
‘Wot do ye mean Yes or No?’ 
‘Well, Yes I am, and No I’m not, but mostly No I’m not, otherwise, 
Yes I am.’ 
He frowned. ‘You’ll never get promotion.’ 
Wilson was a Glaswegian, he was ‘Fitba’ (Football) mad, and his 
family at home were hard put to it to sendJiim all the news cuttings 
on the Scottish Matches*. s 
\ 
September 24 1943 
REGIMENTAL DIARY: HMS Boxer landed first party on Red 
Beach, Salerno Bay at 0940 hrs. 
The ship touched the beach very gently, so gently I suspect it’s not 
insured. ‘Sorry about the bump, gentlemen,’ said a chuckling Navy 
voice on the Tannoy. A cheer arose from the lads as the landing 
ramp was lowered. Another salvo from Warspite. At the same time 
an American supply ship starts to broadcast Bing Crosby singing 
‘Pennies from Heaven’ over its speakers. To our right, over the 
Sorrento peninsula, a German plane is flying very high; pinpoints 
of high bursting Ack-Ack shells trace his path. 
Time 9.30. Sea calm. 
The Tannoy crackles. Another coughing demo? No. 
‘Hello, is it on? - Hello, Captain Sullivan speaking.’ 
‘Give us a song, Captain,’ shouts Gunner White. 
‘Attention, will all men without vehicles, repeat, without vehicles, 
please disembark first?’ 
‘I think I’m without vehicles,’ I said to Harry. 
‘How about you?’ 
‘No, I haven’t got vehicles, but they might be incubating,’ says 
Edgington, who is, now that the sea is calm, back to his cheery self; 
the roses haven’t come back to his cheeks, but he tells me they’re 
* Scottish Matches = ones that wont strike. 

Boys with Guns 
77 
on their way. ‘They have reached my knees and are due in me navel 
area this afternoon.’ 
9 
The Tannoy: ‘Will men without vehicles disembark now?’ 
‘We’ve been spoken for, Harry,’ I said as we trundle down the 
gangways to the ‘Floor’ of the Boxer. We were about to set foot on 
Italy. The jaws of the Boxer are opened on to a sunlit beach. 
‘I could never have afforded all this travel on my own,’ I say. ‘It 
had to be the hard way, World War 2. I’ve always wanted to see 
Russia, I suppose that would mean World War 3.’ 
I don’t believe it, we were walking down the broad ramp on to 
the Salerno beaches, no bullets! no shells! and I didn’t even get my 
feet wet, as I leave my first footprint in the sand. I shout loudly 
‘TAXI!’ and point in the direction it’s coming from. ‘The woods 
are full of them,’ I add. 
We move in a milling throng on to the beach. I start the sheep 
bleating and soon we are all at it, much to the amusement of the 
seamen watching from top deck. The scenery by L/Bdr Milligan: 
the beaches are a mixture of volcanic ash and sand, the colour of 
milky coffee, it stretches left and right as far as the eye can see. 
Strewn along the beaches is the debris of a battle that had raged 
here; an occasional German long-range shell explodes in the bay. 
There are no hits. The beaches vary from twenty to thirty yards 
deep. Back from this is a mixture of pines, scrub, walnut trees and 
sand hillocks mounted with Tuffa grass. Bulldozers have made 
clearways flanked by white ribbons denoting them mine-free. There 
is activity the length and breadth of the shores. Great ammo dumps 
are, as we watch, getting higher and bigger. Just inland, Spitfires are 
refuelling and about to take off from a makeshift airstrip. American 
Aero-Cobras are revving their engines, turning into the wind and 
taking off in the direction of Naples. 
We congregated by the sand hillocks, dumped our small kit and 
started to explore the area. Hard by was an American Lightning 
plane that had crash-landed half in the sea; a glimpse inside showed 
a blood-saturated cockpit. ‘He must be very anaemic by now,’ said 
Sherwood. There are slit trenches everywhere, water bottles, helmets, 
empty ammo boxes, and spent-cartridge cases by the hundreds. 

78 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
‘Must have been a hot spot,’ said Bdr Fuller. 
At the bottom of a trench I spot a Scots Guard cap badge, several 
pieces of human skull with hair attached, and a curling snapshot 
of two girls with an address somewhere in Streatham. I put it in my 
paybook intending to forward it to the address. We come across 
thirty or so hurried graves with makeshift wooden markers. ‘Private 
Edwards, E.’, a number, and that was all. Fourteen days ago he was 
alive, thinking, feeling, hoping ... If war.'was a game of cards, I’d 
say someone was cheating. ' 
SOLDIER, SOLDIER 
There was a little'soldier 
Who went off to the war 
To serve the King, 
Which is the thing 
That soldiers are made for. 
> 
But then that little soldier 
Was blown to bits, was he. 
All for his King 
He did this thing: 
How silly can you be? 
- from Startling Verse for All the Family 
24 September 1943 
My diary: Cool night, a touch of autumn chill in the air. Had very 
disturbed sleep. Kept waking up in a cold sweat, took swig at water 

Boys with Guns 
79 
bottle, had a fag. What a bloody life. I finally dropped off into a black 
sleep, like death. Am I the black sleep of the family? 
25 September 1943 
I awoke at first light, sat up, yawned. I felt as tired as though I had 
not slept. A morning mist is rapidly disappearing. It swirls around 
the head of Monte Mango. I start the ritual of folding my blankets. 
A voice calls, ‘Hallo, Terry.’ Terry? I hadn’t been called that since I 
turned khaki. It was Reg Lake, a Captain in the Queen’s Regiment. 
He had been sleeping about thirty yards away. Reg was the pre-war 
manager of the New Era Rhythm Boys, one of the best semi-pro 
bands in London. He was the one who gave me my first break as a 
‘crooner’. Last time I had seen him was on a 137 bus going from 
Brockley to Victoria. 
‘My God, Terry, what are you doing in this God-forsaken place?’ 
‘I’m helping England win the war.’ What a silly bloody question. 
‘Reg,’ I said, ‘or do I call you sir?’ 
‘How long you been here?’ he said. 
‘Came yesterday - I thought it was a day trip.’ 
‘I was here on the landings, you missed all the fun.’ 
‘I’ll try and make up for it.’ 
It was difficult to make conversation. I couldn’t say, ‘Where’s the 
band playing this week?’ I asked what had happened to the boys in 
the band. 
‘All split up.’ 
‘That must be painful.’ 
‘Most of them are in the services - remember Tom the tenor 
player with only one lung? They took him.’ 
‘They took me and I’ve only got two.’ 
He was called away by a Sergeant. I never saw him again, I’ve no 
idea if he survived the war. If he reads this book, I hope he gets in touch. 
A voice is calling across the land, ‘Bombardier Milligan.’ 
‘Bombardier Milligan is dead,’ I call in a disguised voice. 
The voice replied, ‘Then he’s going to miss breakfast.’ 
Good God! it’s nearly nine! I just get to the cookhouse in time 

8o 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
to have the remains of powdered eggs, bacon and tea that appears 
to have been all cooked together. 
‘You slept late,’ says Edgington. 
‘I’m training for sleeping sickness.’ 
We are now gathered around the Water Wagon doing our ablutions. 
Edgington is at the lather stage, peering into a mirror the size of a half 
crown propped on a mudguard. He was moving his face clockwise as 
he shaved. I had stripped to the waist, which brought cries of‘Where 
are you?’ I had my head under the tap enjoying the refreshing cascade 
of chlorinated cold water, at which time, twelve F W 109s are enjoying 
roaring out of the sun, guns hammering, there’s a God-awful scram¬ 
ble, we all meet under a lorry. I caught a glimpse of the planes as they 
launched their bombs on the 25-pounder regiment behind us. 
‘Look out,’ warns Edgington, when the planes were half way 
back to base. He hurled himself face down. ‘All over.’ We stand 
up. Edgington presented a face, half lather, dust and squashed 
grapes. 
What was I laughing at? One moment I was well. Next moment 
I was on my knees vomiting. It was unbelievable. I became giddy, 
kept seeing stars and the Virgin Mary upside down. 
‘Report sick,’ says Bombardier Fuller. 
‘You’re so kind,’ I said. 
They took me to the Doc, who said I had a temperature of 103. 
‘What have you been doing?’ he said. 
‘I was washing, sir.’ 
Having a temperature of 103 allowed you to stop fighting. No but 
seriously, folks, I was ill! Oh I was illl! The war would have to go 
on without me! In a bren carrier they took me shivering with ague 
to the Forward Dressing Station. It was a small tented area off a 
rough track; a Lance-Corporal, tall, thin with spectacles, took my 
details, tied a label on me, I think it was THIS WAY UR 
‘That stretcher there,’ he said. 
So, they were going to stretch me! I felt a bit of a fraud. Around 
me were seriously wounded men. Some were moaning softly. A 
chubby Catholic priest, about forty-five, red faced, blond hair going 
grey, walked among us. 

Boys with Guns 
81 
‘What’s wrong with you, son?’ 
‘I got fever.’ 
‘Fever?’ 
‘Yes. Disappointed, father?’ 
He grinned, but it dfdn’t wipe the sadness off his face. He told 
me they were awaiting the arrival of some badly wounded men 
from the Queen’s. 
‘They were trying to take that.’ He nodded towards Monte Stella. 
Three jeeps arrive with stretcher cases. Among them is a German, 
his face almost off. Poor bastard. There was a trickle of wounded all 
afternoon, some walking, some on stretchers, some dead; the priest 
went among them carrying out the last rites. Was this the way Christ 
wanted them to go? The most depressing picture of the war was for 
me the blanket-covered bodies on stretchers, their boots protruding 
from the end. For my part I kept falling into a delirious sleep, where 
I told General Montgomery to sing ‘God Save America with his 
trousers down. When I awoke it was evening. I’d been lying there 
about four hours. 
‘Are they going to take me?’ I asked an orderly. 
‘Yes, you’re next, Corporal,’ he comforted. ‘We had a lot of badly 
wounded, we had to send them off first.’ 
With the sun setting, and the tent sides turning pink in the light, 
I was loaded aboard an ambulance in the top bunk. The top bunk! 
It all came back to me, the top bunk, that’s the one my parents 
always put me in during those long train journeys across India on 
the old GIP* Railway... all seemed so long ago ... The ambulance 
bumped and jolted through the narrow mountain roads. I recalled 
those bright sunlit Indian days, as a boy, where every day was like 
a Kipling story ... 
‘Like a drink of water, Corporal?’ 
‘Yes.’ 
The attendant poured water into a tin mug. I gulped down two, 
it tasted like nectar. 
It was four stretchers to an ambulance; in between with his back 
* Great Indian Peninsula. 

82 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
to the driving cab sat an orderly. The inside was painted white. The 
vehicle smelt new. A blood plasma bottle was attached to the soldier 
on the lower bunk, his chest swathed in bandages. The orderly 
constantly checked the flow of the plasma. The German kept groan¬ 
ing. It all seemed to be coming to me through a heat-charged mist. 
I was hovering twix delirium and reality. I doze off. 
The ambulance stops, nearby artillery are banging away, the 
doors open, it’s dark, voices mixed With gunfire, I am being 
unloaded. I’m on the ground, from there a large municipal building 
with a flat roof is silhouetted against the night sky. Covered with 
ivy, it looks like the setting for Gormenghast. I am carried up stairs 
along corridors, more stairs, and finally into a dim-lit ward of about 
thirty beds, all with mozzy nets down. I am placed on the floor. 
‘Can you undress yourself?’ says an overworked orderly. 
Yes, I can. 
‘The pyjamas are under the pillow,’ he points to a bed. 
My God, it looked good, already turned down, white sheets and 
pillows, TWO PILTOWS, being ill was paying dividends. I pulled 
on the standard blue pyjamas. 
‘Where’s the karzi?’ I said weakly. 
He pointed out the door. ‘Dead opposite.’ 
I wasn’t quite dead but I went opposite; that journey over, I pulled 
my body under the sheets. I was desperately tired and feverish, but 
stayed awake to enjoy the luxury of sheets. Another orderly; they 
all wear gym shoes so you don’t hear them coming, he took my 
pulse, temperature, entered them on a board that hung on the foot 
of my bed. 
‘Like some tea?’ He spoke Yorkshire. 
‘Aye,’ I said in Yorkshire. 
‘Anything to eat?’ 
‘Yes, anything.’ 
He came back with a plate of tomato soup and bread. On the tray 
were four white tablets. 
‘Take these when you dun, they’ll help bring temperature 
down.’ 
‘I don’t want it down, I want it up for the duration.’ 

Boys with Guns 
83 
I gulped it down. Took the tablets, brought them all up. Who said 
romance was dead? So much for my first forty-eight hours in 
Italy. 
26 September 1943, 0660 hrs 
Awakened by a nurse. A female nurse, all pink and scrubbed in 
spotless uniform smelling of Pears soap. 
‘Darling, I love you, marry me,’ I said. 
‘Good morning,’ she said, threw back the mozzy net and before 
I could answer had stuffed a thermometer in my gob. 
‘It’s down,’ she said. 
‘What’s down?’ I said. 
‘You’re only a 100.’ 
She bent over the next bed, and showed two shapely legs, one 
would have been enough. I felt my temperature go up again. I really 
was ill. I fell asleep, an orderly woke me up with breakfast. The ward 
was coming to life, I wasn’t; orderlies were taking down the last of 
the blackouts, those patients who could were putting the mozzy nets 
up, trailing out to the ablutions, others were swallowing medicines, 
here comes mine, four white tablets, what are they? The orderly 
doesn’t know. 
‘I don’t have to,’ he says, ‘then if you die it’s not my fault.’ 
Cheerful bugger. For the first two days my temperature goes up 
and down, and so I’m not alone, I go with it. At night it was worst 
with delirium and terrible dreams. However, gradually I start to 
recover. The nurse (I wish I could remember her name) tells me 
of an incident. In the officers’ section there’s a Colonel from the 
RAOC; he’s due for a hernia operation, the matron has been given 
the job of shaving him, she knocks on the door. 
‘Come in,’ says the Colonel. 
The matron throws back the bedclothes, lathers all around his 
willy, shaves him and starts to leave. The Colonel says, ‘Pardon me, 
matron, but why did you bother to knock?’ 
In the next bed is a Marine Commando, Jamie Notam. He’s in 
with our old friend ‘Shell Shock’, received during the landings 

84 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
around Marina. He was forty-one, a bit old for a Commando. 
‘I used to be a Gentlemans Gentleman,’ he’s speaking with a broad 
Scots accent. 
Jamie is sitting on the edge of his bed, he is in his battle dress, his 
boots highly polished, a hangover from his gentleman’s gentleman 
days. His bed was immaculate, his eating irons and mess-tins shine 
like silver. He basically wanted to do things; if he folded a newspaper 
it was always perfectly square, but-there the creation stopped. He 
could never make anything. It was always do but what he did was 
perfect. He must have been the ideal servant. 
THE BATTLE 
Aim! said the Captain 
Fire! said the King 
Shoot! said the General 
Boom! Bang! Ping! 
Boom! went the Cannon 
Bang! went the Gun 
Ping! went the Rifle 
Battle had begun! 
Ouch! said a Prussian 
Help! said the Hun 
Surrender! said the Englishman 
Battle had been won! 
Melbourne 
April 1980 
from Unspun Socks from a Chickens Laundry 

Boys with Guns 
85 
The Battle of Spion Kop 
from More Goon Show Scripts, Woburn Press 1973 
The Goon Show, no. 250 (9th Series, no. 9) 
Transmission: 
Monday, 29 December 1958: 8.30-9.00 p.m. Home Service 
Wednesday, 31 December 1958: 9.30-10.00 p.m. Light 
Programme 
Studio: Camden Theatre, London 
Can England be saved by the British Army’s rendition of ‘Good- 
Bye Dolly I must leave you’? Will what saved Lord Nelson at 
Waterloo, likewise save Willium ‘Mate’ Cobblers from a fate 
worse than bananas? . . . And is French Neddie’s accent convin¬ 
cing? These and answers to other vital questions will not be 
revealed in the following pages. However, the full Technicolor 
spectacle of British military dinners under fire, Bloodnok’s secret 
woman recipe, and Moriarty’s socks are here to be observed in 
microscopic detail, along with the full story of how the peaceful 
hamlet of Poknoips became the turbulent battleground of Spion 
Kop! 
THE MAIN CHARACTERS 
Ned Seagoon 
Major Denis Bloodnok 
Captain Jympton 
Eccles 
Recruiting Sergeant 
Moriarty 
Grytpype-Thynne 
Member of Parliament 
Henry Crun 
Minnie Bannister 
Harry Secombe 
Peter Sellers 
Spike Milligan 
Spike Milligan 
Harry Secombe 
Spike Milligan 
Peter Sellers 
Spike Milligan 
Peter Sellers 
Spike Milligan 

86 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Bluebottle 
French Neddie 
Moriarty Bonaparte 
Peter Sellers 
Harry Secombe 
Spike Milligan 
The Ray Ellington Quartet 
Max Geldray 
Orchestra conducted hy Wally Stott s 
Announcer: Wallace Greenslade 
Script by Spike Milligan v 
Produced by John Browell 
BILL: This is the BBC Light Programme. Now here is a vari¬ 
ation on that. This is the BBC Light Programme. 
OMNES & ORCHESTRA: MURMURS OF APPROVAL. 
PETER: The old night school’s paying off there, Wal. 
HARRY: Yer, chat on more on it there Wal lad. 
BILL: I continue my recital of announcements. The BBC is 
open to the public on Thursdays and Wednesday after¬ 
noons, or, on Wednesday afternoons and Thursdays. 
> 
SPIKE: Thank you Jim, now here folks is Chief Ellinga to say 
Thursday in Swahali. 
RAY: Ma ar la toola, yarga toola marngo, me ar gar tula la 
margu uta meel tick arrs fargoola tol dommmmmmmm . . . 
SPIKE: You see how long the days are in Africa folks. Forward 
Mr Seaside with your New Year’s resolutions. 
SEAGOON: Thank you. Hello folks, hello folks, it is me folks. 
Next year folks I hope to give up 1958 permanently. 
PETER: (As elder statesman) Ungrateful beast, after all 1958 has 
done for you, you discard it like an old boot, I won’t hear it. 
SEAGOON: Let me warn you hairy sir, of the many dangers 
and dongers of keeping on old years after it’s worn out. Mrs 
Greenslade’s husband will now tell you why. 
BILL: It was the year 1907 and here is the orchestra to play it. 

1923. Leo and Florence, showing their equestrian skills. 
April 1928. The gun belt was a birthday 1930. His first suit. So normal - what happened? 
present from his father. 

1940. He loved the army life. His smile says it all. 
1945. The Bill Hall Trio and the start of 
it all for Spike. He wrote sketches for 
the show. 
1946. The Bill Hall Trio 
with Milligan on guitar. 
Where’s his beloved 
trumpet? 

(above) The Bill Hall Quintet? When? Where? Never 
heard of a quintet. Neither has anyone else I’ve asked: 
it’s a mystery. 
(right) 1948. The year he hoped to go solo but joined 
another trio: the Ann Lenner Trio. 
(below) 1948. Ann auditioned him for a singing spot’ 
and they toured Europe. 

1950. His first attempt at 
PROFESSIONAL COPY t 77© songwriting and music. Typical 
Spike; he loved his alterations. 
WORDS and MUSIC , 
' • BY V 
dASK JORDAN. 1 It; 
# JAMES 3 
• & TERENCE MILLIGAN Z 
Edward Cox Music Co Ltd. 
H2, CHARING CROSS RB,LONOON,W.C.2 
Made in England. 
1951. His big break, as a vocalist 
with Joe Loss. 
Shepherds Bush Empire 
Chairman 
Supervisor 
Manager 
... PRINCfcUTTLER 
... JOHN CHRISTIE 
J. H. CHRISTIE. Jnr. 
BOOK BY ’PHONE 
SHEpherds Bush 4531 (3 lines) 
6.30 
TWICE NIGHTLY 
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 19th, 1951 8.40 
1 OVERTURE 
2 THE VERNON SISTERS 
Dancing Around 
^0, (Wf' 
i- 
3 BOB WAYNE & BARBARA i&JC 
“ Slightly Insane ” 
THE CARSONY BROTHERS !< *W7“AS' 
Sensational Hand Balancers 
The Life and Soul of the Party 
GEORGE DOONAN 
“ Smatterwitchew ?” 
6 INTERMISSION 
CHARLES HENRY with 
he EMPIRE ORCHESTRA 
7 THE SKATING DEXTERS 
A Boy & A Girl in a Whirl 
COLISEUM 
| DRURY LANE 
CHARING CROSS 
THEATRE ROYAL 
Commencing THURS. MAR. 8th 
JACK HYLTON presents 
CAROUSEL 
‘KISS ME KATE’ 
A RODGERS and HAMMERSTEIN 
Musical Success 
MUSIC by COLE PORTER _ 
Every Evening 7.30. WED. & SAT. 2.30 
MATS. WED. & SAT. 2.30 
8 LESLIE ADAMS 
L. — t Li. 
“Eve’s Delight” 
“IN THE MOOD” 
Britain’s King of Rhythm In Person 
JOE LOSS 
presents his new 19S1 BAND SHOW 
PERSONNEL 
Conductor 
Vocalists 
Saxophones ...... 
( {'*, IV 
Trumpets 
A-i' » 
V ^ 
Trombones .I ' 
Piano _r p _ 
Bass. 
Percussion _ 
JOE LOSS 7a 
Howard Jo'nes^.,f,„ 
Elizabeth Batey . . ,, 
Tony Ventro u£4; 
Irene Miller IrfjLtA 
Spike Milligan ^ 
— Manny Prince—Alto 
Danny Miller—Alto ^ 
Joe Temperley—Tenor 
Bill Unsworth—Tenor 
Tony Beck—Baritone & Sax 
Sid PoIlittLt^iL'j 
~v,7‘ Reg Arnold 
eJ Joe Ward 
-.1 Don Clark 
c V. George Wilder 
Clair Welsh 
Syd Lucas 
Syd Burke 
.Phil Seamon 
Manager: William Treacy 
Arranger 
Secretary : Miss R. Wright 
Vinall 
STOLL THEATRE, Kingsway 
The 1 Gay * and * Exciting * 
SPANISH BALLET of 
TERESA and IIJISILIO 
Commencing MON. FEB. 26th. 
EVENINGS at 7.30 
MATS. : WED. & SAT. 2.30 
And Their 
Company of 
Spanish Dancers 
and Musicians 
1 

i95i- Signing the contract 
for ‘The Crazy People’, the 
first series of what became 
The Goon Show. 
(right) 1952. Now recording as The 
Goon Show - and in suits and ties! 
(below) 1952. Practising his Minnie 
Bannister voice. 

A rare card - the only one I know of with all of their signatures. It must be late 1952 because Michael 
Bentine had already left the show. (By kind permission of the Goon Show Preservation Society.) 
1953- On the set of The Harry Secombe Show, famous for Spike and Erics ‘Mirror Routine’. 

1962. Spike and his father in the gun 
room at Woy Woy. He loved the times 
they shared together in that room. 
i960. Spike gave me this 
photo and said, 'We were 
happy then.’ Said with such 
sadness. 
/Oort-' 
A. W />/S 
£t- 
1965. John Bluthals Christmas card to Spike. 

JU JIMAKt 
Week ending CXA-C . [ 3 
19 u
£ 
! s. 
MONDAY MATINEE ... 
MONDAY EVENING ... 
n 
,ir 
TUESDAY MATINEE ... 
TUESDAY EVENING. 
sii 
WEDNESDAY MATINEE 
i <2 S' 
WEDNESDAY EVENING 
(, o 6 
1 7 
THURSDAY MATINEE ... 
THURSDAY EVENING ... 
L .3 b 
U 
1 FRIDAY MATINEE 
5 FRIDAY EVENING . 
!o io 
a 
SATURDAY MATINEE 
tf£ o 
9 
SATURDAY EVENING 
\ 
(oh Ur 
s' 
Last Week £/7^^: "7 
bp/Dqwa OJfjf: 3 ,:G 
1 
TOTAL £ 
1 
1 
rOJIi• | t[J 
PS—HW42—CT 
(above left) 1967. Ben Gunn at the Mermaid 
Theatre. Women found him attractive! 
(above right) Son of Oblomov broke all box 
office records at the Comedy Theatre. 
(centre left) April 1966. Maggie Jones’s 
Restaurant, last-night party of Son of 
Oblomov. 
(below left) 1968. Curry and Chips - a TV 
programme written by Johnny Speight. 
Spike loved the role of‘Paki Paddy’. 

Boys with Guns 
8 7 
ORCHESTRA: NEW MAD LINK ALL OVER THE SHOP. 
SINGING IN THE MIDDLE. SOUND F.X. IN MUSIC. 
FINISHES ON A CHORD. 
SEAGOON: Ohhh what a year that was . . . the South African 
war had broken out and was now in its second year. 
OMNES & ORCHESTRA: SING HAPPY BIRTHDAY - 
(Fade) 
SEAGOON: Knock knock knock on a door in Africa. 
BLOODNOK: Knock knock on a door in Africa . . . Gad, that’s 
the address of my door - come in! 
SEAGOON: Effects door opens . . . 
/’ i 
BLOODNOK: Ahhh ‘effects Ahhh’. 
SEAGOON: May I introduce myself? 
BLOODNOK: Of course. 
SEAGOON: (Announcing) Ladies and Gentlemen! The man in 
the blue corner is Neddie Seagoon. 
SEAGOON: (Normal) Thank you. I’m 5th Lieutenant Seagoon 
» 
reporting from Sandhurst SW9. 
BLOODNOK: Oh, sit down on that chair in Africa SE16. 
F.X.: DUCK CALL. 
SEAGOON: Thank you. I was told to hand this envelope to 
you with a hand . . . 
BLOODNOK: Oh . . . Pronounced . . . 
GRAMS: BLOODNOK Ooooooooooooh!!! 
F.X.: ENVELOPE OPENING. 
BLOODNOK: Oh, these are your secret orders. 
SEAGOON: What do they say? 
BLOODNOK: Standddddd Attttttt . . . Ease . . . 
GRAMS: REGIMENT STANDING AT EASE. 
SEAGOON: (Relief) Oh, that feels much better sir. 
m 

88 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
BLOODNOK: Yes, and it suits you what’s more. Now to 
military matters, of milt. Captain Jympton? 
GRAMS: MAD DAHS OF COCONUT SHELLS HORSES 
HOOVES VERY BRIEF, VERY FAST, APPROACHING 
TO FOREGROUND. 
JYMPTON: Ah (stutters) . . . sorry I’m late sir, I. . . was quell¬ 
ing a native with ah . . . quells. 
BLOODNOK: You’ll get the military piano and bar for this, ah . . . 
\ 
now explain the victorious positions of our defeated troops. 
JYMPTON: Ah . . . intelligence ah . . . has established that the 
ah . . . people attacking us ar . . . are . . . are . . . the enemy. 
BLOODNOK: So that’s their fiendish game is it? 
SEAGOON: Gentlemen, do the enemy realize that you have 
this information? 
BLOODNOK: Oh no, we got ’em fooled, they think that we’re 
the enemy. 
SEAGOON: What a perfect disguise. 
JYMPTON: Ha ha ha, yes you see Lieutenant Seagoon we 
have a plan - a plan of plin and ploof. The South Africans 
are magnificent fighters, and it’s our intention to persuade 
them to come over to our side. 
SEAGOON: Then that would finish the war sir! 
JYMPTON: Oh no! Ha ha ha. Oh dearie no! 
SEAGOON: Then how would you keep it going? 
JYMPTON: England, my dear sir, is never short of enemies! 
BLOODNOK: Of course not the waiting room’s full of ’em. Now 
Seagoon, sit down, tell me what’s the time back in England? 
SEAGOON: Twenty to four sir. 
BLOODNOK: Ah . . . it’s nice to hear the old time again 
Singhiz? 
SINGHIZ: Yes sir? 

Boys with Guns 
89 
F.X.: SLAPSTICK. 
BLOODNOK: Now get out will you! You see, Seagoon, how 
bad things are! That banana for instance . . . It’s only been 
eaten once, and look at it! 
SEAGOON: But sir, back in England they told me all was well. 
BLOODNOK: Back in England, all is well. It’s here where the 
trouble lies. 
GRAMS: EXPLOSION. 
BLOODNOK: (Over above) Oh - what the - eh - what? 
GRAMS: APPROACH OF OLD CAR BACK FIRING. 
GRINDING OF GEAR. PARPING ON BULB HORN. 
CAR EXPLODES . . . GUSHER OF STEAM. FALLS TO 
BITS . . . YELLS. 
ECCLES: Well ... I think I’ll pull-up here. 
BLOODNOK: I say you . . . you with the apparent teeth. 
ECCLES: Ohh a soldier . . . Hello soldier . . . Bang . . . Bang . . . 
Bang Bang . . . Bang - you’re dead soldier! 
SEAGOON: Let me talk to him. I speak Idiot fluently . . . (Does 
Eccles impression) Hello Ecclesssss. 
ECCLES: Oh? . . . You must be from the old country . . . Oh 
hohoh! 
BLOODNOK: Neddie allow me to humour him with this 
mallet. 
SEAGOON: No no no, leave it to me. (As Eccles) Tell us Mad 
Dan, wha’ are you doing in Africa . . . Wha’n 'u doin’ Afric- 
aaa . . . 
ECCLES: ‘What are you doing in Africa’ I translated. I’m here 
as an adviser to the British Army. 
SEAGOON: (As Eccles) Splendid, what are you going to 
advise them? 
ECCLES: Not to take me. 
BLOODNOK: Oh, I respect your cowardice, it warms my heart 

90 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
and gives old Denis a real smart idea. Come over here and 
warm yourself by this Recruiting Sergeant. 
SERGEANT: (Cockney) 'Elio ’ello ’ello my lad, you look a likely 
lad. 
ECCLES: HELLO, hello, hello my laddddd. Yourn loonk linke a 
ohn (Rubbish) . . . 
SERGEANT: Very gude, very gude . . . ’ere lad, ’ow would you 
like to 'ave a grandstand view of the opening night of the 
Battle of Spion Kop dere. 
BLOODNOK: Just a moment Sergeant . . . Spion Kop! He can 
have my place I tell you! 
SERGEANT: Oh ho ho? 
BLOODNOK: Yes, just by chance Sergeant I have a vacant 
uniform in the front rank, he’ll see everything from there. 
SERGEANT: Now then, you ’eard that very fair offer from the 
nice Major dere. 
ECCLES: Yes, he’s a nice Major - ah a nice man. How much do 
you want fer it? 
BLOODNOK: Well, usually it’s free, but just this once it will be 
seven shillings, so ... ah shall we say a pound? 
ECCLES: A pound? 
BLOODNOK: You said it. 
ECCLES: Oh . . . I’ve only got a five-pound note. 
BLOODNOK: Well, I’ll take that and you can pay me the other 
four later. 
F.X.: TILL. 
BLOODNOK: Oh, the old Military till. 
SERGEANT: You’re a very lucky ladddd . . . I’ll have a regi¬ 
ment call for you at six tomorrow morning. Meantime here 
is the well known ‘Conks’ Geldray. A sittin’ target. 
MAX: Boy, in the war my conk holds its own. 

Boys with Guns 
9i 
MAX & ORCHESTRA: MUSIC. 
(Applause) 
ORCHESTRA: DRAMATIC ‘RETURN TO THE STORY’ 
LINK (PRE-BATTLE). 
GRAMS: HORSE ARTILLERY TROTTING UP THE LINE. 
DISTANT TRAMP OF SOLDIERS PLODDING ALONG 
ROUGH ROAD. 
BILL: At Dawn the British attack was mounted, not very well 
stuffed but beautifully mounted. And then suddenly 
through the stilled British front line, a lone voice is heard. 
MORIARTY: (Approaching) Lucky charms . . . get your lucky 
charms before the battle . . . get your lucky charmssssss. 
(Sings) Get your self a charm today, and save yourself from 
harm today. 
WILLIUM: 'Ere . . . ’ere mate . . . charm man? 'Ere. 
MORIARTY: What is it merry drummer man. 
WILLIUM: Them charms, are they any cop mate? 
MORIARTY: Ah, thOy’re . . . they’re real cop mate - Nelson 
bought one for Waterloo. 
WILLIUM: He weren’t at Waterloo. 
MORIARTY: Of course not, he was in my shop buying a lucky 
charm. You see how lucky they are. 
WILLIUM: How much is a good one then? 
MORIARTY: Well certainly, what part don’t you want to be 
wounded in? 
WILLIUM: I don’t want any of me parts wounded. 
MORIARTY: I know, you want the all parts comprehensive charm. 
WILLIUM: Hurry up then - how much?? 
MORIARTY: Three shillings, a bargain . . . 
WILLIUM: THERE - I pins it on me chest so me chest won’t 
get killed. 

92 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
F.X.: PISTOL SHOT. 
WILLIUM: Owwwwwwwwwwwww Mateeeeeeeee. 
F.X.: THUD OF BODY. 
MORIARTY: Good shot Grytpype. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Unpin the lucky charm and back on the 
tray with it. Off you go. 
MORIARTY: Charms, second-hand lucky charms. (Fading) 
<* 
Only used once ... ' 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: There he goes, a true son of France and 
Hyde Park. Who knows what mystic thoughts are whisper¬ 
ing in the mossy glades of his krutty shins. 
HARRY: (Hooray off) I say, do you mind taking your hat off, old 
chap? The battle’s about to begin, and we can’t see you know. 
GRAMS: BATTLE STARTS - FIRST THE VOLLEYS OF 
MUSKETRY, THEN DISTANT CANNONS. THE 
RETURN FIRE OF THE ENEMY IS EVEN MORE 
DISTANT. FADE DOWN & UNDER. FADE IN BIG BEN 
CHIMING. FADE. 
\ 
ELDER STATESMAN: Gentlemen of the house, the Battle of 
Spion Kop opened last night. 
OMNES & ORCHESTRA: Hear Hear! Long Live the Empire! 
ELDER STATESMAN: Ahh, but I fear it got very bad notices 
in the Press. 
M.P.: You’re not thinking of taking it off are you, Mr Prime 
Minister? 
ELDER STATESMAN: Well, unless Robert Morley puts some 
money in I can see no other way . . . 
M.P.: But what about Binkie and his backers, they’ll lose their 
money. 
ELDER STATESMAN: Patience sir, patience. We have here 
Lieutenant Seagoon, who will proceed to give us the reason 
for the disaster. 

Boys with Guns 
93 
SEAGOON: Thank you, Hon Members. The reason for it 
flopping was obvious . . . there isn’t one decent song in the 
whole battle. 
PETER: (As another statesman) But soldier fellow, the Battle 
of Spion Kop isn’t musical! 
SEAGOON: And that’s where we went wrong. If the Ameri¬ 
cans had been running it they’d have had Rex Harrison, and 
the other wrecks. 
ELDER STATESMAN: Do you know any good composers of 
battle scores? 
SEAGOON: Just by chance and careful planning, I have an 
auntie in Grimsby who sits among the cabbages and plays 
an elastic water tank under supervision. 
ELDER STATESMAN: (Ecstatic) I didn’t know there were any 
of her kind left you know. Now off you go and tell your 
auntie the good news. 
GRAMS: RUNNING FOOTSTEPS & HARRY SINGS ‘LAND 
OF HOPE AND GLORY’ SPEEDING UP INTO THE 
DISTANCE. 
ORCHESTRA: DRAMATIC CHORDS. 
F.X.: HAMMERING OF A METAL SPOON ON ANVIL. 
CRUN: (Over hammering mutters) Ohh, dear . . . there . . . now 
that’s got the spoons in fine-spoons fettle Min. 
F.X.: QUICK TWO SPOONS TOGETHER A LA BUSKERS. 
CRUN (Sings) ‘Na ahah, ahah, ahah, ah’. Now Min, get inside 
the piano and select me a tuning A. 
GRAMS: ONE SHEEP BLEATING. 
CRUN: Again Min. 
GRAMS: ONE SHEEP BLEATING AGAIN. 
CRUN: Oh, they don’t make pianos like that any more. 
MINNIE: Isn’t it time we had it shorn Henery? 

94 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
CRUN: No, not yet Min, the winters aren’t upon us yet, you 
know. Hand me my knuckle oils. 
MINNIE: Now Crun rub it well into the knuckles . . . it’s mixed 
with Indian brandyyy. 
BOTH: (Cries of bran dyyy bran dyyy). 
CRUN: Oh Min. 
F.X.: AGONIZING KNUCKLE CRACKING. 
CRUN: (Muttering over) It’s no good Min, I’ve got flat-feet in 
the third knuckle you know Min„ . . Ah! . . . Ah well - Now 
to try for the Paganini variations for spoons arranged - 
Crun!!!! 
GRAMS: DISC OF VARIATIONS. CRUN PLAYS SPOONS 
AND WHISTLES. 
CRUN: Stop! Stop stop! This spoon is out of tune, Min. Have 
you been eating with it again? 
MINNIE: No. 
CRUN: (Power) Then what’s that you’re stirring the soup with? 
MINNIE: A violin. 
CRUN: She’s always got an answer the old cow. Now to 
compose the last tune for the Battle of Spion Kop. 
F.X.: BUSKER SPOONS IN TEMPO. MINNIE & CRUN 
SING ‘DOLLY GREY’ FADE. 
GRAMS: FADE UP BATTLE NOISES. EXPLOSIONS. ETC. 
BLOODNOK: Aaaaaaaahhhh . . . aaahhh . . . ahhhhhhh. 
Ellinga . . . turn the volume of that battle down. 
F.X.: DOOR BURSTS OPEN. 
SEAGOON: Major! The enemy are . . . 
BLOODNOK: Aaahhhhh . . . Ah! 
GRAMS: WHOOSH. 
SEAGOON: Good heavens, he’s gone. Ah here are his boots, 
they’re still warm, he can’t be far. 

Boys with Guns 
95 
BLOODNOK: (Slightly off) Aaahhh, there ain’t nobody here 
but us chickens I tell you. 
* 
SEAGOON: The voice came from a cowardly red-face on the 
top of a chicken wardrobe. 
BLOODNOK: Oh, it’s you Seagoon, you you coward. 
SEAGOON: Why have you deserted your post? 
BLOODNOK: It’s got woodworm sir. 
SEAGOON: Old jokes won’t save you. 
BLOODNOK: They’ve saved Monkhouse and Goodwin, and 
that’s good enough for me. 
SEAGOON: Major, there’s still hope. Crun’s vital battle songs 
have arrived. 
BLOODNOK: It won't be easy sir. The enemy have just 
attacked in E-Flat. And we had to retire to G-Minor. 
SEAGOON: Never mind sir, these old songs are all written in 
six-sharps. 
BLOODNOK: The most powerful brown key of them all. Get 
Ellinga and his Zulu bones to dash off a chorus towards the 
enemy. 
SEAGOON: Fire - ! 
RAY ELLINGTON QUARTET: MUSIC. 
(Applause) 
ORCHESTRA: DRAMATIC CHORDS. 
GRAMS: BUGLE CALL AT VARYING PITCHES, 
MURMURS OF TROOPS TAKING UP POSITIONS. 
SEAGOON: At dawn under cover of daylight we took up our 
positions with our teeth blacked out. 
SPIKE: (Woeful) Every man has his ammunition pouches bul¬ 
ging with offensive military songs and spoons at the ready. 
SEAGOON: Right. We’ll just have to sit and wait. 
(Long pause) 

96 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
BLUEBOTTLE: You tink we’re goin’ to win, Captain? 
SEAGOON: Never was victory more certain little lad. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Oh . . . then why have you got that taxi 
waiting for you at the end of the trench. 
SEAGOON: Ha ha . . . here’s half-a-crown little lad. I think we 
can forget all about it now. 
BLUEBOTTLE: No ... I can’t forget about it. 
F.X.: COLOSSAL CLOUT. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Ahh ... I forgotten about it. 
SEAGOON: Now explain to me why you’re lying down two 
inches below the level of the ground and speaking through 
a tombstone. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Well, I was doing an impression of a zebra 
crossing when . . . squelch! . :. a taxi ran over me breaking 
both my boots above the wrist. 
SEAGOON: What agony igony ogony oogany mahogany . . . 
Did it hurt you? 
BLUEBOTTLE: No because I’m making it all up. Ha hee . . . 
SEAGOON: Taxi! 
GRAMS: TAXI APPROACHES AT TERRIFIC SPEED. 
JELLY THUD SOUND. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Oooh. You’ve taxied me. Look, the Christmas 
string's coming off my legs. 
SEAGOON: Swallow this first-aid book and custard. I’ll have 
your legs relacquered free and exported to Poland. 
BLUEBOTTLE: You’re a fair man, sir . . . Merry Krudmas. 
ECCLES: Ooh, Bottle. What you doing under that taxi? 
BLUEBOTTLE: It ran over me, Eccles. 
ECCLES: You must be rich ... I can only afford to be run over 
by buses. 

Boys with Guns 
97 
BLUEBOTTLE: Well my man when you’re in the big money 
you know, you can do things like this. 
f 
ECCLES: You see, one day I’ll have enough money to be run 
over by a Rolls-Royce with a chauffeur. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Well, pull me out then. 
ECCLES: Right. Hold this. 
BLUEBOTTLE: What is it? 
ECCLES: I don’t know, but I got it cheap. 
SEAGOON: Let me see what you got cheap? 
GRAMS: TIGER GROWL. 
SEAGOON: Good heavens it’s a genuine hand operated 1914 
tiger! 
BLOODNOK: Seagoon, put that tiger back in its stripes . . . we 
don't want any scandals during ladies’ night. 
JYMPTON: Pardon me, sir. All the men are ready with their 
music. 
BLOODNOK: Good, let’s have those spoons then lad. 
ORCHESTRA: EACH MAN ISSUED WITH TWO SPOONS. 
THEY MAKE NOISE LIKE BUSKERS. 
BLOODNOK: Oooh . . . what a terrifying sound. It’s a good job 
nobody heard it. 
SEAGOON: Now men, to your military Crun music and take 
up your vocal positions with your voices facing outwards. 
BLOODNOK: And don’t sing men until you see the whites of 
their song sheets. Bugler, sound the elephant. 
GRAMS: INFURIATED HIGH-PITCHED TRUMPETING 
BY SINGLE ELEPHANT. 
BLOODNOK: Ohhh . . . 
JYMPTON: Here they come now, sir. 
BLOODNOK: Quick, me spoons and me music. I’ll show ’em . . . 

98 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
F.X.: TWO SPOONS BUSKING IN TEMPO TO BLOODNOK 
SINGING ‘GOODBYE DOLLY, I MUST LEAVE YOU’. 
BLOODNOK: ‘Goodbye Dolly, I must leave you.' (Shouts) 
Come on you fools, there’s more where that came from. 
(Continues singing) ‘Off we go and fight the foe.’ (Shouts) 
Sing up lads! 
OMNES & ORCHESTRA: ALL JOIN IN SINGING AND 
RATTLING SPOONS. 
GRAMS: SHELLS START BURSTING IN THEIR MIDST. 
STARTING SLOWLY & INCREASING IN INTENSITY. 
BLOODNOK CONTINUES TO SING BUT GRADUALLY 
HIS MORALE IS DESTROYED. HE BREAKS OFF. 
BLOODNOK: Run for it lads . . . Oooh, these songs aren’t 
bullet proof. 
GRAMS: WHOLE ARMY RUNS AWAY YELLING IN 
TERROR. SPEED UP AND FADE. 
(Pause) 
GRAMS: ARCTIC GALE HOWLING. OCCASIONAL 
WOLVES. THEN APPROACH OF RUNNING ARMY 
STILL YELLING & PANTING. ALL GRADUALLY SLOW 
DOWN BY SLOWING RECORD. 
BLOODNOK: That's far enough lads, where are wTe? 
SEAGOON: The South Pole sir. 
BLOODNOK: No further, we don’t want to back into them. Oh 
. . . plant the Union Jack will you? The national flag of the 
Union of Jacks. I claim the South Pole in the name of Gladys 
Ploog of 13 The Sebastibal Villas, Sutton. 
SEAGOON:'Who is she, sir? 
BLOODNOK: I don’t know, but obviously we’re doing her a 
big favour. 
SEAGOON: There’s still a chance of victory. Look what I’ve 
got in the brown paper parcel. 

Boys with Guns 
99 
F.X.: RUSTLING OF PAPER. 
BLOODNOK: Good heavens white paper, what a glorious 
victory for England. 
SEAGOON: Look under the stamp. 
BLOODNOK: What? A fourteen-inch naval gun. 
ECCLES: And guess what’s in the barrel? 
BLOODNOK: I’ve no idea. 
SEAGOON: Major, inside the barrel are photographs of a 
British military dinner. 
BLOODNOK: Really . . . Keep it going lads, keep it going. 
SEAGOON; I intend to fire that photograph at the enemy 
canteen during their lunch break. When they see the size of 
British military dinners they’ll desert. 
BLOODNOK: I know . . . half our men deserted when they saw 
the size of ’em. However it’s worth a try. Take aim . . . fire! 
GRAMS: COLOSSAL EXPLOSION. FOLLOWED BY PILES 
OF BONES FALLING ON TO THE GROUND. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Ah . . . that’s the last time I kip in a barrel. 
Collapses, and is left out of show from now onwards. Good¬ 
night everybody. 
GRAMS: CHEERS, APPLAUSE. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Oh ... by popular request I come back again. 
F.X.: SLAPSTICK. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Ahhh . . . 
SEAGOON: All we can do is to wait and see what effect that 
photograph of a military dinner has on the enemy. Mean¬ 
time a sound effect. 
GRAMS: WIND UP AND WOLVES HOWLING. 
BILL: Meantime in Parliament the British Government had 
written off the Battle of Spion Kop as a dead loss. 
HARRY: (Statesman) Gentlemen, um, um ... to save face and 

100 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
the honour of England, we’re going to bring back that old 
favourite um, ah . . . the Battle of Waterloo. 
OMNES & ORCHESTRA: ANCIENT MURMURS OF 
APPROVAL. 
ELDER STATESMAN: Gentlemen, we shall send out immedi¬ 
ate notification to the original cast. 
ORCHESTRA: MARSEILLAISE-TYPE LINK. 
MORIARTY BONAPARTE: (Shoring). 
F.X.: DOOR OPENING. 
FRENCH NEDDIE: Mon Emperor, wake up! 
MORIARTY BONAPARTE: How dare you wake the Emperor 
Napoleon up in the middle of his retirement. 
FRENCH NEDDIE: Wonderful news ... by special request we 
have to do an encore of the Battle of Waterloo. 
MORIARTY BONAPARTE: What ... but we lost it. 
FRENCH NEDDIE: This time we’ve got a British backer. 
MORIARTY BONAPARTE: Get my trousers oiled and unwrap 
a fresh Josephine . . . ahh, there’s going to be fun tonight. 
F.X.: THWACK. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Down Emperor down . . . back to your 
grave. You know you’re not allowed out after your death. 
MORIARTY BONAPARTE: Blast these silly rules. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: My card Neddie. 
SEAGOON: This is a piece of string. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Have you no imagination lad. I am 
Lord Ink. 
SEAGOON: Not Pennan? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Yes Pennan Ink. 
ORCHESTRA: CHORD IN C. 
SEAGOON: Don’t worry folks, it’s getting near the end now. 
All pay-offs will be gratefully received. 

Boys with Guns 
101 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: One coming up, Ned. Unfortunately 
my client Moriarty is appearing in ‘The Death of Napoleon’ 
t 
at the local nackers yard ... it looks like being a very long 
run. 
SEAGOON: It looks like being a long run? What does? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Ten miles. 
F.X.: PISTOL SHOT. 
GRAMS: TWO PAIRS OF RUNNING FEET. 
SEAGOON: (Panting) As we ran we discussed the contract for 
the Battle of Waterloo. Later at Preston Barracks Brighton, 
we auditioned.for the part of the Duke of Wellington. 
GRAMS: FADE IN PETER SINGING LAST PART OF 
‘ANY OLD IRON’ MATE. 
SEAGOON: Thank you. Wait inside the piano one moment 
will you. What do you think? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: He’s not the Lord Wellington type you 
know. 
SEAGOON: Yes (Calls out), I say - we’ll write and let you know. 
WILLIUM: Let me know what? 
SEAGOON: That you’re no good for the part. 
WILLIUM: Rite - I won’t take another job till I hear that, then. 
SEAGOON: Next please. 
ECCLES: (Sings) I’ll follow my secret heart till I find you . . . 
SEAGOON: One moment. (Aside) Where’s my pistol? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: No Neddie no one moment . . . 
MORIARTY BONAPARTE: Grytpype . . . with Eccles playing 
the part of Wellington this time the French are bound to win 
the Battle of Waterloo. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Right . . . Eccles? Button the hat and 
sword. Now Charge . . . 
GRAMS: GREAT GALLOPING OF HORSES INTO 

102 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
DISTANCE WITH SHOTS, SCREAMS AND MORE 
SHOTS. 
SEAGOON: (In tears) No . . . we’ve . . . we've lost the Battle of 
Waterloo. 
MORIARTY: New history books . . . get your new history 
books here . . . read all the truth about Waterloo. 
F.X.: PHONE RINGS. 
SEAGOON: Hello? 
BLOODNOK: Seagoon, look here, a, right twitt you made of 
yourself firing that photo of a dinner at the enemy. Do you 
know what they’ve fired back? 
SEAGOON: What? 
BLOODNOK: The photograph of an empty plate. 
SEAGOON: Well, there you are 'folks, the old anti-climax again. 
ORCHESTRA: ‘OLD COMRADES MARCH’ PLAYOUT. 
from Mussolini: His Part in My Downfall 
Towering above the countryside, with vines growing on its lower 
slopes, was the ominous shape of Vesuvius; like me it smoked heavily. 
At night, from my bed, I could see the purple-red glow from its throat; 
it looked magnificent. At one time it had looked so to those doomed 
people, the Pompeians, but I wasn’t a Pompeian, I was Irish, how could 
Vesuvius wipe out Dublin? No, I was perfectly safe, but Vesuvius 
wasn’t. I discovered that Pompeii was but three miles as the crow flies. 
This incredible relic of a Roman city free of camera-clicking tourists 
was a situation I had to thank Hitler for. Thank you, Hitler! 
hitler: ‘You hear zat, Goebbels? Milligan is visiting Pompeii. 
Keep all tourists out, and zer ruins inV 

Boys with Guns 
103 
After roll-call, accompanied by a Private Webb, we hitched and 
walked till we arrived at the gates. There was no one about, save a 
sleepy unshaven attendant, who said he had no tickets and charged 
twenty lire to go in, which he put straight into his pocket. It was a 
day I shall treasure, *a day I met the past, not only the past but the 
people from it, be it they were now only plaster casts. I had read 
Pliny the Younger’s account of that terrible day of destruction, Gells 
Pompiana and several text-books, so I was reasonably well informed. 
We had gone in the entrance that opened on to the amphitheatre 
and the Grande Palestra on our right. The excitement it generated 
in me was unbelievable, and it stayed with me all day. I don’t think 
there are many sights as touching as the family who died together 
in the basement of their home, off the Via Vesuvio, the mother and 
father each side of three little girls, their arms protecting them this 
two thousand years. There were the lovers who went on banging 
away even though being suffocated. He must have been a Gunner. 
What a way to go! 
All through that warm dusty day I wandered almost in a dream 
through the city, now almost deserted save for an occasional 
soldier. 
It was late evening when we finally arrived at the Porta Ercolano 
that led into the Via dei Sepolcri. We sat in the mouth of one of the 
tombs and smoked a fag. Webb was knocked out. 
‘Bloody hell,’ he said. ‘I never heard of the place, I never knew it 
existed, they don’t say a bloody word about places like this at school. 
Alfred the Great, Henry the Eighth, Nelson, Queen Victoria and 
that’s the bloody lot.’ 
I discovered that the Americans had actually bombed it! They 
believed German Infantry were hiding in it! Not much damage had 
been done, museum staff were already at work trying to repair it. 
Bombing Pompeii!!! Why not the Pyramids, Germans might be 
hiding there? Or bomb the Astoria Cinema, Wasdale Road, Forest 
Hill, that’s an ideal hiding-place for Germans? Or bomb Mrs Grol- 
lick’s boarding house, Hagley Road, Birmingham? 
Webb afforded me amusing incidents during the day; we 
approached the front of a house in the Via de Mercurio; another 

104 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
shabby unshaven attendant was standing outside. He looked like a 
bag of laundry with a head on. He indicated a boxed partition on 
the wall. ‘ Vediamo questo? he said, and the innuendo was that of 
something naughty’. 
‘Si’ I said fluently. 
We gave him ten lire each, and with a well-worn key he opened 
the door. It revealed a male figure dressed as a Roman soldier; 
holding up his kilt from under it was an enormous phallus that 
rested on a pair of scales, the other scale held a bar of gold. Very 
interesting, but the point of it all escaped me. 
‘Wot’s ee weighing ’is balls for?’ said Webb, the true archaeolo¬ 
gist. 
‘I think it’s something to do with wartime rationing.’ 
The Italian explains the message, the man is saying, ‘I would 
rather have my prick than a bar of gold.’ Wait till he’s sixty, I thought. 
Another diversion is the Lupariarium. 
"Ere, isn’t that a man’s prick sticking out over the door?’ 
‘Well, it certainly isn’t a woman’s.’ 
It was a monster made of concrete and about a foot long. 
‘What’s it doin’ up there?’ says Webb. 
I demonstrate by hanging my hat on it. 
‘A hat-stand? Get away.’ 
‘Well, it’s a stand of some kind,’ I explained, ‘and this is a house 
of ill repute.’ 
Webb grinned from ear to ear. ‘Ahh, that’s why they got that 
bloody great chopper sticking out, then.’ 
‘You should have been a Latin scholar,’ I said. 
The Lupanarium: around the walls were paintings, or rather a 
catalogue of the various positions that the clients could have; there 
was everything but standing on the head. I observed that the cubi¬ 
cles the ladies had to perform in were woefully small, one would 
have to have been five foot four or a cripple. It must have been an 
interesting sight that day of the eruption, all fourteen cubicles 
banging away and suddenly Vesuvius explodes, out the door shoot 
men with erections and no trousers followed by naked screaming 
tarts. You don’t get that stuff in the film versions. 

Boys with Guns 
105 
The sun was setting when we retraced our footsteps. I was loath 
to leave but I was to return here again in exciting circumstances. 
We hitched back on several lorries including one American with a 
coloured driver, yellow. 
Ain’t you limeys got any fuckin’ transport?’ he said. 
‘Yes, we have lots of transport, trams, buses, but they’re all in 
Catford.’ 
He didn’t know what I was talking about and he said so. ‘What 
are you talkin’ about, man?’ 
He hated me. I hated him. It was a perfect arrangement. We were 
just in time for dinner. I took mine to the billet (the walk did it 
good) and ate it in the semi-reclining position; when in Rome ... 
Another occupant of our billet stumbled in. Corporal Percival, he’s 
smelling of beer. 
‘Where have you been?’ 
‘I been to Naples,’ he said. 
Naples wow! The big time! The Catford of Italy. 
‘I went to the Pictures, I saw... Betty Grable and Cesar Romero 
in Coney Island. Bai she’s got lovely legs.’ 
‘What about his?’ , 
‘Fook off.’ 
‘Of course, I’ll pack at once.’ 
Percival was a North Country lad, all ‘Eeeee bai Gum’. He doted 
on Gracie Fields. 
‘Grade Fields,’ I guffawed, ‘she’s as funny as a steam roller going 
over a baby.’ 
‘You must be bludy thick, she’s a scream.’ 
‘Yes, I scream every time I hear her sing.’ 
‘Ooo do you think is foony then?’ 
‘W. C. Fields, Marx Brothers’ 
‘Oooo?’ 
He’d never heard of them. 
‘I bet they’re not as foony as Gracie, you put ’em next to her and 
she’d lose ’em.’ 
The mind boggled, Gracie Fields meets the Marx Brothers! Help! 
I tried to demonstrate to him how Groucho walked. 

io6 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
‘Wot ee walk like that fur? It looks bludy daft.’ 
‘It’s supposed to, you nana, look! North Country humour is all 
bloody awful, all Eeeee bai Gum, flat hats and boiled puddens. I 
mean, you must be all simple to think George Formby s funny, I get 
the same feeling from him as if I’d been told my mother was dead.’ 
The onslaught silenced him, then he spoke, ‘Milligan? That’s Irish 
isn’t it.’ 
‘Yes, well I’m half Irish.’ 
‘That’s bludy truble ... that’s what keeps you simple minded.’ 
‘Bernard Shaw and Oscar Wilde were Irish.’ 
‘What bludy good did they do?’ 
‘They were recognized as great writers.’ 
‘Not by me, fook ’em.’ 
‘Listen, mister, the worst thing in life I can think of is being tied 
to a post and forced to listen to George Formby...’ 
‘All right, ’oo do you think is a gud singer?’ 
‘Bing Crosby.’ 
‘Tm? ee sounds like ee’s crapped ’imself and it’s sliding down 
wun leg.’ 
‘Yes ... he would sound like that to you; I suppose you think 
Gigli is a load of crap as well.’ 
‘Gigli? Who’s she?’ 
‘He s a great opera singer.’ 
‘Grade Fields could sing opera standing on her head.’ 
‘If she did, it would be the first time I’d laugh at her.’ 
Arguments like this were frequent; there seemed to be a love-hate 
relationship between the North and South, the South loved them¬ 
selves and the North hated them for it. Percival had been down 
with sandfly fever like myself. 
‘Were you on the landings?’ 
‘Nay, we cum in ten days after to-lay Sumerfield Track for fighter 
planes ter land on, but ship with the stoof on were soonk by Jerry 
radio-controlled bomb.’ 
Percival had once brought me to the verge of tears; one night, he 
came in pissed as usual. 
‘Ever seen a white-eared elephant?’ he said. 

Boys with Guns 
107 
No, I hadn’t. Whereupon he pulls the linings of his two trouser 
pockets out, opens his flies and hangs his willy out. I cried with 
laughter, who in God’s name invented these tricks? and all the 
others like the swan flies East, sausage on a plate, sack of flour, 
the roaring of the lions, there was a touch of obscene genius about 
them all. 
THE SOLDIERS AT LAURO 
Young are the dead 
Like babies they lie 
The wombs they blest once 
Not healed dry 
And yet - too soon 
Into each space 
A cold earth falls 
j 
On colder face. 
Quite still they lie 
These fresh reeds 
Clutched in earth 
Like winter seeds 
But these will not bloom 
When called by spring 
To burst with leaf 
And blossoming 
They will sleep on 
In silent dust 
As crosses rot 
And memories rust. 
Italy 1943 
- from Small Dreams of a Scorpion 

io8 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
THE YOUNG SOLDIERS 
Why are they lying in some distant land 
Why did they go, did they understand? 
Young men they were 
Young men they stay 
But why did we send them away, away? 
written during Korean War 
30 March 1955 
- from The Bedside Milligan 
from Mussolini: His Part in My Downfall 
Gunner Edgingtons Public Appearance 
‘Crabs! They’ve got crabs!’ the cry runs through the serried ranks. 
The ‘Theys’ were the crew of Monkey 2, it was the first mass 
outbreak of crabs in the Battery; how proud we were of them, at 
last the label dirty bastards could be added to the Battery honours. 
The only other mass outbreak of crabs was Gunner Neat in B exhill. 
He told the MO he got them off a girl in Blackpool. ‘I brought them 
south for the sun, sir,’ he said. 
Among the crab-ridden is Gunner Edgington. Let him recount 
the grisly details. 
We hadn’t had our clothes off for some considerable time, much 
less our underwear, such as it might have been, and as I’ve said, 
a bath was something we only vaguely remembered from long 

Boys with Guns 
109 
ago. My hair was a matted lump. The whole world we knew at 
that time was to get phone lines out and keep them going - all 
else was sleep and food and a good deal of the latter was often 
scrounged from strange outfits we encountered while out on the 
line. * 
Not surprisingly we began to smell strongly and then to scratch: 
the irritation became incessant and something obviously had to be 
done: I don’t think Bentley came to us ... it was just arranged by 
phone calls, that we go over to RHQ. 
I think there must’ve been more than the M2 team, for the crab- 
ridden’ were taken in a three-tonner to where some showers had 
been erected in the corner of a field. The showers were a Heath 
Robinson contraption mounted under a tin roof on angle-iron 
supports, but they were thoroughly efficient. 
Capt. Bentley, keeping a distance, called down instructions from 
the safety of his room on an upper floor of an adjacent building. 
‘Strip off!’ he called to us, and this was just the Monkey 2 gang 
at this point. ‘Have a thorough wash-down all over as hot as you 
can possibly stand it.’ 
In the middle of this field, in full view of civilians and soldiers 
alike, we disported ourselves joyously under four very efficient jets 
of steam and near-boiling water to the accompaniment of screams, 
yells and cackles. 
‘Blimey, you can see the bloody things! See ’em moving under 
the skin? Those little bastards’ 
Sure enough, I could see my collection in the skin of my belly 
just above the ‘short-and-curlies’. 
Some five minutes, and Bentley calls: ‘OK, that’s enough - get 
up here like lightning!’ 
Away we went in a tight bunch for the steps which led up the 
side of the building; these being only wide enough to permit one 
at a time, it meant some of us had to ease back to create a single-file 
rush up the stairs, all naked and freezing. Into a small bare room 
we thundered, its only furniture a bare table, on which stood in a 
row seven empty cigarette tins, and a large dob of cotton wool 
alongside - no sign of Bentley though. 

110 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Looking round puzzled, we see his grinning face peering round 
a distant door at the far end of the room - he had no wish to get 
near us. The legend crabs can jump six feet’ still lingered on. 
‘Right! Each man grab a tin and a blob of cotton wool. Dip the 
cotton wool into the tin and dab it generously all over the affected 
parts ... quickly now, quickly!’ He slammed the door, in case any 
escaped. s 
Looking in my tin I saw a clear mauve liquid. The lads were all 
still chortling and crying in mock agony - ‘Unclean! Unclean!’, the 
war-cry we had been bellicosely hollering from the lorry that 
brought us - and ringing imaginary handbells. 
The fluid was liberally applied - backs, balls and bellies as well - 
not one of us having guessed what it was, it took about ten to fifteen 
seconds to act. Then everyone’s balls caught fire. It was raw alcohol. 
The first ‘Cor-mate!’ was rapidly echoed all round, followed by 
a growled ‘Awww! Gawd blimey!!’ Faces were transfixed with pain 
and cross-eyed agony, they yelled, they screamed, they fell anpl 
rolled, they jumped, they ran back and forth, they twisted, cannoned 
into walls - each other - they fell over the table. At the height of 
the chaotic fandango I was sat on the floor, knees drawn up, left 
arm wedging my trunk half upright, right hand fanning my 
‘wedding-tackle’, when through the melee of flailing arms, legs and 
prancing bodies I saw the inner door open again slightly and Bent¬ 
ley’s face appear in the narrow gap. ‘Merry Christmas,’ he said and 
was gone! 
For Edgington to remember that occasion in such detail thirty-five 
years after the event is quite a feat of memory. Mind you, one doesn’t 
get crabs every day, not even at the fishmongers. 
We set off single file on the road towards Castleforte, which sits 
in the near distance on a hillside full of Germans. We turn left 
off the road into a field; we pass a Sherman Tank, a neat hole 
punched in the turret; a tank man is removing kit from inside. 

Boys with Guns 
111 
Laying on a groundsheet is the mangled figure of one of the crew. 
‘What a mess,’ says the Tankman in the same tones as though 
there was mud on the carpet. 
I grinned at him and passed on. Above us the battle was going on 
full belt; coming towards us is Thornton, dear old thirty-five-year- 
old Iffornton; he looks tired, he has no hat, and is smoking a pipe. 
‘Hello, what’s on?’ 
He explains he’s been sent back. ‘I’m too old for that lark. I kept 
failin’ asleep.’ 
I asked him the best way up. He reaffirms, ‘You go up a stone- 
lined gully; when it ends start climbing the hill, it’s all stepped for 
olive trees. Of course,’ he added, ‘if you’re in the gully and they start 
mortaring, you’ve had it.’ 
‘Thanks,’ I said, ‘that’s cheered us up no end.’ 
He bid us farewell and we went forward, we reached the gully. In 
a ravine to the left were Infantry all dug into the side; they were 
either ‘resting’ or in reserve. So far so good. We reach the end of the 
stone gully and start climbing the stepped mountain - each step is 
six foot high, so it’s a stiff climb. CRUMP! CRUMP! CRUMP! - 
mortars. We hit the ground. CRUMP CRUMP CRUMP - they 
stop. Why? Can they see us? We get up and go on, CRUMP CRUMP 
CRUMP - he can see us! We hit the deck. A rain of them fall around 
us. I cling to the ground. The mortars rain down on us. I’ll have a 
fag, that’s what. I am holding a packet of Woodbines, then there is 
a noise like thunder. It’s right on my head, there’s a high-pitched 
whistle in my ears, at first I black out and then I see red, I am strangely 
dazed. I was on my front, now I’m on my back, the red was opening 
my eyes straight into the sun. I know if we stay here we’ll all die ... 
I start to scramble down the hill. There’s shouting, I can’t recall 
anything clearly. Next I was at the bottom of the mountain, next I’m 
speaking to Major Jenkins, I am crying, I don’t know why, he’s saying, 
‘Get that wound dressed.’ 
I said, ‘What wound?’ 
I had been hit on the side of my right leg. 
‘Why did you come back?’ He is shouting at me and threatening 
me, I can’t remember what I am saying. He’s saying, ‘You could find 

112 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
your way back but you couldn’t find your way to the OP’; next I’m 
sitting in an ambulance and shaking, an orderly puts a blanket 
round my shoulders, I’m crying again, why why why? Next I’m in 
a forward dressing station, an orderly gives me a bowl of hot very 
sweet tea; ‘Swallow these,’ he says, two small white pills. I can’t hold 
the bowl for shaking, he takes it from me and helps me drink it. All 
around are wounded, he has rolled up.my trouser leg. He’s putting 
a sticking plaster on the wound, he’s telling me it’s only a small one. 
I don’t really care if it’s big or small, why am I crying? Why can’t I 
stop? I’m getting lots of sympathy, what I want is an explanation. 
I’m feeling drowsy, and I must have started to sway because next 
I’m on a stretcher. I feel lovely, what were in those tablets ... that’s 
the stuff for me, who wants food? I don’t know how long I’m there, 
I wake up. I’m still on the stretcher, I’m not drowsy, but I start to 
shiver. I sit up. They put a label on me. They get me to my feet and 
help me to an ambulance. I can see really badly wounded men, their 
bandages soaked through with blood, plasma is being dripped into 
them. 
When we get to one of the Red Cross trucks, an Italian woman, 
all in black, young, beautiful, is holding a dead baby and weeping; 
someone says the child has been killed by a shell splinter. The rela¬ 
tives are standing by looking out of place in their ragged peasants’ 
clothing amid all the uniforms. An older woman gives her a plate 
of home-made biscuits, of no possible use, just a desperate gesture 
of love. She sits in front with the driver. I’m in the back. We all sit 
on seats facing each other, not one face can I remember. Suddenly 
we are passing through our artillery lines as the guns fire. I jump at 
each explosion, then, a gesture I will never forget, a young soldier 
next to me with his right arm in a bloody sling put his arm around 
my shoulder and tried to comfort me. ‘There, there, you’ll be all 
right mate.’ 

Boys with Guns 
113 
from Indefinite Articles and Scunthorpe 
Christmas 1944 
I was a Lance Bombardier at an observation post on the forward 
slopes of Monte Sperro in Italy. With me was Lieutenant ‘Johnny 
Walker’ and his assistant Bombardier Eddie Edwards. It was Christ¬ 
mas Eve, the rain fell in sheets, it was icy cold and we sat in our slit 
trench sitting on wooden boxes with water slopping around our 
boots. We took it in turns to try and empty out the water in a small 
tin. As darkness fell a man from the battery scrambled down the 
slope; it was mail from home! 
‘Bombardier Milligan?’ 
‘Yes,’ I said. 
‘Nothing for you,’ he said with a cheery laugh (the bastard). One 
letter for Walker (lucky bastard). 
By a covered torch he read it aloud: ‘Oh my God,’ he said, ‘I’ve 
been burgled.’ We couldn’t help it, we laughed. 
To add to the festive cheer a German 155mm gun started to lay 
down harassing fire; we tried to doze. As it drew near to midnight 
an infantryman from a nearby slit trench must have watched the 
clock reach midnight and started to sing: Silenttttt nightttt (CRASH 
BOOM A SHELL) Holyyyyy nighttt all is peace (WEEEEE 
BOOM!) Round yon manger (WEEEEEE BOOM). 
The last one landed just above the trench and threw up a column 
of mud that descended on us. By the light of the torch we saw that 
Lieutenant Walker had got it right in the face and, looking like Paul 
Robeson, said, ‘Hello dere! A Werry Merry Christmas.’ 
Ah! They don’t have Christmases like that any more. 

114 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
from Where Have All the Bullets Gone? 
Stop the festivities! The Germans have broken our lines in the 
Ardennes, all our washing is in the mud! Yet another it’s-going-to- 
be-over-by-Christmas-promise gone. Still, it could be worse. Like 
poor old Charlie Chaplin who was in a paternity suit - unfortu¬ 
nately it fits him. 
Steve Lewis looks up from his newspaper, stunned! How can this 
happen? Will Hitler win after all? Should he telegraph his wife and 
say, ‘Sell the stock, only take cash.’ Stay cool. Help is coming. Is it 
John Wayne? No, it’s Sheriff Bernard Law Montgomery. He is going 
to ‘tidy up the battle, which ends with him claiming he’s won it, 
and he will shortly rise again from the dead. Eisenhower is furious. 
He threatens to cut Monty’s supply of armoured jockstraps and 
Blue Unction. Monty apologizes: ‘Sorry etc., etc. You’re superior by 
far, Monty.’ 
Christmas came and went with all the trimmings, tinned turkey, 
stuffing, Christmas Pud, all served to us by drunken Sergeants. 
Now we were all sitting round waiting for 1945. It had been a good 
year for me. I was alive. 
January 1945 
Cold and rain. 
Letter from home. 
Very quiet month. 
Then, on 23 February 1945, this drastic message was flashed to the 
world from the pages of Valjean, the O2E house magazine. 

Boys with Guns 
115 
TRUMPETER 
# 
Is there no stylish trumpeter in the ranks of the Echelon? 
At present the 02E Dance Orchestra is handicapped to 
a certain extent by the lack of one of these only too rare 
musicians. Ex-trumpeter ‘Spike’ Milligan, who has now 
gone on to the production line, had to hang up his trum¬ 
pet on medical grounds, so if there is a trumpeter in our 
midst please contact SQMS Ward of R/O. 
Milligan has hung up his trumpet! A grateful nation gave thanks! 
It started with pains in my chest. I knew I had piles, but they had 
never reached this far up before. The Medical Officer made me strip. 
‘How long has it been like that?’ he said. 
‘That’s as long as it’s ever been,’ I replied. 
He ran his stethoscope over my magnificent nine-stone body. 
‘Yes,’ he concluded, ‘you’ve definitely got pains in your chest. I can 
hear them quite clearly.’ 
‘What do you think it is, sir?’ 
‘It could be anything.’ 
Anything? A broken leg? Zeppelin Fever? Cow Pox? La Grippe? 
Lurgi? 
‘You play that wretched darkie music on your bugle, don’t you?’ 
‘Yes, sir.’ 
‘You must give it up.’ 
‘Why?’ 
‘I hate it.’ He goes on to say, ‘It’s straining your heart.’ 
Bloody idiot. It’s 1985, I’m a hundred and nine, and I’m still play¬ 
ing the trumpet. He’s dead. At the time I stupidly believed him and 
packed up playing. 
The first Saturday Music Hall of the New Year was a split bill. 
The first half variety, the second half a play, Men in Shadow. It was 
seeing the latter that prompted me to do a lunatic version of our 

n6 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
own. We timed it to go on the very night after the play finished, 
using all the original costumes and scenery. 
MEN IN G I T I S 
Tomorrow the chief attraction at the Concert Hall will 
be the super, skin-creeping, spine-tingling production 
‘Men in Gitis’. In it are the craziest crowd of local talent 
\ 
that one could imagine. Spim Bolligan, the indefatiguable 
introducer of this new type of show, describes it as ‘co¬ 
lossal’. 
I wrote the script with Steve Lewis and Len Prosser. It was total 
lunacy, starting the play before the audience came in; several of 
the actors outside the hall doing the first act to the queue; the 
curtain going up and down throughout the play; the orchestra 
coming into the pit calling out ‘Bread . . . give us bread,’ then 
proceeding to tune up every ten minutes. Bodies were hauled up 
to the ceiling by their ankles asking for a reduction in rent; people 
came through trap doors, and all the while a crowd of soldiers 
done up as Hitler tried to get a grand piano across the stage, and 
then back again. It ended with the projection of the Gaumont 
British news all over us, with the music up loud, while the band 
played ‘God Save the King’ at speed. As the audience left we leapt 
down among them with begging bowls, asking for money, and 
shouted insults after them into the night. How were we received? 
See below. 

Boys with Guns 
117 
ENTERTAINMENTS — contd. from page 1 
MUSIC HALL 
Last Saturday’s Musical Hall was one of the best ever pre¬ 
sented. The highspot was undoubtedly ‘Men in Gitis’ - a 
satirical sequel to ‘Men in Shadow’.This type of show is 
either liked or hated, and quite a few did not care for it 
at all, but the majority of people present gave the distin¬ 
guished performers a really good ovation/Spike’ Milligan 
was at his craziest and the show was a cross between 
‘Itma’ and‘Hellzapoppin’. 
The entry of Major Bloor, Major New and the RSM 
added to the enjoyment of this burlesque which culmi¬ 
nated in the ‘Mass Postings’ poster being exhibited. 
I love that good ovation as against a bad one, however it wasn’t 
bad for lunatics. Spurred by success, like vultures we prepared to 
wreck the next play. This was ... 
FUTURE ATTRACTIONS 
Tonight and tomorrow there is the well advertised 
‘White Cargo’ showing in the Concert Hall. This play, 
which some may remember seeing in pre-war days, has a 
first class story running throughout and should definitely 
not be missed. 
The innocent actor-manager putting it on was Lt Hector Ross. 
No sooner was White Cargo over than Black Baggage was on its way. 
With maniacal relish we went on to destroy the play piecemeal. The 

n8 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
best part of it was that we had persuaded Hector Ross to keep appear¬ 
ing and saying lines from the original show, then bursting into tears 
and exiting. It was uproarious fun. I didn’t know it, but I was taking 
my first steps towards writing the Goon Show. For this I have to 
thank Hitler, without whose war it would never have happened. 
SOMEWHERE IN THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO 1984 
NINETY-YEAR-OLD HITLER IS SHOVELLING SHIT 
AND SALT. 
\ 
hitler: ‘Hear zat? You must let me be free. I am zer inventor 
of zer Coon Show. Ven zer Queen hears zis she will giff me zer 
OBE and ein free Corgi.’ 
SAID THE GENERAL 
Said the General of the Army, 
‘I think that war is barmy’ 
So he threw away his gun: 
Now he’s having much more fun. 
- from Silly Verse for Kids 
from Where Have All the Bullets Gone? 
We have driven through Naples, turned left at the bottom of Via 
Roma up the Corso San Antonio, which goes on for ever in an 
Eastern direction. Finally we arrive at a broken-down Army Barracks 
complex. The walls are peeling, they look as if they have mange. I 

Boys with Guns 
119 
report to a Captain Philip Ridgeway, a sallow saturnine fellow with 
a Ronald Colman moustache who looks as if he has mange as well. 
He sits behind the desk with his hat on. He is the son of the famous 
Ridgeways’ Late Joys Revue that led to the Players Theatre. He looks 
at my papers. ‘So, you play the trumpet. Do you play it well?’ 
‘Well, er loudly.’ 
‘Do you read music?’ 
‘Yes, and the Daily Herald.’ 
He smiled. He would find me a place in ‘one of our orchestras’. 
I was taken by a Corporal Gron, who looked like an unflushed 
lavatory, and shown to a billet on the first floor, a room with forty 
single beds around the walls. In them were forty single men. This 
being Sunday, they were of a religious order that kept them in kip 
until midday. I drop my kit on a vacant bed, and it collapses to the 
floor. ‘That’s why it’s vacant,’ laughed Corporal Gron, who laughed 
when babies fell under buses. Next bed is Private Graham Barlow. 
He helps me repair the bed with some string and money. Nice man 
- he played the accordion. Noel Coward said, ‘No gentleman would 
ever play the accordion.’ 
I had no job as such, and as such I had no job. Breakfast was at 
8.30, no parade, hang around, lunch, hang further around, tea, 
extended hanging around, dinner and bed. The CPA Complex had 
the same ground plan as the Palace of Minos at Knossos, consisting 
of rehearsal rooms, music stores, costume stores, scenery dock and 
painting area, Wardrobe Mistress, Executive offices. People went 
in and were never seen again. The company was assembled from 
soldier artistes who had been down-graded. They would be formed 
into concert parties and sent on tour to entertain those Tommies 
who weren’t down-graded. The blind leading the blind. The facili¬ 
ties were primitive, the lavatories were a line of holes in the ground. 
When I saw eighteen soldiers squatting/balancing over black holes 
with straining sweating faces for the first time, they looked like the 
start of the hundred yards for paraplegic dwarfs. 
My first step to ‘fame’ came when I borrowed a guitar from the 
stores. I was playing in the rehearsal room when a tall cadaverous 
gunner said, ‘You play the guitar then?’ This was Bill Hall. If you’ve 

120 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
ever seen a picture of Niccolo Paganini, this was his double. What’s 
more, he played the violin and played it superbly; be it a Max Bruch 
Concerto or ‘I’ve Got Rhythm’ he was a virtuoso. But bloody scruffy. 
We teamed up just for the fun of it, and in turn we were joined by 
Johnny Mulgrew, a short Scots lad from the Recce Corps; as he’d left 
them they were even shorter of Scots. Curriculum Vitae: Pre-war he 
played for Ambrose and the Inland Revenue. In the 56 Recce in N. 
Africa. Trapped behind enemy lines at Madjez-el-Bab. Lay doggo for 
forty-eight hours in freezing weather. Got pneumonia. Down-graded 
to B2 ... 
s 
Together we sounded like Le Hot Club de France. When we 
played, other musicians would come and listen to us - a compli¬ 
ment - and it wasn’t long before we were lined up for a show. 
In the filling-in time, I used to play the trumpet in a scratch 
combination. It led to my meeting with someone from Mars, 
Gunner Secombe, H., singer and lunatic, a little myopic blubber of 
fat from Wales who had been pronounced a loony after a direct hit 
by an 88mm gun in North Africa. He was asleep at the time and 
didn’t know about it till he woke up. General Montgomery saw him 
and nearly surrendered. He spoke like a speeded up record, no one 
understood him, he didn’t even understand himself; in fact, forty 
years later he was knighted for not being understood. 
The Officers’ Club, Naples. We were playing for dancing and 
cabaret, the latter being the lunatic Secombe. His ‘music’ consisted 
of some tatty bits of paper, two parts, one for the drums and one 
for the piano - the rest of us had to guess. We busked him on with 
‘I’m just wild about Harry’. He told us he had chosen it because his 
name was Harry, and we said how clever he was. He rushed on, 
chattering, screaming, farting, sweat pouring off him like a 
monsoon, and officers moved their chairs back. Then the thing 
started to shave itself, screaming, chattering and farting; he spoke 
at high speed; the audience thought he was an imported Polish 
comic, and many wished he was back in Warsaw being bombed. 
Shaving soap and hairs flew in all directions, then he launched into 
a screaming duet with himself, Nelson Eddy and Jeanette Macdon¬ 
ald, but you couldn’t tell him apart. A few cries of ‘hey hup’ and a 

Boys with Guns 
121 
few more soapy farts, and he’s gone, leaving the dance floor smoth¬ 
ered in shaving soap. His wasn’t an act, it was an interruption. 
The dance continues, and officers are going arse over tip in 
dozens. ‘No, not him,’ they’d say when Secombe’s name came up 
for a cabaret. 
Bill Hall. A law unto himself. He ignored all Army discipline, he 
ignored all civilian discipline. His regiment had despaired of him 
and posted him to CPA with an apology note. 
Take kit parade. We are all at our beds, kit immaculately laid out 
for inspection. The Orderly Officer reaches Gunner Hall. There, on 
an ill-made bed, where there should be nineteen items of army 
apparel, are a pair of socks, three jack-knives, a vest, a mess tin and 
a fork. The officer looks at the layout. He puts his glasses on. 
officer: ‘Where is the rest of your kit?’ 
gunner hall: ‘It’s on holiday, sir.’ 
Apart from Gunner Secombe, CPA contained other stars to be, 
including Norman Vaughan, Ken Platt and Les Henry (who later 
formed The Three Monarchs). 
Civilian Status 
The Central Pool of Artists is changed to The Combined Services 
Entertainment. Why? I suppose it’s the result of a ‘meeting’. In its 
wake we, the Bill Hall Trio, are being offered officer status and wages 
if, when we are demobbed, we sign with the CSE for six months. 
Hedonists, we all say yes. Officer status? Cor Blimey! All the bloody 
months in the line and you become Lance-Bombardier. Play the 
guitar in perfect safety, you become an officer. If I learned the banjo 
and the tuba I could become a Field-Marshal! 
I wrote home and told my delighted parents. Mother proudly 
informed the neighbours that her son was a ‘Banjo-playing Officer’. 
* 

122 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
Lieutenant Priest seeks me out. Tomorrow Bill Hall and I are to report 
to Villach Demob Camp to be issued with civilian clothes, how excit¬ 
ing! Next morning a 15 cwt truck takes us to the depot. Giant sheds 
loaded with military gear. We hand in our papers and discharge 
sheets, then we are given the choice of three suits - a grey double- 
breasted pinstripe suit, a dark blue ditto or a sports jacket and flannels. 
I had chosen clothes three times too large for me and Hall had 
chosen some three sizes too small. The distributing sergeant was 
pretty baffled. We duly signed our names and walked out. England’s 
heroes were now free men. No more ‘yes, sir, no, sir’, no more 
parades. Back at the guest house, we have our first meal as civilians. 
As I remember it was spaghetti. 
We had one more demob appointment. That was with the Army 
MO. This turns out to be a watery-eyed, red-nosed lout who was 
to medicine what Giotto was to fruit bottling. 
‘It’s got you down here as Bi,’ he says. 
‘That’s right, I was downgraded at a medical board.’ 
‘It says “battle fatigue”.’ 
‘Yes. “Battle fatigue, anxiety state, chronic”.’ 
‘Yes, but you’re over it now, aren’t you?’ 
‘No, I still feel tired.’ 
‘So, I’ll put you down as Ai.’ 
‘Not unless I’m upgraded by a medical board.’ 
‘Oh, all right. Bi.’ 
He then asks me if my eyesight is all right. 
‘As far as I know.’ 
‘You can see me, can’t you?’ 
‘Yes.’ 
‘Then it’s all right.’ 
It ended with him signing a couple of sheets of paper and show¬ 
ing me the door. Why didn’t he show me the window? It was a nice 
view. 
That was it. I was a civilian and Bi. 

3 
Earning a Living 
All I ask is the chance to prove that money can’t buy you 
happiness. 
- ‘Spike on Spike’, Memories of Milligan 

V 
\ 

fter the ‘Adolf Hitler Show’ Spike didn’t return to England. He 
ii.was demobbed in May 1945 but stayed in Italy and toured with 
the Bill Hall Trio. Their show was called Barbary Coast. During this 
tour he started to perform sketches that he had written - the begin¬ 
ning of the Goon Shows? 
He returned to England in 1946, still touring with the Bill Hall 
Trio, but wanted to go solo. After arguments and a less than amic¬ 
able split with Bill Hall, he went. But before he could get a solo gig, 
he joined the Ann Lenner Trio playing the guitar, which took him 
on another European tour that ended in Vienna. By now he was 
determined to go solo. 
Jimmy Grafton, who owned a pub called the Grafton Arms, 
was writing for a comedian, Derek Roy, who performed there. 
Grafton heard Spike had appeared with the Bill Hall Trio and 
had written some ‘funny material’, so he asked Spike to join him 
writing for Derek Roy. This was in 1948. The BBC got wind of 
this and asked Jimmy and Spike to write for a radio show, Hip 
Hip Hoo Roy. 
Harry Secombe and Spike remained friends after the war, and 
Spike went to see him perform at the Hackney Empire. In the bar 
after the show, Harry introduced Spike to another up-and-coming 
comedian, Peter Sellers. Harry was friendly with Jimmy Grafton 
and so the pub became their meeting place. 
Peter had worked at the BBC and knew a producer, Pat Dixon. 
They met, and Pat asked Spike to write a script - the first Goon 
Show - but when the show aired on 28 May 1951 it was called ‘The 
Crazy People’. It changed to The Goon Show at Spike’s insistence for 
the second series. 
The pressure of writing a Goon Show every week caused him to 
have a nervous breakdown, which eventually ended his marriage 

126 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
to June Marlow. At the end of 1959 he wrote: ‘It had been the most 
traumatic year of my life. I had become famous and successful but 
deeply unhappy. God please help me.’ 

from The Murphy 
Showing at the local cinema was a silent film of Tarzan, played by 
Frank Edwards* an actor with a magnificent torso, but painfully 
thin legs. This they overcame by having him wear a long leopard 
skin back and front from the waist down. In the film, Tarzan 
manfully strangled a gorilla with his bare hands and also killed a 
lion that was stuffed. 
A newsreel followed, showing strikes in America. 
Ah, America!’ sighed Murphy. ‘Dat’s der place fer strikes.’ 
His uncle had gone to America and become a policeman. He 
married a huge German woman who beat the shit out of him every 
night. 
America’s der land of opportunity!’ exclaimed Murphy, as he and 
Molly walked home. 
‘Den why don’t you go dere?’ asked Molly. 
‘I don’t want an opportunity,’ he answered. ‘I might not like it... 
I won’t be a moment,’ he added, disappearing into a public toilet. 
He swiftly reappeared. ‘Oh, what a filthy mess! None of the dirty 
buggers had pulled der chain.’ 
He reported the condition to the Council Sanitary Officer, Adam 
Ripley, who immediately went round and pulled all the chains - a 
man of action. Murphy admired that. He determined to become a 
man of action and took a new job at the Sligo Funeral Parlour. He 
had to show customers the entire range of coffins, from the 
reinforced cardboard ‘Powell’, to the mahogany ‘Churchill’. He sold 
a lot of ‘Powells’ but never a ‘Churchill’. 

128 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
‘People can’t afford to die in style these days,’ he said, sadly. He 
was on commission. 
Mrs Priscilla Doyle came seeking a coffin for her husband. 
‘Is he dead?’ asked Murphy. 
‘No, he’s not,’ she said, ‘but I don’t want to leave it till the last 
moment.’ 
In fact, Mr Doyle was only twenty-three. She chose the ‘Powell’. 
It was put on the back of an open-topped lorry and driven back to 
her house in the rain. When they arrived, the cardboard had 
softened and collapsed. 
‘It’ll be all right when it dries out,’ Murphy advised by phone. 
‘Put it in front of der fire.’ She did. It burned to the ground. 
‘Oh, bugger,’ Murphy advised by phone. ‘Well, we’ll replace it 
when it stops raining.’ 
‘What if it dies before he does?’ said Mrs Doyle. 
‘Oh, bugger,’ muttered Murphy, who didn’t know the answer to 
that one. Eventually he sold her his first ‘Churchill’. She kept it in a 
warm, dry room awaiting her husband’s death. 
The job held, people went on dying, most were buried in the 
‘Powell’, which generally held together quite well. Murphy was often 
heard quietly praying in the funeral parlour’s chapel of rest, ‘Just 
don’t let it bloody rain!’ 
Financially he was doing well; his wage was three pounds a week 
plus a percentage of coffins sold. On a good week he could make 
fifteen to twenty pounds. He never told Molly that - she’d have had 
all of it. Ironically, when the rainy winter months ended, coffin sales 
declined. The bronchitis season was over and people just refused 
to die! Murphy’s income plummeted. 
Money, bloody money. One thing would solve the problem - a 
robbery. Murphy thought deeply on it and gradually an idea came 
into his head. Sligo Castle - Lord O’Neill - he’d have money. Now, 
inside the castle there were suits of armour. If he could get into one 
and wait for nightfall... 
Pretending to be the man who read the gas meter, Murphy was 
allowed entry, despite the fact that the real man who read the gas 
meter never visited Sligo Castle. They were all-electric. Murphy 

Earning a Living 
129 
spotted the suit of armour straight away. There was nobody about. 
Furtively, he hid all of his clothes in a large chest. Slowly he got into 
the suit; it was quite comfortable, if cold. He shivered. He sounded 
like one of those strings of tin cans they tied behind wedding cars. 
Settling down for a long wait, he tried not to think of the cold. He 
tried not to think. He was good at that. 
Eventually he heard the hall clock strike twelve. The house was 
silent. Now for action - the safe! Stealthily he crept up the stairs. 
CLANG! Blast, an arm fell off - no one seemed to have heard. As 
he walked there was a slight squeaking from the joints. Finally he 
reached the study. He opened the visor. It slammed shut. He took 
the helmet off. That was better, now he could see. There on the wall 
was a picture, behind it, the safe! Now if he could only get the 
combination right. . . well, he had all night. He proceeded to try 
various combinations with no luck whatsoever. In the end he tried 
his old army number, 954042. My God, it worked! The safe opened 
- there was money inside! He counted it feverishly. It totalled three 
pounds ten shillings. Surely there must be more? There was, but it 
was in the Bank of Ireland. Well, so be it. Clutching the money, he 
put his helmet back Qn and tiptoed downstairs. 
He tried to take the armour off but, curse it, it wouldn’t shift. He 
was still trying to remove it when the early morning butler found 
him. 
‘Who are you in there, sir?’ 
‘Mick Murphy,’ the armour replied. 
‘What are you doing in there, Murphy?’ 
‘I’m trying to get out,’ said Murphy. 
Til have to inform the police, sir,’ said the butler. 
‘No, now don’t be troublin’ yourself by doin’ dat. Just help me off 
wid it and I’ll go.’ 
‘No, it’s no good, sir, it won’t come off. You’ll need a plumber,’ 
said the butler, and phoned for one. 
Roy Coe, the plumber, assessed the job. It was a tricky one, but 
it was better than being up to his elbows in shit unblocking some 
poor diarrhoeic sod’s toilet. ‘It needs an acetylene torch, but that 
would burn him to death.’ 

130 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
‘Not der torch!’ screamed the armour. ‘Not der torch!’ 
Inside, despite the chill of the metal suit, Murphy was pouring 
with sweat. The plumber decided to cut him out with a hacksaw. 
First he cut the legs free, revealing Murphy’s fat hairy legs. 
By now Lord O’Neill was watching. ‘Why in God’s name, man, 
did you do this?’ 
‘I was going to a fancy dress ball, sir,’ lied Murphy from behind 
his visor. 
By midday, most of the armouf was pff, but the police had arrived. 
‘Do you wish to press charges, sir?’ asked Garda Michael Milli¬ 
gan, number 213. 
The garda were numbered in case they got lost. This was one of 
the most exciting things ever to have happened in Garda Milligan’s 
short and inauspicious career in law enforcement. Sligo was a dead 
town. No one was clever enough to be a criminal. 
‘There’s no one to arrest,’ he had once complained to his sergeant. 
‘Oh, dear,’ said Garda Sergeant Drew. ‘You can always arrest 
someone for pissing in a doorway.’ 
Was that true? Milligan had pondered. ‘Right, then!’ He kept a 
watchful eye out that night as he was patrolling the street and he 
caught a couple fornicating in the doorway of a shop. 
‘And what would youse be doin’?’ he asked. 
‘We’re having a shag,’ was the answer. 
‘Is dat so?’ nodded Milligan. ‘Well, it’s a good job youse were not 
having a piss or I’d have got yer!’ 
The man in the suit of armour, though, was a different matter 
altogether. Here was a clear crime in progress. ‘So, sir, do you wish 
to press charges?’ repeated Garda Milligan. 
‘Well, he nicked my elbow wid dat hacksaw, but I’ll let him off 
dis time ...’ said Murphy. 
‘Not you,’ hissed the policeman. ‘Your Lordship?’ 
Oh, no, officer. I think this is just a joke gone wrong,’ he 
chuckled. 
‘We can have him for trespass ...’ insisted the policeman. 
An hour and a half later, the armour was finally off, revealing 
Murphy in his vest and underpants, which sent O’Neill into parox- 

Earning a Living 
131 
ysms of laughter. Sheepishly, Murphy retrieved his clothes from the 
chest. 
‘Would sir like a cup of tea?’ asked the footman. 
Oh, yes, dat was what was needed. Murphy sat drinking it under 
the watchful eye of the policeman. ‘You were lucky to get away wid 
dis,’ he warned. 
‘Look,' said Murphy, ‘I must have bin drunk.’ 
Garda Milligan eyed Murphy with great suspicion. He knew there 
was more to Murphy than met the eye, and more would certainly 
have met the eye had Murphy not kept his underpants on. 
Meanwhile, Roy Coe, having dismantled the armour, was having 
some difficulty in reassembling it. The arms were now welded on 
backwards and the feet pointed in different directions. Murphy 
counted himself extremely lucky not to be still inside. 
It was one of the few strokes of luck he had ever had. Maybe if 
he had had a bit more luck, he wouldn’t have always been so poor. 
‘Yes,’ thought Murphy, °tis a terrible ting ter be poor ... a ter¬ 
rible ting ter be poor ...’ 
from Goodbye Soldier 
Foreword 
FIND A PLACE - STOP THE CLOCK 
Sitting here at the typewriter, stop the clock. When I think of the 
kind of human being I was then, I can’t believe that it was me. I was 
twenty-eight, with the best years of my life spent in the Army. I had 
found the transformation from civilian life painless: it allowed 
freedoms I hadn’t had before. No longer did I have my mother’s 
dictatorship about going to mass - we had unending rows over it, 
in fact I left home for a time. No longer did I have that voice on the 

132 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
landing when I came home at night, ‘Is that you, Terry? What time 
do you call this?’ type rows. I had always given my mother my entire 
wage packet, £5.00. In return, I got half-a-crown pocket money at 
the age of twenty-one. Now I kept all my pay, came in late and didn’t 
have to go to mass. It was freedom! I was living for the moment. If 
there was any future, it was the next band job. I loved being there, 
playing the trumpet, me the music maker, me being asked by offi¬ 
cers, ‘I say, Milligan, can you play such and such a tune?’, me 
singing, flirting with the girls. NPw hej'e I was in Italy on £10.00 a 
week with officer status, playing with a trio that I thought would 
bring us fame and fortune, and all this and a pretty ballerina. This 
was Italy, the sun shone, free of all responsibilities except the show, 
free all day. Oh, life was good! One day that would all end. 
Spike Milligan 
' Monkenhurst 
1 May 1986 
Barbary Coast , 
Barbary Coast opened at the Argentina Theatre on Monday, 24 
June. It was an immediate success and the Bill Hall Trio again the 
hit of the show. Wait till England heard about us, rich, rich, rich!!! 
It’s a busy show for me: I have to appear in sketches, in the Bowery 
Quartette singing ‘Close the Shutters, Willy’s Dead’, play trumpet 
in the orchestra and the guitar in the Bill Hall Trio - all at no extra 
charge. Bornheim has a dastardly trick. During my solo in ‘Close 
the Shutters’, he drops a lone ping-pong ball that bounces slowly 
and repeatedly and faster into the orchestra pit, where he has 
arranged for a man to drop a brick into a bucket of water. It was a 
simple but funny idea. 
Of others in the show, the lead comic was Jimmy Molloy, about 
forty, overweight, a cockney, very left-wing, his comedy all aggres¬ 
sive. After the war not a word was heard of him in the profession, 

Earning a Living 
133 
so . . . There’s one born every minute and we had one who was, 
Sergeant Chalky White, ex-Marine Para Commando. What he was 
doing in the entertainment world was as baffling as finding Adolf 
Eichmann in the Israeli government. His only claim to fame was 
he once leapt oft Bari Bridge into the harbour with an umbrella - all 
very clever, but there’s a limit to how many times. He was a boun¬ 
cing all-noise cockney boy: if you were in a pub with him, you all 
had to sing and do ‘Knees Up Mother Brown. He had a brain that 
would have fitted into a thimble with room to spare. He was i/c 
transport and scenery, both of which strained his mental capacities 
to the limit. Yes, he was a nice bouncing thirty-year-old cockney 
lad who should have stayed on his barrow. However, he was turned 
on by the bright lights and birds of showbiz, so he wheedled his 
way into the show. He couldn’t act, he couldn’t sing, he couldn’t 
dance, but he could fight... So, for no reason at all, in the middle 
of the show a mock fight breaks out and we all have to pretend to 
be floored by Sergeant White. 
‘Don’t worry, I won’t ’urt yer, I’ll miss you by a whisker.’ 
This didn’t work out. Every night he would mistime and render 
one of the cast unconscious. As I had boxed in the past, I rode his 
punches. Even then, to this day I have a chipped front tooth and a 
scarred inner lip. Finally, after we’d all been hit, Lieutenant Priest 
had to put a stop to the ‘Fight’. White sulked off. 
‘It’s professional jealousy,’ he said. 
White truly believed that after the war he would ‘become some¬ 
one’. He did, a dustman. 
Maxie - just Maxie - was a short, squat mid-European. A huge 
head dwarfed his body and his neck didn’t exist, so much so that 
he couldn’t turn his head but had to revolve his whole body. He 
spoke very little English. His ‘act’ consisted of bending iron bars 
on his head and shoulders, concluding with his bending an iron 
bar on his forearm. 
‘Maxie has developed this special muscle that “no living human 
has developed”. In this attempt, if he misses the muscle he could 
break his arm,’ announced Molloy. 
There followed great grunts and thwacks as the sweating strong 

134 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
man beat the shit out of himself, finally holding up the now bent 
bar and collapsing into the wings. 
* 
Time for the last show. We gather chattering in, the foyer, then board 
the Charabong through the Roman cacophony of motor horns. 
Tonight our strong man, Maxie, will try and break his own weight¬ 
lifting record of umpteen pounds. We,all watch from the wings as 
the dwarf-like strong man strains to get the weights above his head. 
The silence is broken by his grunts and strains, the veins stand out 
on his head. Finally, with a gasp, he gets them above his head. He 
takes the applause. 
‘What a way to make a bloody living,’ says Hall. ‘I bet one day 
e’ll get a double rupture.’ 
There’s a sense of sadness in the air. This company has been 
together every day for three months; it has become as familiar as a 
family. As the Trio are taking an encore, I think well that’s it; the 
next time we play will be in England. Then what? I can still hear 
that applause on the last night... 
The stage party is very good. Chalky White and his helpers erect 
trestle tables which are loaded with cheese, wine and biscuits. We help 
ourselves. Johnny Bornheim plays the piano. The Italians have invited 
members of their families, big fat mommas and kids. It’s a very jolly 
affair. Before we finish, Lieutenant Priest thanks us for our efforts and 
says the show is the most successful one that Combined Services 
Entertainment have put on. We drink and eat our fill. We stand in 
circles, chatting and laughing, recalling moments that have highlighted 
our tour, and then the evening has run out. Time for home. Some of 
the Italian cast will be leaving us at Rome; there are tearful goodbyes, 
a lot of red eyes and red noses. Mulgrew’s nose is going red for an 
entirely different reason. In dribs and drabs we board the old 
Charabong where patient Luigi waits. The engine is running, but no 
one else is. Finally, we set off for the hotel. We all start slightly inebri¬ 
ated singing: ‘You are my sunshine, my only sunshine, you make me 
happy when skies are grey’ echoes along the now empty Roman streets. 

Earning a Living 
135 
It’s nearly 2 a.m. by the time we get back; yawning, stretching and 
farting we climb wearily into bed. I can’t sleep, my mind starts to 
revolve around the things I have to do when we get back to naughty 
Napoli. I must collect all my kit from the CSE barracks, get a passport, 
an advance of money, presents to take home, fix the boat trip home 
- all this, and fix a week on Capri. Gradually I fall into fitful sleep to 
the sound of Mulgrew’s snoring in Scottish, plus a few postern blasts. 
from Peace Work 
Home 
Indeed, we won the war, but I lost five precious years. I was to 
mourn, and still do, the physical break-up of my family; it was a 
sort of time-warp Belsen. As my ship left Naples harbour - it was 
the cool end of autumn, the year 1946; time, like the ship, was slip¬ 
ping away - an azure twilight glazed the Campania, lights 
enumerated along that seemingly timeless shore, now lifeless, Vesu¬ 
vius was turning into a faded amber silhouette. I stood aft on the 
promenade deck, seamen still fussed around the ship’s limits, other 
passengers leaned out at the rail. I watched the oncoming pollution, 
as they tossed their cigarette ends in the sea. 
Goodbye, here was I saying ‘Goodbye to all that’ though I was 
only twenty-eight, here I was saying goodbye, I hated goodbyes, 
they gave me the same haunting sadness every time. Wherever I 
had put down emotional roots, it was painful to bid it adieu; I am 
still haunted by all the homes I have had to leave. What was it like 
to live in a cottage in a village in the sixteenth century, and never 
say goodbye to it? Is the modern social pattern of unending change 
and movement the cause of two modern diseases, insecurity and 
dissatisfaction? How lucky Thomas Hood was to be able to write: 

136 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
I remember, I remember, 
The house where I was born. 
I don’t even know what mine looked like! I stayed on deck, smoked a 
Capstan ‘full strength’, one of my last NAAFI-issue cigarettes. On the 
portside, we passed what were then isles of magic memory, Capri and 
Ischia, scarlet and bronze in the sunset; the sea was turning to ink, our 
propellers churning up a Devonshire cream wake, the ship’s siren sent 
out a long mournful departure note - if echoed across the bay. 
from Treasure Island According to Spike Milligan 
Prologue 
HOW GROUCHO JOINED THE CREW 
Q: Are you, Groucho Marx, willing to appear in ‘TREASURE 
ISLAND’? 
GROUCHO: Oh? What’s in it for me, my good man? 
Q: Fame and fortune! 
GROUCHO: Never mind that, what about the money? 
Q: Who’s talking about money? 
GROUCHO: No one. That’s why I mentioned it. 
Q: In this book no one gets paid. , 
GROUCHO: Well, I wish them luck and goodbye, suckers. 
Q: Wait! In your case perhaps we can come to some special 
arrangement. 
GROUCHO: In my case, my special arrangement is money. 

Earning a Living 
137 
Q: What do you want? 
GROUCHO: Ten dollars a word. 
Q: What if you don’t speak? 
GROUCHO: Then I’Jl get fuck all. 
Q: Supposing we paid a dollar a word? 
GROUCHO: Then I’d talk very fast. 
Q: OK, you’re on, a dollar a word. 
GROUCHO: I agree. Yes I agree, yes I agree, I agree. That’ll 
be sixty-two dollars. 
Q: Have you change for a hundred? 
GROUCHO: No-, but I’ll keep it till I do. 
Q: Right, sign this agreement. 
GROUCHO: I'll just sign it with a cross. 
Q: A cross? Are you illiterate? 
GROUCHO: Heavens no. I can spell cross. 
Q: You are a difficult man to deal with. 
GROUCHO: Sometimes if the date is right, I’m a difficult 
woman to deal with. 
Bow! Wow! Wow! 
GROUCHO: Whose dog is that? 
from Peace Work 
Yes, what did we do in the day? One time at the Windmill canteen, 
Harry introduced me to ‘Jimmy Grafton who owns a pub’; he was 
to figure in my life in those immediate post-war years. He had 

138 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
served as an officer in the infantry and was at Arnhem. He was now 
serving behind the bar; he had, somehow or other, become a script¬ 
writer to Derek Roy, a would-be comic appearing on Variety 
Bandbox, so Jimmy had an ‘in into broadcasting. 
Michael Bentine introduced Harry to Jimmy; as Harry recalls, 
‘Mike told me of this pub in Strutton Ground where I got a drink 
after hours, and somehow Jimmy became my manager and script¬ 
writer.’ He started back to front by me telling him what bloody awful 
scripts Derek Roy had, and Jimmy.said, ‘Well, I write them’. A 
strange start to a forty-year relationship. 
Hackney Empire 
‘I’ve got a week for you at the Hackney Empire,’ the words fell from 
the mellifluous lips of Leslie MacDonnell, our agent, sitting behind 
his desk at Piccadilly House, Piccadilly Circus. 
We were overjoyed, I could see our name in lights. MacDonnell 
then added, ‘I’ve arranged for Val Parnell to see you on the Monday 
performance.’ 
Val ParnellWW This was something. If Parnell was coming to see 
us, MacDonnell must have thought pretty highly of us; for giving 
us this break, Bill Hall proffered his thanks, ‘Ta,’ he said. 
I burst out laughing. ‘Bill,’ I said, ‘Ta? Ta? Excuse him, Mac¬ 
Donnell, Bill is a man of few words and that was one of them.’ I 
then thanked MacDonnell more formally, ‘Like this, Bill,’ I said. I 
knelt in the grovelling position, my head on MacDonnell’s shoe, 
‘Oh a thousand thanks, oh great wise one.’ 
MacDonnell was highly amused. ‘Is he always like this?’ he said. 
‘Only when the money’s right,’ said Mulgrew, pulling me away. 
‘There, there boy,’ he said, patting me on the head and feeding me 
pretend sugar lumps. So to the big time. 
‘Oh, we’ll be there* son,’ said my dad when I told him. My parents, 
especially my father, were very proud, he having been a stage 
* At home. 

Earning a Living 
139 
performer. ‘I never knew you had it in you,’ he said. I told him I 
myself had never had it in me, but I had had it in other people, the 
opposite sex, well ‘that’s where they were at the time. 
That fateful Monday night, the night of 3 February 1947. Heavy 
snow had been falling, it was very cold - up to then it was the worst 
recorded winter in living memory. Our dressing room was on the 
fifth floor. ‘They must think we’re bloody eagles,’ said Mulgrew, 
humping his double bass. Dressing room six feet by ten: a cracked 
mirror with dabs of greasepaint, a surround of forty watt bulbs, 
three fused, a leaking washhand basin - ‘Warning, do not stand in 
the sink, one of the girls did and was TERRIBLY INJURED’. It 
must have been something to see. Before the show started we 
peeped through the front curtain. My God, there were only three 
people in and two of them were Val Parnell. Even by curtain-up 
there were only twelve customers. Serious. The pit band struck up. 
I strolled on the stage alone, started to tune my guitar, Bill Hall runs 
on backwards as though being cheered on - he collides with me 
- looking directly at me he places the hair of the bow over the string 
and with the bow underneath the violin saws through ‘Organ 
Grinder’s Swing’, until then a popular tune, during which Mulgrew 
brings his bass on. The diminutive audience don’t laugh, one person 
applauded, which made it sound even worse, in the box we could 
see the chair-oscuro figure of Val Parnell. We went through our 
repertoire, after each number there was the lone clapper. In desper¬ 
ation I ad-libbed, ‘Please sir, you’re spoiling it for the other people.’ 
This got the only laugh of the evening, it would go on to be the only 
laugh of the month. We died the death. The pit band played us off 
with ‘Where’s That Tiger?’; if I’d have found it I would have shot it. 
We stood there in the gloom. ‘Never mind, lads,’ said the Stage 
Manager, ‘it’s Monday, they’ll be better by the middle of the week.’ 
‘They’re not staying here till then are they?’ I said, always cheer¬ 
ful Spike. 
We sat in our dressing room. In silence, in unison, we lit up a 
cigarette. ‘Where the fuck did they get that audience?’ ‘It’s the Nazi 
Party.’ Never mind eh? Val Parnell had seen us, he knew a good act 
when he saw one. We never heard from the bastard again. Tuesday 

140 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
night only eighteen people in, the next night it snowed heavily. 
‘This’ll kill the business,’ said the manager. On the Saturday night 
we did well; why, oh why did Val Parnell come on a Monday? ‘He’s 
a perv, that’s why,’ said Mulgrew. ‘I bet he feels little girls’ bicycle 
saddles.’ However, from that week we received £75! Who would 
have dreamed such wealth existed! It meant £25 each, but each of 
us had to pay £2.10.0 commission. Mulgrew rolled his wages into 
a tight roll then wedged it into his wallet with a rubber band around 
it; I think he was marinating it. 
A Dream of Grandeur 
The story that follows tells of the bitter experience of a bass player 
who basically had the arse out of his trousers, even someone else’s 
trousers. This first week’s wages went to Mulgrew’s head. He had 
met a girl - Elsie, I remember was her name; she had enormous 
bosoms that promised pneumatic bliss, it appeared as though a 
giant hand had grabbed her bottom half and squeezed it all upwards. 
Mulgrew was besotted with all three of her. Every night after the 
show, she waited at the stage door, and he whipped her away from 
A to B - that is, stage door to bed. By the time I arrived back at 13 
Linden Gardens, groans and steam were coming from under his 
bedroom door. I would send a prayer to help him through the night. 
On the Sunday I was up at the crack of one in the afternoon. Sunday 
was the one day we didn’t get breakfast, so I made tea and toast on 
my gas ring and did my accounts for the week. 
There was a faint tapping on my door; there after a good night’s 
coitus stood the wreck of a man in the Robbie Burns manner. I sang 
at him as he tried to shush me. 
They were fucking in the hallway 
They were fucking on the stairs 
Yer could nae see the carpet 
For the xxxx and curly hairs. 

Earning a Living 
141 
‘Ssh! She’ll hear you,’ said the wreck of a man whom I recognized 
as the remains of Johnny Mulgrew. ‘Ha, you got any tea?’ he said. 
Ha - yes, so I boiled up a pot for him and his wee lassie. That 
night we repaired to the Coach and Horses (now alas demolished). 
Here Mulgrew’s attempts at the grandiose failed. What he had 
done, the little Scottish nana, was to cut thirty strips of the Daily 
Mirror to the size of pound notes. These he rolled into a wad, then 
wrapped his twenty-five one-pound notes around them. This 
looked very impressive until the following Thursday when, at the 
same pub, well oiled, he forgetfully peeled off his last two pounds 
to reveal the Daily Mirror; it didn’t stop there, he peeled off two 
Daily Mirrors - the barman said, ‘I’m sorry, we only take the 
Express.’ 
My brother Desmond, like all males in a sexual trauma, is to get 
married; Pixie Roberts of Devon is the one to get it. I’m to be the 
best man, thank God I’ve got that new suit made by the tailor in 
the Circus Maximus in Rome - what a heritage for a suit!!! Why 
didn’t I choose Royal Purple? The wedding took place at St Saviour’s 
RC, Lewisham, with the reception at Chiesmans (now Army & 
Navy), where the entire Milligan family assembled. 
5 May 1947 
Phone for me from Leslie MacDonnell, thank God! ‘Spike, I’ve got 
a few dates for you.’ 
Dates? Where is he, Arabia? 
‘We have a week’s variety for the Trio!’ 
Oh boy! We’re on our way. ‘Thank you, Leslie. I’ll tell the boys.’ 
First week is in Beautiful Sunless Blackpool - Hollywood with flat 
’ats. 
So we proceeded to do the No. 1 dates, something my father would 
have given his right arm for. Why he wanted to do a one-armed act 
I’ll never know. It seemed as though I personally was like a gramo¬ 
phone needle stuck in a groove. Life was like moving but standing 

142 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
still, 1939 was hard to recapture; on stage I wasn’t crooning, or look¬ 
ing like Robert Taylor - no, I was in rags, with a grotesque make-up, 
and ridiculing the music we played. It was the liberties we took with 
the music that got us our applause - but 1939 it wasn’t; it was digs 
like 356 Hagley Road, Birmingham - poached haddock in milk for 
breakfast, lunch in a cafe, dinner was Arrggg!!! Cold Collation! 
One show a night, matinees Wednesday and Saturday. Friday 
night, the agents came in, Lew Lake, Joe Collins, to suss out the 
acts; from it a Joe Cohen got us Some work after the show at work¬ 
ing men’s clubs. Everyone changed in the same room. We shared 
with a lady act. Cathy, the cowgirl (Will lasso your heart), say forty- 
one, but not in front of her. I watched fascinated as she put 
make-up to cover the varicose veins on her plump legs. ‘I should 
have the operation, but I’d be laid up fer a month, I can’t afford that.’ 
Bill Hall felt sorry for ‘Poor Cowgirl’, he said. He felt so sorry for 
her he took her back to her digs'and screwed her. Bill! All those 
veins like snakes crawling up her legs. Don’t worry, Spike, you 
couldn’t see ’em, she had her elastic support stockings on. Ah, 
l’amour\ It was in these very digs, 356 Hagley Road, the landlady 
had caught Sir Donald Wolfit at it on the marble washstand with 
his leading lady. ‘It’s all right, Mrs Cartwright,’ said the steaming 
actor, ‘it’s ... it’s only my sister.’ 
The afternoons of those distant days were spent at a cinema. I 
remember seeing Danny Kaye in The Kid From Brooklyn and think¬ 
ing, I should be doing that... that was me up there. I realize now 
that while I was young, vigorous, good-looking and a natural clown 
I should have gone just for that, it was the right time for my type 
of clowning - but fear of unemployment, inherited from my mother, 
kept me with the Trio, at £25 a week I could save, but what for? In 
any case I always felt I had no talent outside of music; I came from 
a family who were basically working-class, who had left the poverty 
of London’s Poplar and Woolwich, then suddenly were with the 
Indian Army in India - servants, free quarters, free rations, horse 
riding, shikar, polo. Despite this, I remember my family thought 
of anyone above the rank of Sergeant as ‘Superior’. I didn’t think I 
could do anything on my own - because I was working-class. When 

Earning a Living 
143 
I think of the number of idiots I said Sir to because they had a posh 
accent. Oh, what did class do to me? I could have been a Scholar, 
University, hell 
Money can’t buy you friends, 
but it does get you 
a better class of enemy. 
- from ‘Spike on Spike’, Memories of Milligan 
from Peace Work 
During the week Secombe and I hang around Alans Club and go to 
news theatres to see Cartoons - we see the newsreel of a shark, its 
mouth held open. When it’s dropped it looks like an idiot. We went 
into hysterics and stayed to see it round a second and third time. 
We are the hit of the bill - Harry Foster and Leslie MacDonnell 
see us second house Saturday. ‘We’re very pleased, boys, we’re 
managing to up your money to £100 a week.’ 
I phone my father at work and tell him. ‘I’ll come home right 
away,’ he said. 
I rode all the way to 3 Leathwell Road and told my mother, I stayed 
the night and slept in the room where the trains shunted. I still let 
jazz music run through my head - always had, always will. I turned 
on my little green Bakelite radio, it’s Billy Ternent and his tinkly-poo 
band - no jazz, but what the hell, this is Deptford not Birdland. 
Dizzy live at 3 Leathwell! Wow! Sing Dizzy, blues. 
Hey there Dizzy playing at Leathwell Road! 

144 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Hey there Dizzy playing at Leathwell Road! 
You play that music 
A knighthood will be bestowed ... oh, yeah! 
I was listening to radio. Men At Work was one that grabbed me. It’s 
forgotten now, but it was what put The Goon Show on the road. Men 
At Work* were ignoring logic and for me it worked, but nobody 
seemed to notice it. I laughed at Derek Roy, a bit at ITMA, but 
things that really made me laugh were Groucho Marx, W. C. Fields, 
Beachcomber, Sid Fields - so there! I was writing things on paper 
with no object in mind; I’d joke a lot with Secombe, but with var¬ 
iety work, neither Bentine nor Sellers got together much - it was to 
come. Only when we had a week out or a weak heart (eh?) did we 
meet. I met Sellers at Hackney Empire where Secombe was appear¬ 
ing. Bentine introduced him to me in the bar; he was spraunced’ 
up, felt trilby, gloves, Dick Barton collar-up mackintosh. As usual, 
Mike did most of the talking. That’s all I remember of the occasion. 
Inside me I had no idea where I wanted to go. I’d stopped play¬ 
ing trumpet. Big bands were going out, radio was the thing, how 
could I get in? I had no confidence as a solo performer, and never 
had until Oblomov, so I was a maelstrom'of complexities. I certainly 
admired Secombe, Sellers and Bentine - I’d hang around them. 
A week out! The first week we’re promised £100, we’re out - don’t 
worry boys, it’s Bolton next week. Bolton - the Angel of Mons, 
Manna from Heaven. Bolton, the Promised Land. Bolton, an 
anagram of Notlob! Yes, Notlob, there was lots to do in Notlob - the 
pubs, the pictures - wait, it’s been cancelled. Sod. Everything comes 
to he who waits, even unemployment. 
Ally Pally 
Incredible! We’ve been booked for the modern wonder, Television! 
At Alexandra Palace. So important is the occasion that Leslie 
* Written by Max Kester. 

Earning a Living 
145 
MacDonnell has summoned us to his office to tell. ‘Yes, boys, a Mr 
Richard Afton ot the BBC.’ The BBC, the words send the blood 
swirling in the swonnicles, the BBC. ‘Yes,’ says MacDonnell, ‘the 
BBC’, he stands to say the majestic words, ‘BBC - Tele-e-vision.’ 
He could be Lincoln before Gettysburg, Antony at Actium! TELE¬ 
VISION! 
Hall the Wretch explained the wonder. ‘Television!’ he said 
ecstatically. ‘It will bring us into people’s homes.’ 
Our parents had already warned me they would never have him 
in their homes. ‘We don’t want to catch it.’ 
The show was called Rooftop Rendezvous, the producer Richard 
Afton, like BBC producers, had delusions of grandeur; he had his 
name changed by deed poll to Lord Afton, oh yes, dear reader, there 
are plenty like him in the BBC, those who want weddings at dawn 
on Navaho Indian mountain tops. The fee! Leslie, the fee! ‘Well 
boys, it’s £150 before commission.’ 
My God, that would leave us each with £40. 
‘I’ll nae ha to cut strips of Daily Mirror any mair,’ said Mulgrew. 
At 13 Linden Gardens we informed flatmates Reg O’List, the singer 
from the Windmill, his girlfriend Jennifer with a forty-two inch 
bust (the unflattest flatmate). 
‘Let’s have a party,’ I said. 
A fiesta, okay. That night we sat on beds eating chicken and 
drinking Chianti - memories of Italy were still strong. Reg O’List 
entertained with his guitar. He, Gracie Fields and Donald Peers 
should never have sung, but, there is Reg now, ‘Over the plains, 
now I hear the Russian horsemen riddinggg.’ Please God they’re 
coming for him. I got very squiffy and sang Boo-Boo - ‘Body and 
Soul’. 
I woke up next morning with Blanche and her kipper at the door, 
‘God, I must hurry, Blanche - I’m on television tonight.’ 
‘Oo-er,’ she said. Yes, that’s what people say when you become 
famous. ‘Oo-er.’ Mulgrew has already had his kipper and oo-er. We 
are lumbered with the props. Hall will meet us at Ally Pally. We get 
a taxi to the gig: Alexandra Palace is a warren of signs and BBC 
men with hats on who mindlessly point the way, ‘Der lift to der 

146 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
turd floor,’ said an Irish one. ‘Oh yes,’ said a clipboard girl, who had 
as much feel for showbiz as Mrs Higgs had for hunting basking 
sharks. ‘I’m Penelope Mutts, I’m the floor manager.’ Who manages 
the ceiling? ‘You are the ...’ she consults her board, ‘Marty Midge 
and Naylor.’ 
We are shown into a dressing room with several other perform¬ 
ers; some are dressed as cowboys, th^y are Big Bill Campbell and 
his Bunkhouse group, all done up in stetsons and a Red Indian chief 
- all from East Acton. They wefe practising, ‘There’s an old covered 
wagon for sale.’ 
‘If it goes, they’ll have to walk back,’ said Mulgrew. 
A gay floor manager calls us for rehearsal with Eric Robinson 
and the Orchestra. ‘Is this all you got?’ he said, looking at our 
meagre band parts. 
‘Yes, just play them loud,’ I said. 
The orchestra applauded our rehearsal. 
‘Can I have your agent’s number?’ said Robinson. 
‘You gonna kill him?’ I say. 
‘No, I might be able to use you, have you got a card?’ 
‘No, just this bit of paper.’ 
‘Make-up?’ says a girl. 
‘Is that what you’re wearing?’ 
‘No, the make-up you have to wear is green,’ she said. ‘It comes 
off with water.’ 
Hall has arrived, I knew he comes off with water. I’ve got good 
news, he said; it was good news, he’d turned up. He’d got a gig 
immediately after the show at the Domino, a nightclub in Balham, 
the arsehole of London. The wretched appearance of Hall disturbs 
the make-up girl. ‘I don’t think you need any,’ she says, backing 
away. The show centres on the Television Toppers, fifteen rather 
lovely girls, Argggghhh. Fifteen Arghhhs! The TV show is all very 
interesting, being live, it’s split-second timing. 
The set is a Parisian Cabaret with a maitre d’, an old broken actor 
with an awful French accent; he announced us, ‘End nous, from ze 
Coco-nut Grover-er, Le Beel Hall Trio.’ There’s no real audience so 
a planted one acts insane with artificial applause. Our problem is 

Earning a Living 
147 
we have no time afterwards to remove the green make-up, so that’s 
how we appear at the Domino, green. 
Alan Clare, a friend, superb ballad player, told me a story. A Sloane 
Ranger and her micromind came in and said, ‘Oh dear, ha ha ha, I 
thought you were a recording, ha-ho-he-ha.’ Alan said, ‘Ha ha ha 
- that’s funny, I thought you were one too, can they switch you off?’ 
Another jolly chap said, ‘I say pi-ano, do you play this thing?’ Alan 
said, ‘Yes.’ ‘Oh - do you play requests?’ Alan says, ‘Yes, what would 
you like?’ ‘Oh, anything.’ He’s possibly head PR for Harrods. 
Playing my masterpieces at the Grafton after hours, I ignored 
everyone, and they ignored me. I like making sounds; my life was 
shattered by bone and spoon players, they didn’t have a clue what 
you were playing and didn’t care; that terrible clattering of some 
dead cow’s ribs. 
Of course, with Secombe and Bentine, they would play the idiot 
along - ‘Were you taught, chum?’ 
‘No, it’s just natural like.’ 
‘Yes, seems natural like.’ 
‘Do you read music?’ 
‘No need to, any tune comes easy.’ 
‘Do you know Beethoven’s Fifth?’ 
‘Oh yer.’ He bursts into the opening Victory Vs of the introduc¬ 
tion - on and on he rattled, off his elbows, off his knees, his arse 
(very funny). Finally, with a furious rattle he stopped. 
‘Was that it?’ 
‘Yer.’ 
‘Amazing.’ 
‘Yer, I keep it all in my head.’ 
‘That was a very short version of the Fifth.’ 
‘Ah well, I go fast and I leave out bits I don’t like.’ 
I abandon the piano and join in joking and ad-libbing with 
Secombe and Bentine - with Jimmy adding drinks; he was a shrewd 
man and he sensed we had something - like rabies. 

148 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
BENTINE: I arrest you for nose. 
ME: My nose is innocent - who are you? 
SECOMBE: Just a minute. I’m Inspector Thuds of Scotland 
Yard. 
ME: This man’s nose is on undercover service. 
BENTINE: On or under, make up your mind. 
ME: Then where’s its secret cover? ‘ 
SECOMBE: He’s off duty. 
BENTINE: Not so fast - Secombe. ' 
SECOMBE: All right, I’ll speak slower. 
BENTINE: I happen to be chief nose cover inspector to the 
Surete - ou est cover du nez? 
SECOMBE: It’s in 10 Downing Street - with Mrs Clement 
Attlee’s plumber. 
BENTINE: Her plumber? 
SECOMBE: Who would look for it there? 
ME: Narkington Quench Esq. 
\ 
BENTINE: Then all is lost - the only escape is in this match¬ 
box. Etc, etc. 
We pulled a lot of grimaces during our clowning. 
ME: Sir, this finger will never make it on its own. 
SECOMBE: Hold it on your other hand and purse your lips. 
This was all after hours, with just a few late drinkers. One man said, 
‘Two years in the army would do you wastrels good.’ 
‘We’ve just done five,’ we said. 
‘Then do five more, you’re not better yet.’ 
It was the late Kenneth More who was fascinated by our humour, 
as were Norman Castle, Michael Howard, Dick Scrongle, Tim 
Gritts, Len Trock, and many other people with names. 
One night Sellers said: ‘I have just eaten the Elfin Oak.’ 

Earning a Living 
149 
ME: Did anybody see you? 
SELLERS: Yes. 
* 
ME: Then you’re a marked man. 
SELLERS: I haven’t got any mark, only a brown spot on my 
knee - it’s a birthmark. 
ME: How long have you had that? 
There were miles of that. 
So the week prior to Zurich, I spent the days hanging around 
with Bentine, Secombe, for ever watching newsreels, cartoons, 
ribald laughter, mad ideas. In the Telegraph it says an atomic paper 
had gone missing. Bentine and I spent the night drawing up a bogus 
formula; he knew all the mathematics, I just went along for the ride. 
It ended by scraping the luminous dials off our watches, which 
contain radium; we leave it all in a phone box, it all looked very 
authentic - it had taken all night. We kept watch on the booth. 
Someone threw it on the floor. 
PENNIES FROM HEAVEN 
I put lop in my Piggy Bank 
To save for a rainy day. 
It rained the very next morningl 
Three cheers, Hip Hip Hooray! 
- from Unspun Socks from a Chickens Laundry 

150 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
from Peace Work 
I get home to 3 Leathwell Road and go to bed. Its almost the end 
of the Bill Hall Trio - though we don’t know it. My mum is worried; 
I’ve been in bed five days, unshaven. ‘Get up, son, have a wash and 
a shave, you’ll feel better.’ Perhaps. I try a hot bath in front of the 
fire. Mum adds another bucket of hot water. Had I caught some¬ 
thing when I was in Germany, did I sit on any dirty lavatory seats, 
or eat any German food? No, I didn’t eat any lavatories or sit on 
dirty food. The doctor comes (yes, in those days). He wants to know 
when I was in Germany, etc. No, he says I haven’t got German 
measles or rabies. My temperature is normal, my pulse rate is fast. 
He writes a prescription. My dear mother goes out in the rain to 
the local chemist. ‘It’s a good tonic,’ he tells my mother. My mother 
tells me, ‘It’s a good tonic.’ It gives me the shits. 
I went to tell Bill and Johnny I wanted to finish with the Trio; 
Bill took it badly. ‘You’ll never work again, you bastard,’ were his 
parting words. The Trio went on with a new guitarist, Bart Norman, 
once of the Three Admirals. The Trio went on working for another 
thirty years doing the same act. When Johnny died six years ago, 
it finally stopped. 
Ann Lenner Trio 
The Bill Hall Trio was not the last trio I would appear in. No, Jimmy 
Grafton has found me work - Ann Lenner, one-time lead vocalist 
with Carol Gibbons at the Savoy, wants to break away. So she wants 
to form a trio but finds it hard on her own. I am introduced to her 
at the Grafton Arms, which is becoming for me what Berlin was 
for Isherwood. Ann is a petite lady in her late thirties. ‘Hello, pleased 
to meet you, Miss Lenner - I hope I’m suitable.’ 

Earning a Living 
151 
She smiles. ‘Well, you look suitable.’ 
We are joined by the third member of the Trio, my old friend 
Reg O’List, late of the Windmill Revue. ‘Super, super,’ he said, so 
now, the act. 
‘Mostly vocal with a little light comedy,’ says Ann. 
Jimmy Grafton is to write the act for us, Reg and I will accompany 
Ann on guitars. Reg has a straight, shivery, light baritone, Ann is 
a soprano with a very good range, I’m - well, light Bing Crosby 
baritone. So, the act is on. Our first job is in an Army Welfare Show, 
Swinging Along, with the comic Eddy Molloy. He’s never made the 
big time, he’s a summer season or pantomime comic - in America 
called a second banana. I can’t imagine what a fourteenth banana’s 
act must be - it must be so bad you’re not allowed on. We rehearse 
the show over the Irish Club in Eaton Square. My God, the fug that 
arose from the bar below! You got pissed inhaling it. 
The Ann Lenner Trio goes like this: I spring from the side of the 
stage singing ‘Flat Foot Floogie’ with the Floy Floy. To cut me off, 
Reg O’List comes from the other side singing ‘The Cossack Patrol’ 
- then Ann Lenner enters centre singing ‘I’ll Capture Your Heart 
Singing’. Light patter - who do you think you are? I think I’m me, 
’ 
who did you think I was? Etc. Then ‘A Quiet Town in Crossbone 
County’, made popular by Danny Kaye; during the number I 
clowned a lot, and I became aware during rehearsals people in the 
cast were laughing out loud, the best way - I can’t remember all 
that act but we ended on a sing-along - your favourite tune, but 
not mine. For a briefing on the show, the whole cast assemble at 
the rehearsals on the Friday before we leave, and, wow, there’s eight 
girl dancers. Captain Richard Leche tells us we will play Hamburg, 
Munich, Liineburg and Vienna. I spot one of the chorus girls, Dorita 
Smith, another redhead with green eyes. She is Head Girl. We do 
a complete run-through of the show - I have to appear in some of 
the Eddy Molloy sketches, which I think are as funny as a baby with 
cancer, but it’s work, money and, perhaps, fame. 
‘Well, looking forward to the trip?’ says Reg. 
‘Yes, it would be silly to look backward to it, even sideways at it 
- no, it’s best to look forward, it’s a jolly good direction. In the 

152 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
dictionary it says, Forward: at or near the forepart of anything. Well, 
that’s where I wanted to be, Reg - at or near the forepart of anything. 
How proud my mother would be when she saw me on stage. “That 
boy there near the forepart of anything is my son.’” 
Poor Reg got three weeks of this. ‘Spike, my boy, I will do my 
best to understand you, I am older than you in years (even minutes!) 
so I’m a patient man.’ 
‘Yes, Reg, with your complexion, you look like a patient, if you 
lie on the floor I’ll call the ambulance.’ 
\ 
Reg smiles. He hasn’t got the mind that can handle my ravings. 
Reg is just lovely, kind, solid but square. Reg and I compare wages, 
well rather I compare wages. I say, I’m on £30 a week, anyone want 
to swop? ‘No, Spike, I too am on that princely sum; it’ll suffice, it’ll 
be hard to save, I tell ee lad.’ 
No, I said, if he didn’t save it, the sum would stay at £30, no matter 
what. You could transfer it from your back to your breast pocket 
provided, in between, you didn’t spend any, it would end up £30.1 
didn’t have £30 at the time, I only had one, and I showed Reg how 
I transferred it from my back to my breast pocket, then slowly I 
returned it to my back pocket, then I triumphantly showed the 
pound safe and sound. 
‘Very good, Spike, very impressive, as soon as I get my £30, I’ll 
sit up nights practising that very valuable financial move.’ 
I said, ‘I must warn you, in time the money will start to fray, and 
that’s when to spend.’ 
‘Yes, that’s enough for today,’ says Reg, ‘I’m wearing thin.’ 
‘Are you all packed?’ says Ann - all this while the chorus are 
going through the routines. 
‘Yes, I’m all packed, Ann, and most of it is in this suit - well, half 
of my underwear is; I always travel light, that’s why I leave my 
mother and father behind.’ 
‘You won’t bugger the act, will you Spike?’ she said. 
‘You’ll see, I’m a good pro, as good as £30 can make.’ 
In the rehearsal break, I go down to the Irish bar for some cig¬ 
arettes. ‘Twenty Players, please.’ 
‘Oh no, sir,’ says the Irish barman. °Tis only Sweet Afton we have.’ 

Earning a Living 
153 
What in God’s name was Sweet Afton? 
‘Tis an Irish cigarette.’ 
Irish cigarettes? Like saying Irish bananas. So I smoke Sweet 
Afton; where, when and how in Ireland were they growing tobacco? 
I felt so proud, yes, I felt my knee, elbow and wrists and they all felt 
proud. I wondered where the tobacco plantations were. 
As she danced, all flashing, cherubic limbs, I watched Dorita 
Smith. God, she was luscious - but I was luscious too, me and my 
nine-stone Belsen body. 
Here I was, really standing still; I was in a Trio that was medi¬ 
ocre compared with the Bill Hall Trio, so where was I headed? I 
could clown, tell jokes, sing, play the guitar and it was in the style 
of Danny Kaye who was now wowing audiences. I’d done all the 
continental touring I wanted; I needed another tour of Germany 
like a drowning man needed a piano. Somehow, there just might 
have been a drowning man who needed a piano - take the Titanic: 
the lifeboats were full, those drowning would have been very grate¬ 
ful for a piano floating by. There is a story of the Titanics band, a 
quartet; as the ship sank they played on, the violin leader said ‘Keep 
playing’, but as the ship tilted, the drummer slid away, then the piano, 
next the cello - to avoid the water, the leader stood on a chair - 
finally, he too slid into the Atlantic with a cry of‘Fuck show business’. 
* 
I go over to the Grafton Arms and Jimmy is happy that I continue 
writing part-time with him for Derek Roy. ‘I don’t want to be rude, 
Jimmy.’ 
‘Then don’t be,’ he interrupted with a giggle. 
‘I was going to say that I don’t think Derek Roy is very funny.’ 
Jimmy agrees, then says perhaps the scripts are bad? Not so, I 
had seen Derek Roy perform at the Gaumont State, Kilburn; he was 
a nice unfunny fellow with a jolly singing voice. 
‘Well, it’s up to us to make him funny, there’s money in it.’ 
I suggest he should wear a Harpo Marx wig and a red nose. 
Variety Bandbox on BBC is the biggest entertainment show of 

154 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
the week; Roy alternates with Frankie Howerd, who is much 
funnier. 
At the same time as writing, Jimmy is trying to progress the 
career of one Harry Secombe, our perambulating, chattering Welsh¬ 
man; also in the pipeline is a possible series for Roy. As Jimmy’s 
writing times are erratic, he works in the crocks between running 
the pub. He has also put himself up as a Conservative Councillor, 
so usually we work at nights on the living-room table when his 
wife, Dorothy (long-suffering), and two children James and Sally, 
along as I say with Buller the bulldog, Minty the cat, and Jacko the 
monkey, are abed. By the time we’ve finished writing, it’s too late 
to catch a train home, so I sleep on a mattress in Jimmy’s attic using 
one blanket and overcoats. In rush hours I sometimes help behind 
the bar. 
Jimmy, now with no movement from the Ann Lenner Trio, tries 
to get me odd dates. He gets me one at the Nuffield Services Club; 
first I have to meet Mary Cook to vet me. With my affair with Dorita 
going like a piston the last thing I needed was a vet. Mary Cook is 
a well-educated, terribly well-spoken lady with enormous hips; it 
looks like a thin person has been slid into someone else’s bottom 
half. ‘Now, Mr Milligan, or do they all call you Spike?’ 
No, she can call me Spike, normally I’m called ‘Hey you’ or on 
bad days ‘Stop thief’. 
Is my act clean, yes, that means I’ll have to drop the joke about 
the monkey, the elephant and the sore arse. So on the Friday night, 
wearing a velvet jacket I’ve knocked off from Army Welfare Service 
Wardrobe, I do an act doing imitations of wallpaper and end up 
singing ‘Body and Soul’ as a coloured girl. I go down okay, but 
nothing to write home about. But a singer, David Hughes, goes and 
sings ‘The Desert Song’; he gets an ovation, so fuck him. 
So back to the attic and scriptwriting. Margaret Lockwood is to 
be Derek Roy’s guest - now his gimmick is to be billed as ‘The 
Laughter Doctor’, opening his act with ‘hello patients’, they all were 
by the end of his act - so we have to write a script with her as the 
nurse. We work all night on the script, in fact, I haven’t shaved for 
three, then there s a panic: Miss Lockwood must see the scripts right 

Earning a Living 
155 
away, so first thing in the morning I shave at speed, cut myself to 
pieces. Off I go to somewhere on the outskirts of London to a posh 
block of flats. "Ere, where you goin’?’ said a grotty hall porter. 
‘I’m going to see Miss Lockwood.’ 
He savages me with his crust-edged eyes. ‘No, you’re bloody not,’ 
he said. He picked up the phone, ‘Miss Lockwood, there’s a man 
here says he’s got a script for you from the . . .’ He looks at me, 
‘Where is it?’ 
‘The BBC - Derek Roy.’ 
He repeats it down the phone. ‘Okay. Second floor, room 118, the 
lift’s not working,’ he said gleefully. 
The RAF? I thud up the stairs two at a time. I’m in fine fettle, in 
fact I’ve never been fettler. I press a polished, polished bell on a 
gleaming white door. Wow, Miss Lockwood opens it with her beauty 
spot. 
‘Oh,’ I said surprised. ‘No coloured footman.’ 
She gave me a Rank Charm School smile, took the script, said a 
Rank Charm School thank you and shut the door; it was all of one- 
minute fifty. 
» 
‘Oh Jimmy,11 say, ‘is it worth £10 scriptwriting for Derek Roy, the 
man who kills 99 per cent of all known jokes?’ 
Jimmy said, ‘Patience, it can lead to bigger things.’ 
I tell him I don’t need bigger things, mine are big enough, ask 
any heavy plant operator. 
‘There could be a series,’ says Jimmy. 
‘What, of disasters? Roy is not funny.’ 
‘It’ll put money in your shatteringly hollow account,’ he says. 
So when he’s in the bar serving I bang away at the jokes. I remem¬ 
ber an early one: Man says to doctor, ‘My wife thinks I’m mad 
because I prefer brown boots to black.’ Doctor says, ‘How silly, I 
myself prefer brown boots to black.’ Man says, ‘How do you like 
them, boiled or fried?’ Now that’s how a normal joke would end; 
not me, with me the Doctor says, ‘I like mine boiled, my wife thinks 
I’m mad too.’ 
Jimmy organizes a night with the Goons, as we have decided to 

156 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
call ourselves. So one evening, after hours, we have an ad-lib session. 
Bentine starts the ball rolling, ‘Gentlemen, now you know why I’ve 
called you here?’ 
‘No, we don’t,’ we murmur. 
‘Very well, we’ve been besieged in this fort for, does anybody 
know?’ 
‘Forty days,’ says one. 
‘Fifty,’ says another. 
Any advance on fifty - ? 
Seventy. 
‘Right, we’ve been besieged forty, fifty and seventy days. Gentle¬ 
men, you will synchronize watches.’ 
They all adjust their watches, but never say a word, the phone 
supposedly rings, Secombe answers, ‘Hello, Fort Agra, hello? Just 
a minute.’ He holds his hand over the phone, ‘Does a Mrs Gladys 
Stokes live here?’ No, sorry Mrs Stokes doesn’t live here. 
SELLERS: Someone has got to go and get reinforcements. 
ME: Yes, someone has to. 
BENTINE: Yes someone has to. 
SECOMBE: Yes gentlemen, someone has to go and get re¬ 
inforcements. 
(Pause) 
SELLERS: Good, well that's settled. 
ME: Run up the Union Jack. 
SELLERS: Right, sir. 
ME: Wait, that flag should be red, white and blue. 
SELLERS: Yes, I thought I’d run up the white part first. 
BENTINE: It’s these night attacks that worry me, one more 
night attack and I’ll have to change the sheets. 
It went on for an hour, with all four of us crawling on our stomachs 
in the desert dying of thirst. 
ME: Water. 

Earning a Living 
157 
BENTINE: Water, for God’s sake. 
SECOMBE: Yes, water- 
SELLERS (drunk): Scotch and Soda. 
I suppose it would only be a matter of time before someone in the 
BBC might use us. There was one enlightened producer streets ahead 
in perspicacity, Pat Dixon, totally unrevered by the BBC but directly 
responsible for giving us the break. Already we had introduced the 
first comedy show on the new Third Programme (for unknown reason 
now called Radio 3, they can’t leave alone can they), using Harry 
Secombe, Peter Sellers, Benny Hill. It was the first comedy show with¬ 
out an audience, I used to go and listen through the studio door, I was 
desperate to be given a break as such on the media; it never did, the 
three, Secombe, Sellers, Bentine are all working and earning. If I hadn’t 
written myself into The Goon Show, I’d never have been heard of. 
* 
At last, another breakthrough! The BBC have commissioned Jimmy 
Grafton to write a series for Derek Roy - Jimmy asked me to write 
it with him, I really wasn’t up to it yet, I could drum up a few one- 
liners but a whole half hour was behind me. But in we go, we both 
work long hours, split with Jimmy in the bar, then he’s running as 
a Conservative Councillor and he gets me going round putting his 
election leaflets in letterboxes, all this and writing with visits from 
the monkey. At night Jacko was locked in the attic next to me. Out 
of curiosity I wondered what he was doing and I looked through 
the keyhole only to see his eye looking at me. To keep himself going 
Jimmy took pep-up pills, consequently he could stay awake when 
I was falling asleep. The show was very well received. 
Well, folks, that’s where I was at on Wednesday, 5 October 1949. 
I went on writing for the series, which was far from being a success 
when it ended. I was back where I started, though I had been paid 
£30 a week and I’d saved nearly all of it, except I bought my very 
first radio, hoping one day I would be on it with my own show. 

158 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Napoleons Piano 
from The Goon Show Scripts, Woburn Press 1972 
The Goon Show, no. 129 (6th Series, no. 4) 
Transmission: Tuesday, 11 October 1955: 8.30-9.00 p.m. Home 
Service ' „ 
Studio: The Camden Theatre, London 
THE MAIN CHARACTERS 
Ned Seagoon 
Grytpype-Thynne 
Moriarty 
Mr Henry Crun 
Miss Minnie Bannister 
Eccles 
Major Denis Bloodnok 
Justin Eidelburger 
Throat 
Yakamoto 
Bluebottle 
The Ray Ellington Quartet 
Max Geldray 
Orchestra conducted by Wally Stott 
Announcer: Wallace Greenslade 
Script by Spike Milligan 
Production by Peter Eton 
Tricked into signing a contract to bring over to England the very 
piano that Napoleon played at Waterloo, Neddie Seagoon stows 
away on a boat to France. A chance meeting in the disreputable 
Cafe Tom with piano robbery specialist Justin Eidelburger seems 
Harry Secombe 
Peter Sellers 
Spike Milligan 
Peter Sellers 
Spike Milligan 
Spike Milligan 
Peter Sellers 
Peter Sellers 
Spike Milligan 
Spike Milligan 
Peter Sellers 

Earning a Living 
159 
to solve all Neddie’s problems - but others, too, are after Napo¬ 
leon’s piano. With £10,000 at stake, the only solution is to sail the 
instrument back to England - a voyage fraught with peril. . . 
BILL: This is the BBC Home Service. 
GRAMS: OUTBREAK OF PEOPLE SIGHING. 
BILL: Oh come, come, dear listeners - it’s not that bad - 
HARRY: Of course not - come, Mr Greenslade, tell them the 
good news. 
BILL: Ladies and gentlemen, we now have the extraordinary 
talking-type wireless ‘Goon Show’. 
GRAMS: SCREAMS OF ANGUISH. PEOPLE RUNNING 
AWAY. 
HARRY: Mmm - is the popularity waning? Ahemm. 
SPIKE: Ho ho ho, fear not, Neddie lad - we’ll jolly them up 
with a merry laughing-type joke show. Stand prepared for 
the story of ‘Napoleon’s Piano’. 
GRAMS: VERY OLD RECORD OF A PIANO SOLO 
(MARSEILLAISE). 
SEAGOON: Napoleon’s piano - the story starts in the bad old 
days, back in April 1955. It was early one morning. Breakfast 
had just been served at Beauleigh Manor - I was standing at 
the window, looking in. With the aid of a telescope, I was 
reading the paper on the breakfast table - when suddenly 
an advertisement caught my eye. It said - 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: (Distort) Will pay anybody five pounds 
to remove piano from one room to another. Apply, The 
Bladders, Harpyapipe, Quants. 
SEAGOON: In needle nardle noo time I was at the address 
and with the aid of a piece of iron and a lump of wood - I 
made this sound. 
F.X.: THREE KNOCKS WITH IRON KNOCKER ON SOLID 
OAK DOOR. 

i6o 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
MORIARTY: Sapristi Knockoes - when I heard that sound I 
ran down the stairs and with the aid of a door knob and two 
hinges I made this sound. 
F.X.: DOOR KNOB BEING HEAVILY AGITATED 
FOLLOWED BY FAST SQUEAKY HINGES AS DOOR 
OPENS. 
SEAGOON: Ah, good morning. 
MORIARTY: Good morning? Just a moment. 
F.X.: FURIOUS DIALLING. 
MORIARTY: Hello, Air Ministry Roof? Weather report. Yes? 
Yes, thank you. 
F.X.: PHONE DOWN. 
MORIARTY: You’re perfectly right - it is a good morning. 
SEAGOON: Thanks. My name is Neddie Seagoon. 
MORIARTY: What a memory you have. 
SEAGOON: Needle nardle noo. I’ve come to move the piano. 
MORIARTY: (Insane laugh) Come in. 
SEAGOON: (Insane laugh) Thanks. 
MORIARTY: You must excuse the mess but we’ve got the 
Socialists in. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: (Approach) Oh Moriarty, can I borrow 
a shoe? Mine’s worn out - oh, you have company. 
MORIARTY: Ahh ah - these three men are called Neddie 
Seagoon. He’s come in answer to our ad. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Ohhhh - come in - sit down. Have a 
gorilla. 
SEAGOON: No thanks, I’m trying to give them up. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Splendid. Now, Neddie, here’s the 
money for moving the piano - there, five pounds in fivers. 
SEAGOON: Five pounds for moving a piano? Ha ha - this is 
money for old rope. 

Earning a Living 
161 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Is it? I’d have thought you’d have 
bought something more useful. 
# 
SEAGOON: Oh no - I have simple tastes. Now, where’s this 
piano? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Just a moment. First, would you sign 
this contract in which you guarantee to move the piano 
from one room to another for five pounds. 
SEAGOON: Of course I’ll sign - have you any ink? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Here’s a fresh bottle. 
SEAGOON: (Drinks) . . . ahhhhhhhh. Gad, I was thirsty. 
MORIARTY: Sapristi Nuckoes - do you always drink ink? 
SEAGOON: Only in the mating season. 
MORIARTY: Shall we dance? 
GRAMS: OLD 1929 SCRATCHY GUY LOMBARDO 
RECORD OF ‘LOVER’ WALTZ. 
SEAGOON: You dance divinely. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Next dance please! Now, Neddie, just 
sign the contract on the side of this horse. 
SEAGOON: Certainly. 
F.X.: SCRATCHING OF PEN UNDER SEAGOON AS HE 
SPEAKS NEXT LINE. 
SEAGOON: Neddie - Seagoon - A.G.G. 
MORIARTY: What’s A.G.G. for? 
SEAGOON: For the kiddies to ride on . . . get it? A gee-gee 
- ha ha ha ha - 
(Agonized silence) 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: You’re sure you won’t have a gorilla? 
SEAGOON: No thanks, I’ve just put one out. Now, which 
room is this piano in? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Ahemm. It’s in the Louvre. 
SEAGOON: Strange place to put a piano. 

i6i 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: We refer to the Louvre Museum, Paris. 
SEAGOON: What what what what what? Ahhhh, I’ve been 
tricked - ahhhh. 
F.X.: THUD OF UNCONSCIOUS BODY HITTING 
GROUND. 
MORIARTY: For the benefit of people without television - 
he’s fainted. s 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Don’t waste time - just open his jacket 
- get the weight of his cruel wallet off his chest - mmm - 
found anything in his pockets? 
MORIARTY: Yes - a signed photograph of Neddie Seagoon, a 
press cutting from the Theatre, Bolton, a gramophone 
record of Gigli mowing the lawn, a photo of Gigli singing, 
and a half share in Kim Novak. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: He’s still out cold - see if this brings 
him round. 
F.X.: PENNY THROWN ON CONCRETE FLOOR. 
SEAGOON: Thank you, lady. (Sings) Comrades comrades - 
ever since - oh - where - where am I? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: England! 
SEAGOON: What number? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Seven A. Have a gorilla. 
SEAGOON: No, they hurt my throat. Wait! Wow I remember! 
You’ve trapped me into bringing back a piano from France 
for only five pounds. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: You signed the contract, Neddie - now, 
get that piano or we sue you for breach of contract. 
SEAGOON: Ahhhhhhhh. (Going off) 
F.X.: DOOR SLAMS. 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: Gad, Moriarty, if he brings that piano 
back we’ll be in the money. That piano is worth ten thou¬ 
sand pounds. 

Earning a Living 
163 
MORI ARTY: How do you know? 
GRYTPYPE-THYNNE: I’ve seen its bank book. Do you know, 
that’s the very piano Napoleon played at Waterloo. With the 
moolah we get on that we can have a holiday. (Sings) 
BOTH: April in Paris - we’ve found a Charlie. 
BILL: I say - poor Neddie must have been at his wits’ end! 
Faced with the dilemma of having to bring Napoleon’s piano 
back from Paris, he went to the Foreign Office for advice on 
passports and visas. 
F.X.: BITS AND PIECES DROPPING DOWN. 
CRUN & MINNIE: (Nattering away) 
CRUN: Ohh dee deee - dee, X9? 
MINNIE: (Off) X9 answering - who’s that calling, buddy? 
CRUN: It’s me - the Foreign Secretary. Do you know where 
the key to the secret documents safe is? 
MINNIE: Yes - it’s with the charlady. 
CRUN: Do you think that’s wise - she has access to all the 
vital British secret documents. 
MINNIE: She can’t read them, buddy, she only speaks 
Russian. 
CRUN: That’s a bit of luck - 
F.X.: KNOCKS ON DOOR. 
CRUN: Ohh, that might be one of England’s strolling Prime 
Ministers of no fixed abode. 
MINNIE: Coming, Anthonyyy - coming . . . 
CRUN: Tell him we’re very sorry. 
MINNIE: Sorry for what? 
CRUN: Oh, mmm - make something up. 
F.X.: DOOR OPENS. 
MINNIE: Ahh, we’re very sorry, Anthony, we - ohh, you're not 
the Prime Minister. 

164 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
SEAGOON: Not yet, but it’s just a matter of time. My name is 
Neddie Seagoon. 
CRUN: Want to buy a white paper - 
SEAGOON: No thanks, I’m trying to give them up. 
CRUN: So are we - 
SEAGOON: I want a few particulars., You see, I want to leave 
the country ... * 
« 
CRUN: He’s going to Russia! Stop him, Min - get him! 
MINNIE: Hit him, Hen ... 
GRAMS: MIX IN GREAT BATTLE. ALL STOPS 
SUDDENLY. 
CRUN: There! Let that be a lesson to you - get out. 
SEAGOON: I will, but not before I hear musical saboteur Max 
Geldray. 
MAX & ORCHESTRA: ‘AIN’T MISBEHAVIN’. 
(Applause) 
BILL: Seagoon was confused - it seems that the cheapest 
method of getting to Paris was to stow away to France on 
board a Channel steamer. 
GRAMS: SHIP’S TELEGRAPH RINGING. SEAGULLS - 
WASH OF SHIP’S WAKE. 
SEAGOON: Down in the dark hold I lay - alone - so I thought. . . 
ECCLES: (Off-sings) I talk to der trees - dat’s why they put 
me away ... 
SEAGOON: The singer was a tall ragged idiot - he carried a 
plasticine gramophone, and wore a metal trilby. 
ECCLES: Hello, shipmate. Where “you goin’? 
SEAGOON: Nowhere. I think it’s safer to stay on the ship 
until we reach Calais. 
ECCLES: You going to Calais? 
SEAGOON: Yes. 

Earning a Living 
165 
ECCLES: What a coincidence. Dat’s where the ship’s going - 
ain’t you lucky. 
$ 
SEAGOON: Here - have a gorilla. 
ECCLES: Oh;-thanks! 
GRAMS: GORILLA FIGHTING ANOTHER GORILLA (IF 
YOU CAN’T GET THE RIGHT SOUND TRY TWO 
LIONS). ALL STOPS ABRUPTLY. 
ECCLES: Hey - dese gorillas are strong. Have one of my 
monkeys - they’re milder. 
SEAGOON: And so for the rest of the voyage we sat quietly 
smoking our monkeys. At Calais I left the idiot singer. By 
sliding down the ship’s rope in French I avoided detection. 
Late that night I checked into a French hotel. Next morning 
I sat in my room eating my breakfast when suddenly 
through the window a fork on the end of a long pole 
appeared - it tried to spear my kipper. 
BLOODNOK: (Off) Strained. Aeiough. 
SEAGOON: Who the blazes are you, sir? 
» 
BLOODNOK: Aeioughhh - oh, oh, I’m sorry, I was fishing. 
SEAGOON: Fishing? This is the thirty-fourth floor. 
BLOODNOK: Oh, the river must have dropped. 
SEAGOON: Who are you, sir? 
BLOODNOK: I’ve got it on a bit of paper here - ah yes - Major 
Denis Bloodnok, late of the Third Disgusting Fusiliers - 
OBE, MT, MT, MT, MT and MT. 
SEAGOON: What are all those MTs for? 
BLOODNOK: I get tuppence on each of ’em - aeioughhhh. 
SEAGOON: You’re acting suspiciously suspicious - I’ve a 
good mind to call the manager. 
BLOODNOK: Call him - I am unafraid! 
SEAGOON: Mmmm - no! Why should I call him? 

i66 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
BLOODNOK: Then I will - manager? 
F.X.: DOOR OPENS. 
SPIKE: (French) Oui, Monsieur? 
BLOODNOK: Throw this man out. 
SEAGOON: Ahhhhh. (Thrown out) 
F.X.: DOOR SLAMS. ! 
i! 
BLOODNOK: Now for breakfast - se6, kippers - toast de da 
dee deeee. What’s this coming through the window - flat¬ 
ten me krurker and nosh me schlappers - it’s a fork, on a 
pole, and its trying to take the kipper off me plate -1 say, 
who’s that? 
SEAGOON: I’m sorry, I was just fishing. 
BLOODNOK: What, you! I’ve a good mind to call the 
manager. 
SEAGOON: Go on then, call him. 
BLOODNOK: No, why should I? 
SEAGOON: Then I’ll call him. (Watch me turn the tables, 
listeners.) Manager? 
F.X.: DOOR OPENS. 
SPIKE: Oui, Monsieur? 
BLOODNOK: Throw this man out of my room. 
SEAGOON: Ahhhh. (Thrown out) 
F.X.: DOOR SLAMS. 
SEAGOON: Alone in Paris - I went down the notorious Cafe 
Tom. Proprietor: Maurice Ponk. 
GRAMS: ‘SOUS LES TOITS DE PARIS’. 
SEAGOON: Inside, the air was filled with gorilla smoke - I 
was looking for a man who might specialize in piano 
robberies from the Louvre. 
F.X.: WHOOSH. 

Earning a Living 
167 
EIDELBURGER: Gute evenung. You are looking for a man 
who might specialize in piano robberies from the Louvre? 
9 
SEAGOON: How do you know? 
EIDELBURGER: I was listening on the radio and I heard you 
say it. 
SEAGOON: Good - pull up a chair. Sit down. 
EIDELBURGER: No thanks - I’d rather stand. 
SEAGOON: Very well, stand on a chair. Gargon! 
THROAT: Oui? 
SEAGOON: Two glasses of English port-type cooking sherry, 
and vite. 
THROAT: Two glasses of sherry and vite coming up. 
SEAGOON: Now - name? 
EIDELBURGER: I am Justin Eidelburger. 
SEAGOON: Oh. Have a gorilla. 
EIDELBURGER: No zanks - I only smoke baboons. 
SEAGOON: This piano we must steal, it’s the one Napoleon 
played at Waterloo. 
EIDELBURGER: That will be a very sticky job. 
SEAGOON: Why? 
EIDELBURGER: It’s just been varnished - he ha, zer German 
joke. 
SEAGOON: Zer English silence. 
EIDELBURGER: Now, Mr Snzeegroon - meet me outside the 
Louvre at midnight on the stroke of two. 
SEAGOON: Right. 
SEAGOON: True to my word, I was there dead on three. 
EIDELBURGER: You’re late. 
SEAGOON: I’m sorry - my legs were slow. 

i68 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
EIDELBURGER: You must buy another pair. Zis here is my 
oriental assistant, Yakamoto. 
YAKAMOTO: I am very honoured to meet you. Oh boy. 
SEAGOON: What does this oriental creep know about piano 
thieving? 
EIDELBURGER: Nothing - he’s just here to lend colour to the 
scene. Now, Neddie, this is a map-plan of the Louvre and 
the surrounding streets. 
v 
F.X.: LONG UNFOLDING. 
\ 
SEAGOON: You take one end. 
F.X.: UNFOLDING. THE MAP BEING UNFOLDED 
CONTINUES FOR A WHOLE MINUTE. 
SEAGOON: It’s big, isn’t it? 
EIDELBURGER: (In the distance) Yes, it is! This bit here 
shows the Rue de la Paix. 
SEAGOON: Good heavens, you’re miles away - walk straight 
up that street - take the second on the left - I’ll be waiting 
for you. 
F.X.: TAXI PULLS UP. 
EIDELBURGER: I took a taxi - it was too far. Now - we 
disperse and meet again in the Hall of Mirrors, when the 
clock strikes twinge. At midnight we strike. 
F.X.: BIG BEN STRIKES TWELVE - AT VARYING 
SPEEDS. 
SEAGOON: Shhhhhh. 
EIDELBURGER: Is that you, Seagoon? 
SEAGOON: Yes. 
EIDELBURGER: Good. 
F.X.: HAND BELL. 
BILL: (French) Every bodee out, closing time - everyone back 
to zere own bed. 

Earning a Living 
169 
SEAGOON: Quick, hide behind this pane of glass. 
EIDELBURGER: But you can see through it. 
SEAGOON: Not if you close your eyes. 
EIDELBURGER: Gerblunden, you’re right - are all your family 
clever? 
SEAGOON: Only the Crustaceans. 
BILL: Everybody out - and that goes for you idiots with your 
eyes shut behind that sheet of glass. 
SEAGOON: You fool, you can’t see us. 
BILL: Yes, I can - get out or I’ll call the police. 
EIDELBURGER: Why, you anti-Bismarck swine, I shoot 
you. 
SEAGOON: No, not through the glass - you’ll break it. First 
I’ll make a hole in it. 
F.X.: PANE OF GLASS SHATTERING TO PIECES. 
SEAGOON: IVow shoot through that. 
F.X.: PISTOL SHOT. 
BILL: You’ve killed me - now I’ll get the sack. Ooooooo - ohhhh 
- ohhhhh -1 die -1 fall to the ground - ahhh meee - ahh my 
- ohhh ohhh I die, killed by death! 
SEAGOON: Never mind - swallow this tin of Lifo guaran¬ 
teed to return you to life - recommended by all corpses 
and Wilfred Pickles. Forward, Ray Ellington and his 
music! 
QUARTET: ‘BLOODSHOT EYES’. 
(Applause) 
BILL: Part Two - in which our heroes are discovered creeping 
up to the piano. 
EIDELBURGER: Shhh, Neddie - there’s someone under 
Napoleon’s piano, trying to lift it by himself. 
SEAGOON: He must be mad. 

170 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
ECCLES: (Sings) I talk to der trees ... 
SEAGOON: I was right. Eccles, what are you doing out after 
feeding time? 
ECCLES: I signed a contract that fooled me into taking dis 
piano back to England. 
SEAGOON: What? You must be an idiot to sign a contract like 
that - now, help me get this piano back to England. 
Together, lift! 
OMNES: (Grunts, groans) 
SEAGOON: No, no, it’s too heavy - put it down. 
ECCLES: Here, it's lighter when you let go. 
SEAGOON: I have an idea - we’ll saw the legs off. Eccles, 
give me that special piano leg saw that you just happen to 
be carrying. Now ... 
F.X.: SAWING. 
ECCLES: (Sings over sawing) I talk to der trees - dat’s why 
dey put me away - 
SEAGOON: There! I’ve sawn all four lags off. 
EIDELBURGER: Strange - first time I’ve known of a piano 
with four legs. 
ECCLES: Hey - I keep falling down - ohhhhhhh. 
SEAGOON: Sorry, Eccles - here, swallow this tin of 
Leggo, the wonder leg-grower recommended by all 
good centipedes. 
BILL: Sweating and struggling, they managed to get Napo¬ 
leon’s piano into the cobbled court. 
SEAGOON: (Dry) Which was more than Napoleon ever did. 
BLOODNOK: Halt - hand over le piano in the name of 
France! 
SEAGOON: Bloodnok, take off that kilt, we know you’re not 
French. 

Earning a Living 
171 
BLOODNOK: One step nearer and I’ll strike with this fork on 
the end of a pole. 
SEAGOON: You do, and I’ll attack with this kipper. 
BLOODNOK: I’ve a good mind to call the manager. 
SEAGOON: Call the manager. 
BLOODNOK: No, why should I - 
SEAGOON: Very well, I'll call him (I'll get him this time). 
Manager? 
F.X.: DOOR OPENS. 
SPIKE: Oui, Monsieur? 
SEAGOON: Throw this man out. 
SPIKE: (Raspberry) 
F.X.: DOOR SHUTS. 
SEAGOON: Nurse? Put the screens around that bed. 
BLOODNOK: Seagoon, you must let me have that piano - you 
see, I foolishly signed a contract that forces me to - 
SEAGOON: Yes, yes, we know - we’re all in the same boat. 
We have no money, so the only way to get the piano back to 
England is to float it back. All together into the English 
Channel - hurl. 
F.X.: PAUSE - SPLASH. 
SEAGOON: All aboard - cast off. 
ORCHESTRA: SEASCAPE MUSIC. 
GRAMS: HEAVY SEAS. GULLS. 
SEAGOON: The log of Napoleon’s Piano. December the third 
- Second week in English Channel. Very seasick - no food - 
no water. Bloodnok down with the lurgi. Eccles up with the 
lark. 
BLOODNOK: Ohhh - Seagoon - take over the keyboard, I 
can’t steer any more. 
SEAGOON: Eccles? Take over the keyboard. 

172 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
ECCLES: I can’t. I haven’t brought my music. 
SEAGOON: You’ll have to busk for the next three miles. 
BLOODNOK: Wait! Great galloping crabs, look in the sky. 
GRAMS: HELICOPTER. 
BLOODNOK: It’s a recording of a helicopter - saved! 
SEAGOON: By St George - saved - yes. For those of you 
who haven’t got television, they're lowering a man on a 
<• 
rope. ' 
BLUEBOTTLE: Yes, it is I, Sea Ranger Blunebontle. Signals 
applause. 
GRAMS: APPLAUSE. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Cease - I have drunk my fill of the clapping. 
SEAGOON: Little stinking Admiral, you have arrived in the 
nick of time. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Silence - I must do my duty - hurriedly runs 
up cardboard Union Jack. I now claim this island for the 
British Empire and Lord Beaverbrook, the British patriot 
- thinks, I wonder why he lives in France. Three cheers for 
the Empire - hip hip hooray - hip hip . . . 
SEAGOON: Have you come to save us? 
BLUEBOTTLE: Hooray! Rockall is now British - cements in 
brass plate - steps back to salute. 
GRAMS: SPLASH. 
BLUEBOTTLE: Help! I’m in the dreaded drowning-type 
water. 
SEAGOON: Here, grab this fork on the end of a pole. 
BLUEBOTTLE: It’s got a kipper-on it. 
SEAGOON: Yes, you must keep your strength up. 
BLUEBOTTLE: But I’m drowning. 
SEAGOON: There’s no need to go hungry as well. Take my 
hand. 

Earning a Living 
173 
BLUEBOTTLE: Why? Are you a stranger in paradise? 
SEAGOON: HeavQ . . . for those without television, I’ve pulled 
him back on the piano. 
BLUEBOTTLE^ Piano? This is not a piano - this is Rockall. 
SEAGOON: This is Napoleon’s piano. 
BLUEBOTTLE: No, no - this is Rockall - we have tooked it 
because it is in the area of the rocket testing range. 
SEAGOON: I've never heard . . . 
F.X.: ROCKET WHOOSH. EXPLOSION. 
BILL: What do you think, dear listeners - were they standing 
on Rockall or was it Napoleon’s piano? Send your sugges¬ 
tions to anybody but us. For those who would have 
preferred a happy ending, here it is. 
F.X.: DOOR OPENS. 
HARRY: Gwendeloine?? Gwendoline. 
PETER: John, John darling - 
HARRY: I’ve found work, darling. I’ve got a job. 
PETER: Oh John, I'm so glad for you - what is it? 
HARRY: All I’ve got to do is to move a piano from one room to 
another. 
MORIARTY: (Mad laugh) 
ORCHESTRA: SIGNATURE TUNE: UP AND DOWN FOR: 
BILL: That was The Goon Show - a BBC recorded programme 
featuring Peter Sellers, Harry Secombe and Spike Milligan 
with the Ray Ellington Quartet and Max Geldray. The Orches¬ 
tra was conducted by Wally Stott. Script by Spike Milligan. 
Announcer: Wallace Greenslade. The programme produced 
by Peter Eton. 
ORCHESTRA: SIGNATURE TUNE UP TO END. 
(Applause) 
MAX & ORCHESTRA: ‘CRAZY RHYTHM’ PLAYOUT. 

174 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
from Depression and How to Survive It 
The best scripts I wrote were when I was ill. I’ve just recalled this 
- the ones that I wrote best were when I was ill - a mad desire to 
be better than anybody else at comedy, and if I couldn’t do it in 
the given time of eight hours a day I used to work twelve, thirteen 
and fourteen. I did, I was determined. There was a time when I 
was positively manic. I was four feet above the ground at times, 
talking twice as fast as normal people. Working on this with great 
fervour to write this stuff and to hear them do it every Sunday. I 
couldn’t wait for them to do it, to hear how it sounded, because 
it would be acclaimed when it went out. ‘I’ve done it, I’ve done it’ 
- and then I had to go and start all over again, that was the awful 
part of it. 
When I look back at it, I think, ‘Was that really me, was I ten feet 
off the ground all the time?’ I was - I was terribly manic. 
\ 
I once did write 10,000 words in one day, like Balzac! I was pres¬ 
sured inside. I couldn’t sleep. I just wrote and wrote. I couldn’t stop, 
couldn’t control it. I did stop. In all, the state lasted about forty-eight 
hours. All I could think of was the book. I didn’t think of time. I 
may have been manic once or twice since but I haven’t noticed it. 
I was so ill when I wrote those scripts, particularly at the beginning, 
that now, when I think back, that is what I remember. Of course I 
take pleasure in the fact that I made people laugh and the scripts 
still do. But it was at a terrible price for me. If I could choose now, 
which of course I cannot, I think I would choose to be free of the 
illness and not to have written the Goons. It took that much out of 
me. It caused me that much pain - and pain to my wife and children 
too. 

Earning a Living 
175 
[Michael Mills was Head of Light Entertainment at the BBC. He 
wanted Spike to become involved with a project on Lear. He tried 
for several months until finally Spike said yes. This is Spike’s letter 
explaining how he saw the Lear programme.] 
9 Orme Court 
London W 2 
4 February 1970 
Michael Mills Esq.- 
British Broadcasting Corporation 
Television Centre 
Wood Lane 
London W12 
Dear Michael, 
Lear. Okay. When you say ten to fifteen poems, I presume you mean 
some of the limericks, in which case here goes: 
1) ‘The Cummerbund’ 
2) ‘The Quangle Wangle’s Hat’ 
3) ‘The Duck and the Kangaroo’ 
4) ‘The Jumblies’ 
5) ‘The Owl and the Pussycat’ 
6) ‘The Dong with a Luminous Nose’ 
The above are six quite long poems. Find attached a separate 
sheet with the limericks. You will notice / have added an additional 
fourth line in brackets which are my own personal idea of how the 
limericks should end. / did this not in an attempt to better Mr Lear, 
but merely as an exercise. Basically, I think its much droller to 
repeat the first line as the last, and it is also much more in keeping 
with the thinking of that time. 

176 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Music can also be included in the programme. The ‘Yonghy 
Bonghy Bo’ has been set to music, as has ‘The Pelicans’. 
I thought that some enchantment could be added to the 
programme, by the use of commissioned cartoonists, to help ride 
out long poems like the ‘Duck and the Kangaroo’. I also envis¬ 
aged some bizarre locations for some of the limericks. For 
instance, a great general falls dying at\ a great Napoleonic 
Battle. Fie pulls his ADC to his ear, and then dies with the 
limerick: ' „ 
There was an Old Man with a beard, 
Who sat on a horse when he reared; 
But they said, ‘Never mind! you will fall off behind, 
You propitious Old Man with a beard!’ 
Leave the ADC with a baffled look. 
Likewise, a Constable suddenly stops a man in the street, and 
goes on: 
There was an Old Man in a Tree, 
Who was horribly bored by a Bee; 
When they said, ‘Does it buzz?’ He replied, ‘Yes it does!’ 
‘It’s a regular brute of a Bee!’ 
There could also be an ‘on the spot artist’ who could draw the 
subject matter, and one of the limericks as it is spoken. 
There are also his nonsense alphabets, which with more imagin¬ 
ation could be choreographed; and again his nonsense botany; such 
as the ‘Knutmigrata Simplice’ which the design boys could have fun 
with, and with other of his botany specimens make a brief spot with 
a nonsense ‘horticultural lecture’. 
Anyhow, I have done your bidding. I hope it might provide 
some ideas for Eleanor Fazan. I was only thinking in terms of this 
being one programme. It could, with ingenuity, last forty-five 
minutes. 
Another idea has occurred to me: 

Earning a Living 
177 
LEAR SEEN AT LECTERN OR WRITING DESK 
LEAR: ‘There was an Old Man who said . . 
(Cut to Old Man) 
OLD MAN: “Hush - I perceive a young bird in this bush’ 
LEAR: ‘When they said . . .’ 
(Cut to SMALL GROUP OF PEOPLE) 
SMALL GROUP OF PEOPLE: ‘Is it small?’ 
LEAR: ‘He replied’ 
(Cut to Old Man) 
OLD man: ‘Not at all, it’s four times as big as the bush!’ 
As the Old Man speaks the line, on the words four times as big as 
the bush \ B.P. behind shows a thrush which grows in size on each 
syllable. 
(Cut to Lear. Sits back, drops pen, having finished the limerick.) 
1 must leave you now, as I smell something burning. I think its 
my overdraft. 
T 
Regards 
Spike 
1) There was an Old Man of the West, 
Who wore a pale plum-coloured vest; 
When they said ‘Does it fit?’ he replied ‘Not a bit!’ 
That uneasy Old Man of the West. 
(Cant you see I’m exposing my chest?) 
2) There was an Old Man who supposed, 
That the street door was partially closed; 
But some very large rats, ate his coats and his hats, 
While that futile old gentleman dozed. 

1/8 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
3) There was an Old Man of Corfu, 
Who never knew what he should do; 
So he rushed up and down, till the sun made him brown, 
That bewildered Old Man of Corfu. 
(And the moon turned him red white and blue.) 
4) There was an Old Man of the Dee, 
Who was sadly annoyed by a flea; 
When he said £I will scratch it’ - they gave him a hatchet, 
Which grieved that Old Man of the Dee. 
(So he chopped the poor flea in the threa.) 
\ 
5) There was an Old Man of Jamaica, 
Who suddenly married a Quaker! 
But she cried out - ‘O lack! I have married a black!’ 
Which distressed that Old Man of Jamaica 
(What a terrible, terrible mistaica!) 
6) There was an Old Man of the Coast, 
Who placidly sat on a post, 
But when it was cold, he relinquished his hold, 
And called for some hot buttered toast. 
7) There was an Old Man at a casement, 
Who held up his hands in amazement; 
When they said ‘Sir! you’ll fall!’ he replied ‘Not at all!’ 
That incipient Old Man at a casement. 
(But he did wallop thud on the pavement.) 
8) There was an Old Man of Peru, 
Who never knew what he should do; 
So he tore off his hair, and behaved like a bear, 
That intrinsic Old Man of Peru. 
(And now the poor sod’s in a zoo.) 

Earning a Living 
179 
[The Boulting Brothers, John and Roy, were head of British Lion 
Films. They produced all the Ealing Comedy classics such as Peter 
Sellers’s I’m All Right jack and Heavens Above!] 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
21 December 1970 
Messrs John & Roy Boulting 
British Lion Films 
Broadwick House 
Broadwick Street 
London W1 
Dear John and Roy, 
According to my diary and the number of employers stamps on my 
card, you have not employed me for six years. 
Now, I don’t want to have to resurrect the Irish Rebellion of 1916 
so I am going to give you an alternative. 
In case you have doubts about my acting, repeat acting, ability 
would you like to watch the following programmes and see the 
diversification of characters that I do: 
handsomest hall in town 26 December 1970 
lollies ol the wise 31 December 1970 
After wa tching these, if you fail to recognize my talents I 
can only presume it’s the hang over from the days your 
ancestors made porcelain ware for toilets, and because I 
don’t appear as one of your customers, you are holding it 
against me. 
I will give you the year 1971 to make up for your shortcomings. 

i8o 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
After which, I will invite you to lunch and beat you lightly to death 
with a surfeit of iron lampreys 17'0" long. 
Love, light and peace, and employment 
for talented actors lying in the wilderness 
Spike Milligan 
9 Orme Court 
' London W2 
30 December 1970 
Messrs John & Roy Boulting 
British Lion Films 
Broadwick House 
Broadwick Street 
London W1 
Dear Boultings, 
Thank you for your circular. So, it’s coming to this. You think 
you can buy off the Prince of Eire, dripping with Gaelic talent, 
by a grotty lunch on some sausage stall, somewhere in vile Soho. 
Very well, owing to certain financial difficulties with Messrs 
Coutts & Co. (branches in the Strand) I am forced to accept your 
meagre fare (a plate of meagre for Mr Milligan, please). 
My, my, didn’t we get edgy at the mention of the family’s connection 
with early English water easences. Let’s face it lads, when the English¬ 
man John Carze invented one it was through sheer necessity. There was 
shit everywhere, so don’t be too cock-a-hoop;face it lads, the Boulting 
dynasty was launched on the sea of commerce by shit, and in this 
respect my family have been helping the business ever since, without 
ever once asking for a seat on the board. It was not for nothing that I 
cried out to the amassed aborting Milligans ‘Gentlemen, be seated. ’ 
/ trust this letter will receive a reply in the Times, where we can 
further discourse the humble beginnings of the Boulting family. 

Earning a Living 
181 
All right, if you insist, I accept your good wishes from you and 
your brother for the coming year. After consulting my solicitor he 
has given me an all clear to wish you and your brother a Happy 
New Year from me. 
I would like to point out that this does not constitute a contract. 
Yes, my exotic secretary will ring your beautiful secretary and fix 
th ings up. 
I must warn you that my exotic secretary has lesbian tendencies 
and wears an appliance. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike 
Don't forget, watch me in Follies of the Wise on BBC1 at 6.45 p.m. 
on 31 December. 
[Spike was on a tour of Australia and New Zealand with his ‘One 
Man Show’. He had been grumpy for months (a delaying tactic to 
avoid getting down and writing Volume 5 of his War Memoirs). 
This letter was to lay the blame on everyone else. When he finally 
finished the book, it became Where Have All the Bullets Gone?] 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
28 February 1983 
Ms Norma Fames 
Ms Shelagh Sinclair 
Jack Hobbs Esq. 
Pat O'Neill Esq. 
Dear All, 
This is a forewarning as to what I would like to do in June, 1983, 
on my return from Australia. 

182 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
I would like to be given total freedom to write Vol. 5 of my War 
Memoirs, so far 1 have delayed it for my One Man Show, and my 
television series. 
I have been given an advance of £20,000 in various stages, 
therefore, unless somebody can come up with a higher offer, 
this is what I want to do. 
I am giving due warning, so that I am not approached at the last 
minute because I would find it very hard to put aside all the work I 
had done on it. * s 
Otherwise I am well, and the proud possessor of six damaged 
pairs of underpants, ranging between the ages of six and seven, a 
pair of socks I do believe have marks of the Blitz, and a pair of shoes 
which are so thin in the soles, they could be warn as frog masks for 
deep sea diving. 
Sincerely, 
Spike 
[David Clark was the Producer/Director of Give Us a Clue, a game 
show for Thames Television. Spike was very fond of him, hence the 
warmth in his letters.] 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
12 April 1984 
David Clark Esq. 
Thames Television Limited 
Brook Road 
Teddington 
Middlesex 
Dear David, 
Listen, I have never got over that terrible clue you gave me in 
which I had to mime Zorba the Greek. I mean how do you mime 

Earning a Living 
183 
Zorba, and how do you mim e Greek, I had never seen the film. 
It's time you did it again to me, I await your reply. Please find 
enclosed £1.00 as a bribe, current value 27.8p. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan, and his Manager, Norma Fames, 
who desperately needs the commission 
Teddington Studios 
Teddington Lock, 
Teddington 
Middlesex TW11 9NT 
19 April 1984 
Spike Milligan Esq. 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
Dear Spike, 
Thanks for your letter. You have obviously forgotten that you 
redeemed yourself admirably with 7 was a Teenage Werewolf' and 
Tnka Dinka Doo ’ a couple of series ago. 
I was thinking of asking you if you would like to come on again 
during the next series, but your ‘green Queen' tells me that I definitely 
should. We are recording on 9 and 17 June, 1, 8, 15 and 29 July — so 
take your pick. Incidentally, Michael Parkinson is taking ewer as 
Chairman and I hope this doesn't make you change your mind. 
It's good to hear from you, and your bribe will find its way to the 
nearest children's charity box. 
Look forward to seeing you, 
Best wishes 
David Clark 
PS. We’re repeating your ‘redemption' next Tuesday — purely 
coincidental, I assure you! 

184 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
24 April 1984 
David Clark Esq. 
Thames Television Limited 
Teddington Studios 
Teddington Lock ' 
Teddington 
Middlesex TW11 9NT 
Dear David, 
Obviously money talks, who knows'with a £1 here and a £1 there l 
could be in Dynasty next year. screwing Joan Collins, wearing a 
wig. 
Listen regarding the £1 'to the nearest childrens charity', the 
nearest children's charity is possibly yours, give it to them: the next 
nearest children's charity is mine, so send it back. 
Out of the plethora of dates, I have chosen the 9th June. I had 
been invited to have tea on that day by Barbara Cartland. and this 
is the greatest out I've ever had. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 

Earning a Living 
185 
[Virginia McKenna and her husband Bill Travers were instrumen¬ 
tal in founding the Born Free Foundation. Spike admired and 
respected her for her undying devotion to animal rights campaigns.] 
The Oast House 
Hazelhurst Farm 
Ticehurst 
East Sussex TN5 7LF 
18 April 1988 
Ms Virginia McKenna 
Zoocheck 
24 Tempo House 
17—27 Falcon Road 
London SW11 2BJ 
Dear Ginny, 
/ have unwittingly made a boob. My Manager telephoned me and 
said ‘Eve got a very easy commercial for you to do, all you have to 
say is “Come alive, come to Whipsnade Wild Animal Park" - with¬ 
out thinking 1 did it, and / am sending you part of my fee so that 
some good comes out of it. I wont do it again. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 

i86 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
[‘Esther’ here is better known as Esther Rantzen, whom Spike 
admired for what she achieved in her campaign to set up Childline.] 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
•i 
„ 9 June 1989 
Mr & Mrs Desmond Wilcox ' 
Blood Oaks Farm 
Bramshaw 
Hampshire 
My dear Esther & Desmond 
Thank you for your wonderfully worded invitation. I see you have 
tea by the pool, normally I have it by the cup, and that you are 
serving lunch on the grass, haven’t you any plates? 
Alas on that day I will be sunning my skinny white body on some 
distant Mediterranean beach. I got it on tKe NHS, my doctor said T 
must warn you you are too white to live, either you get into a micro- 
wave for 30 seconds or use the Mediterranean NHS. ’ 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 
[Susan Watt was the managing director of Michael Joseph. Spike 
had tremendous respect for her, but not for her female editors, who 
he thought had no sense of humour. They didn’t think the seven 
volumes of his War Memoirs were funny. It was down to the market¬ 
ing director, Dick Douglas Boyd, to tell them how funny they were 
and to ‘publish’. 
In an interview I did with Dick he said ‘a phone call would come 

Earning a Living 
187 
down from the women editors saying they had got a new manu¬ 
script from Spike and would I look at it because they didn’t think 
it was funny.’ 
That’s why Spike called them the Vestal Virgins.] 
Susan Watt 
Michael Joseph Publishing 
27 Wrights Lane 
London 
W8 5TZ 
28 June 1993 
/■ 1 
Dear Susan, 
I have just completed a comic version of Lady Chatterley’s Lover 
and rather than give it to one of your virgins to read I realized this 
book needed somebody with balls to read it and therefore I have 
given it to a friend of mine Jack Clarke to read and he has said it 
is, and I quote, ‘hysterically funny’. I am not given to accepting 
lavish praise but I wanted you to know that it is a genuinely funny 
book. Please tell the wise virgins this. 
Warm regards 
Spike Milligan 
PS. I am just off on the road to Damascus to see Jesus. 
[The documentary that Jonathan James-Moore refers to here was 
about the Goon Shows and how they had survived for forty years. It 
culminated in the airing of two Goon Shows. Spike fought the BBC 
for years to have the Goon Shows repeated. He failed; so this was a 
bonus for him. ‘They repeat a Goon Show once a year on Boxing 
Day. They take me off the shelf and dust me down for Christmas’ 
Thank God for Mary Kalemkarian, and Radio 7. They play the 

i88 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Goon Show tapes every week. Alas, Spike never heard them. Mary 
launched the channel in December 2002. 
Spike was asked to write 150 words for the cover of his cassette. 
He did just that: exactly 150 words, none of them related.] 
British Broadcasting Corporation 
Broadcasting House 
London W1A 1AA 
4 June 1991 
\ 
S. Milligan Esq. 
9 Orme Court 
Bayswater 
London W2 
Dear Spike, 
I hope you enjoyed the documentary. At the weekly meeting of BBC 
initials it was deemed to have been a thoroughly good thing. 
By careful timing Ifound myself on a weeks holiday in Italy. I 
didn't feel too guilty because I had enjoyed reading of your escapades 
there. However, I have now listened to the tape which I thought was 
terrific: a good pacey mix of fun, insight and information. 
I expect Norma has told you that the documentary is to be 
repeated along with two of the selected shows on Radio 4: Th ursday 
12.25, August 29th and September 5th with the ‘Go On'programme 
on Saturday 31st August 10.02am. 
There is no doubt that the glorious fun of the shows will last as 
long as the tapes survive and the ears that hear them. 
Thank you for giving time for the interview and I hope this little 
festival has given you pleasure. 
Best wishes 
Jonathan James-Moore 
Head of Light Entertainment Radio 
PS. I enjoyed many of your 150 words on the cassette! 

Earning a Living 
189 
9 Orme Court 
Bayswater 
London W2 4RL 
11 June 1991 
Jonathan James-Moore Esq. 
BBC 
Broadcasting House 
London W1A 1AA 
Dear Jonathan, 
It is we the beggars on the outside of the Corporation who are still 
remembering the Goon Shows and are very grateful to get letters 
praising some of the th ings we did half a century ago, it just goes to 
show that the waiting game pays off. I am currently trying to sell 
150 Goon Show tapes to Ethiopia whom I am encouraging to eat 
them, at least they can die laughing. 
I look forward to another fifty years anniversary with great 
anticipation. I am having my body deep frozen in case / die before 
that occasion. I am going to have an audio cassette tombstone in 
which visitors can buy a Goon Show and insert them and play them 
over my dead body. 
Yours ever most humble 
Spike Milligan 
Ex BBC Employee 
PS. / mean there are people still laying flowers on the tombstone of 
Charlie Kunz. 

\ 
N 
% 
v 
\ 
V 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
Chopsticks are one of the reasons the Chinese never 
invented custard. 
‘Spike on Spike’, Memories of Milligan 

\ 
s. 
\ 
k 

fter the success of that innovative show, The Goons, Spike found 
.xVhis place in society. It was at this point that he started to write 
books, beginning one of the most successful writing careers of any 
twentieth-century comedian, or any writer for that matter ... 
His first published work came in 1959. It was a poetry book, Silly 
Verse for Kids. After that he started on a novel. 
Puckoon was published in 1963. He had started writing it in 1958. 
(This was all before I came to work with him at Orme Court.) It was 
a traumatic time for him. In 1959, while he was writing Puckoon, his 
wife left him. She waited until Spike was in Australia and sent him a 
telegram to say it was over and that shed taken the children with her. 
He attempted suicide by taking an overdose of sleeping tablets. And 
yet, in ‘the worst time of my life’, he continued to write what I consider 
to be his funniest book. When it was published in 1963, he said, ‘It 
nearly drove me mad, and I vowed Id never write another novel.’ 
But now that he was up and running, the books came pouring 
out of him: plenty of poetry as well as the seven famous volumes 
of his War Memoirs. The first in 1971, Adolf Hitler: My Part in His 
Downfall - the prologue read, ‘After Puckoon I swore I would never 
write another novel. This is it’ - and the last of them, twenty years 
later, called Peace Work. 
Throughout this time he wrote and appeared in his television 
series Q5, a sketch-comedy show that ran and ran, until the last 
series, Q10, There’s a Lot of It About. 
The writings, the television and radio appearances were his ‘work’, 
but the love of his life was the theatre. He toured England, South 
Africa, New Zealand and Australia over a period of twenty years 
with his ‘One Man Show’, a (for him) gruelling two hours, apart 
from a fifteen-minute interval, of reading poetry, doing impres¬ 
sions, audience reaction and playing his beloved trumpet. 

194 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
Enough? No, there was also his involvement in numerous char¬ 
ities, saving the planet and the now endless political demonstrations 
- not to mention his correspondence with the great and the good 
(and the not so good), which I’ve included in this chapter. The 
boundless energy. How did he do it? And how did I keep up? 

from Scunthorpe Revisited, Added Articles 
and Instant Relatives 
' • My Home 
It was 1951. I was young and green in my years and I sang in my 
chains like the sea. The flat my wife and I occupied suddenly started 
to shrink; this was caused by the unexpected appearance of two 
children, a dog and a stray cat - the last two I don’t know about, 
the children were apparently mine. 
‘We must get a bigger place,’ said wife. 
‘Infanticide is cheaper,’ I said. 
A house. We started what all Britons will know as the most 
agonizing time of one’s life. For the next year we scanned the 
columns for a home. We visited house agents - their names became 
more familiar than Hollywood stars, names like Benham & Reeves, 
Knight, Frank & Rutley, and Chestertons. 
Those who answered the phones in these establishments became 
gods - they all sounded like Battle of Britain pilots in between 
scrambles. ‘You’ll go to what? - £3,900 (He made it sound like you 
were a Mega-Scrooge) and that is your final offer.’ 
‘Yes.’ 
Then, in tones in which doctors tell of a terminal illness, he’d say 
‘Oh dear.’ He would conclude with that old favourite: ‘I must warn 
you’ (like a boxer with a low blow) ‘that there are several offers 
already in the pipeline.’ 
‘Are they higher?’ you drivel. No, he’s not at liberty to say, breach 

196 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
of etiquette. You wait a day, two - three - four - five - after a week 
you can’t stand it. 
‘Hello, remember me.’ 
‘Who? Oh, you want Mr Gibbs-White. He’s on holiday, can I help 
you?’ 
You go carefully through the whole sombre story. 
‘Ah, yes - 29 Clens Avenue - I’m afraid it’s gone.’ 
‘Gone!? You - he - never told us.’ 
There follows a standard apology, blew Secretary - phone out of 
order - World War 3 pending. So passes six months. We are now 
well and truly on the books - circulars cascade through our letter¬ 
box arriving on a Saturday morning. We race around north London 
to see ‘Delightful Edwardian Home: 3 bed. 2 sit. Kit. Bt. Gr. Gdn. 
In need of decoration’. 
The outside is peeling, and not just the paint - the bricks - the 
front garden was once, I suppose; a garden - weeds - vestiges of a 
pebble path - caravan - a jacked-up Ford Zephyr - and dog shit 
- several ageing ‘For Sale’ signs almost invisible with weathering 
(two of the Companies have gone into liquidation). 
‘It might be better inside,’ says wife. 
‘I’ll top that,’ I said. ‘It’s got to be better inside.’ 
Monday 9.00 a.m. ‘Hello, 127 Holden Road - could we make an 
appointment?’ 
The agent with all the enthusiasm of a rabbi at a Nuremberg Rally 
says: ‘I think that can be arranged.’ I want to say, would you feel 
better if I knelt down? 
We saw the home. It was terrible - but it was better than this 
continued enslavement to house agents and - ah! SURVEYORS 
- ‘It’s not worth buying - it’s got dry rot - damp rot - damp course 
gone - needs re-wiring - re-roofing.’ 
‘You forgot leprosy,’ I said. 
The grovelling, cringing, paying and signing of documents went 
on for months. In mid-contract the owner died of a stroke - a stroke 
of luck for his wife. He left her £50,000. She now wanted the price 
of the house raised. I was now on tranquillizers, and would sign 
anything - money didn’t matter - one had to escape from the 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
197 
enslavement of the system. I put the deposit down in 1951.1 was in 
the house for twenty years; nineteen of those it was still the build¬ 
ing society’s. I called the home ‘The Millstone’. In February 19711 
paid the last instalment - now, it was mine. 
Despite the surveyor’s report condemning the house - he didn’t 
know (or find out) the house was built on a spring. One day the 
floor in the cellar burst and filled to four feet. The children loved 
it. To cap the spring would cost £2,000 - or as the builder said, ‘We 
can contain it by digging a well, but you’ll have to bail out with a 
bucket when it floods.’ I re-christened the house ‘The Titanic.’ I 
sued the surveyor, but he was too clever for me - he died. 
The roof. In 1957 there was an incredible gale. The whole roof 
tiling fell apart. The insurance policy, yes, there it was, full cover 
for storm damage. The assessor arrives. ‘Ah yes, you need a new 
roof,’ he said. ‘Have you had a builder in?’ 
‘Yes, and rain.’ 
‘Ah - £1,500 for re-roofing, I’ll go over this at the office and let 
you know.’ 
A week passed - two - three - rain poured in - we slept in a tent 
in the bedroom. I couldn’t wait; I told the builder, Ernie Stevens, 
to go ahead. He started by putting waterproof sheeting in the attic. 
The dripping stopped. It was quite something to hear an approach¬ 
ing scream from above - and for a workman to hurtle through the 
bedroom ceiling and crash to the floor by the bed. It was Ernie’s 
mate Ted. He was unconscious. We had the ambulance. It rained 
that night, especially through the new hole. 
‘I need a couple of hundred up front for more scaffolding.’ 
I never saw Ernie again. I got another builder, Mr Dick Soames, 
but his price would be £300 more. I phoned the Samaritans six times 
that week. Dick Soames mended the roof. He took six months, 
during which the insurance company joker said they would meet a 
fifth of the cost. A fifth? But it says storm damage. Ah yes, but that’s 
only for buildings built after (in small print) 1932, provided the roof 
gables were double-latticed, dove-tailed, one made by a Chinaman 
during the Equinox of the moon only visible in the Easter Islands. 
I’ll sue! I brief my solicitor. 

198 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
‘Don’t do it, Mr Millington, you’ll lose the case, it would cost a 
lot in legal fees - like this advice, £35.00. Yours etc. Jim Solicitor.’ 
I was now forty. I owned my own home, on eight Tryptazol a day, 
three Secanol at night. As I write, my wife is bailing out the cellar. 
Tomorrow I’m registering the house as a ship. 
Carpenters Meadows 
Dumbwomans Lane 
Udimore 
Rye 
East Sussex TN31 6AD 
11 October 1988 
HRH The Prince of Wales KGKT 
Buckingham Palace 
London 
\ 
Dear Prince Charles, 
I have just received an invitation to your Birthday Ball. Of course I 
will come but can I have the first waltz with you? Its 1-2-3 1-2-3. 
If you do 1-2—3-M it means you get there first. 
I will see you at the snacks counter. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
199 
9 Orme Court 
- ^ London W2 
11 April 1984 
D. Vaux Esq. 
Lloyds Bank Limited 
85 High Street 
Barnet 
Herts 
Dear Mr Vaux, 
My wife went to cash a cheque for £3,000 at your bank, and they 
said they did not have enough money, and to come back the next 
day. Can you tell me how much money you carry so that, in future, 
/ will know whether a cheque should be no more than £5.00 or 
£10.00 or whatever. 
1 cant believe a gipnt bank like Lloyds could not cash a cheque 
for £3,000. 
I mean, the adverts they put out on television and newspapers 
must cost more, so really the adverts are a total contradiction of the 
actual material merchandised. When it comes to the crunch — don’t 
bank at Lloyds if you want to cash a cheque for £3,000. 
Tell you what, supposing I deposit £3,000 in your bank, do you 
think if 1 came back in a year you could cash that ch eque for me. 
That giant horse I keep seeing prancing up and down — does one 
have to own one of these before one can get a cheque cashed. 
With Barnet Lloyds in such a terrible plight, 1 shudder to think 
what it’s like at Lloyds in Potters Bar; as for St Albans, no 
wonder the Romans left, obviously Lloyds could not cash their 
cheques. 
Sincerely 
Spike Milligan 

200 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
from Indefinite Articles and Scunthorpe 
One Mans Week 
Monday. Arise at 7.30. Open the window and scream. Put telephone 
back on hook. London Broadcasting, where news comes first (also 
second, third, fourth and fifth), is telling us the latest. ‘Belfast 3 
bomb explosions, London 2. Belfast still lead by 311...’ the news is 
all bad, but does the announcer have to sound as if he is personally 
involved in it? Even the most trivial news is read in a hard-driving 
the-world-is-ending-tomorrow-voice, i.e. ‘Today the Queen Mother 
opened a Flower Show at Bournemouth’, but when he says it, you 
feel as though the Queen Mother has broken into a Bournemouth 
flower shop wearing a stocking mask and shot the proprietor. 
Why, why, why do they all create an atmosphere of tension? 
Likewise sports reports: ‘Manchester United smashed to defeat 
today etc. etc. Leeds pulverize Villa in savage five-goal attack. 
Tottenham destroyed in three devastating minutes.’ We complain 
about soccer hooliganism, yet all the matches are described in 
violent terms ... The news continues. Moslems and Christians are 
slaughtering each other in ... Basques and Spaniards ... In Ulster 
Protestants and Catholics . . . Portugal Left against Right on the 
verge of Civil War ... I suppose what it all boils down to is man’s 
never really quite happy unless he’s killing himself. And it’s still only 
Monday. 
Another day. I’ve got to go to the Prince of Wales (Theatre), a post¬ 
show presentation to Harry Secombe. I go backstage in the interval 
- we have a laugh. After the show it was intended that Peter Sellers, 
Michael Bentine and I were to give Secombe the Variety Club award 
for his one-hundreth year in show business. Alas, Bentine is 
confined to bed with a severe overdraft, and Sellers is in America 
studying the plans of his next wife, so I have to clod on the stage at 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
201 
the end and say: ‘Harry Seacrune, apparently you haven’t been 
found out yet, so on behalf of someone or other here is something 
or other Value £2.50 VAT 37p.’ He then looked at me and said: ‘Who 
is this man? The play isn’t over yet. Throw him in the general direc¬ 
tion of out.’ It was a thick first-night audience. One had the feeling 
that once they had established they could afford the £25 seat, they 
left. Back in his dressing room, Secombe consumes so much brandy 
that he convinces me he has weaned himself off food. 
Monday continues. The story of man’s follies continues. An Air India 
flight arrives at Heathrow. From it step 100 well fed, well tanked 
up, tired but healthy people - ‘Air India looks after you.’ In the hold 
of the plane are 171 little dead birds; in two following flights the 
number of dead birds total 2,000. I phone Mr Whitaker, the 
Manager, RSPCA Heathrow. Like me, he is morally decimated at 
the needless killing of these small creatures. I ask him who’s respon¬ 
sible; they won’t tell him. He does, however, find the name of one 
home importer, and I print their name large: LADY DELL of 
Worthing. I write to Fred Peart, Minister of Agriculture, and ask 
him does he intend putting an end to this outrageous trade. If so, 
what? I have my hackles up and I decide to do something positive. 
To my way of thinking, a law that imposed massive fines on airlines 
would stop the trade dead in its tracks. With that in mind I write 
to people asking them to become patrons of my cause. I write to 
Prince Charles and say if he becomes the Patron, I will let him off 
the hook for fox-hunting. Lady Dowding promises support, so does 
Michael Foot... Good heavens, it’s still Monday! 
Monday. I watch a bureaucratic charade on TV. The Hounslow Coun¬ 
cil have spoken. Women’s Aid under Erin Pizzey are the only 
organization who give immediate safe refuge to battered wives and 
children. Needless to say, they are overcrowded. ‘Unless you evict 
half the women and children, we will withhold our financial aid.’ The 
reason is there is a health and fire hazard. The latest inmate, Mrs 
Gwen X (I can’t print her name for fear of reprisals by her husband) 
arrived with six broken ribs, a swollen face, and scalds between her 

202 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
thighs - and all done by her husband in full view of their six-year-old 
little girl. Alderman A. King says: ‘If they go to their local social 
worker they will help.’ Well, we then see Mrs Gwen X who had gone 
to her social worker who told her: ‘Go back to your husband.’ 
I cannot see the reasoning of the Hounslow Council. I decided 
to help. We will put on a poetry and jazz concert on Sunday 2 
November at 8.30 p.m. at Ronnie Scott’s, who has given the hall 
free for Womens Aid. Sir Bernard Miles says: ‘Of course I’ll do 
something, Spike.’ Likewise Christopher Logue, Bill Kerr, the Stan 
Tracey Quartet. There’s no shortage of volunteers . . . This wife¬ 
battering is a terrible thing. I wish I could do more. 
Still Monday, Bloody Monday. I am thinking about the Blackpool 
Conference. Old hat by the time you read this, but the aftermath 
still lingers on. What I thought was a monumental piece of walking 
backwards was the rejection of the chance of electoral reform. OK, 
it’s democracy, but the reason for rejecting it, to quote the prime 
mover against, Mr Angus Maude, was: ‘Why should we make it 
possible to let in another 100 Liberals, when the most they can ever 
muster is twenty?’ My God, the nerve!!! He’s not interested in the 
electorate, only the fear of letting in Liberals!!! He concluded with: 
‘Why should we have electoral reform when we have no idea of the 
consequences?’ Thank God Jenner didn’t think like that, or the 
entire Conservative Party would be pox-marked. 
My God, its still Monday. I’m rehearsing my new TV series, Q6 
(why Q6? Why not?). We have an hour to go to recording time and 
we have a disaster. One of the sketches is about a Day in the Life of 
an Ordinary Pakistani Dalek (eh?), in which we use the original 
Daleks, but NO! The agent for the copyright refuses to let us ‘make 
fun of the Daleks’. What to do? I phone the inventor, Terry Nation. 
He’s heard about the trouble and says: ‘Listen Spike, I’ve been waiting 
to repay a favour. Remember when I first came to London twenty- 
three years ago, broke, you lent me twenty quid to tide me over?’ 
‘Did you pay it back?’ 
‘No.’ 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
203 
‘Well, the interest on that will keep me for life.’ 
‘Listen. I’ll let you use the Daleks and we’ll call it square.’ 
‘OK.’ 
It is the last show of the series, so I take the entire cast and tech¬ 
nical crew to the Kalamaris restaurant. I awake next morning face 
downwards on the office floor fully clothed. What went wrong? 
Curse, it’s Monday again. 
Monday. Midday concert for the women of Holloway Prison. I can’t 
understand - you can only give them one and a half hours’ enter¬ 
tainment. If I had gone over time, would they have let me out? 
The fourth Monday in a row, it’s got to stop. 
My continuing battle with food additives is reagitated by a sticker 
on a packet of jam tarts: ‘These tarts must be eaten before 7 Novem¬ 
ber.’ Why? What exactly happens to them on the 8th? I mean, if 
you put them in the fridge and forget to eat them before the 9th, 
when you open the fridge does a green hairy arm covered in jam 
reach out and pull you in? I can’t believe that man has got to the 
state where he is swallowing millions of tons of chemical additives 
a year, and has never ever been asked if he agreed to them being 
put in his food. Who’s in charge? 
The last Monday. The end of the week, and one thing looms large 
in my mind. Someone is spending a lot of money on publicity for 
Mrs Thatcher ... Who? 
Yet another Monday, 19 October. To dinner at Michael Foot’s 
home. When I entered the room Tom Driberg stood up. Has my 
time come at last? On my left hand was Paul Foot. Had a wonder¬ 
ful dinner, which terminated with the table opening in two, and 
those at each end having to keep their knees at fourteen inches 
above normal to keep the table stable for the cheese and biscuits. 
Yes, Michael is a great man, so am I, so is Tom Driberg, so is Paul 
Foot, and so is Mrs Jill Foot. It took eighteen bottles to reach that 
stage. Take a little wine for thy stomach’s sake - well, I also took it 
for my legs, arms, teeth, ankles and the abdominal ridge. 
I must fly now, I feel an attack of British Railways coming on. 

204 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Carpenters Meadows 
Dumbwomans Lane 
Udimore 
Rye 
East Sussex TN31 6AD 
7 December 1988 
The Listener 
BBC Television 
199 Old Marylebone Road 
London NW1 
Dear Sir, 
Milligans Ongoing Revelations of the BBC 
I put up a record programme idea to a producer who thought it ‘too 
good an idea to waste’, and he put it up to^some unknown, name¬ 
less committee who took eight months to say no, whereupon I 
phoned Capital Radio and in one phone call they said yes. 
The BBC used to be called Auntie — I think it’s time to call it 
Grandma. 
Sincerely 
Spike Milligan 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
205 
BBC Television Centre 
. London W12 7RJ 
25 October 1988 
Mr Spike Milligan 
c/o Norma Fames 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
Dear Spike, 
Re: ‘The Royal Variety Performance 1988’ 
Monday 21 November 1988 
The London Palladium 
It is with much regret, that I have to inform you that our proposed 
comedy quick fire gag sequence, in the opening spot of this years 
Royal Variety Performance’, has now had to be withdrawn from the 
show. 
As I explained, the item was based upon the participation of the 
top British Comedy Stars. To be successful, this sequence had to be 
a star-studded ‘tour-de-force’, but, unfortunately, as so many artists 
were unavailable we have been unable to achieve the required 
number of Stars. 
1 do apologise for this cancellation, but I’m sure you will under¬ 
stand that it is because of circumstances beyond my control. I do 
hope that this has not inconvenienced you; but, once again, thank 
you, in advance, for your kind understanding. 
Yours sincerely 
Michael 
Michael Hurll 
Executive Producer and Director 
c.c. Norma Fames 

206 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
28 October 1988 
Michael Hurll Esq. 
The Royal Variety Performance 
British Broadcasting Corporation 
Television Centre ' 
London W12 7RJ 
Dear Michael, 
Your grovelling circular to hand — ‘the best laid schemes o’ mice an 
men gang aft agley’, but in your case its a fuck up. 
Warm regards 
Spike Milligan 
PS. I am going to tell the Queen Mother. , 
from Indefinite Articles and Scunthorpe 
Read All About It! 
Let me take you back to India circa 1924. (Try dialling it, you get put 
through right away.) It was a period when a khaki copy of The Times 
flew alongside the Union Jack at Government House. I was seven at 
the time. Every morning at Reveille a Coggage Wallah* delivered the 
* Paper boy. 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
207 
Poona Times, which I dutifully took to my bedridden, dying grand¬ 
father. In those early years I thought a newspaper was something 
you gave to dying grandfathers. Having just read the entire range of 
morning papers, I am still of the opinion it is something you give 
to dying grandfathers. Hindu editors never quite got the hang of our 
language, for example the headline: ‘GANDHI SENT TO YERO- 
DAH GAOL. SERVES HIM JOLLY WELL RIGHT.’ And again 
the same week: ‘GANDHI THREATENS HUNGER STRIKE: 
KING GEORGE VERY ANGRY GOD BLESS HIM.’ 
I still retain cuttings of my father’s theatrical exploits in India. 
The Bangalore Cantonment Gazette: ‘Bombadier and Mrs Leo Milli¬ 
gan, the married couple, were the hitting of the night’ and, further 
on, ‘Mr Bertram Kettleband did very fine readings from Charles 
Dickens’ Great Expectorations’. Once a month we would receive the 
Overseas Daily Mirror, in its gamboge cover. 
My early knowledge of England then was through the headlines. 
I thought an ordinary day in England was ‘Heavy Snow in Cots- 
wolds. Villagers cut off. Sheep Starving. Jimmy Wilde Champion 
of the World. King George Gravely Ill. Desperate Unemployment 
in Wales. Gracie Fields Mobbed. Fol de Rols break all records in 
Eastbourne. Beheaded Nude Body of Woman found on Brighton 
Beach.’ The only normal thing in the paper was Pip, Squeak and 
Wilfred. It was a shock when I arrived in England to find that 
people in the street were not penguins, dogs or rabbits. This made 
me sad, as I was a member of the Gugnunk Club. I was thirteen 
at the time. Sitting on the train from Tilbury to London I saw the 
headline: ‘DOCKS. RAMSAY MACDONALD STEPS IN.’ 
My own father went to work for the Associated Press of Amer¬ 
ica off Fleet Street, and was soon on the bottle and murmuring: 
‘There’s a nasty rumour going around Fleet Street and his name is 
Lord Northcliffe!’ During his delirium he made up headlines. 
‘Titanic arrives safe at Southampton. “I overslept,” says Captain,’ 
or ‘Archduke Ferdinand still alive! World War 1 a Mistake! Sorry 
says Kaiser.’ He told me that every night news editors knelt naked 
in front of a statue of Beaverbrook, crossed themselves with print¬ 
ers’ ink and said, ‘Please God may something terrible happen in 

208 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
the world tonight preferably to (a) the King, (b) the Pope, or (c) 
Jack Buchanan, and please in time for the next edition, eh?’ 
I was fourteen at the time. It’s on record that the old editor of the 
now dead News Chronicle was without a morning headline and lay 
face down on the floor chewing the carpet. The phone rang. ‘Hello 
Dad? Brace yourself. Mother’s just been killed by a coloured Chinese 
Jew who plays the trombone in Harry Roy’s band.’ ‘Thank God,’ 
said the editor, ‘I’ll have a photographer round in a flash.’ 
In those days newspapers did'straightforward reporting, i.e. a 
football match was reported on the merits of the game. Not so 
today. The reporter concentrates on the player-manager-dressing- 
room-boardroom conflicts. You don’t report goals, you report 
punch-ups. A Rangers-Celtic match is now reported: ‘Rangers: 
3 dead, 20 injured. Celtic: 7 injured, 1 dead.’ The unruly player 
gets the news. Let’s take George Best. He arrives ten minutes late 
for practice; ‘GEORGE BEST MISSING! “I don’t know where 
he is,” says sexy 23-year-old Pop Star Sandra O’Toole, son of Peter 
O’Toole, who is also missing from his grave in Highgate Old 
Cemetery where is making Carry on Up Your Dracula! When Best 
arrives ten minutes later: ‘BEST GIVES HIMSELF UP!’ says 
the midday edition. ‘Under questioning from hard-hitting team 
manager Jim “Socks” Scrackle, “Best broke down and confessed 
that he was 10 minutes late.’” ‘BEST CONFESSES! “Ten Minutes 
That Nearly Ruined My Life.” Read all about it in the News of the 
World. The newspaper with its heart in your knickers.’ 
There is a surfeit of news in England, unlike my parents’ bush 
town in Australia, Woy Woy. Nothing happens in Woy Woy. Some 
headlines are desperate: ‘TODAY IS THE 3RD OF APRIL. OFFI¬ 
CIAL.’ Cub reporters try and turn minutiae into leaders. ‘Woy Woy. 
April 10. This morning during Woy Woy s rush hour, a Mrs Glenda 
Scrock, 64-year-old housewife, was standing at the corner of Kitch¬ 
ener Avenue and Bindi Bindi Crescent when she saw a broken pencil 
lying on the pavement. She picked it up. It was a 2B. She threw the 
pencil in the gutter. The police have ruled out foul play.’ The fact that 
Harry Secombe arrived at Woy Woy station with a banner saying ‘I 
AM HARRY SECOMBE’ and went unrecognized is by the way. 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
209 
Let’s look at the character of each British newspaper each cover¬ 
ing the same story. Let us imagine that Princess Anne, like Sir 
Stafford Cripps’ daughter, married a coloured man, say an African 
goat herder. 
Morning Star 
MARRIAGE OF CONVENIENCE. 
CUNNING MOVE BY 
HEATH 
GOVERNMENT TO PLACATE 
BLACK RHODESIANS 
Daily Telegraph 
Financial Times 
COLOURFUL ROYAL 
SOUND FINANCIAL 
WEDDING 
It was announced from the Palace 
MOVE BY 
ROYAL FAMILY 
today that Her Royal Highness is 
The forthcoming marriage of 
to marry Mr N’galu N’Goolie, a 
Princess Anne to a PAYE native 
foreign gentleman with farming 
Rhodesian commoner will entitle 
connections in Africa, his dark 
her to £100,000 from the privy 
skin no doubt the result of long 
purse as a married woman. Her 
hours in the tropical sun supervis- 
husband’s goat herd will be put in 
ing his herds. 
her name. The Goats will go 
public next year as Royal Goat 
Herd (Holdings) Limited. 

210 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
[John Stonehouse was the MP who famously faked his own death 
in 1974. He’d got into financial difficulties and apparently dis¬ 
appeared into the sea at Brighton, leaving behind a pile of clothes 
on the beach. He turned up in Australia (he hadn’t swum there!). 
He was eventually found, deported to the UK and convicted of 
fraud, reducing Harold Wilson’s Labour government to a minority.] 
V 
' 9 Orme Court 
London W2 
28 April 1988 
Ms Linda Lee Potter 
Daily Mail 
Northcliffe House 
London EC4 
Dear Linda, 
How nice of you to be so kind about John Stonehouse in your 
column. The acrid part of it, of course, was the complete non- 
appearance of any of his old political colleagues. 
It doesn’t speak much for compassion from the Mother of Parlia¬ 
ments. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
211 
10 Downing Street 
London SW1A 2AA 
12 September 1990 
Spike Milligan Esq. 
Dear Mr Milligan, 
Thank you for your further letter of 8 August about the future of 
College Farm which is occupied by Mr Chris Ower. 
I have made enquiries at the Department of Transport. 1 do 
realize the difficulties which the delay has posed for Mr Ower; and 
as I have previously mentioned the rent which he is paying does 
appear to reflect the uncertain ty of his position. Nonetheless I can 
understand his frustration that it is taking so long to reach a 
decision upon the road scheme. 
I very much hope that it will not be too long before a decision on 
the scheme, which initially gave rise to the purch ase of the farm, 
can be made. As soon as a decision on the scheme is announced, 
immediate consideration will be given to the future of the farm. 
I am copying this letter to Cecil Parkinson: I know that he will 
make every effort to expedite matters as soon as possible. 
Kind regards. 
Yours sincerely 
Margaret Thatcher 

212 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
9 Orme Court 
Bayswater 
London W2 4RL 
26 September 1990 
The Prime Minister 
10 Downing Street 
London SW1A 2AA s 
\ 
My dear Mrs Thatcher, 
It’s very heartening to get such an extended letter from such a busy 
woman as yourself, re College Farm. 
I hope you do not mind 1 have s'ent a copy of your letter to Chris 
Ower as it might sound encouraging to him. 
You are a good lass. 
My warm regards 
Spike Milligan 
9 Orme Court 
Bayswater 
London W2 4RL 
2 June 1993 
Rt Hon Norman Lamont MP 
House of Commons 
London 
SW1A OAA 
Dear Norman Lamont, 
Despite all the condemnation I would like to say that as Chancellor 
of the Exchequer you did the very best you could. Alas you were not 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
213 
just facing a recession in Englan d, you were facing one which was 
world wide. I really think you did your best but I thought you were 
a bit naive when you kept announcing the economy was recovering, 
it wasn t recovering and it still isn’t and it will go on for sometime. 
Anyhow just to let you know that I thought you were a good 
Chancellor. 
Sincerely 
Spike Milligan 
Carpenters Meadows 
Dumbwomans Lane 
Udimore 
Rye 
East Sussex TN31 6AD 
20 March 1997 
John Gummer MP 
Secretary of State for En viron men t 
Room 6/0 
Eland House 
Bressenden Place 
London SW1E 5DU 
Dear Mr Gummer, 
I live in Dumbwomans Lane Udimore and in the Spring it is a riot of 
wild flowers. The Rye council cutting machine comes down the lane 
and literally exterminates all the wild flowers. I think the statute book 
states that there is a fine of £1,000for destroying wild flowers. 
I have twice teleph oned the town clerk and asked if they could 
delay the cutting machine for just three weeks which will enable 
these flowers to proliferate. Over to you chum. 
Sincerely 
Spike Milligan. Ace Naturalist. 

214 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
South Asia Educational Fellowship 
2 Eaton Gate 
London SW1W9BL 
} 14 July 1983 
Spike Milligan Esq. 
Spike Milligan Productions Ltd 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
Dear Mr Milligan, 
Recently I had a private lunch at the Institute of Directors for the 
South Asia Educational Fellowship to launch a national appeal of 
£500,000 to further the need for English medium teaching in the 
Indian subcontinent — the philosophy of SAEF being leadership 
through education. 
In writing to you I would hope that you would consider being a 
Patron for this Appeal. I have accepted the role as Chairman of the 
Appeal Committee which consists of many leading figures in the 
business community and others. 
The monies from the Appeal will be used to further increase the 
facilities for education in poor rural areas, aimed at young people 
to obtain appropriate qualifications that will enable them to enter 
medicine, teaching and the business, academic and civil service 
worlds as well as agriculture. 
Recognizing that India is short of some two million teachers with 
a 64% illiteracy index and a population growth of one million a 
month, the urgency is self evident. ■ 
As you will see in the attached Boardroom Brief, Dr Alka Peter 
from Nagpur, north India, received a grant from SAEF that has 
enabled her to finish her medical training and return to India with 
the appropriate qualifications. 

\(our "to 
w^uda \ NslvVl <^et atait 
\d^d, but ir\~\te Sa^e carik 
cx \^ec-Prcm ELmvVa, zwKk 
-£*b\c>Sive Gcrnci \Hfud\ one 
cdmosA £v«a.C A^-e nn^Aioq sk*2- 
mana^^l ^ 3a p«lW °\, 
* 3* cWTqe.^U - -'■VW 
cL c«w^) sfceol u"> 
5«Su, Tail <n J ( 
J -' 
wH nain \ /U €* 
When I asked Spike the 
date of this letter to Robert 
Graves he said, ‘Somewhere, 
sometime.’ This is the original 
of the crossword joke, now a 
greetings card. 
Charges to pay 
^ d<V«- *«P©JU-0£ 
T/4 1430 ST JJ1ES ST BO 37 
SPIRE MIL.UlQAN 
BIRTHDAYS C01E AMD BIRTHDAYS SO 
VIE1 GOVERNED BY LIFE'S EBB AMD FLO 
BUT AS I FACE THE NACKER3 YARDS 
I THA.Mil YOU FOR YOUR SIND REGARDS - 
LOVE NED THE DISAPPEARING TENOR + 
1 4 * 
tl 
2 C?D Ati 950 4124 
For free repetition of doubtful words telephone "TELEGRAMS ENQUIRY” or call, with this form 
at office o* delivery. Other enquiries thould be accompanied by this form, and, If possible, the envelope 
(above) 8 September 1974. A telegram from Harry 
Secombe thanking Spike for his birthday card. 
(left) 1978. Signing copies of Mussolini; while promoting 
Friends of the Earth with his T-shirt and animal rights 
on his cap. 

-jqbi 1 1 PO °n 3 
>00007 oo TS >5 
^ 1 1212 LONDON T 6p 
M? SPIKE MILLIGAN 
■P 
>A' SPIKE I A" DESPEPA7E T 0 HAVE SOME W.t"' FUN A3AI‘ •/1 T • I YOU A NO 
-A73Y . PLEAS! AN v'S get TCTET IE' AND •>=!?•,’ SOME MORE GOON SHGVS 7 
•E COULD PLACE THEM ANY '/HERE I DOMT /ANT At*Y MONEY I /ILL VORK JUST 
FOP THE SHEER JOY OF BEING VITH YOU ROTH AGAIN AS •/£ VL1 E . 
LOVE • 
PETER \ 
299992 PO TS 3 
JOB 111 PO PO 0 
1980. Telegram from Peter Sellers. How apt that Spike should have said, ‘We were all 
happy then.’ Peter trying to recapture the happiness. He died two months later. 
1981. One of the guests at Prince Charles and Lady 
Diana’s wedding - but who? 
1984. Now wearing his Great Ormond Street 
jumper, pictured here with his hero. 

4Ma* Mc**u3l 
1985. My birthday card, but why 'Spike Milligan? He got carried away with his calligraphic signature. 
Spike Milligan. 
The Oast, 
Hazelhurst Farm, 
Ticehurst, 
East Sussex. 
tn5 7lf 
Tel. (0380) 200314 
CaA 

, P'assonttcl 
K; ' )1 Pi - 
Kgwvuc iFtmjvve/^ 
°) Gdu,^, 
^>CImA^ felIpS LO Otte^ 
la ^-Lcov^ 
M 0r,v^ 
0rrnt- Gauir 
^Y-Svuoiu. 
/V. Fames, 
9, Orme Court, 
Bayswater, 
London, 
^2 
*/l C< C&J v*» 
V>eA<?v T'Wa>^ V\e*9 
C.t*^ 
Qj cP-^ 
UrJiV^ 
&d«-< 
Vfsl , 
w. 
?*H »W*o 
R>uyu^> 
°) dnfv\€. C^ur-L 
S'cu^o U>ccl-<U^ 
^oitcX^x 
vn2. 
Spikes love affair with the postmen - and they loved it too. ‘Another letter from Spike,’ they’d sa> 

(top) 1988. In those famous red braces, with his Irish friend 
Terry Wogan. He drove Terry mad, but he loved him. 
(centre) 1990. The Harry Secombe Show. Spike came back after 
the shoot and said, ‘I know now that that’s what I should have 
been all my life - a busker.’ 
(right) Spike on hard times? This photo was sent from New York 
. and addressed to the News of the World, asking if it was really 
Spike. Spike’s response: ‘Bring on the clones ...’ 

1992. Well, that’s a lie. 
With John Paul Getty. ‘Taking his place in society’? 
You. could say he’d arrived. They were great friends. 
1995. His sweetheart, the love of his life: Maria Antoinetta Fontana, aka Mrs Toni Pontani, 
on This Is Your Life. 

1990. He had to cancel this performance. 
He was too ill to appear. Note: Natalie the 
Neighbours star! . . 
AND 
SEVEN 
THE 
DWARFS 
SPECIAL 
FINALE 
SONGSHEET 
APPEARANCE 
OF 
CCHWTtSV fTi, v 
mo* jf 
World of 
adventures 4 . 
MARIO 
RETURNED BY PUBLIC DEMAND f 
BBC RADIO 2 PRESEN TER k 
BARBARA STURGEON \ 
mTM Wicked Queen 
KATE CORMAN as Fairy Snowflake 
sutf*aapn>c*i >*««*ouRr isuSAYMTtRnRKwTHEAWMiair 
NICK GEORGE as Lord Chamberlain I 
MATTHEW STIRLING a. IN* Tax Collector / 
THE RITA PROCTOR DANCERS L 
ANDRfW RUMBLE & HIS ORCHESTRA Q. 
'A NINTENDO'S 
SUPER 
'r. MARIO 
4 BROS.~ 
ALSO STARRING 
Marlowe „ DAVID LEE’S TENTH 
SPECTACULAR PANTOMIME! 
DAVID LEE PRODUCTIONS LTD IN ASSOCIATION with 
CANTERBURY CITY COUNCIL PROUDLY PRESENTS 
SPIKE MILLIGAN 
v. Q 
NATALIE IMBRUGLIA 
DIEtCTCD BY OAVIO ICC CHORCOCRAPH* BY RITA PROCTOR 
(BETH BRENNAN) 
BOX OFFICE: CANTERBURY (02271767246 
Open 10am-6pm Sean (*>*45.50 §§ ^ 
December 1908 
7.30pm ’ 
£*^^f£'W«.il8,ao)I25 
X 
E LONDON PALLADIUM 
A Stol! Moss Theatre 
BOX OFFICE 0171 494 5058 
1998. His last performance at 
the Palladium with his one-man 
show. 

1999- The last photograph of two old 
mates. 
2008. A Spike Milligan bridge and 
Spike Milligan room in Woy Woy 
library. Perhaps he did take his place 
in society after all. 
<u 
O) 
33 
Cd c 
c 0 
• MHM 
a 
o> -Q 
jC 
• ■MB 
s X 
LU 
CD 0 
• BM 0 
a 
(/> O- 
LZ 
CD 
JZ 
CD 
o> 
0 
h“ 
- T5 
• Mi 
O OQ 
0 
O) 
r- od 
(D 
# MM 
> 
a> 
D cr 
c 
%• • a 
Mayor of Gosford City 
Councillor Jim Macfadyen 
wishes to invite Norma Fames to the unveiling of 
'The Spike Mi'ligan Bridge' Plaque 
Where 
The northern side ofThe Spike Milligan Bridge, 
Koolewong. 
Following you are Invited to join me In walking along 
the footpath to Woy Woy Library where there will be a 
Spike Milligan Bridge Photo Exhibition and 
morning tea in the Spike Milligan Room, 
Woy Woy Library, Blackwall Road, Woy Woy. 
When 
Saturday 29 March 2008 
10,00am 
Please RSVP by Monday 24 March 2008 to 
Allan Brown on 4325 8929 or 
Allan,Brown@aosford.nsw.aov an 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
215 
I very much look forward to hearing from you in the hope that 
you will agree to be a patron. 
Yours sincerely 
The Viscount Slim 
9 Orme Court, 
London W2 
22 July 1983 
The Viscount Slim 
South Asia Educational Fellowship 
2 Eaton Gate 
London SWIW 9BL 
Dear Viscount Slim, 
How can I ever refuse anything from a man like you. Of course, any 
project to help humanity. 
I beg you to bear in mind though, my own particular work which 
most people are ignoring, that is the desperate need for first a 
population stabilization, and then a reduction of population to a 
level whereby which the produce of their own country can match 
their own fertility. 
This is the big problem of our time, we have a limited size Globe, 
and yet our leaders seem unaware that limitless numbers are trying 
to live off it, hence starvation, malnutrition, disease, squalor and 
filth. 
Good luck to the project. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 

216 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Carpenters Meadows 
Dumbwomans Lane 
Udimore 
Rye 
East Sussex TN31 6AD 
v 27 February 1989 
Mr Christopher Patten s 
Minister of State 
Overseas Development Administration 
Eland House 
Stag Place 
London SW1E 5DH 
Dear Christopher, 
I write to you pleading with you to cease supplying funds for this 
monstrous dam in South America. What we are doing, Chris, is 
destroying reality for something artificial and along with that we 
Christians are going to dispose two primitive tribes of their hom e¬ 
land where they have lived since the beginning of time. Do look 
deep into your conscience, not as Minister of State but as an ordi¬ 
nary person and say to yourself, ‘What am I doing to these people?’ 
What is happening, Chris, is the system is running the people and 
the people are not running the system. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
217 
from Indefinite Articles and Scunthorpe 
Honesty 
The Editor of Punch, slobbering white, comes tippy toe to me, 
Spike Milligna the well-known typing error, and whines ‘Will you 
write an article on Honesty?’ Of course I will, anything to stop 
the closure of the magazine. There was the usual hand to hand 
struggle with pangas to agree the fee. Honesty? Of course I knew 
all about it, wasn’t it growing in my garden under the name of 
Lunaria biennis? 
It wasn’t until I had finished the third volume that Silly Willy 
Davis pointed out the mistake. ‘You silly twit, you’ve made a cock- 
up.’ I accepted the apology and a cheque for eighty new pence in 
lieu of a court case. He went on ‘You really are a sillypoo, what we 
want is the moral connotation. Write one thousand two hundred 
words.’ One thousand two hundred words? On Honesty? Nobody 
was that HONEST. Twenty-seven words was enough for anyone, 
even Jesus, and he’s a bit suspect - it’s strange, he never put anything 
in writing! 
HONESTY. I went to the British Museum, where they kept the 
word under lock and key. The word has been on loan to Mr Jack 
Jones, but the moment he mentioned ‘HONEST day’s work’ he 
was floored by a docker. The keeper of the word HONESTY took 
me into its cage. ‘It’s getting a bit old and worn. We’ve tried to get 
a new one but it’s very rare, in fact it’s in the World Wildlife Fund 
Red Book as endangered. I think myself it’s ’ad it. I sometimes take 
it for a walk on a lead, but nobody seemed to recognize it, some 
children patted it but that’s all.’ 
‘What is your opinion of the word HONEST?’ 
‘It can’t live in twentieth-century environment sir, so she’s dyin’, 
we try matin’ it wiv the word PAYS, and get a sort of cross-breed 
called HONESTY-PAYS. We flew it in!’ 

218 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
‘In? Where from?’ 
‘Russia, they has this word PAYS on its own in a cage, it was a 
male, because the Male always PAYS’ 
‘Did it work?’ 
‘No.’ 
In the Reading Room I looked it up. There it was. HONEST: 
Upright, fair, trustworthy in dealings, fr,ank. Open. Honest to good¬ 
ness, to turn an honest penny, to seize opportunity to make a profit, 
to make an honest woman of a seduced woman ... so, an honest 
man had a military bearing (upright). Blond hair (fair). Plays cards 
s 
(trustworthy dealings). Christian name Frank (frank). Doorman 
(open). Welsh (honest to goodness). Robs weak old ladies (seizes 
opportunity to make a profit). Makes single women pregnant and 
then marries them (To make an honest woman of a seduced 
woman). 
Next on the list of Silly Willy’s 'questions was: 
question 1: ‘Have there been times in your life when you were 
totally honest, and regretted it?’ 
answer: ‘Yes. I once said to a 6 ft 3 in Canadian soldier “I’ll 
punch your bloody head in.’” 
question 2: ‘Are there times when you wished you had been 
totally honest?’ 
answer: ‘Yes. My first marriage. I said “I do.’” 
question 3: ‘What sort of things on the national scene, etc. do 
you think we should be totally honest about?’ 
answer: ‘All those faceless bastards called “Spokesman Said” 
should be forced to give their names i.e. “A Spokesman Said called 
the Hon. Startling-Grope OBE said, etc. etc.’” 
And who cares about honesty in this day and age? Diogenes 
walked the streets of Athens in daylight holding aloft a lamp to help 
him find an honest man. Imagine that in Piccadilly. 
policeman: ‘I saw the accused, Diogenes, at midday in Picca¬ 
dilly carrying a hurricane lamp, which he held up in the face of 
oncoming men.’ 
judge: ‘Is that true?’ 
Diogenes: ‘Yes. I was looking for an honest man.’ 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
219 
judge: ‘In London?’ 
Diogenes: ‘Yes.’ 
judge: ‘Remanded for a psychiatric report.’ 
And take the first American President. There he is as a lad, a 
fresh felled cherry tree lies at his feet, he is clutching a hot axe, not 
another person for miles when a man asks: 
man: ‘Son, who chopped down the cherry tree?’ 
george: ‘I cannot tell a lie, I did.’ 
I mean, what else could he say? And because of that he’s called 
honest? And why is it that those in dodgy professions use the 
word? The bookie ‘Honest’ Bill Hampton? A glance down shows 
him to be wearing running shoes. Why not extend the idea?.. . 
bbc tv announcer: ‘And now a partially political broadcast 
by Honest Reginald Maudling ...’ 
Or ‘And now our annual company report by Honest Sir Val 
Duncan.’ Why should the word only apply to homo sapiens? Why 
not, ‘Look out here comes HONEST Tiger,’ or ‘Help, I am being 
strangled by HONEST Gorilla? Let’s break the word down into 
units. Take H, Hitler, Hum-drum, Hack, Horrible, or HO, Ho Ho 
Ho, mocking laughter, three letters HON, the HON Edward Heath, 
see? It leads to a twit. 
No, we need a new word. I suggest Eileen. ‘That man’s one of the 
most EILEEN men in the world’ or ‘He’s never done an EILEEN 
day’s work in his life.’ 
Well, that should keep Silly Willy quiet for a while. And I say to 
you all, try and live an EILEEN life. That’s the best I can do, Willy. 
EILEEN it is. 

220 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Carpenters Meadows 
Dumbwomans Lane 
Udimore 
Rye 
East Sussex 
TN31 6AD 
\ 
17 January 1989 
The Officer Commanding 
Regimental Headquarters 
The Coldstream Guards 
Wellington Barracks 
Birdcage Walk 
London SW1 
Dear Sir, 
I really must unburden my conscience. On the night of 5 Novem¬ 
ber 1943 Lieutenant Walker MC and myself Lance Bombardier 
Milligan, were in an OP trench on the slopes overlooking the 
village of Gala Britto. It was an appalling night made slightly 
humorous by a report on my OP phone that there was a position 
near called Bare Ass Ridge. That said during the evening the 
position was heavily stonked by 88mm guns firing air bursts over 
our trenches. Somewhere about 3.00 in the morning it was my 
duty to crawl out of this trench and go to a collection point where 
we were to gather our rations, in this case some hot stew in a 
container. In the darkness and the gloom there were many units 
collecting various rations and then, and this is where I must have 
brought the wrath of the Guards Brigade on me, in the darkness a 
voice called out, ‘Coldstream Guards rum ration, ’ and in that split 
moment I shouted out, Mere, ’ and I was given a glass/carton 
container with rum in it. I got safely back to my OP trench where 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
221 
Lieutenant Walker and I drank it all the while toasting the 
Brigade of Guards. Apparently during the night we both became 
stupified with the atcohol because at dawn the next day when we 
were relieved the relief party officer said, ‘That was a nasty 
German attack last night, ’ whereupon I replied in all innocence, 
‘What attack?’ 
What I am trying to do is to arrange an occasion when I can 
presen t a case of twelve bottles of rum to any particular unit of the 
Coldstream Guards that are in need of that rum ration. 
I remain, sir, 
repentant but now sober 
Spike Milligan 
9 Orme Court, 
Bayswater 
London W2 
8 March 1989 
i 
Lt Col. E.B.L. Armitstead 
1st Battalion 
Coldstream Guards 
Wellington Barracks 
Birdcage Walk 
London SW1E 6HQ 
Dear Lt Col. Armitstead, 
Alas, owing to other commitments I will be unable to accept your 
very kind offer to lunch on Thursday 6 April. However, / would still 
like to have the dozen bottles of rum delivered. As I have no phone 
number for you I will phone Major Cazenove and ask him the best 
place to have it delivered. 
I hope this meets with your approval. 

222 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
It is over forty years since I drank the Coldstream Guards rum 
and now my conscience will be salved. 
Sincerely 
Spike Milligan 
Mr Spike Milligan 
Archbishop’s House 
Westminster 
London SW1P 1QJ 
29 August 1990 
Dear Mr Milligan, 
Please kindly forgive this way of writing to you! 
I am trying to collect texts for a possible book on the theme of 
HEAVEN/PARADISE to be called I WILL MEET YOU IN 
HEAVEN. The book will be ecumenical. 
I would be honoured if you would contribute one page to this 
work. This could be expressed in a personal way or through: SCRIP¬ 
TURE, HYMN, POEM, PROSE, SPIRITUAL OR GENERAL 
WRITING, YOUR OWN WORDS (published or other). 
I hope and pray that you will answer this request and that 
people will be helped by your words as a source of hope and 
strength. 
On a very practical note, if you give a quote, please kindly give 
the TITLE, PAGE, PUBLISHER AND DATE or the translation 
of a Bible used, etc. May I also have your permission to use the text 
and to give your name (all proper copyright would be fully 
respected). 
You might simply mail me a Xerox copy of any material or if a 
Bible quote please just give Chapter and Verse. I would like very 
much for it to be near a page in length. 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
223 
/ would appreciate very much a quick reply, knowing just how 
very very busy you are. 
God bless and keep you. 
With my sincere and warm thanks. 
Affectionately, 
Fr. Michael, SA 
Father Michael Seed, SA 
Ecumenical Adviser 
PS. Forgive this way of writing to you - do hope you can help. 
9 Orme Court 
Bayswater 
London W2 4RL 
27 September 1990 
Father Michael Seed 
Archbishop’s House 
Westminster 
London SW1P 1QJ 
Dear Father Michael Seed, 
Forgive the delay in replying to your letter of August 29th it arrived 
when / was on holiday. 
Yes of course I would like to help and I am enclosing herewith 
my text. 
I do hope this is what you wanted. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 

224 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
I have a problem, I would like to believe in heaven and an afterlife 
but I can find no evidence of it. There is much spoken about the after¬ 
life and the glories that it contains but personally I cannot feel that 
such a place exists; that does not stop me living a life of a good Chris¬ 
tian whose philosophy, through the teachings of Jesus Christ, I try to 
observe closely mixed with a touch of Buddhism on the environmental 
side. ? 
Shall I put it this way I find heaven is on earth 1 am stunned by 
the beauty of a blade of grass, cdn I say more. 
If there is a h eaven then I will consider it a bonus. 
[Knowing he was a supporter of their cause, the Hunt Saboteurs 
Association wrote to Spike asking for a quote for their newsletter.] 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
4 August 1988 
Chris Bishop Esq. ' 
Hunt Saboteurs Association 
PO Box No. 87 
Exeter EX4 3TX 
Dear Chris Bishop, 
Here is my quote, in answer to your letter of the 24th July. 
7 like birds in the sky 
Not in the pie. ’ 
Sincerely 
Spike Milligan 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
225 
from Indefinite Articles and Scunthorpe 
The Hell of Flying 
There was a time when Canopus and Solent flying boats, complete 
with beds, cabins, lounges, etc., would fly one to Australia, but - ha 
ha - since then we’ve made that bloody pardon-me-howling-with- 
laughter-word ‘Progress’. Let me recount that progress, if at all, 
amounts to 300 mph faster, and 20,000 feet higher; the rest is sheer 
agony. When I pay BA or Qantas or South African or TWA airlines 
hundreds and hundreds of pounds to travel first class, the word 
‘first’ should have a meaning beyond more grog, grovelling and 
grub. One needs most of all on a long journey to, say, Australia, 
relaxation, tranquillity and rest - and do we get it? My God we 
don’t! Let me carry out a blow-by-blow account of the punishment 
from the moment we board. 
First that terrible sound-swill is playing, that unbearable Muzak. 
Even more terrible, the sound control is with, not a musician or a 
passenger, but a member of the cabin staff, and the degree of blast¬ 
ing you get depends on exactly how thick or deaf he is. He has no 
idea what is on the Muzak tape - one is fed absolute absurdities. 
Board a BA 747 on a snow-bound day at Heathrow, and the idiot 
machine will be playing ‘Springtime in Vienna. It is mindless. No 
one listens to it. It is a waste of time, money and energy and is 
IMPOSED upon the traveller irrespective of whether he wants it 
or not. 
I show my boarding pass to a young thing who by her slightly 
dazed reaction shows she has not been on the plane much longer 
than I have. ‘Now see, in a Trident the As are there and on a 747 
there.’ She shows me my seat. 
‘I asked for, and was told, I would be in a non-smoking area. This 
is a smoker.’ 
‘Oh, we’ll see what we can do after we take off,’ she says. 

226 
Milligan’s Meaning .of Life 
Great, I wish I could say that when I was buying my ticket: ‘I’ll 
see what I can do about paying you’ 
‘Paper, sir,’ says a sweet young thing. 
‘Yes, I’d like the Guardian.’ 
‘Sorry, there’s only the Financial Times and the Sun! I see, it’s 
money or tits. I opt for the money rag. As I’m excitedly reading 
about the variability of the equity market, I am offered a glass of 
champagne. 
‘No, thanks. I don’t drink at 10.30 of a morning.’ 
‘Orange juice?’ 
‘No, thanks. I had some for breakfast.’ 
All my answers are received with a commutability. It’s either 
yes or no and, like the milkman’s horse, she moves on at the word 
‘no’. All the other regular travelling slobs are downing the stuff so 
they can forget who they are. I’m looking for some news in the 
Financial - 
‘Canapes before lunch, sir?’ 
‘It’s a bit early for lunch.’ 
‘Oh, it’s not yet.’ 
‘When?’ 
As soon as we take off.’ 
‘When is that?’ 
‘There’s been a delay so we can’t say.’ (Note the Royal We.) 
‘No lunch for me then.’ 
The word ‘no’ sends her on her way. I am looking for news in the 
Financial Ti - 
‘Writing paper and postcards, sir?’ 
I accept them. I note the smoking lunatics are clenching and 
unclenching their fists waiting for the NO SMOKING signs to 
disappear. Some of the loonies are sitting with a cigarette in their 
mouth, match in one hand and matchbox in the other. The Muzak 
grinds endlessly on. I am looking for news in the Financial Ti - 
‘Headphones; sir.’ 
‘What for?’ 
‘The music channels, sir.’ 
‘Music? I can hear it playing quite clearly.’ 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
227 
‘No. These are other music channels’ 
‘I’ll think about it.’ 
‘It’s one pound for the headset.’ 
I am looking for news in the Financial Ti - 
‘Programme, sir.’ ♦ 
‘What for?’ 
‘The music channel.’ She sticks it in my hand. 
I am looking for news in the Financial Ti - 
‘Hot towels?’ 
‘No, thank you. I can’t eat another thing.’ 
I am looking - 
‘Socks and eye masks?’ 
I’m handed another envelope with the stuff in. When in Christ 
is it going to stop? Almost immediately I am given the lunch menu. 
A bowl of peanuts is put beside me (YOU’VE GOT TO HAVE 
THEM). 
‘More champagne, sir?’ 
I have given up trying to read. I sit back, look blankly ahead, 
listening to the Muzak gunge pour out. 
An announcement: ‘Will cabin crew check all doors for take-off’ 
» 
Hooray, that actually stopped the Muzak. Wait. No, it’s back 
again. 
Announcement: ‘Good morning, this is your captain speaking. 
I’m sorry about this delay, it’s to do with the rain, but we should be 
taking off shortly.’ Muzak. 
‘Will you fasten your safety belt, please.’ 
Ah! the Muzak has stopped. ‘Hello, hello. Ladies and gentlemen, 
under your seat you will find a life jacket. In the event of an emer¬ 
gency, etc. etc.’ The girl stewardess does the cabaret, and we all cheer 
at the end. Muzak. 
Hoping that the interruptions are over, I start to read Twenty- 
four Hours in Entebbe, and wish I was there and not on this bloody 
plane. 
‘This is your flight deck steward. For your information, the 
stewards or stewardesses [and there’s very little difference] can 
be called by pulling the button in your arm rest. Thank you.’ 

228 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Were moving!! 
‘Hello, ladies and gentlemen, this is your captain speaking. We’ve 
had a clear for take-off, so we should be airborne in about twelve 
minutes. Thank you.’ 
There is hardly a pinpoint between the announcement and the 
interruptions. You realize we are all on one great conveyor belt. We 
taxi to the runway. 
‘I must apologize for this further delay, but we should be off in 
about five minutes.’ 
The restrained smokers are now sitting with bulging eyes, pour¬ 
ing alcohol down themselves to neutralize their craving for the 
weed. We are actually taking off!!! Fortunately the whine of the 
engines has partially drowned the Muzak. We are up. Off goes the 
NO SMOKING sign, the nicotine lunatic next to me is off in a 
cloud of smoke, and that awful job of me having to inhale some 
of it for him is on. I remind the hostess of her promise of a non- 
smoker. Luckily there is a vacant non-smoking seat in which I now 
take up residence. Outside is a beautiful, silent, clean, aired world. 
Inside the Muzak is grinding my mind to pulp. 
‘Hello, this is your captain speaking. Just to fill you in, we shall 
be flying at...’ Here we all join in the chorus ‘500 mph’, ‘ .. and we 
will be flying at...’ All together! ‘30,000 feet...’ 
Muzak again. I pull the call button. Sweet thing arrives. 
‘Can you turn off this Muzak, please? I’ve heard it round three 
times.’ 
‘I’ll speak to the chief steward.’ She really doesn’t understand. 
Why? No other passengers have ever asked for it to be turned 
off. 
I carried out a minor psychological experiment. I asked each one 
of the stewardesses if they could remember any tune of the tape. 
No. I even asked several passengers if they remembered any. Answer. 
No. So will someone tell me what it’s on for? 
It’s switched off, and a little girl in the seat behind says, ‘Mummy, 
they’ve switched off the don’t-be-frightened-we’re-not-going-to- 
crash-on-take-off music’, and that summed it up. 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
229 
Concept Public Relations 
4 Cupar Road 
Battersea 
London SW11 4JW 
13 September 1986 
Spike Milligan 
Spike Milligan Productions Ltd 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
Dear Spike, 
Please accept this complimentary sample of Brauns latest electrical 
appliance. 
It has been specially designed for men who like to keep their 
beards in trim. 
Braun hope you enjoy using this to keep your World famous 
beard in trim. 
Kind regards 
Yours sincerely 
pp. A. Heath 
Lyndon Evans 
Shaver Product Manager 
Braun UK Ltd 

230 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
23 September 1986 
Lyndon Evans 
Concept Public Relations 
4 Cupar Road 
Battersea n 
London SW114JW 
Dear Lyndon Evans Shaver Product Manager Braun UK Ltd, 
Thank you for your magnificent gift of the Braun Beard Trimmer, 
alas I haven’t a beard, can we swop one for an electric razor; this is, 
of course, if you intended it to be a useful present. If it is intended 
to be a useless one, then thank you I will keep it. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan , 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
231 
Concept Public Relations 
. ' ■ 4 Cupar Road 
Battersea 
London SW11 4JW 
30 September 1986 
Spike Milligan 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
Dear Spike, 
Thank you very m uch for your letter in response to our apparently 
not very appropriate gift. What ever happened to your beard!!? 
Enclosed, please find our swopsy, a Braun 3512 electric Shaver, I 
hope that you will find this a lot more useful. 
Many thanks 
Kind regards 
Abby Heath 
Concept Public Relations 

232 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
13 October 1986 
Ms Abby Heath 
Concept Public Relations 
4 Cupar Road 
Battersea ' 
London SW11 4JW 
Dear Abby, 
What a magnificent gift; my legs look magnificent now, in fact, I 
have given up wearing trousers. Cl£an and smooth, white and 
spotless, with dimpled knees, wearing fishnet stockings I can be seen 
any day on the tube between Queensway and Leicester Square and 
my importuning licence is up to date. 
You asked what became of my beard, for services to the nation it 
now lies buried in a time capsule at Runnymede where it will be 
captured by Martians. 
Give my love to your mother she knows what this is all about. 
Let’s get married, 1 love you. A picture of you standing naked 
outside Buckingham Palace would suffice. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
233 
from Scunthorpe Revisited, Added Articles 
and Instant Relatives 
Holiday Package 
There was a honeyed time when through the impoverished eyes of 
my early post-war years, the nearest I got to the exotic holiday was 
through a Travelogue at the local flea pit, or the glossy travel 
brochures that were starting to proliferate with the coming tourist 
boom. One day, I thought, I will make enough money to go to a 
sun-scorched beach, and splash in turquoise waters. Well, what do 
you know? It all came true. I worked hard, money was shovelled 
into my coffers, and the world was my oyster. 
Wrong! Had I only gone on dreaming. Alas, I found the condi¬ 
tions in the glossy brochure better than reality. I first settled for 
‘Historic, sunladen, land of the Lotus Eaters’. So said the brochure. 
I arrived at Goulette Airport Tunis, destination Skanes Palace 
Monastic The Glossy Brochure Car - ‘Will meet you at the airport 
and waff (yes, waff!) you to your destination’ - did not materialize. 
What did materialize was one hour of argument with the tour rep, 
during which a Tunisian customs officer tried to confiscate my 
radio/cassette player believing that the reason for my trip was to 
sell it! 
Finally a taxi turned up, who, having us by the shorts, charges 
us double for the trip. The ‘Delightful bungalow on to the sea’ had 
delightful non-functioning air-conditioners, so we slept with every 
window, and door, closed at night to avoid malarial mosquitoes. It 
was like sleeping in a sauna. I won’t warn tourists of the minor 
irritations, but we made a visit to Ras Domas (Roman Thapsus). I 
and my wife were looking over the ruins, when three Arab youths 
with spear-guns threatened us with violence. It was very frighten¬ 
ing. I wrote to President Bourgiba, and despite a second letter, I 
was ignored. 

234 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Had enough Milligan? No, this was just a one-off. Next glossy 
brochure holiday - ‘Greek villas in historical Lindos’. This turned 
out to be a cupboard with a fridge. At dawn it was a rat race for 
three-wheeled motor vehicles to awaken you. Every afternoon 
during siesta it was noisy. Greek men sat under our window and 
spoke as though conversing with the deaf. Atjiight, across the bay, 
four discos blared out appalling Quadrophonic music which 
continued until 4 a.m. We searched out isolated beaches, only to 
find them so fouled as to be unbearable. I prayed for the day I flew 
home. 
What’s that jolly British Airways tune? ‘We’ll take good care 
of you.’ Well, something must have gone wrong. From the roof 
of the plane water kept dripping, the carpet underfoot was 
soaked. 
‘It’s the condensation,’ explained the helpful air hostess. 
Surely this was just a run of bad luck? One more time. Comes 
1980, year of hope, and this time it’s gotta be good. My auntie has 
recommended us a villa in Corfu. The brochure looks good; I speak 
with the agents, all charming, helpful, quiet, yes, isolated, yes, own 
catering, etc. fine. There’s the usual cattle round-up flight, OK 
Corfu. Most dangerous airport in the Med, says helpful fellow 
passenger. Hire car OK. Off we drive to Kassiopi. Our villa is 
isolated, the views are superb, Albania. Villa a converted farmhouse, 
no luxury but comfortable. 
Shortcomings occur as time passes. Half the light bulbs are dead; 
‘Sorry no replacements, we have to get them from England.’ (Then 
why don’t they?) Water pressure not very good. Why? Water is from 
well, well is nearly empty. 
‘I’ll get a water wagon to fill it up.’ 
‘Daddy, Daddy, the toilet won’t flush.’ 
Daddy can get it to flush, no he cap’t. What Daddy can do is fight 
a burst pipe which is flooding the house, and he only succeeds 
because he brought (a) a kit of tools, and (b) adhesive waterproof 
tape. 
Eating out in Kassiopi, very nice if you can stand appalling West- 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
235 
ern Rock music, full blast, not one tune mind you, but five tavernas, 
cheek by jowl, each with a different tune. 
Conversation is Impossible. The tourists don’t seem to mind as 
they appear to be pissed out of their minds. Young trainee rapists 
with tattoos from their ankles up to their teeth shout, ‘Whey oop, 
Spike, can I have your autograph on this fag packet?’ 
So, meals at home for Daddy. Never mind, there are those glossy 
‘Golden Beaches’, but, not apparently on Corfu. There was every 
kind of filth on the beach except dying lepers. A fortnight’s holiday 
in the Gents’ Urinal at Victoria Station would be preferable. There 
were, of course, the intermittent electrical blackouts. The best 
surprise was the electrical shocks from the water taps. Nothing like 
200 volts in the bath with a wet body. A search revealed an earth 
wire wound round the water pipes. It was hell having to bath in 
rubber gloves and plimsolls. 
9 Orme Court, 
London W2 
10 June 1985 
Miss D. Harman 
Rostrum 
Christie’s 
85 Old Brompton Road 
London SW7 3JS 
Dear Debbie, 
I wont say it was an appalling piece of editing, but it must have 
been a total puzzle to people who read my article (did you edit it), 
when suddenly at the end of the whole article it said For the 

236 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
anxious, the two Elizabethan chairs were copies of English ones, 
made in Goa, India in about 1850, inlaid with bone and ivory. ’ 
Whereas there is absolutely no mention of this previously in the 
article, it made no sense at all. 
Yours baffled 
Spike Milligan 
' GGK London Ltd 
, 76 Dean Street 
London W1V 5HA 
17 June 1985 
S. Milligan Esq. 
9 Or me Court 
London W2 
Dear Mr Milligan, s 
Re: CHRISTIE’S 
Following a conversation I have had with Debbie Harman at 
Christie’s South Kensington, she has asked me to write to you in her 
absence this week. 
It is, of course, in respect of your article that appeared incorrectly 
in Rostrum magazine. As the producer of Rostrum, can I apologize 
for what is a mistake of considerable proportions. It is somewhat 
academic how the mistake occurred, though perhaps it is relevant to 
say that it was not a case of crass editing, but a failure in the system 
between typesetting and make up, and ultimately proof reading. 
I very much appreciate the considerable effort that goes into 
producing such articles and I can well understand the anger felt 
when such a mistake as this occurs. I hope that the episode has not 
caused you too much embarrassment and I am sure, should you 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
237 
wish, that a suitable piece could he published in the next issue of 
Rostrum, to correct matters. 
Finally, may I shy that your article was a much valued contribu¬ 
tion and there is considerable embarrassment over what has 
occurred. I hope our sincere apologies will go some way towards 
repairing the situation. 
Yours sincerely 
Paul Silvester 
Client Services Director 
C.C. Debbie Harman, Christies South Kensington 
9 Orme Court 
London W2 
19 June 1985 
Paul Silvester Esq. 
j 
GGK London Ltd 
76 Dean Street 
London W1V 5HA 
Dear Paul, 
What’s this terrifying, grovelling, eating humble pie letter. I was just 
pointing out to the poor reader, suddenly we were being told about 
these two chairs, that were not mentioned in the article — that’s all, 
don’t worry too much about it, continue on your way, be happy, take 
tranquillizers, massage your body with palmolive oil, keep your face in 
the fridge, you will look younger, in all these things I wish you well. 
Love, light and peace 
Spike Milligan 
PS. A bit on the side does you good. 

238 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Norma 
The enclosed is the correct way my books should be listed — 
Love 
Spike 
* 
Yes Spike. But I ought to point out. That there are four titles miss¬ 
ing. And two titles which are incorrect. 
Love Norma 
AUTOBIOGRAPHY 
1971 Adolf Hitler - My Part in His Downfall 
1974 ‘Rommel?’ ‘Gunner Who?’ 
1976 Monty - His Part in My Victory 
1978 Mussolini - His Part in My Downfall 
\ 
FICTION 
1963 Puckoon 
DRAMA 
1970 The Bedsitting Room (with John Antrobus) 
POETRY 
1959 Values 
1972 Small Dreams of a Scbrpion 
1979 Open Heart University 

Taking One’s Place in Society 
239 
MISCELLANEOUS PROSE 
1977 The Spike Milligan Letters, edited by Norma Fames 
1981 Indefinite Articles & Scunthorpe 
children’s books 
1959 Silly Verse for Kids 
1968 Milliganimals & the Bald-twit Lion 
1973 Badjelly the Witch 
1974 Dip the Puppy 
1981 Unspun Socks from a Chickens Laundry 
HUMOUR 
1961 A Dustbin of Milligan 
1963 The Little Pot Boiler 
1965 A Book of Bits, or a Bit of a Book 
1969 The Bedside Milligan 
1972 Goon Show Scripts 
1973 More Goon Show Scripts 
1971 Milligans Ark 
1975 The Milligan Book of Records 
1976 William McGonagall: the Truth at Last 
1978 Goblins 
1979 The Q Annual 
1980 The Q Annual 
1982 101 Best Limericks 
Booh of the, Qoons 
Transports of Deitijkt 
Qreat MoQoeiayall Scrapbook 
Sir NobonJc and the* Drapon 
Incorrect Titles: 
Qet til the* (^Annual 
101 Best and Only Limericks 


5 
Tender(ish) Moments 
My love is like a red, red rose, 
but my underwear is off-white. 
- Spike Milligan to Norma Fames, 
accompanied by a large bouquet of flowers 

V 
s 

I think the tender(ish) moments in Spike’s life were the times 
spent with his families. He loved his children and the joy 
they brought him, particularly when they were young. He had a 
wonderful childlike quality, which he shared with not only his own 
children but other children through his poetry books. 
In June 1946 came his first great love affair: he met Maria Antoi- 
netta Fontana, an Italian ballerina. She was appearing at the Bellini 
Theatre in Rome with the Italian corps de ballet. He was appearing 
with the Bill Hall Trio at the same theatre. 
In January 1952 he married June Marlow. June was friends with 
Anne Howe, at that time Peter Sellers’s girlfriend. They made up a 
foursome, and their first date was at the Edgwarebury club. Spike 
and June had three children: Laura Theresa, born November 1952, 
Sean Patrick, born September 1954, and Sile Javotte, born Decem¬ 
ber 1957. The marriage ended in divorce. Spike claimed: ‘The strain 
of writing a Goon Show every week would tear us apart.’ 
In April 1962, Spike married Patricia (Paddy) Ridgeway. They 
met on the set of Muckinese Battlehorn. Paddy was an extra. She 
was also appearing as a nun in 7he Sound of Music, and Spike went 
to see the show. Spike and Paddy had one daughter, Jane Fionnuala, 
in May 1966. Paddy died in February 1978. 
In July 1983, he married Shelagh Sinclair. The marriage was child¬ 
less, and he was married to Shelagh when he died. 
Throughout his life, though, Spike had many girlfriends. He loved 
the company of women. One ‘tender moment’ in 1972 resulted in 
an illegitimate daughter, Romany Anne Jocelyn, whose mother was 
Roberta Watt, a wonderful Canadian journalist who was in love 
with Spike all her life. Tragically, she died when she was only thirty- 
six years old. And yet another tenderish moment and yet another 
result: an illegitimate son, born in 1976. 


HAMLET 
Said Hamlet to Ophelia, 
‘I’ll do a sketch of thee. 
What kind of Pencil shall I use, 
2B or not 2B?’ 
Perth, WA 
March 1980 
- from Unspun Socks from a Chickens Laundry 
from Goodbye Soldier 
So far Bornheim has passed the journey immersed in the Union 
Jack newspaper. He walks down the Charabong, swaying and bump¬ 
ing. He makes reference to my new amour. 
‘Is there something going on?’ he said, nodding towards my Toni. 
I told him most certainly there was a lot going on. I had met her, 
according to my new watch, at ten-thirty precisely. Yes, there was 
a lot going on but as conditions improved I’d hoped for a lot coming 
off. He grins like a fiend. 
‘The poor girl,’ he said. ‘You’d better not show it to her all at once.’ 
He slunk away chuckling, the swine! This was not that kind of 
affair, this was true romance. No tawdry thoughts entered my head, 

246 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
but they were entering other areas. South of Rome we lumber 
through hot dusty villages, the grapes are heavy on the vine and on 
sale are large luscious red bunches for a few lire. But I don’t have 
eyes for the delights of the Campagna, only Toni’s glances and the 
squeeze of her little hand. 
Late evening and the dusty chugging Charabong enters Rome 
through the Porta Maggiore. It’s a Sunday evening and the sunlight 
is turning to rose-petal pink. The streets are full of the populace 
taking their evening strolls - elegant Romans are really elegant, 
they wear clothes well. But! None of them are wearing sensible 
brown English shoes like me . . . The Charabong comes to rest 
outside the Albergo Universo. I’ll help Toni with her luggage to 
her bedroom. Her mother wants her to go home, but, because she 
wants to be near me, lies, and tells Momma the company rules 
insist she stays at the hotel. Ha! Ha! Love finds a way. 
LOVE SONG 
If I could write words 
Like leaves on an Autumn Forest floor 
What a bonfire my letters would make. 
If I could speak words of water 
You would drown when I said 
‘I love you’. 
from Small Dreams of a Scorpion 

Tender(ish) Moments 
247 
. from Goodbye Soldier 
We pile on the Charabong which threads its way up a mountain, 
or was it a hill? That’s a point: at what height does a hill become a 
mountain? The sun is shining ferociously, even after we reach the 
snow line. We are met by a sergeant ski instructor. He fixes us up 
with skis and leaves us to it. So, it’s fun on the slopes. There must 
be a world record for falling over, and I hold it. I strip to the waist 
- even in the snow, I’m perspiring. I rub my body with snow and 
feel exhilarated. The sergeant makes some tea for us in the out-of¬ 
season cafe. I notice lying among the trees spent cartridge shells. 
The sergeant tells us that this used to be a training depot for German 
ski troops. ‘The lot that done Narvik trained here,’ he says. 
The afternoon passes with us falling down. Finally the sergeant 
lends us a two-man sleigh. ‘This is more like it,’ says Bornheim. The 
afternoon passes with us sliding down the mountain. No ski lift 
here, you have to schlep back up on foot. Plenty of tumbles on the 
overloaded sleigh. ' 
‘It was never meant for so many,’ shouts Angove as five of us 
hurtle down into a tree. Great flurries of snow and tumbling bodies 
- sun, snow, sleigh, wonderful! 
At six o’clock, Lieutenant Priest reminds us there’s a show to do. 
I keep forgetting the show is the reason we are having all this fun. 
We arrive back sunburnt and shagged out, not looking forward to 
the show. A quick tea and a slice of cake, I collect my guitar and 
hurry to the waiting Charabong. 
‘Terr-ee! You all sunburn,’ says Toni. I told her that all day I’d 
missed her and longed for her on skis next to me with the wind 
blowing through our hair as we raced down the mountain. 
I stand up in the bus and start to declaim for all to hear, ‘What 
a fool I was to leave you, darling, to do the laundry, while I, a young 
Celtic god, was coursing down the white mountain in a rapture of 
speed, wind and other things’ I kneel down and start kissing her 

248 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
arm. ‘Oh, forgive me, my beloved, my little laundress. It will never 
happen again.’ Toni is laughing with embarrassment and the cast 
give me a round of applause. Greta Weingarten is saying have we 
noticed how clean Austria is after Italy. I agree with her. ‘I’ll say this 
for Hitler: I bet before he shot himself he put on clean underpants!’ 
In the dressing room, Hall and Mulgrew get into an argument 
about women. 
‘I look for women with experience,’ says Hall. ‘I choose women 
who make the act of love last.’ 
Mulgrew guffaws. ‘Bloody hell,’ he Says. ‘Some of the old boilers 
I’ve seen you with don’t look like they’d last the walk home.’ 
‘Looks aren’t everything,’ intone^ Hall. ‘I mean, most of these 
young tarts - show ’em a prick and they’d faint.’ 
Mulgrew is laughing. ‘No wonder. When I saw yours, I nearly 
fainted. For a start, it’s got a bend in it.’ 
‘It’s not a bend. It’s a slight curve,’ says Hall. 
‘Curve?’ laughs Mulgrew, ‘it nearly goes round corners.’ 
I was crying with laughter. Barrack-room humour, there’s noth¬ 
ing quite like it. 
After the show Major Hardacre, the Town Major, comes back- 
stage with two young officers. They congratulate us over the show. 
It was jolly good.’ They seem interested in the girls whom the Major 
has a slight tendency to handle. He’s very interested in Toni, my 
Toni. He shakes her hand and holds it overlong. He’d better watch 
out or I’ll have his Hardacre on a slab, sliced up like salami and 
stuffed up his married quarters! God, I was jealous! In love and 
jealous, it was like being on the rack. 
After dinner, that night, we have a dance. The trio, plus Bornheim 
on the accordion, supply the music. Toni dances with Maxie. He 
dances splay-legged, as though he has messed himself. Toni, she was 
so doll-like. Strange - when I was a boy in India, up to the age of 
eight I liked dolls. My father was a worried man. Was it Toni’s doll- 
like image that attracted me to her? Forward the resident analyst. I 
have the last waltz with Toni. Bornheim plays the ‘Valzer di Candele’. 
He knows that it’s ‘our tune’. I hold Toni close and the room seems 
to go round and round - very difficult for a square room. 

Tender(ish) Moments 
249 
By midnight, the dance had broken up. Toni and I went and sat 
on a bench in the neglected rose garden. (Today’s Special, Neglected 
Roses five shillings a bunch.) We talked about each other. Were we 
sure we were in love? The answer seemed to be yes. So, what to do? 
Do we get engaged? I think if I had asked her, she would have said 
yes. You see, Id never thought about marriage. I was a day-by-day 
person. If at the end of day everything was OK, then we were set 
fair for tomorrow. Why ruin it by planning, say, six months ahead? 
I tell you, whoever planned my head should have got six months. 
I was a woolly thinker. Toni and I would go on for ever; there was 
no end to the tour, we would ride in the Charabong eternally and 
never grow old ... 
a/ 
A t 
Bloody Awful 
Next day, after breakfast, its a real hot day. I tell Toni we must try 
and get a swim in the Worthersee. We take our costumes and make 
for the lake. But everywhere it’s reeds, reeds, reeds and where there 
is access, it’s mud, mud, mud. So, we settle for a sunbathe. Oh, the 
heat. Toni so close, covered in oil - it’s almost frying her. ‘Terr-ee, 
some more oil on my back, please.’ So Terree obliges, taking his 
time to rub the oil on her satin skin. Ohhhh, the heat. Ohhhh, the 
oil. God, we all need a button on us that says SEX ON-OFF. Right 
now, I’m fumbling for the off switch. Through the lazy afternoon 
we talk with our eyes closed, sweet nothings that would bore any 
but us. Being in love, everything seems important. Small things. 
God, why did I have a small thing? 
‘What’s going on here?’ I open one eye to see Bornheim and 
Mulgrew; the latter, who hasn’t learned his lesson, is holding a fish¬ 
ing rod. ‘You know there’s no mixed bathing allowed in the long 
grass,’ he says. 
‘Go away, Mulgrew. Weren’t you ever young?’ 
‘Yes,’ he says. ‘It was on a Thursday.’ 
It is tea-time, so we give in and the four of us head back to the 
guest house. I need a shower to get the oil off and a cold one to 

250 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
reduce the swelling. Toni came down to tea in an all-white dress to 
show off her suntan, and lovely she looked. 
The show that night was pretty hysterical. A lone drunk in the 
middle of the hall started to shout out, ‘Its bloody awful, bloody 
awful.’ It took a time to evict him. Then, in the second half he obvi¬ 
ously somehow got back in because he shouted from the gallery, 
‘It’s still bloody awful, bloody awful.’ Again he was thrown out, only 
to reappear through a front row fire exit direct from the street. ‘It’s 
bloody awful from here, as well,’, he shouted, before doing a bunk. 
It caused great laughter in the audience and the cast. It wasn’t the 
last of him, my God. As we were about to drive back to the billets, 
he was thumping on the sides of the Charabong, ‘You’re all bloody 
awful, bloody awful.’ Bill Hall rolled down a window and blew a 
thunderous saliva-draped raspberry at him, causing howls of glee 
in the truck. 
‘Perhaps we are bloody awful,’ said Bornheim. ‘I mean, how many 
of us would a West End audience come to see?’ he went on. ‘I mean, 
they’d pay to see the Bill Hall Trio. But the rest of us?’ 
This started a real row till we got to the hotel. Everybody was 
suddenly in star class. Of course the West End audiences would pay 
to see Chalky White hitting people, etc,, etc. There was a lot of 
laughter as each artiste defended himself against the ‘bloody awful’ 
label. The fact is none of them were ever heard of again. 
At dinner, the argument breaks out again. When Bornheim plays 
the piano, a shout of‘Bloody awful’ goes up. From then on, no one 
could make a move without a shout of‘Here comes bloody awful’. 
The Italian artistes couldn’t get the gist of it. But when they did, 
they too took up the cry. Toni asked me with a perfectly straight 
face, ‘Tell me, Terree. We are bludy awful, yes?’ 
The next morning broke sunny and warm. Across the road from 
us was a little Austrian beerhouse, so at lunchtime Bornheim and 
I toddled over and sat outside. We ordered a bottle of white wine 
and some cheese, then another bottle of white wine. Two Austrians 
in lederhosen with overmuscled legs and blue staring eyes asked 
us to join them for a ‘drink of zer Schnapps’ and my God we got 

Tender(ish) Moments 
251 
pie-eyed. We wobbled back to our chalets. I was sick and crashed 
out groaning on the bed. Toni is horrified, I’ve never been drunk 
before. She sees the drunken wretch and says, ‘Terr-ee, you, you, 
bludy awful,’ bursts into tears and runs out. I stumbled after her 
and crashed to the floor where I was sick yet again. I now looked 
like a walking Irish stew on legs. By evening I was coming to and 
drank a lot of black coffee, brought in by faithful Mulgrew who 
knew drunkenness. That night on stage I was bloody awful. I muffed 
the announcements, got the wrong intros and generally buggered 
up the act. But we still went down well. 
‘Just bloody luck,’ said Bill Hall. 
‘What did you get pissed for?’ said Lieutenant Priest. ‘About thirty 
Schillings,’ I said. ‘We were very economical.’ 
The weather stays divine. Up the road at the Worthersee riviera 
Toni and I hire a rowboat and take a packed lunch. I row to the 
middle of the lake. It’s one of those boats with a lounging double 
seat in the stern, so we snog while the boat drifts and drifts and 
drifts . . . Let it drift for ever, for we are lovers and the hands of 
the clock stopped the moment we met. We live in a time capsule 
called now. We can only think of each other. It is young and true 
love. The waters lapped the sides, lake birds flew hither and 
thither to their secret places and the day lay on us like a diapha¬ 
nous dream .. . 
Wake up, wake up! The boat is leaking. Blast, yes, there’s three 
inches of water in the bottom. So I row the love wagon back to 
the boathouse and point out to the Austrian man what has 
happened. He just laughed and gave us half our money back. We 
walked back down the dusty road and arrived home for tea. Toni 
is giggling because somehow I have managed to wet the seat of 
my trousers, which looks like a giant ink stain. I hang my shirt 
out to cover it but that’s wet as well. The hell with it! Wild poppies 
grow by the wayside. I pick some for Toni. Alas, the poor things 
start to die within a few minutes. Why can’t we leave nature alone? 
Toni takes a photo of me. She wants me to turn my back to the 
camera. I refuse. 

252 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
WHEN I SUSPECTED 
There will be a time when it will end. 
Be it parting 
Be it death 
So each passing minute' with you 
penduiumned with sadness. 
So many times ' 
I looked long into your face. 
I could hear the clock ticking. 
On a plane over Java 
November 1977 
- from Open Heart University 
from Goodbye Soldier 
Yes, Madam Butterfly was at the Rome Royal Opera House. Toni 
has two free tickets that her mother had given to her by a customer 
at the ClT travel agency. What a treat to look forward to! But it 
was a night of suppressed hysterical laughter. The whole opera was 
financed and cast by black marketeers. I couldn’t believe it. When 
first I saw Madam Butterfly, she was huge, with a heaving bosom. 
I thought, out of this frame will come a most powerful voice. When 
she opened her mouth to sing, you could hardly hear anything. To 
accentuate the shortcoming, she overacted, throwing her arms in 
the air, clasping her hands together, falling on her knees with a 
groan, running across the stage with loud, thudding feet - all to 
thunderous applause from an obvious claque. Then we wait for 
Lieutenant Pinkerton: my God, he’s half her size! He can’t be more 

Tender(ish) Moments 
253 
than five foot five inches and so thin that when he stood behind 
her, he vanished. He has a piercing tenor voice, high up in the nose, 
with a tremendous,wobbly vibrato that fluctuates above and below 
the real note. He is obviously wearing lifts in his shoes that make 
him bend forward from the ankles as though walking in the teeth 
of a gale. If that isn’t all bad enough, he is wearing what must be 
the worst toupee I’ve seen. It appears to be nailed down, the front 
coming too far forward on the forehead with a slight curl all round 
where it joins his hair. 
Trying to laugh silently, I’m almost doubled up in pain. All 
around me are Mafia-like creatures - one wrong move and I’ll be 
knifed. So be it, no comedy could exceed this. We notice that when 
Pinkerton tries for a high note, he shoots up on his toes, putting 
him at an even more alarming angle. When he and she embrace, 
she envelopes him completely, his little red face appearing above 
her massive arms as though he’s been decapitated. I’m carried on 
the tide of enthusiasm. When the claque jump up applauding, so 
do I. ‘Bravo, encore,’ I shout. It was a night I can never forget. 
At the little restaurant after the show, I keep breaking into fits of 
laughter as I recall it all. Toni is split down the middle, both halves 
being equal to the whole. She’s ashamed that something so bad 
should go on at the Royal Opera House. ‘Disgrazial she says, but 
continues to laugh through it. 
I remember that, as we sat outside eating, for no reason it started 
to rain. We retreat inside while a waiter rescues our food. The waiter 
is amusing; he apologizes for the rain and says even though some 
has settled on the food, there’ll be no extra charge. 
Seated inside, Toni suddenly says to me, ‘You know, in two day 
you leave me.’ 
My mood changed, was it that soon? I was so impervious to days 
that each one came as a shock. Why wasn’t time timeless? 
‘Toni,’ I said, ‘I’ll come back as soon as I can and I’ll write as 
much as I can.’ 
That’s followed by us just looking at each other in silence. 
‘I miss you very much, Terr-ee.’ 
She looks so small and helpless; I feel so small and helpless. 

254 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
. 
‘I tell you what, we have some champagne, yes?’ 
She pauses reflectively. ‘OK,’ she says. 
The restaurant hasn’t any champagne. ‘Tedeschi hanno bevuto 
tutto] says the waiter. Would we like Asti Spumante? Yes, when in 
Rome. 
When midnight strikes in some campanile, we toast each other. 
Wed done it so often before, but this time its a little more meaning¬ 
ful - our sand is running out. In the taxi back, I sit with my arm 
around her, her head on my shouldef (sounds like a transplant). I 
hum her favourite tune, ‘Valzer di Candele’... We tiptoe into the 
apartment and I instinctively wait for my mother’s voice, ‘Where 
have you been at this time of night.’ No, it’s Signora Fontana asking 
is that Toni. Yes, so goodnight. 
The day is suit-fitting day. When we arrive at the tailor’s, a man is 
leaving wearing a terrible suit that appears to have been made by 
a blind man. No, no, no, says the little tailor, he didn’t make that. 
It’s only his father-in-law visiting to collect the alimony. My suit is 
all ready on a hanger. Will I step into the cubicle and change? The 
suit is a great success; I can’t wait to get outside for a photograph. 
Oh, yes, this is a Robert Taylor suit. Quick! I must be seen walk¬ 
ing about the town. What’s the best street? Ah, yes, driver, the Via 
Veneto and step on it. When we arrive it’s midday and the morning 
promenade is coming to an end. Nevertheless Toni and I and the 
suit walk up and down, then down and up. Toni and I and the suit 
sit at a restaurant and Toni and I and my suit have an ice-cream. 
All Rome must be talking about me. My suit is now smoking a 
cigarette. Toni is totally bemused: is this a man or a little boy she’s 
going out with, or is it a suit? If only they could see me in Brockley 
now, standing outside the Rialto Cinema waiting for Lily Dunford. 
My picture would be in the Kent Messenger. 
By mid-afternoon I think Rome has seen enough of the suit, so 
we return to the apartment. Gioia opens the door to my suit, she 
doesn't seem to notice ft!!!! She’ll have to be killed. I have a good 
reason to take my suit off: Gioia has to go out shopping. Its the last 
chance of Toni and I being alone. I draw Miss Toni’s attention to 

Tender(ish) Moments 
255 
this by making her take her clothes off and getting into bed, where 
we foreclose on the world. There is a Father Christmas. He was 
early this year. However, though it was divine making love to her, 
it lost a bit by Toni breathlessly telling me all the time to ‘hurry up’ 
as Gioia was due back. I did my best, finishing in under twenty- 
three minutes - beating Gioia by five and my own record by ten. 
With Gioia fiddling at the door with the keys, I rush madly back 
to my room, just slamming the door on my bare bum in time. Worn 
out by pressurized love-making, I have a siesta. It’s a warm after¬ 
noon but nice and cool in the room. I can hear Gioia clinking and 
clanking in the kitchen ... 
I awake in the evening to the sounds of Signora Fontana and Lily 
talking. As this is my last evening here, they want me to have dinner 
a casa. They know my love of pasta and have prepared spaghetti 
Neapolitan. Toni wants her mother to see ‘the suit’, so I put it on 
and do an ‘entrance’ into the sitting-room. Oh, yes, her mother 
thinks it’s very smart. But should the flies be undone? Oh, dear. 
Today is Signora Fontana’s wedding anniversary. She shows me a 
photo album: that’s her as a young woman on holiday with her 
mother and father in Savona. Did I know her mother was French? 
No? Well, I did now. I'see grinning photos, from her mother-in-law 
grinning in Ravenna to her husband grinning outside his soap 
factory in Abyssinia in 1936. It was possibly one of the best records 
of grinning I had seen. 
We dine to a mixed conversation about the world: things aren’t 
getting any better. I agree, I know my thing isn’t getting any better. 
Shoes are very expensive, ‘Troppo carol says Signora Fontana. Has 
she thought of bare feet? They must be economical. The Communist 
leader Togliatti is a very dangerous man. ‘He want revolution in 
Italy,’ says Toni. So a ragbag of conversation. Gradually, I’m left out 
of it altogether as they all jabber heatedly in Italian. As the conver¬ 
sation swung from Toni at one end and her mother at the other, I 
must have looked like a spectator at a tennis match. I call out the 
score: ‘Fifteen, love... thirty, fifteen...’ They ignore me, but it’s fun. 
Dinner over, they listen to the news in Italian on the radio as I 
sip a glass of white wine. After the news comes Italy’s premier dance 

256 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
band led by Angelini. Lily wants to know if I can ‘jitter bugger’. Try 
me. We move back the chairs a little and Lily and I ‘cut a rug’. She’s 
very good, I am not. Toni and Mother watch on with amusement. 
Gioia looks on in amazement. The phone rings, Lily hurls herself 
at it: it’s himl She is running her finger up and down the wall. The 
evening ends with us playing snap. How delightfully simple it was, 
the simplest of all was me ... 
* < 
V 
I put through a phone call to Toni, ^fter a delay it comes through. 
‘Hello, Toni.’ 
‘Terr-ee,’ she gasps, ‘my Terr-ee, you go all right Napoli?’ 
‘Yes, I go all right in Napoli.’ 
Ow lovelee ear your voice, mio tesoro. I miss you much already. 
Why you go away?’ 
‘What are you doing?’ 
‘Just now we have dinner. Tell me you love me.’ 
‘I love you.’ 
A little more of that type of chat and we finish. Yes, I promise I’ll 
phone tomorrow. No, I won’t go out getting drunk with Mulgrew. 
No, I won’t go near other girls. Now, where is that man Hall. I buzz 
his room. 
”Oos that?’ 
‘Me, Spike. Are there any gigs going? I’m at a loose end till the 
boat sails.’ 
No, no gigs tonight. There’s one tomorrow. Do I mind playing 
in a sergeants’ mess? Well, as long as it isn’t too big a mess. 
‘Wot you doing tonight?’ 
‘I’m not doing anything tonight.’ 
‘Well, good luck with it,’ he says. 
I met him in the dining-hall for dinner. Has he seen Mulgrew or 
Bornheim lately? Yes, he’s done a couple of gigs with them. What 
about the Dominion Monarch and the sailing date? That’s all fixed, 
I have to collect my ticket from Major Ridgeway. So the end is in 
sight: it’s goodbye Italy and hello Deptford. 

Tender(ish) Moments 
257 
The remaining days were very very boring. So I won’t bore the 
reader. I do a couple of band gigs on guitar with Hall, Bornheim 
and Mulgrew at military establishments. I collect my boat ticket 
and passport and I buy a few trinkets for my mother and father. 
Most days I spend in my room reading books from the hotel library. 
The very last one was the story of San Michele by Axel Munthe, a 
most moving story about Capri. 
The night before I sail, Jimmy Molloy checks into the hotel. He’s 
booked on the same ship as me. He wants to have a night out; he 
knows a good officers’ nightclub on the seafront. OK, I’ll come 
with him and wear the suit. It’s the Club Marina, ‘Officers Only’. 
We show our CSE passes. Down a corridor to a large room with 
a central dance floor, where a good Italian band are playing the 
music of our time. There are hostesses at the bar: no, Jimmy, I’m 
not interested. Well, he is. He goes over and chats to one and brings 
her back to our table. Ah, good, wait till she sees my suit. She is 
pretty stunning, small, petite, saturnine-dark with a pair of giant 
olive eyes. 
‘This is Francesca,’ says Molloy. 
‘Piacera,’ I say. 
She throws me a dazzling white-toothed smile. More than that, 
as the evening progresses I realize that she fancies me and my suit. 
‘I fink I’ve picked a loser here,’ chuckled Molloy. Do I want to take 
her over? No no no, Jimmy, I am promised to another. He gives me 
a disbelieving look. ‘Come on, a bit on the side won’t hurt.’ I told 
him I had no bits on my side, all my bits were at the front, so I’d be 
the wrong fit for her. However it’s nice flirting with her. 
The lights go down: a spotlight on the stage illuminates an Italian 
MC in a white jacket. ‘Laddies and Gintilmin, nower oura starer 
of thee cabareter, Gina Escoldi.’ He points left, the band strikes up 
and a ballerina on points pirouettes on the floor and sings ‘a hubba 
hubba hubba with red-hot accompaniment. She has a coarse croaky 
voice, loaded with sex - all the while standing on points. It was a 
head-on collision between jazz and ballet, but very successful. She 
goes down big with what is, in the majority, an American officer 
audience. 

258 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
At the end of the evening Molloy says, ‘You takin this bird or 
not.’ I decline, cursing the fact that I have a conscience. ‘One day,’ 
he laughs, ‘you’ll regret this decision!’ What did he mean ‘one day’, 
I was regretting it now. While he offs with her, I off to the hotel and 
bed. While I lay there, my mind was going through the long years 
away from home. Had I really been in action in North Africa? Had 
I really taken part in the Tunis Victory Parade? Did I land at Salerno? 
It all seemed unreal, like a distant dream ending up in the most 
distant dream of all - Toni and me on Capri. Would the sun ever 
shine like that again? " v 
On departure morning I awake and, first thing, put in a call to Toni. 
We say our final goodbyes - tears on the phone from Rome. At 
breakfast, I meet Jimmy Molloy. ‘That bird last night, what a con. 
When we get to er place, she just kisses me goodnight then pisses 
off. I think it was all your bloody fault, Milligan.’ Smugly, I say, yes, 
it undoubtedly was. 
Our ship sails at midday. We have to start boarding at 10.30. We 
take a taxi to the quay where the Dominion Monarch awaits. We 
both have first-class passages - I’m nominated a cabin on the port 
side. A young English steward carries my bag and calls me sir. It’s 
a fine, single-berth cabin with a porthole for looking out - or, if 
you hang on the outside, for looking in. ‘If there’s anything you 
want, sir, just ring the service button.’ I locate the Purser’s Office 
where a grim-faced staff change my lire into sterling, which looks 
much less. Up on the promenade deck I find Molloy and I get him 
to take my photo. 
The ship is alive with bustle, with sailors shouting yo ho ho and 
pouring hot tar down the hatches. At midday the gangplank is 
removed, the ship gives a long mournful blast on the hooter and a 
tug starts to manoeuvre us out to sea. Molloy and I stand at the rail. 
Slowly, the great ship puts on speed, the Italian mainland recedes 
into the distance, finally lost in a haze. It’s over: it’s goodbye Italy, 
goodbye Toni and goodbye soldier. 

Tender(ish) Moments 
259 
from Spike Milligan: The Family Album - 
An Illustrated Autobiography 
1952 
On 26 January June Marlow and I were married. We were very 
happy together, but eventually the strain I was under in writing The 
Goon Show would tear us apart. 
There were constant battles with the BBC. We did a whole spec¬ 
trum of voices on the show. Peter could do anything from a 
dustman to the Queen, but the BBC didn’t like us doing voices 
like General Montgomery, Churchill or the Queen. They only 
wanted jokes like, T used to play the Palladium.’ ‘Yes, I’ve never 
heard it played better.’ 
I was writing at our flat in Shepard Hill Road but when my 
daughter, Laura, came along, she distracted me so much I found 
an office at 137 Shepherd’s Bush Road. I would take the Under¬ 
ground from Archway and change at Camden for Shepherd’s 
Bush. It was a short walk to the office which I shared with Eric 
Sykes. I had bought a Letra 22 typewriter (I still have it) and I 
worked a long day, leaving home at 9 a.m. in the morning and 
working until ten or eleven at night; sometimes I worked through 
the night. I had to work long hours to make the scripts as good 
as I could. When I got home, June would have left out a meal for 
me to warm up. I had difficulty sleeping and I was seen by a stupid 
doctor who kept giving me sleeping pills - you name ’em, I’ve 
taken ’em. 
This life put a great strain on me and my marriage with a wonder¬ 
ful wife, June. I must have behaved impossibly - it was all leading 
up to a breakdown. 
In December I was writing the third series of Goon Shows when 
I finally broke down. If anybody wants to know what down is, ask 
me - I’ve been there. The doctor who was treating me realized that 

26o 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
I was too much for him to handle and had me taken to St Lukes 
Psychiatric Hospital in Muswell Hill in London. As I got out of the 
ambulance, there was a cat sitting on the doorstep. I stroked it. The 
contact with its fur was soothing. They put me in a room next to a 
noisy bloody kitchen. I screamed, ‘Get me out of here!’ A doctor 
gave me a jab of something and in ten seconds I was unconscious. 
I lay there in a deep sleep for fourteen days-. 
They brought me round occasionally to drink some liquid food. 
I grew a dark brown beard and I remember one nurse saying, ‘He 
looks like Our Lord.’ When I was half awake I had hallucinations. 
Hanging from the ceiling were halves of coat hangers. Then there 
was a live lion on top of the cupboard. There came a stream of silver, 
materializing in the door way opposite into a lady with black ribbon 
round her hair, which hung down to her shoulders. 
The trauma of my childhood bed-wetting haunted me and even 
though I couldn’t pass any urine, I’d keep on trying, still uncon¬ 
scious. 
The result, a prolapse. One good thing came from all this. I was 
a heavy smoker and being unconscious for two weeks had abated 
the craving. A nurse would sit with me all night. She smoked, I 
smelled it. Deep down I wanted to give up and now was the chance. 
I took it - I’ve never really smoked since. 
June came to visit. She looked terrible with worrying about the 
breadwinner having come to a sudden halt. 
1953 
By February I was well enough to leave hospital, but still very shaky. 
I went back to the slog of writing which I faithfully did, although 
the payment was very small. For my acting part in the show I think 
I got £12 and for writing I got £25. As Sellers and Secombe were big 
names they got £100 a week. Ultimately, I was paid £100 as well 
and, with repeats, £200 - a lot of money. £200 - that must have 
hurt them! 

Tender(ish) Moments 
261 
By now Michael Bentine had left The Goons. He was an extraor¬ 
dinary character who told the most extraordinary stories. He once 
told me that his mother had levitated from the ground, across the 
dining room table and settled on the other side. One night when 
we were appearing in a show in Birmingham, I asked him, as he 
claimed to be a mathematician, could he give me the formula for 
the atomic bomb? He took out a lipstick and covered the mirror 
in the dressing room with Pythagoras, finishing off at the bottom 
on the right hand side with, ‘There! That is the formula for the 
atomic bomb!’ Unfortunately, there was a Professor Penny in the 
audience that night. I happened to know him and he came into 
the dressing room and looked at the mirror. I asked him what it 
was and he said, ‘That’s a load of bollocks!’ I told Michael and he 
said, ‘Of course it is! You don’t think I would give away the secret 
of the atom bomb to you in a dressing room in Birmingham, do 
you?’ 
1954 
On 17 September we had a second child, Sean Patrick. Joy, a boy! 
At least one successor to my name! 
We bought a Maltese puppy and called him Baggage. He was 
scruffy but cute. Also scruffy but cute was the 1929 Austin soft-top 
tourer which I bought from Peter Sellers for £300. 
1955 
We bought, on a mortgage, 127 Holden Road, Finchley. It had a 
large garden with a stream at the bottom. That summer June took 
Laura and Sean on holiday in the car, by now named ‘Little Min’. I 
couldn’t go as I was still working hard to deliver a complete Goon 
Show script once a week. 

262 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
from Indefinite Articles and Scunthorpe 
Christmas Comes Once Too Much a Year 
Christmas - the word strikes fear in every Christian adult. A time 
of good cheer - yes - but what does ifiadd up to? So far mine adds 
up to £182. Is there any more spine-chilling remark than the wife 
saying, About the presents this year, dear’? That simple remark, 
that was once delivered about three weeks prior to the happy day, 
is now mentioned in November; one starts buying fireworks with 
holly on. 
When I was a child my presents were two boxes of lead soldiers 
- but now my childrens list starts thus: 
Jane (8) - Honda motor bike. 
Sile (16) - Quadrophonic hi-fi sound kit. 
I tell you, there should be a Minister of Christmases! Laws: 
> 
(1) It is forbidden to spend more than £2 per present per person. 
(2) One is not obliged to kiss any woman under the mistletoe. 
(3) Christmas cards must be sent only to close relatives. 
When I think of the insane, frenzied shopping on the 23rd and 
24th - by the 25th, 60 per cent of the nations shoppers are in a state 
of collapse and about to be aroused at 0500 hours on the dawn of 
the 25 th. I myself have been woken at three o’clock with the blowing 
of bugles, beating of drums, squeaking and barking toys. By the 
night of the 26th I am adding codicils to my will: ‘I leave nothing 
to any of my family, they’ve already got enough.’ 
My list of Christmas cards runs into 600 people - half of them 
unknown. For instance, about 1959 I received a Christmas card with 
a snap of a baby, signed ‘Merry Christmas from Fred and Family’, 

Tender(ish) Moments 
263 
no address. Next year, the same baby one year older. ‘Merry Christ¬ 
mas Fred and family’. Last year the card had six of his kids on - ‘Merry 
Christmas Fred and family’. Every Christmas I want to send him a 
card but I don’t know who or where he is, and there are a hundred 
like him. They sign themselves ‘Jim and Mary’ as though they were 
the only Jim and Mary in the world! 
I believe it to be the work of one man, who is a sadist, and gloats 
at my discomfort; his name might even be Tom, Jim or Mary. 
And when Christmas morning arrives, that voice says, ‘Hurry 
up dear, the children are waiting to open the presents on the Christ¬ 
mas tree.’ Dying of fatigue, you arrive in the front room full of 
smiling faces, you in that twenty-eight-year-old dressing-gown, 
with seven-year-old C & A slippers held on with string, unshaven. 
You force a smile that cripples your face. ‘And here’s one for Daddy.’ 
You unwrap a plastic battery-operated fish with flashing eyes - 
Love from Jane. ‘Do you like it, Daddy - I saved up and bought it 
myself,’ she says. What can you say but, ‘It’s lovely, darling.’ There’s 
fifty slim cigars; you gave up smoking eight years ago. Two bottles 
of after-shave; you haven’t shaved for five years. Your vagrant son 
and daughter arrive; more cigars, shaving lotion. 
‘Oh, lovely,’ you say. A late Christmas card arrives: ‘A Merry 
Christmas from the Manager and Staff of Coutts’ - the writing is 
in red. As a vegetarian, something is bothering me - the Turkey 
dinner. 
turkey: ‘Aren’t you ashamed?’ 
me: ‘Yes. I’m sorry I’m going to eat you.’ 
turkey: 'You re sorry.’ 
me: ‘Be reasonable. All my children will be here. If I don’t join 
the festivities they think of me as a Scrooge Father.’ 
turkey: 7’m a father. I left behind a wife and six kids!’ 
me: ‘Look, I promise this will be the last Christmas I’ll eat you.’ 
turkey: ‘Look, mate, this is my last Christmas -’ 
me: ‘You see, turkey, it’s a dinner for a Christian occasion.’ 
turkey: ‘Christian? I’ve seen you give bits to your bloody cat, 
is he Christian?’ 

264 
Milligan’s Meaning of Life 
me: ‘Well, I didn’t want any to go to waste .. 
turkey: ‘All of me goes to waste, you know. On Boxing Day, 
when you’re slobbed out in the lounge, I’m floating down a London 
sewer.’ 
The time of the coming of the God-child is used in most foul 
ways - there’s a perv in Soho who dresses up as Father Christmas, 
then solicits citizens: ‘Merry Christmas - want to see a Christmas 
porn-film?’ 
And the unending plague of carol singers. One arrived at 11.30 
p.m. on 1 December. I opened the door to a crowd of smiling-faced 
teenagers with a candle lantern. I cotildn’t resist it, I gave them a 
£1. It was only after they’d left I realized they were all Jewish and 
were collecting for the NSPCC - they had a good sense of timing, 
that’s all. The next choir - Id teach ’em. It soon came, angel voices. 
‘What do you bloody well want?’ I shouted before I saw they were 
nuns. You can’t win. 
Will my father in distant Australia ever forget Christmas 1968 ... 
my mother was dangerously ill. A devout Catholic, she asked for 
Communion every morning. My father (a lapsed Catholic) was told 
that the priest would arrive at 5.30 a.m. (before first Mass) and my 
father was to meet him at the door with a lighted candle, a bowl of 
water, and a towel. Now the priest had never set eyes on my father. 
Dead on 5.30 the door bell rang. My father, dressed in his best suit, 
opened the door. It was the local dustman, who eyed my father 
holding a candle, a bowl of water and a towel, and said, ‘Don’t worry, 
Mr Milligan, I’ve had a few rough nights myself. I dropped by to get 
the Christmas box.’ My father, a bit thrown, said, ‘Hold these,’ and 
passed the candle, etc. while he went in to get some loose change, 
at which moment the priest arrives, sees the dustman (who was 
absolutely filthy) and says, ‘Ah, good morning, Captain - you know, 
I never knew you were a dustman.’ It broke my immaculate father’s 
heart. 
My own unforgettable Christmas was in 1956.1 was living with 
my wife and two children in a rented crumbling Victorian home 
at Highgate. I loved my family, and had built up the children’s belief 

Tender(ish) Moments 
265 
in Father Christmas and how he came down the chimney. Now I 
was disappointed as a child at having heard my parents say; ‘Just 
missed Father Christmas, he’s just gone back up the chimney.’ Well, 
my children wouldn’t be denied that. 
As fortune would have it, the chimney-breast was huge and still 
had the inlets for chimney-sweeps’ boys to climb up. I decided my 
children would actually see Father Christmas, and coming down 
the chimney. I hired a Father Christmas costume, plus beard and 
wig. So on Christmas Eve I got up inside the chimney, hammered 
two nails inside and hung the pillowcase of presents there. On 
Christmas night it seemed the children would never sleep. Finally 
at midnight all was clear. I donned the costume wig and beard and, 
using mortician’s wax, changed the shape of my nose. Carefully I 
climbed up the chimney, while the wife aroused the children with, 
‘Wake up - Father Christmas is coming,’ and led them into the 
drawing room. 
Then disaster. I slipped and crashed with all the presents into the 
grate, bringing down a rain of soot; the nose bent, the beard came 
off. I got up in some pain to the children crying, ‘Look Mummy, 
it’s Daddy dressed up as Father Christmas’ Sod Christmas. 
TRUST 
Painful though it was, 
I cut my last winter rose for her. 
She turned it inside out 
to see who the manufacturer was. 
- from Open Heart University 

266 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
JOURNEY 
I think I am going out of my mind 
The journey shouldn’t take long 
Once I get outside I’ll be fine 
I won’t have to worry about thinking 
I’ll sit on a green bank of Sodium Amytal 
and watch my mind float away 
Ah! my mind has a visitor! 
A white-washed nurse 
a tray of NHS food 
If only it would fit my mind 
It’s my stomach they’re treating 
letting my head starve to death. 
January 1981 
- from The Mirror Running 
from Depression and How to Survive It 
I have got so low that I have asked to be hospitalized and for deep 
narcosis [sleep]. I cannot stand being awake. The pain is too much. 
I have had thoughts of suicide. I get depressed that I am old. Some¬ 
thing has happened to me - this vital spark has stopped burning 
- I go to a dinner table now and I don’t say a word, just sit there 
like a dodo. Normally I am the centre of attention, keep the conver¬ 
sation going - so that is depressing in itself. It’s like another person 
taking over, very strange. The most important thing I say is good 
evening’ and then I go quiet and other people will talk. It must be 
a bit unbalanced at the table with me just sitting there dead-silent. 

Tender(ish) Moments 
267 
I love my fellow-man but he’s a two-faced bastard. I’m sorry for 
him principally because he can’t change, he’s reached the end of the 
line, and going to the moon smacks of‘I climbed the tree first, so 
there’. Aren’t I in a grim mood. 
He [Peter Sellers] didn’t understand mental illness. He kept coming 
to the flat all the time and his phone had broken down and he 
wanted to use mine. And I couldn’t stand the noise. I said, ‘Tell him 
to stop it.’ He said, ‘Oh, tell him not to be silly.’ So I got a potato 
knife from the kitchen. I had been wanting to get into hospital and 
I felt, ‘Why won’t they put me in hospital?’ I thought, ‘If I get a knife 
and try and kill him they’ll put me somewhere’ and I did. I went to 
attack him with a knife. I didn’t mean to kill him, but I thought 
they will hospitalize me. They took me away to a hospital and put 
me under deep narcosis. 
There are a number of things which go towards my depression. One 
of them is that I am completely ridden in nostalgia. I get sad when 
my children aren’t children any more. I get depressed that I am old 
... A simple drive through London on my way to the BBC and I 
see all the sites where I used to be a young man, houses in which 
my friends used to live, the dance hall where I used to play in the 
band, the site where I used to work in a launderette, all these 
reminders non-stop, all the time. And it haunts me, the past, it 
haunts me. It preys on my mind. I turn on the radio and it suddenly 
plays a tune, say Glenn Miller’s ‘Moonlight Serenade’, and straight¬ 
away it takes me back. Yes it’s all gone, Glenn Miller is dead and 
the band is split up and I am not young any more. It has all come 
to an end. The nostalgia does that to me. 
There is little in this terrible emptiness. I just want to go away, 
disappear, cover myself up until it goes away. It is like pain yet it 
is not a physical pain. I cannot describe it. It is like every fibre in 
your body is screaming for relief yet there is no relief. How can I 
describe it? I cannot really. I cannot, of course, escape because I 
have to keep working, which I just about do - though once or 

268 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
twice I have had to stop, had to hide away and wait till I could 
summon up the energy to keep going. 
The last time I cried, really cried, I had gone to a site which used to 
be my garden and is now full of offices and flats and I went down 
to a stream and found some of my little girls toys in the grass and I 
thought, ‘Is this all there is? Is that it?’ Yes thatmade me weep desper¬ 
ately. 
I ploughed on without any smile ommy face through these Goon 
Shows. I never laughed. I knew ‘That’s funny, that’s a joke,’ but I 
wouldn’t laugh at it when I wrote it. I was very grim, very 
depressed. 
TO A VICTORIAN DOLT IN A SHOP WINDOW IN 
KENSINGTON CHURCH STREET - PRICED £200 
Beautiful, porcelain yester-doll, 
still wax fresh 
Some little girl all ringlets 
and flounced lace 
Loved you, cried on you, slept happy 
in your glass-eyed gaze. 
Those long shed safe dreams 
have slipped their moorings. 
That great red brick house 
spick-span polished proud 
Now hard-boarded uni-rooms reeking 
curry, cabbage and cat’s piss. 
Polished doors he Dulux deep, 
with red plastic handles. 

Tender(ish) Moments 
269 
So, dear home-less doll in the window 
waiting the right price 
they’ve turned you into a whore. 
- from Open Heart University 
BRAVE NEW WORLD 
Twinkle Twinkle, little star 
How I wonder what you are 
Up above the sky so high 
Like a diamond in the sky 
Twinkle Twinkle, little star 
I’ve just found out what you are 
A lump of rusting rocket case 
A rubbish tip - in outer space. 
- from The Bedside Milligan 
AGNUS DEI 
Behold, behold, 
The Lamb of God 
As it skips and hops. 
I know that soon 
The Lamb of God 
Will be the Lamb of Chops. 
- from The Mirror Running 

270 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
from My Wife and Cancer 
In a letter I wrote to The Sunday Times I postulated that except in 
extreme circumstances I see no point in telling a person with terminal 
illness that they are going to die. Doctor magazine asked me to 
expand on this. 
When my wife developed cancer, I of course came face to face with 
that part of medicine that deals withNthis incurable disease. It was 
disturbing to find, in some cases, the totally immature and almost 
immoral attitude some doctors adopted, and in some cases downright 
inhuman. Likewise the amateur-like biopsy. The latter case I will 
explain. When a tumour was removed from my wife’s breast she 
phoned me with the joyous news ‘Thank God, it’s benign.’ Half an 
hour later a second call from my wife, now in an agony of tears and 
reversed emotion: ‘They have made a mistake, it’s malignant.’ It was 
unbelievable, especially so as, to avoid conveyor-belt medicine on the 
National Health, I had had this done privately. I was appalled at this 
outrageous, amateur, non-professional conduct. The culprit, of course, 
has gone free and he is possibly still doing it. The breast was removed. 
Now comes the waiting. Alas, secondary cancer occurred within 
two years. This time in the lymphatic system, and so to the expected 
radiation treatment. After the treatment I had an interview with a 
view to the doctor explaining exactly the position of my wife’s 
health. I found that the man was incapable of facing up to the 
consequences of cancer. He gave me an embarrassed, sloppy, mean¬ 
ingless talk. ‘She will be all right, she will be able to live a perfectly 
useful life.’ It was of course all rubbish. What he should have said 
was: ‘From past evidence in treatment based upon many years 
during which statistics in carcinoma have emerged, for a woman 
of your wife’s years, with her conditions, we give her chances of 
survival as slight.’ This information is vital to the next of kin. Even 
I, a layman, knew secondary cancer was round about 95 per cent 
lethal. So here we have an entire case during which death was never 

Tender(ish) Moments 
271 
mentioned, nor were those involved willing to give any clue or 
intimation appertaining to it. (Bear this in mind when we arrive at 
the ‘You must tell them they’re dying’ brigade.) 
So much for the immorality. Now to the cruelty. As the radiation 
(conventional medicine) had very little effect in regressing the 
disease, my wife, who had not wished to use medicine that had 
involved the use of animal experiments, sought help from a homeo¬ 
pathic healer and his wife. Of this form of medicine I have no 
knowledge, but in my own rationality I didn’t think that it would 
work. However it gave my wife hope, as the homeopath told her 
that he had cured cancer using homeopathic medicine, one case 
being himself, though he stipulated at this stage there was no guar¬ 
antee. With great integrity they applied treatment to my wife. It was 
quite obvious that these people were of the utmost dedication; like¬ 
wise they didn’t take any payment. However, I could see it was 
having no effect on the disease. I was stunned then, when in my 
presence the homeopath said: ‘The cancer is dead.’ Of course, in 
the light of my wife’s death I know that statement to be rubbish. I 
point this particular incident out to show that people with the great¬ 
est integrity and intense dedication can go on a ‘high’ on their own 
chemistry, i.e. ‘a self-induced trip’. Beware. 
At this stage my wife did not know she was dying and showed 
every hope of recovery, therefore she was not in a state of mental 
anguish. She had a day and a night nurse, a devoted nanny, a bedside 
phone, a television, books, magazines, plenty of visitors. She 
received visits from our local Dr Thomas, who in every way was a 
splendid man with a good sense of humour, and he came regularly 
despite the fact that she was not taking conventional medicine. He 
still visited her on humanitarian grounds. My wife looked forward 
to his visits. At this point I was concerned as to what stage the 
cancer was at. I wrote to the doctor asking if he could pay a profes¬ 
sional visit to her and give me an opinion. He declined to attend. I 
phoned him and pleaded with him to see her and give me a profes¬ 
sional opinion. I was absolutely stunned when he said, in a very 
spoilt child voice: ‘No, I won’t see her. She refused my medicine.’ I 
wrote him a letter and I said: ‘Some men take the Hippocratic Oath 

272 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
and then hide behind it.’ In this case justice was not only blind, but 
also deaf. And as for his ‘medicine’ - could somebody name me 
any ‘medicine’ that cures cancer? 
There are situations in life when a person becomes helpless; 
this can be divided into mentally and physically, or both. Among 
homo sapiens very young children present a mental and physical 
helplessness and this offers an opportunity for applying cruelty, 
knowing there can be no physical retaliation. I quote the Spartans 
placing babies on the roof. Child sacrifice among the primitives. 
Ritual clitorectomy performed on young girls. Child labour in 
Victorian times. Indeed, once a helpless situation presents itself 
to the adult world it affords an opportunity for physical or 
emotional exploitation, a release of sadistic instincts. The removal 
of hearts from live war prisoners by Aztec priests has its contem¬ 
porary parallels with cruel experimental operations on war 
prisoners by Nazi doctors (not always Nazis). 
Likewise a person who is dying awakes these instincts, and I 
think it all matures with the ‘Tell them they are dying’ brigade. In 
my wife’s case it was not an isolated incident. Of the ten nurses that 
attended her eight were of the ‘tell them’ brigade. The first nurse: 
nurse: ‘Have you told her she is dying?’ 
spike: ‘No.’ 
nurse: ‘Don’t you think you ought to?’ 
Let’s analyse this occasion. The nurse is not a part of my family, 
She knows nothing about the family. She had no knowledge of my 
wife’s personality, nor of the infra-structure between her and me. She 
has been employed as a nurse, not as a consultant psychiatrist. Her 
job is to administer medicine and keep a log of the patient. So what 
motivates her to ask such a question? Likewise the second nurse: 
nurse: ‘Does your wife know?’ 
spike: ‘No. I don’t want her to.5 
nurse: ‘Isn’t that selfish?’ 
spike: ‘What do you mean?’ 
nurse: ‘Well, you are keeping the knowledge to yourself?’ 
spike: ‘When did you last have sexual intercourse?’ 

Tender(ish) Moments 
273 
nurse: ‘What?’ 
spike: ‘When did you last have sexual intercourse?’ 
nurse: ‘That’s a private matter.’ 
spike: ‘I see - don’t you think it selfish keeping the knowl¬ 
edge to yourself?’ 
The amazing part of these occasions is the salient fact that the 
nurse is new and after only, say, thirty minutes in the house, 
having given no great depth of thought to the matter, makes a 
statement the ramifications of which are enormous. My family 
doctor, Dr Thomas, agreed there was no point in informing my 
wife of her end. Likewise when the homeopathic medicine did 
not ease the pain, he gave her conventional medicine that did. 
One day there came a locum. My wife asked him: ‘Am I dying?’ 
and he said, ‘Yes, you are.’ 
It shows he obviously had no deep liaison with Dr Thomas and 
didn’t ask a question of paramount importance on entering the 
house: ‘Am I to let your wife know?’ This man changed my wife’s 
demeanour to one of depression and a great gloom set in her. There 
were occasions when, if she saw her daughter, Jane, she cried when 
she left the room. So, the ‘tell them they are dying’ brigade eventu¬ 
ally got through with devastating emotional results. I still believe 
that basically the reason is a sadistic one. I remember identical 
feelings during the war when somebody was killed near to me. I 
always felt better that it hadn’t been me. 
I hope doctors and nurses in the light of what I have written will 
think long and hard about terminal cases when they are tempted 
to break the news. There might be cases where one has to tell them. 
Otherwise ignorance is bliss. 

274 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
[The friendship between Robert Graves and Spike Milligan was an 
extraordinary one. Two entirely different personalities, yet the 
friendship lasted from when they met in December 1964 until 
Roberts death at the age of ninety in 1985. They corresponded 
frequently. 
In 1966 Robert Graves was giving a charity reading at the Mermaid 
Theatre to help Bernard Miles, it$ founder, to raise funds for restora¬ 
tion work. Robert wrote to Spike sayihg he was worried about the 
concert. Also: ‘I am still without funds this twelve months’ Robert 
was anxious that Spike would appear with him. The concert was a 
huge success. Paddy Milligan, Spikes wife, sang light opera, Tomas 
Graves, Robert’s son, played guitar and Spike and Robert ad-libbed 
and read their own poems.] 
25 Wed. 
Dear Robert, 
Your letter arrived. I do hope you aren’t worrying about June 19, 
you ask what can I do’. Answer: anythingTalk, read your own 
verse, sing any song you know or takes your fancy - read excerpts 
from your books, tell a joke, or if you wish just sit there drinking rose 
hip cordial ’47. It’s an evening of mutual enjoyment twix audience 
and us. Muggeridge, I’m still trying to get him. I’ll let you know if I 
do, really, anybody who wants to appear, let them. Most certainly we 
won’t rehearse, just turn up on the evening and see what happens! 
Paddy has had a baby girl. Jane Fionella! 10lb 6oz, both doing 
well. I did want a son but that was primitive ego at work. 
You’re broke! Everybody’s broke. At least you’re not taxed on your 
overdraft. I only need money to buy wine. Must go. 
Love to all 
from us all 
Spike 

Tender(ish) Moments 
275 
• Orme Court 
London W2 
14 January 1970 
My Dear Robert, 
It was lovely to get a letter from you at last, especially in the New 
Year, which it helped to make all the brighter for me. 
Sorry that you seem to be having some trouble with your innards. 
Nervous stomach would appear to be a safe label for a doctor to 
hang on it. I hope you have taken the precaution to have some 
X-rays taken. 
You're right. Nothing can stop ‘progress’, especially the destruc¬ 
tion of old buildings, that is, nothing except Spike Milligan. I am a 
pretty old building myself. 
I have had some success in the past in Australia. I saved the 
cottage where Hen ry Ken dall wrote some of his early verse, like 
’Bellbirds' and ‘Names Upon a Stone'. In England I had success 
in saving the gas lamps at Constitution Hill. I am giving up 
two months of my own work to try and organize the various 
scattered preservation societies into one consolidated unit, which 
will automatically support one of the mem bers in an attempt 
to save a building; that is, if the Victorian Society want to save 
the Town House, they automatically have to support all the 
societies, like the Georgian Society, and the Holborn Society, 
etc., etc. 
If you would trust me, may I use your name when trying to 
save something ivhich I think worthwhile? 
I was in Dublin last week, to see the Ireland—Springboks 
match, and was delighted to hear that the canal, which the 
governm ent wan ted to fill in, and build a road over, had been 
saved. It is now to be a public amenity for barging, sailing, and 
walks on each side of it. 1 did my share to save it, so I feel pretty 
good. 

2 76 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
For Gods sake, don't stop fighting Robert. Is there anything I 
can do to help you defend your one unspoilt cove in Majorca, you 
only have to say. At least seek comfort as a poet. They cannot 
destroy your skill. Though, most certainly sometimes, they destroy 
the inspiration. 
I have before me, at the moment, the entire tape recording 
of our evening at the Mermaid Theatre. I have been waiting ever 
since for the company concerned to get it into a long-playing 
record, but the fire h aving gone out of the English personality, 
the tapes have lain fallow on someone s desk. I have decided 
to get it together myself, and I will let you know the results. 
Love, Light and Peace, to all of you, from all of us 
Spike 
[Robert wrote to Spike: ‘No, I never stop fighting. Congratulations 
on your saving the canal at least.’] 
Orme Court 
London W2 
8 January 1971 
My Dear Robert, 
To wish you a Happy New Year. Glad you are agin R. T.Z. Indi¬ 
viduals have to take up the sword against these twentieth-century 
van dals — they exist from local councils up to Company chairman 
level. I have had two successes. I’ve saved St Albans - a beautiful 
1700-1901 House at Hampton on the Thames - and I think we’ve 
saved Wiltons Music Hall (1843) in Whitechapel. Also fighting for 
John Loudon’s house (he was the man who laid out all the great 
garden squares in London (1790-1850)) - Fight! Fight! Fight!!! 
If you come to London - see me. 
Love Light + Peace 
Spike 

Tender(ish) Moments 
2 77 
from Spike Milligan: The Family Album - 
An Illustrated Autobiography 
1968 
16 April - my fiftieth birthday! This has got to stop! Paddy bought 
me an antique Victorian tie pin. The children bought me a vintage 
bottle of Chateau Margaux, 1947. I laid it down. It didn’t get up. 
Years later I drank it at Christmas. It laid me down. I took all the 
children save Jane to the GPO Tower revolving restaurant. How 
did the waiters ever remember which table they were serving? After¬ 
wards, we all went to see Annie Get Your Gun. What a wonderful 
score by Irving Berlin, and funny, too. 
In May Peter Sellers, having married his dream girl, Britt Ekland, 
invited Prince Charles to lunch with the Goons at Peter’s house. 
Secombe had a moustache and a goatee beard as he was appearing 
in The Four Musketeers. He was all four of them. 
Alas, Peter’s marriage didn’t last long. I was present one day when 
she came back from a shopping trip. He eyed her with distaste. She 
threw a pair of golf cuff links down on his table. The atmosphere 
was terrible, so I said, Tve got to leave now, my house is on fire,’ 
and went. 
Dick Lester, the bald film director whose films with the Beatles 
had been a roaring success, wanted me to appear in a film of The Bed 
Sitting Room in June. He wanted it rewritten by his favourite writer, 
John Woods, who I didn’t think was in the same league of comedy 
writers that John Antrobus and I were. There were some silly, unex¬ 
plainable jokes where Michael Horden said, ‘I’ve forgotten to put any 
wooden planks up my back,’ before getting into bed. The film won a 
peace award in Russia. I enjoyed doing it and some bits of the origi¬ 
nal play were left in, but the stage show had been hilarious and I was 
sad that the film wasn’t. Still, it was a good try by Lester. 
In July Laura was voted head girl of St Mary’s Abbey School and 

278 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
won the school prize for Senior Art. She also won the drama award! 
On Anzac Day in Woy Woy, the veterans paraded in a march 
past and Captain L. A. Milligan marched with them. After the 
parade, they all gathered at the Returned Soldiers’ Club and 
proceeded to get blotto, except for the Captain who came home 
sober. What was wrong with the man? 
In August I was back in Australia for my parents’ fifty-fourth 
wedding anniversary. We had dinner in the kitchen. I had bought 
them a bottle of champagne (master .of the obvious). 
‘Dad, have some,’ I said. 
‘Well, the doctor said I shouldn’t,’ he said, ‘but what the hell!’ 
So he took a sip, and suddenly his head slumped forward. 
Suppose the doctor was right? He began to recover a little, but 
he was still dopey. I took the back of his chair and dragged him 
to his bedroom. He managed to get his pyjamas on and get into 
bed. 
In the morning he was still dopey. I phoned for an ambulance 
and Desmond and I got him into it. He kept saying how good it 
was to have ‘two strong sons’. He would never come home again. 
I visited him in Gosford Hospital. He was paralysed down his 
left side. They had rigged up a sling to enable him to try to lift 
himself up and down. 
He spoke quite clearly and asked Mum to buy him some dates. 
He was worried about his bowel movements. I saw him every day 
for a week and then I had to get back home for some bloody job. 
Dad was moved to Newcastle Hospital bloody miles away. Desmond 
would drive the 120 miles with Mum on weekends. But Dad de¬ 
teriorated. 
My family knew little of this as they were all holidaying in Tobago. 
They travelled by a banana boat, MV Golfito. 
1969 
In February came a very sad day for me. I received a telegram from 
my mother: 

Tender(ish) Moments 
279 
Father very ill. He may go any time. 
Love Mum and Des. 
Next day, Dad was dead. At his funeral, a police car led the way. He 
had been a wonderful father. I shall miss him as long as I live. 
It was years since I had written the Goon Shows, but it was only 
after they finished that I received a copy of the newsletter from the 
Goon Show Preservation Society. Evidently it had been going, as I 
had been, for years. The Patron was Prince Charles and they were 
extremely well organized with branches as far distant as Australia, 
Canada, America and South Africa. The Society is still going strong 
today. This year also saw the publication of another book, The Bedside 
Milligan. Apparently it didn’t reach many bedsides. I had quite a few 
by my bedside, about a hundred, which I sold for a new bed. 
Laura went to her first ball this winter and, therefore, had to have 
her first ball gown. She looked so grown up! 
SPRING SONG, MARCH 18TH 1972 
Spring came haunting my garden today - 
A song of cold flowers was on the grass. 
Tho’ I could not see it 
I knew the air was coloured 
And new songs were 
in the old black bird’s throat. 
The ground trembled at the thought 
of what was to come! 
It was not my garden today, 
it belonged to itself. 
At the dawn smell of it - 
my children fled the house 
And went living in that primitive dimension 
that only they and gardens understand. 

280 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
My dog too lost his mind 
And ran in circle after canine circle 
Trying to catch himself - 
And do you know what? - He did\ 
It was that kind of a day. 
Written in China to 
avoid Income Tax 
- from Small Dreams of a Scorpion 
\ 
from Spike Milligan: The Family Album - 
An Illustrated Autobiography 
1974 
I was commissioned by The Times to covdr a game of backgammon 
on board the Queen Mary sailing to New York and back. My article 
was entitled ‘There and Backgammon. During the trip I swam in 
the heated swimming pool and relaxed, so much so that when a 
young woman came into my cabin and said, ‘Would you like a 
quickie?’ I was too stunned to say yes! 
In July I did a one-man show, one-man that is, except for the 
other man, a South African singer called Jeremy Taylor. He sang 
and played the guitar like a maestro. I liked to end the show with 
‘San Francisco’: 
I left my heart in San Francisco 
I left my knees back in Peru 
I left my little wooden leg 
Hanging on a peg 

Tender(ish) Moments 
281 
I left my lungs in Dublin Zoo 
With you 
I left my teeth on Table Mountain 
High on a hill they smile at me 
When I go back to San Francisco 
' - There won’t be much for them to see. 
♦ 
I returned to Australia to finish another volume of War Memoirs 
- the fourth: Mussolini, His Part in My Downfall. Mum looked after 
me well. She bought beautiful organic vegetables with such variety 
(Australia - land of plenty) and one evening made a marvellous curry. 
One evening? She had spent all day on it. We had a civilized dinner 
with Desmond, sitting on the verandah by oil lamp, talking of 
Mum and Dad’s early days. They had enjoyed such a good lifestyle 
in India. The disappointments of England could be written off. 
Here in Australia they had a very happy retirement. I recalled 
Leo’s constant efforts to get money for nothing. He once wrote to 
his Masonic Lodge Headquarters saying he was down on his luck 
and could they give him some ‘assistance’. Eventually, a letter arrived 
saying that a member of Sydney Lodge would visit him to establish 
his circumstances. No date was given. The member arrived on Leo’s 
birthday, for which I had sent him a box of Havana cigars and a 
case of half a dozen bottles of Heidsieck Dry Monopole Cham¬ 
pagne. The Masonic visitor came to see the ‘impoverished’ Leo 
sitting on the verandah smoking a cigar and drinking champagne! 
The previous year I had written Badjelly The Witch. I wrote it 
longhand in a very good, painstaking, calligraphic style to encour¬ 
age youngsters to learn how to write. The book did very well and, 
astoundingly, in far off New Zealand we had several requests to 
turn it into a school play. 
New Zealand was where I was bound next, flying from Sydney 
to Wellington, where I stayed with Harry Edgington. I took my 
cornet with me and we relived those years when we were the 
darlings of Bexhill. We weren’t as good as we had been then, but 
just as enthusiastic. 
Back in England there was a property boom. When I arrived 

282 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
home in September, half the houses in Holden Road had been sold 
at a huge profit. David White was a speculator who was desperate 
for me to sell 127.1 had bought it for £3,500 and was being offered 
£30,000 for it. I didn’t want to sell. It was the first home I had ever 
owned and I knew that, if I sold, the house would be pulled down 
for redevelopment. One day David drove me to Hadley Wood and 
he pointed to a beautiful Victorian manor. He said, I’ll give you 
this for yours.’ I couldn’t resist it. We moved from 127, sadly, late in 
September. It broke my heart but what we were getting was a sump¬ 
tuous property - Monkenhurst. I-spent £10,000 restoring it. In the 
drawing room was a marvellous Adam fireplace and the house was 
eventually voted one of the beautiful private dwellings of London 
by the Institute of Architects. 
I was proud to live in such a wonderful building. Christmas in 
Monkenhurst was a fabulous affair. Our Christmas tree was the 
biggest ever. The ceilings in Monkenhurst were very high, so we 
had a tree to fit. How do trees have fits? 
Right on cue, it snowed and we had a happy Christmas week. 
Most of my presents were bottles of wine. Paddy bought me a dozen 
bottles of Orvieto Abbrocado. This is one of my favourites, a wine 
which I first discovered in Italy during the war. We were in a gun 
position at Lauro. I was an OP signaller and we were supporting 
the Hampshire Regiment who were to attack the village of Orvieto. 
At dawn they took the objective, a typical village with a square and 
a fountain in the centre. Then we were subjected to a storm of 
German artillery. We took shelter in the cellars around the square. 
In these cellars were barrels of wine. We soon filled our water 
bottles. In fact, we emptied them and refilled them several times. 
When the shelling ended, the Hampshires lolled about the square, 
me amongst them. A Jeep arrived with a Colonel Simpson, their 
commanding officer. He went up to a pissed sergeant, kicked him 
in the boot. 
‘You!’ he said. ‘Do you know who I am?’ 
The sergeant turned to his buddy and said, ‘There’s a cunt here 
doesn’t know who he is!’ 
The wine was Orvieto Abbrocado and now, thirty years later, I 

Tender(ish) Moments 
283 
had a dozen bottles to drink. I drank a bottle of it with Christmas 
lunch. Despite everything, over the Christmas period I became 
very sad. Don’t ask me why. Perhaps it was the memory of my own 
childhood Christmases. 
There were certainly worse Christmases ahead. In the very near 
future Paddy was to develop breast cancer. Eventually she had the 
breast removed and wore a mould. She was given the all-clear in 
1977 but the cancer reappeared in her spine and upper neck. She 
went to see a naturopath who had ‘cured his own cancer’. Amongst 
other things, he said we must remove all vapour-producing medi¬ 
cines in the house - Vick’s, etc. Our usual doctor, Dr Thurman, 
visited her from time to time to try to persuade her to take a normal 
anti-cancer treatment but she refused, and gradually she declined. 
I never told Jane that Paddy was going to die until the day before 
it happened. 
I said, ‘Darling, Mummy’s dying.’ 
She said, ‘No, she’ll be better by Christmas.’ 
I said, ‘No, darling.’ 
She said, ‘But I’m only eleven!’ 
Oh, God, the pain. 
Jane has grown up the double of her mother. She has taken to 
the stage, sings, dances, plays keyboards and saxophone as well as 
classical flute. How proud her mother would have been of her. 
1975 
In February I was taken to Rhodesia to do a commercial for the 
tourist industry. After I had finished it, I had enough money to fly 
Paddy, Jane, Laura, Sile, Sean and the nanny out for a tour of the 
wild places. We travelled overland by Jeep to the Wankie Game 
Lodge. Venturing forth from the camp early every morning, we 
went in search of animals. Another wonderful holiday. 
For Jane’s ninth birthday, there was a big party at Monkenhurst. 
What a mad house. All her friends were there wearing ‘zany’ make¬ 
up. I had dressed up as Hitler. There was a knock on the front door. 

284 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
I opened it. It was a policeman. ‘Excuse me, sir. There’s a car parked 
in the main road unattended.’ I told him I had no knowledge of it. 
‘Oh, sorry to have bothered you, sir. Good night.’ He was totally 
unmoved by my appearance. 
Here the story must draw to a close. Having reached the age of 
fifty-seven and travelled the world from India and Burma to 
England, Africa and Australia, I had a great deal to look back on, 
a great many happy memories and a great deal of sadness. There 
was a great deal of both still to come ... 
MY DAUGHTER’S HORSE 
My daughter has a horse in her head 
He gallops thru’ fantasies in her mind 
She calls him Fury 
I can see him thru’ her eyes 
She rides him thru’ her spirit grasses 
At night she stables him in her, dreams. 
He must be beautiful 
Her face is alight when she sees him 
She feeds him on her soul 
He becomes what colour she wishes. 
I thought there was no end to him 
Until - one day she met 
Fred - the butcher’s boy. 
- from The Mirror Running 

Tender(ish) Moments 
285 
GROWING UP II 
Is that all there is? Goodbye! 
After a million hellos 
After all those bird-blessed good-mornings, 
After the bubbling bathtime laughter, 
After so many soul-searching Santa Claus, 
After a million wild walks on the moors, 
After the swing-swung laughing summers, 
After the tear-drenched kiss-better bumped head, 
After the new wear-them-in-bed red shoes, 
After a tumult of timeless teddy bears, 
After a delirium of dolls in prams, 
After a rainbow of ice-creams, 
After daddy I love you all the world - 
Goodbye? 
17 March 1985 
—From The Mirror Running 
THE BUTTERFLY 
This evening in the twilight’s gloom 
A butterfly flew in my room 
Oh what beauty, oh what grace 
Who needs visitors from out of space? 
Bedroom 
Monkenhurst 
24 July 1984 
—from The Mirror Running 

\ 

6 
Final Curtain 
No one ever cured me, they just went away like the mist. 
- Spike Milligan 

s 

The year 1998 saw quite a deterioration in Spike’s health but he 
still wanted to work. His ‘One Man Show’ by this time had been 
considerably reduced. It now consisted of reading his poetry, recall¬ 
ing anecdotes, reminiscences and questions from the audience. 
On Sunday 20 December he appeared at the London Palladium to 
a sell-out. That should have been his last performance, as his energy 
levels were diminished. He performed in Hull and Chichester after 
that but it was clear to me he could no longer sustain the hour on 
stage and there were a lot of complaints from the audience. 
Throughout his life Spike had collected family photographs 
dating from i860 onwards. In 1999 he arranged them in five very 
large leather-bound albums. In his distinctive calligraphic hand¬ 
writing he meticulously noted dates, times and places. From this, 
he had the idea for a book, An Illustrated Autobiography, which was 
published in this year, but work was beginning to be a struggle for 
him. He found the travelling from Rye to his office in London, even 
though he had a driver, too arduous. So we agreed I would do the 
travelling. I went to his home each week and it seemed to work for 
a while. 
In 2000 his last novel was published, The Murphy. Certainly not 
his best work. I encouraged him to write, but it was clear I would 
never submit any of his future writing to his publisher. The spark 
had gone. 
In 1994, he received a Lifetime Achievement Award at the British 
Comedy Awards, and in 2001 he received an honorary KBE. 
26 October 2001 was Harry Secombe’s memorial service in West¬ 
minster Abbey. He was too ill to attend. Michael Parkinson read 
out Spike’s last tribute to his friend: ‘Harry was the sweetness of 
Wales’ 
26 February 2002: the dynamo went out of my life ... 

V 
\ 

from Goodbye Soldier 
A Joke Morticians Shop 
ME: 
MORTICIAN: 
ME: 
MORTICIAN: 
I’ve come to bury a joke. 
I’m sorry, sir, the graveyard is full. It’s been 
a good year. 
What do you suggest? 
Cremation, sir. You can have the ashes of 
your favourite joke in an urn. In moments 
of depression, you can take the lid off and 
have a good laugh. 
If I die in War 
You remember me 
If I live in Peace 
You don’t. 
from Small Dreams of a Scorpion 

292 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
I walked along some forgotten shore. 
Coming the other way 
a smiling boy. 
It was me. 
‘Who are you old man?’ he said 
I dare not tell him all 1 could say was 
‘Go back!’ 
\ 
Madrid 
14 September 1973 
- from Open Heart University 
EASTER 1916 
The lights had gone out! 
The sun cannot set! 
The green heart is suppurating! 
Heroes’ souls are on the English rack 
and the harp’s strings are muted. 
In the fusillade 
a child is born in blood, 
his heritage will be glory. 
Goodnight Padraic Pearse 
and your friends. 
February 1975 
- from Open Heart University 

Final Curtain 
293 
FOR LUCY GATES 
Carry me mother - carry me 
To where the Romans died, 
Take me to the cavern mouth 
Where Ariadne cried, 
Show me Agamemnon 
and his golden face, 
Then show me all the dust of lives 
that lived and left no trace. 
Show me, show me Mrs Jones 
who lived in Deptford Town, 
there falling from the sky at night 
the wrath that put her down. 
The nameless dustman 
(was it Fred?) 
Who found the dying child 
and in the flix-twix 
T 
Life and Styx 
She looked at him and smiled. 
So carry carry carry her 
To where the forgotten lie 
And on the stones 
Above her bones 
Carve out the one word 
Why. 
Monkenhurst 
17 March 1982 
- From The Mirror Running 

294 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
from Depression and How to Survive It 
Isn’t it funny, I couldn’t imagine her dying. There seemed a perma¬ 
nency, and the shock now of realizing that she’s dead is having a 
depressing effect. I didn’t say goodbye to her before she died. I 
couldn’t bear saying, ‘Goodbye for ever, Mum’ - she was in hospi¬ 
tal in a bed and I said, ‘I’m going now, Mum, bye bye,’ and she said, 
‘Bye bye, son’ and that was it. I feel like that Dylan Thomas poem 
- ‘Do not go gentle into this good night. Rage, rage against the 
dying of the light.’ She died about ten days after I got back to Brit¬ 
ain. 
How many good-byes? 
When I was born 
My Mother took me from hospital 
The nurses said good-bye' 
That was my first one 
I was too young to hear it 
One day I will die 
Someone will say good-bye 
And I still won’t hear it 
Monkenhurst 
April 28 1987 0100 hrs 
How many meals 
did you cook for me mum 
No computer can tell me. 
You started feeding me 
the day I was born 

Final Curtain 
295 
I cant remember 
when you stopped 
But' I miss it 
no food has ever tasted the same 
January 1990 0200 a.m. 
Mum died July 3 1990 
TO MY FATHER 
Why did you go Dad? 
So much left undone. 
So much unsaid 
You never finished the story. 
There was so much wine left 
Did you order too much 
Or did we drink too little? 
Mum had put fresh sheets on the bed. 
So why did you go 
in the middle of the song? 
The tune was so good 
We wanted to hear the end 
Why did you go? 
There was so much love 
The fridge was full of it 
If you were coming back 
Why did you send your suit to the cleaners? 
You know tonight there was Gunsmoke on telly 
Tomorrow we were going to walk up Blackwall mountain 
Why did you go 
And what about Mesopotamia 
What did happen at the battle of Chaiba. 
I’ve rearranged the muskets in the gun room 
So why did you go. 
We are waiting - waiting. 

296 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
MY MOTHER 
So my mother, my mother 
laid to rest 
The fairy dances fade . 
but cannot end 
The dolls stand * 
serious faced 
In your empty room 
cast glass eyes 
At the Burmese lacquer 
I left the piano lid open 
So you can play for dad 
The Love Lyrics ' 
The Cubanola Glide 
The officers mess glasses 
from Belgium 
Have drunk their last 
Regimental toast ' 
You left the house full 
of everything 
mostly love. 
Good-bye for a while mum. 
Remember Rangoon mum 
the concerts and the Brigade dance 
you made your own dress 
White organdie 
And Poona. 
You must have loved Poona 
The Governors’ Ball 
- you singing with the band. 
How wonderful it must have been 

Final Curtain 
297 
Heidsiecks Monopole! 
all your life. 
I can’t say how much 
I love you. 
The-language wasn’t invented 
I rang Woy Woy 413662 today 
You didn’t answer 
You must have been out. 
July 8 1990 
G.M.T. 9.30 am 
[Marty was a great script-writer and a very funny actor. One of 
Spike’s favourite people. Spike thought he was brilliant. They were 
great friends. When Marty died Spike wrote a letter to his widow 
Lauretta. This is an extract: ‘He wasn’t just a funny man, he was a 
bloody nice fellow. If life is a game of cards, somebody is cheating.’] 
Marty Feldman 
1600 North Highland Avenue 
Hollywood 
California 90028 
You swine Feldman all these months Fve been laying wreaths on a 
grave in Arlington Cemetery and all the while you weren’t there. 
When you are cremated I am going to package your ashes and sell 
them as Ready Brek. Will phone you soon. 
Love 
Spike 

298 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
Wanker Productions 
1600 North Highland Avenue 
Hollywood 
California 90028 
22 July 1981 
Dear Spike, " 
Its been almost a year since 1 got your very kind letter; just after I 
went to meet my Maker and He didn’t show up. 
And I’ve been meaning to say thank you, but you know how it is 
and that’s how it was and thank you now. 
Oddly, I miss you more than England. Perhaps not oddly. After 
all you’re there and most of England seems to be here. 
So here I am, full of boozy gush and wish ing I could split a bottle 
or three of cheap plonk with you. 
I hear, from time to time, what and how you’re doing, and it 
seems that you’re surviving and working and getting laid, so there 
doesn’t seem to be much more to ask does there? 
I’m back to what passes for normal around here. Scribbling and 
acting and as you recommended, reading poems to Lauretta by 
candlelight - So my status is back to quo and I’m as happy as a 
Jew can ever be. 
Please write, if you have the time, and if you should be looting 
in Harrod’s could you pick up an onyx coffee table for me? 
When I do die, I shall ask to be cremated and request that you 
snort my ashes. Till soon . . . 
Fond smiles and manly embraces 
Marty Feldman 
(Earthman — Naturalized) 

Final Curtain 
299 
ODE TO MY MOTHER 
If I should die, 
Think only this of me, 
The swine left owing us 
Six pounds eighty p. 
- from Unspun Socks from a Chickens Laundry 
9 Orme Court 
Bayswater 
London W2 4RL 
17 January 1996 
1 
Fax to: The Editor 
The Times 
Dear Sir, 
I saw one of your articles headed ‘Not enough room for the dead’. 
Well let me say if the population goes on swelling there wont he 
enough room for the living. 
Yours 
Spike Milligan 
Outraged of Tonbridge 

300 
Milligans Meaning of Life 
DEATH WISH 
Bury me anywhere, 
Somewhere near a tree 
Some place where a horse will graze 
And gallop over me. < 
Bury me ' v 
Somewhere near a stream, 
When she floods her banks 
I’ll give her thanks 
For reaching out to me. 
So bury me - bury me 
In my childhood scene; 
But please - 
don’t burn me 
In Golders Green. 
Italy 1944 
- from Small Dreams of a Scorpion 

Final Curtain 
301 
Spike, you got your wish 

302 
Milligans Meaning of Life 

! 


> 

s 

'' I 
» 

t 


s 


v„ _ __. ; • 

was Spike Milligan’s agent, manager 
mother confessor and friend for thirty-six years. 
Her books include Spike: An Intimate Memoir and 
Memories of Milligan. She edited Box 18: The 
Unpublished Spike Milligan and The Compulsive Spike 
Milligan to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of Spike’s 
first book, Silly Verse for Kids, published in 1959. She 
has also compiled a selection of his poems and 
stories for children in The Magical World of Milligan 
and is currently writing her own children’s bedtime 
story books, The Adventures of Henry the Hedgehog. 
She lives with her partner in London and Yorkshire. 
-o 
ZT 
o 
n 
O 
(K> 

: ‘The Godfather of 
Alternative Comedy’ 
‘My father had a 
profound influence on me 
he was a lunatic’ 

