
90000 > 

Mind Control 101 
How To Influence the Thoughts and 
Actions of Others Without Them 
Knowing or Caring 
By 
Dantalion Jones 

Mind Control Publishing 
First published 2006 
Copyright © Dantalion Jones 2008 
Mind Control 101 
ISBN: 9781440486685 
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyrights reserved above, no part of this 
publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of the copyright owner. 
by Lulu, Inc. 
www.Lulu.com 

Table Of Contents 
Introduction 
PART 1 
What Is Mind Control? 
Introduction to Mind Control 
Where Is Mind Control Used? 
Models Of Mind Control 
A Brief History Of Mind Control 
Memes And Mind Control 
"Only Idiots Are Influenced By Mind Control? 
So You Want To Learn And Use Mind Control? 
What Are The Related Fields Of Mind Control? 
PART 2 
1 
7 
11 
13 
19 
25 
29 
31 
37 
The Techniques Of Mind Control 
41 
(How To Influence The Thoughts & Actions Of Others Without Them 
Knowing Or Caring) 
-Behavioral Conditioning 
45 
-Coercion 
49 
-Social Pressure & Mob Mind Control 
57 
-Social Influence A La Robert Cialdini 
56 
-NLP - Neuro Linguistic Programming 
62 
-Hypnosis 
103 
-Psychic Cold Readings 
108 
-"Dumb Blond Mind Control" 
118 
-Appealing To Basic Human Responses 
120 
-Interviews & Interrogation 
126 
-Gaslighting Old & New 
149 
-Pharmacological Mind Control 
157 
-The Power & Use Of Symbols 
165 
-Psychic Influence 
167 
-Other Techniques For Mind Control 
172 
-Cult Mind Control Tactics & Strategies 
180 
-The 5 Steps Of Mind Control 
188 
-How To Create A Recovered Memory 
190 
-Mind Tricks With Others 
194 

-Enchantment 
What Are The Dangers Of Using Mind Control? 
Conclusion 
Recommended Mind Control Movies 
Additional Resources 
204 
206 
210 
212 
214 

Dedication. 
To my faithful djinn, familiar and constant companion, Dantalion, the 
71 st spirit of the Goetia, "His Office is to teach all Arts and Sciences 
unto any; and to declare the Secret Counsel of anyone; for he knoweth 
the Thoughts of all Men and Women, and can change them at his WilL 
He can cause Love, and show the Similitude of any person, and show 
the same by a Vision, let them be in what part of the World they WilL" 
Also to Robert Greene who read over 1,000 books for me so that I 
might learn to spiritualize everything and treat life like a glorious 
campaign. 

Introduction 
Why in the world would someone write a book on Mind 
Control? 
More specifically, why would someone write a book on how to 
use Mind Control as though it is a great and wonderful thing to "fuck 
with peoples heads"? 
The answer is that as much as we try to elevate ourselves above 
being human animals we are, in fact, animals. We are subject to the 
wants and desires of any being with a genetic make up and vertebrae. 
To rise above that is an admirable aspiration and one that I encourage 
anyone take on as a worthy spiritual endeavor. 
But to deny that we are, truly, animals is to lie to ourselves. We 
must interact in a social environment and deal with people who may 
not be so enlightened and spiritually advanced as we are. They may 
desire what we have and be secretly filled with envy and contempt. 
The worst event is to have these suspicions fulfilled and then be pulled 
down into the politics of man. 
In this event what are the options? Do we deny that it is 
happening and hope others will be touched by our honesty and good 
will enough to change? Or do we drop our highest spiritual ideals and 
play their game? 
I would like to suggest a radically different strategy. Take the 
game of manipulation and Mind Control and make it a part of your 
spirituality. 
By doing so, we neither deny manipulation and Mind Control 
nor do we surrender to it. Instead we embrace it and see it for what it 
is; a tool for our growth. 
What I describe is the spiritual life of the warrior who 
embraces life and sees every battle as an expression of life, not death. 
To this warrior every moment is a chance to live fully and aspire while 
walking in the world yet guided by something higher. 
If you are so bold and fearless to embrace Mind Control in this 
manner every interaction is lifted above the mundane and worldly and 
becomes a vehicle for your spirituality. You will be lifted and remain 
untouched even amid the most vulgar of human politics. Your war will 
be your temple. 
You should be warned. As you read this there is nothing that 
will be withheld. Like the warrior there are many unpleasant things 

that you must learn about this life you choose. While you are obligated 
to learn these secrets you are not obligated to use them. 
I bid you to walk fearlessly. Face your demons and laugh at 
them. Make them your servants and walk untouched. 

What is Mind Control? 
Mind ControL When you hear those words a myriad of images 
may come to mind. You might envision a devious man using the 
power of his mind and will to dominate the actions of some 
unsuspecting and innocent women. 
You may think of some clandestine cabal of world leaders 
secretively planning the next steps toward a unified world economy. 
Or perhaps you are the cult leader (one of my favorite images) 
with a gathering of loyal followers ready to hear every word. 
It is not likely you have in mind a loving parent reading to his 
children or an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting helping its members 
live a decent life of sobriety. 
It is also unlikely that, as you stand in your favorite church of 
worship, you will recognize the grasp that Mind Control has on you. 
Or as you sit with your psychiatrist you are unlikely to be 
aware of the subtle acts of Mind Control that are being used on you. 
But it is there. 
And for the sake of this book, any attempt to bring about a 
change in your thoughts and feelings, and therefore your actions, is an 
act of Mind ControL 
That may sound shocking because most people see Mind 
Control as a bad thing done by bad people. So let me make it clear; the 
intention and motives of the controller are not relevant to this 
discussion. The controller may be motivated by the most altruistic 
ideals or may only want your money. 
This book will attempt to uncover the methods of how those 
thoughts and feelings are instilled to bring about the controller's 
outcome. 
To make a distinction Mind Control differs from the vulgar 
actions and tactics of coercion. Coercion is when all a controller wants 
is to have someone make a specific action and has no concern for their 
motivation. Threats, guilt and humiliation will usually do the job. But 
coercion lacks any form of grace or elegance. 
Coercion cares nothing about the thoughts and feelings of the 
people being coerced. This is the major difference between coercion 
and Mind ControL 

2 
Because many so-called cults use coercion to get compliance 
from their subjects the topic will be discussed but it is the goal of this 
book to aspire to something higher, namely Mind Control. In the next 
chapter of this book the various models of Mind Control will be 
covered. 
The difference between Mind Control and persuasion is subtle, 
but nonetheless important. Consider all power of one form or another 
as a hierarchy. By moving up each level one controls more and more 
power. Persuasion starts at the bottom, while Mind Control seeks to 
control the top of the pyramid. As an example, persuasion seeks to sell 
a widget and overcome the buyer's tendency to say "I have to ask, my 
wife". Mind Control, on the other hand, seeks to make the thought of 
not owning the widget blasphemous and unnatural. 
It is a good idea to remember that true Mind Control is difficult 
and unnatural because it requires the controller to think above the 
present short term and think beyond mere appearances. The majority 
of the world responds to what they see and reacts to it by thinking in 
terms of the tactics that will get them what they want. Mind Control, 
true quality Mind Control, requires thinking in terms of strategy. 
Thinking far enough ahead so that your real desire is hidden, yet your 
outcome is still achieved. 
No simple task. 
It requires knowing how people think and respond and a 
knowledge of the individuals personal impulses and weaknesses. 
More importantly it requires knowing yourself and being able 
to control your impulses to react. Your goals, your highest ambitions, 
must be held secret and every action measured by how close it brings 
you to your goal. 
One way of distinguishing how people think is in terms of 
serial, linear and non-linear thinking. 
Serial thinking is the act of thinking and responding in an 
automatic fashion. Serial thinking is a result of our evolution and is 
quite useful. By simply reacting to the situation at the moment it 
prevents us from having to think too much. It is also how sheep are led 
to slaughter. 
Linear thinking is a step up and requires forethought and the 
ability to predict in some way the consequences of actions and various 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

3 
paths that lead to our goals and desires. For the average chess player 
the game is an excellent example of how to stretch linear thinking to 
its limits. 
Non-linear thinking does not stop at the chess board. At its 
pentacle it incorporates all dimensions of space and time. While a 
linear thinking chess player may aim to win each game and become a 
world champion, the non-linear player will be able to see how losing a 
game will position them to play an opponent that will be easier to beat 
and therefore give themselves and the game greater publicity. A non-
linear thinking player may even see so far ahead, knowing their own 
limitations and the limitations of the game, that at one point they will 
stage a huge outburst promising to never play the game again and 
gamer exposure for one of their other ambitious projects. 
The art of Mind Control is more than just responding to the 
situation (serial thinking) or having a structured plan to get your 
outcome (linear thinking). It is the ability to be fluid when responding 
to a fluid environment. You must know your goal, you must know 
yourself, you must know your environment, and you must know the 
people you influence in every way possible. And you must do it all 
while outwardly appearing to be like everyone else around you. 
This is no easy task but it is worthy of your efforts. 
To aspire to this ideal promises that at every tum you will learn 
something about yourself and your world. 
Of course if you are interested in Mind Control it is probably a 
good idea to discuss the ethics of Mind Control. I'm not one to preach 
morality and no where in this book will you read how you should use 
Mind Control. 
This is not a book on ethics and you can guess that there are 
plenty of people and organizations who have used this technology with 
no concern about how it affects people. I know plenty of men who 
have used Mind Control to get laid. It is truly not that hard. The ones 
who are good at it can frame their actions so that the women involved 
understand that it is a way to give them the pleasure they will enjoy. In 
other words, they appreciate the effort made to seduce them. Others 
are not so skilled and would do better to remain silent about their 
actions and intentions. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

4 
Let me therefore recommend that you use what you learn here 
as if it were to be used on you. 
So, if you aren't annoyed with Mind Control being used on you 
(believe me, it is being used on you all the time) and you are generally 
a happy person, then it is probably okay to do the same with others. 
As a general rule if you decide to use Mind Control and you 
are motivated by anger or hurt it is very likely that you will hurt people 
in the process. Perhaps that's not a concern for you. So be it. However 
you should be warned never to underestimate peoples desire to get 
even and change your actions accordingly. 
As a final note, through all of this you may find it so 
enlightening that you feel it is worth sharing, especially with people 
close to you. One might believe that others will appreciate being 
awoken from their ignorance. 
I dare you to try. 
What you will find is that sleep (metaphoric sleep) is the 
natural state of the mind. People will equate your efforts to awaken 
them with an attempt to change them. While people might not mind 
changing they resist being changed. Therefore it is best to keep you 
own counsel. 
Do people need waking up? Of course, but let them do it in 
their own time. Untill then it will be you and I who benefit from these 
insights. 
The movie The Matrix offers an analogy. In the movie 
humanity was subjugated, through Mind Control, to serve a machine. 
Supposing that you are an insignificant power source subordinate to a 
huge world dominating machine, would you have swallowed the red 
pill as the main character, Neo, did, in order to be 'woken up' and 
realize it? 
"We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of 
infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far." 
-H.P. Lovecraft 
The Intended Audience 
This book was written to appeal to a wide range of people who 
can apply its knowledge in the area of human interaction. 
Mind ControllOl 
www.MindControllOl.com 

5 
Your ambitions may vary as much as your interest, whether 
you seek world domination or to merely to better your interpersonal 
communications this book will have something for you. 
It is safe to say that the only person who will not benefit from 
applying this knowledge is the individual isolated from all human 
contact. 
There have been many people who have preceded you and you 
and anyone else can learn from them. You can study them or use them 
as models of behavior. Who are these people? Martin Luther King Jr., 
Golda Meir, Fidel Castro, Alfred Hitchcock, Nepoleon Bonaparte, 
Salvidor Dali, Alexander the Great, Indira Gandhi, Anton Szandor 
LaVey, Marlon Brando, John Wayne, Darth Vader, Don Vito Corleone 
and King Lear. 
Welcome to the brotherhood. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

Introduction to Mind Control 
To understand the process of Mind Control it is necessary to 
have a basic understanding of the human mind. 
People make decisions on every level in a way that is unique to 
each of them. Those decisions are based on mental filters that are used 
to perceive the self and its environment. These filters are best 
understood in the form of questions that people ask themselves. Keep 
in mind that these questions are asked unconsciously therefor people 
are unaware of them, but they can be deduced by a person's behaviors 
and the way they react to events. 
These questions are not the same in every context. A person 
may make major decisions about relationships based on the question 
"Would this person provide me with security?" but in the context of 
buying a car the question might be "Will it get me attention?" or vice 
versa. 
These questions may be numerous and have a hierarchy of 
priority. For example determining whether to consider someone as a 
sexual partner may involve having to fulfill the following questions. 
"Am I attracted to their appearance?" 
"Do I feel safe with this person?" 
"Can I see myself having sex with this person?" 
"Can I see myself having sex with this person more than once?" 
"Will I feel good about myself if I have sex with this person?" 
and so on. 
People will respond differently to the same situations 
depending on the questions (filters) they ask. One person facing the 
loss of a job may ask "What did I do wrong?" in which case they 
notice, find or create what they did wrong. Another person in the 
same situation may ask unconsciously "How is this an opportunity for 
me?" and see the same situation as an opportunity. 
Much to the amazement and amusement of many rational 
thinkers there is no end of people who habitually focus on the 
problems rather than the solutions to the things life throws at them. 
Of course none of these questions are asked on a conscious 
level. Many of these questions/filters are so deeply ingrained that it 

8 
may offend people if they are asked to consider the situation in any 
other possible way. 
The degree to which you can direct a persons filters and the 
unconscious questions they ask themselves is the degree to which you 
can direct their thoughts and actions. In other words Mind Control. 
This holds true of the questions you ask yourself as well. 
So, understanding this, you can start your journey of learning 
Mind Control by examining your own filters/questions that lead you to 
make decisions and, at the same time, observe the people around you 
as well. 
A couple of filters/questions you could add to your own 
personal repertoire for the purpose of learning Mind Control is "What 
can I assume is true of this person that's not overtly apparent?" and 
"How can I direct their attention to get my outcome?" 
You will be surprised how much you learn. 
Mind Control goes by many names, persuasion, seduction, 
manipulation, sales skills, politics, advertising and so on. The one 
thing that they all have in common is the desire to change peoples 
minds and behaviors. 
Now, I ask you, is this common? 
You bet it is. In fact it is one of the mam functions of 
communication. Yes, even when you are talking to yourself (absent of 
any mental disorder) the reason you do it is to direct your thoughts, 
actions and behaviors. 
The ugly truth is we use Mind Control every time we open our 
mouths to talk. While those two words "Mind Control" may have a 
grating ring to most of our ears it doesn't prevent it from being a fact 
of everyday life. Many people will violently deny that they use it. 
The more we try to deny how we use Mind Control 
the more ineffective we are at it. 
It is time to raise the phrase "Mind Control" from its impr-
operly placed gutter and hold it up to examination as a simple fact of 
human nature. That means being truly honest about ourselves while 
keeping our intentions close to the vest. 
Some might argue that honesty is the best policy. 
Mind Control 10 I 
www.MindControllOI.com 

9 
As much as that is the ideal and few people will eagerly tell 
you otherwise, the opposite is usually true. 
I was in a conversation with a close friend who expressed to 
me that, as much as he likes and admires me, he was concerned about 
my tendency to withhold and obfuscate information, telling me it 
seemed to him to be the main obstacle to what he considers my 
success. 
There is no doubt that he believes what he says and that his 
intentions are well meaning but reality teaches a different lesson. 
To prove it all one has to do is be completely honest about your 
intentions whenever you go on a first date. Perhaps you have visions 
of matrimony in mind with your date. Or perhaps your only goal is 
lead your date into an unrestrained expression of sexual debauchery. 
Either way it is very unlikely that you will achieve your goals by 
openly stating your intent from the start. 
Truth, it seems, is a caustic and volatile chemical when added 
to most human interactions. When it is administered without restraint 
the only certain outcome is that the outcome will be uncertain. 
Thankfully, Truth is also very malleable and relatively safe when 
cautiously administered in deluded forms. 
It is best then to be judicious with your expressions of true 
intentions and feelings until a reliable response can be determined. 
In the meantime we can look for evidence of how pervasive 
Mind Control is in our daily lives. 
"Judge a man by his questions rather than 
his answers. " 
~ Voltaire 
Mind ControllOl 
www.MindControllOI.com 

Where is Mind Control Used? Everywhere! 
Here is a list of how Mind Control is used in everyday life: 
• 
Motivating a child to eagerly perfonn better in school 
• 
Creating obedience to a religious of political figure 
• 
Creating a feeling of superiority towards one group 
• 
Motivating a prospect to buy a specific product or service 
• 
Creating panic to sell a certain stock 
• 
Instilling trust in the authority that is speaking to you on the 
television 
• 
Creating contempt for the competition while establishing greater 
customer loyalty 
• 
Bringing in greater revenues 
• 
Bringing an attractive person into a romantic or sexual encounter 
• 
Selling an undervalued product for a higher price 
• 
Talking a cop out of a traffic ticket 
• 
Making a spectator believe in psych abilities 
• 
Causing someone to reevaluate their prior beliefs 
The list can go on and on. 
In all of these cases the controller clearly knows his or her 
outcomes and objectives. 
It is safe to say that any time you want something that involves 
motivating someone to do something or when people do something 
without questioning why they are doing it some fonn of Mind Control 
is involved, whether it is intentional or not. So we are using Mind 
Control all the time. Even the act of having your partner take out the 
garbage could not happen without some fonn of setup, conditioning 
and Mind Control. If you doubt it ask a stranger to take out your 
garbage and see what kind of compliance you get. 
As you will learn, Mind Control requires thinking on a higher 
level than the subject and veiling the strings of control with the 
everyday distractions of daily life. As one seeks to control the higher 
levels of a hierarchy of power something interesting occurs. The 
visibility of the control becomes less obvious to the subject(s) as they 
become more involved with their day-to-day concerns. 

12 
Mind Control is everywhere. Once you realize the depth of 
Mind Control in your life your only option, outside of paranoia, is a 
calm, almost Buddha-like all-knowingness that recognizes the 
ubiquitous presence of Mind Control and to set out to use it to your 
advantage. While this mindset can be encouraged, no one can teach it. 
Only through patience, effort and a little suffering can you gain this 
invaluable perspective. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

Models of Mind Control 
If Mind Control is about controlling the thoughts, emotions and 
actions of others there are several functional models that will help you 
do that. 
To find out just how Mind Control creates the degree of 
compliance that one wants let's consider some common models of 
Mind Control. 
Behavioral Modification/Conditioning Model 
As with every case of Mind Control the controller knows what 
he wants people to do and wants them to do it willingly and for, what 
they think, are their own reasons. 
The Behavioral Modification/Conditioning Model works by a 
system of stimuli in the form of rewards and punishments based on the 
behaviors of the subject. So in much the same way as you would train 
a dog to do tricks you can train a person to willingly take part in some 
action. 
Behavioral Modification/Conditioning requires a series of steps 
that rewards good behavior and punishes bad behavior. But let's say 
you want your subject to steal some candy from a store (or worse). 
Using the behavioral modification model you would first reward them 
for "thinking creatively" outside the norm of social ethical behavior. 
After they have become used to thinking out side the norm, and you 
reward them at every tum for it, it is time to move to the next level. At 
this next stage rewards are given for taking actions outside the norm 
but sanctioned within a social structure or group. College hazing is a 
good example. Each act the subjects perform that is outside the norm 
(but protected within the group) is rewarded, perhaps with a slap on 
the back or toast in their name. 
With the proper conditioning at the final stage the subjects are 
then told to go steal some candy. And when this is completed a rousing 
party is held in their honor. 
It wouldn't take much more than several of these exercises to 
have them do something even more malicious. 
A punishment when an action is not taken could be something 
as mild as having members of the group scoff in disdain. They will 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

14 
also be given a choice to deal with the consequences of not acting as 
requested. This creates the illusion of free will. 
To use the Behavioral Modification/Conditioning model 
skillfully and with stealth the controller must make the rewards huge 
and the punishments mild but memorable. This will prevent the subject 
from believing they were coerced in any way. 
Scientology has a very thorough behavioral conditioning 
process that they refer to as "The Training Routines" or "TRs". The 
TR's are presented as a communication training at the very beginning 
of someones interest in Scientology. The TRs are a progressive set of 
exercises that lead the subject to instantly respond to a command that 
is given in what is called a 'tone 40' voice. Once the subject learns to 
respond as asked in this way they can be easily told to take out their 
check book and emoll in the next training. 
Hardwired Model 
In much the same way that a doctor may tap your knee and it 
reflexes with a jerk of the leg so too are there certain way that we as 
humans are hardwired to respond. While this will be covered in more 
detail in the section titled Appealing to Basic Human Responses two 
examples ofthis are The Need to Be Special and The Scapegoat. 
An example of The Need to Be Special is in telling a subject 
that they are uniquely qualified for a task and appreciated for their 
skills and knowledge. The hardwired human response to this is one of 
agreement and a feeling of satisfaction. 
The Scapegoat is the basic human need to know that our 
problems are not our fault even if in fact they are. 
There is a great deal of talk among the Human Potential 
Movement to "take responsibility for your life" and on a conscious 
level it makes complete sense. If we look at our life as something that 
we are in complete control of we feel more empowered, will tend to 
act more decisively and be happier people simply because we choose 
it. Nonetheless, the world has other plans and will often throw us a 
curve ball that we didn't expect; people we trust will rip us off, we'll 
deal with bills and financial concerns and loving relationships will 
end. In all of these cases it is still a relief to know that "it is not our 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

15 
fault". We will gladly take sides with strangers who will support us 
throwing stones at our enemies. 
I was discussing this with a friend who eagerly agrees with the 
concept of 'complete personal responsibility'. When the topic turned to 
a problem he was having with a client I responded by lambasting the 
client expressing how it was all the clients fault and that my friend was 
not responsible for the troubles. He was instantly appeased and 
showed his appreciation at my concern. I then told to him how I was 
using The Scapegoat on him and he immediately understood its 
power. 
The Need to Be Special and The Scapegoat are just two of the 
examples that show how we are hardwired to respond. 
NLP Model 
NLP stands for N euro Linguistic Programming. It is field of 
study that was developed in the late 70's by two scientists, Richard 
Bandler and John Grinder. 
They wanted to discover why certain therapists could deal with 
their clients and get very rapid results where other therapists seem to 
take months and years. 
In doing this they discovered that there are certain mental 
processes we all go through to make decisions and to make changes. If 
someone (anyone) knows anothers process for making changes they 
just have to conform to that process and change will occur. 
It is essentially having the road map to someones mind. With it 
you can guide the person to do a whole myriad of things without them 
even knowing what you are doing. As a result many people have 
applied NLP to sales and persuasion while others have applied it to 
seductions. 
What makes NLP unique as a model of Mind Control in that it 
treats people as distinct individuals, not as a mass of hardwired robots. 
This means that each person has their own processes for change and 
these processes are unique to them. 
The central key in using NLP as a Mind Control tool is to find 
ways to elicit peoples individual processes. These processes can be in 
the form of beliefs, personal assumptions, tendencies and values as 
well as their strategy for making decisions. Once you discover an 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

16 
individual's unique processes the doors are wide open for Mind 
Control. 
Environmental Control Model 
The Environmental Control Model can be a lot of fun and a lot 
of work. 
It requires that the controller take into account everything that 
the subject will experience so that they will naturally conclude exactly 
what the controller wants and, as a result fulfill the controller's 
objective without considering any other possibility or option. 
It truly requires seeing a much bigger picture of what is 
happening. 
Think of how magicians control the environment to have you 
believe the effect. A good magician won't tell you "This is an ordinary 
deck of playing cards." Instead he will fan them for you and even have 
you handle them so that you conclude, on your own, what he wants 
you to believe. All the while the deck could marked, rigged or a prop 
of one sort or another. 
To use the Environmental Mind Control model, consider this 
phrase: "No can resist what they can't detect." 
The Environmental Control Model is also a favorite of con 
men. If you are in a hospital parking lot and you see a man in a white 
coat with a stethoscope dangling out of his pocket, a name tag that 
says "Samuel Wallis, MD, Urology" who asks for jumper cables to 
start his car you naturally assume he is a doctor. More importantly, 
you don't assume he is not a doctor. 
The pentacle of the Environmental Control Model is the movie, 
"The Matrix". 
For the people who lived connected to the Matrix everything 
was just as they thought it was with the worries and desires of 
everyday life. All the while they were protected from discovering that 
they were nothing more than AA Batteries used to power a global 
machine. 
To use the Environmental Mind Control model effectively, you 
must first ask what you want your subject to do and what to believe 
and then create the environment that will naturally make them 
conclude what you want. Doing this on a large scale can prove 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

17 
difficult because of the numerous variables one must control. On a 
smaller scale however it can be quite simple. 
Take the example of going to a religious retreat. The 
participants are isolated from the rest of the world. No TV or 
newspaper. No cell phones or computers. They are then asked to 
remove their shoes and be silent when in certain locations as a sign of 
reverence. After doing this for a period of time it does not take much 
for them to begin to believe what they are told to believe. 
A con-man will also use isolation by making sure his mark is 
constantly occupied by his con man collaborators whose jobs are to 
make certain that the mark's attention is continually directed exactly 
where they want it. 
These are merely models of Mind Control not the techniques 
and tactics. As models they provide hints at the possible strategies that 
make Mind Control possible. 
The next chapter will cover how Mind Control, techniques and 
tactics, have been used on a historical basis. 
Mind Control 10 1 
www.MindControllOl.com 

A Brief History of Mind Control 
Mind Control is not bad in itself, it is a process that has 
evolved as a survival mechanism for the group. In other words, if the 
group could stay together in an effective way, they would have a better 
chance of collectively surviving what the world throws at them. If one 
person didn't conform in thought and behavior to the group norm they 
could threaten the groups survival. They further learned that by 
influencing others outside of the clan in certain ways they could 
prevent attacks. 
Keep in mind that while most of us value and tout the virtues 
of freedom and personal independence these are new concepts when 
compared to the long span of human history. Mind Control has been 
the rule not the exception. 
Parents and upbringing 
Beliefs are born from our experiences and not from facts. In 
fact a belief is a belief because it is not a fact. Facts can be proven but 
beliefs must be argued. 
However, most people do not make these distinctions and hold 
their beliefs as facts, stating them without even the consideration of 
anything contrary. 
Parents are no exception. Thus parents unknowingly take part 
in the most thorough Mind Control processes that are available by 
controlling every aspect of a child's life (Environmental Control 
Model). They reward preferred behavior and punish the bad 
(Behavioral Modification Model). Some who are good at parenting 
understand a childes unique tendencies and dispositions and controls 
them by accommodating this uniqueness (NLP Model). 
Teaching Institutions 
The worlds second oldest profession is, in fact, a well crafted 
Mind Control experiment. There are many features and techniques of 
Mind Control at work in any classroom. The most obvious is peer 
pressure designed to enforce conformity. 
Other techniques include Behavioral Modification of rewards 
and punishments that work together with the intention that everyone 
learn the same information. The result, and perhaps the hidden 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

20 
intention, is to instill conformity of thought and behavior as the rule. 
An possible secondary hidden intention is to forbid free thought and 
creativity. Yes, modem pedagogy, regardless of its intentions, uses 
tried and tested Mind Control methods as a matter of course. 
Religion and the Application of Mind Controlled 
This is one of my favorite topics because religious 
organizations use every Mind Control method available. 
Let's focus on the stated and unstated intentions of most 
religious groups and how they use the means of Mind Control to reach 
their ends. 
Their stated intention is to get closer as individuals to their god. 
In doing so, a devout follower will eagerly apply any Mind Control 
method on themselves. This might even includes the various 
deprivations that would normally fall under the category of self-
imposed coercion. 
The unstated aims of religious Mind Control are many, among 
them are to 
• 
Raise money for the church or church leaders. 
• 
Instill fear of disobeying church doctrine. 
• 
Create a sense of moral superiority to the devout. 
• 
Create contempt for the non-believers. 
• 
Unify the group to work together. 
• 
Recruit non-believers into the flock. 
Anton Mesmer 
Anton Mesmer is the founder of mesmerism and the forerunner 
of hypnosis. 
Mesmer believed that all living organisms have a magnetic 
fluid running through them and that by making passes over the body 
with magnets one can control the flow of that fluid and alter the 
persons health and mental state. 
Later in his career he found that making these passes without 
magnets created the same result. 
What he fell upon was the wonderful phenomenon of human 
suggestibility. By speaking with confident authority and telling people 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

21 
what they would experience people experienced just that. By adding 
the effect of rituals it was made even more compelling. People would 
swoon and fall over under his control. 
MKULTRA 
Project MKULTRA (also known as MK-ULTRA) was the 
code name for a CIA mind-control research program that began in the 
1950s, and continued until the late 1960. There is much published 
evidence that the project involved not only the use of drugs to 
manipulate persons, but also the use of electronic signals to alter brain 
functioning. 
It was first brought to wide public attention by the u.s. 
Congress (in the form of the Church Committee) a presidential 
commission (known as the Rockefeller Commission) and also to the 
U.S. Senate. 
On the Senate floor, Senator Ted Kennedy said: 
"The Deputy Director of the CIA revealed that over 30 
universities and institutions were involved in an 'extensive testing and 
experimentation' program which included covert drug tests on 
unwitting citizens 'at all social levels, high and low, native Americans 
and foreign.' Several of these tests involved the administration of LSD 
to 'unwitting subjects in social situations.' At least one death, that of 
Dr. Olson, resulted from these activities. The Agency itself 
acknowledged that these tests made little scientific sense. The agents 
doing the monitoring were not qualified scientific observers." 
MKULTRA did experiments in every conceivable area of 
Mind Control from the coercive to the covert in an attempt to find out 
how to control the thoughts and actions of groups and individuals. 
Keep in mind that this was during the time of the Cold War 
where many felt that the government was being assailed from every 
direction. 
By doing just a little searching on the Internet, anyone can find 
government documents that describe the depth of sincere interest the 
US government had in Mind Control. It is safe to assume that these 
now public documents represent only a portion of what the 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

22 
government does in the name of national security and that some other 
experiments are yet unrevealed and still ongoing. 
L Ron Hubbard 
There are plenty of people who have started cults and religious 
movements that could be mentioned here but L Ron Hubbard stands 
out as an icon for his creative use of Mind Control. 
Hubbard is best known as a science fiction writer and founder 
of Scientology. He is quoted as prophetically saying "If you want to 
make a lot of money start your own religion." and he did just that. 
Hubbard invented a process he called Dianetics which he 
proposed was able to clear people of all their worldly and spirih\al 
problems and had the potential to give them super powers of 
perception and influence. 
Through his Church, Scientology, members would go through 
lengthy and expensive trainings called 'auditing' to remove 'engrams' 
from their nervous system that they claimed to be the origin of all 
human problems. 
Being a creative and prolific writer, Hubbard and his followers, 
created a complex and compelling process that would lead its members 
into a video game-like world view in which they would zap hindering 
engrams and release 'Operating Thetans' from the psyche so that each 
person could be free to fulfill their true potential. 
Clearly Hubbard was a creative genius that used his love of 
science fiction to compel people into his Scientology/Dianetics Mind 
Control system. 
Robert Cialdini and Social Influence 
In 1984 Robert Cialdini wrote a landmark book called 
'Influence: How and Why People Agree to Things' in which he 
describes six very basic principles of social interaction in which people 
consistently respond. 
Advertising 
It is no secret that the advertising industry's goal is to 
manipulate people to buy, buy and buy more of whatever they are 
peddling. 
Suffice to say that they use every tool of Mind Control that is 
know to man from social pressure to NLP to subliminal suggestions. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

23 
Because money is the motivator they pull out all the stops and test 
every ad to get the maximum effect. 
Landmark Forum 
Landmark Forum is a form of self improvement training that 
originated in the 1970's with 'est' or Erhart Seminar Training. People 
would go through weekend and week long training sessions and 
emerge laughing and smiling trying fervently to enroll their friends. 
There is a wonderful paradox with Landmark Forum. It has a 
overt intention to liberate people from all previous forms of Mind 
Control so that they will take responsibility for themselves and think 
independently. The irony is the incredible depth of Mind Control that 
is used to accomplish their end. 
In the early days of 'est' participants would be locked in a room 
with restricted bathroom breaks, told to remove their watches because 
"Now is the only time you need". They would endure coercive 
berating from the seminar leaders and volunteers (called facilitators) 
who had already gone through the training. Eventually the participants 
would break down and yield, as in traditional brainwashing programs 
to accept what was being said as true. 
They were then given the final blow. They were told that none 
of what they have gone through had any meaning at all except for what 
they gave it. They were told that they are the ONL Y one who was 
responsible for what they had experienced and for their life in general 
and all the blaming and scapegoating was bullshit. In those early days 
of "est" every overt coercive brainwashing method was used leading 
up to the final revelation. The effect was astounding. 
Since then "est" has transformed its name and image to 
Landmark Forum and they have managed to add a bit more of the 
velvet glove to their steal hammered approach. 
The irony of the "est" and Landmark Forum training is the way 
in which they would coercively steal the control from people so that 
they would fully accept it back when offered. 
Charles Manson and Other Modern Mind Control Strangeness 
Charles Manson was a small time crook who spent most of his 
life in prison until his release in the 1960s. In his 30s and living in the 
heart of the hippie movement in California, Manson discovered two 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

24 
things that he exploited to his advantage. First, the anti-establishment 
movement that encouraged people to enter a world of self-exploration, 
to "Turn on, tune in and drop out.". The second was the prevalences of 
the mind altering drug LSD. 
Manson combined them in the form of sex orgies that propelled 
people far beyond their normal acceptable behaviors in the name of 
freeing themselves. But Manson's personal psychosis and delusions 
took charge when he ultimately told his followers to commit acts of 
murder to incite a war between the races. 
What makes Manson unique as a study of Mind Control was 
that he was the first documented case that combined the use of modern 
psycho active drugs and sex to instill new beliefs and behaviors in his 
subjects. 
Other Modern Strangeness 
There are a lot of things that are best categorized as "fringe" 
topics of Mind Control. Among these are radionics, remote viewing 
and psychic influence. 
These fields have a format but tend to lack the ability to 
objectively quantify results. Results are reported but they are often 
sporadic and subjective in nature. 
An Exercise For Your Benefit 
If true Mind Control is being used on you at every turn, it 
provides you with a wonderful opportunity to examine it. Start to 
examine the more obvious efforts of others to influence you. It will be 
in conversation, images, emails, advertising, TV shows, music and 
more. Ask yourself what their real intent could be. You will find that 
there are many possible answers because if it is true Mind Control the 
intent is often veiled behind a glossy image. 
More importantly, examine how you respond to these things. 
It could be exactly the very response that the controllers wanted. If that 
is true and you are responding just as they wanted ask yourself what 
tools they used to do it and how they were able to mask their intent. 
Always keep in mind that the intent you judge them to have may just 
be exactly what they want to you believe. 
Mind Control 10 1 
www.MindControllOI.com 

Memes and Mind Control 
The term 'meme' was coined in 1976 by Richard Dawkins. 
It refers to a replicator of cultural information that one's mind 
transmits (verbally or by demonstration) to another mind. Dawkin's 
examples of memes are tunes, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, ways of 
making pots or of building arches. Other examples include deities, 
concepts, ideas, theories, opinions, beliefs, practices, habits, dances 
and moods which propagate within a culture. A meme propagates 
itself as a unit of cultural evolution analogous in many ways to the 
gene (the unit of genetic information). Often memes propagate as 
more-or-Iess integrated cooperative sets or groups, referred to as 
memeplexes or meme-complexes. The theory itself has proved to be a 
successful meme, achieving penetration into popular culture rare for a 
scientific theory. 
Some meme-theorists contend that memes most beneficial to 
their hosts will not necessarily survive; rather, those memes which 
replicate the most effectively spread best; which allows for the 
possibility that successful memes might prove detrimental to their 
hosts. An example of this is the meme of a belief that states 
"Something wonderful is about to happen." This belief may in all 
rational analysis benefit regardless of its veracity but stronger beliefs 
may win out such as the belief "Everyone is out to get me." 
If this is true then when designing a meme (or a system of 
beliefs) for the purpose of Mind Control one must consider how to 
increase the ability of the meme to replicate and thus increase the life 
span of the belief system or memeplex. 
Some proponents of memes suggest that they evolve via 
natural selection -
in a way very similar to Charles Darwin's ideas 
concerning biological evolution -
on the premise that variation, 
mutation, competition, and "inheritance" influence their replicative 
success. For example, while one idea may become extinct, other ideas 
will survive, spread and mutate -
for better or for worse -
through 
modification. 
This has some practical applications as you apply your skills at 
Mind Control. If the beliefs that you instill in people are to be of 
benefit to you, you need to find a way that they can persist and 
replicate. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

26 
One of the ways to do that is to give meaning, not just to the 
belief, but to holding the belief. As an example, a religious group may 
call themselves "believers" to emphasize the value of their belief and 
especially very specific beliefs in the rightness of the leaders words. 
Thus as they value calling themselves "believers" then, without stating 
it they value the leaders words as truth. 
A perhaps simpler process to accomplish replication of a meme 
is the initiation process. During a typical initiation the initiate is put 
under emotional stress. When told he has passed the initiation a great 
emotional celebration takes place. This process instills in the new 
initiate a deep sense of personal value for the group and the initiation. 
This makes him eager and willing to participate in the next initiates 
ritual of initiation. 
Examples of Memes 
Mormonism 
Mormonism is a religion that was started in New York in the 
1800s. Now it is probably best known for having originally endorsed 
polygamy and while the official Mormon Church does not continue the 
practice there are plenty of fundamentalists Mormons out there who 
are part of a 'plural marriage'. 
The original Mormons relocated from the east coast to the then 
secluded area that was the Utah Territory. Two factors assisted in 
creating a very powerful set of self replicating memes within the 
Mormon culture. The first was the geographic isolation which 
liberated them from the scrutiny of the rest of American culture. The 
second was the social isolation provided by the practice of polygamy 
These factors enabled them to practice their unique form of 
Christianity for an entire generation. Permitting those raised during 
this generation to see their religion as the single pathway to God. 
The entire Mormon culture used its deep sense of isolation to 
strengthen the belief of its followers. This is reinforced by the way in 
which the church integrates itself into the lives of its members. From 
social events, to youth groups, even church sanctioned life insurance 
companies, every aspect of life as a Mormon can be found the 
tentacles of church involvement. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

27 
It is often reported that when visiting Salt Lake City, Utah, the 
'Vatican of Mormonism', that it is nearly impossible to live for a week 
amidst the people without being asked "Are you member of the 
Church?" If you are you get to discuss church activities, if you are not 
you get to hear about how rewarding those activities are. 
This is often true even when applying for a job in Salt Lake 
City. While it is against the law to make an applicants religion a basis 
of hiring, and even illegal to ask, many Mormon bosses find asking the 
question difficult to resist. In some cases they ask about church 
involvement and consciously ignore the possible legal ramifications. 
The memes created by the Mormon Church are ones that are 
designed to reinforce participation in the Church. 
Example: Harley Davidson Motorcycles. 
Originally, Harley-Davidson built a mid quality motorcycle. 
They eventually achieved is a cult-like following of HOG 
organizations (HOG short for 'Harley Owners Group'). These groups 
reinforced the Harley-Davidson meme of uniqueness and supremacy, 
resulting in a tight bond with other Harley owners and extreme brand 
name loyalty. 
The example of Scientology 
Like many very successful cults Scientology has constructed 
around itself a very thorough belief structure. 
Within that belief structure is the knowledge that Scientology 
is the only correct path. 
This belief is instilled right from the very beginning as it 
teaches new recruits communication skills. During these trainings they 
are taught how to calmly face the most confrontational opponent by 
learning 'confrontation skills'. 
Combine this belief that they are 'the way' with the skills 
learned about "confronting" and people will fight for the cause. In 
other words it is a very powerful meme. 
Do these religious memes have a higher agenda? Maybe not. 
The secret of using memes effectively is to create a meme that does 
have a higher/different agenda but have it hidden so that it is not 
questioned. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

28 
An example of this is the meme created in Nazi Germany. 
Under Hitler, a powerful meme was created that focused on unifying 
the country by creating a superior social structure based on their idea 
of race. The meme itself created the Holocaust that systematically 
killed 6 million people (Jews, Gypsies, etc). As the meme evolved 
from a vision of social unity and power to mass killing the end result 
became just the opposite of its original intent. It vilified 'Nazism' and 
turned a once spiritual symbol, the swastika, into a synonym for hate. 
Because memes tend to have a life of their own, it demands a 
fair amount of forethought when attempting to design one. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

"Only idiots are influenced 
by Mind Control." 
When you consider the extremes of human behavior the most 
difficult actions to understand are those of seemingly normal people 
who act in ways that are contrary even to what they would think they 
are capable of. 
Cults are the best example. No normal person would tell you 
that they plan to become celibate, and kill themselves in the hope to be 
reborn on a space ship operated by angelic space aliens. Nonetheless, 
that is exactly what 39 people did in 1997 in the now famous Heavens 
Gate cult. 
Nor would any child of a well to do business man leave home 
with the ambition of participating in the bloody murder of a pregnant 
Hollywood starlet. But that is what Charles Manson compelled several 
of his followers to do. 
When we try to make sense of these acts we are often left 
dumbfounded and quickly categorize them into one of two categories; 
they are either "crazy" or "monsters". It is in that act that we 
inadvertently prevent ourselves from learning the most valuable 
lessons of Mind Control. 
So I ask you to consider, what if they were not crazy? What if 
they were not a monster? What if they were, in fact, ordinary people? 
What would lead them to do what they did? 
It is here that we come across the biggest obstacle in 
understanding how Mind Control works, namely morality. 
Anytime that we use our morality to evaluate an action, event 
or situation we unconsciously block our ability to understand it and 
unintentionally limit our ability to communicate effectively. 
So, if you have read this far (and I know you have) it is best to 
put aside all your judgment and moral analysis so as to truly learn 
something. 
The fact of the matter is that anyone can be affected, moved 
and manipulated by Mind Control. Like Archimedes who realized that 
if he could stand in the right place in the universe he could move the 
earth, there is no man that cannot be moved given the right pressure in 
the right spot at the right time. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

30 
I tell you this not to instill paranoia but humility. 
Put aside your piety and judgment and be willing to step into 
the minds of others, even those people you consider crazy or 
monstrous and you will learn more about yourself and Mind Control 
than even this book can reveal. 
"Whoever gets around you must be sharp and 
guileful as a snake; even a god might bow to you in 
ways of dissimulation. You! You chameleon! Bot-
tomless bag of tricks! " 
~ Homer, The Odyssey, Athena to Odysseus 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

So You Want to Learn and 
Use Mind Control? 
What are the rewards of learning Mind Control? 
On a lot of levels the study of Mind Control can benefit 
anyone. On the most basic level of our needs and wants it seems 
simple, that the more easily we can influence the people around us the 
easier we will fulfill our needs for money, love, sex and security. 
But that is only the most obvious. It is also the least important. 
While I have managed to get all of those in my life long study 
of the subject the greatest benefit I've gotten is the most difficult to 
quantify. It is the peace of mind that can only come from long years of 
using and wielding power. 
Most humans hunger and long for the power that Mind Control 
can give. That hunger, while compelling, is also a result of lack. Not 
enough money. Not enough sex. Not enough certainty. Not enough 
security. It is like the child that is constantly trying to prove to their 
parents that they are good enough even as they pass into the third, 
fourth and fifth decade of life. 
After holding power and influence over others for a while one 
quickly learns how truly simple it is. In fact it seems that most people 
are walking around with their umbilical cords in their hands seeking 
someone to plug it into. Power and influence are no longer goals to 
achieve but become tools to use. Just like a hammer in the hands of a 
good carpenter who learns how to hammer a nail with the least amount 
of swings, so too power becomes something that you use less and less 
as a demonstration of your skill. It is just a tool. And like the carpenter 
and his hammer you can make a good living using it effectively. 
When one starts using Mind Control the goals are usually 
simple and predictable; usually more sex and money. But eventually 
all of that becomes old and familiar. The goal then becomes finding 
out what the least amount of power (and Mind Control) is needed to 
get what you want. 
Another benefit is a calm detachment from the major sufferings 
of humanity. One first notices it as the smug feeling of superiority that 
comes from knowing something that to others is forbidden. The 
superiority later gives way to a sense of amusement at how people 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

32 
make "little things" matters of life and death. They panic over rent and 
relationships and seeking approval. 
Eventually, people will come to you asking how you remain so 
calm and poised amid the turmoil that seems so obvious to them. In 
truth, all they want is to be in the presence of that calm because there 
is really nothing that you can tell them that will give them what they 
want. 
You also learn why people who drive a Ferrari never race. It is 
because they don't have to. 
So, what are the benefits oflearning Mind Control? 
You tell me. 
What if you don't learn Mind Control? 
That's a great question and I can say that if you never learn the 
art of Mind Control life will be pretty much the same. You will run 
with the same types of people doing the same types of things you've 
always done. You will have the same frustrations that you've always 
had, and the same rewards. 
It is very likely that outwardly you won't appear to be missing 
out on anything. 
Your life will be like most people, thinking that what you see is 
truly real and you won't be curious or disturbed by the subtle and 
sometimes devious things that go on beneath the surface. 
You will see people as people and without fail they will live up 
or down to your expectations. 
If you don't learn Mind Control you will continue to be 
distracted and annoyed by politics or advertising but never realize or 
consider why. 
If you never learn Mind Control you will be able to evaluate 
yourself and safely conclude that you are very much like most of the 
people that you know, and you will be absolutely right. 
What do I need to be good at Mind Control? 
Let's distinguish between learning Mind Control and being 
good at it. 
Learning Mind Control falls into two categories. Reading about 
it and studying it. As far as I know, because this book is in your hands, 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

33 
you are only willing to read about Mind Control. That means that you 
will read this book once and remember that you read it and be able to 
tell people that you know something about Mind Control. 
Studying Mind Control is an order of magnitude beyond 
reading about it. Studying means you devote yourself to understanding 
the concepts of Mind Control at least on an intellectual level. Studying 
will make you a good commentator on the subject. 
Being good at Mind Control is yet another quantum leap. 
At this level you don't just know it and can talk about it, you do 
it at every opportunity. You see every social interaction as an 
opportunity to witness some aspect of Mind Control in action or, better 
yet, to test something about Mind Control that you've learned. 
So if you want to be good at Mind Control it will require time 
and study, reading (of course) and learning the concepts but even more 
it requires an adventurous attitude and a desire to connect deeply with 
people. 
To be good at Mind Control it is a good idea to study 
everything that you can think of on hypnosis, NLP, social influence, 
brainwashing, 
cults, 
unclassified 
government 
documents 
on 
interrogation and more. 
You will also make efforts to see Mind Control in action. You 
will visit and join cults. You might even try to climb the hierarchy 
within the cult to see how far you can go and how much more you can 
learn from the experience. 
You will make every attempt to make your life rich with 
diverse types of people so that you can learn from experience the rules 
and exceptions that apply to human behavior and thought. 
To truly be good at Mind Control you must vow to live your 
life trying to understand and control people in ways that make them 
enjoy your presence and grateful for your attention. When you screw 
up (and, believe me, you will) you objectively examine the results and 
make adjustments. 
There is a mind set that anyone wanting to learn Mind Control 
will likely evolve to. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

34 
Curiosity 
There is no limit to the amount of information about Mind 
Control that can be studied and tested. That is why curiosity is so 
important. Curiosity is the quality that will allow you to test everything 
that you learn about Mind Control. 
Gregariousness 
If you are going to learn Mind Control you had better like 
being around people. This doesn't mean that you won't have a private 
life. In fact a full life of personal self discovery will certainly benefit 
you. The opportunity to be in the presence of other people is always 
taken as a chance to test your ability to guide and influence. Your 
goals do not have to be grand during these interactions. Sometimes it 
is just a matter of observing which people respond to your influence. 
Studious 
There is no limit to the aspects of Mind Control that you can 
study. It is assured that as you go deeper into the depths of research 
and experimentation that you will uncover new and unpublished 
information. 
Thinking Strategically not just Tactically 
Tactics is about the things that you do to get an outcome. 
Strategy is about controlling the things that influence getting your 
outcome. A good strategy will make it appear that the world offers you 
all that you want as if it were a gift, but in fact, you have seen the real 
picture of what effects things. A gentle nudge using strategy will yield 
as much as a forceful push using tactics and make your power to 
appear almost magical. 
Quiet 
This may seem counter to the mind set of gregariousness but 
one finds that creating a balance between these two extremes offers 
great strength. 
This is perhaps the most difficult part to learn: to keep silent 
with what you know. Many who have just learned their first magic 
trick are often prone to reveal the secret in exchange for some short 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

35 
term attention. In the long run though they lose out because from that 
point on the sense of awe you can create is replaced by the knowledge 
that you are a trickster. Thus one learns that keeping a secret has 
power and giving it way limits that power. 
"A novice chess player soon learns that it is a good idea to 
control the center of the board. This recognition will recur, in novel 
disguises, in situations far from the chessboard. It may help to seek the 
equivalent of the center of the board in any situation, or to see that the 
role of the center has migrated to the flanks, or to realize that there is 
no board and no singular topology. " 
Carl von Clausewitz, war strategist 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

What Are the Related Fields 
of Mind Control? 
All of the fields of Mind Control that are mentioned here have 
one thing in common: their goal is to change the way people think and 
behave. 
Hypnosis 
The most basic pretense of effective hypnosis is to make 
changes through the bypassing of the subject ability to analyze 
suggestion. When this is done suggestions are accepted without 
question. What you will learn from studying hypnosis is how to make 
suggestions that will give your subjects the result you intended. Keep 
in mind that hypnosis is as much art as science and the more you use it 
and test its limits the more you will learn. 
NLP 
Neuro Linguistic Programming evolved from hypnosis into a 
very conversational form of changework and self improvement. It 
creates a form of hypnotic trance without doing the traditional 
hypnotic induction. Because NLP is conversational by its nature you 
will learn by studying how to induce that hypnotic trance in a very 
covert fashion. 
Social Influence 
This is the study of how people are influenced by their 
interactions together. When certain aspects of their environment and 
interaction are altered people will to respond in certain ways. Having a 
good understanding of social influence will help you design the 
settings and environments in which people will be under your Mind 
Control. 
Coercive Brainwashing 
While this is an unpleasant subject it should be looked into. 
The worst part of Coercive Brainwashing is that it lacks grace but you 
will learn some creative ways that Mind Control has been used when 
the subjects are incarcerated or in situations of duress. 

38 
Experimental Pharmacology 
Required Disclaimer 
Neither the author nor publisher encourages the use of drugs. 
Drugs possess inherent dangers to the user and severe legal 
consequences for anyone caught giving drugs to another. 
Like coercive brainwashing, using pharmacology (drugs) to 
influence peoples thoughts and behaviors is like using a sledge 
hammer to crack a nut. It is overkill for sure but it has been used with 
measurable results. 
Public Relations and Advertising 
How do you turn sugared water into a multi million dollar 
product? Call it Coca-Cola. 
The public relations and advertising industries know exactly 
how to turn the thoughts of people into sales, donations and votes. 
Consider their incentive, money. That's enough for anyone with 
sufficient resources to think in terms of Mind Control. 
Take some time to watch TV commercials. The more 
expensive the commercial the more research the advertiser have put 
into their commercials. Focus groups are often used to make certain 
that every frame and pixel will yield the best response. Even a one-
hundredth of one percent improvement can mean the difference 
between a million dollars' worth of profits. 
Black Ops Mind Control - Stuff No One Talks About 
When you consider all the speculations of conspiracy theories 
that are tossed about the things they seem to have in common are 
minimal evidence they're real and lot's of possible support information 
that could back them up. 
What we do know for sure is that during the Cold War the US 
government made a serious effort to use and understand how to control 
the minds of others. Most of it headed under the names MK-ULTRA 
and MONARCH some information has been made available through 
The Freedom of Information Act. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

39 
What was revealed was that they took their job seriously. A 
great deal of what people say was done (and still is done) continues to 
fall into the arena of "plausible deniability". 
There remains a lot that is strictly speculation but there is 
enough material available that can allow someone to "back engineer" 
the various Mind Control projects that fell under these government 
black operations. 
Psychic Influence 
One can find a great deal of information on psychic influence. 
Unfortunately the field of psychic influence is largely based on 
subjective testimonials, stories and shelves of books that wish to tell 
the reader how it should be done along with the evils of doing it some 
other way. 
Psychic influence is so subjective that what might work well 
for one persons will cause another person headaches. If you were 
researching this field the best advise is to ignore the preaching fluffy 
bunny types and test out everything to find out exactly what really 
works. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

The Techniques of Mind Control and How 
to Influence the Thoughts and Actions of 
Others Without Them Knowing or Caring 
Before we go into the techniques it is probably best to think 
about strategy. The techniques are merely the tools and tactics to get 
your outcome, strategy is how you are going to use them together in a 
dynamic process. As a rule most people feel they are thinking 
strategically when in fact they are only thinking of tactics. 
The tactics you willieam is the easy part. To get you thinking 
on the level of strategy here is one Mind Control strategy to consider. 
It is called the Three Level Intent Strategy. 
Three Level Intent Strategy 
Just like it sounds the Three Level Intent Strategy has three 
levels of intent; the Stated Intention, the Hidden Intention and the 
Secret Intention. 
The Stated Intention is what you tell people from the outset. 
The Hidden Intention is then later revealed as the deeper reason for 
your action. At the same time it clouds any connection with The Secret 
Intention. 
The Secret Intention is the real reason for your action. It is never 
revealed. 
Case Study 
A good example of this was in the 1930s when crime mob king 
pin Al Capone was approached by Count Victor Lustig and asked to 
invest $50,000 and promised that the investment would double in 60 
days. Capone would not usually have fallen for this and at first thought 
the Count was a con man but there was something about him that 
intrigued Capone. Capone agreed to loan Lustig $50,000 and see him 
in two months. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

42 
At the end of the 60 days Lustig returned to meet with Capone 
and he was very disheartened. "I'm afraid things did not work out like 
I had thought. In fact it was a complete failure." Capone, began to 
consider how he would dispose of this ripoff artist. 
Lustig continued by reaching in his jacket and taking out the 
original $50,000 and saying, "I'm terribly sorry. Here is the $50,000 
you gave me. God knows I could have used the money." and got up to 
leave. 
Capone was confused at first and then realized what he was 
witnessing. In all of his life of crime he was seeing something rare -
the actions of an honest man. As soon as Capone recovered his poise 
he said "I thought you were a crook at first. But you are honest! If you 
are in a tight spot I hope this will help you out." Capone then peeled 
off $5,000 from the stack that Lustig had returned to him and handed it 
to him as a gift. 
In fact, Count Lustig was a conman. From the start all he really 
wanted was the $5000. 
When examining this you can see the Three Levels of Intent. 
The Stated Intent for Lustig was to double Capones $50,000 in two 
months. 
When Lustig told Capone ""God knows I could have used the 
money." He was revealing the Hidden Intent; his own financial 
troubles. 
The Secret Intent was to prove to Capone he was an honest 
man and get the $5000. As you can see it worked wonders. 
Using the Three Level Intent Strategy you can begin to employ 
the techniques of Mind Control. Thinking in this way is very unnatural 
for most people so the following exercise was devised. 
Three Level Intent Exercise 
Step 1 
Begin with your Secret Intent. Ultimately what do you want 
people to do, believe or perceive? 
Mind Control 10 I 
www.MindControllOI.com 

43 
Step 2 
Design your Stated Intent. This should be very reasonable and 
transparent from the outset and stated as an action that is to be 
performed. 
Step 3 
Design a Hidden Intent that you will later reveal or, even 
better, allow to be discovered. The qualities of the Hidden Intent must: 
(1) Make the Stated Intent and your actions seem more justified and 
(2) Completely cloud and distance you from the Secret Intent. 
It is important that you make your actions congruent with both 
your Stated Intent and your Hidden Intent. 
Exercise Example 
Your goal, or Secret Intent, is to take over your boss's business. 
As a Stated Intent you say that you are going to help him 
improve his bottom line. 
Your Hidden Intent, which is to be revealed as your work 
progresses, is your love of the business. You often say, "I would do 
this work for free. I love working with the customers so much." 
As a note, often people caught stealing from the companies 
who hire them will attempt a version of the Three Level Intent 
Strategy by appearing honest and finding needed corrections that put 
them into positions where they have even more access to the money. 
The problem is that they don't think far enough ahead. If they were 
truly good at stealing, they would have designed the theft so that 
nothing would point to them and someone else could always be 
blamed. 
This chapter will cover many specific methods of Mind 
Control. Keep in mind that there are very few instances of Mind 
Control that use only one technique. More often there are numerous 
techniques applied in a myriad of levels. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

Behavioral Conditioning 
(Behavioral Modification) 
In its simplest form Behavioral Modification is nothing more 
than a series of rewards and punishments for certain behaviors. The 
goal of of Behavioral Modification is to program people to do some 
behaviors within certain contexts and not do other behaviors within 
certain contexts. 
While this seems very simple there are wonderful nuances in 
this field that make the application of it fascinating. To change a 
person's behavior is Behavioral Modification. But to train them to 
respond consistently is Behavioral Conditioning. 
The first step is to pick the behavior you want to reinforce. 
Start with a small and very specific behavior. If your goal is to instill 
large global beliefs then think in terms of what specific behaviors 
typically manifest with that belief. For example do you want people to 
hold an image of a deity or guru in reverence? Then you condition 
them through a series of rewards to bow, keep silent, lower their 
heads, or take off their shoes while in the presence of the image. 
Do you want women (or men) to give you attention? Then 
acknowledge them in some way that they value when they do so. 
As you compile the list of behaviors that manifest around a 
belief and reward them you will be reinforcing the belief because 
people will have to justify in their mind why they are behaving in such 
away. 
While this may be obvious, the rewards should be given only 
in the presence of the behavior. No behavior, no reward. 
Punishment can be given in the absence of the behavior but this 
is best done with great care. Too many punishments that are too 
painful may begin to be perceived as coercion and the subject may be 
responding only to avoid the punishment. In the case of reinforcing a 
potential lover's attention, the best punishment is an unemotional 
silence or simply not acknowledging that anything was said at all. For 
example if you notice that someone is typing on their computer while 
you are try to talk with them you could calmly say "I hear you are 
typing. Why don't we talk when I can get all of your attention?" If they 
agree to stop typing then you can further reinforce this by saying "No. 
you are preoccupied. We'll talk again." and only agree to continue the 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

46 
phone call when they insist that you have their full attention. During 
this exchange there is no anger, blaming or shaming, that would be too 
extreme of a punishment and border on coercion. Remember you are 
reinforcing the behavior first and foremost not the emotions. The 
emotions will follow the behavior. 
Conditioning through behavioral modification is the process of 
making the modified change a self rewarding, self justifying habit. 
This occurs with people who have been doing the same thing the same 
way without variation simply because that is how they were originally 
conditioned to do it. 
Frequency and degree of the rewards and punishments are 
some of the variables to be considered when using behavioral 
modification and conditioning. 
Behavioral Conditioning is a fine balance of reward and 
punishment. While you may get quicker compliance using punishment 
you will tend to get more lasting compliance with the judicious use of 
rewards. 
The main goal of all studies of Behavioral Conditioning aim to 
determine is the most effective ways to create a behavior and to reduce 
resistance to new behaviors. 
Another factor to consider is the regularity of the rewards and 
punishments. Contrary to what might seem right a random reward 
schedule gets a better response than a reward schedule that 
consistently gives a reward for every right action. 
The reason for this is that if the subject is on a random reward 
schedule they tend to learn the behavior faster. The anticipation of 
finding out if they get a reward adds faster learning. 
Rewarding small behaviors is easier than rewarding complete 
change. The typical way of doing this is to ask for the behavior of your 
subject. Even if there is a very small change that is in the direction of 
your goal it is easier to reward that and then ask for more in the future. 
If you deny any reward, or worse give a punishment your subject may 
lose motivation. 
In cults, the most common behavioral conditioning process is 
referred to as Love Bombing. Love Bombing takes the form of the 
group showing loving support and acceptance when the subject is 
doing the right behavior. When the subject strays from 'right behavior' 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

47 
the Love Bombing is denied and the subject is given a cold and 
unloving glare. The effect on the subject's behavior is visible and 
dramatic. 
There are plenty of good books on Behavioral Conditioning but 
There is no learning like that you can get from experience. Of course 
you must have your objective clearly in mind, reward small behaviors 
that are toward your goal and you will see it is not just easy but fun. 
Also you can take an animal training course to assist you. 
It is worth mentioning that there is a drawback to Behavioral 
Conditioning. The drawback is that its focus is on the behavior not the 
motivation that drives the behavior. As a consequence, when 
Behavioral Conditioning is used in a therapeutic setting, the subject 
learns that sharing feelings about their problem is either punished or 
ignored. When they are rewarded it is for things that are meaningless 
to them. In the end the subject learns that withholding their feelings 
and their concerns is the best way to get what they want. They learn to 
be 'inauthentic'. 
This may get the controller a desired behavioral outcome but it 
would not be a lasting change. 
In its highest form, Mind Control seeks to control the beliefs 
and motivation that drive the behaviors. 
One of the very best demonstrations of this was done in 2005 
by British magician, mentalist, hypnotist and performer Derren Brown 
in a documentary called "The Heist". 
Under the pretense of teaching a few selected people during an 
exclusive "mind power seminar" he chose four people and conditioned 
them to hold up an armored car. 
Unbeknownst to them, these four were selected as being the 
most suggestible people from the group and, over the course of several 
weeks, they were conditioned so that when given an opportunity to 
hold up the armored car three out of the four did it. 
The armored car was merely a set up and no laws were actually 
broken. 
Mind ControllOI 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

Coercion 
Anything that one wishes to avoid can be used as a weapon of 
coerCIOn. 
Let's make it clear first that coercion is the least graceful form 
of Mind Control. As a technology of Mind Control coercion is only 
slightly more advanced than fire. In fact, one may argue whether it is 
Mind Control at all because coercion is devoid of concern about what 
is going on in the mind. Coercion seeks actions that are not congruent 
with the thoughts and feelings of the subject. 
F or the purposes of this book coercion is not just a 'bad thing' 
but the worst thing in terms of Mind Control because there is no 
promise of long term change. A person may be coerced into donating 
their money to a charity but they are very likely to want it back in a 
very short amount of time. 
Physical torture is the most obvious example of coercion. 
Torture dates back to before the Spanish Inquisition in which people 
were "persuaded" into confessions of heresy. The "persuasion" was 
certainly painful and often lethal. Anyone who finds themselves 
resorting to this form of Mind Control should best read the chapter 
titled "What are the Personal Dangers of Learning Mind 
Control?" 
MentalJEmotional Torture 
Providing mental and emotional discomfort to influence 
peoples actions is another form that falls under the heading 'Torture' 
though it is often more indirect and less obvious. In this category there 
is no physical discomfort but mental and emotional stress is applied. 
A good example of this is a police interrogation where they 
knowingly employ the most thorough tools of Mind Control to get the 
information they need. 
This takes place begins innocently enough. They ask their 
suspect to enter into a room 'Just to clear up a few questions". From 
that point on the suspect is under isolation and completely under their 
influence. They will alternate between letting him know that he's not 
in trouble and that they think he is withholding information and could 
be arrested for doing so. The interrogators will ask seemingly 
unrelated questions as if they were of vital importance. The mental 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

50 
stress and confusion combined with long hours of question asking (see 
'gaslighting') loosens the suspects hold on his perceptions just enough 
to reveal information that will be presented at his own trial. 
In some cases innocent people have succumbed to the pressure 
and confessed to things they did not do. 
From this example the question should be asked "Do police lie 
to get the information they need?" You bet they do. Police will go to 
any pretense to get the information they need. 
A more severe form of this type of Mind Control is military 
interrogation. 
In the event of their capture every Special Forces soldier and 
military pilot is required to be part of the receiving end of a military 
interrogation as part of their training. This take the form of 'Escape and 
Evade' training which incorporates the most severe forms of coercion 
and duress. Prior to this training they are warned that during the mock 
military interrogation they will go through to "Believe half of what 
you see and none of what you hear." Even given this warning the 
control that 'the enemy" interrogators have is so deep and pervasive 
that most of the trainees accept the lies told to them as truths. 
Outside of the isolated environment of an interrogation room 
emotional coercion is quite common. It takes the form of passive-
aggressive behavior, outbursts of anger, blaming, threats to withhold 
love and attention or visitation privileges, etc. 
As a general rule coercive practices of Mind Control have the 
opposite long term effect. Where the operator wants trust it creates 
suspicion, where love is desired it creates fear, and so on. If you 
remember back to the Three Level Intent Strategy the only real use of 
coercion in long term Mind Control is if you want your Secret Intent to 
be the fear, suspicion, etc, while justifying your coercive with your 
Hidden Intent as typical passive aggressive behavior. 
Game Theory 
An interesting concept came out of game theory that can be 
used to create incredible motivation in people. This is a type of 
coercion even though the people had to volunteer for the situation and 
they knew the structure of the situation from the outset. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

51 
The people all wanted to lose 10 to 15 Ibs of weight in 6 weeks 
time. They all had trouble keeping to their diets. 
The experiment was very simple. They were told that if they 
did not lose the weight semi-nude photos of themselves would be 
published and sent to people that they know. They were not told how 
to diet only that if they didn't lose the weight there would be definite 
embarrassing consequences. 
Remember these were volunteers. 
The percentage of people who reached their goal weight within 
the deadline was over 90%. 
Thinking about it, the reason is very simple. They had a visible 
and quantifiable consequence if they did not lose the weight. 
The ancient Chinese war strategist Sun Tzu referred to this as 
'the death ground', where an army is stuck between a cliff face and an 
opposing force that seeks to destroy them. Their only option is to fight 
with all their hearts. 
As for using this as a Mind Control tool it gives renewed 
meaning to the word 'deadline' and is often used by employers to 
hasten the completion of a project. 
Whether the threat is real or fabricated they will say that the 
project must be completed by a deadline or the company will close (or 
some other tangible threat). As a positive effect when this tactic is 
successfully used within a group it can bring an esprit de corps that 
helps unify the members as 'brothers in arms'. 
To use this technique effectively it is fairly simple; I) The 
consequence of failure must seem real, measurable and immediate. 2) 
It must affect the subjects on a personal level. 3) It must be believable. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

Social Pressure and Mob Mind Control 
I was watching a TV show on how groups of strangers corne 
together to become a riotous mob. What I saw was clearly an altered 
state of group consciousness. 
"None of us is dumber than all of us. " - Anonymous 
Being the deviant thinker that I am I immediately asked "How 
could this mob mentality be used and exploited?" 
The first step is to do an analysis of the dynamic. 
The members of the mob share one thing in common. 
Of these you can see that some of it comes about from having a 
common enemy. 
• 
Anger over a vetoed bill 
• 
Soccer fan angry at an opposing team 
• 
AIDS or PETA activists 
But others have more benevolent common factors 
• 
A vacation beach 
• 
A victory rally for their local sports team 
• 
The start of a peaceful demonstration 
For the individual participants who become "the mob" and 
operate outside of their normal behaviors there are some common 
qualities that can be isolated. 
• 
They have an opportunity to freely express their most base 
emotions while being protected by the anonymity of "the crowd". 
• 
A very small group (sometimes only one person) of these most 
active participants tend to elicit participation from others. 
• 
Alcohol is often a factor further loosening inhibitions that tum 
someone over to mob control. (See the section on Pharmacology 
and Mind Control). 
Mind ControllOI 
www.MindControllOI.com 

54 
Another factor to consider is that counter measures to control 
the mob (Riot police banging night sticks against Plexiglas shields, for 
example) often bring about an escalation in mob violence. This is 
especially true when the police represent the oppressive government or 
force the group is protesting against. 
This is just a hypothetical conjecture, of course, but how could 
one use these factors to create a mob that would do what you wanted? 
First the outcome should be clearly stated. Because mob mentality is 
almost the level of an idiot one must set the bar pretty low and make 
clear simple tasks that one would only do behind the cover of 
anonymity. These don't have to be malicious acts but malicious act llfe 
easier to create. 
The Steps for Mob Mind Control 
1. Have a clear and simple outcome for your mob to perform. Don't 
tell them ahead of time. 
2. Create a shared experience in a location where the action should 
take place. 
3. Create a heightened emotional state in the group. Anger is an easy 
state to elicit but more positive states can work as well. 
4. Isolate potential mob leaders who would more freely act if 
protected by anonymity of the crowd. 
5. Call to action. Make it simple. 
6. Keep the group together. 
7. As the mob actions escalates others can be brought in by rumor 
exchange. Given the group dynamic by introducing an emotional 
rumor, true or not, other more docile members of the group can be 
called in to contact with the front lines. Screaming "They just 
killed a kid with their night sticks!" is a good example. 
8. If you only want chaotic destruction it will be easy and all you 
have to do is add lot's of alcohol to the above equation. 
Because violent mob action is well documented more 
benevolent mob reactions would be interesting to study. 
One example of a very benevolent mob act is a fad called 'an event' 
that uses cell phones and web sites to solicit strangers to take part in 
innocuous "public performance art". One example of such an event is 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

55 
everyone who subscribes to the service is asked to go to the third floor 
of Macy's in New York City at a specific time and ask all the clerks 
"Where do you keep the underwear drawer." Then at a prescribed time 
the group disperses as fast as they came. 
Another example is Burning Man, an annual week-long 
bacchanal set in the desert that culminates in the burning of a large 
effigy. In that event the emotion and drug use is often very high. 
Burning Man could be excluded from this type of mob chaos because 
of its well structured ritualistic nature. 
These 'events' fill most of the requirements for a mob act 
except the extreme emotional state. It could be assumed then that for 
some mob actions anonymity and an emotional state of 
mischievousness are sufficient to bring some action about. 
A further assumption is that the more intense the emotion, 
especially true of emotions of fear and anger, the more volatile the 
potential behavior of the mob. 
What could be an application of this knowledge? 
Violent Organized Group Ritual 
This seems most obvious to me. Creating a highly organized 
event in which violence, destruction and 'chaos' is systematically 
structured into the situation and allowed under proper circumstances. 
Control of the violence could be made by several modifications. The 
first being removal of any outside elements to interfere with the ritual. 
Plus rules for the engagement like in the film Fight Club and at 
Burning Man that would swiftly deal with only the individuals and not 
the crowd. 
Marketing 
Scheduling various "events" like the one mentioned at Macy's 
could be used to bring some emphasis to the consumer's need for a 
product and raise stock prices. 
Political Action 
Already been done. 
AIDS activists blocked off the Golden Gate Bridge to gain 
attention for their cause. 
Mind Control 10 1 
www.MindControllOI.com 

56 
Counter-Marketing 
Hold an event and sell cheaply or give away beer in the name 
of your competitor. Get the crowd drunk then insult them and stop 
selling beer to the angry crowd. This would create a bad rep for your 
competitor. Make certain there are lot's of things for the crowd to 
destroy that has your competitors name on it. 
Demolition 
This would be an interesting experiment. Start a demonstration 
around an old house you want tom down. Incite a drunken fraternity 
party riot and have the mob destroy the house. Liability would go 
largely to the fraternity. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

Social Influence a la Robert Cialdini 
Social Influence is the study of how people can affect each 
other when interacting with each other. 
The scientific study of the process of social influence has been 
under way the 1940's, beginning in earnest with the propaganda, 
public infonnation and persuasion programs of World War II. Since 
that time, numerous social scientists have studied the ways in which 
one individual can influence another's attitudes and actions. 
The powerful effects of social influence was first published in 
the book "Influence: How and Why People Agree to Things" by Dr. 
Robert Cialdini. 
In the book Dr. Cialdini describes six factors that lead people 
to do things that they wouldn't ordinarily do under most other 
circumstances. This can have a very dramatic impact when used alone 
and even more when combined with other tactics of Mind Control. 
Reciprocity 
The act of simply giving a gift without expectation has a very 
powerful effect on people. Remember the phrase "There is no such 
thing as a free lunch." 
All societies subscribe to a nonn that obligates its members to 
repay in kind what they have received. So when one is approached by 
someone on the street giving them a flower they are much more likely 
to give a donation in return when asked. It is a common practice 
among groups soliciting for donations. 
Evangelist Oral Roberts is famous for his lucrative letter 
writing campaigns to his followers. One such letter included a one inch 
square of carpet that he described as being from his old office. "Over 
the last 15 years I have knelt and prayed for hours on this carpet." the 
letter would say. At the conclusion he would ask for a donation and it 
worked!! 
Reciprocity is used in most Mind Control settings. The 
important thing to understand is that the item that you are giving does 
not need to be of any great value. It is the act of freely giving it that 
makes the impact. Give the item and mention that it is free and there is 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

58 
no obligation then to ask for something. Don't put any focus on the 
gift, they can keep it no matter what. 
A gift can also be a concession of some sort. Knowing this you 
can offer them something that you know might be too expensive for 
them like a large donation or giving of their time. When they refuse to 
acknowledge their misgivings and lower the offer, ask for less. 
Exercise In Reciprocity 
Anytime you know that you are going to ask for something, 
anything, create an opportunity to give the person something before 
you ask. Make sure there is no obligation connected to the gift, you 
just thought they might like it. The gift can be relatively insignificant. 
If for any reason they refuse don't take back the gift or bring it to their 
attention. 
Commitment and Consistency 
Anytime you ask a person to do something, even the most 
small and insignificant action you begin the process of creating some 
form of consistent action that they can continue. This is most easily 
done by requesting that someone do something small then later asking 
them for just a little bit more. In doing this they will try to act 
consistently with their previous actions. The magnitude of the requests 
can escalate until more and more is given. 
Consider the so called 'brainwashing' of American soldiers by 
the Chinese military during the Korean war. During an interrogation 
they would ask simple easy to answer questions like "What is your 
name and rank?" The soldier could easily answer these questions. 
Often they were then asked to talk about their life back home in the 
United States. Again an easy request which might be rewarded with 
some small privilege or some extra food. They were then asked to talk 
about the things they didn't like about back home; taxes, unfair 
treatment by their local police, legal problems, etc. 
Each time they would give forth more and more information 
until they were directed by the questioning to not like the unfair 
treatment they are now recognizing by the US government. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

59 
Through the use of consistency they would eventually be 
willing to completely denounce the US government and its military 
policies. 
The key here is to ask something small of the person or persons 
you are trying to affect then slowly escalate the requests. 
An example of this in action was used by a restaurant to ensure 
patrons would call if canceling a reservation. The change dropped his 
no-call, no-show rate from 30 to 10 percent immediately. 
All that was done was to change a simple question. The 
receptionist only had to change her request from "Please call if you 
have to change your plans" to "Will you please call if you have to 
change your plans?" At that point, she politely paused and waited for a 
response. The wait was pivotal because it induced customers to fill the 
pause with a public commitment. And public commitments, even 
seemingly minor ones, direct future action. 
Exercise in Commitment and Consistency 
Keeping your outcome in mind. Find something you can ask of 
someone that is small and insignificant. Later ask them for something 
slightly more. Test this out on others without asking for the first 
smaller request. Note their responses. 
Social Proof 
In short Social Proof is doing something because everyone else 
is doing it. Don't underestimate its effectiveness. 
If one person stands looking up into the air there is a only a 
small chance that anyone else will look up trying to discover what that 
person is looking at. If there are three or four people are looking up in 
the same direction the numbers of people who comply and gaze 
upward has been shown to quadruple. 
This effect of Social Proof can be easily incorporated by 
having the Mind Control subject in the presence of people who are 
already conforming to the prescribed 'acceptable behavior'. This has 
particular power with people who feel they are outside the social norm 
and find a group that is accepting and non-judgmental toward them. If 
the group is designed to appeal to those 'outside the norm' those 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

60 
joining in the activities will be even more likely to conform to the new 
behaviors. 
The more you can show evidence that "everyone is doing it" 
the more effective a demonstration of social proof you have. 
Consider how a party can start and turn into an orgy. If there 
are enough people willing to take part the more inhibited individuals 
will feel a more comfortable to take part. 
Liking 
Liking demonstrates the tendency for people to participate in 
activities in which their friends are also participating. 
A Tupperware party is a great example of that. 
Likewise, liking can come about by more superficial means. 
Attractive people can more easily flirt their way to success in more 
ventures than the unattractive. This is not lost to members of cults who 
tell their most attractive members to guide the curious into the next 
level of indoctrination. 
There are many self-improvement workshops that rely on this 
by insisting their participants enlist their friends to take the next 
training. 
Authority 
Getting someone who is perceived as an authority will add 
value to a product or service. Having Charlton Heston as the president 
of the Nation Rifle Association was great victory because if 
Moses/Ben Hur/Charlton Heston is a member it must be good. 
This is the power of testimonials. As a tool of Mind Control 
there is a hierarchy of value of these testimonials. In order of value 
they are 
1. Pictures of several celebrities with testimonials 
2. Picture of single celebrity with testimonial 
3. Pictures of several ordinary people with their testimonials 
4. Testimonials of ordinary people with their full names and locations 
5. Testimonials lacking information of names and locations 
Exercise in Using Authority 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll01.com 

61 
Consider what your message is or what you want your 
subjects to do. What perceived authority can you point to who 
endorses your outcome? 
Scarcity 
A great deal of evidence shows that items and opportunities 
become more desirable to us as they become less available. For this 
reason, marketers trumpet the unique benefits or the one-of-a-kind 
character of their offerings. It is also for this reason that they con-
sistently engage in 'limited time only' promotions or put us into 
competition with one another using sales campaigns based on 'limited 
supply'. 
Scarcity can take several forms, limited supply, limited time to 
joinibuy/participate, limited membership and limited to only the 
people who qualify. 
Exercise in Scarcity 
First examine every instant when scarcity is used on you. You 
will find it everywhere with "limited time offer" and "call within the 
next 15 minutes and ... " and more. 
Consider your message or product and how you can add 
scarcity to increase its value. If the product is you and your image the 
rule often is "The guru at the bottom of the hill doesn't have a 
following." Find ways to make yourself inaccessible. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

62 
NLP - Neuro Linguistic Programming 
NLP is short for Neuro-Linguistic Programming and is the 
most contemporary publicly available system of Mind Control. 
NLP came about from therapists that were able to accomplish 
their therapeutic goals in a very short periods of time. Not only has 
NLP proved to be an effective therapeutic tool, it is also a very 
powerful covert tool of persuasion and influence. If a therapist can 
subtly persuade a client to accept a new solution to their problem then 
the same techniques can be used to sell a product or even instill a new 
list of beliefs. 
As much as NLP is a science it is also an art and takes a good 
understanding of the NLP model and techniques as well as the time to 
practice it. 
To understand the model ofNLP one first has to accept that in 
many ways people are both the same and different. We are the same in 
that we have only a limited number of ways to understand our 
experience. We are different in that each person has their own specific 
way of making sense of their experience. For the individual who 
knows how someone else makes sense of their world they can tailor 
their message so that it is accepted. 
Needless to say, with the power that is implied in NLP, it has 
been picked up and exploited in the fields of sales, advertising, and 
helping men get laid. 
Sensory Acuity 
Sensory acuity is NLP lingo for "Pay Attention!" 
It basically means when working with someone that you have 
to pay more attention to how they are responding than whether or not 
you are doing things right. When you do that ("Pay Attention!") you 
will notice that people respond to you in very subtle ways. 
Rapport 
For the purpose of Mind Control and NLP the best place to 
start is at the beginning. All NLP teaching starts with the topic of 
rapport. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

63 
Rapport is much more than just having someone like you. In 
fact it is possible to have rapport with someone who doesn't like you. 
What is important about rapport is that the other person perceives that 
you are very much like them on a deep level. This allows the person to 
feel comfortable with you and willing to respond to you with some 
sense of acceptance. (Yes, even if they don't like you they can be 
responsive to you. Think of this as enemies who respect each other.) 
It's been said, and rightly so, that without rapport nothing is 
possible and with rapport anything is possible. 
"Mirroring and Matching" are the techniques that are first 
learned to create rapport. 
Mirroring simply means to move and speak in a manner that is 
like the other person and doing it in a way that doesn't appear like 
mimicry. This creates an unconscious belief in the other person that 
you are like them. 
You can see people unconsciously mirroring each other among 
those who already are in rapport. They sit the same way, when one 
changes his position the other person will change their position to 
match the other person. It is a very natural outcome of having rapport. 
Many NLP trainings spend long hours doing mirroring and 
matching exercises to help participants learn to gain rapport quickly. 
The exercises are very useful but there is an easier way. 
The easier way to gain rapport is to think of mirroring as a 
result of rapport instead of the cause of it. In other words, when you 
like someone and feel you are like this person you have rapport and 
will do all the mirroring and matching without thinking about it. So, all 
you have to do is assume you are like this person. Assume that the 
rapport is already there and that you both have a deep familiarity with 
the other persons thoughts and habits. At first, this may take some 
mental gymnastics but it is much easier than paying close attention to 
peoples movements and then moving your body to match theirs. 
Rapport Exercise 1 
Find a person you don't know well and begin a conversation 
with them while mirroring the body position and movements. In order 
not to get caught make sure you wait five seconds after they have 
moved before you move into their body posture and position. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

64 
Rapport Exercise 2 
Do the exercise above but this time assume you already have 
rapport with the other person. This means starting off in your mind 
with the assumption that you like this person and have known them for 
a long time and that you will naturally get along. 
By doing these exercises you will learn the power of rapport 
and hopefully gain some respect for how difficult Mind Control is. 
There is also a likelihood that you will begin to see people as unique 
individuals and not just objects to be manipulated. In spite of the fact 
you want to control their minds, this last point is actually a benefit to 
you because it will help put a velvet glove over the iron fist of power 
you are trying to wield. 
Pacing and Leading 
Pacing and leading can be used in any situation in many 
different ways. 
Pacing and leading consists of first pacing which essentially 
means the controller does what the other person is doing then followed 
by leading, doing something that takes the lead so that the subject can 
follow. 
Using pacing and leading is an essential part of traditional 
rapport exercises as mentioned above. In the case of rapport the 
controller would pace the movements of the subject then later lead. 
Pacing and leading can also be used in just about any situation 
in order to take the lead. 
Linguistically, pacing and leading take the form of a pace -
anything that is true and verifiable by the subject and a lead which is a 
statement that the controller wishes the subject to agree upon. The 
traditional formula for this type of pacing and leading is 
Pace, pace, pace, lead. 
Pace, pace, lead. 
Pace, lead. 
Lead, lead lead .... 
It would sound something like this: 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

65 
"Here we are (pace). You are sitting here (pace) and we're 
talking (pace) and there is something curious happening that you 
might not be aware of (lead). Time is passing (pace). It always does 
(pace). We forget what is really important (lead). But we're here 
(pace) and when you focus in on what is important (lead) you can give 
it strength and see it (lead) as if it were right in front of you (lead). 
You can feel how this moves you (lead) because it is that important 
(lead) and you know it (lead). " 
Pacing and Dragging 
This refers to something a little bit more intense than pacing 
and leading. It requires strong sensory acuity and the ability to compel 
the subject to follow your lead much earlier than would normally 
occur with pacing and leading. 
Pacing and Dragging require several things from the operator. 
Focus 
Focus means that the operator is completely focused on the 
subject and intentionally ignores any of their own personal concerns 
whatever they may be. 
As the controller this means that bills, mortgage payments, 
fights with spouses are put completely aside when you are with your 
subject. 
Concern 
As a controller Concern means making the subject the most 
important person in your world as you are with them. This can only be 
done by using your focus and sense of caring, even if you have to fake 
it. 
Passion and Conviction 
Passion and Conviction is the knowledge that what you are 
doing is right. There are very few things more powerful than the belief 
in what you are doing. 
To enliven this belief consider all the benefits of what you are 
doing that involves the subject. These benefits include reasons why it 
is important and it also includes the values, or things that it gives you. 
Mind ControllOl 
www.MindControllOl.com 

66 
By combining these qualities pacing and dragging is made 
easier. Sensory acuity will be heightened by the focus and concern and 
can be used to see if the subject is in any way resisting the 
leading/dragging. When resistance is sensed the controller can make 
immediate corrections to their presentation. 
The Power of Physiology 
Physiology in NLP terms means how the body is used to create 
and lead emotional and mental states. By making changes in the 
physiology it is much easier to access certain emotional states. 
A good example of this is the act of simply sitting up straight 
and looking upward. It is very very hard for anyone to maintain a 
depressed state as they do this. 
On the other hand one will tend to find that by slumping over, 
looking downward, and breathing very short and shallow breaths 
depression is easy to achieve. It is a freaking wonder more people 
haven't applied this. 
But good Mind Controllers have. Consider how may churches 
have very high and ornate ceilings. This forces the people to look up 
and more easily access pleasant emotional states. 
Another way of utilizing physiology is for the controller to 
simply tell the subject what to do and how to posture themselves. 
Rituals, meditations and breathing exercises are all designed to 
covertly affect the subjects physiology to aid in an outcome. 
By simply asking "Can I show you something about how your 
body effects your mind?" a controller can then ask the subject to 
change their posture or movements in order to demonstrate the point. 
Public speakers and seminar leaders will often make sure the 
audience is in their control by asking them as a group to do certain 
simple changes to their posture; asking them to sit up straight, breathe 
as if they are very excited and sit on the edge of their seats (literally) 
as if what they are going to hear is the most important information 
they ever hear. 
The key factors of physiology that are within conscious control 
are posture, breathing, eye movement, and activity. So by effecting 
any combination of these a change in emotions can occur. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

67 
Physiology Exercise 
Monitor you mood and emotional state. Determine what mood 
you want to be in and adjust your posture and physiology to fit that 
mood. This may include sitting up straight, tilting your chin up and 
looking up. Experiment with putting a slight smile on your mouth. 
Physiology Exercise II 
Ask a friend to participate in an exercise with you. You can say 
"Can I show you something about how your body affects your mind?" 
to start and see how many emotional states you can lead them through. 
Start with contrasting emotions; depression/joy, anger/acceptance, 
fear/excitement, hate/joy, revulsion/attraction. 
When doing this make sure that the positive states are elicited 
when they are looking at you and the negative emotions are elicited 
while NOT looking at you or with eyes closed. This will link good 
feelings to you. 
Physiology Exercise III 
Create a ritual or activity that allows a reason for the subject to 
make changes breathing, eye movement, posture and activity. It can 
include music, dance drumming or exercise. 
Sensory Modalities and Sub-Modalities 
In NLP one interprets reality through the senses and usually 
one of the senses is dominant. Visual/sight, auditory/hearing and 
kinesthetic/feeling are the main modes (or modalities) that people use. 
These are preferred ways of thinking that people use and in NLP 
literature is referred to as V AK for Visual, Auditory, Kinesthetic. 
People who think predominately in visual terms will refer to 
something as how they "see" things and use phrases like "That seems 
right.", "it is clear to me." "I've good a picture of what you are 
saying." 
A person who thinks in auditory terms will say things like 
"That sounds like a good idea." "Let me chime in." "That speaks to 
me." 
A person who thinks in kinesthetic terms will respond to how 
things "feel" and use phrases like "I've got a gut feeling about this." 
"Get a grip on it." "That has impact." 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

68 
All one has to do to determine someones dominant sensory 
modality is listen to them speak. Therefore sensory acuity is very 
important. 
When you use a person's predominate sensory modality you 
increase rapport and gain a greater foothold to guide them. 
More Sensory Modality Information 
Ask someone how they decided to make their last purchase and 
listen to what they say. In making decisions people will go through a 
mental process in which they mention in order the sensory modalities 
they use. 
For example, if you are showing someone a coat to buy and ask 
them how they got their last coat and they say: "I saw (visual) the coat 
in the window and said (auditory) to my self 'That looks good'. Then I 
got this feeling (kinesthetic) that I had to have it." 
To keep rapport all you have to do is use that same process. For 
example "Take a look (visual) at this coat and when you do, listen 
(auditory) for "That looks good" and tell me how good a feeling 
(kinesthetic) you get." 
Sub-modalities 
Sub-modalities are more specific distinctions of the various 
sensory modalities. When these sub-modalities are altered the impact 
of the message is also altered. 
Of the visual modality some of the sub-modalities are the 
distance of an image, the size, location, whether it is in color or black 
and white, location of the image are the most prominent and common 
and enough for most to use effectively. 
Auditory sub-modalities include loudness, if it is a voice that 
one is hearing or telling themselves (it usually is) gender of the voice, 
emotional tone, directionllocation, whispering, speed of voice. 
Kinesthetic 
sub-modalities include, 
warmth, 
heaviness, 
location in the body, tingly, soft, hard, etc. 
To understand how sub-modalities are used therapeutically 
consider how someone might describe being depressed. Their 
head lowers and their physiology slumps (kinesthetic). They hear a 
loud oppressive voice in their mind saying "you are worthless!" then 
hear their own voice say "I'm nothing." Then see an image of 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

69 
themselves standing two feet tall and stared at with contempt by 
everyone who sees them (visual). 
The therapist using NLP would elicit this information, which 
the subject is not consciously aware of, and then have the subject 
consciously alter these sub-modalities. The subject would start by 
envisioning themselves as standing very tall and having people seeing 
them and smiling (visual). The internal voices would be turned to 
giggling whispers with louder more positive voices saying "you are the 
best!" added (auditory). Kinesthetically they would be asked to "stand 
taller" and imagine positive feelings within their body. 
This will have an immediate effect on the subject but it may be 
only temporary unless it is practiced as an ongoing project. 
As a tool of Mind Control one can use sub-modalities covertly 
by using some general rules about sub-modalities that tend to effect 
most people. 
Visual sub-modalities tend to have more impact on people 
when they are imagined close-up, large and in color. So by describing 
your product or service as being "big" and seeing it "up close and 
colorful" will tend to make more impact. 
As an example note the difference between these two 
apartment for-rent listings: 
Two bed room, one bath apartment. Dining space with kitchen 
area." or "Spacious colorful two bed room apartment with sunlit 
dining space. Second bedroom suitable for a bright home office. " 
Note how the second description makes the apartment seem 
more real. This can be used for Mind Control by adding more visual 
sub-modalities to the description of your product or service. 
Television commercials and print ads often make use to this by 
showing their product as large and colorful as possible and comparing 
their competitor in smaller black & white images. 
Describing Auditory sub-modalities as loud and echoing will 
tend to have a strong impact but you must be cautious with this as 
some people will not respond positively to a "loud" description. 
The Kinesthetic sub-modalities of "warm" "soft" "comforting" 
and "embracing" tend to be thought of as positive to most people. Sub-
modalities of "sharp", "cutting", "rigid", "chilling" tend to be 
considered negative. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

70 
To add impact to any message a Mind Control operator can use 
a very effective process of incorporating the visual, auditory and 
kinesthetic sub-modalities to all of their communications. This will 
make certain that people will see, hear and feel the message impact 
regardless of their dominant sensory modality 
Values Elicitation 
Values are the core of our decision making. They are deep and 
unconscious until they are either fulfilled or challenged. 
Values are powerful enough that when someone tells you that 
by buying their product or service your values will be fulfilled it is 
almost impossible to resist. To a sales person finding someone's values 
is equivalent to finding their buy button and pressing it again and 
agam. 
Using values as a Mind Control tool is powerful enough that if 
you don't fulfill them as you promise you will make a very bad enemy, 
so use this tool wisely. 
The process of using values as a tool of Mind Control consists 
of uncovering a persons values and then linking them to your outcome. 
Both steps are amazingly simple and straightforward. 
The Elicitation 
First understand that everyone has criteria that needs to be 
fulfilled before they agree to something. If it is a new car they may 
need it to be fast, or a new model or color or within a certain price 
range. Once these criteria are are met the person feels the value. 
Most people try to influence by trying to meet all the criteria. 
Values elicitation bypasses that and goes straight for that motivating 
value. 
Getting to the value is done by simply asking the question 
"What's important about (fill in your product)." For example if you are 
trying to enroll someone in a communication workshop you would ask 
"What's important about communicating with people?" From that you 
will get their first answer. Then you ask them "What's important about 
that (their first answer)?" giving you their second answer. Then ask 
"What is important about that (their second answer)?" Usually by then 
you will have reached their highest value. Don't be surprised if they 
show some sort of strong emotion. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

71 
Let me give you some advise on asking these questions. Keep 
in mind you don't want to learn why it is important only what is 
important about "it". The reason is that "why?" causes people to 
become defensive. To make it simple don't ask "Why is _ 
important?" ! 
While asking these questions it is important to not make it 
sound like an interrogation. You can do this by interspersing your 
questions with conversations about life and relevant matters. 
What you will notice is that when you show a sincere curiosity 
about what is important to people people take interest. To say it 
another way, asking these questions builds rapport because people like 
to talk about what they feel is important. 
Part Two 
Another way to accomplish an elicitation of values is to simply 
listen. Many people will quickly begin to talk about what they value. If 
you simply feed that back to them and ask them to elaborate you will 
find that they "light up"; a strong indication that you have gotten to 
something they value. 
The Delivery of Values Elicitation 
Once you have their values the rest is fairly simple. All you 
have to do is mention those values as you describe your service or 
product. 
Saying "Do you feel that having X and Y and Z are important 
enough to take part in this seminar?" 
Or, while this may be crude, you can say "This seminar shows 
you how to have more X,Y and Z. Does it sound like something you'd 
like to take part in?" 
Final Note on Values Elicitation 
This process is so powerful that you have to really try it to test 
its effectiveness. You should also note that if your product or service 
doesn't fulfill that value as you've implied you may have a very up set 
person. In fact enemies are made by cheating them in this fashion. 
Beware. 
Mind Control 10 I 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

72 
Determining values through surveys 
To find out peoples values on a large scale some people will 
employ a survey that asks various questions about certain aspects of 
their lives. From this information one can tailor responses and 
presentations prior to individual meetings. 
Emotional Elicitation 
Emotional Elicitation is the NLP process of bringing out the 
emotions you want an individual to feel. It will be of great value in the 
next section on anchoring. 
To start, determine what emotions in your subject would help 
lead to your outcome. These emotions could be excitement, joy, fear, 
worry, frustration, despair, love, certainty, curiosity etc. 
There are several ways to elicit emotions. The simplest and the 
most direct way is to ask "What is it like when you feel X?" or "Do 
you remember a time when you felt?" Keep in mind that rapport is 
vital to doing this process because these are rather strange questions to 
be asking a stranger. So, gain rapport! 
As you ask these questions watch how they respond. You 
should be able to witness the emotion emerge. 
Another way to do this is to by talking about the feeling as if 
you are telling a story describing the emotion. Use your sensory acuity 
when doing this as it doesn't promise that your description will match 
your subjects so pay attention to how they react. 
By doing emotional elicitation successfully it causes the 
subject to be a bit more flexible. If they are able to bring about 
emotions that you lead them to it is an indication you have great 
rapport and makes them even more responsive to your leading. This is 
often done in TV shows and what makes watching certain series so 
addictive. Yes, the media knows the power of Mind Control. 
Emotional Elicitation in Writing 
Emotional elicitation happens all the time in writing and is 
most common in fiction because it allows the reader to identify with a 
character and become emotionally involved. 
You will also see emotional elicitation in the very best 
advertising. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

73 
Anchoring 
Anchoring is the next step once you've learned how to elicit 
emotions. 
Anchoring is a very Pavlovian procedure that links an emotion 
to a gesture, a touch, an object or setting or anything at all. it is a very 
natural process the we as humans have anchors. We love our favorite 
restaurant because they treated us right and left us with a warm feeling 
every time we think about it. Commercials use the anchoring process 
by eliciting an emotion and then linking the feeling to a product. 
To use anchoring your sensory acuity must be sharp 
enough to notice when someone is feeling the emotion you are trying 
to elicit. As the emotion climbs to a peak you "set" the anchor, 
meaning to bring in the thing you want to associate with the feeling. 
Consider how anchoring happens in a romantic setting. 
Rapport is built and warm and fuzzy feelings start to grow as you are 
looking at the person. This alone links those feelings to the person so 
that all you have to do is think of the persons face and you feel those 
feelings. 
But you can use this to accelerate those feelings by 
using the anchoring process with a conscious intention. 
One way that can be accomplished is to first elicit the 
feeling either through asking about what it is like to feel "a 
connection" with someone or by describing the connection (or both). 
As you notice the feeling within the person grow you touch them in a 
unique way. 
Here is a word-for-ward example of romantic anchoring 
that is often used in romantic settings. 
"] don't know what it is that causes most people to 
notice that feeling of connectedness to each other. One of my friends 
was telling me that when she can feel that connection it is like there is 
this cord of light that connects us (gesture by moving the hand 
between you and the other person simulating the connection) and this 
cord grows with the warmth of that connection. ] imagine that it is like 
you feel this "click" and you can see yourself years from now and still 
feel that connection ... and then remember back to today as the start of 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

74 
it. And you can feel that right here (touch the solar plexus of the other 
person). 
The touch to the solar plexus will anchor that feeling of 
connection (referred to as "setting the anchor"). So any time you want 
to bring about that feeling again all you need to do is touch the solar 
plexus and the feeling will return. 
Other ways of setting anchors can be done without 
physical contact. Using a unique gesture, like tilting your head, or 
stroking your chin will work just as well. 
In NLP lingo that second touch that brings back the 
emotion is called "firing the anchor". 
Anchoring Exercise 1 
Watch TV commercials for the use of anchoring. You will 
notice it anytime some strong emotion is raised. Typically within the 
first 30 seconds an emotion will be elicited from the viewer and the 
commercial will end with either the name of the product or the product 
logo. 
Anchoring Exercise 2 
Create a conversation with someone with the outcome of 
setting and firing an anchor. Determine the emotion that you want to 
elicit and a unique way of setting and firing the anchor. Practice till 
you become good at it. Remember to use your sensory acuity. Note: be 
fearless and don't worry about being caught. Learn from your 
mistakes. 
Embedded Commands 
Embedded Commands are incredibly effective as a tool of 
Mind Control because they deliver messages to the unconscious mind 
without the conscious mind being aware of it. 
You can think of them as almost subliminal except that when 
you are trained to listen for them they become quite obvious. 
Thankfully, almost no one devotes enough time to learn to use or listen 
for embedded commands. 
To learn how to use embedded commands consider first how 
we speak. We tend to say things with one specific voice or tone of 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

75 
voice. Occasionally we get excited or angry and our voice will change 
in volume or intensity , but for the most part we speak without much 
change in our modulation and pace. 
Embedded commands work by using our voice to mark off 
certain words and phrases in our speech so that we are sending two 
messages. One of them is conscious and one is unconscious. 
The conscious message is the basic content of what we are 
saying. This would be the information that would be conveyed if we 
were to write down our words and read them from a script. 
The unconscious messages are the short words and phrases that 
you mark off as commands by changing the delivery of your words. 
For example let's use the quote that from above. This time the 
words that are to be used as embedded commands are marked in bold. 
"] don't know what it is that causes most people to notice that 
feeling of connectedness to each other. One of my friends was telling 
me that when she can feel that connection it is like there is this cord 
of light that connects us and this cord grows with the warmth of that 
connection. ] imagine that it is like you feel this "click" and you can 
see yourself years from now and still feel that connection ... and then 
remember back to today as the start of it. And you can feel that right 
here. 
As you make a list of the phrases in bold you will see a theme. 
"notice that feeling of connectedness" 
"feel that connection" 
"feel this 'click'" 
"see yourself years from now" 
"feel that connection" 
"remember back to today" 
"feel that right here" 
Because these are parts of complete sentences you can 
significantly change how the phrases are pronounced to mark them off 
but there will be no conscious awareness of anything being any 
different. 
There are several ways to pronounce the phrases differently 
from the rest of the paragraph so that the unconscious mind begins to 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

76 
recognize the patter. The easiest way is to pause before the embedded 
command then lower your voice then pause after the end of the 
command and resume to normal speaking. 
Try reading it again this time and note that the ... marks 
indicate a pause and when you read the command, read it like you are 
giving a command and let the tonality drop as if giving an order. 
"I don't know what it is that causes most people to ... notice 
that feeling of connectedness ... to each other. One of my friends was 
telling me that when she can .. feel that connection. .. it is like there is 
this cord of light that connects us (gesture by moving the hand 
between you and the other person simulating the connection) and this 
cord grows with the warmth of that connection. I imagine that it is like 
you .. feel this "click" ... and you can ... see yourself years from now ... 
and still .. feel that connection... and then ... remember back to 
today... as the start of it. And you can .. feel that right here... (touch 
the solar plexus of the other person). 
At first using embedded commands will seem awkward and 
unnatural. Get over it. This is a tool that people have paid a lot of 
money to learn for good reason; it works. If you follow the steps of the 
exercises below you will become very good at embedded commands 
and you will see people responding to your commands without even 
knowing what's going on. 
1. State your outcome not just in terms of actions but also in terms of 
emotions that motivate the action. 
2. Write short 2 to 4 word commands that lead to your outcome. The 
more the better. 
3. Write as many of these commands as possible. 
4. Make sure they are in command form. 
5. Begin to write the commands into a monologue about anything you 
would normally be talking about. 
6. Read it aloud. 
7. Practice, practice, practice. 
Using only one embedded command will not be effective 
because the subject's unconscious mind will not have enough samples 
of the commands to distinguish it as different from the rest of the 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

77 
speak and detennine that these are commands. So the rule is to use a 
lot of them. 
Because embedded commands are covert, it is possible to send 
them to one person in a group by marking the commands with a direct 
eye-contact gaze to the subject. 
Meta Programs 
A Meta Program is an NLP tenn that describes the possible 
ways individuals sort the infonnation they perceive. Thus they can 
detennine an appropriate reaction. 
It has been stated by some that there are over 30 various Meta 
Programs that people unconsciously use. In this chapter I'll restrict this 
to the six most common and most easily understandable Meta 
Programs. 
The NLP model Meta Programs demonstrate that we can best 
interact with (and control) people if we deal with them as they are 
instead of forcing them to be what we think they ought to be. 
Keep in mind that all Meta Programs are dependent on the 
context and not necessarily universal for the individual. So someone 
might use a towards meta program (see next) to choose a romantic 
partner but may use an away-from meta program to purchase tuna fish. 
Thus people are not to be considered as meta program "types" as some 
NLP books suggest. Meta programs are dependent on the context not 
the person. 
The Key 
The key to usmg Meta Programs for Mind Control is 
straightforward and simple. You use the meta program that your 
subject is using for the context you are discussing. Period. 
Meta Program: Towards vs. Away-From 
When someone says "1 want/don't want to do this because ... " 
what follows will tell you whether they are motivated by getting 
something (a towards meta program) or avoiding something (an away-
from meta program). 
Consider this, depending on the context and situation, each of 
us are motivated either by wanting to avoid something that is 
displeasing or to get something that we desire. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

78 
You can very quickly determine someones towards/away-from 
meta program by asking "What's important to you in a ... ?" 
Meta Program: Options vs. Procedures 
When given the choice of how to do something people will 
have two ways of responding. They will choose to respond by 
choosing a set procedure or by deciding among a variety of options. 
People tending toward procedures will tend to have a set way of doing 
things. They don't need much for motivation, only a process that they 
can refer to and rely on. 
Those who tend toward options will always be looking for a 
better way to do things and love responding creatively with new ideas. 
As an example when you ask "How did you choose your 
current job?" an Options response will sound like this "I wanted to be 
in a position that gave me a chance to travel. 1 looked at my choices 
and started at the top of my list of most favorite possible jobs and went 
down the list untill 1 got one." 
A Procedures response will be very systematic and procedural! 
Something like this: "I went to my friend and he told me about a the 
work that flight attendants do so 1 read up on it and talked to a few 
people. One of them used to work as an attendant and told me where to 
apply so 1 looked at some of the trainings and ... " This type of story can 
go for a while. 
Using this meta program for Mind Control means that for a 
person who tends toward options will respond favorably to a 
presentation that gives them choices while someone who relies on 
procedure must tell a story. 
Meta Program: Relationship (Sameness vs. Difference) 
This Meta Program helps determine how much similarities and 
difference contribute to peoples choices. 
When asked "What is the relationship between the (service or 
product) you want and what you have now?" the subject will respond 
by either saying that it is similar or different. There is a common test 
that NLP practitioners use in which they show three coins, two heads, 
one tails. 
The subject is bound to answer one of four ways. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

"They are all the same. They're all coins. " 
"They're all different coins. " 
"They're all the same except one is tails. " 
"They're all different except for they are coins. " 
79 
When this question is asked about whatever the controller is 
trying to offer the controller would tailor the information to the 
subjects relationship meta program. 
In other words if the subject was asked the relationship 
between his present car an ideal car and he responded that it had to be 
completely different, then the controller would emphasize the 
difference of the car he's offering, even if he is offering a very similar 
car. 
Likewise, if the subject wants a similar fill-in-the-blank the 
controller would point out the similarities of what he is offering, even 
if it is very different. 
The exceptions to this: 
"They're all the same except one is tails. " 
"They're all different except for they are coins. " 
You will notice that the subject is pointing out an exception to 
"all the same" and "all different". In this case the controller would also 
give an exception thus matching the subjects Meta Program. 
Convincer Meta Program and Strategy 
The convincer strategy starts by asking the subject "How do 
you know (product/service) is good?" 
The subject will answer one of four ways; 
• 
see it 
• 
read about it 
• 
hear about it from someone 
• 
have it or work with it 
The subjects' answer will determine whether the controller will 
show the product/service, give written information, have people tell 
the subject or have the subject work with that the product/service. 
Mind ControllOl 
www.MindControllOI.com 

80 
The second factor that will ensure the subject is convinced the 
product/service is good is time. 
The time factor is elicited by asking the question "How much 
time or for how long do you have to see it/read about it/hear about 
it/work with it?" 
That answer will fall into four answers 
• 
once 
• 
x number of times 
• 
specific length of time 
• 
never 
If the answer to this second question is once all the controller 
must do is show, give written material, have someone give a 
testimonial or have it work with the product or service. Doing this 
once will be enough. 
If the subjects answer is more than once the controller simply 
show, give written material, have someone give a testimonial or have 
him work with the product or service that number of times. 
If the answer is a specific length of time the controller will 
show, give written material, have someone give a testimonial or have 
it work with the product or service for that length of time. A long 
length of time can be dealt with by waiting about 20% of that time and 
saying something to the effect of "It seems like it is been (name length 
of time) since we last spoke." 
For those people who are never convinced or have to be 
convinced every time a different strategy is needed. In this case 
hypnotic language patterns are needed. 
The controller would first elicit and anchor the certainty that 
the product/service is good for one time then say "Can you imagine 
feeling that (fire anchor) every time you just think about the 
product/service so you don't have to worry about it again?" 
Final Note on Meta Programs 
There are numerous Meta Programs to consider and think 
about. This is by no means an in depth survey of the topic. You are 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

81 
encouraged to study more on the subject. There are a lot of resources 
available. 
Belief Change Processes 
NLP is a particularly good therapeutic tool to assist people to 
reevaluate beliefs that have held them back from accomplishing their 
goals. Because NLP is often used as a covert tool of persuasion it can 
be used to covertly change peoples beliefs for Mind Control purposes. 
To understand the belief change process it is easiest to see how 
it is used in an overt therapeutic setting. 
In a therapeutic example the subject reports that they are 
hesitant about going to back to school because they believe they are 
too old to restart their education. 
Here sub-modalities are used and four different images are 
elicited and followed by the NLP process that will create the change 
they needed. 
Step 1. The subject is asked to make an image of the belief 
"I'm too old to learn." and then is asked the sub-modalities of that 
image; the location, distance, colorlblack&white, in motion or still, 
etc. The NLP practitioner/controller makes notes of these. 
Step 2. The subject is then asked to envision a new positive 
belief that would benefit them such as "I can learn at any age." and the 
same sub-modalities are elicited. 
Step 3. The same is done for the "something that used to be 
true but is no longer true." This should be something mundane that has 
no emotion content. 
Step 4. The last image that's elicited is of something that the 
subject knows is true. 
Step 5. The subject is asked then to swiftly move the image of 
the belief "I'm too old to learn." into the location of "something that 
used to be true but is no longer true." and make certain it takes on all 
the related sub-modalities of "something that used to be true but is no 
longer true." 
Step 6. The image of the belief "I can learn at any age." is then 
very quickly moved to the location of "something that is true". 
Step 7. The subject is then asked to rehearse seeing these 
changes. When done well the belief is permanent. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

82 
Covert Belief Change 
Changing a belief covertly is a bit trickier because it requires a 
great deal of rapport and becoming very skilled with anchoring. To do 
it convertly the controller would do the same process as mentioned 
above but incorporate covert anchors. 
The first step for the controller is to elicit the thing that used to 
be true or it could be a thing they know as "wrong". Then fire the 
anchor when the discussion turns to their current belief that the 
controller wants to remove. 
The next anchor is for something they know is true and to fire 
that when the discussion turns to the belief the controller wants to be 
accepted. 
This process is done on a regular basis in many TV 
commercials. 
Additional Belief Change Methods 
Simple operant conditioning (see behavioral conditioning) will 
also work. Rewarding any movement that is indicative of the new 
belief and giving the cold stare to opposing beliefs. 
Using slight of mouth is also effective at combating an existing 
belief (see Gaslighting). 
Another method is to use the voice where any reference to the 
old belief is referred to in a whining tone, sarcasm or with some 
contempt. As a warning, strong rapport is very important because it 
can very easily be taken as an insult. 
Timeline and Time Manipulation 
Timeline refers to how people tend to perceive time as a linear 
series of events with events of the past leading to present events and 
are followed by future events. This in effect can be drawn as a line in 
two dimensions. 
To figure this out tell someone to assume that they are standing 
on a line of time and ask them where they perceive the past and have 
them point to it. Then have them point to their future. With that 
information you will understand how they perceive their past and their 
future. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

83 
A controller can elicit a persons timeline or it can be suggested 
by a simple use of gestures; the right hand extended to the side can 
represent the future and the left hand extended can represent the past. 
The center is the present. 
All of this can be done covertly by talking about the past while 
extending the left hand and the future while extending the right hand. 
To suggest a future response the controller can simply gesture to the 
future and suggest the feeling be there. 
Time Manipulation refers to the process of covertly suggesting 
that a response or feeling from the subject will happen in the future. It 
can also be used to help the subject imagine a feeling, or even an 
event, has happened in the past. 
An example of that would be to elicit a feeling and through use 
oflanguage patterns (mentioned below) to suggest it in the future. 
"It is interesting to feel that excitement tomorrow now isn't 
it?" Note that the time is ambiguous. Is it referring to feeling the 
excitement now or tomorrow? Because it is ambiguous BOTH 
meanings are accepted as true. 
Likewise you can suggest a feeling or response has happened 
in the past. 
"That excitement you are feeling is a great feeling wasn't it?" 
Language Patterns 
Language patterns are phrases, stories and metaphors combined 
with other NLP practices (like anchoring and embedded commands) 
that are designed to covertly elicit a response from the listener. The 
response desired is usually something emotional so that it can be 
anchored in some way. 
Language patterns are a unique form of covert hypnotic 
suggestion. In traditional hypnosis the hypnotist will give direct 
suggestions, telling the subject what to do and how to respond. 
Language patterns differ from traditional hypnotic suggestions in that 
they are not direct. Instead the operator often describes a process. In 
order for the subject who is listening to the pattern to understand the 
process they have to go through the process in their mind, doing it to 
themselves. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll01.com 

84 
The popularity of covert language patterns evolved from NLP 
practitioners who wanted to get laid. Then they were packaged into 
"get laid" NLP products and seminars designed for consumption by 
the horny male masses too busy to take an NLP course and figure it 
out for themselves. 
If one can control the emotions of others they are very likely to 
follow suggestions. This is because people almost universally make 
their decisions based on emotion more than reason. Using emotions a 
nation can be driven to war or to build giant monuments. Individuals 
in a one-on-one are no different and because a controller can get 
instant feedback the control is often easier. 
When using language patterns rapport is essential. 
Most people who learn language patterns begin first by 
memorizing existing patterns and, if they're smart, practice them. After 
some practice, most people start to understand the theory behind 
language patterns and can begin to generate language patterns on their 
own. 
The I-You Shift 
This is a very simple pattern and something that we do all the 
time in regular conversation. 
The I-You shift happens when one begins talking about their 
experience and instead of use the first person "I" they shift to "you". 
This is a covert way of telling someone to feel what you want them to 
describe. 
"I was thinking what happened to me yesterday. I was standing 
in line at the checkout counter and someone asked me to hand them a 
magazine by the register. You know what it is like when someone looks 
at you and has such a kind voice and manner that you smile and just 
do what this person says. And they just smile and tilt their head It 
leaves you with such a warm feeling that you know it is something that 
you are going to remember for that day. " 
In this example, using the I-You shift, the speaker is covertly 
telling the subject to feel a warm feeling toward them. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

85 
The Connection Pattern 
This one you will recognize from earlier. It IS designed to 
create a sense of connection and familiarity. 
"I don't know what it is that causes most people to ... notice 
that feeling of connectedness ... to each other. One of my friends was 
telling me that when she can .. feel that connection ... it is like there is 
this cord of light that connects us (gesture by moving the hand 
between you and the other person simulating the connection) and this 
cord grows with the warmth of that connection. I imagine that it is like 
you .. feel this "click" ... and you can ... see yourself years from now .. . 
and still .. feel that connection ... and then ... remember back to today .. . 
as the start of it. And you can .. feel that right here ... (touch the solar 
plexus of the other person). 
Fascination Pattern 
This pattern is, as it describes, designed to create fascination. 
Have you ever seen something that really got your attention? 
Maybe it was something you wanted. .. to buy ... or a maybe you got in 
a conversation that could really... grab your attention... it is like 
whatever you have right in front of you is the only thing ... that's in 
your awareness .•. and you ... focus in... because what you have in 
front of you is so compelling that you close off everything else ... when 
it is as if you just ... begin to falL •• into the thought that something. .. 
like this ... can be so compelling that time stops ... 
These patterns can go on for as long as the operator cares to 
describe them. 
Here is another attraction pattern. 
"Isn't it interesting how everyone is so different yet in so many 
ways we are all the same. I mean for example, I don't know what it is 
you do, when you decide for yourself that you really want to be with 
someone, and you know it is what you want cause you find yourself 
imagining it ... you picture it and your mine and you look forward to it 
for all the right reasons. Reasons that are right to you because you 
know its what you want but I think you know a person can find that 
when that's what's taking place, Wow, what a difference in the way 
they think and just how readily you then begin to make time for this 
Mind ControllOl 
www.MindControllOI.com 

86 
special person you are now connecting so strongly with. Its a totally 
different experience its like you feel almost magnetically drawn to this 
person you know what I mean? And sometimes I think a person 
wouldn't even know that that's what's taking place until afterwards. 
And you look back on it as one of those amazing memories you 
treasurelcherish for the rest of your life 
... now ... with me as I think long and hard about it I think 
that's the process of discovering that a person is being drawn to 
another person. " 
This one is referred to at "The BJ Pattern" 
I was just sitting here thinking about taking a vacation, if you 
could imagine your idea vacation spot what would it be like? (Stop 
and let her talk) 
You know, I think its so interesting how people connect with 
their hopes and their desires and their daydreams right ... I was 
reading this article the other day about compulsions and it got me to 
thinking about the difference between compulsion and anticipation. 
I mean you ever come home from a hard day a work and the 
boss was a jerk and kept piling the papers up on you desk and its like 
all you can think about it is dropping your clothes and getting into 
that steamy hot bath or shower. That's like before you even step in you 
can already feel that heat working its way through every muscle in 
your body and all your frustrations just drop away and all you can 
feel is the pleasure of that warmth just shooting through every part of 
you. And then There is that moment of sliding in where you really let 
that pleasure take you and it just feels great doesn't it? 
Yeah well do you like chocolate? (Is there a food where when 
you see it you absolutely have to put it in your mouth?.) I mean, can 
you stop and remember a time when you, it is like you see that piece of 
chocolate and your mouth is already tasting it before you even put it 
in. You can already taste that sweetness against your tongue and you 
can feel the special rich texture of it against your tongue as well. You 
know that texture that really good chocolate has. And then There is 
that moment, that moment when the first molecule of chocolate 
touches your tongue and you know it is inside your mouth and you just 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

87 
want to keep it there because it is so rich and so good. And There is 
that extra special warmth when you swallow that sweetness down. 
Or then maybe, you know like sometimes you meet someone 
and you are really attracted to them and you both know it and There is 
that moment when your eyes lock, it is that special look just before you 
kiss before the very first time and you are trembling with anticipation 
and your heart is pounding because you are thinking about how good 
it is going to be. It is like every physical moment of that relationship is 
enfoldedlcontained or rolled into that first touch of the lips and There 
is that excitement, with that first soft contact of the lips where you 
don't even know if you are touching or not but then, oh man. It is like a 
jolt of electricity all through you. See 1 think what happens is the 
conscious mind goes down into the unconscious and brings back up 
all these thoughts, images, desires and fantasies, and you may think 
those thoughts are above me, but really 1 think they're blow me __ 
because you are coming from a much deeper part of your mine aren't 
you? " 
Forbidden "Dark" Patterns 
Dark patterns refer to patterns that can be used to hann. These 
types of language patterns tend to create depression, fear and guilt. 
They are the most difficult because it requires a lot of rapport 
combined with stealth and guile. It is like using a velvet glove to hide 
a steel hammer. 
Disclaimer 
Neither the author, the publisher nor anyone 
known to them endorses the use of these patterns. 
The Hospital Pattern 
This is a fear inducing pattern that produces a fear of loss. It 
begins by describing a loss of something of great emotional value. 
a) Did you ever know someone that went into a hospital and never 
came back? 
b) It is amazing how often people just go and never come back. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

88 
c) If you like what we have, remember that I could leave you and 
never come back. 
The operator would then capture the pieces into a nice little 
story and likely multiply the effect using anchors. 
Example said to lover: 
a) "Did you hear about (insert famous person or acquaintance) who 
went to the hospital for something (anchor here) and never came 
out?" 
b) "By the way, I had a doggie that I loved and one day it just 
disappeared (use same anchor here with more intensity), (keep 
building value of doggie) She was so good to me, she would wait for 
me after school and she would just kiss me and knock me down ever so 
gently. We would roll on the floor and play all kinds of games. " 
c) "We would chase each other, she would fetch for me, she even slept 
in my room (what could you do with this?) but then one day, I came 
looking for her and she wasn't there. You have no idea what it feels 
like to lose someone like that (anchor). For days you look for her, you 
post posters, you post rewards. No matter what you do, it is over, gone 
out of your life (anchor)." 
The Depression Pattern 
This pattern is very advanced because it employs Values 
Elicitation and Anchoring. 
The start of the pattern is to elicit the life values of the subject. 
In other words the process begins with rapport and the operator asking 
"What's important to you in life?". This will lead the subject finally to 
reveal whatever those values are and, for this example, let's say the 
subject answers "Family, Religion and Work" in that order of priority. 
The operator will then ask the question "What are you not 
thinking about?" This question will bring about a profound state of 
confusion in the subject at which time the operator would covertly 
anchor the confusion with a touch or gesture. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

89 
The operator would then begin to talk about the subjects values 
of "Family, Religion and Work" and fire off the confusion anchor 
linking confusion to these values, effectively nullifying them 
The most malicious use of this or any "Dark" pattern would be 
to have the subject practice this response and have it effectively 
predetermined as an outcome. This might sound something like this: 
"I'm not sure how well you can imagine thinking about 
Family, Religion and Work and still having this feeling (firing anchor) 
in thefuture .. from now on ... but that's not something you have to think 
about consciously as it takes place. " 
Consider now why this type of pattern is so malicious. When 
done effectively anytime the subject thinks about what they used to 
have value in; Family, Religion and Work, they now feel confused. 
Elements of Dark NLP Patterns 
There is an element of some Dark NLP patterns that in itself is 
not bad and is often used to help in an NLP therapeutic setting. 
It is creating an anchor for "things that used to be true". 
The hypnotic version of this would be to have the subject 
create a place or even a box in their mind that they put things that are 
no longer true for them. They can put habits, compulsions and 
cravings in the box so that they are no longer are true. The result is 
very effective and positive for the subject. 
But what if the operator has them put things there that they 
value? 
The effect would be much like the previous pattern. 
Story Telling as Language Pattern 
When anyone tells a story, especially a vivid and compelling 
story they are using metaphors to covertly influence and hypnotize. 
Because a story is not about the people it is being told to they 
can listen without feeling preached to. But in order for them to truly 
understand the story they must, at some level, feel the emotions of the 
characters. This is where story telling is a great tool for Mind Control. 
There are several good examples of this that can help a 
beginner understand the process of Mind Control. The first example is 
fairly common and happens any time someone reads a story or 
Mind Control 10 I 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

90 
watches a movie and becomes so involved in the story line that they 
forget the fact they are involving themselves in a fiction. 
In spite of the fact that they are maybe sitting on their couch 
reading or watching a TV show they react as if they are in the story. In 
other words they are being affected by what they are reading/watching 
AS IF IT WERE REAL. 
This has been used by Mind Controllers all throughout history 
and many shamanic cultures place the story teller as the central person 
in their rituals. 
To learn this skill it is best that the controller first go into their 
history and remember times when they were reading or watching a 
show and got so intensely involved that they lost track of time and 
began to care about the characters in the story. 
What was it that made it so interesting? 
How was it you forgot where you were at and 'got into the 
story'? 
What emotions did the story involve? 
By answering these questions the controller can begin to 
understand what kinds of stories move them and begin to craft stories 
they can tell that are equally involving. 
How does one craft a story that delivers a covert message? 
There are a few factors that one needs to consider and try to 
incorporate. 
1. Tell a story with a character that is similar to the listener. The 
main character needs to have something that the listener can 
relate to regardless if the main character is a turtle or a human 
being. 
2. If telling the story orally (aloud) become involved yourself. 
The more passion, energy and enthusiasm you can put in the 
story the more the audience will react to it. 
3. Lead off the subject at times. The more convoluted a story 
becomes the more the listener must involve themselves to 
follow it. Often you will hear a story begin like this: 
"When I was little boy my mother would send me over to her 
mothers house, my grandmother. And she would tell me stories from 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

91 
the old country. I've never heard these stories except from here so I 
don't know if she made them up or if they're just part of the folklore. 
She told me that when she was a little girl her cousin would tease her 
to go to the "The Witch's House" and talk to the lady they called "The 
Witch". The thing was that the witch didn't mind being called that and 
my grandmother always approach the house scared and every time the 
Witch would befriend her, take her in, tell her a story and she'd leave 
always feeling better. Her friends told her that The Witch put a spell 
on her which scared her every time yet she would still go back for 
more. 
Well, one day The Witch told her a story about when she was a 
little girl and how she was always concerned about getting to close to 
the Black Lake. The Black Lake, they told her was haunted and would 
pull young girls infrom the shore and drown them if they didn't take a 
certain path to the shore .... " 
Just from this introduction it is hard to tell who the story is 
really about, the person telling the story, the grandmother, The Witch? 
In order to understand it the listener must forget who the story 
is about and follow deeper and deeper into the story eventually losing 
themselves it in. 
4) Design a message in the story. The message in the story can 
be like a moral of the story like Aesop's Fables. The message can also 
be much more covert. The covert message is one of emotion, meaning 
there is an emotion that the main character feels that motivates them. 
This emotion must be justified in the story. In doing this the subject 
that hears the story can relate to the emotion. Remember how a simple 
story like Snow White 
Exercise: Make up and tell a story that is convoluted like the 
one above. Write it down if you you have to. Observe how they 
respond. If you get a glassy eyed stare in the midst of telling it that is a 
sign of a hypnotic state induced by the story. 
Other Variations of Story Telling 
A testimonial is another example of story telling because it is 
one person saying what happened to them with a certain product or 
service. It is used everywhere from the religious practice of 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

92 
"witnessing" to TV commercials featuring both stars and ordinary 
people telling their story. 
Exercise: 
Make a list of all the time a testimonial has been used to sell a 
product or promote a service. Consider how you can do that with your 
outcome in mind. Who can tell the story? What will they say? 
The Voice Roll 
The voice roll is a way of speaking that is very common among 
public speakers and especially common with preachers giving 
sermons. 
The voice roll is a way of speaking that has specific rhythm. 
The rhythm creates a hypnotic effect with a majority of the audience. 
The reason why is that the rhythm itself becomes unconsciously 
anticipated and thus the listener follows the rhythm. 
The specifics of the rhythm is about pausing briefly 45 to 60 
times a minute or about once a second. 
Here is an example of the voice roll with ( ... ) representing the 
brief pause. 
"There is pattern ... of unique thinking ... that allows us ... to see 
how each of us ... can create such power ... create such influence ... that 
people will follow ... Now ... Think of it! ... i\It is all in how you think ... 
that propels others... to follow ... It is as if you have behind you... a 
force of will ... And that's what it is ... A force of Will!! So think about 
what you want... Think about how... you want to effect people ... 
Imagine that you CAN .. and you are on your way ... " 
Another way of setting a rhythm is to pace it according to the 
breath; breathing normally and only speaking on the exhale. This 
creates a unique pattern that is unconscious. To understand it consider 
what happens when we breathe with emotion. When we feel 
excitement the emphasis is on the exhale. We sigh with relief. By 
pausing on the inhale the speaker is stimulating the part of the 
unconscious mind that inhales with anticipation and by speaking on 
the exhale unconsciously providing relief. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

93 
When speaking to an individual the speaker would pace the 
breathing of the listener. Speaking to a group is much easier as the 
speaker does not have to pace anyone. The process alone will allow 
the audience to follow the inhale-exhale/anticipation-relief pattern. 
Exercise 
Take a book and before reading aloud notice your breath. 
Breathe the same way as you read aloud only speaking on the exhale. 
Eye Accessing Cues 
Eye accessing cues describe a particular way that we tend to be 
hardwired. This is a tendency and not to be taken as a hard fast rule. 
Eye accessing cues show that when people are thinking in a 
certain way their eyes tend to move in a particular direction. 
There are several cop shows on TV that show a police 
interrogation in which the police determine a suspect is lying simply 
by watching the movement of their eyes and knowing about eye 
accessing cues. 
The first time "Visual Accessing Cues" were discussed was by 
Richard Bandler and John Grinder in their book "Frogs into Princes: 
Neuro Linguistic Programming (NLP) " From their experiments they 
found that the following applies when a question was asked to a 
"normally organized" right-handed people. 
Keep in mind that right-left is determined from your viewpoint, 
looking at them. 
• 
When the eyes look up and to the left this indicates "Visual 
Constructed" meaning they are having to make pictures in their 
head. 
Example: Ask someone to make a picture of a red hippopotamus 
wearing a blue tutu and watch their eyes. 
• 
When the eyes look up and to the right indicates "Visual 
Remembered" meaning the image is a memory. Example: Ask 
someone the color of their mothers hair and watch their eyes. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

94 
These two examples are often used as the lie detector in cop 
shows. The cop would ask the suspect to describe what happened at 
the time a crime occurred. If they looked up and to the left they were 
remembering the event. If the suspect looked up and to the right they 
were constructing the event and not remembering it. In other words 
they were lying. 
What about the other eye movements? 
• 
When someone is looking to the left, they are usually in an 
"Auditory Constructed" mode. Meaning they are making noises or 
dialogs in their mind. One can notice this when asking someone 
"Imagine Darth Vaders voice whispering your name with a lisp." 
• 
When someone is looking to the right it is an indication of an 
"Auditory Remembered" thought. Meaning they are recalling the 
sound of something. Think of your favorite song and imagine it in 
your mind. 
• 
When someone is looking down and to the left they tend to access 
an emotion or feeling. One can notice this by asking someone to 
remember an emotion. 
• 
When someone is looking down and to the right it means that they 
are talking to themselves. 
It would be a mistake to treat this as a hard and fast rule. 
People will vary. Left handed people will tend to be the exact opposite 
of the above eye accessing model and some people will not conform to 
this model. The solution is flexibility and sensory acuity. 
There is a very simple exercise and a fun game that anyone can 
use to gain the skill of eye accessing cues. 
Exercise 
Take a few friends and ask them to tell you four things and have one 
of them be a lie. With a little practice you will be able to determine 
each persons lying eye accessing cues. Teach them the skill if you like 
to make it more fun. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

95 
NLP for Group Presentations 
For a public speaker there exists a very special opportunity to 
evoke the powers of Mind Control when speaking to a group. 
When speaking to a group the group has made an unspoken 
agreement among the group members to listen and follow the speaker. 
To be a good public speaker Mind Control is not just an option, it is an 
obligation. 
There are several beliefs, assumptions, specific actions and 
skills that a public speaker can use to gain control over the mind of the 
group. 
Belief: Public Speaking is Fun, Easy. 
This is a common belief among those who are good public 
speaker who can move a crowd. 
There are two things that anyone can do to gain this belief. The 
first is simply by doing the NLP belief change process on themselves 
that were mentioned earlier. 
The second thing is to create as many opportunities to speak in 
public as possible. 
"The more you sweat in training 
the less you bleed in combat. " 
~ Anonymous, U.S. Special Forces 
With practice the skill of public speaking can be learned and 
utilized as a wonderful tool of Mind Control. 
Assumption: People are here to get my information and want to be 
led. 
This assumption/belief is basically true for any public speech 
or presentation. Whether it is a political rally, theatrical play, religious 
sermon, college pep rally, lecture or seminar people are there to fulfill 
two criteria; to get information and to react to what they hear, i.e., to 
be led. 
This assumption on the part of the speaker gives them the 
permission to do whatever they can to hold the audiences attention 
while delivering their message. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll01.com 

96 
Conviction: Belief in the product. 
When a public speaker believes in what they are speaking 
about they become impassioned. That energy is conveyed to the 
audience during the delivery and should be amplified. 
It has been said that an audience will only respond to about 
10% of the speakers energy. For that reason many public speakers 
make their presentations hyper and sometimes even manic. This can be 
very effective when the speaker has developed rapport with the crowd. 
Gaining rapport with the group will be discussed in the section 
"Unifying the Group Through Group Action". 
By combining the assumption that people are present to be led 
and the deep conviction in your product or service a public speaker can 
do a great deal of "pacing and dragging" of an audience. 
Attitude: Magnanimity (aka charisma): "They care about me and 
I care about them." 
While many people talk about the power of charisma few will 
describe how to develop it. For that reason it is better to focus on a 
more specific and measurable quality; magnanimity. 
Magnanimity is the act of being liked and appreciated. It also 
has the same feeling of liking and appreciation toward those doing the 
liking. Combine magnanimity with the qualities of Conviction and 
Belief that public speaking is fun and easy and a very powerful mental 
state is created for public speaking. A controller can use the belief 
changing processes mentioned earlier to get into this state. 
With this knowledge the controller in the public speaking 
setting looks at everyone in the audience, and the audience as a whole, 
as if they are each best friends and that these friends are eager to hear 
and be with the controller. 
Speaking to the "Group Mind" 
For someone speaking to a group it is impractical to think in 
terms of controlling every individual within the group. There are 
simply too many minds there to deal with to effectively influence 
every one of them. In theory, however, there is a synergy created by all 
those minds coming together in the same place. It is called "The Group 
Mind Control 10 I 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

97 
Mind". The goal of any public speaker is to use all their tools to direct 
the Group Mind. 
In reality "The Group Mind" is a metaphor to help us 
understand how a group functions as a unit. 
There are certain things that can be assumed about the group 
mind. As a synergy of all the minds in the group the Group Mind is 
easily distracted and generally passive unless incited. It is the 
responsibility of the speaker to harness and direct the attention of the 
Group Mind. 
One technique used is a mentaVself-hypnotic process used by 
the controller on himlherself. This is a metaphoric mental construct 
used to gather energy from the Group Mind for the presentation and to 
direct it. 
The controller envisions a "group mind" that floats above the 
group perhaps as a brain or a ball of energy. Each individual in the 
group is connected to the group mind by invisible tentacles which the 
controller also imagines. 
The next step is to tap into the energy of the group mind. This 
is done by envisioning a conveyor belt or conduit that goes from the 
group mind directly to the speaker. 
Two additional processes are added to this mental exercise. 
Before the energy connects with the speaker a "converter" is installed 
to tum all the energy into positive energy. Then an amplifier is 
increases the energy before it reaches the speaker. 
The speaker then imagines that the energy is projected back to 
the individual audience members as shelhe speaks through the 
speakers voice and the eyes. 
The cycle continues with the audience's energy increased and 
fed again into the group mind continuing in an endless loop. 
For the speaker who incorporates this metaphoric process the 
result of this is that it energizes both the speaker and the audience. 
Some speakers have reported a "high" after giving a presentation using 
this technique. This is very important because the audience as a whole 
will only get about 10% of the enthusiasm that the speaker projects, so 
the more energy/enthusiasm from the speaker the more affected the 
group mind. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

98 
Tactic: Unifying the Group Through Group Action 
A very skilled public speaker knows that if the group is unified 
they are easier to control as a group. The way to do that in the most 
physical way is to have them do something as a group. The best 
modem example of that is the stadium wave. If you are not familiar 
with the stadium wave it occurs in sports areas when a group of 
spectators stand with hands raised then sit down. They are followed by 
the people next to them doing the same. When the wave begins 
everyone eagerly anticipates their chance to join in and in doing so the 
group unifies. 
In a lecture or seminar the speaker can create the same sense of 
unity by introducing a group exercise in which everyone must 
participate. 
Several examples of this are: having everyone stand up and 
stretch and asking the members of the group to introduce themselves 
to each others but keep in mind that any exercise that involves the 
entire group will work. 
Keeping the group unified is done by doing these exercises on 
a regular basis. 
Tactic: Elicitation for groups 
Eliciting emotions and mental states from a group is different 
than when working with individuals. The group itself does not have a 
way of communicating a preexisting group emotion or state so instead 
the emotion or state is suggested and the individuals in the group are 
asked to model the emotion or state. 
As an example, let's take the emotion of wanton desire and 
anticipation. The speaker would begin to describe the emotion/state. 
"We've all had the feeling of wanting something ... that feeling 
of ... when you think about what you want ... you've just gotta have it ... 
and how the longer you wait the more you want it... and then there 
comes that time when you realize you are going to get it ... and there is 
this wondeiful eager feeling. .. anticipation ... like when you are on the 
start of a roller coaster and it is going up... building... more and 
more ... Do you remember that feeling? " 
"Lets talk about what makes something interesting. Everyone 
knows what it is like to have something that is so interesting... so 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

99 
compelling that you can't turn away ... and you lock in ... like it is right 
in front of you ... and it takes up all your field of vision ... it is 
compelling and all you want is to know more ... that's the interest I want 
you to remember. " 
When the speaker delivers this with energy (i.e. enthusiasm) it 
will have an impact on the Group Mind and impart a percentage of that 
emotion. 
Tactic: Linking emotions to the speaker 
This is much easier than it might first appear. Consider that the 
speaker has the attention of the audience and can introduce any 
subject. Typically, this is done is by creating a pretense to discuss a 
dichotomy of emotions and having the audience look up at the speaker. 
Example: 
uTo really get the most from this training we're going to 
discuss trust and how it effects each of us. Take a moment to close 
your ryes and remember a time when you lost trust. Remember what it 
is like to lose trust. Now, open your eyes and discuss the feeling. 
(pause) Now remember the feeling of trust. Close your eyes and bring 
about that feeling of trust. Remember that feeling and bring it about. 
Feel it. Now open your ryes and look up here. " 
In this case the speaker is covertly creating the feeling of trust 
and, by having the audience look at him, link that trust to him. 
Any emotion can be linked to the speaker in this way. In fact 
there are several trainers who use this extremely well during a seminar. 
Once they know the audience is following them they will use the 
procedure to link wisdom, trust, awe, amazement, joy to themselves. 
Strategy: Using conflict to unify the group -- Hecklers and 
Controversy 
While most people will think that conflict within a group is a 
divisive quality, a good speaker will use it as a tool to bring the group 
into unity. 
One way a speaker can do this is to introduce controversy very 
early into the presentation. This can be done by openly and 
unapologetically mentioning the criticisms and conflicts that others 
have toward the topic being discussed. Starting off by saying "This is 
very controversial because ... " is enough. This creates a tension in the 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

100 
minds of anyone listening, that they are being let in on a topic that 
others criticize and that the speaker is open and honest enough to 
address this right from the start . 
When a member of the group challenges the speaker many 
speakers would find this a challenge. A skilled speaker interested in 
Mind Control will consider it an opportunity. This is important 
because the norm of the group is a one of equilibrium and stasis and 
any challenge to the leader disrupts that status quo and brings the 
group closer. 
Dealing with the heckler is important and various skills like 
embedded commands can be done so that the commands are addressed 
directly to the heckler. 
Tactic: Telling a Story 
(See "Story Telling as Language Pattern") This will never get 
old. People have been sitting down to be led by a good story ever since 
humans could talk around a camp fire and they continue to do it with 
the technology of television today. 
Many skilled public speakers will make a point to tell a long 
involved story that drags the audience though a long list of emotions 
often ending with something that is inspiring and tearful. it is often 
then that they pitch their product of ask for a donation. 
When using story telling one tactic they often employ is to not 
warn the audience that they are going to tell the story. They just begin 
and let it go ... the audience has no way or resisting. 
Use of Language Pattens 
Just like story telling, public speaking is an ideal venue for 
using language patterns. In fact, a good public speaker will use 
language patterns in their presentation and they often do it 
unconsciously as a result of a lot of experience. The moral: Get a lot of 
experience speaking in public. 
Anchoring the group 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

101 
A public speaker can use what is called spacial anchoring to 
elicit emotional responses from the audience. This is done by using the 
gestures and the location on the stage where the speaker is standing. 
For example the speaker can elicit through metaphor the 
feelings of want, desire and "go for it" when standing in a specific spot 
on the stage. When the speaker wants the audience to buy a product or 
make a donation he'll return to that particular spot while talking about 
the product or requesting a donation. 
How to Get Started at Group Mind Control 
There are endless opportunities to do public speaking and 
practice these skills. You can start locally by calling up any of your 
public service organizations like Optimists Club, Kiwanis Club, 
Rotary Club, Lions Club and the list goes on. Just call up your local 
chamber of commerce and ask for a list of these groups. 
When calling the group pick a topic that you are interested in. 
You won't be paid but most of these groups gather for a lunch or 
dinner meeting so the benefit is you will get a free meal. When you do 
a lot of them you will learn why it is called "the rubber chicken 
circuit". Don't worry about impressing them if this is your first time, 
they are used to setting through some very boring presentations and 
yours will likely be better than most. 
Mind Control 10 1 
www.MindControllOl.com 

Hypnosis 
Hypnosis is one of the oldest forms of documented Mind 
Control in history. In spite of all the books and training about hypnosis 
that are available hypnosis it is much easier and simpler than anyone 
wants you to believe. 
Most hypnotists rely on two crutches that in practical terms 
serve only to perpetuate the belief that hypnosis is hard. They are the 
"pre-talk" and "progressive relaxation induction". 
The pre-talk is usually a long monologue that a hypnotist will 
give the subject so that they'll understand what's going to happen and 
follow instructions. 
The progressive relaxation induction is a way to induce 
hypnosis by instructing the subject to relax usually starting at one end 
of the body and going over the entire body one body part at a time. It 
is a very long and monotonous process that, for some hypnotists, is the 
only process they know. It is also an incredible waste oftime. 
Both the pre-talk and the progressive relaxation induction can 
be avoided and lot's of time saved. 
The solution to both of these are rapport and giving a simple 
instruction. It goes like this: "All I want you to do is simply follow my 
instructions. Don't analyze or judge what you hear. Just make it true 
for you as ifit were your reality. Do you agree?" 
The hypnotist then waits for them to agree and then it is done. 
From there the hypnotist gives a series of instructions that 
convince the subject that they are hypnotized and then teach them how 
to do incredible things and have wonderful feelings using hypnosis. 
Here is the an example of the hypnotic process. 
All 1 want you to do is simply follow my instructions. Don't 
analyze or judge what you hear. Just make it true for you as if it were 
your reality. Agreed? (wait for response) 
Close your eyes and command the eyes to "Stay Closed!" and 
imagine them sealed tightly closed. .. so tightly closed that no one could 
open them ... so tightly closed that even you could not open them. Make 
that so! ... and when you have ... prove it to yourself and test it. Make 
it so! The eyelids stay closed. So Stop testing. The reason they stay 
closed is that you followed the instructions and you are a very good 
hypnosis subject. Now, relax and go deeper. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

104 
Then a whole series of instructions are given and tested. These 
tests can be for deeper relaxation, catalepsy (inability to move), create 
pleasant feeling, amnesia to various degrees up to forgetting major 
information like their name, carrying out suggestions in the hypnotic 
state and so on. 
With the passing of each test the subject is congratulated 
(positive feedback) so that the subject knows how to correctly follow 
hypnotic instructions. 
As the process continues the subject goes through the process 
of hypnotic conditioning where they learn to respond to commands 
automatically. 
Not every subject will respond quickly and some will require 
more training than others. 
A very thorough description of hypnotic conditioning can be 
found in my book Perfected Mind Control: The Unauthorized 
Black Book of Hypnotic Mind Control. 
Subliminal Suggestions 
There are many ways to deliver subliminal suggestions. Most 
commonly know is the urban myth of words "Drink Coke!" and "Eat 
Popcorn!" which were allegedly flashed on the screen of a movie. This 
story has been very difficult to verify but it has been reported as 
increasing sales. It was alleged that these messages were repeatedly 
flashed at less than a fifth of a second, just outside the human ability to 
consciously be aware of it. 
Let's assume this myth is true and based in fact. The fact that 
the viewer has no reason to suspect that these messages are being 
displayed is central to its success. If they were told that the film is full 
of subliminal messages it is likely that they would begin to notice the 
messages and consciously resist them. 
This last point is a reminder that "People can't resist what they 
can't detect." 
Doing this on a large scale for the purpose of Mind Control has 
some technical obstacles to overcome. With current technology of 
video editing it is possible to create video presentations that flash or 
overlay messages or images in this manner. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

105 
A second factor in using this fonn of subliminal messaging is 
frequency. Only by flashing these messages repeatedly will the 
unconscious mind recognize the pattern and then follow the 
suggestions. 
In recent years there have been new spam emails to buy 
products that contain a quick flash of the words "Buy!". 
The effectiveness of these subliminal messages have yet to 
tested with any scientific scrutiny. With that said subliminal messages 
theoretically should impact the mind. 
The evidence of that is mostly testimonial, for example, 
embedded commands (mentioned earlier) have a long history of 
delivering messages that impress the user at the results they receive. 
One way of using embedded commands on a large scale would 
be to have a prerecorded message played over loud speakers as regular 
public service announcement. 
Hello shoppers, buy now, you can see all the great bargains 
we offer at SpendMart. Making sure you feel satisfied with your 
choices is our job. As you shop here at SpendMart feel free to ask for 
your discount card and keep shopping to find your best deal. And 
thanks for shopping. 
There are various ways to do the same thing with visual media. 
One way to do this is that the controller considers the desired outcome 
and places items, pictures and decorations in the areas that the subjects 
would see. These items on the most obvious level appear to be nothing 
out of the ordinary, however within the items can be hidden images 
and words that 1) directly state the outcome, like "Trust" or 2) imply it 
through imagery. 
Fast Talking to Deliver Subliminal Messages 
After gaining rapport a controller can be telling stories or 
lecturing. When the words begin to flow quickly very short fast 
commands can be delivered and as long as the story continues at a 
rapid pace the commands will quickly be ignored, in other words they 
go directly to the unconscious mind. Because the commands are not 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

106 
relevant to the story the secret is to not mark them off like embedded 
commands. 
"This was one of the best pieces of real estate that I've got 
listed get real excited in this location. There is a hot tube and out door 
pool in the back. Let me show it to you really feel at home. Over here 
is the kitchen. it's complete with new fridge and fully stocked can't 
wait to see the upstairs, the pantry could keep you stocked for a 
" 
year. 
Using Ambiguities As Subliminal Messaging 
Another way of delivering subliminal messages is through the 
use of linguistic ambiguities. These ambiguities bypass the listeners 
conscious awareness because the sentences don't fit into an 
understandable linguistic construct and it is simply "not heard". 
As an example read this sentence aloud "You can either say 
"Yes, I want it." or No that this is the right thing to do. " 
In this case the "no" is an ambiguity for "know". While this 
may seem very awkward using it is even more interesting because 
people don't notice! 
Take this example of a linguistic ambiguity: 
"Here is a product that you might want to take a look at it with 
excitement. " 
You will notice that there are almost two sentences there. The 
first "Here is a product that you might want to take a look at. " and 
"Look at it with excitement. " 
Ambiguities work because there are two or more meanings that 
one can get from the sentence so the unconscious mind accepts both 
meanings while the conscious mind only recognizes the one that 
makes the most sense. 
Here are examples of other ambiguities: 
"I'm sure you will find this an interesting experience this as 
something powerful. " 
"Please, get behind the wheel and take it for a drive yourself 
to wanting it really is a good car. " 
"The choice is all yours. You can say 'Yes' you want it or you 
can say no (know) that it is the right thing to do. " 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

108 
"Psychic" Cold Readings 
Cold Reading refers to the act of telling things about someone 
in such away that it appears to come form "psychic" influences. 
There is nothing psychic about psychic cold reading. It is 
strictly a skill that combines very generalized statements that most 
people will agree to, the ability to read people at a glance and a few 
tricks of guile. 
Doing psychic cold readings exercises a particular mental 
muscle that is absolutely essential for Mind Control; thinking on "a 
higher level". 
To explain this, consider how the higher up the levels of power 
you go the more you control. The same is true of knowledge, the more 
you can know the more you can influence. Psychic readings require 
the reader to quickly observe someone and make global assumptions 
about them. The psychic reader gathers more information from their 
observation than the normal person just by paying attention. From that 
the reader finds an artful way to describe what they've learned from 
their quick scan and do it in such a way that the subject feels as if 
someone is reading their diary. 
Being able to do a psychic reading creates an opportunity for 
any controller to meet and speak with anyone who shows an interest. 
Simply by saying "You have very nice energy. Do you have a spiritual 
practice?" can quickly lead to doing a psychic cold reading. 
In a social setting or party people will quickly find a way to 
talk to the psychic in the room. 
Before going any further it is important to point out that this 
attempt at describing psychic cold reading is not to discredit those 
people who truly feel they are psychic. This is merely a description of 
the psychic cold reading process. 
What are the basic rules of cold reading? 
1. Never refer to what you are doing as a "trick". This undermines the 
mysteriousness of what you are doing and can tum you into a 
trickster instead of someone that people want to learn from. 
2. If you resort to some form of slight of hand or magic during the 
reading under no circumstances reveal how it was done. 
Mind Control 10 I 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

109 
3. Practice. Practice as much as you can with as many people as 
possible. The more you practice the better you will get at reading 
people and being able to "talk on your feet" as if you were a 
psychic. 
4. If you do use magic tricks during your psychic presentation use 
them sparingly and only to add impact to your presentation. Never 
do more than three or four unless you are getting paid for your 
psychic reading. 
5. Don't tell the reader anything directly. Instead you can use 
anything like the following statements "] feel ... " "My intuition 
tells me ... " "The sense] get is that ... " 
6. Bill yourself as doing it only for entertainment, but make your 
presentation as serious as possible. 
7. Some cold reading books would tell you for ethical reasons that 
you should never claim supernatural powers. That does not forbid 
you from allowing people to think it. In fact, people will believe it 
more if they conclude it on their own without any explicit 
instructions. You can even make it more convincing by trying to 
persuade them not to tell anyone. 
So what does a non-psychic cold reader use to convince people 
of their psychic powers? 
The first tool is sensory acuity and being a good observer. With 
experience and a bit of study anyone can learn how to read someone 
based on their age, dress, posture, jewelery, hair style, and how they 
interact with people. Based on this information the reader makes 
opening statements and intersperses them with statements that are 
likely to be true. 
Some of these clues are: 
• 
People who wear their watch on the right wrist are likely left 
handed. The reader can say" You grew up knowing that something 
was different and you tried hard to fit in. You notice how a lot of 
people are conformists and how you are different. " 
• 
Red headed people, especially with curly hair and freckles, will 
find the following statement generally true "] can tell that for you 
there was some trouble you had with people seeing you as being 
Mind Control I 0 I 
www.MindControllOI.com 

110 
different, you even got a bit of teasing when you were younger. 
Eventually what you found is that you had to find a balance 
between being different to meet their expectations and then 
deciding that what they thought was not your concern. " 
• 
People, especially women, who were a lot of jewelry (and make-
up), will find be very likely to find this statement true for them. 
"There is a concern that you try to hide about how people perceive 
you. You want to always create a positive first impression because 
you know how important it is and it will allow you to more easily 
reveal that part of you this is deeper ... the part of you that has more 
depth and is not so easily seen at first glance. " 
• 
During a reading, people may be rapt by what you say with eyes 
locked on you, or they their eyes will be darting back and forth, 
trying to find out internally if your statements are true for them. In 
this latter case, and with people who are more skeptical, the 
following statement can be used. "You don't always take things at 
face value. You make a point of testing out what people tell you as 
fact. " 
• 
Very attractive women will often find this statement true. "You 
have a habit of attracting the wrong type of man. " and "Even 
though you are often told that you are attractive you find that you 
are your own worst critic, never truly satisfied with what you have 
and always lookingfor some area that might need improvement." 
As an exercise begin to make a list and collect your own list of 
these statements ... and practice, practice and practice. 
Good generalized statements that most people will agree applies to 
them. 
The Forer Effect is a psychological phenomenon described by 
Bertam Forer in 1949. The Forer Effect occurs when a very general 
statement that is said to describe someones personality and the person 
will most often agree that it is true, remembering the statements that 
are favorable and accurate and dismissing and forgetting those 
statements that are inaccurate. This selectiveness of the human mind 
allows the person receiving the psychic reading to retrofit the 
information in order to accept it as true. 
Mind ControllOI 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

111 
For example Forer gave a personality test to people and each 
person was given the same personality description below. When 
read most people agreed that it was an accurate description of their 
personality. 
"Some of your aspirations tend to be pretty unrealistic. At 
times, you are extroverted, affable, sociable, while at other times you 
are introverted and reserved. You have found it unwise to be too frank 
in revealing yourself to others. You pride yourself on being an 
independent thinker and do not accept others opinions without 
satisfactory proof You prefer a certain amount of change and variety, 
you become dissatisfied when hemmed in by restrictions and 
limitations. At times you have serious doubts as to whether you have 
made the right decision or done the right thing. Disciplined and 
controlled on the outside, you tend to be worrisome and insecure on 
the inside. " 
"Your sexual adjustment has presented some problems for you. 
While you have some personality weaknesses, you are generally able 
to compensate for them. You have a great deal of unused capacity 
which you have not turned to your advantage. You have a tendency to 
be critical of yourself. You have a strong need for other people to like 
you and for them to admire you. " 
"People close to you have been taking advantage of you. Your 
basic honesty has been getting in your way. Many opportunities that 
you have had offered to you in the past have had to be surrendered 
because you refuse to take advantage of others. You like to read books 
and articles to improve your mind. In fact, if you are not already in 
some sort of personal service business, you should be. You have an 
infinite capacity for understanding people's problems and you can 
sympathize with them. But you are firm when confronted with 
obstinacy or outright stupidity. Law enforcement would be another 
field you understand. Your sense of justice is quite strong. " 
Except for the fact that many people wanting a reading also 
want to hear more than just about their personality it is possible to give 
the very same basic reading by simply having a script that includes 
these types of statements. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

112 
The following is a list of the most common topics that people 
are interested in during a psychic reading are. It would be a good idea 
to write a list of responses to each of these topics that will apply to 
most people and give good general recommendations. 
Sex 
Spouse (if married) 
Fidelity 
Choice of partner (if single) 
Engagement 
Personal Appearance 
Health 
Physical Activity 
Physical Health 
Health of Other 
Mental Health 
Money 
How money is spent 
Recovery from debts 
Career Change 
Gambling 
Investments 
Property 
Loans 
Giving covert suggestions during a psychic reading 
A psychic reading is a great place to give embedded commands 
and other hypnotic like suggestions. For example it is nice to have 
someone who is responsive to the psychics reading and is paying 
attention so the reader can make that a part of the reading. 
"You seem like someone who can really ... focus in ... on 
something when it is right in front of you ... and you ... find it 
interesting ... there are certain things that do get your attention ... one 
of those things is when you have a chance to learn about yourselj ... 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

113 
Tricks on reading people 
This effect is so simple that when I first heard of it I really 
didn't think it would do much. It can be used as an opener but I think it 
is put to better use a few minutes after meeting a woman and chatting 
with her. Keep in mind that you can segue into these effects any way 
you wish. Practice different ways of introducing them to see what suits 
you best. 
Effect: You take her wrists and tell her to close her eyes and 
concentrate on one hand or the other. After a few seconds you tell her 
which hand she was thinking about. 
How it is done: Take her hands in yours and then find her pulse 
on each arm with your thumbs. It may be awkward at first from where 
you're sitting but what I do is 'follow her thumbs' - put your thumbs 
at the top of hers and follow them down and in until you hit the pulse. 
Whichever hand she is concentrating on will have a quicker pulse, so 
select that one. You can perform this effect more than once with the 
same person but I prefer not to. 
Understanding personality types 
A little psychology can go a LONG ways when doing psychic 
cold readings. Take personality types for example. 
There are plenty of great resources on-line and in books to help 
anyone learn about personality types and use them in cold readings so 
this description is by no means in depth. It is just enough to get you 
headed in the right direction. 
There are many different ways of categorizing personalities 
and any of them will be useful for you. The most common is the 
Meyers-Briggs Type Indicator that consists of four qualities of 
personalities that each have two possible choices. 
These are 
Social Orientation: Extrovert(E) / Introverted(I) 
Information Gathering: Sensation(S) / Intuition(N) 
Decision Process: Thinking(T) / Feeling(F) 
Relationship to the Outside World: Judgment(J) / Perception(P) 
By understanding the variations in personalities a reading can 
quickly conclude things about people from a very brief observation 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

114 
which can add huge amounts of content to the reading. For example if 
someone appears reserved and introverted the following statement will 
be easy for them to accept as true "Time with yourself is very 
important. Even though you have people in your life you interact with 
you are most comfortable dealing with your own thoughts and 
feelings. " 
An extroverted personality would easily accept this statement 
as true: "You have a great ability to enjoy the company of others. 
Sure, there are times when you need to collect your thoughts and be 
alone, but you can easily devote your time to others and be energized 
by these interactions. " 
Tarot card and Palmistry 
Tarot cards and palmistry can be a great resource for a cold 
reader because they naturally give the impression of authority. When 
people see you doing a tarot card reading, they are going to instantly 
assume you've put in the time to learn this mysterious craft and know 
what you are talking about. Another benefit is that people tend to lose 
their inhibitions and openly ask for a tarot card or palm reading when 
they see it done to others in a social setting. 
Tarot cards and palmistry are skills that require a certain 
amount of practice but the benefit in learning these skills is that the 
reader gives credit to the system instead of themselves. In other words, 
anything in the reading that is inaccurate or unfavorable are simply 
attributed to "what the cards say". 
Tricks of guile - Mentalism 
Mentalism is a field of magic that appears to be mind reading 
when in fact it is simple magic and trickery. Doing a search on line or 
in a book store will give a wealth of resources to incorporate a few 
mentalism tricks into your cold reading routine. 
Here is one of the simplest mentalism mind reading tricks that 
always promises a good result using tarot cards. 
The reader riffles quickly through the deck of cards and asks 
the subject to tell him when to stop. The subject then takes the card, 
not revealing it to the reader. The reader then gives a reading to the 
subject describing their personality and concludes by saying "Based 
on that reading it is my guess that you would have pulled out the Ace 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

115 
of Cups. Am 1 right?" and, of course, that's what the reader is holding 
in their hand. 
How the effect is done is incredibly simple. After shuffling the 
deck the reader glances at the very bottom card and then cuts the deck. 
He will place his little "pinky" finger slightly over the edge of the 
bottom half of the cut. This keeps the cut separated with the bottom 
card resting hidden on top of the little finger. He then riffles through 
the deck telling the subject to say "Stop." at any time. When the 
subject says stop the reader quickly moves the upper half of the deck 
forward and lifts it off, revealing the card at the bottom of the cut that 
he glanced at before the cut. (In magic this is referred to as a "card 
force" and there are hundreds of ways of doing them.) 
When the reading is over and the reader "guesses" at what card 
the subject "randomly" picked it will tend to verify that the reader is 
"the real deal" and thus make every other aspect of the reading true 
and acceptable. 
Appealing to the Seven Hidden addictions 
In the section of this book you'll read in more detail about the 
Seven Hidden Addictions. A psychic can never fail by appealing to 
these powerful human needs. This is especially true of the addictions 
of "Providing Hope" and "The Scapegoat". 
When it comes to "providing hope" you will never lose out by 
providing someone with hope during a psychic reading. You can give 
them cautions and let them know there are things they should pay 
attention to but don't destroy their hope. 
If there is a problem they are facing you will do best to find a 
way to let them know it is not their fault; give them a scapegoat. I 
don't recommend you tell them they've been cursed or anything like 
that. Instead reassure them that they've done all they could and that 
they are a good person. 
It is also a good idea to let the person know that they are in 
some way needed and important to the people around them. 
If you are going to go into doing psychic cold readings make a 
point of reading and incorporating "The Seven Hidden Addictions" 
in your reading and people will naturally love what you tell them. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

116 
Training for Unconscious Response 
To my knowledge, this is the first time this trick has been 
revealed in writing but its has been alluded to by magicians who 
practice mind reading and mentalism tricks. Many psychic cold reader 
use it unconsciously with great effect. It is called the "eye brow raise" 
using the raised eyebrow and head nod to get unconscious 
confirmation. 
The reader starts by making asking a question that they know 
or strongly suspect to which the subject will answer "yes". For 
example, noticing the watch on the right wrist the reader will ask in the 
tone of a statement "You seem like someone who looks at things a bit 
differently than others. You are left handed. Aren't you?" but the 
reader will raise the eye brows and nod as if asking for confirmation. 
The subject will then respond. When they respond with a yes, they will 
also unconsciously nod their head to the eye brow raise. This act 
begins to train them to respond with unconscious signals. When the 
answer to a statement asked in this manner is "no" they will pause 
which allows the reader to back track. 
Here is an example of "mind reading" done in this way: 
Reader: "I'd like to ask you to think of a memory, make sure it 
is a pleasant memory that you remember from way back. " This directs 
the subject to go "way back" and find a pleasant memory. Already the 
memories are being limited by the reader. The reader will then direct 
the questions based on the subjects unconscious responses to the 
eyebrow raise with nod. "This was a when you were young. " (eyebrow 
raise) "quite young" (eye brow raise, noting pause response) "not too 
young. .. a teenage" ( subject gives an unconscious yes nod) "okay, so 
you are a teenager... this is a special occasion. .. (eyebrow raise and 
nod not noticing a response) ... it is not that special... it is an regular 
day but something nice is happening ... you are with friends ... family 
members (notice which they respond to "friends" or "family 
members"). 
Mediumship and Group Reading 
This is the art of working with people who want to speak with 
a dead friend or relative. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

117 
This does take some practice and experience to do well but it is 
surprising how simple it can be. Many people will do a psychic 
reading for a group of people. The reader would start by reading 
"someone in the group" without being specific who it is. This makes it 
even easier because it is much easier to find someone who will agree 
that the reading applies to them. One such reading can be as follows: 
"There is some one here who has lost someone, a close friend 
or family member. The loss happened during a celebration or 
holiday... that's how you remember it. " During this open reading the 
reader would be looking around for signs of unconscious agreement. 
Then look at the person who is responding to what they say. 
Many cold readings do not involve fishing, vagueness, or wild 
guessing. The key to a successful cold reading is the willingness, 
ability, and effort of the client to find meaning and significance in the 
words of the psychic, astrologer, palm reader, medium, or the like. A 
medium claiming to get messages from the dead might throw out a 
string of ambiguous images to the client. "Father figure, the month of 
May, the Big-H, and H with an N sound, Henna, Henry, M, maybe 
Michael, teaching, books, maybe something published. " This list could 
mean different things to different people. To some people it probably 
has no meaning. The client will either connect these dots or she won't. 
Clients of mediums who claim to get messages from the dead are very 
highly motivated clients. Not only do they have an implicit desire for 
immortality, they have an explicit desire to contact a dear loved one 
who has died. The odds are in favor of the medium that the client will 
find meaning in many different sets of ambiguous words and phrases. 
If she connects just a couple of them, she may be satisfied that the 
medium has made a connection to a dead relative. If she doesn't find 
any meaning or significance in the string, the medium still wins. He 
can try another string. He can insist that there is meaning here but the 
client just isn't trying hard enough to figure it out. He can suggest that 
some uninvited spirit guests are confusing the issue. It is a win-win 
situation for the medium because the burden is not on him but on the 
client to find the meaning and significance of the words. 
If you ever get a chance to see one of those psychic readers 
who tells people about their dead friends and relatives you willieam a 
lot about cold reading and watching for unconscious responses. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

118 
"Dumb Blonde Mind Control" 
Dumb Blonde Mind Control refers to a specific strategy used 
mostly by women to control men. The strategy works best when it is a 
kind of a push-pull. That is to say, the promise (or hint) of easy 
sexuality (the pull), combined with a calculated helplessness and 
vulnerability (the push). It is the second half, the perception of 
vulnerability, that encourages the victims to make allowances when 
they'd other wise get angry (or catch onto the scam). 
This push-pull is referred to in hypnosis as fractionation, where 
each time a person returns to a previous mental or emotional state the 
intensity of the state or emotion grows. 
The best 'dumb blondes' are often really approachable and 
personable -- at first. 
The ones who really know the game alternate between sexy & 
vulnerable, affection & rejection in a sort of three-step process. 
At first, the affection/rejection swing seems to be a reaction to 
something her subject is doing, and he begins to modify his behavior, 
thinking he's in control and stimulating her good behavior and moods. 
Actually, it is him that's responding to conditioning, a la Pavlov, and 
this is the first stage of compliance. 
Then, when she's got pretty reliable compliance, her moods and 
reactions may become more overt rewards & punishments. She should 
always frame them as reactions, and emphasize her own vulnerability, 
to keep his defenses down. (How many times have You seen a guy 
doing something nice for his girlfriend as a result of her being a bitch, 
and he not even quite knowing why he's doing it. I have several friends 
who, when asked why they are doing this, just shrug and reply, nOh, 
well, it is just one of her little moods. n) 
Finally, she should alternate between sexy & vulnerable, 
affection & rejection incongruously. He should be at a total loss as to 
why she reacts the way she does-- sometimes. To achieve real control 
over her subject, she has to get him to believe he has her almost 
figured out. Almost. Thinking that he's almost got her will keep him 
hooked. 
Breaking the pattern will send him back to square one. 
This is just one context in which this strategy can be used. It 
can be applied in other areas too. 
Mind ControllO! 
www.MindControl101.com 

119 
Consider a setting where a potential business partner promises 
investment capital for a project but acts ignorant about certain aspects 
of the project. So the subject give a concession in the form of more 
information. This is followed by a return to the promise of investment 
capital then another requested concession. Ultimately, the controller-
investor has all the concessions they need and completely withdraw 
their investment capital. 
The only way to counter this strategy is to be aware of it and 
make a note whether each concession has actually yielded any real 
measurable progress. If the "progress" is only a promise or a 
possibility and not something tangible then all concessions must stop 
until something measurable is returned. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll01.com 

120 
Appealing to Basic Human Responses 
In 2004 TV producer and author Blair Warren wrote and 
published the book "The Forbidden Keys to Persuasion" in which he 
describes what he calls "The 7 Hidden Addictions". 
These "addictions" are responses that people have almost as a 
reflex and are often expressed as needs. They are called "addictions" 
because we automatically respond to them as if they were a drug. 
These are the seven addictions. 
Addiction #1 
The need to be needed. 
This addiction goes to the heart of our need to know that we 
are special. When we are needed our value is recognized. 
The process of expressing that need is simple and straight-
forward and Warren describes the process in six steps. 
Step 1. Explain the situation as a whole. What is at stake? What is a 
dilemma? 
Step 2. Explain the specific role the person can play in the situation. 
Step 3. Emphasize the importance of the role. 
Step 4. Point out how the person is uniquely qualified for the role. 
Step 5. Openly acknowledge that your request will require a sacrifice 
on their part. 
Step 6. Ask if you can count on them to help. 
As you can see this is a very simple tactic to implement and it 
can be done in person and with any form of media. 
Exercise 
Go through this process with someone. Anyone. It could be a 
family member, employee, friend or co-worker. Compare your results 
to any other way you try to motivate them. 
Addiction #2 
The need for a sense of hope when an impasse occurs. 
People will automatically respond when given some form of 
hope in a tough situation. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

121 
Psychics hot lines make a damn fine living fulfilling this need. 
They tell people what they want to hear and people are willing to pay 
for it. 
Consider how many "self help" and "how to" books line the 
books shelves. 
This can easily be taken advantage of anytime a problem is 
recognized. If this is a process that will be repeated with the same 
subjects it is best to have a good track record of rescuing from the 
impasse. 
Exercise 
Anytime you ask something of someone implement this 
process of letting them know they are needed. 
Addiction #3 
The need for a scapegoat. 
As much as people preach about taking responsibility for our 
lives there is nothing more reassuring than knowing that the source of 
our troubles can be placed on someone else's shoulders. 
Why? Because we want to believe our perception of reality is 
right (another hidden addiction). If our perceptions are correct then we 
would not have problems and any problems we perceive are not 
because of us. 
Providing a scapegoat prevents us from having to reevaluate 
that, in truth, our reality might be wrong. 
A good example of this is in many weight loss commercials 
that say "Have you tried to lose weight and feel frustrated no matter 
what you do? It may be your metabolism." Giving the person a 
scapegoat, their metabolism, provides a HUGE amount of relief and an 
opportunity to provide relief using the previous hidden addiction. 
Consider how having an enemy motivates people to war. When 
a rival is identified, people will focus all their attention to the battle. 
Many a governments, politicians and religious leaders have created an 
enemy to help unify the group. 
When speaking about this particular addiction I always make a 
point of arguing in favor of taking responsibility for everything in our 
lives, good and bad. At the same time it would be wise to never 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

122 
underestimate people's tendency to find fault anywhere but with 
themselves. 
Exercise 
Test this out in anyway possible just to see how people respond 
to it. Especially do it with those people who encourage taking 
complete responsibility for their lives. Even they will respond 
favorably. 
Addiction #4 
The need to be noticed and feel understood. 
One of the reasons cults can be so attractive to people is that 
they give, at least for a time, feelings of acknowledgment and 
acceptance. 
One way that anyone can fulfill this need is to not just listen to 
what people say but to take part in "active listening". Active listening 
is a simple process of repeating back what people tell you without 
adding your own comments and interpretations. 
There are several benefits to active listening for both parties. 
For the subject it fulfills the need to be noticed and understood. Active 
listening provides a way that the subject can express their views 
without judgment. 
For the controller active listening is a great substitute for going 
on the defensive when being told something uncomfortable. All the 
controller needs to do is say "So what you are saying to me is .... " then 
rephrase what the subject has just said and then remain silent. In many 
cases the subject will take this for agreement and the discussion will 
end. 
Active listening also provides the controller with excellent 
information about the subjects perceptions and world views because it 
allows for the subject to respond to what the controller has said. This 
can be very useful in elicitations of states and emotions. 
Exercise 
Make a point of seeing how people respond to you when you 
let them know you understand what they are expressing. Don't just say 
"I agree." or "I understand." Demonstrate your newfound sense of 
understanding by actively communicating with them. Put aside any 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

123 
moral evaluations to what they are saying and avoid getting defensive 
if this is a personal issue involving you. 
Addiction #5 
The need to know things they don't or shouldn't know. 
You want to know a secret? So does everyone else. 
Being let in on a secret confirms that we are special when it is 
provided by an outside source. When the secret is discovered 
independently it tends to create a sense of power that "I know 
something you don't know." 
Using this addiction is very easy. You can do it by referring to 
something that the subject can't know about yet, perhaps due to lack of 
training 
A good sales man will never give away all the information 
about his product. If he's smart he'll hold back and then "let you in on 
a secret". 
There are two forces within someone when they are given a 
secret. Both are powerful. One is the force to tell the secret to others 
and receive an immediate reward for the knowledge. The other force is 
the one that comes from keeping the secret. This force is more lasting 
yet less immediate and grows more powerful the longer you keep the 
secret. By keeping that secret it builds a sense of strength that only the 
individual knows about. 
When every effort is made to keep the secret then, if you are to 
reveal it, it becomes like a holy weapon that is only to be used in the 
most extreme situation for the most devastating results. 
Addiction #6 
The need to be right. 
Our need to be right is based on our trust of our perceptions 
because we rely on our senses for our lives. Being told we are wrong 
forces us to reevaluate the trust we have in our senses. Often the issue 
of being wrong becomes more important than the issue being argued. 
By letting someone know that they are right you gain their 
rapport and establish that you are on their side. 
But what if they are not right? 
Then you refer to the scapegoat and let them know that they are 
wrong but it is not their fault! 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

124 
Let's suppose you are being challenged by someone. You want 
to maintain your position but you want to make sure the other person 
is not told that they are wrong. 
Another way to accomplish this is to acknowledge their point 
while setting aside the issue. Phrases like "Your point is well taken." 
and "I can appreciate where you are coming from." and "I'm glad you 
brought that up" make you appear to agree with them without 
agreeing. 
Exercise 
Note how many times during the next week you are involved in 
an exchange where someone is trying to be right. If your tendency is to 
argue for your point try acting like a diplomat and use one of the 
mentioned tactics so that they will not feel challenged. 
Addiction #7 
The need to feel a sense of power. 
The key word for this addiction is "sense of power" As long as 
they feel they are in control the opposite reality does not have to be 
shared with them. 
This is often done by pointing out that any action they take is a 
choice and entirely up to them. 
Imagine a young person, named Chris, who is tom between a 
cult and his parents. His parents tell him that the group he is 
participating in is a cult and they forbid him from going any further. At 
the same time the cult will tell him "No doubt, your parents love you. 
No one can blame them because they want what they think is best. 
Chris, you've lived long enough to know what's best for yourself. We 
trust your decision. We would certainly love your participation here, 
but you are an adult now and that choice is ultimately up to you. " 
The cult has done something that Chris's parents did not; They 
treated him like an adult and gave the power of the decision up to him. 
By comparison it is almost irresistible. 
Exercise 
Take note of your interactions with people and find out where 
in the exchange you can build the other person's sense of power and 
control. This does not have to compromise anything you are doing. 
You don't have to give up power to point out the power that someone 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

125 
else has. The easiest way to do this is to point out that they ultimately 
have the final choice in any deal. 
Exercise 
This isn't hard. Consider the seven hidden addictions and how 
they are applied in everyday life. Take note when you recognize any of 
the hidden addictions being used and use them liberally yourself and 
notice peoples reactions. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

126 
Interviews and interrogation 
Mind Control has many outcomes. For the sake of getting the 
truthful answers to serious questions it is ideal and it has been polished 
to a razor sharp edge. 
This process has been described in much more depth in the 
book by David Leiberman entitled "Never Be Lied To Again". 
Getting the truth can be divided into a series of steps. If the 
truth is not given in the first step the controller progresses to the next 
step. 
Phase One - Three Attack-Sequence Steps 
Step 1 
The objective here is to ask a question that does not accuse the 
person of anything but alludes to the person's possible behavior. The 
key is to phrase a question that sounds perfectly innocent to an 
innocent person, but like an accusation to the guilty. 
Suspicion: You feel that your girlfriend was unfaithful the night before. 
Question: "Anything interesting happen last night?" 
Suspicion: You think a coworker told your secretary that you have a 
crush on her. 
Question: "Heard any good gossip recently?" 
Any answers such as "Why do you ask?" or "Where did you 
hear that?" indicate concern on the person's part. He should not be 
seeking information from you if he does not think that your question is 
leading. He should also not be interested in why you're asking the 
question unless he thinks that you may know what he doesn't want you 
to know. 
Step 2 
The objective here is to introduce a scenario similar to what 
you suspect is going on, using specifics. 

127 
Suspicion: You suspect one of your salespeople has lied to a customer 
in order to make the sale. 
Question: "Jim, I'm wondering if you could help me with something. 
It's corne to my attention that someone in the sales 
department has been misrepresenting our products to 
customers. How do you think we can clear this up?" 
Suspicion: A hospital administrator suspects that a doctor was drinking 
while on duty. 
Question: "Dr. Marcus, I'd like to get you advice on something. A 
colleague of mine at another hospital has a problem with 
one of her doctors. She feels he may be drinking while on 
call. Do you have any suggestions on how she can 
approach the doctor about this problem?" 
If he's innocent of the charges he's likely to offer his advice 
and be pleased that you sought out his opinion. If he's guilty he'll 
seem uncomfortable and will assure you that he never does anything 
like that. Either way, this opens the door to probe further. 
Step3 
The objective here is to introduce a scenario similar to what 
you suspect is going on, using general terms. 
Suspicion: You think a student has cheated on his exam. 
Question: "Isn't it amazing how someone can cheat on a test and not 
realize that I was standing behind him the entire timeT' 
Suspicion: You suspect a coworker of bad-mouthing you to your boss. 
Question: "It's amazing all the backstabbing that goes on around here, 
isn't it? And these people doing it think that it won't get 
back to the person involved." 
Suspicion: You think that your girlfriend may be two-timing you. 
Question: "It's amazing how someone can be unfaithful and expect not 
to get caught." 

128 
A change in subject is highly indicative of guilt. However, ifhe 
finds your question interesting and he's innocent, he might begin a 
conversation about it since he's unafraid to discuss the subject. 
Phase Two - Eleven Attack Sequences 
Attack Sequence 1: Direct Questioning 
Stage 1. Ask your question directly 
• 
Give no advance warning of the subject you're about to bring up or 
of any feelings of mistrust. 
• 
Never reveal what you know first. Ask questions to gather 
information to see if it's consistent with what you already know. 
• 
The way you present yourself can greatly influence the attitude of 
the other person. Three powerful tips for establishing and building 
rapport: 
1. Matching posture and movements - if he has one hand in his 
pocket, you put your hand in yours. 
2. Matching speech - ifhe's speaking in a slow, relaxed tone, you 
do the same. 
3. Matching key words - if he's prone to using certain words or 
phrases, use them when speaking. 
• 
Ask a question that you know will produce a response similar to 
how you expect him to react. In other words, if he waves his arms 
around no matter what he's talking about, you want to know this. 
• 
Use a relaxed and non-threatening posture, and square off so that 
you're facing each other. 
• 
Never, ever interrupt. You can't learn anything new while you're 
talking. Ask open-ended questions. 
Stage 2. Silence. The pressure of silence is incredible especially for 
the person who is withholding information. 
Stage 3. Really? At the end of his answer respond with "Really?" 

129 
Stage 4. Sudden Death. Follow with "Is there anything you want to 
get off your chest?" 
Attack Sequence 2: Lead and Confine 
• 
Stage 1. Ask a leading question. For example, "you were back by 
two a.m. last night, weren't you?" 
• 
Stage 2. Reverse course: You've got to be kidding! For example, "I 
was hoping you did, so you would have gotten it out of your 
system. Please tell me that you've done it, so I know that it's over 
with." 
• 
Stage 3. This is not going to work. For example, "I thought you 
were somebody who had a sense of adventure. Someone who 
knows how to live a little." 
Attack Sequence 3: Time Line Distortion 
• 
Scenario: You suspect several employees in your store of stealing 
money 
• 
Stage1. Setting the scene. Let the conversation turn casually to 
stealing and say, "Oh, I knew right from the start what was going 
on." 
• 
Stage 2. It's no big deal. "You had to know I knew. How else do 
you think you could have gotten away with it for so long? I hope 
you don't think I'm a complete idiot." 
• 
Stage 3.1 appreciate what you've done. "I know that you were just 
going along with it because you were scared of what the others 
would do. It's really okay. I know you're not that kind of person." 
Attack Sequence 4: Direct Assumption / Shot in the Dark 
• 
Stage 1. Set the scene. Be somewhat curt and standoffish, as if 
something heavy-duty is bothering you. This will cause his mind to 
race to find ways to explain the "error of his ways." 
• 
Stage 2. I'm hurt. Say, "I've just found something out and I'm 
really hurt [shocked/surprised]. I know you're going to lie to me 
and try to deny it, but I just wanted you to know that I know." You 
establish that (a) he's guilty of something and (b) you know what it 
is. 

130 
• 
Stage 3. Holding your ground. Say, "I think we both know what 
I'm talking about. We need to clear the air, and we can start by 
your talking." 
• 
Stage 4. Continue to hold your ground. Repeat phrases such as 
"I'm sure it will come to you" and "The longer 1 wait, the madder 
I'm getting." 
• 
Stage 5. Apply social pressure. "We were all talking about it. 
Everybody knows." Now he begins to get curious about who 
knows and how they found out. As soon as he tries to find out, 
you'll know he's guilty. 
Attack Sequence 5: The Missing Link 
• 
Scenario: You think that your mother-in-law may have hired a 
private investigator to follow you around. 
• 
Stage 1. List facts. Tell her something that you know to be true. "I 
know you're not very fond of me, and that you objected to the 
wedding, but this time you've gone too far." 
• 
Stage 2. State your assumption. "I know all about the investigator. 
Why did you think that was necessary?" 
• 
Stage 3. The magic phrase. "You know what, I'm too upset to talk 
about this now." The guilty person will honor your request because 
she won't want to anger you further. An innocent person will be 
mad at you for accusing her of something that she hasn't done and 
will want to discuss it now. 
Attack Sequence 6: Who, Me? 
• 
Stagel. Setting the scene. He suspects that his ex-girlfriend broke 
into his house. He phoned to let her know in a very non-accusatory 
way that that there had been a break-in and some items were 
missing. The following type of conversation would ensue: 
• 
Winston: The police are going to want to talk to everyone 
who had access to the house. Since you still have a key, 
they're going to want to speak with you. Just routine stuff, 
I'm sure. Of course you're not a suspect. 
• 
Ex-Girlfriend: But 1 don't know anything about it. 
• 
Winston: Oh, I know. Just policy, I guess. Anyway, one of 
my neighbors said that she got a partial license-plate number 
on a car that was by my house that day. 

131 
• 
Ex-Girlfriend: (After a long pause) Well, I was driving around 
your neighborhood that day. I stopped by to see if you were home. 
But when you weren't, I just left. 
• 
Winston: Oh, really? Well, they did a fingerprint test too. That 
should show something. 
• 
Ex-Girlfriend: What test? 
• 
Winston: Oh, they dusted for prints and ... 
• 
Stage 2. Inform non accusatorily. Casually inform your suspect of 
the situation. 
• 
Stage 3. Introduce evidence to be rebutted. As you introduce the 
evidence, look to see if each of your statements is met by 
explanations from him as to how the evidence could be 
misunderstood. For example, you suspect that a co-worker had 
shredded some of your files. You would first set the stage by 
letting him know that you can't find some important files. Then 
say, "Well, it's a good thing my new secretary noticed someone by 
the shredder the other day. She said she recognized his face but 
didn't know his name." An innocent person would not feel the 
need to explain in order to avert the possibility that he might be 
wrongly accused. 
• 
Stage 4. Continue. Continue with more facts that the person can try 
to explain away. But in actuality, as soon he starts to talk about 
why the situation might "look that way," you know you have him. 
Attack Sequence 7: Outrageous Accusations 
• 
Stage 1. Accuse him of everything. In a very fed-up manner, accuse 
him of doing every imaginable dishonest and disloyal act. 
• 
Stage 2. Introduce the suspicion. Now introduce the one thing you 
feel he really has done, and in an attempt to clear himself of the 
other charges, he will offer an explanation for his one slip-up. Say, 
"I mean, it's not like you just stole a file, that would be fine. But 
all these other things are unspeakable." He responds, "No, I just 
stole that one file because of the pressure to get the job done, but I 
would never sell trade secrets!" The only way to prove his 
innocence to all of your outrageous accusations is to explain why 
he did what you really suspect of him of doing. 

132 
• 
Stage 3. Step in closer. This increases anxiety in the guilty. He 
feels he's being closed in on. 
Attack Sequence 8: Is There a Reason? 
• 
Stage 1. Introduce afact. For example, if you want to know if your 
secretary went out last night when she said she was sick, "I drove 
by your house on the way home. Is there a reason your car wasn't 
in the driveway?" Had she been home sick, she would simply tell 
you that you were wrong - the car was in the driveway. 
• 
Stage 2. One more shot. "Oh, that's odd, I called your house and I 
got your machine." If she's guilty she will look for any way to 
make her story fit your facts. 
• 
Stage 3. Stare. Staring makes someone who is on the defensive 
feel closed in; your glare is infringing on her personal space, 
inducing a mental claustrophobia. Lock eyes with her and ask 
again. 
Attack Sequence 9: Third-Party Confirmation 
• 
Scenario: You suspect one of your employees is having someone 
else punch out on the time clock for him. 
• 
Stage 1. Accuse outright. After gaining the assistance of a friend or 
coworker, you have this person make the accusation for you. Such 
as "Mel, I was talking to Cindy, and she told me she's getting 
pretty tired of your having someone else punch out for you so you 
can leave work early." At this point Mel is concerned only with 
Cindy'S disapproval of his actions. Your friend is thoroughly 
believable because we rarely think to question this type of third-
party setup. 
• 
Stage 2. Are you kidding? "Are you kidding? It's common 
knowledge, but I think I know how you can smooth things over 
with her." See ifhe takes the bait. A person who's innocent would 
not be interested in smoothing things over with someone else for 
something that he hasn't done. 
• 
Stage 3. Last call. "Okay. But are you sure? At this point, any 
hesitation is likely to be a sign of guilt because he's quickly trying 
to weight his options. 
Attack Sequence 10: The Chain Reaction 

133 
• 
Scenario: You suspect several employees in your store of stealing 
money 
• 
Stage 1. Setting the scene. In a one-on-one meeting with the 
employees, let them know that you're looking for someone to be in 
charge of a new internal theft program for the entire company. 
• 
Stage 2. The irony is ... "We're looking for someone who knows 
how it's done. Now don't worry, you're not going to get in trouble. 
As a matter of fact we've known about it for some time. We were 
more interested in seeing how efficient you were. Quite 
impressive. Anyway, we feel that since you know how it's done, 
you'll know how to prevent it. Granted, it's pretty unusual, but this 
is an unusual instance." 
• 
Stage 3. 1 told them so. "You know, I told them that you would be 
too afraid to have an open discussion about this. They were wrong, 
I was right." Look for hesitation on his part. If he's guilty, he will 
be weighing his options. This takes time. An innocent person has 
nothing to think about. Only the guilty have the option of 
confessing or not. 
Attack Sequence 11: Condemn or Concern 
Stage 1. 1 'm just letting you know. The key with this sequence is not to 
accuse, just to inform. Let's say that you're working in the customer 
service department of a computer store. A customer brings back a non-
working printer for an exchange, claiming that he bought it just a few 
days before. He has the all-important receipt and the printer is packed 
neatly in the original box. Upon inspecting the contents you find that a 
necessary, expensive, and easily removable component of the machine 
is missing, a clear indication of why the machine was not functioning 
properly. Here are two possible responses you might get after 
informing the customer of your discovery. 
Response 1. "I didn't take it out. That's how it was when I bought it." 
(Defensive) 
Response 2. "What? You sold me a printer that has a missing part? I 
wasted two hours trying to get that thing to work." (Offensive) 
The person who utters Response 2 has every right to be 
annoyed; it never crosses his mind that he's being accused of anything. 

134 
The person who gives Response 1 knows he never even tried to get the 
printer to work because he took the part out. It doesn't occur to him to 
become angry. He assumes that he's being accused of removing the 
part and becomes defensive when you inform him the part is missing. 
Phase Three -
Eleven Silver Bullets: How to Get the Truth 
Without Beating It Out of Them 
To convey honesty and truthfulness in your message, use the following 
techniques: 
• 
Look the person directly in the eyes. 
• 
Use hand movements to emphasize your message. 
• 
Use animated gestures that are fluid and consistent with the 
conversation. 
• 
Stand or sit upright - no slouching. 
• 
Don't start off with any statements such as "To tell you the 
truth ... " or "To be perfectly honest with you ... " 
• 
Face the person straight on. Don't back away. 
Liars need an incentive to confess. The payoff for confessing 
needs to be immediate, clear, specific, and compelling. You can't just 
tell a person what he'll gain by being truthful or lose by continuing to 
lie; you must make it real for him - so real, in fact, that he can feel, 
taste, touch, see, and hear it. Make it his reality. Let him experience 
fully the pleasure of being honest and the pain of continuing the lie. 
Involve as many of the senses as you can, particularly visual, auditory, 
and kinesthetic. Create images for the person to see, sounds for him to 
hear, and sensations that he can almost feel. You want to make this 
experience as real as possible. First state the positives, then state the 
negatives, and then present the choice. 
Silver Bullet 1: If You Think That's Bad, Wait Until You Hear 
This! 
This bullet works well because it forces the liar into thinking 
emotionally instead of logically. It alleviates his guilt by making him 
feel that he's not alone, and it throws him off by creating a little anger 
and/or curiosity. Plus he thinks that you and he are exchanging 
information, instead of his giving you something for nothing. 

135 
Sample question formation: "The reason I'm asking you these 
questions is that I've done some things that I'm not too proud of, 
either. I can understand why you might have ... In a way I'm almost 
relieved. Now I don't feel too bad." At this point he will ask you to get 
more specific about your actions. But insist that he tell you first. Hold 
out and he'll come clean. 
Silver Bullet 2: It Was An Accident. Really! 
This is a great strategy because it makes him feel that it would 
be a good thing to have you know exactly what happened. He did 
something wrong, true, but that is no longer your concern. You shift 
the focus of your concern to his intentions, not his actions. This makes 
it easy for him to confess to his behavior and "make it okay" with the 
explanation that it was unintentional. He feels that you care about his 
motivation. In other words, you let him know that the source of your 
concern is not what he's done, but why he's done it. 
Sample question formation: "I can understand that maybe you 
didn't plan on its happening. Things just got out of control and you 
acted without thinking. I'm fine with that - an accident, right? But if 
you did this on purpose, I don't think that I could ever forgive you. 
You need to tell me that you didn't do it intentionally. Please." 
Silver Bullet 3: The Boomerang 
This bullet really throws a psychological curve ball. With this 
example you tell him that he did something good, not bad. He's 
completely thrown off by this. For example, you want to see if your 
interviewee has lied on her resume. 
Sample question formation: "As we both know, everybody 
pads his resume just a bit. Personally, I think it shows guts. It tells me 
that the person isn't afraid to take on new responsibilities. Which parts 
were you most creative with on this resume?" 
Silver Bullet 4: Truth or Consequences 
With this bullet you force your antagonist to work with you or 
you both end up with nothing. This is the exact opposite of the 
boomerang. Here the person has nothing unless he cooperates with 
you. Since you have nothing anyway (the truth), it's a good trade off 

136 
for you. Let's say you suspect that your housekeeper has stolen from 
you. 
Sample question formation: "I'd rather hear it from you first. I 
can live with what you did/what happened, but not with your lying to 
me about it. If you don't tell me, then it's over. If you tell me the truth, 
things can go back to how they were. But if you don't, then we have 
no chance here, and you'll have nothing." 
Silver Bullet 5: Speak Now or Forever Hold Your Peace 
Human beings place a premium on that which is scarce. Simply 
put, rare equals good. You can dramatically increase your leverage by 
conveying that this is the only time that you will discuss this. Let him 
know that (a) this is the last chance he'll have to explain himself, and 
(b) you can get what you need from someone else. Try increasing the 
rate of your speech as well. The faster you speak, the less time he has 
to process the information, and it conveys as stronger sense of 
urgency. Give a deadline with a penalty for not meeting it. Deadlines 
force action. If the guilty party thinks that he can always come clean, 
then he will take a wait-and-see approach before tipping his hand. Let 
the person know that you already know and have proof of his action. 
And admitting his sins now will give him the opportunity to explain 
his side. 
Sample question formations: "I want to hear it from you now. 
After tomorrow, anything you say won't make a difference to me." 
-- "I know what happened/what you did. I was hoping I would hear 
it from you first. It would mean a lot to me to hear your side of it. I 
know there are two sides to every story, and before I decide what to 
do, I want to hear yours." Hearing this gives him the feeling he still 
has a chance if he confesses. After all, what really happened can't be 
as bad as what you heard. Confessing now is a way of cutting his 
losses. 
Silver Bullet 6: Reverse Course 
You convey to him what happened or what he did was a good 
thing insofar as it allows you and he to establish an even better 
relationship - personal or professional. You give him an opportunity to 
explain why he took that choice. You also blame yourself. 

137 
Sample question formation: "I understand why you would have 
done that. Clearly you wouldn't have unless you had a good reason. 
You were probably treated unfairly or something was lacking. What 
can I do to help so that it doesn't happen again?" Keep interjecting the 
following phrases: "I take full responsibility for your actions. Let's 
work together to see how we can avoid this from happening again. I 
understand completely. You were right to do what you did." 
Silver Bullet 7: I Hate To Do This, But You Leave Me No Choice 
This is the only strategy that involves threat. You let him 
become aware that there are going to be greater ramifications and 
repercussions than just lying to you - things that he never thought 
about. You rely on his imagination to set the terms of the damage that 
you can inflict. His mind will race through every possible scenario as 
his own fears tum against him. 
• 
Sample question formation 1: "I didn't want to have to do this, but 
you leave me no choice." This will propel him to respond: "Do 
what?" At this point he's waiting to see what the trade off will be. 
But do not commit yourself to an action. Let him create in his own 
mind scenarios of what you will do unless he confesses. 
• 
Sample question formation 11: "You know what I can do, and I'll 
do it. If you don't want to tell me now, don't. I'll just do what I 
have to do." After this statement, pay close attention to his 
response. If he focuses on what you will do to him, the odds lean 
more toward guilty. However, if he reasserts that he's done 
nothing, he may in fact be innocent of your accusation. The guilty 
person needs to know the penalty to determine if it makes sense for 
him to stick to his story. 
Silver Bullet 8: I Guess You're Not Allowed 
Never underestimate the power of appealing to a person's ego. 
Sometimes you want to inflate it, and others times you want to attack 
it. This bullet is for attacking. It's truly saddening how fragile some 
people's egos are. 
Sample questionformations: "I think I know what it is - you're 
not allowed to tell me. Somebody else is pulling the strings and you'll 

138 
get in trouble. You'd tell me the truth if you could, but you don't have 
the power to do so." 
Silver Bullet 9: Higher Authority 
As long as the person believes that you are on his side, he'll 
take the bait. All you have to do is let him know that anything he's lied 
about can now be cleared up in seconds. However, if anyone else finds 
out about it later, it's too late. Let's say that you want to know if your 
secretary leaves early when you're out of the office. 
Sample question formation: "The vice president from corporate 
is coming in today. He's asked about your hours, so I'm going to tell 
him that you come in early on the days that you leave early. Do you 
remember what days last month you finished up early and took off?" 
This is disarming, and you're not yelling at her or demanding answers. 
You're on her side, and you're going to work together to smooth 
things over. 
Silver Bullet 10: The Great Unknown 
You can obtain maximum leverage by explaining how the 
ramifications of his deceit will be something that the suspect has never 
known before. Even if he believes that you are limited in what you can 
do to him and in what the penalty will be, the severity of the penalty 
can be manipulated in two major ways to make it appear much more 
severe: time and impact. 
• Time: Give no indication of when the penalty will occur. 
When things happen unexpectedly, the degree of anguish is more 
potent. 
• Impact: Convey that his entire life will be disrupted and 
drastically altered for the worse. He needs to see that this event is not 
isolated and will instead have a ripple effect. When bad things happen 
we are often comforted in knowing that it will soon be over and the 
rest of our life will remain intact and unaffected. But if these things are 
not assured, we become increasingly fearful and concerned. 
Silver Bullet 11: I Couldn't Care Less 
A primary law governing human nature is that we all have a 
need to feel significant. Nobody wants to be thought of as 
unimportant, or feel that his ideas and thinking are irrelevant. Take 

139 
away a person's belief that he has value and he'll do just about 
anything to reassert his sense of importance. Your apathy toward the 
situation will unnerve him immensely. He will begin to crave 
recognition and acceptance, in any form. He needs to know you care 
what happens, and if talking about his misdeeds is the only way he can 
find out, he will. 
Sample question formations: "I know and I just don't care. 
This is not for me." -
"I've got other things to think about. Maybe 
we'll talk some other time." -
"You do what you have to do, that's 
fine with me." To be more powerful, stare at him. When you stare at 
someone he often feels less significant and will seek to reassert his 
value. 
III. Tactics for Detecting Deceit and Gathering Information In 
Casual Conversations 
General Conversations 
1. Ask-a-Fact 
• 
During the conversation simply ask general, clear questions 
pertaining to your suspicion. This causes the person you are 
questioning to recall information. Ifhe's lying, he'll take a while to 
answer because he first has to check his response mentally to be 
sure it makes sense. Made-up stories do not have details because 
they never happened! 
• 
Ask questions that will give you an objective, not a subjective 
response. For instance, if you think an employee was home when 
he said he would be away on vacation, don't ask him how he 
enjoyed the weather in Florida, but rather ask "Did you rent a car?" 
Once he answers yes to any question, ask for more detail. If he's 
lying, he'll try to keep the facts straight and will take his time 
answering further questions. 
2. Add-a-False Fact 
Add a fact and ask the person to comment on it. This fact is 
one that you've made up, but one that sounds perfectly reasonable. For 
example, if you wanted to know if someone really indeed went on a 
safari to Africa, you mention that your uncle who works as a customs 

140 
officer at the Nairobi airport told you that everyone going to Africa 
was given special instructions on how to avoid malaria. As soon as he 
validates your claim in an attempt to back up his assertion that he has 
gone to Africa, you know that his story is untrue. Otherwise he would 
simply say that he doesn't know what your uncle is talking about. 
Here are the criteria: 
• 
Your statement has to be untrue 
• 
It has to sound reasonable 
• 
Your assertion has to be something that would directly affect the 
person, so he would have firsthand knowledge of this "fact." 
3. Support-a-Fact 
• 
In this sequence you take what the person says and request proof, 
but in a very non-threatening manner. For example, in the case of 
the person who claimed he had gone on safari, you might let him 
know that you would love to see pictures of the trip. If he offers up 
a reason why you can't see the pictures, then this should arouse 
some suspicion. 
4. Expand-a-Fact 
• 
Use this clue to determine how far someone is willing to go to get 
what she wants. All you do is expand on a fact that she has already 
offered. If she just goes on without correcting you, then you know 
that she may be lying about what she's said so far and/or is willing 
to lie to get you to see her point. For example, your secretary asks 
you for the rest of the day off because she's not feeling well. You 
might say, "oh, of course, if you've got a fever and a bad 
headache, by all means take off." She never claimed to have these 
symptoms. You merely expanded on her statement. 
Special Occasions 
1. Third-Party Protection 
• 
This tactic is used if someone is reluctant to tell you something that 
involves another person. You have to appeal to his ego and let him 
forget that he's telling tales out of school. The conversation needs 
to be positive. The other person must feel as ifhe's doing a good 
thing by answering your question. 

141 
• 
Scenario A: Your attorney is telling you about a case that a fellow 
attorney screwed up on. Simply asking, "What did he do wrong?" 
would probably get you nowhere. However, by turning it around 
you create an incentive for him to tell you. Ask, "Had you handled 
the case, what would you have done differently?" 
• 
Scenario B: While chatting with Brad, one of your sales people, 
you would like to find out why Susan's sales figures are low. But 
simply asking him why she's not doing well might prove fruitless. 
Ask, "What areas do you think Susan can improve in?" 
2. The Power Play 
• 
Sometimes the person reluctant to tell the truth is in a position of 
power. In these situations it's usually inappropriate and futile to 
become argumentative. In these instances you want to bring the 
conversation to a personal level. 
• 
Scenario: You're trying to sell to a buyer who doesn't want to buy 
and is not giving you a reason that you truly believe. Your 
objective will be to get to the real objection. "I do this for a living. 
My family relies on me to support them. Clearly we have a fine 
product and you're a reasonable man. Would you mind telling me 
what I did to offend you?" Now your buyer is caught off guard and 
will undoubtedly follow with "Oh, you didn't offend me. It's just 
that. .. " 
3. Hurt Feelings 
• 
Someone is lying to you to protect your feeling - perhaps one of 
those little white lies. A touch of guilt makes the other person 
reevaluate his approach. 
• 
Scenario: You feel that the truth is being withheld from you for 
your own benefit. "I know you don't want to offend me, but you're 
hurting me more by not being perfectly honest." "If you don't tell 
me, no one else will. If I can't count on you for this, I don't know 
what I would do." 
4. It's a Matter of Opinion 
• 
The following is an excellent method for detecting deceit in a 
person's opinion. 

142 
• 
Scenario: You're not sure if your boss really likes your idea for a 
new advertising campaign, even though she says she does. "Do 
you like the concept for my new idea?" "Sure. It's very original." 
"Well, what would it take for you to love the idea?" 
5. I Don't Know 
• 
This response can stall a conversation and leave you searching for 
answers. Sometimes it's just easier to say, "I don't know," which is 
often why we say it in the first place. Either way, when you hear "I 
don't know," try some of the following responses: 
1. "Okay, then why don't you tell me how you've come to think 
the way you doT' 
2. "I know you don't know, but if you were to guess, what do you 
think it might be?" 
3. "What emotion best describes what you're thinking right now? 
4. "What one word comes closest to describing what you're 
thinking?" 
• 
In all these responses, you're taking the pressure off. You 
acknowledge the person's difficulty in answering. You then seem 
to be asking her to provide something else, when in reality your 
new question is aimed at getting your initial question answered. 
6. I'm Simply Embarrassed 
• 
The person may lie to you out of embarrassment. The usual tactics 
don't work here because the person probably isn't obligated to tell 
you and more than likely will have nothing to gain by doing so. 
Therefore you need to create an incentive for telling the truth in an 
environment that makes him feel comfortable. 
• 
Scenario: You think the new intern mixed up two piles of papers 
and shredded the documents that were supposed to be copied. 
"Nelson, if you're the one who did this, it's all right. 1 remember 
when 1 first started here. What I'm going to tell you is between you 
and me, okay? Good. 1 once made copies of a confidential memo 
instead of the lunch menu and placed a copy in each person's 
mailbox." This instantly puts the other person at ease. It shows that 
you trust him, and he also feels obligated to share with you 
something he's done that he feels uncomfortable with. 

143 
7. Divide and Conquer 
• 
This is situation where there are two or more people from whom 
you can get the truth. 
• 
Scenario: Several of your sorority sisters pulled a practical joke 
and you want to find out who is responsible. "Jennifer, who did 
this is not important. I don't even care. What is important is our 
friendship. I want to know that I can trust you. I think I can, but I 
need for you to speak honestly with me. It's not that I'm so 
concerned with who did it - only that you are truthful with me 
about it." If you don't get anywhere with her, go to someone else 
with the same speech. 
8. Professional Reliance 
• 
When dealing with professionals: 
1. Always, if possible, get a second opinion. It's easy to do and 
can save you a lot of heartache. 
2. Make sure the person is licensed, insured, and registered to do 
the actual work. 
3. Have your agreement drawn up in writing. Oral contracts aren't 
worth it. 
4. Ask for referrals or testimonials. 
• 
If he balks at anyone of these points, you might want to take your 
business elsewhere. Finally, the following strategy should give you 
an accurate insight into the person's intentions. They key is to ask 
for the opposite of what you really want. 
• 
Scenario: Let's say that your travel agent suggests the Five-Day 
Cruise Getaway vacation package for you. You're looking to really 
let loose; you want a trip that will be nonstop fun, but you're not 
sure if she's pushing this package for the commission or if she 
really believes that it's a great deal. "The brochure looks great, 
Sandy. I just want to make sure that this is not one of those party 
boats. I'm looking for some rest and relaxation. Is this that kind of 
trip?" By asking your question this way, you will know the 
intentions of your travel agent and the answer to your question. If 
she answers yes, then you know that the cruise is not for you or she 
is lying to get your business. 

144 
9. I Don't Know and I Don't Care 
• 
Few things are more frustrating than dealing with someone who 
just doesn't give a damn. Why? Because you don't have a whole 
lot to work with. You've got zero leverage. He's got nothing at 
risk, so you've got little bargaining power. You simply have to 
change the equation so he's got something at stake. 
• 
Scenario: You take your car to the mechanic and he tells you it will 
be fixed by Friday. But you just know that something is going to 
come up and it will be sitting in his garage all weekend. "Okay, 
Joe. Tomorrow's fine. Just so you know, my wife is pregnant and 
she's due any day. That's our only car, so if you can think of any 
reason why it may not be ready by Friday, you've got to let me 
know now." 
10. I Just Heard 
• 
Most people who lie usually confide in at least one other person. 
It's important to let this person believe that you already know the 
truth and then add your emotional reaction to it. For example, 
some general statements that would be said to the person whom 
you believe knows the truth: 
1. Sympathy: "I can't believe what Sam did. 1 am truly very 
sorry. If there's anything 1 can do for you or whatever, please 
just let me know, okay? 
2. Humor: "Mary, is Joe a magnet for odd things or what? He just 
told me and 1 still can't believe it." 
Directing The Conversation 
You can steer a conversation in any direction that you choose. You can 
do this very efficiently with just a few well chosen words. After he 
makes a statement, you can use the following key words to direct the 
flow of information in any way that you choose. They can be used to 
extract information from any conversation. 
1. Meaning ... Saying this word after he speaks directs his thinking 
and the conversation toward the larger picture, giving you a better 
look at his overall position. He will offer the reason for the 
position. 

145 
2. And ... This response gives you more lateral information. You'll 
be able to gather additional facts. 
3. So ... This response makes him get more specific, giving you the 
details of his position. 
4. Now ... This response makes him translate his position into a 
specific action. He will proceed to tell you exactly what he means 
and how it applies to you. 
Getting Specific 
Sometimes you'll get an answer, but it doesn't do you much good. 
Here are a couple ways of narrowing it down. 
1. In Response to an Opinion or Belief 
• 
"I don't think the meeting went very well." - "Compared with 
what?" or "How poorly did it go?" 
2. In Response to a Reluctance to Commit 
• 
"I don't know ifl could." - "What, specifically, prevents you?" 
or "What would have to happen for you to be able to?" or 
"What would change if you did?" 
Let the Truth be Told 
These simple words work better than any others do: 
1. Because: We're programmed to accept an explanation as valid if it 
follows this word. 
2. Let's: This word generates group atmosphere and initiates a 
bandwagon effect; it's positive and creates action. 
3. Try: This little word is a powerful motivator because it has a 
"what's the harm" mentality. 
For example, "Let's give it a try because if it doesn't work we 
can always go back to the way it was." Clearly you haven't introduced 
any reason for the person to take action, yet it seems to make sense 
just the same. 
Don't accuse someone as by saying, "Why did you take five 
dollars from petty cash?" If you want to know if he took the money, 
simply say, "The money that we take from petty cash? Let's try to 

146 
keep it to fewer than ten dollars at a time, because it works out better 
that way." 
Taking Control 
If in a situation where you are unable to speak because the 
person keeps talking or interrupting, use some zingers like these. They 
play on two susceptible angles of human nature - ego and curiosity. 
1. "You're a smart person; let me ask you a question." 
2. "I know that you would want me to ask you this." 
3. "You're the only person who would know the answer to this." 
4. "I hope this news doesn't upset you." 
5. "Along those lines ... " It's easy to change conversation when you 
begin with the other's last thoughts. 
IV. Mind Games 
A Strong Defense: Avoiding The Lie 
The best time to deal with a lie is before it turns into one. The 
following is a technique for cutting a suspicion off at the pass before it 
turns into deception. 
Method 1 
This is the method you use when you want the truth as it relates 
to a person's previous behavior. Here is a possible scenario: a parent 
suspects that her twelve-year-old son is smoking cigarettes. 
Approach: "I know all about the smoking and the sneaking 
around. You know I'm not happy about that, but I just want you to 
promise me that you won't drink alcohol until you're twenty-one." 
This is by far the finest approach because it works on so many 
levels. First, it takes a forward assumptive stance - the parent "knows 
all about the smoking." Second, it uses two truisms. The phrases 
"sneaking around" and "you know I'm not happy about that" set the 
tone for honesty. The child hears two things that he knows to be true: 
He was sneaking around and his mother is unhappy about his smoking. 
He is therefore willing to accept at face value what follows. Third, the 

147 
mother gives her son an easy out. All he has to do is promise not to 
drink and he's home free. There's no threat or punishment, just honest 
statements followed by a deal that he believes to be true as well. 
The guidelines to keep in mind for this procedure are as 
follows: 
• 
Assume your suspicion as fact 
• 
State at least two truisms (facts that you both know to be true) 
• 
Switch the focus from a threat to a request 
• 
The request should be easy for him to accept and sound reasonable 
Method 2 
This method is used when you want the truth as it relates to a 
new decision. It is a simple but highly effective strategy to avoid being 
deceived. Oftentimes someone wants to tell us the truth, but it's easier 
to tell a lie instead. The person knows the answer you want to hear and 
will give it to you whether he believes it or not. However, ifhe doesn't 
know what you want, then he won't be able to deceive you. Read the 
following examples and notice how well the second phrasing masks 
your true question. 
• 
Would you like me to cook for you tonight?" -
"Do you feel like 
eating in or out tonight?" 
• 
I'm thinking of asking Rhonda out. What do you think of her?" 
-
"What do you think of Rhonda?" 
Know Thy Enemy: Knowing The Liar and His Intentions 
The following example illustrates a process that is becoming 
very popular in employee screening tests. The questions below are 
asked the prospective employee to determine if he is an honest person. 
If you really wanted the job, how would you answer these questions? 
Have you ever stolen anything in your life? Have you ever run a 
red light? 
Do you have a friend who has ever shoplifted? 
Many of us would have to answer yes to most of these 
questions. And that is precisely the answer a prospective employee is 
looking for. Why? Because the honest answer is yes for most of us. 

148 
The employer's task is finding those who are honest about it. Stealing 
a pack of gum when you were twelve years old doesn't make you a 
bad person or an undesirable employee. 
Let's say that Martha's teenage son, who has been away from 
home and living on the streets for the past two years, wants to come 
home. Knowing that her son is addicted to cocaine, she is worried 
about whether he can actually clean up his act. She could tell him that 
he can move back in only if he enrolls in a drug rehabilitation 
program. He will probably agree to this whether he plans to do it or 
not. Instead, she tells her son that he can move back in if he quits cold 
turkey - never doing another drug whatsoever. Her son's answer will 
reveal his commitment to getting well, which is the real concern. 
Obviously her son can hardly get rid of his addiction instantly. So ifhe 
indicates that he can, she knows that he's lying about his intention to 
get well. However, ifhe says that he can't but will make strides toward 
getting better, she will know that he is sincere in his pursuit of 
wellness. 

149 
Gaslighting Old and New 
The origin of the word "gas lighting" refers to the 1944 movie 
"Gaslight" in which a husband attempts to make his wife appear 
insane so he might commit her to a hospital. He does so by 
manipulating her environment with the objective to have her doubt her 
ability to interpret reality. 
As a modem practice gas lighting is any process designed to 
cause someone to doubt their judgment, perceptions or reality so they 
may more easily accept another judgment, perception or reality that's 
offered to them. 
Gaslighting happens every day when someone attempts to have 
you reevaluate your conclusions so that you will more readily accept 
their suggestions. In other words it is a central feature of human 
communication and THIS HAPPENS ALL THE TIME. 
The typical form of gaslighting occurs by simply telling 
someone they are wrong. Of course, this has a limited effect because it 
instantly creates resistance. Better to be subtle. 
So the more subtle ways of gaslighting. 
Repetitive Questions and Slight of Mouth 
Asking a series of even the most innocent questions about ones 
perceptions causes the individual to examine how these perceptions 
are constructed. 
There is a method of selling called "Socratic Selling" in which 
question are used by the sales person to gain information about the 
buyers needs. (This is based upon the Socratic teaching method where 
the teacher asks questions of the student to provoke critical thinking). 
The questions asked are 
• 
"How does _ 
fit the picture?" 
• 
"Would you elaborate on _?" 
• 
"What else should I know about 
?" 
• 
"How does this affect you?" 
• 
"What makes this urgent?" 
.... and so on. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

150 
Each time these questions are asked they focus the buyer on the 
need instead of the cost or whatever might be the buyers objection to 
buying right away. 
The pentacle of this is the form of gas lighting is called "Slight 
of Mouth". 
Slight of Mouth, came about when NLP developer, Richard 
Bandler, was witnessed to never lose an argument. 
When asked a series of slight of mouth questions it forces the 
individual to reevaluate their belief, perception or reality until they can 
no longer have the strength or stamina to hold it as real. 
Slight of Mouth can take various forms. Here are a sample list 
of types of Slight of Mouth questions. 
Questioning The Source 
"Where did you hear that from? " 
"What could cause you to make that decision?" 
"According to whom? " 
"Have you checked the source?" 
"How did you reach that conclusion?" 
"Who told you to think that?" 
"Well, it is possible that's based on faulty logic, isn't it?" 
Questioning The Possibility 
"How is it possible to see it in that way when you know you have 
better options? " 
Questioning The Intent 
"What possible benefit could you lose out on by thinking that?" 
Questioning The Methodology 
"How did you come to that conclusion?" 
Questioning The Consequences 
"Have you considered exactly what thinking that is going to lead 
to? " 
Giving a Counter Example 
"Have you thought of all the cases where that wouldn't be the case 
like (give an example)?" 
Mind Control 10 1 
www.MindControllOl.com 

Going to the Extreme 
"You know, if that were true it would mean that (give an 
exaggerated and ridiculous outcome). " 
Asking for a Different Perspective 
151 
"You know if that were true wouldn't everyone see it that way? " 
Considering the Opposite Conclusion 
"How would (describe an opposing perception or belief) actually 
help you more easily get what you want?" 
Questioning Who They Are 
"Are you really the type of person who wouldn't consider another 
possibility? " 
If the controller creates a warm and friendly setting, like an 
instructional opportunity, and asks his subject a series of these 
questions in a caring and supportive fashion, the results are amazing. 
The subject will completely reevaluate anything that they've been 
thinking. 
The key is to do it in such a way that the subject is not 
threatened. This could begin as a series of written questions and 
followed by a get-to-know-you type of interview. 
Consider that advertising does this all the time in various ways. 
Referring to the unseen 
Suffice to say that anytime an expert talks about something that 
his listeners don't have a general knowledge about he is using one of 
the most common methods of Mind Control. 
When an expert in the field of psychiatry responds to his 
clients anger as a "complex" it forces the client to consider that there 
are things to be considered that are yet unknown. 
Cults are notorious for pointing out things that are intended to 
be outside the normal persons awareness. This is usually done by 
creating a special language that is unique to the group. By doing that it 
makes the uninitiated willing to put aside their assumptions to learn 
more. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

152 
This is also characteristic of specialized careers. All you have 
to do is listen to lawyers argue tax law and you will realize that there 
are things you don't know about yet. 
For you to use this fonn of gaslighting in an simple and easy 
way all you have to do is remember the power of bullshit. Anytime 
you speak with authority about something using unknown tenns or 
using a common tenn in a new way people will yield to your authority. 
This can be done to both encourage good behavior. 
" ... the more you attach your appreciation to the wholeness of 
the other person the more you allow them to access the unconscious 
recognition of their own completeness." 
and to discourage bad behavior: 
" ... by creating the acknowledgment of personal unconscious 
dysfunction within the in-the-moment awareness of responses and 
behaviors one can initiate cessation of these dysfunctions by the 
diligent application of awareness." 
When spoken with authority nonsense can be a powerful tools 
of Mind Control. 
Refer to the mystical 
This has some similarity to Refer to the Unknown but is more 
about presenting yourself as simply knowing more than the other 
person. 
This can most easily be done by making mention of things that 
they have no knowledge of. 
Think of when you go to any doctor and you overhear them 
speaking in tenns that sound like a doctor. As long as you don't know 
what they talking about you are going to naturally assume that they do. 
To use this in whatever field you want just think of the tenns or 
phrases that your subject has no idea about. 
Reveal the Secret Thoughts of Others 
Think what would happen if someone from your group of 
friends told you that most of the people within the group thought you 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

153 
were annoying and loud? Further that no one wanted to tell you and so 
they've been trying to act polite in your presence. 
For most people this would cause them to doubt themselves; a 
perfect example of gas lighting. 
This is a common strategy among cults where a lead person in 
the group takes someone aside to reveal that others believe them to be 
unworthy of the next initiation. The result is that they work harder and 
are much more willing to do anything that might put them back into 
favor. 
This is a fairly negative example and it is very easy to use in 
this way, but it is equally powerful to use in a positive way. 
An example of this form of positive gaslighting was written 
about by Blair Warren in his book "The Forbidden Keys to 
Persuasion". He describes how his young son got a A + on a report 
card and while tucking him into bed told him "You know your mother 
couldn't stop bragging about you, she was so proud of you, but you 
can't let her know I told you." 
This positive form of gas lighting bolstered his sons self image 
and motivated him to keep his grades up. 
The example is of the Prodigal Son, who leaves home and 
when he returns he expects to be seen as the black sheep of the family. 
Instead he is told that he has always been loved and never thought ill 
of even during his absence. He is accepted and explained that he did 
nothing wrong and welcomed back into the family. 
Being able to orchestrate this for a subject creates an 
unexpected sense of acceptance, revealing the secret thought of 
acceptance to the subject. 
Pointing Out Inconsistencies 
Like Revealing the Secret Thoughts of Others, Pointing out 
Inconsistencies is a gaslighting technique that can be used either to 
undermine a subjects confidence or to build it up. 
Consider the early days of 'est'. The seminar participants were 
told the importance of keeping their commitments. They would start a 
diet and be off it in a week. They would commit to being a more 
caring spouse only to return to their old habits. After having this 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

154 
hammered into them one hour after hour, they would completely give 
up on their own perceptions of themselves creating complete doubt. 
The constructive way to doing this is fairly simple. When your 
subject is in doubt provide evidence of the contrary based on their 
actions. As an example someone who is feeling frustrated with their 
creative ability can be bolstered by simply pointing out all the times 
they were creative, either is writing, art, or decision making. 
Defining Reactions 
Defining Reactions refers to an often used tool in 
psychotherapy in which the therapist interprets and defines the clients 
response or reaction. 
A typical example of this is when a client becomes angry or 
defensive and the therapist defines the reaction as a "complex". Other 
self improvement/personal 
growth 
trainings 
have 
their 
own 
terminology. They may refer to someones response as an "addiction" 
and then define it as "an 'addiction' is something that you have to have 
happen whether it benefits you or not. 
Other terms include "issues", being "on it" to which you must 
"get off it", "a case", "an engram" just to name a few. 
Defining reactions allows the subject to put aside their present 
interpretations of how they are reacting and substitute the operators 
meamng. 
In order for this to have any strong effect a great deal of 
rapport and/or transference needs to be present. 
Use Group Pressure 
"None of us is dumber than all of us. " Anonymous 
The power of group pressure can't be underestimated. 
There is an often duplicated experiment in which one person is 
put in a group under the pretense that they will evaluate pictures. In the 
beginning of the experiment they all agree on common colors and 
dimensions of images. As the experiment continues the group begins 
to agree on things that are obviously incorrect leaving the unwitting 
subject to deal with the group pressure. In the majority of cases the 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

155 
subject eventually agreed with the group; that green is blue, that the 
short line is in fact the longer than the one they are comparing it to. 
The subject will eventually doubt what they are seeing. The 
gaslighting is complete. 
Another manifestation of this is obvious is mob actions. In the 
safety of a mob people will tend to do things far outside their normal 
behavior. Just watch riots in action and you can see this clearly. No 
one person will singularly throw a petrol bomb into a cop car on their 
own but given group protection and encouragement someone in a 
group of people will do it without hesitation. 
Exercise 
Take a look at the examples in your daily life of gaslighting. 
Once you understand the concept you can begin to recognize them 
everywhere. 
Final Note 
Gaslighting aside from a tool of Mind Control is also used as 
a tool of revenge. If this is your goal the book I can recommend to you 
is "GASLIGHTING: How To Drive Your Enemies Crazy" by 
Victor Santoro. The book is truly devious and has every step one can 
use to make your enemy think they are insane and not get caught. Use 
it with caution. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

157 
Pharmacological Mind Control 
Required Disclaimer 
Neither the author or publisher encourages the use of drugs. 
Drugs possess inherent dangers to the user and severe legal 
consequences for anyone caught giving drugs to another. 
On a personal note, I found it very uncomfortable writing about certain 
aspects of using drugs for Mind Control. 
Cigarettes 
Seriously, one can't study Mind Control without looking at to 
the tobacco industry. For the first time smoker smoking tobacco is 
very seldom a pleasurable experience. Add to that the bad health 
effects and the contemporary social stigma of smoking it is a wonder 
how millions of people take up the habit. 
So how do you make a billion dollars a year selling a product 
that stinks and makes people sick? 
You use Mind Control! 
As a drug nicotine is only mildly addictive. This is largely 
dependent on the person. Some people become more addicted to it 
more than others. 
Combine that with advertising that tells the population that 
smoking will make you cool, manly, sexy or whatever and making it a 
product that is within the price range of even the most destitute and 
you've got the hottest selling product in the world. 
Another factor is that tobacco was promoted as a central 
agricultural economy for many and that builds strong political support. 
Alcohol 
The oldest and most common Mind Control drug used is also 
the most available: alcohol. Alcohol tends to remove inhibitions. 
That's common knowledge after a couple of thousand years of use. 
As a tool of Mind Control the effects are short lived and can be 
used only to get the most ephemeral outcomes. 
Its only other use as a Mind Control drug is like that of many 
drugs, to maintain the users addiction enough to keep them distracted 
from other issues. Alcohol has been proved to be quite effective at 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

158 
that. A nation that can maintain the fine balance that keeps its citizens 
productive and drunk can get away with quite a bit. 
MDMA 
MDMA, better known as ecstasy, has a tendency to create a 
deep sense of connection and love for the people who use it. When 
taken under the right circumstances it magnifies any warmth and love 
and can create a deep sense of love. Taken in a group it will bring 
together all the members of the group. 
This intense feeling of connection can bring people to do and 
say things they normally wouldn't. sometime bringing about 
embarrassment when the drugs effect has worn off. Assuming the 
behavior is what the operator wants it would be necessary to create a 
very supportive atmosphere that first supports and encourages the new 
behaviors when the drug is not used. 
It is been published on the internet that when one combines 
MDMA with anti anxiety drugs like Valium or Adavan compliance to 
do normally unacceptable behaviors is dramatically increased. It 
should also be noted that these two drugs alone may not be enough and 
that an atmosphere of trust and rapport continue to be equally 
important factors to achieving this high level of compliance. 
LSD and Other Psychedelics 
The effects of LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) have been well 
documented as one of the most powerful psychoactive hallucinogens 
on the black market. It is the best known and most researched 
psychoactive drug. It is active at extremely low doses and is most 
commonly available on blotter or in liquid form. 
Under the influence of LSD, people see images, hear sounds, 
and feel sensations that seem real but do not exist. In addition mood 
changes will occur throughout the period the drug is active based on 
the users mental state. It has been noted that the effects of LSD are 
equivalent to having a case of short term schizophrenia where nothing 
you are perceiving is in fact real. 
Chronic effects of the drug can be positive and negative. 
Positive effects include spiritual contact and self-exploration; the most 
severe negative effect is known as LSD psychosis. 
Mind Control 10 I 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

159 
Because the effects seem so real LSD has been billed as a drug 
that expands ones perceptions. 
Many users are quite able to occasionally use LSD without it 
effecting their everyday interactions. But it has been noted that 
frequent and prolonged use increases the probability that users will 
alter the normal reality testing abilities and have "flashbacks" which 
relive the drug state even when the drug is not present in their system. 
Its use for the purposes of Mind Control require slightly more 
preparation than the mere casual user. 
In many shamanic cultures where psychoactive drugs are used 
as part of an initiation, LSD has been used within a ritual setting to 
create a tension of anticipation in the subject and at the same time 
create an atmosphere of safety. It has been rightly stated that the set 
and setting of rituals is central to creating a positive and powerful 
experience for the subject when these types of drugs are involved. Do 
it at the wrong place or time and the results will be very uncomfortable 
for the user. If the user begins the ritual in a stressed condition or bad 
mood it may not be very pleasurable. 
So, set and setting plus the rapport that the subject has with the 
other participants are important. Assuming that the controller has set 
up the environment appropriately so that it is safe and comfortable the 
controller can begin to introduce the beliefs, doctrines or behaviors 
they wish to teach and instill. 
The most noted case of this being practiced is the infamous 
Charles Manson Family of the 1960s. During this groups LSD trips 
Manson would have the participants engage in sex orgies. If one 
participant found a sexual act unappealing and resist participating 
Manson would force them to perform every imaginable sexual act and 
frame it as "overcoming your parents' issues". 
The goal was to break down all the subjects resistance and 
inhibitions to do what they were told. 
The results were dramatic. 
Using this method, along with other methods of cult 
indoctrination and Mind Control, Manson assigned several of his 
followers to perform the brutal murders of pregnant Hollywood actress 
Sharon Tate along with Leno and Rosemary LaBianca in a bizarre 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

160 
rampage that Manson thought would bring about a race war in which 
he would rise up as the new messiah. 
As a historical note, the US military used LSD during military 
interrogations on unsuspecting prisoners to increase anxiety. The terror 
and trauma were so profound that it created long term effects even 
after they were released from prison. 
Sodium Pentathol and Sodium Amitol 
These are in a class of drugs known as hypnotics which depress 
the higher functions of the nervous system and cause a person to be 
more open to suggestions. These are also known as "truth serums" 
because they inhibit the faculties for deception. 
According to the book "Deeper Insights into the Illuminati 
Formula" by Fritz Springmeier & Cisco Wheeler a huge secret 
government conspiracy exists to create Mind Control slaves. 
The focus of the Mind Control programming is referred to as 
"trauma based Mind Control" and is very shocking as it blatantly 
violates all moral and ethical rules of how to treat another human 
being. The subject was repeatedly put through cycles of programming 
and torture so that they learned to follow orders to the letter without 
question or judgment. Some of this alleged work includes the use of 
drugs. 
Here is an excerpt from the book: 
PROGRAMMING DRUGS 
Acetophenzine aka Tindal--(this anti-psychotic has been used on multiples, it 
mutes anxiety, suspiciousness and delusions. it would fall more into the 
control category of uses rather than for actual programming.) 
Amines--(this is a general term for many types of the brain's own chemicals 
used to produce moods, and feelings) 
Damiana--(aka Mex. Witching Herb, the extract is used wi other herbs during 
programming for a relaxed pleasure state.) »An example is Damiana-Biack 
Kava Kava-Valerian-Skullcap-Wild Lettuce Opium, which makes a "it's-
nothing-but-a-dream" state. 
Chloral hydrate--(which is a hypnotic put in pill form such as chi oral betaine, 
Beta-Chlor, and given with something like a glass of milk. About 500 mg. of 
Chloral hydrate are given for a hypnotic for an adult.) 
Cyciohexamide--(produces retroactive anmesia) 
Cylert--a type of speed 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindContro110I.com 

161 
Datura aka Jimsonweed, or thorn apple--(sometimes used to help a child 
conjure up their personal spirit.) 
lminodibenzyis-- (used for sedation) 
Lettuce Opium--(tradition Hopi shaman trance drug) 
Mandrake--(from the Mandragora plant, an ancient occult drug, a traditionai 
witchcraft drug for causing people to sleep) 
Methaqualone--(a rapid hypnotic drug that produces a dissociative high, it can 
be used to put someone into a coma) 
Pemoline-magnesium hydroxide (aka PMH, helps enhance conditioned 
avoidance training by acting as a stimulant, is helpful for repetitive learning 
situations by a general alerting effect on the mind) 
Phenothiazines--(used to raise the threshold of electrical stimulation tolerance, 
to tranquilize or induce sleep) 
Rowan--traditional sleeping/death herb of witches; May Day is also called 
Rowan Tree Witch Day. 
Seconal, 
aka 
Seconal 
Sodium or Secobarbital 
Sodium--(a popular 
programming drug to stabilize programming, to set in deep programming into 
the base of the mind such as dates and codes, and to block out memory of 
missions by slaves, see various paragraphs below for more explanations. Used 
in 10, 20, 30, 50, 100 mg. increments. A tubal pregnancy/birth can be hid in a 
woman by 300-400 mg., while surgery on an adult man may require 500 mg.) 
Tetrodotoxin (made from the Puffer Blowfish, used by Voudoun, & others to 
create a zombie state) 
In our discussion of drugs used in programming, this chapter will expand upon 
the previous book by discussing the application of drugs to: 
a. to stabilize the programming after torture 
b. hiding the codes 
c. building in deeply embedded structures and beliefs, and the creation of false 
identities 
d. to influence the memory by drugs c. to stimulate instinctual behaviors 
e. to create moods and attitudes by synthetically manufacturing and injecting 
the brain's own natural amines. 
STABILIZING THE PROGRAMMING 
The total mind-control of the Illuminati is called "trauma-based mind-control" 
because repeated traumas are inflicted upon the victim is a very systematic 
calculated inhumane way. The tortures and stress are all parts of a 
programming package. After a particular harsh session of programming the 
victim's mind will be in a high state of terror, shock, dissociativeness and 
splintering. The victim's mind can't take much more, and the potential of 
having uncontrolled splintering of the victim's mind and thereby having the 
destruction of the mind and programming threatens the programmers' control. 
The programmer wants the mind and body to rest so that the programming can 
set in, without destabilizing events occurring. For instance, after severe water 
torture (drowning) the programmer will want the programming (hypnotic 
script) to set in, and he will give seconal (aka seconal sodium or secobarbital 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

162 
sodium) to induce a deep sleep. Sleep occurs within 10 to 15 minutes. 
Sometimes a victim's heart has been pushed to its limits during a trauma and 
they must shut the body down to let the victim rest. Seconal is a drug of choice 
for this. Seconal is administered in hospitals or programming sites where 
trained personnel know how to give the drug. Dirty psychiatrists, who 
understand the relationship between drugs and human behavior and who are 
either programmers themselves or assistants to programmers often are the ones 
who give the victims drugs like seconal. 
EXTENSIVE RESEARCH DONE TO INFLUENCE HUMAN MEMORY 
BY DRUGS 
The complete list of researchers who have studied the effect drugs have on 
memory would require a massive book. However, we will just mention a few 
that pertain to this book briefly. One of the places the effect of drugs on 
memory was researched was at the Univ. of California at Irvine, CA. Another 
was at institutions in the Boston, Mass. area such as the Massachusetts 
General Hosp., in Boston. Dr. Talland in Boston tested the effects of PMH on 
human memory. He discovered PMH could help people relearn material that 
had been partially forgotten. The Illuminati programmer Cameron (aka Dr. 
White) also tried out various approaches including the administration of RNA 
and RNA- synthesis stimulants. John C. Lilly, who admits being a member of 
an Esoteric Mystery School, was a government researcher on the use of LSD 
to program people. He did part of his work on LSD programming at the 
Maryland Psychiatric Research Center under admitted government financing. 
His book Programming and Metaprogramming in the Human Biocomputer 
(NY: Julian Press, 1967, & revised format 1972) is an excellent paper trail of 
how the Illuminati has used LSD to program total mind-controlled slaves. 
Originally, the book was given out only to a few select people. The book 
attempts to hide what it talks about behind a long intro, long sentences, big 
words and arcane psychological terms, but it does spell out how they do the 
mind-control programming with LSD. A section later in this chapter will lay 
out for the reader how they do this. 
ONE TYPE OF EXPERIENCE OF VICTIM HYPNOTIC DRUG A MIND-
CONTROL 
The drugged victim feels like he is looking through a keyhole and the hypnotic 
voice of the programmer is the key hole. The world may be very shadowy and 
drawn in on itself. The mind has its attention on the hypnotist/programmer. 
The BASIC PHASES of MEMORY 
The human memory process can be basically broken down into 3 phases, the 
registration phase, the retention phase and the retrieval phase. Great amount of 
research has gone into how to use drugs to manipulate each of those phases. 
Great amount of research also went into how to measure people's abilities to a. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

163 
learn, b. remember, c. and to do non-learned behavior such as arm-hand 
steadiness and visual time reaction. 
WHAT THE MIND-CONTROL PROGRAMMERS USE TO MANIPULATE 
memory. 
Scopolamine was found to impair short-term memory. It was discovered that 
retrograde amnesia could be created by electroshock several hours after the 
brain had learned something. This lesson caused the Illuminati and those 
working in Mind Control with them to use cattle prods and stun guns. 
If a person performed something they were to forget they can be stunned or 
given scopolamine to deaden their memory. A quick anesthetic applied 
immediately after something has been done might also impair the retention of 
what had happened. Yet another way is seconal, which will be discussed soon. 
Low doses of analeptic drugs given about 10 to 20 min. before training were 
found to help learning. Analeptic drugs include bemegride, diazadamantanol, 
pentylenete-trazol, picotoxin, and strychnine. It was discovered that strychnine 
helps enhance classical conditioning. It can be administered either before or 
after the learning has taken place. It is believed that memory storage is 
enhanced by strychnine and strychnine sulfate. Strychnine was also found to 
help protect the mind's memory against the effect of electroshock. Abusers out 
on the street have been turning to GHB and Rohypnol to decrease inhibitions 
and to cause memory loss in their victims. Rohypnol (which sells for up to $10 
a tablet) is dependable but more expensive than the GHB. A number of 
women who have been raped by adding these drugs to their alcoholic drinks at 
the Club Boca, Palm Beach, FL made the paper after they were drugged and 
raped after partying at the club. (The Palm Beach Post, Mar., 1996 pp. lB, 
lOB.) GHB (Gamma Hydroxy Butyrate) is a compound essential to the body. 
It acts similar to a neurotransmitter. It helps release the Hurnan Growth 
Hormone and removes inhibitions around intimacy, as well as some other 
beneficial effects. GHB crosses the blood-brain barrier and metabolizes into 
GABA. GHB's high degree of safety was proved over 25 years of research, 
and was basically an established fact before the FDA and the media 
demonized GHB. Several sources seem to indicate that the FDA banned GHB 
--not because it has dangerous side effects, which it doesn't have in spite of 
the established media's disinformation campaign with halftruths--but because 
it is not patented by the drug companies and would cut into their profits. 
GHB also has a great aphrodisiac effect. It reduces inhibitions to have sex, but 
because the woman clitoris is more sensitive it interferes with female orgasms. 
However, when the women do achieve it, it is longer and more intense, 
according to GHB researchers. (This author got much information on GHB 
from the Centurion Aging Research Lab.) GHB is described here because it is 
a drug that is known by the type of people who use sexual slaves and other 
people, and its use and misuse pertain to Mind Control. Like so many things 
involved with mind-control, GHB and many other items could be put to 
positive uses if used in the proper way. Sometimes the programmers use drugs 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

164 
rather than ECS (Electro convulsive shock) to destroy the memory in slaves 
after they have done some mission for the Illuminati, the Syndicates, or Cult 
they belong to. The decision to use drugs rather than ECS is largely personal 
tastes. The very sadistic programmers enjoy using ECS, while the less sadistic 
ones often use the drugs, which in some instances actually perform better, but 
are not as violent to the victim of Mind Control. Retroactive amnesia can be 
caused by an intra cerebral or a subcutaneous (under the skin) shot of 
Acetoxy-cycloheximide, cyclohexamide, or puromyxcin. A more sophisticated 
technique incorporates the drug seconal (aka Seconal sodium), the victim's 
dissociativeness (the MPD), and hypnosis. Seconal is a strong sedative that 
puts people into sleep. The programmers have considered it "wonderful". The 
victim's mind is conditioned hypnotically to be able to remember the drugged-
seconal state. Then the hypnotic command is given that if anything about a 
particular mission is remembered, the person will immediately trigger (pull-up 
to the front of the mind) the seconal memory. This is why many therapists 
discover their clients getting sleepy when they get close to certain thoughts, or 
when they try to do therapeutic work. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

The Power and Use of 
Symbols and Rituals for Mind Control 
Rituals and symbols have incredible power over the people. 
Rituals help define the people involved and how they think of 
themselves as part of the group. As a result every culture has it sown 
set of rituals and symbols. 
These rituals include the obvious like Jewish bar mitzvahs, and 
Catholic confirmations, and graduation celebrations. Amid all the 
rituals of our lives are also the less obvious rituals like passing your 
first drivers test or getting your first apartment. 
The purpose of a ritual is to bring the participants more fully 
into the society or subculture and thus help them to more easily 
conform to the regulations of that group. 
Think of each ritual as a way to mark a significant turning 
point in the persons life. 
In his book and video series "The Power of Myth" Joseph 
Campbell, describes how symbols have a simplifying effect that all the 
members of the group can link to a specific meaning. The rituals that 
are created around these symbols give each participant a personal 
experience, something visceral, an NLP "anchor" to the symbol and its 
meaning. 
Rituals and their related symbols help define the reality of the 
group. As it relates to Mind Control the more a controller can 
incorporate rituals into the experience of hislher subjects the more 
deeply the prescribed reality is accepted. 
Example of Rituals and Mind Control 
In the early days of America many social organizations were 
established. Many of them had very little more than mens clubs with 
no real social or political agenda. One of those organizations which 
took root in the southern United States was the Ku Klux Klan better 
known as the KKK. 
The KKK had its share of rituals from the beginning. When 
racial tensions began to grow in the American south the KKK took it 
up as a personal cause. They combined their rituals complete with 

166 
colorful wardrobe, burning crosses and vows of secrecy, to put 
emphasis on the superiority of whites over blacks and immigrants. 
Anything can be used to implement rituals and symbols for 
Mind Control. To do it, consider what the message is you want your 
subject to receive and the reality you want them to value. Your 
message may also include the beliefs you wish to instill. 
Let's start with the symbols. Take a look at all the symbols in 
your life. They are everywhere. Crosses, pentagrams, stars, company 
logos, team uniforms, fraternity paddles, corporate T-shirts and caps, 
hair styles, tennis shoes, images of heroes and deities, TV stars, gurus 
and prophets. Symbols are everywhere. It is the rituals that give these 
symbols meaning. 
Rituals and symbols are obvious in religions. They are also 
present in politics. 
From the Solidarity Movement, to Ronald Regan's presidential 
campaign and rise of the Nazi party the historical displays of 
patriotism and national unity have employed symbols and rituals. The 
rituals take the form of rallies. The symbols, banners, leaders and 
flags. 
The same is often true for corporate environments. 
For the operator who seeks to employ this knowledge of 
symbols and ritual a little creativity is all it takes. The symbols can be 
preexisting or created. The more the rituals include heightened 
emotional states and secrecy the more powerful the impact on the 
participants. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

Psychic Influence 
Psychic Influence is the ability to effect people's mood or 
behavior by mere thought. It is a field of parapsychology along the 
lines of telepathy and mind reading and has been explored 
scientifically by both the academic and military communities. 
The academic goals of these types of studies is to measure and 
understand if psychic influence is possible. 
The military seeks to use psychic influence to effect people for 
political gain. 
Most academic studies on the subject have proven very little 
with only a very small percentage of experiments giving any indication 
that psychic influence is possible. That has not discouraged those who 
want to explore psychic influence on a personal level. 
F or that reason the information presented here on psychic 
influence relies less on scientific evidence and more on a consensus of 
testimonials from people who have reported some control over psychic 
influence. 
One of the factors that's unique to psychic influence, as 
opposed to other forms of Mind Control, is that a large quantity of 
"work" is done to and on the controller. This is because the controllers 
personal beliefs can dramatically affect the success or failure of any 
psychic influence experiments. 
Let's address these beliefs and how they are conceptualized by 
the controller. 
The Belief in Connection 
One belief that prevents people from effectively influencing 
others on the psychic level is the belief that there is a separation that 
prevents anything other than influence through the senses. 
Imagine that the senses are nothing more than filters that limit 
what you can perceive. The eyes only perceive visible light, the ears 
only perceptible sound waves and the physical body is limited to heat, 
vibration and touch. These add to the belief that there is nothing more 
to perceive beyond that and that we are, in fact, separate from one 
another. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

168 
So what if those senses and their limitations were eliminated? 
A simple conclusion is that even though we perceive separation, on a 
deeper level, it does not exist. 
If this were the case it could be just as easy to find a way to 
connect via an extrasensory method. By reprogramming and removing 
the belief that psychic influence is not possible the limitations that are 
contained by the belief itself are removed. At the very least the 
removal of these limitations create an opportunity to explore and test 
any theories of psychic influence. 
Experimentation 
In experimenting to get psychic influence anything can be used 
with the single outcome in mind to cause someone to do something 
without sensory contact. 
This creates the perception of "sender" and "receiver" even 
though, now absent the belief of real separation is absent, it is now a 
matter of making sure that the "senders" message is clear enough and 
that the "receiver" will respond to it. 
What follows are the types of experiments that the sender can 
practice. 
Will 
"Will" experiments are simply a matter of causing someone 
to do something from a distance by energizing, forcing and propelling 
the action into the receiver at a distance by thinking about it and 
"willing" it to occur. 
An example of this would be that of sitting in a crowd of 
people and focusing on one individual attempting to cause a behavior; 
scratching the head, going to the bathroom, pulling the ear. 
Imagination Exercises 
Silva Mind Control is perhaps one known systems of using 
imagination exercises for psychic influence. Imagination exercises for 
psychic influence usually include the sender imagining connecting 
with with the receiver and delivering the message. 
The imagination exercise is a meditative or self-hypnotic 
process in which the sender/operator mentally imagines first the 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

169 
connection to the receiver and the message or new behavior being 
transmitted and received. 
Here is an example of a psychic influence exercise: 
It is recommended that this exercise is done at a time when the 
subject is sleeping and in a mentally receptive state. 
State your intention. For example "Joe Smith will call me 
tomorrow before noon. " Close your eyes and go through a relaxation 
or self hypnosis process. When in "state" imagine lifting up out of 
your body and moving to a realm beyond the senses where are things 
are connected. Reach out with your hands as if "parting the veil" and 
imagine grasping Joe Smith in a sleeping state while you move your 
hands accordingly. 
With your hands grab Joe and "unzip" him as if he were a suit 
and then put him on like a wet suit. When you have a good fit walk Joe 
through the thoughts, emotions and actions of Joe making the call to 
you. When the exercise is complete take of the "Joe suit" and zip him 
back up and send him back through the void. 
Next imagine a golden messenger orb that holds your intention 
"Joe will call me tomorrow before noon. " and instruct it to follow Joe 
and invade his thoughts, day dreams and impulses. When the sphere is 
completed with the intention and instructions send it off into the void. 
Once complete end the imagination exercise with laughter. 
The final instruction of ending the exercise with laughter is 
done to banish the thought from the senders mind. This is done in the 
belief that having a conscious awareness of the exercise acts as an 
obstacle to successful results. 
Ritual 
The use of rituals to change the thoughts and actions of others 
has been used ever since the first love spell and curses were cast. 
F or several reasons when using rituals to effect psychic 
influence often intention is simplified into a phrase like a mantra or a 
symbol, called a sigil. This has several benefits. First it only has 
meaning to the sender and protects them from other people knowing 
their intention. Second is that it is easier to forget. This is important 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

170 
because it is often believed that a conscious knowledge of the intention 
can be an obstacle to success. 
There are so many resources that list these rituals of 
influencing others that they won't be mentioned here. All one has to do 
is rent a few horror videos to get the idea. So without going into the 
depth of what to do as a ritual of psychic influence it is safe to say that 
ritual is a form of theater that is done for the participants and by the 
participants with an outcome of effecting the subject. 
Rituals of psychic influence will tend to involve the 
participants doing a pre-designed theatrical performance with the 
hopes of becoming so involved in the part that they are playing the 
"energy" effects the intended subject. Often the participants will 
portray a magician who summons a spirit or a god who is casting 
divine influence over the intended subject. 
Many writers on the topic of psychic influence consider any 
attempt to influence someone in this manner as "black magic". That is 
not a judgment suited for this book as our only concern is what works. 
Dreams 
The ability to contact and influence people in their dreams is 
difficult at best. To do so most people have to overcome some deeply 
ingrained habits that cause us to minimize and forget what we've 
dreamed. 
The first efforts to gain any skill of dream control and dream 
influence is to remember dreams and then to control them. After being 
able to consistently remember their dreams the control must then be 
able to control them and become aware they are dreaming while they 
are dreaming. This lucid dreaming process is best documented by the 
works of author Stephen Le Berge in his book "Lucid Dreaming" and 
subsequent works. 
As the operator masters lucid dreaming they can attempt to 
direct themselves into the dreamscape of the person they are trying to 
influence. 
Influence by way of Ecstatic/Inhibitory States 
For the controller who has a clear intention for the subject that 
they wish to send psychically it is often prescribed that they enter an 
extreme mental/emotional state in order to "charge" the message. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll01.com 

171 
The extremes can take two forms: Inhibitory or Ecstatic. 
Inhibitory states include any state where the senses are closed 
down. This can include a hypnotic state or prolonged sessions of 
sensory deprivation. Another example of this extreme inhibitory state 
is "the death posture" where the sender attempts to close off every 
bodily function including breathing until the very last moment when 
they think of and "charge" their intention. 
Examples of Ecstatic states for charging these intentions are 
dancing, chanting, spinning, prolonged sexual activity all done while 
the intention is held in mind. Often when using Ecstatic/Inhibitory 
states to charge an intention the intention is reduced to a phrase or sigil 
as mentioned above. 
Drugs 
A disclaimer here is important. Firstly drugs are dangerous and 
using them in this culture to "psychically influence" someone is an act 
that invites the potential of straitjackets and rubber rooms. 
Nonetheless, its been tried. 
Peruvian shamans have claimed to do this using the 
hallucinogenic tea ayahuasca. 
It is safe to say that if anyone wants to attempt such an act this 
is not going to be an instructional source on how to do it. One must be 
of stable mind and character and best have an experienced guide who 
is familiar with the effects of these drugs and how to guide someone 
through the psychological mine fields they present. 
Final Note on Psychic Influence 
As for influence using psychic influence there are no hard fast 
rules. Many have preceded you in the research in this field but as a 
general rule the only thing you will discover consistently is that 
everyone discovers their own best way of doing it. 
As the sender practices these experiments in combinations and 
variations of them they will develop an understanding what gets the 
best results for them. 
Mind Control 10 1 
www.MindControllOl.com 

172 
Other Techniques of Mind Control 
Cunning Acts of Guile and Trickery of Cults and Con Men 
By studying con men one can discover just how easy it is for 
people to be convinced that something is real. The downside of this 
field of study is that it can create a painful sense of conscious in 
someone with a firm set of morals and ethics. Nonetheless, it is a field 
of study that has some good information in it. 
Remember to be good at Mind Control you don't have to do 
anything in this book. Just learn. 
High Frequency Directional Voice Projection 
It is amazing what can come to you when you are watching 
The Discovery Channel. 
There exists a technology that's used by the government and is 
now available for commercial use that consists of flat speakers that 
project a sound much like a laser projects light. It works by using ultra 
high frequency sound waves of millions of cycles per second. 
Normally the human ear can hear from between 20 to 50,000 cycles 
per second of sound but these sound waves are manipulated so that 
they are very audible and focused into narrow beam that can only be 
heard by the person who is in the line of sight of the speaker. 
To my knowledge using this to convince people they are 
hearing voices has never been proposed till now, but the effect would 
be quite dramatic. 
Even more dramatic if this devise were used on people who 
already had a history of auditory hallucinations such as 
schizophrenics. 
Scientology TRs 
Scientology has a so-called communications course that is the 
basic introduction to the religion called "The Training Routines" or 
TRs for short. It is also the first step into the Scientology 
indoctrination process. 
The Scientology TRs can be easily found by doing a search on 
the internet. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOl.com 

173 
Like any good Mind Control process it starts off based on a 
fact that is true for most people, that when we try to communicate with 
others we tend to be more concerned with our own problems and 
objectives than truly "being" with that person. This fact, the 
Scientologists will tell you, is what prevents us from being able to 
communicate well and get what we want. 
How it presents this and helps to resolve that problem is 
through an ingenious series of exercises that eventually lead the 
student into the trap of doing whatever the instructor asks them to do. 
The TRs are presented in a "gradient" or series of steps with 
each successive TR building on previous ones. This is an ideal 
example of "indoctrinated knowledge" used by religions all over the 
world in which one can't learn secret D unless they have successively 
learned secrets A through C first. 
The beginning TRs are simple enough. Two students are asked 
to face each other, knee to knee, and to look at each other without 
expression. In Scientology terms they are supposed to "be in the 
moment" with that person. This by itself can be very uncomfortable 
for most people and nervous laughter often results. If either of them 
begin to laugh, giggle or looks away in discomfort the other student is 
instructed to shout "Flunk!" and describe what occurred "Laughing!" 
and then restart the TR with "Begin!". 
After some practice, sometimes hours, the students learn to 
very comfortably look at the other person and "be in the moment" with 
them. 
The gradient continues to other seemingly innocuous TRs and 
then to a harder step called "Bull Baiting" in which the students take 
turns trying to provoke any response from their partner. Their partner 
in the mean time is trying not to laugh, get angry or be insulted while 
just sitting there receiving whatever verbal cajoling or abuse that's 
offered. 
This, in itself has great value because it teaches people to be 
their most calm in the midst of huge external one-on-one pressure. 
Those who have gone through this TRs report that it gives them a 
calmness of mind enough to think rationally under extreme pressure 
and the exercise itself often creates a sense of accomplishment and a 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

174 
high for the successful participant. Combine that with the positive 
feedback from the instructors and the student is very eager to do more. 
Ultimately, as they go through the gradient of TRs they are 
taught about what's called the "Tone 40" scale. The Tone 40 is a scale 
of aliveness on the low end is depression and death on the high end is 
the ability to say something and make it come about by the sheer 
power of its delivery. Students are taught to look at an ashtray and tell 
it forcefully to "Stand up!" 
Doing this for a long enough period of time the student 
becomes convinced that their will can be delivered through their voice 
to cause the ashtray to "Stand up!" even when they reach with their 
hand and make it "stand up". 
Lastly they are given the final TR and told to use the Tone 40 
voice with each other, giving simple orders like "Stand up! Thank 
you." "Walk to the door!", "Stop! Thank you." , "Walk to me!", 
"Stop!" and so on. The process goes on for over an hour with each 
person taking turns as the controller and the subject. They are 
essentially learning how to respond to orders without questioning. 
This is where the devious part of this process occurs that no 
one who takes part is aware of. By going all the way through this 
process to this final Tone 40 TR the students of this class are training 
each other to respond to the Scientologists when they tell them "John, 
Stand up. This is Sarah. Sarah take John to the registration desk and 
sign John up for the auditing!" 
The conditioning is so thorough its almost impossible to resist 
the commands that are given. 
Forcing Choice as in Psychological Card Forces 
In card magic that uses slight of hand there is a whole list of 
tricks that fall under the category of "card forces". 
To force a card means to offer a person a chance to pick a card 
and force them to pick a specific card while they believe they have 
completely free choice. Most of these forces use some form of slight 
of hand. One magic book made a list of over a hundred different forms 
of card forces and it was just scratching the surface. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

175 
Some magicians have fine tuned this by using a psychological 
force that compels people to choose a specific card merely by 
choosing the right words to say. 
For example by asking a person to think of a card and "make 
the colors bright and vivid" the person will tend to only include red 
cards. By telling them to imagine the card with sharp contrasts black 
cards will imagined. 
This ideal, that choices can be forced like cards, opens up a 
whole field of possibilities in Mind Control and causes one to examine 
the seemingly mundane things that effect the illusion of choice. 
The Power of the Emotional Chamber 
The Emotional Chamber is a sales and seduction technique that 
was described by persuasion author JD Fuentes in his book "Sexual 
Key". 
It dives deep into archetypes and patterns that are specific to 
women that can effect how they perceive things and make choices 
about them, including products and partners. 
To easily understand it think of sex and then tum it into a 
metaphor of feelings leading to a decision. 
There are several components to the emotional chamber; 
• 
A pleasant emotion that initiates the decision making 
• 
An invitation to let it come inside and be felt 
• 
A feeling, color or sound is given to the emotion 
• 
A building up of that emotion which brings forth another emotion 
• 
An invitation to bring that new emotion in along with its physical 
feelings 
• 
The cycle can continue on with a cycle of one emotion after 
another being invited inside, feelings felt, building up and 
culminating and yielding to another emotion. 
If it isn't obvious, this is a metaphor for a female sexual 
orgasm. 
For the sake of example the decision will be to buy a widget. 
Using the Emotional Chamber process it would sound like this: 
"One you think of the widget one thing that you can become 
aware of is a feeling of interest. So when you notice that interest it is 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

176 
like you've created an opening for it. Letting it come inside so you 
notice the electric tingling that brings it to your attention and as that 
feeling of interest builds, stronger and stronger, more and more you 
may begin to notice another feeling; curiosity so you bring that 
curiosity in and take it in very deep. And like anything you are curious 
about that you take in you want to know more and more about it and 
that firm feeling just grows firmer and firmer until you finally have a 
welcomed understanding that you can use this widget. A smooth fluid 
acceptance that this is yours to use anytime you want .... " 
Of course the cycle of the emotional chamber can be repeated 
again and again. 
MKULTRA 
MK-ULTRA was the name of a secret government project that 
was obsessively dedicated to the subject of Mind Control. The project 
was not limited by ethics or the laws of the government. Keep in mind 
that MK-ULTRA occurred during the time of the Cold War when all 
of the nation was feeling under the hammer of nuclear war by the 
"communist menace". The US government feared and suspected the 
worst, namely that communist nations were creating Mind Controlled 
Manchurian candidates or "sleeper agents" that could be triggered to 
do any act of terror at any time. Their only recourse was to develop 
their own form of Mind Control. 
What they came upon was research done in Nazi Germany that 
indicated people who grew up under traumatic childhoods made 
excellent candidates for this type of research. The result is what is 
called "Trauma Based Mind Control" in which allegedly children have 
been intentionally raised and abused to create the ideal agent; an agent 
that will do anything asked, even suicide or murder without question, 
and have no memory of the act when completed. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

MKUL TRA - Cathy O'Brian and Mark Phillips 
Disclaimer 
This topic you will read about is NOT a form of 
Mind Control that is endorsed by this book, the author 
or anyone known to the author. 
177 
The book "The Trance-Formation of America" By Cathy 
O'Brian and Mark Phillips contains description of what was alleged to 
have happened to one person under the clandestine supervision of the 
US Government. The details of the story are shocking and include 
accusations of secret black ops projects that institutionalize child 
sexual abuse and trauma based Mind Control procedures for the 
purpose of creating a secret government "uber-agent" who will follow 
every command to the letter and have no memory their actions. 
Of course, the government has never confirmed these 
accusations and they could easily be dismissed as sensationalism if it 
were not for the incredible detail of the story and the lingering thought 
that a secret government agency could do such a thing. 
As a study in Mind Control it bares examination. 
The story of Cathy O'Brian begins with her earliest memory of 
being repeatedly sexually abused by her father. According to her, 
undergoing that intensity of abuse at such an early age it forced her 
mind to create different personalities to deal with the trauma. This is 
what is clinically called "Disassociative Personality Disorder" (DPD) 
and has been previously called multiple or split personality disorder. 
Someone who has DPD will have several personalities that act 
independently of each other and therefore memories of actions by one 
personality are not recalled by other personalities. 
As the story continued, her photo was spotted in child 
pornography by a secret arm of the US government. She was then 
"purchased" from her father so that she could be trained to serve in 
government black operations. 
Her responsibilities were largely to have sex with whomever 
she was instructed to for the purposes of government bribery or 
blackmail. She would also be enlisted to act as courier for money, 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

178 
drugs and information from one underground government operation to 
another. 
The nature of her DPD made her ideal for the job. 
Because of a childhood of constant fear and threat people who 
are diagnosed with DPD tend to have a very heightened sensory acuity 
that gives them the skills of photographic memory. 
Because 
people 
with 
DPD 
are 
already 
able 
to 
compartmentalize experiences Cathys handlers used a combination of 
hypnosis and torture to create further compartments that would allow 
them to hide precise instructions within her memory to be revealed 
when the proper trigger word was given. The hypnotic training was so 
thorough that these compartments even hid the information from 
Cathy herself. 
A further benefit is that since one personalty can be called on 
after another, no one personality knows how long the host has been 
awake and without sleep, so they tend to have boundless energy. 
According to Cathy O'Brian people who became these types of 
agents had no idea of any other possible life. They knew their value as 
a person was zero. Following the orders given to them resulted in a life 
of sexual exploitation, abuse and fear, this was all that they knew and 
they followed them to the letter. They were often "eliminated" by the 
time they were 30 years old because their minds would often begin to 
integrate memories and begin to learn to think autonomously. 
A book that details this form of trauma based Mind Control is 
"Deeper Insights into the Illuminati Formula" by Fritz Springmeier & 
Cisco Wheeler and can be found on the Internet and ordered from 
book stores. The book has a very strong Christian bias and heavy 
overtones of conspiracy theories but is full of detail about the 
procedures of trauma based Mind Control. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

Cult Mind Control 
Tactics and Strategies 
Stephen Hassan, author of "Combating Cult Mind Control", 
describes the model of cult Mind Control with the acronym B.LT.E. 
which stands for control over 1!ehavior, Information, Ihoughts and 
~motions. 
Keep in mind that each of these, or at least components of 
much of these can be used to in many ways to lead someone to the 
outcome you desire. 
Behavior Control 
Behavior Control is described as the regulation of one's 
physical and mental reality. A new recruit is encouraged repeatedly to 
squelch hislher critical-thinking skills and gut instincts in return for 
group approval and inclusion. Exerting such a control over people 
allows high-pressure groups to determine most or all of the following: 
• 
Where, how, and with whom recruits live and associate. 
• 
What clothing, colors, and hairstyles to wear. 
• 
Which foods/drinks are accepted or rejected. 
• 
How much financial dependence recruits are to have on the group, 
what percentage of recruits' income is collected for the group's 
purposes. 
• 
How much time is spent on leisure activities such as relaxing, 
sleeping, leisure activities, and vacationing. 
Once behavior control is put into effect, recruits respond and 
react accordingly. The recruits: 
• 
Unwittingly commit themselves to the required indoctrination 
sessions and group rituals. 
• 
Relinquish many personal decision-making processes and go to 
the group to determine minor and/or major life decisions. 
• 
Are required to report all doubts about the group, perceived 
negative thoughts, personal feelings, and external activities to their 
superiors. 

181 
• 
Undergo endless cycles of verbal and/or physical abuse, then being 
praised or rewarded. (When husbands do that to wives, it is called 
The Battered Wife Syndrome.) 
• 
Steer clear of individualism and independent thought as group-
thought prevails. 
• 
Adhere to often unforeseen rigid rules and regulations. 
• 
Develop a need for obedience to and dependency on the group 
Information Control in cults can involve six key elements: 
Deception 
Outside Information Forbidden 
Levels of Information 
Spying and Survelliance 
Group Propaganda 
Unconfidential Confessions 
Deception 
Cult members will often: 
• 
Deliberately withhold information from recruits 
• 
Distort information to make it appear acceptable 
• 
Lie to obtain their goal 
Outside Information Forbidden 
Access to information outside of that of the group is minimized 
or discouraged. These restrictions are set on: 
• 
Certain books, articles, newspapers, magazines, TV and radio 
shows that expose the group 
• 
Critical information pertaining to the internal problems within the 
group 
• 
Written critiques, letters, editorials, or history of involvements of 
former members of the group 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

182 
Levels of Information 
Often, and necessarily so within cults, infonnation is 
compartmentalized. That is, only certain top-notch members are privy 
to exactly what is happening in the leadership and with the group as a 
whole. Infonnation pertaining to the group doctrine is fed in small, 
digestible spoonfuls to new recruits for a reason -- so that they remain 
ignorant for the time being of the workings of the system. Leaders are 
seen as possessing what Lifton called "sacred science," or having the 
ability to decipher and interpret doctrines, philosophies, etc, in a way 
that no one else has ever done or could ever do. 
• 
Infonnation is not freely accessible 
• 
Infonnation varies at different levels and missions within pyramid 
• 
Leadership decides who "needs to know" what 
Spying and Survelliance 
• 
Pairing up with "buddy" system to monitor and control 
• 
Reporting deviant thoughts, feelings, and actions to leadership 
Group Propaganda 
• 
Newsletters, magazines, journals, audio tapes, videotapes, etc. 
• 
Misquotations, statements taken out of context from non-cult 
sources 
Unconfidential Confession 
• 
Infonnation about "sins" is used to abolish identity boundaries. 
• 
Past "sins" are used to manipulate and control; no forgiveness or 
absolution is given. 
Thought Control 
Here are a few guidelines for thought control: 
Need to internalize the group's doctrine as "the truth". 
• 
Map = Reality 
• 
"All-or-none" mentality 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOl.com 

183 
• 
Good against evil 
• 
Us against them (inside versus outside) 
Adopt 
"loaded" 
language 
(characterized 
by 
"thought-
terminating cliches"). 
Words are the tools we use to think with. These "special" 
words constrict rather than expand understanding. They function to 
reduce complexities of experience into trite, platitudinous "buzz 
words". "thought-terminating cliches" and simplistic slogans to stop 
critical thinking. 
Even the self help community has its list of loaded lingo with 
things like "shame spiral", "stinkin' thinking", "shoulding on 
yourself'. 
Only "good" and "proper" thoughts are encouraged. 
Practice thought-stopping techniques, prevent "reality testing" 
by stopping "negative" thoughts and allowing only "good" thoughts, 
and prohibit rational analysis, critical thinking, and constructive 
criticism: 
• 
Denial, rationalization, justification, and wishful thinking. 
• 
Chanting, meditating, praying. 
• 
Speaking in "tongues". 
• 
Singing or humming. 
Only "good" and "proper" thoughts are encouraged. 
No critical questions about the leader, doctrine, or policy are 
seen as legitimate. 
Exclusivity 
No alternative belief systems are viewed as legitimate, good, or 
useful. 
Emotional Control 
Emotional control allows cults to manipulate and narrow the 
range of a recruit's feelings. The objective of cults is to make recruits 
think that any doubts about the group is their fault, and never that of 
the leader(s) or the group. Any negativism toward the group is often 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

184 
misdirected back to the recruit -- causing the recruit to internalize their 
doubts. 
This section contains the following: 
Guilt Association 
Fear Induction 
Extremism 
Phobia Indoctrination 
Guilt Association 
Cults induce large amounts of guilt, typically, in association 
with the following: 
• 
Who you are (and why you are not living up to your potential) 
• 
Who your family is (those from dysfunctional families are to 
attribute their dysfunctional past to their not being a member of the 
group yet; those from well-adjusted families are to feel guilty for 
having had it so good) 
• 
What secrets lie in your past (sexual history, childhood mistakes, 
any past criminal involvement is overly emphasized) 
• 
With whom you are affiliated (the company you keep, boyfriend / 
girlfriend / fiancees shunned, family, friends, etc.) 
• 
What you think (how you feel, and what you do about your 
feelings, whether what you think and feel is acceptable to the 
group) 
• 
Social guilt (recruit is made to feel inadequate because of hislher 
social status) 
• 
Historical guilt (recruit is forced to take on the oppression of 
hislher ancestors and the plight of martyred persons) 
Fear Induction 
In order for guilt induction to successfully operate, cults must 
be able to instill fear in their followers: 
Mind Control 10 1 
www.MindControll0l.com 

185 
• 
Fear of thinking independently. (Recruits wonder whether they are 
making right decisions, what the consequences will be if they think 
independently.) 
• 
Fear of the "outside" world. (Recruits have a "we/they" mentality, 
and generally see all in the group as "saved," while all outside the 
group are "lost. ") 
• 
Fear of enemies. (Recruits are indoctrinated to be very paranoid of 
all those on the outside, including the government, cult awareness 
groups, and/or society in general.) 
• 
Fear of losing salvation. (Recruits are taught that salvation is 
attained only through group affiliation and nowhere else.) 
• 
Fear of being shunned. (Recruits often risk losing family, friends, 
job, etc. if they decide to leave. Many cults "mark" or otherwise 
collectively shun former members.) 
• 
Fear of disapproval. (Recruits learn to live according to the laws of 
the leaders, and learn that deviating from these laws is detrimental 
to the well-being of both oneself and the others in the group.) 
Extremism 
Cults often deal in extremes. Here are a few examples of 
extremism in cults: 
• 
Extremes of emotional highs and lows (rewards and punishments 
go hand-in-hand) 
• 
Ritual and often public confessions of sins (confessions provoked 
and exaggerated by inductor, i.e. a recruit who confesses to having 
had a few beers is labelled "an alcoholic. ") 
• 
"We/they" mentality, in which group sees itself as better than the 
rest of the world, The group sees itself as the only people capable 
of accurate doctrinal interpretation (also called "sacred science"). 
Phobia Indoctrination 
Phobia indoctrination is the programming of irrational fears of 
ever leaving the group, or even questioning the leadership's authority. 
Recruits are manipulated to the extent that they cannot visualize a 
positive and successful future without being in the group. They are 
taught that horrific consequences will ensue if they are to leave (i.e., 
"hell," "demon possession," accidents, suicide, and/or insanity, etc.). 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

186 
Often, former cult members are so confused upon leaving that the 
group's predictions become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Many former 
cult members have killed themselves because that was exactly what 
the group said they would do. Those who leave are often shunned and 
rejected by the group. From the group perspective, there is never a 
legitimate reason to leave. Those who leave are perceived as "weak," 
"undisciplined," "unspiritual," "worldly," "brainwashed by family, 
friends, counselors", and/or seduced by the world of drugs, sex, and 
rock-and-roll. 
Comments on B.I.T.E. Cult Mind Control Model 
Not all of these components of cult Mind Control are needed to 
effectively influence someone. Many smaller parts of this description 
are used in everyday situations of influence. 
In the area of behavior control a salesperson for example will 
limit the choices of chairs a prospect can sit in and then tell him to 
only sit in one chair. This can also be done by limiting the hours a 
person can be contacted. 
Artful Mind Control is best done by avoiding the negative 
aspects of the B.I. T.E. Model. While abuse and coercion are certainly 
usable aspects of Mind Control they are by no means essential to 
creating a compliant Mind Control subject. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

The Five Steps of Mind Control 
outlined by Edgar H. Schein. 
188 
His five criteria for a person's "changing" or confonning to the 
group nonn are: 
1. new identification, 
2. behavior modification, 
3. mystical manipulation, 
4. mind-altering techniques, and 
5. confession eliciting. 
This is a brief description of each of them: 
New Identification 
A new "cult identity" is created and imposed fonnally in 
indoctrination sessions as well as infonnally through personal relations 
with cult members, tapes, books on group doctrines. 
For the controller this is an opportunity to consider the type of 
identity you want your subject to take on. 
Behavior Modification Techniques 
Behavior modification techniques include the reward/punish-
ment cycle, the use of thought-stopping techniques, and the control of 
environment. 
Mystical Manipulation 
Mystical manipulation is the perception of coincidental or 
inevitable events as spiritual signs. Recruits are trained that such signs 
are symbols of the greatness of the group. 
The controller can either create a mystical event through guile 
or simply use events that happen naturally and give them meaningful 
interpretations for his subject. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

Mind-altering Techniques 
Hypnosis, repetition, monotony, and rhythm are often used to 
numb the thought processes of recruits. These are often carried out 
through excessive chanting, praying, decreeing, and visions. 
Eliciting Confession 
Testimonials and/or confessions are forcibly and continually 
extracted from recruits as a means of keeping recruits dependent and 
obedient. 
This process is seldom used in a constructive fashion like it 
should. Usually it creates guilt and shame to motivate the subject to 
change. A more positive use of confession is one that is followed by 
acceptance instead of guilt. This acceptance will bind the subject 
closer to the controller, as in the Prodigal Son pattern mentioned 
earlier in this book. 
Mind Control 101 www.MindControllOl.com 

How to Create a Recovered Memory 
In the late 1980's there was litany of reports of people who 
recovered repressed memories of childhood abuse. Some of these 
reports were shocking and included memories of participation in 
human sacrifices, satanic rituals and sexual abuse from family 
members, the discovery of multiple personalities, not to mention alien 
abduction. These memories were detailed and elaborate and the 
subjects were convinced of their authenticity even when evidence 
contradicted them. 
This phenomenon quickly became known as "recovered 
memory syndrome" and a slew of psychologists gained a great deal of 
acclaim and authority at helping people uncover these lost and 
dangerous memories. The therapists were so convinced that these 
memories were repressed from the conscious mind that the evidence of 
the repression was the fact that they weren't remembered. 
What came of these "recovered memories"? 
In spite ofthe publicity (reporter, Geraldo Reveria even made a 
hour long special report) the official investigations found there was no 
evidence of these events having ever taken place and another 
discovery took place; that memories and even alternate personalities 
could be created and implanted and the term "recovered memory" 
quickly became "implanted memory". 
This is something that could be of great interest to anyone 
interested in Mind Control. 
The interesting part of this discovery is that these false 
memories were created unintentionally by seemingly well meaning 
psychologists who assumed they were doing work to help people. 
So the question is what did they do to create this effect so that a 
Mind Controller could duplicate it? 
Upon examination there were several components of the work 
that these therapists did that created these false memories. 
Conviction of the Therapist 
Whether intentional or not if the controller or counselor 
portrays the belief that there are hidden memories within someone and 
rapport exists then the doorway is open to create false memories. The 

191 
controller must act congruently with the belief that false memories 
exist. 
The Misinformation Effect 
The misinformation effect occurs when something factual is 
reported or demonstrated and then other facts about it are introduced 
which are not true. 
For example showing a video of a car accident and later asking 
the subject to describe the street signs in the video. The truth is that no 
street signs were in the video. A significant number of the people in 
this experience began to detail street signs that were not there. 
Imagination Inflation 
Studies have shown that when a person is asked to simply 
imagine they were taking part in an event they would most likely 
accept that it really happened. 
Repetition 
Quite simply, the more the process of "recovering memories" 
is done the easier it is for the subject to believe that it happened. 
Conditioning 
Rewarding the subject will improve the results. The simplest 
reward is the best; giving the subject attention and acknowledgment. 
Putting this all together in some systematic fashion the process 
could work as follows: 
The controller would begin a discussion of how we learn from 
memories and elicit various memories from the subject. The subject is 
rewarded by listening and through encouragement. 
The next step is an "imagination exercise" aka hypnosis, of 
reliving the memory so that information can be used from the memory 
to be augmented and modified later. Other imagination exercises are 
incorporated that are not memories but incorporate aspects of the 
subjects memory. The purpose is to ease the subject into confusing the 
two experiences. 
During the imagination exercises (aka hypnosis) the controller 
can elicit from the subject the aspects of memory (NLP sub-
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

192 
modalities, for example) that make the memory real and believable. 
This can then be incorporated in any future sessions. 
Allow some time to pass, a few days is enough, and talk about 
the aspects of the suggestions that were given that are not part of the 
memory and elicit the values and meanings of those aspects. Once 
again using an imagination exercise to strengthen the impact of the 
implanted (false) aspects of the memory and reinforce it with 
discussion. 
Allowing time to pass between each meeting will further 
confuse the suggested aspects of the memory with the actual memory 
itself. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

Mind Tricks With Others 
Mind Tricks is a category of fun, weird, short-tenn, interesting 
tricks one can do with others. They are tricks which can be very 
impressive when they work and will give the user the immediate 
reward of learning that there are amazing things that can be done with 
the mind. 
Please note that sometimes they work and sometimes they 
don't. The good news is that you have noting to lose and they are a lot 
of fun. 
How to Disassociate Yourself From Your Mistake 
You are getting this one first because this is the simplest and 
easiest mind trick there is. 
It is also one of the most useful. 
Let's assume while in a conversation with someone you say 
something that shocks or insults them. The reaction they give and look 
on their face will be obvious; you said something wrong. 
Nonnally we would backtrack and apologize, minimize or 
rationalize the comment in order to appease the other person and calm 
them down. The problem with that is that it only brings attention to the 
insult. 
The mind trick that resolves it is so simple you will laugh. 
All you do is step to one side, point to where you were just 
standing and say with equal shock or insult "Oh my God. I can 
NOT believe he just said that!" 
The response you will get is one of laughter and amusement. 
The process works by unconsciously disassociating you from 
"the other guy" who said the shocking words. 
When doing this there is an important point to remember, that 
is to not refer back to your shocking comment as it will relink you to 
the feelings those words elicited. Also, don't step back into the place 
that you were pointing to as it might unconsciously relink you to the 
words you said. 
This can also be done over the phone by simply saying with 
shock "Did he say what I thought he said? I can't believe he said 
that!" 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

195 
The Tilted Register 
Imagine asking the clerk for more change than you actually 
have coming ... and they give it to you! 
This one is very sneaky and if you are in a tight spot for money 
might work for you. Those who've tried it find that There is nothing to 
lose in doing it and that it will work from 10% to 30% of the time 
when the conditions are right. 
First let's understand something about the mind, namely, that it 
can only do a very limited number of things at one time. Scientists call 
it "the seven plus or minus two" meaning, at the most, our minds can 
concentrate on five to nine things at one time. If we are given more 
information than we can handle or too many things to do at one time, 
our mind "locks up". At that moment anything that is told to us slips 
past our conscious mind and is only heard by the unconscious mind. 
If we can create this "lock up" of the mind in someone we can 
use it to give a suggestion to the unconscious mind. 
Granted it doesn't always work. When it doesn't, no big deal, 
nothing is lost. When it does work. .. WOW! ... People will do things 
that you never thought possible. 
Here is how to do "The Tilted Register". 
The controller would buy something at a store for less than a 
dollar and cordially greets the clerk and gives him a five dollar bill. As 
the clerk rings up the purchase and the cash drawer is open the 
controller points to the register and says "Is your register tipping 
over? Just give me a ten and keep the change. It looks like it wobbles 
a bit when the drawer opened. " 
The key to making this work is in the timing. The controller 
needs to be quite aware of when the clerk is most distracted looking at 
the register. So when the controller says "Is your register tipping 
over?" he will wait to see that the clerk is paying attention to the 
register and not to the counting of change. The controller then follows 
with "Just give me a ten and keep the change. It looks like it wobbles 
a bit when the drawer opened." These last two sentences must flow 
evenly in the same tone of voice as if they are both about the same 
topic. The controller then simply waits for the change to be delivered 
and sees if the clerk hands him the ten dollar bill. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

196 
Other than walking off with the money there are few other 
things that can happen. 
• 
The clerk notices the suggestion. The controller simply shakes his 
head and makes a disparaging comment about "the New Math". 
• 
The clerk gives the ten dollars and then realizes the mistake. The 
controller simply acknowledges the mistake and acts just as 
confused as the clerk. 
If you try this enough you will begin to notice the type of 
people who will most likely follow through with your suggestion. 
They will tend to be running on automatic at the register and be in a 
sort of "cashiers trance". 
The Russian Game 
This is the name of a con game that is pure Mind Control 
trickery. It was demonstrated on the BBC by performer Derren Brown 
and there are several places on the internet where you can see it. 
The essences of The Russian Game is where the controller asks 
for directions from a stranger they also give him their wallet, cell 
phone and wrist watch as well ... just because they were asked! 
Like the Tilted Register this will work only on about a third of 
the people it's tried on. 
To do this the controller would go to an area that is frequented 
by both tourists and locals alike. He would stand with an open map in 
his hands and a bottle of water along with a confused and lost look on 
his face. 
Waiting for someone to pass by the controller is looking ideally 
for someone walking by who is in their own "walking trance". 
"Excuse me. Can you ... give me ... the directions to Market 
Street?" (looking at map and pointing the controller gets the 
information from the passer by. By doing this it creates some 
confusion in the subject as to what to really focus on. This is key in 
this process.) 
"So it is down and to the left and two blocks ... you don't mind 
giving me that do you? Great thank you." (the controller extends his 
hand to shake the hand of the helpful citizen then puts the water bottle 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

197 
in the hand of the passer by) "Here could you hold this? (the 
controller pats his pockets as if looking for something) And could you 
hand me your wallet? Yes, that's good. .. oh do you have a cell 
phone? Great! Thank you. So it is just left and two blocks ... oh .. and 
my drink. •• Thats right?" The controller then walks away with all the 
passer by has given him. 
Of course this sounds so absurd that no one can think that it is 
that simple but it is and it will work on about 10% to 30% of the time. 
This depends largely on picking right person to approach. That can 
only be learned by experience. 
The Handshake Interrupt 
The Handshake Interrupt is unique in hypnosis as a way to 
covertly induce confusion and introduce a suggestion by just a hand 
shake. 
Before going into how to do the Handshake Interrupt it is a 
good idea to understand how is works. 
To understand it first let's consider the common everyday 
handshake. We do it all the time and don't ever give it a second 
thought. We've done it so often that it is thought of as one single 
smooth motion when in fact it is several motions performed one right 
after the other in such a smooth and fluid way we forget the steps that 
make it up. 
Steps to Ordinary Handshake 
1. Extend right hand by bending the elbow to a right angle 
2. Palm facing left 
3. Move arm forward 
4. Reach for right hand of other person 
5. With right hand grab the other persons right hand interlocking the 
thumbs on top and fingers grabbing lower part of hand 
6. Move hands up and down 
7. Separate hands 
8. This is usually accompanied with direct eye contact and smile or 
expression of amiability 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

198 
We've learn the process of a handshake so that if any part of 
that process is changed or interrupted we become confused and start to 
wonder what we should do next. In other words, we become open to 
suggestions. 
The process of the Handshake Interrupt gives a break to the 
normal process of the handshake long enough to give a suggestion. 
Handshake Interrupt Version 1 
Milton Erickson's version of the Handshake Interrupt takes 
only an instant to do but to explain it is rather complicated. 
The handshake begins normally by extending the hand and 
grasping the other persons hand. The interrupt begins just after the 
hands meet and the controller then defocuses the eyes with a blank 
expressionless and unblinking gaze. When pulling the hand away the 
fingers disengage but the thumb tightens around the upper part of the 
hand while the fingers separate then letting go with the thumb and just 
before letting go, slowly tightening the last two fingers around the 
hand and slowly pulling it away while gazing blankly into the eyes of 
the subject. At that moment the subject will pause and freeze in a state 
of momentary catalepsy in which the hand remains locked in position 
and the eyes glaze slightly. 
The operator must use sensory acuity to note the momentary 
instant of confusion that the subject experiences. At that moment a 
suggestion can be given. Such suggestions can fall under the category 
of "feel good" suggestions like "Connect very deeply now." or 
"Relax. you will be fine. " or "This meeting is important. " 
At that moment the operator can create amnesia for the 
suggestion by returning to conversation and completing the handshake 
as normal. 
Other suggestions can be given that don't fall under the "feel 
good" category and are more mischievous than malicious. The 
operator can tell the subject "Look at the hand and stay ... right there. " 
and the subject can be left there looking at their hand for quite some 
time. One operator has reported to have told the subject "Your feet are 
stuck right where ... they are staying. " 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControl101.com 

199 
Handshake Interrupt Version 2 
This variation of the Handshake Interrupt is much more direct 
and simple. 
The operator initiates the handshake and at the moment of 
contact the operator defocuses on the eyes and blank stare and then 
lifts the subjects hands up to their face with the soft but direct 
command of "Look at the hand. " and holds the hand in place. What 
follows is often a string of commands. "Notice the distance of the 
hand and the depth of your thoughts and when the time is right ... 
now ... close the ryes and ... go inside ... " 
In both these versions of the Handshake Interrupt the operator 
refers to the hand of the subject as "the hand" not "your hand" . By 
doing this it "disconnects" the subjects hand from the subject and they 
begin to see it as something that is separate from themselves and if it is 
separated in that way it can be manipulated by an external force. 
"Brain Pirating" 
"Brain Pirating" is the name of a Mind Trick practiced by 
hypnotist Jeffrey Stephens as a way of getting people's attention and 
promoting his own hypnosis practice. 
During this Mind Trick Stephens describes how he causes the 
hand of a clerk at McDonald's to hypnotically stick to the counter. 
NOTE: THIS WILL NOT WORK IF THE PERSON IS BUSY!!! And that 
would be wrong to do anyway as it would be interfering with their business. 
First, let me say that I am no expert. Just a guy who likes playing with 
hypnosis. And when I go places I like to test my skills and give people a 
story to tell their friends. I also tend to draw attention [not intentionally] by 
the fact that I typically wear a hat. Not a 'ball cap'. I wear either a homburg 
or a fedora, the latter being my favorite. And since this isn't common 
anymore, people tend to look at me just a little closer. I also wear 
sunglasses, even at night. [Adds to the mystique, you know.] They are 
polarized so they don't interfere with driving or anything else. 
So I will walk into, let's say Micky D's, and go to the counter. Because my 
sunglasses are just a little bit oversized [they are glass-lensed, polarized, 
fishing glasses, for those who know what I am talking about] the person 
behind the counter (whom I will call Tom for no apparent reason) tends to 
Mind Control 10 1 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

200 
look at my face a bit more directly/intently. (Trying to see my eyes, I would 
guess.) 
Tom asks if he can help me (or take my order, or what ever). I quickly note 
something to focus on (ie. a necklace, bracelet, ring, etc. - something 
personal) that I can draw his attention to and get him to start focusing 
inward about. 
So Tom asks his question. Then I say, "Yes." 
Then I pause for just a moment and then say, "1 would like ... " [PAUSE] 
"Interesting necklace. I *'like' 
that." [Give just a second or two to allow Tom to mentally move inward.] 
" ... a Big Mac meal." 
What I have just accomplished is the following: 
1. Tom focused on me for a second or two. 
2. He went into his one-line spiel, which has the effect of putting him in 
'zone'. [By this I mean that he is now listening for any of the words on 
the menu. He is 'expecting' to hear certain things - with just a small 
margin for things like "hey", "hi", "yes", etc .. Tom has been saying his 
'opener' for hours and getting "Yeah, give me a number one ... " over and 
over again. It is now what he EXPECTS (that is the key word) to 
happen.] 
3. I meet his expectation precisely. And then throw him a curve. 
4. By immediately turning his attention to something that will make him 
mentally turn inward I have created a pattern interrupt in his brain. This 
is why necklaces, chains, small medallions, etc. work best. The item is 
personal, but they cannot readily see it and so they must turn inward to 
get a picture of it. 
5. As though in mid-sentence, I continue with my order. I have now drawn 
his attention back outside. 
To recap (and I hope no one is getting angry that I am making this so 
detailed): I drew his attention to me. Then let him drop into 'zone'. Then 
moved him in that direction slightly. Then completely turned him inward. 
Then immediately pulled him back outward in a way that creates a slight bit 
of confusion, since he thinks he missed part of what I was saying because I 
began speaking in mid-sentence. By this time Tom's brain is off-balance. 
Back to our show: Within a second or two, Tom is punching the keys on the 
register and I jump right into a statement such as, "Isn't it interesting how 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

201 
different people like different things. I like that 'necklace', as I am sure you 
do, too. It's all a matter of preferences. Funny how the mind works. 
Different people 'stick' with different things. You get 'stuck' with the things 
that 'hold you down' and appeal to you." Note that I have not waited at any 
point for Tom to tell me anything about hi necklace. Flow is everything. 
Tom: "Will that be all?" 
"Yes." And keeping my eyes on his [though mine are behind sunglasses] I 
pause for about 2 seconds and say, "The mind is a strange thing, when you 
think about it. The way it gets 'stuck' to something and Just can't pick it up." 
[I hold a $10 bill, closer to me than to him.] I never look away from his face. 
And if he looks away from mine, I quickly do a reverse nod (ie. head 
flicking up rather than down) to draw his attention back up to my face 
(subconscious directional control, perhaps?).] 
Tom: "Your total is $5.47." 
I hold the bill forward very close to the counter [calm down, still a ways to 
go]. Tom will break the 'eye contact' at this point since he has to count the 
change out. Now this is the point where the whole thing can fall apart. If 
Tom is 'not too swift' and has trouble counting your change, or if he has to 
ask for change from the manager because he has run out of quarters, or 
anything that completely breaks the flow, [and this could be you hesitating 
too long as well] it just isn't going to work. 
On average, you will have ideal flow maybe 1 out of 5 or 6 times. But all the 
rest are good setup practice. So go for it. Just don't get frustrated. Enjoy the 
practice and see what you can learn from it. But PLEASE NOTE that if the 
flow is broken, DO NOT proceed with the rest of this as Tom will think you 
are a freak. And that is not what you are going for. ** 
While Tom is counting the change I say, "Your mind may make you do 
things you can't seem to explain or understand. Perhaps you 'hand' someone 
their change and 'you get stuck'." [This is timed to be as he finishes counting 
the change and is moving his hand toward me.] My hands, both of them, are 
still on the counter just about half way between Tom and myself. Since my 
hands are resting lightly on the counter and I make no move to lift them, 
Tom starts to lower his hand toward mine. 
"Do you see it?" [This remark is intended to get Tom to look at me in the 
face again. Another quick reverse nod helps here.] I point toward the 
counter, which he sees peripherally. [Both that last remark and this gesture 
are sufficiently ambiguous as to put Tom in a (very) slightly confused state.] 
Tom reaches to put the change on the counter near my hand. When he does 
[all of the following assumes that Tom is right-handed] I tap the side of his 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

202 
hand with my right index finger [sometimes several times, kind oflike doing 
Morse code] and gently push downward with the first two fingers of my left 
hand, until his hand is touching the counter. "You find your hand is stuck 
and you cannot lift it no matter how hard you try. 'Try' but you cannot lift 
it. " 
The look on Tom's face at this point is extremely gratifYing to my playful 
sensibilities. I quickly pull out a business card that I have strategically 
placed for this quick flourish. Tap his hand (which has now only been 'stuck' 
for a few seconds - perhaps 3 to 4 seconds) with the card, and say, "Back to 
norma!." [Or alternatively, "You can lift it now."] As his hand comes up I 
extend the card with a smile and say, "Hypnosis is a very powerful thing. 
'You can take control of your life. Hypnosis can help make it happen.'" 
[Those last two sentences are on the bottom of my business card as my 
slogan.] 
I smile, take my change, and step back to wait for my order. And I enjoy it 
as Tom goes back and starts talking about what just happened. For weeks 
following this, the people watch me closely whenever I go there. And 
sometimes ask for my card. And by going only at times when business is 
very slow, I give them the chance to ask me questions. 
If nothing else, you can use this technique to think about other ways you can 
use influence techniques within a normal situation or context. 
Jeffrey Stephens 
midwest_ hypnosis@charter.net 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControlIOI.com 

204 
Enchantment 
Enchantment is a tenn that comes from magic and in all of my 
personal experience it seems to be the most powerful and positive 
fonn of Mind Control. 
It is positive because, in my experience, everyone wants to be 
enchanted (it is the opposite of being cursed) and it is powerful for the 
same reason. 
To get the feeling of enchantment imagine being told a story or 
a conversation that draws you into a magical world where anything is 
possible and you know you are completely safe to go there. 
Like some of the psychic influence enchantment requires the 
operator to do a certain degree of work on themselves first. you will 
find that when you are able to create the mental state of enchantment 
as an operator the rest is easy. 
Because no one I know has done any work in the field of 
"influence by enchantment" what follows 
are 
my personal 
observations and models on the subject. 
Attraction/Liking 
Contrary to most models of influence the first quality of 
enchantment is not the outcome but instead a love for the subject. This 
is not a sexual or romantic attraction but an intense liking. This means 
that regardless of the established relationship between the operator and 
the subject the operator feels a deep attraction to the subject. This 
feeling of attraction/liking causes the operator to completely focus in 
on the subject in a way that most everyone would enjoy. It creates a 
compelling feeling of attention within the subject that increases their 
willingness to follow the operators suggestions. 
This intense liking also compels the operator to pace the 
subject making rapport very easy. 
The Outcome 
Once this attraction/liking is established then the outcome can 
be given some focus by the operator. To use an analogy, 
attraction/liking is the boat and its engine, the outcome is the rudder 
that guides the vessel. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

205 
Fulfillment 
The feeling of Fulfillment is the next quality. If the operator is 
feeling completely fulfilled with the interaction then there is no sense 
of disappointment, regardless of how the subject responds. This 
feeling of fulfillment results in the operator having a greater sense of 
flexibility so that if something does not work it is okay and something 
else is tried. 
Eagerness/Excitement 
With the rapport that is created through attraction/liking the 
eagerness/excitement ofthe operator subtly creates a willingness in the 
subject that compels the subject to follow. This model of Enchantment 
is strictly my own. As you go through this process consider how you 
would want to be enchanted if the opportunity came about. Your 
outcome as a controller would be to create something magical and to 
start that magic with yourself. 
You will know when you've got it because the magic will 
linger. 
Good luck and I wish you something magicaL 
Mind Control 101 www.MindControl101.com 

206 
What are the Personal Dangers of Using 
Mind Control? 
Perhaps this is obvious, perhaps not. The fact is that this may 
not even be a hazard except for a few. It is the detachment from the 
rest of humanity. There is fine balance one must maintain between our 
loving connectedness with humanity and the objectification that occurs 
when you look at people as if they were sheep to be led. No one can 
teach this balance and it most often occurs as a result of long mindful 
meditations. It is essentially a paradox; on one end you are human and 
a part of humanity, on the other end you seek to elevate yourself and 
become separate. 
I can give you no advice on how to deal with this paradox. 
Only to make you aware of it and wish you well. 
But there are worse maladies that one can suffer when using 
Mind Control and so I list for you what they are. If there is a sign of 
them in your behavior it may already be too late. 
Signs of being out of control. 
Egomania 
If you get a taste of power and the ability to influence others 
there is a hazard that has befallen even the most sane people. 
Having influence over others will tend to make one susceptible 
to believing in their own self-importance and infallibility. 
Paranoia 
Believing you are infallible may lead one to perceive any 
opposition, no matter how slight, as a wholesale assault. With 
just a little bit of nurturing this could escalate to reclusive 
behaviors and stock piling of firearms. 
Signs of paranoia? 
• 
As a general rule it is when you start collecting weapons for the 
sake of protecting your cause. 
• 
Reclusive behavior. 

207 
• 
Preaching an us/them gospel. 
• 
Talking about your enemies and how to deal with them more than 
having fun. 
Restricted World View 
If you begin to believe in your own self importance it is likely 
that you will also begin to believe in all sorts of bullshit you are telling 
yourself. The detriment of this is a closed mind and loss of willingness 
to consider other possibilities and world views. That is like becoming 
the ex-smoker who now makes a smoker's life hell. 
If you start to take yourself too seriously and can't laugh at 
your own screw-ups (you will have a lot) it is probably too late. 
Obsession 
Obsession is like a drug. It keeps you up and energized but it 
also restricts you in ways you can't imagine. The worst part isn't the 
obsession, it is when you lose interest in your obsession. Then you are 
likely to suffer depression and begin looking for your next fix. 
Believing that your doctrine is the answer will prevent you 
from exploring any further. 
To avoid obsession your best remedy is to have a full life with 
many dimensions. A wide variety of friends and interests should keep 
you balanced. 
Sadism 
Mind Control has gotten a very bad name because of the abuse 
that the mentally unstable can do with it. For a few, power over others 
creates the willingness to test the limits and leads to unrestrained 
abuse. 
As mentioned in the beginning of this book it is best to do only 
those acts of Mind Control which you would want others to do to you. 
Anyone who uses Mind Control will find it much more 
rewarding, and with more benefits to motivate your subjects by having 
them want your presence instead of fear it. 
Mind Control 101 www.MindControl101.com 

How to use Mind Control and not 
become a paranoid gun collecting nut that 
sees conspiracy at every turn. 
By far, one of the best ways to keep yourself from tipping off 
the deep end while employing the tools of Mind Control is to have a 
diverse group of friends who have no fear of telling you when you are 
full of shit. These could be drinking buddies or just friends from your 
past. 
A more systematic way of keeping yourself in check is done by 
some groups that fully understand the possible dangers of tipping off 
the deep end using Mind Control. They assign an "insubordinate" to 
every person in their hierarchy. The purpose of the insubordinate is to 
give unrestrained criticism without punishment. This was the position 
of the court jester of the royal court. 
Keep in mind you don't have to agree with what they tell you. 
You only have to listen. It may be the best advise of your life. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControIIOI.com 

Conclusion: What you will learn by 
applying Mind Control in your life 
If this hasn't frightened you and you've, in fact, managed to 
read this far, there are only a few other things that will experience if 
you continue to study Mind Control. 
• 
Mind Control becomes an obsession, or at least a sincere interest. 
It will be one of those things you will want to constantly test and 
master. 
• 
It is not as important as it used to be. Once you begin to "think up 
a level" you will raise yourself above the turmoil, compulsions and 
desires, that first motivated you to learn to control the thoughts and 
actions of others. The result: a calmness that puts things in a clear 
perspective. Your original obsession with Mind Control and power 
will have been realized and your next desire will be to see how 
skillfully you can wield that power. Ultimately, as you are 
surrounded by the calm that true power brings, your ambition will 
be to see how little effort it takes to get what you want. 
• 
Power is a tool, nothing more. 
As much as we try and should try to elevate ourselves above 
them the true persuaders of our actions will continue to be our fears, 
vanities and appetites. To believe anything else is to embrace a 
Pollyanna simplicity and deny our origins as animals. 
Even though this is from where we've come and will continue 
to be a part of us, we should attempt to raise ourselves. Though it is a 
futile effort, it is a worthy one and its an attempt to grow. 
There will always be a vast majority who continue to only 
allow these impulses to guide them. Ultimately your goal is to not be 
one of them. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOl.com 

Recommended Mind Control Movies 
• 
The Usual Suspects 
• 
The Grifters 
• 
Runaway Jury 
• 
The Sting 
• 
Scanner Darkly 
• 
The Trueman Show 
• 
The Sixth Sense 
• 
Unbreakable 
• 
Signs 
• 
1984 
• 
Dark City 
• 
The Matrix 
• 
The Mothman Prophecies 
• 
The Manchurian Candidate 
• 
The Butterfly Effect 
• 
the MTV cartoon 'The Maxx' 
• 
The Power (old scifi horror movie about super psychics 
bending reality and perception) 
• 
Silence of the Lambs 
• 
Red Dragon 
• 
V for Vendetta 
• 
The Illusionist 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControllOI.com 

Additional Resources 
The 33 Strategies by Robert Greene 
The Art of Seduction by Robert Green 
The 48 Laws of Power By Robert Greene 
Perfect Mind Control by Dantalion Jones 
Gaslighting, The Double Whammy, Interrogation, and Other 
Methods of Covert Control in Psychotherapy and Analysis by 
Theo L. Dorpat 
Don't Shoot The Dog by Ellen Prior 
Deeper Insights Into The Illuminati Formula by Fritz Springmeier 
& Cisco Wheeler 
Combating Cult Mind Control by Stephen Hassan 
1984 by George Orwell 
Forbidden Keys of Persuasion by Blair Warren 
N ever by Lied to Again by David Lieberman 
How to Get Anyone to do Anything by David Lieberman 
Enchanted Evening by Kenton Knepper 
The Frame Game: Persuasion Excellence by Michael Hall 
An Insiders Guide to Sub modalities - By William MacDonald and 
Richard Bandler 
Any religious of the hundred of religious texts that are used as 
doctrine. 
Mind Control 101 
www.MindControll0l.com 

