

Mind Control 
Hypnosis 
By Dantalion Jones 
Author of 
Perfected Mind Control- The Unauthorized Black 
Book Of Hypnotic Mind Control 
Mind Control 1 01 - How To Influence the Thoughts 
and Minds of Others Without Them Knowing or 
Caring 
The Forhidden Book Of Getting What You Want 
Cult Control - The Building of a Cult 
The Delta Success Programming CD series 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Mind Control Publishing 
Copyright DantalionJones 2010 
ISBN 1448619181 
EAN-13 9781448619184 
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights 
under copyrights reserved above, no part of this 
publication may be reproduced, stored in, or 
introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means (electronic, 
mechanic at photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise), without the prior written permission of 
the copyright owner. 
Formatted using Open Office 

Dedication 
To all those wonderful friends and brothers living "behind the 
veil" who have brought me from darkness to light and who taught 
me that there is no greater ambition than to cast a boulder into the 
current of time and alter the course of history. They have shown 
me the programs we live by and the programs behind the 
programs. They have shown me that while we all value free will 
very few truly have it ... or want it. 
Also 
To my faithful djinn, familiar and constant companion, Dantalion, 
the seventy-first spirit of the Goetia, "His Office is to teach all 
Arts and Sciences unto any; and to declare the Secret Counsel of 
anyone; for he knoweth the Thoughts of all Men and Women, 
and can change them at his Will. He can cause Love, and show 
the Similitude of any person, and show the same by a Vision, let 
them be in what part ofthe World they Will." 

Table of Contents 
Note to Reader ..... 1 
Introduction ..... 2 
What is Mind Control? .... 5 
Hypnosis Myths Made True ..... 7 
What Is Hypnosis? .... 8 
Who Can and Cannot Be Hypnotized? .... 16 
Who NOT to Hypnotize ..... 18 
Can People Be Made To Do Things Against Their Will? ... 20 
The Myth of The Will ..... 20 
Transference and Values Elicitation ..... 23 
Values Elicitation ..... 24 
Undressing in Public: An Example of Hypnosis ..... 30 
Overview of The Hypnosis Process ..... 32 
The Pre-Talk. .... 34 
The Entrainment ..... 39 
U sing Reward and Punishment ..... 40 
The Hypnotic Induction ..... 42 
Five Things That Assist To Induce Hypnosis ..... 49 
A Comment on Inductions ..... 52 
Rapid Hypnotic Inductions ..... 53 
Subtle "Tricks" Within The Hypnosis Process ..... 57 
Tips, Techniques, and Tricks of The Hypnotist ..... 65 
Using The Subject's Own Words ..... 65 
Pointing Out Successes and Using Them ..... 66 
The Voice of Experience ..... 67 
Places In The Mind ..... 68 
The Hypnotic Seal ..... 78 
Creating Useful Mental Structures In The Mind ..... 84 
Training to Hallucinate ..... 85 
Bottles, Boxes, Treasure Chests and Containers ..... 87 
Useful Hypnosis Scripts ..... 96 
The Mirror of The Future ..... 96 
The Cravings Crusher ..... 100 
Creating Negative Hallucinations ..... 104 
The NLP Phobia Hypnosis Process ..... 107 

For Fun: Hypnotic Drunkenness ..... 111 
The Dantalionjones Hypnosis Setting ..... 114 
The PMC Processes ..... 117 
Conclusion ..... 187 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Note to Reader 
Traditional martial arts are filled with veteran 
fighters who have dedicated their lives to learn their 
craft. The most senior among them have gained such 
skill that they make their actions appear effortless. 
They may even have come to believe that if they can 
do it so easily that it must be easy for others. That 
clearly is not the case. 
They have forgotten the years of work and 
training they have put into learning and mastery. 
They may even treat students and newcomers like 
idiots for not knowing what has taken them years to 
learn. 
My experience has often left me cynical and 
jaded as if, at times, I've forgotten the seeds of 
learning. To those I hypnotize I forget they are 
sometimes afraid and anticipate something magical. 
To those I teach I tend to be impatient with their 
fear and timidity. 
Here is my very best advice to the reader who 
wants to learn and practice hypnosis: be fearless. 
Go out and test what you've learned until you've 
mastered it. Don't wait to learn more when you have 
enough to act now. This is good advice in hypnosis 
and in life. 
Any mistake you make by being bold and 
audacious can usually be overcome by greater 
audacity. 
Perhaps this sounds foolhardy, but timidity will 
only yield you aJife half lived. 
Be Fearless. 
Dantalion Jones 
1 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Introduction 
As with most of the books I've written, I will 
attempt to 
exploit the 
reader's 
sincere and 
sometimes twisted interest in mind control and, in 
this case, specifically hypnosis. 
For many there has long existed a romance 
with being able to talk someone into a lethargic and 
robotic state in which they will do things without 
any personal inhibition. 
The mind runs wild with 
possibilities. 
Many a child's juvenile fantasies for 
power and control have been fueled by witnessing a 
performing hypnotist at the county fair. 
But theory and reality seldom come into a 
perfect convergence, and this holds true of hypnosis 
as well. 
However, my many years of doing hypnosis in 
various settings helped prove to me several things 
that most hypnotists will work fervently to deny or to 
explain away as myth. I suspect this is because most 
hypnotists have never dedicated themselves to 
testing the limits of the hypnotic arts. They have 
likely been subjected to narrow minded training that 
indoctrinated them to work within rigid constraints, 
and therefore hold limited ideas of what's possible. 
While it is wise to understand what these 
limits are, I've never found a benefit to blindly 
accepting 
them. 
The 
power 
of hypnosis 
is 
underrated because the power of the mind is 
underrated. The mind can decide to control its 
breathing, heart beat, blood pressure and other 
things that were once thought to be involuntary. 
Studying, learning and practicing hypnosis and 
related skills like NLP have been passions for me 
and, were I to die today, I could say have played a 
2 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
major part in the "great work" of my life. 
I'd like to point out that this book will talk 
specifically about the authoritarian style of hypnosis, 
as opposed to the permissive style of hypnosis made 
famous by Milton Erickson. 
Authoritarian hypnosis is what people are used 
to seeing when they go to a hypnosis show, and is 
what they are most familiar with from TV and media. 
It is an overt style of hypnosis where the hypnotist 
and subject have both agreed upon their roles. The 
subject agrees from the onset to follow the 
hypnotist's suggestions, and the hypnotist agrees to 
keep the subject safe and offer good healthy 
suggestions. 
Many people have made powerful claims about 
how someone can be covertly hypnotized to do 
things. Even I have written on this subject (see my 
book Mind Control Language Patterns.) Let me 
make it clear that this book has none of that. You'll 
be exposed to techniques and methodologies some 
would consider "sneaky," but none of it is covert. 
And so in this book I intend to explain what 
I've learned doing hypnosis on people who know 
they are going to be hypnotized. A portion of this 
book is likely to be new, profane and even sacrilege. 
I make no apology if a few icons fall during these 
heresies. I seek only to tell what I've discovered. 
Let us not forget that Galileo and Charles Darwin 
were also heretics. 
In this book I'll explain the theory and 
application of my experience in the art of hypnosis. 
This will include how hypnosis relates to the concept 
of mind control. and a sincere look at the so-called 
"myths" of hypnosis. It will uncover a shocking look 
at the concept of the human will, and a new but 
3 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
meaningful definition of hypnosis. The details of the 
hypnotic experience will be described, beginning at 
the setting used for hypnosis, the preparation for 
hypnosis, and what to say. Lastly, you'll be given the 
specific hypnotic scripts that have been used to 
create positive and dramatic change in others. 
For the neophyte this book is designed to 
inform. For the experienced hypnotist it may inform 
and also surprise. 
4 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
What is Mind Control? 
Story #1 
A man enters an AA meeting for the first time. 
He has personally experienced what alcohol has 
done to him, his family and his job. He sees all the 
people one by one describing their ("battle with 
addiction. He feels as if this is his only hope for a 
better life. He stands and sees the eyes of others 
focus on him, his voice quivering, "Hello, my name 
is ... /1 
Story #2 
The doctor has told her what she has already 
suspected. She has CPD, cardiopulmonary disease. 
Her life long love affair with the cigarette will either 
have to end now, or she will have to begin carrying a 
bottle of oxygen wherever she goes. The thought of 
stopping smoking creates a shot of anxiety as she 
opens the paper and sees an advertisement that 
reads "Stop Smoking With Hypnosis is 20 Minutes./I 
Story #3 
The young woman enters her appointment 
with her counselor weighed down by a lifetime of 
guilt. The secret that she has held all her life was 
now about to end. The words come out. Tears are 
shed. At the end of the session she notices a 
lightness in her step. Something has changed within 
her and she realized she can begin to make better 
choices in her life. 
Let's make it clear. Mind control is happening 
all around us. 
This is not the fearful mind control envisioned 
5 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
by the paranoid conspiracy theorist who see covert 
signs and manipulations written on the back of a 
dollar bill. This is the mind control that happens 
within the settings we walk through every day. It is 
the 
mind 
control 
that 
happens 
in 
friendly 
conversations and the subtle pleas that tug at us in 
everyday life. 
Is mind control good or bad? 
Neither. Mind control is the sincere attempt to 
influence our thoughts to effect our lives in some 
measurable way. To look objectively at mind control 
we must abandon all the moralistic garbage others 
have given it. 
Mind control is at the very core of our 
communication. Even when we talk to ourselves 
(and we do it more often than we might admit) we 
are doing it to influence ourselves. 
People are even willing to employ the mind 
control skills of others when their own mind control 
skills fail. 
This is why people visit or hire 
psychologists, hypnotists, and coaches. 
There often looms an aura of mystery around 
these people but still their services are needed and 
desired. 
Hypnosis is probably the most mysterious and 
misunderstood form of mind control. There have 
been endless books written on the subject that often 
say much of the same thing. The authors of these 
books are usually experienced and well; meaning 
professionals, but are invested in maintaining a 
divide between "mind control" and "hypnosis". 
I intend to close that divide. 
Hypnosis i5 a form of mind control. That does 
not make it bad. It makes it an extension of how we 
communicate. Nothing more. 
6 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Hypnosis Myths Made True 
(Based on my long and jaded experience) 
Like psychology, neuroscience ,or any field of 
the mind, it is hard to find anyone who can speak 
about hypnosis with any degree of thorough 
understanding. Those who can are usually people 
who 
have at least some training and, 
like 
psychologists and neurologists, are not likely to be 
present at every dinner party you go to. 
The result is that our understanding is based 
on an imperfect knowledge, and we are left to rely 
on hearsay, fantasy and popular fiction to fill in the 
blanks. From this "half knowledge" comes myths 
and legends about hYPnosis. 
That we can call them myths gives most 
hypnotists the license to dispel them which allow 
their subjects to feel safe and secure. 
But let us not forget that the word "myth" does 
not mean "false" or "lie." It means "story." We will 
review these stories, and while others may try to 
dispel them, we will explain and elaborate on them. 
The two biggest myths to be explained are as 
follows: 
• Some people cannot be hypnotized. 
• You cannot make someone do something 
against their will by using hypnosis. 
You may be a bit surprised. 
Let's first look at what hypnosis is. 
7 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
What Is Hypnosis? 
Do a little research and you III find that there 
are 
many 
people 
who 
have 
given 
different 
definitions of hypnosis. For the most part, these 
definitions are accurate and give a good idea of what 
constitutes 
hypnosis. 
Here are some 
of the 
definitions: 
James Braid Oune 19, 1795 - March 25, 1860) 
The real origin and essence of the hypnotic 
condition is the induction of a habit of abstraction or 
mental concentration, in which" as in reverie or 
spontaneous abstraction, the powers of the mind are 
so much engrossed with a single idea or train of 
thought as, for the nonce, to render the individual 
unconscious of, or indifferently conscious to, all 
other ideas, impressions, or trains of thought. 
Hippolyte Bernheim (1840-1919) 
To define hypnotism as induced sleep, is to 
give a too narrow meaning to the word, to overlook 
the many phenomena which suggestion can bring 
about independently of sleep. I define hypnotism as 
the induction of a peculiar psychical condition which 
increases the susceptibility to suggestion. Often, it is 
true, the sleep that may be induced facilitates 
suggestion, but it is not the necessary preliminary. 
It is suggestion that rules hypnotism. 
I have tried to show that suggested sleep 
differs in no respect from natural sleep. The same 
phenomena of suggestion can be obtained in natural 
sleep, if one succeeds in putting one's self into 
relationship [rapport] with the sleeping person 
without waking him. 
8 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
This new idea which I propose concerning the 
hypnotic influence/ this wider definition given to the 
word hypnotism/ permits us to include in the same 
class of phenomena all the various methods which 
acting upon imagination induce the psychical 
condition of exalted susceptibility to suggestion 
[hyper-suggestihility] with or without sleep. 
Sigmund Freud (May 6, 1856 - September 23, 
1939) 
It has long been known though it has only 
been established beyond all doubt during the last 
few decades/ that it is possible/ by certain gentle 
means/ to put people into a quite peculiar mental 
state very similar to sleep and on that account 
described as 'hypnosis. I 
[. • .J The hypnotic state 
exhibits a great variety of gradations. In its lightest 
degree the hypnotic suhject is aware only of 
something like a slight insensibili~ while the most 
extreme degree/ 
which is marked by special 
peculiarities/ is known as 'somnambulism ~ 
on 
account of its resemblance 
to 
the natural 
phenomena of sleep-walking. But hypnosis is in no 
sense a sleep like our nocturnal sleep or like the 
sleep produced by drugs. Changes occur in it and 
mentalt.functions are retained during it which are 
absent in normal sleep. 
The UK Book of Statues 
"Hypnotism N includes hypnotism/ mesmerism 
and any similar act or process which produces or is 
intended to produce in any person any form of 
induced sleep or trance in which the susceptibility of 
the mind of that person to suggestion or direction is 
9 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
increased or intended to he increased hut does not 
include hypnotism~ mesmerism or any similar act or 
process which is self-induced. [The Hypnotism Act:, 
1952J 
The British Medical Association 
A temporary condition of altered attention in 
the suhject which may he induced hy another person 
and in which a variety of phenomena may appear 
spontaneously or in response to verhal or other 
stimuli. These phenomena include alterations in 
consciousness and memo~ increased susceptihility 
to suggestion and the production in the suhject of 
responses and ideas unfamiliar to him in his usual 
state of mind. Further, phenomena such as 
anaesthesia~ paralysis and rigidity of muscles~ and 
vasomotor changes can he produced and removed in 
the hypnotic state. 
[BMA~ 
Medical 
use of 
Hypnotism ~ 1955J 
Dave Elman (1900-1967) 
Hypnosis is a state of mind in which the critical 
faculty of the human is hypassect and selective 
thinking estahlished. 
Gil Boyne 
Hypnosis is a natural state of mind with 
special identifying characteristics: 
1. An extraordinary quality ofrelaxation. 
2. An emotionalized desire to satisfy the 
suggested hehaviour: The person feels like 
doing what the hypnotist suggests~ provided 
that what is suggested does not generate 
conflict with his helief system. 
10 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
3. The organism becomes self-regulating and 
produces normalization of the central nervous 
system. 
4. Heightened and selective sensitivity to 
stimuli perceived by the five senses and four 
basic perceptions. 
5. Immediate softening of psychic defenses. 
The UK Council for Psychotherapy 
Hypno-Psychotherapy originates in procedures 
and practices discovered and recorded over the last 
three hundred years. The first formal exploration 
and beneficial application of hypnotic phenomena 
began in the 1750's. Increasing awareness" over the 
last 100 years" of the pervasiveness and importance 
in human experience of what are now more 
appropriately 
described 
as 
'altered 
state 
phenomena' has led to huge shifts in theoretical 
understanding" 
convergence 
with 
discoveries 
emerging from modern neuro-science and much 
increased consistency in application. This has been 
accompanied by the creation of a substantial 
scientific literature. 
Hypnosis describes a range of naturally 
occurring states of altered awareness which may 
vary from momentary distractions and 'absences' 
through much enhanced states of relaxation to very 
deep states of inward focus and awareness .. The 
mental processes which can occur in any of these 
states" appropriately utilised" are generally far more 
flexible and potentially far more powerful in 
effecting change than those we can achieve in most 
everyday states of active conscious awareness. 
These states may be induced quite formally or quite 
naturalistically" in an almost unnoticeable way" 
11 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
depending on the requirement of the problem/ the 
capability of the practitioner and the needs of the 
client. 
As 
well 
as 
alleviating 
a 
range 
of 
disadvantageous habits and many physical ailments/ 
Hypno-Psychotherapy also deals in deep-seated 
problems involving themes and procedures in many 
ways similar to those addressed by many other 
branches of Psychotherapy. Hypno-Psychotherapists 
take a wide-ranging and eclectic view in helping 
clients to understand and to alleviate psychological 
difficulties. 
At one 
end of the 
spectrum 
Hypno-
Psychotherapists base their diagnostic work and 
therapeutic strategies in modem information 
processing models whilst others have emphases in 
other orientations ( e.g. 
Cognitive/ 
Cognitive 
Analytic/ Psychodynamic or Counselling modes J. In 
all cases/ practice differs from other forms of 
psychotherapy in the deliberate ( direct and indirect 
J use of altered mental states and supporting 
therapeutic structures as the principal medium for 
effecting change. 
It should be emphasized that the methods and 
strategies used in Hypno-Psychotherap~ though 
powerful and often speedy in effect also respect and 
are attuned to the qualities and characteristics of 
the individual client involved. They seek to utilize 
and enhance the resources and capabilities that 
reside in all people/ and do not by any means 
require the client to respond to any standardized 
technique or to fit into any standardized pattem. 
While flexibility is paramount the working 
relationship in Hypno-Psychotherapy strives for 
equality between client and therapist in providing a 
12 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
safe and supportive environment where the client 
can explore and clarify relevant personal matters. In 
encouraging agreed modification of the client's 
heliefs/ emotional responses and hehaviou~ the 
prohlem may require the therapist to assume a more 
active 
or 
directive 
role. 
In 
shorter 
term 
engagements/ it can he used to inculcate skills and 
overcome limiting hahits or personal and social 
inhihitions. During longer-term therap~ the working 
relationship may present a dynamic context for the 
client to examine and work through important self-
protection issues/ including the reframing and 
resolution of challenging early experiences and 
liheration 
from 
previous hlocks to personal 
development. 
Hypno-Psychotherapy may he valuahle to 
anyone seeking to resolve specific prohlems/ or for 
personal development. 
Whitney Hibbard and Raymond Worring 
Hypnosis is a controlled dissociated state in 
which the conscious/ criticaL intellectuaL and 
logical portion of one's mind is disassociatett 
inhibited misdirected or distracted allowing for 
direct access to one's suhconscious/ therehy making 
the 
elicitation 
of natural 
and 
preexisting 
suhconscious mental mechanisms possihle. 
N ow that you have an idea of what others 
think hypnosis is and, if you have experienced 
hypnosis, these definitions can all seem accurate, for 
the most part. 
Here is the Dantalion Jones definition of 
hypnosis: 
13 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Hypnosis is the exact following of suggestions in 
order to create a meaningful experience. 
That's it. Short simple and to the point. 
Hypnosis is the exact following of suggestions in 
order to create a meaningful experience. 
In looking at the parts of this definition we'll 
start with the word suggestion. A suggestion is just 
that, a suggestion. It is not an order, command or 
imperative. 
A suggestion does not have to be 
followed. At some level there must be an agreement 
by the hypnotic subject to follow the suggestions. 
This can be an overt or implied agreement, but 
without following the suggestions nothing can take 
place. 
The next words to examine are 
exact 
following. Following suggestions exactly allows the 
hypnotist to describe in detail the experience the 
subject is to mentally enact. It allows the subject to 
feel emotions that are suggested, reactions and 
responses that are suggested, and to make possible 
things that at one time might not have been within 
the subject's realm of reality. 
To create a meaningful experience are the 
remaining words. To understand why a meaningful 
experience is needed, consider that most people who 
want to make changes already know what they 
should do. Overweight people know that they should 
limit their food and increase their physical activity, 
but simply knowing the information does not make 
people change. On the other hand, when people go 
through experiences that are meaningful to them 
they can make dramatic and significant changes 
14 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
immediately. 
Consider people who have gone through the 
experience of a religious conversion. They have been 
known to change their behaviors in a major and 
dramatic way. The same is true when one has a life 
threatening experience. 
In both experiences they reevaluate their life 
and behaviors and from that meaningful experience 
the information became important enough to create 
a new behavior. 
The idea of a meaningful experience allows us 
to include numerous life changing experiences that 
people go through, from rites of passage to military 
training. 
By 
adding 
the exact following of 
suggestions you include the traditional hypnotic 
experience. 
So the key to being good at inducing hypnosis 
has several components. 
1. The hypnotist must get from the hypnotic 
subject either an overt or implied agreement 
to follow the suggestions exactly. 
2. The 
hypnotist 
must 
give 
acceptable 
suggestions that will create a meaningful 
experience for the subject. 
Before 
we 
explore 
forming 
acceptable 
suggestions and how to get agreement to follow 
them exactly, lets first look at the various other 
myths of hypnosis. 
15 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Who Can and Cannot Be Hypnotized? 
People will often ask a hypnotist 
II are there 
people who canlt be hypnotized?" 
The fact is that the hypnotic state is a natural 
state that people go in and out of all the time. The 
only real difference is that in hypnosis someone is 
guiding you through that state. 
Consider what happens in those moments 
before you drift off to sleep. You close your eyes, you 
still your body, and your attention begins to turn 
away from the outside world as you fall into an inner 
world that is all your own. This is very much like the 
hypnotic state with the exception that someone is 
guiding you through that state. 
Understand that everybody can enter that 
state; therefore, anybody can be hypnotized. 
However, whether you, t or someone else can 
hypnotize them is a completely different matter. 
More on this soon. 
There are conditions where a person will not 
respond to hypnosis. These are: 
• People with a low IQ or a brain disorder. 
To be hypnotized you must first have an 
attention span, and some neurological problems can 
inhibit one1s ability to pay attention. As a general 
rule these problems must be severe. Schizophrenics 
already have a tenuous grasp on reality and 
hypnotizing them is simply best avoided. Attention 
Deficit Disorder (ADD) is not always enough to 
prevent hypnosis, although the hypnotist might have 
to get creative. 
16 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
• People drunk or on drugs. 
While alcohol removes inhibitions it does not 
make hypnosis easier. Most drugs will inhibit the 
brain from responding to anything. The only 
exception to this is a rare class of highly controlled 
drugs called "hypnotics." The most well known is 
sodium pentathol, also known as "truth serum." 
• Idiots 
I use the term idiots to describe a very small 
class of people who come to a hypnotist with a 
complete misconception of hypnosis that even the 
hypnotist cannot dispel. Even though the hypnotist 
tells them to "follow the suggestions" and "hypnosis 
demands your cooperation" they believe that to be 
convinced they are hypnotized they must be unable 
to resist the hypnotists suggestions. Thus, they 
resist all the hypnotists suggestions and they say "I 
can't be hypnotized." 
These latter group of people are thankfully 
rare and will justify their reactions by what they've 
seen on TV and in the movies. To them anything that 
is less than magical, instant, dramatic and puppet-
like submission to the hypnotist means they cannot 
be hypnotized. 
• Children 
Actually, the fact is that most children can be 
hypnotized. Children have not learned to inhibit 
their imagination so the truth is that children can't 
not be hypnotized. 
17 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Who NOT to Hypnotize 
There are many hypnotists in the world who 
are compassionate, patient, caring and empathetic 
people and who are usually willing to help anyone 
with their skills of hypnosis. I am not one of those 
people. 
While I generally like people and love using 
hypnosis I am also very lazy and don't like to work. 
There are people who may genuinely want my help 
but who I've learned to refer to someone else. These 
people don't fall into a "type," but there are certain 
behaviors I look out for. Here is my personal list of 
red flags of people to avoid: 
• People who want to negotiate down your fee. 
• People consistently late for appointments. 
• People who monopolize your time with phone 
calls and stay beyond the appointment time. 
• People who expect you to save them, and those 
who see themselves as perpetually victimized 
by the world. 
• People 
who 
have 
been 
diagnosed 
with 
borderline personality disorder, as these 
people will likely demonstrate all of the above 
behaviors. 
The group of people who expect you to save 
them may seem like good candidates as hypnosis 
subjects because they would seem to be willing to 
follow the instructions you give them. While this may 
18 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
be the case on occasion, it is more likely that you 
will 
have 
someone 
who 
has 
a 
pathological 
commitment to their own misery. 
To explain further, their entire identity is 
based on a belief that "no one knows my pain," and 
to remove their pain will leave them in chaos, in 
spite of what they say. You may help them and for a 
moment they will notice they are not feeling 
miserable, but they will then have to create an 
entirely new perception of who they are. If you help 
them you may discover that they will begin to 
instruct you in how everything you are doing to help 
them is not the right fit for them, but they will still 
want your help. 
If you work with this type of personality it is 
likely they will begin to cancel out all the good 
reasons you got into business. 
If you have a lot of confidence in your ability 
you may want to try to help them, but my advise for 
these people is to quickly and kindly refer them to 
someone else. It's a good rule to stick with clients 
whom you can categorize at lithe worried well." 
Now let's tackle the really BIG myth; that 
people cannot be hypnotized against their will. 
Hold on to your seat because most hypnotists 
won't want you to learn this information. 
19 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Can People Be Made To Do Things Against 
Their Will? 
The audience has filled the seats. As the lights 
go down out steps the gentleman in a tuxedo who 
invites people to a row of chairs and proceeds to 
hypnotize them. Because the audience is all over 
twenty-one the hypnotist goes wild and has his 
subjects doing the most hilarious and unimaginable 
things. They seem to be stripped of all inhibitions 
and common sense. When the show ends people 
forget the hypnotist's first few words about hypnosis 
and ask themselves, "can people be made to do 
things in hypnosis against their will?" 
You will not be the first person to ponder that 
question nor will you be the last. 
If you want a short and simple answer to that 
question the answer is "no," but looking at the 
question in greater detail can be very interesting 
and sometimes uncomfortable. 
This 
myth 
is 
the 
reason 
that 
people 
occasionally have an unreasonable fear of hypnosis 
and hypnotists. 
It should be noted that while hypnotists have 
commonly been feared for willfully controlling their 
subjects and doing bad things with that control, that 
fear has not been passed so easily to priests, clergy, 
doctors and counselors. All of these professions 
possess an equal power to exploit and abuse their 
clients, and yet people still fear hypnosis. Strange! 
The Myth of The Will 
The myth of the Will is that when we focus our 
intention to make something happen we are 
20 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
exercising our Will. 
What one can be capable of by using their Will 
can inspire awe and wonder. It is by means of Will 
that nations have been built, buildings raised and 
fortunes earned ... all by shear acts of Will. 
The problem with the myth of Will is that, 
while it can be assumed to exist, very few people use 
their Will for anything more than getting out of bed 
and pouring a bowl of cereal. 
To really use the Will all one has to do is set an 
outcome and work to achieve it. The strength of a 
person's WilL or Will Power, can be measured by 
how well they accomplish it. Most people will make 
some effort toward their outcome, but sustaining 
that effort is where most people fall short. They have 
a Will to stop smoking, to exercise, to lose weight or 
end an unhealthy habit, but their Will is weak. On 
the other side of this dynamic think of athletes who 
want to be Olympic gold medalists. Their Will is set 
towards one end: being the best they can be in their 
sport. Every waking moment is spent training and 
focusing on that goal. 
Another example of real Will can be found 
amid those business people who see a business 
empire in their future but seem to have few 
immediate resources. With their Will set they go 
about doing whatever needs to be done to work 
toward the future that they foresee. They plan 
diligently, 
learn 
new 
skills, 
create 
alliances, 
conserve what they have 
earned and make 
necessary sacrifices. If there is a challenge or 
obstacle they adapt but always with their goal in 
mind. 
So now I ask you, how many people have this 
later type of Will? 
21 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The answer is very, very few. 
Most people crumble at their first or second 
effort. A person wanting to quit smoking lives a 
week without the habit but upon smoking one 
cigarette at a bar with friends they deem themselves 
a failure and give up. They could have taken the 
event 
as 
a 
lesson 
and 
simply 
recommitted 
themselves to now lasting even longer, but they do 
not. 
They make no effort to see their Will as a 
muscle to be exercised and strengthened and thus 
they give up. 
Returning now to the question, II can hypnosis 
make people do things against their will?" the 
answer is still no, but few people have a Will that is 
strong enough. If they had enough strength of Will 
there would be no reason to see a hypnotist. 
For a person to prevent herself from being 
manipulated using hypnosis, or any other modalities 
of influence, she must have a clear understanding of 
what she is willing and unwilling to do. In spite of 
beliefs to the contrary, very few people have that 
clarity of Will. 
Please note that in that previous paragraph 
the phrase lIother modalities of influence" was used. 
These modalities include religion, psychiatry and 
social pressure to name a few. While people may shy 
away from hypnosis as a tool of change they are 
more than willing to put themselves into situations 
where there are well documented records of abuse 
and exploitation. In these other modalities many 
people have been influenced to do things that they 
would never have believed they would willingly do. If 
one is to ask IIcan hypnosis be used to abuse and 
injure" they must also be willing to ask if that is true 
of counseling, psychology and religion. 
22 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The problem with entering into any of these 
modalities on guard and fearful is to limit their 
effectiveness. There is a certain degree of trust and 
surrender that is needed to benefit from any 
modality of influence. 
The best advice to give to a person entering 
into hypnosis is to be very clear on your outcome 
and be completely willing to follow the suggestions 
exactly. Trust yourself and the hypnosis process. 
After alt the best way to judge your success is not 
during the hypnosis process but upon its completion. 
Transference and Values Elicitation 
Transference and Values Elicitation are two 
things that any student of hypnosis should be aware 
of that can be used to overcome what we think of as 
the Will. Hypnosis does not have to be taking place 
to use them. In fact they are used in every other 
modality of influence (religion, psychiatry, therapy, 
etc.) often for good and sometimes for bad. 
Transference describes what happens in the 
mind of a client or subject when they begin to 
project feelings of love and affection onto their 
therapist. 
This 
will 
often 
manifest with the 
client/patient expressing their affection for their 
counselor/therapist/hypnotist. They may see their 
therapist as an ideal father figure or mate. The truth 
is that the therapist is just a person, and while they 
have as many flaws as anyone else, these flaws are 
simply unseen. Fortunately, most therapist are well 
aware of transference and are trained in how to 
deal with it. They are also aware that it will often 
happen without the client overtly communicating it. 
Using the transference the therapist can do 
23 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
good things for their clients. They can encourage the 
client to make changes they would not ordinarily do. 
They may quit smoking simply because the therapist 
asked them to regardless of the discomfort quitting 
smoking may cause. 
With this power it's easy to see how even 
simple transference can be abused. 
Therapists, being human, are subject to a 
similar 
projection 
called 
counter-transference. 
Counter-transference occurs when the therapist 
begins to have feelings of affection toward their 
client. They may look upon their client as a child 
figure that needs their nurturing or they may see the 
client as an ideal lover. This, of course, is not real 
and good therapists are trained to see these "rescue 
fantasies" for what they are, fanciful creations of the 
mind. 
If you work with a hypnosis client/subject over 
several sessions you may begin to see this 
transference manifest. I trust you will use it with 
the client's well-being in mind. 
Values Elicitation 
The topic of values elicitation has been 
thoroughly explained in the book Mind Control 
Language Patterns and reads as follows: 
How To Motivate People To Do ANYTHING You 
Want 
Values Elicitation 
When you find out what is most important to 
people, you can use it to influence and persuade 
24 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
them. The power of being able to do this is profound 
and can be used to help or harm. 
The key is to uncover their set of values. 
The good news is that it's much easier than 
you might think. Consider that people love to talk 
about what is important to them, when someone 
shows even a little interest. Sometimes, all you have 
to do is pay attention, and people will give you their 
hearts (more on this later). Other times, you only 
need to skillfully ask a few simple questions, and 
they will tell you everything you want to know about 
what motivates them. 
Here is the process. First, understand that 
there is a context in which you want to influence the 
other person. This context could be selling a car, 
thus the context would be "cars." The context could 
be seduction, thus you would be talking about "ro-
mantic encounters." The rule is to keep the conver-
sation within the context. 
Once you are aware of the context, then the 
question you ask is quite simple. IIWhat's important 
to you about (context)?11 
So if the context is cars, then the question 
would be, "What's important to you about a car?" 
and if the context is sex, then the question would be, 
"What's important to you in a lover?" 
A variation of this question can be, "When you 
have (context) fully and completely, what does that 
give you that's important?" 
So, using the examples and this variation, the 
questions would be, "When you have the car you 
want, what does that give you that is important?" or, 
"When you have the lover or sex partner that you 
25 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
truly want, what does that give you that is import-
antr 
When asking these questions, the first answer 
is not likely to be their deepest value, but it is im-
portant. In order to get to their deepest value for 
this context, you repeat the questioning cycle. 
Let's say that your context is seduction, and 
you are attempting to woo a particular person. The 
first question asked is, "What's important to you in a 
lover?" Let us say they answer "romance." So to re-
peat this process, you would use the word "romance" 
as they have used it. "When you have romance fully 
and completely, what does that give you that's im-
portant?" 
Let's then suppose the person's answer then 
becomes "passion." 
This process of questioning would continue, 
until you reach their highest value. As a general 
rule, you will likely only have to repeat this process 
three times, sometimes less and sometimes more. 
How will you know their highest value has been 
reached? Pay attention, and look for some expres-
sion of emotion. 
Keep in mind that these are people's highest 
values within this context, and for them to talk about 
it is bound to elicit emotions of some sort. This emo-
tional response may be subtle or overt. It might not 
be tears, but you will want to pay attention to their 
response. 
So, knowing that her first answer is "romance" 
and then "passion," you ask again. "What is ulti-
mately important to you about passion?" Let's sup-
pose their answer is "That would fulfill my deepest 
desire." 
26 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Keep in mind that we are only half way 
through the entire values elicitation process. Often 
this first half of the process of elicitation is enough 
for the person to begin to link these powerful values 
to you or your product. 
Let's continue with the entire process. 
Next, you use their answers to link their values 
to you or your product. 
So you know that "romance" and "passion" are 
part of what makes their vision of an ideal partner 
and that ,ultimately, passion would "fulfill (her) 
deepest desire. II All you do is work those exact 
words into the description of your values, or demon-
strate them in your behavior. 
You might later say something like, "When I 
think about the things that make a relationship 
worthwhile, there has to be a feeling of romance and 
passion, in order to fulfill my deepest desires," or "I 
don't know how well you can sit there and look at 
me as we talk, and know that there is, deep inside, a 
sense of romance and passion that will be there to 
fulfill your deepest desire. II 
At first, this may sound mechanical and con-
trived, but keep in mind that you are talking about 
their highest values, and it has a very powerful ef-
fect. 
This pattern is so powerful that it can influ-
ence people to do things they would not normally do. 
Warning!!! 
If this pattern is done to someone in a "dark" 
way;. and they are persuaded to expect something 
you cannot live up to/ then it is likely you will have 
27 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
made an enemy for life - or worse. You may have 
created someone who is compelled to hunt you down 
and kill you. Remembe~ this is manipulation on the 
level of a person IS deepest values. 
In short, the process of values elicitation 
uncovers the subject's deepest values and increases 
rapport. The result is that the therapist, counselor, 
priest or salesperson links that value to a suggested 
outcome. The result is that the subject would believe 
that by following the suggested behavior they would 
fulfill that core value. This could be true even if that 
behavior went against what the subject would 
usually consider normal or appropriate ... and they 
don It have to be in hypnosis. 
This later technique of values elicitation has 
been used by the most skilled negotiators and 
interrogators in the world with dramatic results. By 
using values elicitation a person could be made to 
willingly confess to a crime they did not do. Values 
elicitation can be use to compel them to commit a 
crime as long as they believe it would bring them 
closer to or fulfill a core value. 
So, let's ask again, "is it possible to make 
someone do something against their Will?" 
It is possible to have people do things beyond 
what they think is their normal behavior given 
several conditions: 
• Transference may occur that could compel the 
subject to do things based on emotions they 
hold toward their counselor, therapist, priest 
28 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
or hypnotist. They would do it just because the 
person asked them to do it. 
• The subject's core values can be linked to a 
certain act or behavior so that they feel that by 
doing this behavior they are fulfilling that 
value, even while that act might be outside 
their normal range of behaviors. 
• Deception. Never underestimate how much 
one can be manipulated through deception. 
Even 
the 
famed 
hypnotherapist, 
Milton 
Erickson, was quoted saying til will go to no 
end of sophistry to get my client their 
outcome." 
• Very few people truly have the Will needed to 
train themselves against a skilled combination 
of 
Transference, 
Values 
Elicitation 
and 
deception. 
To those who read this for the first time this 
can be quite a shock, and I know of no other book on 
hypnosis that has explained it in this way. The 
author of this book can only encourage you to do 
nice, healthy and good things with this knowledge, 
and takes no responsibility for those who, by choice, 
misuse it. 
For the remainder of the book you'll be lead 
through the process of how the traditional practice 
of hypnosis can be used to influence people to 
change, sometimes in dramatic ways. I can only 
encourage you to use it with wisdom and kindness. 
29 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Undressing in Public: An Example of Extreme 
Hypnosis 
There is a 30 minute TV show that stars a 
famous magician who also claims to be a skilled 
hypnotist. 
In one show he went to a hotel swimming pool 
and announce he was going to do an hypnosis 
experiment. By the end of the experiment he had 
everyone who participated completely naked in a 
public setting. 
He proclaimed that no other 
hypnotist had done that and, to my knowledge, he 
was right. 
The viewer may question whether the event 
truly occurred as it was portrayed. After all the man 
is a well known magician, someone who we pay to 
deceive us. However, based on my experience there 
were elements of this event that allowed me to 
believe that what he did was possible. These 
elements are as follows: 
1. Having announced that he was going to do a 
hypnosis experiment, and offering no other 
details, he asked for anyone to leave who feels 
uncomfortable 
following 
any 
outrageous 
suggestions he might give. 
2. After those people left he asked everyone to 
close their eyes and keep them closed no 
matter what. Their eyes remained closed 
throughout the entire experiment. 
3. He suggested they bring up feelings of comfort 
and security, and continued to reinforce these 
feelings throughout the session. 
4. He then told everyone present to remove any 
clothing they were wearing on the upper torso, 
30 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
then lower torso. At this point they were 
completely naked around the hotel pool. 
5. He then told them to keep their eyes closed 
and then redress putting on their bottoms then 
their tops. Only then did he ask them to open 
their eyes. 
Only when you imagine what the subject's 
experienced does this begin to seem plausible. First, 
the hypnosis was to be on EVERYONE present. This 
creates a feeling of group security. No one was 
present who did not want to participate. 
The fact that their eyes were closed during the 
entire process is important on several levels. First, 
no one was allowed to be distracted by others 
looking at them, nor were they distracted by seeing 
other naked bodies. 
Suggesting comfort and security would have 
added to their ease of undressing. 
After the event the participants were amazed 
that they would have so easily and willingly done 
such a thing, yet they remember doing it and feeling 
good about it. 
It is these factors that allow me to think that a 
situation could be created where people might be 
willing to undress in public. 
I want to return to what I was saying about 
using hypnosis with wisdom and kindness. While the 
thought of this taking place is shocking, the 
hypnotist used wisdom and kindness in the 
execution of this naked-at-the-pool hypnosis process. 
Noone was hurt, or embarrassed. Everyone felt a 
feeling of comfort and security. 
As a hypnotist I can say it was beautifully 
executed. 
31 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Overview of The Hypnosis Process 
Let me share with you an ironic paradox. 
When it comes to hypnosis people want magic. 
To make the most effective hypnosis session there 
are two thing you must accomplish: 
a) Tell them why hypnosis is NOT magical and 
that the hypnosis process (not you, the 
hypnotist) demands their full cooperation 
and 
b) provide them with an experience that seems 
magical. 
When you are able to do this well you'll be very 
effective at getting the subject to change, and they 
will be more eager to follow your suggestions. 
The following is a detailed description of the 
procedures that help create that experience for the 
subject. 
The traditional use of hypnosis in the clinical 
or therapeutic setting consists of several different 
parts that usually proceed in a sequence. The 
sequence usually consists of pre-talk, induction and 
entrainment. The hypnosis process is more detailed, 
but these three parts are sufficient to help see how 
it works. 
These three aspects of the process each 
contain opportunities to momentarily bypass the 
subject's Will and assist in making change happen. 
32 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Pre-talk 
The pre-talk is the part of the hypnosis session 
that precedes the hypnosis. Its purpose is to give the 
subject enough information to feel comfortable 
about what will follow and to get the subject's 
agreement, either explicitly or inferred, to cooperate 
with the hypnotist and follow the suggestion. The 
pre-talk itself takes anywhere from two to thirty 
minutes. 
Entrainment 
The entrainment teaches 
respond 
to 
suggestions 
by 
experience of what it's like. 
TheInduction 
the subj ect how to 
giving 
them the 
The induction is the process the hypnotist uses 
to create the hypnotic state. To many it may appear 
mysterious or hokey, but it is an essential process 
the subject must go through to achieve hypnosis. 
Suggestions 
Suggestions is the part where the subject, in 
hypnosis, is guided through the experience that is 
designed to be meaningful enough to change their 
behavior. 
The following sections goes into detail using 
the Dantalion Jones preferred method of hypnosis. 
33 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Pre-Talk 
If you Ive read and listened to as many 
hypnotists as I have you begin to notice that much of 
their pre-talk is exactly the same. 
Typical pre-talk includes a description of the 
conscious and unconscious mind. Their abilities and 
limitations, as well as how they have developed. 
Also included is how hypnosis relates to the 
conscious and unconscious minds. The subject is 
then explained the various responses he or she 
might have to a suggestion, and which response is 
optimal for success. 
This process can take up to 20 minutes or 
more depending upon how thorough the hypnotist 
wants to be with his description. 
Upon completion the subject is then asked if 
they have any questions and if they now are willing 
to proceed to the hypnosis. 
The pre-talk you will get in this book has been 
tested to be very effective and can help accomplish 
the desired results in less than two minutes. 
Before the pre-talk itls important to talk with 
the subject to find out what they wish to accomplish. 
Once the hypnotist 
is satisfied and feels he has 
enough information to proceed the pre-talk begins 
as follows: 
"Let me tell you how to he very good at 
hypnosis. Are you ready?" The hypnotist pauses to 
get agreement and build anticipation. I recommend 
you raise your eyebrows and nod your head when 
asking '~e you ready?" 
The subject will affirm they are ready. 
Take in a deep breath as if you are going to 
34 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
begin 
a 
long 
monologue 
and 
then 
say 
"Follow ... my. .. suggestions. N Say it in a downward 
tonality. This may bring a laugh to the subject as 
tension is relieved and here you can turn the tone to 
more lighthearted. 'Let me explain what that 
means. If I suggest a thought then think that 
thought. If I suggest a feeling or emotion then bring 
forth that feeling. And if I suggest a belief then in 
that instant imagine that its absolutely true (pause.) 
Now let me tell you why this works. N 
'~s human beings we generally know what we 
need to do to get what we want but if that 
infonnation were enough to change us then we 
would all be rich and thin. So the fact is that 
infonnation doesn It change our behaviors, What 
changes our behaviors is having a meaningful 
experience and that is what we are trying to create 
in this process. That is why you have to ... follow ... 
the ... suggestions. I can It give you that experience. I 
can only guide you. Okay? So as I give a suggestion 
simply follow it. Donlt analyze or judge what you 
hear 
just 
make 
it 
true. 
Agreed?N 
There are several reasons that this pre-talk 
works so let's dissect it in detail. 
A primary point is it's brevity. Instead of giving 
a 
lot 
of highly 
technical 
and 
psychological 
information it is short and understandable. 
'Let me tell you how to be very good at 
hypnosis. N 
The hypnosis subject is there for a reason, and 
one you've already uncovered, so it is hoped that 
their reasons and motivations are transparent. They 
35 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
want a result that will get them what they want. By 
saying, /1et me tell you how to he very good at 
hypnosisN you are presupposing that they can be 
hypnotized and they can actively take a part in being 
"very good" at it. This gives the subject a feeling of 
control which they haven't experienced up until this 
point. 
/~re you ready?N 
This implies that they have to "get ready" for 
the information you will give them. The information 
thus must be important and that their full attention 
is needed. 
#Follow ... my ... suggestions. N 
You will find that people will smile or even 
laugh at times when you say this. The simplicity of 
the statement 
/~ollow ... my ... suggestions. N 
compared to the anticipation they were just feeling 
creates an emotional "slingshot" much like the 
punchline of a joke. You are acclimating the subject 
to be responsive to you with this very simple 
question and response. 
/7.et me explain what that means. N 
This brings the subject back to a slightly more 
serious matter. 
7f I suggest a thought then think that thought. 
If I suggest a feeling or emotion then hring forth 
that feeling. And if I suggest a helief then in that 
instant imagine that it's ahsolutely true. II 
36 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Very simple and explicit instructions yet not 
condescending. It explains everything the subject 
must do in the areas of thought, emotions and belief. 
You will at times get a subject who doesn't 
understand how they would "make a belief true" if 
they didn't believe it to begin with. I deal with this 
by asking them "just suppose for a moment you 
absolutely kneJ1l that something wonderful was 
about to happen. What would it be like?" They would 
then describe what would be different with them if 
that were true. I would then go on to explain "to 
know what it would be like if you know something 
wonderful was about to happen you had to, at some 
level, put yourself in that state. That's all I'm asking 
you to do is "just suppose" a belief is true the 
moment I suggest it." 
"Now let me tell you why this works. 
'~s human heings we generally know what we 
need to do to get what we want hut if that 
information were enough to change us then we 
would all he rich and thin. So the fact is that 
information doesn't change our hehaviors. What 
changes our hehavior is having a meaningful 
experience, and that is what we are trying to create 
in 
this 
process. 
That 
is 
why you 
have 
to .. .follow ... the ... suggestions. I can't give you that 
experience. I can only guide you. Okay? So as I give 
a suggestion simply follow it. Don't analyze or judge 
what you hear. Just make it true. Agreed?" 
The beauty of this last paragraph is it's logical 
simplicity. It speaks to everyone's experience and 
addresses in short order the complaint "1 know what 
37 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
to do. I just can't seem to do it." The reason is that 
"knowledge" has a very limited effect on behavior. 
It also reemphasizes that the subject must take 
control by following the suggestions the hypnotist 
gives them. 
This 
pre-talk 
explains 
and 
upholds 
the 
definition of hypnosis that has been given, II hypnosis 
is the exact following of suggestions to create a 
meaningful experience. N 
The next step of the hypnosis process, called 
liThe Entrainment" is something I've only seen a few 
hypnotists do but adds to the effectiveness of the 
hypnosis by a hundred fold. 
38 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Entrainment 
The purpose of the Entrainment is to teach the 
subject how to respond to suggestions. Through the 
pre-talk the subject has an understanding of what it 
means to "follow the suggestions," but they do not 
have an experience of it. 
The Entrainment would immediately follow the 
pre-talk. 
#Oka~ let me show you how to respond when 
you hear a suggestion. Pm going to give you some 
suggestions right now and when you hear them/ 
don't judge/ don't analyze or evaluate them. Don't 
even think. just do them the instant you hear them. 
Oka~ let's go. Lift your arm. Look up. Look down. 
Close your eyes. Nod your head. Say 'elephant'. # 
The delivery of these commands should be 
done in quick succession but with a flat tonality as if 
ordering from a menu. They are best done without 
gesture or pantomime. Having done it the first time 
have them do it again. This will give them a second 
chance to do it better. 
#Let's do that again even hetter. Lift your 
arm. Look up. Look down. Close your eyes. Nod your 
head. Say 'elephant'. # 
Keeping in mind our definition of hypnosis. 
"Hypnosis is the exact following of suggestions to 
create a meaningful experience. /. One can see how 
the entrainment adheres to "the exact following of 
suggestions # and helps makes it possible. 
What follows the Entrainment is the hypnotic 
39 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
induction. 
Ultimately the goal of entrainment is to have a 
subject that is unconditionally responsive to your 
suggestions. This ideal can only be achieved through 
practice and repetition. 
There is an interesting subset of individuals 
who don't respond to hypnosis because they regard 
hypnosis with strong unaltered misconceptions. 
They believe that they could only be under hypnosis 
if they are unable to resist the hypnotists 
suggestions, therefore they make every effort to 
not do what the hypnotist suggests. This is not 
following the hypnotists suggestion but challenging 
them. Fortunately, these people are rare and their 
misconceptions can usually be removed with a little 
more education and through the process of 
entrainment. 
Using Reward and Punishment 
There are hypnotists who use both reward and 
punishment to reach a high level of entrainment. 
The reward is, at the very least, an acknowledging 
word or a suggestion to feel a pleasant feeling. The 
punishment can vary widely from a stern word to a 
complete torture session. It should be noted that 
using punishment more severe than simple silence, 
as a tool for hypnotic compliance is at best a morally 
questionable practice. 
Those 
who 
use 
punishment 
to 
create 
compliance are not professional hypnotists or 
coaches but consider themselves to be "trainers" 
and "programmers". They often are employed by 
clandestine organizations that are usually involved 
in criminal endeavors. Those "trainers" will also end 
40 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
a traumatic session with comfort items. 
Comfort items are offered to the subject when 
their training session is completed. By doing this the 
subject begins to identify with the programmer in a 
condition called the Stockholm syndrome, and 
confuses the subject as to the motivations of the 
trainer. The process assists the subject to put aside 
any feelings of the trauma. In short, it is an extreme 
way to mess up someone's mind. 
Consider how a fraternity or organization may 
put an initiate through a difficult initiation but up 
completing the initiation they are "bonded" to the 
group with celebration and mass approval and 
support. This celebration is a variation of the 
"comfort item". 
41 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Hypnotic Induction 
The hypnotic induction has been describe as a 
ritual for the benefit of the subject and, like many 
other rituals, is designed to introduce a change in 
experience. 
The induction that follows is a modified 
version of the traditional Elman induction. 
"Closer your eyes/ pay attention to all the 
muscles of the foreheacL and let those muscles 
completely relax... and recognize that to he 
successful at any hypnosis process is ve.zy simple, all 
you have to do is follow the suggestions. So/ if a 
thought is suggested then think the thought. If a 
feeling or emotion is suggested then hring forth the 
feeling ancL if a helief is suggested then in that 
moment imagine it to he ahsolutely true. 11 
"So create for yourself a feeling of ease and 
comfort a feeling that is even more enjoyahle than 
just a moment ago. When you notice that feeling 
take in a deep hreath and as you let it out and settle 
into that feeling of ease and comfort. (pause until 
suhject exhales with a sigh) ... and recognize that you 
created that feeling. You are the one in complete 
control. You created the feeling. You simply followed 
the suggestion. 11 
''And notice as you are relaxing even deeper 
how easily the eyes and eyelids just naturally ... stay 
closed ... relax the eyes and eyelids even further so 
that they just continue to ... remain closed ... Let you 
eyes gently roll up and gaze toward the middle of 
the forehead and in a voice within your mind tell the 
eyelids to ... remain closed ... no ... matter ... what ... and 
seal the eyes so tightly shut no one can open them ... 
42 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
so tightly sealed even you cannot open them ... make 
that true and it becomes true ... and when you have 
take a instant and prove it to yourself. .. and then 
stop ... take a deep breath ... and ... relax even deeper. 
The eyelids stay closed because you make it so ... you 
are the one in complete control.. .you simply 
followed the suggestions. # 
'Now as relaxed as you are double it ... (pause) 
then ... double it again ... and begin now to imagine 
yourself playing a child's game ... where you find 
yourself. .. inside your mind ... standing with your eyes 
closed ... and you begin to spin in a circle ... laughing 
and giggling as you spin and spin and spin and all of 
the world simply falls away. Keep spinning and 
spinning ... again and again ... around and around and 
around and around ... and then you ... stop ... and there 
in front of you is a black box ... an ordinary black box 
no more than knee high ... until you open it and it's 
filled with a vast emptiness in which you can throw 
anything and it will simply. .. fall away. .. so you throw 
away all your worries/ doubts and hesitations ... and if 
you like ... throw away all your conscious awareness 
and seal up the box ... seal it tighter than you've 
sealed your eyes shut ... and then again you close 
your eyes and begin again to tum and spin around 
and arounci spinning and spinning and all of the 
conscious awareness falls away ... # 
With the induction presented we can now 
analyze its parts. 
"Closer your eyes pay attention to all the 
muscles of the forehead and let those muscles 
completely relax ... and recognize 
that 
to be 
successful at any hypnosis process is very simple. 
43 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
All you have to do is follow the suggestions. So~ if 
thought is suggested then think the thought. If a 
feeling or emotion is suggested then hring forth the 
feeling anct if a helief is suggested then in that 
moment imagine it to he ahsolutely true. # 
In this first paragraph the instructions to 
IIfollow the suggestions" is reiterated as in the pre-
talk and explained exactly what is needed to do so. 
NSO create for yourself a feeling of ease and 
comfort a feeling that is even more enjoyahle than 
just a moment ago. When you notice that feeling 
take in a deep hreath and as you let it out and settle 
into that feeling of ease and comfort. (pause until 
suhject exhales with a sigh). .. and recognize that you 
created that feeling. You are the one in complete 
control. You created the feeling. You simply followed 
the 
suggestion. # 
This step does two things. First it allows the 
hypnotist to know that the subject if following the 
suggestion by noticing the deep breath. Secondly. It 
demonstrates to the subject that they are in control 
of their success. 
NAnd notice as you are relaxing even deeper 
how easily the eyes and eyelids just naturally. .. stay 
closed... relax the eyes and eyelids even further so 
that they just continue to ... remain closed ... Let you 
eyes gently roll up and gaze toward the middle of 
the forehead and in a voice within your mind tell the 
eyelids to ... remain closed ... no ... matter. .. what ... and 
seal the eyes so tightly shut no one can open 
them ... so tightly sealed even you cannot open ... make 
44 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
that true and it hecomes true ... and when you have 
take a instant and prove it to yourself. .. and then 
stop ... take a deep hreath. .. and ... relax even deeper. 
The eyelids stay closed hecause you make it so ... you 
are the one in complete control.. .you simply 
followed the suggestions. " 
This is the part of the induction that is the 
modified Elman hypnotic induction. As you have 
demonstrated with the previous paragraph, the 
subject is in complete control, thus they must have 
the control to create this sensory paradox. By 
extension, if they can create this sensory paradox, 
then they follow other suggestions with ease. It 
further reiterates that, by following the suggestions, 
they are the ones in control of the experience. 
"Now as relaxed as you are" douhle it ... (pause) 
then ... douhle it again ... and hegin now to imagine 
yourself playing a child's game ... where you find 
yourself. . .inside your mind ... standing with your eyes 
closed. .. and you hegin to spin in a circle ... laughing 
and giggling as you spin and spin and spin and all of 
the world simply falls away. Keep spinning and 
spinning ... again and again ... around and around and 
around 
and 
around ... and 
then 
you ... stop ... " 
This part of the hypnosis session is referred to 
as the "deepener." The deepener is typically the part 
where the hypnotist counts down from ten to one 
telling 
the 
subject 
to 
"deepen" 
the 
relaxation/hypnosis/trance. 
What I've found by doing this form of deepener 
is that it relies on the disorienting experience of 
spinning to pull the subject out an ordinary state of 
45 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
awareness. Combined with the fact that they are 
asked to close their imaginary eyes and do it all 
within their imagination, their mind is fully occupied 
within this internal state. 
': .. and there in front of you is hlack hox ... an 
ordinary hlack hox no more than knee high ... until 
you open it and it's filled with a vast emptiness in 
which you can throw anything and it will simply. .. fall 
away. .. so you throwaway all your worries" douhts 
and hesitations ... and if you like ... throw away all your 
conscious awareness and seal up the hox ... seal it 
tighter than you1ve sealed your eyes shut ... and then 
again you close your eyes and hegin again to tum 
and spin around and around" spinning and spinning 
and all of the conscious awareness falls away ... II 
The black box metaphor is used to further 
distance the subject from their worries and concerns 
as well as assist the hypnotist by getting rid of the 
subject's doubts and hesitations. 
The subject is 
encouraged, but not commanded, to put their 
conscious awareness within the box as well. This can 
help the subject by getting rid of any possible 
conscious objection to the suggestions that will be 
given. 
Once again, the subject performs the spinning 
process. 
Before going into the portion of the hypnosis 
where the therapeutic suggestions are given the 
next section will discuss the "tricky" aspects of 
hypnosis that help compel the subject to follow all 
the hypnotists suggestions ... no matter what! 
This, of course, is just one variation of 
46 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
hypnosis induction. 
Another method involves an 
induction and awakening process that have identical 
elements. In the following example the "black pearl" 
is used. Having common elements at the beginning 
and ending of the hypnosis can create a kind of 
"container" in which the other suggestion are held. 
Upon awakening the subject will tend to only 
remember the common elements that are shared in 
the induction and awakening. 
The Black Pearl Induction with Awakening 
(Ellipses, or three dots in this script do not indicate 
missing parts, but rather pauses. In other words, 
pauses are indicated by three dots.) 
'Breathe 
deeply. 
You 
are 
floating 
down ... down ... on a heautiful red cloucL and your 
whole hody is red ... as you go drifting and 
floating ... rocking 
gently ... deeper. .. and 
deeper. .. down ... "(this repeatecL one time" for each 
color of cloud-orange" yellow" green" hlue" and violet 
clouds.) 
"Land very gently ... very softly ... in the center 
of a rouncL hlack pearl. See it glowing" softly" gently. 
Now tum and face the East ... and then the 
South ... and then the West ... and then the North. 
Open all of your inner senses. " (The rainhow gives 
the suhject a safe mental place to travel to; and this 
serves as a "home hase" for the mind to return to if 
things get difficult.) 
Bringing The Subject Out Of Trance 
After the suggestions have been made it is important 
47 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
that the programmer takes time to get the subject to 
emerge slowly and gently from their altered state. 
The induction process is reversed. The repetition of 
trances will reinforce the depth of the trance state, 
and keep everything operating smoothly: 
"In the pearl prepare to awaken. When you 
awake" you will feel refreshed" alert" renewed" and 
filled with energy. You will rememher all that you 
have experienced. Now turn and face the East ... then 
the South. .. then the West ... then the North." (This 
helps the suhject orient themselves internally.) 
NTake a deep hreath. .. inhale ... exhale. You are 
floating up ... up ... on a heautiful violet cloud" and 
your whole hody is violet as you drift gently upward 
on a heautiful hlue cloud. .. up ... up ... and your whole 
hody is hlue and you are heginning to awaken gently 
and you drift gently up ... up ... on a heautiful green 
cloud ... and your whole body is green ... as you drift 
gently ... up ... up ... on a heautiful yellow cloud ... getting 
more and more awake ... and your whole hody is 
yellow ... as you drift gently ... up ... up ... on a heautiful 
orange cloud ... filled with energy and vitality ... your 
whole hody is orange ... as you float up gently ... on a 
heautiful red cloud ... almost fully awake now ... and 
your whole hody is red as you float gently. Stay on 
the rainhow. " 
After the session the hypnotist finishes ... 
/'Leaving the memory in the hlack pearl and closing 
and sealing the hlack pearl you will rememher only 
those details that I tell you to rememher" and in a 
moment you will count to ten and go hack into your 
space" and return. " 
48 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Five Things That Assist To Induce Hypnosis 
The nature of the mind is such that it will 
respond to certain events and actions by creating a 
state that is very susceptible to suggestion. These 
events and actions are relaxation" surprise, physical 
disorientation" confusion and emotions. When you 
understand how these situations effect the mind 
you'll be better able to induce hypnosis in others. 
Relaxation 
The neophyte to hypnosis is most often 
introduced to hypnotic induction by means of 
relaxation. 
This is where the subject is guided 
through a relaxation process starting at one end of 
the body and slowly progressing through the parts of 
the body to the other end. 
The reason this works is that by relaxing the 
body it is supposed to remove resistance to any 
suggestions. 
The downside of a hypnotic induction that uses 
relaxation is that it sometimes puts the subject into 
a state of sleep instead of hypnosis. 
Many 
hypnotists become "married" to the progressive 
relaxation 
induction 
and 
unknowingly 
limit 
themselves because it does not easily lend itself to 
testing the hypnotic state. 
Surprise 
When a person experiences surprise they are 
forced to make sense of the experience. This pushes 
out all other distractions and forces their awareness 
to a single focus. 
49 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The most common hypnotic induction process 
using surprise is when the hypnotist shouts 
"SLEEP!" at the subject. With few exceptions this 
will seldom work without the pre-talk. 
Physical Disorientation 
Most people have experienced the sensations 
of swinging on a swing and closing their eyes. 
Likewise you may have sat in a rotating chair and 
spun around with your eyes closed. The experience 
tends turn ones attention inward and away from the 
external environment. This is an ideal inroads to 
create a meaningful internal experience for the 
hypnotist. 
Some cultures would do this by building a 
"witches chair." This is a comfortable chair or bed 
that is suspended from the ceiling. The subject 
would close their eyes and others would swing and 
rotate the chair as the subject focused on creating 
an meaningful internal mental state. 
In modern hypnosis there are inductions which 
rely on very gently rocking the subject as you give 
suggestions. 
The rocking or movement is not so 
much for the standing subject to fall over (the 
hypnotists arm is holding them steady by the 
shoulders) but it is just enough to create a gentle 
disorientation. 
Confusion 
If you have ever experienced something 
confusing it is not pleasant. In the state of confusion 
the mind will quickly begin to search for anything 
that will help make sense of the situation. 
This 
50 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
search seldom takes more than a second but within 
the brief moment the mind is highly suggestible and 
will accept any suggestion that might fit. 
It should be noted that surprise, physical 
disorientation and confusion make up many of the 
rapid hypnotic inductions. These will be discussed in 
the next section. 
Emotions 
Hypnotic Inductions that use emotions are 
seldom used by anyone other than the most skilled 
hypnotists and are often used to deal with severe 
emotional pain and trauma. 
To understand how emotions are used to 
induce hypnosis one can start by understanding that 
emotional reactions are seldom within our conscious 
control and have their origins deep within the 
unconscious mind. When someone is beginning to 
feel and express an emotion they have pushed aside 
most other distractions and are becoming very 
focused. 
A skilled hypnotist will use this focus as a 
starting point for the induction by asking the subject 
to focus on the feeling and it's origins. Most often 
this emotion will be based in pain or fear. The 
hypnotist's intent would be to remove the negative 
emotion 
and 
help 
the 
subject 
reframe 
the 
experience. 
The use of an emotion based hypnotic 
induction is best left to the skilled and experienced 
professionals who know how to deal with pain and 
trauma. 
51 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
A Comment on Inductions 
People are not cookies cut from the same mold 
so you will find that some people respond better to 
one induction process than another. You may find 
some subjects get nauseous when they imagine 
themselves spinning, for example, so be flexible. 
You will find that your best work comes from 
your most challenging subjects. Take it in stride and 
adapt. 
You may also find that some subjects respond 
better to a long drawn out induction that includes 
lots of counting backwards. 
Once you've worked with a subject enough 
times it's likely they will have learned how to enter 
the hypnotic state at will and very rapidly. Even 
when they have reached that level of skill as a 
hypnosis subject you are still likely to hear from 
them the best ways to phrase their suggestions. 
In the next section we'll discuss inducing 
hypnosis in the most rapid ways imaginable. 
S2 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Rapid Hypnotic Inductions 
A rapid induction is very dramatic to watch 
and many stage hypnotists have use this type of 
induction to bill themselves as lithe worlds fastest 
hypnotist" . 
A rapid hypnotic induction typically takes 
anywhere from 5 to 30 seconds to perform and can 
seem very foreboding to the neophyte because it 
demands a great deal of confidence and boldness to 
perform. 
To understand how to use rapid inductions 
let's talk about why it works. 
First understand that the human nervous 
system has it's own limitations. When a person is 
shocked or threatened all awareness stops. The 
attention then quickly turns into a search to 
understand what is happening and to choosing the 
right response. A rapid induction exploits this 
weakness by creating an unexpected shock where 
attention halts momentarily, and then quickly 
providing the response by offering a suggestion, 
A description of the rapid induction will soon 
follow but it can seem so bold that even the most 
detailed 
description 
may 
seem 
inadequate, 
especially to those who have not done it. 
Others 
who resist using the rapid induction will do so 
simply because it is so dramatic and resembles a 
stage show. I've heard people object to rapid 
inductions because it would make them appear as if 
they are showing off. 
Personally, I'm more concerned about what is 
effective, and what other people think be damned. 
53 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Components of the Rapid Induction 
As 
simple as the rapid induction is, it has 
components that will help to make it work more 
effectively. 
The components are The Set Up, The Shock, and 
The suggestion/Entrainment 
1. The Set Up or Pre-talk 
This is your typical pre-talk as mentioned 
earlier. Ask the subject to agree to follow your 
suggestions and get their complete agreement. This 
is often done without telling them the induction 
method they are going to use. 
2. The Shock 
Most often the shock is a quick motion or 
shout. It is most commonly done by the hypnotist 
extending his hand as to begin a handshake. When 
the subject follows through with the handshake the 
hypnotist jerks their clasped hands and shouts in a 
commanding voice "SLEEP!" Then reaches up to the 
subjects face to close their eyes and continue with 
the suggestions. 
3. The Suggestion/Entrainment 
The suggestion phase is much like any 
suggestion phase with the suggestions proceeding 
fluidly. 
For those hypnotists doing this type of rapid 
induction for the first time they often are so shocked 
54 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
by it's effectiveness and speed they are at a loss for 
what to say. Knowing this ahead of time you can be 
ready to continue with your suggestions. 
That is the whole of the rapid induction. It is so 
simple, short and surprising that it is hard to 
believe, yet it's that effective. 
Here is what it would sound like if you were to 
overhear this rapid induction being used. 
"~ .. so do I have your agreement to follow my 
suggestions? "" 
(wait for agreement) 
""Greatr' 
(hypnotist extends hand for a handshake; 
suhject grasps hands) 
""SLEEP! II 
(hypnotist give one swift short jerking pull on 
the suhjects hand.) 
""Let your eyes close ... tighter and tighter ... so 
tight perhaps not even you can open them ... hut for 
now just relax and follow my words as if they were 
your own thoughts ... II 
Once you have the idea of how rapid 
inductions work you can also begin to improvise and 
create your own variation. 
Variation #1 
Ask the subject to close their eyes while 
standing and then rock them with your hands on 
their shoulders. 
Variation #2 
Tell the subject you will not let them fall. Have 
them stand and close their eyes while facing you. 
SS 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Put your hands on their shoulders and ask them to 
lean in to you. Let them lean more and more and 
when they are getting comfortable with that position 
let your arm break so that they fall forward. 
Command them to "Sleep!" and catch them so they 
do not hit the ground. 
From these examples, and a little bit of 
experience, you can pretty quickly begin to create 
your own variations of rapid hypnotic induction. 
56 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Subtle "Tricks" Within The Hypnosis Process 
The "tricks" that follow in this chapter are 
done during the hypnosis process to increase the 
subject's compliance to the hypnotists suggestions. 
Some of them are simply observations about the 
normal hypnosis process that are done in most any 
hypnotic session. Others are processes or hypnotic 
suggestions to be made. 
Overcoming The Will by Agreement 
As mentioned earlier, at some level the subject 
must agree to follow the hypnotists suggestions. 
This has been often referred to as "the hypnotic 
agreement." 
When you read the pre-talk consider the fact 
that the hypnotic agreement bypasses the Will 
because of the subject's motivation (or perhaps 
through the guile and trickery of the hypnotist), and 
agrees to follow the suggestion exactly in order to 
have the experience that will benefit them. 
By comparison, there is a difference between 
the hypnotiC agreement and what happens in other 
psychotherapies. 
In other psychotherapies the 
subject is generally not asked to blindly follow the 
therapist. The only agreement the subject has to the 
traditional therapist is to show up on time and pay 
their bill. Typically the subject/patient must pour 
over events and emotions so that if they are to make 
any change they must discover it themselves. In 
classic Freudian psychoanalysis the therapist is 
forbidden from doing anything greater than asking, 
"and how did you feel about that?" 
The result is that the traditional therapist 
57 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
often has to fight the Will of the subject to get any 
change to occur. 
Overcoming Will by linking pleasure and good 
things 
If you've ever experienced hypnosis you will 
likely agree it is a very pleasant and e~oyable 
experience. 
There are several reasons for this. The relaxed 
state is free from tension, the general awareness of 
the world is absent, and pleasant feelings can be 
suggested and amplified. 
Any pleasant emotion or feeling that can be 
experienced by the subject can be amplified. Also, 
any pleasant feeling can be linked to anything else; a 
thought, an action, a belief. 
The "trick" is to purposefully link pleasant 
feelings to every step of the hypnosis process, and 
especially to the simple act of following the 
hypnotist's suggestions. This process begins at the 
very start of the hypnotic induction where the 
subject is asked to "create for yourself a feeling of 
ease and comfort a feeling that is even more 
enjoyahle than just a moment ago. ~ From there the 
"ease and comforr can be increased and altered. 
An example of this type of suggestion would be 
as follows: 
/~s you notice that feeling of joy and pleasure 
take a moment to settle into it and understand that 
whenever you say the words/ /Tm a nonsmoker. // 
Whether aloud or in your mind you can feel that joy 
and pleasure increasing more and more with every 
passing day. So take a moment now and feel that joy 
58 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
and pleasure and repeat in your mind those pleasing 
words" 'Tm a nonsmoker. I'm a nonsmoker. I'm a 
nonsmoker." Repeating repeating right no~ out 
loud to yourself inside like a gentle echo. Just let 
this voice be in the background of your thoughts 
reminding you of that joy and pleasure as you hear 
1'm a nonsmoker. I'm a nonsmoker. I'm a 
nonsmoker. I The louder you hear it the more joy you 
feel. " 
To the hypnotist who wants to use this 
consider all the things that you suggest and all the 
possible pleasant feelings that could be linked to 
each other. 
The Emotional Chamber 
Another example of the amplification and 
linking of emotions was created by JD Fuentes, the 
author of a book on relationships and seduction 
titled liThe Sexual Key System. II Fuentes named this 
process liThe Emotional Chamber," and while it 
mimics the female sexual response it should be 
noted that it is a very effective process regardless of 
the subject's gender. The Emotional Chamber can be 
used effectively in hypnosis to amplify the quality of 
emotions. 
The steps are as follows: 
1. Bring in or become aware of a pleasurable 
feeling or emotion. 
2. Create an opening, like a door, through which 
the subject can bring in this emotion. 
3. Amplify the emotion and describe it in other 
59 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
sensory 
modalities, 
visual, 
auditory, 
kinesthetic, etc. 
4. Bring that feeling/emotion to a peak. 
5. This then invites in another emotion. 
6. Repeat 
the 
process 
using 
this 
new 
feeling/emotion. 
As part of a hypnosis script it would sound 
something like this: 
"~s you hear those words repeating in your 
minet ""I'm a non-smoker. I'm a non-smoker. I'm a 
non-smoker. "" Invite a feeling of satisfaction in as if 
you were to open a door and hring in that warm" 
fuzzy feeling of satisfaction. And let that satisfaction 
hegin to grow stronger and stronger growing to a 
peak and as it culminates you feel that wonderful 
feeling of relief. So create an opening and let the 
relief come in and let it huild growing stronger and 
stronger with a satisfying tingle that moves through 
every part of you ... huilding ... heyond helief...(etc.)"" 
This cycle can be repeated with any number of 
emotions and creates a very powerful and positive 
feeling within the subject, and again links it to the 
needed state or new response. 
The Hypnotic Yes Set 
In sales there is something called "the yes 
set, " which is a series of questions to which the 
answer is consistently "yes." In the Hypnotic "Yes 
Set" multiple pleasant emotions and feelings are 
elicited and then linked to the subject saying the 
word "yes." The pleasure of saying yes to the 
60 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
hypnotist's questions and suggestions can become a 
pleasantly compulsive response and thus aid in the 
subjects compliance to the suggestions. 
The suggestions may be phrased like this: 
In a moment I'm going to ask you to hring up a 
very positive feeling of ease and comfort and when 
you feel that wonderful feeling simply say the word 
"Yes. " So hegin now to huild that wonderful feeling 
and let it come to a peak and at it's peak let me 
know hy saying "yes'~ .. (Pause until the suhject says 
yes. If too much time seems to pass continue to 
encourage and lead) ... Yes, that's right. As you now 
feel that sense of ease and comfort hring a feeling of 
relief. .. and when you feel that sense of relief make it 
real and say "yes"(pause) ... and now comhine that 
ease and comfort with that sense of relief. .. hring 
them together and as you notice that they have 
merged and increased say the word ... "yes." (pause) 
Now, hring in the feeling of. .. pleasure ... wonderful 
shear ... pleasure and when you Ive hrought in 
that ... pleasure ... say yes ... and notice how easy and 
pleasurahle it is now to speak to me in wonderful 
state ... do you enjoy this feeling? (wait for a "yes") 
Can you now increase that pleasure even more now? 
(wait for "yes) Good! Douhle that pleasure and hring 
to this the feeling of rightness ... that this is a joy and 
pleasure and when you notice that feeling of 
rightness say "yes." Douhle that feeling again and 
say "yes." (pause) Do you enjoy this feeling? (pause) 
Do you enjoy this process (pause) ... and following 
each suggestion ... ? (pause) that you hear from 
me ... ? Now just as you feel that feeling of 
pleasure ... make that feeling present ... with each 
suggestion you 
follow. 
Do 
you 
agree?" 
61 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The hypnotist can make an entire session that 
creates and amplifies pleasure while linking that 
pleasure to following the suggestions. 
Variation #2 "Open Your Eyes" 
This variation of the "Yes Set" should be used 
with a great deal of caution because it can create a 
very strong transference toward the hypnotist. 
The difference is that instead of asking the 
subject to say "Yes" when the pleasurable state is 
achieved the hypnotist asks the subject to open their 
eyes. The hypnotist will place themselves in direct 
line of sight to the subject and by default be the first 
person the subject will see when this ideal 
pleasurable state is reached. In so doing the 
pleasurable feeling is linked to the hypnotist. This is 
all done without the hypnotist overtly telling the 
subj ect to "link those powerful feelings to me." 
This should be done with great caution and 
perhaps not at all, for it can create a very 
compulsive subject who constantly wants the 
attention of the hypnotist, which can be quite an 
annoyance if one does not know how to handle a 
client/subject 
who 
feel 
a 
strong 
sense 
of 
transference. It can also be very easy for a hypnotist 
to "forget" the en loco parentu5 responsibility they 
have. 
Before you attempt this for the first time it is 
wise to repeat several times the words of 
Spiderman, 
"with 
great 
power 
comes 
great 
responsibility." 
62 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Overcoming Will by minute progress 
"The journey of a thousand miles begins with a 
single step. N 
So it is through taking small, simple, and 
incremental steps that someone can be lead into a 
hypnotic state where they could potentially do any 
behavioI the hypnotist asks of them. 
Think about what you've learned so far and the 
implications of it being applied perfectly to the right 
person. 
1. They would agree to follow the suggestions 
and have a basic understanding of what that 
would be needed. 
2. Using the modified Elman induction they 
would be shown how to create the paradox of 
sealing their eyes so that even they could not 
open them. This offers an example that they 
can seemingly do strange and wonderful 
things. 
3. They are told to bring up a positive emotion 
and to amplify it, again demonstrating the 
control that they have. This for many is 
enough to willingly follow the suggestions. 
4. Take that pleasure and link it to an act or 
behavior, the hypnotists voice, or to simply 
following suggestions without question. 
Each step is a small and incremental one, yet 
each has it's purpose and lays a foundation for the 
next step. 
63 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
This is how people are hypnotically trained, 
whether 
for 
therapeutic 
reasons 
or 
for 
entertainment. It also describes how most hypnosis 
sessions proceed. 
At 
this 
point 
the 
implications 
of this 
information could frighten many lay people. It could 
equally anger many hypnotists because it implies 
that a person could be compelled to do things in 
hypnosis contrary to their normal behavior, but the 
fact is that is why hypnosis is such a powerful tool of 
behavioral change. If a persons normal behavior is 
smoking, overeating and lack of self confidence then 
hypnosis may be the best and fastest tool for the job. 
Let's consider someone who enters traditional 
therapeutic modalities because they lack confidence 
when they are with people they find attractive. 
Psychoanalysis can takes months or years to achieve 
a noticeable result. Other therapies can have 
varying results. The reason is that most therapies 
have to battle their way past all the conscious 
barriers the subject/patient has learned. These 
barriers may be simple habits or they may be beliefs 
about their self worth and deservingness. 
Hypnosis is about training new reactions and 
responses so that they happen automatically. While 
the training may happen in one hypnosis session or 
several the time by comparison is much less that 
other therapies. 
64 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Tips, Techniques, and Interesting Tricks of The 
Hypnotist 
This chapter contains some of the "insider 
techniques" that I've developed as a hypnotist and in 
talking with experimental hypnotists over the years. 
These insider techniques are ideas used in 
hypnosis that aid the subject to be more compliant. 
They are also metaphors that the hypnotist can use 
to simplify the giving and accepting of suggestions. 
Each one of these has it's benefits and will be 
explained in detail. You'll probably find that you can 
incorporate them as language patterns in more 
conversational formats. 
Using The Subject's Own Words 
If you have studied the use of values elicitation 
(see the book Mind Control Language Patterns) 
you find that by using the subject's exact words you 
can unlock very powerful emotions. This affect is 
increased when used in hypnosis. 
It is assumed that the hypnotist would have 
taken some time prior to the hypnosis session to talk 
with the subject. During that time the hypnotist 
would have heard how they describe their problem 
and what it does to them. They would have also 
heard what feelings they would feel to be free of the 
problem. 
As a hypnotist, and a lazy one at that, I make 
it a point to jot down any of the key words, 
sometimes called "trance words" that the subject 
uses to describe their internal states and emotions. 
It is not uncommon to get a profound response when 
these words are used in hypnosis. After solving a 
65 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
problem for them a subject may cry with relief at 
the hearing of these words. 
Pointing Out Successes and Using Them 
The 
technical 
term for 
this 
is 
Trance 
Ratification and it is a process that provides the 
subject with a convincer that they are in some 
different state of awareness. 
You will find that 
sometimes even the most skilled hypnotic subject 
will not believe they were in an altered state. So 
when you have the subject experience or do 
something that is outside their normal experience 
and behavioral they take note. In that experience 
their confidence is built and the experience can be 
referred to in the future. 
An example of trance ratification is the 
hypnotic induction where first the subject creates a 
feeling of ease and comfort and then is told to seal 
his eyes shut so that he could not open them. When 
the subject follows these two suggestions the 
hypnotist points out that the subject, not the 
hypnotist, created those results. This ability of the 
subject will be referenced throughout the session. 
As an example such a hypnotic script would 
be: 
hNow link that pleasure to these words 
repeating in your minet 'I'm a non-smoker. I'm a 
non-smoker. I'm a non-smoker. ' just like a moment 
ago you made it true the eyes would stay closed no 
matter how hard you trieet make it true that these 
words 'I'm a non-smoker' hring you such jo~ relief 
and pleasure ... every time you say those words to 
yourself.
N 
66 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
This gives the subject a ratification of trance 
and an example of how to treat other suggestions. 
The Voice of Experience 
The "Voice of Experience" mentioned in the 
book Mind Control Language Patterns is 
a 
conversational tool of influence, but its effectiveness 
can be easily multiplied when used in hypnosis. 
Here is the hypnosis version of The Voice of 
Experience. 
" Within 
the mind reside incredible and 
wonderful resources that are there for us to use. 
Some of those wonderful resources are memories. 
We all have memories of times we've learned and 
maybe you can even remember your very earliest 
memory of learning when you learned what it was 
like to learn. Maybe you were with a group of people 
or with someone olde~ but in that moment you knew 
what it was like to learn/ and everything seemed 
right. 
It sounded true and it felt real. // 
"in a lot of ways it's like this voice - a voice of 
experience and support. So when you think about 
what it is you're going to learn and you listen you 
can hear this voice ... and if you listen ... really 
listen ... you can hear this voice right now ... speaking 
to you right from the very center of who you are. 
This is your voice of experience and support. I have 
a voice like that and you have this voice too ... and 
even in the quiet moments of your thoughts you can 
always hear this voice ... guiding you/ protecting you 
and keeping you from harm. N 
67 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
You'll note that there is nothing in this pattern 
that directly says, "my voice is the voice in your 
head," but when someone is hearing this pattern, at 
some level, they put in the speakers voice as that 
"voice of experience." In fact anytime the hypnotist 
refers to an inner voice as "this voice" 
they are 
relying on an ambiguity to take place. Does "this 
voice" mean the voice in my head or the voice of the 
hypnotist? Not knowing which answer to accept the 
mind agrees that it means both. 
Some of the variations of this can be very 
direct. I've heard some hypnotist simply say "make 
my voice your inner voice" I and this will. work for 
those who prefer brute force over subtlety. 
When this is done on a recording that the 
subject will hear repeatedly the effect can be that 
they instantly begin to respond to the hypnotists 
voice in any situation. When listening to bedtime 
hypnosis sessions, some female subjects will report 
lightheartedly to their hypnotists that "I go to sleep 
to you every night." 
68 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Places In The Mind 
This next processes can be quite useful for 
both the hypnotist and the subject because it creates 
a quick and effective way to deal with anything that 
the subject brings to the hypnosis session. 
To get a clear image of this concept, here is a 
quote that you might ponder: NTo name something is 
to make it real. To descrihe it makes it come alive. II 
This becomes even more true in the highly 
suggestible state of hypnosis. 
If this is true then it is possible to create 
things or places within the mind that can go to work 
for the subject as needed. All that needs to be done 
is to fully describe how these things or places in the 
mind work. 
While there are many possibilities, what 
follows are four specific "places in the mind" that 
can be created in hypnosis and used to great effect. 
With each you'll get the description that "make it 
come alive." With each of these places within the 
mind it is recommended that upon creating them 
you also test them out as well. 
They are: 
1. The place where things are true. 
2. The place where things only used to be true 
but aren't any longer. 
3. The place where anything is possible and 
can be made true. 
4. The place of forgetting. 
One way to introduce this concept to the 
subject is by simply saying, "we all have places in 
the mind. One of those places in the mind is ... II 
69 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Place Where Things Are True 
liThe Place Where Things Are True" is where 
the hypnotist wants all of hislher suggestions to go. 
The description of liThe Place Where Things are 
True" 
would 
sound 
something 
like 
this: 
NWe all have places in the mind. One of those 
places in the mind is the place where things are 
true. This is where we put thing we know are 
ahsolutely true/ like the sun rises in the east and 
sets in the west or that the earth id helow and the 
sky ahove. Find this place where things are true. 
Think of one thing you know is true ... perhaps it's 
that you have feelings for someone dear to you ... or 
that hreathing clear air is good ... and when you have 
this place where things are true simply nod your 
head ... {wait) .. .In this place where things are true 
you can put anything there and it hecomes true. N 
This is enough to create The Place Where 
Things Are True, and to let it come alive. From here 
all 
the 
suggestions 
can be 
placed 
there. 
" ... take that helief that says '1 am a non-
smoker' and place it in that place where things are 
true ... and notice how ... it just fits ... and when you've 
noticed 
that 
just 
nod 
your 
head. N 
Even the hypnotists voice can come from the 
Place Where Things Are True. 
'~ .. and as you listen listen listen to every 
word repeating in your mind notice how this voice 
70 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
comes right from that place where things are true ... 
and it's there guiding you/ encouraging you/ 
comforting you and keeping you from harm ... # 
The Test for The Place Where Things Are True 
': .. now take those words 'I'm a non-smoker' 
and place it in that place where you everything you 
know is true and make it fit perfectly. .. notice how it 
feels there ... where things are true ... and when you 
have it there so that it feels just right ... simply nod 
your 
head ... # 
With those final instructions to nod their head 
when "it feels just right" is the sign that they have 
done it correctly, and that their "test" is complete. 
The Place Where Things Used To Be True 
Throughout our lives things change. We go to 
school, and learn to drive. Move from one town to 
another, one apartment to another, and during these 
changes what once used to be true for us isn't true 
any longer. 
We used to go to high school but now we don't. 
We used to drive a red mustang but now we 
don't. 
We used to live in a specific apartment but 
now we don't. 
All of these things fit into a special place in our 
mind where things use to he true but aren't any 
longer. 
So it is that once we recognize this place 
where things used to be true we can begin to put 
thing there that we no longer want to be true. We 
71 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
can put beliefs and habits there. 
For example, if you put the belief that "dieting 
is painful" there it would make losing weight much 
more enjoyable. The same would be true if you put 
the love of chocolate there. From that point in time 
onward the subject would know that they used to 
helieve that dieting was painfut but not any longer. 
They would remember that they used to love 
chocolate but now it's no big deal. 
To create this place in the mind the hypnosis 
script 
would 
be 
something 
like 
follows. 
': .. there is also a place where you put things 
that only used to he true hut aren't any longer. Like 
you used to ride a certain hicycle hut now you don 't 
or you used to live in an apartment hut not any 
more ... in this place are all the things that used to he 
true hut aren't any longer ... take a moment to find 
this place where things used to he true ... and when 
you do nod your head ... # 
The Test For The Place Where Things Used To 
Be True 
"Now take that hahit of smoking and the helief 
that quitting smoking is hard and place it in that 
place where you put things that used to he true ... 
notice how it feels ... you used to smoke ... you used 
to helieve that quitting smoking is hard ... hut not 
any more .... and make all the adjustments so that it 
fits and it feels just right there ... and when you have 
simply nod your head. # 
You can further test it through questioning. 
"You notice how good it feels there? Yes?# 
72 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Place Where Anything Is Possible 
This place, where anything is possible is quite 
powerful because it is there that dramatic changes 
can be made and tested out before bringing them 
into the everyday world. 
As an example of the place where anything is 
possible in action you might consider how people 
(perhaps even yourself) have changed to enjoy 
things that at one time would have never been 
considered. The most dramatic of these can be how 
some people at one time in their lives could never 
consider certain sexual acts but after being in a 
relationship that act becomes a pleasant norm. 
Somewhere within their mind they began to 
consider it as a possibility and, in that place, they 
played with it until they were willing to accept it. 
It should be noted that this place-where-
anything-is-possible is quite powerful and should be 
treated with great care. If you are to think of going 
into this place within your mind you would have to 
feel completely safe and protected. Mter all, 
anything could be made true there, so you must be 
safe. A strong emphasis on safety and protection is 
needed when describing "the-place-where-anything-
is-possible." 
Here is an example of a script that describes 
lithe place where anything is possible." 
~~ .. there is also a very special place within 
you ... this is a place where anything can he made 
true ... in this place you are completely safe ... and you 
can try on new hehaviors" new ideas" new heliefs 
and walk around with them and make them fit 
73 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
hefore you ever take them into your real life ... within 
this place where anything is possible you can safely 
do things ... things you wouldn It tell even your closest 
friends .. .It is a place where only you can go ... and 
when you feel right ... you can hring with you those 
people ... who understand this part ofyou ... and 
together you can explore new feelings" new 
hehaviors and new joys and pleasures ... you have 
never dreamed of. .. "" 
This description gives respect to the power of 
this place and gives the subject full control to go 
there and bring others with him or her. 
If a 
hypnotist were to seal off this place-where-anything-
is-possible then "bad things" are likely to occur. The 
hypnotist would soon become the whole source of 
pleasure to the subject and they would hounded to 
no end. 
It is much wiser to give control of this place-
where-anything-is-possible over to the subject and 
place yourself, the hypnotist, as an occasional 
welcomed guest. 
The Test For The Place Where Anything Is 
Possible 
To test this it's a good idea to start with 
something that is only slightly outside their normal 
behavior. For this this example I'll use public 
speaking. 
NCO to that place where anything is possihle 
and when you're there simply nod your head. (wait) 
Now see yourself at a distance speaking in puhlic " 
confident" comfortahle" completely at ease and 
74 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
doing it with complete enjoyment. When you have 
that simply nod your head. (wait) Good! Now feel 
that ease and confidence as you now step into your 
hody and look through your eyes and feel the 
excitement and wannth of the people eager to hear 
your words. 
When you notice that feeling of 
confidence 
just 
nod 
your 
head. # 
Youlll notice that this was done is steps, first 
creating the new behavior and seeing it dissociated, 
from a distance, then associating into it only after all 
the positive feelings were described. 
The Place of Forgetting 
The place of forgetting is occasionally useful if 
the subject might have a tendency to over think a 
suggestion. 
If this is the case the suggestion is 
given and then the memory of the suggestion is cast 
into the-place-of-forgetting. 
Here is one script that can help describe the 
place-of-forgetting. 
#There is a place far far in the hack of your 
mind. It is a place where youlve put things that don It 
even matter. .. the phone numhers youlve dialed only 
once, the names of people you Ive never met a 
second time ... and hack there things go that are no 
longer important ... you'll find way hack in the dark 
comers where you Ive forgotten so many things is a 
small hlack hox that is filled with a vast 
emptiness ... and if you put anything there is will 
simply fall away ... and it no longer even matters ... its 
no longer important ... gone ... this is the place of 
forgetting. # 
75 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
You'll notice that this place of forgetting is the 
same "black box" that is mentioned in the initial 
hypnotic induction, so there should be some 
familiarity with it. This description simply adds more 
depth 
The Test For The Place of Forgetting 
The testing for this has been know to put off 
many neophyte hypnotists because it goes against 
reason that it should work. To those hypnotists I 
can only encourage you to be fearless and remember 
that you have asked the subjects to follow your 
suggestions exactly; and they have agreed. 
The test would go as follows: 
'~ .. to show you the power of this place of 
forgetting .. Just for this moment ... take your name 
and everything that has to do with your name and 
seal it .. Just for this moment ... in that hlack hox ... seal 
tighter that you sealed your eyes closed just a 
moment ago ... so that ... as you walk away notice what 
happens when you, go ahead and try in vain to find 
the name and it's just not there .. .forgotten ... when 
you notice that simply simply nod your head (wait) 
and let the hox open and retrieve your name. You 
can leave anything you don 't want in there ... " 
Here you have further tested the "black box" 
that is mentioned in the initial hypnotic induction. 
The hypnotist can further get feedback on his test by 
bringing the subject to the eyes open state and 
asking them to describe what they experienced 
when the sealed their name (Simply ask them "What 
76 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
was your experience when you sealed your name 
away?") 
The subject's experience can vary from 
simply not finding the name and being confused, to 
knowing their name but not trying to look for it. 
Regardless of what the subject experienced assure 
them they they did well and that hypnosis is a skill 
they learn and they will learn even more as they 
continue. 
77 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Hypnotic Seal 
The purpose of a hypnotic seal is to prevent 
anyone other than the programmer/hypnotist from 
accessing certain hypnotic states. 
The hypnotic seal typically falls under the 
category of "a bad thing" for the simple reason that 
you prevent the subject from accessing useful 
mental/emotional states without the hypnotist. 
In 
theory it is easy to break a hypnotic seal, but it has 
been used by hypnotists who want the practice of 
hypnosis to be isolated only to doctors and people in 
the field of psychology. 
Another type of seal would be 
II Anyone can 
hypnotize you but only I can bring you in and out of 
this particular state." 
Applying the Hypnotic Seal: 
1. Achieve true somnambulism. 
2. Make the idea of a seal appealing, then obtain 
your client's consent. 
3. Apply the type of seal that you want. 
4. Give him amnesia for the entire conversation but 
reinforce the idea that the suggestion will work, 
even though he does not consciously remember 
anything about it. 
5. Bring him up, question him to determine if he has 
amnesia. It is important while questioning not to 
mention anything about a seal. 
Breaking the Hypnotic Seal: 
Type la: 
You may suspect a seal has been placed if your 
78 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
subject does not respond to any of your suggestions, 
does not understand anything you are saying, or 
keeps popping out of hypnosis every time you obtain 
eye closure. It is important that you never mention 
anything ahout the seal in your clienrs presence. 
Mention of the seal merely reinforces it. The 
wording might be as follows: 
II Someone has talked to you hefore ahout 
relaxation or hypnosis/ is that right? ... Can you 
visualize that person in your mind? ... Mayhe you can 
get a hetter picture of him with your eyes 
closed ... Did he ever say in his conversation that your 
eyes are so relaxed or so heavy they won't work? 
(client says 
yes; Hear that voice in your 
mind ... Hear him saying your eyes are so relaxed and 
so heavy they won't work ... Do you hear his voice? ... 
(client says yes; And they won't work -
test them 
and see. Now you have perfect eye closure and the 
seal is hroken. " 
Type Ib 
Your client fails to respond to your suggestions 
because he or she does not understand what you are 
saying .. .it sounds like gibberish or a foreign 
language. To break the seal follow the same 
procedure as above but through an intermediary 
(third party). 
Type Ie 
Your client was told any other hypnotist 
attempting to hypnotize him would immediately 
become invisible and silent. Your client would not be 
79 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
able to see nor hear you. Break this type of seal by 
following the same procedure as above, using an 
intermediary . 
Type 2 
This is the easiest to break, for the person 
offers no objection to going into hypnosis. Let your 
client remain in hypnosis for a few minutes then 
bring him up. By taking your suggestion to come out 
of hypnosis, he has negated the seal of the original 
hypnotist. 
Merely induce hypnosis again and explain 
what has transpired. Should the person interpret the 
seal as if it would not allow any other hypnotist to 
bring him or her out of hypnosis, proceed to treat it 
as the third type of seal. 
Type 3 
You may suspect this type of seal has been 
placed when usual and refractory methods for 
bringing your client out of hypnosis fail. The 
procedure is similar to the first type. 
Say to your client: 
II Picture the person who hypnotized you 
before and hear him saying those same words ... To 
open your eyes and be totally alert ... And they are 
beginning to open - your eyes are opening ... All the 
way up nOK-j totally alert, totally aware ... " 
Instructions for Hypnotic Seal Type Ic 
If this Seal is present you must obtain someone 
80 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
and train as an intermediary to assist you in case 
this ever occurs. 
The intermediary that you choose to help out 
in this situation must not be a trained hypnotist. All 
they need to do is read the instructions or commit 
the instructions to memory. If they are trained as a 
hypnotist this will not work. 
Instructions that your intermediary will need 
Ask my client the following questions: 
1. 
(Client's name), have you felt very relaxed 
before possibly in the presence of another 
person. 
2. 
(Client's name), can you recall how you felt at 
that time. 
3. 
(Client's name), did anyone help or teach you 
how to achieve that relaxation? 
N ow say to my client: 
1. 
If you close your eyes maybe you can recall 
what was said to you. 
2. 
Maybe you can think better with your eyes 
closed. 
3. 
Imagine in your mind that you are hearing 
those same old instructions on how to relax. 
4. 
Now you can hear the exact words that were 
said to you then. You can even remember how 
the voice sounded. 
5. 
Can hear that voice in your mind? 
6. 
Just imagine that he can hear that voice. 
7. 
There was a time, when you were so relaxed 
your eyes wouldn't open ... Remember how the 
81 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
voice said to you ... "and now your eyes are 
locked and won't open" ... 
When my client tries to open his or her eyes and 
fails, say the following: 
"What has happened to you is hased on a false 
helief that someone can entirely suggest away a 
person IS 
suggestihility ... This fallacy should he 
apparent since you have heen following all my 
suggestions. No~ if such a thing were possihle/ the 
person would truly he a zomhie ... We know this does 
not occur in hypnosis hecause the human mind 
won 't let it happen ... A person can have a particular 
thought hlocked oft; however ... This does not mean 
that the halance of the person's mind is kept from 
working. Since you now realize this ... That effect that 
you have heen displaying is now null and 
void ... From this moment forward you will accept the 
suggestions which my colleague gives you that are 
good for you freely. .. My colleague will now he 
speaking to you and you 
will follow their 
instructions and suggestions ... " 
Hypnotic seals can take many forms, including 
the following: 
• Simple hypnotic states that only the hypnotist 
can help the subject enter. "You are now with 
me and in this state. Only when you are with 
me can you go into this state. Anyone else who 
makes suggestions for you to enter this state 
will automatically cause you to awaken with a 
shock. .. " 
82 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
• Direct suggestions for anxiety. 
~7f anyone 
other than me suggests you close your eyes 
and relax you will immediately hecome 
anxious. The more they encourage you the 
more anxious you will hecome. Only when I 
ask you will you follow and relax even deeper. " 
• Suggesting 
that 
the 
subject 
will 
only 
understand the hypnotist. All other people are 
confusing and unintelligible. "When 
anyone 
other than me asks you to enter this state you 
will notice they are not speaking your 
language. It will he ve.zy confusing. You will 
not understand them. " 
• Suggesting that if the subject suspects a 
hypnotic suggestion is being made by anyone 
other than the hypnotist they must first gain 
approval from the hypnotist. 
• By making the access to hypnotic states 
complex 
83 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Creating Useful Mental Structures In The Mind 
What follows is an advanced way of helping 
someone to organize their mind. If this were your 
first introduction to hypnosis then this section will 
probably be a bit It out there" because it speaks of 
creating things within the mind as if they were real 
three dimensional objects. 
That said there is 
something of great use and benefit to building these 
processes. 
If we can create useful metaphors for mental 
processes then, in hypnosis, the metaphors become 
the processes. This can then make change a much 
simpler accomplishment than most people think. 
Let's start by proposing that one of the most 
beneficial values anyone can take on is flexibility. If 
one is flexible it means they can adapt to situations 
and events easily and they can build, find, and 
create resources at times when none previously 
existed. Taking it a step further, one can build even 
more wonderful feelings than they previously had. If 
you were to list all the good feelings it would not 
matter how long the list is ... it is not long enough. 
By using these mental constructs you can build 
within yourself and in others more of the flexibility 
that will create the ultimate freedom people desire. 
Remembering that when you name something 
it becomes real and when you describe it it comes 
alive, you can now go from creating places in the 
mind to create constructs that have a predetermined 
purpose. 
These constructs can have shape, size, 
color and dimension that help designate their 
purpose, but they are wholly mental creations in the 
subjects mind. 
How this is applied is only as limited as the 
84 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
creativeness of the operator. 
The subject and 
operator together can create entire mental and 
emotional mindscapes complete with all the mental 
structures needed for the most effective life 
experience. 
What follows are examples of how the subject 
can be trained to "see" this construct, and then 
examples of their application. 
Training to Hallucinate 
The subject is told that they will learn how to 
create powerful and useful mental tools and shown 
how to enhance their minds ability to visualize. The 
first step is done in a non-hypnotized state. 
They are first shown an ordinary object that 
has minimal details. It could be a simple black box 
or a ketchup bottle. They are told to look at it with 
their full attention and memorize it. Next they are 
told to close their eyes and imagine it in their mind. 
The obj ect is then removed and they open their eyes. 
They are asked if the object is present. They answer 
no. Then, they are asked if they can still see the 
object in their mind. When the answer is "yes," as it 
usually is, they proceed to the next step. 
With their eyes open the are asked to imagine 
a turntable with the object in the center of it. They 
are to focus their eyes where that imaginary object 
would be on that imaginary turntable. 
Once they 
have done that they are told to reach out with their 
finger and touch the edge of the turntable to slowly 
rotate the object. They are asked if they can see the 
objects different sides as they rotate the turntable. 
This step begins to link their kinesthetic/feeling 
modality to their visual modality and for those who 
85 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
have not experienced this before they will actually 
"see" the object and may be locked in fascination at 
their new found ability. 
The next step is to enhance that ability by 
having the subject do it while in hypnosis. 
': .. Now with your eyes closed see the ohject 
on the turn tahle and just as hefore" reach out with 
your hand and rotate it and tell me when you can 
see it's other sides ... now put your hand down and do 
the same process entirely in your mind ... watching 
the ohject rotate at the speed you determine ... and 
tell me when you can see it's other sides. " 
Using this method any mental construct can be 
made. 
Water 
Water is a very useful mental construct when 
something needs to be "washed away" like pain or 
anxiety. This can be tested if the subject has a pain 
or headache. 
Jewels, Gems and Crystals 
Jewels, gems and crystals themselves have a 
certain romance, glamor and appeal. As objects 
within the imagination they can be used to radiate a 
specific mental or emotional state. They can also be 
used as markers that designate a certain part of the 
subject's mental journey. 
86 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Bottles, Boxes, Treasure Chests and Containers 
Containers are mental constructs that are used 
to hold things. These things could be resources, 
abilities, information or emotions. 
As containers these mental constructs can take 
any form; boxes, bottles, jars, cans. In many ways 
containers are like rooms, which are mentioned 
below. The differences between containers and 
rooms are that you can enter a room but you cannot 
enter a container. Another difference is that 
resources/abilities/information etc. are created prior 
to the introducing the container. Using rooms the 
resources are usually created within the room and 
thus further distanced from the conscious mind. 
"You take all of your fear of not heing creative 
and put them into a hottle. The hottle now hecomes 
a hundle of energy. Now imagine you are opening 
the hottle and out of the sack comes a rainhow of 
energy. It is powerful, it is positive. You are now full 
of new ideas. You can feel this power surge through 
your hody. Your mind is now clear and focused. You 
feel confident, sure of your talent and eager to set 
your new ideas into motion" and you control the 
energy in your life. You are very successful in 
controlling the energy in your life. You take a few 
hreaths and relax. You notice the neighhorhood 
around you. There is a heautiful park. You hegin to 
notice how heautiful the day is/ and you hegin to feel 
a fresh new energy flowing through your hody. .. the 
more calm you hecome the more enthusiastic and 
creative you hecome ... you will feel free to create/ to 
enjoy your creative talent, to invent, to shape/ and 
form new and wonderful ideas. II 
87 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Rotating Objects 
Because of the sensory confusion that can be 
created by spinning, objects that spin can be useful 
anchors to trigger amnesia or to lock away 
suggestions from the conscious mind. 
'~ .. imagine a hlack hox ... and in this hlack box 
place all your memories of these suggestions so that 
they will rest comfortahly in there allowing you to 
carry them out without ever having to think of 
them ... now seal the hox up and watch it hegin to 
spin ... slowly at first ... so that you can see it's other 
sides~ and with each full rotation it turns ever so 
much faster. Turning and turning and turning ... and 
it will remain turning and turnin~ forever turning in 
yourmind.
N 
Of course you are not limited to black boxes. 
Anything that spins can be used. Music boxes with a 
spinning ballerina inside are a common experience 
for many people and can useful. 
Looped or Figure 8 type Objects 
Objects that are looped can be figure eights, 
infinity signs, mobius strips, etc. can also be useful 
mental constructs. 
These 
shapes 
have 
two 
immediate 
applications. They can be "loops" that stick people 
into a specific state. They can also be used as a 
"reset" that brings someone back to an original state 
when distracted. 
The "loop" construct would have two emotions 
88 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
on either side of the figure eight and the subject 
would follow the line of the loop going from one 
state to the next back and forth ad infinitum. 
'7magine now a figure eight or infinity sign 
and you'll see how the line moves so fluidly from one 
side/ curving around to the next. On one side I want 
you to put the feeling of pleasure there so that you 
focus on that half of the figure eight you feel 
pleasure/ and on the other side of the figure eight 
you feel acceptance ... hegin now to carefully follow 
the line as it curves on one side generating for you 
pleasure and on the other side acceptance ... going 
hack and forth from one state to the next and notice 
how well the fit together one after another. Just go 
hack and forth enjoying this process. (pause) Now 
place this figure eight there in the hack of your mind 
where a part of you can focus on it as the rest of you 
hears and follows each suggestion ... and if your mind 
wanders away you can always return it to the figure 
eight and the cycle of pleasure and acceptance. N 
To use the loop as a "reset" allows the cycle to 
be broken up so not to repeat. Then the process with 
this break is repeated until it is ingrained as a 
response. 
'~ .. imagine now a figure eight or infinity sign 
and you'll see how the line moves so fluidly from one 
side/ curving around to the next. On one side you 
can see mental clarity; calmness of mind ... on the 
other side is fear and anxiety ... Begin now to focus 
on the line of the figure eight that is on the anxiety 
side so that as you follow it you can feel that 
discomfort and anxiety. When you move to the other 
89 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
side of the figure eight you immediately feel the 
calmness of mind and mental clarity ... when you 
notice that calmness" nod your head. // 
The operator waits for a response. As soon as 
the subject reports calm the operator continues) 
Notice the calm and open your eyes to feel that 
calm. Other versions of "breaks" can be "move your 
head around/' "shake your hands and arms, etc. This 
process is then practiced until the response becomes 
automatic. It is a constant process of rehearse and 
test, rehearse and test, towards an automatic 
response. 
Walls, DooI'S, and Barriers 
Walls, 
doors, 
and 
barriers 
are 
useful 
constructs when there are things that require being 
hidden from the conscious awareness of the subject. 
Keep in mind that archetypal symbolism of a door 
represents change or transition to a new state. 
Within that state can be placed information or 
behaviors that would be outside the subject's 
awareness. 
The first step is to create the door and give it a 
key. 
Upon opening the door with the key and 
entering a mental state is created within the room 
with all the associated visual, 
auditory, 
and 
kinesthetic experiences. Only then is the information 
or behavior implanted. For example: 
"Now you will see a door. The door is large 
and hlack with yellow polka dots. When you reach to 
open the door you notice that it is locked. No matter 
how hard you try it will not open hecause the door 
90 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
needs a key. I will give you the key and I alone will 
hold the key. The key is a word (or shapeJ or sound.) 
The key is my voice alone saying 
J and 
upon me and me alone saying the key 
the 
door opens. Now you can easily step inside heyond 
the door and there is a large and heautiful room. 
The room is dimly lit and within it are floating 
heautiful yellow orhs providing light where ever 
they go ... there is within this room a lightness as if 
gravity is only one fifth of normaL and a pleasant 
joy ... when you now notice those feelings simply nod 
your head ... and the next wonderful step will follow ... 
(wait) ... now you will receive the information that is 
only availahle within this room hehind the hlack 
door with yellow polka dots ... " (The information is 
given and then asked to he repeated and tested until 
the answer is returned automatically.) 
Keys can also be events and situations so that 
"when X occurs the door will open and you will do Y 
(or have the information) ... " 
The best way to do this is through the process 
of training and testing, training and testing. 
The Delta and The Delta State 
The Delta is a symbol that is used to represent 
"the difference that makes all the difference." In 
mathematics it is used to represent a quality of 
change. In marketing Delta represents the factor 
that sets a product apart from it's competitors. 
The purpose of the Delta state is to create a 
template from which anything can be created. In the 
Delta state the subject is a blank slate, upon which 
anything can be created. One of the most effective 
91 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
ways to do that is to suggest a mental state that has 
no reference point; a place that is outside of time, 
space and dimension. The Delta state is unique and 
must be tested and validated for amnesia and for the 
ease 
of 
creating 
harmless 
arbitrary 
mental 
constructs like mental lenses that only sees things in 
black and white, or an eye patch that causes 
temporary blindness in one eye. 
First you take the subject through the regular 
induction and testing for somnambulism: 
"Now let all the awareness fade away so that 
you can now find yourself in a safe place where 
there is no color or light or dark ... when you have 
that place simply nod your head. (pause) Now take 
away all sensation and awareness of time and 
gravity ... all gone ... and after you1ve done that you'll 
find you are safe and completely ready to proceed. 
When you have done that simply nod your head. " 
It should be noted that numerous objects, 
figure eights, doors, and Deltas can be made and 
distinguished from one another by making them 
different colors and sizes, and each can have it's 
separate function. 
To accommodate the individuality of the 
subject the operator/hypnotist can give the subject a 
survey asking, "When you feel satisfaction (or any 
emotion) what color do you envision it to be?" and 
"When you feel (name an emotion) what body 
sensation do you best associate with that emotion?" 
The survey will yield a list of emotions, associated 
colors, and body sensations. 
With the information 
received from the subject the operator can then 
make mental constructs that better fit the subject. 
92 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
So if the subject experiences "pleasure" as pink and 
the bodily sensation as "tingly" the operator can 
suggest a "pleasure room" for example, with a pink 
door and upon entering the subject feels a tingly 
sensation. 
By the time the hypnotists begins using these 
mental constructs they have a certain leeway that 
allows them to make the hypnosis appear more 
magical. 
Remember what was stated at the 
beginning of this course, that while people are told 
hypnosis is not magic, they want magic to happen. 
Here the hypnotist can begin to give seemingly 
magical names to the constructs and processes 
through which they guide the subject. Those names 
play to the subjects hidden desire for a magical 
experience. 
Unconscious Mental Structures and Machines 
Remembering that "when you name something 
it becomes real, and when you describe it it comes 
alive" one can create "things" or "machines" in the 
mind that serve a useful function while working at 
an unconscious level. 
Perhaps you've known people who can awaken 
from sleep at a predetermined time without the aid 
of an alarm clock. This is because they have created 
a mental alarm clock that is there to help them. 
In the hypnosis session the process is to first 
name the form by saying what it will do, and then 
describe how it will do it. Because people learn best 
from a meaningful experience the hypnotist would 
then have the subject go through the experience of 
the "mind machine" working. 
This would be 
repeated until the subject gets a consistent response 
93 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
with no conscious effort. 
When creating a "mind machine" for the first 
time it's a good idea to emphasize the importance of 
calibrating the machine. 
Using the alarm clock as 
an example, for the first few attempts, the subject 
may not awaken at the right time, maybe awakening 
too early or too late. These are not to be regarded as 
failures but as calibration points to reset the alarm. 
Mind machines can also be thought of as types 
of computer programs because they tend to follow 
an "if/then" procedural process (example: "If it's 
6:00am then I awaken") . 
Mind machines can take many forms but they 
will tend to fall into these categories: 
Assisting Machines 
Assisting machines unconsciously help the 
subject to organize information and give instructions 
on how to proceed. 
Alerts and Alarms 
Alerts point out opportunities to the subject 
when they become available. 
An alert could automatically make you aware 
of possible money making opportunities, or perhaps 
when attractive romantic partners are within sight. 
An example of this would be what's referred to as 
"gay-dar" within the gay community. 
Alarms are designed to make you aware when 
a possible threat is near. People who spent time 
amid abusive alcoholics are often able to quickly 
recognize people with drug dependency issues. 
94 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Defensive Devices 
Defensive machines are an offshoot of alarms 
that automatically begin behaviors to keep the 
subject safe. 
An if/then example of an automatic 
defensive device would be "If I'm alone in an 
unfamiliar environment then I become very aware of 
all the people around me." 
Well trained body guards have create very 
strong defensive mind machines to keep them and 
their clients safe. 
Influencing Machines 
Influencing machines are used when dealing 
directly with other people for the purposes of 
influencing them. 
Influencing 
machines 
automatically 
bring 
together a 
combination of sharp observation, 
learned skilled and focused desires to keep the 
subject focused on persuading others to their goals. 
Some sales people simply think of it as a 
"switch" that they turn on and it brings to bare all of 
their skills and talents right when they need them. 
9S 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Useful Hypnosis Scripts 
What follows are various hypnosis processes 
that can be of use in helping people overcome 
personal limitations such as fears and compulsive 
habits. 
The Mirror of The Future 
(While he may humbly deny it I would like to credit 
hypnotist, Jeff Stephens, for this script). 
When working with people for therapeutic 
reasons one of the greatest obstacles to overcome is 
the subject's own lack of self worth, self esteem, and 
deservingness. Often the subject has a personal 
history filled with attempts and subsequent failures 
that effect even their willingness to try any further. 
They often approach hypnosis as a final attempt and 
are already disheartened and desperate. 
When working with people for weight loss I 
will often propose a thought experiment in which I 
ask the subject to pretend that they are actually an 
identical twin separated at birth. Upon finally 
meeting their twin they both realize they need to 
lose the same amount of weight, and they both set 
out to do it. 
At the end a certain period of time they both 
are successful. Both lost the same weight over the 
same time doing the same activities. The only 
difference is that one of them lost weight because 
they hated themselves and the other did it because 
they loved themselves. The story ends by asking 
them which twin would they rather be? 
The purpose of the The Mirror of The Future is 
to rebuild the self image so that they proceed with 
96 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
purpose and commitment. 
'7n a moment I will count hack from five to 
zero, and as I do you will go further into that deep 
and pleasant state. Imagine that there is a zero out 
there in front of you, and with each count you get 
closer, finally going through that zero, inside that 
zero and the all the way down into that zero. From 
that point on every word you hear can he made 
ahsolutely true allowing you to change in all the 
ways you've always wanted to change for so long. " 
"S ... 4 ... 3 ... 2 ... 1 ... Zero. 
FORGET. .. trust your 
unconscious mind to do it's perfect work ... and notice 
that you can see yourself in the mirror. From this 
point on when you look in the mirror you LIKE what 
you see in the mirror. " 
'7'm speaking directly to the unconscious mind 
... so the conscious mind can just drift away in 
whatever direction you like, or it can stay and pay 
attention to each and every word as you go deeper 
and deeper inside. " 
"From this point on you LIKE what you see in 
the mirror. From this point on you LIKE that person 
you see in the mirror. From this point on you LIKE 
yourself. " 
"Unconscious mind., you like (name) and from 
this point on you like, love and DEEPLY accept 
(name) and hecause you want to make him/her 
happy you do EVERYTHING necessary to make 
(name) happy and healthy. From this point on you 
like what you see in the mirror, you like (name) and 
no longer do you see what you had seen in the past. 
No longer do you focus on the pain, hitterness and 
failure. No longer do you see the (name) that was, 
the (name) that had to he. From this point on when 
97 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
you look in the mirror you see the (name) that CAN 
he. You see the (name) that WILL he ... you see the 
(name) that IS going to he .. .for the (name) that 
WILL BE .. .IS the (name) that exists right now ... and 
you do EVERYTHING in your power to make THAT 
(name) happen. You do EVERYTHING necessary to 
make (name) healthy -
Financiall~ 
Spirituall~ 
Emotionall~ Relationally and Physically. Those five 
areas of health are from now on THE MOST 
important thing to you without exception. " 
"You release all sahotage. You have no need to 
struggle any longer hecause you're done. You're 
done with the hitterness the hurt and the failure. 
You're done with any need to punish yourself or to 
feel guilt or shame. You are done with ALL of 
that ... FOREVER. " 
"You like yourselffrom now on and and you let 
go of any need to notice criticism from other people 
or even yourself. " 
"You let go of all self criticism hecause from 
this point forward you like yourself and have no 
need for it any longer. " 
"(Name)J if I throw a dart at a walL it will 
damage the wall and if I throw it a window the 
window will shatter ... But if I throw it as a river it 
doesn't damage the water hecause the river does 
not make a wall out of itself; and you are no longer 
making a wall out of yourself any longer either. You 
no longer make walls out of your self hecause you 
realize that hy heing that river you cannot he 
damaged hy the darts of criticism. You no longer 
need to worry ahout the darts of criticism any longer 
hecause you have let go of the need to notice 
criticism from others and even from yourself. " 
'From now on you are done with self-
98 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
sahotage in every way. You are done with any 
sahotage of yourself. # 
/'You feel good ahout yourself from the INSIDE 
now. Your river flows from the spring within you so 
your self esteem comes from the INSIDE now. What 
other people think and say does not matter. If there 
is a lesson you need to learn you learn it without 
feeling had and you can learn any lesson and it will 
not hurt your feelings. You simply use EVERYTHING 
to improve your health ... fjnanciall~ 
relationall~ 
emotionally and physically. // 
#From this point on you 'Fe DONE with failure 
and you focus ONLY on the future. That is THE most 
important thing from this point on. N 
This script has been know to bring tears to 
subjects eyes because for many this is often the first 
time they were told that they could feel good about 
themselves for no reason. 
99 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Cravings Crusher 
This is a technique I've made from a modified 
anchor collapse. It is designed to eliminate or 
minimize cravings and desire. 
The Cravings Crusher was first tried on weight 
loss clients for chocolate and chips and was later 
incorporated for smokers. 
To begin I ask "do you have cravings?N Many 
people will easily say "yes," but others may need a 
further explanation. ':4 craving is when you have a 
thought to eat somethin~ and that thought won 't go 
away until you're satisfy it. N 
Then ask them, "if you thought about it could 
you bring up a craving right now?" This is important 
for the process to work and most people will say yes. 
If they say no, or "I don't know" then encourage 
them to try and remind them that for the the process 
to work well they need to bring up a craving. 
'Here is what is going to happen. I'm going to 
ask you to sit with your hand resting either on your 
lap or the anns of the chair palm up. You'll be 
looking into the palms of your hand. When you look 
into your right hand I want you to bring up a 
craving. In you left hand I want to imagine being 
completely free of cravings, at your ideal weight (a 
non-smoker) and feeling great! At some point I'm 
going to have you bring your hands together and it 
is going to get very confusing so just follow along 
with me. OK?N 
In the hundreds of times I've done this I never 
had anyone ask anything more about the process. 
Begin the process as follows: 
100 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
"Oka~ sit with your hands resting comfortahly 
either on the arms of the chair or on you lap. Look in 
to you right hand. As you focus intently on the right 
hand I want you to hring up a craving. When you 
notice that craving ... simply nod your head. Take 
your time. (wait for response) Good! Now as you 
notice that craving focus on the feeling of the 
craving. It's not ahout the food/smoking. It's ahout 
the feeling of the craving and imagine that craving 
is in the right hand. Either you're holding that 
craving or that's where it originates hut that craving 
is in the right hand. N 
"Take a deep hreath. .. and look into the left 
hand. As you look into the left hand. . .imagine that 
you are completely free from cravings. You're 
looking through your own eyes at your ideal 
weight/a non-smoke~ you're feeling fine/ in perfect 
health. When you notice that incredihle feeling and 
all the wonderful resources you have simply nod 
your head (wait for response.) Good!N 
NNo~ tum to your right hand and notice the 
craving. (wait for response). Now, turn to you left 
and notice all those wonderful resources there 
waiting for you ... and close your eyes ... and I want 
you to SLOWLY hring those hands together as if 
they're heing pulled together hy an magnetic 
force ... and soon they will come together ... and those 
two feelings will crash and collide and smash 
together ... it will he very confusing ... hut that 
confusion will pass ... so let them come together (wait 
until the hands meet) ... and when that confusion 
passes you'll know it ... hecause you'll feel fine ... so let 
those two feelings m~ merge and intertwine and 
when the confusion has passed nod your head (wait 
101 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
for response.) # 
'No~ I'm going to ask you a question and I 
want you to tell me ... what happens ... now ... when you 
go ahead and try in vane to bring up a 
craving ... what do you notice? (Wait for response. 
They will typically report that they cannot bring up a 
craving or that it's drastically minimized.) # 
#That's right. Notice that response. So now 
imagine taking any last minimal remnant of the 
craving and tossing it behind and it just begins to 
fall away ... it doesn't even matter. It isn't even 
important. You don't even have to do a thing about 
it. Gone ... and notice that incredible feeling of relief. # 
'Now imagine yourself, today, tonight or 
tomorrow when you would have normally had this 
craving but NOW you have this response. As soon as 
you notice it you take the very thought of a craving 
and you toss it behind you where it doesn't even 
matter ... and feel that relief. # 
'Now just create one event right after another 
where you already have this response. Different 
places, different times and this response is already 
there. Again and again and again and again. (pause, 
give them time to do this fora while)# 
#So when you notice ... NOW. .. that you can't 
even bring up a craving no matter how hard you 
try ... what sort of thoughts and feeling come up? 
(They usually will mention a positive feeling like 
'relief#or Ncontrol. # If they say something that is 
other than clearly positive then guide them to a 
positive feeling.) Good! Notice that relief. Focus in 
on it and say this loudly within you mind ... and feel it 
in your heart ... hear yourself say, /7 deserve this. I 
deserve this. I deserve this. # You do deserve this 
feeling of relief. # 
102 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The next step is to have them open their eyes 
and notice what it's like to be free from cravings. 
Most people will not be able to bring up a craving no 
matter how hard they try. 
The nature of this process is similar to an NLP 
anchor collapse when two opposing feeling are 
brought together. These two feelings cannot coexist 
at the same time thus creating a temporary feeling 
of confusion. But the mind sorts it out because the 
mind cannot easily maintain a constant state of 
confusion. 
Once the subject has an experience of NOT 
having a craving they are taught a useful response 
to cravings, one of tossing it behind them. This is 
follow by rehearsing the process until it becomes 
unconscious and automatic. 
The concept of "Deserving" is introduced to 
help the subject at the level of their self-worth and 
personal identity, and is sometimes the most 
powerful part of the process. 
This process is often done just preceding the 
"hypnosis" process because it is not entirely like 
what people think of hypnosis. Usually because of 
the dramatic effect it has on the subject it 
encourages the subject to be more comfortable 
complying to the suggestions during the hypnosis 
that follows. 
The Cravings Crusher also provide an example 
of how to "throw something behind you and let it 
go," which is a useful process to learn when you 
want to change old behaviors. 
103 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Creating Negative Hallucinations 
Ever since Bob saw the fire that destroyed his 
house he cringes at the sight of flame and fire. The 
anxiety has kept him of visiting his friends, most of 
whom smoke. Now even a match or a lighter seems 
as big as fireplace. He even sees it when it is not 
there. 
What bob sees at times can be called a 
hall ucination. 
A hallucination is when something is seen 
though nothing is there. A negative hallucination is 
the opposite, where you don't see something that is 
there. 
Negative hallucinations are very useful and 
helpful when it comes to removing things that are 
either unpleasant or emotional triggers. 
There are several ways to create a negative 
hallucination. If you've read my book Mind Control 
Language Patterns you'll discover a few helpful hints 
in the section called "'The Book of Forgetting.~· The 
way to create a negative hallucination using 
hypnosis 
is 
through 
direct 
suggestion 
and 
minimization. 
The normal testing for amnesia is needed. The 
direct suggestions can be: II the fire is not here. As if 
it were hlank ... meaningless ... # 
You can begin these suggestions by linking 
pleasant feelings to the process of removing the 
image: 
': .. from a distance see a picture on a wall. The 
picture has a frame around it and the picture is that 
of a fire (or whatever you want to negatively 
hallucinate.) Now erase the fire and feel the 
104 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
relief...as you paint over it notice the joy. .. and 
continue to erase it from your mind ... the more you 
continue to clear it away the more joy and pleasure 
you feel. You have now a constant process of 
removing ... erasing ... and 
wiping 
away all 
the 
thoughts/ 
responses 
and 
images 
ahout 
that ... forget ... completely just let it fall from your 
mind. .. and just notice the joy and pleasure that is 
left hehind. N 
The minimization suggestions are designed to 
tell the mind how to perceive what is bothering 
them. Minimizing suggestions will sound like: 
"... make is smaller and smaller ... push it far 
away. .. let all the color just flow from it ... as if 
nothing is there ... and let it fall far far hehind 
you ... where it doesn It even matter .. .it's no longer 
important ... gone ... you don It even have to think 
ahout it ... and you mind does this ... right now and 
every time you're in it's presence ... and under these 
circumstances ... your mind will just shrink it 
away ... tiny tiny tiny. .. like a dot that just falls away ... 
your mind does this every time ... like it's doing 
now. .. again and again ... N 
To personally test the effectiveness of this 
imagine a 
hamburger, or your favorite most 
delicious distraction, and go through the process of 
imagining it shrunk down, pushed away, turned 
black and white and move it away, all in your mind, 
of course, and notice how it's appeal has changed. 
Make it a habit every time you see or think of 
your delicious distraction and notice how you 
respond differently to it. 
105 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
To do this in hypnosis and make it an 
unconscious 
reaction is 
merely a 
matter of 
practicing the response in hypnosis until it becomes 
easy, testing it several times. 
When it becomes 
automatic in hypnosis then test it during the waking 
state, out of hypnosis. 
106 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The NLP Phobia Hypnosis Process 
When someone reports they have a phobia 
they want to get rid of there are some very effect 
and rapid ways to do it using hypnosis and NLP 
processes. The hypnosis process that follows is one 
that I use that dramatically reduces the subject's 
fear and anxiety. 
The first step is to, in a matter of fact way, 
introduce the NLP phobia cure process as a "test. II 
You would say, '7just want to have you go through a 
very quick process to see how you respond. This is 
not a pass/fail type of test. I use it so that I can more 
easily modify the hypnosis process to fit your 
needs. '- You say this to make sure that they are 
getting a useful response, but framing it so that they 
are not under any pressure to perform. 
It should be noted that this short "test" is often 
all that is needed to remove a phobia. It is placed 
here to give the subject momentum to continue 
through the hypnosis process and create an even 
more powerful hypnosiS process. 
Let's assume the subject has a fear of dogs 
that prevents her from strolling the neighborhood 
with her family. 
"First Can you think of the last time you were 
frightened hy a dog? Think ahout that now and what 
sort of feelings are you feeling as you think ahout 
it?N 
The purpose of this line of questioning is to get 
a base line to compare to when the hypnosis session 
is over. 
"And even when you try to relax and calm 
yourself are you still anxious?N This question too is 
part of the base line. 
107 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
"Okay. Before we do the hypnosis let me just 
walk you through this very quickly. Follow along 
with me as fast as you can. Don't analyze or judge 
what's happenin~ just imagine it in your mind as 
quickly as I describe it. I'll also ask you to 
occasionally nod your head. Are you ready?~ 
As you do this process the goal is to speak just 
fast enough that the subject will only have enough 
time to keep up with you. This doesn't have to be a 
machine gun delivery, just one with a minimum of 
pauses. 
"Close your eyes and imagine yourself in a 
very comfortable chair in a big beautiful movie 
theater. You can see on the movie screen an image 
of yourself relaxed and comfortable. From that seat 
lift up out of your body and float up ... up ... back. .. to 
the projection room ... and from that projection room 
grab the reel of film that shows your most recent 
experience ... except that this reel of film will show 
you reacting calmly and undisturbed just as you've 
seen others so easily respond in that situation. Now 
let the movie move forward in time to that time 
when" no matter what you are ok with dogs (or 
whatever their fear) and you're standing there 
feeling absolutely wonderfuL and when you are 
there simply nod your head ... take all the time you 
need (wait.F' 
"Great! Now jump into the screen and be there 
looking through your eyes at that time in the future 
and feeling through your senses at ease and 
comfortable ... now imagine the film being played in 
reverse as fast as you can with you in it ... doing 
108 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
everything hackwards ... untij you're right hack to 
this moment in time ... right here ... right now ... going 
hackwards" and when you're hack here to this 
moment just nod your head (wait.),," 
As soon as the subject is back ask them, /no~ 
when you think ahout that incident with the dog (or 
the fear) what do you notice that is different?N 
The subject will usually report that they no 
longer have fear or anxiety when they rethink the 
event. 
It should be noted that often this one very 
rapid "test" is enough to eliminate a long time 
phobia. Many NLPers would simply stop there. The 
reason I recommend that you proceed quickly to the 
hypnosis is to give them their money's worth and 
create a more powerful experience. 
When the subjects report that they are 
remembering the event without anxiety, the typical 
response is "You did great. Notice how it's not there 
even now. Let's do the hypnosis. N 
Following the hypnotic induction the hypnotist 
would go through the same process. The main 
difference is that it will be repeated several times 
within the hypnosis session, and with each repetition 
a new resource is added each time and in different 
situations. The subject is encouraged to go through 
each process completely, and as quickly as is 
manageable. 
Without writing out the entire hypnotic script 
and it's repetitions, an outline of the process is as 
follows: 
1. You are resting in a comfortable movie theater 
seat. In front of you is a black and white image 
109 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
of yourself just as you are now resting 
comfortably. 
2. You float out of your body up and back to the 
movie projection room. 
3. You put a reel of film in the projector that is 
about you doing the action perfectly and 
without fear, each time adding a new positive 
resource. 
4. From the projection room you watch the movie 
play all the way to the end when you are free 
of fear or anxiety. 
5. You jump into the movie and experience those 
feelings in the first person as if you are there. 
6. The movie runs quickly backward until you roll 
the movie back to the moment just before the 
event. 
Once the subject has done this enough times 
to know how the process works the hypnotist can 
tell the subject to repeat the process on their own. 
During sessions like this I have at times told 
the subject: 
"Do this same process rapidly again and again 
until you feel that you've already done it 100 times 
in you mind without counting. You go through the 
process repeating it quickly again and again until 
it's ingrained within you. Take all the time you need 
until that feeling is right that you've already done it 
100 times without even counting, and when you 'Fe 
there simply nod your head. /. 
By doing it this way the subjects tend to count 
100 
repetitions 
unconsciously 
and 
involve 
themselves more deeply in the process. 
110 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
For Fun: Hypnotic Drunkenness 
If a person wants to give a dramatic public 
demonstration of hypnosis and make it fun then 
hypnotic drunkenness will do it. 
In short, hypnotic drunkenness is simply using 
hypnosis to create the feeling of being drunk in 
someone. For the people who volunteer to be the 
subject it's incredible fun, and for those watching it's 
a huge laugh. 
Because of the overall fun and pleasure of this 
effect I'll describe in a step-by-step format how to do 
it. 
Step 1. Select The Right Candidate 
It's best to enlist someone who considers 
themselves to be a "fun drunk," meaning they giggle 
when intoxicated with alcohol. You can start by 
simply asking if there is anyone in the audience who 
knows they get "silly" when drunk. It's likely you'll 
find some eager volunteers, especially if the 
audience is of college age. Remind everyone that 
whole experience is designed to be fun. 
Step 2. Get Agreement From Your Volunteer 
and Begin to Elicit Their IIGetting Drunk" 
Process 
After your volunteer has agreed to follow your 
suggestions ask them to tell you the very first thing 
they notice as they drink just hefore they begin to 
get drunk, and beginning with their first sip of 
alcohol. 
111 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Continue to ask the question, "what do you 
notice or do next?" In so doing you1re getting details 
of what they do internally as they get drunk. You 
may find there are three or four steps to this 
process, but there may be more. Take note of the 
steps. 
Step 3. Go Through the Process 
Ask your subject to close their eyes and begin 
to walk them through the steps just as they 
described them (without them taking in any alcohol, 
of course.) Make certain they bring about (or 
imagine) the sensations they would be feeling. 
Step 4. Repeat 
Repeat this several times. You may have to do 
it as many as 10 or 15 times, perhaps more. You'll 
know they are responding because they'll begin to 
act intoxicated and, because you screened them for 
it, they'll begin to get funny and giggly. 
Step 5. Have Fun 
This includes having them do all the normal 
tests for intoxication: 
• Walking in a straight line 
• Reciting the alphabet 
• Extending arms to their sides and touching 
their nose 
• Extending arms to their sides and standing on 
one foot 
112 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
You can also see how their behavior is 
different in social settings by having them talk to 
other people, always good for a laugh. 
Concluding The Demonstration 
At the end of this demonstration it's always a 
good idea to make certain your subject leaves in the 
sober condition they started, so tell them II on the 
count of three I will clap my hands and you will 
return completely sober, alert, wide awake and 
feeling great. One. Two. Three (Clap!)" 
113 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Dantalion Jones Hypnosis Setting 
Among hypnotists and psychedelic drug users 
there is a saying, "set and setting are everything." 
What this means is that the where you're having the 
altered state is just as important as the altered state 
itself. 
Hypnotists have a long tradition about what a 
hypnotist's office should look like. 
It's often suggested that a hypnotist's office 
should have warm colors and a comfortable chair for 
the subject. Additionally, a background of new age 
music is often played to assure the subject is in a 
comfortable condition. 
I am not one of those hypnotists. 
I am in full agreement that set and setting are 
important, and I propose a radical change from what 
a traditional hypnotist's workspace might look like. 
Please keep in mind that while I have reasons 
for what I will be suggesting, this is entirely 
personal. I am not proposing a radical change for 
every hypnotist's office, just a change in various 
ways we look at the hypnosis setting. 
To get an understanding of why these changes 
are being suggested let's go back to the original 
paradox about people and hypnosis, namely, that 
people need to know that hypnosis is nolt magical, 
yet have it presented in a way that helps them 
experience it as magical. Done correctly this will let 
them know that they are responsibility for their 
success, and bypass their conscious understanding 
so that their results are powerful and lasting. 
In this ideal hypnosis setting there would be 
two rooms. 
One for the pre-talk and one for the 
hypnosis session. The pre-talk office is in every way 
114 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
normat and designed to get the subject comfortable 
and bring them to the ultimate agreement to follow 
the 
hypnotist's 
suggestions 
as 
they've 
been 
described. 
The mood in the pre-talk office should be 
lighthearted with a strong emphasis on being 
informative. Upon getting the agreement to follow 
the hypnotist's suggestion the hypnotist simply says, 
"great, let's get started," and stands and walks out 
with a gesture for the subject to follow. 
The hypnosis room is a featureless room with a 
small circular table in the center and two straight 
backed wooden chairs on either side facing each 
other. The hypnotist sits in one chair and the subject 
in the other. 
There are several reasons for this setup. 
Reason 1 
To defy the subject's expectations of what a 
hypnosis session should be like. Mter all, they have 
agreed to follow your suggestions and not judge, 
analyze or evaluate. 
Reason 2 
To add a minor bit of confusion as to what is to 
happen. The setting of two chairs and a table are 
innocuous and safe enough, but again a bit 
confusing. This helps to overload the sensory input 
of the subject. 
Reason 3 
With the table separating the hypnotist and 
subject they can easily place their hand on the table. 
This makes the subject's hands available for setting 
anchors. At the same time the table provides a 
115 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
boundary of safety. 
Reason 4 
With the hands accessible on the table the 
hypnotist can add to the sensory overload by a 
simple process of very gently tapping on back on the 
hands. 
Reason 5 
The setting allows the hypnotist to train the 
subject to follow their suggestions with simple 
commands like, "come on in," "have a seat," "no, 
take this one," "move closer," "put your hands here," 
"get comfortable," and so on. 
I have fantasized of having the table and two 
chairs setup in the middle of a large dark basement 
with a single light dangling overhead. This may add 
a component of fear into the subject's experience 
(which I don't mind as long as they follow the 
suggestions), and thus contribute to the magical 
quality of the hypnosis experience. Sometimes all 
that is needed to create a feeling of the magical is a 
little sense of drama. 
116 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The PMC Processes 
My 
first 
book, 
Perfected Mind Control, 
contained what I still feel are some of them most 
powerful hypnosis processes ever made public. 
Combine those processes with the insights I've 
written about here, and you are on your way to 
being a top-notch hypnotist with unimaginable 
power. For that reason I'm including a discussion of 
them in this book. 
As someone who now has some skill and 
knowledge in hypnosis I ask you to read these 
hypnosis processes in a very unique and powerful 
way - read them as if you are doing them on 
yourself. In other words, put yourself in the position 
of the hypnotic subject and make all of these 
suggestion real for you. 
It is then that you will 
understand their power. It is then you will decide if 
you wish to proceed any further. 
"It's dangerous to understand new things too 
quickly. # 
-Josiah Warren - True Civilization 
I hope you haven't jumped to this section 
without reading everything that has preceded it. If 
you have, you're not ready. Go back. Start at the 
beginning and try, really try, to get an idea of this is 
all about, because what follows is what you as an 
operator will be using with your subject. 
If you do it right, everyone you work with will 
love you. If you do it wrong ... you'll pay for it in the 
long run. 
117 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The lesson is (yes, I'll say it again) do these 
processes on yourself first! Only then can you use 
them 
with 
the 
respect 
they 
deserve. 
118 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The "Creating An Inner Voice" Open Process 
The purpose of an "open" process is that it can 
be inserted 
anytime during the other similar 
sessions. Itls a very benevolent process that can get 
anyone to easily feel good about who they are and 
what you Ire doing with them. In the hypnosis world it 
does what is called "ego strengthening" for the 
subject. For that reason it's quite good for the 
subject's first introduction to the PMC processes. 
Additionally, if the operator feels that the 
subject is not responding well or quickly enough 
then, no need to rush. Simply introduce this simple 
and enjoyable process that has many benefits. 
Objectives: 
• To build the subject's sense of comfort with 
the PMC processes in general. 
• To build the subject's confidence. 
• To build an enjoyable anticipation to learning 
about themselves, and changing to fit their wants 
and needs. 
• To create an ongoing internal voice that will 
continue to provide positive and beneficial 
reinforcement to the subject on both a conscious and 
unconscious level. 
• To covertly install the operator's voice as a 
nurturing voice within the subject's consciousness. 
Please note as you read this that the 
suggestions given would be suggestions that we all 
119 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
would like to hear. If these suggestions are an 
internal endless loop within our minds then we 
would each be much more likely to feel good about 
things, be more flexible to challenges, and be happy 
in general. 11m including the hypnotic induction in 
hopes that this will make things simpler. 
Youlll also notice that early on that the subject 
is being enlisted to not merely lay passively with 
eyes closed, but to engage in responses to the 
operator. This cannot be underestimated. 
Responsiveness Is Important! 
The Induction 
You '11 find that this only takes a very short amount of 
time for you ... so ... 
Take that moment and close 
your eyes ... hegin to hecome aware of the muscles 
of your forehead and let them ... relax... as the 
muscles of the forehead relaxes you can notice 
that the eyes and eye lids naturally. .. remain 
closed ... so now focus on the eyes and eyelids and 
relax them even further and they will continue to 
... stay closed ... let your eyes gently gaze no~ 
heneath closed eyelids at the center of your 
forehead and in a voice within your mind tell the 
eyelids to... "Stay closed!". .. and if you like 
very hriefly test them and stop and go deeper. .. 
which 
only means 
to 
become 
more 
comfortable... and you don 't even have to move 
to do 
that. 
(PAUSE) ... 
once again tell the 
eyelids "Stay closed" and if you like hriefly test 
them and stop testing and... go deeper... even 
more relaxed. More comfortahle than you were even 
just a moment ago... 
and as you notice your 
degree of relaxation there are even greater levels of 
120 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
relaxation which I call levels A" Band C and let 
me describe them to you hefore you actually go 
there. 
When you go to Level A ... hut don't go there 
yet ... you'll relax yourself even more than you are 
right now. And when you reach level A you'll easily 
he able to move the index finger of the right hand. 
When you go to level B I want you to 
relax so much that it takes all your effort to move 
the index finger of the right hand... and you may 
only get just a small visible twitch hecause you're 
so relaxed. 
Finally" when you go to level C I want you 
to imagine as if you've relaxed it all away so that 
even though you know that you're trying to move 
the index finger everything will ... stay perfectly 
still. 
So when you're ready go to that level A. When you 
feel you are more relaxed than you were just a 
moment ago gently move the index finger of your 
right hand. (wait) Good! When you're ready relax 
even further ... go to that level B... where you are so 
relaxed it takes all your will and effort to move 
the index finger ... hecause you're so relaxed ... you 
may only get a small motion or twitch enough for 
me to see. And even thought it's hard I know you 
can do it. (wait) Good! 
Keep relaxing. Go Deeper... as if you have 
relaxed everything away. .. so relaxed that even 
though you know that you're trying to move the 
finger... everything stays ... perfectly still. ., and you 
know you're safe. You're completely in control. And 
if something truly needed your attention you could 
easily emerge from this state ... hut now ... even 
121 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
though you know that you're trying to move the 
finger... everything stays ... perfectly still. 
From here there are four things that we 
can do whenever you're within this process state. 
The first is you can simply follow the suggestions 
and just hy doing that you have already achieved a 
comfortahly pleasant state ofawareness. You've done 
very well. 
The second thing we can do is I can ask 
you to imagine something and it can instantly 
come to mind. For example I'd like you to now 
imagine a crystal hall with a heautiful red rose 
inside of it. 
The third thing is that I can mention 
feelings and you can hecome instantly aware of 
them. And hecause you are within this process 
state now you can notice how easy it is. From now 
on you don't even have to try your mind will notice 
this automatically. For example even though you 
might not have heen aware of it a moment ago 
hecause you are in this pleasant state you can 
automatically hecome awareof the shoes on your 
feet. You might notice the feel or the weight on 
comfort 
of discomfort. And even though you 
haven't heen thinking ahout it you can notice the 
feeling of your hands resting comfortahly where 
they are right now. You may notice the pressure or 
texture or the temperature. And you can also notice 
the feeling of the surface heneath you giving you 
complete support enough to relax even more 
comfortably with every word. 
The forth thing we can do is I can ask you to 
recall memories and they can instantly come to you. 
I will ask you to rememher only pleasant memories. 
When you recall these pleasant memories I'd like 
122 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
you let me know hy moving the right index 
finger. (wait) Good! 
And now I'd like you to recall a pleasant 
memory of you around a swing. It could he your 
swing or the a friends swing or swing at a park or 
play ground. When that pleasant memory comes 
to mind move your right index finger. (wait) Good! 
And I'd like to rememher a time when you 
leamed something of great importance/ perhaps 
even the very first time you leam what it was like 
to leam. You could have heen with a group of 
people or with someone older and when 
that 
pleasant memory comes to mind move your right 
index finger. (wait) Good! It is times like that 
when we leam... when everything seems right if 
sounds good and it feels reaL that it's like this 
voice ... that is guiding us. A voice of support a 
voice of wisdom/ a voice of encouragement. I have 
a voice like that .... and when you listen for what 
you want to learn you can hear this voice. This 
is your voice. And if you listen... if you truly listen 
you can hear this voice this voice speaking to you 
right from the center of who you are. Listen .... 
listen ... and when you hear this voice ... move 
your right index finger. (wait) Good! This is your 
voice and you can always rely on it ... to give you 
what you want to know ... that will help you ... that 
will guide you ... that feels good. 
Listen. Listen ... and just let this voice repeat 
and repeat ... right now... out 
loud 
to 
yourself... inside... all that you want to know 
... thats good ... ahout yourself. 
(End of induction) 
123 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
You have a very strong mind and you like 
learning about yourself... to lind new ways that 
will allow you to make changes ... that you 
want which will feel good for you... and it doesn't 
even matter if you know exactly what those changes 
are ... it's only important that you learn 
and 
enjoy as this process naturally takes place ... at 
the deepest level ... you realize that there is a part 
of you that can make changes... wonderful powerful 
changes... in any area of your life ... hecause 
you have 
throughout your life 
always made 
changes ... even now ... you're not the same person 
you were a year ago ... or ten years ago ... hecause 
you Ive learned ... many things since then... and 
you realize that there is much more for you that is 
possihle. 
Even as you imagine how you wish to feel 
more fultiHed with who you are as you see 
yourseU at a future time clearly in your mind ... 
you've already made those changes ... heing more 
open to learn ... you have a strong mind .. and 
your mind is now ready to listen to this voice ... 
your voice... reminding you of all the wonderful 
things you're learning ... that feels good. 
You understand that to make any change 
you can... make that change happen ... just like 
you wanted... and you can also... allow that 
change to happen ... naturally; easily. .. as if it 
were the simplest thing in the world to do... all 
you have to do is be open... to that change... and 
put aside your doubts... 
put aside your 
hesitations... and give yourself permission ... 
that will naturally allow you to feel good about 
this process... and all the other wonderful work 
you are doing right here" right now ... at the deepest 
124 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
level of your mind... even though you don't know it 
... there is a part of you that is helping you ... 
hecause you are right here" right now listen to 
this voice... your voice... telling you just what you 
need... that you want ... it reassures you to ... just 
relax and let it happen. You don't even have to try. 
All you need to do is listen and let the kind words 
echo again and again inside your mind ... and 
you can naturally... find resources... that you 
didn't even know you had. .. hecause they are 
there ... just waiting... waiting... to help yourself 
go deeper into that pleasant state where this 
voice is now natural for you to ... just follow 
along ... so that during your day. .. whether you're 
alone or with people ... 
on the phone .. , or 
working here... in this way... or even in the quiet 
moments ... all you have to do is listen... and this 
voice reminds you ... you're doing fine ... relax .. . 
just let it happen ... go deeper... forget ... trust .. . 
your inner mind to do it's perfect work... and 
reassures you with all the kind words ... That you're 
hearing ... every time you ... just listen ... as each 
word passes over you like a gentle hreeze coming 
from that place inside where you keep everything 
that you know is true... and during your day. .. 
anytime... when you want to... feel this well... all 
you need to do is ... close your eyes... and 
remember ... the sound of each reassuring word ... 
that's 
always 
there... 
giving 
you 
the 
encouragement you want and need. 
You give yourself full permission to feel good 
for no reason. 
So just take some time to 
recognize 
the pleasant 
feelings 
that 
you've 
felt ... at any time in your life ... Now. .. these feeling 
are there... as a way to remind you... you are 
125 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
okay. .. and everyday you are doing the hest you can 
... sometimes under demanding circumstances... That 
is the definition of a hero... You are a good person ... 
you have a strong mind ... that can tell the 
difference hetween this voice and the the other 
things you've heard yourself say. 
It's true that at times we tell ourselves 
other things ... that are nothing more than what 
other people have told us about who they think we 
are ... or who they want us to he ... or what you 
say to yourself when you're frustrated ... you can 
always tell what these voices are hecause they don't 
fully reassure us ... in just the way that we want ... so 
you can always recognize them 
at times that 
you're feeling had and down on yourself... and just 
let them fade away... these voices don't really 
matter ... you don't even have to think ahout them ... 
their not even important... as you tum your 
attention to your own voice.. this voice... that 
completely reassures you ... in all the ways ... that you 
want. 
Take a moment now you create at some 
level of mind ... a mechanism ... an endless loop of 
wonderful feelings" suggestions and encouragement 
that you're hearing hy this very positive and 
supportive internal voice ... that reminds you you 
are loved and supported hy everything around 
you ... knowing that all you have to do is be ... 
exactly who you are... and that you are not your 
thoughts... thoughts are just what you tell yourself 
... you are not your feelings... you are something 
greater... you are at the deepest level something 
wonderful ... and all of this is true simply hecause 
you were hom ... a child ... to human parents ... no 
matter where you go ... no matter what happens 
126 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
around you ... there is a part of you that always 
knows you are a loved and perfect so that when 
you want to learn more about yourself and make a 
change... you can learn easily and with pleasure 
and that change can happen just the way you 
want ... and every part of you can make this change 
easy... go ahead ... go deeper... and enjoy the 
process ... that's taking place right here... right 
now... as this voice... your voice ... just flows and 
gives all the kind words you need to remember 
you're okay... and you can feel a strength and 
loving energy at any time of the world around you 
loves you and supports you... and you don 't have to 
do a thing... just pennit it... allow it all to take 
place... just as you wanted.. just as you needed 
... when you first came to hear this voice . ... 
You 
see yourself standing talL 
relaxecL 
feeling at ease and able... to accomplish each of the 
goals you set out to accomplish. .. naturall~ easily as 
if it were the simplest thing in the world to do ... 
you don 't even have to give it a second thought. 
You hear within your own mind the power 
of a strong internal voice ... that's always there ... 
putting you at ease.. 
and you 
feel 
it's 
encouragement ... 
as each word and sound 
support as you... to do what you need to do ... 
this is your voice... There is always something 
wonderful about being who you are. 
Within each 
sound ... that you're hearing ... now and as you 
listen to your inner voice... there is a comfort ... 
that you enjoy... learning more and more about 
yourself... by just following along ... and you can 
welcome that comfort ... 
in... 
deeper and 
deeper. .. so no matter where you are ... you can 
feel at ease... and know that you have all the 
127 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
resources you need to accomplish what you want ... 
you focus in on your what is important and you act 
on it naturally and easily just as you wanted to ... 
Go Deeper. .. forget... trust your inner mind to do 
it's perfect work. 
So that even in your dreams this voice .. 
your voice ... can he there as a gentle guide so 
perhaps tonight and tomorrow too ... you can hegin 
to create a dream that will he coming together to 
create new possibilities ... of how good you can feel 
ahout yourself ... just hy learning more ahout who 
you are ... and your willingness to find out more ... 
You give yourself full permission to feel good 
for no reason. 
So just take some time 
to 
recognize 
the pleasant 
feelings 
that 
you've 
felt ... at any time in your life ... Now. .. these feeling 
are there... as a way to remind you... you are 
okay... And you don't even have to think... ahout 
it ... you don't even have to rememher that ... it's 
there... repeating in the hack of your mind ... like a 
constant pleasant reminder that ... you're okay ... 
no matter what... It just makes you ahle to feel 
good that at anytime all you have to do is just 
listen ... at the deepest level... It's reminding you 
you're a good person ... that feels good ... no 
matter where you are ... it's like someone you can 
trust 
is 
ready 
to 
give 
you 
support 
and 
encouragement ... and this person is always with 
you... you can enjoy anything fully... at any time ... 
and you enjoy learning about yourself... and how 
you can change to suit whatever is happening ... 
whether alone or with people/ on the phone/ or just 
relaxing ... like what you're doing right now. 
So all you have to do is just relax... go 
deeper... heyond 
any 
thought 
or 
memory 
128 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
hecause you don't have to even think .. ahout it ... 
create an opening and welcome in this pleasant 
voice... and wrap yourself around it... tighter than 
you've ever wrapped yourself around anything 
hefore you realize it... it creates a gentle current 
of pleasure that goes deeper... and deeper ... 
inside you... there is a feeling that something 
wonderful is ahout to happen... as this comfort 
and pleasure huilds and the words wash over you 
like a gentle hreeze ... Something wonderful is 
about to happen ... and you can now move 
through 
the 
world 
with 
a 
sense of calm 
anticipation... not knowing exactly what wonderful 
thing you'll soon discover ahout yourself... 
and 
how you can enjoy things more/ and more .. and 
more ... intensely. .. letting this voice continue ... to 
encourage you to do what you want most to do ... 
you have the strength... and all the resources 
you are just waiting for you to call upon them ... 
NOW. 
And even though this only took a hrief 
minute of time you'll he amazed and surprised at 
how well you've done. But time doesn't even 
matter hecause of how you feel so good ahout this 
new feeling of control that you feel. 
As you gently hring your awareness hack hegin to 
hecome aware that even in the silence that is around 
you ... you can still feel wonderful ... that this 
voice is there with you. 
And if you 'Fe listening to this just prior to 
sleep you can easily tum off the recording and drift 
into a deep and restful dream ... filled sleep. At 
any other time you can find you energy returning 
129 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
fully aware awake and feeling wonderful. On the 
count of three allow your eyes to open as hring 
yourself fully hack and aware of the environment 
around you. 
One ... You give yourself full permission to feel 
good for no reason. So just take some time to 
recognize the pleasant feelings that you've felt ... at 
any time in your life... Now... these feeling are 
there... as a way to remind you... 
you are 
okay. .. this voice will always he there as you 
hegin to return more and more aware of my 
voice, the comfort of your hody. Bring the energy of 
awareness more fully hack. 
Two... everything is in it's proper place as you 
hecome more and more aware awake, alert and 
feeling wonderful. 
Three ... Take a deep hreath now! Inhale 
deep/y... Let your arms stretch. Let your eyes 
open ... refreshed alert 
WIDE AWAKE... 
feeling 
great. OPEN YOUR EYES. 
130 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
liThe Importance of the Process State" 
This hypnosis script is designed to demonstrate 
the usefulness of the hypnotic state. For the sake of 
jargon the "process state" is the hypnotic state and is 
given a different name so to present it as something 
unique and interesting in the subjects mind. 
This script lays a foundation for everything that 
follows. Itls objectives are as follows. 
• Have the subject understand the concept of 
"mind control/' which is to gain more flexibility in 
thought and behavior. 
• Create a "process state" that the subject will 
look forward to. Within this state changes can be 
made. 
• Have the subject gain the ability to create an 
internal sense of comfort and pleasure. 
• Frame the words "deep" and "deeper" to 
mean "more comfort and more pleasure." 
• To test the subject's ability to create amnesia, 
further demonstrating control that they have over 
their thoughts. 
• Create an experience that is pleasant for the 
subject and that offers feeling of anticipation for other 
processes. 
• Responsiveness, the ability to respond 
131 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
comfortably and automatically to questions and 
suggestions, is established as a key to pleasure and 
enjoyment. 
"This will only take an instant of your time 
to experience. The purpose of this process is to 
gain a clear and full understanding of how 
the mind works ... sometime it works for us ... and 
sometimes it works against us .. and understanding 
the workings of the mind you can gain control of 
mental processes so that life can he more 
enjoyahle/ you can have more pleasure and 
feel completely free from hurts worries and 
irritations that your mind can hring up hy hahit. 
You'1l leam this and get a good feeling 
for it through creating a state of learning that is 
called the process 
state 
that's 
comfortahle/ 
flexihle/ 
quick to leam/ 
that 
feels 
good 
whenever 
you 
enter 
the process state you'1l 
discover new things ahout yoursel£ your mind and 
how you can create joy and pleasure at will. 
Each time you listen to this process from 
heginning to end you '11 feel more comfort and ease/ 
you '11 retum rested and energized feeling wonderful 
ahout yourself and your experience and leamed 
ahout yourself. 
Leaming in the process state is not 
achieved hy studying or hy awareness of your 
extemal environment hut hy heing ahle to go 
deeply inside to revie~ leam and experience 
what it is that's just waiting for you to he discover. 
Within the process state comfort is important 
and a person can feel comfort first hy simply 
heing aware 
of your 
physical 
hody 
and 
relaxing... 
Get comfortable... now... as your 
132 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
comfort grows more and more pleasant it's 
important that you understand that during each 
process you will hear the word #deeper" and all 
that word #deeper" is to mean is to increase your 
comfort... which will demonstrate to you by 
experience that you are gaining more and more 
control of your thoughts and your mind. So 
begin now to notice your body and take a few 
moments 
to 
create 
comfort 
for 
yourself. 
(pause) and as you hear the word #deeper// increase 
that comfort in what ever way is most natural and 
easy for you. (pause) Now go deeper (pause) and 
as you experience more comfort acknowledged 
that to yourself that you are gaining more control 
(pause) now go deeper again creating even more 
comfort so that each time through each process you 
experience a more pleasant and enjoyable sense of 
comfort and trust the process that is taking 
place even as you might begin to notice that on 
occasion your mind might wander which is 
perfectly natural and you can allow your mind to 
wander as you respond fully to each suggestion 
and to each suggestion you can go deeper (pause) 
create more comfort and enjoyment which is a 
natural part of the process state. Each time you 
go deeper you can consciously acknowledge the 
control that you are experiencing over your 
thoughts/ 
your 
emotions/ your body and your 
mind. 
An important part of the learning in the 
process state is that of easily being able to respond 
in simple and pleasant ways to each suggestion 
such as responding to the word #deeper" by 
feeling ve.lY comfortable right now or you '11 
notice that if a questioned is asked you easiJy 
133 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
respond 
with 
movement of your head or a 
simple word "yes" or "no" and in so doing you are 
learning even greater control 
to 
bulld 
that 
sense of comfort in any situation, any time/ 
and under any circumstance your ability to feel 
comfort is there as a resource for you relyon. 
So/ now go deepez; so that each word that 
you hear more easily begins to create its own 
smooth and pleasant place - all your objections 
behind you - that feels natural and easy so that 
you are now learning more and more about 
yourself. 
And because responding to suggestions is 
vital to learning in the process state go deeper 
now and when you feel the deeper sense of 
comfort easily nod your head or say "yes" (wait 
for response). Good! And each time you respond 
fully in such a way you open yourself to learn 
more... so now again go deeper and when you 
have/ again nod your head or say "yes" (wait for 
response) Good! And will you continue to do so with 
each suggestion? (wait for response) Good! Go 
deeper knowing that each time you 
respond 
fully you 
will learn more and more about 
yourself; your workL your mind and gain greater 
and greater control. 
And so you're ready to learn. 
Within the mind there are many places and 
each place within your mind has an important 
role in leaming. 
There is a place where you put 
things that you know are true. Things like the sun 
rises each morning or perhaps its true that you feel 
a wonderful feeling towards someone very close to 
you. Take a moment and find or create that place 
where things are true and when you have it simply 
134 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
respond with a nod or say yes. (pause) Good. Now 
go deeper and continue to respond pleasantly in 
just that manner. In this place where things are 
true you can begin to accept each pleasant change 
you are making as true and real for you. Each new 
wonderful thing that you learn about yourself can 
now become true because you place it right there 
where things are true. Take a moment to make all 
this true and when you are done nod your head or 
say "yes~~ (pause) Good. Go deeper. 
With each new thing that you learn you will 
know it's 
true... 
now you 
can make 
each 
suggestion true ... that you like... by simply 
allowing it to naturally fit so comfortably into the 
place where things are true. So no~ on a deeper 
level suggest to your deeper inner mind to make 
that happen... and once you have nod your head 
or say 
~'yes" and allow yourself to go deeper. 
(pause) 
Good. 
Go deeper... forget.... trust... your 
inner mind to do it's perfect work and make all 
that you experience here today real/ right and true 
for you. And so it is. 
There is another place within your mind 
that you '11 find quiet useful. A place far behind you 
where you put things that are no longer true for 
you and things that no longer really matter. .. things 
like you used to live in another town but now you 
don't or that you used to ride a different vehicle 
but now you don't. Find or create that place 
inside your mind now and when you have nod 
your head or say yes (pause) Good. 
This is the 
place where things no longer matter and in this 
place you can put all your 
worries~ all your 
hesitations~ all your excuses and all the things that 
135 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
used to hold you back. Because it's so pleasant 
you can now let those things begin to slide or fall 
back there where you don't even have to think about 
them. They don't even really matter. As you let 
that happen now and notice it simply nod your 
head or say )Tes" and then go deeper. (pause) 
Good. 
And even further back in that place that no 
longer matters is all of your forgettings" all the 
names of people you've met just once .. .lost to 
time. All the phone numbers ... forgotten ... filled 
with 
unimportant 
things 
piJed 
deep 
and 
unknown... So that you can have even greater 
control of your mind take moment now and find 
that place of forgettings and you have it nod your 
head or say 'yes' and go deeper (pause) 
So that you can learn even more about 
yourself I'd like to demonstrate the power you 
truly have over your mind ... just for the even the 
briefest moment" in that place of forgetting, right 
now put your name right there" you might find it 
confusing but you realize you're fine" and when 
you've done that nod your head or say 'yes' and 
congratulate yourself on learning the power of 
control. (pause) Good. Now retrieve your name. Do 
you have it? (pause) Good. Go deeper. .. Forget ... 
trust your deeper inner mind to do it's perfect 
work to follow each pleasant suggestion that you 
like to lead you to greater knowledge and 
understanding. 
Now" I'm going to reveal to you a secret that 
prevents so many people from really learning 
how to enjoy life. The reason is that of judgment. 
We've all felt the pain of not being understood. 
We've all felt what it was like to have someone 
136 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
reject us without ever considering what we1-'e 
experiencing and feeling and in the same way hy 
us judging we ourselves loose 
out 
on 
truly 
understanding what's possible ... that can make all 
the difference. Before anyone can learn what it is 
they truly want to know;. you have to experience it 
as real... 
to find the real jo~ pleasure and 
excitement of life. Can you see that as true? 
(pause). 
Good. So while you 1-'e learning through this 
process put all your judgment aside ... go deeper. .. 
forget... and allow yourself to simply let go and let 
each word wash over you as if it were your own 
thoughts guiding you to deeper understandings 
more about yourself. 
At the same time we all know what it's like 
have someone with your who truly understands 
your hopes" your fears" your feelings and desires. 
And to share that openness one does that 
without judging" only accepting" what is true and 
real for you right now. 
(this you can repeat this paragraph at various 
times throughout the process) and right now. .. you 
enjoy learning ahout yourself and this process of 
learning. You are strong and in control enough 
to easily let go and feel pleasure with each 
suggestion your mind understands" your hody grows 
strong and you 1-'e eager to learn more ... and let 
all your analyzing simply fall away to the place 
where you put things that no longer matter" it isn't 
important" it doesn't 
even 
matter" 
you 
don 't 
even 
have 
to think ... ahout it. Just enjoy and 
accept that you are unique with a deeper 
understanding of what is true 
and real and 
137 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
important to you there is so much pleasure in 
letting go and learning in this way as you let each 
word that you hear becomes part of your own 
thoughts and repeats/ repeats/ right noft..j out louct 
to yoursel£ inside/ you have so much more 
strength con t r oland confidence in yourself. 
(this you can repeat at various times throughout 
the process) 
It is only through your strength that you can 
let go and allow this learning to take place so 
easily that it seems like a faint and pleasant 
dream that fades naturally from your memory 
upon returning from the process state. Yet you 
know all of this is true. 
And each time you think back to this process 
all you need to remember is the special feeling of 
knowing that you 'Fe learning ... more and more about 
yourself ... and that you eagerly look forward to this 
listening to this process again and again because 
each time you do you instantly return to that 
pleasant deep learning state called the process 
state. It feels wonderful and all you have to do is let 
go/ relax and go deeper. 
Between now and the next process session 
you will discover more about who you are and 
new healthy things that you enjoy. You look 
forward to the next session with a calm readiness. 
Each day for you is special and a each night you 
will dream wonderful dreams that will be coming 
together for your greater joy and happiness now 
each suggestion naturally fits and is real for you. 
Each suggestion is right there in that part of you 
where you keep everything that is true. 
As you look now to that place that's true you 
138 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
can tell it just feels right to know you 'Fe learning in 
this way you have more energy throughout your 
da~ free from 
wony and concern. 
You are 
changing just as you wantect just as you needed 
when you first came to hear this voice. Because 
inside you there is a voice of confidence securi~ 
comfort and strength. This voice is your voice and 
it guides you revealing new and wonderful things 
about yourself. Liston ... Liston... as this voice 
echoes pleasantly at the deepest level of your inner 
mind whether you are asleep or awake or in this 
process state of learning as you are right now this 
voice is your true guide. There is a calm and 
comfort as it guides you. So that in the quiet 
moments of your thoughts the pleasant whispers 
of this 
voice 
comforts you and gives you 
strength. This is your voice and all of this is true. 
So just let go. Go deeper. Forget... trust ... 
the power of your inner mind and this voice to guide 
you so you don't even have to remember. .. that 
each suggestion is all part of your true self being 
revealed to you as each wonderful day unfolds 
before you there is a quiet eagerness to explore 
what more you can learn about yourself... explore 
how much more your life is getting better; better 
and better in every way. You truly are eager to 
listen to this process every day and find out more 
about yourself. 
You now understand the importance of truly 
learning in the process state because you can 
truly test what is real and you know this is true 
because you are focusect relaxed and feeling 
absolutely wonderful about what is taking place 
right this very moment as each word simply washes 
over you ... and you may begin to find that as you 
139 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
focus in on the sound of each word and words of 
each sound that you don't know if it what you are 
hearing or your own thoughts and it doesn't even 
really matter. 
Tonight perhaps tomorrow too/ your deepe~ 
inner mind can give you a dream/ a very special 
dream that clarifies the prohlem 
indicates the 
source perhaps/ hut tells you quite clearly how to 
solve your concerns and prohlems now. And each 
night afterwards/ until you understand it until you 
decide to do it or not that dream can retum to you in 
one fonn or another. 
And every day as you go ahout your 
husiness/ your unconscious can find 
somethin~ 
some thought perception 
awareness/ 
a taste 
perhaps or a sensation or even a 
colo~ that 
seems familiar and reminds you of somethin~ 
reminds you of what your unconscious mind is 
trying to tell you/ until you fully understand and use 
that understanding for you. 
Because you enjoy learning ahout yourself 
and this process of leaming. You are strong and in 
control enough to easily let go. It is only through 
your strength that you can let go and feel pleasure 
with each suggestion your mind understands/ your 
hody grows strong and you're eager to leam 
more ... and let all your analyzing simply fall away 
to the place where you put things that no longer 
matte~ it isn't important it doesn't even matte~ 
you don't even have to think ... ahout it. just enjoy 
and accept that you are unique with a deeper 
understanding of yourself and what is true and real 
and important to you there is so much pleasure in 
letting go and learning in this way as you let each 
word that you hear hecome part of your own 
140 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
thoughts and repeat repeat 
like a comforting 
echo/ right no~ out 10ucL to yourself; inside/ you 
have so much more strength control and confidence 
in yourself. You have a ve.zy strong mind. You have 
a ve.zy strong will and it is hy the strength of 
your mind and will that each time you listen to 
this process you will go deeper heyond any douht 
and hesitation and enjoy the rest it gives you from 
concern and thought with the understanding that 
to learn in this process state is to make real 
changes ... that feels good. 
So as you gently and pleasantly emerge from 
this process state you will find each time you listen 
it hecomes easier ... and easier. Each time you 
go deeper and each time you return restecL 
comfortahle/ confident in that you're doing the right 
thing to improve your life just the way you wantecL 
just as you needed when you first heard this voice 
and all you have to rememher is that it felt 
wonderful and that you are changing in all the 
ways that you want. 
So as you return from this pleasant process 
state you will feel rested and alert a wide smile will 
come to your face as if you were told a special 
secret ahout who you truly are eager to listen to 
this process eve.zy day. 
And even though this only took a short 
minute you will he surprised and amazed at how 
well you've done. Yes/ even though you've spent a 
short minute in this pleasant process state you will 
he amazed at how well you've done. 
And this is so. 
So gently you will guide your hack from this 
pleasant state returning your awareness to this 
voice/ your hreathin~ feeling wonderfuL alert and 
141 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
rested. At the time your eyes open you will smile 
widely with a sense of ease remember clearly the 
joy and pleasure that you now feel so deeply. 
(pause) 
Take a deep hreath and allow the movement to 
return slowly and comfortahly to your hody. 
Eyes open. Alert. Awake. Feeling absolutely 
wonderful. II 
Once the subject has returned from the process 
state you point out the importance of being able to 
respond quickly in this state, and then practice going 
in and out of this state on command. Also it is 
important to practice this while standing, moving, and 
walking. Once that is accomplished you suggest that 
as the subject walks closer and closer to their car 
they will enter this state and gain a new insight or 
feeling which they will remember and report to you 
the next time. 
142 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
liThe Source of Suffering - The Key to Freedom" 
This script is designed to help the subject put 
aside the habit of conscious judgment when 
practicing hypnosis. 
Objectives: 
• To clearly explain that the cause of trouble is 
automatic and unconscious judgments. 
• To have the subject willingly put aside 
judgments in order to experience enjoyable 
suggestions. 
• Give suggestions during the process state that 
will be tested immediately after emerging from it. 
• Give suggestions that will be carried out later 
in the absence of the operator during the days that 
follow and prior to the next session. 
• To verify that the subject will out of habit 
automatically enter the process state when directed 
to. 
The following are a few effective questions for 
testing the results of the last process: During the last 
process did he or she emerge with a broad smile? 
Prior to starting, did the subject appear eager and 
excited to participate in this process? Did the subject 
report any new insights or feelings from the last 
process? Did the subject report vivid dreams? 
143 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
'Just like this ... hefore ... will take no time at 
all... It will take only an instant. The purpose of this 
process is to learn more about how the mind 
naturally works. Sometimes it works for us ... to 
help us feel comfortable and to ease all 
concerns... and allows us to go deeper within to 
make new discoveries ... sometimes it works against 
us ... making conclusions that we find out are 
wrong... and as you learn about your mind you 
learn more about yourself so that each new 
experience within the process state ... creates joy 
and allows you to go deeper ... than the time 
hefore .. that feels comfortable ... simple and 
easy to learn in this the process state ... and you 
know that each time you hear the words "go 
deeperN you will create more pleasant sense of 
comfort for your hody and ... your mind .. . 
So just let everything happen ... exactly as 
it wants to happen. Don't try to make anything 
happen ... don 't 
try 
to 
stop... 
anything 
from 
happening. Just allow everything to please itself 
and happen as it feels like it wants to, naturally 
and easily as if it were the simplest thing in the 
world to do ... go deeper. .. and relax so that your 
mind can let go completely and experience to 
trust the process state so that you can learn what 
it is you need know ahout yourself and gain more 
control of your life ....... now you can listen ... listen 
for a voice that you trust ... inside you is this 
voice... this voice has a calm comforting presence 
that guides you to make all the changes that you 
need ... to enjoy life. This voice is your voice ... 
always there like a friendly guide ... and as you 
listen you can find that the words simply wash over 
you so smooth soft, like the warm touch of summer 
144 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
hreeze you can hear each word guiding you ... 
and even in the quite moments of your thoughts 
are the gentle whispers of this voice reminding 
you 
"You're safe. Relax. Let go and let me guide 
you. N In so doing you can enjoy ... whatever you are 
experiencing right this very moment .... and so it can 
seem like a gentle fading dream yet you know 
that you will respond fully, easily, naturally to 
each opportunity to learn. 
And so that you can 
learn go deeper and each time you hear the 
words "go deeper" you will go past all your 
conscious thoughts and create more comfort for 
yourself and your hody and your mind. 
And you will respond to every suggestion you 
hear and each 
time you respond to 
each 
suggestion you hear you will go deeper as if it were 
the most natural thing in the world to do. And each 
time you are ask to respond to a question you will 
nod your head or say "yes~~ and each time you do 
nod your head or say "yes
N you will go deeper 
with more ease. Do you agree? (wait for response) 
Good! Go deeper as your pleasant reward for doing 
so well. 
You have already learned that you can learn 
anything as long as your allow yourself to 
experience it for yourself as true. This provides 
you with the greatest freedom and pleasure. The 
freedom to enjoy ... every moment ... just as you are 
right now. .. you also have learned that the greatest 
ohstacle to leamin~ truly leamin~ is the criticism 
and judgment of the conscious mind... to know the 
true limitation that of the judgment I'd like you 
to search your memory for a time when you 
criticized without heing understood. (pause) do you 
rememher that time? (wait for response) In that 
145 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
moment as you relive it it is as if you created a 
doorway of invitation that opened up ... but instead 
of the kindness of understanding thrust in is the 
harsh pain of judgment ... growing more painful 
and sharp ... denying who you are... forcing your to 
feel it's hurt ... and then comes the shame of being 
judged ... pushing it's way deeper within you and 
burning at that precious part of you .... until all 
you could do is escape... Do you remember? (wait 
for response) Yes. And so it is that you create the 
same pain when you judge and evaluate. 
You can let that go now and go deeper and 
allow those hurts to fall away. Let go of judging 
so that you can truly learn. Because now you 
are learning how the only way to enjoy every 
moment ... enjoy this moment... is to let go 
of judgment, go deeper and learn from a new 
direction. 
U1.zen you do that now you are free... free 
from hurt free to experience new things in new 
ways. This provides you with a sense of meaning 
and comfort and you can feel that comfort right 
no~ is this true? (response) Good! 
Go 
deeper. . .forget... 
trust your deeper 
inner mind. .. to do it's perfect work and create more 
comfort for yourself; your body and your mind. 
Go deeper. 
(pause) 
go deeper (pause) 
go 
deeper because now you are ready to learn how 
to create truejoy. 
True joy, true pleasure only comes from 
acceptance of what is happening. Only then can you 
yield to the possibilities that are right in front of 
you and learn. 
This can happen simply the moment that you 
become aware. The moment that you realize now 
146 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
is the time and you focus in deeply and as you 
do that it's like you see a door in front you and 
you allow that door to open up to let that curiosity 
enter you. That tingling smooth feeling of curiosity 
penetrating deep within you as an excitement to 
learn more and as it builds to 
rich colorful 
brilliance you discover that feeling of acceptance. 
Only by accepting can you truly learn. 
The 
acceptance guides you to open yourself to it 
knowing that all this is right and as the feeling of 
acceptance goes deeply inside of you with it's 
velvety soft warmth it becomes you and you can 
learn and understand even more about yourself and 
what is possible so with pleasure you can wrap 
yourself around this feeling of acceptance so that 
slowl~ gently and in it's own time with each step 
toward acceptance/ taking it in go deepeI; it 
begins to build, stronger and stronger until you 
culminate in understanding and curious to learn 
more. 
And so it is that one returns to curiosity. .. and 
you have that curiosity to know more about yourself 
and create more joy. .. go deeper... forget... trust 
your deeper inner mind to do it's perfect work so 
all you have to remember is that you enjoy the 
process state and each time that you listen to your 
process learning will occur on deeper level that 
ever before ... you realize it the whole process is 
over in an instant and you fell wonderful. 
And just listen to your inner voice/ this voice 
that comforts and guides you. Each sound of each 
word gently washes over you like a warm caress of 
an angels wing so you don 't even have to listen 
and remember you can remember to forget 
completely as you follow all the suggestions 
147 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
without hesitation or doubt simply washing them 
away from all your conscious awareness because 
each word is a natural part of your thoughts and 
your mind. And all of this is true. 
True joy, true pleasure only comes from 
acceptance of what is happening. Only then can you 
yield to the possibilities that are right in front of 
you and learn. 
This can happen simply the moment that you 
become aware. The moment that you realize now 
is the time and you focus in deeply and as you 
do that it's like you see a door in front you and 
you allow that door to open up to let that curiosity 
enter you. That tingling smooth feeling of curiosity 
penetrating deep within you as an excitement to 
learn more and as it builds to 
rich colorful 
brilliance you discover that feeling of acceptance. 
Only by accepting can you truly learn. 
The 
acceptance guides you to open yourself to it 
knowing that all this is right and as the feeling of 
acceptance goes deeply inside of you with it's 
velvety soft wannth it becomes you and you can 
learn and understand even more about yourself and 
what is possible so" with pleasure" you can wrap 
yourself around this feeling of acceptance so that 
slowly, gently and in it's own time with each step 
toward acceptance" taking it in go deeper" it 
begins to build" stronger and stronger until you 
culminate in understanding and curious to learn 
more. 
And so it is that one returns to curiosity ... and 
you have that curiosity to know more about yourself 
and create more joy. .. go deeper ... forget... trust 
your deeper inner mind to do it's perfect work so 
all you have to remember is that you enjoy the 
148 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
process state and each time that you listen to your 
process learning will occur on deeper level that ever 
before. 
And all of this is true ... and will continue at a 
deep level of your mind unaware that you'll be 
pleasantly surprised at what you'll discover without 
meaning to discover it. 
With in your minit there is that powerful 
place where you put all things you know are 
true. It is there 
that make 
all 
this 
real 
without thought judgment and it feels so right it 
feels so natural to learn in this way free from 
memory as each word slides deeply into that place 
where things are true. 
You don't even have to remember ... all of 
this is true ... you can forget to remember or 
remember to forget what it is that you're already 
allowing yourself to 
discover 
on 
your own 
... naturall~ easil~ and all you have to do is let 
go and let this voice/ your voice/ guide you 
repeating, repeating, right no~ out loud to yourself 
inside is that comforting voice guiding you and you 
can easily respond without thought or judgment 
because all of this is true/ is it not? 
... and just allow your head to nod or say ~yesN and 
go deeper. (wait) and to make this naturaL eas~ 
enjoyable and fun let any conscious memory or 
awareness of each suggestion disappear so you that 
you can learn effortJessly. .. let it fall away into the 
place behind you all your forgettings because 
remembering doesn't even matter when you learn 
in this pleasant manner and each time you 
remember to forget you demonstrate to yourself on 
a deep level the control you have over your mind. 
To prove to your deeper inner mind the 
149 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
ease of your learning upon retuming form the 
process state you will begin to laugh uncontrollably 
and for no apparent reason and free from memory 
of this suggestion you will find yourself enjoying 
laughing without control just because it feels 
right. So as you hear these words echoing within 
your mind your deeper inner mind accept them 
naturally 
and 
easily 
free from judgment or 
memory ... gone... forget ... trust your deeper inner 
mind to carry out each suggestion because you 
want to leam more and more more about 
yourself.. .and upon returning form the process state 
you will begin to laugh uncontrollably and for no 
apparent reason and free from memory of this 
suggestion 
you 
will 
find 
yourself 
enjoying 
laughing without controljust because it feels right. 
Go deeper. .. now ... with each time you listen 
this enjoyable process you will go deeper... deeper 
and deeper ... each time deeper than the time 
before... You enjoy listening every day to the 
process given you so that you can leam about 
yourself and gain more control of the world around 
you. 
Each day you enter deep into the process 
state you retum restect 
energizect alert and 
enjoying life more. Each day you enter deep into 
the process state you retum restect energizect 
alert and enjoying life more. 
And this is true ... is it not? ... and just allow 
your head to nod or say "yes" and go deeper. 
(wait) Good and so it is that your deeper inner 
mind can now do all the work for you automaticall~ 
instant1~ so that you don 't have work, to try or 
even 
to think ... all you have to do is let your 
deeper inner mind hear each word as right for 
150 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
you 
and 
you 
will 
make 
it 
your 
own 
thoughts ... erasing any memory of the words so that 
everything you want happens just as you want it and 
it's a wonderful surprise. 
You are surprised at what you are leaming 
and that you have never leamed it hefore in your 
life is so exciting to discover these new things 
and new things about you. The excitement follows 
you each day as you look forward to the next 
process leaming .. .following you just as this voice 
follows you hecause this is your voice and it feels 
... just right to leam in this way. 
Go deeper. .. forget trust your deeper inner 
mind to do it's perfect work and carry out each 
suggestion without effort and free from thought 
and 
even though you have only spent a hrief 
minute with the process state you realize the 
freedom you are gaining as you leam in this manner. 
Godeeper. 
So for now as you go deeper allow a part of 
your mind visualize in an easy natural way the 
mind 
heing 
rewirecL 
reprogrammed 
to 
experience joy, pleasure at each suggestion you 
hear in the process state and hecause all of this 
happens 
without 
your 
effort 
or 
conscious 
awareness forget the suggestion completely and 
let it happen 
naturall~ easily and automatically 
like it were a pleasant and reassuring hahit. 
And so that you leam and enjoy and enjoy 
the leaming Over the next few days automaticall~ 
free from thought or effort you'1l notice yourself 
relaxing quietly and rememhering this voice ... 
taking a whole moment to yourself... to enjoy the 
process state ... all on your own ... and heing 
completely safe and secure and surprised at how 
151 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
deep you go ... all the way down... only doing this in 
times when your daily activities allow it ... without 
warning while in a safe environment ... automatically 
you find yourself enjoying the process state and 
heing so surprised you have to tell me at our next 
meeting. 
Thats right .... so that you learn and enjoy and 
enjoy the learning Over the next few days 
automatically; free from thought or effort or memory 
of these words you'll notice yourself relaxing 
quietly and remembering this voice ... taking a 
whole moment to yourself... to enjoy the process 
state ... all on your own ... and heing completely 
safe and secure and surprised at how deep you 
go ... all the way down ... only doing this in times 
when your daily activities allow it ... 
without 
warning 
while 
in 
a 
safe 
environment ... 
automatically you find yourself enjoying the process 
state and heing so surprised you have to tell me at 
our next meeting. 
And your inner mind agrees to this so that you 
can now nod your head or say 'yes I and this is true~ 
is it not? (wait). 
And each time we meet you will he ready to 
learn more and go deeper so that your mind is 
ready to make changes that will create pleasure 
in every level of your life. 
And this is true and will he true from this time 
forward hecause you are automatically placing 
each suggestion each word from this voice~ your 
voice~ right there where you put everything that is 
true ... and as you listen from that place where 
things are true you will always hear this voice 
guiding you to learn more and make the right 
changes ... whether you are learning in the process 
152 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
state or fully alert on the phone or in any setting 
this voice is there comforting you/ supporting you ... 
completely in every area of life. 
Because you enjoy leaming ahout yourself 
and this process of leaming. You are strong and in 
control enough to easily let go. It is only through 
your strength that you can let go and feel pleasure 
with each suggestion your mind understands/ your 
hody grows strong and you 'Fe eager to leam 
more ... and let all your analyzing simply fall away 
to the place where you put things that no longer 
matter; it isn't important it doesn't even matter; 
you don't even have to think ... ahout it. Just erljoy 
and accept that you are unique with a deeper 
understanding of yourself and what is true and real 
and important to you there is so much pleasure in 
letting go and learning in this way as you let each 
word that you hear hecome part of your own 
thoughts and repeat repeat like a comforting echo/ 
right now, out 10ucL to yourself; inside/ you have so 
much more strength control and confidence in 
yourself. You have a very strong mind. You have a 
very strong will and it is hy the strength of your 
mind and will that each time you listen to this 
process you will go deeper heyond any doubt and 
hesitation and enjoy the rest it gives you from 
concem and thought with the understanding that 
to leam in this process state is to make real 
changes ... that feels good. 
Now... inside 
your mind I'd like you 
create a event that I will vividly describe to you ... of 
a time in the future... Where you can instantly enter 
the process state just as you are now. .. so that 
each time you are ready and feel anticipation for 
entering the process state you go deeper and more 
153 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
enjoyably than the time before you know it you are 
enjoying the process state ... as you create this 
event inside your mind naturally easily by simply 
hearing the words /go deeper" you create an 
opening to allow the process state in and you 
embrace it tightly. .. and so it is with each imagining 
of a future time you clearly see, crisply hear and 
dramatically feel yourself wrapping yourself around 
the this wonderful and enjoyable state of mind 
... and you are ready to leam. 
And so she did imagine that just as she was 
described ... is was all so clear to her. .. she was 
there at that moment hearing the words 
Ngo 
deeper" and she felt the words pull at her like 
strong and caring arms... all around her was 
nothing but this voice ... her voice that echoed all 
her kindest thoughts so it was so easy to follow ... 
so simple to just let go... deeper and deeper 
than 
the 
time before... 
and even after she 
remembered only wanting waiting and anticipating 
the next occasion that she could retum ... It was 
all so clear to her as she heard the words and 
felt their warm touch ... 
That's right you see so clearly that time in the 
future ... any time in the future... where you hear 
the words /go deeper" and feel swiftly retuming 
deeper than the time before ... 
So as you gently and pleasantly emerge from 
this process state you will find each time you listen 
it becomes easier ... and easier. Each time you 
go deeper and each time you retum restecL 
comfortable, confident in that youre doing the right 
thing to improve your life just the way you wantecL 
just as you needed when you first heard this voice 
and all you have to rememher is that it felt 
154 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
wonderful and that you are changing in all the 
ways that you want •.. and only a moment has past. 
So as you return from this pleasant process 
state you will feel rested and alert a wide smile will 
come to your face as if you were told a special 
secret ahout who you truly are eager to listen to 
this process every day ... and only a moment has past. 
And even though this only took a short 
minute you will he surprised and amazed at how 
well you've done. Yes" even though you've spent a 
short minute in this pleasant process state you will 
he amazed at how well you've done. 
And this is so. 
So gently you will guide your hack from this 
pleasant state returning your awareness to this 
voice" your hreathing" feeling wonderfuJ" alert and 
rested. At the time your eyes open you will smile 
widely with a sense of ease rememher clearly the 
joy and pleasure that you now feel so deeply. 
(pause) 
Take a deep hreath and allow the movement to 
return slowly and comfortahly to your hody. 
Eyes 
open. 
Alert. 
Awake. 
Feeling ahsolutely 
wonderful. 
Once the subject has returned from the 
process state you point out the importance of being 
able to respond quickly in this state and then 
practice going in and out of this state on command. 
Also important to practice this standing and moving, 
walking. Once that is accomplished you suggest that 
as the subject walks closer and closer to their car 
ISS 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
they will enter this state and gain a new insight or 
feeling which they will remember and report to you 
at the next process. 
156 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
liThe Power of the Process State" 
Objectives: 
• Train and test the subject to enter the process 
state on the command "go deeper." 
• Create amnesia on command. 
• Test to see if the suggestions given in 
previous processes were successfully carried out. 
• If all tests are successfut suggest a new 
behavior be performed that is outside of the subject's 
norm. The new behavior is done with great pleasure 
and carried out without the subject's memory of the 
suggestions, but the subject will be eager to report it 
to you. 
• Frame the unconscious mind as the place 
where creativity, flexibility and enjoyment come from 
via the process state. Get confirmation and 
agreement. 
• Frame the conscious, thinking mind as the 
reason they have not experienced deep, profound and 
consistent joy and pleasure in their life. Get 
confirmation and agreement. Put aside all conscious 
awareness to maximize true enjoyment. 
• Suggestions of vivid and pleasurable dreams 
that will eagerly be reported at the next process. 
A few questions which can test the 
effectiveness of the last process are did the subject 
157 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
report on automatically entering the process state 
and not need to be prompted to tell you? Did the 
subject laugh spontaneously upon emerging from the 
last process? Did the subject report a new insight as 
they walked to their car after the last process? 
"Go deeper. The purpose of this process is 
you to learn more about who you are and to explore 
further .. your response-ahility ... to open you up ... 
for heyond question or douht ... and inside your 
mind you will ... have all the resources .. you need to 
... just let go ... give yourself permission to ... live 
freely. .. from the hurdens and conditions of the 
world ... let go ... let completely go... and go 
deeper... inside your mind ... so that ... you will ... 
learn to get the benefits you desire ... as you let 
go completely ... trusting ... that you're in the right 
place .. at the right time... to give yourself 
permission to enjoy what is happening ... right this 
very moment ... free from douht or hesitation ... 
Now go deeper and allow your powerful 
inner mind to demonstrate to you it's true power 
that only the inner mind can reveal to you... with 
this process state you will learn to enjoy more 
choices and more options hecause you know that the 
more choices you have the more free you are in 
every situation ... and hegin to let the old conscious 
mind full of thoughts and worries just slip away ... 
and drift off... freeing you... completely to all the 
way inside ... perhaps you feel as if you're floating or 
if you're gen tJy falling or perhaps you will no longer 
he aware of the you that is experiencing this 
pleasure... 
and it really doesn't even matter 
hecause you know it's right and good 
158 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
... and you can begin to listen to this voice ... your 
voice ... that gently guides you ... 
, 
So that you can learn exactly how to be free" 
truly free" hear this voice" your voice say the 
words go deeper and allow it all to just happen" 
naturally easily as if it were the simplest thing in the 
world to because you have permitted it. 
Go beyond any doubt or hesitation go beyond 
the awareness of the body ... go deeper to the 
place of dreams... these can be dreams of sleep or 
dreams of possibilities but however it is you 
naturally have these dreams you will be the 
dream you are dreaming so that it doesn't even 
seem real it only seems so pleasant that you just 
want it to happen ... allow it to happen ... permit it 
to happen just as it does happen ... so that you 
experience the dream so easily just as I describe 
it focus yourself on each word completely... so 
you hear only the sound of each word and the 
word of each sound that each word you are 
hearing is your own thought ... and it's so nice not 
to wony about what to think or what others think 
... it's nice to just go so deeply that all you are is a 
dream of pleasure and with each suggestion you 
hear you respond within this dream ... that's right 
with each word you hear of each suggestion you 
hear you respond and each time you respond you 
enjoy... deeply eIljoy responding ... just as you hear 
... free ... completely free from hesitation as if it were 
the most natural thing in the world to do ... 
Now... so that you learn and enjoy this 
process of responding to each learning I'd like to 
demonstrate to you the true power of your inner 
mind I'd like you to remember the part of the mind 
where you put all things that are true... the place 
159 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
where you know the sun appears each day is true ... 
the part of the mind where 
you 
keep 
the 
knowledge of those people whom you care about 
is true ... and when you have that place in your 
mind... in a calm firm voice say "Yes
N
• 
(wait) 
Good... very good now go deeper ... and when you 
want to make a change a part of you and a true 
part of you life all you have to do is place it there 
where you put all things you know are true... and 
even as you remember the wonderful changes that 
you Ive made you now can see them there where you 
all things that are true ... isnlt this so? (wait) and you 
can continue to respond in just that manner and go 
deeper each time... will you not? (wait) Good. Go 
deeper. 
And you can now remember how you 
learned about the part of your mind where you 
put things that don It even really matter... it~ also 
the part of you where you put things that just 
used to be true for you but aren It any more... for 
example it used to be true that you lived in another 
place but now you don It and that is now in that part 
where things used to be true ... can you see that now? 
(wait) Good. 
Now even further back behind you in the 
place where you put things that don It even really 
matter is the place of all your forgettings ... all 
the phone number that are lost to time ... all the 
names of those faint people you Ive met just once .. . 
forgotten... this is the place of your forgettings .. . 
and so that you can learn even more let me know 
when youlve found that place of forgettings by 
saying and a calm firm voice "yes
N (wait). 
Good! 
Now to demonstrate the true power of your 
160 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
deeper inner mind... In the place where you put all 
your forgettings just place your name right there 
... and once you have go deeper and tell me that 
you have done that in a calm firm voice say 
/'yes
N
• (wait) Good! 
That's right for now you can just let it go ... just 
let the name go completely. .. and feel just tine .... is 
it gone? (wait) Good! And permit it to remain 
there comfortably for now ... and to further 
demonstrate the power within your inner mind 
allow your eyes to open comfortably while still in 
the process state.. (wait) ... good ... and you have 
forgotten something haven't you? (yes) Did you 
forget the name completely? {yes)... and you feel 
very comfortable don't you in this state? (yes) 
You're doing very well and learning the real power 
of your inner mind and the power of the process 
state... go deeper... forget ... trust your inner mind 
to do it's perfect work ... without doubt or hesitation 
and follow each suggestion so that you can learn 
and as you learn you respond just you're ask to 
respond. 
And so that you can learn powerfully within 
this state I'm going to ask you to let everything go 
just like you did the name ... let everything simple 
fall far far far behind you in the place of all 
forgettings... and you will respond to me as I ask 
by saying yes. Will you do that now? (yes). 
Now I want to reveal to you the secret of how 
you have suffered for so long ... your suffering is 
because you have used your conscious mind to 
think and evaluate and to judge ... it is this conscious 
mind that has caused all your pain and caused all 
the pain of the world... and as you are now 
experiencing the power of the deeper inner mind 
161 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
you see the inner mind is there to help you enjoy 
whatever it is you are feelin~ enjoy whatever your 
experiencing right this very moment... You inner 
mind has all the secrets that you have heen 
looking for and now you are ready to learn. 
You can now imagine with your mind and see 
with your eyes a cord of light that comes from 
you to me... feel the warmth of that cord of light 
and it pulsates the connection that is hetween us 
... do you feel 
it 
now? 
(wait) 
.... let 
that 
connection 
grow stronger... hrighter ... now 
warmer... and feel the wonderful emotion 
that 
you are feeling from me now... do you feel it? 
(wait) does it feel wonderful? 
(wait) 
Each time you hear a suggestion in the 
process state you create an opening ... create an 
opening of connection hetween us ... and you allow 
this warm flowing connection to enter inside ... 
your mind... and grow stronger... allowing it to 
huild ... huilding more and more... stronger and 
stronger until is fjJJs throughout who you are and 
reveals to you a wonderful excitement... which 
allows you to go deeper now... revealing an 
excitement ... ahout what you can do ... notice the 
tingling of this excitement as you... let it in ... let 
go further inside ... humming and vibrating... as 
the excitement huilds... getting stronger... 
and 
rushes 
through 
every part of you with an 
explosion that show you a powerful sense of 
... certainty ... yes certainty that what you are doing 
is right ... certainty that each soft word you hear can 
repeat firmly 
within 
your mind... 
so that 
certainty hecomes firme~ stronge~ and you feel the 
power of this firm and ridgect as it huilds and 
explodes with an ahsolute ... conviction ... to repeat 
162 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
the process so that you can enjoy the all that you 
are learning ... conviction ... smooth and velvety. .. 
llke the comfort you feel right now ... that 
touches you at the deepest part of who you are ... 
as that conviction huilds and culminates naturally 
as if all on it's own ... it reveals a joy... a joy to he 
learning so powerfully... in this way... and in this 
way it will happen 
... again and again ... each time in the process state ... 
natural~ easily ... just as you've always wanted and 
enjoy to learn in this manner. 
Good! And all of this has happened hecause 
you've followed my suggestions so perfectly isn't 
that true? And you want to follow my suggestions. Is 
this true? (wait) and you will follow each suggestion 
I give you completely hecause you enjoy the process 
state and you know that it pleases me and you 
want the success and that you are very pleased hy 
the success that you have received ... and that 
pleases you very much does it not? (wait) and it 
pleases me to see that are succeeding and 
achieving what you want ... and you enjoy pleasing 
me in this way. .. and you enjoy pleasing me ... hy 
successfully following each of my suggestions... Do 
you ... agree with me? And you want to please me 
don't you? (wait) Yes/ as you please me your 
success will grow.. and you have many successes 
hy simply doing what I have asked you to do ... 
.. . in your mind review all the wonderful 
success and joy that you have heen ahle to 
achieve ... like heing ahle to sleep like a haby at night 
and awakening fully refreshed and have so much 
more energy in your life ... for you to ... accomplish 
.. , more ... of the things 
that 
you 
want 
to 
accomplish.. and you've done this all hy learning in 
163 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
the process state and the power of my voice ... so in 
order to gain even more control over your life ... 
even more control over your emotions... I want 
you... to focus on the feeling of conviction... of 
making a decisions and knowing he yond douht of 
hesitation that you will carry it out with all your 
force~ will and heing ... when you feel that sense of 
conviction now say "yes
N and feel it heing said with 
that conviction ... 
Good and say yes again increasing that 
conviction.. and realize that any time you respond 
to me hy answering 'yes N or hy nodding your head 
you will do so feeling that sense of conviction and 
you realize how... this will benefit you ... will you 
agree ... this is true?(yes) 
Excellent! You are doing very well and now 
continue to huild that sense of conviction ... when 
ever you respond to me do you... agree with me 
completely? 
Now you have learned to feel a sense of 
conviction, it will henefit you to hring ahout other 
powerful and positive emotions... 
so focus now 
on 
gratitude .. .focus on the things that you 
... feel velY grateful for... NOW... those things 
that 
support you ... and 
help 
you.. 
those 
hlessings 
in 
your life ... now.... the gratitude for 
heing ahle to... follow evelY suggestion so well 
you've learned so perfectly ... following without 
question or douht ... heing so grateful... to have 
that wonderful experience of having me in your 
life... as a friend and trainer... do you feel that 
gratitude now with conviction? 
(wait) 
Wonderful! You are doing Very well ... you are 
164 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
doing very well indeed .. and I appreciate your 
eagerness to ... follow every suggestion I give 
you ... you have a very strong mind ... and a very 
powerful will.. and no~ in order for you to gain 
even more control of your mind and life.... think of 
those things that you know are true.. that's good ... 
because you are going to focus on a sense of 
certainty.... CERTAINTY... 
the 
knowledge 
of 
what you realize is true... the certainty that the 
process state is pleasant and enjoyable ... and the 
certainty that you have the ability to learn and 
improve simply because you follow 
every 
suggestion 
I 
give you.. 
without question or 
doubt... and the certainty that comes from your 
ability to enjoy doing that.. in the process 
state ... NOW.. do you now feel that certainty 
with that sense of conviction and gratitude? (wait) 
No~ In order for you to even further 
improve your life and your flexibility in how you 
respond to the world ... I want you ... to focus on 
JOY... joy... of just being alive and being able to 
make changes.. that you want.. and the joy of 
living life fully... the joy of being in my presence 
.... and the joy of knowing that you are safe and 
secure 
... and 
can 
trust me .... fully 
and 
completely ... focus on that joy.. now. .. and all the 
joys of your life .. and when you feel that joy with 
conviction, gratitude and certainty. .. say 
~yesN(wait). 
Yes it is true. You do feel the joy of simply 
giving yourself to me and my voice ... don't you? 
(wait) 
Following 
each 
suggestions 
is 
your 
pleasure and you can now gain even more jo~ 
gratitude and pleasure by focusing on the other 
165 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
ways and feelings that you are now even more 
capable of expressing ... 
There are many pleasures in life... emotional 
and physical pleasures.. there is the pleasure that is 
so ... indulgent ... that you must have it ... you want it 
... it is that power pleasure of sexual pleasure ... the 
wonderful powerful pleasure of sexual orgasm ... and 
now on let that pleasure of orgasm build as you say 
NYes
N to accept each suggestion. (wait) 
That is right.... you mind is very powerful 
and you enjoy following my suggestions and 
commands. This is true isn 't it? (wait) 
And you want to follow my suggestions and 
my commands. Is this true? And you will follow and 
obey each suggestion and command because you 
know that it pleases me and that you will learn 
more... and you are 
very pleased with your 
success ... are you not? (wait) and it pleases me to 
see that you are succeeding and achieving what 
you want ... and you enjoy pleasing me in this way ... 
you enjoy pleasing me... by successfully following 
each of my suggestions.... Do you... agree with 
me? (wait) And you want to please me don 't you? 
Yes" and as you please your success will grow. .. 
and the more you please me the more success you 
will experience ... this as the greatest learnings of 
your life ... this learning is that all your life it has 
been your conscious mind that held you back from 
learn... your conscious mind has held you back 
from 
having real joy 
and 
pleasure... 
your 
conscious mind has been your true enemy. .. 
preventing you from having what you want and 
making all the problems you Ive experienced .... but 
in the process state you have gone past every part 
of the conscious mind to really learn ... from me 
166 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
and your inner mind... 
your inner mind has 
shown you the true freedom of and joys that you 
are capable of and still you realize that you no 
longer remember your name and it feels okay 
doesn't it? (wait)... in fact there is no longer is a 
YOU there that is holding you back ... from learning 
and enjoying life ... and from this time forward you 
go into the process state you will go so deeply that 
you will easily follow each suggestion instantly 
carrying them out without doubt or hesitation and 
then erasing them from your memory ... It will have 
only been an instant past of powerful learning and 
you'1l have a wonderful feeling and smile on your 
face ... as you deeper inner mind erases all memory 
... like erasing a magnetic tape... or wiping away 
chalk from a chalk board ... gone... it no longer 
even matters... and you will continue to carry out 
each suggestion instantly and easily and then 
erase the memory from your mind ... like erasing a 
magnetic tape... letting it go... it doesn't' even 
matteI; it's no longer important.... [new behavior] 
and automatically you are producing a wonderful 
new behavior. .. a behavior that helps ... that's new ... 
throughout the course of your day... each time you 
pass by a mirror... or each time you see your 
reflection in a surface a mere second will pass in 
your mind... and you will here a voice... this voice ... 
your voice ... and you will smile ... a smile that you 
know a very special secret ... a secret that is 
held deep within you... and a warmth will build in 
you as you continue with your activities... this will 
only be an instant of time... throughout the course of 
your day... each time you pass by a mirror... or 
each time you see your reflection in a surface a 
mere second will pass in your mind... and you will 
167 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
here a voice... this voice... your voice... and you 
will smile ... a smile that you know a very special 
secret... a secret that is held deep within you ... and 
a wannth will build in you as you continue with 
your activities... this will only be an instant of 
time... throughout the course of your day... each 
time you pass by a mirror... or each time you see 
your reflection in a surface a mere second will pass 
in your mind... and you will here a voice... this 
voice ... your voice ... and you will smile ... a smile 
that you know a very special secret ... a secret that 
is held deep within you... and a wannth will build 
in you as you continue with your activities ... this 
will only take an instant of time ... 
Now go deeper. 
[vivid and pleasant dreams] 
and now I speak only to your deeper inner 
mind ... between now and the next process we do 
together ... the deeper inner mind will create for you 
dreams ... as you sleep so soundly at night... and 
instantly fall... into the state of deep restful 
sleep ... as you rest ... vivid and pleasant dreams 
will arise ... vivid dreams that will be coming 
together. .. to show the powerful changes ... that are 
taking place as the each moment passes... and as 
they reveal themselves to you ... you will feel desire 
to share them with me ... because your inner mind 
hears the suggestions and responds ... your inner 
minds knows the desire to make changes... that 
helps you... that's right ... you'll know the 
dreams 
to 
describe 
to me 
without knowing 
why. .. because each suggestion is there and you 
respond 
so 
naturally 
to 
learning 
in 
this 
168 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
manner. ... between now and the next process we do 
together ... the deeper inner mind will create for 
you dreams ... as you sleep so soundly at night ... and 
instantly fall... into the state of deep restful sleep ... 
as you rest... vivid and pleasant dreams will arise 
... vivid dreams that will be coming together. .. to 
show the powerful changes ... that are taking place 
as the each moment passes... and as they reveal 
themselves you will feel desire to share them with 
me ... because your inner mind hears the 
suggestions and responds .. , your inner minds 
knows the desire to make changes... that helps 
you... that's right ... you'1l know the dreams to 
describe to me without knowing why. .. because 
each suggestion is there and you respond so 
naturally to learning in this manner .... 
Now... inside 
your mind I'd like you 
create a event that I will vividly describe to you ... of 
a time in the future... Where you can instantly enter 
the process state just as you are now... so that 
each time you are ready and feel anticipation for 
entering the process state you go deeper and more 
enjoyably than the time before you know it you are 
enjoying the process state... as you create this 
event inside your mind naturally easily by simply 
hearing the words "go deeper" you create an 
opening to allow the process state in and you 
embrace it tightly. .. and so it is with each imagining 
of a future time you clearly see, crisply hear and 
dramatically feel yourself wrapping yourself around 
the this wonderful and enjoyable state of mind 
... and you are ready to learn. 
And so she did imagine that just as she was 
described ... it was all so clear to her. .. she was there 
at that moment hearing the words "go deeper" 
169 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
and she felt the words pull at her like strong and 
caring arms... all around her was nothing hut this 
voice ... her voice that echoed all her kindest 
thoughts so it was so easy to follow... so simple 
to just let go... deeper and deeper than the 
time hefore... and even after she rememhered 
only wanting ... waiting and anticipating the next 
occasion that she could return... It was all so 
clear to her as she hear the words and felt their 
warm touch ... 
That's right you see so clearly that time in the 
future ... any time in the future ... where you hear 
the words 
#go 
deeper" 
and 
feel 
swiftly 
returning deeper than the time hefore ... 
[return name & identity] 
Now you can recover your name from that 
place offorgettings ... Now as you return from this 
process state you lmow exactly who you are ... you 
have your name... you have your name hecause 
now it will serve you ... 
So as you gently and pleasantly emerge from 
this process state you will find each time you listen 
it hecomes easier ... and easier. Each time you 
go deeper and each time you return rested 
comfortahle, confident in that you're doing the right 
thing to improve your life just the way you wanted 
just as you needed when you first heard this voice 
and all you have to rememher is that it felt 
wonderful and that you are changing in all the 
ways that you want. 
So as you return from this pleasant process 
state you will feel rested and alert a wide smile will 
come to your face as if you were told a special 
secret ahout who you truly are eager to listen to 
170 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
this process every day. 
And even though this only took a short 
minute you will he surprised and amazed at how 
well you've done. Yes" even though you've spent a 
short minute in this pleasant process state you will 
he amazed at how well you've done. 
And this is so. 
So gently you will guide your hack from this 
pleasant state returning your awareness to this 
voice" your hreathing... feeling wonderfuL alert and 
rested. At the time your eyes open you will smile 
widely with a sense of ease remember clearly the 
joy and pleasure that you now feel so deeply. 
(pause.)" 
"Take a deep hreath and allow the movement 
to return slowly and comfortahly to your hody. Eyes 
open. Alert. Awake. Feeling ahsolutely wonderful. " 
Once the subject has returned from the process 
state you point out the importance of being able to 
respond quickly in this state and then practice going 
in and out of this state on command. Also, it is 
important to practice this standing and moving, 
walking. Once that is accomplished, in the process 
state, you suggest that as they are just about to leave 
the building they will remember that they have 
forgotten something and return to find it. When they 
return they will realize they have everything they 
need with them and have no memory of this 
suggestion. 
171 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
IIRestraint as liberation" 
Objectives: 
• Confirm that all process suggestions were 
carried out. If not, the previous process is repeated. 
Emphasis is given on how much more joy, pleasure, 
and understanding will be available when each 
suggestion is carried out effortlessly. 
• Re-frame for the subject that true power lies 
in the ability to restrain oneself, and give an 
experience of that degree of control using bondage. 
• Create a process-oriented identity and name 
for how the subject would ideally respond in every 
situation with these new learnings. 
'Are you ready? Good ... go deepeI. 
The purpose of this process is so that you 
can learn even more on new leveL a deeper level 
ahout what you are capahle of ... so much more 
than you ever thought possihle ... as someone who 
deeply values the process state I'd like you to 
notice 
where 
you 
are 
at 
... and 
go 
deeper ... deeper now than you've ever heen ... 
going past all your thoughts and judgments that 
have held you hack ... knowing that each time you 
hear the words "go deeper" you canjust ... let go ... 
Let go completely and allow yourself the 
real 
freedom 
to 
learn 
about yourself. .. learn about 
how you can just relax ... relax away time/ relax 
away space/ relax away awareness ... of all your 
limitations. 
just go deeper and enjoy fully and 
172 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
completely what it is you were meant to do/ what 
you were meant to truly feel ... a wonderful sense of 
comfort and pleasure can hegin as you open yourself 
to new learnings and experiences that means so 
much to you... and as the hody you inhabit just 
now relaxes away your mind can just listen to each 
word... the sound of each word and words of each 
sound ... that doesn't even matter to your conscious 
mind as your deeper inner mind hears each 
word with complete understanding and agreement 
it just feels like the sounds of each word are 
warmly moving through you as you hear them in 
just the same way you hear your own thoughts ... 
and every time you you hear the words in my 
voice say "go deeper' instantly you go further 
and further than the time hefore. So just let go 
and let that comfort hegin to huild stronger and 
stronger as you open yourself to it and let it in so 
that the voice you hea~ this voice/ your voice can 
he received just wrap yourself around the words/ 
wrap yourself around the voice and hring the soft 
smooth sound deeper and deeper so that it feels 
just right it feels like it's a part of you and you 
wrap yourself around it tighter and tighter ... wrap 
yourself around it tighter than you've ever wrap 
yourself around anything hefore and ... go deeper 
inside your mind heyond even thought ... so that all 
there is is this timeless moment ... that only seems 
like an instant... and time didn't pass at all for 
her. .. and as she looked at me there was something 
she could see ahout me... she just saw some part 
of my face that fascinated her as i read she 
couldn't move or look past it ... felt so comfortahle to 
just fall into that voice and how it to hecome the 
only thing in her awareness . .. and in that moment 
she hegan to feel that it was all right ... that what 
173 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
made sense was to go past judging and thinking 
and let it all happen just the way it was supposed to 
happen .. Just the way it was meant to happen .... 
and she could take her eyes away ... the voice she 
heard was her voice speaking her thoughts and 
feelings... so she just followed along naturall~ 
easily and everything she needed to do she 
knew was right ... there in that part where things 
are true .. .for you there is always a part that knows 
you can listen and follow along ... a part that is ten 
times stronger than even you are ... that enjoys this 
process ... and will follow each suggestion naturally 
as if it were so easy... this part that is ten times 
stronger than even you are will hear every word ... 
and respond ... by simply answering 'yes' or doing 
what is asked ... in the process state... whether 
standing or Sitting or awake or in the process 
state ... on the phone ... or with friends ... this 
wonderful part will find pleasure in carrying out 
each 
suggestion 
and 
will 
answer yes ... when 
asked. .. Is this true? (wait) 
[Amnesia for name and feel great about it} 
[ foreshadow that by end of this process if you do 
well you can create a New Name that reps you in 
process state that will enhance your leaming- give 
this suggestion 3 times} 
Good! Now Go deeper and find that place 
within your mind where you forget... where you put 
things that no longer matter. .. there far behind you 
where go all the 
things 
that are lost to 
time ... unimportant... forgotten... 
they don't even 
matter... and so that you can learn even more 
about yourself ... when you have that place of 
174 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
forgettings say "yes
JJ (wait). Good! Now you have a 
very strong mind so with the strength inside 
your mind .. in that place of forgetting place your 
name right there ... and feel wonderful ... Place your 
name right there and feel wonderful.. 
when 
you've done that say 'yes' (wait) good ... and you'll 
notice that no matter how hard you look you can't 
find it and you feel wonderfully free from that 
label that others have given you... don't you? 
(wait). 
So just enjoy that freedom 
enjoy it 
completely... create an opening that will let that 
freedom inside and free you more and more ... until it 
explodes with understanding that you've have now a 
chance ... if you do well... to create your own name ... 
That's right if you do well ... before you return from 
this pleasant process state you'll have a chance to 
choose your own name ... your new name that will 
help you learn even more ... that understanding has a 
strength a firmness that grows inside of you ... 
wanting to do well... and pleasing me so that you 
may choose your new name... and you would like 
that don't you? (wait). 
That's correct you had no choice in the past 
so you had to live up to the name people gave 
you ... but now it's gone and you are free... to feel. 
to enjoy what you enjoy doing right now ... and you 
enjoy following these suggestions and pleasing 
me and feeling this wonderfuL don't you? (wait) 
Good... and if you do well and please me you will 
choose a new name for the you that you want to 
be... responding naturally and easily so you can 
learn more and more about the power you feel right 
now. .. 
In the past a lot of things were true and you 
now know you can go past the past and create what 
175 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
you truly want and enjoy... in the past you had no 
choice so you had to live up to the name people gave 
you ... hut now it's gone and you are free... to feel... 
to enjoy what you enjoy doing right now... and you 
enjoy following these suggestions and pleasing 
me and feeling this wonderfuL.. and if you do well 
and please me you will choose a new name for the 
you that you want to he ... responding naturally and 
easily so you can learn more and more ahout the 
power you feel right now ... so go deeper ... go even 
deeper 
[Yes set with Mag Grid - yes -> certainty -> 
conviction -> pleasure -> orgasm. then ask Ndo 
you want to learn more ahout how to enjoy life?7 
... allow your self to respond completely to 
what you are learning to enjoy ... to my suggestions 
... so that as you experience this pleasant state you 
can respond completely to my questions with a yes 
or no and 
each 
time 
go 
deeper... 
do 
you 
understand? (wait) Good.. so go deeper just as 
you will each time to you respond this way to 
me... now ... .I want you... I deeply want you... to 
hring up the feeling of certainty ... the certainty that 
you are learning and enjoying this process... hring 
up the feeling ofcertainty. .. and when you feel that 
certainty, with all your feelings say Nyes" (wait) ... 
and go deeper ... now with that certainty hring 
forth the feeling of conviction... that what you are 
doing is right ... hring up the that feeling of 
conviction and add it to your certainty and when 
you feel is ... with all your heart ... say 'yes" (wait) 
Good... 
now comhine 
that 
with pleasure 
pleasure of knowing you are learning about 
176 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
control and freedom... powerful joyous pleasure 
and add that to your certainty and conviction and 
when you feel that pleasure say "yes" ... Good. And 
you eIijoy this don It you? (wait)... 
and enjoy 
responding so powerfully to each suggestion ... 
don It you" (wait). 
There are many pleasures in life... emotional 
and physical pleasures .. there is the pleasure that is 
so ... indulgent ... that you must have it ... you want it 
.. .it is that power pleasure of sexual pleasure ... the 
wonderful powerful pleasure of sexual orgasm ... and 
now on let that pleasure of orgasm huild as you say 
'Yes" to accept each suggestion. (wait) 
That is right .... your mind is ve.zy powerful 
and you enjoy following my suggestions and 
commands. This is true isn It it? (wait) 
Good! Now go deeper... forget... trust your 
inner mind to do it's perfect work and follow each 
suggestion you hear from the sound of my voice 
... as you let each sound of each word create an 
opening and you let it in .... wrap yourself around 
each word ... each sound of my voice ... so that each 
word creates a color or truth ... a warm touch. .. a 
powerful acceptance of what you know is true for 
you. 
[reframe restraint as power] 
... and there was a woman who had left who 
she thought she was hehind ... to leam more 
ahout what she could he... even more that could he 
imagined ... and she realized that there was so much 
pain that she had felt ... hecause she was trapped hy 
what she only thought was real... she protected 
herself hy holding hack on exploring what was 
177 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
possible and she lost out ... lost out completely ... 
because when she held herself back ... she didn't 
mean to... she closed off all possibilities of 
learning ... You've 
always had to hold yourself 
back... and because you didn't understand what you 
now knOw... you did it so as not be judged or 
criticized... now you understand even more... that it 
is you who have control of how you evaluate what 
you experience ... this as meaningfuL.and you are 
now able to enjoy so much more than you ever 
thought possible ... isn't this true? (wait) Now, 
because your mind is under a greater control you 
can change your holding back into a strength. .. 
because now, 
in your restraint, you are free to 
experience anything ... that you decide... don't 
you? (wait) So now you can surrender yourself 
completely and anticipate the joy and pleasure that 
you will create. 
For it is in complete restraint 
that you can see new directions of possibilities. 
Don't you? (wait) 
[subject creates catalepsy and within that restraint 
creates pleasure that is moved through the body] 
So to learn this I want you... to still your 
body completely ... telling each muscle in the body 
to re- main stili... unmoving ... so that all that your 
body can do is answer me... and when you've done 
that say 'yes' (wait) Good. Now by doing that 
begin to create a feeling of joy and pleasure that 
you can feel ... within the right hand... feel the 
warmth the COlOI; the texture of that delicious 
pleasure within your right hand... and when you 
have that .. say 'yes' (wait) ... good! Now move all 
of that pleasure to your left hand ... feeling it, 
tasting and drinking it the color of pleasure that 
178 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
you feel in the left hand ... and when you have that 
pleasure... say 'yes' (wait). Now your mind is 
under even greater control and you can move that 
pleasure to where ever I want ... so gently move 
that pleasure to your right shoulder ... and when 
you have say 'yes'. 
(Proceed 
with 
moving 
the 
pleasure 
throughout various points in the hody always always 
having the suhject confirm with "yes~J . 
.. . and all of this is done within your new 
understanding of restraint ... and this is pleasurahle 
isn't it? 
So take this knowledge with you and as you 
do ... allow your eyes to fully see the power that your 
mind is under (suggest her eyes open and see to it 
that she is looking at you while still in the process 
state). Do you see the power your mind is under? 
(wait) Do you feel pleasure at this power? Feel this 
power as a massive mountain... it fills your vision ... 
it reaches farther than you can extend... wherever 
you reach you can feel it ... and the higger you 
discover and accept and know that it is-- the more 
powerful it is-- the more this limitless power 
protects you ... and the safer that you feel... the 
more powerful it is~ the more you surrender to it 
hecause the higger and more powerful you admit 
tbat it is~ the smaller and safer you are~ and the 
more it protects you . 
.. . and all of this is done within your new 
understanding of restraint ... and this is pleasurahle 
isn't it? (wait) Do you agree to let your restraint he 
your strength (Holding up cuff/restraints). 
(put the subject through a series of restraint 
drills and following directions while in restraints 
confirming that she finds pleasure in each activity.) 
179 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
[restraint drills showing pleasure about consent -> 
agreement to enjoy pleasing the operator} 
(remove restraints) ... and now I'm going to 
ask you to enjoy the highest level of restraint 
... which is that in only you are in control... 
command yourself to hold hack ... with great 
pleasure... not allowing a muscle 
to 
move ... 
command your hody to remain ... still.. . so that 
there is no movement no reflex... give yourself 
that great pleasure of knowing that you are under 
complete control ... and when you have done so 
... and are ready to enjoy even more ... look only into 
my eyes ... 
(test the suhject with tick1in~ giving approval for 
her restraint) 
Now allow yourself only to speak. Do you 
notice the pleasure you are creating? (wait) Good. I 
am going to reveal to you an equation for your 
enjoyment... Because there is an equation to 
enjoyment ... first you feel the anticipation ... then 
you participate fully... then you reflect hack at a 
deep level on the enjoyment ... Now you can do 
that at the deepest level of your inner mind... and 
as you do that you will feel a connection wJth 
me ... a 
connection 
that magnifies 
whatever 
pleasure I 
feel 100 times stronger for you ... 
when 
I 
feel 
pleased you 
will automatically 
magnify your pleasure 100 times ... through the 
power of this 
connection... 
so imagine that 
connection now as a cord of light he tween you and 
me... and as i tell you "you have pleased me N feel 
180 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
that 
pleasure 
100 
more 
powerfully 
than 
me ... don't you? (wait) That pleases me... that 
pleases me very much. .. and you have pleased me ... 
to have learned so well... and to be so willing to 
learn in this manner... and it would please me that 
you learn more ... would you like to learn more? 
(wait) 
[Emo chamber for reframing s&m with drills -> for 
org -> feeling shock only reminds your unconscious 
mind of the pleasure that you have control of] 
You can learn now to tum anything into pleasure ... if 
I strike the skin you can tum that shock into a 
... release... of pleasure... and to do that first you 
must feel an anticipation... knowing that at some 
moment that shock will release all the pleasqnt 
feelings ... but you will still have to wait ... and let 
that anticipation 
build... 
can you feel that 
anticipation? (wait) ... let it build even more ... 
powerfully ... as each second passes ... so will the 
release build .. . 
(proceed with spanking being VERY careful not to 
bruise or injure) 
... and perhaps throughout the days to come 
you will feel the reminders of this on your skin 
and body. .. not know what they are or where they 
came from ... forgotten to you conscious mind ... only 
knowing that you enjoy the pleasure of 
learning ... you enjoy the pleasure of learning ... is this 
true ?(wait) 
[Yes set repeated -> do you have your new name? 
(get name) will be used only when doing these 
processes} 
181 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Good ... now ... go deeper ... and allow your self 
to respond completely to what you are learning to 
enjoy ... to my suggestions ... so that as you 
experience this pleasant state you can respond 
completely to my questions with a yes or no and 
each time go deeper... do you understand? (wait) 
Good.. so go deeper just as you will each time to 
you respond this way to me... now ... .I want 
you... I deeply want you... to hring up the feeling of 
certainty... the certainty that you are learning and 
enjoying this process... hring up the feeling of 
certainty... and when you feel that certainty, with 
all your feelings say "yes N 
(wait)... 
and go 
deeper... now with that certainty hring forth the 
feeling of conviction... that what you are doing is 
right ... hring up the that feeling of conviction and 
add it to your certainty and when you feel is 
... with all your heart... say "yesN (wait) 
Good ... 
now combine that with pleasure ... pleasure of 
know you are learning ahout control and freedom ... 
powerful joyous pleasure and add that to your 
certainty and conviction and when you feel that 
pleasure say "yesN ... Good. And you enjoy this don't 
you? (wait)... and enjoy responding so powerfully to 
each suggestion ... don 't you N (wait). 
There are many pleasures in life... emotional 
and physical pleasures .. there is the pleasure that is 
so ... indulgent ... that you must have it ... you want it 
... it is that power pleasure of sexual pleasure ... the 
wonderful powerful pleasure of sexual orgasm ... and 
now on let that pleasure of orgasm huild as you say 
"YesN to accept each suggestion. (wait) 
That is right .... your mind is very powerful and 
you enjoy following my suggestions and commands. 
This is true isn 't it? (wait) 
182 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
[New Name will eagerly anticipate the next 
process] 
When we started I told you that if you do well 
you will have a name ... that you inner mind will 
give you... a name that you will instantly respond 
to ... day or night ... awake or asleep ... a name 
that 
will help you learn even more... 
that 
understanding has a strength a finnness that grows 
inside of you... wanting to do well ... and pleasing 
me so that you may choose your new name ... and 
you have pleased me very much... So now your 
mind is under complete control and your inner 
mind can now reveal your new name.... What is 
the new name that your inner mind has chosen? 
(wait. For the purpose of the processes 
'New 
Name" will he used for the persons choice of 
name). 
Very good. New Name, you have pleased me. 
You have pleased me very much New Name. 
Will 
you agree to return again when I call you? (wait) 
Good! That pleases me! 
So, New Name, I am now going to ask you to 
return to Names inner mind. Return ... hidden 
completely from her conscious awareness ... locked 
away in right next to where she keeps everything 
that's true... so that you can secretly teach her how 
to enjoy life ... and wait patiently for the next time 
you will will he called... hy my voice and my voice 
only ... this voice will call you ... so that you can 
come forth and learn even more... and in those 
moments you can patiently restrain yourself... and 
guide her with your thoughts... and your strength. .. 
teaching her to enjoy life even more... and you will 
follow these suggestions and enjoy the power you 
183 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
have in your restraint ... will you not? 
Good. So go now. Go deeper... go deeper. .. 
forget ... trust your inner mind to do it's perfect work. 
[End Amnesia] 
... and so you now know what it's like to have 
forgotten... your name completely... feeling just 
fine... and you can now retrieve 
your name" 
Name" and do you have it? Good... you've done 
wonderfully... and your inner mind will" Name, 
remember what it needs to forget or it may forget 
what you only think you remember ... as it really 
doesn't even matter" it's not even important... you 
don't even have to think about it" Name" so just let 
it go ... and even though it only took a brief minute 
of your time you'll emerge feeing 
absolutely 
wonderful... that's right" even though it only took 
a brief minute of time ... you'll be amazed at how well 
you feel 
Now you will remember to remember that you can 
continue to learn you will discover new pleasures 
for yourself between now and when we next 
meet... that's right... new things will for you find 
new pleasures... in ways... that surprise and amaze 
you... to feel such joy and pleasure ... during the 
days and weeks to come ... you'll find that you are 
enjoying life more in new ways and finding new 
ways to enjoy life... more fully... and your inner 
mind creates an awareness that you are changing 
... you are changing in all the ways that you like 
... that you enjoy... you are changing in all the 
way you wanted to when you first heard my voice ... 
and feels so natural ... it feels so easy ... to make 
184 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
these changes a part of you ... that~ right ... new 
things will for you find new pleasures... in ways ... 
that surprise and amaze you ... to feel such joy and 
pleasure ... during the days and weeks to come ... you 
will not touch yourself to enjoy that pleasure ... 
you'll find that you are enjoying life more in new 
ways and finding new ways to enjoy life... more 
fully ... and your inner mind creates an awareness 
that you are changing ... you are changing in all 
the ways that you like ... that you enjoy ... you 
are changing in all the ways you wanted to when 
you first heard our inner voice... speaking to you ... 
and it feels so natural ... it feels so easy. .. to make 
these changes a part of you... do you agree to this? 
(wait for response) Good. 
And even though all of this has taken just an 
instant you'll be amazed and surprised at how 
well you've done. That~ right. Even this has been 
only a few brief minute you'll be pleasantly surprise 
at how well you've done. 
And all of this is true 
[give post hypnotic suggestion to laugh enjoy life 
now upon awakening] 
So allow yourself to return but only as 
quickly as you begin to smile and laugh ... for no 
apparent reason ... just bring yourself all the way 
back to the full awareness of the environment 
around you feeling wonderful laughing and smiling 
for all the reasons ... that feels right ... for you. 
There are additional scripts that are part of 
185 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
the Perfected Mind Control process. They are quite 
explicit and can be used to further bind a subject to 
following orders. If you are serious about learning 
and applying them you can find them fully described 
in Perfected Mind Control, but be warned, they are 
not designed for those who have an irresponsible 
approach to power. 
186 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Conclusion 
What I've tried to expose in this book have been 
some of the secrets used by hypnotists to overcome 
some of the most resistant hypnotic subjects. The end 
result is to assist them and to help them make the 
changes they want. 
Possibly some of this information seemed 
intimidating and perhaps too powerful to be put in the 
hands of the unskilled masses. Perhaps it's true but 
my job is not to create and enforce some arbitrary 
hypnosis law. It is simply to inform. 
Having read an early version of this book one of 
my friends had two responses. The first was how he 
would "zone out" when reading the hypnosis scripts. 
The second was a curious waxing that included 
creating a community of mind controlled hypnotic 
slaves. My response to him was IYes, it's possible but 
it is much likely to be more effort than it's worth." 
To everyone else who reads this I ask that you 
put aside any juvenile fantasizes of power . Itls very 
likely that when you finally have that power you will 
no longer need it.. Instead use it to make people 
happier and better. 
So I end this book with the advise I gave at itls 
beginning. 
Be fearless. 
Dantalion Jones 
187 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Mind Control Language 
Patterns 
by Dantalion Jones 
Mind Control Language 
Patterns are phrases that can 
act as "triggers" to the people 
who hear them. They 
influence and control how we 
respond, and cause us to be 
influenced to do things 
without our knowing. 
These language patterns are 
not fantasy, but are based on documented uses that 
come from psychology, hypnosis, Neuro Linguistic 
Programming, and studies of human behavior. Mind 
Control Language Patterns can be used to help and 
hurt. One can use Mind Control Language Patterns 
to create positive and lasting change in people, as 
well as feelings of trust, love and affection. They can 
also be used to induce amnesia, fear, insecurity and 
doubt. These types of patterns are what we call 
"dark" patterns. Knowing how to use these Mind 
Control Language Patterns gives you incredible 
power. Not knowing these Mind Control Language 
Patterns takes the control out of your hands, and 
places it into the hands of people who know their 
real power. 
Available at Amazon.com or at 
www.MindControlPublishing.com 
188 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Secrets Of Hypnotic Mind 
Control Report 
By Marc Savage 
After studying these 
programs for more than 11 years 
and over 1067 hours of reading, 
listening to audio programs and 
going to training classes, I 
realized they all lacked one big 
thing. A quick easy way to use these techniques 
NOW. Not after years of training and study. 
I have reviewed most, if not all of the courses 
you will find available. And they are all just fluff. 
They talk about hypnotic principles. They tell you 
about Milton Ericson who was considered to be the 
greatest hypnotist of all time. They talk about 
Richard Bandler the godfather of NLP. 
While this is all interesting and I will tell you I 
learned a lot they don't show you how to use these 
techniques. If you want a history lesson then these 
are the programs for you, but. 
If you want hard hitting easy, to use covert 
hypnotic mind control techniques then this is what 
you've been looking for. 
Secrets Of Hypnotic Mind Control Report 
By Marc Savage 
www.secretsofmindcontrol.net 
189 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Hypnotherapy for 21st Century 
Healing & Success 
"It is a great pleasure to have 
your book. Finding True Magic 
contains a great amount of 
practical information and creative 
guidance on the lmowledge of 
mind and body derived from 
various disciplines of the Eastern 
and Western worlds." - Tulku 
Thondup, Tibetan Meditation 
Master, Author, The Healing 
Power of Mind 
"East Meets West in True Magic. 
Finding True Magic is a 
remarkable textbook on 
Transpersonal Hypnotherapy. 
Recommended for deep study." - Ormand McGill, PhD., Dean 
of American Hypnotists 
"Finding True Magic is a superb book. It's truly comprehensive 
and eclectic in its intelligent presentation of trans personal 
work. It explores philosophy, metaphysics, eastern wisdom and 
their relationship to hypnotherapeutic healing. If you do 
healing work, you must have this book. If you teach, you and 
your students must have this book!" - Marilyn Gordon, CHT, 
Author, Extraordinary Healing 
Purchase a signed copy of Finding True Magic and CD #1 for 
$50 - and save $7! 
Go to www.FindingTrueMagic.com or send $50.00, check or 
money order (incl. S&H for US) to: 
Jack Elias 
Institute for Therapeutic Learning 
P.O. Box 17229, Seattle, WA 98127 
Phone: (206) 783-1838, jack@FindingTrueMagic.com 
This book it utilized by teachers & students internationally for 
professional & personal growth. 
190 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Rich Mind, Poor Mind 
- Finding Emotional 
Freedom 
by Jesse M. Berg 
ISBN: 1-60672-010-4 
"Rich Mind, Poor Mind ' 
a book that is exclusive 
in many ways. A unique 
writing style will intrigue 
you to continue and 
discover what is to be 
revealed next. You will 
find a combination of 
classic thinking about 
happiness mixed with a new approach of looking at 
the human condition." 
"What if you could be shown the hiding place of the 
thieves of your peace of mind? You could use the 
spotlight of your awareness to cause these thieves to 
run for cover leaving you with a clear and quiet 
mind." 
Available at Amazon.com or at 
www.RichMindPoorMind.net 
191 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
practical demonstrations. 
How to Hypnotized 
The Complete Step-by-
Step Guide to Stage 
Hypnosis 
by Steve Hall 
Simple step by step easy 
to follow guidance 
that reveals how to 
hypnotize people quickly 
and easily. Perfect for 
the absolute beginner 
with complete word for 
word scripts and 
This is an ebook available for download at 
www.lnducingTrance.com 
Readers say: 
"1 was just as shocked as my subject when I 
successfully hypnotized her within minutes. I didn't 
think it'd work and I'd be practicing for months!" -
Daniel Stanton, UK. 
"1 successfully hypnotized my first subject using 
your book. He was hypnotized to a very deep trance 
and I was able to suggest he forgot his name and a 
number. It is a great feeling to achieve this!" -
Richard Jackson, Norfolk, UK 
192 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
Without 
Embarrassment: 
The Social Coward's 
Totally Fearless 
Seduction System 
by Mike Pilinski 
Without 
is by far the best book 
you're 
going 
to 
anywhere when it comes 
addressing the single 
important element of 
man's romantic success 
those devilish 
thoughts that go on deep inside your head where it 
relates 
to 
matters 
of 
the 
heart. 
I'm especially talking about that galaxy of 
mojo-stealing ruminations and fears which are based 
upon deeply-seated internalized shame and self-
hatred. These monsters can quietly begin to take 
over your consciousness until they eventually ruin 
entire 
aspects 
of 
your 
life. 
"I am quite intelligent (169 IQ, 1510 SAT, 
MENSA member) and I must say that I found your 
book immensely enlightening and insightful much on 
the same scale that I found physics books such as 
Steven Hawking's A Brief History of Time, Feyman's 
Quantum ElectroDynamics and Lederman's The God 
Particle highly thought-provoking. I was humbled by 
your intellect and your knowledge of this material on 
a MASSIVE scale. You Sir are 'THE 
MAN.'" 
www.HighStatusMale.com 
193 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 
Rick 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
The Persuasion Skills Black 
Book 
by Rintu Basu 
Acclaimed NLP trainer, 
Basu, has worked hard to 
this book so that you 
have to. As well as 
laid-out 
chapters, 
~A':Ulll-'''''' and case studies, the 
book has been written 
the very patterns you'll 
learning. So, as you read 
and use your new skills, your conscious understanding 
and unconscious ability will continue to deepen. 
These patterns are not necessarily about sending 
people into a hypnotic trance but just a way to move you 
from one perspective on an issue to another. 
"I can get very excited when I think about the 
results people are likely to create using this material. If 
you spend a few minutes thinking about where, when and 
what results you are lookingfor I would guess you can 
get excited as well". 
"In essence the little-known patterns and 
approaches I'm sharing can be used in all areas of your 
life to help you get more of what you want and less of 
what you don't. " 
Available at amazon. com or 
www.thenlpcompany.com 
194 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

Mind Control Hypnosis 
• 
Hands On Chaos 
Magic: Reality 
Manipulation 
Through the Ovayki 
Current 
by Andrieh Vitimus 
ISBN-10: 0738715085 
Who said magical training 
had 
to 
be 
so 
dry 
and 
complicated? 
In 
this 
instructional text, Andrieh 
iVitimus banishes the severe 
tone of other esoteric orders 
and instead proposes a more 
accessible 
and 
practical 
....... _______ ....... ____ ........ approach - a course of study 
for the average Joe. From discovering new meditation 
positions through random dance to sculpting energy into 
playful balls, puppets, and form - fitting body suits, 
Vitimus' exercises are fun and irreverent while still 
imparting the skills needed for serious self-study."Hands-
On Chaos Magic" emphasizes experimentation and 
finding out what works for you, and Vitimus makes it 
clear that pop magic is allowed. So you may want to try a 
spell from Harry Potter while assuming a Dragon Ball Z 
stance. Or maybe you'd like to bribe yourself into daily 
practice by 'kicking your mind's ass and then giving it 
candy'. By adopting a practical understanding of magical 
theory, readers will find magic easier to perform - and 
they'll achieve results more in line with their own notions 
of success. 
Available at amazon. com 
or 
www.AndriehVitimus.com 
195 
www.MindControIPublishing.com 

