
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

MIRACLES AND MACHINES
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

ii
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

iii
chapter title
a sixteenth-century automaton 
and its legend
MIRACLES 
AND MACHINES
with photographs by 
Rosamond Purcell
Elizabeth King 
and W. David Todd
getty publications | los angeles
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

iv
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

Contents
 | To Set the Stage     11
 | A Miracle and a Vow     15
 | Diego de Alcalá     19
 | An Automaton by Juanelo Turriano     22
 | The Attribution of the Monk     27
 | A Letter     30
 | A Monk’s Opinion     34
 | An Immaculate Object     41
 | The Monk Performs     46
 | A Mechanical Anatomy     49
 | Monks, Saints, and Musical Ladies     76
 | A Second Monk?     79
 | A Saint in Budapest     87
 | Three Sister Musicians     93
 | The Vienna Cittern Player     103
 | A Late Arrival from Milan     107
 | The Category Challenge     110
 | The Earliest Free-Walking Androids     120
INTRODUCTION     1
APPENDIX. TABLE OF COMPARISONS: 
EIGHT AUTOMATA     198
NOTES     202
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY     228
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS     233
ABOUT THE AUTHORS     236
ILLUSTRATION CREDITS     237
INDEX     238
 | Craft Guild or Imperial Court?     130
 | Two Masters, Two Cultures: 
    Jakob Bulmann and Juanelo Turriano     134
 | A Nuremberg Clockmaker’s Workshop     140
 | The Art Cabinet of Rudolf II     147
 | Searching the Lost and Found     152
 | A Monk’s Opinion, Continued     160
 | Miracles and Walking Sculptures     170
 | Perpetual Devotion     189
 | The Machine and the Corpse     194
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
PART I: 	 A Legend
8
9
10
PART III: 	 Eight Androids
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
PART IV: 	 A Search for Origins
PART II: 	 The Monk
PART V: 	 A Machine That Prays
25
26
27
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

To Otto Mayr, Silvio Bedini, Carlene Stephens, and Servus Gieben 
and to José Antonio García-Diego and Adelheid von Herz, 
all of whom escorted the monk out of oblivion
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

This page intentionally left blank
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

QVI. SIM. SCIES. SI. PAR. OPVS. FACERE. CONABERIS
“You Will Know Who I Am If You Try to Make This”
—Juanelo Turriano’s Latin inscription on his great astrarium, recorded by 
Ambrosio de Morales, Las antigüedades de las ciudades de España 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

1
In 1977 the Smithsonian Institution purchased a small 
automaton made in Europe in the second half of the six­
teenth century. A diminutive figure of a friar in Franciscan 
tunic and sandals, the automaton possesses a jointed 
wooden body animated by a concealed drive mechanism of 
hand-forged iron (FIGS. I.1, I.2). Set in motion, the figure per­
forms for spectators on any tabletop, without a mediating 
plinth or stage. “The monk,” as he is popularly known, walks 
and turns along a nonrepeating path, striking his chest with 
one hand, raising and flourishing a small wooden cross with 
the other. As he walks, his head and his eyes pivot to gaze 
at the cross, then the onlookers, then the cross. His mouth 
opens and closes as in speech. From time to time he brings 
the cross to his lips and kisses it.
The monk’s wooden hands, head, and feet are del­
icately carved and painted. The paint, now cracked with 
age, was clearly once aglow with life; a faint flush still lingers 
on cheek and lip. The eyeballs are made of iron, hammered 
round and painted. The figure wears a tunic made of real 
cloth. An X-ray of the head reveals the internal machinery 
that guides the motions of the eyes and mouth. At sixteen 
inches in height, the machine weighs just under five pounds. 
This is what we now call an android—an automaton of a 
human figure that moves by its own accord. In good work­
ing order after some 450 years, the monk comes to life in 
animated defiance of the wounds of time. 
FIGURE I.1. 
Automaton of a Friar, mid-sixteenth century. 
Spain or South Germany. Wood, fabric, iron 
clockwork. Height: 40.64 cm (16 in.). On 
arrival at the Smithsonian, 1977. Curators 
immediately recognized its importance to the 
histories of technology and artificial life. 
Introduction
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

2
INTRODUCTION
The automaton arrived with a story. Legend claims 
that the figure is a votive representation of Diego de Alcalá, 
a Franciscan lay brother whose holy corpse was agent to the 
miraculous cure of the young prince Don Carlos, heir to the 
Spanish throne, who lay near death from a head wound in 
1562. The prince’s father, Philip II of Spain, petitioned Rome 
to recognize the miracle, and Pope Sixtus V made Diego 
a saint in 1588. Juanelo Turriano, royal clockmaker to the 
king, and to the king’s father, Emperor Charles V, must have 
fashioned the automaton, the story goes, to reenact the cure 
with state-of-the-art technology. The wizardry of Juanelo, 
known for his automata, was celebrated in a 1575 biography. 
Prince, cure, and saint: this much is history. More mysteri­
ous are the documents connecting the automaton itself to 
the drama in the Spanish court.1
The historian Otto Mayr, then curator at the Smith-
sonian’s National Museum of History and Technology, wrote 
to his acquisition board before the purchase, “For the his­
tory of technology, this automaton is important as one of the 
earliest program-controlled self-acting machines that have 
survived to the present.” Referring to makers of several great 
Enlightenment mechanical androids and their connection to 
the origins of computing, he noted that “it is a direct prede­
cessor of the eighteenth-century automata of Vaucanson and 
Jaquet-Droz, of the Jacquard loom and Babbage’s computer.” 2 
Mayr equally understood its significance to philosophy and 
to the literature of artificial life, for few of the famed autom­
ata attributed to inventors and thinkers from Archimedes to 
Descartes have materialized beyond legend. Fate is reversed 
in the case of the monk: it arrived intact from the tumult of 
history with no letter of introduction. We find no identifying 
mark, no inscription on the clockwork. 
Every great and surviving automaton from history 
engenders legends. Mechanism starts them in motion; sto­
ries keep them running. The history of legends of artificial 
beings is the subject of an essay that Mayr himself wrote 
several years before encountering the monk. Makers of 
automata from antiquity to the Renaissance, he wrote, 
engaged a technology “in which rational, magical, and mys­
tical elements intermingled.”3 Do legends spring from the 
object itself or from gaps in our knowledge about the object, 
its origins, its uses? The performance confronts even the 
twenty-first-century robot-savvy viewer in a demanding 
and urgent way. What did an onlooker in the sixteenth cen­
tury see and believe, witnessing the monk in action? 
Let us imagine the monk set in motion by a trusted 
steward, in a privileged setting. The mainspring has been 
wound ahead of time, out of sight of the assembled spec­
tators, and the key withdrawn. The steward steps forward 
holding the figure upright in both hands and places it on 
a table, with a feint that discreetly releases a hidden stop-
work lever. Slowly the monk comes to life. He turns his 
head to single out one among the company. Left foot step­
ping forth from under the cassock hem, then right foot, the 
monk advances in the direction of his gaze, raising the cross 
and rosary before him as he walks. His eyes move: turning 
his head, he looks to the raised cross and then back to his 
subject. His mouth opens, then closes, affording a glimpse 
FIGURE I.2. 
Side view of the automaton without the tunic, 
affording a glimpse of the internal clockwork. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

3
human/machine interface, the mind/body riddle, the illusion 
of agency, the history and psychology of belief, and our pas­
sionate arguments about what a robot can and cannot do. 
We are a clockmaker (David Todd) and a sculptor (Elizabeth 
King), putting our two worlds together to study a 450-year-
old clockwork sculpture. As artisans ourselves, we write 
from the perspective of workshop and studio, from the 
knowledge of our hands. David has been a practicing clock­
maker since the late 1960s. Trained in his native England, 
he is an expert on sixteenth- to eighteenth-century English, 
European, and American clockwork. He apprenticed under 
the third-generation clockmaker Cyril Boniface, who pre­
served the family commandment that a clockmaker ought 
to be able to make a clock without using modern power 
tools. To conserve a sixteenth-century clock, the precise 
skills of the original maker were to be mastered first. From 
1978 to 2006, David was museum specialist in Timekeeping 
at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of 
History and Technology (now the National Museum of 
American History), where he worked under Otto Mayr, 
Silvio Bedini, and Carlene Stephens. One of his first tasks at 
the Smithsonian was to examine, clean, and document the 
newly acquired automaton monk. He cared for it and kept 
it in running condition for the next thirty years. Elizabeth 
is a sculptor whose works in wood, bronze, and porcelain 
reflect her interest in early puppets and clockwork autom­
ata. She first encountered the monk in 1989 on a field trip 
organized by the artist Christopher Furman, then a student 
in the sculpture department at Virginia Commonwealth 
University where Elizabeth was teaching (FIG. I.3). Twenty 
sculpture students crowded into David Todd’s small work­
shop in the museum basement, where he murmured the 
legend of the monk’s origins while demonstrating the meth­
ods of the sixteenth-century clockmaker who made its iron 
parts. A few years later Elizabeth began a search for the 
source of the curious story. Steeped in the history of figu­
rative sculpture and drawn to literature’s age-old legends of 
artificial figures that come to life, she was in the midst of 
an artist fellowship in 1996 at the Mary Ingraham Bunting 
Institute (now the Radcliffe Institute of Advanced Study at 
Harvard) and found she had access to a great library. 
3
INTRODUCTION
of teeth and interior. He bends his right arm, and with the 
beaked fingers of his hand, he strikes his chest. The small 
blow is audible. Now he lowers his head as he walks, and 
with elbow and shoulder in synchronized motion he brings 
the cross to his lips and kisses it. Twenty seconds into the 
act, he has taken eight steps, beaten his chest three times, 
kissed the cross, and traveled a distance of nineteen inches. 
At what seems like the last moment—doubtless the guest 
in his sights has backed away from the table—he executes 
a turn to his right and begins a new advance. But as he 
turns, he keeps his eyes on that person for two seconds lon­
ger, then looks away. He will make seven such turns if the 
mainspring is fully wound, navigating the table and fixing 
spectators, one by one, with an iron gaze. The uninterrupted 
repetition gives the campaign its force.
This book narrates the search for the origins of the 
monk and the sources of the legend. We examine a set of 
intersecting histories, sites, and witnesses, for the monk 
until now has evaded classification. As a prototype, this early 
figure represents a synthesis of sculpture and mechanism in 
one object. The monk’s carved and painted wooden body 
displays, in miniature, the virtuoso polychrome sculptural 
tradition at its height in early modern Europe. A dissection 
of the concealed iron clockwork firmly locates its fabrication 
in the early years of the golden age of clockmaking in the 
same period. How were these separate worlds combined in 
the fabrication of a moving sculpture? The question cannot 
be broached without acknowledging the monk’s character 
as a Catholic icon. Though this is one of the best-preserved 
examples of an automaton that predates and anticipates 
the famous mechanical androids of the Enlightenment, 
the monk and his story must not be confined to a study of 
technology alone. Art, religion, natural science, medicine, 
folklore, and popular culture all play a part in the perfor­
mance of this charismatic object from the past. Against the 
backdrop of Reformation and Counter-Reformation Europe, 
who indeed commissioned the monk, and for whom was the 
performance intended? Have other such walking automata 
survived to the present? The paradox of a rational object 
performing a mystical act: What can it reveal of the birth of 
the machine in a still-fervent age of faith? 
Seen today, the monk in performance brings us face to 
face with our own ambivalent relationship to artificial life: the 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

4
INTRODUCTION
and David together compare them in part 3 and propose 
that this group of self-propelled walking figures consti­
tutes a class of its own in the history of artificial life. Part 4 
assembles witnesses, then and now, in pursuit of the 
origins of these automata. Sixteenth-century chronicles 
name Juanelo Turriano but also the Nuremberg clock­
maker Jakob Bulmann among makers of such automata. 
Juanelo was a royal court clockmaker in Habsburg Spain; 
Bulmann, a guild clockmaker in South Germany. We 
sketch the differences between these two settings: David 
describes a typical clockmaker’s workshop in Nuremberg, 
while Elizabeth locates descriptions of automata in the 
inventory of the famous Kunstkammer in Prague assem­
bled under Rudolf II, cousin to Don Carlos. In tracking 
the cascade of references to these two clockmakers by 
scholars and horologists across time and into the pres­
ent, Elizabeth discovers the constellation of sources 
for the monk’s legend and lays them out in chapter 24. 
In part 5 Elizabeth asks how a spectator in the sixteenth 
century might have viewed a small moving religious icon in 
the context of devotional sculpture before and during the 
Counter-Reformation. At last, we both return to the bedside 
of the prince, to see why the legend behind a machine that 
prays has gained a life of its own.
Our study is brought to life by the photographs of 
Rosamond Purcell, whose color plates appear through­
out this book. Her closely observed portrait series of the 
monk was made at the Smithsonian’s National Museum of 
American History on December 6, 2002, during the early 
years when we first began our collaboration. When we 
asked if she might come to the museum with her camera, 
her only requirement was to be allowed to photograph the 
monk in natural light. On the appointed day, the Director’s 
Conference Room, its stately fifth-floor windows facing 
south onto the Mall, was free. David brought the monk 
upstairs from his workshop and posed it on the massive 
table, and Rosamond set to work in the clear winter light. 
Her focus on the mute material of the monk, the marks of 
the passage of time on the wooden body, the delicate and 
speaking cracks in the paint—miraculously unspoiled by pre­
vious “restoration”—tells a visceral story of age and fate. The 
photographs answer the monk’s mystery with the immedi­
ate news of its sheer physical presence.
Our book is itself a clockwork: many separate parts 
are assembled to describe an object that is a sculpture, a 
machine, an icon, and a messenger. We circle back again and 
again to the physical object that is the monk in our search for 
its origins. The search itself is left visible, for the chronology 
of our discoveries gained its own drama. Our two voices are 
distinct. In part 1 Elizabeth lays out the strands of the legend: 
prince, saint, clockmaker, automaton. Part 2 is David’s work: 
the object that is the monk, what it is and how it works. By 
what authority can we establish a date for its manufacture, 
and is it fully original to that date? (We believe that only 
the monk’s robe, cross, and rosary have been replaced in 
the intervening centuries.) Surely no single artisan could be 
adept at fashioning both sculpture and clockwork: How was 
the automaton made? Seven surviving automata similar to 
the monk are known at present in collections in Europe, sev­
eral of them once attributed to Juanelo Turriano. Elizabeth 
FIGURE I.3. 
The monk on display in 1993 in what was 
then the Hall of Timekeeping, National 
Museum of American History, Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, DC. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

5
chapter title
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

7
chapter title
PART I
A Legend
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

8
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

9
chapter title
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

11
To Set the Stage
1
In the reign of Charles V (as he is now best known) from 1516 
to 1556, the House of Habsburg, a ruling dynasty in Central 
Europe originating in the thirteenth century, attained its 
broadest geographic reach (FIG. 1.1). Before his abdication 
and the division of his territories in 1556, Charles was Holy 
Roman emperor and monarch of the lands and cultures of 
Austria, Hungary, Bohemia, South Germany, Burgundy and 
the Netherlands, the Italian kingdoms of Naples and Sicily 
and the duchy of Milan, and Spain and the Spanish con­
quests around the world, including Mexico and Peru. The 
period of his rule spanned the late Renaissance and the flow­
ering of the classical humanism of Erasmus of Rotterdam, 
followed by the devastating religious wars of the Protestant 
Reformation and the Council of Trent that launched the 
Counter-Reformation of the Catholics. Almost continu­
ally at war with France and with the Ottoman sultanate of 
Suleiman the Magnificent far to the east, Charles was equally 
engaged by battles within the empire: Spanish revolts, papal 
intrigues, German peasant uprisings. Aggressive, strategic,
diplomatic, and revered, he believed he could unite all 
Christendom into a world-defining imperium equal to the 
golden age of Augustus. He was a powerful patron of arts 
and letters, astronomy and clockwork, and a lover of feast 
and pageant. The works by Titian and Albrecht Dürer that 
he commissioned can be seen today in the collection of the 
Museo del Prado in Madrid. 
FIGURE 1.1. 
The House of Habsburg, Europe, 1547. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

12
CHAPTER 1
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

To Set the Stage
13
In 1556, at the age of fifty-six, Charles stunned Europe 
by relinquishing his crown, dividing his realms between his 
son Philip II and his brother Ferdinand I, and retiring to 
the remote Hieronymite monastery of San Yuste in Spain, 
where he died within two years, surrounded by his paintings, 
his books, and his clocks. In the now-split Habsburg line, 
Ferdinand I (and after him, in quick succession, Ferdinand’s 
son Maximilian II and then grandson Rudolf II) assumed the 
Holy Roman imperial rule of domains in Central Europe. 
Philip II (1527–1598) inherited the Netherlands, the 
Burgundian Franche-Comté, the Italian kingdoms, and the 
great kingdom of his native Spain—together with Spain’s col­
onies in the Americas and the Caribbean, founded under the 
crown of Castile in the late fifteenth century and dramati­
cally, if brutally, expanded over the half century preceding 
his ascension to the throne (FIG. 1.2). He was briefly king con­
sort of England through his second marriage, to the reign­
ing queen, Mary Tudor. Following Mary’s death, he formed 
an alliance with France through his third wife, Elisabeth 
of Valois, although good relations with neither England 
nor France would last. When he secured Portugal in 1580, 
and thus the Portuguese claims in Africa, the Americas, 
India, Indonesia, and China, his authority extended across 
an empire larger than any known in history. In contrast to 
Charles’s militant mobility, Philip ruled his empire almost 
exclusively from Spain, a poised and stationary monarch 
who conducted his global affairs through his viceroys and 
generals. Spain’s vast enterprise of colonization, religious con­
version, and plunder in the western hemisphere was a major 
source of the wealth that sustained his reign. Under the for­
ty-year rule of this “most Catholic king,” as he has often been 
called, the Counter-Reformation attained its most repressive 
form. Spain’s Inquisition was already well established by 
Philip’s time, implemented in 1478 by Philip’s great-grandpar­
ents Ferdinand and Isabella, who launched the persecution 
and dispersal of the great populations of Muslims, Jews, and 
Berbers that had defined the Iberian Peninsula as one of the 
most culturally diverse regions in the world.
Yet Philip’s reign inaugurated what has been called 
Spain’s artistic golden age: Juan de Herrera, Miguel de 
Cervantes, and El Greco flourished within or in proximity to 
his court. In his massive San Lorenzo del Escorial—palace, 
monastery, museum, library, mausoleum—Philip installed 
his father’s great collections of art and added his own: 
new works by Titian; the sculpture of Leone and Pompeo 
Leoni and Benvenuto Cellini; paintings by Antonis Mor, 
Alonso Sánchez Coello, and the great El Greco. Among the 
Netherlandish masterpieces he inherited or sought out was 
Rogier van der Weyden’s incomparable Descent from the 
Cross and what is now the world’s finest collection of the 
works of Hieronymus Bosch. 
Hugh Trevor-Roper, in his 1976 book, Princes and 
Artists, ponders the strange attraction that drew Philip 
to Bosch: “Why did he wish to contemplate, in his private 
rooms, those bizarre canvases filled with strange symbol­
ism of monstrous figures emerging from broken eggshells, 
incomplete, fantastic forms, weird half-animal machinery 
and mechanised animals, and gleeful devils toasting naked 
bodies in lurid, fuliginous flames?” Trevor-Roper can do 
no more than defer to Philip’s librarian at the Escorial, the 
Hieronymite monk José de Sigüenza, 
who, of all men, best understood his royal master’s mind. 
There are some people, says Sigüenza, who are so foolish 
as to think that Bosch was a heretic; which is absurd, for 
if that were so, the king would never have had his pictures 
near him. No: Bosch is a devout and orthodox satirist of 
our sins and follies: what distinguishes him from other 
painters is that while they seek to paint men as they out­
wardly appear, “he has the courage to paint them as they 
really are.”1
Who was Philip’s firstborn son, Don Carlos? Bedeviled 
from birth by poor health, he was suspected of having inher­
ited the unsound mind of his great-grandmother Juana la 
Loca (Joanna the Mad). The visionary theater of Bosch, pag­
eant of saints and demons, wounded bodies and uncanny 
creatures, may capture the faith and fervor of Philip’s world­
view, but the king’s effort to preserve “outward appearance” 
could not prevent the young prince’s fall from grace.
FIGURE 1.2. 
Sofonisba Anguisola, Philip II, 1573. Oil on 
canvas. 88 × 72 cm (34⅝ × 28⁵⁄₁₆ in.). Museo 
Nacional del Prado, Madrid. In the mid-sixteenth 
century, Phillip’s authority extended throughout 
western Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Americas, 
but he was unable to prevent misfortune from 
befalling his son and heir.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

15
A Miracle and a Vow
2
Don Carlos is perhaps best known today as the romantic hero 
of Giuseppe Verdi’s opera Don Carlo, first performed in Paris 
in 1867. Verdi set to music Friedrich Schiller’s eighteenth-
century play about a noble and defiant crown prince of 
Spain, destroyed by his jealous father, King Philip, in a tale of 
empire, doomed love, and Inquisition. The historical record 
reveals a real-life sixteenth-century Spanish prince, king, 
and court of a very different order, although even today 
contention clings to the short and strange life of Don Carlos. 
Heir to the Spanish throne, the prince was born misshapen 
and remained childlike in frame and mind into adulthood. 
Unfit for roles at court, he grew dangerously volatile; by the 
time he was twenty-two, Philip found no choice but to con­
fine him. His death soon after gave Spain’s enemies, espe­
cially those in the Netherlands, a pretext to claim the prince 
a martyred rebel. So orchestrated was the propaganda that 
historians, repeating it, turned fabrication into whole cloth. 
In the battle for command of any public narrative, such is 
the power of a good story.1 But an earlier event in the life of 
the unfortunate prince, with repercussions just as momen­
tous for the Spanish crown, launched a different story, the 
one we tell now (FIG. 2.1.). 
FIGURE 2.1. 
Alonso Sánchez Coello, El príncipe don 
Carlos, 1564–65. Oil on canvas. 43 × 31.2 cm 
(161⁵⁄₁₆ × 12¼ in.). Coleção da Cãmara 
Municipal, on deposit at the Museu Nacional 
de Soares dos Reis, Porto, Portugal. The heir 
to the Spanish throne suffered a dramatic 
accident at the age of seventeen. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

16
CHAPTER 2
fifteenth-century member of the order, Diego de Alcalá, for 
whom they had long hoped to win sainthood.”6 Prescott 
tells the story a little differently, having the king himself and 
members of his court fetching “the mouldering remains of 
the good father, still sweet to the nostrils, as we are told.” 
Laying the corpse on the prince’s bed, they removed the 
cloth that wrapped its head and placed it on Carlos’s fore­
head.7 Witnesses describe the prince, eyes swollen shut, 
rousing himself from delirium to feel with his hands the 
exposed face of the corpse and then touch his own eyes and 
mouth.
Yet by evening death seemed so imminent that the 
king took his closest advisers and departed before midnight, 
riding to the Hieronymite monastery outside Madrid to 
pray and await the final news. But that night the prince slept 
peacefully for the first time in weeks. The next day he began 
a sudden, extraordinary recovery. He regained his sight a 
week later, his fever disappeared soon after, and within a 
month he was on his feet.
In the aftermath of this near- resurrection, the question 
arose as to how the cure was gained. Some praised the efforts 
of Vesalius, although a few among the ten attending physi­
cians who labored for two months at the prince’s bedside felt 
they deserved some credit. But attention came to focus on 
fray Diego de Alcalá, with a groundswell of feeling that here 
was the agent of a miracle. We can look back today and see 
two miracles, the second being the patient’s survival of the 
physicians’ purging and bleeding and the daily probing of the 
wound with nonsterile instruments. (“They went on placing 
upon the exposed portion of the skull a powder made of iris 
and birthwort, and on the lips of the wound a mixture of tur­
pentine and egg yolk. Following this, they cleaned the wound 
with honey of roses and applied a plaster of betony.”)8 The 
most dramatic evidence came from Don Carlos himself. On 
the night of May 9, following the intercession of the corpse, 
he was heard speaking in his sleep, as if addressing the bea­
tus, saying the words, “Basta, basta, padre, aparta el cordon” 
(lit., “Stop, stop, father, take away the cord”). On waking the 
next morning, he reported a vision: “This night the holy fray 
Diego appeared, standing at my bed, with a reed cross in his 
Born in Valladolid in 1545, Don Carlos was the first 
of eight children by four successive wives of Philip II. His 
mother, Maria of Portugal, age seventeen, died soon after 
his birth. The prince was himself seventeen years old in 1562 
when, on Sunday, April 19, just after noon, rushing from his 
room on an ill-fated indiscretion, he fell down a flight of 
little-used stairs in his royal lodgings in the university town of 
Alcalá de Henares and struck his head against a closed door in 
the passageway below.2 The historian William H. Prescott, in 
his 1874 History of the Reign of Philip the Second, describes 
what happened to Don Carlos after the fall.
He was taken up senseless, and removed to his chamber, 
where his physicians were instantly summoned, and the 
necessary remedies applied. At first, it seemed only a 
simple contusion on the head, and the applications of the 
doctors had the desired effect. But soon the symptoms 
became more alarming. Fever set in. He was attacked 
by erysipelas; his head swelled to an enormous size; he 
became totally blind; and this was followed by delirium. It 
now appeared that the skull was fractured....Meanwhile, 
the greatest alarm spread through the country at the 
prospect of losing the heir-apparent. Processions were 
everywhere made to the churches, prayers were put up, 
pilgrimages were vowed, and the discipline was unspar­
ingly administered by the fanatical multitude, who hoped 
by self-inflicted penance to avert the wrath of Heaven 
from the land.3
All modern accounts of this injury describe a grief-
stricken king rushing to Alcalá from Madrid with his councils 
of state and the best physicians in the land, among them, the 
Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius.4 One detailed recent 
study, published in 1995 by the historian L. J. Andrew Villalon, 
takes us through day by appalling day of the ordeal, quoting 
from the accounts of the prince’s surgeon.5 On the afternoon 
of May 9, twenty-one days after the fall, in the aftermath of 
a halted attempt by physicians to trepan the patient’s skull, 
the townspeople of Alcalá gathered at the Church of Saint 
Francis. “With Franciscan friars in the lead, they marched 
toward the palace, carrying with them the remains of a 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

17
A Miracle and a Vow
hand. I asked him if he was Saint Francis for it seemed to me 
that he was; he answered he was not Saint Francis but he had 
trust in God that I would be healed.”9 Certain that the figure 
had been Brother Diego himself, Don Carlos and King Philip 
vowed to bring this miracle before the pope. In Counter-
Reformation Spain, even Andreas Vesalius himself would risk 
accusations of heresy were he to contest such testimony to 
divine intervention.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

19
Diego de Alcalá
3
A dead body brings another body, on the brink, back to life. 
Don Carlos’s cure was not the first wonder performed by this 
thaumaturgical corpse. Through the hundred years before its 
appearance on the royal stage, Diego’s preserved body had 
gained a reputation throughout Castile for its divine agency. 
Diego had lived a life of uninterrupted poverty, famous for the 
asceticism of his practice, but his death in 1463 was only the 
beginning of his holy career. Born around 1400 in the small 
village of San Nicolás del Puerto, in Andalucía, Diego had 
become first an anchorite hermit, then a Franciscan brother, 
serving missions in the Canary Islands and then caring for 
the sick in Rome, to which city he had walked on foot from 
Castile to attend the Jubilee year ceremonies in 1450. In the 
final decade of his life he performed the duties of gatekeeper 
for the monastery of Santa María de Jesús in the town of 
Alcalá. Alonso Cano’s seventeenth-century sculpture shows 
him holding a clutch of flowers in the folds of his robe (FIG. 
3.1). Confronted in the act of stealing monastery bread to give 
to the poor, legend goes, he opened his robe at his superiors’ 
command and out tumbled not the illicit loaf but a fragrant 
bouquet. He remained illiterate all his life, and this prevented 
him from advancing beyond a lay affiliation with the order. 
After his death, as his reputation spread, numerous attempts 
were made to bring him to papal notice, but efforts lost trac­
tion in the declining reign of King Henry IV and the rise of 
Ferdinand and Isabella. 
FIGURE 3.1. 
Alonso Cano, San Diego de Alcalá, 1652–57 
(detail). Polychromed wood, glass eyes, hemp 
cord. 60.5 × 23.7 × 23.5 cm (2313⁄₁₆ × 9⁵⁄₁₆ × 
9¼ in.). Instituto Gómez-Moreno, Fundación 
Rodríguez Acosta, Granada. Following Diego’s 
death in 1463, his pristine corpse gained a 
reputation for divine agency. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

20
CHAPTER 3
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

21
Diego de Alcalá
for a vitae sanctorum, and the miracle book of the previous 
century was transcribed and extended. Diego’s case was 
unusual. Solitary, unordained, he left no written creed, he 
kept no possessions, he invited no notice. Saint making as a 
practice was under heavy Reformation criticism. In the suc­
cession of popes between 1566 and 1585, petition after royal 
petition fell into the fault lines of Spanish/Roman politics. 
Each time, the proçeso had to be reinstated anew. At last a 
Franciscan pope, no doubt aware that Philip’s great armada 
had recently left port in Lisbon to make war on Protestant 
England, allowed the full canonization to unfold. The 
armada, of course, would soon endure a crushing defeat. But 
on July 2, 1588, more than a century after his death, Diego 
de Alcalá de Henares was canonized by Pope Sixtus V as 
the Roman Catholic Church’s first Counter-Reformation 
saint—and the first to be named in Rome in sixty-five years.4 
The king finally gained his saint—watertight proof of the 
divine status of the dynasty—but he had long since lost his 
firstborn heir, Don Carlos having died in 1568, only six years 
after his famous ordeal. In his will, the prince had implored 
his father to pursue the campaign for Diego’s canonization.5
San Diego’s symbols, humble ones, are a small reed 
or wooden cross and a rosary. His Latin name, Didaci 
Complutensis, is derived from the ancient Roman town of 
Complutum, later conquered by the Moors, who renamed 
it Al-Qal’ah al-Nahr. He is commemorated in paintings by 
Francisco de Zurbarán, Bartolomé Estéban Murillo, and 
Annibale Carracci and in sculptures by Gregorio Fernández, 
Alonso Cano, Pedro de Mena, and Luisa Roldán. His remains 
are still in Alcalá de Henares, although the body was moved 
in 1975 to the Iglesia Magistral, a twelfth-century cathedral 
newly rebuilt following its destruction in the Spanish Civil 
War. A side chapel is devoted to the display of San Diego’s 
small tomb (FIG. 3.2). Over it, an inscription on the wall reads:
capilla y altar
de san
diego de alcalá
cuerpo incorrupto
† 1463            1975
A mission in his name was established in America in 1769. It 
later became the city of San Diego.
A manuscript in the archives of the Escorial gives 
historians a scribe’s copy of the “miracle book” of Diego 
de Alcalá. The original book (now lost), produced between 
1463 and 1467, in the four years following Diego’s death, 
survived at least into the next century, for Don Carlos him­
self ordered the copy to be made.1 It transcribes the deposi­
tions of 159 witnesses to miracles attributed to fray Diego, 
observed at his deathbed and afterward in the chapel where 
his body was preserved. The testimony, overseen by Alonso 
Carrillo, the powerful archbishop of Toledo, and fray Juan 
de Peñalver, the monastery guardian, had been recorded in 
formal language in the presence of a notary. We learn that 
Diego died from an ulceration of his left arm and that at the 
moment of death he overcame his paralysis to lift a small 
wooden cross in both hands, breathing a prayer in Latin, “a 
language he had never been heard to use.” That night the 
monastery cook, fray Pedro de Maturaba, holding vigil over 
the body in the church, “saw such a great light surrounding 
the corpse of Brother Diego that it appeared lighter than the 
sun and rendered the chapel as light as day.” The guardian, 
Peñalver, was so distraught following the burial in the small 
monastery cemetery that on the third night, as he said in 
his own deposition, he sent a young brother out to unearth 
the corpse. Working in the dark, the brother accidentally 
severed the corpse’s left hand with his shovel, “at which 
moment, he later told the guardian, he had felt the monas­
tery walls tremble...[and] he finished the digging with only 
his hands.” The severed hand of the dead Diego would there­
after be kept separately in the sacristy.2
The corpse, moved to the altar of a side chapel in 
the church, lay on display for six months. So perfect was the 
absence of any mark or scent of death that one visitor in 
the first month tried to take a pulse.3 And now began a 
steady procession of ailing pilgrims, come to touch the holy 
flesh of an illiterate Franciscan lay brother. 
It took King Philip twenty-six years of respectful peti­
tions to four consecutive popes to secure recognition of the 
miracle of Don Carlos’s cure. The petition process was ardu­
ous: commissions of bishops and ambassadors were named 
to draw up the proçeso, witnesses were assembled and their 
testimony was notarized, the life of Diego was researched 
FIGURE 3.2. 
Chapel and tomb of San Diego, Iglesia 
Magistral, Alcalá de Henares.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

22
The canonization documents that Philip’s court amassed 
are intact today in the Vatican library; they are the source 
of the close historical detail scholars have of the story of 
Don Carlos and San Diego.1 The king had charged his court 
annalist, Ambrosio de Morales (1513–1591)—Córdoban priest 
and professor of rhetoric at the University of Alcalá de 
Henares—to act as procurador to oversee the compilation 
of documents to be submitted to Rome. The massive dos­
sier included Morales’s recorded testimony of eighty-three 
witnesses to events surrounding the miracle cure: the open­
ing of the tomb and the transfer of the corpse, and Don 
Carlos’s waking description of his midnight vision of the 
friar, followed by his sudden and swift recovery. Morales 
was further entrusted with the research and writing of 
Diego’s vitae sanctorum, providing Catholic history with 
the first biography of San Diego.2 
As it happens, Ambrosio de Morales was the author 
of another encyclopedic oeuvre for his king. Titled Las 
antigüedades de las ciudades de España and published in 
Alcalá de Henares in 1575, it is a partial history of the cities 
and geographic features of the Iberian Peninsula, presented 
as a tour, with particular emphasis on Spain’s religious insti­
tutions, relics, and libraries (FIG. 4.1).3 Chapter 22 is devoted to 
the city of Toledo, and here we find a detailed introduction 
An Automaton 
by Juanelo Turriano
4
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

23
to the works of Juanelo Turriano, Philip’s fabled engineer, 
whom Morales knew as a friend. In eloquent Old Spanish, 
Morales chronicled Juanelo’s inventions large and small—
among them, his famous clocks—relating how he made them 
and what he had to say about them. Among the smaller 
works is an automaton.
Juanelo as a diversion also wanted to create anew the 
ancient statues which moved and, on that account, were 
called automata by the Greeks. He made a lady more 
than one tercia [about eleven inches] high who, placed 
on a table, dances all over it to the sound of a drum which 
she meanwhile beats herself, and goes round in circles, 
returning to where she started. Though it is a toy and fit 
for mirth, it is nevertheless a great proof of his high intel­
ligence.4 (FIG. 4.2.)
“La dama que tañe y dança,” reads Morales’s paragraph title: 
“The lady that plays and dances.”
Juanelo Turriano was born in Italy sometime around 
1500 to parents of humble means. He was first known as 
Gianello Torriano, or della Torre, after the great medieval 
tower, il Torrazzo, landmark of his native Cremona. Little 
is certain about his education or apprenticeship.5 He was 
characterized by contemporaries as a prodigy, and for the 
first decades of his working life he practiced in Milan, where 
he restored and built some of the most advanced clocks 
and astronomical models of his time. During this period—
scholars disagree on precisely when—he attracted the notice 
of Charles V, whose love of clocks was well known, and he 
was ultimately engaged as imperial court clockmaker in 
the later years of the emperor’s reign, working in Brussels, 
Madrid, and finally Toledo. Following the emperor’s death 
in 1558, Juanelo served Philip II as court engineer. He died in 
Toledo in 1585 (FIG. 4.3.). 
FIGURES 4.1 and 4.2. 
Ambrosio de Morales, Las antigüedades de las 
ciudades de España (Madrid, 1575), title page 
and page 93v, identifying Juanelo’s automaton, 
“La dama que tañe y dança”—The lady that 
plays and dances.
An Automaton by Juanelo Turriano
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

24
CHAPTER 4
Ambrosio de Morales was not the first contemporary 
of Juanelo Turriano to write about him, nor was he the only 
one to mention an automaton. As vivid as Morales’s account 
of Juanelo’s reputation in the Spanish court is, earlier writ­
ers from Juanelo’s native Italy had already proclaimed him 
a new Archimedes. Bernardo Sacco (1497–1579), nobleman 
and fellow Lombard, tells the story of Juanelo’s introduction 
to the court.
During the reign over the regions beyond Padua of 
Joannes Galeacius Vicecomes [Visconti], it is reported 
that there was completed a clock, showing not only 
the hours, but also the stars [i.e., the planets], and the 
courses of the Sun and the Moon. The author of this 
work is not known. The clock was set up in the strong­
hold, or castello, of Pavia, where, after the death of the 
Prince, a work as marvellous as this lay despised, and 
even some of its circles [dials?] were removed. In the 
very next century, in the 1500’s, about the 29th year, 
when Charles the Fifth received the imperial crown at 
Bologna, that clock, incomplete and marred with rust, 
was brought from its place to the aforesaid Emperor, 
who, having inspected and admired the machine, 
ordered the repair of so great a work by workmen called 
from all parts. While they worked in vain on the task 
of reconstruction, there arrived a certain Joannes of 
Cremona, called Ianellus, of misshapen appearance, but 
bright of mind, who when he examined the work said he 
could repair the machine, but this was of no use to any­
one as the iron parts were brittle with rust and eroded 
away, unless a new instrument, similar to the old one 
and of the same proportions, be put together. Having set 
about this work, he completed the task by daily labour, 
imitating, emulating and equalling the earlier device. 
When the Emperor wanted to take it to Spain, he took 
Master Ianellus at the same time.6
The mathematician Gerolamo Cardano (1501–1576) and the 
poet-bishop Marco Girolamo Vida (1485?–1566) had also 
published accounts of Juanelo’s clocks and astraria, Vida 
coining the Greek word microcosm to describe the great­
est of them.7 In 1585 Antonio Campi (or Campo, ca. 1524–
1587), painter, architect, historian, and fellow Cremonese, 
published a multivolume history of his native domain and 
FIGURE 4.3. 
Unknown artist, Bust of Juanelo Turriano, 
ca. 1560. Carrara marble. 85.5 × 60 × 31 cm 
(33⅝ × 23⅝ × 12¼ in.). Museo de Santa Cruz, 
Toledo. A photograph extraordinary in its own 
right, made between 1860 and 1886 by Jean 
Laurent.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

25
An Automaton by Juanelo Turriano
proclaimed, “But of all the craftsmen from our city, there 
is none more illustrious than Lionello Torriano, a lowborn 
man, but gifted by God with such a sublime intelligence that 
he astounded the world, and was reputed by everyone to be 
a miracle of nature.”Among the wonders of his craft, Campi 
writes, “Lionello had fashioned (like a new Archytas) birds 
that not only beat their wings, but also sang, to the amaze­
ment of everyone, as if they were real.” 8 Such lifelike birds 
appear again in accounts by later writers (with ever greater 
rhetorical flourish), deployed in larger theaters of automata.
For often, when the Cloth was taken away after dinner, 
[Turrianus] brought upon the board little armed figures 
of Horse and Foot, some beating Drums, others sound­
ing Trumpets, and divers of them charging one another 
with their Pikes. Sometimes he sent wooden sparrows 
out of his chamber into the Emperours Dining-room, 
that would flie round, and back again; the Superiour of 
the Monastery, who came in by accident, suspecting him 
for a Conjurer.
The quotation above is from a history of the Low Country 
wars printed in 1647 by the Italian Jesuit historian and poet 
Famianus Strada (1572–1649), translated from Latin into 
English in 1650.9 Juanelo Turriano’s fame had carried him 
into the dawn of the scientific revolution (FIG. 4.4.). 
When the infirm Charles abdicated in 1556 and retired 
to the remote monastery at San Yuste in Extremadura, 
Spain, he took a small group of retainers with him into seclu­
sion, Juanelo among them. Strada relates Juanelo’s evening 
diversions for the ailing emperor, surrounded by his clocks, 
“whose wheels he governed with more ease, than Fortunes 
wheel.” 10 Strada’s source for the anecdote may be Campi, 
but other references to Juanelo in his text bear a strong 
resemblance to Morales’s phrasing. The passage has been 
much quoted. Here it is paraphrased by Sir William Stirling-
Maxwell (1818–1878), in The Cloister Life of the Emperor 
Charles V (1852), where it joins forces with Morales’s 
description of the dancing lady:
[Torriano] also constructed...the figure of a lady who 
danced on the table to the sounds of her own tambou­
rine. Other puppets were also attributed to him, minute 
men and horses which fought, and pranced, and blew 
tiny trumpets, and birds which flew about the room as if 
alive; toys which, at first, scared the prior and his monks 
out of their wits, and for awhile gained the artificer the 
dangerous fame of a wizard.11
Stirling-Maxwell credits Morales and Strada in his notes, 
and in citing them both he builds an ever stronger case for 
Juanelo’s automata. By the time our own contemporary histo­
rian Silvio Bedini narrates the scene, it is tradition speaking.
During the sojourn of Charles V at San Yuste, Torriano 
devoted himself to averting the Emperor’s moods of 
depression by creating little automata for his diver­
sion. Tradition relates that Torriano’s little figures 
often appeared on the dinner table after the Emperor’s 
meal in the form of armed soldiers which marched 
about, rode horseback, beat drums, blew trumpets, and 
engaged in battle with lances. At another time Torriano 
is said to have released little birds carved of wood which 
flew about the room, out of the windows and returned, 
to the great disapproval of the Father Superior, who con­
sidered them to be works of the devil.12
FIGURE 4.4. 
Attributed to Jacopo Nizzola da Trezzo or Leone 
Leoni, Juanelo Turriano, ca. 1555. Bronze medal. 
Diam.: 80.5 mm (33⁄₁₆ in.). Museo de la Fundación 
Lázaro Galdiano, Madrid. “Ese buey de forma 
humana,” Leone described Juanelo: “An ox in the 
shape of a human.” 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

27
Around 1922 an automaton turned up in Austria that so 
closely resembled Ambrosio de Morales’s account of the 
dancing lady that the horological historian Ernst von 
Bassermann-Jordan (1876–1932) cited the passage to sug­
gest an attribution to Master Juanelo. Bassermann-Jordan, 
who had seen this figure in a private collection, described it 
in his comprehensive volume, Alte Uhren und ihre Meister 
(Historical clocks and their masters), published in 1926.1 
The figure plays a cittern (an instrument similar to a lute) 
rather than a drum, but her dancing steps and circular tour 
and her small size certainly fit the slipper. The material and 
design of her clockwork, like that of the Smithsonian monk, 
confirm a sixteenth-century pedigree. Bassermann-Jordan’s 
argument is cited in turn in the great two-volume encyclo­
pedia that remains indispensable to any present-day study 
of the history of automata, Le monde des automates: Étude 
historique et technique, by Alfred Chapuis and Édouard 
Gélis, first published in Paris in 1928. Chapter 23, “Les auto­
mates et androïdes marchants,” opens with an illustration 
of this small masterpiece.2 In 1934 the figure was given to 
Vienna’s Kunsthistorisches Museum, where she can be seen 
today (FIG. 5.1). Juanelo Turriano’s name has followed her, 
with the caveat that no firm provenance has been possible. 
His name, once connected to this dancing lady by respected 
The Attribution of the Monk
5
FIGURE 5.1. 
Automat, Cisterspielerin (Automaton, 
Cittern player), second half of the sixteenth 
century. Spain. Painted wood, linen, silk 
brocade, iron clockwork. Height: 44 cm 
(17⁵⁄₁₆ in.). Kunstkammer, Kunsthistorisches 
Museum, Vienna. Similarities in the size 
and clockwork between this figure and the 
automaton monk led some scholars to spec­
ulate a common provenance.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

28
CHAPTER 5
running backward through Bedini, Bassermann-Jordan, 
Strada, and so on, to Morales. The other is the Smithsonian 
monk. “This second automaton represents a friar,” he writes. 
“In contrast with the musical woman, I would say that its 
personality is, for me at least, considerably unpleasant.”4As 
it turns out, he has had some previous experience with this 
figure, having seen it in Geneva in 1975. The following year, 
he tells us, it was offered (unsuccessfully) for sale in two 
auctions, one in Zurich and one in Geneva. The auction cat­
alog from the Zurich sale speculates a South German origin 
for the automaton;5 the Geneva catalog argues for Spain. In 
García-Diego’s words: 
But in the cited catalog of Geneva a hypothesis was given 
about when the religious figure could have been fabri­
cated, of which I think I should record mention. It is sup­
ported in an announcement by Father Servius Gieben 
[sic], director of the Instituto Histórico de los Capuchinos 
de Roma. According to him, it would represent San Diego 
de Alcalá, a Franciscan who died in 1463. That would per­
mit connecting it to the Spanish court, since the episode 
was known of how his mummy [momia] was placed in 
the bed of Prince Don Carlos, wounded in the head in a 
supposedly fatal fashion, having fallen downstairs (1562); 
which had the effect of an immediate cure and later, upon 
petition of Philip II, the canonization of the friar. Father 
Servius continues and I copy: “It is in this climate of reli­
gious exaltation—processions, public prayers, pilgrimages 
for obtaining a cure for the prince—that the fabrication of 
the automaton found itself as a kind of votive offering....
The date should be 1562 or a little later, and the author 
Juanelo Turriano (or de la Torre, dead in 1585) who was 
chief engineer for Philip II.”6
Who is “Father Servius”? Is he a contemporary or a 
historical source? García-Diego doesn’t say, and the reader 
is left with an author quoting an auction catalog quoting 
a hypothesis. But two more images are reproduced in his 
book. Taken from the same auction catalog and apparently 
provided by the mysterious “historiador capuchino,” a 
close-up photograph of the head of the automaton is paired 
with an engraving said to have been made in 1588: a portrait 
of San Diego de Alcalá (FIG. 5.2).
scholars, has moved in turn to circle the Smithsonian monk. 
The functional similarity of the figures’ iron clockworks and 
their comparable size was well evident. 
Is it quixotic, then, in searching the chronicles of the 
secular and religious celebrations following Don Carlos’s 
return to health, to hope for mention of a clockwork autom­
aton, a votive offering of thanks, fabricated with the latest 
technology? Long before the mysterious monk arrived 
at the Smithsonian in 1977, Bassermann-Jordan had cited 
Morales’s “dama que tañe y dança” to pose a connection 
between the automaton in Vienna, Juanelo Turriano, and 
the Spanish court. We find Juanelo’s name connected with 
yet another automaton, a musical saint, in the Iparművészeti 
Múzeum (Museum of Applied Arts) in Budapest, purchased 
in 1915. Both museums now emphasize that the attribution 
is hypothetical. The attribution comes down to us from the 
history of technology: Ambrosio de Morales’s testimony 
and other sixteenth-century firsthand records of Juanelo 
Turriano’s clocks are the source for a cascade of references 
to Juanelo’s legendary automata. But how striking to learn 
that Morales, the first historian to systematically assemble 
the fragments of San Diego’s life, was the same historian 
to observe and record the accomplishments of Juanelo 
Turriano. Eyewitness to events from both the theological 
and technological spheres of the Spanish court, he is the 
very man we should like to consult in the search for the ori­
gins and legend of the Smithsonian monk. As tantalizing as 
this is, we have no further words from Morales on any other 
automaton by Juanelo’s hand.
A startling clue appears in a monograph titled Los 
relojes y autómatas de Juanelo Turriano (The clocks and 
automata of Juanelo Turriano), published in a small sub­
scribers’ edition in Madrid in 1982. The author is José A. 
García-Diego (1919–1994), a civil engineer who became inter­
ested in the history of science and technology in Spain.3 His 
book is devoted to piecing together the fragmented record of 
Juanelo’s life and works, in an effort to recuperate the legacy 
of an innovator whose rightful place in the history of tech­
nology has been overlooked. In an inventory of surviving or 
lost or alleged machines from Juanelo’s hand, García-Diego 
includes photographs of two small automata. Not surpris­
ingly, one is the dancing lady with the cittern in Vienna, 
and he notes the stream of references to Juanelo Turriano, 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

29
The Attribution of the Monk
FIGURE 5.2. 
A page from the 1976 auction catalog Très 
importante collection de tableaux espagnols 
du XIIIe au XVIIIe siècle...un automate de 
Juanelo Turriano ingénieur de Charles Quint. 
An engraved portrait of San Diego de Alcalá 
appears next to a photograph of the autom­
aton. The catalog text suggests that they are 
images of the same saint. Even the lighting and 
shadows are matched.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

30
Elizabeth had encountered José A. García-Diego’s book 
on Juanelo Turriano in 1996. Upon reading it, she dropped 
everything in order to track down the quoted auction cata­
log. She found a copy in the library of Connecticut College. 
The auction had been held at l’Hotel Richemond in Geneva 
on June 21, 1976, and the catalog is titled straightforwardly 
by the list of items to be sold: Très importante collec­
tion de tableaux espagnols du XIIIe au XVIIIe siècle, un 
chef-d’œuvre de Martin van Heemsckert [sic], un automate 
de Juanelo Turriano ingénieur de Charles Quint.1 The 
entry for the monk identifies it as “un automate représen­
tant Saint Diégo d’Alcala.” Juanelo Turriano is introduced 
via the seventeenth-century authority of Famianus Strada, 
transcribed in full. Next García-Diego himself, an expert on 
Juanelo Turriano, is quoted from a communication dated 
August 28, 1975, offering the opinion that the automaton 
was made for the emperor at San Yuste. The images of the 
two heads, automaton and engraving, are presented and 
identified:
A Letter
6
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

31
Research subsequently undertaken at the Institut 
Historique des Capucins de Rome, concerning the 
identity of the individual represented by the monk, 
permits us to come closer to the problem. According 
to engravings from the sixteenth century, one dating 
from 1588, the year of the canonization of Saint Diego 
d’Alcalá, the figure would appear to be a representation 
of the saint, a lay brother of the order of Saint Francis 
of Assisi, who died in 1463. Here we encounter again 
the Spanish court, but several years later, in 1562, four 
years after the death of Charles V. We excerpt here a 
communication from November 16, 1975, and the con­
clusion reached by Father Servus Gieben, director of the 
Institut Historique des Capucins de Rome.2 
And the opinion of Fr. Servus Gieben follows (the name 
“Servus” here spelled without the i), containing the passage 
on Don Carlos’s miraculous cure, which is quoted by García-
Diego in his subsequent book. So Elizabeth learned at least 
the date 1975 for the work of the “historiador capuchino.” 
Was his research commissioned by the broker? But the cat­
alog text proceeds briskly to its conclusion:
The automaton would have thus belonged to the unhappy 
prince Don Carlos, who after having plotted against his 
father, was imprisoned in the Alcázar in Madrid, where 
he died on July 25, 1568.... 
The authorship of Juanelo Turriano seems to be 
without any doubt and, as for its intent, one sees that 
the automaton well resembles Saint Diego de Alcalá. 
The hypothesis of Father Gieben seems to us perfectly 
coherent. Regarding the automaton itself, which has 
come down to us marvelously well preserved, is it neces­
sary to emphasize the principal importance of an object 
nearly unique, living testimony, dare one say, of the tech­
nological preoccupations of the Renaissance and of the 
inventive genius of the men of that era?3
The monk was not sold at auction that day; the 
Smithsonian’s purchase took place the following year as a 
direct transaction through a private dealer in the same city. 
Among the documents in the Smithsonian acces­
sion records for the monk is a letter to Otto Mayr dated 
April 4, 1977, from a Messr Georges Sedlmajer, in Geneva, 
paraphrasing much of the catalog copy. “With this letter,” 
Sedlmajer writes, “I send you the complete dossier that I have 
assembled on this automate. The only letter which is missing 
is of Father Servus Gieben of the Institut in Rome, photo­
copy of which I can send if you wish.” Mayr must have asked 
for it, for indeed the photocopy is included in the museum’s 
records. Written in French and dated November 16, 1975, it is 
the precise “communication” quoted by the Geneva catalog 
and later by García-Diego. “Monsieur Sedlmajer,” this import­
ant letter begins, 
Our research to identify the personage represented by 
your interesting automaton has brought us to the follow­
ing conclusion. 
After searching in vain among the priests of the 
period, the iconography of the image, namely, a Franciscan 
brother with the attributes of the cross and the rosary, 
sent us to Saint Didace, or Diégo d’Alcalá. This is a lay 
brother of the order of Saint Francis of Assisi, who died 
on November 12, 1463, and was canonized in 1588. As a 
lay brother he does not wear the full tonsure, but presents 
instead a shaved head. His attributes are precisely the 
cross, often made of reed, and the rosary. Is it possible that 
your automaton originally carried both attributes sepa­
rately, rather than together as now? In other words: not a 
cross of the rosary, but a cross and a rosary?
Regarding the resemblance between the antique 
engravings of San Diego (believed to be somewhat ide­
alized, of course) and the figure of your automaton, I 
wouldn’t overly insist on it. You will find enclosed with 
this letter two photocopies of engravings, one from 1588 
and the other a little later, for making a comparison. For 
my part, the likeness is more than sufficient.
But I have further clear grounds for bringing this lay 
Franciscan saint into a royal Spanish milieu, and pre­
cisely in the year 1562. They are as follows:
A Letter
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

32
CHAPTER 6
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

33
A Letter
In April of 1562, the prince Don Carlos (1545–1568), 
son of Philip II, King of Spain, was in the palace at Alcalá, 
seriously ill. In falling down a flight of stairs (19 April 
1562) he had suffered a wound to the head that the sur­
geons judged fatal. In desperation, they brought to the 
prince’s room the intact remains of the body of the saint, 
and at once he was completely cured. 
Philip II, king of Spain, father of Don Carlos, in 
gratitude immediately set out to seek the canonization 
of a Servant of God. Sixtus V placed him in the com­
pany of Saints in 1588. (On the miracle of the cure, see 
Fr. Lucio María Núñez, “Documentos sobre la curación 
del príncipe D. Carlos y la canonización de San Diego de 
Alcalá,” in the review Archivo Ibero-Americano 2 [1914] 
424–446.)
It is in this climate of religious exaltation—proces-
sions, public prayers, pilgrimages for obtaining the 
prince’s cure—that one should situate the fabrication of 
the automaton, as a kind of ex-voto and—why not?—as 
an exhortation to the young prince to a more serious life 
(he was very capricious). The date should be 1562 or a lit­
tle later, and the author Juanelo Turriano (or de la Torre, 
died 1585), who was chief engineer to Philip II.
It would be very interesting to check these dates 
in the manuscript “The Twenty-One Books of Devices 
and Machines” of Juanelo Turriano to be found in the 
National Library of Madrid.
As you can understand, we are always very inter­
ested in all other documentation that you succeed in 
obtaining on this interesting piece of Franciscan art.
I beg you to accept my best regards, 
Servus Gieben
Directeur de l’Institut Historique des Capucins4
FIGURE 6.1. 
Cornelius Galle, Diego de Alcalá (vita), first 
published 1614. Engraving. Sheet: 25.6 × 
16.4 cm. (10 × 6½ in.). Courtesy of Museo 
Francescano, Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini, 
Rome. The central image of the saint is ringed 
by a cycle of depictions of miracles attributed 
to him, including, at upper right, the arrival 
of his miraculously preserved corpse in the 
sickroom of the young Don Carlos.
The photocopies of the engravings, one by Cornelius Galle 
(FIG. 6.1) and one by Johann Sadeler, both show the figure of 
San Diego, with cross and rosary, surrounded by a cycle of 
images of miracles attributed to the saint. Each engraving 
includes in its cycle a panel depicting Don Carlos’s sick­
room, complete with a kneeling king and a group of three 
Franciscan priests lifting a composed and haloed momia 
onto the bed.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

34
The Geneva auction catalog presents a genuine effort to 
construct an authoritative provenance for an object emerg­
ing from obscurity onto the world antiquities market—in 
hindsight, one could say groomed (and rightly so) for ascent 
into one of the world’s major museum collections. A story all 
its own, with a striking similarity to the delayed recognition 
of San Diego himself, its connection to this fugitive autom­
aton has come about not just through sheer repetition but, 
perhaps more compelling, because the automaton demands 
an explanation equal to its charisma. If the proposed link to 
the historical record might be too good to be true, it is none­
theless not implausible. 
One interesting thing has changed since the sale of the 
monk to the Smithsonian in 1977. When García-Diego first 
encountered the automaton monk in Switzerland in 1975 
he attributed it to Juanelo, and his authority was cited the 
following year in the Geneva auction catalog. But six years 
later, when he published his book on Juanelo Turriano, he 
wrote that he had changed his mind, concluding that only the 
dancing lady could still be a candidate for the claim (acknowl­
edging his former opinion in an endnote). Then, in 1986, he 
published a second edition of his book, this one translated 
into English under the title, Juanelo Turriano, Charles V’s 
Clockmaker: The Man and His Legend.1 And here he with­
drew the lady, too, from Juanelo’s hand, as well as the word 
automata from his book’s title. As he appealed to the reader, 
“Correcting one’s mistakes seems to me the right thing.” 
A Monk’s Opinion
7
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

35
Intrigued as he clearly was with these figures, García-Diego 
based his conclusions on the belief that such objects were 
only toys, presumably beneath the genius of Juanelo, the dig­
nity of the emperor, and the tolerance of the king.2 
In 1980 the Smithsonian included the monk in an 
ambitious show produced in partnership with the Bavarian 
National Museum in Munich. Curated by Otto Mayr and 
Klaus Maurice, The Clockwork Universe: German Clocks 
and Automata, 1550–1650 presented a comprehensive 
selection of works from the golden age of German clock­
making. From extravagant tower clocks and planetary 
clocks to mechanical terrestrial globes and from gilt bronze 
and enameled automata to common domestic clocks of the 
period, the show brought together masterworks from collec­
tions throughout Europe and the United States. In the land­
mark catalog published for the exhibition, the monk, one of 
the earliest pieces in the show, is labeled as follows:
Automaton figure of a monk
South Germany or Spain, c. 1560
Figure: head of poplar wood; head and limbs 
rendered naturalistically; modern habit
Movement: iron; height: 39 cm (153/8 in.)
Movement has a wooden fusee. The monk is programmed 
to move in a square approximately 2 feet wide. Although 
his feet step out from beneath his robe, he is actually roll­
ing on wheels. As he proceeds he strikes his right arm 
against his chest and moves the left arm up and down. 
He is constantly turning his head, nodding, moving his 
mouth, and rolling his eyes. The mechanism is pinned for 
the most part; only the pillars and one cam are secured 
by means of screws. 
The ascription to Spain is based upon the realis­
tic conception and modelling of the monk’s head and 
upon the datum that Emperor Charles V’s clockmaker, 
Juanelo Turriano, had also made comparable mecha­
nisms for automaton figures. Yet similar moving figures 
were also made by the Nuremberg clockmakers. Jakob 
Bulmann (master in 1497) made “figures of men and 
women that walked around and struck their measure 
upon lutes and kettledrums.” In Emperor Rudolf II’s col­
lection of art treasures there were a number of spring-
driven clothed dolls that beat upon drums and walked 
about.3
South Germany or Spain? Amid the cascade of narra­
tives supporting a Spanish origin, Servus Gieben’s hypoth­
esis takes wing like a meme, for its fit with a likeness to 
San Diego. Could the greater weight of the hieratic tale of 
how and why this little machine came to be made rest on 
Gieben’s 1975 letter? An automaton fabricated as an act of 
gratitude, a votive offering, if not precisely the fulfillment of 
a king’s commission. Under what circumstances did Gieben 
come to perform his research? Was he aware of how his 
hypothesis would be utilized? He doesn’t mention any other 
automata, or the chronicle of Juanelo Turriano by Ambrosio 
de Morales. Did he know of these connections? 
In 1999, twenty-four years after his letter was writ­
ten, Elizabeth was lucky to contact Servus Gieben himself. 
At the age of seventy-five, he was once again head of the 
Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini in Rome and director of its 
Museo Francescano. A scholar of medieval theology and a 
specialist in the lives of the saints as depicted in the history 
of art, he responded to her letter in fluent English (one of his 
six languages), writing, “I certainly will be pleased to read 
your paper on the ‘Mechanical Monk,’ of which I preserve 
nice photographs and curious memories.”4 Elizabeth’s first 
question for him: Had the Geneva broker mentioned either 
Juanelo Turriano’s name or the precedent of the Vienna 
automaton? No, he replied, and no link whatsoever had been 
made to another automaton. At most, he recalled the sugges­
tion of a sixteenth-century origin for the piece. His opinion 
that the monk represented a Spanish figure was based on 
the physiognomy of the carved face, a judgment confirmed 
by his search through the Museo Francescano print archives 
and the match, not just with the person of San Diego, but 
with the saint’s symbols, lay status, and gestures. 
Gieben’s hypothesis thus comes not from the history 
of technology but from the history of theology, for he arrived 
at his conclusion without an awareness of the attribution 
to Juanelo of any similar automaton figure. It is more than 
remarkable that two separate tracks converge on so close a 
hypothesis of the monk’s origin. 
The clockmaker himself evades us yet, for none of the 
machines Juanelo Turriano made with his own hands has 
survived in a form we can identify.5 Ambrosio de Morales 
tells us Juanelo signed his greatest astronomical clock, the 
work of a lifetime, with an engraved inscription in Latin: 
“QVI. SIM. SCIES. SI. PAR. OPVS. FACERE. CONABERIS,” which 
can be very roughly translated as, “You will know who I am 
if you try to make this.”6
A Monk’s Opinion
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

36
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

37
chapter title
PART II
The Monk
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

38
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

FIGURES 8.1–8.3. 
A few of David Todd’s drawings of individual 
parts of the monk’s clockwork, 1978. 8½ × 11 in. 
(21.6 × 27.9 cm), each sheet. The drawings 
are color coded: red for iron, green for brass, 
brown for wood. 
8.1.
8.2.
FIGURE 8.4. 
David routinely makes rubbings of each part 
of a clockwork, to record true scale. This is the 
third wheel of the monk’s clockwork wheel 
train, excerpted from pages of rubbings of all 
parts of the machine, printed here at actual 
size. Its diameter is 1.875 inch.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

41
When David Todd arrived at the Smithsonian’s National 
Museum of History and Technology in 1978, one of his 
first tasks was to examine the newly acquired automaton 
monk. Delicately removing the habit and wooden casing 
shell, he dismantled the full internal mechanism in order to 
clean remnants of corrosion from the iron parts. In the pro­
cess, he produced an index of drawings of each component 
(FIGS. 8.1–8.4). He found the clockwork to be original, except 
for the mainspring, some of the wire linkages, and the thin 
catgut line to one forearm. The mainspring had clearly been 
replaced, possibly in the nineteenth century, with a spring of 
a different type. He elected to leave these alterations in place 
since they were visible only on disassembly. Well aware of 
the rare virtue of intact original paint on all exterior carved 
wooden body surfaces, he preserved this untouched histor­
ical patina, allowing its full age to remain visible. To avoid 
damage to the fragile carving of the head, he had it X-rayed in 
the Smithsonian’s Conservation and Analytical Laboratory in 
order to view the internal iron components and their design 
(see FIG. 10.15). The X-ray revealed the inside of the head in 
graphic detail, the iron parts of the mechanism immediately 
recognized by radiography. A beautiful and mysterious image 
in itself, a machine within a ghost, it showed all interior con­
nections were intact and fully functional.
An Immaculate Object
8
8.3.
8.4.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

42
CHAPTER 8
Throughout this work, David searched for signatures, 
identifying stamps, or later restorers’ cleaning marks that 
could yield a clue to the automaton’s history. He found noth­
ing. Its provenance would have to be gleaned through com­
parison of its materials and design with those of kindred 
clockworks.1 The most prominent distinguishing feature: the 
internal mechanism is made almost entirely of hammered 
iron, bearing the unmistakable marks of period tooling. Later 
mechanisms of similar design and fabrication are made of 
brass. In the era prior to production gear-cutting machinery, 
each clockwheel had its teeth cut one by one, with handsaw 
and file. A count of wheel and pinion teeth in the monk yields 
some 186 teeth, each calculated, cut, and filed to exact mea­
sure by hand and eye: the labor is immediately recognizable. 
Parts are assembled largely with handmade screws, wedges, 
and pins, each fashioned separately for its job rather than 
drawn from a standardized pattern. These features, along 
with a characteristic decorative style of workmanship of the 
iron, point to the second half of the sixteenth century, consis­
tent with well-documented clock technology of the period. 
The wooden parts of the figure—hands, head, and 
body—also display little interim repair or alteration, pre­
senting a characteristic array of paint breaks, fading, and 
wear. Only the sandaled feet bear possible signs of relatively 
newer paint.2 The interface between sculpture and clock­
work is pristine. The sculpture is sensitively carved, and 
painted in the trompe l’oeil polychrome style ascendant in 
sixteenth-century European workshops. Paint was applied 
only to those parts of the wooden body visible outside the 
figure’s intended cloth habit, making it possible to observe 
the boundaries between painted and unpainted wood sur­
faces. These boundaries, some of which betray wear and 
tear over time from the motion of the automaton’s move­
ments, reveal no prior paint underlayers, and we can reason­
ably conclude that the paint is original. 
With the monk’s iron clockwork disassembled—133 
separate parts in all—David could map the mathemat­
ics of power source and gear train and parse the exact 
sequence of the movement cycle that choreographs the 
figure’s motions. He used this knowledge to build a fully 
working model of the automaton in steel and cast acrylic, 
one-fourth larger in scale, to be installed in the museum 
gallery next to the original (FIGS. 8.5–8.7; see also view of 
FIGURE 8.5. 
Monk and model. David Todd built a working 
replica of the monk, complete in all its parts, 
made of cold-rolled steel and cast acrylic, seen 
here in 1980 next to the original. 
model on p. iv.). Visitors could wind the replica them­
selves to view the performance. For the model, he used 
modern rolled steel, but he fabricated a majority of the 
parts of the clockwork by hand, following sixteenth-
century methods, cutting each of the wheel teeth individ­
ually. The labor gave him an intimate knowledge of the 
orchestration of forces in this small machine. Only late in 
the process did he realize that if he had attempted to size 
his model any larger, he would not have been able to pro­
vide a spring strong enough to operate it. While the model 
is only one and a quarter times larger than the original, he 
found that the mainspring had to be almost twice as pow­
erful. The thickness of the spring blade had to go from the 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

43
An Immaculate Object
FIGURE 8.6. 
David installing his model in the museum. From 
1980 to 1996 the model was on view in its own 
vitrine next to that of the monk. Visitors could 
wind it themselves and view its performance—
all but the walking tour. Running wheels “up,” it 
walked in place. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

44
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

45
An Immaculate Object
ELIZABETH: People have been killed?
DAVID: You take a pair of strong round-nose pliers. 
And you tightly grab a few center coils of the spring 
together with the pliers, and rotate a little as if to wind 
the spring. You’re grasping the barrel in your other 
hand, with your fingers closed around the front to 
hold the majority of the spring safely inside. And you 
very carefully pull the center of the spring out of the 
barrel, a coil at a time, just easing the first few coils out 
slowly between your fingers and thumb. You’ve got to 
go slowly and concentrate because if too many coils 
come out at a time, that’s when you lose control. After 
the first coils have been eased out this way, you can 
drop the pliers and grasp the spring right at the point 
where you’ve got it emerging from the barrel. Then, 
bit by bit, turning the thing like a yo-yo between your 
hands, always holding it tight with the one hand, and 
slightly winding the spring each time to take tension 
off the point of exit, you ease out the whole spring. 
The monk’s spring, when out and at rest, is a great 
open spiral ribbon of steel, the spiral about 2 feet in 
diameter, the ribbon (or blade, as we call it) 13⁄8 inches 
wide, and the overall length about 4 or 5 feet if you 
straightened it out. 
ELIZABETH: All from a barrel the size of a pillbox!... And 
when you have the spring out—
DAVID: —then you have a cup of tea. Because the part 
most fraught with danger is done.4
With cleaning, study, analysis, reassembly, and a few minor 
repairs to linkages, David at last wound that spring. The 
monk performed flawlessly on cue.
monk’s 0.013 inch to the model’s 0.023 inch. Even then, 
David found it close to impossible to find a commercially 
made modern spring that strong.3 The monk, he then under­
stood, was a sensitive compromise between the power of its 
mainspring and the size of the mechanism made to house it. 
The performance of the monk, we must remember, called 
for a mechanism that goes well beyond the requirements of 
the hands of a clock. With wooden arms and feet to be lifted 
in three dimensions against gravity and with the diverse 
actions of the head—each with its counteracting return 
spring—and, most important, with the task of moving the 
machine itself across a table, the monk needed an extremely 
forceful spring. The monk’s size is not an accident. It is a 
critical calculation of matter, weight, and motion.
One day in the lab Elizabeth asked David whether 
he removed the mainspring entirely from the mechanism 
during his cleaning and study of the monk’s clockwork. 
“Yes,” he said, “I released the clickwork, let down the spring, 
and removed the barrel cap.”
ELIZABETH: And did the spring just burst out like an 
escaped bird?
DAVID: Goodness, no. The spring must first remain con­
tained inside the barrel wall. First, I unhooked the bar­
rel arbor, by turning it backwards. This unhooks the 
arbor from the inside end of the coiled mainspring. 
And then I very carefully removed the spring, inch by 
inch. It’s actually a moment for great concentration.
If you lose control of a spring whilst you’re taking it 
out—remember, the spring is still under great tension 
because it’s contained within the barrel—it’ll cut you 
to bits. People have actually been killed doing this. 
Because the outer end of the spring is still hooked to 
the barrel (the inside of the barrel wall), and the sud­
den explosion of the spring out of the barrel is like a 
kind of slingshot. It’ll propel the barrel like a missile.
FIGURE 8.7. 
David Todd’s model of the monk, photographed 
by Rosamond Purcell, 2002. See also view of the 
model on p. iv.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

46
The Monk Performs
9
The monk is a quintessential object of theater. The cloth 
tunic is the closed curtain concealing the stagecraft. Hidden 
under the tunic hem, behind the monk’s right foot, is a small 
crank called the stopwork lever. Easily pressed or released by 
a knowledgeable handler, this lever interrupts the automa­
ton’s gear train at its point of lowest torque (the fly) and acts 
as a switch that can halt, or resume, the action of the fully 
wound clockwork. The mainspring may thus be wound ahead 
of time with its key, the key removed, and the automaton held 
motionless until the moment the performance is to begin. A 
practiced attendant sets the monk on the table and discreetly 
releases the stopwork lever. The ready gear train is set run­
ning, and the monk starts moving. In turn, the performance 
ends when the stopwork lever is secretly reengaged as the 
monk is lifted, and the stilled figure is removed from sight.
Perhaps the monk was seen only during the three 
minutes of the performance and spirited away before 
observers had time to look twice. Primed to believe that the 
monk moves of its own accord, spectators might wonder, 
“What else will it do?” Whoever is seen to handle or possess 
the monk—clockmaker, prince, king, or steward—could claim 
authority to the mystery. Above all, winding the monk out of 
sight of observers lets the operator determine exactly when, 
in the clockwork’s movement cycle, to set the stopwork 
lever and thus what the monk will do first when released in 
front of onlookers.
Suppose you are one of a small group of visitors assem­
bled for the occasion. You are seated at the table, by the light 
of a flickering oil lamp, or candle; what would you see? A 
silent steward appears from an adjoining room and places a 
small cloaked figure on the table before the company, then 
steps back. A compact statuette, about half an arm’s height, 
in the form of a friar, wears a rough-spun cassock and sandals. 
The shaved head is erect, the face severe. In its left hand it 
grips a tall wooden cross.
Murmurs break out around the table as the figure 
moves and stirs. It glides forward very slowly, footsteps 
barely touching the surface of the table. Its eyes move. Its 
mouth opens and then closes. A few of your companions 
have backed away; others lean in for a closer look. 
As it advances, the manikin-friar flourishes the cross, 
left arm hinging at the elbow to bring the cross upright like 
a pike. Now the right arm moves. With fingers beaked to a 
point, the figure strikes its own chest.
It—no, he—is walking in the direction of a person 
across the table. You see the friar in profile. As he raises the 
cross, his mouth opens as if to say, “See this?” A few steps 
more and without breaking pace, he looks down and raises 
the cross slowly to his mouth. With a fierce snap of his lips, 
he kisses it.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

47
Still moving forward, he looks up and resumes bran­
dishing the cross. Twice more he beats his chest. The impact 
of each beat makes his head shudder. Closing in on your dis­
mayed neighbor, the friar comes within inches of the edge 
of the table and at the last moment makes a smooth walking 
turn to his right—and heads your way.
Now you see him head-on, and your own flight urge 
stirs. His eyes scan the table, then fasten on you. Everyone’s 
eyes fasten on you. He’s moving slowly, but he’s doing more 
than you can take in. You notice his protruding ears. He 
glances left at the cross, then back at you. Mouth opening 
and closing, he hikes the cross repeatedly in front of him as 
he comes. Step by step, each foot lifting the cassock hem. 
He is like an emissary acting under orders, or under a spell. 
Again he brings the cross to his mouth, his eyes focus on 
it, and again the formidable kiss. He strikes his chest, the 
mea culpa, but there’s no pause in his step. Just inches from 
you he begins a turn. You let out half a breath. But as his 
full body pivots on the table, feet in motion, head forward, 
his eyes slide left in their sockets to stay fixed on you! Then 
they snap forward as he strikes his chest again, and he locks 
his eyes on another guest across the table.
Now he moves away from you. His face is hidden but 
not the wide-eyed face of the person in his path. You try to 
picture his gaze. Each time he beats his chest his head jerks 
back with the impact. This time, as he brings the cross up 
for the kiss, you see the arm now moving at both elbow and 
shoulder, the cassock sleeve sliding and creasing with the 
motion. He lowers his head to the cross. 
Five more turns and five more advances. On each turn 
he selects a different person, never the same person twice. 
You see his head turn: to the left, pause, to the right, pause. 
Some of his motions are repetitive; others are new with each 
step. Or is it that you notice something new with each step? 
His tour back and forth across the table keeps changing the 
angle of your view, in a performance too complex to parse 
(FIG. 9.1). 
The steward steps forward, and the figure is gone 
before you quite know what you’ve seen.
FIGURE 9.1. 
The monk “works” the table. If the automaton 
was whisked away at the close of the perfor­
mance, spectators might be left to imagine 
further actions and added consequences. 
The Monk Performs
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

49
Understanding a few of the mechanical principles underly­
ing the monk’s performance will let us grasp the relation­
ship between technology and art in this automaton. When 
we look at the clockwork that brings the monk alive, we look 
back in time to a world just awakening to what a machine 
could do and could be (FIG. 10.1). To art’s dramatic depictions 
of the quick and the dead, the introduction of real-time 
motion illustrates how the monk might have been consid­
ered an object of magic or miracle by some who saw it.
Key to the power of the performance is the combina­
tion of separate motions and arcs as the automaton moves 
in three dimensions. The monk moves his head, his mouth, 
his eyes, his two arms, and his feet, all while advancing along 
the table: the onlooker cannot perceive one action in iso­
lation from the others. Both arms are in motion when the 
monk makes his walking turn, and they sweep out three-
dimensional gestures in space. As he turns to his right, his 
eyes shift left, effectively holding the prior direction of his 
gaze as his body pivots. His feet are stepping as he turns, 
each foot tracing successive arcs en route. All these actions 
happen simultaneously, each at its separate speed, with the 
overall movement quite fluid. At five pounds of iron and 
wood, this is a lot to ask of a coiled spring. 
A Mechanical Anatomy
10
FIGURE 10.1. 
In X-ray view, the monk’s iron clockwork 
appears darkest; the painted head, forearms, 
hands, and sandaled feet show in midtones; the 
unpainted wood body and fusee are pale shad­
ows. National Museum of American History and 
Smithsonian Museum Conservation Institute, 
Washington, DC.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

50
CHAPTER 10
FIGURE 10.2. 
The monk’s walking path: a crisscross tour of 
the table, each “address” revealed as onlookers 
watch and wait. Each turn angle can vary by a 
few degrees.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

51
A Mechanical Anatomy
• Each foot is raised and lowered four times.
• The head turns from center to left and back.
• The head bows forward once, for the kiss.
• The lower left arm bearing the cross is raised 
	
and lowered at the elbow six times.
• The upper left arm is raised at the shoulder 
	
for the kiss, then lowered.
• The lower right arm, moving at the elbow, 
	
strikes the chest three times.
• The eyes move from center to left and 
	
back again, three times.	
• The mouth opens and closes six times, 
	
and performs one kiss. 
Each action is precisely synchronized with all others. The 
kiss, for example, involves simultaneous motions of the 
head, mouth, eyes, and both the elbow and the shoulder of 
the left arm, all in coordination. Below, David touches on key 
parts of the monk’s clockwork: the frame, the mainspring, 
and its ingenious fusee that is the monk’s power source, the 
gear train, the primary cams and levers that create the per­
formance, the speed-governing fly, and the hidden stopwork 
“switch” that starts or stops the action after the mainspring 
has been wound. 
The monk’s feet were designed to step out from the 
hem of a cloth habit in imitation of walking, but the fig­
ure actually rolls forward on three wheels hidden beneath 
the habit. Two “perambulation wheels” at right and left 
are driven by the clockwork mainspring—the monk’s 
power source—and one trailing wheel at the rear keeps 
the machine stable as it advances. The monk will “walk” a 
straight distance of approximately 19 inches, then turn to 
his right and pace out another 19 inches, turn again, and so 
on, tracking the path of a nonrepeating irregular polygon on 
a tabletop. The turn is accomplished by means of a pivot 
that periodically lifts the right perambulation wheel off the 
table surface just enough so that the left wheel rolls in an arc 
around the pivot. If the mainspring has been fully wound, he 
will complete a total of seven such lengths and turns. The 
angles of the turns are not exact and depend on the texture 
of the tabletop. Angles from 100 to 118 degrees have been 
measured: the variability means that the monk’s new walk­
ing direction after a turn is unpredictable. Onlookers will 
be in some suspense about where he will head next, as he 
“works” the table. FIGURE 10.2 shows a diagram of the monk’s 
path based on video taken from above, in December 2021.1 
Including the turns, the net length of the monk’s travel adds 
up to almost 14 feet.
The slowness of the monk’s actions lends his character 
an agency not quite of this world. Only his eyes and his strik­
ing hand move abruptly—all the more disturbing in contrast 
to his otherwise ghostly pace. The net time of the perfor­
mance can differ, due to variable traction and drag from the 
tabletop surface. Tests in the lab have yielded twenty-five 
to thirty seconds for one straight walk and three to four sec­
onds for a turn. The monk’s full performance might last no 
more than three and a half minutes.
On a single walking span, the monk performs a com­
plex sequence of body motions, to be repeated on each of 
the seven segments of the polygonal path. Picking up the 
performance just after a turn, here is a summary:
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

52
CHAPTER 10
FIGURES 10.3A–10.3D. 
Four views of the monk’s animating clockwork. 
The Clockwork Frame 
and the Monk’s Wooden Body Shell
In the sixteenth century the posted frame configuration of 
the traditional weight-driven wall clock was adapted to the 
newer spring-driven table clocks, and the monk’s clockwork 
structure follows suit. Such a frame consists of the horizon­
tal top and bottom plates, the vertical pillars (or posts) that 
separate them, and three vertical plates, called the train 
bars. The plates and pillars form the initial “cage” of the 
frame; the train bars anchor the various elements of the gear 
10.3A.
10.3B.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

53
A Mechanical Anatomy
train (FIGS. 10.3A–10.3D). Note the elegant tab-and-slot joints 
that secure the train bars to the plates, held fast by a tapered 
pin or wedge hammered through the tab. The pillars, square 
in cross section, are turned and threaded at each end and 
fastened to top and bottom plates with custom-made nuts.
The bell-shaped wooden shell of the monk’s body (see 
introduction, FIG. I.2), lathe-turned and hollowed out, serves 
as a casing for the mechanism. Made from a single piece of 
wood, the shell is attached to the front pillar of the frame 
with, remarkably, just one substantial iron screw. Of a piece 
with the shell but in contrast to its lathed skirt, the roughly 
carved upper torso is also hollow and contains the linkages 
to the limbs and head. Openings at each side and at back 
give access to the mechanism for assembly. The wood itself 
is identified as poplar or beech, the museum’s current esti­
mate. No microanalysis has yet been carried out for a sure 
identification. The shell’s thin bottom edge is reinforced 
with glued cloth to give it strength (this could be original 
or a later repair). If the less refined shell is intended to be 
hidden beneath the monk’s robe, it nonetheless harbors the 
proudly fashioned clockwork. 
10.3C.
10.3D.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

54
CHAPTER 10
Mainspring and Fusee: 
Power Source and Perfect Torque
The monk was made only about a century and a half after 
the introduction of the mainspring—the tightly coiled rib­
bon of tempered steel used to drive clockwork mechanisms. 
The spring’s greatest advantage—it released clocks from 
the captivity of the hanging weight and thus heralded the 
table clock—also allowed the introduction of freely roaming 
automata, portable and mobile, and the technology of true 
androids began. The monk’s mainspring is coiled inside the 
mainspring barrel, an iron drum mounted between train 
bars just above the cone-shaped fusee (FIG. 10.4). Inside the 
barrel, the spring’s outer end is hooked to the barrel wall; 
its inner end is hooked to an axle, called the barrel arbor. If 
the barrel is turned while the arbor is held still, the spring 
inside will be tensioned, or wound. The tighter the spring is 
wound, of course, the greater the captured latent force.
A mainspring may render a clock portable, but a spring 
by itself does not provide a uniform release of power. A fully 
wound mainspring is extremely powerful, while one that 
is almost unwound has close to no torque. Of all the solu­
tions devised to address the problem of the uneven force of 
a spring, the fusee is by far the most elegant. Its use became 
widespread after its introduction to clockwork around 
the middle of the fifteenth century.2 The monk’s fusee is a 
graduated cone made of hardwood, with a spiral groove cut 
into it, turning on its own arbor, parallel to and beneath the 
mainspring. The fusee is connected to the mainspring bar­
rel by a thin strong catgut line.3 One end of this line is tied 
into the fusee cone at its large diameter; the other end is 
wrapped around the barrel wall for a number of turns and 
then attached to it with a knot or a hook. Winding the main­
spring is accomplished indirectly by winding the fusee, with 
a key applied to the squared end of the fusee arbor. As the 
key turns the fusee, the catgut line is drawn off the barrel 
and on to the fusee cone, thus turning the barrel and wind­
ing the spring inside it. As the winding continues, the line 
seats into the spiral groove on the fusee cone (FIG. 10.5). 
When the machine is then set running, the driving 
power of the wound-up spring is transmitted from the barrel 
through the gut line back to the fusee: the line is now pulled 
off the fusee and back on to the barrel, thus turning the 
FIGURE 10.4. 
Mainspring barrel and fusee. 
A view into the clockwork from the rear: the 
mainspring barrel, with gut line wrapped 
around it, one end attached to the wooden 
fusee. The fusee winding square (to wind up 
the clockwork) is visible at lower left. Note the 
fusee clickwork at the wide end of the fusee 
and next to it the toothed fusee wheel, the 
first wheel in the gear train. The mainspring 
barrel arbor also has a clickwork, visible at 
upper left (and more clearly in FIG. 10.3B) to 
keep the barrel from spinning backward as it 
is wound. The curved pawl, called the “click,” 
with its decorative shape, is pushed against 
the toothed ratchet wheel by the long vertical 
leaf spring mounted beneath it.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

55
A Mechanical Anatomy
FIGURE 10.5. 
Mainspring barrel and fusee diagram. 
The automaton’s power source. The barrel 
is shown with a portion of its lid cut away to 
reveal the partly wound mainspring inside. 
The outer end of the coiled mainspring blade 
is secured to the barrel (with strong steel tabs, 
one of which can be seen in the barrel cap); 
the inner end is hooked to the barrel arbor. 
The spring is wound indirectly from the fusee 
below: a key set on the long winding square of 
the fusee arbor and turned counterclockwise 
will draw catgut line off the barrel and on to 
the fusee, turning the barrel on its arbor and 
thus winding the spring inside it. The force of 
the mainspring is held in check by the fusee’s 
clickwork. After winding, the stored power is 
delivered evenly and slowly, as the fusee keeps 
the force constant. The engaged gear train and 
fly comprise a workload calculated to spend 
the force at a specific and gradual rate. 
fusee. The force emanating from the spring is determined at 
the fusee by the diameter of the cone where the line meets 
it. When almost fully wound and very strong, the spring 
pulls line from the small diameter of the fusee cone; when 
half unwound, the spring pulls line from the midsection of 
the cone; and when almost unwound, the now-weakened 
spring pulls line from the large diameter of the cone. To 
visualize this action differently, think of the fusee as a lever 
and the point where the line meets the cone as its fulcrum. 
(Recall that the longer the lever, the less force is required 
to move it.) With the driving force of the spring lessening 
as it unwinds, the fulcrum of the lever must be moved in 
order to keep an unvarying force delivered to the clockwork 
gear train. The greater the distance from the fulcrum to the 
fusee’s axis of rotation, the less force is required from the 
spring. This ratio explains why the line meets the cone at 
its smallest diameter when the spring is fully wound (and 
at its strongest) but meets the cone at its largest diameter 
when the spring is almost unwound (and at its weakest). 
The curved profile of the fusee cone, as you view it from 
the side (see FIG. 10.5), is a perfect graph of the diminishing 
power of the mainspring.4 The partnership of spring to fusee 
delivers a torque so consistent and precise that it is still used 
in high-end mechanical clocks today.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

56
CHAPTER 10
clickwork can be seen in FIGURES 10.4 and 10.5, its ratchet-
toothed clickwheel at the wide end of the wood cone, its 
spring and pawl attached to the fusee wheel. The interaction 
of pawl and clickwheel makes the staccato sound we hear as 
the monk is being wound. FIGURE 10.6A shows the fusee and its 
arbor. FIGURE 10.6B shows just the right half of the arbor, fusee 
wheel removed, revealing the shaft that inserts into the wood 
fusee cone. This shaft remains stationary inside the fusee 
cone during winding, as the fusee turns around it. Both shafts 
then turn together when the machine begins to run.
The wood fusee cone is seated against but is not 
directly secured to the fusee wheel, the first toothed clock­
wheel in the gear train. Both fusee and fusee wheel are 
secured to the fusee arbor, but the fusee wheel and the gear 
train must remain stationary while the fusee is being wound. 
The clockmaker accomplishes this by separating the fusee 
arbor into two parts—one shaft turning inside another—and 
installs a clickwork between them.5 The fusee clickwork, a 
ratchet and pawl, also prevents the mainspring and fusee 
from violently unwinding when the key is removed. The 
10.6A.
10.6B.
FIGURE 10.6A. 
Fusee assembly and its cams. 
The fusee on its arbor, bearing the cams that 
are the “brain” of the monk. Starting at the 
far left, we see the winding square, then the 
comma-shaped stopwork that prevents over­
winding of the fusee line, then the wood fusee 
cone itself, then the first train wheel, called 
the fusee wheel. That wheel in turn is attached 
to the right half of the fusee arbor, bearing 
its three primary cams, and finally at far right 
to the multipurpose cam, which fits onto the 
squared right end of the fusee arbor, retained 
with a tapered pin. A clickwork, not visible in 
this view, allows the separation of the fusee for 
winding, then its reengagement for the gear 
train to run.
FIGURE 10.6B. 
Fusee arbor and cams. 
Fusee arbor shown without the fusee and 
fusee wheel. At left is the long pivot that is 
inserted into the wood fusee cone, permitting 
the winding of the fusee without engaging the 
gear train. Three cams are pinned or brazed 
onto the arbor shaft. The first cam (1) engages 
the serpentine lever that turns the head from 
side to side. Next to it, the large second cam (2) 
both tilts the head and raises the left arm at 
the shoulder. The third cam (3) initiates the 
monk’s walking turn. The square at the far end 
receives the multipurpose cam. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

57
A Mechanical Anatomy
Transmission and Regulation
In the world of clockmaking, the words arbor, wheel, and 
pinion have precise meanings. Arbor is the horologist’s term 
for axle. A clockwheel, or wheel, refers to the metal disk 
with teeth cut into it, called in other trades a toothed gear. A 
wheel by definition has more than sixteen teeth. Any wheel 
with sixteen teeth or less is called a pinion. Pinion teeth are 
known as leaves. A wheel is typically riveted to its arbor and 
spins with it, though in some cases it may spin around its 
arbor. Pinions, in contrast, are always riveted to, or of a piece 
with, their arbors. A gear train (or wheel train)—a mating 
set of wheels and pinions—divides and distributes the main­
spring’s force through the stepped ratios of driving wheels 
to driven pinions.6 For example, one revolution of a wheel of 
forty teeth will drive a ten-leaf pinion to revolve four times. 
Such ratios, in combination, will progressively increase the 
speed of a train of wheels. But speed is bought at the price of 
power. In any clock mechanism the high-force/slow-speed 
work is done closest to the power source. Actions requiring 
less force and/or greater speed take their power from cal­
culated points progressively more distant from the power 
source as the gear train steps up. Each of the monk’s actions 
requires a specific and different speed and force. Ratios 
between wheels and pinions determine what the monk 
does, when and how fast he does it, and how much power is 
available for each function. 
Although the fusee equalizes the power of the main­
spring, it does not control the rate—the speed—at which this 
power is spent. Will a given action take 5 seconds, 10 sec­
onds, 20 seconds? How fast will the wheels turn; how much 
time will the monk’s performance take? The net number of 
uses—the load—asked of the mainspring’s force determines 
the speed at which the spring unwinds and thus the faster 
or slower rotation of the gear train. If the spring is asked to 
do too little work, the gear train will run faster. Too much, 
and the train will run too slowly—or finally not at all. The 
clockmaker takes care to underuse the mainspring force and 
then calculate the weight and drive of the fly to precisely top 
off the net load and determine the speed of the full machine 
behind it.
The fly, so called because its vanes fly around at great 
speed (FIG. 10.7), spins at the tail of the gear train. It functions 
as an air brake: the resistance of the air on its vanes keeps 
the speed of its rotation in check. It is the governor of the 
machine, providing a calculated drag on the full system to 
keep it running at a specific rate. The beauty of the fly is 
the way that it operates “backward” through the train of 
wheels to govern the rate at which the train turns. In sum­
mary: while the fusee equalizes the force of the mainspring, 
the rate at which that force is spent is regulated by the gear 
train and its fly. Finally and serendipitously, because the fly 
spins with such minuscule torque on the wing, it can easily 
be interrupted, to halt the entire machine. It would take a 
firm grasp, and torn flesh, to stop the machine at the fusee. 
At the fly it can be done by one finger. This is the perfect 
place to introduce a “switch”—the fly stopwork lever—that 
the operator of the monk can discreetly press or release, to 
bring the monk to life or to bring the performance to a halt.
FIGURE 10.7. 
Fly components, laid out. 
The large and heavy fly, in the center, regulates 
the speed of the monk’s performance by wind 
resistance. On the left is the fly arbor with its 
locking lever and four-leaf pinion (top end) and 
groove (bottom end) for its spring. Beneath 
the fly is the forked spring that keeps the fly 
located and friction-tight on its arbor and 
also acts as a shock absorber when the gear 
train’s movement is suddenly halted by the 
operator (via the fly stopwork lever). The small 
hole in the edge of the fly receives the bent 
and pointed end of the spring and retains it 
in position. At right is the third wheel, the last 
wheel in the train, with its sixty teeth and its 
pinion of six leaves. This wheel drives the fly 
pinion. FIGURE 10.3A shows the third wheel, the 
fly pinion, and the fly in place. FIGURES 10.3C 
and 10.10 show the fly from above.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

58
CHAPTER 10
The Cam: Mechanical Memory
The fusee and mainspring have been wound, the stopwork 
lever is released, the fusee arbor and fusee wheel start turn­
ing, and the theater begins. The fusee wheel drives not one 
but two separate pinions (both glimpsed in FIG. 10.4: one at 
seven o’clock and the other at eleven o’clock on the wheel). 
The lower pinion, the perambulation pinion, transmits 
power to the monk’s two perambulation wheels secured at 
each end of that pinion’s arbor, and the automaton advances 
on the tabletop. This is the heaviest work, done closest to 
the power source. The ratio of fusee wheel to perambulation 
pinion yields four revolutions of the pinion (and its arbor) 
for every one revolution of the fusee arbor. Two iron pins 
secured in the perambulation arbor initiate the actions of 
the monk’s feet (FIGS. 10.8A, 10.8B). 
The upper pinion driven by the fusee wheel, the sec­
ond pinion, has two roles: it initiates the complex motions 
of the left forearm, and it drives the full remainder of the 
gear train. 
FIGURE 10.8A. (above) 
Perambulation components, laid out. 
CLOCKWISE FROM LEFT: turning pivot (seen here 
upside down), turning pivot leaf spring, trailing 
wheel in its bracket, trailing wheel bracket 
mount, serrated perambulation wheel, and 
perambulation arbor bearing its pinion. Note 
the perambulation arbor’s squared extensions 
at each end to receive the pinned-on peram­
bulation wheels. The two spikes lift the feet 
alternately. The arbor pinion is driven by the 
fusee wheel, the first wheel in the gear train.
FIGURE 10.8B. 
The feet.
The delicately carved wooden feet are mounted 
on U-shaped iron levers that pivot at the front 
pillar. Each foot is lifted by a spike on the 
perambulation arbor that pushes against the 
lever’s inner-facing flattened blade.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

59
A Mechanical Anatomy
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

60
CHAPTER 10
Built directly onto the fusee arbor are three cams (see 
FIGS. 10.6A, 10.6B, above). As the arbor carrying these cams 
rotates, the cams push levers that generate the turning of the 
monk’s head, the bowing of the head, the motion of the left 
shoulder, and the monk’s walking turn. A fourth, more com­
plex cam, the multipurpose cam, is secured to the arbor’s far 
end, outside the supporting train bar. FIGURE 10.9A shows the 
various levers and the multipurpose cam. FIGURE 10.9B shows 
two levers and the multipurpose cam in place. A disk with 
steps and pins, the multipurpose cam governs the actions 
of the mouth, the movements of the eyes, and the action of 
the right arm, activating levers and chain linkages to each 
part. These four cams, along with additional input from the 
upper steps of the gear train, produce the choreography of 
the monk’s head and arms and his walking turn. 
The cam is a crucial development in the history of 
technology. An ancient device attributed to Archimedes, 
the cam reached broad use in the fifteenth century in the 
striking trains of clocks. A cam is simply a barrel or disk 
FIGURE 10.9A. 
Levers and multipurpose cam, 
laid out. 
CLOCKWISE FROM TOP: the serpentine lever (for 
turning the head) and the shouldered screw 
on which it pivots; the combined eye and right 
arm lever (a cranked lever with its two holes, 
one for linkage to the eyes for line-of-sight 
motion and one for linkage to the right arm for 
the beating of the chest); the smaller cranked 
mouth lever (for speaking and for the kiss); the 
multipurpose cam; the bracket that supports 
and pivots the eye and right arm lever; and 
finally the double-ended lever, which is asso­
ciated with the simultaneous raising of the 
left arm (which bears the cross) and bowing 
of the head (for the kiss). Note the single 
pointed spike on the multipurpose cam. The 
lever to the mouth, riding along the profiled 
edge of this cam as it turns, reaches that spike 
and abruptly opens and closes the mouth to 
perform the kiss.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

61
A Mechanical Anatomy
FIGURE 10.9B. 
Multipurpose cam in place with 
levers to mouth, eyes, and right arm. 
The multipurpose cam is pinned onto the 
squared end of the fusee arbor. In this view 
the cam will turn counterclockwise in rotation. 
The smaller cranked lever to the mouth runs 
along the steps of the cam profile to generate 
the “speaking” movement of the mouth. The 
“kiss” spike is hidden behind the perambu­
lation wheel in this photograph. The larger 
cranked lever to both the right arm and the 
eyes is activated by pins on the cam face. Note 
two holes at the end of this lever: one (with 
chain in place) is for the linkage to the eyes, the 
other is for the linkage to the right arm. Putting 
eyes and arm on a single lever assures their 
synchronization. The shape and position of 
this lever, as each pin pushes against it in turn, 
is designed for a gradual tilt followed by an 
abrupt drop off the pin, and this accounts for 
the gradual backswing of the arm followed by 
its violent beating of the chest. Likewise, the 
eyes gradually move to the left and suddenly 
snap back to center with each blow of the arm 
to the chest. No pin is located on the cam near 
the spike for the kiss: eyes and right arm must 
be entirely still for this moment. 
of metal rotated by the gear train. Its outer edge is either 
studded with short pins or cut to a calculated profile, and 
as it turns, one end of a lever riding against that uneven 
edge is set in motion. Called a following-arm, this lever 
translates the cam’s calculated profile into reciprocat­
ing movements that can be highly precise and perfectly 
timed. Taken together, the monk’s cams are the central 
memory of the machine, nothing less than a small analog 
minicomputer, rotated by the fusee arbor. A look at the 
multipurpose cam in FIGURE 10.9A shows the profile that gen­
erates the movements of the monk’s mouth. Note the thin 
solitary spike at twelve o’clock on the disk, distinct from 
the other steps cut around the perimeter. This is the kiss!
The same cam bears the three pins that generate the all-
important movement of the eyes. As the cam turns, the pins 
one by one come into contact with a lever so shaped that 
it rides gradually against each pin and then abruptly drops 
off it. The lever’s linkage to the eyes thus draws them very 
gradually to the left, and when the lever drops off a pin a 
return spring in the head snaps the eyes back to center. Note 
that the pins are located well away from the cam’s spike for 
the kiss: this is so the eyes stay focused on the cross at that 
penultimate moment. But, the kiss done, the monk raises his 
head and continues his advance across the table, and now 
his eyes again move slowly to the left, giving the uncanny 
appearance of a sustained sight line fixed on a single point 
as the monk walks past it. Brief as this is, if an onlooker hap­
pens to occupy this spot, he will likely feel as if the monk has 
singled him out for special attention, in effect keeping an 
eye on him. The surveillance lasts just so long, then the eyes 
dart forward, as if in sudden dismissal. For each revolution 
of the fusee, the eyes drift left and then spring forward three 
times. The third time, as the monk pivots to march in a new 
direction, his eyes stay momentarily locked on the person 
toward whom he had been headed, and he holds the gaze as 
he turns away. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

62
CHAPTER 10
Putting It All Together
FIGURES 10.10 through 10.15 describe the five separate actions 
for the head: its bowing, its turning, the movement of the 
eyes, and two different movements of the mouth. All these 
actions, plus those of the arms (FIGS. 10.16–10.18A, B), come 
together at the moment of the kissing of the cross. The 
monk must turn his head to the left, tilt it forward, and 
simultaneously raise his left arm at both elbow and shoul­
der to bring the cross to his mouth; at exactly the precise 
moment, the jaw opens and snaps shut to perform the kiss.7
All the while, the monk continues his advance across 
the table, step by step. FIGURE 10.19 details how he performs 
his walking turns. 
Finally, the all-important fly stopwork lever, essen­
tial to the staging of the monk’s performance, can be seen 
protruding from the rear of the clockwork frame, where it 
would be hidden beneath the cloth of the cassock (see FIGS. 
10.3C, 10.11). Pivoted near the bottom plate, it is operated by 
a small crank, visible in figure 10.19 at top left. FIGURE 10.20 
shows the crank too, in the shadowy interior within the 
cutaway of the wooden body shell, just to the right of the 
FIGURE 10.10. 
Top plate and clockwork 
from above. 
A large cutout in the top plate accommodates 
the spinning fly. The small, narrow, rectan­
gular slot alongside it admits the tip of the 
head-turning lever, called the “serpentine” 
lever, so named for its nimble detour around 
the cross traffic of the gear train arbors deep 
inside the clockwork. Other openings allow 
pass-through for linkages to arms and head. 
Vertical train bars attach to the plate at right 
and left, mortised and slotted, held in place 
with tapered pins. The large slotted screw 
protruding from the front pillar, at lower left in 
the photo, is for securing the monk’s wooden 
body shell to the clock frame.
FIGURE 10.11. 
Clockwork and linkages 
to the head. 
Note the multipurpose cam and its levers in 
place just above and behind the perambula­
tion wheel. At rear, the long lever protruding 
outward from the base of the clockwork is the 
fly stopwork lever, visible also in FIGURES 10.10 
and 10.3C. 
FIGURE 10.12. 
The head and its linkages.
10.10.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

63
A Mechanical Anatomy
10.11.
10.12.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

64
CHAPTER 10
FIGURE 10.13A. 
Head bowing mechanism, 
three-quarter front view. 
The second cam on the fusee arbor (see FIG. 
10.6B) lifts the back of the double-ended lever, 
causing the chain and wire linkage to pull down 
on the head lever and tilt the head forward. 
A strong return leaf spring (just visible in the 
drawing, secured to the back of the vertical 
head turning arbor) returns the head to its 
upright position. The head is mounted on the 
pointed end of the head lever; the linkage to it 
is seen at the front of the neck in FIGURES 10.11 
and 10.12. 
10.13A. 
10.13B. 
10.13C. 
FIGURE 10.13B. 
Head bowing and turning 
mechanism disassembled, rear view. 
The component parts of the head bowing 
mechanism, the leaf spring, and the strong 
well-sculpted bracket, or “cock,” for the head 
turning arbor, seen from behind. In assembly 
the bracket is secured to the clock frame’s top 
plate. The bracket must withstand the forces 
of all the linkages to the head, together with 
their return springs. 
FIGURE 10.13C. 
Head turning mechanism, 
three-quarter front view. 
The upper tip of the serpentine lever engages a 
slotted tab on the vertical head turning arbor. 
The bottom of the serpentine lever forks into 
two curved tines. As the fusee arbor slowly 
revolves, the first cam on that arbor pushes 
one tine, then the other, oscillating the lever 
back and forth, to turn the head from side to 
side. The gap between the tines ensures that 
the head turns, pauses, turns back, pauses, and 
so on, in intermittent motion. (The upper tip 
of the serpentine lever is seen in FIG. 10.11. FIG. 
10.10 shows clear glimpses of the full serpen­
tine lever deep within the clockwork.) 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

65
A Mechanical Anatomy
FIGURE 10.14. 
Inside the head: eyes and mouth. 
David Todd’s original diagram, 1979. As the 
monk advances across the table, his eyes move 
slowly to his left, giving the impression of a 
sustained sightline fixed on a single point as he 
walks past it. For each revolution of the fusee, 
the eyes move from center to left and back 
again three times, controlled by three pins pro­
jecting from the face of the multipurpose cam. 
The pins in sequence push and then release 
a cranked lever connected to a long chain 
and wire linkage that ascends to the inside of 
the head, where it operates a reciprocating 
eye-movement assembly. Mounted on a plate 
inside the head, the spherical painted iron eyes 
are pivoted top and bottom in brackets, and 
wire rods from the back of each eye are con­
nected to a horizontal sled that can move from 
side to side. As the chain linkage pulls the sled 
to the monk’s right via a pivoted iron fork, the 
eyes move to his left. A coil spring attached to 
the back of the plate returns the eyes to center.
The monk opens and closes his lower 
jaw as he walks, in imitation of speech. As 
the multipurpose cam turns, a cranked lever 
rides along its profile, rising and falling in six 
asymmetrical steps. The motion is transferred 
via a chain and wire linkage that passes up 
into the head to the hinged jaw. The steps of 
the multipurpose cam, in concert with the 
calculated contour of the lever that rides it, 
allow the mouth to open naturally, while the 
cam step’s gentle backslope closes the mouth 
slowly. Inside the head, a coiled spring puts 
tension on the short lever to the jaw to close 
the mouth between pulls. The kiss is delivered 
by the seventh step of the multipurpose cam, 
an abrupt spike. As the cam rotates, the lever 
encounters that spike and leaps on its pivot to 
deliver a sharp jerk on the linkage to the jaw: 
the mouth opens and shuts with a snap. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

66
CHAPTER 10
FIGURE 10.15. 
X-ray of the head. 
The mechanism of the eyes, mouth, and neck. 
Radiograph taken by staff at the Museum 
Conservation Institute (formerly the Conservation 
Analytical Laboratory), Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, DC, 1979. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

67
A Mechanical Anatomy
FIGURE 10.16. 
Left arm shoulder and elbow, 
three-quarter front view. 
The elegant and complex mechanism of levers 
governing movement of the left arm. The 
shoulder joint, seen here partly exploded, has 
two brackets: one screwed to the inner edge of 
the wooden shoulder and bearing a long pivot, 
the other screwed to the wooden body and 
bearing a strong iron pipe that receives the 
pivot. The end of the pivot carries a small lever 
with a chain linkage that passes down through 
the monk’s body to a pair of levers riding on 
the large second cam on the fusee arbor. The 
cam pushes the lever, which pulls the chain to 
raise the upper arm, making it pivot forward 
and upward from the shoulder. Separately, the 
mechanism just above the elbow activates 
the forearm. It shows a simple sprung pivoted 
lever for raising the forearm, via a gut line 
linkage that passes up through the shoulder 
and armpit and then down to the gear train 
below, connected to an eccentric crank on the 
second pinion’s arbor (visible in FIG. 10.3B and 
color plate on p. vi). The monk holds the cross 
in his left hand and raises and lowers it using 
only his elbow and forearm: six times for every 
revolution of the fusee. But the kiss requires 
the combined movement of elbow and shoul­
der together, to raise the cross higher as the 
head bows forward.
FIGURE 10.17. 
Double-ended lever, 
three-quarter front view. 
A portion of the fusee arbor shows its large sec­
ond, or central, cam, with the head bowing lever 
in direct contact with the surface of the cam 
(see FIG. 10.13A). Riding atop the head lever is a 
second lever that controls the movement of the 
monk’s left shoulder (FIG. 10.16). The cam lifts 
the head bowing lever, which pulls down the 
chain linkage (at right) to bow the head for the 
kissing of the cross. Simultaneously, the head 
bowing lever itself lifts the left shoulder lever 
(hence the name “double-ended lever”), which 
pulls down the chain linkage (at left) to elevate 
the arm at the shoulder, and thus the monk 
bears the cross to his mouth for the kiss. This 
double-lever action assures the paired motions 
of bowed head and raised cross. 
10.16. 
10.17. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

68
CHAPTER 10
FIGURE 10.18A, B. 
Right arm mechanism. 
The “mea culpa” of the right arm beating the 
chest: a cranked lever is set within the wooden 
shoulder; its lever tip engages the slotted tab 
of a vertical arbor extending the length of the 
upper arm from shoulder to elbow. The vertical 
arbor pivots in a metal bracket above the 
elbow and is held in tension by a small spring 
coiled inside the bracket. The wooden forearm 
is pinned to the lower end of this arbor, just 
above the elbow. When the chain linkage is 
pulled downward (by the right arm lever at 
the multipurpose cam; FIG. 10.9B) the vertical 
arbor rotates and the forearm moves away 
from the body, against the tension of the coiled 
spring. As the multipurpose cam turns, its lever 
abruptly drops off the cam’s pin, the sprung 
arm is released, and the beaked hand strikes 
the chest. 
10.18B.
10.18A.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

69
A Mechanical Anatomy
FIGURE 10.19.  
Bottom plate. 
Note the cutouts for the feet, the two peram­
bulation wheels, the outer train bars, and the 
trailing wheel. The small rectangular bar seen 
end-on near the smooth perambulation wheel 
(at photo top) is the turning pivot: it periodi­
cally projects through the plate—pushed down 
by the third cam on the fusee arbor—to make 
contact with the tabletop. The push is slight, 
just enough to lift that perambulation wheel 
off the table surface, and the bar becomes the 
pivot for the walking turn. Separately, the thin 
rod projecting from the rear of the plate (at ten 
o’ clock in this view) is the crank on the hidden 
stopwork lever. FIG. 10.3C shows a good view 
of the fly, the stopwork lever, and its crank. 
The color plate on pp. 74–75 gives a beautiful 
close-up view of the crank, just to the right 
of the trailing wheel. Discreetly pressed with 
a finger, it will tip the stopwork lever back to 
release the fly, freeing the clockwork to run. 
Lifting the crank will tilt the stopwork lever 
forward into the path of the fly, halting the 
machine. Other details: the two narrow slots 
near the center are for locating the central 
train bar. The octagonal nuts secure the lower 
ends of the front and rear pillars, which add 
strength to the clockwork frame. The feet 
are pivoted on the front pillar. The inscribed 
rings, present on both surfaces of the top and 
bottom plates, are a decorative feature widely 
seen in period clockmaking.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

70
CHAPTER 10
trailing wheel. The monk’s mainspring may be fully wound 
and ready, but only with the release of the fly stopwork lever 
can the fly take off, the gear train begin to run, and the monk 
come to life. 
The principle of the lever and the physical laws of 
velocity and ratio govern all the monk’s movements. The 
individual parts by themselves are simple, but their orches­
tration delivers an irreducibly complex performance. The 
relationship of the fusee arbor cams, the multipurpose cam, 
and the crank that moves the left forearm is critical to the 
coherence of the monk’s act. In assembling the parts, if the 
meshing of the fusee wheel with the second arbor pinion 
is just one tooth out of place, the concert of moving parts 
required to raise the cross to the lips is lost. Which of the 
four possible positions of the multipurpose cam on the 
squared end of the fusee arbor is the right one? Or the four 
possible positions of the left arm crank on the second pin­
ion’s arbor, or the many possible wheel/pinion synchro­
nizations? It is relatively easy for the conservator to get it 
right, as the ratios between parts have already been estab­
lished. Cam profiles have been filed, lever lengths decided, 
gear train ratios calculated. The fusee itself has been shaped 
and cut to address the unique behavior of the mainspring. 
Synchronization for the conservator is just a matter of trial 
and error, disassembling and reassembling until everything 
behaves as it should.8 But the maker started with iron bars 
raw from the chafery. He had to calculate the ratios and 
create the relationships before he could begin the labor of 
filing the cams and gear teeth. In his mind’s eye he had to 
visualize the monk’s performance, seeing not only what the 
onlooker would see but also the hidden interactions within 
the machine, of part with part. We, the onlookers, can only 
try to peer back into time and picture the clockmaker work­
ing his way forward through the maze. Look again at the 
X-ray of the monk (FIG. 10.1). A thin iron spike runs inside the 
length of each wooden forearm. These add strength to the 
wood so that the arms will never break. The clockmaker was 
thinking about the future.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

71
A Mechanical Anatomy
FIGURE 10.20.  
Stopwork lever released, the monk heads out.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

73
chapter title
PART III
Eight Androids
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

74
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

75
chapter title
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

76
The automaton monk made its public debut in the 1980 
exhibition The Clockwork Universe: German Clocks 
and Automata, 1550–1650. Co-curated by Otto Mayr at 
the Smithsonian Institution and Klaus Maurice at the 
Bayerisches Nationalmuseum (Bavarian National Museum) 
in Munich, the show opened in Munich and traveled to 
Washington the following year.1 To the finest pieces from 
their host institutions Maurice and Mayr added master­
works borrowed from sixty public and private collections 
in Europe and the United States, assembling a landmark 
show of clocks, mechanical celestial globes, music-playing 
machines, and automata from the golden age of German 
clockmaking. The exhibition catalog, with essays by four­
teen European and American scholars, remains an essential 
text in the field of horological history.
Pride of place among automata on display went to 
figure clocks and composite pieces: stationary clocks sur­
mounted with figures performing at the strike of the hour, 
and ornate machines in the form of carriages, ships, and 
towers, some with ensembles of soldiers, musicians, and ani­
mals performing on miniature stages. Made by celebrated 
clockmakers and goldsmiths, many of these were signed 
and thus documented. The monk, though with uncertain 
national pedigree, was included as the show’s earliest exam­
ple of a tabletop automaton. Compared with costlier enter­
tainments, the monk was a humble anomaly: faded paint on 
Monks, Saints, and Musical Ladies
11
a wooden body, lowly cloth habit—materials genuine to a 
representation of monkish poverty. Yet its inclusion brought 
closer attention to a dispersed group of similar clockwork 
figures that have also survived to the present. Mayr’s rec­
ognition of the significance of the automaton he acquired 
for the Smithsonian and David Todd’s analysis of its mecha­
nism helped set a new standard for the study and conserva­
tion of these figures. Later restoration reports for automata 
similar to the monk cite the catalog entry in this exhibition.
At present, six self-propelled walking figures kindred 
to the monk are known. Made in Europe between 1550 
and 1650, all are tabletop performers of similar scale, their 
heights ranging from 11 to 17 inches. All wore garments of 
real cloth over jointed bodies of carved wood. Heads, hands, 
and feet were painted in lifelike colors, in imitation of flesh. 
Hidden clockwork is iron or brass. Like the monk, none bear 
identifying stamps to establish provenance, though Juanelo 
Turriano has been proposed in the recent past for several of 
the figures. Dates of origin are based primarily on analysis of 
internal clockworks. A seventh figure closely resembling the 
others but considered eighteenth-century work is included 
in our study for comparison. The value of these automata 
both then and now lies not in precious material or the pag­
eantry of craft but in their close imitation of human appear­
ance and motion.
Six of these seven automata may be found in pub­
lic collections in Europe and the United States, some on 
view well before the monk appeared in the 1970s. The 
cittern-playing lady in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in 
Vienna (see FIG. 5.1), bequeathed to that museum in 1934, 
is the best known. Three more figures are variations on a 
lute player: one in the Smithsonian itself, a small maiden in 
good original condition, acquired in 1984; another in the col­
lection of the Bavarian National Museum in Munich, given 
to that museum in 1927; and a third in the Conservatoire 
national des arts et métiers in Paris, there since 1853. Two 
male figures more closely resemble the monk. One is a 
bearded figure, also called a monk, purchased at auction by 
the Deutsches Museum in Munich in 1985, just eight years 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

77
individuality, the hidden clockwork of each figure consists of 
a posted frame and drive system whose layout clearly comes 
from the same prototype. Vertical train bars, mainspring and 
fusee, the illusion of stepping feet glimpsed under the hem 
of a cloth robe that in turn hides a three-wheeled rolling 
frame—seven of the figures share these features. The size 
of the clockwork mechanism itself, and thus the height of the 
automaton, can vary by several inches, and the material used 
to fabricate it also varies: brass in the case of the lutenists in 
Munich, Washington, and Paris; iron for all the others. But 
the structural and functional similarity of the clockwork is 
unmistakable. 
Most revealing is the comparison of the three male fig­
ures: the Smithsonian monk, the Deutsches Museum figure 
in Munich, and the saint in the Iparművészeti Múzeum in 
Budapest. The sixteenth-century technology of ironworking 
is everywhere apparent, giving stylistic and methodological 
clues to the age. Clockwheels, plates, pillars, and train bars 
reveal the kinds of tool marks characteristic of the period, 
with discs and plates hammered out by hand from cast-iron 
bars direct from the chafery, then filed and scraped to a fin­
ish. Decorative elements such as the framework’s chamfered 
pillars and securing nuts are traditional sixteenth-century 
work. The three automata also share a similar bottle-shaped 
wooden body shell. Heads, hands, and feet, according to con­
servators, were carved from linden or poplar, both species 
widely used by period sculptors.
Elizabeth was able to view all but one of the automata 
in European collections in 2019 and early 2020 and meet 
with the curators and conservators who care for them. 
(Budapest was out of reach, the saint in storage since 2017 
while its home museum is renovated.) David had already 
made detailed conservation documents for the clockworks 
of three of the full family of eight: the Smithsonian monk, the 
Smithsonian lute player, and the lute player in the Bavarian 
National Museum, which he helped conserve in 1980. In 
comparing them for clues about the monk, both of us have 
come to believe that these figures together comprise a class 
by themselves in the history of artificial life: the first solo 
free-walking self-propelled androids. In the following brief 
chapters we introduce each automaton and sketch what is 
known of its history. With their similarities and differences 
in view, chapters 17 and 18 address what they reveal as a 
group and assess their historical significance.
after the Smithsonian monk arrived in Washington. The 
other is a haloed saint in the collection of the Iparművészeti 
Múzeum (Museum of Applied Arts) in Budapest, acquired 
in 1915. Finally, an unusual figure has recently emerged from 
a private collection in Milan: a “noble matron in the act of 
playing a drum,” seen for the first time in a 2005 exhibition 
in Italy on the history of the Italian clock.
José A. García-Diego, the first recent biographer of 
Juanelo Turriano, must be credited with the early com­
parison of several of these figures, which he traveled to 
see in the 1970s and early 1980s in his search for works by 
the master. The first comprehensive study of a group of 
sixteenth-century walking automata was a master’s thesis 
written in 1990 at the University of Hamburg by Adelheid 
von Herz, “Androiden des 16. Jahrhunderts” (Androids of 
the sixteenth century).2 Von Herz carried out research on 
seven of the eight figures we compare here. To learn about 
the Smithsonian monk and its sister lute player, she corre­
sponded with David, and when she later sent him a copy 
of her completed thesis he in turn benefited from her work 
on the others. We have compiled data on our group of eight 
automata for a table of comparisons (see appendix), based 
on direct observation, photographs, museum archives, res­
toration reports, catalog entries, and correspondence with 
museums and owners.
The physical condition and restoration records of the 
automata vary profoundly from one to the next. Exposed 
wood and cloth have suffered most, as might be expected, 
particularly in the figures that show frequent performance 
and handling. Iron and brass outlive wood and cloth in 
these machines—and an automaton’s wooden body protects 
its metal clockwork, as any clock is protected by its case­
work. In the Smithsonian monk, the iron clockwork itself is 
responsible for wear on the wooden body: a small felt pad 
is found nailed to the monk’s chest to protect him from the 
blows of his own hand—and to protect the hand too. Many of 
the automata have had wooden hands and feet replaced and 
heads repainted, and at least one has a new head entirely. 
The two Smithsonian figures are considered to be in rela­
tively untouched original condition.3 
As a group, the automata exhibit broad differences 
in sculptural style and character. Carved wood faces and 
limbs carry the most weight in our initial response to a 
figure, but a look at the clockwork inside the wooden bod­
ies of the eight automata is startling. For all their exterior 
Monks, Saints, and Musical Ladies
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

79
A Second Monk?
12
In October 2019 the conservator Thomas Rebényi, master 
clockmaker and head of the Deutsches Museum Restoration 
Workshop for Scientific Instruments and Clocks, wound 
up the museum’s automaton and filmed the performance. 
Automatenfigur: Predigender Mönch, the figure is identi­
fied at the museum: preaching monk automaton (FIG. 12.1). It 
had recently returned from loan to an exhibition in Vienna, 
and during the journey’s vibrations, the original glue in the 
seam between the front and back halves of the wooden 
head, brittle with age, gave way. Discovering the back cap 
loose in the crate, Rebényi was first horrified, then fasci­
nated, for he suddenly had a forbidden glimpse inside the 
hollow head, where the now-exposed micro-machinery that 
animates the automaton’s mouth and eyes was sealed. It is 
more than likely that he was the first person to see inside 
that head since the day in the sixteenth century that its 
walnut-sized clockwork was installed and the halves of the 
wooden skull were glued tightly together. An X-ray of the 
head by an earlier conservator had shown a ghost silhouette 
of the mechanism, but here was the real thing (FIGS. 12.2–12.4.). 
With the agreement of museum curators, Rebényi elected 
to leave the back cap off. He would later mount it on its own 
stand and display it on a slender rod at the right height, 
just behind the automaton in the vitrine, allowing museum 
FIGURE 12.1. 
Automatenfigur: Predigender Mönch 
(Automaton: Preaching monk), ca. 1560. 
South Germany or Spain. Wood (poplar), iron 
clockwork. Height: 39 cm (15⁵⁄₁₆ in.). Deutsches 
Museum, Munich. Its name notwithstanding, 
the identity and specific nature of the perfor­
mance of this automaton remain a mystery. 
Different in character though it is from the 
Smithsonian monk, it harbors a clockwork 
and wooden body shell remarkably similar 
in design.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

80
CHAPTER 12
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

81
A Second Monk?
visitors too to see inside the head (FIG. 12.5). But first, with 
the figure still in the lab, he thought, “This is surely the time 
to wind the automaton’s mainspring and set it running for 
the camera.” Freshly reminded of its fragility, he proceeded 
with utmost caution, giving the mainspring a fraction of a 
turn with the key and restraining the fly. The automaton 
performed without a hitch, as if it had been waiting. One 
gentle quarter-wind at a time, Rebényi captured the perfor­
mance piecemeal, and from all angles, distances, and depths 
of field. He did not fail to zoom in to the back of the head to 
shoot the levers, cranks, pivots, and return springs as they 
clicked and whirred to animate the automaton’s face. The 
detailed footage is an unprecedented look inside the “live” 
head of an early android. 
FIGURE 12.2. (opposite)
The automaton in the Deutsches Museum 
conservation lab, March 3, 2020. A wide-
awake face and a mind of its own. The 
elegantly carved beard hides the seams of 
the movable mouth.
FIGURE 12.4. 
A rare view inside the head: visible are the 
cranked lever and return spring that animate 
the motion of the eyes; beneath these, a 
glimpse of the linkage and lever to the jaw that 
opens and closes the mouth.  
FIGURE 12.3. 
Clockwork and linkages to the head. A com­
parable view of the Smithsonian automaton 
(FIG. 10.11) shows the close kinship of the two 
machines. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

82
CHAPTER 12
Fully wound, the automaton would travel a distance 
of 40 centimeters (15¾ in.), turn to its right, and follow 
the path of a variable polygon, accomplishing eleven walk­
ing spans and turns. The walking turn would be executed 
via the same arrangement seen in the Smithsonian monk: 
one perambulation wheel lifted by a cam-lowered pivot, 
letting the other wheel roll in a partial arc around it (the 
third trailing wheel at rear keeping the figure steady). Along 
each walking span, the head turns once to the left, once 
to the right, and nods once. The mouth opens and shuts 
four times. Eyes glance right to left and back eight times. 
Measurements were first made by Peter Friess, a former 
conservator at the Deutsches Museum, who undertook the 
restoration of the figure and published a detailed report of 
his work in 1988.1 The parallel with the Smithsonian monk’s 
performance was immediately apparent. The biggest dif­
ferences appear in the motion of the arms. The Deutsches 
Museum figure is all wrist. With both arms held up before 
the body at fixed angles, the right wrist rotates back and 
forth forty times between each walking turn, and the left 
wrist, twenty-two times.2 Rebényi’s video footage shows the 
right hand oscillating more than once a second, the left hand 
every second and a half, an almost 2:1 rhythmic performance. 
What can these very fast movements represent? Hard and 
fast calculation went into the choreography of these pivoting 
hands. As noted in chapter 10, the timing of these motions is 
determined by the numerical relation of wheel teeth, pinion 
leaves, and cam profiles in the gear train. Once the metal is 
cut, the resulting actions are set in iron. Von Herz speculated 
that the automaton may have manipulated, or appeared to 
manipulate, the beaded loop of a rosary in these busy hands.3 
Friess had noted that inside its wooden body shell this fig­
ure originally contained a miniature hidden glockenspiel: a 
tiny set of bells struck by spring hammers, also driven by the 
mainspring—as if there wasn’t already enough machinery in 
so small a chamber! Could this automaton have once grasped 
some kind of musical instrument, miming a performance 
coordinated with actual sounds from within? 
Rebényi, pressed for an opinion, doubts that the figure 
represents a preacher or a monk.
Though much corroded, the iron clockwork of the 
figure still functioned when it entered the museum col­
lection, according to Friess. It lacked only the lift rod for 
FIGURE 12.5. 
The automaton on display at the Deutsches 
Museum, Munich. The back of the head wins 
its own stand inside the vitrine.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

83
A Second Monk?
implementing the walking turn, and this has not been 
replaced, hence we cannot be certain of the angle of the 
walking turn. Friess described cleaning the mechanism and 
replacing the gut line joining the fusee to the mainspring 
barrel. But the figure’s wooden body shell, limbs, and head 
had suffered much prior damage. One hand and both feet 
were missing, Friess noted, two fingers were gone from the 
remaining hand, and chipped paint on the face disclosed 
layers of original color now overpainted.4 Following David’s 
lead, Friess had the head X-rayed in order to view its hidden 
mechanics without breaking the head open. The two X-rays 
show the close similarity of the machinery inside each head. 
In both, the original wooden head would have been carved, 
then cut or split vertically behind the ears into front and 
back halves, the back half smaller, like a cap. Each half would 
then be hollowed out, the jaw cut and hinged, and the eye 
sockets opened. The iron mechanism, built to fit, would be 
installed within the front half: the eyes (prepainted) snug in 
the ready wooden sockets, and the jaw lever engaged. The 
whole tiny assembly would then have been fastened in place 
with two wood screws. With wire linkages hooked in place 
for later connection to the gear train below, the two wood 
halves would then be glued back together and the head 
given a chalk primer and painted.
While Friess’s report closely details the process 
of replacing absent sections of the wooden body shell—
necessary for the figure to be stable enough to wind and 
fully move again—he makes no mention of the replacement 
of the missing feet, hand, and fingers, which appear in bright 
finished form in the photographs illustrating the report. 
Such information on the exterior sculpture is what is most 
missed in efforts to identify the provenance and past resto­
rations of this and so many of the other extant automata. 
Their repair requires the skills of a clockmaker but those of 
a sculptor too.
And how does the sculpture compare in these two 
monkish automata sharing such similar clockwork? The 
turned shape of the wooden body shell is of different pro­
portion: the Smithsonian figure has a lower “waist” to allow 
clearance for moving arms; the Deutsches Museum figure, 
with its permanently raised arms, has a higher waist, likely 
to provide additional space for the internal glockenspiel. 
The Smithsonian shell includes discreet “bumpers” at the 
wooden hem to cover protruding perambulation wheels (see 
introduction, FIG. I.2); the Deutsches Museum shell encom­
passes a larger circumference at the hem, hiding wheels 
within. Wheel coverage was important: when the figure was 
dressed in cloth robes, the automaton’s running wheels had 
to be protected from entanglement in fabric. Perhaps the 
Smithsonian monk’s feet, sandaled in the Franciscan style, 
served as Friess’s models (thus influencing its identification 
as a monk). 
The carved head of the Deutsches Museum figure 
presents a visage very different in style and representation 
from that of the Smithsonian. Facial features are less exag­
gerated in size relative to the face: observe the higher fore­
head, smaller ears, and straight nose, with carved hair and 
beard expertly concealing the mechanics of the jaw. Delicate 
eyebrows are carved as slightly gathered at the center brow, 
in concentration. This more refined appearance comes 
from the use of layers of a chalk ground, or gesso, to further 
articulate the surface of the carved wood prior to painting. 
In Renaissance polychromed wood sculpture, gesso func­
tioned not only as a ground for paint (in the same way that 
panel painters prepared and stabilized a wood surface to 
accept pigment) but also to build finer detail, such as ring­
lets of hair or delicate creases of flesh. Made as a fine paste 
of chalk and hardening agents, gesso permitted the carver 
some shortcuts for achieving detail in any piece where paint 
would cover wood and gesso alike. The Smithsonian monk’s 
original faded and cracked paint shows no signs of an under­
lying gesso ground.5 With his deeply fluted upper lip, pro­
truding ears, and large direction-finding nose, he is almost 
but not quite a caricature by comparison. It is even possible 
that his hooded cowl was meant to be drawn, shrouding his 
face in shadow. He looks fiercer and more ascetic than his 
brother in Munich. But we are also looking deeper into time 
when we study this untouched face.
One unique feature of the Deutsches Museum autom­
aton: an ornamental flourish in red paint decorates the 
front surface of the wooden body shell (see FIG. 12.1). Worn 
and faded, the paint appears original. No other figure among 
those we compared carries this embellishment, which would 
anyway be hidden beneath a garment of actual fabric. In fact, 
only this automaton lacked fabric dress of any kind, or rem­
nants of such dress, when it entered the museum collection.6 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

84
CHAPTER 12
Elizabeth visited the Deutsches Museum in Munich in 
early March 2020. Thomas Rebényi had taken the automa­
ton out of its humidity-controlled vitrine in the museum’s 
hall of early computers and brought it into the lab for the 
meeting (leaving the back of the head on its pole to com­
mand the vitrine). He secured the figure on a cylindrical 
mount, like a car raised on a jack, to free the perambulation 
wheels from contact with the table so the figure could “walk 
in place” when wound. His new video footage was running 
on a computer screen nearby. Frank Dittmann, head of the 
Department of Automation, and Carola Dahlke, curator of 
Computer Science and Cryptology, were present. Joining 
the group was Raphael Beuing, curator of Timepieces and 
Scientific Instruments at the nearby Bavarian National 
Museum, where its automaton, one of the lute players, is 
kept.7 The two museums are within blocks of each other, 
and staff members from each museum wanted to see the 
other museum’s figure. We had met that morning at the 
bnm to view the lute player (more on this visit in chap. 14), 
and we had just walked together to the Deutsches Museum. 
Elizabeth’s first glimpse of both automata after years of 
studying them only in photographs brought the sensory jolt 
one gets from the gulf—the abyss—between a photograph 
and the thing itself. Actual size forces the immediate re-
register of an object in its native scale. Walk around it in real 
time, and its three-dimensional nature is irreducible. True 
color, in the here and now of the eye instead of the camera: 
the physical integrity of a thing cannot be mediated, though 
a great photographer can teach us how to look. These are 
the scribbled first impressions of the Deutsches Museum 
automaton in Elizabeth’s notes: 
So much smaller than I thought! Fiercely focused on 
something in its hands. The mouth and inside it the teeth, 
meant to be seen. Other people here today also riveted. 
Missing paint on the nose. Awe at time’s eloquent dam­
age. Amazement that it has survived. How did it look long 
ago, seen by candlelight? 
FIGURE 12.6A, B. 
In the Deutsches Museum conservation lab, 
March 3, 2020. A close-up photograph (A) of 
the sixty-tooth clockwheel on the second 
arbor (B), showing the clockmaker’s radiating 
layout marks for dividing the wheel perimeter 
into sixty equal parts. The teeth would then 
have been individually cut, one by one, with a 
handsaw and file.
12.6A.
12.6B.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

85
A Second Monk?
Rebényi lifted the automaton and tilted it to allow 
us to see the bottom plate. Noting a squared opening in 
the plate, Dittmann pointed to its fore and aft edges, which 
were beveled at angles, suggesting the accommodation of a 
now-missing cylinder in the narrow space above it, directly 
under the fusee. He speculated that here was part of the miss­
ing glockenspiel. Rebényi pointed out two pivot holes in the 
train bars that would have supported an arbor and indicated 
several other now-empty holes in the bottom plate and rear 
pillar. Other observations: Sets of inscribed concentric rings 
are present on the top and bottom plates, which David Todd 
has found in all the other automata sharing this clockwork 
design, and many early German clocks as well. Decoratively 
nicked square nuts, surely original, secure the front and back 
pillars to the bottom plate, a custom that David associates 
with South German tradition. Mouth and eye movements 
originate not from shaped cams on the fusee arbor, as in 
the Smithsonian monk, but from pins on the perambulation 
arbor below it. Elizabeth was excited to discover unmistak­
able marks in one of the clockwheels, showing how its teeth 
had been laid out and cut one by one, by the original clock­
maker (FIGS. 12.6A and B). Above all, everyone in the lab that 
day spent time wordlessly peering inside the automaton’s 
head from the back. Newly exposed, the working parts of the 
eyes and mouth allowed a gaze into untouched history. 
In his 1988 restoration report, Peter Friess adopted 
the same suggested date and attribution for his automaton 
as that of the Smithsonian monk. At present, the Deutsches 
Museum retains only the estimated date of 1560 and states 
simply, “place of manufacture unknown.” 
With the key in his gloved hand, Rebényi wound the 
mainspring a quarter turn. The automaton’s hands began 
their flutter. The eyes shifted, the head turned, the mouth 
opened...
Across two days in the lab, the group searched for 
clues to the mystery of what this automaton was meant 
to perform. Were the arms always fixed in this raised posi­
tion? Yes: the iron joints inside the wood, transferring rota­
tional motion from gear train to wrists, dictate the angle. 
The ingenuity of getting this motion to the wrists is itself 
a mechanical accomplishment: the linkages must navigate 
right-angle turns at both the shoulders and the elbows. 
Rebényi explained that the iron joint assemblies would not 
mate if the arm positions were changed. Hence the loose 
wood seams at the shoulders, and the wire loops holding the 
arms to the torso, are not signs of adjustable positions or 
later adaptations but were designed for ease of assembling 
the wooden parts of the figure around the iron clockwork. 
Conversation moved to the iron strap mounted front 
and center in the monk’s wooden body shell, surely a means 
for attaching a former prop of some kind, visible in FIGURE 
12.1. (The lute players have versions of such brackets to sup­
port their lutes.) The strap spans a slot cut into the wood, 
beveled to allow the insertion, from above, of something 
that clearly called for substantial support. A drum? But the 
angle of the arms makes the wielding of drumsticks difficult 
to envision. Nor do the positions of the hands suggest this, 
though we recall that one hand—the left hand as was now 
apparent—had been missing and was remade by Friess or 
someone working under his supervision. What was the pose 
of the original hand?8
The inability to name what the automaton is doing 
lends it a kind of unique power. Rather than locked in a 
repetitive task we can parse, it keeps us guessing. Its pur­
pose hidden, the purposeful gesticulation itself becomes the 
performance. This is a messenger from the past, the mes­
sage yet to be deciphered.  
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

FIGURES 13.1–13.3. 
Zenélő automata, férfi szent (Musical 
automaton, male saint), sixteenth 
century. Spain. Wood, silk damask, 
iron clockwork, miniature glock­
enspiel. Height: 41 cm (16⅛ in.). 
Iparművészeti Múzeum (Museum of 
Applied Arts), Budapest. A musician-
saint, with an onboard glockenspiel 
operated by the clockwork.
13.1.
13.2.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

87
Deemed a saint by the gilded halo that frames the head, 
this automaton in the Iparművészeti Múzeum in Budapest 
indeed possesses a bespoke glockenspiel, intact and func­
tional, custom-designed to fit inside the narrow body shell 
with the animating clockwork (FIGS. 13.1–13.3). Photographs 
show its substantial real estate, far outsizing any similar 
instrument that might have once fit inside the Deutsches 
Museum automaton. FIGURE 13.3 shows the horizontal array 
of six bells at the figure’s backside, each with a correspond­
ing strike hammer. The hammers, a set of vertical finger-like 
levers, are plucked by an arrangement of flat iron pegs 
driven into a rotating wooden barrel at the base of the fig­
ure. The barrel is turned by the same mainspring and fusee 
that animate the automaton’s body. Museum conservators 
Katalin Soós and Jenö Rácz note that the wooden barrel 
shows evidence that it had been repegged in the past, hence 
the original melody is considered lost. The music historian 
Ilona Ferenczy has suggested the current notes play a secu­
lar melody, possibly a folk song.1
Significantly, this is a stationary, not a walking, figure. 
The internal clockframe reveals the characteristic cutouts 
in the iron baseplate for perambulation wheels, and the 
saint’s individual wooden feet, as in the other automata, 
emerge from an opening cut in the turned wood body shell. 
A Saint in Budapest
13
13.3.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

88
CHAPTER 13
referenced the work of both Todd and Friess as the impetus 
for “rediscovering” the automaton in their own collection.3 
Dismantling the entire automaton to its separate parts, they 
conserved each material—cloth, wood, and metal—according 
to best practice. Though a later addition, the garments were 
carefully conserved too, with new material clearly identi­
fied. The wooden head, they wrote, was in relatively good 
condition. Though the report made no mention of opening 
the head, the authors described the moving parts for mouth 
and eyes, noting that the eyeballs were made of pewter and 
painted.4 The wood itself they identified as linden, with 
gesso primer on head, hands, and feet. But the hands were 
much damaged, especially the bell hand. The conservation 
report states, “A replenishment of the fingers was necessary 
because of the attachment of the bell[,]...[and] the grip of 
the bell was replaced.”5 The conservators clearly indicated 
which additions were new, as they did with the cloth gar­
ment. The left hand was allowed to remain as found, missing 
the forefinger. Splits in the body shell, formerly joined with 
brass bands, were repaired with glue. Their report made lit­
tle mention of the feet; the photographs show simple generic 
shoes, painted black. The conservators made an inventory 
of drawings of each part of the clockwork, removed corro­
sion from all iron surfaces, replaced the mainspring, and 
fashioned a tiny brass fragment to repair a missing ray in the 
halo. The glockenspiel bells were cleaned and adjusted. The 
only previous repair they found in the clockwork, aside from 
wear and age, they wrote, was in the linkage to the figure’s 
right arm with its bell hand. And as mentioned, the glocken­
spiel’s wooden barrel had been repegged.
Contemplating the saint’s performance (and recalling 
the signs of missing components in the Deutsches Museum 
automaton), David and Elizabeth continue to ponder the 
mystery of the cutouts in the clockwork’s baseplate. Why 
would such cutouts for perambulation wheels have been 
made in a stationary figure? Was a formerly ambulatory 
automaton rebuilt for a new role? But this seems unlikely, 
since no cutout for a turning pivot is seen in photographs 
of the baseplate. Were parts originally intended for a walk­
ing figure adapted for a stationary one? Similarly, though 
the joints of the left shoulder and elbow are tightly glued 
together now, might the left arm once have moved, in 
But photographs show no cutouts in the baseplate to make 
room for the stepping motions of the feet and no slot for a 
turning pivot (FIG. 13.4). Instead, a curious role is assigned to 
one foot. As with all the automata, a knowledgeable atten­
dant must wind the mainspring’s fusee and then initiate the 
performance by releasing a hidden stopwork lever. In the 
Smithsonian monk this lever hovers just above the base­
plate at right rear, hidden by the monk’s cloth tunic. In the 
saint, this secret lever is his right foot! After winding the 
spring, the attendant gently presses this foot, like tapping a 
key on a typewriter, and the action begins. 
With mainspring fully wound and foot tapped, the 
saint mimes many of the same gestures as the monk and the 
monk’s Munich brother but in a single cycle all his own. His 
head turns once right, once left; his mouth opens and shuts 
twenty-six times; his eyes move from side to side sixteen 
times. The motions of the eyes and mouth originate from 
the same wooden barrel that commands the glockenspiel: 
iron pegs in a dedicated section of the barrel activate their 
own levers to transmit action to the head via wires and gut 
strings. As eyes and mouth and head move, the glockenspiel 
rings its melody and repeats it twice. All the while, the saint 
wields a hand bell in his right hand and rotates the hand from 
the wrist to ring the bell a total of thirty-six times, in rhythm 
with the glockenspiel. When the song is finished, the saint 
bows his head. Net run time is about one minute forty-
eight seconds. It seems safe to assume that the power of 
the mainspring—rather than driving the weight of a three-
wheeled rolling chassis across a table—is here spent on the 
glockenspiel and its bell concert. But in every other respect, 
including the mysterious cutouts for wheels, the saint’s 
clockwork design and wooden body is so functionally sim­
ilar to that of the walking figures that its inclusion in the 
group is essential.2 
The saint entered the museum collection in 1915, long 
before the automata acquired by the Deutsches Museum or 
the Smithsonian were documented or known. The museum 
presumed the saint an eighteenth-century figure, based on 
the style of its ornamented damask cape and cloak. But Soós 
and Rácz discovered a much older machine under those 
garments when they undertook the restoration of the saint 
in the 1980s. Their conservation report, published in 1990, 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

89
A Saint in Budapest
FIGURE 13.4. 
The bottom plate of the saint’s clock­
work, showing cutouts for perambulation 
wheels, but no wheels or stepping mech­
anism for the feet are present. Compare 
with the Smithsonian monk’s bottom 
plate, FIG. 10.19.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

90
CHAPTER 13
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

91
A Saint in Budapest
a bell-note song, like the saint does now. The Smithsonian 
monk all but forbids such pleasure.
The Phonogrammarchiv of the Austrian Academy 
of Sciences once offered a recording of the saint’s glock­
enspiel on the internet. The website link is still active 
but without the magic sound.9 Elizabeth wrote to the 
Phonogrammarchiv in 2021 and was put in contact with 
Helmut Kowar, who made the recording himself in 1996, on 
site at the museum. With the kind permission of Christiane 
Fennesz-Juhasz of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, we 
were permitted to hear the recording again via private file, 
and we begged that it be restored on the website. In corre­
spondence with Helmut Kowar, Elizabeth asked if the bell 
the automaton holds can also be heard in the recording. 
“At the very beginning of the recording you can hear a few 
strokes of the bell, very soft and faint,” he wrote back. “Then, 
when the glockenspiel starts playing[,]... some bell strokes 
are perceptible if you listen closely.”10
One tiny detail escaped David’s memory for many 
years. When he dismantled the monk’s clockwork in 1978 
for cleaning, he had been surprised to find that the pinion 
on the arbor for the fly had an unusually low count of just 
four leaves, something he had not seen before (the teeth of a 
pinion wheel are called leaves). A four-leaved pinion would 
theoretically sustain tremendous sliding friction from the 
mating wheel teeth that drive it. The general rule in horology 
calls for no fewer than six leaves in a driven pinion. Further, 
he noticed that there was surprisingly little wear evident 
on either the wheel teeth or the pinion, and he remembers 
thinking that the mechanically impractical can sometimes 
be made to work—but also, more important, that the monk 
had seen little use. In making his steel model of the monk, he 
dutifully reproduced the impossible pinion. When the Soós 
and Rácz report appeared years later, he learned that the 
saint’s clockwork, exactly like that of the monk, possesses 
a four-leaf fly pinion.11 As he began compiling data for our 
table comparing the eight automata, the coincidence struck 
home. Four-leaf fly pinions are not supposed to run! And 
especially in a machine that had seen enthusiastic wear. 
The devil, even for a wooden saint, let alone a monk, is in 
the details.
concert with the right arm? Adelheid von Herz gave the fol­
lowing elegant description of the arms and hands:
The upper arms of the figure are raised slightly to the 
sides; both forearms are angled forward and turned 
slightly toward the upper body. The preserved frag­
ments of the hands are rendered in a naturalistic 
way. The finger stumps of the right hand indicate an 
encircling gripping position; the remaining fingers of the 
left hand, by contrast, are only slightly curved.6  
The still-visible original parts of the hands show that both 
were carved in active and specific positions (see FIG. 13.2). 
Further, there is an aperture at the saint’s waist not unlike 
that in the Deutsches Museum figure, though without the 
rugged iron strap, where an additional prop of some kind 
might once have been secured. The edges of the opening, 
just as in the Deutsches Museum figure, are beveled in such 
a way that a bracket or post inserted from a steep angle 
would offer maximum support, as if to buttress something 
operated on by the hands. Such questions of course must 
remain unanswered. Any changes in the arms or in adapting 
a walking figure to a standing one, if they were made at all, 
would have taken place long before the saint reached safe 
haven in the museum.
The sculptural character of the saint’s head is subtle, 
lifelike, and refined. This is the work of a sculptor well versed 
in the anatomy of the head and face. As von Herz writes, 
“The head shows the physiognomy of an older man. The fig­
ure wears a full beard that covers the neck, and long wavy 
hair; the upper part of the skull is bald. A wrinkled forehead, 
deep-set eyes, sunken cheeks, and pronounced nasolabial 
folds give the face a serious expression.”7 
A look at the saint’s profile next to that of the Smith-
sonian monk (cf. FIG. 13.5 and introduction, FIG. I.2) shows two 
very different character types, in style and depiction. As 
in the comparison with the Deutsches Museum figure, the 
monk’s visage approaches theater, with its expressive fea­
tures and pointed fervor. The three automata are virtually 
the same height: Smithsonian, 40.64 centimeters; Deutsches 
Museum, 39 centimeters; Iparművészeti Múzeum, with halo, 
41 centimeters.8 But how different they are in both look and 
performance! Perhaps the Munich brother once sounded 
FIGURE 13.5. 
The saint’s refined profile. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

93
The Smithsonian Institution Lute Player 
In 1979, two years following the acquisition of the monk, 
Otto Mayr brought a second automaton to the Smithso­
nian, on loan for consideration of purchase. The lady play­
ing a lute arrived in working condition, original in almost all 
parts (FIG. 14.1A). The clockwork was fabricated not of iron 
but of brass, a significant difference arguing for a later date 
than the three male figures. David made a close study of her, 
as he had of the monk, and she was exhibited alongside the 
monk the following year in the Washington installation, The 
Clockwork Universe. Mayr launched a four-year campaign 
to raise funds for a purchase, with a successful acquisition in 
1984.1 Though she is smaller than the three male figures—the 
smallest of all the eight automata—the clockwork design and 
performance are nonetheless schematically similar if with 
less mechanical depth (FIG. 14.1B, and see FIG. 18.3, below). She 
steps along a roughly triangular course, the walking turn ac­
complished by means of the now-familiar lifted wheel and 
pivot. Between turns, she takes ten steps (each foot lifts 
and falls five times), rotates her right wrist to strum the lute 
(thirty times), and moves her left forearm from the elbow to 
carry her hand up and down the fretboard (five times). She 
turns her head once left, once right, and nods once, and her 
eyes move from front to right and back five times. The lute 
Three Sister Musicians
14
FIGURE 14.1A. (opposite)
Automaton: Lady lute player, ca. 1640–60. 
Germany. Wood, fabric, brass clockwork. 
Height: 31 cm (12³⁄₁₆ in.). A second walk­
ing automaton entered the Smithsonian 
collection, a few years after the arrival of the 
monk. National Museum of American History, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.
FIGURE 14.1B. (above) 
Automaton: Lady lute player, clockwork. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

94
CHAPTER 14
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

95
Three Sister Musicians
clockwork and sculpture had suffered extensive damage 
in the distant past. Reconstruction, in the nineteenth cen­
tury or earlier, had included a replacement head made not 
of wood but of wax, and the figure had been assigned an 
eighteenth-century date at the time it entered the museum 
collection.2 David found evidence in the clockwork that the 
automaton had formerly possessed both moving mouth 
and eyes in an original wooden head. Though perambula­
tion wheels and trailing wheel are still present, the figure’s 
feet and stepping levers are missing. She would once have 
trotted across a tabletop in a lively tour, strumming the lute 
with her right hand, fretting it with her left, while turning 
and nodding her head, very much like the Smithsonian lute 
player (though one much-reproduced early photograph 
shows the lute incorrectly reversed in the automaton’s 
hands).3 Her wooden hands, original or not, were elegantly 
carved, with long graceful fingers, and this lute too is a first-
rate miniature. The fusee arbor bears a cam that would 
once have depressed a pivot for the walking turn. The same 
arbor, David notes, carried remnants at its far end of another 
cam that would have tripped a spring-loaded hammer for 
a small bell on the train bar: a single strike just before each 
walking turn. The bell’s muffled ding! from beneath the lute 
player’s full-skirted dress would perhaps have reached the 
viewer’s ear as if from afar, and as if to prove it, the autom­
aton seemed to hear it too and turn on cue. 
With clockwork thus undone by time, the figure re­
mains inoperable. But the missing parts bear witness to the 
triumph of the lute player’s survival. This automaton is the 
only one among the figures with clockworks made of brass 
to have had a moving mouth. Such mobility of the face re­
quired sophisticated engineering and represents more than 
mimed song or speech, as we show in chapter 23.
A full thirty years after David worked on this autom­
aton in Munich, Elizabeth traveled to see it in 2020. As re­
counted in chapter 12, she had arranged two meetings in 
Munich, one to see the Deutsches Museum automaton and 
one to see the lute player at the Bavarian National Museum; 
and she had invited parties from one museum to also join 
her at the other. What made this especially valuable is that 
the Bavarian National Museum is a museum of art and cul­
ture, whereas the Deutsches Museum is dedicated to the 
history of science and technology. Each preserves a walking 
is played in mime of course; the performance is silent. There 
are no compound movements, as seen in the combined 
motion of the left arm, shoulder, and head in the monk, and 
no movement of the mouth. But the lute player has much 
poetry. She arrived in an eighteenth-century silk dress, and 
her lute too may have been replaced at some time in the 
past. The miniature lute itself is beautifully crafted, perhaps 
made by a period luthier. The wood fusee is more finely cut 
than that of the monk, with an eleven-turn spiral against the 
monk’s seven. Radiography gives a glimpse inside the lute­
nist’s head, revealing a layout similar to the monk’s, though 
simpler, with no moving parts to the jaw. The head appears 
to have survived the centuries intact. The X-ray, some­
thing uncanny in itself, deserves pause (FIG. 14.1C). The high-
resolution X-ray film shows the figure’s exquisitely carved 
face and hands. The dress registers as a faint cloud around 
the body; the wire hoops that give the dress its shape leap 
out from the wooden body shell. Acquisition papers es­
timated a date of circa 1630 for the figure; at present the 
museum gives a mid-seventeenth-century origin, between 
1640 and 1660. 
The Bavarian National Museum Lute Player
The Bavarian National Museum in Munich, where The 
Clockwork Universe exhibition premiered in 1980, has its 
own lute-playing automaton, in the collection since 1927. 
When David traveled to Munich to assist in the exhibition 
installation, he was shown the lute player. Having just com­
pleted conservation documents for the two Smithsonian 
automata, he offered to produce an analysis of this one too, 
with detailed drawings and photographs. Peter Friess (who 
would later conserve the Deutsches Museum automaton) 
was then a young conservator at the Bavarian National 
Museum and joined David in the study of this figure. Larger 
than the Smithsonian lutenist (at 155⁄8 inches, closer in 
height to the monks and saint), this figure too possesses 
a clockwork made mostly of brass (FIGS. 14.2A, B). But both 
FIGURE 14.1C. 
A beautiful ghost. X-ray of the full lute player 
clothed. Radiograph taken by staff at the 
Museum Conservation Institute (formerly 
the Conservation Analytical Laboratory), 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, 1979.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

96
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

97
Three Sister Musicians
FIGURE 14.2A, B. 
Lautenspielerin (Lute player), ca. 1600. Wood, 
brass clockwork, wax head. Height: 39.7 cm 
(15⅝ in.). Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, 
Munich. The original wooden head is lost, 
but surviving fragments in the core clockwork 
reveal cams that would have animated 
movable eyes and mouth.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

98
CHAPTER 14
The Mandolin Player in the Conservatoire 
national des arts et métiers
Another brass-works automaton, the Joueuse de mando­
line, in the museum of the Conservatoire national des arts 
et métiers (cnam) in Paris, has a lively history of shifting 
attributions (FIGS. 14.3A–14.3C). The 1882 edition of the Con­
servatoire catalog attributes her to the famous inventor 
Jacques de Vaucanson (1709–1782), with repair by Jean-
Eugène Robert-Houdin in 1859.5 A 1906 edition of the 
catalog retains this identification, adding that the figure 
entered the collection in 1853. In 1928 two photographs of 
the mandolin player appeared in Le monde des automates, 
the benchmark encyclopedia of automata by Alfred Chapuis 
and Édouard Gélis, but the authors move her to the nine­
teenth century, arguing that her mechanism is too simple for 
Vaucanson’s hand.6 The only sure information, they note, is 
the date she entered the collection, which they give as 1833. 
For its part, the Conservatoire kept its eighteenth-centu­
ry estimate, though in a still later edition of its catalog the 
attribution shifted to one Pierre Gautier, in view of the au­
tomaton’s similarity to another known lute player carrying 
this signature.7 Gautier (also spelled Gauthier), according 
to Britten’s Old Clocks and Watches and Their Makers, 
was an eighteenth-century clockmaker in Paris.8 Indeed, 
Gautier’s name apparently appears on a very similar au­
tomaton pictured in a volume by Alfred Chapuis and Ed­
mond Droz, Les automates, figures artificielles d’hommes 
et d’animaux: Histoire et technique, published in 1949.9 
Finally, the 2008 cnam online database dropped all identifi­
cations of an original maker; the figure is described as “orig­
inal or reconstructed from original parts,” dated 1775–99, 
with the Robert-Houdin restoration still noted, along with 
two additional subsequent restorations. The most recent 
database, which features three good photographs of the fig­
ure and its mechanism, patiently retains 1853 as the date of 
the automaton’s entry into the collection.10 
automaton with a remarkably similar clockwork template 
but classifies it in a different historical context. The chance 
to compare them back-to-back in the company of curators 
and conservators from both institutions was a welcome ac­
knowledgment of the hybrid nature of the automata. 
The group met first at the bnm. Raphael Beuing and 
Joachim Kreutner, curator and conservator, respectively, 
had brought the lute player out of storage and set it on a 
turntable in the conservation lab. They had removed the 
lute and dress, to permit the close view of the wooden body 
and the clockwork inside it. The lower wooden body shell 
is missing much of its circumference—a misfortune for the 
automaton but a windfall for the visual access this gives to 
the clockwork from most angles. Mainspring, fusee, gear 
train, fly, cams, and linkages: 90 percent of the machine is 
intact. Though most metal components are brass, dimen­
sions and handcraft are as robust as the iron works in the 
male figures. Kreutner had requested a microscopic sample 
analysis of the lower wooden body shell; it was identified as 
mountain ash.4 
Unable to see the lute player perform, the group fo­
cused instead on the logic of the clockwork. Kreutner slowly 
revolved the turntable so each of us could study the ma­
chine in the round. We tracked the presumed actions of the 
figure’s wooden hands back to source cams deep inside the 
machine, via levers, wires, and offset cranks. We counted 
the number of spiral cuts in the fusee arbor, which told us 
how many times the performed actions would have been 
repeated. We computed gear train ratios for the timing of 
separate actions. It was an exercise in empirical surmise, a 
collaborative effort to reverse engineer the imagined per­
formance. From the sculpture to the mechanics and back 
again, the process showed us the clockmaker’s genius. The 
lighthearted lute player was once animated by formidable 
calculation and craft.
That afternoon, schooled in the mathematics of one au­
tomaton, we walked as a group to the Deutsches Museum to 
see another automaton accomplish the performance. Could 
two figures be more different in character and play—a lady 
lutenist and an arm-waving preacher (if preacher he is)? But 
their clockworks are near copies. 
FIGURE 14.3A. 
Automate: Joueuse de mandoline 
(Automaton: Mandolin player), 1775–99. 
Wood, fabric, brass clockwork (original, or 
reconstructed from original parts). Height: 35 
cm (13¾ in.). Conservatoire national des arts 
et métiers, Paris. In the museum collection 
since 1853, this figure was the first of the 
eight walking automata to be identified and 
cataloged in a modern museum.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

99
Three Sister Musicians
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

100
FIGURE 14.3B. 
The brass clockwork of the mandolin player. 
The fusee too is made of brass rather than 
wood, an indication of the later date of this 
figure. Remnants of an original wood body shell 
remain in place over a much-operated machine. 
FIGURE 14.3C. 
Schematic diagram of the mandolin player’s 
clockwork, rear view. Conservatoire national 
des arts et métiers, catalogue du musée, sec­
tion Z, automates et mécanismes à musique 
(Paris, 1960), 54. An excellent if simplified 
illustration of the core gear train shared by 
most of the walking automata. Visible are the 
mainspring barrel with gut line to fusee, the 
fusee wheel to second arbor pinion, second 
arbor wheel to third arbor pinion, third arbor 
wheel to (hidden) fly pinion, and stopwork lever 
to interrupt the fly. But no cams are present 
within this automaton’s clockwork: the arms 
are moved by offset cranks on the outer ends of 
upper arbors in the gear train.
But the revisions are welcome, for this automaton 
carries the earliest published documentation of any of the 
automata we compare in this book. Though her origin re­
mains in doubt, the record of restorations, going back to 
1859, is invaluable for its candid disclosure of radical repair. 
Contemplating the lost wooden head of the bnm lute player, 
or the now-remade feet and hand of the Deutsches Museum 
figure, or the cutouts for perambulation wheels in the stand­
ing Budapest saint, or simply the parade of cloth garments 
in updated styles on earlier machines: all are signs of other 
hands in later shops. The one constant is the design of the 
clockwork. If the cnam joueuse dates to the last quarter of 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

101
Three Sister Musicians
mechanics follow suit: the right wrist is pivoted via transfer 
linkages inside the fixed wooden shoulder and elbow. The 
left forearm moves side to side from the elbow, via a linkage 
through the shoulder, drawing the hand back and forth along 
the fretboard of the mandolin. The left thumb hooks behind 
the mandolin’s neck to form a loose yoke so the hand would 
slide along the neck as if by intent. Further, the swing arc of 
the forearm requires some give at the wrist, and the wrist 
joint must hinge freely to accommodate it, the hand thus 
gracefully following the forearm lead. The resulting perfor­
mance will be an elegant illusion. 
“Original or reconstructed from original parts.” So 
similar to the earlier machines is the clockwork inside this 
automaton that we wondered, is it a very good copy, a cen­
tury on? Or could it be an earlier machine, redeployed in­
side a mostly newer body sometime before the museum 
acquired it?
One clue can come from close inspection of the clock­
wheels themselves, to determine whether the wheel teeth 
were hand cut, as were those in the earlier automata, or cut 
with a wheel-cutting engine, a faster production process 
that came into use in seventeenth-century clockmaking 
shops. Hand-cut wheels often still carry the clockmaker’s 
layout marks on the wheel face (see FIG. 12.6), and teeth show 
slight irregularities, since each tooth was individually cut, 
freehand. Engine-cut wheel teeth are more uniform. The 
difference can be an indication of age, though not a binding 
one, since clocks and automata continued to be made by 
traditional methods well into the eighteenth century, par­
ticularly in smaller shops. For a closer look at the wheel­
work in the mandolin player, Catillon took a series of micro­
photographs for David to study. The images show no layout 
marks on the wheel faces, for the original surfaces had been 
filed and wire-brushed either at the time they were made 
or in later cleaning. Yet David detects enough irregularity 
in the teeth to believe they were individually cut by hand.12 
The caveat of course is that seeing something only in 
a photograph, devoid of scale (such clockwheel teeth can 
be less than a millimeter wide each), and above all not side 
by side with a comparable wheel of proven date, forces 
even a clockmaker’s opinion into surmise. We defer to the 
long-standing expertise of the Conservatoire in assigning 
the date of the automaton.
the eighteenth century, the automaton is a tribute to the 
longevity of this design. She may be the most recently made 
of the eight walking automata in our study, but thanks to 
the Conservatoire she was the first to be publicly identified. 
In January 2020 Elizabeth traveled to Paris to view the 
automaton. Cyrille Foasso, head of Scientific and Mechanical 
Instruments at cnam, and Rémi Catillon, head of Restoration, 
kindly agreed to a meeting, and we were joined by museum 
conservators Perrine Starck and Marie Charet. The figure is 
displayed in the museum’s dramatic, darkened Théâtre des 
Automates, home also to the famous dulcimer player, “La 
joueuse de tympanon,” made by David Roentgen and Peter 
Kinzing for Marie-Antoinette in 1785.11 Rémi Catillon un­
locked the heavy glass vitrine door and carefully lifted out 
the small mandolin player and carried her to a temporary ta­
ble nearby. The costume could not be removed, but the skirts 
could be lifted for a glimpse of the clockwork (...la mariée 
mise à nu). Armed with flashlights, we studied the body, the 
face and hands, the costume and mandolin, and the interior 
wheelwork, to try to divine original from repair.
She is small, just an inch taller than the Smithsonian 
lute player. She wears an eighteenth-century peasant cos­
tume and a bonnet over a wig of real hair, her garments in 
far better condition than those of the Smithsonian lady. But 
viewed in the flashlight’s beam, her wooden face shows earlier 
paint layers partly chipped away, now overlaid with newer 
paint. A wooden torso to the waist appears intact, but only 
fragments remain of a lower wooden body shell. Instead, ver­
tical brass strips had been added to the frame to keep the 
garments from catching in the gear train. Significant repairs 
to the clockwork are visible. As with the Munich lutenist, the 
missing body shell allowed an unbidden view of the clock­
work. Unique among the kindred automata, the fusee in this 
machine is made not of wood but of brass, one argument for 
a later date of manufacture. Though no longer operated, her 
performance would match prototype: hands ply the mando­
lin, head and eyes move, feet step forward under hoopskirt 
hem, the walking turn won by lifted wheel and pivot. The 
motions of her two arms are similar to those of the Smithso­
nian Institution and bnm lute players: the right hand strums, 
the left hand frets, and the mandolin itself is supported by a 
hidden bracket attached to the figure’s waist. The right arm 
is animated just at the wrist, the left at the elbow. Internal 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

103
The venerable cittern-playing lady in the Kunsthistorisches 
Museum in Vienna (FIGS. 15.1, 15.2) received the first in-depth 
study of any of the walking automata addressed in this 
book, and partly for this reason she has come to be seen in 
recent scholarship as a prototype for the others. As intro­
duced in chapter 5, her appearance in a private collection 
was reported in 1926 by the horological historian Ernst von 
Bassermann-Jordan. Citing the sixteenth-century testimony 
of the Spanish annalist Ambrosio de Morales, Bassermann-
Jordan suggested this automaton might be kin to the dancing 
lady Morales described, made by Philip’s court clockmaker 
Juanelo Turriano. “La dama que tañe y dança” (the lady 
that plays and dances), Morales had called Juanelo’s little 
drum-playing figure, using the word automaton to list her 
among the mechanical marvels made by Spain’s famous 
engineer.1 Enough historians had already quoted this pas­
sage in referring to Juanelo’s lost masterpieces that it seems 
The Vienna Cittern Player
15
FIGURE 15.1. (opposite) 
Automat, Cisterspielerin (Automaton, Cittern 
player), second half of the sixteenth century. 
Spain (?). Painted wood, linen, silk brocade, 
iron clockwork. Height: 44 cm (175⁄₁₆ in.). 
Kunstkammer, Kunsthistorisches Museum, 
Vienna. See also FIGURE 5.1. In the collec­
tion since 1934, once attributed to Juanelo 
Turriano. Scholars writing about this regal 
figure in the first half of the twentieth century 
laid the foundation for the study of all the early 
walking automata.
FIGURE 15.2. (above) 
The cittern player’s iron clockwork. Arguably 
the earliest of the eight walking automata. The 
structure of the clockwork is unique to this fig­
ure: the mainspring barrel is placed not above 
the fusee but horizontally behind it; the arbors 
of the gear train step up in diagonal progres­
sion within a canted U-shaped frame.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

104
CHAPTER 15
as if the words were waiting for the Vienna figure when she 
appeared in the 1920s—and Bassermann-Jordan had the 
command to propose a match.
She plays a cittern, not a drum, but like Juanelo’s 
dama she performs and walks in a circle on a tabletop. At 
first appearance she is similar to the lutenists described 
above: a rolling three-wheel chassis driven by mainspring 
and fusee, delicate feet stepping forth at the hem of an 
ornate robe, hand strumming the instrument, head grace­
fully turning. But her walking path is adjustable: the trailing 
wheel, like the rudder of a boat, can be set in advance by 
hand for a circular or a straight march. The other autom­
ata are programmed by hidden cams for specific paces and 
turns. Her iron mechanism places her considerably ear­
lier in date than the brass-works lutenists and mandolin-
playing lady. Even among the figures with iron mechanisms, 
the U-shaped serpentine frame of her clockwork is struc­
turally different from the posted-frame configuration of the 
others (see FIG. 15.2). The diagonally stepped arrangement of 
the arbors of the gear train is singular to this clockwork, with 
the mainspring barrel sitting not above the fusee but hori­
zontally behind it.2 The feet are raised and lowered by pegs 
attached directly to the perambulation wheels. A rack-and-
pinion assembly generates the turning of the head rather 
than the easier-to-make pin and slotted lever we see in the 
other machines. Her eyes and mouth are fixed: the head 
itself contains no moving parts. If this is a more primitive 
machine, it may well be the first of its kind, a prime inno­
vation. The sculpture and costume meanwhile are resplen­
dent. The great train of her brocade cloak is longer than she 
is tall.
Bassermann-Jordan’s account of the cittern player 
is the subject of a full chapter in his 1926 opus, Alte Uhren 
und ihre Meister. Titled “An Automaton from the Era of 
Emperor Charles V,” the chapter opens with the lament that 
automata from antiquity, from Arabic invention, from the 
wonders of the fifteenth-century Burgundian court, have 
survived only in the written record:
The earliest preserved automaton [depicting a human] 
known to me dates from the mid-sixteenth century. It is a 
female figure, now dressed in the kind of ornate costume 
common around the end of the sixteenth century,...the 
height of a medium-sized children’s doll of modern times. 
The torso houses the iron works, entirely constructed of 
components commonly used in mid-sixteenth-century 
clockmaking. The figure is propelled by two wheels, 
moving its feet forward and back, its right hand strum­
ming a lute, which it firmly holds with its left. It turns its 
head alternately right and left. The date of origin of the 
doll—not after 1550—can best be deduced by the broad 
shape of its shoes. It was originally clothed in a low-cut 
white linen shirt. The automaton was treated carefully 
and kept with respect: when its original dress was worn 
out and no longer in fashion, a new one was made about 
forty years later, in the style of international court cos­
tumes of the nobility coming out of Spain at the time....
The figure wears a grand coat with a train, and with it 
a bonnet, which must once have been adorned with a 
feather. The predominant colors of the silk fabrics are 
red and yellow. The face, finished in enamel-like colors, 
has been modified in later times; the lute is still the orig­
inal. Thus this little treasure has come down to us, likely 
the only remaining one of its kind, to this day still run­
ning about patiently—with much noise—and executing 
its movements, when a caring and knowledgeable hand 
winds its spring. The doll is old Austrian private prop­
erty, having been inherited from the Netherlands.3 
Bassermann-Jordan proceeds with a detailed delibera­
tion on the origins of the figure, citing both Spanish and 
German spheres, and concludes that although there may 
be a Nuremberg precedent for the clockwork, the outward 
character of the lady seems distinctly Spanish. 
His comments are referenced in turn in Chapuis and 
Gélis, Le monde des automates, published just two years 
later, in 1928, in which a chapter on the history of walking 
automata opens with this figure.4 Chapuis and Gélis were 
the first to record that the automaton could advance in a 
straight line or follow the path of a circle, a design unique to 
this machine.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

105
The Vienna Cittern Player
Whether or not the Vienna cittern player may claim 
precedence, Bassermann-Jordan’s lingering description of 
her, his historical perspective, and his horologist’s eye are 
foundational for the study of the walking automata.5 We 
return to his analysis in chapter 20.
The cittern player entered the Collection of Sculp-
ture and Decorative Arts (Sammlung für Plastik und 
Kunstgewerbe) in the Kunsthistoriches Museum in 1934. 
The 1935 edition of the museum catalog identifies her as 
the work of “Giovanni della Torre (Juanelo Torreano)...sup­
posedly made for Charles V.”6 It seems safe to assume that 
Bassermann-Jordan’s educated guesswork influenced the 
attribution. The next year, 1936, the art historian Fritz Saxl, 
head of the Warburg Institute (which had moved to London 
from Hamburg in 1933), gave a lecture at the British Academy 
titled “Costumes and Festivals of Milanese Society under 
Spanish Rule” and cited the costume of the cittern player.
We know very little about a dress, especially about a 
woman’s dress, if we do not know how it looked when 
its wearer walked through a room, mounted a staircase, 
sat down, etc.... How did the wives of the Marchese 
del Vasto, Muzio Sforza, and their friends look as they 
moved about in their costumes?. . . [A]ll the art of 
Titian cannot—and is not intended to—give us an idea 
of the real form and grace of movement of his models. 
Fortunately, there is in the Vienna museum a mechan­
ical doll, which serves to supplement our imagination. 
We know that the Marchese del Vasto introduced to 
Charles V a Lombard engineer, Giovanni Torriano from 
Cremona, who made similar mechanical dolls.7
Saxl described the doll’s motion in words only a wit­
ness seeing it in person could write.
A combination of stateliness and grace characterizes 
its movement. The feet move slowly, the figure seems 
to float. The skirt disguises the shape of the body com­
pletely. In contrast, the hands and head are in free and 
elegant motion. The head describes exquisite curves to 
the music produced by the sensitive delicate hands.8 
Apparently he had asked for a film to be made of the cit­
tern player in performance, and he showed the film in his 
London lecture, thanking Leo Planiscig, then director of 
the Collection of Sculpture and Decorative Arts at the 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, for making it. In 2021, the 
film was recovered in the Warburg archives and sent to 
Paulus Rainer, current curator of the Kunstkammer at the 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, who kindly allowed Elizabeth 
and David to view an mp4 copy.9 If reading Saxl’s text brings 
a little wince at its unexamined liberty in seeking the body 
under the dress, is this not what we too are doing (with a bit 
less offense) when we see the automaton move? Watching 
the film is an extraordinary chance to experience this leg­
acy figure in motion, a high point of all our work on this 
book. Indeed, her head describes exquisite curves to the 
music we imagine she is playing. We returned to the pho­
tographs of her clockwork to look again at the rack-and-
pinion assembly that animates her head (see FIG. 15.2), real­
izing that this mechanism not only turns the head from side 
to side, but gently tilts and nods it in the process, a com­
pounded motion that lends a dreamy lilt to her performance. 
She is listening as she plays! Meanwhile, her right hand is 
moving like a bird’s wing on the strings of the cittern, too 
fast to see its form (frames per second battling teeth per 
clockwheel). As she slowly moves forward, her feet step 
forth from her hem, maybe two steps per second. There is 
enough residual momentum within the clockwork to give 
her left arm and the cittern some slight motion. The over­
all effect is fluid and hypnotic. There is nothing mechani­
cal about it. We know very little about an automaton, any 
automaton, if we do not know how it looks when it moves.
The museum’s 1966 edition of its catalog was more 
circumspect about the origins of the cittern player, adding 
the names Jakob Bulmann (a Nuremberg locksmith and 
clockmaker) and Christoph Margraf (court clockmaker to 
Emperor Rudolf II in Prague) to the name of Juanelo as 
makers of mobile automata.10 Correspondence in 2000 with 
Rudolf Distelberger, then director of the Kunstkammer at 
the Kunsthistorisches Museum, informed Elizabeth that 
the cittern player functioned effectively until 1964. At 44 
centimeters in height, she is the tallest of the eight autom­
ata we compare. Upper body, hands, head, and feet are poly­
chromed wood. For her linen and silk brocade costume, the 
catalog suggests a French character but adds that the fluctu­
ation of fashions could also point to Spain, the Netherlands, 
or Italy. Though no longer operable, the figure is beautifully 
cared for, and she holds pride of place among automata in 
the museum’s collection.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

107
A Late Arrival from Milan
16
Well into our work we were astonished to learn of the 
appearance of another automaton whose clockwork design 
and appearance locate it squarely in the family of early 
walking figures (FIG. 16.1). A lady musician, she represents an 
elderly court matron once playing a drum, we learn. On loan 
from a private collection, she had appeared in an ambitious 
2005 exhibition in Trent celebrating the history of Italian 
horology, La misura del tempo: L’antico splendore dell’orol­
ogeria italiana dal XV al XVIII secolo (The measure of 
time: The antique splendor of Italian clockmaking from the 
fifteenth to the eighteenth century), curated by the histo­
rian Giuseppe Brusa. The exhibition catalog included essays 
by two dozen authors, among them Silvio Bedini, and it was 
Bedini who alerted us to the automaton.1 In the catalog she 
is identified, “Automa: Nobil matrona in atto di suonare un 
timpano” (Automaton: Noble matron in the act of playing 
FIGURE 16.1. 
Automa: Nobil matrona in atto di suonare un 
timpano (Automaton: Noble matron in the 
act of playing a drum), ca. 1560. Wood, iron 
clockwork. Height: 38 cm (15 in.). Private col­
lection, Milan. Shown for the first time in 2005; 
restored by the Milan clockmaker Giorgio 
Gregato. A grande dame to be reckoned with. 
Remnants of a wig, fancy bonnet, and dress 
not shown.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

108
CHAPTER 16
horologist and conservator of antique clocks. Gregato 
declares that this automaton is the only specimen from 
the late Renaissance that corresponds in movement and 
appearance to Morales’s report.3
Gregato, who also contributed the description of 
this figure in the 2005 catalog, further proposes that the 
automaton is mentioned in the inventory of the famous 
seventeenth-century collection of the Milanese nobleman 
Manfredo Settala.4 Published in 1666, the inventory lists a 
musical ensemble of moving figures one of which is a “nobil 
Matrona in atto di suonare un Timpano.”5
As we soon learned, Giorgio Gregato himself restored 
this automaton in 1989. Master clockmaker and expert in 
Renaissance clocks and scientific instruments, Gregato 
apprenticed with Luigi Pippa in the 1960s, and in 1972 he 
established his own restoration laboratory in Milan that 
he runs to this day.6 He has conserved historic clocks for 
the Biblioteca Ambrosiana, the Museo nazionale della 
scienza e della tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci, the Castello 
Sforzesco, and the Museo del Risorgimento, among muse­
ums in Milan; Savoy clocks in the Royal Palace of Turin; and 
many other revered timepieces throughout northern Italy. 
A former expert for the auction house Finarte, he has also 
played coordinating roles in significant exhibitions of clocks, 
including the 2005 La misura del tempo in Trent, where the 
newly conserved automaton made its debut. 
He welcomed Elizabeth to his Milan workshop on 
May 13, 2019, for a visit to see the lady. As would happen 
time and again, the encounter with the actual automaton 
brought a haptic jolt of misrecognition. Why is it that expec­
tation, or memory, makes things larger than they are? In an 
instant, like Alice in Wonderland, the lady shrank to real 
size, in real space. Amazement at her small dimension is not 
unlike our wonder at the tininess of an infant’s fingers but 
in this case an uneasy wonder, at a thing made long ago by 
human hands. The figure is twice aged: a portrait of a fierce 
old woman, the portrait itself is now fiercely old. (We hope 
she retains this double triumph, and no one dares repaint her 
face.) Fairly glaring at us, she held a makeshift drum in one 
hand, a short drum stick in the other (FIGS. 16.2, 16.3). Gregato 
set her on the immaculate floor of his showroom, wound 
the fusee, released the stopwork, and stood back. Instantly 
she took off, madly beating the drum, her head bobbing in 
a drum). “Maker unknown, probably from Milan. Mid-17th 
century. Iron.” We were thunderstruck. An iron-clockwork 
automaton like the monk and his brothers—and the photo­
graphs revealed what was clearly a movable mouth. 
The carved wooden head is extraordinary: deep-
set eyes, Roman nose, delicate cheekbones and ears, and 
a marionette-style movable chin with seams disguised by 
expressive wrinkles and pendulous jowls. This is no maiden 
lute player but a grande dame to be reckoned with. She is 
pictured without dress but adorned with beaded hoop ear­
rings. Remnants of hair whisker her head. The wooden cap 
that forms the back of the head is not glued on, as in the 
other automata, but is attached with thread, laced through 
tiny holes behind the ears. The familiar lathe-turned body 
shell in wood is of a piece with the upper torso, the torso 
gracefully carved. Openings in the shell permit a glimpse 
of the iron clockwork within: mainspring, wooden fusee, 
pillars, cams, and elegantly detailed mainspring barrel 
clickwork, fully intact and startlingly similar to that of the 
Smithsonian monk. Even her height is close: 15 inches, to the 
monk’s 16. The aperture in the wooden shell of her upper 
back is tapered and arched, like the handsome architecture 
of a clock casing. In the monk the same aperture (for access 
to the mechanism inside) is only a roughed-out hatch (see 
FIG. 10.20). Dainty feet step out from the body shell, carved 
and painted as buckled slippers. The catalog describes her 
performance: “The automaton walks, following a triangular 
path, the feet move, the head turns, the eyes roll and the 
mouth opens, the wrist of the right hand rotates as if to 
strike a tambourine [tamburello].” 
The automaton was shown again in 2016, this time 
in an exhibition in Cremona, Janello Torriani: Genio del 
Rinascimento, celebrating Cremona’s famous native son. 
Curated by Cristiano Zanetti and Cinzia Galli, sponsored 
in part by the city of Cremona and the Fundación Juanelo 
Turriano in Madrid, this show too was accompanied by an 
in-depth exhibition catalog, important for its new research 
by Zanetti and a host of distinguished authors on the life 
and legacy of Juanelo Turriano.2 Here the date of the autom­
aton is moved back to the second half of the sixteenth cen­
tury, with a tentative attribution to Juanelo, now supported 
by Ambrosio de Morales’s account of Juanelo’s dancing lady. 
The catalog entry was written by Giorgio Gregato, Milanese 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

109
A Late Arrival from Milan
every direction, eyes rolling, mouth chomping like a piston. 
If the sight of her was shocking, the performance was more 
shocking still. The slow motion of the monk was a distant 
dream compared to this wide-awake creature. Seen from 
above, she charged back and forth on the floor in running 
steps and tight turns, Gregato pointing out that she tracks 
the path of a five-pointed star. Indeed, not a far cry from 
Ambrosio de Morales’s description of Juanelo’s automaton: 
“a lady more than one tercia high who, placed on a table, 
dances all over it to the sound of a drum which she mean­
while beats herself, and goes round in circles, returning to 
where she started.”7.
Gregato brought out photographs taken prior to his 
restoration that showed the clockwork intact but cemented 
under rust and corrosion. He had dismantled it down to 
arbors and pins, cleaned every surface, and carried out 
needed repairs. The wooden body was missing the left arm 
and hand, both feet, and large sections of the body shell. 
He engaged a colleague, a wood carver, to remake these; 
the original wood was identified as poplar. A provisional 
drum (made from a bottle cap) awaits further research. 
The automaton had arrived dressed in once-elaborate silks 
and petticoats now in tatters, with a bonnet of lace over 
real hair, possibly early eighteenth-century replacements. 
In her right hand she had held, not a drum stick, but a fan. 
Early video footage shows her feverishly fanning herself—
perhaps more typical than drum pounding for a lady of that 
age (Elizabeth’s opinion). Gregato identifies the sculpted 
swells at her neck as goiters, a story unto itself about art’s 
imitation of life in this era. When she opens her mouth, a few 
teeth are now spied missing—but she has a tongue! 
A video of the automaton in performance is now avail­
able on YouTube, with Gregato himself winding her up and 
illuminating her clockwork.8
FIGURES 16.2 and 16.3. 
The matron performing in Giorgio Gregato’s 
shop, Milan, May 13, 2019.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

110
The Category Challenge
17
Half of the family of eight automata considered here has 
appeared in the public record only within the past fifty years. 
Conservation carried out on the newcomers has shed new 
light on all of them, affording a better understanding of what 
is sixteenth-century craft and what is later repair, alteration, 
or copy. Clearly, a distinct class of early walking automata 
is just now coming into view. Their appearance puts new 
pressure on the search for archival references. Primary text 
sources—like the objects they describe—undergo histories 
of neglect and rediscovery. Uncertainty about makers and 
origins have deprived these automata of the reputation they 
deserve in the histories of art and technology. We argue that 
they are the first true androids: solo self-propelled at-large 
artificial beings in human form. 
The very task of classifying them poses a category 
challenge. Current-day institutions, disciplines, and mar­
kets have named and sorted them in ways that have kept 
them apart. Housed in distant kinds of museums, or in sep­
arate departments of like museums, they suffer a mixed his­
tory of reclassification and taxonomy. Sometimes the host 
museums themselves change names and focus, as when the 
Smithsonian Institution in 1980 changed the name of its 
Museum of History and Technology to National Museum 
of American History. Where, then, did its un-American 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

111
Alfred Chapuis and Édouard Gélis give a clear defi­
nition of the word android in their 1928 encyclopedia, Le 
monde des automates:
An “android” is, in the broadest etymological sense, an 
“automaton of a human figure.” However, the idea that 
this automaton moves by its own powers is the exact 
definition; we will adopt it therefore ourselves, adding 
that the particular androids that we will consider here 
are gifted with four clearly defined functions: they 
speak, they walk, they write or draw, or they play a musi­
cal instrument. A bell tower jaquemart [bell striker] we 
will not consider an android then, any more than, for 
example, the small figures we’ve seen moving in clocks 
or watches with automatons.3
Chapuis and Gélis locate the makers of the first true androids 
in the sixteenth century, and they offer chapters on each of 
the four declared functions. Chapter 23, “Les automates et 
androïdes marchants” (Walking automata and androids), 
opens with the Vienna cittern and Paris mandolin players, 
the earliest walkers then known to them. Anticipating the 
protest that these two should be considered music-playing 
androids as well, the authors point out that the musicians 
only mime the play and that their instruments “make not the 
slightest sound.”4 One might argue that the act of walking 
too is only mime; the figures only appear to walk, their feet 
step forth in mock stride as they roll along on hidden wheels. 
Here, of course, is the ever-shifting distinction between the 
“real” and the “seeming” that characterizes all stages in the 
evolution of the android. From a theater of illusion to a sci­
entific model of human movement, the increasingly sophis­
ticated command of mechanics in the next two centuries led 
to the great works of Jacques de Vaucanson, the Jaquet-Droz 
family, Henri Maillardet, Abraham and David Roentgen and 
Peter Kinzing, and others, who made androids that indeed 
literally do what they appear to do: their fingers strike and 
sound notes on flutes and harpsichords, torsos heave in 
audible sighs, hands dip pens in bottles of ink and draw let­
ters and pictures on paper, eyes follow the progress.5 Such 
figures had their own advanced valence of pretense, how­
ever, best exemplified in the Jaquet-Droz writer, who pauses 
from time to time to look up and think (FIG. 17.1). Vaucanson’s 
life-size duck was among the most famous: it fluttered its 
feathers, pecked and ate grains of corn, digested them, and 
monk belong? Originally installed in the great Hall of 
Timekeeping as an example of early European clockwork 
technology, the monk was removed when this space was dis­
mantled in 1997 to make way for a new exhibition, On Time, 
which examined timekeeping from an American perspec­
tive.1 In 2008 the monk reappeared briefly as a side feature 
in an exhibition of robotic automobiles. (As we write, the 
monk is on view again at the museum in a fine show titled, 
Discovery and Revelation: Religion, Science, and Making 
Sense of Things, curated by Peter Manseau and Andrew 
Ali Aghapour.) The saint in the Iparművészeti Múzeum 
in Budapest is classified under the category “Decorative 
Arts.” The Deustches Museum in Munich cared for its fig­
ure within the Department of Energy, Technology, Power 
Engineering, and Automation Technology, where it was 
exhibited in the context of the history of computers.2 But 
a new home for this figure is being prepared as we write: 
the exhibition Robotics will open at the museum in 2022. 
The Conservatoire national des arts et métiers in Paris 
has addressed the problem in elegant style with its newly 
designated Théâtre des Automates, placing its mandolin 
player in the company of objects of mechanical theater and 
music. The history of religious icons could make its own 
claim to the ecclesiastical automata. Art history owes them 
allegiance as sculpture. The study of anatomy and morphol­
ogy is still informed by models from the clockwork para­
digm. The cittern player, acquired in 1934, was placed in the 
Kunsthistorisches Museum’s Collection of Sculpture and 
Decorative Arts (Sammlung für Plastik und Kunstgewerbe), 
the collection renamed in 1990 the Kunstkammer, where 
treasures of every genre are gathered in the historical 
context of the great sixteenth- and seventeenth-century 
Habsburg art and wonder cabinets. Ancestors of the mod­
ern museum, Kunstkammern were repositories for as wide 
and mixed a compass of objects as possible; each princely 
collector categorized things in imperial if recondite order. 
An argument could still be made for classifying automata by 
their intended effect, as empirical wonders. 
But it is no wonder now that so little opportunity has 
emerged for considering the walking figures as a group, and 
for comprehending them as a singular class. In this book we 
have helplessly defaulted to naming them by the museums 
or cities where fate brought them: a near abandonment of 
classification. We bring them together now. 
The Category Challenge
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

112
CHAPTER 17
pooped. The duck—now known only through references 
and photographs (FIG. 17.2)—required some covert advance 
preparation for its performance, as Jessica Riskin relates in 
her essay “The Defecating Duck, or, the Ambiguous Origins 
of Artificial Life.”6
If their wooden feet never quite touched the ground, 
the sixteenth-century walking automata were nonethe­
less ambulatory machines: peripatetic, processional, on the 
move. They were self-propelled, their means of motion, 
self-contained. “Self-contained” is key, because the size 
of the clockwork power source for all automata, then and 
later, demanded space. Cabinet-consoles acted as bases for 
automata, not unlike the sculptor’s traditional solution to the 
problem of supporting an upright two-legged statue against 
gravity. For an automaton—a moving statue—the clockwork 
in the base was also the furnace in the cellar. Cellar space 
only expanded in the centuries to come as massive stacks of 
FIGURE 17.1. 
Pierre and Henri-Louis Jaquet-Droz, L’Écrivain 
(The writer), 1774, Musée d’art et d’his­
toire Neuchâtel, Switzerland. Photograph 
from Alfred Chapuis and Edmond Droz, Les 
automates, figures artificielles d’hommes et 
d’animaux: Histoire et technique (Neuchâtel: 
Éditions du Griffon, 1949), 404. In the theater 
of lifelike androids, how “real” is the perfor­
mance? The boy dips the quill in the inkwell 
and pens a Cartesian riddle: “Je ne pense pas...
ne serais-Je donc point?” (I do not think, am I 
therefore not?).
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

113
The Category Challenge
cams and linkages delivered an ever more lifelike repertoire 
of motion to the automaton perched above it (again, see the 
duck, FIG. 17.2). Of the best-known automata produced in the 
eighteenth century at the height of the clockwork paradigm, 
only the Jaquet-Droz writer and his brother the draftsman 
famously contain their mechanisms entirely within their bod­
ies. As for the imitation of simple walking, the simulation of 
bipedal locomotion has been achieved only in the computer 
age, with on-board hardware to calculate weight transfer and 
balance. The later examples of walking automata in Chapuis 
and Gélis are primarily drawings and patent diagrams. 
Thus in defining the android, Chapuis and Gélis ruled 
out bell tower automata, as well as small automata on figure 
clocks, for these gain their animation from external clock­
works. The same distinction must hold for many of the cel­
ebrated composite automata made in the late Renaissance, 
the same period as the monk and the kindred walkers. As 
we mentioned in chapter 11, the showstoppers in the 1980 
exhibition The Clockwork Universe: German Clocks and 
Automata, 1550–1650 were a selection of marvelously 
ornate machines in the form of carriages, ships, towers, 
and processions, many bearing multiple animated figures. 
Larger pieces might harbor hidden mechanical organs 
comprising bellows and pipes, powered by more than one 
heavy mainspring, with separate gear trains. These were 
stationary machines, with figures moving on a stage or a 
platform—detailed settings extending the narrative while 
also providing space for the clockwork. A prime example in 
the show was the Trompeterautomat made in 1582 by the 
Augsburg master Hans Schlottheim (1544/47–1624/25): an 
ebony tower with ten small trumpeters and a drummer at 
the ramparts and an internal pipe organ, on loan from the 
Kunsthistorisches Museum.7 But mobile constructions were 
produced as well, the pedestals themselves set on wheels 
to move the whole ensemble across a table: Diana astride a 
centaur, flanked by hounds; Minerva with satyrs, enthroned 
on a horse-drawn triumphwagen. Heads turn, eyes move, 
horses leap, the centaur shoots an arrow.8 Mobile ensembles 
like these were intended for the banquet table, fashioned in 
dazzling silver and bronze, fire-gilded and set with gems. 
The materials themselves demonstrated wealth, but they 
also retained medieval associations with magic for many 
onlookers.9 Some were designed for drinking games, popular 
FIGURE 17.2. 
A photograph said to show the ruins of Jacques 
de Vaucanson’s legendary duck, ca. 1890s. The 
duck, first displayed in Paris in 1738, astounded 
witnesses for its visible as well as its invisible 
performance. It fluttered its gilded copper 
feathers, dabbled in a cup of water, quacked, 
stretched its neck to peck kernels of corn from 
the hand of its maker, swallowed the corn, and 
before long, produced a convincing excretion. 
Vaucanson declared his duck digested its food 
by chemical dissolution in its stomach, as in the 
real creature. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

114
INTRODUCTION
in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century princely courts. The 
centaur’s arrow would single out a guest who then had to 
contrive an erudite toast and empty his wineglass. 
A sixteenth-century mobile automaton that dis­
penses with a base is the spectacular gilded silver nef, or 
table ship, also by Schlottheim, made for Rudolf II in 1585 
(FIG. 17.3A, B). This marvel is kept in the Kunsthistorisches 
Museum Kunstkammer, displayed not far from the lady 
cittern player. Inscribed and dated, with the Habsburg double-
headed eagle enameled on its banners, the 26-inch-long 
miniature galleon rolls along a table while multiple tiny 
musicians perform on deck, the figure of the emperor at 
the ship-of-state helm. Two internal pipe organs and a hide 
drum deliver the music. Discreet wheels advance the ship 
forward on the tabletop. Clockworks and organs are hidden 
within the ship’s generous hull. The performance culminates 
in a firecracker burst from four of the ship’s ten cannons, 
FIGURE 17.3A, B. 
Hans Schlottheim, Automat in Form eines 
Schiffes (Automaton in the form of a ship), 
1585, Augsburg. Gilded silver, copper alloy, 
enamel, oil paint; iron clockwork. 67 × 66 × 
67 cm (26⅜ × 26 × 26⅜ in.). Kunstkammer, 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna. A mobile 
machine for an emperor’s banquet table. Far 
from the material realism of the solo walkers, 
the gleaming ship is defined by its costly 
metalcraft and technical bravura, along with 
enough space in the hull for hidden clockworks 
to animate a spectacle of characters, music, 
and cannon fire. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

115
The Category Challenge
complete with flames and smoke. Guests must have leaped 
from their chairs.10 With its clockwork components made 
of iron, not unsimilar in fabrication and date to those of the 
monk, the ship is an example of a mobile automaton with, 
among much else, simply a lot more room for a drive mech­
anism. And what a mechanism: three separate mainsprings, 
fusees, and gear trains, cued to operate in sequence.
The ship (and others by Schlottheim and peers) 
combined state-of-the-art technology and bravura met­
alsmithing to create a potent symbol of Habsburg seafar­
ing imperialism.11 Modest indeed are the solo walkers by 
comparison! But their own mechanical competence is just 
as sophisticated. What all the mobile machines share is a 
designed intent to interact in a direct way with spectators—
on a table. At least the lute players too might have performed 
on festive occasions. Indeed, Adelheid von Herz included 
one additional walking figure in her thesis that we have not 
yet mentioned in this study—another cittern player—very 
much meant for the banquet table. This is a small early sev­
enteenth-century figure, Joueuse de théorbe (in the collec­
tion of the Musée d’Horlogerie du Locle, Château des Monts, 
Le Locle, Switzerland) (FIG. 17.4).12 Like the kindred cittern 
and lute players, she rolls along a tabletop, strums her 
instrument, and moves her head, tiny feet stepping in turn 
from beneath a bell-like skirt. But the full figure is entirely of 
cast bronze, fire-gilded to a high gleam. The dress is chased 
in a virtuoso imitation of brocade. Far from the polychrome 
realism of the wooden figures, this exquisitely fashioned 
bronze musician is more sculpture than android. Von Herz 
refers to her as an “unechte Androide” (an imitation of an 
android), suggesting that the clockwork was a later addi­
tion. Klaus Maurice, writing in Annette Beyer’s 1983 vol­
ume, Faszinierende Welt der Automaten (Fascinating 
world of automata), describes her intended role: “The lute 
player was used to entertain guests at banquet tables. It 
walked down the table, and where it stopped, the chosen 
guest would have to deliver on a preordained pledge. Some 
of these machines were drinking cups filled with liqueur or 
intoxicating wine.”13 Here is an automaton that belongs with 
Diana and Minerva and the masterpieces of South German 
metalsmithing, this one meant to perform an entertaining 
roulette on a festive occasion. But here too is none other 
than a solo walker whose mechanism is hidden on board. 
FIGURE 17.4. 
Joueuse de théorbe, first half of the seven­
teenth century. South Germany (?). Gilded 
bronze and copper. Height: 25 cm (913⁄₁₆ in.). 
Musée d’Horlogerie du Locle, Château des 
Monts, Le Locle, Switzerland. A solo walker with 
a lute or cittern (here called a theorbo), possi­
bly once intended to contain a hidden drinking 
cup filled with wine. At the table where she 
stops, that guest had to discover the wine and 
drink without spilling. The body and dress are 
entirely of bronze; the maiden is more sculpture 
than android. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

116
CHAPTER 17
Further, those in our study are fashioned of materials 
that are as close as art could muster to imitating the matter 
of the body. No fire gilding, gold, or gems mark them first as 
costly objects of royal prestige. They bear flesh of carved 
and polychromed wood in the tradition of trompe l’oeil 
sculpture, a tradition we say more about in chapter 25. They 
wear robes of real cloth that slip and crease over moving 
limbs. The female figures, coiffed with real hair, strum tiny 
lutes or citterns made of wood, pegs, and strings. Such mate­
rials may be humble, but they win their virtuosity by their 
mimetic realism: of a piece with the lifelike primum mobile 
of the clockwork inside them. The Greek mathematician 
and engineer Hero of Alexandria said an automaton had to 
be small enough so that no person could hide inside it to 
operate it.18 Only the small size of the figures—their weight 
not more than a contained mainspring could power—contra­
dicts their realism.
The Gondelautomat
One additional automaton of a boat must be mentioned, 
bringing us closer to the walkers. This is the Gondelautomat 
currently kept in the Ambras Castle in Innsbruck, site 
of the original Kunstkammer of Archduke Ferdinand II of 
Austria, nephew of Charles V.19 A miniature gondola made 
of gilded bronze carries a gentleman and a lady, seated 
under a canopy, while a standing gondolier plies his oar at 
stern (FIG. 17.5A, B). The figures’ heads and limbs are made of 
wood and polychromed; they are dressed in real cloth in late 
sixteenth-century style. The boat, running on hidden wheels, 
travels a distance of about 40 inches, then changes direction 
with the gondolier’s stroke, to navigate a squared course on 
a tabletop. The gentleman turns his head and raises an arm 
while the lady strums what could be a lute or a cittern. The 
lady herself looks surprisingly familiar. High forehead under 
formal headdress, face brightened in delicate enamel colors, 
graceful hands in lacey cuffs: the Vienna cittern player in a 
Venetian setting? She strums the instrument with her right 
hand, as do all the walking lute players. The dimensions of 
the machine—14⁹⁄₁₆ inches in height, 28⁵⁄₁₆ inches in length—
suggest that if the lady disembarked, she would stand close 
to the height of those lute players. Picturing the layout of 
the clockworks inside the walking androids, we wonder, 
could this automaton not employ the same design? A 
She advances on two perambulation wheels, with a third 
“steering” wheel, as von Herz calls it, that can be adjusted 
to set directional motion—very similar to the Vienna cittern 
player’s adjustable trailing wheel. Beyer includes a photo­
graph of the mechanism, a squat horizontal carriage, not 
much more than a mainspring to turn the two perambu­
lation wheels, with a vertical rod to the figure’s head. The 
clockwork also contains a bell. The figure is small, just under 
10 inches in height.
The bronze Joueuse de théorbe recently traveled to 
the United States for inclusion in the stunning 2019 exhibi­
tion Making Marvels: Science and Splendor at the Courts 
of Europe, curated by Wolfram Koeppe and Ana Matisse 
Donefer-Hickie at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New 
York. In the catalog for the exhibition, one of the contrib­
utors, Paulus Rainer, curator of the Kunstkammer in the 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, compares the figure to sta­
tionary objects called “maiden cups” that contained hidden 
reservoirs of wine that the appointed guest had to discover 
and drink.14 Other examples in the show featured tabletop 
machines that combined the mobility of an automaton with 
a cleverly concealed vessel and drinking spout.15 These were 
games of wits (and witnesses), with the stakes raised by the 
high-tech wizardry of machines whose apparent agency 
demanded a response in kind.16 Could this curious late-
Renaissance form of interactive clockwork have played a 
role in the origin of a much-adapted mechanical design that 
led to the first androids? The monk, on rare loan from the 
Smithsonian, was also featured in this wide-ranging exhibi­
tion at the Metropolitan Museum, taking part in the show’s 
grand finale of automata.17
The walking automata were not unique, then, among 
machines made in the golden age of clockwork with enough 
spring power to move by themselves in locomotion. What 
singles them out and defines them as androids, following the 
ever useful definition of Chapuis and Gélis, is their auton­
omy as solo figures, machinery hidden on board, without 
recourse to exterior plinths or bases. Arrayed ensembles of 
human and animal figures mounted on pedestals or ships or 
carriages, while they may perform a more distributed rep­
ertoire of motions, adding sounds and music, more closely 
resemble miniature theaters. The individual android figures, 
in contrast, are solo actors that step across the boundary 
between theater and life. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

117
The Category Challenge
FIGURE 17.5A, B. 
Gondelautomat, ca. 1600. Augsburg. Gilded 
brass, painted wood, linen and silk garments. 
37 × 72 cm (14⁹⁄₁₆ × 28⁵⁄₁₆ in.). Sammlungen 
Schloss Ambras, Kunsthistorisches Museum, 
Vienna. Three moving figures in a gondola that 
plies the tabletop on hidden wheels The lady 
strums a lute or cittern. Could the internal clock­
work be similar to that of the solo walkers? 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

118
CHAPTER 17
But the church too had an ongoing history of theatri­
cal mechanics in the service of conveying the drama of the 
Christian story. Processions, feast days, and sermons across 
medieval Europe featured reenactments of biblical epi­
sodes involving actors and apparatus. The very word clock 
derives from the Latin word for “bell,” cloca, associated with 
the bell-striking mechanisms that accompanied early water 
clocks in monasteries, signaling canonical calls to prayer.22 
By the fourteenth century, weight-driven mechanical tower 
clocks were essential structures in cathedrals and wealthy 
monasteries, made possible by the invention of the escape­
ment, a mechanism to intercept the motion of a falling 
weight and release its momentum in regular ticking inter­
vals.23 The escapement, combined with wheelwork and a 
striking mechanism, relieved the tower warden—guardian 
of the belfry—of his role ringing the bells with ropes and 
pulleys and gave rise to the origins of the jacquemart: a 
bell-side mechanical figure that springs into motion with 
a hammer to sound the hour.24 “In the course of time,” 
Silvio Bedini writes, “the jacquemart developed a family 
of his own.”25 Smaller bells sounding the half and quarter 
hours gained additional automata, and soon scores of bib­
lical figures appeared on the faces of towers, and on clocks 
within the church, animated by bell-striking gear trains. 
Nativities, episodes of the Passion, resurrections, and ascen­
sions were set in motion. Every history of the automaton 
cites the mid-fourteenth-century monumental clock in the 
Strasbourg Cathedral, a tower unto itself inside the cathe­
dral’s south transept, some 65 feet in height. E. R. Truitt 
describes it best, in the final chapter of her book, Medieval 
Robots: Mechanism, Magic, Nature, and Art: 
Built between 1352 and 1354, [the clock] symbolized 
microcosm and macrocosm, demonstrated the glory of 
God’s creation, and dramatized the timeline of salva­
tion. Figures of the Blessed Virgin, the newborn Jesus, 
and the three Magi gave the clock its nick-name: the 
“Horloge des Trois Mages” or “Die Dreikönigsuhr.” The 
clock also had a mechanical astrolabe, a perpetual cal­
endar, a carillon, tables that indicated proper times for 
phlebotomy, and a mechanical rooster that flapped its 
wings and crowed every hour. The perpetual calendar 
three-wheeled rolling frame, now hidden by the gondola, 
which itself provides room for a few extra linkages and 
perhaps a larger mainspring. This can only be surmise, for 
we have not succeeded in learning more about the hidden 
works. But the gondola may conceivably be nothing more 
than a large “skirt” attached to one primary figure—the one 
wearing the full dress—with added links to the moving arms 
of the other two figures. The museum gives the piece a date 
of around 1600 and notes that the initials “J. F.” appear inside 
the boat, thought to be those of the celebrated Augsburg 
goldsmith Joachim Friess (ca. 1579–1620). Future study is 
in order, to understand the potential relationship between 
this automaton and the walking figures, particularly as this 
machine is signed and connected to a well-known master.
 
Robed Figures
A final defining compromise the walking androids share: 
they are all robed figures. Those robes conceal the clock­
work mechanism that produces their mobility.20 Only per­
sons properly wearing floor-length robes were represented 
among these automata! Is this why only monks and ladies 
constitute our corps? Period styles for male dress across 
the classes called for leggings or hose, waist-length shirts 
and doublets, and hip-length tunics. Such form-fitting dress 
would all but reveal the conceit of the imitation of walking. 
Tunics, cloaks, capacious capes, and voluminous skirts were 
essential for the walkers. Costume itself announces the final 
category challenge, between secular and religious spheres.
The cittern and lute players might well have found 
roles among the more elaborate machines deployed in fes­
tive settings: secular themes for affairs of state.21 They may 
have also found their way to more intimate social settings or, 
less costly to produce, to modest estates vying for machines 
of their own. The three devout brothers, on the other hand, 
cued to the church, demand a different stage. Any attempt 
to envision how or where they were deployed conjures a 
separate mise-en-scène, perhaps no less theatrical but with 
different rules of decorum and propriety. The admonishing 
monk in particular: In what social setting would a clock­
work performance of prayer have been appropriate or even 
acceptable, against a backdrop of Reformation politics? 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

119
The Category Challenge
and mechanical astrolabe reflected the divinely ordered 
macrocosm. The tables for bloodletting indicated the 
harmonies between the macrocosm and the microcosm. 
The characters in the hourly pageant (Virgin, infant 
Jesus, Magi, and rooster) enacted a moving memorial 
to Jesus’s sacrifice for humankind. The rooster symbol­
izes Peter’s denial of Jesus and his repentance, as well 
as papal vigilance, as Peter later became head of the 
Church. The rooster’s morning cry reminds Christians 
to be prepared to accept the sudden second coming of 
Jesus, along with the resurrection of the dead and the 
final judgement. 
...The clock depicts cosmological, Christological, 
biological, diurnal, and horological time.26 
If Chapuis and Gélis, in defining the android, ruled out bell 
tower automata, nonetheless automata on bell towers were 
the android’s immediate forebears. Clockwork and “jack­
work”—what the physicist and science historian Derek J. 
de Solla Price has called biological automata—arrived 
together.27 Courtesy of the church, as Chapuis and Gélis 
attest, in several chapters on the rise of mechanism to 
animate and reify sacred narrative. “The Catholic Church, 
which has always excelled in the art of staging, left no stone 
unturned in attracting and retaining the faithful,” they 
wrote.28 We return to the monk and the church in part 5.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

120
Who made these extraordinary machines, extending the 
power of the clock into moving models of mythic creatures, 
warships, nativities, zodiac heavens—and small walking 
androids? Some were signed by now-famous clockmakers 
or goldsmiths; some carry trade guild marks; others are rec­
ognized from descriptions in imperial inventories. Surviving 
contracts and correspondence track yet others. Many more, 
including major works, remain of uncertain origin. No sig­
natures or stamps are found in any of the eight walking 
androids, and no later restorers left identifying marks.
For all the variations in their character, their pre­
sumed audience, and the dates estimated for their manufac­
ture—and amid the widely different forms of attention paid 
them today—the eight androids taken together offer a group 
portrait that widens our view of each one and demands 
notice in itself. Setting aside for the moment the woodcarv­
ers’ styles, the application of paint, the manner of dress, 
and the duet between sculpture and mechanics, we see 
that seven of the figures harbor an internal clockwork that 
follows a cognate design. Only the cittern player in Vienna 
differs in mechanical layout but for comparable function: a 
gesticulating figure on a self-propelled three-wheeled rolling 
chassis capable of directional change, two carved wooden 
feet stepping forth from the hem of a fabric robe, powered 
The Earliest Free-Walking 
Androids
18
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

121
by a hidden mainspring, fusee, gear train, and an anatomy of 
distributed levers, cams, and return springs. 
As we assembled the table of comparisons (see appen­
dix), additional affinities appeared. Of the six androids that 
perform a series of turns in the direction they walk, all 
accomplish the turn in the same way. As the two perambu­
lation wheels (hidden under the costume robe) drive the fig­
ure forward, feet stepping forth all the while from the robe’s 
hem, a cam on the fusee arbor periodically pushes a vertical 
pivot to the table near one wheel and temporarily lifts the 
wheel a few millimeters off the surface of the table. This 
allows the other wheel to roll in an arc around the pivot. 
The figure continues to “walk” its feet in imitation of a deci­
sion to turn. The rear trailing wheel maintains stability. The 
length of the pivot and the shape of the cam that depresses 
it determine how long the lifted wheel stays up, and thus 
how acute an angle the turn will be. The Smithsonian monk 
and the Milan matron, though they walk at very different 
speeds (the monk slow, the matron fast), both execute 
turns at angles greater than 90 degrees, resulting in sharp 
changes of direction. The clockmaker need only calculate 
the dimensions of the cam and pivot, simple enough vari­
ables in a well-tested design for navigational mobility. When 
they turn, all six androids turn to their right.1 
We noticed that all the lute players, and the cittern 
player, strum with their right hands, fingers facing down, 
and fret with their left hands, fingers facing up (which 
also allows the left hand to support the neck of the instru­
ment in the crook between thumb and fingers). The saint 
in Budapest also possesses this orientation of hands. 
Further, those right hands all move rapidly, whether strum­
ming a lute, ringing a bell, or rapping a drum, and here the 
Deutsches Museum monk and Milan matron join the group. 
Thus not only is the gear train layout similar, but in the case 
of a reciprocating right wrist, seven of the eight automata 
possess a similar offset crank and linkage, with transverse 
connections through a wooden shoulder and elbow to the 
wrist. Only the Smithsonian monk differs: his right arm 
moves not at the wrist but at the elbow, and only inter­
mittently, to beat his chest. Yet this too is a back-and-forth 
reciprocating motion, generated from an offset crank at the 
far end of an arbor in the gear train. The speed of the motion 
depends on which arbor powers the crank: the slow fusee 
arbor or the faster-turning second or third arbors in the 
upper steps of the gear train. Left arms too were animated 
by offset cranks in various applications, though several of 
the androids have fixed or nonmoving left arms (the saint, 
the matron, and the cittern player). 
Whether still functional today, seven of the eight 
androids could move their eyes. Of these, five also move(d) 
their mouths. Those whose heads have been opened or 
X-rayed (monks and matron) share a similar arrangement of 
levers and return springs. The method for mounting the tiny 
machinery behind the wooden face, and coordinating it with 
a hinged wooden jaw, is also comparable. The presence of a 
movable mouth required more space for the hardware inside 
the head, more adaptation in the clockwork below, and con­
siderably more strength from wood and metal. The wire 
or chain linkage from gear train to mouth, passing through 
the neck, subjected the head and neck to more stress, to be 
withstood without loss of the neck’s separate capability 
to turn and nod. Monks, saint, and matron all possess this 
sturdy articulation of the mouth, neck, and head—still intact 
and animate today. Eyes and eye-turning mechanisms have 
stood the test of time as well. 
Significantly, these figures all possess iron, not brass, 
internal clockworks. Just this difference—between machines 
made of iron and those made of brass—allows horologists 
some confidence in establishing dates for unsigned clocks 
and automata. Here a telling difference is found among the 
eight androids. We have noted that the clockworks inside 
five of them are made of iron: the four figures named above 
with moving mouths and the Vienna cittern player. The 
remaining three, all lute or mandolin players, are of brass. 
The distinction is important, for the history of metallurgy 
helps us with chronology. 
Artisans in Europe before 1600 employed brass 
primarily as a decorative medium, or in rare clock move­
ments designed to be exposed to view.2 By century’s end, 
increased trade access to mined copper and to calamine (a 
mineral containing what we now know is zinc ore), along 
with advancements in alloying, soon made brass cheaper 
and more available.3 Softer than iron and thus more easily 
cut and shaped with iron tools, brass was first prized for its 
resistance to corrosion and its similarity in color to gold. 
Bronze was darker in color and brittle under the hammer. 
The Earliest Free-Walking Androids
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

122
CHAPTER 18
“The final task is the most demanding,” he has written. “The 
upper half of both sides of each tooth must be filed to an epi­
cycloidal curve, a shape similar to a bishop’s miter, with its 
point directly above the center of the tooth. This will ensure 
the correct profile for reducing friction between the teeth 
of the mating wheels. Absolute concentration is imperative: 
one imperfectly filed tooth will ruin the wheel and halt the 
entire gear train” (FIG. 18.1).6 Every step of this process leaves 
telltale marks. The wheel teeth in particular, seen under a 
magnifying glass, reveal slight differences one from the next, 
particularly in the gutters between teeth. Layout marks 
were often left visible, as in FIGURE 12.6A. Moreover, there 
were no standardized tools of measure in this period; each 
shop often made its own instruments for measuring out the 
dimensions of mating parts so essential in clockmaking. 
But like bronze, brass could be melted and cast into plate, 
replacing the labor of hammering iron ingots into plate on 
the anvil.4 Clockmakers further discovered during the last 
quarter of the sixteenth century that brass offered a signif­
icant reduction of wear when paired with a dissimilar metal 
at points of sliding friction, as between mating teeth in a gear 
train. Brass wheels driving iron pinions suffer so little wear 
that such clocks have kept accurate time for hundreds of 
years.5 All three of the brass-works automata boast the duet 
in enough key locations to likely be original (not later repairs), 
including brass/iron pairings among other moving parts that 
bear on one another—levers, cranks, hinges, and cams trans­
mitting motion to the automata’s heads and limbs. The fusee 
too would soon be made of brass rather than wood, as seen 
in later clocks, and the cnam mandolin player contains just 
such a brass fusee, unique in the family of eight. Because their 
clockworks are primarily of brass, and exhibit innovations in 
metallurgy, the three brass-works musicians were likely made 
a generation or more after the automata with iron move­
ments—the cnam figure much later still. David recalls Klaus 
Maurice suggesting a date of roughly 1620 for the bnm and 
Smithsonian lute players. They are currently dated at around 
1600 (bnm) and 1640–60 (Smithsonian). As for the monk 
and the brother and sister androids whose movements are 
entirely of iron: this is the first signal that enables horologists 
to assign them to earlier dates.
A second signal comes from the iron itself: clues on 
the surfaces of individual parts of the clockwork indicate 
how the metal was smithed and tooled. As we have noted 
(see chaps. 8 and 11), the labor involved in the “free-form” 
cutting of clockwheel teeth leaves a signature of its own on 
the metal, indicating the tools and methods employed by the 
maker. David, who has used period tools across his career 
and is known among colleagues at the Smithsonian for 
being adept at “reading” the metal, estimates that a skilled 
clockmaker or journeyman in the late Renaissance required 
two days or more to make a single clockwheel. Hammering 
out the plate, cutting the disc with a handsaw, truing it in 
a foot- or hand-operated lathe, indexing it with a dividing 
plate to mark equidistant teeth around the perimeter, and 
cutting each tooth with saw and file: David himself delib­
erately followed most of this sequence to make each of the 
seven steel wheels and pinions for his model of the monk. 
FIGURE 18.1. 
David Todd files the “bishop’s miter” on one 
tooth of a clockwheel. Though much larger 
than a wheel in the monk’s gear train, this 
wheel requires the same method and skill to 
make. Between 2010 and 2012 David fabri­
cated a weight-driven alarm clock patterned 
on sixteenth-century German technology, 
using only the methods of the age. Working at 
a coal-fired blacksmith’s forge in Heathsville, 
Virginia, he hammered out his wheel blanks, 
plates, and bars from scraps of mild steel, 
shaped them on the swage block and anvil, 
measured and cut them with hand tools, and 
heat-riveted, mortised, and pinned parts 
together following early tradition. The process 
gave him a profound appreciation for the 
finesse and command of the sixteenth-century 
craftsman.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

123
The Earliest Free-Walking Androids
With the introduction of the wheel-cutting engine 
in the seventeenth century, many such wheels could be 
indexed and cut in a day’s work. Juanelo Turriano himself is 
said to have invented a prototype engine, in order to make 
his great astrarium.7 David had his colleague Stan Nelson at 
the museum sketch an early such engine (FIG. 18.2). Yet even 
the early wheel-cutting engines were hand-operated tools, 
adapted from principles of the lathe combined with the divid­
ing plate. Power from a motor, so instinctive to us today with 
any tool called an “engine,” would originate only with indus­
trial production in the distant age of steam. But an engine-
cut wheel can show more uniformity in the profiles of wheel 
teeth. David finds that the clockwheels in the three autom­
ata he has personally handled were cut freehand one by one, 
tooth by tooth. He estimates that this is the case for the oth­
ers as well, including even the later cnam mandolin player. 
Metallurgy, process, and a “period eye” for both thus 
leads historians and conservators to assign most clockworks 
made entirely of iron to points across the sixteenth century 
or earlier. Those made of brass appear in the closing years of 
the century and begin to gain precedence in the first quar­
ter of the seventeenth century. The androids follow suit. 
As more knowledge of these figures comes to light, further 
refinement of dates will undoubtedly continue. Comparisons 
As David has found throughout his experience with clock 
conservation, it is extremely difficult to mimic the methods 
of the Renaissance clockmaker. The iron clocks and figure 
clocks that show such characteristics, and were signed, help 
confirm dates for those that weren’t.
The small scale of these clockwheels, we should add, 
must be seen to be appreciated. FIGURE 8.4 shows one of the 
rubbings David made of parts of the monk’s wheel train: the 
third wheel, printed at actual size. There are sixty teeth in 
this wheel. Imagine cutting each tooth by hand and filing it 
to shape. 
FIGURE 18.2. 
An early wheel-cutting engine might have 
looked like this: a lathe combined with a 
dividing plate and compass. The clockwheel 
“blank,” already riveted to its arbor, is secured 
between centers. For each tooth, the wheel 
would be locked in place, and the saw blade 
worked by hand to make the cut. The wheel 
would then be rotated a fraction of a turn to its 
next position, based on direct calibration from 
the dividing plate—the disc with rings of mea­
sured holes—on the shaft at the lathe head. A 
compass-like arm set hole to hole prescribes 
each advance of the wheel, for a precise 
number of equidistant teeth around the wheel 
perimeter. Drawing by Stan Nelson, specialist 
in graphic arts, National Museum of American 
History (NMAH), from David Todd’s sketches. 
18.2.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

124
CHAPTER 18
sure identification. Today it can be performed on a wood 
sample as small as a breadcrumb. Our hope is that museums 
will pursue this analysis in the future, for this would add an 
important piece to the puzzle of the origins of each automa­
ton. Of course, wood itself, like many raw materials including 
metals and ores, was traded and shipped across continents.11 
Yet if we should learn that the Smithsonian monk is made of 
linden, not poplar, this would make Spain a little less plausi­
ble as this figure’s native sphere. 
Where indeed were these androids made? Their dif­
ferences call not just for a chronology but for locations and 
makers. One possibility is that the monks, the saint, and the 
sister musicians emanated from the same locality, over an 
extended period of time. It is not unreasonable to hypoth­
esize a single company of clockmakers with a proprietary 
mechanism, altering its design as demand shifted and as 
brass came to replace iron in shops across Europe. A likelier 
scenario singles out one or two figures as prototypes, later 
copied and adapted by other makers. Elizabeth’s opportu­
nity to view the iron clockworks of the Deutsches Museum 
monk and the Milan matron in particular and compare them 
to the Smithsonian monk was a chance to see the elegance 
and pride evident in all three machines. As David believes, 
their embellished hidden mechanisms suggest a pursuit of 
beauty for its own sake. Brackets, clicks, pillars, and other 
components were gracefully shaped, chamfered, and dec­
oratively nicked. Much of this is absent in the later brass 
clockworks, whose makers streamlined a prior clockwork 
design to less complicated effect, shifting priority to the 
automaton’s outward appearance, character, and dress.
A third proposal has the clockwork mechanism pro­
duced in one shop and exported to another for development. 
This might account for the wide variation across the eight 
androids in size, material, date, performance, and character. 
The Budapest saint’s mechanism, for example, distinctive 
for its stationary pose, yet with a baseplate showing cutouts 
for perambulation wheels: Did a second shop adapt it and 
replace the walking mechanism with the glockenspiel? 
Once again, the Vienna cittern player, with its unique 
gear train layout, stands alone. For the others, it is possible 
that all these scenarios were in play. So coherent was the 
clockwork design that something very close to it appeared 
in Japan in the eighteenth century in the form of exquisite 
tabletop tea-serving automata made almost entirely of 
wood (FIG. 18.3).12
just among the three brass-works players reveal categorical 
exceptions.8 The fact that the bnm lute player once had a 
movable mouth (and eyes), like the early iron-works figures, 
makes this a transitional machine among the eight. The out­
lier in the group is the cnam mandolin player, pinned to the 
late eighteenth century, a date that radically extends the life 
span of this clockwork design. So good was the design that 
we see it put to use across generations, and this makes the 
search suddenly interesting for a prototype, a first appear­
ance, and an evolution. At the very least, we can say that the 
brass mechanisms in the three musicians were derived from 
the earlier iron examples. The surviving wheel work in the 
Paris figure shows the kinds of no-frills simplification that 
may point to later small-batch shop production.
With so many materials and crafts combined in one 
object—metal, wood, cloth—the eight automata harbor multi­
ple genealogies. Carved wood—the androids’ flesh and form—
gives fewer material clues for assigning dates. But in some 
cases the species of wood, if it can be named, allows propos­
als for the geographic origins for an automaton. Peter Friess 
made a point of determining this for the Deutsches Museum 
figure, identifying body, head, and hands as made of poplar—a 
splinter sample of which he had microscopically analyzed. 
European poplar grew abundantly in both Germany and 
Spain, and it was frequently used by sculptors in both regions. 
“Had linden wood been used,” he wrote, “a German origin 
would have been more likely.”9 Microscopic sample analysis is 
available only for this figure and for the bnm lute player, whose 
remnant body shell has been identified as mountain ash (see 
chap. 14 n. 4). Head, hands, feet, body shell, and fusee: Are all 
made from the same wood in any of these figures? Michael 
Baxandall, in The Limewood Sculptors of Renaissance 
Germany, gives a firm geography of linden, its microscopic 
signature, and a palpable idea of its handling and value for 
the German sculptor.10 (Linden and limewood are consid­
ered interchangeable names for the same Old World species, 
once abundant on German soil.) Would that we had so ele­
gant a portrait of poplar—or of any other wood in the history 
of sculpture. Poplar is the wood that Smithsonian wood con­
servators initially indicated for the carved head and limbs 
of the monk, based on visual inspection, though since then 
other species have been considered, most recently beech. 
By visual inspection too the Milan matron is reported as 
poplar; the Iparművészeti Múzeum saint, linden. But only 
the analysis of cell structure under the microscope yields 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

125
Modern labels identifying the eight automata still give 
them no common genealogy. Horology’s written record fails 
to chart them. Period scribes looked elsewhere for the defin­
ing technologies of their time. But the shared blueprint is 
unmistakable. The collaboration between clockmaker and 
sculptor yielded a new kind of object, the first of its kind.
Among the costly composite tabletop automata men­
tioned in the previous chapter—mobile theaters, we called 
them—we know of at least one that was equipped with a 
probe, beneath the base and forward of the wheels, that 
could detect the table’s edge and halt the machine to prevent 
it from falling.15 Other such masterpieces surely included this 
protection. Not so, the walkers, alas. We are lucky that a few 
of them steered clear of the edges of their world.
Clockwork-driven automata of all kinds—single 
androids, animated figures on clock striking trains, and com­
plex composite machines—shared iterations of a mainspring, 
fusee, gear train, cams, and levers to effect animation. Clocks 
themselves, and the models of the movements of moon, sun, 
and stars that gave rise to clocks, drove the technology. But 
this was also a moment of tremendous vitality in art’s cap­
ture of the moving human form in sculpture. Amid these 
wonders, a small doll-like figure that walks by itself may 
have been a humble achievement. But as the great historian 
George Kubler wrote in his book The Shape of Time, many 
prime objects appear first as mere mutations, only later to 
be recognized as the first links of a paradigmatic chain. “In 
other words,” he wrote, “when people create new forms, they 
commit posterity at some remote interval to continue in the 
track by an involuntary act of command, mediated by works 
of art and only by them. Here is without doubt one of the 
most significant of all the mechanisms of cultural continu­
ity, when the visible work of an extinct generation can still 
issue such powerful stimuli.”13 Kubler even demonstrates 
how two distinct crafts, each in play at the same moment 
in history, can combine to create a new class of forms.14 A 
small wooden sculpture with a hidden clockwork was once 
crafted to move as if with a mind of its own. The philosophy 
of mind and body in the next centuries took notice. Today 
we are obsessed—haunted—by robots. 
FIGURE 18.3. 
David Todd’s NMAH lab at the Smithsonian, 
September 1999. David and Elizabeth look 
at the lute player (whose internal clockwork 
has been removed and set out for study), the 
monk, and a replica of an eighteenth-century 
Edo-period Japanese tea-serving automaton. 
Murakami Kazuo, expert in Japanese autom­
ata, brought the tea-serving karakuri ningyō 
to the United States and took this picture 
to compare it to its European forebears. The 
replica was made in Osaka in the early 1990s 
by Minesaki Sougo, renowned restorer of early 
Japanese automata.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

126
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

127
chapter title
PART IV
A Search for Origins
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

128
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

129
chapter title
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

130
By now, it is clear that the Smithsonian monk was made by 
more than one master. A clockmaker, a sculptor or wood-
carver, a painter, and certainly a tailor all contributed their 
skills to the task. The integration and coherence between 
metal and wood—clockwork and sculpture—is a question 
of particular interest to David and Elizabeth, clockmaker 
and sculptor, respectively. What if this had been our assign­
ment? Was the clockwork made first, then the wooden parts 
carved and pieced together around it? Or was the sculpture 
roughed out—head, arms, feet, and body shell—and the 
clockwork then measured and built to fit? 
The X-ray of the monk’s wooden head reveals a crisp 
longitudinal seam just behind the ears. As mentioned in 
chapter 12 (regarding the Deutsches Museum figure), the 
head would have been rough carved, then split or cut in half 
and hollowed out with a chisel, and the interior prepared to 
receive the small machinery to animate the eyes and jaw.1 
The sculptor worked from the outside in, then the inside 
out, to create eye sockets and to section the jaw. The seam 
between the reassembled halves of the monk’s head is just 
visible under the paint, and straight enough that it was likely 
saw-cut rather than split. Because wood is more forgiving 
than iron, the iron components must have been prepared 
before the final carving of the head. The iron eyeballs, the 
Craft Guild or Imperial Court?
19
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

131
sled and return spring for their motion, the chassis that sup­
ported these, together with the levers, arbor, and spring for 
the jaw (see David’s diagram of the inside of the head, FIG. 
10.14): we believe these parts were made after the sculptor 
roughed out the wooden head but before the final carving. 
Locating the chassis so the iron eyeballs would register on 
all axes in their wooden sockets, and rotate without scrap­
ing off their paint, required both wood and iron to be cut 
and teased and adjusted for the fit. The sculptor could final 
carve the thin outer eyelids only once the eyeball placement 
was certain. The same duet would be essential for installing 
the two arbors for the jaw. Both arbors are visible in FIGURE 
10.12: one beneath the ear at the jaw-hinge point (for the lever 
to the chin), the other just below the corners of the mouth 
(the pivot for the wooden chin itself). The iron mechanism 
fits inside the wooden head as precisely as a walnut fits 
inside its shell. The monk’s arms illustrate a similar nego­
tiation between the competing requirements of image and 
movement. Surely sculptor and clockmaker worked side by 
side to build this figure. And when their work was finished, 
the painter took over. 
A complex multifigure automaton like the Trompeter-
automat, or the Diana and centaur, mentioned in chapter 17, 
required a pyramid of trades for its manufacture. The clock­
maker or goldsmith who undertook such a piece depended 
not just on journeymen and apprentices under his supervi­
sion but on smiths and founders, toolmakers, bell casters, 
woodworkers, sculptors, painters, enamelers, gem cutters, 
and so on—some of whom depended in turn on the mining 
and smelting of ores and the ready supply of metals. The 
monk would have called for a humbler collaboration but a 
collaboration nonetheless. Because the clockwork shows 
more methodological and stylistic similarity than the sculp­
ture and because the walking automata are above all forms 
of clockwork, they surely originate within the domain of the 
spring-driven clock, acquiring virtues from the other arts by 
necessity.
The European craft guild system presents a prime 
setting for a community of interdependent artisans. 
Guild records from sixteenth-century cities with ties to 
the Habsburg realm and the Holy Roman Empire show 
Nuremberg and Augsburg as craft centers where clockmak­
ing flourished and expanded. Nuremberg at midcentury 
was a nexus of trade routes reaching across the continent. 
Augsburg, with its sophisticated bank and credit system, 
would gain even greater precedence by century’s end. Iron 
and brass were smelted and cast in local foundries, and spe­
cialists of all kinds prospered. The metalworking trades in 
particular were highly regulated: adherence to guild and city 
council laws proved effective in holding resources and pro­
prietary technology close, promoting reputations, and pro­
tecting livelihoods.2 
A royal court clockmaker, in contrast, singled out by 
talent and called to work at the pleasure of a king, pursued 
a career free from guild regimentation. Producing one-of-a-
kind objects to adorn a world-class collection or to symbol­
ize the power exchange in a gift of state, such an individual 
was expected to exercise the very invention and innovation 
that the guild system often suppressed. Practitioners of 
many other crafts including sculpture and textiles would 
also be players in a court setting, on call to contribute their 
skills to princely commissions. 
The divisions between guild and court were not 
impermeable. Nuremberg and Augsburg were both free 
imperial cities: self-ruling, independent of German territo­
rial claims, they were bound only to the emperor in Vienna 
or Prague. Guild contracts record major works commis­
sioned by Habsburg nobility, and such works are identified 
in inventories of imperial and patrician collections. Both 
guild and court artisans appear in chronicles compiled by 
scribes vying for history and precedent for native cities and 
city-states. Artisans themselves sometimes moved between 
roles, as did the Nuremberg smith Jakob Bulmann, called on 
occasion to the court of Ferdinand I in Vienna. 
In either setting, the presence or absence of a mak­
er’s mark on a work was unpredictable. Guild law often 
required it on clocks, both to certify the originating city and 
to monitor the work of guild members. Automata presented 
a particular dilemma. The absence of signatures or guild 
stamps on some automata may be due to the fact that they 
were not subject to the limitations of a single guild. Klaus 
Maurice gives examples of automata produced by makers 
of chamber clocks, by goldsmiths, by locksmiths, and by 
others; the clockmaker was not always the originating con­
tractor.3 A goldsmith could initiate a piece, and if his work 
was considered the most valuable or visible, protocol might 
Craft Guild or Imperial Court?
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

132
CHAPTER 19
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

133
Craft Guild or Imperial Court?
Campi, Marco Girolamo Vida, and others. Jakob Bulmann’s 
name survives in guild and city records. Christof Margraf is 
named in a royal inventory from Prague; a Milan inventory 
contains a description of an automaton cited for the Milan 
matron. These documents were produced for quite different 
reasons, and comparing them will generate a new set of cat­
egory challenges. Keeping this in mind, let us see what they 
reveal. Two names, Jakob Bulmann and Juanelo Turriano, 
are mentioned most often today in the literature on the 
walking automata. Across regional and cultural divides, 
Bulmann hails from South Germany in the central European 
region of the empire; Turriano, Italian born, carried out his 
best-known work in the court of Spain.
omit the clockmaker’s name. Further, works that might 
have been considered copies may have remained unsigned 
for reasons of “copyright” or breach of propriety. The sta­
tus and identity of the sculptors whose work was essential 
in the production of figure clocks is further shrouded, as 
Maurice shows in searching the Augsburg records for the 
makers of the small cast bronze and silver figures in these 
popular thematic clocks.4 But the Netherlands-born sculp­
tor Johan Gregor van der Schardt was active in Nuremberg 
in the late sixteenth century; he was known for small works 
and portraits in bronze and painted terracotta (FIG. 19.1) and 
known as well for his collaboration with the goldsmith 
Wenzel Jamnitzer. Maurice mentions an automaton made 
by Jamnitzer’s nephew, Barthel Jamnitzer (ca. 1548–1596), 
fashioned from a small sculpture by Van der Schardt: a silver 
Cupid with bow and arrow.5
A signature on a work made within a court setting had 
its own mix of custom and circumstance. Schlottheim’s nef, 
made on commission for Rudolf II, was inscribed with words 
celebrating the emperor, not the maker or the city where it 
was made.6 On the other hand, Ambrosio de Morales shows 
Juanelo solemnly signing the great astrarium he made for 
Charles V.7
But the kinds of documents unique to these set­
tings—guild, city, and court—preserve invaluable records 
of makers and works, and historians comb them for clues 
to the identity of objects of every kind. In the case of the 
clockwork automata, as we have seen, horological historians 
have found mention of solo walking figures in several kinds 
of archives, along with a tantalizing few names of clock­
makers who made them. Juanelo’s name comes to us from 
encomia by Ambrosio de Morales, Bernardo Sacco, Antonio 
FIGURE 19.1. 
Johan Gregor van der Schardt, Half-Length 
Portrait Bust of Anna Imhoff, ca. 1580. Painted 
terracotta. Height: 65.5 cm (25¾ in.). Bode-
Museum, Berlin (inv. 539). Anna Imhoff was the 
wife of the Nuremberg art collector and merchant 
Willibald Imhoff. Van der Schardt, known for his 
portrait sculpture, also had numerous contacts 
with Nuremberg goldsmiths and may have 
provided small sculptures in bronze and silver 
for figure clocks.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

134
The locksmith Jakob Bulmann (d. ca. 1535) is named in a 
1547 manuscript account of Nuremberg’s “most refined 
artists and craftsmen” of the century, composed by the cal­
ligrapher, mathematician, and historian Johann Neudörfer 
(1497–1563).1 The entry on Bulmann, among the shortest in 
the manuscript, reads in full:
This Bülmann [sic], though untrained in writing and 
reading, was nonetheless almost skilled and learned 
in the field of astronomy, which is why he was able to 
set in motion, through the application of 80 pounds of 
weights, the clockwork of the Theoriam planetarum, 
which nobody else before him had been able to accom­
plish. He also fashioned male and female figures for 
clockworks, which would walk about and strike their 
measure on lutes and timbals. King Ferdinand, for whom 
he had done much work, had him brought to Vienna in a 
sedan in his old age, for the sole purpose of showing His 
Majesty a clockwork. Moreover, he fashioned many fine 
items in his capacity as a locksmith, especially the scales 
with its two arms, allowing the goods to be weighed out­
side of the scale.2
Two Masters, Two Cultures: 
Jakob Bulmann 
and Juanelo Turriano
20
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

135
Neudörfer’s original manuscript of seventy-nine biographies 
received full publication and proper credit only in 1875, 
through the careful research of the Nuremberg archivist 
and historian Georg Wolfgang Karl Lochner (1798–1882).3 
In the meantime, his briefs on Bulmann and many others 
found their way into print under the names of later authors. 
In 1730, two centuries after Neudörfer’s time, the mathema­
tician and astronomer Johann Gabriel Doppelmayr (1677–
1750) included Bulmann in an expanded list of Nuremberg 
mathematicians and artists, copying the biography from 
Neudörfer. Here is the key sentence, in Doppelmayr’s phras­
ing: “Furthermore, he crafted movable figures in the shape 
of male and female persons with clockworks of such a fash­
ion as to make them walk to and fro, striking a measured 
beat on timbals as well as on lutes.”4 He credits Neudörfer 
only with a footnote at this very sentence:
This is confirmed by Johann Neudörfer the Elder in a 
manuscript [stating] that among the craftsmen renowned 
in his time, it was an altogether novel and special thing. In 
our time, such artificial machines are no longer so rare, as 
many have devoted themselves to such works in a variety 
of representations with great industry.5 
These two versions of the reference to Jakob Bulmann 
and his automata were carefully studied by Adelheid von 
Herz, whose 1990 thesis, “Androids of the Sixteenth 
Century,” we’ve consulted throughout our work. Singling out 
Neudörfer’s original sentence, which reads, “[Bulmann] also 
fashioned male and female figures for clockworks,” von Herz 
asks if this might refer to figures made for clocks. That is, did 
the text refer to figures incorporated into the striking mech­
anisms of large weight-driven clocks such as the clock in the 
Nuremberg Frauenkirche, called the Männleinlaufen?6 In 
studying the semantics of the text, von Herz too was search­
ing for sure historical references to independently moving 
androids: clockwork-driven but not themselves accessories 
to clocks. Doppelmayr’s version could seem to be just such a 
reference, for he describes figures moving “with clockworks” 
instead of “for clockworks.”7 Yet Doppelmayr’s rhetoric and 
later date might just as well signal, as his footnote suggests, 
a mistaken connection to a class of figures more common 
two hundred years later. Lochner adds a more secure clue, 
for he appends a long editorial note to Neudörfer’s text, 
examining an array of legal documents from sixteenth-cen­
tury Nuremberg archives to ascertain Bulmann’s correct 
name and vita, and in the process he mentions a ledger 
document dated October 23, 1535, which notes payment 
received from one Hanns Retsch for an object made by 
Jakob Bulmann, “a walking sculpture of a maiden [ein 
gehend Jungfraubild].” Drawing special notice to this ref­
erence, von Herz concedes the plausibility that Bulmann 
indeed made such androids, self-propelled by a clocklike 
mainspring drive.8
Brief as it is, Neudörfer’s portrait of Jakob Bulmann 
reveals an individual working both as an independent crafts­
man in Nuremberg and as a contracted court clockmaker to 
Ferdinand in Vienna. Ferdinand I, brother of Charles V, was 
king of Bohemia and Hungary at the time, a powerful patron 
with imperial tastes and ambitions. He would later become 
Holy Roman emperor on Charles’s abdication in 1556, with 
sovereign rule over the Austrian Habsburg lands. 
Further, Bulmann, not unlike Juanelo Turriano, was 
called upon to repair a celebrated astronomical clock. In 
Juanelo’s case, chronicles refer to the great planetary clock 
made in the fourteenth century by Giovanni de’ Dondi of 
Padua (ca. 1330–1388), its ruins still known in 1529 or 1530 
when Charles V learned of it and Juanelo was brought for­
ward to renovate it. FIGURE 20.1 shows a modern reconstruction 
of de’ Dondi’s clock.9 In Bulmann’s case, Neudörfer’s assertion 
that Bulmann “was able to set in motion. . . the clockwork of 
the Theoriam planetarum, which nobody else before him 
had been able to accomplish,” leads of course to the ques­
tion: What was the Theoriam planetarum? Klaus Maurice 
speculates that it was a planetary clock built in the previous 
century by Johannes Müller, known as Regiomontanus (1436–
1476), a clock that had either fallen into disrepair or was left 
unfinished in Nuremberg at the time of Regiomontanus’s 
early death.10 At the very least, we learn from Neudörfer that 
Jakob Bulmann encountered a complex clock from an earlier 
time and mastered its restoration.
Bulmann’s name was first paired with that of Juanelo 
Turriano, as candidate makers of automata, by Ernst von 
Bassermann-Jordan, whose 1926 essay on the Vienna cit­
tern player identified them both. Not by accident, that essay 
appears in Bassermann-Jordan’s encyclopedic volume, Alte 
Uhren und ihre Meister, directly following his longer and 
Two Masters, Two Cultures
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

136
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

137
Two Masters, Two Cultures
equally readable chapter on Juanelo himself, “Emperor Charles 
V and His Last Clockmaker.” Narrated in detail is Juanelo’s 
pride of place among the courtiers whom the emperor took 
with him into seclusion in the Hieronymite monastery of San 
Yuste in 1556. Juanelo’s most celebrated works, including his 
great astrarium, his legendary automata, and his late, famous 
Artificio (the unprecedented hydraulic pump and aqueduct 
he built for Philip II in Toledo) are laid out and appraised along 
with the primary-source authors who chronicled his public 
life.11 Together, the two essays—Juanelo’s story, followed by 
that of the Vienna automaton—make a strong case, in part by 
pure proximity, for Juanelo as maker of that automaton. Here 
is what Bassermann-Jordan concludes:
But to which cultural sphere does this [Vienna] figure 
belong and where did it originate? Italy as a land of orig­
ination is hardly thinkable. The craft of making small 
clocks was not well developed in Italy at the time and 
depended on imports; no Italian automata of small size 
are known, the artistic style of the time aimed rather for 
monumental effect. But we know of one Italian whose 
fate led him to the court of Emperor Charles V and to fol­
low the emperor to the remote monastery of San Yuste: 
commonly referred to as Giovanni, this was Juanelo 
Torriano of Cremona, the mechanic, clockmaker, and 
engineer of whom I spoke at length in a previous essay. 
Ambrosio de Morales, who knew the master personally, 
informs us in his “Las Antiguedades de las ciudades de 
España” (Alcalá, 1575, pp. 91 ff.) that Torriano created 
the automatic figure of a lady that danced on the table 
to the beat of her tambourine.
But there is another account from the time period 
in question that could also refer to the automaton. In 
his “Historical Account of the Mathematicians and 
Artists of Nuremberg” (Nurnberg, 1730, p. 285), Johann 
Gabriel Doppelmayr writes the following about Hanns 
Bullmann: “An artisan locksmith, though untrained in 
reading or writing, acquired through much contempla­
tion prompted by his good natural intellect, such skill in 
various arts and crafts, that all accorded him the title of 
an artist....Furthermore, he presented various figures 
in the shape of men and women, set in motion by clock­
works so that they walked to and fro, striking a rhythm 
on timbals and lutes....”
FIGURE 20.1. 
A modern reconstruction of the fourteenth-
century astrarium of Giovanni de’ Dondi. The 
model built in 1960 by Thwaites and Reed Ltd., 
England, with technical guidance by H. Alan 
Lloyd. Brass. Height: 132.1 cm (52 in.) Diam.: 
76.2 cm (30 in.). National Museum of American 
History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 
DC. The machine was a clock, a calendar, and an 
instrument for demonstrating the motion of the 
sun, moon, and the five planets then known, on 
the Ptolemaic system. The original astrarium 
was constructed by de’ Dondi between 1348 
and 1364, historians say, in Padua, and acquired 
in about 1381 by Duke Gian Galeazzo Visconti, 
who installed it in his Castello Visconteo in 
Pavia. According to chronicles, its legendary 
fame, and its ruins after two centuries, led 
Emperor Charles V to call for its repair, and 
Juanelo Turriano undertook the task. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

138
CHAPTER 20
association between sculptor and clockmaker, both, she 
says, likely of South German origin. But the Vienna figure, 
she believes, is Spanish.13 
The differences of opinion concerning region and 
setting are driven as much by the automata themselves 
as by the names Bulmann and Turriano, as history brings 
two consummate craftsmen to us via ledgers and legends. 
In a curious unity, both were described as prodigious math­
ematicians despite little education, both were associated 
with great astronomical clocks and works of technical engi­
neering, and both were reputed makers of fabled android 
automata. They are united by the cultural trope of the gifted 
outsider, the mythic blacksmith. They were thinkers and 
makers both. Following Bassermann-Jordan’s lead, Chapuis 
and Gélis, in Le monde des automates, name Bulmann and 
Turriano as the two sixteenth-century “premiers chercheurs” 
known to have made genuine androids.14 Silvio Bedini follows 
suit in his 1964 essay, “The Role of Automata in the History 
of Technology.”15 Vienna’s Kunsthistorisches Museum too, 
in its 1966 catalog, gives equal mention to Turriano and 
Bulmann in discussing its cittern player.16 Maurice and Mayr 
continue the double reference in 1980 in their entry on the 
Smithsonian monk in The Clockwork Universe.17 Finally, 
apropos of these two astronomer-blacksmiths, and the con­
nection of heavenly clocks to androids, we must not forget 
the declaration of Derek J. de Solla Price on astronomical and 
biological simulacra: “These two great varieties of automata 
go hand-in-hand and are indissolubly wedded in all their 
subsequent developments.”18
The debate between Jakob Bulmann and Juanelo 
Turriano, and between guild and court settings, also takes 
the form of a tug between two distinct geographic (today we 
would say, national) spheres. Although the historical record 
yields far fewer references to Bulmann than to Juanelo, it 
provides a more vivid idea of the technical milieu in which 
Bulmann worked, thanks to the craft guild records of the 
South German city-states.19 Against these, how are we to 
weigh the legends surrounding Juanelo Turriano? Ledgers 
support one sphere, legends the other. 
Here is a sketch of Juanelo in his own workshop, writ­
ten in Latin in 1550 by his countryman and fellow Cremonese 
Marco Girolamo Vida, revered poet and bishop of Alba:
At least the priority of invention, then, must be 
given to the Master from Nuremberg, the city of Peter 
Henlein, who survived the Master Hans Bullmann. The 
broad shoes, which never really gained popularity in 
Spain, also speak for a German origin. Not so the head 
of the doll, which seems to derive from the nativity 
sculptures and polychrome sculptures of the Romance 
countries. In light of the rather tenuous artistic evi­
dence, no final judgment shall be made here. However, 
we lean toward the assumption that this piece is to 
be attributed to the sphere of Spanish art, although it 
must be borne in mind that particularly in the field of 
precision mechanics, a brisk exchange of experience, 
masters, works, and perhaps even mechanical parts was 
taking place between the European states.
In any case, the automaton discussed and depicted 
here deserves an excellent place as the oldest preserved 
work of its kind in the history of technology; moreover, 
the little walking doll is a first-rate exquisite antique.12
Though it concedes the overall scarcity of the evi­
dence and gives Bulmann precedent in making earlier 
figures, Bassermann-Jordan’s 1926 study of Juanelo and 
the cittern player now in Vienna has provided the prime 
reference inherited by every sister and brother automa­
ton that has come to light since (with or without the nod 
to Bassermann-Jordan’s influential conjecture). Of his two 
candidates—one a trade locksmith in South Germany, one a 
court clockmaker in Spain—his final guess is a nod to both. A 
Nuremberg precedent for the clockwork but a Spanish sphere 
for the character of the figure . . .and a reminder that the 
empire covered a flexible map of exchange, craft, and trade.
Our opinion is the reverse of Bassermann-Jordan’s: we 
would give precedence to a court setting for the innovation 
of the clockwork mechanism and credit a guild setting for 
its subsequent propagation. We wonder what Bassermann-
Jordan would say with the full family of figures before him. 
The Vienna figure, as the solo subject of his essay, is still 
the exception that puts all proposals in question. Von Herz 
too argues for a court-produced prototype group (the male 
figures) and a subsequent series of guild examples (the 
brass-movement lute players). She posits a cooperative 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

Juanelo was once recorded as saying, “Princes are 
deprived of three very lovely and good things worthy of being 
esteemed by everyone, namely: of being told the truth, of see­
ing the dawn, and of feeling hungry.”22 To this day, the street 
in Toledo where Juanelo Turriano lived is called Calle del 
Hombre de Palo, the street of the wooden man (FIG. 20.2).23
139
Two Masters, Two Cultures
If you observe the man, nothing will be less obvious 
than the acuity of his talent. His face and figure are 
rough, ugly and coarse, and there is no dignity, no nat­
ural grace, not a sign of diligence in his features. That 
you always see his face, hair and beard caked and black­
ened with quantities of ash and clumps of soot just adds 
to his vileness. His hands and gross, enormous fingers 
are always coated with rust. Further, he is untidy, badly 
and disagreeably dressed, so that you might think him 
a Brontes, a Steropes or some other servant of Vulcan, 
who shapes everything he makes at the anvil with 
his own hands—a man born for working at the forge. 
However, lest a person think that some outstanding 
master in mathematics has written out and solved for 
him the principle of the spheres, their motions, and the 
stars, and that this master has determined it all for him 
in advance because he understands nothing about these 
things and is only skilled in craftsmanship, let that per­
son know that he prepares everything himself and con­
structs it all without any help whatsoever, using his own 
talent, his own research, “his own force,” as they say. 
He is both inventor and executor at once, one of those 
I have mentioned who stands out among all our fellow 
citizens in the mastery of astrology, even though no one 
ever taught him to read or gave thought to a teacher for 
him. Not only is he versed in the workings of the heav­
ens themselves in this way, but with his intelligence he 
discerns the very causes through his calculations and 
understands them. Moreover, he often and quickly 
contradicts recognized authorities on astrology—men 
who write books on the subject—and he does so knowl­
edgeably and assuredly. Indeed, on no few occasions he 
proves them wrong with incontrovertible arguments, 
obliging them to admit their errors and mistakes.20
As García-Diego has commented, “The astronomer who at 
the same time worked with his hands, of whom Vida speaks, 
was then, and also later, a rare phenomenon.”21
FIGURE 20.2. 
Calle del Hombre de Palo, a street sign 
in Toledo.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

140
Although the mechanical clock is thought to have origi­
nated in northern Italy or England before 1300, its later 
development in South Germany is well documented in 
metalworking guild records, famous for their detail. The 
imperial free cities of Augsburg, Nuremberg, and Ulm and 
the Bavarian capital of Munich numbered among import­
ant centers of metalworking technology from the fifteenth 
to the eighteenth century, and many specific trades—
locksmith, gunsmith, toolmaker, clockmaker—evolved in 
time from the blacksmith’s craft. Augsburg and Nuremberg 
produced scientific instruments, sundials, clocks, and 
automata that were world renowned. Nuremberg, the city 
where Jakob Bulmann plied his trade in the early half of 
the sixteenth century, was known for its innovative figure 
clocks, hence our choice of this city for envisioning one pos­
sible scenario for the monk’s origin. Johann Neudörfer, whose 
manuscript preserves the first account of Bulmann, also sin­
gled out some of the greatest names we associate today with 
Nuremberg: Peter Henlein (1485–1542), inventor of the watch; 
the great limewood sculptor Veit Stoss (ca. 1445/50–1533); 
the goldsmith Wenzel Jamnitzer (1507/8–1585), who would 
later serve in the court of Rudolf II; Neudörfer’s close friend 
and neighbor Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528), who employed 
Neudörfer’s script Frakturschrift in his woodcuts; and Hans 
Sachs (1494–1576), shoemaker, poet, and Meistersinger, 
A Nuremberg 
Clockmaker’s Workshop
21
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

141
about whom more below. Nuremberg was also the chosen 
home of Johannes Müller, better known as Regiomontanus, 
who set up an observatory, workshop, and printing press 
in 1471 and published leading modern and ancient texts on 
mathematics and astronomy.1 
By the mid-sixteenth century, clockmaking practice 
in Nuremberg flourished within a broad network of inter­
dependent metalworking trades. Iron ore was smelted in 
blast furnaces fueled with charcoal made of wood from the 
surrounding forests of Saint Lorenz and Saint Sebaldus; the 
ore in turn became the raw material for the city’s master 
smiths, instrument makers, and clockmakers, together with 
those who fashioned the primary tools employed in trades 
of every kind.
Nuremberg also served as a nexus of established trade 
routes dating from the Middle Ages, carrying commerce and 
exchange across and beyond the Holy Roman Empire, in a 
network that included Genoa, Venice, Lisbon, Madrid, Paris, 
Toulouse, Antwerp, London, Danzig, Constantinople, Africa, 
the Levant, and the Orient. Nuremberg merchant families 
stationed relatives as trading agents in many European 
cities, where they had established credit and reciprocal 
customs treaties. Records show, for example, 232 Nuremberg 
merchants in Venice alone around 1500. Well into the six­
teenth century, Nuremberg remained outwardly neutral in 
the face of social and political unrest associated with the 
Reformation and Counter-Reformation, peacefully doing 
business with all parties, while Lutheranism, with its inde­
pendent spirit, quietly gained appeal among the patrician 
ruling families, the professions, and the skilled trades alike.2 
An old proverb celebrated the city’s economic primacy: 
“Nürnbergs Tand/Geht durch alle Land” (Nuremberg’s 
hand/Through every land).3 
Among the larger cities where cognate trades were 
organized into systems of self-governing craft guilds, 
Nuremberg was unique in the direct administration of its 
trades by the city council, and as a result the merchant 
class exercised considerably more power over craft prac­
titioners. If Nuremberg artisans plied their skills with less 
guild protection and more open competition, they none­
theless navigated a closely scripted set of contracts among 
masters, journeymen, apprentices, and oversight councils, 
which regulated everything from pricing, business territory, 
and shop size to resource and labor use, subcontracting, 
and client relations.4 Above all, the city council dictated the 
requirements defining the “masterpiece,” the technical term 
for work submitted by an applicant for status as a master. In 
its prime in the first half of the sixteenth century, this urban 
environment fostered an unprecedented level of standard­
ization and virtuosity across the trades, including armorers, 
metalsmiths, weavers, potters, glassmakers, carpenters, and 
coin stampers. Type founders, printers, and bookbinders 
produced the books that we study now in order to learn 
about the age that produced them. Prized among these is 
Jost Amman and Hans Sach’s famous Ständebuch, or Book 
of Trades (published in Nuremberg in 1568).5 Urban regu­
lation, whatever its social costs to citizens, has redeeming 
value for historians in search of information about a van­
ished era.
The sixteenth-century clock—a Nuremberg spe­
cialty—took a form very different from the routine timepiece 
we now take for granted. Clock time was at first incidental 
to an instrument that demonstrated the complex relative 
motions of the sun, moon, planets, and so-called fixed stars. 
The astronomical clock, or astrarium, as much a spatial 
tool as a temporal one, told location and influence in the 
revolving cosmic order. Such a machine naturally entailed 
the representation of first causes and prime movers: the 
figures of the constellations, of myth, religion, and imperial 
agency. The astrarium epitomized a new world science: a 
manifestation of the power of measure, a symbol of wealth, 
and an object of wonder. Neudörfer mentions such a clock 
in connection to Jakob Bulmann, as we’ve seen. The word 
itself, astrarium, is closely connected to the unprecedented 
machine made by Giovanni de’ Dondi (see FIG. 20.1). These, 
and elaborate figure clocks and automata from Nuremberg 
and Augsburg, were commissioned as royal peace tributes 
to the Ottoman sultanate, as Jesuit mission gifts to China, as 
currency of imperial diplomacy in courts across Europe, and 
as the furniture of public relations in patrician households. 
Smallness was regarded as a measure of genius: the more 
actions that could be generated by a diminutive mechanism, 
the higher the price. However, basic wall-hung alarm clocks 
were also in demand, for the bell towers of monasteries, for 
public buildings, and for larger houses, while table clocks 
and animated toys, humbler marvels, found many buyers 
among the merchant class.6 
A Nuremberg Clockmaker’s Workshop
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

142
CHAPTER 21
A shop producing one-of-a-kind clockwork pieces, or 
small-batch productions of pieces, might typically comprise 
a master, one or more journeymen, a few apprentices, and in 
some cases journeymen from other trades whose skills were 
wanted in the clockmaking enterprise, such as coppersmiths 
or goldsmiths. Auxiliary crafts might include the construc­
tion of wooden clock cases, brass founding, bell casting, dial 
painting, and sculpture: these tasks would have been con­
tracted to other shops or to individual artisans. Only late in 
the next century did a higher degree of specialization begin, 
as when several masters in Augsburg were permitted to take 
up the exclusive production of clock springs.7 Only later too 
did the metallurgical development of brass as a noncorro­
sive and easily worked replacement for iron become com­
mercially affordable. 
A midcentury Nuremberg clockmaker’s shop is 
illustrated by Jost Amman (1539–1591) for the famous 
Ständebuch produced with Hans Sachs in 1568 (FIG. 21.1).8 
The full title of this compendium of 114 woodcuts by 
Amman and short verses by Sachs devoted to the trades, 
professions, callings, and ranks in the city of Nuremberg 
conveys a worthy history lesson in its own right. Translated, 
it reads: 
Exact description of all ranks on earth, high and low, 
spiritual and secular, of all arts, crafts, and trades, etc., 
from the greatest to the smallest; also of their origin, 
invention, and usages. By the far-renowned Hans Sachs 
most diligently described and put into German rhymes 
very useful and pleasurable to read, and also with 
artistic illustrations the like of which has never been 
seen before, printed for the honor and satisfaction of 
all ranks included in this book and particularly for the 
use of all artists, such as painters, goldsmiths, etc. With 
the permission of the Holy Roman Emperor. Printed at 
Frankfurt am Main. 1568.
The parade begins with Pope, Cardinal, Bishop, Priest, 
Monk, Emperor, and King...and ends with four classes of 
fool: the money fool, the gluttonous fool, the jester, and the 
natural fool. But the heart of the Ständebuch consists of 
the arts and crafts of manufacture, with the clockmaker in 
their midst, together with the closely allied locksmith (FIG. 
21.2).9 The sculptor too is represented (FIG. 21.3).10 The book, 
FIGURE 21.1. 
“The Clockmaker,” from Jost Amman and 
Hans Sachs, Eygentliche Beschreibung aller 
Stände auff Erden [Exact description of all 
ranks on earth] (Nuremberg, 1568), popularly 
called The Book of Trades (Ständebuch). 
Original sheet with Amman’s woodcut and 
Sachs’s verse about 20 × 15 cm (just under 8 
× 6 in.), bound for a page size of about. 7 × 5 in. 
Amman’s woodcut shows a clockmaker dis­
playing a fine example of a period mechanical 
clock, though Sachs unaccountably praises a 
sandglass, or hourglass: “The charming clocks 
I make are nice,/Polished smooth and most 
precise./Their glass and sand is always pure,/
So that they will long endure./Their wooden 
cases I make, too,/Paint them green, grey, 
red, and blue,/To show, when fitted round the 
glass,/Ev’ry hour and quarter pass.” (Verse 
translation by Theodore K. Rabb)
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

143
A Nuremberg Clockmaker’s Workshop
FIGURE 21.3. 
“The Sculptor” (Amman and Sachs, 
Ständebuch). Amman depicts a remarkably 
well-dressed sculptor at his bench with 
gouges, mallets, and drill, at work on what 
appears to be a tomb effigy. Good light, many 
works in progress, and gentleman’s attire con­
firm his status. Sachs’s verse: “The art of sculp­
ture, which I’ve taught,/Brought me honors 
when I wrought/The idols which the people 
so/Dearly worshipped long ago./ I carved 
them out of stone and wood,/ Purest marble, 
clear and good./The well-proportioned forms 
I made/Earned me wealth—I was well paid.” 
(Verse translatation by Theodore K. Rabb) 
FIGURE 21.2. 
“The Locksmith” (Amman and Sachs, 
Ständebuch). Amman gives a good view of 
the furnace, its bellows poised for pumping 
air to boost the charcoal’s heat. Two smiths 
wield tongs and hammer to shape a piece of 
hot iron on an anvil, the anvil mounted on a 
stout tree stump. Many a locksmith also made 
early clocks. Sachs’s verse: “There’s grates 
and bolts and straps and keys;/Locks as well, 
and things like these;/There’s railings, chests, 
and iron chain;/Chimney linings for the rain;/
There’s pans and stands for kitchen fires,/
Weathervanes on churches’ spires— /If iron­
ware you want, then I/Make the goods you 
need to buy.” (Verse translatation by Theodore 
K. Rabb)
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

144
CHAPTER 21
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

145
A Nuremberg Clockmaker’s Workshop
tools, David learned much about the characteristics of iron, 
along with the huge advantages of “batch production.” In 
2010 he set out to fabricate a simple wall-hung alarm clock 
in the style of the mid- to late sixteenth century, using only 
the tools and methods of that period, and it entailed more 
than two years of work at forge and bench (see FIG. 18.1). 
This convinced him that even at this early date, the master 
could make a reasonable profit on a clock only by contract­
ing or employing other artisans. The master would have 
had overall control of the assembly and fine-tuning, but the 
individual parts would have been produced by a number of 
different practitioners, each specializing in a particular skill, 
some in the shop, others as outworkers. A few decades after 
Amman and Sachs published their Ständebuch, another 
artist took a closer look inside a clockmaker’s workshop (FIG. 
21.4), this one filled with workers.11
Ambrosio de Morales’s chronicle of Juanelo’s produc­
tion and Vida’s description of his blackened face and hands 
offer but a brief glimpse of this preindustrial world. The 
workmen who knew about iron, as the Siennese metallurgist 
and engineer Vannoccio Biringuccio wrote in his celebrated 
1540 text, De la pirotechnia, were “never able to enjoy any 
quiet except in the evening when they are exhausted by 
the long and laborious day that began for them with the 
first crowing of the cock. Sometimes they even fall asleep 
without bothering about supper.”12 A complex clock would 
require many different types and sizes of toothed wheels, 
together with a multitude of arbors, pinions, cams, and 
levers, as well as the driving weights or mainspring, the sub­
sidiary springs, the components of the escapement (such as 
the verge and its foliot or balance wheel), and the frame and 
various supporting brackets. All these crucial parts, each 
made individually from forge anvil to final polish, had to 
work together flawlessly in concert.
celebrated for the accuracy of its detail, is also contempo­
rary with the period of the monk’s estimated origin, making 
it a valuable resource for our study.
Amman’s woodcuts of the clockmaker’s and lock­
smith’s shops illustrate some of the tools essential to clock­
making: the forge fire with its bellows; the smith’s anvil; 
tools of persuasion, such as the hammer, drift, and swage; 
cutting tools like the file and punch; and assorted holding 
tools, vises, tongs, and pliers. To which David would add 
the handsaw, the drill, the dead-center lathe, and measuring 
devices: calipers and rules and dividing plates. Some tools 
came from local specialist smiths and toolmakers, but many 
more were produced in the shop where they would be used. 
The clockmaker first makes the tool, then, by means of the 
tool, the clock. 
These elementary tools made possible astonishing 
precision and artistry. In our industrial and postindustrial 
world, skill and labor hold profoundly different meanings, 
which make it difficult for us to imagine the sheer manual 
bravura of artisanal iron-working technology before the 
introduction of electricity and power tools. As a clockmaker 
of long standing, while making and using early-pattern hand 
FIGURE 21.4. 
Horologia ferrea (Iron clocks), a copperplate 
engraving from the series Nova Reperta 
(New discoveries), printed by Philips Galle in 
Antwerp, ca. 1591. Sheet: 23.2 × 29.2 cm (9 × 
11½ in.). Influenced by Jost Amman’s clockmak­
er’s shop in Nuremberg, Jan van der Straet, 
known as Johannes Stradanus (Flemish, 
1523–1605, active in Antwerp, Florence, and 
Rome), produced this detailed scene showing 
the diversity of skills needed to make a clock. A 
master works on a virtuoso clock while a finely 
dressed nobleman looks on. At left, a bespec­
tacled craftsman examines a finished clock­
wheel, while his bench mate files the teeth of 
a new wheel, held in a foot-operated vise (see 
FIG. 18.1.). Behind them, a worker inspects a set 
of oval neck watches (once called “Nuremberg 
eggs”) hanging in a cupboard, while at rear, two 
men work the forge. At right, a worker adjusts 
the pendulum weights of a wall-mounted 
chamber clock. Through the shop’s rear door, 
a clock tower is visible in the distance.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

147
The Art Cabinet of Rudolf II
22
Among the most demanding and persistent customers for 
objects produced by the masters of the German craft guilds 
were reigning members of the Habsburg dynasty and, in par­
ticular, the sovereign collectors who created Kunstkammern, 
art cabinets. One such avid collector, Ferdinand I, ruled the 
Austrian hereditary lands for his brother Charles V and 
became Holy Roman emperor when Charles withdrew to San 
Yuste. Like his brother, he was fascinated by clocks and instru­
ments. His sons, Maximilian II and Archduke Ferdinand II, 
governor of Tyrol, built eminent collections of their own. 
But the collections in Prague amassed by Emperor Rudolf II, 
grandson of Ferdinand I and firstborn son of Maximilian 
II, are justly celebrated as the most famous and extensive 
treasury of the northern Renaissance (FIG. 22.1). As the Czech 
art historian Eliška Fučíková has asserted, “Even though 
Rudolf’s collection and the Emperor’s court had their pre­
decessors—one need mention only Lorenzo de’ Medici and 
his collections—in magnitude, quality and diversity Rudolf’s 
collections were without equal, not only in their time but for 
centuries to come.”1 
Kunstkammern, and kindred cabinets referred to as 
Wunderkammern, Schatzkammern, or cabinets of curi­
osities, depending on their contents, were compendia of 
natural and artificial marvels containing samples of all the 
FIGURE 22.1. 
Joseph Heintz the Elder, Emperor Rudolf II, 
ca. 1592. Oil on copper. 16.2 × 12.7 cm (6⅜ × 5 in.). 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna. Rudolf II 
sent emissaries across Europe and around 
the globe in search of treasure for his Prague 
Kunstkammer and amassed the most encyclo­
pedic collection of natural and artificial wonders 
of the northern Renaissance. Instruments, 
clocks, and automata are well represented in 
surviving inventories.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

148
CHAPTER 22
medals, prints, and artworks of surpassing craftsmanship).6 
Works by the finest goldsmiths and clockmakers in Europe 
were represented: Anton Schweinberger, Wenzel Jamnitzer, 
Gerhard Emmoser, Jost Bürgi, Christoph Margraf, and Hans 
Schlottheim. Court craft workshops flourished, such as 
that of the incomparable gem-cutter Ottavio Miseroni and 
his family. The library contained treatises by Paracelsus, 
Giordano Bruno, Galileo, Giovanni Battista della Porta, 
Tycho Brahe, and Johannes Kepler, as well as archives of 
codices on astronomy, mechanics, mathematics, alchemy, 
and the search for perpetual motion. The naturalia fea­
tured precious stones, medicinal herbs, bezoars, ambers, 
fossils, dinosaur bones, preserved creatures of air, land, 
and sea, monsters and mandrakes, marvelous fakes, and 
the products of the occult crafts.7 Beyond the halls of the 
Kunstkammer itself, Rudolf’s collections boasted artworks 
by Titian, Correggio, Veronese, Tintoretto, Dürer, the elder 
Brueghel, Giambologna, and the court artists Giuseppe 
Arcimboldo, Bartholomeus Spranger, Hans von Aachen, 
Adriaen de Vries, and Joris Hoefnagel, among others. 
The Kunstkammer, Fučíková recounts,
was not merely a static display to please the eye of the 
onlooker; it was a living organism and a fascinating 
resource. Various ores, natural gemstones, shells, horns, 
rare nuts, and the like were deposited in it not merely 
because of their unusual shape, the rarity of their mate­
rial or their origin in distant lands: they represented a 
store serving the craft workshops of the court, to which 
exotic or precious raw materials were dispatched only to 
return to the Kunstkammer in the form of artefacts.8 
Rudolf famously kept his Kunstkammer secluded and 
private, yet it was also available as an open laboratory to 
appropriately credentialed visiting and court alchemists, 
astronomers, artisans, and artists.9 The collection reflected 
Rudolf’s secular passions. Though educated in Philip’s 
court, he resisted the orthodox pressures of the Spanish 
sphere in his patronage and his reign.
Rudolf’s Kunstkammer did not survive. At Rudolf’s 
death, his brother Matthias succeeded in moving only frac­
tions of the huge collection to Vienna; other parts were sold 
in the next decade by Rudolf’s successors in order to finance 
military campaigns; and the remainder was pillaged in 1648 
by Swedish forces in the sack of Prague at the close of the 
world’s knowledge and of all the phenomena of Creation. Art 
and wonder cabinets arose from the will to capture and to 
categorize all that man and nature could make. Precursor of 
the museum as it is instituted today, encyclopedic cabinets 
initiated the marshaling and division of knowledge itself. 
R. J. W. Evans, in Rudolf II and His World, writes, “The 
assembling of many and various items reflected the essential 
variety in the world, which could nevertheless be converted 
into unity by a mind which brought them together and 
divined their internal relations one with the other....[W]e see 
the analogy from microcosm to macrocosm and the search 
for a ‘key’ to the harmony of the created universe.” 2 It is no 
accident that imperial cabinets expanded at the moment 
when Europe was encountering for the first time the won­
ders brought back by explorers and conquerors of what was 
called the New World. A collection was a world in parallel: 
physical encyclopedia, art museum, repository of dynastic 
regalia, of ethnographic plunder, scientific laboratory, and 
philosophical archive. Not least, it was an instrument of 
imperial prestige, diplomacy, and power. “A prince expresses 
his virtus, his worth, in his collections,” observes Thomas 
DaCosta Kaufmann.3 
Rudolf II (1552–1612) ruled the Habsburg lands of 
Central Europe from 1576 to 1612. His two grandfathers were 
brothers: Ferdinand I (through his father) and Charles V 
of Spain (through his mother); his parents, Maria and 
Maximilian II, were first cousins. He was educated and came 
of age in the court of his uncle, Philip II in Madrid, sent there 
by his mother from Vienna for a good Catholic upbringing.4 
Only seven years younger than his cousin Don Carlos, he 
would have arrived in Madrid at the age of eleven, the year 
after Don Carlos’s illness and cure. On the early death of his 
father, he assumed rule at age twenty-three as archduke of 
Austria, king of Hungary, Croatia, and Bohemia, and (by age 
twenty-four) Holy Roman emperor. Such were the impera­
tives of dynasty. 
Rudolf’s extensive collections, including treasures 
secured from his Habsburg forebears, were housed in three 
great halls of the Prague castle, with a fourth vast chamber 
given to the Kunstkammer proper and its library.5 Objects 
in the Kunstkammer comprised naturalia (natural history, 
zoology, botany, and mineralogy), scientifica (clocks, astro­
nomical instruments, terrestrial and celestial globes, and 
compasses), and artificialia (weapons, textiles, coins and 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

149
The Art Cabinet of Rudolf II
Thirty Years’ War.10 The posthumous inventories composed 
in 1619 and in 1621 reflected a collection much reduced and 
its order lost. Scholars searched in vain for an inventory said 
to have been produced during Rudolf’s lifetime. Piecemeal 
reports from letters by court visitors give a mythic sense of 
its size and diversity, but few visitors privileged with an invi­
tation had time to absorb Rudolf’s method of organization. In 
the absence of a direct record, the nature and arrangement 
of the Kunstkammer remained elusive, contributing to the 
reputation of the emperor as a recluse secluded among his 
fathomless treasures, neglecting affairs of state.
Just after World War II a manuscript was found in 
the Bibliothek des Regierenden Fürsten in the tiny nation 
of Liechtenstein, the German-speaking Alpine principal­
ity dating to the late medieval era, whose nobles had once 
served Habsburg rulers. Archived in the library only as 
an “inventory of an unknown collection,” it was discov­
ered by Gustav Wilhelm, director of art collections for the 
Principality of Liechtenstein, who thought he recognized its 
identity. Knowing there were at least some surviving origi­
nal Kunstkammer objects that had passed into the collec­
tions of the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna, Wilhelm 
produced a transcription of the manuscript in 1947 and 
gave it to Erwin Neumann, curator and later director of the 
Collection of Sculpture and Decorative Arts at the museum. 
Neumann, confirming what Wilhelm had suspected, pub­
lished an account of the find in 1966, announcing, “The 
author of the present text...finds himself in the agreeable 
position of being able to report the unexpected discovery 
of the original inventory, long believed lost or even nonexis­
tent, of the Rudolfian Art chamber.”(FIG. 22.2).11 
Out of one war came the key to an earlier war’s ruins. 
Neumann foresaw that besides furnishing a provenance for 
works of art that had survived the dispersal, the inventory 
would lead to a broad reappraisal of Rudolf and his contro­
versial reign. Scholars transcribed its full text in the next 
decade, working from a bound parchment codex of 415 
sheets, listing almost three thousand entries. Their assess­
ment lays out the method, coherence, and scope of the col­
lection, as well as Rudolf’s unflinching promotion of the arts 
and the natural sciences in the face of inquisitorial Rome 
and the western empire under Catholic Spain.12 
FIGURE 22.2. 
Title page of the Kunstkammer inventory of 
Rudolf II, 1607–11. Kunsthistorisches Museum, 
Vienna. The title reads in part, “VON ANNO 
1607. VERZAICHNUS, WAS IN DER RÖM: KAY: MAY: 
KUNSTCAMMER GEFUNDEN WORDEN” (From the 
year 1607. Directory of what has been found in 
the Kunstkammer).
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

150
CHAPTER 22
Precious few words, and much hangs on these tacit 
phrases! The name “Marggraven” leaps out, for this is 
Christoph Margraf, whose name was added to those of 
Bulmann and Turriano as makers of mechanically mov­
ing figures in the description of the Vienna cittern player 
in the 1966 catalog of the Kunsthistorisches Museum.17 
Erwin Neumann himself wrote that catalog description, 
as he was by then head of the Collection of Sculpture and 
Decorative Arts at the museum. He does not cite a source 
for his reference to Margraf, but with the transcript from 
Liechtenstein in his hands, he must surely have spotted the 
entry describing the velvet-clad cittern player. But does the 
entry describe a walking figure? And is it a female figure? 
The German phrase that concludes the entry, “schlecht 
ein fantasia”—strums a fantasia—might equally apply to a 
music box supporting a partly movable figure rather than 
a walking android.18 And how did Fröschl know this was a 
Margraf piece? Was it signed, or did Fröschl know the court 
clockmakers so well that it was familiar to him? If only those 
two Rudolfian inventory entries were combined into one 
marvelous automaton, we would have an account of an 
android as complete as that of Ambrosio de Morales’s dama 
by Juanelo.19 Both entries mention the figures’ clothes: “cov­
ered in velvet” and “dressed in a long coat.” Robes or dresses 
would hide the clockwork, an important clue, as we have 
mentioned. None of the descriptions identify the material 
of the clockwork itself, if of brass or of iron.
But Neumann’s addition of Margraf to the list of clock­
makers known to make walking automata is important. 
From 1595 to 1612, Margraf was a celebrated clockmaker in 
the court of Rudolf II. A signed and dated clock by Margraf, 
today displayed in the collection of the Kunsthistorisches 
Museum in Vienna, is his 1596 Kugellaufuhr (lit., “rolling 
ball clock”) based on Galileo’s discovery that a rolling ball 
responds to gravity in a way that can measure time. An elab­
orate machine, the clock takes the form of a box: when its 
lid is tilted open a mirror on the underside of the lid allows 
a view of the clockwork inside. There, on an inclined glass 
plate, along wires strung in a zigzag pattern, a small white 
ball rolls back to front and top to bottom. Viewed through 
the mirror, the ball appears to float in space, resetting itself 
and continuing its motion as long as a hidden mainspring 
and fusee run. All the while the ball transmits its motion 
The inventory itself is unsigned, but its author is 
believed to be Daniel Fröschl (1563–1613), painter, miniatur­
ist, and, from 1607 until the emperor’s death, Rudolf’s trusted 
court antiquarian. Clearly, Fröschl was intimately familiar 
with the collection, and his many notes on the sheet margins 
document the active use of the collection over time.13
Are automata mentioned in the inventory? In that 
golden age of the mechanical clock, indeed they are. Many 
were small figurative embellishments on the striking trains 
of clocks, but others are listed as complex performing clock­
work machines, not timepieces. A few entries name mak­
ers. Augsburg and Nuremberg loom large as manufacturing 
locales. A number of the finest machines listed in the inven­
tory still exist today, preserved in the Kunsthistorisches 
Museum in Vienna. Surviving works include the gilded 
silver ship made for Rudolf by the Augsburg master Hans 
Schlottheim, which we described in chapter 17.14 
But are any self-propelled androids listed in the inven­
tory? Perhaps fashioned of more humble materials, dressed 
in real cloth? In fact, there are two such entries, tantaliz­
ingly brief. Listed under the heading “Clocks and clocklike 
works [Von uhrn und dergleichen rederwercken]” is entry 
2145.h/379:
Another of C. Marggraven’s works is a waxen likeness/
image, covered in violet velvet, [which] strums a cittern, 
moving its head and its hand. Wound up like a clock­
work, it strums a fantasia.
[Ein ander werckh vom C. Marggraven mit veyelbrau­
nem samet überzogen, ist ein waxin bild, schlegt uff der 
cittern, mit dem kopf und hand sich bewegendt, man 
zeuchts auf wie ein uhrwerckh, schlecht ein fantasia.]15 
Later in the inventory, under a different heading, “Clockworks 
in pictures and other diversions [Uhrwerck von bildern und 
andern kurtzweyligen sachen],” we find entry 2194/426: 
A young boy dressed in a long coat, wound up like a 
clock, beats the drum with natural movements and 
walks about.
[Ein jung knäblin in einem langen röckhlin beklaidet, 
welches man auch wie ein uhr aufzeucht, schlegt natür­
lich die trummel und geht umbher.] 16 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

151
The Art Cabinet of Rudolf II
To the Rudolfian inventory we should now add 
another list from a later collection: this one in Italy, assem­
bled by the seventeenth-century nobleman Manfredo 
Settala (1600–1680). As mentioned in chapter 16, the clock­
maker Giorgio Gregato, who restored the Milan automaton, 
has argued that an entry in the 1666 Settala inventory iden­
tifies this automaton. Settala was a visionary Milanese cleric 
famous both as a collector and as an inventor: he called him­
self an artisan-scholar. “Settala created a museum filled with 
natural and ethnographic curios, that arrived from the far 
reaches of the formidable Catholic missionary networks, as 
well as mechanical and optical inventions of his own device,” 
the historian Paula Findlen writes.24 Among independent 
patrician collectors in the seventeenth century, Settala 
vastly expanded a collection of medicinal and scientific 
matter begun by his father and pursued a vigorous effort of 
classification that advanced the meaning and definition of 
collecting well beyond the by then typical Wunderkammer. 
Colleague of Athanasius Kircher in Rome, and of a wide cir­
cle of thinkers, makers, princes, and cardinals, he had his 
inventory published in both Latin and Italian, for broadest 
notice, and won the support of powerful patrons, including 
Federico Borromeo, archbishop of Milan, who had founded 
the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in 1607. At Settala’s death, the 
collection passed through subsequent generations of the 
Settala family and ultimately to the Ambrosiana in 1751. 
In citing the 1666 inventory, Giorgio Gregato adds a 
welcome source to the small list of period records that refer 
to walking automata.
to the clock face on the front of the box and to a striking 
bell within. With its illusion of perpetual motion, it was said 
to be the first of its kind—and it won him special privileges 
in Rudolf’s court.20 Such an object exemplifies the kind 
of innovative machine that a court clockmaker had the 
opportunity to develop. Future research on automata must 
include a search for works by Margraf. 
The much-awaited publication of the Rudolfian inven­
tory in 1976 allowed historians to at last find their way to 
individual entries in that great list.21 The news traveled 
fast, for by 1980, when Klaus Maurice and Otto Mayr pre­
sented the Smithsonian monk in The Clockwork Universe, 
they added a new reference to its modest bibliography. To 
the sources naming Bulmann and Turriano, they appended 
one more: “In Emperor Rudolf II’s collection of art treasures 
there were a number of spring-driven clothed dolls that beat 
upon drums and walked about.”22
This is the landscape behind the circumspect bibli­
ography Maurice and Mayr assembled for the Smithsonian 
monk. “Spring-driven clothed dolls that beat upon drums 
and walked about”—the simple but telling paraphrase 
Maurice and Mayr borrowed from the inventory in indi­
cating cousins to a small, dressed, mobile, self-propelled 
automaton beating, not a drum, but its own chest. Morales 
in Toledo, Neudörfer in Nuremberg, and Fröschl in Prague: 
three eyewitnesses observed such automata.23 The texts 
they wrote served different aims. Morales, on royal assign­
ment for Philip II, tours cities of Spain and reports Juanelo’s 
accomplishments in Toledo. Neudörfer and Doppelmayr 
include Bulmann in biographical chronicles of outstanding 
citizens of sovereign Nuremberg. Fröschl names Margraf for 
an object in an imperial cabinet inventory. But all three con­
firm the existence of walking clockwork figures and allow 
us to posit plausible settings for their manufacture and 
destination. It is just possible that one or two of the objects 
described in these brief passages parade before us now. The 
texts chronicle a family, a genus, to which the figures belong. 
Although it is difficult to envision a monkish android in 
Rudolf’s secular Kunstkammer, we might picture a figure 
not unlike it among wonders kept hidden in the emperor’s 
private theater, set before a select audience on the right 
occasion. Automata took their place among clockwork mar­
vels and demonstrated both the power to fashion a lifelike 
being—and the power to possess it.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

152
perceived as only incidental novelties at the time they 
were made. The more complex composite machines like 
Schlottheim’s nef were seen as outstanding accomplish­
ments of their day, worthy of preservation even as tech­
nology moved on and patronage changed. The clockwork 
astrarium retains its high status even today, rightfully so. A 
solo figure, in contrast, with wooden body and perishable 
dress, was perhaps only “a toy and fit for mirth,” as Morales 
wrote, to be discarded with other trifles as a culture outgrew 
them. What purpose could the monk have served? Now that 
a number of kindred figures have emerged from history’s 
shadows, one can hope and expect that the discovery of 
additional neglected records, and even newfound automata, 
will follow. A new understanding of the significance of these 
figures has already brought more of them to light. 
These small figures may have been lost in time 
because they are protean and mutable. The metal clockwork 
outlasts the wood sculpture—and even damages it: recall 
the small felt pad added to the monk’s chest to dampen the 
splintering blows of his own hand. All the figures we exam­
ine in this study sooner or later received new costumes, for 
the cloth dress was the first to deteriorate. The mandolin 
player in the Conservatoire national des arts et métiers in 
Paris was identified as a nineteenth-century figure, then 
later understood to be an older machine under a newer 
dress. Only the brass mechanism itself inside the lute player 
The 1607–11 inventory of Rudolf’s Kunstkammer, emerging 
from oblivion, gives us a glimpse of how automata might 
have been seen, and by whom. A lost inventory, rediscov­
ered, sets a cascade of revisions in motion. Just as the monk 
too has appeared only recently, further discoveries will 
surely come to light and change what we can know. With 
each discovery, we marvel first at the odds of survival. The 
Rudolfian inventory lay neglected for 350 years; the monk, 
far longer. What lost news will reach us yet?
The search in the historical record for citations of 
self-propelled clockwork figures remains quite new. The 
most defining characteristics of the monk—that he walks by 
himself, that he interacts with onlookers in a direct way, that 
he is a monk and not, say, a lute player—would seem to be 
distinctive features ripe for comment by period witnesses. 
Morales, Neudörfer, and Fröschl single out an automaton’s 
walking capability, definitive for a figure that moves under 
its own power. But would not further detail about mobility—
especially the movement of mouth and eyes—be equally 
defining features of such a machine? Above all, wouldn’t a 
praying monk warrant special notice?
The automata that have survived to our time have 
become, in retrospect, small archetypes: prime objects that 
launched the evolution of the great androids that followed. 
Contemporary interest in the history of artificial life turns 
a spotlight on a class of early automata that may have been 
Searching the Lost and Found
23
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

153
in the Bavarian National Museum in Munich (and remnants 
of the wooden body shell) is original. With such similarity 
of clockwork design across the family of automata, is it pos­
sible that these durable machines were always intended to 
be finished on demand? Perhaps they were meant to ani­
mate relatively inexpensive, replaceable, even expendable 
characters. Or perhaps they were showpieces to be catego­
rized with other (to us, equally marvelous) table ornaments 
meant for onetime festivals and court celebrations (FIG. 23.1).1 
Such utilitarian or ornamental purposes would distinguish 
them from wonders of a different order, with only a few 
rare figures finding their way to the Kunstkammer. Could 
this explain why little apparent value was placed on the fig­
ures we study here—that is, if the scarcity of contemporary 
descriptions of them should be so interpreted?
FIGURE 23.1. 
From Fürstliche Hochzeit (A princely wed­
ding) by Dietrich Graminaeus, engraving by 
Franz Hogenberg, Cologne, 1587, a book that 
commemorates the extravagant wedding of 
Johann Wilhelm, duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg 
(son of Maria of Austria), and Jakobea von 
Baden, 1585, Düsseldorf. The engraving depicts 
a tabletop garden menagerie, sculpted in sugar 
(Zuckerbäckerei). Klaus Maurice writes that 
automata too were created for decorative ban­
quet settings like this one, a world in miniature. 
Searching the Lost and Found
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

154
CHAPTER 23
language associated with the Catholic liturgy, especially the 
repentant “mea culpas” of the beating of the breast. But von 
Herz asserts further that the sequenced actions of the head 
and eyes show a clear intent to represent a gaze that con­
nects with an onlooker in a performance of admonishment 
and warning. The mobile sensory organs of the head imi­
tate not merely acts of perception but feedback structures 
of cognition and reaction as well. “These mimetic qualities 
involve a visualization of invisible processes,” she writes. 
“Driven by a concealed mechanism, the figure performs vis­
ible movements simulating human behavior that constitute 
a reflection of inner processes. That is to say, sensory, noetic, 
and moral human faculties are being simulated.”4
This representation of inner process goes beyond the 
simple simulation of motor activities in the female musi­
cian figures, she continues. The period writers seem to 
describe not the male figures but the lady musicians with 
their less complex, more programmed movements (Morales, 
Neudörfer, and the Margraf figure in Rudolf’s inventory). “It 
would appear,” von Herz comments, “that the ‘female musi­
cian’ was a topos, that is to say, a characteristic and wide­
spread form of android that was a popular motif for ornate 
toys designed for use in a sophisticated entertainment.”5 
She argues that the kinetic image of the female musician 
does not go beyond a simulation of human motor actions. 
The three male figures, however, mimic the paired actions 
of looking and of speaking; they give the impression that 
they observe their surroundings, that they are aware of the 
things they hold in their hands; they “speak” in response 
to what they see, in a pattern of syntactic perceptions and 
reactions. We could add that the monk, seen in performance, 
even mimics human spontaneity. He seems to turn not on 
cue, not on a mechanical pattern, but as if abruptly making 
up his mind.
Automata with head and face mobility would surely 
have been noted by annalists, even if at the time they 
were considered comparatively minor pieces in terms of 
their clockwork. Von Herz comes to the same conclusion 
we have reached, reviewing the historical record: “None of 
the texts describes a figure possessing as complex a pro­
gram of movements, especially involving the head, as is 
found in the surviving male figures. Since the sources [we 
do have] repeatedly emphasize the naturalistic qualities of 
the movements, it seems to me that they would hardly have 
overlooked or failed to mention such a complex program of 
movements.”6
Talking Heads
A subtle moment in the monk’s performance, as David 
parsed and timed the sequence of actions in chapter 10, 
bears a second look. 
The kiss done, the monk raises his head and continues 
his advance across the table, and now his eyes again 
move slowly to the left, giving the uncanny appearance 
of a sustained sight line fixed on a single point as the 
monk walks past it. Brief as this is, if an onlooker hap­
pens to occupy this spot, he will likely feel as if the monk 
has singled him out for special attention, in effect keep­
ing an eye on him. The surveillance lasts just so long, 
then the eyes dart forward, as if in sudden dismissal. For 
each revolution of the fusee, the eyes drift left and then 
spring forward three times. The third time, as the monk 
pivots to march in a new direction, his eyes stay momen­
tarily locked on the person toward whom he had been 
headed, and he holds the gaze as he turns away.
This remarkable bit of clockwork required the tight coor­
dination of separate parts of the gear train. We watch the 
automaton, and it watches us back. One thinks of the ancient 
phenomenon of the “following illusion” in the Egyptian Old 
Kingdom reserve heads, with eyes ingeniously cut from 
rock crystal in such a way that they seem to move with the 
motion of the viewer. Or of the all-seeing eyes of the fres­
coed medieval Pantocrator. The artist’s depiction of the eye 
and its gaze is a subject unto itself. But representing the act 
of looking performed by a moving sculpture was something 
altogether new to art and to mechanics. Even today, David 
notes, sustained sight line is one of the biggest challenges in 
the technology of human/robot interaction.
Adelheid von Herz’s research emphasizes the mobility 
of the faces of the three male figures—the Smithsonian and 
Munich monks and the Budapest saint (and to these we now 
add the Milan matron). Referring to them as “die cephalen 
androiden” (lit., “the cephalic androids”), she suggests that 
the motions of their heads, eyes, and mouths represent the 
enactment of perception and response. A head turns, its 
eyes make contact with an onlooker, its mouth opens to 
speak.2 Especially the movement of the mouth, von Herz 
says, links these automata to the literature of talking heads 
in medieval and Renaissance lore.3 Although no actual voice 
is produced, the repeated opening and closing of the mouth 
in the Smithsonian monk might correspond to uttered 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

155
Searching the Lost and Found
Later Sightings?
Equally surprising is the absence of sure images of such 
automata in the many late Renaissance paintings and illus­
trations depicting collections, studios, and Kunstkammern. 
For all the pleasure of the search—for example, in the ency­
clopedic suite of paintings titled The Five Senses (1617–18) 
by Jan Brueghel the Elder and Peter Paul Rubens in the 
Museo del Prado, Madrid, replete with clocks, instruments, 
workers at the forge, and the bounty of art—no automata can 
be found.7 Not until the eighteenth century do we alight on 
an engraving that clearly pictures a small walking automa­
ton: La charmante catin, 1742 (FIG. 23.2). The print bears an 
inscription in French:
Sans badiner, malgré ce que nous sommes,
Tel est souvent nôtre destin;
Les Grands quand il leur plaît font à peu près 
des hommes
Ce qu’un ressort caché fait icy de Catin
[Without jest, despite what we are,
Such is often our fate;
The Great Ones, when it pleases them make of men
the same as a hidden spring here makes of the doll]8
Horst Bredekamp opens his groundbreaking study, 
The Lure of Antiquity and the Cult of the Machine, with 
this print.9 Image and inscription are credited to Charles-
Nicolas Cochin, and the ironic message is clear, for by then 
the clockwork automaton had begun to assume its now-
familiar pejorative metaphor. “The doll,” Bredekamp writes, 
“bathed in a diffuse and flickering light, dominates the scene 
with the power of a supernatural apparition. Facing the 
magic of this autonomous movement, the plainly-dressed 
woman in the foreground falls to her knees in a praying 
gesture and the other, more reserved witnesses also seem 
deeply affected.” Without jest, the image jests, depicting 
astonishment where wisdom should be. The engraving, 
however ironic its message, also captures the genuine aston­
ishment that must once have greeted such an automaton. 
We know better now, the inscription implies, and the magi­
cian at far right with his magic lantern, who has just wound 
the doll up, must be enjoying the show. 
What the engraving also demonstrates is that Mssr 
Cochin had in fact seen such an android. Its size is correct, 
full dress covers the clockwork, and the figure moves under 
its own power, sharing the floor with the onlookers. The 
FIGURE 23.2. 
Louise-Magdalene Hortemels, after Charles-
Nicolas Cochin, the Younger, La charmante catin, 
1742. Engraving. Sheet: 27.5 × 19 cm (10¾ × 7½ in.). 
A small walking automaton performs for specta­
tors in a candle-lit room.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

156
CHAPTER 23
Moreover, automata statues in human or animal form 
ought to be told. In his Mathesis Polemica, Adrianus 
Romanus says he saw a statue in the size and form of 
a young girl, who was marching forth, bending down, 
rising up, extending her hand, and performing other 
things. She could hardly be distinguished from a real 
girl. What’s more, in Würzburg, the most illustrious lord 
Konrad Friedrich von Thüngen, canon of the Würzburg 
Cathedral, showed Romanus a silver drinking cup made 
in the form of a girl and filled with wine. It proceeded 
across the table, even to the far end to whomever it was 
ordered to approach. When it reached the end of the 
table, it remained there without any movement, as if it 
knew the boundary and precipice. After the wine was 
drunk and the cup was refilled, it was set free and dis­
patched to someone else in the same way, and its motion 
continued for another half hour. We also saw in Palermo 
in Sicily at the house of the most reverend lord Abbot 
Gieze, among other rare things and artifacts, a statue in 
the form of a girl, who played the citharam beautifully 
and harmoniously and danced to the rhythm. It roamed 
across the table and when the song ended, it turned to 
those around it and greeted them with a bow. There 
won’t be enough time and paper to go over everything 
I have seen at the house of the Abbot in Palermo and at 
many collections, or “galleries” as the Italians call them, 
of princes and cardinals, in Rome and various cities in 
Germany.10
This wonderful account singles out two automata march-
ing across a tabletop, making sequential stops before guests, 
one even bowing to finish the performance. Could these auto-
mata have been made in Schott’s time, or were they earlier 
works, treasures in noble collections? The silver drink-
ing cup maiden calls to mind the small early seventeenth-
century Joueuse de théorbe now in the Musée d’Horlogerie 
du Locle in Switzerland, described in chapter 17. The dancing 
citharam player is even more intriguing, so close is it to the 
lute players illustrated in part 3. Schott admired these fig­
ures among “rare things” in that house in Palermo, belying 
Doppelmayr’s later claim that they had become common. 
And rare are such period descriptions yet, among the few we 
have found.
doll’s feet and wheels may be faintly visible in the shadow 
under the hem of the dress. Another print with the same 
title, dated 1737, also French, in an album of etchings of 
working-class Parisiens, features a peasant girl staring at a 
doll in fancy dress (FIG. 23.3). At least one wheel is clearly vis­
ible beneath the dress hem. 
Here we can make a connection to the comment 
of Johann Gabriel Doppelmayr, quoted above (see chap. 20 
n. 5), who wrote in 1730 that such artificial machines were 
no longer rare in his time, citing three contemporary descrip­
tions. Of these, one by Kaspar Schott (1608–1666), a German 
Jesuit mathematician known for his interest in mechanical 
instruments, is invaluable, though we note it dates not from 
Doppelmayr’s time but from the previous century. In a sec­
tion titled “Statua automata” in his treatise, Magia univer­
salis naturae et artis, 1657, Schott describes two tabletop 
walking maidens, both of them tantalizingly close to those 
we have studied: 
FIGURE 23.3. 
Anne Claude Philippe de Tubières, comte de 
Caylus (etching), Étienne Fessard (engraving), 
after Edmé Bouchardon, La charmante catin, 
in Études prises dans le bas peuple ou les Cris 
de Paris, 1737. 23.8 × 18.6 cm (9½ × 7¼ in.). 
British Museum, London.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

157
Searching the Lost and Found
A more startling image of a group of spectators in the 
presence of an alleged automaton, although even more dis­
tant from the sixteenth century, is a canvas by the Spanish 
painter Miguel Jadraque y Sánchez Ocaña titled Carlos V 
en Yuste, finished in 1877 (FIG. 23.4). The painting shows the 
seated emperor, surrounded by friars and courtiers, leaning 
forward to study two diminutive figures on a cloth-covered 
table. One, in caftan and turban, poses on one knee with 
arms flung up; the other is in European dress with one hand 
on his sheathed sword and the other hand raised in the sign 
of the cross. Each is mounted on a low plinth. Their color­
ful garments appear to be of real cloth, with the folds of the 
caftan falling over the plinth to the table. Nearly every gaze 
of the assembled company converges on the pair, tokens of 
FIGURE 23.4. 
Miguel Jadraque y Sánchez Ocaña, Carlos V 
en Yuste, 1877. Oil on canvas. 147 × 193 cm 
(58 × 76 in.). Cámara Oficial de Comercio e 
Industria in Salamanca (La Casa de la Tierra), 
long-term loan from the Museo Nacional del 
Prado, Madrid. Jadraque’s painting shows the 
aged emperor, his courtiers, the friars of San 
Yuste, and perhaps Juanelo himself standing 
behind the monarch. What holds their 
attention? The painting surely shows that 
the legends of Juanelo’s automata remained 
vivid for nineteenth-century viewers. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

158
CHAPTER 23
constituted a formal lamentation group commissioned by 
the melancholic emperor.16
The tiny figure of the monk in the painting is indeed 
very close in scale and in pose to the alabaster mourners 
from Burgundy, and it likewise shares the proportions of the 
automata. Does the painter represent here a sculpture or 
an automaton? The argument for the latter depends on the 
presence of other clues to Juanelo Turriano in the picture. 
As a nineteenth-century view of a legendary moment in 
Spanish history, the painting reflects the rich lore surround­
ing the emperor’s final years at San Yuste. And as Friess and 
Steiner point out, it shows that stories of the emperor’s love 
of clocks and automata remained alive in the popular imag­
ination, as did legends of Juanelo himself. 
The monastery of San Yuste was destroyed in 1809 by 
Napoleon’s forces during the Peninsular War. The treasures 
and belongings of the emperor were recalled to Madrid long 
before that, at the time of his death, though the monastery 
itself remained active following the departure of its royal 
guest. It has since been restored, and a sundial said to be 
made by Juanelo is still there. 
the Habsburg-Ottoman struggle that dominated Charles’s 
reign. Could they represent the much-fabled figures that 
Juanelo Turriano is said to have fabricated for the emper­
or’s diversion at the monastery of San Yuste? Other objects 
in the painting reveal historically accurate knowledge of 
the objects the emperor took with him into retirement: 
at right is Titian’s portrait La emperatriz doña Isabel de 
Portugal, Charles’s much-loved wife; next to it is a smaller 
panel, perhaps the Titian Dolorosa known to have been in 
Yuste.11 Both works now hang in the Prado, since 1821 and 
1839, respectively. At left is a large portrait in the shadows, 
difficult to identify but not unsimilar to another canvas by 
Titian titled El caballero del reloj (The gentleman of the 
clock), once thought to be a portrait of Juanelo Turriano (FIG. 
23.5). This too hangs in the Prado.12 Two clocks stand atop 
the cabinet in the background, at least one of which is close 
in form to a clock by Juanelo, listed among objects at San 
Yuste at the time of the emperor’s death.13 In the foreground 
of the painting, at far left, just under the emperor’s right 
hand, with a large book propped against it, is an octagonal 
cabinet made of dark wood. It is not inconceivable that this 
is the wood case Juanelo made to contain his great astrar­
ium, “the great clock, made by Master Juanelo, with its case,” 
as documents from San Yuste identify it. Size and shape are 
exact.14 Juanelo himself is surely represented in the shad­
ows, if not in the portrait hanging just above him on the wall, 
on call behind his monarch.
Peter Friess, former conservator at the Deutsches 
Museum in Munich and restorer of that museum’s autom­
aton (see chap. 12), coauthored an essay about this picture 
with the art historian Reinhard Steiner in 2003.15 While 
the small figures on the table are the focus of the paint­
ing, Friess and Steiner draw attention instead to the small 
hooded monk in the background, on the cabinet next to 
the clocks. They compare it, first, with the famous alabas­
ter mourners of near-identical small size found in the great 
tomb sculptures of the dukes of Burgundy in the late four­
teenth and early fifteenth centuries, monuments familiar 
to Charles, who inherited rule of the Burgundian territories 
in 1506. They go on to observe that it is close in size to the 
monk automata in Munich and Washington. Citing legends 
of Charles’s preoccupation with the details of his funeral, 
they propose that an ensemble of automata might have 
FIGURE 23.5. 
Titian, El caballero del reloj (The gentleman of 
the clock), ca. 1550. Oil on canvas. 122 × 101 cm 
(48 × 40 in.). Museo Nacional del Prado, Madrid. 
Once considered by historians to be a portrait 
of Juanelo Turriano.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

159
Searching the Lost and Found
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

160
Another inventory—the catalog of objects at San Yuste, com­
piled after the emperor’s death— together with the wealth 
of correspondence from the final years of his life were 
ultimately transferred to the royal archives in Simancas, a 
stronghold initiated by Charles himself and institutionalized 
in 1588 by Phillip II. The archives suffered disruption and 
partial transfer to France in the Peninsular War (1807–14) 
but were reclaimed after Napoleon’s defeat. The task of 
restoring order fell to the archivist Don Tomás González, 
canon of Plasencia, whose labor was elegantly acknowl­
edged by William Stirling-Maxwell in The Cloister Life of 
the Emperor Charles V.1 González had begun his own narra­
tive account of the San Yuste years, but he died before it was 
finished, and his manuscript passed through several hands 
and ended up, ironically, back in France in the archives of 
the French Foreign Office. Stirling-Maxwell, Louis-Prosper 
Gachard, William H. Prescott, and others were able to study 
not just the freshly reconstituted archives in Simancas but, 
on discovering it, the González manuscript in Paris for an 
intimate understanding of the final years of Charles V.2 
Juanelo’s role in the daily round at the monastery, and his 
move to Toledo following the emperor’s death, come from 
these sources. Newly available to scholars and readers 
in the nineteenth century, this literature surely gave the 
A Monk’s Opinion, 
Continued
24
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

161
painter Miguel Jadraque y Sánchez Ocaña the details for 
his portrait of the emperor. The painting, with its accurate 
depiction of persons, clocks, and portraits at San Yuste, was 
shown in Paris in 1878.3 Awareness of Spanish history and 
precedent was in the air. Only a few decades later, Ernst von 
Bassermann-Jordan saw the cittern-playing automaton in 
Austria and seized on the legends of Juanelo’s automata.4
Though our search has yielded no period witness 
of the monk, we have been able to assemble a handful of 
“bones” leading to other kinds of recovery. We have argued 
that the family of walking clockwork androids to which the 
monk belongs forms a now-significant class in its own right. 
We can establish dates for them in the absence of makers’ 
marks. Though their fabrication would have required the 
skills of more than one craft, a few individual clockmakers 
were said to have made movable figures that “beat upon 
drums and walked about.” Guild contracts, royal invento­
ries, and biographical briefs, though scarce, suggest a shared 
technology, a mercantile context, a court audience. We have 
retraced the steps of scholars who have combed the histor­
ical record, and we have observed how the repetition of a 
surmise from one century to the next can generate its own 
kind of truth. The chronology of voices citing and reciting 
Morales to attribute the cittern player and then the monk to 
Juanelo: this we understand is history’s reflex. We ourselves 
play it forward, in the recounting. Even as other documents 
and proposed makers—and recovered automata—have come 
to the fore, Morales’s “dama que tañe y dança” remains an 
indisputable primary source, just detailed enough to hold its 
own in the void.
And with Juanelo ever in the wings, the connection 
between the automaton monk and the miracle of fray Diego 
also comes to the fore. What is the backstory of this connec­
tion? The monk came to public notice in the 1970s with the 
legend intact. 
The Legend Reprised
A review of the events is in order. Following the death of 
Charles V in San Yuste in 1558, the imperial clockmaker 
Juanelo Turriano assumed the role of engineer to Philip II, 
in Madrid and later Toledo. The near-fatal injury of Crown 
Prince Don Carlos occurred in 1562 in the university town 
of Alcalá de Henares, near Madrid. The prince’s unexpected 
recovery, following the intercession of the body of the 
Franciscan brother Diego de Alcalá, compelled Philip and 
his bishops to mount a petition to Rome to confirm a mira­
cle. In 1575 Ambrosio de Morales—court annalist to Philip II, 
professor at the University of Alcalá de Henares, and author 
of Diego’s vitae sanctorum—published Las antigüedades 
de las ciudades de España, an encyclopedia of the mate­
rial history of Spain, which included a detailed chapter on 
Juanelo Turriano and his Toledo workshop. Morales, who 
knew Juanelo well, inventoried marvels from Juanelo’s hand 
and gave the clearest period description we have found of 
a self-propelled solo automaton. Juanelo died in Toledo 
in 1585. Diego was made a saint in 1588, twenty-six years 
after the miracle, the first Counter-Reformation saint in the 
Roman Catholic Church (and the first Iberian saint in more 
than a century). 
From these well-documented facts, the legend takes 
its shape. When the figure of the monk first appeared in the 
1970s, attempts to identify it followed several leads that con­
verged on Juanelo and the Spanish court. The ecclesiastical 
nature of the automaton, the role of Charles V as patron in 
the golden age of clockwork, and the precedent of credit­
ing similar machines to Juanelo: all coalesced in the Spanish 
sphere. The story that braided the strands together, and 
reinforced them by adding one more strand, is the episode 
of Don Carlos and the miracle. Without that added dramatic 
strand, an evidence-based argument could still be made for 
a Spanish origin for the automaton, as Bassermann-Jordan 
in particular had provided. With the story of the miracle, 
however, we have a legend that has come to have a life of 
its own. The legend has attached itself so irrevocably to the 
monk that the monk all but tells it himself, raising his cross 
and beating his chest. The person who accomplished this, 
without realizing the spark he would ignite, was the modern 
Franciscan historian and scholar Servus Gieben.
Gieben’s 1975 letter, a response to an inquiry from a 
broker, is preserved in the Smithsonian archives among the 
monk’s acquisition papers.5 As Elizabeth would later learn, 
the museum contacted Servus Gieben directly to request 
the letter and received it from him. Gieben’s proposal—
that the monk was a votive figure made in the aftermath 
of the famous miracle—is more than reasonable, given the 
A Monk’s Opinion, Continued
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

162
CHAPTER 24
in the journal Desipientia, a periodical of the Catholic 
University of Nijmegen (now Radboud University) in the 
Netherlands, in an issue that transcribed papers given at 
a 1995 university conference on Christian iconography. 
Gieben’s paper, “Christelijke iconografie: Problemen en 
oplossingen” (Christian iconography: Problems and solu­
tions), discussed the unique use of printed images of saints—
images rather than texts—for advancing iconographic 
understanding, and he included some unusual cases that 
had had real-world consequences outside the task of inter­
pretation. “In the summer of 1975,” he wrote,
I was approached by the antique dealer Georges 
Sedlmajer from Geneva. He was in possession of a curious 
automaton, in the figure of a monk, which he wished to 
identify. Because he thought that it was a Jesuit preacher, 
he had turned for help to the Jesuits in Rome. But they 
pointed out to him that the doll was wearing sandals: not 
the habit of the Jesuits, but of the Franciscans. Thus they 
redirected him to our Museo Francescano. The automa­
ton doll could perform the gestures of preaching, moving 
its head and rolling its eyes, and was indeed dressed as a 
Franciscan. The doll had a very intense facial expression, 
which pointed in the direction of a portrait. The only 
other clue was an approximate date of circa 1560.11 
Sedlmajer had provided good photographs of the automa­
ton. Gieben, then director of the print archives of the Museo 
Francescano, describes his search through the collection 
and his study of images of Didacus van Alcalá, which he felt 
offered a “more than sufficient” likeness to the automaton. 
The automaton’s simple cross and rosary as iconographic 
identifiers and the shaved head (identifying a lay brother 
rather than a priest) further confirmed a representation 
of Diego. From there Gieben singled out, among the prints’ 
depictions of the saint’s miracles, the sickroom scene.
In despair they brought the body of the holy Didacus 
to the royal palace and placed it on top of the sick boy. 
Upon this touch the boy awoke from the sleep of death 
and urned to health within a few days. It is understand­
able that Philip II now put full effort in speeding up the 
process of canonization of Friar Didacus in Rome. And 
to motivate the young Carlos into a more structured life 
(apart from being sickly and without grace, he was—
according to the chroniclers—also extremely cruel and 
prevalence and popularity of votive artifacts in the church 
and their role in seeking or commemorating miracles.6 
The miracle of Brother Diego carries its own exhaustive 
church-ordained proof by evidence, and it provides the 
momentum for an icon in the form of a “miracle” from the 
technical sphere: a portrait of the saint to be, on its feet and 
moving, made after the prince himself gained his feet. An 
unacknowledged resonance with the story of the cure is set 
in play by Gieben’s proposal. 
Servus Gieben
 
Widely recognized as scholar and archivist, Servus Gieben, 
ofm Cap. (Ordo Fratrum Minorum Capuccinorum), served 
two terms as president of the Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini 
in Rome, where he was also curator and then director of 
the institute’s Museo Francescano. The museum’s collec­
tion of paintings, drawings, prints, sculpture, manuscripts, 
seals, medals, and functional objects spans the full eight-
hundred-year existence of the Franciscan order and is 
among the largest of its kind.7 For some forty years, Gieben 
developed, cataloged, exhibited, and wrote about its col­
lection of more than 40,000 engravings of Franciscan sub­
jects. Born Harrie Gieben in the Netherlands in 1924, he 
acquired the name “Servus”—a name he took as a call to a 
life of service—when he entered the Capuchin novitiate 
in 1942. He was ordained as priest in 1949 and completed 
a PhD at the Università Gregoriana in Rome in 1953. As a 
scholar of medieval theology, he researched the life and 
works of the thirteenth-century English philosopher Robert 
Grosseteste, contemporary of Saint Francis, leading to the 
definitive critical edition of Grosseteste’s Hexaëmeron 
(1982) with coauthor, Richard C. Dales. “Whoever confronts 
this text,” a commentator remarked, “can touch at first 
hand the scrupulousness of Father Gieben and the rich­
ness of his scriptural and theological knowledge.” 8 Among 
Gieben’s published volumes are many editions of primary 
manuscripts from the history of Franciscan thought.9 He 
was fluent in Dutch, German, French, Italian, English, and 
Latin. Servus Gieben died in 2014 at the age of eighty-nine, 
in Tilburg in the Netherlands, not far from his native village 
of Sint Anthonis.10 
Gieben himself published the story of how he came 
to perform his research on the automaton monk. It appears 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

163
A Monk’s Opinion, Continued
of the lives of the saints, his opinion comes from a different 
sphere than does that of the horological historian Ernst von 
Bassermann-Jordan, who marshals a separate set of sources 
in support of Juanelo. They arrive at Juanelo from different 
points of the compass. The monk belongs equally to the his­
tory of technology and to the history of the church. This is 
why the texts by Ambrosio de Morales, witness to prince, 
saint, and clockmaker all, are so invaluable. While Otto Mayr 
and Klaus Maurice introduce us to the clockwork monk, 
Servus Gieben’s remarkable letter gives the monk its identity 
as votive object, icon, and cautionary figure. Father Servus is 
our missing art historian—our historian of the spirit—with his 
eye for art’s depiction of saints and his resources as curator 
and director of one of the world’s significant collections of 
Franciscan images. Such a convergence of expertise across 
distant bodies of knowledge is precisely what it will take to 
discuss this automaton, now and in the future. 
prone to all sorts of foolishness), his father gave him the 
admonitory automaton with the appearance of his bene­
factor, the holy Didacus of Alcalá. The author-maker of 
this complicated mechanism could only have been the 
clockmaker of the Spanish court, Gionello Torriano.12
Gieben then related that the Smithsonian’s National Museum 
of American History had contacted him a few years after his 
exchange with Sedlmajer for information about an autom­
aton they presumed was in his own museum’s collection, 
saying they themselves had a similar specimen on display, 
bought from a Swiss dealer. 
We quickly solved the misunderstanding about the 
assumed specimen in our museum when I sent them 
a copy of my correspondence with Mr. Sedlmajer in 
Geneva. The specimen in their museum turned out to 
be the same one I had identified for the Swiss antiquities 
dealer. They informed me that my information about 
the holy Didacus had also been cited in a recent Spanish 
book on the clocks and automata of Gionello Torriano 
([by] Jose A. Garcia-Diego of Madrid...). Without my 
knowing about it, my historical interpretation of an 
automaton had had far-reaching consequences.13 
Unaware of this article, Elizabeth wrote to Servus 
Gieben in 1999 at the Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini in 
Rome, and he kindly responded, providing a reference to his 
Desipientia essay. He added that the impetus for his identifi­
cation of San Diego, in response to Sedlmajer’s query in 1975, 
came on November 12 of that year, the feast day of San Diego, 
as he was reading about the saint’s life.14 Indeed, his now-
essential letter was dated November 16, just a few days later. 
Remarkably, his study did not touch directly on the writing 
of Ambrosio de Morales, and he was not aware of any other 
automaton similar to the monk (such as the Vienna cittern 
player) or attributed to Juanelo Turriano. As he explained to 
Elizabeth, both image and text archives pointed to the right 
setting for a votive object and an admonition to the unruly 
Don Carlos, and the emperor’s clockmaker had the skill to 
make it.15 “There is no tradition for this kind of automaton 
in the Franciscan order, and I would exclude that the monk 
could have been made for the friars,” he affirmed.16 
Later in their correspondence Servus Gieben men­
tioned his lifelong interest in clocks and his awareness of 
the emperor’s famous clockmaker. But since he is a scholar 
FIGURE 24.1. 
Death mask, wax, identified as that of San 
Giacomo della Marca (1393–1476). Collection 
of Convento S. Maria La Nova, Naples. 
Portraits of the saints were often based on 
such death masks, prized for true likeness. 
Servus Gieben speculated that such a mask, 
should one have been made of Diego, might 
have informed later representations. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

164
CHAPTER 24
If that were the case, this would put Juanelo in his fifties or 
sixties, by which time he would have been busy with grander 
projects. It is easier to imagine him as supervisor of the work 
of a younger man.20
Servus Gieben’s instinct that the automaton may rep­
resent a specific historical figure was central to his conclu­
sions. “I think it was a question of physiognomy that led me 
to identify the monk as a Spanish figure and finally as a por­
trait of Diego,” he wrote to Elizabeth.21 He even entertained 
the idea that a death mask (FIG. 24.1), not an unusual funerary 
practice at the time, may have served as a model for the like­
nesses of Diego seen in Cornelius Galle’s engraving (see FIG. 
6.1) and in the automaton itself.22 
Gieben responded patiently to Elizabeth’s questions 
about his theory, across a correspondence that began in 1999 
and lasted until 2007. She asked, for example, about the sig­
nificance of the shaved head rather than the tonsure. “The 
tonsure was reserved only for clerics, not for lay brothers 
like Diego,” he replied. She asked, “How many Franciscan 
lay brothers ultimately became saints? If there were several, 
even many, then the shaved head becomes only one of a num­
ber of reasons for choosing San Diego.” Gieben responded by 
email, with the subject line “Shaved head saints”: 
Dear Prof. King,
The following lay brothers of the Franciscan Order
have been canonized:
Diego of Alcala † 1463
Felix of Cantalice † 1587
Benedict the Moor of San Fratello † 1589
Paschal Baylon † 1592
Seraphin of Montegranaro † 1604
Crispin of Viterbo † 1750
Ignace of Laconi † 1781
Francis Mary of Camporosso † 1866
Conrad of Parzham † 1894
I have not counted the lay brothers who died in groups,
like Accursius and Adiutus (Protomartyrs of Marocco 
† 1220), Donnolus of Castrovillari (7 Martyrs of Ceuta
† 1227), etc.
Yours faithfully,
Servus Gieben23
“Shaved-Head Saints”
Even a concession to Juanelo opens new questions. Given 
Charles’s well-known love of clocks, would it not be more 
likely that Juanelo, if he made the monk, made it for the 
emperor rather than for the emperor’s wayward grandson? 
In this case, since the emperor’s death took place four years 
before Carlos’s ordeal, a votive portrait of Brother Diego 
and the life-granting miracle would be quite ruled out. As 
for King Philip, formidable as was his belief in the agency 
of Diego, there are few indications in the historical record 
that he shared his father’s passion for clockworks. To con­
nect the automaton, the clockmaker, and the court of Spain, 
three alternative scenarios might be tested: (1) an autom­
aton but not a portrait created for Charles V in San Yuste 
between 1556 and 1558; (2) an automaton made in Toledo 
for Don Carlos after the 1562 miracle; or (3) an automaton 
made by another clockmaker, perhaps an associate or for­
mer apprentice of Juanelo, on the occasion of Diego’s can­
onization in 1588. It is also conceivable that Juanelo made 
automata at another time, before his arrival in Spain. He 
was famous first in Lombardy and worked in Milan. Morales 
described Juanelo’s dancing lady in Toledo, late in Juanelo’s 
life, but gave no actual date for it. Was the automaton there 
in the workshop, and did Morales actually see it? 
Finally, to retain a connection to Spain, there is the 
real possibility of an automaton made under Juanelo’s 
supervision but not by his hand, for he indeed had assis­
tants. Bassermann-Jordan names the clockmaker Jean Valin, 
together with an assistant, Jorge de Diana, working with 
Juanelo at San Yuste.17 Stirling-Maxwell also mentions one 
“Jorge de Diano, a boy employed in the workshop of Torriano” 
at San Yuste.18 The following comment about Juanelo 
Turriano and Jean Valin appears in Chapuis and Gélis, Le 
monde des automates: “We are not unmindful that Gianello 
was assisted by a skilled craftsman, clockmaker Jean Valin. 
Although we can’t be certain what was done by whom in this 
work, we believe that here, as in many other similar cases, 
the learned Gianello della Torre was only the designer, while 
the practitioner Jean Valin executed the work.”19 Otto Mayr 
himself spoke of assistants to Juanelo in a letter to Elizabeth 
in 2000. If there is substance to the San Diego hypothesis, he 
wrote, it would be likely that Juanelo too would be involved. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

165
A Monk’s Opinion, Continued
If Servus Gieben thought the monk bore a resemblance to 
San Diego, Elizabeth could rest assured that he had the pan­
theon of saints in view.
Servus Gieben’s 1975 letter to Georges Sedlmajer 
marked a turning point for all who encountered the automa­
ton, before and after the figure was acquired by the museum. 
Spain, in the absence of stronger evidence to the contrary, 
will continue to exert its magnetic compass as the culture of 
origin for the mysterious monk.
FIGURE 24.2. 
Servus Gieben, OFM Cap. (at left), showing 
an antique meditation clock to a visitor in 
the Museo Francescano, Istituto Storico dei 
Cappuccini, Rome, 2005. The clock (made 
in 1757), adjustable for the timing of varying 
durations of prayer, was used in early Capuchin 
devotion. Servus Gieben was director of the 
Museo Francescano from 1981 to 2010. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

167
chapter title
PART V
A Machine That Prays
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

168
INTRODUCTION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

169
chapter title
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

170
There is more to say about the automaton and the mir­
acle. Even as we concede that the link is only an elegant 
hypothesis, the hypothesis refuses to disappear. Why does 
the story of Don Carlos and San Diego continue to grip us 
when we look at this figure? Indeed, looking at this figure is 
something we’ve not finished doing yet. The monk wins his 
motion from the clockmaker, but he gains his identity and a 
great part of his meaning from the sculptor.
Without hesitation, everyone who looks at the monk 
accords him agency and gender. In spite of his cracked paint, 
and even disrobed, clockwork revealed, he demands our 
interaction. We give it without thinking. His authority is 
confirmed for us through the character of his face and his 
bearing. The sculptor has endowed him with gravitas, with 
decorum. His features are theatrical, but even in compar­
ison to the classic composure of the Munich and Budapest 
brothers, this is not the anatomy of caricature. The architec­
ture of the brow and bridge of the nose, the rise of jaw and 
cheekbone from the hollows of the face, the proportions of 
the upper lip, the earlobe, and the delicate folds flanking 
nostril and mouth: these draw us into a subtle regard. The 
hands are masterfully carved: the fingers of the right hand 
press hard against the thumb for the strike to the chest. Form 
itself, from the sculptor’s hand, instructs our response. We 
Miracles and 
Walking Sculptures
25
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

171
might say the monk is uncanny—he appears familiar, yet 
strangely disquieting—or that he has duende, the dark spirit 
conjured and defined by the poet Federico García Lorca.1 Or 
we might call him an ur-robot, a conceit from another time 
and another world. But these are modern ways of speaking. 
What did a sixteenth-century viewer see and believe when 
the monk was new? His color and eyes would have possessed 
their original gleam, his arms and body in motion beneath the 
tunic, cloth folding and creasing as he moved.
Does the monk—or any work of art—possess qualities 
that transcend historical context and call forth responses 
common to generations or cultures across time? At least 
some of our perceptions go beyond culture and come from a 
primal human nerve. The monk’s head-on motion seizes our 
instincts: a small, convincingly sentient thing heads our way 
on a table, and our animal reflexes stir. 
The cultural historian Peter Burke cautions those 
who look back in time: “Our modern distinctions (between 
rational and irrational, natural and supernatural, religious 
and superstitious) were in process of formation during the 
period; to apply them to the years before 1650, in particu­
lar, is to invite misunderstanding.”2 So drilled are we against 
“presentism” in interpreting works from history, we hardly 
know what to do with our emotional reactions to the objects 
we have inherited. Yet is this not precisely how works of art 
connect us to the past? How can we hope to understand 
how representational objects were seen at the time they 
were made if we repress our own responses to these works? 
This is the question that the art historian David Freedberg 
asks in his milestone book, The Power of Images, a study of 
the history of human response to works of art.3 Many classes 
of object come under his scrutiny: votive images; religious 
relics; objects of pilgrimage; acheiropoietic images (those 
not made by human hands); images said to bleed, or weep, 
or whose eyes moved; effigies of sorcery; wax-museum fig­
ures—works from across the canon of Western painting and 
sculpture. His discussion of verisimilitude in objects associ­
ated with miracles offers insights that suggest how an early 
walking automaton friar might have been received.
A strong devotional image may invoke what Freedberg 
calls an answering act of reconstitution performed by 
the beholder. Using the terminology of semiotics, he pro­
poses that the gap between sign and signified may remain 
unacknowledged in the devout response. In this case, an 
image is seen not just as a metaphor or stand-in for a saint. It 
is instead a metonym: a piece of the real cloth. The power of 
an image, together with the desire of the beholder, collapses 
the distinction between representation and presence.
The sign has become the living embodiment of what it 
signifies. Perhaps it will be suggested that a strong or 
ingrown belief in the powers of the Virgin easily inclines 
the believer to see her present, disencumbered of every­
thing that makes her dead representation. Perhaps the 
suggestion will run that one cannot believe that the 
Virgin is in the picture—or is the picture—unless one 
believes, to begin with, in the Virgin. Then, wanting her 
to be there, to exist (because of the love we bear her), we 
willingly concentrate on the image, and what is repre­
sented on it becomes present again. She is, quite literally, 
re-presented. The slip from representation to presenta­
tion is crucial, from seeing a token of the Virgin to seeing 
her there. What happens? How do we proceed without 
engaging in the analysis of the propositional status of 
statements about belief, or the relations between the 
nature of beliefs and reports about them?4
The slip from representation to presentation, Freedberg 
argues, is something all of us experience every time we 
respond emotionally to an image, and such a slip accounts 
for the unacknowledged traces of animism in our own time. 
“Not necessarily ‘animism’ in the nineteenth-century eth­
nographic sense of the transference of spirits to inanimate 
objects, but rather in the sense of the degree of life or liveli­
ness believed to inhere in an image,” he writes.5 
The collapse of distinctions—confounding the image 
of Mary with Mary herself—was among the accusations that 
launched the Protestant Reformation. “Thou shalt not make 
unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that 
is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in 
the water under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down thyself 
to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous 
God.”6 Martin Luther in Wittenberg in northern Germany, 
Ulrich Zwingli in Zurich to the south, and later John Calvin 
in Geneva singled out as particularly egregious those idola­
trous images that played a role in the commerce surround­
ing indulgences—the buying of time from damnation. 
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

172
CHAPTER 25
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

173
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
But arguments for the usefulness of images had 
existed for a thousand years. Pope Gregory in the sixth 
century declared, “The picture is exhibited in church, so 
that those who cannot read may, by looking at the walls, at 
least read there what they are unable to read in books.”7 The 
fourteenth-century Franciscan teacher Nicholas of Lyra 
argued that “the prohibition [of images] belonged to a period 
when God himself had not yet become Man and so could 
have no image: after the Incarnation, however, and under 
the New Law, the image was not forbidden.”8
Luther himself softened his line on images even 
before the iconoclasts’ violent destruction of works of art in 
Zurich, Basel, and Strasbourg in the 1520s. Remove them, 
do not destroy them, he said. The Council of Trent (1545–
63) laid out Counter-Reformation support for the role of 
images, albeit with renewed censure for those suspected 
of misuse. Priests and mystics argued the fine points of the 
efficacy or corruption of an icon. The key distinction was 
between honor and worship: honoring an image for what 
it represented versus adoring or worshipping it as a divine 
presence.9 Catholic doctrine has spent centuries of ink to 
try to determine the difference. Art, meanwhile, had its 
own designs.
Inhabited
Among well-loved works of art in Spain is the small and 
haunting Saint Francis carved in wood by the Andalusian 
sculptor Pedro de Mena (1628–1688). Mena created it in 
1663 for the great Santa Iglesia Catedral Primada in Toledo, 
where it stands to this day (FIG. 25.1). The sculpture is said 
to represent not the saint but the apparition of the saint, 
standing alive in his crypt deep under the basilica in Assisi. 
The apparition was seen by Pope Nicholas V in 1449, search­
ing for the tomb by torchlight, two hundred years after the 
saint’s death. A cardinal accompanying the pope witnessed 
the figure too:
FIGURE 25.1. 
Pedro de Mena, San Francisco de Asís, 1663. 
Polychromed wood, glass eyes, eyelashes of 
human hair, ivory teeth, cincture of real cord. 
97 × 33 × 31 cm with plinth (383⁄₁₆ × 13 × 123⁄₁₆ in.). 
Figure itself 83 cm in height, or just under 33 in. 
Toledo Cathedral. A small masterwork of Spanish 
polychrome realism, its pose connected to the 
story of a miracle.
It was a strange thing, that a human body, dead so 
long before, should be in that manner in which it was: 
for it stood straight up upon the feet; without leaning, 
or being supported on one side or the other. The eyes 
were open, as of a living man, and moderately lifted up 
to heaven. The whole body was entire without any cor­
ruption, white and red, as if it had been alive. It held the 
hands covered with the sleeves of the habit before its 
breast, as the Friars Minorites are wont to hold them. 
The Pope seeing him in this posture, fell upon his knees 
with great reverence and devotion: and lifted up the 
habit from above one of his feet, and he saw, and we also 
that were there present saw, that in that holy foot there 
was a wound, with the blood as fresh and red as if it had 
been then made with a nail in some living body.10
Reading the cardinal’s words, the term “apparition” for this 
figure may be misleading in modern parlance, where we 
assume a threshold between the real and the imagined. The 
tactile vividness of the cardinal’s description carries the 
lived, sensory experience of witness: the erect figure stands 
by itself without support, eyes open, “as of a living man,” the 
colors red and white of the flesh, the pope lifting the fab­
ric of the habit with his fingers, fresh blood visible in the 
wound.11 Pedro de Mena, among Spain’s greatest masters of 
polychrome realism, created an encarnación of what the 
visitors saw in the crypt. 
At half life-size, the Saint Francis stands poised on an 
ebony plinth, face suspended in the dark recess of the cowl, 
glass eyes raised under real eyelashes, mouth open to reveal 
two uneven rows of ivory teeth (some missing), the teeth 
parted, the interior of the mouth dark. The tunic, carved 
and finely textured in relief to represent the coarse patched 
cloth of poverty, is cinched at the waist by a knotted cord 
made of real fiber. Hair and tunic are finished with a low-
gloss polychrome; the face takes its hue from matte pigment. 
A sculpted tear in the tunic reveals the side wound.
Earlier artworks—sculpture by Gregorio Fernández, 
paintings by Francisco de Zurbarán and the Guatemalan 
Antonio de Montúfar, educated in Spain—depict the saint in 
near-identical posture, and many copies in sculpture were 
made after Mena. Richard Ford, nineteenth-century British 
traveler and Hispanophile, extolling the precedent and 
glory of Spanish sculpture, described it as “a masterpiece of 
cadaverous extatic sentiment.”12
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

174
CHAPTER 25
The exhibition, curated by Xavier Bray, had traveled 
to Washington in 2010 from the National Gallery in London, 
giving viewers in the United States a rare chance to see mas­
terpieces from Spanish church and museum collections, 
some of which, like the Saint Francis, were being borrowed 
from religious institutions for the first time. Bray paired 
works by both painters and sculptors to reveal the unique 
ways they borrowed from one another and, in the case of 
sculpture itself, to show the combination of highly special­
ized skills requiring both painter and sculptor to work in 
collaboration. (Guild regulation separated the two arts; only 
very few sculptors were allowed to paint their own works, 
Mena among them.) The show went a long way to reset 
the asymmetry of notice between painters and sculptors 
in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Spain, especially for 
viewers in the United States. El Greco, Zurbarán, Velázquez, 
and Murillo need no first names, whereas (until recently) 
some of the greatest sculptors of the same period have won 
little mainstream recognition outside their native sphere: 
Gregorio Fernández, Juan Martínez Montañés and his stu­
dent Juan de Mesa, Alonso Cano (who was also a painter 
and an architect), Pedro de Mena, Andrea de Mena, Pedro 
Roldán, Luisa Roldán, José de Mora, Francisco Antonio 
Gijón, and many others whose works graced cathedrals, 
convents, and private residences in Iberia and Hispanic 
America. These sculptors worked largely for the church 
rather than the court. Their depictions of the holy family, 
the saints, and the sacred mysteries attained an unsur­
passed visceral and emotional realism. Masterpieces by 
Martínez Montañés, Fernández, Mesa, Cano, Mena, Mora, 
and Gijón were on display in The Sacred Made Real. It 
was extraordinary to see these sculptures in the flesh, and 
almost equally extraordinary to see their effect on visitors 
to the show. Works that had been borrowed from the devo­
tional settings for which they had been made carried the 
weight of four centuries of worship. Conversation died away 
in front of them. People just stood and looked, transfixed.
Indeed, when we look at these works we are aware of 
the invisible presence of the generations of people through 
time who have looked at them before us, prayed to them, 
studied them. Humans leave their traces on the objects that 
win their regard. In the show, Mena’s small sculpture was 
paired with Zurbarán’s painting of the saint, both identified 
Made in Toledo in the century after the automaton 
monk, the Saint Francis is a prime work in the Spanish poly­
chrome idiom. Skillfully carved and painted, this is a small-
scale icon intended for close-up viewing. The wooden head, 
like the monk’s head, would have been halved and carved 
from both inside and outside, to open the eyes and mouth. 
Color amplifies its realism, and accessory materials extend it: 
glass eyes, eyelashes of human hair, ivory teeth, braided cord. 
The saint’s preternatural suspense, its motionless nunc stans, 
holds our attention with its own astonishing performance of 
locked attention. The sculpture’s hush may be the antithesis 
of the moving monk, though the monk exacts an equal claim 
on our attention, interrupting the fabric of ever-moving time 
with his own urgent “now.” The topos of a sculpture repre­
senting an apparition touches the automaton too. 
Spanish sculpture is scarcely the only arena for a dis­
cussion of Catholic saints in carved wood in any search for 
correlatives to the sculptural character of the automaton 
monk. Elizabeth will readily admit that when she first saw 
Mena’s Saint Francis in Toledo, it delivered the same jolt 
she experienced on first seeing the automaton. Different 
in kind as they are, with Mena among the first-rank sculp­
tors of Spain’s artistic golden age, generations later than the 
unknown sculptor who carved the monk, the two works 
nonetheless harbor a common temper, she felt. Searching 
for the Saint Francis on a visit to see it in Toledo in spring 
2000, she circumnavigated the shadowy cathedral nave for 
a long time before finally spotting the small figure in the 
sacristy behind a closed balustrade. “Where was my torch­
light?” she wrote to David. A decade later came the chance 
to see it again, in Washington, DC, where it was included in 
the landmark exhibition The Sacred Made Real: Spanish 
Painting and Sculpture 1600–1700, at the National Gallery 
of Art.13 As she wrote then:
In Washington, you could step up to within inches of the 
vitrine. The sculpture was lit with subdued but focused 
precision. . . .One tooth caught a tiny highlight and 
glinted from within the mouth. You see this and catch 
your breath—then realize the figure, too, is inhaling. No 
mistaking it: the contracted lift of the head, beard just 
sprung free of the cowl, indrawn gulp at the mouth and 
jaw, taut chest: an inspired pressure at the back of the 
throat is inferred from every part visible around it. All 
who looked at this sculpture held their breath.14 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

175
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
stunned to hear his last words: “Dulce lignum, dulces clavos, 
dulcia ferens pondera” (Sweet wood, sweet nails, that bore 
such a sacred weight).19 Although the miracle of the flowers 
had also been reported in Diego’s late years when he was 
gatekeeper in the monastery of Santa María de Jesús, art­
ists in the seventeenth century began depicting the saint as 
a youthful innocent, perhaps in part to emphasize his look 
of surprise. Diego’s illiteracy and lay status even at the end 
of his life contributed to the reputation of one who never 
seemed to age.20 In 2013 a small sculpture of Diego was 
purchased by the San Diego Museum of Art. The scholar 
and curator José Luis Romero Torres, who has written in 
depth about Spanish seventeenth-century sculpture, has 
attributed the work to Pedro de Mena (FIG. 25.2).21 The figure 
is portrayed in midwalk, mouth open, tunic clutched in both 
hands, the rough cloth carved in a cataract of bunched folds 
held open to reveal the purloined bread. As with other rendi­
tions of the miracle, neither bread nor flowers are depicted, 
for in the devotional setting intended by the artist, partici­
pants placed real flowers in the open folds. In Alonso Cano’s 
earlier depiction too, the saint holds the tunic open and 
empty so the onlooker may enact the miracle. But whereas 
Cano’s saint looks down at what he holds, Mena’s saint 
glances up and brings his guilt and surprise directly to the 
viewer. Glass eyes, catching the flicker of candlelight, would 
have intensified the gaze. Mena often intended his smaller 
devotional sculptures to stare directly at the onlooker.22 To 
capture the viewer’s eye, and build a reciprocal response, 
the sculpture initiates the contact, and its own gaze had to 
be as lifelike as the artist could make it. 
The earliest images of Diego, closer to the always 
sought “true” image of a saint, showed him at the age he 
would have been at the end of his life, in a character type 
not unfamiliar to canonical iconography: the gaunt, ascetic, 
penitential hermit. The automaton monk belongs to this 
type too in look and in act. In a detailed history of artists’ 
depictions of San Diego, José Luis Romero Torres finds 
scant record of visual markers before the campaign for can­
onization, and by the time of the canonization itself, over 
a century had passed since the friar’s death in 1463.23 No 
record of a death mask has appeared (apropos of Servus 
Gieben’s surmise in correspondence with Elizabeth).24 
Unlike with Francis, canonized almost immediately after 
by the same title: Saint Francis Standing in Ecstasy. Since 
then, newer publications have adjusted the titles, and both 
are now often referred to as San Francisco de Asís y la 
visión del papa Nicolás V (Saint Francis of Assisi according 
to the vision of Pope Nicholas V).15 The shift in title, from 
the saint’s ecstasy to the pope’s vision, emphasizes the 
images’ origins in the story of the apparition. The newer title 
moves our attention to the crypt and puts us in the place 
of the pope, and in turn it moves the saint from a seer to a 
thing seen. This is a complicated shift, pushing the sense of 
sight front and center as the artists’ subject. We become, not 
viewers, but witnesses.
And we must remember, the visit to the crypt, accord­
ing to fable, took place two hundred years after Francis’s 
death (d. 1226, canonized 1228). Further still, the cardinal’s 
report of the apparition—the story itself—did not surface for 
almost another two hundred years. Not apparently until the 
mid-sixteenth century was the story disseminated, by the 
Franciscan traveler and historian Marcos de Lisboa, who 
compiled the Chronicles of the Friars Minor, Las crónicas de 
la orden de los frayles menores, and published it in 1562.16 
The news soon gained wider notice, among other places, in 
Pedro de Ribadeneira’s 1599–1601 Libro de las vidas de los 
Santos. Thus launched, the story spread, and was granted 
its form by Fernández, Zurbarán, Mena, and many other art­
ists after them.17
Diego too gained his most recognized form from a 
story, though not the story of the cure of Don Carlos. Pedro 
de Mena himself produced not one but four sculptures of 
San Diego, by current count. Another, made in collabora­
tion with his mentor, Alonso Cano (1601–1667), came first, in 
the mid-seventeenth century. All of them followed a small 
model by Cano, representing Diego and the miracle of the 
flowers, by then the traditional portrayal of the saint (see FIG. 
3.1; see also FIG. 6.1, at lower left in the cycle of panels depict­
ing Diego’s miracles).18 Looking down, a youthful brother is 
about to discover to his own surprise that the bread he had 
stolen for the poor, hidden in his tunic, will turn to flowers 
when the monastery guardian confronts him. Such images, 
and others of Diego, were in great demand following the 
canonization in 1588. The earliest engravings and paintings 
show Diego in old age, grasping and lifting a tall wooden 
cross, as he did on his deathbed, where witnesses were 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

176
CHAPTER 25
his death and of whom many images were made long before 
the pope’s visit to the crypt (and many since), artists more 
or less invented an image of Diego from whole cloth. But like 
the depictions of Francis in the crypt, a story about Diego 
captured the popular imagination and came to assume an 
iconographic key. 
Another Franciscan saint, Pedro de Alcántara (1499–
1562, canonized 1669), in life far more proximate to the 
Spanish court than was Diego, was also a figure much repre­
sented by Spanish sculptors (FIG. 25.3). Mystic, reformer, and 
mentor to Teresa of Ávila, he was active in Extremadura 
during the final years of Charles V in San Yuste. The 
once-powerful emperor had asked the friar to be his confes­
sor, and Pedro had demurred. Another gaunt, ascetic, peni­
tential hermit.
Sculptures That Move 
Spanish sculpture, with its pursuit of closely observed emo­
tion and its embrace of mixed materials and rich color, flour­
ished in the Counter-Reformation. The Catholic rebuttal to 
Protestant rage was to reconfirm, emphasize, and admin­
ister the role of images, however complicated a task this 
became. Spanish theologians declared that pictures were 
better than books at teaching the lessons of scripture. The 
more lifelike the depictions of sacred persons and stories, 
the more immediate to daily life they would be, and the 
more persuasively they would serve the Christian mission. 
The Carmelite mystic Saint John of the Cross (1542–1591, 
canonized 1726) wrote: 
The Church ordained the use of images for two principal 
ends; these being, to revere the saints in them, and to 
move the will and awaken the devotion in them.... And 
when they serve this [end] they are of great benefit, and 
[their] use is necessary; and because of this, those that 
are created most precise and lifelike, and most move the 
will to devotion, must be selected.25
FIGURE 25.2. 
Pedro de Mena, San Diego de Alcalá, 1665–70. 
Polychromed wood, glass eyes, teeth of ivory or 
horn. 61.5 × 24 × 27 cm (243⁄₁₆ × 97⁄₁₆ × 10⅝ in.). 
San Diego Museum of Art. Acquired in 2013, the 
small sculpture of the saint arrived in the city 
named for him.
FIGURE 25.3. 
Pedro de Mena, San Pedro de Alcántara, 
ca. 1670s (detail). Polychromed wood. Height: 
176 cm (69¼ in.). Iglesia del Convento de 
Madre de Dios, Lucena, Córdoba. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

177
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

178
CHAPTER 25
Together with Pedro de Mena’s Saint Francis, a number of 
such works, made to move the will, were brought together 
in London and Washington for the exhibition The Sacred 
Made Real (FIGS. 25.4–25.6).
Yet a further step in the direction of realism appeared in 
the stunning processional sculptures made for the annual fes­
tivals of Holy Week and Corpus Christi in cities across Spain. 
Many of the sculptors who carved works for churches and 
monasteries also created sculptures to be brought out into 
the streets in theatrical reenactments of episodes of the life 
of Christ. A tradition with medieval roots in Christian lands 
in Europe and beyond, featuring both live actors and puppets, 
it gained a reputation in Spain for the drama of the sculpture. 
Carved and polychromed wood figures—many with movable 
limbs animated by hidden means—represented Christ and 
the Virgin, together with patron saints, apostles, and martyrs, 
in a class of devotional sculpture that entered, on a monu­
mental scale, the real space and real time of the spectator’s 
world. Gregorio Fernández (1576–1636) in Valladolid and Juan 
Martínez Montañés (1568–1649) in Seville produced some of 
the most prized figures and figure groups for procession (FIGS. 
25.7, 25.8).26 
Mounted on ornate platforms called pasos, so named 
for their depictions of the Passion, sculptures for Holy Week 
were born aloft in the streets by members of lay confraterni­
ties and paraded on winding routes through village or city in 
imitation of the procession to Calvary. The festival reached 
its height between 1550 and 1700, but processions con­
tinue to this day (see FIG. 25.11). The annual Semana Santa 
in Seville draws spectators from around the world. Among 
its pasos are well-conserved original sculptures, some dat­
ing to the sixteenth century.27 The sculptures command 
the center of the pageant. Imágenes de vestir—images with 
clothes—are dressed in real fabric; their robes flutter in the 
wind, their arms and heads move, and crowns and glass 
eyes (and glass tears) flash light from banks of flickering 
candles carried by attendant marchers (brothers of light). 
The sculptures appear to walk, as the pasos heave and shift 
with the stepping of the teams of bearers under their load. 
The bearers themselves remain unseen within valances of 
fabric skirting the perimeters of the platforms, which are 
flanked by hooded flagellants (brothers of blood), many on 
their knees.28 Every aspect of this public ritual was meant 
FIGURE 25.4. 
Juan Martínez Montañés and unknown 
polychromer, San Bruno, 1634 (detail). 
Polychromed wood. 160 × 73 × 62 cm (63 × 
28¾ × 24⅜ in.). Museo de Bellas Artes, Seville. 
Martínez Montañés was called by his con­
temporaries “el Dios de la Madera,” the God 
of Wood. Commissioned for the monastery 
of Santa María de la Cuevas in Seville. San 
Bruno (ca. 1030–1101), founder of the monastic 
Carthusian order, here shown in fervent medi­
tation on the cross.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

179
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
FIGURE 25.5. 
Gregorio Fernández and unknown polychromer, 
Ecce Homo, before 1621. Polychromed wood, 
glass eyes, cloth. 182 × 55 × 38 cm (71⅝ × 21⅝ 
× 1415⁄₁₆ in.). Museo Diocesano y Catedralicio, 
Valladolid. Fernández and Martínez Montañés 
set the stage for the charged emotional realism 
that reached its height in works by seventeenth-
century Spanish sculptors. Both came of age in 
the decade following Diego’s 1588 canonization.
FIGURE 25.6. 
Pedro de Mena, The Virgin of Sorrows (Mater 
Dolorosa), ca. 1670–75 (detail). Polychromed 
wood, ivory teeth, glass eyes, eyelashes of real 
hair, glass tears (now gone). 62.2 × 49 × 29 cm 
(24½ × 19¼ × 11⅜ in.). Church and Sanctuary 
of Santa María de la Victoria, Málaga.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

180
CHAPTER 25
FIGURE 25.7. 
Gregorio Fernández, El Señor Atado a la 
Columna (Christ at the Column), ca. 1619. 
Polychromed wood, glass eyes. Life-size. 
Iglesia Penitencial de la Santa Vera Cruz, 
Valladolid. Commissioned by the Cofradía 
Penitencial de la Santa Vera Cruz (Penitential 
Brotherhood of the Holy Cross), the sculpture 
is still taken out in procession during Holy 
Week. Seen here emerging from the central 
door: out of the church and into the street. 
Holy Wednesday, March 19, 2008.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

181
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
to inflame the passions of the devout, crowded on roadsides, 
balconies, roofs, and trees to see the sculptures pass. Susan 
Verdi Webster, in Art and Ritual in Golden-Age Spain, sin­
gles out the “at large” character of the sculptures.
The spatial and temporal status of the sculptures in pro­
cession significantly enhance their mimetic effects, and 
their unique kinesthetic character allows them dramatic 
entrance into the realm of human experience. They 
are able to move both physically (through articulated 
limbs) and spatially (through the streets of the city). 
Furthermore, the incorporation of sculpture within a 
processional context acts to change a most fundamen­
tal aspect: the sense of time. No longer the static, eter­
nal images of altars and retablos, their temporal state is 
extended so that they merge with the spectators’ own 
experience of space and time.29
Like the monk and his fellow miniatures in an intimate set­
ting, the processional sculptures in a public setting perform 
in the round in the onlooker’s world. Both are imágenes de 
vestir—sculptures wearing clothes.
Who commissioned the sculptures for the pasos? 
Confraternities, many associated with trade guilds dating to 
the medieval era, were organized brotherhoods formed at 
all levels of the citizenry, from laborers to artisans to mer­
chants.30 They operated independently of both state and 
church, though they often maintained side chapels in local 
monasteries to display their sculptures when not in proces­
sion. Central to confraternity life, the processions combined 
religious practice, status within the community, trade rela­
tionships, and family structure. Competition among confra­
ternities was intense. Each group commissioned sculptors, 
painters, carpenters, costumers, and metalsmiths to create 
pasos ever greater in size, grandeur, and artistry. Multifigure 
FIGURE 25.8A, B. 
Juan Martínez Montañés, Jesús de la Pasión, 
with (A) and without (B) garments, 1619. 
Polychromy attributed to Francisco Pacheco. 
Polychromed wood, cloth. Life-size. Cofradía 
del Cristo de la Pasión, Church of El Salvador, 
Seville. This sculpture, a true imágen de vestir, 
is still carried in procession through the streets 
of Seville during Holy Week. Arms are articu­
lated for alternate poses and for dressing. 
25.8A.
25.8B.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

182
CHAPTER 25
pasos often included smaller figures, half-size angels, for 
example, carrying attributes of the Passion.31 One very small 
jointed figure, thought to represent Simon of Cyrene, pro­
posed as part of a smaller-scale paso ensemble, can be found 
in the collection of the Hispanic Society of America in New 
York (FIG. 25.9).32 Simon, charged with helping Christ carry 
the cross, serves as a classic processional icon. 
The fabrication of the sculpture often called for a 
piecework process of carving only the visible heads, hands, 
and feet, each part then finely finished and polychromed. 
Torsos and legs, hidden under actual garments, were either 
rough carved (often in articulated sections for ease of dress­
ing, posing, and animating) or built as schematic armatures 
to support and give shape to the dress (FIG. 25.10A, B). A few 
Virgins came supplied with spare heads, one face happy and 
one face sad, as occasion required.33 Over time, increased 
attention went into elaborate dress and ornament, espe­
cially for the Virgin. Carved wooden crowns gave way to 
gilded crowns of tin, then silver and gold, with imperial 
domes augmented with halos of rays and stars. 
Brotherhoods and the citizenry of the south of Spain 
routinely ignored repeated decrees by church authorities 
to limit the pageantry of these annual spectacles. Was the 
emotion generated by the sculptures a devout response, or 
was it a profane kind of carnival? (Jugglers, acrobats, and 
magicians often joined the processions.)34 Visitors from 
abroad were scandalized by the Virgin’s luxurious clothing 
and jewelry. Critics reviled the use of wigs, glass eyes, and 
excessively realistic wounds—granulated cork, soaked in 
red pigments, representing abraded flesh—as travesties of 
the decorum of the sacrament. Such criticisms held sway 
over time. The German art historian Carl Justi (1832–1912) 
declared, “The apparatus for moving the head, the eyes, and 
the mouth, the wooden dolls with real hair and real dresses, 
in which the head and hands alone are carved, mark the 
lowest level of the plastic art.”35 “A sculptor who puts glass 
eyes or a wig on the Virgin Mary is ‘at risk of massacring 
her face,’” wrote the French archaeologist Marcel Dieulafoy 
in the early twentieth century.36 The Reformation had 
already halted the flowering of a great northern tradition of 
polychrome wood sculpture in Germany, dubbed the early 
“Florid” style by Michael Baxandall.37 By the late 1520s com­
missions for painted works began to fade, and a chastened 
form of sculpture emerged, replacing color with a subtle 
FIGURE 25.9. 
Follower of Juan Martínez Montañés, Simon of 
Cyrene (?), seventeenth century. Polychromed 
wood, glass eyes. Imagen de vestir, statuette 
with movable shoulders and elbows. Height: 
32.9 cm (13 in.). The Hispanic Society of 
America, New York. This small Simon, a quint­
essential processional icon, is close in scale to 
the walking monk.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

183
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
FIGURE 25.10A, B. 
Unknown artist, Virgin (imágen de vestir, 
undressed [A] and dressed [B]), ca. 1825. Wood, 
polychrome, embroidery, gilt foil thread, sequins; 
gilt metal nimbus and silver gilt crown. Height 
without crown and nimbus, 54 cm (21¼ in.). 
With jointed arms, a traditional armature for 
female processional figures.
25.10A.
25.10B.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

184
CHAPTER 25
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

185
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
We see David Freedberg’s fusion enacted here, and at scale. 
“Perception elides representation with reality,” he wrote.41 
Everyone is seen to play a role in the exchange: God, 
church, brotherhood, sculptor, performer, spectator (FIG. 
25.11). The sculpture too is active, referred to repeatedly by 
name: “The Virgin comes out of the church...”; “Our Lady 
stopped and waited...”; “The Lady Santa Ana came out to 
the bridge...” Witnesses refer to the sculptures as the agents 
of their own movement and behavior.42 The whole party 
brings a wooden figure to life. 
The processional sculptures for Holy Week enact the 
mystery of the resurrection. The moment they emerge from 
the church they come alive, in imitation of Christ from the 
tomb, and alive they must look and must act (see FIG. 25.7). 
For the spectator, the distinction between art and life is an 
open negotiation. Pedro de Mena’s Saint Francis is also a 
resurrection image, showing the saint risen in the crypt. 
The same mystery is inherent in the clockwork monk at 
the moment that the stopwork lever is released and the 
figure comes to life. As long as the story of Diego de Alcalá 
hovers behind the automaton, it too is a resurrection 
image, recalling the prince’s midnight vision: “This night 
the holy fray Diego appeared, standing at my bed, with a 
reed cross in his hand...” 
Though scale and context profoundly separate them, 
the automaton monk and the processional sculpture share 
the hallmark agency of a moving figure, at large on the view­
er’s own turf: figures in the round, moving around us. Both 
entail the production of gestural movement by mechanical 
means. As they move through space—the tiny monk on hid­
den wheels, the towering sculpture on brigades of hidden 
human shoulders—they do things. The compound motion 
of the monk turning his head and raising his arms at the 
moment that he executes a walking turn: this is a pairing 
of two kinds of motion that amplifies, because it fuses, the 
movements of part and whole. From this the performance 
gains its irreducible three-dimensionality. One suddenly 
understands that the monk himself is a processional entity, 
the table a miniature paso. He too is carved and dressed in 
real clothing. Hands, head, and feet finished elegantly and 
polychromed, hidden body roughed out to support the tunic: 
a miniature imágen de vestir. He too performs a circumam­
bulation, station to station, onlooker to onlooker, making 
virtuosity of carved surface in relation to light, best exem­
plified in the works of Tilman Riemenschneider (1460–1531) 
or Veit Stoss (1445/50–1533).38 
In Spain, by contrast, the same preachers who warned 
that the corporeal body was an ally of the devil gave vivid 
sermons appealing to the senses to inspire spiritual feeling 
and pious obedience. Ignatius of Loyola (1491–1556) enlisted 
all five senses to alarm the would-be sinner. 
The first point will be to see great fires with the eyes of 
the imagination, and the souls as though in fiery bodies. 
The second, to hear with the ears the crying, howling, 
voices, blasphemies....The third, to smell with the nose 
smoke, sulphurous stone, sewage and putrid things. 
The fourth to taste with the mouth bitter things....The 
fifth to feel with the sense of touch, this means, how the 
flames touch and sear the souls.39
Little wonder that Philip II so fervently collected the works 
of Hieronymus Bosch, who gave image to such words. 
Webster gathers a wealth of reports on how the sculp­
tures were received by onlookers and communities. Realism, 
from material to motion, was precisely what provoked an 
emotional catharsis. 
Every aspect of the procession—sculpture, clothing and 
adornment, conveyance, and accompaniment—can be 
shown to develop from a transformational paradigm, 
according to which the “thing represented” became “the 
thing-in-itself.” Once established, this context became an 
arena in which the brotherhoods competed to reach ever-
higher stature in the eyes of the public and the Almighty. 
The desire to create as realistic a scene as possible, and 
the extraordinary lengths to which the brotherhoods 
went to achieve their goal, resulted in the merging of 
physical and spiritual realities during the processions.40
FIGURE 25.11. 
A multifigure paso, “The Raising of the Cross,” 
moves slowly through the crowd, borne on 
the shoulders of a team of costaleros: men in 
heaving lockstep, hidden by the damask plat­
form skirt. Holes in the perimeter frieze allow 
the carriers to breathe and see where they are 
going. Photograph by Ruth Anderson, Good 
Friday, April 2, 1926, Zamora, Spain. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

186
CHAPTER 25
eye contact and moving his mouth. Is this not, then, part of 
his family tree? His small scale and the lifelike movement 
produced by his greater mechanical complexity render him 
simultaneously more intimate—and more personal. Some 
quieter measure of the emotion and wonder felt by those 
who beheld the processional sculptures must have been felt 
by anyone who saw this figure move. 
In 2019, the monk, on loan from the Smithsonian 
Institution, was displayed at the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art in New York. The show, Making Marvels: Science and 
Splendor at the Courts of Europe, was curated by Wolfram 
Koeppe and Ana Matisse Donefer-Hickie.43 Borrowing 
priceless treasures from across oceans, they gathered 
some of the greatest objects made in early modern Europe: 
a Kunstkammer of clocks, orreries, automata, scientific 
instruments, optics, tools of alchemy, early metalwork­
ing lathes, sculpture, gemstones, and natural marvels. The 
monk, beautifully lit, was posed in a vitrine, allowing viewers 
to inspect it from inches away. Nearby, projected on a wall at 
floor-to-ceiling scale, ran the film the Smithsonian made in 
1978 of the monk in performance (FIG. 25.12).44 Elizabeth, on 
several visits to the show, couldn’t help but notice other visi­
tors encountering the automaton and film. Conversation fell 
silent. People just stood and looked, transfixed.
FIGURE 25.12. 
November 8, 2019: on loan from the 
Smithsonian Institution, the monk is being 
installed for the exhibition Making Marvels: 
Science and Splendor at the Courts of Europe 
at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. 
The monk was on view from November 25, 
2019, to March 1, 2020.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

187
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

189
We touch finally on an unforgettable group of sculptures 
that portray the processional parade as an image in its own 
right. The Mourners of Dijon they are called: no less than 
eighty small alabaster figures carved for a pair of great 
tomb monuments produced in fifteenth-century Burgundy. 
Thirty-seven of these diminutive figures were recently bor­
rowed from one of the tombs and exhibited by themselves 
in a show that toured the United States and France, and 
they captured hearts everywhere they went (FIG. 26.1).
The monuments, made for two powerful dukes of 
Burgundy, are similar in overall form (FIG. 26.2). A massive 
black marble slab supports a recumbent life-size polychrome 
effigy of the duke, the slab itself raised and supported on 
Perpetual Devotion
26
FIGURE 26.1. (opposite) 
Juan de la Huerta and Antoine Le Moiturier, 
Mourners, from the Tomb of John the Fearless, 
1443–70. Musée des Beaux-Arts, Dijon. Thirty-
seven small processional figures, carved in 
alabaster, each (15 to 16 in.) in height. When 
the tomb monument was put in storage during 
museum restoration in 2009, the diminutive 
mourners were briefly freed from their places 
beneath the marble catafalque and exhib­
ited on their own in the touring show The 
Mourners: Tomb Sculptures from the Court 
of Burgundy. Here seen in installation at the 
Minneapolis Institute of Art in 2011. 
FIGURE 26.2. (above) 
François Denis Née, after Jean Baptiste 
Lallemand, The Tomb of John the Fearless, Duke 
of Burgundy, 1780s or 1790s. Line engraving. 
Plate size: 187 × 248 mm (7⅜ × 9¾ in.). Paper 
size: 206 × 286 mm (8⅛ × 11¼ in.). The site of 
the dukes’ fifteenth-century tomb monuments 
in the Carthusian monastery of Champmol 
outside Dijon, before their partial loss and 
destruction during the French Revolution. The 
Mourners can be seen in procession within the 
pediment. National Portrait Gallery, London.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

190
CHAPTER 26
an impossibly delicate openwork cloister carved in white 
marble. Through the arcades of the cloister winds a cor­
tege of forty humble figures. Priest, choirboys, acolyte, dea­
con, bishop, cantors, monks, and members of the family and 
court march in hooded cloaks. Each figure is between fifteen 
and sixteen inches in height, carved in the round, and bears 
traces of former color and gilding. Some clasp their hands in 
sorrow; others clutch rosaries, cinctures, or pouches; many 
hold books (one saving a place with a finger); some dab their 
eyes with their sleeves, raise their faces to heaven, cover 
their mouths, or open their mouths in prayer. Their twisted 
and wrung cloaks heighten the drama of the poses. Drawn 
hoods leave many faces in shadow or occlude heads entirely, 
allowing onlookers to imagine their own faces of sorrow 
(FIG. 26.3A). They form a pageant of individualized gestures of 
grief. The first tomb was completed in 1410. By the time the 
second tomb was finished in 1470, more than four genera­
tions of sculptors had worked on the two monuments.1 
The tombs are those of Philip the Bold (1342–1404) 
and his son John the Fearless (1371–1419), the first of four 
ambitious dukes of the French Valois dynasty who expanded 
the duchy of Burgundy into a major center of political and 
economic power in Europe. By the end of the fifteenth cen­
tury, much of current-day Belgium, Luxembourg, and the 
Netherlands came under its rule, Dijon its capital, Antwerp 
its port to the world. Alliance with the House of Habsburg fol­
lowed, and Charles I (crowned Holy Roman Emperor Charles 
V in 1520), born in Ghent, the grandchild of the union of two 
great dynasties, would be a duke himself at the age of five. 
Raised in the Netherlands in the “eye of northern Europe,” he 
knew the tombs well and intended his own tomb to be placed 
alongside them, in the Chartreuse de Champmol.2
FIGURE 26.3A, B. 
Attributed to Antoine Le Moiturier, from the 
Tomb of John the Fearless, 1443–70, “Mourner 
No. 56 with cowl pulled down, hands in his 
sleeves.” Partially polychromed and gilded ala­
baster. Musée des Beaux-Arts, Dijon. Charles 
V would have seen these small marching tomb 
figures in Dijon. Peter Friess and Reinhard 
Steiner point to a similarly small cloaked figure 
in the painting by Miguel Jadraque y Sánchez 
Ocaña (FIG. 23.4).
26.3A.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

191
Perpetual Devotion
The monuments were originally located in the 
Carthusian monastery of Champmol outside Dijon but are 
now installed in Dijon’s Musée des Beaux-Arts. They were 
restored in the early 2000s.3 When the museum underwent 
renovation beginning in 2009, Mourners from the tomb of 
John the Fearless were carefully removed and assembled 
for an unprecedented exhibition tour of seven museums in 
the United States and one in Paris.4 Released from their sup­
porting role in the cenotaph pediment, they briefly took the 
spotlight as a procession of freestanding sculptures in their 
own right. “Tiny bravura set pieces of carving,” the historian 
Anthony Grafton described them, reviewing the show.5 It was 
an extraordinary opportunity to view them as solo objects. 
As Grafton pointed out, “They were carved at a time when 
painters finished the backs of altarpieces to perfection to 
please the all-seeing eye of God. To see [the Mourners] in the 
round is to be dazzled by the skill that their creators lavished 
on details that they did not expect human visitors to see.” 
Each host museum arranged them differently, but all pre­
served the processional essence. The Metropolitan Museum 
of Art in New York built an extended runway in its Medieval 
Sculpture Hall and marched the figures two by two in one 
straight suite. The show brought their procession into the 
viewer’s own space: “out of the church and into the street.” 
The exhibition curators reprised the Mourners’ task: 
“Following the Catholic ritual, the Dijon Mourners are 
designed to perform for all eternity the vigil for the dead, 
offering up prayers for the salvation of the deceased.” 
Indispensable for the soul of the prince on Judgment Day 
are the perpetual prayers of the living: the more prayers, the 
better. Seen without the object of their labor, the Mourners’ 
labor itself comes into view. Unique though each figure is, 
the sight of them massed in cloaked procession verges on 
the cinematic to our modern eye, giving us a Muybridge-like 
sequence of walking supplication, a frame-by-frame anal­
ysis of the Catholic requiem. They teach the onlooker not 
only the proper performance of ritual mourning but also the 
power of sculpture to represent and, in its own way, perpet­
uate the act of prayer. Now more than 550 years old, these 
small medieval sculptures, among the most moving and 
luminous in the history of art, instruct us yet. 
26.3B.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

192
CHAPTER 26
was not new, but its iteration at Champmol was unique not 
only for its material grandeur but also for the opened space 
under the bier, for the extreme keyboard of scale, and for the 
full three-dimensionality and individuality of the Mourners.
Looking at “Mourner No. 56” in FIGURE 26.3 and again 
at the Jadraque painting of Charles V in San Yuste, FIGURE 
23.4, one sees why Peter Friess and Reinhard Steiner, study­
ing the painting in 2003, noted the small icon of a hooded 
monk in the background among clocks and paintings—and 
cited the alabaster mourners. The small sculptures would 
have been well known to the emperor. Could Jadraque have 
actually intended this reference? As Friess and Steiner go on 
to say, the small icon is indeed the same size as the monkish 
automata. Elizabeth and David, for their part, dare go no fur­
ther than to imagine that the processional character of the 
Mourners, which predate the monk by more than a century, 
might be something of a precedent or a script for the actions 
of the automaton. The monk performs in clock time what the 
Mourners perform in space. A single automaton is perhaps a 
procession of one—performing, like the Mourners, a sequence 
of urgent gestures: a temporal repetition to the Mourners’ 
spatial repetition. An ensemble of mourners, on the one hand, 
and a solo clockwork monk, on the other: each articulates the 
repetition of prayer according to its nature. In both, the more 
prayers, the better. 
When the show finished its tour, the Mourners were 
returned to their assignments within the monument. By 
design, the size and number of the figures are properties 
bound to their placement within a predella-in-the-round. 
They inhabit the shadowy through-space beneath the bier, a 
dark interior broken only by the delicate miniature columns 
of the arcades and by the figures themselves, dependent on 
light available from high windows or candles. A viewer walk­
ing around the monument—one procession required to view 
another!—sees it with a moving eye, and glimpses the pale 
queue in parallax motion, as arcade columns in front of each 
small figure slide past faster than columns behind (FIG. 26.4). 
In the indeterminate space under the bier, a viewer might 
imagine even more figures hidden in the recesses, a subter­
ranean zone full of glowing walkers. In these monuments, 
the living and the dead exchange places: the “corpse” on top, 
the mourners below. The carving of processional figures on 
sarcophagi was, of course, an ancient practice, but raising 
a colossal catafalque to place the diminutive figures under 
it transforms ornament into physical support. The practice 
FIGURE 26.4. 
Tomb of Philip the Bold. Detail of the walking 
Mourners in procession within the shadowy 
arcades. Musée des Beaux-Arts, Dijon.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

inherited their task. They perform a service: they provide 
a form of perpetual prayer. They succeed by virtue of their 
effectiveness as images, by their humanity.
In the pantheon of European Renaissance works of 
art are sculptures and paintings that capture and enact 
moments of religious mystery, ecstasy, trial, and emotion. 
As a figure belonging to the history of art, the monk gathers 
some of his outward bearing as sculpture from the expres­
sive Mourners, from Spain’s “most precise and lifelike” pro­
cessional figures, from artistic depictions of the ethereally 
formidable apparitions of saints, and from images of the per­
formance of prayer. These sculptures exemplify the height­
ened realism, skill, and observational brilliance of the best 
art of its kind, created at a time when such works had the 
power to address the terrors and splendors of the body to 
viewers who brought to sculpture, to painting, to art of all 
kinds, their deepest religious needs.
We have traced a few sculptural practices to sketch a 
landscape for considering the monk’s character as a religious 
icon. The nature and varied makeup of audiences are implicit 
in what we have shown, but the overall question of audience—
who saw the monk and where?—must remain open. The 
street, the church, the tomb monument, the Kunstkammer 
each call for different expectations of, and responses to, 
works of art, for different commissions by patrons, for dif­
ferent audiences and occasions.8 What we miss, and would 
gladly add to the public and formal settings we have explored, 
is an example from the private sphere. Perhaps such privacy—
outside an aristocratic or ecclesiastical setting—is a relatively 
modern invention. For all that he shares with the devotional 
sculptures illustrated in this study, the monk automaton 
wants a quiet room with a small audience.
193
Perpetual Devotion
Walking in Procession
Procession itself, an essential part of every culture, was a 
fundamental ritual of public life in early modern Europe. 
Kings and emperors staged triumphant entries and 
marriage processions; bishops decreed requiems and 
jubilees; parishes hosted feast day processions; confrater­
nities walked in supplication to the shrines of patron saints. 
William A. Christian Jr., throughout his book Local Religion 
in Sixteenth-Century Spain, recounts the enduring rich­
ness of procession in community life in New Castile, not just 
for Holy Week or Corpus Christi, but for many other annual 
imperatives such as Ascension Day, Saint Anne’s Day, All 
Souls Day, and local saints’ days.6 There were petitionary 
processions, penitential processions, votive processions, and 
seasonal processions: to implore village saints for relief from 
plague, from locusts, from drought; to give thanks for such 
relief or observe hereditary vows to perpetuate the thanks; 
to honor martyrs; to visit sites where visions were reported. 
Pilgrimages were nothing if not forms of procession. The 
townspeople and clergy of Alcalá de Henares formed a 
procession as they bore the body of Diego from monastery 
to sickroom. The Spanish imágenes de vestir stamp and 
heave through the city in procession. The Mourners process 
through a miniature cloister in three-dimensional depth. 
The clockmaker designing a walking automaton is making 
something that is familiar after all, a figure engaged in a 
defining human act. Diego himself was a walker: to Rome 
and back from Castile in 1450, surely in the company of 
other pilgrims, for the great Jubilee ceremonies under Pope 
Nicholas V. The monk automaton shares its performative 
and temporal nature with the Spanish processional sculp­
tures. But it shares its scale and repetitive nature with the 
Mourners. It is, we can say, many sculptures in one.
And in their compressed quarter, the Mourners enact 
the same choreography as do the sculptures and partici­
pants of the Spanish pasos, though in their own incompara­
ble Netherlandish idiom. They too bear a platform carrying 
an effigy. Beyond the processional topos shared by these 
very different works, the subdued emotional expressiveness 
of the alabaster Mourners is a strong contrast to the theatri­
cal figures of the Spanish pasos, though taken as a whole the 
tomb monuments comprise a theater of grandeur.7 Small 
as the Mourners are, their manner and bearing represent 
the large and universal gestures of grief, and the monk has 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

194
Servus Gieben’s humble epiphany on the feast day of San 
Diego will always belong to the automaton monk. The pro­
posal has taken on a life of its own. Just as the cardinal’s 
description of Saint Francis standing in the crypt created 
a new kind of image centuries later, so has Father Servus 
created a new kind of story, four hundred years on, about 
the automaton. The difference is that the automaton—the 
image—came first in this case, then the story. Or so we think. 
Elizabeth’s father, a scientist, read an early draft of our 
study of the monk and called it a “dendritic” tale. One object: 
an automaton—and a clockmaker, an accident, a miracle, and 
a proposal for how they were connected—with no proofs, is 
this enough for a book? Yes, it is, for the ineluctable fact of 
the automaton itself. We never quite recover from looking 
at him. We look closer, and the histories of technology, med­
icine, art, and faith all compete for a claim to our response. 
The legend that the monk is a portrait of Brother 
Diego serves a purpose (to us now) as useful and urgent 
as if it were true. Paired, the automaton and the saint per­
mit a glimpse of competing definitions of the body and its 
life. Medicine and faith may be uncertain partners. But the 
automaton, in good running order after four and a half cen­
turies, comes to life in animated defiance of time and decay. 
Like the saint’s body, it still delivers after all these years.
The Machine and the Corpse
27
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

195
The practice of medicine in the sixteenth century was 
assembled from incompatible ideas about nature and divin­
ity. Don Carlos’s suppurating head wound, the physicians’ 
pharmacopoeia for the treatment of infection, the ascetic 
Franciscan and his uncanny corpse (still sweet to the nos­
trils), the midnight apparition, the immaculate cure—the 
story is a microhistory of early modern beliefs. What is the 
body made of, and what keeps it running? In the midst of 
the debate, the spring-based clock arrived. In a clockwork 
universe, the coiled spring is primum mobile, the fusee its 
tamer, the gear train takes the power and divides it into sys­
tems, the cams and levers are motive and memory, their mul­
tiple linkages the nerve and muscle of motion, whether to the 
hands of a clock, the heavenly bodies of the astrarium, or the 
limbs of a man. The delicate spinning fly brings judgment and 
governance. The clockmaker who fashioned these parts and 
put them together inside the wooden monk was producing 
a coherent equivalent of body and will. Perpetual motion 
would be the next frontier, the promise of eternal life.
During the twenty-two days Don Carlos lay in delirium 
in Alcalá de Henares, his surgeons and physicians labored 
to name what they saw and deduce what they couldn’t see. 
They engaged in heated debate over whether to trepan the 
skull, for among the attending physicians was the Flemish 
anatomist Andreas Vesalius, who had conducted a post­
mortem in France three years before and observed how 
unseen damage within the cranium had proved fatal.1 Near 
the end of the crisis, drilling was begun, then halted, amid 
fervent argument. At another point physicians noted that 
the patient was moving his bowels more than five times a 
day; taking this as a positive sign, they administered a pur­
gative to assist nature, and within hours twenty more bowel 
movements ensued. On the twelfth day, still seeking signs of 
fracture, surgeons cut away the discolored tissues surround­
ing the wound and exposed the skull, but profuse bleeding 
prevented visibility. One day later, infection “engulfed the 
patient’s face, glued his eyes shut, and then moved down­
ward across his neck and upper torso.”2 In desperation, the 
physicians authorized the ministrations of a lauded Moorish 
healer from Valencia, whose ointments had the effect of 
burning the wound and turning the exposed bone “black as 
ink.” The patient had been given the final sacraments, and 
once already the sheet had been drawn over his head. The 
opening of the tomb of fray Diego at the monastery’s Church 
of Saint Francis marked the moment when medicine gave 
up and faith took over.
The story of Don Carlos shows us the foremost phy­
sicians of the age debating best practice in the treatment of 
infection. It is a harrowing document of the physical body in 
extremis, and the agony of witness. Those who gazed on the 
mortifications of the flesh—and who is spared yet?—could not 
but ask for the promises of faith. They found its assurance in 
the miraculous absence of decay in fray Diego’s disinterred 
body. When friars of the monastery of Santa María de Jesús 
brought the corpse into the sickroom, fresh discussion arose, 
about whether to force open the patient’s eyes. Instead, the 
prince signed for the corpse to be brought close enough to 
touch. The steward and friars transferred the corpse to the 
sickbed and folded back a part of its shroud to expose 
the face. The patient reached out and found the shroud and 
the corpse. “Having touched his hands to the face and body 
of the said Brother Diego, [the prince] raised them and then 
ran them over his own face, eyes, and mouth.”3 
Many people in the room witnessed this moment: the 
king on his knees, the friars, the surgeons and physicians, 
the royal stewards, the confessors, the bishop of Cuenca, the 
duke of Alba.4 What resuscitating essence was expected to 
pass from the corpse to the prince? Vesalius, dissector of 
corpses, whose anatomical treatise De humani corporis fab­
rica would transform the practice of medicine, must have 
wondered.5 Many years later, with Diego at last secured in 
the pantheon of saints, Philip had the tomb in Alcalá opened 
once more, to remove the bones of the saint’s lower legs (still 
bearing flesh) for inclusion among his personal sacred rel­
ics.6 He too wanted to be able to touch the life-giving body 
of the saint.
Such moments of ordeal and mystery are repeatedly 
given visual image in the paintings and sculptures of early 
modern Europe. The lifelike presentation of flesh and its 
affliction, the close observation of wounds, the body at the 
threshold of death, the supernatural aliveness of martyrs, 
saints, and savior, each recovery a resurrection, a Lazarus: 
Gregorio Fernández, Juan Martínez Montañés, Pedro de 
Mena, and masters of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century 
Spanish sculpture depicted, “most precise and lifelike,” the 
ravages and miracles of the body, in full color. Thus does 
The Machine and the Corpse
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

196
CHAPTER 27
Mena give substance to the apparition of Saint Francis in 
the crypt, caught in the visitor’s torchlight. Our Iberian 
focus, though it may yet prove mistaken, finds in the legend 
of the saint the paradox that animates the automaton. 
 The concept of a body that comes back to life, from 
sickness or through holiness, is implicit in the object that is 
the monk too. Theologians describe miracles as events with 
no apparent human or natural cause. The monk models in 
votive intercession or sympathetic repair everything the 
physicians were trying to accomplish: to prevent the ebbing 
of life from the body, to rewind its vital spring, to put the 
prince back on his feet so that he might move again under 
his own power. The legend adheres to the monk because in 
both we sense the analogue forces in play between medi­
cine, mechanics, and faith. Both are ambivalent about where 
the agency of craft ends and that of faith begins, about what 
is proper to the human realm and what proper to the divine.
A small wooden icon stands arrested on a shelf, and 
then one day the icon parades about and gesticulates on a 
table. A small miracle. Or the image of a small miracle. Or the 
metaphor of a large miracle. Or an artificial miracle. Our first 
and last definition of the storied monk: a motionless thing 
that comes to life.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

198
Table of Comparisons:  Eight Automata
APPENDIX
Automaton of a friar
Mid-16th century, Spain or Germany
Height: 40.64 cm (16 in.)
National Museum of American History, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC
https://americanhistory.si.edu/collections
/search/object/nmah_855351
id no. me.336451
Iron clockwork; wood fusee. 
Head, arms, hands, feet of carved wood; stained beech 
or poplar (by visual analysis), polychromed. Body carved 
and lathe-turned from single block of wood. Eyes made 
of iron, painted.
Cloth habit of Franciscan friar when acquired not original. 
Modern Franciscan habit was made at Smithsonian after 
purchase.
The following are excerpts from an ongoing database compiled by the authors. Details are sourced from 
host museums and collections archives, as well as historians, curators, and conservators named in the 
chapters on each automaton.
1975
Zurich (Uto Auktions AG, Sept. 29, 
1975, auction catalog); acquired 
1977, Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, DC
Automaton: Preaching monk
Automatenfigur: Predigender Mönch
ca. 1560, Spain or Germany
Height: 39 cm (15 5⁄₁₆ in.)
Deutsches Museum, Munich
https://www.deutsches-museum.de/en
/museum-island/exhibitions/robotics#c21914
inv no. 84/18
1983
London, Christie’s auction 
(Financial Times, Oct. 15, 1983); 
acquired 1985, Deutsches Museum, 
Munich
Iron clockwork; wood fusee. Signs of a former 
internal glockenspiel.
Head, arms, feet of carved wood; poplar (by sample 
microanalysis), polychromed. Body carved and lathe-
turned from single block of wood. Decorative pattern in 
red paint, now faded, on lower front of body shell, unique 
to this automaton.
Unclothed when acquired.
Musical automaton–male saint
Zenélő automata–férfi szent
16th century, Spain 
Height: 41 cm (16 1⁄8 in.)
Iparművészeti Múzeum 
(Museum of Applied Arts), Budapest
https://collections.imm.hu/gyujtemeny
/zenelo-automata-jezsuita-ferfiszent/869 
accession no. 11254.a-b
1915
Budapest, Iparművészeti Múzeum
Iron clockwork; wood fusee. Glockenspiel bells of bronze 
and pewter. 
Head, hands, feet of carved wood with gesso primer; 
linden (by visual analysis), polychromed. Body carved 
and lathe-turned from single block of wood. Eyes made 
of pewter, painted.
Silk damask cloak and cape in the Italian style, consid­
ered 18th-century replacements.
AUTOMATON
(As currently identified by host institution)
FIRST DOCUMENTED 
APPEARANCE
MATERIALS
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

199
Table of Comparisons
Walks ≈19 in., turns right, repeats 6 more times, 
tracking irregular polygonal path. Per leg of path, 
head moves (1x: left, center, bow), eyes (3x: left, 
center), mouth (6x: open, close; 1x: kiss), right 
elbow (3x: to strike chest), left elbow (6x: to raise 
and lower cross), left elbow and shoulder (1x: to 
raise cross to kiss), feet (4x each: lift, fall). Full 
performance would last 3 to 4 minutes. Autom­
aton is functional, but to protect the mechanism 
the mainspring is not wound fully. For extended 
description, see chap. 10.
Little corrosion present on iron clockwork sur­
faces. Body and clockwork in original condition, 
though mainspring and four chain links were 
replaced at some time in the past.  Two gut lines 
(fusee line and line to left elbow) as well as cas­
sock, cowl, belt, and rosary are modern.
Todd (1978): “Remove, clean and 
re-grease mainspring. Fit one new line. 
Close up all strained chain links. Make 
three chain links and one hook.”
Walks ≈15¾ in., designed to turn right and 
repeat 10 more times. Missing turning pivot, 
hence geometry of walking path unknown. Per 
leg of path, head moves (1x: left, right, nod), eyes 
(8x: left, right), mouth (4x: open, close), right wrist 
(oscillates 40.5x), left wrist (oscillates 22.5x), 
feet (8x each: lift, fall). Automaton is partly 
functional. Mainspring is not wound fully, to 
protect the mechanism. For extended 
description, see chap. 12. 
Friess (1988): “The surface of the iron mechanism 
was rusted but aside from the torn gut string and 
the residue of resinous oil, it was functional. All 
that is left of an original glockenspiel mechanism 
is the driving wheel of the cylinder on the drive­
shaft....Four fractures [in the wooden body] had 
been previously repaired....One arm was broken 
at the elbow, the other arm at the spot where the 
bearing for the hand is screwed in....One hand 
and both feet were missing, two fingers of the 
remaining hand were broken off. The head has 
been refinished several times.”
Friess (1988): “Simple cleaning and 
rust prevention on mechanism. Most 
of the labor involved was devoted 
to the stabilization of cracks, gluing 
of fractures, and the replacement 
of missing fragments of the wooden 
casing....The elbow of the broken arm 
also received a replacement fashioned 
out of poplar wood.” 
Missing fingers, hand, and feet were re­
made and painted, but no details about 
this work appear in Friess’s report.
Stationary figure containing an internal glocken­
spiel (unique to this automaton). At full wind, a 
single sequence: head moves (1x: right, left), eyes 
(16x: side to side), mouth (26x: open, close), right 
hand (wields bell, oscillates at wrist to ring 36x). 
Movement corresponds with 45-second glocken­
spiel melody delivered twice; head bows at end. 
Total performance time is ≈ 1 minute 48 seconds. 
Automaton is functional. For extended description, 
see chap. 13. 
Not known. Soós and Rácz (1990) reported 
nonfunctioning clockwork, signs of former repair 
in the right arm movement, and body shell split 
in many places. Missing fingers on both hands. 
Missing bell handle. Garments damaged. Report 
does not comment on age or condition of paint. 
Feet presumed original. Glockenspiel wooden 
barrel had been repegged, hence original melody 
considered lost.
Soós and Rácz (1990): clockwork 
entirely dismantled, inventoried, cor­
rosion removed. Mainspring replaced. 
Halo repaired with brass and re-gilded. 
Glockenspiel bells cleaned. Missing 
wood fingers of the bell hand and 
missing bell handle remade. Splits in 
the body shell closed and glued. Gar­
ments, though not considered original, 
were conserved, with new material 
clearly identified.
PERFORMANCE
(if mainspring is fully wound)
CONDITION BEFORE 
CONSERVATION
CONSERVATION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

200
APPENDIX
Lute player
Lautenspielerin
ca. 1600, South Germany
Height: 39.7 cm (15⅝ in.)
Bayerisches Nationalmuseum 
(Bavarian National Museum), Munich
inv no. 27/30
1927
Munich, Bayerisches 
Nationalmuseum
Brass clockwork; wood fusee. 
Wax head, not original. Arms, hands of carved wood, 
polychromed. Wood torso. Separate lower body shell 
of lathe-turned wood, identified as mountain ash (by 
sample microanalysis), sections missing.
Dress considered 19th-century replacement. Traces of 
original cloth remain on upper body: green cotton or silk 
with pale gold or silver metallic thread.
Automaton: Mandolin player
Automate: Joueuse de mandoline
ca. 1775–99, France
Height: 35 cm (13 3⁄4 in.)
Conservatoire national des arts et métiers 
(cnam), Paris
https://collections.arts-et-metiers.net/?queries=
query=search=N°%20d’inventaire=[06152-0001-]
&showtype=record
inv no. 06152
1853
Paris, Conservatoire national 
des arts et métiers
Brass clockwork; brass fusee. 
Head, arms, hands, feet of carved wood, polychromed. 
Lower body shell of wood,  only remnants remain.
18th-century peasant costume. 
Automaton, Cittern player
Automat, Cisterspielerin
2nd half of 16th century, Spain (?)
Height: 44 cm (17 5⁄₁₆ in.)
Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna
https://www.khm.at/objektdb/detail/96017/
inv no. Kunstkammer, 10000
1920s
The Netherlands; acquired 1934, 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna
Iron clockwork; metal fusee, frame, and gear train 
layout unique to this automaton. 
Head, arms, hands, upper torso, feet of carved wood, 
polychromed. Lower body shell of wood, repaired with 
patches of leather and brass.
Linen and silk brocade garments in 17th-century 
Spanish court style. 
Automaton: Noble matron 
playing a drum
Automa: Nobil matrona in atto di 
suonare un timpano
ca. 1560, Switzerland or Germany
Height: 38 cm (15 in.)
Private collection, Milan
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jAtkSqRH6-4
2005
Trent (Italy) (Exhibition: La misura 
del tempo: L’antico splendore 
dell’orologeria italiana dal XV al 
XVIII secolo)
Iron clockwork; wood fusee. 
Head, arms, hands, feet of carved wood; poplar 
(by visual analysis), polychromed. Body carved and 
lathe-turned from single block of wood. Eyes made 
of carved wood, painted.
Silk dress, cap, and fan, probably early 18th century 
replacements. Intact but threadbare at sleeves and 
bodice. Wig of real hair
Automaton, Lady lute player
1640–60, Germany
Height: 31 cm (123⁄₁₆ in.)
National Museum of American History, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC
https://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search
/object/nmah_856653 
id no. 1984.0865.01
1978
Geneva (Galerie d’Horlogerie 
Ancienne, Apr. 9, 1978, auction 
catalog); acquired 1984, 
Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, DC
Brass clockwork; wood fusee. 
Head, arms, hands, feet of carved wood, polychromed. 
Body carved and lathe-turned from single block of wood. 
Cloth dress considered 18th-century replacement. 
Intact but tattered at hem and sleeves. Hair wig.
AUTOMATON
(As currently identified by host institution)
FIRST DOCUMENTED 
APPEARANCE
MATERIALS
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

201
Table of Comparisons
Designed to walk and turn, though feet, stepping 
levers, and turning pivot are now missing, hence 
geometry of walking path unknown. Head now 
replaced, but a missing former wooden head once 
moved (side to side, nod), and eyes, mouth, right 
hand (to strum lute), and left forearm (to carry 
hand up and down fretboard) would have been 
movable. Signs of a former internal bell, sounding 
once at each turn. Automaton no longer functional. 
For extended description, see chap. 14.
Not known. Todd (1980) indicated the original 
head (now wax) would have been wood; missing 
components in the clockwork show evidence of 
former movable mouth and eyes as well as step­
ping levers and feet. Evidence of a former single 
bell with strike hammer (both missing) within 
the body. Mechanism for head turning no longer 
functional. Extensive damage to right arm from 
insertion of replacement mechanism. Overpaint­
ing on hands. 
No museum records other than Todd’s 
1980 documentation of the automa­
ton and its clockwork.
Designed to walk and turn. “A walking automaton 
making the gestures of playing the mandolin, while 
turning its head and eyes” (cnam 1960 catalog). 
Right hand strums, left hand moves at mandolin 
fretboard, feet move back and forth. Automaton 
no longer functional. For extended description, see 
chap. 14. 
Not known.
Dress was restored in 1997 and 2016. 
Former cnam database listed three 
previous restorations of the automa­
ton: Auricoste, ingénieur mécanicien, 
Paris [no date]; Hamm, 1970, Paris; 
Robert-Houdin, 1859, France. 
Walking path designed to vary between straight 
line and circular path, depending on manually-set 
trailing wheel, unique to this automaton. On a full 
wind of the mainspring the figure could once walk 
20 meters (khm 1935 catalog). “[She] moved with 
small tripping steps, strumming the instrument 
with her right hand, and turning her head from 
right to left” (khm 1966 catalog). Rack-and-pinion 
design for the head motion gives it an elegant 
tilting side-to-side turn. No eye or mouth motion. 
Automaton functioned until 1964, now too fragile 
to operate. For extended description, see chap. 15. 
Bassermann-Jordan (1926): “The automaton was 
treated carefully and kept with respect: when its 
original dress was worn out and no longer in fash­
ion, a new one was made about 40 years later, in 
the style of international court costumes of the 
nobility coming out of Spain at the time....The 
face, finished in enamel-like colors, has been mod­
ified in later times; the lute is still the original.”  
Textile costume conservation in 1963.
Walks and turns, tracking the path of a five-pointed 
star. Per leg of path, head moves (10x: side to side; 
1x: nod), eyes (≈30x: side to side), mouth (≈30x: 
open, close), right hand (oscillates at wrist 4x per 
second), feet (10x: lift, fall). The most rapid head 
movements of all the automata. Automaton is func­
tional. For extended description, see chap. 16. 
Significant damage: missing feet, left forearm and 
hand, and sections of wooden body shell. Original 
paint on face appears intact. Clockwork very 
corroded and nonfunctioning. No signs of past 
repair efforts.
Complete clockwork cleaning and 
overhaul in 1989 by Giorgio Gregato. 
Reconstruction of missing sections of 
wooden body shell. Left forearm and 
hand remade along with drumstick 
and drum. Drum secured via brass 
bracket to automaton’s waist. Both 
feet remade.
Designed to walk ≈24 in., turn right and repeat 10 
more times, tracking a roughly triangular course. 
Per leg of path, head moves (1x: left, right, nod), 
eyes (5x: right, center), right wrist (oscillates to 
strum lute 30x), left elbow (to carry forearm and 
hand up and down fretboard 5x), feet (5x each: 
lift, fall). Automaton considered functional. For 
extended description, see chap. 14. 
Wood surfaces original and apparently un­
touched. si registrar’s notes (1979) reported, 
“Figure is in working order. Figure’s costume brit­
tle, torn and badly faded. Wooden frame encasing 
clockwork was damaged and repaired at some 
point in the distant past.” Todd (1979): clockwork 
“has been repaired on a number of occasions with 
varying degrees of competency. [Clockwork] has 
also suffered recently through being ‘cleaned’ 
with a wire brush and consequently the original 
finish and patina has been lost.”
Todd (1979): “No work done. Obser­
vation, comparison, photography, 
drawing and documentation only.”
PERFORMANCE
(if mainspring is fully wound)
CONDITION BEFORE 
CONSERVATION
CONSERVATION
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

202
Introduction
1.	
A note on the word monk. In Catholic no­
menclature, monks are members of monastic 
orders, defined by seclusion. Friars belong to 
the mendicant orders, including Franciscans, 
who live a communal life defined by works in 
the secular world. Though the cassock and 
sandals, and the legend itself, urge a Franciscan 
character, the automaton received the generic 
label “monk” in auction and acquisition records 
and in much of the subsequent literature. The 
colloquial name has adhered, and we use it 
too. The museum has recently rechristened it 
a friar.
2.	
Otto Mayr, “Purchase of 16th Century 
Automaton,” April 1, 1977, accession 1977.1191, 
Registration Services, National Museum of 
American History, Smithsonian Institution, 
Washington, DC. On the French inventor 
Jacques de Vaucanson (1709–1782) and the 
Swiss clockmakers Pierre Jaquet-Droz (1721–
1790) and his son Henri-Louis Jaquet-Droz 
(1752–1791), see chap. 17, below. Vaucanson 
went on to invent a prototype automated loom, 
using interchangeable perforated punch cards 
to program the lift and fall of hooks attached 
to warp threads. The loom can be seen today 
in the Musée des arts et métiers in Paris; 
Vaucanson’s inventions and others he collected 
were key to the founding of the Conservatoire 
national des arts et métiers in 1794. The French 
inventor and textile merchant Joseph-Marie 
Jacquard (1752–1834) patented a loom in 1804 
based on Vaucanson’s machine; the Jacquard 
loom would play a prime role in the Industrial 
Revolution. The lowly punch card, the first 
digital command and data storage medium, in­
teracting with a compounded matrix of levers, 
gear wheels, and pinned barrels, in turn played 
a central role in early computing, famously in 
the work of the English mathematician and 
engineer Charles Babbage (1791–1871), inventor 
of the first mechanical computer. See Douglas 
R. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal 
Golden Braid (New York: Basic Books, 1979), 
24–25.
Notes
3.	
Otto Mayr, “Automatenlegenden in der 
Spätrenaissance,” Technikgeschichte: Beiträge 
zur Geschichte der Technik und Industrie 41, 
no. 1 (1974): 20. Thanks to Henning Bauer for 
his translation from the German, which Otto 
Mayr read and approved. See also Otto Mayr, 
Authority, Liberty, and Automatic Machinery 
in Early Modern Europe (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1986); and Otto Mayr, 
“A Mechanical Symbol for an Authoritarian 
World,” in The Clockwork Universe: German 
Clocks and Automata, 1550–1650, exh. cat., ed. 
Klaus Maurice and Otto Mayr (New York: Neale 
Watson Academic Publications, 1980), 1–8.
CHAPTER 1
To Set the Stage 
1.	
Hugh Trevor-Roper, Princes and Artists: 
Patronage and Ideology at Four Habsburg 
Courts 1517–1633 (London: Thames & Hudson, 
1976), 81. Trevor-Roper cites José de Sigüenza, 
Historia de la Orden de San Gerónimo (1605), 
reprinted in Nueva Biblioteca de Autores 
Españoles (Madrid, 1909), 2:635–36.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

203
3.	
William H. Prescott, History of the Reign 
of Philip the Second, King of Spain, 3 vols., 
ed. John Foster Kirk (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippin­
cott, 1874), 2:467–68. Volumes 1 and 2 were 
first published in 1855; volume 3, in 1858. 
Prescott mentions Schiller’s play (2:458). 
Verdi’s opera would premiere in Paris in 1867. 
Erysipelas, also called St. Anthony’s fire, was a 
spreading inflammation of the skin and subcu­
taneous tissues, now understood as infection 
caused by Streptococcus bacteria.
4.	
See, e.g., Kamen, Philip of Spain, 91–92; 
Charles Donald O’Malley, Andreas Vesalius 
of Brussels, 1514–1564 (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1965), 296–302; and Bjørn 
Okholm Skaarup, Anatomy and Anatomists 
in Early Modern Spain (Surrey: Ashgate, 
2015), 128–38. Vesalius (1514–1564) was a 
royal physician to Charles V from 1543 to 1556 
and then physician in the court of Philip II in 
Madrid from 1559 to 1564 (O’Malley, Andreas 
Vesalius, 189, 267, 288; Skaarup, Anatomy and 
Anatomists, 3).
5.	
L. J. Andrew Villalon, “Putting Don Carlos 
Together Again: Treatment of a Head Injury in 
Sixteenth-Century Spain,” Sixteenth Century 
Journal 26, no. 2 (1995): 347–65. Chief among 
the primary texts Villalon consults is the 
document written by the prince’s surgeon, 
Dionisio Daza Chacón: “Relación verdadera de 
la herida de cabeza del Serenísimo Príncipe 
D. Carlos nuestro Señor, de gloriosa memoria, 
la cual se acabó en fin de julio del año de 
1562,” in Colección de documentos inéditos 
para la historia de España, 112 vols. (Madrid: 
Academia de la Historia, 1842–95), 18:537–63. 
O’Malley, Andreas vesalius, 298, calls Daza 
Chacón’s chronicle “one of the fullest pictures 
we have of the medical procedure of that age” 
and prints an English translation of the entire 
report in his appendix, 407–19: “True Account 
of the Head Injury of the Most Serene Prince 
Don Carlos, Our Sire of Glorious Memory, 
Which Occurred the End of July [sic] 1562.”
6.	
Villalon, “Putting Don Carlos Together 
Again,” 356.
7.	
Prescott, Philip the Second, 469.
8.	
Villalon, “Putting Don Carlos Together 
Again,” 354. See Daza Chacón, “Relación ver­
dadera,” 543; and O’Malley, Andreas Vesalius, 
409. Betony or bishopwort: a medicinal herb 
“once the sovereign remedy for all maladies of 
the head” (botanical.com).
CHAPTER 2
A Miracle and a Vow
1.	
To extricate truth from myth concerning 
the death of Don Carlos, see Henry Kamen, 
Philip of Spain (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1997), 120 ff. A more recent and granular 
narrative is Geoffrey Parker’s Imprudent King: 
A New Life of Philip II (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2014), chap. 10, “The Enigma 
of Don Carlos.” Just published is a new study by 
Maria-Cristina Necula, The Don Carlos Enigma: 
Variations of Historical Fictions (Washington, 
DC: Academica Press, 2020). Among earlier 
biographies, Don Carlos et Philippe II, 2 vols. 
(Brussels: E. Devroye,imprimeur du roi, 1863), 
by the nineteenth-century Belgian historian 
Louis-Prosper Gachard (1800–1885), is essen­
tial. Verdi’s conceit and Friedrich Schiller’s 
before him were based on the novel Don Carlos 
(1672) by the seventeenth-century French writer 
César Vichard de Saint-Réal, who in turn had 
incorporated allegations from a polemical tract 
written by William of Orange (1533–1584).  
2.	
Geoffrey Parker attributes the fall to the 
prince’s physical deformity (Imprudent King, 
182). The version of Charles Donald O’Malley, 
Don Carlos of Spain: A Medical Portrait (Los 
Angeles: University of California, 1970), fol­
lows earlier accounts of the prince in pursuit 
of the daughter of the house concierge:
It happened that the caretaker of the royal 
quarters in Alcalá had several daughters, one 
of whom appears to have taken the fancy of 
Don Carlos, although for what reason we are 
not sure....[O]n 19 April, a Sunday, Don Carlos 
caught sight of the girl walking in the garden 
outside the palace, and in his haste to pursue her 
ran down a flight of steps, missed his footing, 
turned a complete somersault and struck his 
head against the door at the bottom of the stair­
case. In his report to Queen Elizabeth, [Thomas] 
Challoner, the somewhat unsympathetic English 
ambassador[,] ...told the story succinctly: “The 
prince in hasty following of a wench, daughter 
to the keeper of the house, fell down a pair of 
stairs [and] broke his head.” ...Don Carlos’ haste 
was all in vain since, as it turned out, the door at 
the foot of the stairs was locked; and whatever 
the purpose of the prince—...as likely brutality 
as seduction—the girl, who would otherwise 
have been lost in anonymity, is known to us as 
Mariana de Garcetas. She was promptly clapped 
into a convent with a consolation of 1,000 
crowns. (7)
9.	
For eyewitness accounts of Don Carlos’s 
report, we relied on Fr. Lucio María Núñez, ofm, 
ed., “Documentos sobre la curación del príncipe 
D. Carlos y la canonización de San Diego de 
Alcalá,” Archivo Ibero-Americano 1, no. 4 (July–
August 1914): 424–46. This four-part series 
continues under the same title to 2, no. 9 (July–
August 1915): 374–87; 3, no. 13 (January–
February 1916): 107–26; and 4, no. 19 (January–
February 1917): 421–31. All are dedicated to the 
detailed account of Don Carlos’s illness and 
cure and the subsequent canonization of Diego, 
compiling sources and quoting contemporary 
witnesses, ambassadors’ letters, physicians’ 
testimonies, and original proçeso documents 
(documents in support of canonization) 
then kept in the Archivo Central de Alcalá de 
Henares. Núñez gained significant portions 
of his narrative from Gachard’s Don Carlos et 
Philippe II (see esp. vol. 1, chaps. 4 and 6); and 
Daza Chacón, “Relación verdadera.”
	
We hesitate to interpret Carlos’s midnight 
cry, “Basta, basta, padre, aparta el cordon,” 
for the word cordon has many meanings, even 
within Franciscan symbolism. The witness 
who heard and reported it was Hernán López 
“el Portugués,” the king’s surgeon, among the 
physicians who attended the prince through­
out the ordeal (Núñez, “Documentos sobre 
la curación del príncipe D. Carlos,” 1914, 433). 
The prince related his waking description of 
the vision to his chamber physician Cristóbal 
de Vega: “Esta noche se me ha aparecido en 
la cama, de pies, el santo fray Diego, con una 
cruz de caña en la mano. Y le pregunté si era 
Sant Francisco, porque me pareció que lo era; 
y respondió que no era Sant Francisco, mas 
que tuviese confiança en Dios que sanaria de 
aquesta enfermedad” (Núñez, “Documentos 
sobre la curación del príncipe D. Carlos,” 1914, 
434; and noted in Daza Chacón, “Relación 
verdadera,” 558–59).
CHAPTER 3
Diego de Alcalá
1.	
L. J. Andrew Villalon, “The Miracle Book 
of San Diego de Alcalá, or, the Fifteenth Century 
Failure to Canonize the First Counter-
Reformation Saint,” Mediterranean Studies 
10 (2001): 9–35. Thanks to Professor Villalon 
for permitting Elizabeth King to see his essay 
before publication and to quote from it in her 
early publications on the automaton monk. 
Villalon located the miracle book in the Real 
Biblioteca de El Escorial, he writes, designated 
only by reference number (&.II.14) in the 
NOTES
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

204
NOTES
the twentieth century, the saint’s life is told by 
Thomas E. Case, La historia de San Diego de 
Alcalá: Su vida, su canonización y su legado 
[bilingual edition in Spanish and English] 
(Alcalá de Henares: Universidad de Alcalá, 
1998). A detailed biography of San Diego 
narrated through depictions of him in works 
of art is José Luis Romero Torres, “Iconografía 
y devoción regia de un santo franciscano 
andaluz: San Diego de Alcalá,” in Actas del 
Simposio Cuatro siglos de presencia de los 
franciscanos en Estepa, celebrado el 11–13 de 
septiembre de 2003 (Estepa: Ayuntamiento, 
2007), 94–113. See also Thomas James Dande­
let, Spanish Rome 1500–1700 (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 2001), 170–78.
3.	
Ambrosio de Morales, Las antigüedades 
de las ciudades de España (Alcalá de Henares, 
1575). A facsimile reprint of a 1792 edition is 
available in two volumes (Valencia: Librerias 
“Paris-Valencia S.L.,” 2001). Our thanks to the 
historian Michael Schreffler, who interpreted 
for us the scope and significance of this work 
by Ambrosio de Morales. See Guy Lazure, 
“Possessing the Sacred: Monarchy and Identi­
ty in Philip II’s Relic Collection at the Escorial,” 
Renaissance Quarterly 60, no. 1 (Spring 
2007): 76–77.
4.	
“Tambien ha querido Janelo por regocijo 
renovar las estatuas antiguas, que se movian, 
y por eso las llamaban los Griegos Automatas. 
Hizo una dama de mas de una tercia en alto, 
que puesta sobre una mesa danza por toda 
ella al son de un atambor, que ella misma va 
tocando, y da sus vueltas, tornando adonde 
partió. Y aunque es juguete y cosa de risa, 
todavía tiene mucho de aquel alto ingenio.” 
Morales, Las antigüedades, 93v, as tran­
scribed in the 1792 edition reprint, p. 341. The 
English translation is from José A. García-
Diego, Juanelo Turriano, Charles V’s Clock­
maker: The Man and His Legend, trans. 
Charles David Ley (Madrid and Sussex: 
Editorial Castalia and Antiquarian Horological 
Society, 1986), 101. A tercia is one-third of 
a vara, or rod. The vara is a Spanish linear 
measure of .84 meter or 33 inches. 
5.	
But see the recent biography of Juanelo 
by Cristiano Zanetti: Janello Torriani and the 
Spanish Empire: A Vitruvian Artisan at the 
Dawn of the Scientific Revolution (Leiden: 
Brill, 2017). Chap. 1, “Janello Torriani’s First Ed­
ucation,” 23–70, offers a detailed description 
of the milieu and ethos of Cremona at the time 
Juanelo came of age.
CHAPTER 4
An Automaton by Juanelo Turriano
1.	
Fr. Lucio María Núñez’s 1914–17 articles 
have become even more valuable as the proçe­
so documents he indexed and quoted were 
destroyed in the Spanish Civil War when the 
Archivo Central de Alcalá de Henares burned 
to the ground. Villalon notes the loss, but was 
able to locate copies of sections of the proçe­
so in libraries in the Escorial, the Vatican, and 
the Archivo General de Simancas, in 2001 and 
2014. The full proçeso was produced in copies, 
both in Spain and in Rome, across the reigns of 
four popes, but a surviving complete copy was 
apparently found only in 1991 by Alejandro 
Recio Veganzones, ofm. He discovered it not in 
the Archivo Secreto Vaticano where process­
es of beatification and canonization are kept 
but among manuscripts filed in the Biblioteca 
Apostolica Vaticana under the name Francisco 
de la Peña, whose papers had entered the 
library in 1612, many years after Diego was 
canonized. Peña, canon lawyer appointed by 
Philip II as Spain’s auditor of the Rota in Rome, 
had played a key role at the papal court, repre­
senting the king and advancing the prospects 
for Diego’s case. Recio Veganzones marks its 
location in the library, and lists its full contents, 
in his article, “Proceso de beatificación y 
canonización de S. Diego de Alcalá, conservado 
en el Ms. Vat. Lat. 7008 e instruido en 1567 por 
Ambrosio de Morales, su procurador en Alcalá 
de Henares,” Archivo Ibero-Americano 51, 
no. 203–4 (1991): 767–97. In a second article, 
he adds an extensive bibliography for San 
Diego: “Ensayo biobibliográfico sobre San 
Diego de Alcalá,” Archivo Ibero-Americano 60, 
no. 236 (2000): 259–305.
2.	
Ambrosio de Morales, Vita B. Didaci 
Complutensis, in volume 3 of Morales’s 
collected works, Opuscula historica, quorum 
exemplaria in R. D. Laurentii Bibliotheca, 
vulgo del Escorial custodiuntur, ed. Francisco 
Valerio Cifuentes (Madrid, 1793), 206–11. 
The original vita was written in 1567 (see n. 1, 
above). Subsequent accounts of the saint’s life 
include Melchor de Cetina, Discursos sobre la 
vida y milagros del glorioso padre San Diego, 
de la orden del serafico padre S. Francisco 
(Madrid, 1609); and Antonio Rojo, Historia de 
San Diego de Alcalá: Fundación y frutos de 
santidad que ha produzido su convento de 
Santa María de Iesús [...] (Madrid: Imprenta 
Real, 1663). Both Cetina and Rojo were later 
guardians of the monastery of Santa María de 
Jesús, Diego’s home when he died in 1463. In 
three-volume Catálogo de los manuscritos 
castellanos de la Real Biblioteca de El Escorial 
(San Lorenzo de El Escorial, 1929), v. 1, 271–72. 
He identifies it as a copy of the now lost orig­
inal fifteenth-century manuscript, describing 
it as a leather-bound volume of 109 folios, 
transcribed in 1562 by a scribe named Andrés 
Muñoz Corchado, at the express command of 
Prince Carlos. See also Villalon’s “San Diego 
de Alcalá and the Politics of Saint-Making 
in Counter-Reformation Europe,” Catholic 
Historical Review 83, no. 4 (October 1997): 
691–715. Villalon revisited and extended his 
work in 2014: “The 1562 Head Injury of Don 
Carlos: A Conflict of Medicine and Religion in 
Sixteenth-Century Spain,” Mediterranean 
Studies 22, no. 2 (2014): 95–134.
2.	
Villalon, “The Miracle Book of San Diego 
de Alcalá,” 22–24.
3.	
Villalon, “The Miracle Book of San Diego 
de Alcalá,” 26.
4.	
Peter Burke, The Historical Anthropology 
of Early Modern Italy: Essays on Perception 
and Communication (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1987), chap. 5, “How to Be a 
Counter-Reformation Saint,” 49–50. 
5.	
The circumstances of Don Carlos’s 
confinement and death have been the subject 
not only of literature and opera but of research 
by generations of historians. Every chronicle 
of the sixteenth-century House of Habsburg 
includes reports of the prince’s infirmity and 
strange behavior, with some modern-day 
scholars venturing clinical diagnoses. Don 
Carlos did in fact plot a conspiracy against the 
crown and threaten the lives of ministers who 
tried to dissuade him and was poised to leave 
Madrid on the night the king confronted him. 
The king issued immediate notice to foreign 
courts of his confinement of Don Carlos and, 
six months later, of the prince’s death. But he 
remained steadfastly silent about the prince’s 
actions and affliction. William H. Prescott, 
writing in the mid-nineteenth century, heralds 
the opening of the Royal Archives in Simancas 
(“which have held the secrets of the Spanish 
monarchy hermetically sealed for ages”) as a 
great service to scholars of his day (Philip the 
Second, 1:vi). Prescott’s chap. 7, “Death of Don 
Carlos,” 2:493–545, opened the court for the 
English-speaking reader.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

205
NOTES
CHAPTER 6
A Letter
1.	
Très importante collection de tableaux 
Espagnols du XIIIe au XVIIIe siècle...[auction 
catalog] (Geneva, 1976). (Maarten van 
Heemskerck’s surname is correct elsewhere in 
the catalog.) The auctioneer, Pierre Cornette 
de Saint-Cyr, wrote the introduction to the 
catalog. He thanks a number of scholars for 
their contributions to the text entries, which 
otherwise are not identified by author. For the 
entry on the monk, see pp. 83–86.
2.	
Très importante collection, 84. Elizabeth 
King’s translation from the French. 
3.	
Très importante collection, 84–86. The 
catalog footnotes two sources for the story of 
Don Carlos: “Cf. sur la guérison du prince, 
Fr. Lucio Ma Nuñez, ‘Documentos sobre la 
curación del príncipe Don Carlos y la can­
onización de San Diego de Alcalá,’ Archivo 
Ibero-Americano 2 [1914]: 424–46, et, sur sa 
mort, Elías Tormo, ‘La tragedia del príncipe 
don Carlos y la trágica grandeza de Felipe II,’ 
Bol. de la Real Academia de la Historia 112 
[1943]: 161–209.” The article by Elías Tormo 
y Monzó (1869–1957), Spanish art historian, 
Prado Museum board member, and minister of 
education and fine arts in the Spanish National 
Assembly in the late 1920s, was delivered as 
a lecture at the Prado in spring 1943; it is a 
politically nuanced review of the many 
versions of the story of Don Carlos.
4.	
Thanks to Nancy Card of the Registrar’s 
Office of the Smithsonian’s National Museum 
of American History for arranging for us to view 
the photocopy of this letter and the earlier 
letter from Georges Sedlmajer. Elizabeth’s 
translation from the French, with help from 
Lory Frankel. “Lay brother” is given as frère 
convers—which should not be confused with 
“converso.” Servus Gieben’s suggestion to con­
sult the “Twenty-One Books” was a reasonable 
one in 1975, but since then scholars have found 
enough to doubt an attribution of this work to 
Juanelo Turriano that the anonymous author is 
now sometimes identified as Pseudo-Turriano. 
The letter bore no return address. Gieben 
refers to the article by Fr. Lucio María Núñez 
in Archivo Ibero-Americano 2 (1914). A small 
error? The article is cited in turn in the Geneva 
auction catalog. We find it in 1 (2014), as in 
chap. 2,n.9, above.
CHAPTER 5
The Attribution of the Monk
1.	
Ernst von Bassermann-Jordan, Alte Uhren 
und ihre Meister (Leipzig: Wilhelm Diebener, 
1926), 58, 66–69. This volume collects twenty 
years of Bassermann-Jordan’s essays in chap­
ters on the history of timekeeping, clocks, and 
master clockmakers from the early medieval 
period forward, with emphasis on masterpieces 
from the high Renaissance. His essay “Eine 
Automatenfigur aus der Zeit Kaiser Karls V” 
[An Automaton from the Era of Emperor 
Charles V] is condensed from his earlier arti­
cle, “Eine Automatenfigur aus der Zeit Kaiser 
Karls des Fünften” published in Der Kunstwan­
derer: Zeitschrift für alte und neue Kunst, für 
Kunstmarkt und Sammelwesen, Adolph Donath, 
ed., (July 1922), 489–91. 
2.	
Alfred Chapuis and Édouard Gélis, Le 
monde des automates: Étude historique et 
technique, 2 vols. (Paris, 1928; repr. Geneva: 
Editions Slatkine, 1984), 2:215.
3.	
José A. García-Diego, Los relojes y 
autómatas de Juanelo Turriano (Madrid: 
Albatros Ediciones, 1982), vol. 6 in the series 
Tempvs Fvgit, Monografías Españolas de 
Relojería. Elizabeth encountered this pioneer­
ing book in 1996 when its unexpected title 
popped up in the catalog holdings at Harvard’s 
Widener Library from a then none too hopeful 
key word search for “Juanelo Turriano.” Read­
ing it launched her pursuit of the legend and 
precipitated a looping sequence of discoveries 
that she published in 2002 as “Clockwork 
Prayer: A Sixteenth-Century Mechanical 
Monk,” Blackbird: An Online Journal of Liter­
ature and the Arts 1, no. 1 (Spring 2002). High 
points of that sequence are preserved here, for 
the way that the legend emerged from an open 
search before our later discoveries. Thanks 
to Adam Meuse and Carlena Kirkpatrick for 
translation from the Spanish of material we 
quote from García-Diego’s book.
4.	
García-Diego, Los relojes y autómatas de 
Juanelo Turriano, 104 and LV–LX.
5.	
Uto Auktionen [auction catalog], Uto 
Auktions AG, Zurich, September 29, 1975, item 
no. 351. 
6.	
García-Diego, Los relojes y autómatas de 
Juanelo Turriano, 105–6. 
6.	
Bernado Sacco, De Italicarum rerum va­
rietate et elegantia [...] (Pavia, 1565), 150–51. 
Quoted and translated from the Latin by Silvio 
A. Bedini and Francis R. Maddison, “Mechanical 
Universe: The Astrarium of Giovanni de’ Dondi,” 
Transactions of the American Philosophical 
Society, n.s., 56, no. 5 (1966): 38–39 (brackets 
theirs). Bedini and Maddison declare that the 
clock, corroded and forgotten in the castello 
in Pavia, was “almost certainly” the once-
celebrated fourteenth-century astrarium of 
Giovanni de’ Dondi. In the ensuing decades, 
Juanelo indeed made a new clock for the 
emperor, improving on de’ Dondi’s machine, 
though this clock too is now lost to the ages. 
7.	
Girolamo Cardano, De subtilitate [...] 
(Lyons, 1554), 611–12. Vida’s memorable portrait 
of Juanelo is presented in chap. 20, below. An 
earlier text clearly describing tabletop autom­
ata, though not specific to Juanelo Turriano, is 
Cristóbal de Villalón, Ingeniosa comparación 
entre lo antiguo y lo presente (1539) (repr. 
Madrid: Manuel Serrano y Sanz, La Sociedad de 
Bibliófilos Españoles, 1898), 173–74.
8.	
Antonio Campi, Cremona: Fedelissima 
città et nobilissima colonia de Romani rappre­
sentata in disegno col suo contado et illustrata 
d’una breve historia delle cose più notabili 
appartenenti ad essa et dei ritratti naturali 
de duchi et duchesse di Milano e compendio 
delle lor vite (Milan: G. B. Bidelli, 1645), Libro 
Terzo, 198–99. Originally published in 1585 and 
dedicated to Philip II. Our thanks to Sally Hill for 
translation from the Italian.
9.	
Famianus Strada, De bello Belgico: The 
history of the Low-Countrey warres, trans. Sir 
Robert Stapylton (London: Humphrey Mose­
ley, 1650), bk. 1, p. 7. Stapylton translated the 
first of two volumes, or “decades” of Strada’s 
title. The Latin original is De bello Belgico 
decas prima ab excessu Caroli V. Imp. usque 
ad initia Præfecturæ Alexandri Farnesii [...] 
[Concerning the Belgian war, first decade, 
from the abdication of the Emperor Charles V 
to the beginnings of the Prefecture of Alexan­
der Farnesius...] (Leyden, 1643).
10.	 Strada, De bello Belgico, in Stapylton 
trans., 6.
11.	
William Stirling-Maxwell, The Cloister Life 
of the Emperor Charles V, 4th ed. (London: 
John C. Nimmo, 1891), 179–80. The first edition 
of this book was published in 1852.
12.	 Bedini and Maddison, “Mechanical 
Universe,” 57.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

206
NOTES
CHAPTER 10
A Mechanical Anatomy
1.	
Our profound gratitude to Carlene 
Stephens, curator, Division of Work and
Industry; Scott Nolley, conservator, Exhibits 
and Loans; Dawn P. Wallace, objects conserva­
tor; and the Conservation Department of the 
National Museum of American History at the 
Smithsonian for making this essential video 
for us in late December 2021. Carlton Newton 
transcribed the bird’s-eye-view video into a 
precise map of the monk’s walking path for 
this specific performance. Each turn angle will 
vary by several degrees, from one perfor­
mance to the next.
2.	
Leonardo da Vinci knew about it and 
sketched it, and the makers of crossbows and 
catapults have used it from antiquity. See Peter 
Honig, “History and Mathematical Analysis of 
the Fusee,” in Maurice and Mayr, The Clockwork 
Universe, 114–20; and Eric Bruton, The History 
of Clocks and Watches (London: Orbis, 1979; 
New York: Crescent Books, 1989), 53.
3.	
Such a line or cord would have been 
made of sheep intestine cut lengthwise into 
thin strips and twisted before being cured.
Traditionally known as “catgut,” it is made in 
many diameters and is still used, principally 
on stringed musical instruments but also by 
clockmakers. It is very strong and if kept well 
oiled will last a century or more. The wood 
fusee absorbed and held oil, and this kept the 
gut supple.
4.	
The fusee with its trumpet-shaped profile 
must be individually cut for its mainspring, 
for not only does a given spring deliver a 
diminishing pull as it unwinds, but it does so at 
a unique, or characteristic, rate. Clockmakers 
cut the fusee’s graduated diameter and groove 
with an elegant jig called a fusee-adjusting 
tool. With the fully wound spring and uncut 
fusee “blank” in situ in the clockframe—gut 
line in place but gear train not yet connected—
the tool was attached to the fusee’s winding 
square. A sliding weight on the long tool arm 
would indicate, with each quarter-turn release 
of the spring, the necessary groove depth for 
the gut line on the fusee, to balance the pull 
CHAPTER 8
An Immaculate Object
1.	
This is not atypical; there are many 
outstanding sixteenth-century clocks that do 
not carry a signature. More on the presence 
or absence of signatures or makers’ stamps in 
chap. 19.
2.	
A tentative analysis of the paint was 
made in 2013; see chap. 11 n. 3, below. 
3.	
How in fact did the clockmaker calculate 
the amount of spring power needed to drive a 
given clock or automaton? Even today, clock­
makers may make these judgments intuitively. 
There are tables and formulas to calculate 
force-to-weight ratios, but David prefers to 
trust his instincts. He has said, “I truly do not 
know if the maker of the monk calculated or 
‘guesstimated’ the strength of his spring, but 
I certainly ‘guesstimated’ the model’s spring 
and was lucky. Imagine holding the ends of a 
blade spring in your two hands and flexing it. 
Your hands can distinguish very subtle differ­
ences in tension from one spring to the next. 
So an instinctive judgment of the power of a 
coiled mainspring is just an extension of this 
kind of knowledge. However, if I had arbitrarily 
made the model 1½ times bigger than the 
monk, rather than 1¼, I would not have been 
able to find a spring strong enough to drive 
it.” Excerpt from a conversation between 
Elizabeth King and David Todd, recorded by 
Elizabeth King on January 23, 2004.
4.	
From a conversation between Elizabeth 
King and David Todd, recorded by Elizabeth 
King on January 23, 2004.
CHAPTER 9
The Monk Performs
(no notes)
CHAPTER 7
A Monk’s Opinion
1.	
García-Diego, Juanelo Turriano; 
see chap. 4, n. 4, above.
2.	
García-Diego, Juanelo Turriano, 112–13, 
115–16.
3.	
The Clockwork Universe: German Clocks 
and Automata, 1550–1650, exh. cat., ed. Klaus 
Maurice and Otto Mayr (New York: Neale 
Watson Academic Publications, 1980), 170. 
Published simultaneously in German: Die Welt 
als Uhr: Deutsche Uhren und Automaten, 
1550–1650 (Munich: Deutscher Kunstverlag 
and Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, 1980). The 
entry on the monk, written by Maurice and 
Mayr, appends references as follows: for the 
Spanish ascription, “Ambrosio de Morales, 
Las antigüedades de las ciudades de España, 
Alcalá, 1575, pp. 91 ff.” For Jakob Bulmann in 
Nuremberg, “Neudorfer, 1547; cf. Maurice I, p. 
58” (referring to Maurice’s book Die deutsche 
Räderuhr [Munich, 1976], vol. 1). For Emperor 
Rudolph II, “cf. Nos. 2193 and 2194 in the ‘Kun­
stkammerinventar Kaiser Rudolf II, 1607–1711,’ 
by Rotraud Bauer and Herbert Haupt, in 
Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen 
in Wien, 1976, 72:113.” (The dates of the inven­
tory are a misprint; they should be 1607–1611.) 
4.	
Servus Gieben, email to Elizabeth King, 
July 29, 1999.
5.	
A review of the works of Juanelo Turriano 
is Giuseppe Brusa, “Giovanni Torriano e i suoi 
favolosi orologi microcosmici,” La voce di 
hora: Pubblicazione dell’Associazione Italiana 
Cultori di Orologeria Antica, no. 15 (December 
2003): 3–22. Brusa argues that there is one 
identifiable extant piece, an armillary sphere 
in Milan, in the Pinacoteca Ambrosiana, signed 
and dated Janellus, 1540, Mediolani (7–8).
6.	
Morales, Las antigüedades, 93v.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

207
NOTES
3.	
In 2013, to examine the monk’s paint, 
Elizabeth organized an informal meeting of 
curators and conservators from the National 
Gallery of Art (nga) in Washington, DC, and 
the Smithsonian’s National Museum of Amer­
ican History (nmah), where the monk is kept. 
Carlene Stephens, curator, Division of Work 
and Industry, nmah, and Beth Richwine, senior 
objects conservator, gave kind permission for 
the meeting and welcomed us to the nmah 
conservation lab on August 20. From the 
nga, Daphne Barbour and Judy Ozone, senior 
objects curators; Alison Luchs, curator of Early 
European Sculpture; and Mary Levkoff, head, 
Sculpture and Decorative Arts, joined us. 
Fredrika Jacobs, Renaissance cultural historian 
and professor, Virginia Commonwealth Uni­
versity, traveled to Washington with Elizabeth 
and David, who brought with them a portfolio 
of photographs of the seven kindred automata 
for comparison. In preparation, Beth Richwine 
performed an X-ray fluorescence (xrf) analysis 
on the paint surfaces of the monk’s head, hands, 
and feet. Her readings showed the presence 
of lead, arsenic, mercury, and iron, but she 
would like to see the paint analyzed with more 
sophisticated equipment, including a scanning 
electron microscope, for more definitive data 
on medium, ingredients, and date, by paint layer. 
She detected the presence of titanium and 
zinc and suggested these could indicate recent 
paint touch-up. Daphne Barbour and Judy 
Ozone identified at least three layers of paint 
on the monk’s head and explained the horizon­
tal paint cracking as characteristic of the paint 
medium itself, not the result of wood grain 
movement. They did not say if the layers were 
applied separately over time or were applied 
in sequence when the figure was first painted. 
Richwine said her paint analysis showed ul­
traviolet light markers on the paint of the feet 
that were different from those on the paint of 
the rest of the figure but said that by itself this 
does not offer firm information on ingredients 
or date. We noted that the paint breaks on the 
feet are different from those on the head and 
arms. The feet also show chips and remnants 
of a prior layer of some kind under the paint. 
All members of the nga group commented 
on the small size of the sandaled feet for the 
overall proportion of the monk. Photographs 
of the other automata show similarly small 
feet. Elizabeth pointed out that if the feet are 
not original, their role in helping to identify the 
monk as a Franciscan icon—i.e., the sandals—is 
less certain. However, all agreed that the 
CHAPTER 11
Monks, Saints, and Musical Ladies
1.	
See the exhibition and catalog text in 
chapter 7, above. See also Otto Mayr, “An 
Offering of Renaissance Clockwork Master­
pieces,” Smithsonian 11, no. 9 (December 
1980): 44–53. Otto Mayr was then curator, 
Division of Mechanisms, in the Smithsonian’s 
National Museum of History and Technology. 
Appointed in 1970 curator of Mechanical and 
Civil Engineering in the Division of Engineering 
and Industry at the museum, he went on to 
be chair of the Department of Science and 
Technology (1976–77) and then acting director 
of the museum (1978–79). The Clockwork 
Universe was among the last large exhibitions 
planned for the Smithsonian’s National Museum 
of History and Technology before the name 
change that would alter its mission, in 1980, 
to the National Museum of American History 
(see chap. 17). In 1982 Mayr took the reins as 
general director of the Deutsches Museum in 
Munich and served until his retirement in 1992. 
His books, including his 1986 volume, Authority, 
Liberty, and Automatic Machinery in Early 
Modern Europe, are widely cited as ground­
breaking studies connecting the history 
of technology to the history of philosophy, 
culture, and political science. Klaus Maurice at 
the time of the exhibition was curator of horol­
ogy and metal crafts at the Bavarian National 
Museum. He would later become director of 
that museum and ultimately secretary general 
of the Cultural Foundation of the German 
States, Berlin. He trained as a clockmaker, then 
a historian of clocks; his two-volume opus, Die 
deutsche Räderuhr: Zur Kunst und Technik 
des mechanischen Zeitmessers im deutschen 
Sprachraum [The German wheel clock: On the 
art and technology of the mechanical time­
piece in the German-speaking world] (Munich: 
C. H. Beck, 1976), is one of the most respected 
works in the field of horological scholarship. 
2.	
Adelheid von Herz, “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts” (master’s thesis, University of 
Hamburg, 1990).
of the spring at that point. The groove would 
then be cut and tested for balance, and, when 
perfect, the spring would be unwound another 
quarter turn for the next cut. And so on, until 
the spring reached its not quite spent release, 
and the fusee’s spiral groove was mapped 
out and completed. The clockmaker plied his 
chisel with caution, bit by bit, for if the groove 
was cut too deeply, destroying the balance, 
he had to start over with a new blank. Every 
spring thus had its dedicated fusee—and a no 
less dedicated clockmaker to make it.
5.	
The clock- and watchmaking trades are 
replete with onomatopoeic words, which 
helped craftspeople identify mechanical 
assemblies with names that imitate their 
functions.
6.	
We use the term “gear train” here, rather 
than the clockmaker’s preferred term “wheel 
train,” to avoid any confusion with the monk’s 
perambulation wheels. 
7.	
We have noted that the cross that arrived 
with the monk at the time of its acquisition is 
not original. This small cross, which we see in 
the monk’s hand in FIGURE I.1, does not rise the 
full distance to the monk’s lips for the kiss. The 
original cross would have been taller, for there 
is no sign that the clockwork mechanism is at 
fault. Servus Gieben, in his letter proposing 
that the automaton represents Diego de Alcalá, 
suggested that the monk carried a cross and a 
rosary, rather than a cross of the rosary, for a 
closer match with Diego’s attributes (see chap. 
6, above). This is a worthwhile distinction, as it 
would predict a larger and taller original cross, 
calculated for the arc of the kiss.
8.	
A case in point: When the monk arrived 
at the Smithsonian, the perambulation wheels 
were reversed. The serrated wheel was thus 
lifted, rather than the smooth wheel, for the 
walking turn, defeating the purpose of the 
serrated wheel in traction on the tabletop. 
David reassembled them correctly. But 
photographs taken before and after his work 
reveal the error, as does the original film of the 
monk in action. FIGURE 10.8B shows the error. 
David points out that each wheel mounts to 
the perambulation arbor with differently sized 
square mounts; hence the entire arbor would 
have been improperly assembled sometime in 
the monk’s past.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

208
NOTES
CHAPTER 13
A Saint in Budapest
1.	
Katalin Soós and Jenö Rácz, “Eine 
Automatenfigur in Budapest,” Zeitschrift für 
Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 4 (1990): 
207–14; for the melody, 209–10. Soós and Rácz 
consulted the music historian Ilona Ferenczy, 
M.T.A. Zenetudományi Intézete (Institute of 
Music Sciences).
2.	
Unable to see this automaton in the flesh, 
the authors are grateful to Anna Ecsedy, histo­
rian and curator of the Metalwork Collection 
at the Iparművészeti Múzeum, for detailed 
correspondence in 2021, clarifying the saint’s 
precise performance sequence. Equal thanks 
to Ágnes Prékopa, former curator at the 
Iparművészeti Múzeum, for her generous 
responses in 1999 and 2000 to Elizabeth’s 
many questions. Hanoch Ben-Yami, philosophy 
professor at Central European University in 
Budapest (and Vienna), has generously shared 
with us over time his observations of the saint 
in relation to his own interest in the history of 
artificial life. 
3.	
Soós and Rácz, “Eine Automatenfigur 
in Budapest,” 209 and n. 5. Also cited is 
the cittern player in the Kunsthistorisches 
Museum, together with references to Juanelo 
Turriano in Bassermann-Jordan (Alte Uhren 
und ihre Meister) as well as Chapuis and Gélis 
(Le monde des automates), all of which, tanta­
lizingly, would have been available to curators 
in the 1920s, soon after the automaton itself 
arrived in the museum’s collection. García-Di­
ego (Juanelo Turriano, 109–10) saw photos of 
the saint around 1981, and Soós and Rácz cite 
his book to support a probable attribution to 
Juanelo, apparently unaware that he changed 
his opinion in his second book. Until the 
museum closed in 2017 for major renovation, 
the saint was on display together with photo­
graphs of its restoration and a video showing 
it in motion. 
4.	
Soós and Rácz, “Eine Automatenfigur in 
Budapest,” 213.
5.	
Soós and Rácz, “Eine Automatenfigur in 
Budapest,” 214.
3.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts,” 65.
4.	
Friess, “Restaurierung einer 
Automatenfigur,” 45.
5.	
The chemistry and technical method­
ology of virtuoso polychromy is detailed by 
Michael Baxandall, The Limewood Sculptors 
of Renaissance Germany (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1980), 41–48. For a close 
description of Spanish polychromy, see Daph­
ne Barbour and Judy Ozone, “The Making of 
a Seventeenth-Century Spanish Polychrome 
Sculpture,” in The Sacred Made Real: Spanish 
Painting and Sculpture 1600–1700, ed. Xavier 
Bray (London: National Gallery, 2009), 58–71, 
the catalog for an exhibition that opened in 
London in 2009 and traveled the next year 
to the National Gallery of Art in Washington, 
DC. Barbour and Ozone are senior objects 
conservators at the National Gallery of Art. In 
2013 we were extremely fortunate that both 
responded to our invitation to step across 
town to view the monk, together with curators 
and conservators from the Smithsonian and 
the National Gallery. See chap. 11, n.3, above. 
6.	
Wolfram Koeppe, Marina Kellen French 
Curator in the Department of European Sculp­
ture and Decorative Arts at the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art in New York, has commented 
that the painted pattern is similar in its floral 
design to the Italian velvet brocades widely 
produced and exported throughout Europe 
in this period. He provided Elizabeth with this 
reference, describing such brocades: Wolfram 
Koeppe, Die Lemmers-Danforth-Sammlung 
Wetzlar: Europäische Wohnkultur aus 
Renaissance und Barock (Heidelberg: Edition 
Braus, 1992), 283.
7.	
Raphael Beuing’s full title at the Bavarian 
National Museum in Munich is curator for 
Arms and Armour, Timepieces, Scientific 
Instruments and Base Metal. 
8.	
When Elizabeth could finally view the 
automaton in person, she saw that the new 
fingers on the right hand were given a differ­
ent shade of paint, to mark them as new. But 
how were decisions made for replacing the left 
hand, its pose, and the sandaled feet? What 
kind of wood was used, who did the carving, 
and who did the painting?
carved precision and anatomical subtlety of 
the feet matches that of the hands and head. 
Barbour and Ozone pointed to the transverse 
seam between front and back of the head, vis­
ible beneath the paint and said that when the 
head was made the wood was sawed in half 
for hollowing out the inside of the head rather 
than split with a chisel (the split with a chisel 
would have been easier to hide under paint). 
Mary Levkoff commented on the similar stylis­
tic character of the Smithsonian monk and the 
Milan “matron” automaton. She also brought 
up the work of Johan Gregor van der Schardt 
in Nuremberg as an example of a sculptor who 
worked in polychromy and often in small scale 
(see FIG. 19.1 and chap. 19, note 5, below). Dis­
cussion moved to the subject of wood itself. 
Without microanalysis, the identity of the spe­
cies must remain unknown for now. Levkoff’s 
strongest message for our meeting was to 
urge a wood analysis of head, hand, foot, and 
bell-shaped body case. Barbour, Ozone, and 
Richwine asserted that contemporary analysis 
can now be done on extremely tiny specks of 
wood. (In 2019 Smithsonian nmah staff again 
examined the monk’s wood, stating it is likely 
poplar but possibly beech. Only microanalysis 
will confirm the species.)
CHAPTER 12
A Second Monk?
1.	
Peter Friess, “Restaurierung einer 
Automatenfigur,” Alte Uhren und moderne 
Zeitmessung 4 (August 1988): 40–50. The 
automaton made its first appearance in 
London in 1983 at auction at Christies. The 
London Financial Times published an article 
on it on October 15, 1983. The Deutsches 
Museum purchased it in 1985. David had met 
Peter Friess in 1980 when the two of them 
helped install the exhibition The Clockwork 
Universe at the Bavarian National Museum in 
Munich, where Friess then worked as a young 
conservator before taking a position at the 
Deutsches Museum. They continued a profes­
sional friendship for many years.
2.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts,” 69, recorded the wrist 
motions as even more rapid at 61 
(right hand) and about 33 (left).
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

209
NOTES
7.	
Conservatoire national des arts et 
métiers, catalogue du musée, section Z, 
automates et mécanismes à musique (Paris, 
1960), 53–56. This edition of the catalog gives 
an expanded and detailed description of the 
figure and an excellent schematic diagram of 
the mechanism (see FIG. 14.3C here).
8.	
F. J. Britten, Britten’s Old Clocks and 
Watches and Their Makers, 9th ed., ed. G. H. 
Baillie, Courtenay Ilbert, and Cecil Clutton 
(London: Bloomsbury Books, 1989), 454.
9.	
Alfred Chapuis and Edmond Droz, Les 
automates, figures artificielles d’hommes et 
d’animaux: Histoire et technique (Neuchâtel: 
Éditions du Griffon, 1949), 325–26. This vol­
ume was translated into English as Automata: 
A Historical and Technological Study, trans. 
Alec Reid (Neuchâtel: Éditions du Griffon, 1958), 
where the Gautier figure appears on 317–18. 
In both editions, the caption under the photo 
is “Poupée marchant, 1764 (Coll. Charliat, 
Paris)” but the text dates the figure to 1751. 
The authors note that the figure was signed 
by P. Gautier. Georges Charliat was a Parisian 
antiquarian and restorer of automata, whose 
workshop on Rue Miromesnil opened in 1937. 
See John Kobler, “The Strange World of 
M. Charliat,” Saturday Evening Post, March 
26, 1955. We have been unable to find any 
further reference to this figure. 
10.	 As of 2022, the database for the 
Joueuse de mandolin can be found at 
https://collections.arts-et-metiers.net
/?queries=query=search=N°%20d’inventaire
=[06152-0001-]&showtype=record
11.	
See Adelheid Voskuhl, Androids of the 
Enlightenment: Mechanics, Artisans, and 
Cultures of the Self (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2013), for a groundbreaking 
study of two of the greatest automata of the 
Enlightenment, one of which is “La joueuse de 
tympanon.”
12.	 With permission from the museum, 
we sought another opinion and showed the 
microphotographs to Jeremie Ryder, Guinness 
Collection Conservator of the Morris Museum 
in New Jersey. He found signs that could 
confirm either method. Final hand-filing of 
engine-cut teeth can introduce small irregular­
ities of its own.
3.	
Mechanisches Spiel und Theater, fig. 69.
4.	
Roswitha Schwarz, head of furniture con­
servation at the bnm, performed the analysis. 
Perhaps this wood species is the widespread 
European Sorbus aucuparia, once believed 
to have magical properties. The upper body 
and arms of the figure appear to be made of 
a different species of wood, and all present 
agreed that most of this wood seems also to 
be original. The wooden hands, under paint, 
are of course more mysterious. Each part 
would want its own microanalysis, something 
to be desired for all the automata.
5.	
Conservatoire national des arts et 
métiers, catalogue des collections, septième 
édition (Paris: Dunod, 1882), 99: “Joueuse de 
mandoline. Automate attribué à Vaucanson, 
réparé par Robert-Houdin en 1859.” (On 
Vaucanson and the conservatoire, see our 
introd. n. 2.) Robert-Houdin (1805–1871) was 
a clockmaker who later became famous as a 
stage magician and illusionist. (The American 
magician Eric Weiss so admired Robert-
Houdin that he took the stage name 
“Houdini.”) In fact, automata often played 
roles in magic performances in this period. 
The late magician Ricky Jay assembled a 
collection of such automata and performed 
with them. A biographical profile on Jay by 
Mark Singer mentions an automaton by 
Robert-Houdin: “Two automatons stood on 
the table. One, called ‘The Singing Lesson,’ 
was the creation of Jean-Eugène Robert-
Houdin, the nineteenth-century watchmaker-
turned-conjurer, who is considered the father 
of modern magic. The other was a Chinese 
cups-and-balls conjurer built by Robert-
Houdin’s father-in-law, Jacques Houdin.” 
(“Secrets of the Magus,” New Yorker, April 5, 
1993, 54–73).
6.	
“Cependant la facture très simple et 
la technique nettement XIXe siècle du mé­
canisme prouvent qu’il n’en est rien” (However, 
the very simple workmanship and the clearly 
nineteenth-century mechanism proves she 
could not be [Vaucanson’s] work). Chapuis 
and Gélis, Le monde des automates, 2:218–19. 
Elizabeth’s translation from the French for all 
quotes from Chapuis and Gélis. 
6.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. Jahrhun­
derts,” 120. Von Herz completed her thesis in 
the same year that Soós and Rácz published 
their report, hence it is not certain if she saw 
the saint before or after the full restoration 
was completed. Her bibliography lists the 
restoration report but as “unpublished.” The 
quotations from von Herz throughout this 
book were translated for us by Henning Bauer.
7.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts,” 120.
8.	
See appendix, “Table of 
Comparisons,” for sources.
9.	
For the saint with glockenspiel, see 
http://www.kfs.oeaw.ac.at/publications/
1999_deutsch_remote_access_and_transfer
_of_audio_recordings/dli/mech/turriano.htm. 
10.	 Correspondence from Helmut Kowar to 
Elizabeth King, March 19, 2021.
11.	
Soós and Rácz, “Eine Automatenfigur 
in Budapest,” 211, for pinion leaf count. This 
strengthens the clockwork connection 
between the two automata if in a much hidden 
way. The Deutsches Museum automaton has a 
reasonable six-leaf fly pinion.
CHAPTER 14
Three Sister Musicians
1.	
The seller was the Zurich antiquities 
dealer Edgar Mannheimer, from whom the 
monk too was purchased. For more about 
Edgar Mannheimer, see the obituary by 
Sebastian Whitestone in The Independent, 
London, Wednesday, January 12, 1994, 
https://www.independent.co.uk/news
/people/obituary-edgar-mannheimer
-1399413.html.
2.	
The automaton was labeled eighteenth-
century Italian in the exhibition catalog, Mecha­
nisches Spiel und Theater, Puppentheatersam­
mlung im Münchner Stadtmuseum, Munich, 
July 4–October 15, 1972, fig. 69, cat. no. 242. 
The catalog cites Karl Gröber, Kinderspielzeug 
aus alter Zeit: Eine Geschichte des Spielzeugs 
(Berlin: Deutscher Kunstverlag, 1928). The 
automaton’s date was moved to 1550 by Peter 
Friess in 1988 and changed shortly thereafter 
to ca. 1600.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

210
NOTES
7.	
Fritz Saxl, “Costumes and Festivals of 
Milanese Society under Spanish Rule,” in 
Proceedings of the British Academy 23 
(London, 1937), 418.
8.	
Saxl, “Costumes and Festivals,” 418–19.
9.	
The Kunsthistorisches Museum now 
keeps a digital copy of the film. The original 
film remains in the Warburg archives. 
10.	 Katalog der Sammlung für Plastik und 
Kunstgewerbe, vol. 2, Renaissance (Vienna: 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, 1966), 118–19:
Cister-Spielerin...der Nürnberger Uhrmacher 
Jakob Bullmann (vor 1535) hat anscheinend 
solche angefertigt; eine andere derartige 
Puppe, das Werk des kaiserlichen Hofuhr­
machers Christoph Margraf, befand sich in 
der Kunstkammer Kaiser Rudolfs II. in Prag 
(entstanden um 1600).
[Cittern Player...the Nuremberg clockmaker 
Jakob Bullmann (before 1535) evidently made 
them; another such doll, the work of the im­
perial court clockmaker Christof Margraf, was 
located in the Kunstkammer of Emperor Rudolf 
II in Prague (made around 1600).]
Erwin Neumann, director of the khm 
Collection of Sculpture and Decorative Arts 
from 1966 to 1975, is credited with writing the 
catalog entries that include no. 391, the Cister-
Spielerin. The cittern player was shown in a 
gala exhibition in 1964 in Versailles and is pic­
tured and described in the exhibition catalog, 
Vienne à Versailles: Les grandes collections 
autrichiennes au Château de Versailles (Paris: 
Ministère d’État Affaires culturelles, 1964), 
45 and cat. no. 55. Here too Erwin Neumann 
is named among catalog authors, and it is 
reasonable to assume he was again responsi­
ble for the description of the automaton. This 
catalog marks the first time Rudolf’s cabinet is 
mentioned in relation to the cittern player, and 
Neumann’s role in bringing it forward is key.
5.	
Bassermann-Jordan’s work was revisited 
in 1966 by the historian Hans von Bertele (1903–
1984), who furthered the argument in favor of 
Juanelo as maker of the automaton: “Zur Prove­
nienz des Mandoline spielenden Automaten im 
Kunsthistorischen Museum in Wien,” Schriften 
des Historisch-Wissenschaftlichen Fachkreises 
“Freunde alter Uhren” in der Deutschen Ge­
sellschaft für Chronometrie 6 (1966): 6–9. The 
historian Silvio Bedini mentioned the Vienna 
automaton in 1966 but stayed within the realm 
of surmise: “An automaton of a lady which 
dances and plays a lute, in the collection of 
the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna, is 
believed to have been the creation of Torriano. If 
so, it is the only example of his automata which 
has survived.” Bedini and Maddison, Mechanical 
Universe, 56–58. See also Bedini’s “The Role 
of Automata in the History of Technology,” 
Technology and Culture 5, no. 1 (1964): 32. A 
decade later, the monk arrived at the Smith­
sonian’s Museum of History and Technology, 
where Bedini was then acting director. Though 
he never wrote about the monk himself, Bedini 
took a lively interest in our research and gave 
us priceless help and advice.
6.	
L. Planiscig and E. Kris, eds., Katalog der 
Sammlungen für Plastik und Kunstgewerbe 
(Vienna: Kunsthistorisches Museum, 1935), 
1:45. The entry in full:
Giovanni della Torre (Juanelo Torreano, gest. 
1580 Toledo): Automatenpuppe aus Holz, in 
alter Fassung und Kleidung; die Figur legt nach 
einmaligem Aufziehen eine Strecke von etwa 
20 m zurück, bewegt Kopf und Füsse und 
schlägt mit den Händen die Laute; angefertigt 
angeblich für Karl V. (Legat K. v. Wischnitz-
Naszod, 1934.)
[Automaton made of wood, clothed in the older 
style; travels a distance of approximately 20 
meters in a single winding, moving head and 
feet, hands playing the lute; supposedly made 
for Charles V. (Gift of K. v. Wischnitz-Naszod, 
1934.)]
It is intriguing to note, according to this entry, 
that the lady could muster a 20-meter straight 
run at only one full wind of the mainspring. 
The Smithsonian monk, were he to walk in a 
straight line, would only cover a distance of 
just under 14 feet—a little over 4 meters—
on a single wind.
CHAPTER 15
The Vienna Cittern Player
1.	
Morales’s description is quoted in 
chapter 4, above.
2.	
Elizabeth learned only recently that the 
fusee in the cittern player is made, not of wood, 
but of metal, of uncertain type (but apparently 
not brass, as in the mandolin player in Paris). 
This was confirmed in an exchange with Paulus 
Rainer, curator of the Kunstkammer at the 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, who kindly sent us 
snapshots of the mechanism in late 2021.
3.	
Ernst von Bassermann-Jordan, “Eine 
Automatenfigur aus der Zeit Kaiser Karls V 
[An automaton from the era of Emperor 
Charles V],” in his Alte Uhren und ihre Meister, 
67. Thanks to Henning Bauer for translation 
from the German. Bassermann-Jordan and 
later authors refer to the musical instrument 
as a lute (Laute) or a mandolin. Given the 
variety of terms across language and time for 
a stringed instrument held in the hands and 
plucked or strummed, we ourselves had 
assumed some interchangeability among the 
words cittern, cister, zither, mandolin, and 
lute in the period descriptions of instruments 
played by automata (the zither is an instru-
ment that later gave its name to the guitar). In 
response to questions from Elizabeth, Paulus 
Rainer at the Kunsthistorisches Museum, 
wrote: “Our lady plays a cittern, not a lute. 
Lutes have a round back, while citterns have a 
flat back” (email to Elizabeth King, November 
9, 2021).
4.	
Chapuis and Gélis, Le monde des 
automates, 2:215–17.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

211
NOTES
CHAPTER 17
The Category Challenge
1.	
See Carlene E. Stephens, “From Little Ma­
chines to Big Themes: Thinking about Clocks, 
Watches and Time at the National Museum 
of American History,” Material Culture Review 
52 (Fall 2000), https://journals.lib.unb.ca/index
.php/MCR/article/view/17867. And see 
Carlene Stephens, On Time: How America Has 
Learned to Live by the Clock (Washington, DC: 
Smithsonian Institution, 2002).
2.	
At purchase the automaton was added 
to the Deutsches Museum’s Department of 
Mathematical Instruments, Calculators, and 
Microcomputers, where it was considered the 
earliest surviving example of a programmable 
control mechanism (Friess, “Restaurierung 
einer Automatenfigur,” 41).
3.	
Chapuis and Gélis, Le monde des 
automates, chap. 21, “Les constructeurs 
d’androïdes,” 2:181. For a history of the word 
itself, and its widening use in the language of 
automata, see Jessica Riskin’s masterful book, 
The Restless Clock: A History of the Centuries-
Long Argument over What Makes Living 
Things Tick (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2016), “The First Androids,” 115 ff.
4.	
Chapuis and Gélis, Le monde des 
automates, 2:218.
5.	
Chapuis and Gélis illustrate these in detail 
in chapters on writing, drawing, and music- 
playing androids: Le monde des automates, 
2:225–89. Two of the great Enlightenment 
android musicians—the harpsichord player by 
the Jaquet-Droz family and the dulcimer player 
by Abraham and David Roentgen and Peter 
Kinzing—receive close treatment in Adelheid 
Voskuhl’s Androids in the Enlightenment. The 
dulcimer player is kept in the Paris Conser­
vatoire national des arts et métiers, as we 
mention in chap. 14 n. 11, above. See also Simon 
Schaffer, “Enlightened Automata,” in The Sci­
ences in Enlightened Europe, ed. William Clark, 
Jan Golinski, and Simon Schaffer (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1999), 126–65. 
Settala, Milanese nobleman], translated from 
the Latin by Pietro Francesco Scarabelli 
(Tortona, 1666), 33. The citation in full: 
Istromento Musicale ch’in tre ombreggiamenti 
à foglie distinto, suona: danzano in un di effi 
cinque figure: in un altro sedendo à mensa alcuni 
convivanti mostrano di bere con atteggiamento 
sì proprio, che se la finta loro sete non estinguono, 
quella almeno de’riguardanti curiosamente ecci­
tano: nel terzo pompeggia nobil Matrona in atto 
di suonare un Timpano; dirimpetto à cui vago 
garzone s’osserua con ceteretta in mano per 
applaudere anch’esso à si imaginaria melodia.
[Musical instrument that plays in three distinct 
parts: in one, five figures dance; in another, sev­
eral couples sitting at a dining table display the 
act of drinking, each with their own expression, 
who, if unable to satisfy their thirst, at least 
curiously excite it in the viewers; in the third, 
a noble matron thumps her hand in the act of 
playing a tambourine; facing her, a charming 
boy observes her with a ceteretta (a musical in­
strument, possibly a cetra or a cittern) in hand 
to cheer on the imaginary melody.] (Translation 
from the Italian for us by Evelyn Lincoln.)
For Manfredo Settala and his collection, see 
Paula Findlen, Possessing Nature: Museums, 
Collecting, and Scientific Culture in Early 
Modern Italy (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1994); Terzago, 42, 220; Set­
tala, 33–34, 325–34 passim. See also Antonio 
Aimi, Vincenzo de Michele, and Alessandro 
Morandotti, “Towards a History of Collecting 
in Milan in the Late Renaissance and Baroque 
Periods,” in The Origins of Museums: The 
Cabinet of Curiosities in Sixteenth- and 
Seventeenth-Century Europe, ed. Oliver 
Impey and Arthur MacGregor (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1985), 24–28.
6.	
While working in Pippa’s shop, Gregato 
helped Pippa build a fully working reconstruc­
tion of the famous fourteenth-century astrari­
um of Giovanni de’ Dondi of Padua. See https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=gNwjWufXthA. 
For the historical connection between this 
astrarium and Juanelo Turriano, see our chap. 4 
and its n. 6 and FIG. 20.1; and Bedini and Maddi­
son, “Mechanical Universe.” See also Zanetti, 
Janello Torriani and the Spanish Empire, “The 
Microcosm,” 270–96.
7.	
See chapter 4, above.
8.	
For a video of the noble matron, 
see https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=jAtkSqRH6-4.
CHAPTER 16
A Late Arrival from Milan
1.	
Giuseppe Brusa, ed., La misura del tempo: 
L’antico splendore dell’orologeria italiana dal 
XV al XVIII secolo, exh. cat. (Trento: Castello 
del Buonconsiglio, monumenti e collezione 
provinciali, 2005). Bedini’s essay, “L’orologio 
notturno: Un’invenzione italiana del XVII sec­
olo,” addresses a number of celebrated clocks 
David Todd conserved for Bedini, e.g., FIG. 3, p. 
205, a 1657–59 night clock attributed to Pier 
Tommaso and Giuseppe Campani. We are 
indebted to Bedini for bringing this show and 
this automaton to our attention. The entry on 
the automaton is on pp. 451–53. 
2.	
Cristiano Zanetti, ed., Janello Torriani: 
Genio del Rinascimento, exh. cat. (Cremona: 
Museo del Violino, 2016). For the automaton, 
see pp. 137–40, 151, 268. 
3.	
Gregato, in Zanetti, Janello Torriani: Genio 
del Rinascimento, 268: “Si tratta dell’unico 
esemplare di automa tardo-rinascimentale che 
corrisponda nei movimenti e nel sembiante 
all’unico attribuito a Janello Torriani dalle fonti 
a lui contemporanee (Ambrosio de Morales, 
1575).”
4.	
Gregato, in Zanetti, Janello Torriani: 
Genio del Rinascimento, 268:
Più volte citato nell’inventario del Museo 
Settaliano (Terzago, p. 33) come nobil matrona 
in atto di suonare il timpano, l’automa vi é 
descritto come facente parte di una scena 
allargata, posata su un vassoio assieme ad un 
altro automa che plaude all’esibizione musicale 
del nostro.
[Mentioned several times in the inventory of 
the Museo Settaliano (Terzago, p. 33) as noble 
matron in the act of playing a tambourine, 
the automaton is described as being part of 
a larger scene, placed on a tray together with 
another automaton that applauds the musical 
performance.] 
Similar text also in Brusa, La misura del 
tempo, 451.
5.	
Paolo Maria Terzago, Museo, ò Galeria, 
adunata dal sapere e dallo studio del signor 
canonico Manfredo Settala nobile milanese 
[Museum, or Gallery, gathered from the wis­
dom and study collection of Canon Manfredo 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

212
NOTES
12.	 Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. Jahrhun­
derts,” 19, 30, 32, 46, 139–41.
13.	 Klaus Maurice, in Annette Beyer, Faszinie­
rende Welt der Automaten: Uhren, Puppen, 
Spielereien (Munich: Callwey Verlag, 1983), 19, 
36. He adds, the “automaton, probably from 
Augsburg, is not signed.” (Both Maurice and 
von Herz refer to the instrument as a lute. The 
theorbo is a lute-like stringed instrument.)
14.	 Paulus Rainer, in Making Marvels: Sci­
ence and Splendor at the Courts of Europe, 
exh. cat., ed. Wolfram Koeppe (New York: 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2019) 234–35: 
“These cups were designed in such a way as 
to not be immediately recognized as drinking 
vessels, or to hide the fact that drinking from 
them required great skill, as with so-called 
maiden cups. In virtually all such drinking 
games it was required that one completely 
empty the vessel in one gulp. In Dresden the 
‘fingernail test’ was adopted as proof. After 
draining the cup, the drinker was required to 
rest the vessel upside down on his thumbnail. 
If more ran out than could fit on his nail, he 
was obliged to drink again.”
15.	 Koeppe, Making Marvels, 240–41, 251.
16.	 A recent study of the relations between 
jest, drinking, and the history of robotics is An­
gela Vanhaelen’s “Strange Things for Strang­
ers: Transcultural Automata in Early Modern 
Amsterdam,” Art Bulletin 103, no. 3 (Septem­
ber 2021): 42–68. By far the most elaborate 
and aggressive precedent of automata testing 
visitors at court was the fabulous grottoes 
and fountains of the château of Hesdin, in Ar­
tois, resplendent under the Dukes of Burgundy 
and particularly Philip the Good (1396–1467). 
Famed across Europe were the hydraulic and 
mechanical theaters at Hesdin, beguiling 
and entrapping visitors in every conceivable 
manner of “hospitable abuse,” as Jessica 
Riskin has described it in The Restless Clock, 
27. Not unrelated to the automata of jest in 
the Habsburg courts, the machines at Hesdin 
were more interactive and architectural. E. R. 
Truitt writes about them in delicious detail in 
Medieval Robots: Mechanism, Magic, Nature, 
and Art (Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl­
vania Press, 2015), 122–37, and concludes, 
“The surprise, terror, dismay, or delight of the 
guests in the gallery were part of the specta­
cle for those who were more knowledgeable 
10.	 “Automaton in the Form of a Ship,” 1585, 
Hans Schlottheim, khm inv. no. kk 874: https://
www.khm.at/de/object/1b2cf3f904/.
11.	
A bellicose inscription in German runs 
around the hull’s perimeter: “Year 1585. I am 
called the double-headed eagle, well known 
of all Princes and Lords. I sail with power; no 
wind is strong enough to harm me. I tell you, 
navigators, remember this with care that 
you do not bar my way....I will not spare my 
cannons.” See Nadja Zweigler, “La nef de 
Vienne,” in Ces curieux navires: Trois auto­
mates de la Renaissance, ed. Julia Fritsch 
(Paris: Éditions de la Réunion des musées 
nationaux, 1999); and for the inscription on 
Schlottheim’s ship, 43 n. 2. (An English edition 
of this book, which we could not find, is Ships 
of Curiosity: Three Renaissance Automata, 
2001. Our thanks to Ian Greaves who has a 
copy and gave us the translation of the inscrip­
tion.) In the same volume, see J. H. Leopold, 
“La construction des Nefs de Schlottheim,” 
61–73. Invaluable also is Leopold’s “Automata 
and the State of Horology until c. 1650,” in 
Royal Music Machines, ed. J. J. L. Haspels, exh. 
cat. (Zutphen, the Netherlands: Walburg Pers, 
2006), 35–43 (catalog for the 2006 show 
at the Nationaal Museum van Speelklok tot 
Pierement in Utrecht). For a rare tour of the 
clockwork and music of both the ship and the 
Trompeterautomat, see Helmut Kowar, “‘Wir 
machen Musik!’: Trompeterautomat, Schiff 
und Bacchuswagen des Hans Schlotheim,” 
Jahrbuch des Kunsthistorischen Museums 
Wien, 13–14, 118–59. (Thanks to Paulus 
Rainer for bringing this study to our attention; 
we were thrilled to read it, for we had only 
recently learned that none other than Helmut 
Kowar recorded the automaton saint in the 
Iparművészeti Múzeum in Budapest; see 
chap. 13, above.) An overview of Schlottheim 
in Augsburg and the reach of his influence 
is found in Maurice, Die deutsche Räderuhr, 
1:118–22. A recent study of the politics and 
cultural milieu of such resplendent automata 
is Jessica Keating’s Animating Empire: Autom­
ata, the Holy Roman Empire, and the Early 
Modern World (University Park: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 2018).
6.	
Jessica Riskin’s now-classic essay, “The 
Defecating Duck, or, the Ambiguous Origins 
of Artificial Life,” Critical Inquiry 29, no. 4 
(Summer 2003): 599–633. On the photograph 
of the duck in ruins, Riskin writes, “One of a 
mysterious set of photographs discovered 
around 1950 by the curator of the Musée des 
Arts et Métiers in Paris. The photographs were 
in a folder left by his predecessor, labeled 
‘Pictures of Vaucanson’s Duck received from 
Dresden’” (607). On the life and demise of the 
duck, see Gaby Wood, Edison’s Eve: A Magical 
History of the Quest for Mechanical Life (New 
York: Knopf, 2002), 26–40. The definitive his­
tory of the duck is found in Chapuis and Droz, 
Automata: A Historical and Technological 
Study, 233–42.
7.	
Maurice and Mayr, Clockwork Universe, 
286–87. “Trumpeter Automaton,” 1582, Hans 
Schlottheim, khm inv. no. kk 855: =https://
www.khm.at/de/object/b0812f10bd/. 
8.	
Maurice and Mayr, Clockwork Universe, 
278–79, 282–83. Both automata are found in 
the Kunsthistorisches Museum Kunstkammer 
and can be seen in action in videos on the 
museum website. “Clock: Diana on a Centaur,” 
ca. 1602/06, by Augsburg goldsmith Hans 
Jakob Bachmann, inv. no. kk 1166: https://
www.khm.at/de/object/2add3fa4ad/; 
“Automaton, Triumphal Chariot with Minerva,” 
c. 1620, attributed to Achilles Langenbucher, 
inv. no. kk 849: https://www.khm.at/de
/object/a0eef8e424/.
9.	
Lorraine Daston and Katharine Park, in 
Wonders and the Order of Nature 1150–1750 
(New York: Zone, 1998), 90, cite medieval 
texts describing artificial wonders and write, 
“What made a work of art marvelous, as 
characterized in these texts? In the first 
place, many artificial wonders exploited and 
depended for their operation on the magical 
properties of exotic substances that were 
already part of the canon of natural wonders: 
magnetic lodestones or luminescent carbun­
cles, the prophetic caladrius or the mysterious 
dindialos, precious spices or medicinal gums. 
To fabricate artificial wonders required access 
to such products, as well as deep knowledge 
of their natural powers. Thus the writers of 
romance invariably described their makers 
as scholars and magicians rather than as 
artisans.”
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

213
NOTES
27.	 Derek J. de Solla Price, “Automata and 
the Origins of Mechanism and Mechanistic 
Philosophy,” Technology and Culture 5, no. 
1 (1964): 9–23. This famous short essay is 
paired with Silvio Bedini’s essay “The Role of 
Automata in the History of Technology” in the 
same issue of Technology and Culture. Both 
were papers delivered on January 19, 1963, for 
the symposium “Automata and Simulated Life 
as a Central Theme in the History of Science,” 
organized by the William Andrews Clark 
Memorial Library and the Division of Medical 
History, University of California Los Angeles. The 
authors thank none other than Dr. C. Donald 
O’Malley for making the meeting possible. (For 
O’Malley, see our chap. 2 nn. 2, 4, and 5.) Both 
Price and Bedini use the phrase “biological 
automata.” Price: “[astronomical clockwork 
and biological automata] go hand-in-hand and 
are indissolubly wedded in all their subsequent 
developments” (15). Bedini (citing Price): “It is 
consequently not surprising to discover that the 
greatest advances in the development of bio­
logical automata, of astronomical clocks, and 
of the fine mechanisms were probably simulta­
neous in point of time and derivation” (29).
28.	 Chapuis and Gélis, Le monde des auto­
mates, 1:101. For a spirited roundup of the role 
of the Catholic Church in the history of autom­
ata, see the opening chapter, “Machines in the 
Garden,” in Jessica Riskin’s The Restless Clock. 
Merriam Sherwood, in “Magic and Mechanics 
in Medieval Fiction,” Studies in Philology 44, 
no. 4 (October 1947): 567–92, charges that 
we have underestimated the sophistication of 
medieval spectators of mechanical display: “It 
is not surprising, therefore, that statues that 
moved, images that spoke or sang and goblets 
from which the wine mysteriously vanished 
had their counterpart in actual machines of 
the time. It is, further, but reasonable to as­
sume that the operation of such machines was 
familiar to a substantial portion of the people” 
(591–92).
23.	 Mayr, Authority, Liberty, and Automatic 
Machinery, 5, on the escapement: “The verge-
and-foliot escapement was an invention of 
radical originality. The complexity of its func­
tioning and the ingenuity with which it had 
been devised [in the late thirteenth century] 
far surpassed all previous mechanical inven­
tions. Its characteristic feature, the carefully 
tuned dynamic interaction of several matching 
parts, is almost impossible to describe in 
words or to illustrate in a two-dimensional 
picture; to fully comprehend it, one should 
handle a working specimen.” There are now 
good animation diagrams of escapements 
on the internet, starting with Wikipedia, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verge_
escapement; and later developments involving 
the pendulum, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki
/Escapement. Smaller clocks mounted on the 
wall or installed in tall cabinets (“grandfather” 
or tall-case clocks) retained escapement tech­
nology. The spring and fusee, with regulating 
fly, replaced the escapement in later centuries, 
making possible small portable clocks and 
mobile automata.
24.	 On the history of the striking jack, see 
Chapuis and Gélis, Le monde des automates, 
chap. 7, “Les jaquemarts et autres automates 
des grandes horloges,” 1:113–75; Bedini, “The 
Role of Automata,” 29–30 n. 15; Mayr, Author­
ity, Liberty, and Automatic Machinery, 3–8; 
Truitt, Medieval Robots, 145–47, 207 n. 32. 
See also Ernest L. Edwardes, Weight-Driven 
Chamber Clocks of the Middle Ages and 
Renaissance (Altrincham: John Sherratt and 
Son, 1965), 1–69; and Daniel J. Boorstin, The 
Discoverers (New York: Random House, 1983), 
36–46.
25.	 Bedini, “The Role of Automata,” 30.
26.	 Truitt, Medieval Robots, 149–50. As she 
declares, “The construction of massive clocks 
for public display dramatically widened the au­
dience for automata” (144). See also Chapuis 
and Gélis, Le monde des automates, 1:120–27. 
The clock has survived the millennium, with 
major renovations in the sixteenth and nine­
teenth centuries. 
or experienced. Networks of pleasure and 
privilege cohered around knowledge, even 
knowledge of jokes or tricks. Knowing the joke 
signaled inclusion into an elite group. Being 
the butt of the joke signified exclusion from 
the group, but the experience could also initi­
ate courtiers into the elite court, by providing 
them with a way of gaining the knowledge 
that would lead to inclusion. And for courtiers, 
their surprise and humiliation came not only 
from physical pain or social embarrassment, 
but also from something deeper: the uncanny 
feeling of being confronted with something 
(the automata) that they could not anticipate 
and did not understand” (135).
17.	 Koeppe, Making Marvels, 256–57.
18.	 Klaus Maurice, Von Uhren und Automaten, 
das Messen der Zeit [Of clocks and automata, 
the measure of time] (Munich: Prestel, 1968), 
57. 
19.	 Schloss Ambras Innsbruck inv. no. pa 386: 
https://www.khm.at/de/object/33777f11a9/. 
The Ambras Castle collections are administered 
by the Kunsthistorisches Museum: https://
www.schlossambras-innsbruck.at/. Literature 
on the Gondelautomat includes Elisabeth 
Scheicher, Die Kunst- und Wunderkammern 
der Habsburger (Vienna: Molden Edition, 1979), 
99–102; and the exhibition catalog Vienne à Ver­
sailles: Les grandes collections autrichiennes 
au Château de Versailles, 48-49 (this catalog 
mentioned in chap. 15 n. 10, above). According 
to the latter, the automaton still functioned in 
1964.
20.	 See our chap. 12 and n. 6 on the Deutsches 
Museum automaton, which arrived without 
a garment.
21.	 Adelheid Voskuhl offers a probing 
discussion of women musicians in the context 
of automata: Androids of the Enlightenment, 
145–53.
22.	 Truitt, Medieval Robots, 142–45; Mayr, 
Authority, Liberty, and Automatic Machinery, 
3–8. Both offer a history of the water clock, 
Truitt in depth. Mayr writes, “Water clocks 
were thus closely related to the highly devel­
oped ancient technology of automata: the 
steady sequence of hourly indications offered 
itself as a convenient way of programming 
automata performances” (4). See also the 
wonderful essay by Sigrid and Klaus Maurice, 
“Counting the Hours in Community Life of the 
16th and 17th Centuries,” in Maurice and Mayr, 
Clockwork Universe, 144–56. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

214
NOTES
6.	
David Todd, “From the Ground Up: Mak­
ing an Iron Clockwheel,” unpublished essay. 
7.	
Ambrosio de Morales records this, from di­
rect witness. He presents Juanelo demonstrat­
ing its use in his shop, to make the clockwheels 
for his great astrarium for Charles V:
In his imagination he conjured the fabrication 
of a clock showing all the celestial motions, so 
that it should be more than that of Archi­
medes of whom Plutarch writes....It took 
him, as he has told me, twenty full years to 
imagine and comprehend its construction....
and having taken so long to imagine, not more 
than three and a half years to build it with his 
hands. This is much, for the clock contains in all 
one thousand eight hundred wheels, without 
counting many other necessary things made of 
iron and brass. Thus (not counting feast days) 
he had to produce more than three wheels each 
day, apart from all the rest, since the wheels 
are of different sizes, with varying numbers 
and shapes of teeth, in addition to the manner 
by which they are mounted and locked upon 
arbors. Though this diligence is so marvelous, 
what is even more amazing to us is the ingenious 
lathe that he invented, and now we see him 
cut iron wheels with its file to produce the size 
and equality of teeth that may be needed. And 
besides all of this, and considering that he made 
all this with his hands, we must not be surprised 
when Janelo states that no wheel was made 
twice, because it was always made the first time 
exactly as required. And if all that was said be­
fore was not enough, this would be held to be a 
strange wonder. (Las antigüedades, 92v–93, as 
transcribed in the 1792 edition reprint, 337–38; 
see our chap. 4, n. 3. Translation Alain Gelbman, 
with Elizabeth King.)
Morales’s description is cited by Robert S. 
Woodbury, History of the Gear-Cutting 
Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1958), 45, 
as the earliest-known reference to a gear-
cutting machine in horological history (ac­
knowledging Derek J. de Solla Price for the 
reference to Morales). We should note that 
Morales’s count of 1,800 clockwheels, much 
quoted by later writers, is quite impossible. 
José A. García-Diego may be the first to 
have noted this error (Juanelo Turriano, 
63), speculating that Morales meant teeth, 
not wheels. Giuseppe Brusa also noticed the 
from the Middle Ages until the 19th Century,” 
in 2000 Years of Zinc and Brass, ed. P. T. 
Craddock (London: British Museum, 1990). Of 
note here is the difference between brass and 
bronze, the latter with a better-known history 
in the evolution of technology. Bronze is 
copper combined with tin (and other metals), 
whereas brass is copper cooked with zinc. The 
differences include brass’s brighter yellow 
color but also its greater ductility under the 
hammer, hence its behavior was more similar 
to iron in sixteenth-century foundry processes 
for making the components for clocks and 
scientific instruments. Distinctions in name 
between bronze and brass in the sixteenth 
century were not always strict (Turner, An 
Introduction to Brass, 7). For brass vs. bronze 
in the history of clockmaking, see Edwardes, 
Weight-Driven Chamber Clocks of the Middle 
Ages and Renaissance, 23–24.
4.	
Britten, Britten’s Old Clocks and 
Watches, 69: “The early German movements 
[of watches] were all of steel, but by 1575 
steel was giving way to brass, especially for 
the plates which could be cast, whereas steel 
plates had to be laboriously hammered and 
filed to the correct thickness.”
5.	
See chap. 10 for wheel and pinion defi­
nitions and ratios. Why wheels of brass and 
pinions of iron, and not the other way around? 
In clockmaking, in every wheel-pinion pair, the 
pinion is the driven element and the wheel 
the driver. Pinions by definition step up the 
rotational speed of the gear train: for every 
revolution of the wheel, the pinion revolves 
many more times, depending on wheel tooth 
and pinion leaf counts. Hence the pinion, 
turning again and again against one revolu­
tion of the wheel, receives the greater wear 
on each of its leaves, and iron is the stronger 
metal. To this day, standard practice is to make 
clockwheels from brass and pinions from iron 
or steel. The model of the monk with all-steel 
clockwork that David made in 1980 proves 
the point: it was in constant use seven days a 
week for more than fifteen years as an interac­
tive display at the Smithsonian, and after this 
relatively short period, its ferrous wheel teeth 
and pinion leaves exhibited almost the same 
amount of wear as in a comparably sized and 
well-used brass and iron clock mechanism from 
the seventeenth century. Mention of brass-iron 
pairing in the history of clockwork in Edwardes, 
Weight-Driven Chamber Clocks of the Middle 
Ages and Renaissance, 119; and Britten, 
Britten’s Old Clocks and Watches, 33, 69.
CHAPTER 18
The Earliest Free-Walking Androids
1.	
Some of the more complex mobile autom­
ata mentioned in the previous chapter employ 
this innovation as well, to turn and roll in a 
sequence of changing directions. See Michael 
Wagner and Ulrike Weinhold, “Der Diana-
Automat im Grünen Gewölbe: Technologische 
und künstlerische Aspekte einer Augsburger 
Figurenuhr” [The Diana automaton in the 
Green Vault: Technological and artistic as­
pects of an Augsburg figure clock], Jahrbuch 
der Staatlichen Kunstsammlungen Dresden 
(2002–3): 38. Our thanks to Paulus Rainer for 
bringing this excellent study to our attention.
2.	
Britten, Britten’s Old Clocks and Watches, 
29: “In early examples the movement is entirely 
of steel; and brass wheels do not become 
common until the seventeenth century.” An 
ur-edition of this great book is F. J. Britten’s Old 
Clocks and Watches and Their Makers (London: 
B. T. Batsford, 1899), where Britten writes, 
“During the first quarter of the [sixteenth] 
century the frames and wheels were of iron or 
steel; productions of the second quarter having 
brass plates and pillars are occasionally to be 
met with. But brass wheels before the middle 
of the century were quite exceptional” (69). 
3.	
The sixteenth-century Swiss alchemist 
Paracelsus is credited among others for giving 
zinc its name, but its presence in calamine and 
its role in turning copper into brass was not 
understood in Europe until long after brass 
alloys were successfully produced and widely 
used. “It was not until the mid-17th century 
that the chemical structure of calamine was 
properly understood and it was discovered that 
it was the zinc constituent which fused with 
copper to give the alloy its character and colour. 
The production of zinc was established in the 
East well before it was carried on in Europe,” 
writes Eric Turner, in An Introduction to Brass 
(Owings Mills, MD: Stemmer House, 1982), 6. 
The knowledge won by empirical craft practice 
prior to modern chemistry and physics is a 
fascinating history unto itself. Early descrip­
tions of the role of calamine in the production 
of brass in Europe are found in the classic 
works of Theophilus (early twelfth century), 
Biringuccio (b. 1480), and Agricola (1494–1555), 
all available in Dover editions with invaluable 
editors’ commentary and interpretation. 
See also Joan Day, “Brass and Zinc in Europe 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

215
NOTES
Research on women in the clockmaking trades 
has only recently begun: the Antiquarian 
Horological Society in London launched “The 
ahs Women and Horology” project in 2017 
to list women active in the watch- and clock­
making trades in the United Kingdom from the 
seventeenth century on, with plans to expand 
to Europe and the United States in the future; 
see https://www.ahsoc.org/resources
/women-and-horology/. 
3.	
Maurice, Von Uhren und Automaten, 56. 
See also Scheicher, Die Kunst- und Wun­
derkammern der Habsburger, 153, for her 
distinction “between the clockmaker who 
constructed the mechanism and the gold­
smith who gave the casing and the ornaments 
their artistic form.”
4.	
Maurice mentions that many of the 
bronze statuettes in Augsburg figure clocks 
originated in Nuremberg, where they were 
cast in multiples, though the makers of the 
original figures remain unnamed. Of these, 
some, he notes, were patterned after small 
Italian bronzes (Maurice, Die deutsche 
Räderuhr, 1:111–15). Wagner and Weinhold, 
“Der Diana-Automat im Grünen Gewölbe,” 43, 
describing an automaton of Diana on a centaur 
now in Dresden (mentioned in chap. 18 nn. 1 
and 15, above) speculates that the sculptor 
might have been Adriaen de Vries, who prac­
ticed in Augsburg and as imperial sculptor in 
Prague.
5.	
Maurice, Die deutsche Räderuhr, 1:116: 
“Another Nuremberg example of a drinking 
game [figure] was by Barthel Jamnitzer. He 
converted the statuette of an archery Cupid 
by Johan Gregor van der Schardt into a silver 
automaton figurine, probably executed in 1576, 
‘a child with a drawn bow, which moves and 
turns around, from the internal clockwork.’” 
(Maurice cites this quote from Hans Robert 
Weihrauch, “Italienische Bronzen als Vorbilder 
deutscher Goldschmiedekunst [Italian 
bronzes as models of German goldsmith art],” 
in Studien zur Geschichte der europäischen 
Plastik: Festschrift Theodor Müller [Munich, 
1965], 264 n. 5.) Elizabeth spotted this refer­
ence late in our study, and we are now eager to 
learn more about the collaboration between 
Van der Schardt and the Jamnitzer goldsmith 
family. An excellent study in English on the 
work of Johan Gregor van der Schardt is Frits 
Scholten, “Johan Gregor van der Schardt in 
Nuremberg,” in Carvings, Casts & Collectors: 
13.	 George Kubler, The Shape of Time: Re­
marks on the History of Things (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1962), 108.
14.	 Kubler, The Shape of Time, 49. In 
speaking of the appearance and development 
of an innovation, Kubler writes, “The linked 
series of solutions composing a sequence is 
not necessarily restricted to a single craft. On 
the contrary, it is more likely to appear when 
different crafts come into play at the same 
time.”
15.	 The automaton is a Diana and centaur 
with four dogs and a clock, ca. 1606–10, in the 
collection of the Staatliche Kunstsammlungen 
Dresden, inv. no. iv 150, by the same Augsburg 
goldsmith who made a similar version now in 
the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Hans Jakob 
Bachmann. See n. 1, above. Wagner and 
Weinhold, “Der Diana-Automat im Grünen 
Gewölbe,” 39, describe the probe.
CHAPTER 19
Craft Guild or Imperial Court?
1.	
See chap. 11 n. 3, above, for nga con­
servators’ comments on the monk’s head. A 
well-aimed hammer blow on a chisel will split a 
piece of wood along its grain, to be later glued 
back together with barely the sign of a seam: 
this was standard period practice in sculpture 
requiring insertion of glass eyes or represent­
ing the open mouth. In 2006 Constancio del 
Álamo, curator of Sculpture, Archaeology, and 
Textiles, and Marcus Burke, senior curator 
of Paintings, Drawings, and Metalwork, at 
the Hispanic Society of America in New York 
kindly gave Elizabeth a tour of the Society’s 
conservation lab where several large wooden 
figures were under restoration. Those whose 
heads were hollow, requiring the internal 
placement of eyes, revealed the technique. 
Once the two halves had been reassembled 
and glued back together, the seam all but hid­
den, the head would be primed and painted. 
2.	
Gervase Rosser, “Crafts, Guilds and the 
Negotiation of Work in the Medieval Town,” 
Past and Present, no. 154 (February 1997): 
3–31, traces the history, origins, and economic 
conditions of artisanal labor in late medieval 
Europe. The organization of urban craft insti­
tutions, and their connections to religious con­
fraternities and community life, are examined 
from the perspective of individual craftsmen 
and craftswomen in local settings. The roles 
of both men and women are touched on 
throughout the essay, one of its many virtues. 
mistake (“Giovanni Torriano e i suoi favolosi 
orologi microcosmici,” 14). Both authors discuss 
the wheel-cutting engine, García-Diego in detail 
(70–72). Ever eloquent, Morales himself con­
cludes his descriptions of Juanelo’s machines: 
“I’ve spoken of these marvels not because 
I can explain all that they are, but because I 
want to record that these noteworthy things 
were made in our time.”
8.	
Returning to his 1979 conservation notes 
for the all-brass wheel train in the Smithsonian 
lute player, David encountered another memory 
shock. As he himself recorded it even then, the 
train terminates in the very inefficient four-leaf 
pinion for the fly, just like the Smithsonian 
monk and the im saint (see chap. 13, above, and 
its n. 11). With its clockwork made of brass, 
this machine might have been made a half cen­
tury later than the iron-clockwork figures. As 
David exclaimed out loud, “Surely the maker 
had plenty of time to correct the mistakes of 
his forebears!” Then he realized he himself had 
overlooked the wild card. Yet in the Smithso­
nian lute player, the pinion is of iron, and the 
wheel driving it (the third wheel in the gear 
train) is brass, hence the reduction of wear 
between mating gear teeth that had become 
standard practice by then. But the low leaf 
count of this pinion in all three figures is a detail 
that begs understanding.
9.	
Friess, “Restaurierung einer Automaten­
figur,” 48, 50 nn. 4 and 5.
10.	 Baxandall, The Limewood Sculptors, 
27–31.
11.	
Imported ebony in particular required 
certification of its authenticity in Augsburg 
guild regulations beginning in 1625. See Georg 
Himmelheber, “The Clock and Its Base,” in 
Maurice and Mayr, The Clockwork Universe, 
124.
12.	 Murakami Kazuo, Japanese Automata: 
Karakuri Zui; An Eighteenth Century Japanese 
Manual of Automatic Mechanical Devices 
(Osaka: published by the author, 2012), repro-
duces a suite of extraordinary Edo-period 
diagrams first published in 1796 by Hosokawa 
Hanzō Yorinao, which include detailed diagrams 
for the tea-serving doll (102 ff.). This book, with 
Murakami’s translations into English, is itself an 
extraordinary contribution to horological history. 
Chapuis and Droz mentioned the Japanese 
tea-serving doll: Automata: A Historical and 
Technological Study, 318–19. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

216
NOTES
4.	
Johann Gabriel Doppelmayr, Historische 
Nachricht von den nürnbergischen Mathemat­
icis und Künstlern...[Historical account of the 
mathematicians and artists in Nuremberg...] 
(Nuremberg: Peter Conrad Monath, 1730), 285: 
“Er stellte ferner unter der Gestalt Manns- und 
Weibspersonen verschiedene Figuren mit 
Uhrwercken dergestalten beweglich vor, daß 
sie hin und her giengen, und nach der Mensur 
auf der Paucken auch auf der Lauten schlugen.” 
Bassermann-Jordan, Chapuis and Gélis, and 
Bedini all cite Bulmann via Doppelmayr.
5.	
“Dieses confirmiret der ältere Johann 
Neudörffer in einem MSto, von denen zu seiner 
Zeit berühmten Künstlern, da es dazumahl 
was neues und besonderes war. Zu unsern 
Zeiten sind dergleichen Kunst-Machinationes 
nicht mehr so rar, indeme sich bishero viele auf 
solche Wercke von allerhand Vorstellungen 
mit großen Fleiß geleget.” Doppelmayr duly 
adds citations to this footnote, to Kaspar 
Schott, John Wilkins, and Johann Sturm. 
As von Herz did before us, we tracked these 
citations as follows: Kaspar Schott, Magia 
universalis naturae et artis (Würzburg, 1657), 
pt. 1, bk. 1, chap. 6, pp. 24–25; John Wilkins, 
Mathematicall Magick, or, the wonders that 
may be performed by mechanicall geometry 
(London, 1648), bk. 2, chap. 4, pp. 172–78; 
Johann Christoph Sturm, Kurzer Begriff der 
Physic oder Naturlehre (Hamburg, 1713), pt. 
2, sec. 2, chap. 1, pt. 8, pp. 825–26. All three 
authors address automata in brief and general 
terms, without detailing sizes, mechanisms, 
or origins. Schott, however, in a section titled 
“Statua automata” describes what are clearly 
two tabletop walking maidens, one in the 
shape of a silver drinking cup and one a lute or 
cittern player. We return to Schott’s report on 
these sightings in chap. 23.
6.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. Jahrhun­
derts,” 34–36. Add to this the question of 
whether the German phrase “schlugen ihre 
Mensur” means “striking their measure” or, 
in context, “striking their hours.” If the latter, 
the phrasing is more suggestive of a clock, 
with automata as embellishments. (Thanks to 
Henning Bauer for this point.) The Männlein­
laufen (little men walking) is the popular name 
of the famous church clock with automata 
on the facade of the Frauenkirche (Church of 
Our Lady) in Nuremberg. Still operating each 
day at noon, as the clock strikes, seven figures 
emerge from a hidden niche and march three 
CHAPTER 20
Two Masters, Two Cultures: 
Jakob Bulmann and Juanelo Turriano
1.	
Johann Neudörfer, Nachrichten von 
Künstlern und Werkleuten...aus dem Jahre 
1547 [Accounts of artists and craftsmen...
in the year 1547], as transcribed by G. W. 
K. Lochner, Quellenschriften für Kunstges­
chichte und Kunsttechnik des Mittelalters und 
der Renaissance (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 
1875), 10:65–69. Neudörfer, friend of Albrecht 
Dürer, is famous for this treatise of the biogra­
phies of the best-known artists of midcentury 
Nuremberg, Dürer among them.
2.	
Neudörfer, Nachrichten von Künstlern 
und Werkleuten, 65–66:
Dieser Bülmann, ob er gleich Schreibens und 
Lesens nicht geübt gewest, ist er doch in der 
Astronomie fast künstlich und gelehrt gewest, 
derhalben er auch mit 8o Pfd. Gewicht die 
Theoriam planetarum in Gang und Uhrwerk 
bracht hat, welches dann vor ihm Niemand hat 
thun mögen. Er macht auch für Uhrwerk Manns 
und Weibs Bilder die umgingen und schlugen 
ihre Mensur auf der Lauten und Pauken. König 
Ferdinandus, dem er viel Arbeit gemacht, liess 
ihn in seinem hohen Alter auf einer Sänften 
zu ihm gen Wien bringen, allein darum, dass 
er seiner Majestät ein Uhrwerk zeigte. Er hat 
aber sonsten von Schlosserwerk viel schönes 
Dings gemacht, sonderlich aber in der Wag die 
zwen schönen künstlichen Wagbalken, daran 
man ausserhalb der Wag die Güter auf der Fuhr 
wiegt.
Thanks to Henning Bauer for translation from 
the German for these and all following quotes 
in this chapter.
3.	
Lochner, in a long footnote examining 
trade and legal documents, corrects Neudörfer, 
who listed Bulmann’s given name as Hans. Here 
is a glimpse: “Bullmann or Püllmann’s name 
was not Hans but Jacob, and is more often 
mentioned as a locksmith who was, by way of 
an exception, granted a greater number of ser­
vants than permitted by law; e.g., on April 20th 
and October 12th, 1513, and on several more 
occasions, also on August 21st, 1528...”
The Art of Renaissance Sculpture, ed. Peta 
Motture, Emma Jones, and Dimitrios Zikos 
(London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 2013), 
134–47. Certainly any clockmaker collaborated 
with woodworkers who made the virtuoso 
casings for clocks, though we continue to 
search for records of wood-carvers commis­
sioned in the making of automata. Michael 
Baxandall finds examples of small piecework 
performed by wood-carvers for direct sale to 
merchant or patrician clientele, noting that 
Veit Stoss made small pieces for occasional 
sale (Baxandall, The Limewood Sculptors, 
102–3). Further study to find records of 
sculptors producing such piecework would be 
invaluable.
6.	
See FIG. 17.3A, B. Regarding this nef, Clare 
Vincent writes, “The ship is not signed, but 
decorative objects made for the emperor are 
known to have been exempt from hallmarking” 
(Clare Vincent, “Diana, Goddess of the Show­
ering Arrows: A Seventeenth-Century German 
Automaton Clock,” Yale University Art Gallery 
Bulletin [2016]: 80). Schlottheim is a prime 
example of a clockmaker who moved between 
guild and court settings. 
7.	
Morales, Las antigüedades, 93v.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

217
NOTES
15.	 Bedini, “The Role of Automata in the 
History of Technology,” 31–32. And see chap. 15 
n. 5, above.
16.	 The catalog cites Jakob Bulmann, so 
the Lochner version of Neudörfer’s manu­
script was at last consulted. It took this long 
for Bulmann to be properly connected to a 
witness contemporary to him, for although 
freshly authenticated in the late nineteenth 
century along with Neudörfer himself, Jakob 
Bulmann’s correct name and champion had to 
wait for Erwin Neumann’s acknowledgment 
in 1966, in this entry in the KHM catalog. (See 
chap. 15 n. 10, above.)
17.	 By then, Klaus Maurice had published 
his 1976 history of the German wheel clock, 
Die deutsche Räderuhr, in which he quotes 
Neudörfer’s praise of Bulmann, thus further 
strengthening the reference to Bulmann as a 
maker of automata (1:58).
18.	 See chap. 17 n. 27, above.
19.	 Bulmann had one published contempo­
rary witness, Juanelo Turriano many more. Von 
Herz, “Androiden des 16. Jahrhunderts,” 43, 
comments that García-Diego indirectly calls 
our attention to a problem of transmission, i.e., 
that historians may so readily choose Juanelo 
as the creator of automata because he, unlike 
many others of his time who were also con­
structing complex devices, was written about 
by so many contemporary scholars, making 
him more “available.” 
20.	 Marco Girolamo Vida, Cremonensium 
orationes III: Adversus Papienses in controver­
sia principatus...(Cremona, 1550), 56r–56v. 
Transcribed and translated from the original 
Latin for us by William M. Barton, of the Lud­
wig Boltzmann Institute for Neo-Latin Studies, 
Innsbruck, Austria; with contributions from 
the historian Wenrui Zhao. “Bronte” and “Es­
terope,” or Brontes and Steropes, were, with 
Arges, the three Cyclopes, children of Mother 
Earth, as Robert Graves tells us: “builders of 
gigantic walls and master-smiths, formerly of 
Thrace, afterwards of Crete and Lycia, whose 
sons Odysseus encountered in Sicily[,]...
and their ghosts have dwelt in the caverns of 
the volcano Aetna since Apollo killed them.” 
Robert Graves, The Greek Myths (Mt. Kisco, 
NY: Moyer Bell, 1955), 31. 
10.	 See “Das Astrarium von Regiomontan” 
and “Jakob Bulmanns Theoria planetarum,” 
in Maurice, Die deutsche Räderuhr, 1:56 and 
58. Maurice examines three planetary clocks, 
among them the one Neudörfer cites for 
Bulmann, as possible appearances of the same 
clock in the generations following Regiomon­
tanus. Neudörfer mentions the Theoriam 
planetarum again, under the name of the 
Nuremberg clockmaker Peter Henlein, con­
temporary to Bulmann, reporting that Henlein 
made further improvements to the clock using 
Bulmann’s tables (Neudörfer, Nachrichten 
von Künstlern und Werkleuten, 71, 77). The 
supposition that it was Regiomontanus’s as­
tronomical clock that Bulmann restored, with 
Regiomontanus’s tables, is mentioned by Ernst 
Zinner in his biography, Regiomontanus: His 
Life and Work, trans. Ezra Brown (Amsterdam: 
Elsevier Science, 1990), 135. Regiomontanus in 
fact saw the astrarium of Giovanni de’ Dondi, 
wrote about it, and possibly consulted de’ 
Dondi’s calculations. See Bedini and Maddi­
son, “Mechanical Universe,” 26–27; Bedini and 
Maddison, 16–17, also helpfully comment on 
the connection between an instrument and a 
“theory.”
11.	
Bassermann-Jordan, Alte Uhren und ihre 
Meister, 55–64.
12.	 Bassermann-Jordan, Alte Uhren und ihre 
Meister, 67–69. Henning Bauer’s translation 
from the German for us, with spelling inconsis­
tencies in Bulmann’s name preserved. We omit 
from this quote only Bassermann-Jordan’s full 
transcription of the Doppelmayr text, which we 
have already seen. As with the Morales report 
of Juanelo’s dancing lady, one sees how texts 
travel through time from pen to pen, era to era. 
13.	 Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. Jahrhun­
derts,” 30–31.
14.	 Chapuis and Gélis, Le monde des auto­
mates, 2:181, where Bulmann and Turriano 
are paired in their chapter 21 in vol. 2, “Les 
constructeurs d’androïdes,” directly following 
their introduction of the word android and 
its definition. They cite Doppelmayr for their 
mention of Bulmann (2:181). For Turriano 
(1:90–91 and 2:181–82), they cite Strada but 
have clearly used Basserman-Jordan’s study, 
with its basis in Ambrosio de Morales’s text, 
and William Stirling-Maxwell’s The Cloister 
Life of the Emperor Charles V.
times around a seated emperor twice their 
size. The “little men” represent the prince elec­
tors who approve a new Holy Roman emperor. 
The Gothic Frauenkirche, initiated by Charles 
IV, was finished in 1362, the clock restored in 
1509 (and many times since). The automata 
were made of hammered polychromed copper.
7.	
Lochner prints Neudörfer’s sentence as, 
“Er macht auch für Uhrwerk Manns und Weibs 
Bilder die umgingen und schlugen ihre Mensur 
auf der Lauten und Pauken.” Doppelmayr’s 
version is, “Er stellte ferner unter der Gestalt 
Manns- und Weibspersonen verschiedene Fig­
uren mit Uhrwercken dergestalten beweglich 
vor, daß sie hin und her giengen, und nach der 
Mensur auf der Paucken auch auf der Lauten 
schlugen.” Von Herz’s emphasis.
8.	
Lochner’s note in Neudörfer, Nachrichten 
von Künstlern und Werkleuten, 66. See also 
von Herz, “Androiden des 16. Jahrhunderts,” 
36.
9.	
The story of this great astrarium is told by 
Bedini and Maddison, “Mechanical Universe.” 
See chap. 4 n. 6, and chap. 16 n. 6, above. De’ 
Dondi also produced a detailed codex on how 
he made the clock, the Tractatus astrarii. The 
clock did not survive, but copies of the codex 
did, thus preserving the reputation of one of 
the most famous planetary clocks in history. 
Modern reconstructions of it are based on 
precise details in the codex. The codex itself 
has been reproduced in The Planetarium of 
Giovanni de Dondi Citizen of Padua, trans. 
G. H. Baillie and H. Alan Lloyd (London: Anti­
quarian Horological Society, 1974). In addition 
to the Thwaites and Reed model made in 1960, 
shown in FIG. 20.1, a second model was built in 
Milan in 1963 by the master clockmaker Luigi 
Pippa and is now on display in the Museo Nazi­
onale della Scienza e della Tecnologia Leonardo 
da Vinci, Milan. More recent scholarship on de’ 
Dondi’s astrarium is found in “Giovanni Dondi 
dall’orologio,” in Dizionario Biografico degli 
Italiani, vol. 41 (1992). https://www.treccani.it
/enciclopedia/giovanni-dondi-dall-orologio
_(Dizionario-Biografico)/
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

218
NOTES
7.	
Groiss, “The Augsburg Clockmakers’ 
Craft,” 69 n. 65.
8.	
Amman and Sachs, The Book of Trades 
(Ständebuch), 75. Sachs’s verses, each 
eight lines in rhyming couplets, are rendered 
in English by Theodore K. Rabb, trans., A 
Sixteenth-Century Book of Trades: Das 
Ständebuch (Palo Alto, CA: Society for the 
Promotion of Science and Scholarship, 2009). 
The clockmaker, p. 135.
9.	
Amman and Sachs, The Book of Trades 
(Ständebuch), 69. Verse translation, the 
locksmith: Raab, A Sixteenth-Century Book of 
Trades, 123.
10.	 Amman and Sachs, The Book of Trades 
(Ständebuch), 36. Verse translation, the 
sculptor: Raab, A Sixteenth-Century Book of 
Trades, 57.
11.	
Jan van der Straet, known as Johannes 
Stradanus, Horologia ferrea (Iron clocks), 
ca. 1591. A copperplate engraving from the 
historical series Nova Reperta (New discover­
ies), one of twenty prints based on drawings by 
Stradanus illustrating early modern technol­
ogies and discoveries, from windmills to silk­
worms to printing itself. Printed by Philips Galle 
in Antwerp. See Lia Markey, ed., Renaissance 
Invention: Stradanus’s “Nova Reperta,” exh. cat. 
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 
2020). For a clockmaker’s tour of the details 
depicted in both Amman’s and Stradanus’s clock 
shops, see John Robey, “Early Clockmakers’ 
Workshops: Part 1, Jost Amman’s Woodcut,” 
and “Part 2, The Stradanus Engraving,” in Clocks 
Magazine, October 2017 and November 2017. 
Our caption for the Stradanus print, FIG. 21.4, is 
informed by Robey’s study.
12.	 Vannoccio Biringuccio, De la pirotechnia 
(Venice, 1540), as quoted in Cyril Stanley 
Smith, A Search for Structure: Selected Es­
says on Science, Art, and History (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1981), 34–35. Smith and 
Martha Teach Gnudi translated and annotated 
Biringuccio’s work as The “Pirotechnia” of 
Vannoccio Biringuccio (New York: American 
Institute of Mining and Metallurgical Engi­
neers, 1942). 
2.	
Gouk, The Ivory Sundials of Nuremberg, 
39–43, for trade routes, Nuremberg merchants 
in Venice, and the city’s Protestant lean. For 
a close description of the clockmaking guild 
system but in Augsburg, see Eva Groiss, “The 
Augsburg Clockmakers’ Craft,” in Maurice 
and Mayr, The Clockwork Universe, 57–86. 
On clockmaking guilds in German-speaking 
central Europe, see Mayr, Authority, Liberty, 
and Automatic Machinery, 8–10; Maurice, Von 
Uhren und Automaten, 28–41; and Maurice, 
Die deutsche Räderuhr, 1:pt. 5: “Zentren des 
Uhrmacherhandwerks bis zur Mitte des 17. 
Jahrhunderts [Centers of the clockmaking 
trades to the middle of the seventeenth 
century],” where Nuremberg’s unique case is 
addressed on pp. 141–46. 
3.	
Benjamin A. Rifkin, in his 1971 introduction 
to Jost Amman and Hans Sachs, Eygentliche 
Beschreibung aller Stände auff Erden [...] 
(Nuremberg, 1568; in modern facsimile reprint 
as The Book of Trades (Ständebuch) [New 
York: Dover, 1973]), ix.
4.	
Britten, Britten’s Old Clocks and Watches, 
69–70: “The pioneer Nuremberg makers were 
not formed into a guild until 1656, and even 
as late as 1629 a locksmith or gunsmith could 
work as a clock maker, but not vice versa.”
5.	
Amman and Sachs, The Book of Trades 
(Ständebuch); see n. 3, above. The publisher 
of the Ständebuch, Sigmund Feyerabend, 
dedicated the book to the goldsmith Wenzel 
Jamnitzer. Precedent to the Ständebuch was 
the famous Mendel Housebook, an archive 
of illustrations memorializing fifteenth- and 
sixteenth-century Nuremberg artisans: Das 
Hausbuch der Mendelschen Zwölfbrüder­
stiftung zu Nürnberg [The Housebook of 
the Mendel Twelve Brothers Foundation of 
Nuremberg] (Nuremberg, 1549; in modern re­
print, Karlheinz Goldmann and Wilhelm Treue 
et al., eds., 2 vols., [Munich: F. Bruckmann, 
1965]). The full series of historical images 
from the Mendel Housebook is now available 
online through the Nuremberg City Library 
and the German Research Foundation, 
https://www.nuernberger-hausbuecher.de/.
6.	
An alarm clock, in the age when clocks 
told time only by the hour, employed the 
wheel of the clock hand itself to set off a strik­
ing mechanism connected to a bell. Minutes 
came into fashion only in the next century, 
driven by clock technology itself.
21.	 García-Diego, Juanelo Turriano, 65.
22.	 Cardinal Federico Borromeo, Il libro 
intitolato la gratia de’principi...(Milan, 1632), 
167–68:
But it would be a highly commendable practice 
and worthy of being observed by wise men 
if they, in uttering such maxims, would avail 
themselves of any nice and opportune circum­
stance, as happened in the case of a famous 
Lombard craftsman, Master Giannelli, whose 
exquisite genius in the construction of the most 
diverse and artful devices was highly praised 
in his day. Among the many remarkable things 
that he used to say, he was in the habit of say­
ing the following: that the three most beautiful 
and most excellent things, and most worthy of 
being valued, and held dear by all men, were 
withheld from Princes: namely, a person who 
will tell them the truth, the ability to behold the 
dawn, and to experience hunger. 
Thanks to Evelyn Lincoln for this translation 
from the Italian original.
23.	 “[I]n memory, says tradition, of a puppet, 
of his making, which used to walk daily to 
the archiepiscopal palace, and return laden 
with an allowance of bread and meat, after 
doing ceremonious obeisance to the donor.” 
Stirling-Maxwell, The Cloister Life of the 
Emperor Charles V, 444. 
CHAPTER 21
A Nuremberg Clockmaker’s 
Workshop
1.	
Penelope Gouk, The Ivory Sundials of 
Nuremberg 1500–1700 (Cambridge: Whipple 
Museum of the History of Science, 1988), 46. 
Legend credits Regiomontanus with the making 
of two automata for the emperor: an iron fly 
and an iron and wood eagle, both said to rise 
and take flight. Johann Gabriel Doppelmayr 
(whose short biography of Bulmann is quoted 
in chap. 20, above) concluded his lengthy en­
try on Regiomontanus thus: “Finally the most 
remarkable thing, according to Petrus Ramus’s 
first assertion, according to which Regiomon­
tanus showed himself to be the most skillful 
mechanic in the world, [is] that he supposedly 
constructed an iron fly and wooden eagle that 
flew. We will leave the question open whether 
this is indeed true, since there is no sufficient 
basis to substantiate such a claim” (23). See 
Zinner, Regiomontanus, “The Nuremberg 
Master Years,” 103–49. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

219
NOTES
Beket Bukovinská, “The Known and Unknown 
Kunstkammer of Rudolf II,” in Collection—
Laboratory—Theater: Scenes of Knowledge 
in the 17th Century, ed. Helmar Schramm et 
al. (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2005), originally 
published in German in 2003, for the series 
Theatrum Scientiarum. 
13.	 “Today, it is universally presumed to have 
been drawn up by the emperor’s miniature 
painter and court antiquarian Daniel Fröschl.” 
Bukovinská, “The Kunstkammer of Rudolf 
II,” 199. “If we can rely on marginal notes to 
reveal the true arrangement of the objects in 
the Prague Kunstkammer during the life of 
Rudolf II or immediately after his death, it is 
evident that a large number of objects were 
arranged in such a way that viewing them 
required time and a knowledge of the material. 
It is striking that if we use these pencilled 
notes to piece together the contents of the 
chests and cabinets, we discover that even 
ostentatious works we would expect to have 
been displayed on tables or shelves were shut 
away in chests and, often, additionally in small 
gilded leather cases” (207).
14.	 Bauer and Haupt, “Das Kunstkammer­
inventar Kaiser Rudolfs II.,” find it in the 
inventory as Nr. 1751 (their p. 93). Also see 
Scheicher, Die Kunst- und Wunderkammern 
der Habsburger, 157.
15.	 Bauer and Haupt, “Das Kunstkammer-
inventar Kaiser Rudolfs II.,” 110.
16.	 Bauer and Haupt, “Das Kunstkammer­
inventar Kaiser Rudolfs II.,” 113. The entry 
echoes in its phrasing Neudörfer’s reference 
to Bulmann’s “figures [for] clockworks, which 
would walk about and strike their measure 
on lutes and timbals.” (A note on the double 
numbers for these and most other entries in 
the Bauer and Haupt transcription: the first 
number is assigned by Bauer and Haupt as 
their editorial index for all objects listed in 
the codex. In most cases a second number 
follows, from the codex itself, which had its 
own system of classification. Our thanks to 
Paulus Rainer for confirming this. The study 
of the original numbering system has helped 
historians shed light on how Rudolf identified 
and classified his collection.) 
17.	 See chap. 15 n. 10, above.
(The Cloister Life of the Emperor Charles V, 
477 n. 2): “The bezuar, bezoar, or bezar, was a 
stone found in the kidneys of the cervicabra, a 
wild animal of Arabia, partaking of the nature 
of the deer and the goat, and somewhat larger 
than the latter. The stone was supposed to 
be formed of the poison of serpents which 
had bitten the producer, combined with the 
counteracting matter with which nature had 
furnished it. It was a charm against plague 
and poison.” 
8.	
Fučíková, “The Collection of Rudolf II at 
Prague,” 52.
9.	
“There can be no doubt that Rudolf’s col­
lection was never destined for a wider public, 
but was limited to those few initiates who 
knew how to use it.” Fučíková, “The Collection 
of Rudolf II at Prague,” 52. And see Bukovinská, 
“The Kunstkammer of Rudolf II,” n. 13, below.
10.	 Eliška Fučíková, “The Fate of Rudolf 
II’s Collections in Light of the History of the 
Thirty Years’ War,” in 1648: War and Peace 
in Europe, ed. Klaus Bussmann and Heinz 
Schilling, vol. 2, Art and Culture (Münster: 
Westfälisches Landesmuseum für Kunst und 
Kulturgeschichte, 1998), 173–80. In the same 
volume, Thomas DaCosta Kaufmann, “War 
and Peace, Art and Destruction, Myth and Re­
ality: Considerations on the Thirty Years’ War 
in Relation to Art in (Central) Europe,” 163–72. 
See also Rudolf Distelberger, “The Habsburg 
Collections in Vienna during the Seventeenth 
Century,” in Impey and MacGregor, The Ori­
gins of Museums, 40; and Evans, Rudolf II 
and His World, 179–80.
11.	
Erwin Neumann, “Das Inventar der 
rudolfinischen Kunstkammer von 1607/11,” 
in Analecta Reginensia I, Queen Christina of 
Sweden, Documents and Studies, (Stockholm, 
1966), 262–65; quote from 262–63.
12.	 Rotraud Bauer and Herbert Haupt, eds., 
“Das Kunstkammerinventar Kaiser Rudolfs II., 
1607–1611,” Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen 
Sammlungen in Wien, 72 (1976). Neumann, 
“Das Inventar,” 263: “We are looking at a 
bound parchment codex of 414 or 415 sheets.” 
Fučíková, “The Collection of Rudolf II at Prague,” 
47–53, states that the 1607–11 inventory does 
not cover the entire collection. The work of 
comparing the principal extant inventories, 
what each lacks and what each offers, and what 
their sum allows us to know, is ongoing. See 
CHAPTER 22
The Art Cabinet of Rudolf II
1.	
Eliška Fučíková, “The Collection of Rudolf 
II at Prague: Cabinet of Curiosities or Scientific 
Museum?,” in Impey and MacGregor, The 
Origins of Museums, 53. 
2.	
R. J. W. Evans, Rudolf II and His World: 
A Study in Intellectual History 1576–1612 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973), 177.
3.	
Thomas DaCosta Kaufmann, “Remarks on 
the Collections of Rudolf II: The Kunstkammer 
as a Form of Representatio,” Art Journal 38, 
no. 1 (Autumn 1978): 22.
4.	
Eliška Fučíková, “Prague Castle under 
Rudolf II, His Predecessors and Successors,” 
in Rudolf II and Prague: The Court and the 
City, ed. Eliška Fučíková et al. (Prague: Prague 
Castle Administration; London: Thames & 
Hudson, 1997), 13: “Rudolf was born of a 
loveless marriage between Maximilian and his 
cousin, Maria of Spain, the daughter of Charles 
V. Maximilian’s sympathies for Protestantism 
and Maria’s bigoted Roman Catholicism both 
manifested themselves in their approach to 
the young prince’s upbringing. Fearing for his 
faith, Maria of Spain, her brother King Philip 
II and their uncle Ferdinand I were able to 
convince Maximilian to entrust the education 
of the young pretender to the imperial throne 
to a responsible person at the Spanish court.” 
See also Evans, Rudolf II and His World, 49–51.
5.	
Beket Bukovinská, in her essay, “The 
Kunstkammer of Rudolf II: Where It Was and 
What It Looked Like,” in Fučíková et al., Rudolf II 
and Prague, 199 ff., describes the four rooms 
and their arrangement, based on the 1607–11 
inventory.
6.	
Patrick Mauriès, Cabinets of Curiosities 
(London: Thames & Hudson, 2002), 171.
7.	
Bezoars were “gastric calculuses found in 
antelopes” believed to be antidotes to poison. 
(Bukovinská, “The Kunstkammer of Rudolf II,” 
203). Stirling-Maxwell is more specific in a 
footnote to the inventory of items belonging to 
Charles V in San Yuste, which included “a box 
of black leather, lined with crimson velvet, con­
taining four bezuar stones, variously set in gold” 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

220
NOTES
record we offer our findings here, with thanks 
to Henning Bauer for help with both search and 
translation: 
entry 349 on page xxvii:
“One chest with a clockwork, [with] 
a drummer and a piper on top”
entry 721 on page xxxv: 
“A waxen child in a case, beating a drum”
entry 731 on page xxxvi: 
“A waxen bust of a woman, moving, 
with a clockwork”
entry 105 on page xxii: 
“A waxen child that moves”
entry 725 on page xxxv: 
“Two wooden chests with two waxen 
figures with clockwork, which dance”
22.	 See chap. 7, above, for the full catalog 
entry in The Clockwork Universe. As we 
mention in chap. 7 n. 3, Maurice and Mayr 
gave Rudolf inventory numbers 2193 and 2194 
and do not include the Margraf entry 2145. A 
typo, as is the mistaken title of the inventory 
as “1607–1711”? While entries 2145 and 2194 
describe solo figures, entry 2193 reads more 
like a stationary machine with an ensemble 
of moving figures, including a drummer. The 
entry appears under the heading “Clockworks 
in pictures and other diversions” (Bauer and 
Haupt, “Das Kunstkammerinventar Kaiser 
Rudolfs II.,” 113) and reads, “A clockwork, 
wound up like a clock, in a green box, a piper, a 
drummer, and a soldier, dressed appropriately, 
each performs his office.”
23.	 We will assume Neudörfer (1497–1563) 
saw the works of Bulmann (d. ca. 1535) in 
person.
24.	 Findlen, Possessing Nature, 34. 
See chap. 16 n. 5, above. The Ambrosiana 
website offers a brief history and a portrait 
of Settala: https://www.ambrosiana.it/en
/opere/portrait-of-manfredo-settala/
read excerpts of this chapter and wrote to 
Elizabeth (December 20, 2021): “The first 
Rolling Ball Clock bears the inscription Cum 
gratia et Priuilegio Sac: Caes: Maiest: ad 
Quindecim Annorum. This is actually a kind of 
patent, meaning that Margraf had the exclusive 
right to make this kind of clock for fifteen years, 
a privilege received from the emperor.” None 
of the Margraf rolling ball clocks are listed in 
the 1607–11 Rudolfian inventory, Rainer informs 
us, but the one we mention appears in a later 
1619 inventory of the estate of Rudolf’s brother 
Matthias.
21.	 Why did it take the discovery of the 1607–
11 inventory to alert Neumann and Maurice to
 the entries that they brought forward as pos­
sible references for the extant automata? Later 
inventories, made in the decade after Rudolf’s 
death, have long been known. Can we find en­
tries in the later inventories that describe the 
same or similar figures, perhaps suggesting 
that they had not yet disappeared from the 
collection or the record? Some of the objects 
in Rudolf’s collection can indeed be tracked 
from one inventory to another, and some have 
been tracked further in their diaspora to other 
lands and collections. Many more have simply 
been lost. Inventories posthumous to Rudolf 
include one drawn in 1619, and another in 1621, 
in the political struggle in Bohemia following 
Rudolf’s death. The 1619 list was made at the 
time of the Protestant Bohemian estates’ 
briefly successful revolt against the Catholic 
Habsburg reign and was intended to aid in sell­
ing off the collection to support the defense of 
the new kingdom. The 1621 inventory was made 
when the revolt was quelled, apparently on the 
orders of Habsburg Ferdinand II of Bohemia, 
returned to power but needing funds of his own 
as the Thirty Years’ War escalated. (Fučíková, 
“The Fate of Rudolf II’s Collections,” 173–80; 
Bauer and Haupt, “Das Kunstkammerinventar 
Kaiser Rudolfs II.,” xii–xiii; Neumann, “Das Inven­
tar,” 262). The 1621 inventory is transcribed in 
“Das inventar der Prager Schatz- und Kunst­
kammer vom 6. Dezember 1621,” ed. Heinrich 
Zimmermann, Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen 
Sammlungen des Allerhöchsten Kaiserhauses 
25 (1905): xiii–lxxv. We searched for any entries 
that could conceivably match entries singled 
out in the 1607–11 inventory. None offer suffi­
cient detail for a sure connection, but for the 
18.	 A note on the translation of the German 
words schlegt and schlecht in the inventory 
entry: though the difference in spelling 
between the two words in the same passage 
gives pause, we conclude that they repre­
sent the same word, the New High German 
schlägt—in English, “strikes” or “strums.” 
Given the cittern, a musical instrument that is 
strummed, and paired with the term fantasia, 
a translation reading, “Wound up like a clock­
work, [it] strums a fantasia,” is more credible 
than a supposition that “schlecht” represents 
another word altogether (such as, conceiv­
ably, New High German schlicht for English 
“simply”). “Fantasia” here must refer to the 
musical form. Our thanks to Henning Bauer for 
translation and interpretation. 
19.	 Only Morales reports the size of an 
automaton: see chap. 4, above.
20.	 In fact, the clock contains two balls that 
take turns: one on view rolls the course while 
the other is lifted by a hidden mechanism to 
replace it at the right moment, for an illusion of 
a single ball running continuously. The device 
of the mirror and invisible glass plate is not 
unlike the phenomenon of “Pepper’s ghost,” a 
nineteenth-century stage illusion. The history 
of Margraf’s clock and the many clocks by 
others made after his is presented in Hans von 
Bertele and Erwin Neumann, “Der kaiserliche 
Kammeruhrmacher Christoph Margraf und 
die Erfindung der Kugellaufuhr,” Jahrbuch der 
Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen in Wien 59 
(1963): 39–98. Further references for Margraf 
are in Manfred Leithe-Jasper and Rudolf 
Distelberger, The Kunsthistorische Museum 
Vienna: The Treasury and the Collection of 
Sculpture and Decorative Arts, trans. Elsie 
Callander and Ilse Seldon (London: Philip 
Wilson, 1982), 98, 112. See the KHM website:  
www.khm.at/de/object/415713fe57/. The 
museum collection has two signed and dated 
Rolling Ball Clocks by Margraf, and a third, un­
signed, attributed to him. Our ongoing thanks 
to Paulus Rainer, curator of the Kunstkammer 
at the Kunsthistorisches Museum, who kindly 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

221
NOTES
12.	 In Jadraque’s depiction of the portrait, 
the sitter’s head and collar are close to those 
in Titian’s painting, but the hands are in a 
different pose. Titian’s canvas El caballero del 
reloj, featuring a Maltese cross sewn on the 
figure’s doublet, may not represent Juanelo, 
though the likeness is compelling when com­
pared to other portraits of the clockmaker.
13.	 Stirling-Maxwell, The Cloister Life of the 
Emperor Charles V, 483–84; García-Diego, 
Juanelo Turriano, 123–28; Bassermann-Jordan, 
Alte Uhren und ihre Meister, on clocks in the 
San Yuste inventory, 56; and Brusa, “Giovanni 
Torriano e i suoi favolosi orologi microcosmici,” 
16–18. 
14.	 “...about two feet in diameter, and 
somewhat less in height” (Stirling-Maxwell, 
The Cloister Life of the Emperor Charles V, 
179). In Stirling-Maxwell’s appendix inven­
toryof items at San Yuste “the great clock” 
appears on p 483. Giuseppe Brusa gives 
60 cm (23⅝ in.) for its diameter and particu­
larly notes its octagonal shape (12). See also 
n. 7, above, on García-Diego’s proposal of an 
image of this clock in the Brueghel and 
Rubens panel The Sense of Hearing.
15.	 Peter Friess and Reinhard Steiner, 
“Frömmigkeits-Maschinen in der Frühen 
Neuzeit” [Machines of piety in the early 
modern period], in Automaten in Kunst und 
Literatur des Mittelalters und der Frühen 
Neuzeit, ed. Klaus Grubmüller and Markus 
Stock, Wolfenbütteler Mittelalter-Studien, vol. 
17 (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 2003), 
223–45. The authors note their discovery of 
the painting (239 n. 37):
This was a chance finding in: Luisa Cuesta, 
“Lo que conocemos de Carlos V” in: Revista 
de archivos, bibliotecas y museos, 68 (1960), 
29–79, Abb. XVII; also: Museo del Prado, 
Inventario General de Pinturas, III, Nuevas 
adquisiciones Museo Iconocráfico Tapices (Ma­
drid, 1990), 130, no. 476 (Inv. actualizado No. 
4826). The painting Carlos V en Yuste, oil on 
canvas, 146 × 193 cm, was executed by Miguel 
Jadraque y Sánchez Ocaña, a historical and 
genre painter born in Valladolid. His vita is not 
precisely known (ca. 1840–1912). The painting 
was exhibited in Paris in 1878 by Jadraque.
(Our thanks to Henning Bauer for translation 
from the German of Friess and Steiner’s text.) 
We were grateful and fascinated to receive a 
reprint of the essay from Peter Friess in 2003. 
8.	
Translating from the French (and losing its 
rhyme), Elizabeth wonders, are “Les Grands” 
gods or kings? Chapuis and Droz, Automata: 
A Historical and Technological Study, 317, 
translate the lines thus:
Without joking, what we are
Is often our fate.
The gods when it pleases them
make very much the same thing of men as a 
hidden spring does of Catin.
9.	
Horst Bredekamp, The Lure of Antiquity 
and the Cult of the Machine: The Kunstkam­
mer and the Evolution of Nature, Art and 
Technology, trans. Allison Brown (Princeton, 
NJ: Markus Wiener, 1995), 2–4.
10.	 Kaspar Schott, Magia universalis naturae 
et artis (Würzburg: Pigrin, 1657), Prolegomena, 
Partis I. Lib. I, pp. 24–25. Our thanks to William 
M. Barton for transcription into modern Latin 
from the seventeenth-century original and to 
Wenrui Zhao for her translation into English. 
The Latin word citharam for the instrument 
the automaton plays could refer to a cittern 
as well as a lute or a lyre, among stringed 
instruments of the period. We note that in 
the Latin original, the phrase “per mensam 
discurrendo,” translated here as “roamed 
across the table,” hinges on the phrase “per 
mensam,” which literally means “through the 
table.” Elizabeth asked the translator Wenrui 
Zhao if the phrase might mean “around” the 
table rather than “on” the table—for “on the 
table” lets us infer a small tabletop figure, but 
“around the table” may mean that Schott is 
describing a larger, even life-size android. Zhao 
responded, “[The Latin] ‘per’ as a proposition is 
often associated with a linear sense of ‘through’ 
or ‘throughout’—spatially as well as temporally. 
Sometimes it can also mean ‘all over’—but that 
would still imply it was on the table. If ‘around’ 
was meant, a proposition like ‘circum’ would 
probably have been used” (email correspon­
dence, December 28, 2021).
11.	
Stirling-Maxwell, The Cloister Life of 
the Emperor Charles V, appendix, 477–85: 
“A Selection from the Extracts made by Don 
Tomas Gonzales from the inventory of the 
jewels, wardrobe, and furniture of the Emperor 
Charles V., at Yuste, drawn up after his death, 
by Fray Juan de Regla, Martin de Gaztelu, and 
Luis Quixada.” The inventory lists “Portraits 
of the Emperor and Empress, on canvas, by 
Titian” and three pictures of the Virgin, among 
them, “A picture of Our Lady, on wood, by 
Titian” (483).
CHAPTER 23
Searching the Lost and Found
1.	
For this image, and a discussion of 
automata as features of decorative table set­
tings, see Maurice and Mayr, The Clockwork 
Universe, 235; and Maurice, Von Urhen und 
Automaten, 54. Daston and Park, Wonders 
and the Order of Nature, 100–108 (“Wonders 
at Court”), help us envision the will to capture 
something more than dramatic effect in the 
coming theater of the mechanical age, with au­
tomata appearing in the extravagant wedding 
banquets and court spectacles of dukes and 
princes.
2.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts,” 58–74.
3.	
A good summary of the “talking heads” of 
Gerbert of Aurillac, Albertus Magnus, Robert 
Grosseteste, and Roger Bacon can be found 
in Minsoo Kang’s excellent book, Sublime 
Dreams of Living Machines: The Automaton 
in the European Imagination (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2011), 68–79, “The 
Talking Oracular Head.” Don Quixote is tricked 
by such a head in part 2 of Cervantes’s epic, 
chap. 62: “Which relates the adventure of the 
enchanted head, as well as other foolishness 
that must be recounted.” Miguel de Cervantes, 
Don Quixote, trans. Edith Grossman (New 
York: HarperCollins, 2003), 864–72. Cervantes 
(1547–1616), a native of Alcalá de Henares, was 
born just two years after Don Carlos. Part 1 of 
Don Quixote was published in 1605; part 2, in 
1615.
4.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts,” 60.
5.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts,” 43.
6.	
Von Herz, “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts,” 43.
7.	
But one panel of the Brueghel and 
Rubens series (in the collection of the Museo 
Nacional del Prado in Madrid), The Sense 
of Hearing, may show a clock by Juanelo. 
García-Diego (Juanelo Turriano, 66–69) offers 
a fascinating discussion about whether a cer­
tain octagonal clock in the background at far 
right, in a wooden case standing on the floor, 
could be Juanelo’s astrarium.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

222
NOTES
8.	
Quoted from the tribute by Cecilia 
Pantu (University of Rome) and Pietro B. 
Rossi (University of Turin), which appeared 
as “In memoriam Servus Gieben, OFM Cap.,” 
Bulletin de philosophie médiévale 56 (2014): 
554–58, and is reproduced on the website of 
the International Robert Grosseteste Society, 
https://grossetestesociety.org/2015/12/05
/in-memoriam-servus-gieben-ofm-cap/. Our 
thanks to Evelyn Lincoln for translation from 
the Italian.
9.	
A bibliography of Servus Gieben’s pub­
lications is found in “Bibliografia de Servus 
Gieben,” in Verum, pulchrum et bonum: 
Miscellanea di studi offerti a Servus Gieben 
in occasione del suo 80th compleanno, 
ed. Yohannes Teklemariam (Rome: Istituto 
Storico dei Cappuccini, 2006), 15–30.
10.	 Lydia Beerkens, managing director and 
senior conservator of Modern and Contem­
porary Art at Stichting Restauratie Atelier 
Limburg in Maastricht, helped us with this 
modest biography of Servus Gieben, her uncle. 
She added that Servus Gieben’s father was a 
blacksmith in the village of Sint Anthonis. We 
have also depended on Vincenzo Criscuolo, 
ed., Quarant’anni di servizio nell’Istituto 
Storico dei Cappuccini (1953–1993): Isidoro 
da Villapadierna, Mariano D’Alatri, e Servus 
Gieben (Rome: Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini, 
1993), 69–84.
11.	
Servus Gieben, “Christelijke iconografie: 
Problemen en oplossingen,” Desipientia: Zin 
& waan 2, no. 3 (1995): 8–9; quote from p. 8. 
Our thanks to Daniëlle Slootjes, of Radboud 
University, for her translation from the Dutch 
and to historian Michael Maas for introducing 
us to Professor Slootjes. Much hangs on these 
sandaled feet, for this was the moment the 
automaton was identified as a Franciscan icon. 
CHAPTER 24
A Monk’s Opinion, Continued
1.	
Stirling-Maxwell, “Author’s Preface,” 
xx–xxiv. Stirling-Maxwell died in 1878; the 
first edition of his book, with this preface, 
was published in 1852. The fourth edition was 
published posthumously in 1891 by his son 
John Stirling-Maxwell. (González’s work was 
essential in identifying objects in the inventory 
at San Yuste; see chap. 23 n. 11, above.)
2.	
Stirling-Maxwell’s story of the González 
manuscript is a tale all its own, as he related it 
in the preface to his own book in 1852. Prescott 
reprised the story in 1855 in his History of the 
Reign of Philip the Second, King of Spain (vol. 1, 
325 ff., of the 1874 ed.); see above, chap. 2 n. 3 
and chap. 3 n. 5.
3.	
Friess and Steiner, “Frömmigkeits-
Maschinen in der Frühen Neuzeit,” 239 n 37.
4.	
Bassermann-Jordan, Alte Uhren und ihre 
Meister, summarizes his sources (59 n. 4) and 
singles out Stirling-Maxwell’s book as most 
useful. 
5.	
The letter is given in full in chap. 6, above.
6.	
A recent and remarkable set of essays 
on this tradition, worldwide, is Ittai Weinryb, 
ed., Agents of Faith: Votive Objects in Time 
and Place, exh. cat. (New York: Bard Graduate 
Center, 2018).
7.	
The Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini was 
formally established in Assisi in 1930 and 
moved to Rome during World War II. The 
Museo Francescano predates the Institute 
and was founded in 1889 in Marseilles, moved 
to Rome in 1912, and in 1927 was associated 
with the then-nascent Istituto in Assisi. The 
Institute’s mandate is the pursuit of scholarly 
research on the history of the Franciscan 
order, and in particular its Capuchin family, 
formed during the sixteenth-century Counter-
Reformation. Servus Gieben, associated 
with the Institute from 1953 to 2013, was 
president in 1971–77 and again in 1998–2004 
(http://www.ofmcap.org/en/istituzioni-
centrali/museo-francescano). Our warm 
thanks to Yohannes Teklemariam Bache, pres­
ident of the Institute from 2014 to 2017 and 
current director of the Museo Francescano, 
for providing citations for the history of the 
institution. 
The painting has been on long-term loan from 
the Prado to the Cámara Oficial de Comercio e 
Industria in Salamanca. Elizabeth saw it there 
in 2006, with the kind permission and accom­
paniment of Gabriel Hortal Castaño, secretary 
general. The Prado restored the painting in the 
1990s, Hortal Castaño said, and only then did 
the small figures become visible. It is Hortal 
Castaño’s opinion that the tiny standing figure 
is shown making the sign of the cross over the 
kneeling “Moor,” converting him. The assembled 
onlookers are startled, he said, even a little 
frightened at what they are seeing. See also 
http://cvc.cervantes.es/el_rinconete/anteriores
/octubre_00/31102000_02.htm. The Prado 
website itself now carries a good reproduction 
of the Jadraque painting, allowing close-in zoom 
inspection: Carlos V en Yuste-Colección-Museo 
Nacional del Prado (museodelprado.es)
16.	 Friess and Steiner, “Frömmigkeits-
Maschinen in der Frühen Neuzeit,” 239:
Even if at present no definitive evidence can 
be proffered (yet), there is a historical painting 
that would seem to suggest that up to the late 
nineteenth century, it was believed that not 
only had Charles V automatic table soldiers do 
battle, but that he possessed small monk figu­
rines. It is more than a fading trace in the sand 
when, in the background of Miguel Jadraque y 
Sánchez Ocaña’s painting showing Charles V 
in Yuste, we see the figure of a monk in a white 
habit next to an astronomical clock atop a piece 
of furniture. Judging by the proportions, it would 
appear to have roughly the same measurements 
of the known monk automata. Since it appears 
unlikely that an individual pleurant would have 
served as an interior ornament, one may surmise 
that this monk figurine was part of an ensemble 
of six—perhaps even eight—automata. These 
may not have held an actual wake during the 
melancholic emperor’s lifetime, but their playful 
gravity would nevertheless have afforded him 
a memento mori without subjecting him to the 
condemnation of the church.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

223
NOTES
19.	 Chapuis and Gélis, Le monde des 
automates, 2:182. Brusa, “Giovanni Torriano 
e i suoi favolosi orologi microcosmici,” 6, 
also mentions the highly skilled Jean Valin 
(1530/35–1598), a Flanders-born clockmaker 
and close associate of Juanelo. Distinguished 
historian of clocks Luis Montañés Fontenla 
(1926–2011) discusses Juanelo Turriano and 
Jorge de Diano in Capítulos de la relojería en 
España (Madrid: Roberto Carbonell Blasco, 
1954), 103–6, and also names Hans de Evalo 
and Juan Cocart (or Cocquart) of Brussels as 
clockmakers for Philip II. A clock by Hans de 
Evalo survives and is now in the Escorial: Mon­
tañés Fontenla tells the story of its discovery 
in El escape y el péndulo [The escapement and 
the pendulum] (Madrid: Ediciones Antiqvaria, 
1991), 11–22. It was Montañés Fontenla who 
supported and arranged for the publication of 
José A. García-Diego’s first book on Juanelo, 
and wrote its forward.
20.	 Personal correspondence from Otto Mayr 
to Elizabeth King, March 13, 2000.
21.	 Personal correspondence from Servus 
Gieben to Elizabeth King, January 16, 2000.
22.	 FIG. 24.1, identified as a death mask of San 
Giacomo della Marca (1393–1476), is kept 
in the Convento S. Maria La Nova, Naples. 
Servus Gieben’s example of such a mask. The 
photograph is from P. Daniele Capone, OFM, 
Iconografia di S. Giacomo della Marca nell’ 
ambiente napoletano lungo i secoli (Naples: 
1976), 38–39. 
23.	 Personal correspondence from Servus 
Gieben to Elizabeth King, January 22, 2000.
16.	 It is unknown if Sedlmajer himself had yet 
made any connection to the Vienna automa­
ton or to Bassermann-Jordan’s work when he 
wrote to Gieben in summer 1975. The Zurich 
auction—the monk’s first public appearance 
(see chap. 5 n. 5, above)—came a little later 
that year, on September 29, 1975, before 
Gieben’s return letter. In that auction catalog 
(Uto Auktionen: 2.Auktion, 29. September bis 
3. October 1975, Uto Auktions AG, Zurich, item 
no. 351, p. 40), the monk is described only as 
follows:
Android Figure of a Monk
South Germany, 16th century
Driven by an iron mechanism. Walks in a trian­
gle. Moves both hands, eyes, head, and opens 
its mouth. A similar piece from the same period 
is in the Historisches Museum in Vienna. De­
scribed throughout as the oldest such android 
in the literature of von Bassaman-Jordan [sic], 
Alte Uhren und Automaten. 
(We assume the cited Bassermann-Jordan 
book title refers to his Alte Uhren und ihre 
Meister.) The Geneva auction the next year, 
June 21, 1976, cites Servus Gieben’s work, as 
we’ve seen, transcribing verbatim Gieben’s 
citation of “Lucio M. Núñez in Archivo Ibero-
Americano 2” on Don Carlos’s illness and 
cure. José A. García-Diego wrote in his book on 
Juanelo that he saw the monk for the first time 
in summer 1975. We do not know at what point 
Georges Sedlmajer was brought in to handle 
the transaction. He was certainly connect­
ed to Edgar Mannheimer by the time of the 
Geneva auction and may have been involved 
in the Zurich auction as well (see chap. 14 n. 1, 
above). When Elizabeth asked Father Servus if 
she might publish excerpts from his letters to 
her, he wrote (on January 16, 2000), “I have no 
problem that you quote from my letters. Just 
remember that when I first told my story of the 
mechanical monk to Mr. Sedlmajer, I had no 
idea at all of...the consequences of that letter. 
Nor did he ever tell me which use he actually 
made of my findings.”
17.	 Bassermann-Jordan, Alte Uhren und 
ihre Meister, 59.
18.	 Stirling-Maxwell, The Cloister Life of the 
Emperor Charles V, 391.
12.	 Gieben, “Christelijke iconografie,” 8.
13.	 Gieben, “Christelijke iconografie,” 8–9.
14.	 Our still-astonished thanks to Tere­
sita Fernández, friend and colleague, who 
initiated the contact with Servus Gieben for 
Elizabeth in July 1999, through associates at 
the American Academy in Rome. See chap. 7, 
above. The feast day of Diego is November 13 
on the liturgical calendar, but Franciscans have 
traditionally observed it on November 12, the 
anniversary of Diego’s death.
15.	 We are grateful to Servus Gieben for his 
permission to quote or paraphrase excerpts 
from this and subsequent letters. His refer­
ences to sources were important to our work, 
in particular, the materials in the Franciscan 
index Archivo Ibero-Americano. He also sent us 
excellent photographs of the two engravings of 
San Diego that he had forwarded to Sedlmajer. 
A note on the engravings: Gieben’s letter to 
Sedlmajer had given a date of 1588 for one 
of them, the other a little later (see chap. 6, 
above). To Elizabeth’s request for confirmation 
of dates he wrote on December 31, 1999:
John Sadeler’s engraving of Diego d’Alcala 
(II-C-2/9) must be dated between 1595 and 
1600. [Between] the first year he settled in 
Venice and [his death] during the pestilence of 
1600. The engraving by Cornelis Galle (IV-G-9) 
first appeared in the picture-book by Hendrik 
Sedulius, “Imagines seraphicae santissimi 
P. Francisci Assisiatis, illustriumque virorum et 
feminarum, qui ex tribus Ordinibus relati sunt 
inter sanctos..., Antverpiae 1614.” The edition 
of our Print Collection was issued from the same 
copperplates, by John Galle, Antwerp 1653.
Cornelius (or Cornelis) Galle (1576–1650) be­
longed to a renowned printing and publishing 
dynasty in Antwerp with his brother Theodore 
(1571–1633), sons of Philips Galle (1537–1612), 
whose engraving of Stradanus’s clock shop we 
show in FIG. 21.4. John (or Joannes) Galle was 
Theodore’s son. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

224
NOTES
12.	 Ford, quoted in The Sacred Made Real: 
Spanish Painting and Sculpture 1600–1700, 
exh. cat., ed. Xavier Bray (London: National 
Gallery, 2009), 173. For Gregorio Fernández and 
copies of his and Mena’s sculptures of Saint 
Francis, see Trusted, The Arts of Spain, 54; and 
Marjorie Trusted, “Art for the Masses: Spanish 
Sculpture in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth 
Centuries,” in Sculpture and Its Reproductions, 
ed. Anthony Hughes and Erich Ranfft (London: 
Reaktion Books, 1997), 57–60. For Antonio de 
Montúfar, see http://collections.lacma.org
/node/215693. Montúfar’s painting, Saint 
Francis of Assisi Appearing before Pope 
Nicholas V, with Donors (La aparición de 
san Francisco de Asís al Papa Nicolás V, con 
donantes), dated 1628, is in the collection of 
the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
13.	 See note 12, above. Curated by Xavier 
Bray at the National Gallery in London, the 
show opened in London in 2009 and traveled 
the next year to the National Gallery of Art in 
Washington, DC.
14.	 Elizabeth King, “Notes from the Field: 
Anthropomorphism,” Art Bulletin 94, no.1 
(March 2012): 9–12. Later published as “Inhale, 
Exhale, Pause: Breath and the Open Mouth in 
Sculpture,” in Field Notes on the Visual Arts, 
ed. Karen Lang (Bristol: Intellect, 2019), 2–7. 
15.	 For the Mena: José Luis Romero Torres 
and Gonzalo Otalecu Guerrero, eds., Pedro 
de Mena: Granatensis Malacae, exh. cat. 
(Málaga: Palacio Episcopal, 2019), 282–84. For 
the Zurbarán (painted in 1640): Joan Yeguas, 
in The Spanish Golden Age: Painting and 
Sculpture in the Time of Velázquez, exh. cat., 
ed. Roberto Contini and María López-Fanjul y 
Díez del Corral (Munich: Hirmer Verlag, 2016), 
214.
9.	
For this distinction, and an analysis of the 
effect of the Counter-Reformation on art in 
Spain, see Marjorie Trusted, The Arts of Spain: 
Iberia and Latin America 1450–1700 (Uni­
versity Park: Pennsylvania State University 
Press, 2007), 25 ff. Trusted quotes the prolix 
language of the 1563 Council of Trent:
The images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother of 
God, and of the other saints are to be placed 
and retained especially in the churches, and 
that due honour and veneration is to be given 
them; not, however, that any divinity or virtue is 
believed to be in them by reason of which they 
are to be venerated, or that something is to 
be asked of them, or that trust is to be placed 
in images, as was done of old by the Gentiles 
who placed their hope in idols; but because the 
honour which is shown them is referred to the 
prototypes which they represent, so that by 
means of the images which we kiss and before 
which we uncover the head and prostrate our­
selves, we adore Christ and venerate the saints 
whose likeness they bear.
(Her source: 25th Session of the Council of 
Trent, from H. J. Schroeder, trans., Canons and 
Decrees of the Council of Trent [Rockford, IL: 
Tan Books, 1978], 215–16.)
10.	 Pedro de Ribadeneira, Flos sanctorum, 
libro de las vidas de los Santos (Madrid: Luis 
Sanchez, [1599–1601] 1616), 708–9. An English 
translation was published in 1669: The Lives of 
Saints with Other Feasts of the Year Accord­
ing to the Roman Calendar, trans. W. Petre 
(St Omers: Ioachim Carlier, 1669), 769. Pedro 
de Ribadeneira (or Ribadeneyra) (1527–1611) 
was a Spanish chronicler, a Jesuit priest, and 
the first biographer of Ignatius of Loyola.
11.	
Our thanks to Susan Verdi Webster, 
who advises caution about current-day 
interpretations of reports of apparitions in 
the sixteenth century (phone conversation, 
March 8, 2022). Her warning echoes that of 
Peter Burke: we are not to trust our modern 
distinctions between natural and supernatu­
ral. Webster speaks of “the lived, real, sensory 
experience” of those who witnessed visions. 
The very odor of the crypt is mentioned by 
Ribadeneira’s source, Marcos de Lisboa: “And 
when the doors were opened, an odor of such 
sweetness came out that we could not bear 
its fragrance.” 
CHAPTER 25
Miracles and Walking Sculptures
1.	
Freud’s definition of the uncanny (unheim­
lich)—uncertainty as to whether a thing is, or 
is not, alive—is taken from Ernst Jentsch, “Zur 
Psychologie des Unheimlichen,” Psychiatrisch-
Neurologische Wochenschrift 8, no. 22 
(August 25, 1906): 195–98; and 8, no. 23 
(September 1, 1906): 203–5. Available online 
in English translation by Roy Sellars, “On the 
Psychology of the Uncanny.” Federico García 
Lorca’s immortal 1933–34 essay, “Play and 
Theory of the Duende,” is found in Deep Song 
and Other Prose, ed. and trans. Christopher 
Maurer (New York: New Directions, 1980). 
2.	
Burke, The Historical Anthropology 
of Early Modern Italy, 218. The quote, from 
chap. 15, “Rituals of Healing in Early Modern 
Italy,” addresses conflicting medical practices 
that reveal beliefs about illness and the body. 
This chapter and Burke’s chap. 5, “How to 
Be a Counter-Reformation Saint,” have been 
essential to our study.
3.	
David Freedberg, The Power of Images: 
Studies in the History and Theory of Response 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), 
431: “[When our study] is too strictly based 
on reclamation of context...[it] resolutely 
refuses to allow the integration of ourselves 
into the past, or—to put it less sentimentally—
to allow the lessons we learn from our own 
responses to inform our judgments about 
the past.” 
4.	
Freedberg, The Power of Images, 28; 
original emphasis.
5.	
Freedberg, The Power of Images, 32.
6.	
Second Commandment, Exodus 20, KJV.
7.	
English translation from Władysław 
Tatarkiewicz, History of Aesthetics, vol. 2: Me­
dieval Aesthetics (The Hague: Mouton, 1970), 
105.
8.	
The quote is from Baxandall, The Lime­
wood Sculptors, 53, summarizing this passage 
attributed to Nicholas of Lyra: “If it is said that 
under the Old Law God had no image and that 
this was a sign for the New Law, the answer is 
that, if God had not afterwards become Man, 
then indeed he should not have had images.” 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

225
NOTES
25.	 Susan Verdi Webster provides this 
quote in Art and Ritual in Golden-Age Spain: 
Sevillian Confraternities and the Processional 
Sculpture of Holy Week (Princeton, NJ: Princ­
eton University Press, 1998), 181. Her source 
is Juan de la Cruz, Subida del Monte Carmelo 
(1579), in Biblioteca de autores españoles 
(Madrid: M. Rivadeneyra, 1853), 27:92.
26.	 Trusted, The Arts of Spain, shows how 
the Catholic processional tradition itself 
originated in part in the carrying of the Host 
through the streets on the annual feast of 
Corpus Christi in the thirteenth century, as 
confirmation of the body and blood of Christ 
(41–47). See also Marjorie Trusted, “Moving 
Church Monuments: Processional Images in 
Spain in the Seventeenth Century,” Church 
Monuments: Journal of the Church Monu­
ments Society 10 (1995): 56–58.
27.	 See Patrick Lenaghan, Images in Proces­
sion: Testimonies to Spanish Faith (New York: 
American Bible Society and Hispanic Society 
of America, 2000).
28.	 Trusted, “Moving Church Monuments,” 
62–64, writes of one confraternity, “Its proces­
sion on Maundy Thursday in the seventeenth 
century was a solemn procession of discipline, 
comprising 650 brothers of light (holding 
torches), dressed in black, and 1,500 brothers 
of blood, who took part in the procession ‘in 
the trance of flagellation’, beating themselves 
with knotted cords until the blood flowed.” 
29.	 Webster, Art and Ritual in Golden-Age 
Spain, 167. Our description of Spanish pro­
cessional sculpture is drawn from Webster’s 
portrait of the processional culture in Seville, 
with its focus on the traditions and practices 
connected to Holy Week. See also Web­
ster’s essay “Shameless Beauty and Worldly 
Splendor: On the Spanish Practice of Adorning 
the Virgin,” in The Miraculous Image in the 
Late Middle Ages and Renaissance, ed. Erik 
Thunø and Gerhard Wolf (Rome: L’Erma di 
Bretschneider, 2004), 249–71.
30.	 Gervase Rosser gives a vivid portrait of 
the origins and social structure of confra­
ternities in his essay “Crafts, Guilds and the 
Negotiation of Work in the Medieval Town.” 
See chap. 19 n. 2, above.
19.	 Antonio Rojo, Historia de San Diego de 
Alcalá: Fundación y frutos de santidad que 
ha produzido su convento de Santa Maria 
de Iesús [...] (Madrid: Imprenta Real, 1663), 
130–31. Andrew Villalon mentions that wit­
nesses in the monastery reported that Diego 
had never until then been heard to speak 
Latin (Villalon, “The Miracle Book of Diego de 
Alcalá,” 22). An early image of Diego embracing 
the cross is the 1594 Assumption retablo by 
Alonso Vázquez in the Cathedral of Seville, de­
picting the saint as a witness (Romero Torres, 
“Iconografía y devoción regia,” 103–4, 106).
20.	 John Marciari, Italian, Spanish, and 
French Paintings before 1850 in the San Diego 
Museum of Art (San Diego: San Diego Museum 
of Art, 2015), 325: “Although Diego was in his 
late fifties or sixties when the Miracle of the 
Roses occurred, he is usually shown in Spanish 
art as a younger man, perhaps to emphasize 
the sweet simplicity of his charitable act.”
21.	 Romero Torres, in Pedro de Mena: The 
Spanish Bernini (2014), 158–69. We wish to 
thank José Luis Romero Torres, Conservador 
del Patrimonio Histórico, Real Academia de 
Bellas Artes de San Telmo de Málaga y Real 
Academia de Nobles Artes de Antequera, for 
graciously responding to our questions about 
this sculpture, and more broadly about early 
depictions of Diego de Alcalá in works of art, 
in email correspondence between 2020 and 
2022. 
22.	 Romero Torres, in Pedro de Mena: The 
Spanish Bernini (2014), 166.
23.	 Romero Torres, “Iconografía y devoción 
regia,” 101–2.
24.	 The earliest image we have found of 
Diego, an anonymous engraving, appears in a 
copy of the documents Philip II submitted to 
Sixtus V in Rome in pursuit of the canoniza­
tion. It is seen in Francisco de la Peña’s De vita 
miraculis et actis canonizationis sancti Didaci 
libri tres (Rome: In Aedibus Populi Romani, 
1589), published the year following canoniza­
tion. On death masks and death portraits of 
saints, see Fernando Quiles, “Between Being, 
Seeming and Saying: The Vera Effigies in Spain 
and Hispanic America during the Baroque,” 
trans. Anna Moorby, in Fiction sacrée: Spiritu­
alité et esthétique durant le premier âge mod­
erne, ed. Ralph Dekoninck, Agnès Guiderdoni, 
and Emilie Granjon (Leuven: Peeters, 2013), 
181–200.  
16.	 Marcos de Lisboa, Primera parte de las 
crónicas de la orden de los frayles menores 
(Alcalá: Casa de Andres de Angulo, 1562), bk. 
10, chap. 1 (fol. ccxxix). Fray Marcos wrote 
that the cardinal related the story only on 
his deathbed. Grateful thanks to Susan 
Verdi Webster for her translation of Fray 
Marcos’s narrative for us from the original 
sixteenth-century Spanish text. Pedro de 
Ribadeneira cites Fray Marcos’s crónicas as 
the source for the cardinal’s report, but in his 
own narration Ribadeneira refers not to Pope 
Nicholas V (r. 1447–55) but to Nicholas IV (a 
Franciscan, r. 1288–92). Trusted has also noted 
this discrepancy but cites modern sources 
naming Nicholas V (“Art for the Masses,” 57 
and n. 44). The crónicas text gives only the 
name Nicolao for the pope. For more on the 
legend, see Émile Mâle, L’art religieux de la fin 
du XVIe siècle, du XVIIe siècle et du XVIIIe siè­
cle, étude sur l’iconographie après le Concile 
de Trente: Italie, France, Espagne, Flandres 
(Paris: Librairie Armand Colin, 1972), 480–83.
17.	 Trusted, “Art for the Masses,” 57–58: “The 
first sculpted interpretations of the subject 
seem to have been produced by Gregorio 
Fernández; one, which had been dated to not 
later than 1620, is in the Royal Convent of the 
Discalced Nuns (Monasterio de las Descalzas 
Reales) in Valladolid.” See Luis Luna Moreno, 
ed., Pedro de Mena y Castilla, exh. cat. (Val-
ladolid: Museo Nacional de Escultura, 1989), 
22–23; and Juan José Martín González, El es­
cultor Gregorio Fernández (Madrid: Ministerio 
de Cultura, 1980), 249. 
18.	 José Luis Romero Torres in Andreas 
Pampoulides, ed., Pedro de Mena: The Span­
ish Bernini, exh. cat. (London: Coll & Cortés, 
2014), 165–66. Cano and Mena together made 
San Diego de Alcalá (1657–58), commissioned 
by the convent of Santo Ángel Custodio in 
Granada, among a group of four saints “larger 
than life size,” now in the Museo de Bellas 
Artes, Granada. Other Diegos known or at­
tributed to Mena, according to Romero Torres, 
include figures in the Iglesia de Capuchinas de 
San Antonio Abad, Granada; the Museo Dio-
cesano de Arte Sacro de Vitoria; and the San 
Diego Museum of Art (see FIG. 25.2). Here, too, 
as with the Saint Francis, Gregorio Fernández 
may have been the first sculptor to depict the 
saint: a 1605 San Diego de Alcalá now in the 
Museo Nacional de Escultura, Valladolid, is 
attributed to Fernández (Martín González, El 
escultor Gregorio Fernández, 251).
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

226
NOTES
CHAPTER 26
Perpetual Devotion
1.	
Dutch-born sculptors Jean de Mar­
ville (active 1366–1389) and Claus Sluter 
(ca. 1360–1406) began the massive tomb 
monument for Philip the Bold: Marville in 
1381, Sluter in 1389. Sluter’s nephew Claus 
de Werve (? –1439) took over and completed 
the monument in 1410, six years after the 
duke’s death. By that time, the duke’s son 
John the Fearless had commissioned a second 
monument for himself and his wife, Duchess 
Margaret of Bavaria, finished half a century 
after John’s own death. The Spanish sculptor 
Juan de la Huerta (active 1431–1462) began 
the work in 1443, and the French sculptor 
Antoine Le Moiturier (1425–1495) finished it 
in 1470.
2.	
The “eye of northern Europe,” Hugh 
Trevor-Roper’s phrase, Princes and Artists, 
127. Sophie Jugie writes, “For the Hapsburgs, 
the descendants of the Dukes of Burgundy, 
the dynastic value of the Chartreuse de 
Champmol was undiminished: in his first will 
in 1522, Holy Roman Emperor Charles V stated 
his intention to be buried in Champmol, but 
ultimately his remains were transferred to 
El Escorial near Madrid.” Sophie Jugie, The 
Mourners: Tomb Sculptures from the Court of 
Burgundy, exh. cat. (Dijon: Musée des Beaux-
Arts and frame, French/Regional/American 
Museum Exchange, in association with Yale 
University Press, 2010), 35.
3.	
The tombs were dismantled and partly 
destroyed in 1793 in the French Revolution, 
the effigies of dukes and duchess, hated 
symbols of the ancien régime, obliterated 
(Jugie, The Mourners, 35). The mourners 
fared better: “Most of the mourners have 
never been outside of Dijon, but in the chaos 
following their dismantling in 1793, three of 
them vanished, while eight others went into 
private hands. Of these latter, three later 
returned to Dijon through national museum 
loans, four belong to the Cleveland Museum of 
Art, and one is still in a private collection” (47). 
Although the monuments are called tombs, 
they are in fact cenotaphs: memorial tombs. 
The bodies of the dukes were interred not 
within the monuments but in coffins beneath 
the church chancel. As with the monuments, 
these too suffered destruction. The Cathedral 
of St Bénigne in Dijon today preserves what 
are considered only partial remains. 
38.	 Baxandall, The Limewood Sculptors, chap. 
3; for this characterization of Riemenschneider, 
see 92, 172–90; and for Stoss, 191–202. But 
see Johannes Taubert, Polychrome Sculpture: 
Meaning, Form, Conservation (Los Angeles: 
Getty Conservation Institute, 2015), a superb 
new English translation of Taubert’s now-
classic 1978 study, Farbige Skulpturen. And see 
chap. 19 and n. 5, above, for the work of Johan 
Gregor van der Schardt and a glimpse of poly­
chrome portrait commissions in Nuremberg. 
A keen analysis of the centuries-old prejudice 
against putting color on sculpture is Luke Syson, 
“Polychrome and Its Discontents: A History,” in 
Like Life: Sculpture, Color, and the Body, exh. 
cat., ed. Luke Syson et al. (New York: Metropoli­
tan Museum of Art, 2018), 14–41.
39.	 “San Ignacio Loyola advised active 
participation of all the senses in meditating on 
the torments of Hell”: Webster, Art and Ritual 
in Golden-Age Spain, 177, quoting Palma 
Martínez-Burgos García, Ídolos e imágenes: La 
controversia del arte religioso en el siglo XVI 
español (Valladolid: Universidad de Valladolid, 
1990), 166–67. And see n. 11, above.
40.	 Webster, Art and Ritual in Golden-Age 
Spain, 163 and chap. 5, “Public Response to 
the Sculptures,” 164 ff. 
41.	 Freedberg, The Power of Images, 30. 
A very different Passion cycle, in which the 
viewer walks and the sculpture “watches,” is 
the famous Sacro Monte in Varallo in Italy’s 
Piedmont, with its trompe l’oeil frescoes merg­
ing with sculptures in wood and terracotta by 
Gaudenzio Ferrari (ca. 1470–1546). Now a 
unesco World Heritage Site, it was finished in 
the first half of the sixteenth century: a series 
of forty-five small chapels replicate holy sites 
from Eden to Calvary for the pilgrim to discover 
by walking a winding path up the mountain to­
ward its summit. See Fredrika H. Jacobs, The 
Living Image in Renaissance Art (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2005), 16–20.
42.	 Webster, Art and Ritual in Golden-Age 
Spain, 79.
43.	 Koeppe, Making Marvels, 256–57.
44.	 For the film, see https://www.metmuseum.
org/exhibitions/listings/2019/making-marvels
-science-splendor/art-in-motion
31.	 Webster, Art and Ritual in Golden-Age 
Spain, 133.
32.	 Lenaghan, Images in Procession, 19–20; 
and Suzanne L. Stratton, ed., Spanish Poly­
chrome Sculpture 1500–1800 in United States 
Collections, exh. cat. (New York: Spanish 
Institute, 1993), 175.
33.	 Webster, Art and Ritual in Golden-Age 
Spain, 64.
34.	 Trusted, The Arts of Spain, 47–48.
35.	 Trusted, The Arts of Spain, 59 n. 172. 
She quotes Carl Justi in his introduction to 
K. Baedeker, Spain and Portugal: Handbook 
for Travellers (Leipzig, 1913), lxxi. Richard 
Ford, quoted above on Mena’s Saint Francis, 
nonetheless joined other foreigners in their 
objections to putting paint on sculpture: 
“From being clothed and painted they are fail­
ures as works of art, strictly speaking, for they 
attempt too much. The essence of statuary 
is form, and to clothe a statue, said Byron, is 
like translating Dante: a marble statue never 
deceives; it is the colouring it that does, and is 
a trick beneath the severity of sculpture. The 
imitation of life may surprise, but...it can only 
please the ignorant and children” (R. Ford, A 
Handbook for Travellers in Spain [1845], ed. 
I. Robertson, 3 vols. [London, 1966], 1:169). 
Cited by Marjorie Trusted, Spanish Sculpture: 
Catalogue of the Post-Medieval Spanish 
Sculpture in Wood, Terracotta, Alabaster, 
Marble, Stone, Lead and Jet in the Victoria 
and Albert Museum (London: Victoria and 
Albert Museum, 1996), 1, in her chapter 
“‘Failures as Works of Art’? British Attitudes 
to Spanish Sculpture and the Formation of 
the Collection.” Trusted’s revealing discussion 
of the battle between religious and aesthetic 
responses to the art of Spain refers to the 
“almost moral disapproval” of the aesthete.
36.	 Marcel Dieulafoy (1844–1920) from his 
1908 La statuaire polychrome en Espagne 
(Paris), as quoted by Gridley McKim-Smith, 
“Spanish Polychrome Sculpture and Its Critical 
Misfortunes,” in Stratton, Spanish Polychrome 
Sculpture, 13. McKim-Smith’s essay is a fierce 
cross-examination of art history’s repeated 
failures to recognize the genre.
37.	 Baxandall, The Limewood Sculptors, 
151 ff.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

227
NOTES
6.	
Núñez, “Documentos,” 3, no. 13 (January–
February 1916): 119–22. Philip amassed holy 
relics at the Escorial in Spain as passionately 
as his nephew Rudolf amassed artworks and 
machines in his Prague Kunstkammer. Mar­
jorie Trusted counts them: “Philip II collected 
7,422 relics between 1571 and his death in 
1598, all of them authenticated and labelled” 
(The Arts of Spain, 50). 
In 2005 Elizabeth visited the Iglesia Catedral 
Magistral in Alcalá de Henares to view the 
tomb of San Diego. A young docent, a student 
at the university, mentioned that on Novem­
ber 13 of each year, the current feast day of the 
saint in Spain, the tomb is opened, to display 
the body. Elizabeth commented on the very 
small size of the saint’s tomb. ”Yes,” the docent 
said, “it is missing its lower legs.”
CHAPTER 27
The Machine and the Corpse
1.	
Vesalius at the prince’s bedside: Villalon, 
“Putting Don Carlos Together Again,” 352 ff.; 
Skaarup, Anatomy and Anatomists in Early 
Modern Spain, 129–37; and O’Malley, Andreas 
Vesalius, 296–302. Vesalius performed the 
postmortem on Henry II in France, injured in a 
jousting accident (O’Mally, Andreas Vesalius, 
283–88).
2.	
Villalon, “Putting Don Carlos Together 
Again,” 353, drawn from Daza Chacón. 
3.	
The words of the witness Alonso de 
Mendoza, theologian and professor at the 
University in Alcalá, transcribed and repro­
duced in Núñez, “Documentos,” 1, no. 4 (July–
August 1914): 431–32.  
4.	
Núñez, “Documentos,” 1, no. 4 
(July–August 1914): 439–40.
5.	
De humani corporis fabrica, published 
in Basel in 1543, as groundbreaking for the 
history of woodblock printing as it was for 
the history of medicine, corrected the ancient 
Galenic theory of the humors with direct 
observation of the body in dissection. Vesalius 
published an abbreviated version the same 
year, the Epitome, and dedicated it to the 
young Philip II, then a boy of sixteen. 
4.	
The Mourners: Tomb Sculptures from 
the Court of Burgundy, Sophie Jugie, curator 
and director, Musée des Beaux-Arts, Dijon. 
The exhibition opened at the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art in New York in March 2010 and 
traveled to the Saint Louis Art Museum, Dallas 
Museum of Art, Minneapolis Institute of Art, 
Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Fine Arts 
Museums of San Francisco, Virginia Museum 
of Fine Arts, and Musée national du Moyen 
Âge–Musée de Cluny in Paris. 
5.	
Anthony Grafton, “In a Fantastic, Lost 
World,” New York Review of Books, May 13, 
2010, 8–10.
6.	
William A. Christian Jr., Local Religion 
in Sixteenth-Century Spain (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1981). This work is 
a panoramic survey of the religious practices 
of lay communities in New Castile under the 
reign of Philip II.
7.	
Philip the Good (1396–1467), who made 
certain that the tomb monument for his father, 
John the Fearless, was brought to completion, 
in his own reign renovated the theatrical 
grottoes and automata of Hesdin, resplendent 
under earlier counts and dukes. See chap. 17 
n. 16, above.
8.	
Webster’s work is invaluable for its por­
trait of popular responses to images of faith 
outside direct church rule, for the processions 
brought every class of citizen to the street. 
She has especially acknowledged the study 
of the practices of local lay communities 
across sixteenth-century Spain in the work of 
William A. Christian Jr. Peter Burke’s Historical 
Anthropology of Early Modern Italy, with its 
intimate portraits of social subgroups from 
the full “urban mosaic” of a given population 
in the past (not just its rulers, ambassadors, 
and bishops), gives us a chance to imagine less 
documented kinds of settings for an encounter 
with the monk.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

228
Selected Bibliography
Bassermann-Jordan, Ernst von. Alte Uhren 
und ihre Meister [Historical clocks and their 
masters]. Leipzig: Wilhelm Diebener, 1926.
Battisti, Eugenio. “For Some Time Now, in 
Order to Write This Wretched Article, I Have 
Been Thinking About Automatons.” Artforum 
21, no. 9 (May 1983): 54–61.
Bauer, Rotraud, and Herbert Haupt, eds. 
“Das Kunstkammerinventar Kaiser Rudolfs II., 
1607–1611.” Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen 
Sammlungen in Wien 72 (1976): XI–XLV, 1–191.
Baxandall,Michael. The Limewood Sculptors 
of Renaissance Germany. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1980.
Beaune, Jean-Claude. “The Classical Age of 
Automata: An Impressionistic Survey from 
the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Century.” In 
Fragments for a History of the Human Body, 
Part One, edited by Michel Feher, with Ramona 
Naddaff and Nadia Tazi, 430–80. New York: 
Zone, 1989.
Bedini, Silvio A. “The Role of Automata in 
the History of Technology.” Technology and 
Culture 5, no. 1 (1964): 24–42.
Bedini, Silvio A., and Francis R. Maddison. 
“Mechanical Universe: The Astrarium of 
Giovanni de’ Dondi.” Transactions of the 
American Philosophical Society, n.s., 56, pt. 5 
(October 1966): 1–69. 
Bray, Xavier, ed. The Sacred Made Real: 
Spanish Painting and Sculpture 1600–1700. 
Exh. cat. London: National Gallery, 2009.
Bray, Xavier, and José Luis Romero Torres. 
Pedro de Mena: The Spanish Bernini. Exh. cat. 
Luxembourg City: Musée national d’histoire 
et d’art Luxembourg, Coll & Cortés, Hannibal, 
2019. Revised edition of Andreas Pampoulides, 
ed., Pedro de Mena: The Spanish Bernini. Exh. 
cat. London: Coll & Cortés, 2014.
Bredekamp, Horst. The Lure of Antiquity and 
the Cult of the Machine: The Kunstkammer 
and the Evolution of Nature, Art and Technol­
ogy. Translated by Allison Brown. Princeton, 
NJ: Markus Wiener, 1995.
Brown, Jonathan. Kings and Connoisseurs: 
Collecting Art in Seventeenth-Century Europe. 
A. W. Mellon Lectures in the Fine Arts, 1994, 
National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

229
García-Diego, José A. Juanelo Turriano, 
Charles V’s Clockmaker: The Man and His 
Legend. Translated by Charles David Ley. 
Madrid and Sussex: Editorial Castalia and 
Antiquarian Horological Society, 1986.
———. Los relojes y autómatas de Juanelo 
Turriano. Tempvs Fvgit, Monografías Es­
pañolas de Relojería, vol. 6. Madrid: Albatros 
Ediciones, 1982.
García Lorca, Federico. Deep Song and Other 
Prose. Edited and translated by Christopher 
Maurer. New York: New Directions, 1980.
Garnett, Jane, and Gervase Rosser. 
Spectacular Miracles: Transforming Images 
in Italy from the Renaissance to the Present. 
London: Reaktion Books, 2013.
Gieben, Servus. “Christelijke iconografie: 
Problemen en oplossingen” [Christian iconog­
raphy: Problems and solutions]. Desipientia: 
Zin & waan 2, no. 3 (December 1995): 4–11.
Gila Medina, Lázaro. Pedro de Mena, escultor 
1628–1688. Madrid: Editorial Arco/Libros, 
2007.
Gouk, Penelope. The Ivory Sundials of 
Nuremberg 1500–1700. Cambridge: Whipple 
Museum of the History of Science, 1988.
Gross, Kenneth, ed. On Dolls. London: Notting 
Hill, 2018.
———. Puppet: An Essay on Uncanny Life. Chi­
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Grubmüller, Klaus, and Markus Stock, eds. 
Automaten in Kunst und Literatur des Mit­
telalters und der Frühen Neuzeit [Automata in 
medieval and early modern art and literature]. 
Wolfenbütteler Mittelalter-Studien, vol. 17. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 2003.
Hall–van den Elsen, Catherine. Luisa Roldán. 
Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2021.
Haspels, J. J. L., ed. Royal Music Machines. 
Exh. cat. Zutphen, the Netherlands: Walburg 
Pers, 2006.
Cohen, John. Human Robots in Myth and 
Science. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1966.
Daston, Lorraine, and Katharine Park. Won­
ders and the Order of Nature 1150–1750. New 
York: Zone, 1998.
Evans, R. J. W. Rudolf II and His World: A 
Study in Intellectual History 1576–1612. Ox­
ford: Oxford University Press, 1973.
Evans, R. J. W., and Alexander Marr, eds. 
Curiosity and Wonder from the Renaissance 
to the Enlightenment. Aldershot: Ashgate, 
2006.
Fane, Lawrence. M.T./L.F.: A Sculptor’s 
Dialogue with Mariano Taccola, 
Fifteenth-Century Italian Artist-Engineer. 
Lake Placid, NY: Pont La Vue Press, 2006.
Findlen, Paula. Possessing Nature: Museums, 
Collecting, and Scientific Culture in Early 
Modern Italy. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1994.
Freedberg, David. The Power of Images: Stud­
ies in the History and Theory of Response. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.
Fritsch, Julia, ed. Ces curieux navires: Trois 
automates de la Renaissance [Ships of 
curiosity: Three Renaissance automata]. Paris: 
Éditions de la Réunion des musées nationaux, 
1999.
Fučíková, Eliška, James M. Bradburne, Beket 
Bukovinská, Jaroslava Hausenblasová, 
Lumomír Konečný, Ivan Muchka, and Michal 
Šroněk, eds. Rudolf II and Prague: The Court 
and the City. Prague: Prague Castle Adminis­
tration, London: Thames & Hudson, 1997.
Gachard, Louis-Prosper. Don Carlos et 
Philippe II. 2 vols. Brussels: E. Devroye, 
imprimeur du roi, 1863.  
Brown, Peter. The Cult of the Saints: Its Rise 
and Function in Latin Christianity. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1981.
Brusa, Giuseppe. “Giovanni Torriano e i suoi 
favolosi orologi microcosmici.” La voce di 
hora: Pubblicazione dell’Associazione Italiana 
Cultori di Orologeria Antica, no. 15 (December 
2003): 3–22. 
Bukovinská, Beket. “The Known and 
Unknown Kunstkammer of Rudolf II.” In 
Collection—Laboratory—Theater: Scenes of 
Knowledge in the 17th Century, edited by Hel­
mar Schramm et al. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 
2005. (Originally published in German, 2003, 
for the series Theatrum Scientiarum.)
Burke, Peter. The Historical Anthropology 
of Early Modern Italy: Essays on Perception 
and Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1987.
Bussmann, Klaus, and Heinz Schilling, eds. 
1648: War and Peace in Europe. Exh. cat., 3 
vols. Münster: Westfälisches Landesmuseum 
für Kunst und Kulturgeschichte, 1998.
Case, Thomas E. La historia de San Diego 
de Alcalá: Su vida, su canonización y su 
legado/The Story of San Diego de Alcalá: 
His Life, His Canonization and His Legacy. 
Alcalá de Henares: Universidad de Alcalá, 1998. 
Bilingual edition.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote. Trans-
lated by Edith Grossman. New York: Harper­
Collins, 2003. 
Chapuis, Alfred, and Édouard Gélis. Le monde 
des automates: Étude historique et technique. 
2 vols. Paris, 1928. Reprint Geneva: Éditions 
Slatkine, 1984.
Christian, William A., Jr. Apparitions in Late 
Medieval and Renaissance Spain. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981. 
———. Local Religion in Sixteenth-Century 
Spain. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1981.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

230
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Long, Pamela O. Artisan/Practitioners and 
the Rise of the New Sciences, 1400–1600. 
Corvallis: Oregon State University Press, 2011.
Luna Moreno, Luis, ed. Pedro de Mena y 
Castilla. Exh. cat. Valladolid: Museo Nacional 
de Escultura, 1989.
Mâle, Émile. L’art religieux de la fin du XVIe 
siècle, du XVIIe siècle et du XVIIIe siècle, étude 
sur l’iconographie après le Concile de Trent: 
Italie, France, Espagne, Flandres. Paris: Librai­
rie Armand Colin, 1972.
Martín González, Juan José. El escultor 
Gregorio Fernández. Madrid: Ministerio de 
Cultura, 1980.
Maurice, Klaus. Die deutsche Räderuhr: 
Zur Kunst und Technik des mechanischen 
Zeitmessers im deutschen Sprachraum 
[The German wheel clock: On the art and 
technology of the mechanical timepiece in 
the German-speaking world]. 2 vols. Munich: 
C. H. Beck, 1976.
———. Von Uhren und Automaten, das Messen 
der Zeit [Of clocks and automata, the measure 
of time]. Munich: Prestel, 1968.
Maurice, Klaus, and Otto Mayr, eds. The 
Clockwork Universe: German Clocks and 
Automata, 1550–1650. Exh. cat. New York: 
Neale Watson Academic Publications, for 
the Smithsonian Institution, 1980. German 
edition: Die Welt als Uhr: Deutsche Uhren 
und Automaten, 1550–1650. Munich: 
Deutscher Kunstverlag, for the Bayerisches 
Nationalmuseum, 1980.
Mayr, Otto. Authority, Liberty, and Automatic 
Machinery in Early Modern Europe. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986.
———. “Automatenlegenden in der Spät-
renaissance” [Legends of automata in the late 
Renaissance]. Technikgeschichte: Beiträge zur 
Geschichte der Technik und Industrie 41, no. 1 
(1974): 20–32.  
Melville, Herman. “The Belltower.” Putnam’s 
Monthly Magazine, August 1855. Reprinted 
in The Piazza Tales. New York: Dix, Edwards, 
and Co., 1856.
———. “Inhale, Exhale, Pause: Breath and the 
Open Mouth in Sculpture.” In Field Notes on 
the Visual Arts, edited by Karen Lang, 2–7. 
Bristol: Intellect, 2019.
———. “Perpetual Devotion: A Sixteenth-
Century Machine That Prays.” In Genesis 
Redux: Essays in the History and Philosophy 
of Artificial Life, edited by Jessica Riskin, 
263–92. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2007.
Kleist, Heinrich von. “On the Marionette 
Theater,” translated by Roman Paska, and 
“The Inanimate Incarnate.” In Fragments for a 
History of the Human Body, Part One, edited 
by Michel Feher, with Ramona Naddaff and 
Nadia Tazi, 410–29. New York: Zone, 1989.
Koeppe, Wolfram, ed. Making Marvels: Sci­
ence and Splendor at the Courts of Europe. 
Exh. cat. New York: Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, 2019.  
Kowar, Helmut. “‘Wir machen Musik!’: Trom­
peterautomat, Schiff und Bacchuswagen des 
Hans Schlotheim” [“We make music!”: The 
Trumpeter automaton, the ship, and the Bac­
chus Chariot by Hans Schlotheim]. Jahrbuch 
des Kunsthistorischen Museums Wien 13–14 
(2011–12): 118–59.
Kubler, George. The Shape of Time: Remarks 
on the History of Things. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1962.
Leithe-Jasper, Manfred, and Rudolf 
Distelberger. The Kunsthistorische Museum 
Vienna: The Treasury and the Collection of 
Sculpture and Decorative Arts. Translated by 
Elsie Callander and Ilse Seldon. London: Philip 
Wilson, 1982.
Lenaghan, Patrick. Images in Procession: 
Testimonies to Spanish Faith. New York: 
American Bible Society and Hispanic Society 
of America, 2000.
Hawthorne, Nathaniel. “The Artist of the 
Beautiful.” In Mosses from an Old Manse, 
164–91. London: Wiley & Putnam, 1846.
Hoffmann, E. T. A. “The Sandman.” In Tales 
of Hoffmann, 85–125. Translated by R. J. 
Hollingdale. London: Penguin, 1982.
Impey, Oliver, and Arthur MacGregor, eds. 
The Origins of Museums: The Cabinet 
of Curiosities in Sixteenth- and 
Seventeenth-Century Europe. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1985.
Jacobs, Fredrika H. The Living Image in 
Renaissance Art. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005.
Jugie, Sophie. The Mourners: Tomb 
Sculptures from the Court of Burgundy. 
Exh. cat. Dijon: Musée des Beaux-Arts and 
FRAME, French/Regional/American Museum 
Exchange, in association with Yale University 
Press, 2010. 
Kamen, Henry. Philip of Spain. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1997.
Kang, Minsoo. Sublime Dreams of Living 
Machines: The Automaton in the European 
Imagination. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2011. 
Kaufmann, Thomas DaCosta. “Remarks on 
the Collections of Rudolf II: The Kunstkammer 
as a Form of Representatio.” Art Journal 38, 
no. 1 (Autumn 1978): 22–28.
 Keating, Jessica. Animating Empire: Autom­
ata, the Holy Roman Empire, and the Early 
Modern World. University Park: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 2018.
King, Elizabeth. “Clockwork Prayer: A 
Sixteenth-Century Mechanical Monk.” Black­
bird: An Online Journal of Literature and the 
Arts 1, no. 1 (Spring 2002). https://blackbird 
.vcu.edu/v1n1/nonfiction/king_e/prayer
_introduction.htm.
———. “Clockwork Prayer: A Sixteenth-Century 
Mechanical Monk.” In Breaking the Disciplines: 
Reconceptions in Knowledge, Art and Culture, 
edited by Martin L. Davies and Marsha Meskim­
mon, 84–128. London: I. B. Tauris, 2003.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

231
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sánchez de Mayendia, José Cristóbal. “Los re­
tratos de Juanelo.” In Cuadernos de relojería: 
Una antología imprescindible, edited by Luis 
Montañés Fontenla, 123–26. Tempvs Fvgit, 
Monografías Españolas de Relojería, vol. 5. 
Madrid: Albatros Ediciones, 1982.
Sawday, Jonathan. Engines of the Imagina­
tion: Renaissance Culture and the Rise of the 
Machine. London: Routledge, 2007.
Scheicher, Elisabeth. Die Kunst- und Wunder­
kammern der Habsburger. Vienna: Molden, 
1979.
Selznick, Brian. The Invention of Hugo Cabret. 
New York: Scholastic, 2007. 
Sherwood, Merriam. “Magic and Mechanics 
in Medieval Fiction.” Studies in Philology 44, 
no. 4 (October 1947): 567–92.
Smith, Cyril Stanley. A History of Metal­
lography: The Development of Ideas on the 
Structure of Metals before 1890. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1960.
———. A Search for Structure: Selected Essays 
on Science, Art, and History. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1981.
Smith, Pamela H. The Body of the Artisan: Art 
and Experience in the Scientific Revolution. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Stafford, Barbara Maria, and Frances Terpak. 
Devices of Wonder: From the World in a Box 
to Images on a Screen. Los Angeles: Getty 
Research Institute, 2001.
Stirling-Maxwell, William. The Cloister Life 
of the Emperor Charles V. 4th ed. London: 
John C. Nimmo, 1891. 
Parker, Geoffrey. Imprudent King: A New Life 
of Philip II. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2014.
Plank, Robert. “The Golem and the Robot.” 
Literature and Psychology 15 (1965): 12–28. 
Prescott, William H. History of the 
Reign of Philip the Second, King of Spain. 
Edited by John Foster Kirk. 3 vols. Philadelphia: 
J. B. Lippincott, 1874.
Price, Derek J. de Solla. “Automata and 
the Origins of Mechanism and Mechanistic 
Philosophy.” Technology and Culture 5, no. 1 
(1964): 9–23.  
Proske, Beatrice Gilman. Juan Martínez Mon­
tañés, Sevillian Sculptor. New York: Hispanic 
Society of America, 1967.
Rabb, Theodore K., trans. A Sixteenth-Century 
Book of Trades: Das Ständebuch. Palo Alto, 
CA: Society for the Promotion of Science and 
Scholarship, 2009.
Rihouet, Pascale. Art Moves: The Material 
Culture of Processions in Renaissance Peru­
gia. London: Harvey Miller, 2017. 
Riskin, Jessica, ed. Genesis Redux: Essays in 
the History and Philosophy of Artificial Life. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007.
———. The Restless Clock: A History of the 
Centuries-Long Argument over What Makes 
Living Things Tick. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2016.
Romero Torres, José Luis. “Iconografía y devo­
ción regia de un santo franciscano andaluz: 
San Diego de Alcalá” [Iconography and royal 
devotion of an Andalusian Franciscan Saint: 
San Diego de Alcalá]. In Actas del Simposio 
Cuatro siglos de presencia de los franciscanos 
en Estepa, celebrado el 11–13 de septiembre de 
2003, 94–113. Estepa: Ayuntamiento, 2007.
Romero Torres, José Luis, and Gonzalo 
Otalecu Guerrero, eds. Pedro de Mena: 
Granatensis Malacae. Exh. cat. Málaga: 
Palacio Episcopal, 2019.
Montañés Fontenla, Luis. Capítulos de la 
relojería en España [Chapters on clockmaking 
in Spain]. Madrid: Roberto Carbonell Blasco, 
1954.
———, ed. Cuadernos de relojería: Una an­
tología imprescindible [Notes on clockmaking: 
An essential anthology]. Tempvs Fvgit, Mono­
grafías Españolas de Relojería, vol. 5. Madrid: 
Albatros Ediciones, 1982.  
———. Relojes españoles. Madrid: Editorial 
Prensa Española, 1968. 
Motture, Peta, Emma Jones, and Dimitrios 
Zikos, eds. Carvings, Casts and Collectors: 
The Art of Renaissance Sculpture. London: 
Victoria and Albert Museum, 2013.
Murakami Kazuo. Japanese Automata: 
Karakuri Zui; An Eighteenth Century Japanese 
Manual of Automatic Mechanical Devices. 
Osaka: Published by the author, 2012.
Nelson, Victoria. The Secret Life of Puppets. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2001.
Neumann, Erwin. “Das Inventar der rudolf­
inischen Kunstkammer von 1607/11 [The 
inventory of the Rudolfian Kunstkammer from 
1607/11].” In Analecta Reginensia I, Queen 
Christina of Sweden, Documents and Studies, 
262–65. Stockholm, 1966.
Newman, William R. Promethean Ambitions: 
Alchemy and the Quest to Perfect Nature. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Núñez, Fr. Lucio María, OFM, ed. “Documen­
tos sobre la curación del príncipe D. Carlos y la 
canonización de San Diego de Alcalá.” Archivo 
Ibero-Americano 1, no. 4 (July–August 1914); 
2, no. 9 (July–August 1915); 3, no. 13 (January–
February 1916); 4, no. 19 (January–February 
1917). 
O’Malley, Charles Donald. Andreas Vesalius 
of Brussels, 1514–1564. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1965. 
———. Don Carlos of Spain: A Medical Portrait. 
Los Angeles: University of California, 1970.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

232
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Trusted, Marjorie. “Art for the Masses: 
Spanish Sculpture in the Sixteenth and 
Seventeenth Centuries.” In Sculpture and Its 
Reproductions, edited by Anthony Hughes and 
Erich Ranfft, 46–60. London: Reaktion Books, 
1997.  
———. The Arts of Spain: Iberia and Latin 
America 1450–1700. University Park: Pennsyl­
vania State University Press, 2007.
———. “Moving Church Monuments: Proces­
sional Images in Spain in the Seventeenth 
Century.” Church Monuments: Journal of the 
Church Monuments Society 10 (1995): 55–69.  
———. Spanish Sculpture: Catalogue of the 
Post-Medieval Spanish Sculpture in Wood, 
Terracotta, Alabaster, Marble, Stone, Lead 
and Jet in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 1996.
Vanhaelen, Angela. “Strange Things for 
Strangers: Transcultural Automata in Early 
Modern Amsterdam.” Art Bulletin 103, no. 3 
(September 2021): 42–68.
 Villalon, L. J. Andrew. “The 1562 Head Injury 
of Don Carlos: A Conflict of Medicine and 
Religion in Sixteenth-Century Spain.” Mediter­
ranean Studies 22, no. 2 (2014): 95–134.
———. “Putting Don Carlos Together Again: 
Treatment of a Head Injury in Sixteenth-
Century Spain.” Sixteenth Century Journal 26, 
no. 2 (1995): 347–65.
Vincent, Clare. “Diana, Goddess of the Show­
ering Arrows: A Seventeenth-Century German 
Automaton Clock.” Yale University Art Gallery 
Bulletin [European Art] (2016): 75–87.
Von Herz, Adelheid. “Androiden des 16. 
Jahrhunderts.” Master’s thesis, University of 
Hamburg, 1990.
Voskuhl, Adelheid. Androids of the Enlighten­
ment: Mechanics, Artisans, and Cultures of 
the Self. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2013.
Stoichita, Victor I. The Pygmalion Effect: 
From Ovid to Hitchcock. Translated by Alison 
Anderson. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2008.
———. Visionary Experience in the Golden Age 
of Spanish Art. Translated by Anne-Marie 
Glasheen. London: Reaktion Books, 1995.
Stratton, Suzanne L., ed. Spanish Polychrome 
Sculpture 1500–1800 in United States Col­
lections. Exh. cat. New York: Spanish Institute, 
1993.
Syson, Luke, et al. Like Life: Sculpture, Color, 
and the Body. Exh. cat. New York: Metropoli­
tan Museum of Art, 2018. 
Taubert, Johannes. Polychrome Sculpture: 
Meaning, Form, Conservation. Edited by 
Michele D. Marincola. Translation from the 
German by Carola Schulman. Los Angeles: 
Getty Conservation Institute, 2015.
Teklemariam Bache, Yohannes. Verum, 
pulchrum et bonum: Miscellanea di studi 
offerti a Servus Gieben in occasione del suo 
80 compleanno. Rome: Istituto Storico dei 
Cappuccini, 2006.
Thomas, Keith. Religion and the Decline of 
Magic. London: Penguin Books, [1971] 1991.
Trevor-Roper, Hugh. Princes and Artists: 
Patronage and Ideology at Four Habsburg 
Courts 1517–1633. London: Thames & Hudson, 
1976.
Truitt, E. R. Medieval Robots: Mechanism, 
Magic, Nature, and Art. Philadelphia: University 
of Pennsylvania Press, 2015.
Wagner, Michael, and Ulrike Weinhold. 
“Der Diana-Automat im Grünen Gewölbe: 
Technologische und künstlerische Aspekte 
einer Augsburger Figurenuhr” [The Diana au­
tomaton in the Green Vault: Technological and 
artistic aspects of an Augsburg figure clock]. 
Jahrbuch der Staatlichen Kunstsammlungen 
Dresden (2002–3): 35–46.
Webster, Susan Verdi. Art and Ritual in 
Golden-Age Spain: Sevillian Confraternities 
and the Processional Sculpture of Holy Week. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1998. 
———. “Shameless Beauty and Worldly 
Splendor: On the Spanish Practice of Adorning 
the Virgin.” In The Miraculous Image in the 
Late Middle Ages and Renaissance, edited by 
Erik Thunø and Gerhard Wolf, 249–71. Rome: 
L’Erma di Bretschneider, 2004.
Weinryb, Ittai, ed. Agents of Faith: Votive 
Objects in Time and Place. Exh. cat. New York: 
Bard Graduate Center, 2018.
Wethey, Harold E. Alonso Cano: Painter, 
Sculptor, Architect. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1955.
Wood, Gaby. Edison’s Eve: A Magical History 
of the Quest for Mechanical Life. New York: 
Knopf, 2002.
Zanetti, Cristiano. Janello Torriani and the 
Spanish Empire: A Vitruvian Artisan at the 
Dawn of the Scientific Revolution. Leiden: 
Brill, 2017.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

233
Acknowledgments
We began this book more than twenty years ago, our prog­
ress always interrupted by workshop and studio. From 
the start, colleagues who believed in our project helped 
us: Carlton Newton, Evelyn Lincoln, Carlene Stephens, 
Rosamond Purcell, Fredrika Jacobs, Clifford Edwards, 
and Ashley Kistler. In the past six years we asked Lory 
Frankel, Erin Hollaway Palmer, Jeanne Schinto, and David 
Morris to read our full manuscript and act as our editors, 
each at a key moment as we kept working. During this time, 
Judith Hudson, Scott Nolley, Brittany Nelson, Pat Keck, 
Michael B. Arthur, Bob Frishman, and Cody Whitby con­
tinually contributed their knowledge and skills. For advice 
and counsel on points across the horizon of our study, 
we thank Susan Bielstein, Pamela H. Smith, Susan Verdi 
Webster, Jessica Riskin, Alison Luchs, Mary Levkoff, Steve 
and Jeremie Ryder, Andrew Villalon, Karen Lang, Nancy 
Princenthal, Paulus Rainer, Marina Belozerskaya, Hanoch 
Ben-Yami, Michael Schreffler, William R. Newman, Jane 
Kamensky, Daniel Dennett, Garry Wills, Frank Fehrenbach, 
Peter Friess, Murakami Kazuo, Ian Greaves, José Luis 
Romero Torres, and Wolfram Koeppe. Our editors at Getty 
Publications, Karen Levine, Tevvy Ball, Nola Butler, and 
consultant Sheila Berg, as well as Danielle Brink, Michelle 
Deemer, Jeffrey Cohen, and consultant Amy McFarland, 
together with the outside readers the Getty engaged, shep­
herded the book to completion.
The monk walks out of Rosamond Purcell’s pictures 
into the reader’s hands. We saw things in her photographs 
that we missed looking at the monk with our own eyes. Her 
camera captures signals, as from a distant star, marking 
the centuries it took the monk to reach us. Dennis Purcell, 
magus in his own right, scanned and color corrected the 
35mm transparencies Rosamond made at the museum.
Curators and conservators in museums in France, 
Germany, Austria, Italy, and Hungary contributed essen­
tial data on the automata in their collections and welcomed 
Elizabeth on visits to study them in 2019 and 2020. We 
thank Cyrille Foasso and Rémi Catillon at the Musée des 
arts et métiers, Conservatoire national des arts et métiers 
in Paris; Thomas Rebényi at the Deutsches Museum in 
Munich; Raphael Beuing at the Bayerisches Nationalmuseum 
in Munich; Paulus Rainer at the Kunsthistorisches 
Museum in Vienna; and Giorgio Gregato at the Giorgio 
Gregato Orologeria in Milan. From Budapest, although the 
Iparművészeti Múzeum was closed for restoration, Anna 
Ecsedy, curator, sent photographs, videos, bibliography, and 
details of the automaton saint; the former curator, Ágnes 
Prékopa, responded to Elizabeth’s first queries in 1999. Rudolf 
Distelberger, from 1971 to 2002 the distinguished curator and 
director of the Kunstkammer in Vienna’s Kunsthistorisches 
Museum, answered our first questions in 1999–2000 on the 
mechanism and history of the cittern player.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

234
The automaton monk appeared in public for the first 
time (in our day) in the landmark 1980 exhibition, The 
Clockwork Universe, curated by Klaus Maurice and Otto 
Mayr. Mayr, a distinguished curator at the Smithsonian’s 
National Museum of History and Technology, had pursued 
the automaton for the museum collection and acquired it 
in time for the show. Silvio Bedini, Mayr’s colleague at the 
museum, contributed one of the essays to the exhibition 
catalog. Bedini, curator at the founding of the National 
Museum of History and Technology in 1964, later rose to 
deputy director of the museum, then keeper of rare books at 
the museum’s Dibner Library. Both Mayr (1992) and Bedini 
(2000) were awarded the Leonardo da Vinci Medal by the 
Society for the History of Technology. With the scholars 
Lynn T. White Jr., Cyril Stanley Smith, Bern Dibner, Derek 
J. de Solla Price, Eugene Ferguson, and others, they helped 
establish and shape the discipline of the history of tech­
nology as we know it. Both also wrote about the history 
of automata. In 1978 Otto and Silvio invited David Todd to 
become specialist in the physical care of the timekeeping 
collection. Silvio’s books on Thomas Jefferson and on the 
great African American clockmaker and surveyor Benjamin 
Banneker were an inspiration to David, who was newly 
arrived from England. Otto returned to his native Germany 
in 1982 to become general director of the Deutsches Museum 
in Munich, but he imparted his level wisdom in correspon­
dence with us over many years. Silvio had agreed to write 
our preface.  He was just completing a book of his own, his 
twenty-third—a biography of the seventeenth-century Italian 
clockmaker and astronomer Giuseppe Campani—at the time 
of his death in 2007 at the age of ninety. We yet dream of how 
he would have launched our story. Carlene Stephens, curator 
in the Division of Work and Industry at the National Museum 
of American History (nmah; renamed in 1980), played a major 
role behind the scenes in preparations for The Clockwork 
Universe exhibition. She was there when the monk arrived 
in 1977, and she was there when David himself arrived the 
next year. Her own exhibitions on the history of timekeeping, 
navigation, sound recording, robots, and gps technology in 
American culture have documented the shift from mechan­
ical to electronic and then atomic timekeeping in the twen­
tieth century. Robotics appears everywhere in her world. 
She knows more of the monk’s history than anyone alive. 
Through Carlene, many members of the nmah staff helped us: 
Beth Richwine, senior objects conservator; Scott Nolley, for­
mer conservator of exhibits and loans (now head conservator 
at the Hirshhorn Museum); Dawn P. Wallace and her staff in 
the Conservation Department; and the archivists Stephanie 
Kurasz and Kay Peterson of the nmah Digital Programs Office.
We thank the staff in libraries at Harvard, Brown, 
Dartmouth, the Library of Congress, and the Smithsonian’s 
Dibner Library of the History of Science and Technology 
for granting access to rare books. For the far greater num­
ber of books still in circulation that we sought, the longtime 
librarian Jean Scott and her interlibrary loan staff at James 
Branch Cabell Library, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
never failed us.
Between 1999 and 2002, the historian Alex Keller of 
the University of Leicester guided Elizabeth through the 
then-current scholarship on the life and work of Juanelo 
Turriano and the groundbreaking research on Juanelo by 
his close friend José A. García-Diego. García-Diego, much 
quoted in this book, established the Fundación Juanelo 
Turriano in Madrid in 1987, which has since published 
significant new research on Juanelo, including the work of 
Cristiano Zanetti. Equal to such pioneers, from a separate 
sphere, Adelheid von Herz’s thesis will remain foundational 
to all future study of this family of walking androids.
We thank Leslee Asch and Cheryl Henson, who invited 
us to present our work on the monk for the symposium 
“Forms in Motion” at the 2000 Henson International Festival 
of Puppet Theater in New York. Andrew Periale, editor of the 
journal Puppetry International, published Elizabeth’s first 
essay on the monk that year. Expanded essays were pub­
lished between 2002 and 2007 by Mary Flinn and Michael A. 
Keller, editors of Blackbird: An Online Journal of Literature 
and the Arts, hosted by the Virginia Commonwealth 
University Department of English; Marsha Meskimmon and 
Martin L. Davies in their anthology, Breaking the Disciplines: 
Reconceptions in Knowledge, Art, and Culture; and Jessica 
Riskin in Genesis Redux: Essays on the History and 
Philosophy of Artificial Life. In 2002 we cochaired a panel, 
“The Automaton, the Homunculus, and Other Artificial 
Beings: Towards an Interdisciplinary History,” for the annual 
College Art Association in the United States. These opportu­
nities, and diverse venues where we have given talks since, 
pushed us to consider the monk from many points of view.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

235
Cyril Boniface taught David Todd the art of clock­
making. The last in a venerable line of English clockmakers, 
Cyril learned the craft from his father, who scorned the 
use of electricity and lit his workshop with oil lamps. David 
rose from apprentice under Cyril to senior clockmaker at 
Meyrick Neilson of Tetbury, in Gloucestershire, England, a 
firm run by Brigadier James Meyrick Neilson and his wife, 
Moyra, specializing in the restoration of seventeenth- and 
eighteenth-century English clocks. David credits the ten 
years he worked with Cyril and “the General” for his lifelong 
dedication to the history and practice of the clockmaker’s 
craft. David’s father, William Joseph Todd, whose sketches 
in letters from North Africa during World War II became 
family treasures, was his first inspiration.
Of all the people to whom we wrote who knew about 
this automaton in the early years of its recovery, Servus 
Gieben wrote us back. Our correspondence with him brought 
us closest, looking at the monk, to thinking back in time. He 
pointed us to sources essential to our search and trusted us to 
quote from his letters. We are equally indebted to two people 
close to him. Yohannes Teklemariam Bache, president of the 
Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini in Rome from 2014 to 2017 
and current director of its Museo Francescano, edited the 
comprehensive tribute to Servus Gieben, Verum, pulchrum 
et bonum: Miscellanea di studi offerti a Servus Gieben in 
occasione del suo 80th compleanno, which includes a bibli­
ography of Gieben’s published works. For milestones in the 
life of Father Servus, we thank his niece Lydia Beerkens, 
managing director and senior conservator of modern and 
contemporary art at Stichting Restauratie Atelier Limburg in 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
Over twenty years we have been graced with august 
help. All mistakes will be our own, for time will shine more 
light on these mysterious clockwork automata. Whatever 
survives of what we have written, let it include our deepest 
thanks to Sheila Todd and Carlton Newton. 
Henning Bauer’s translations of German sources from 
across centuries carried us through the full span of our 
research and writing. Thanks also to Susanne Böer and, for 
eleventh-hour wisdom, Joe Hannan. Wenrui Zhao, William 
M. Barton, and Anthony T. Padovano translated Latin texts. 
Daniëlle Slootjes translated Servus Gieben’s Dutch. For help 
with Spanish: María Lourdes De Panbehchi, Alain Gelbman, 
Adam Meuse, Susan Verdi Webster, and Carlton Newton. 
Lory Frankel edited Elizabeth’s French. Italian sources were 
translated for us by Silvio Bedini himself and by Evelyn 
Lincoln, Cinzia Corubolo, Sally Hill, Miriam Hurley, and Mario 
Pereira. In Milan, when the clockmaker Giorgio Gregato set 
the nobil matrona in motion for Elizabeth, his son-in-law, 
Alessandro Sperlari, translated our animated conversation.
Robert and Karen Duncan and Marc and Kathy 
LeBaron granted Elizabeth a 2016 residency at PVArt Studio 
in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, giving her time to write. In 2021 
Ellen Cassilly and Frank Konhaus gave her support and 
time at the Cassilhaus artist residency in Durham, North 
Carolina. Through Frank and Ellen, Elizabeth met Wallace 
K. Lightsey, who provided counsel on rights and publication. 
Friends supported our work—some directly, some 
by example, many by grace: Joseph Seipel, Larry Fane, Gail 
Mazur, Michael Mazur, Wendy Ewald, Michael Maas, Chris 
Taggart, Heji Kim, John Powers, Karen Rader, Joan Gaustad, 
Stephen Vitiello, Dan Hurlin, Mike Belzer, Bill Barrette, 
George Ferrandi, Kathleen Graber, Kenneth Gross, Denise 
Markonish, Mark Sloan, Paul Jacobs, Sara Monroe, Rob 
Carter, Lynton Gardiner, Leslie Wayne, Teresita Fernández, 
Carol Corey, Charlotte Potter Kasic, Allan M. Heyward, and 
Olympia Stone. Elizabeth’s father, John S. King, read drafts. 
Matthew Charboneau made the first digital scans of David’s 
drawings. Brittany Nelson scanned more drawings and 
David’s photographs, cleaning and correcting the files to 
David’s specifications. Carlton Newton made 3-d cad render­
ings of parts of the monk’s clockwork for David. Eric Stepp 
assisted on the day Rosamond photographed the monk at 
the museum. Kate Scherer and Rachael Starbuck aided 
Elizabeth’s research. Pamela H. Smith gave us confidence, 
as artisans ourselves, to add our voices to the conversation 
about the history of artificial life. Inspiration came always 
from the fabled David Beck. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

236
early clocks and automata, among them the clocks Thomas 
Jefferson commissioned for Monticello. He loves best, while 
working on a clock, to listen to music from the same period, 
the sixteenth century his favorite.  
Rosamond Purcell is known for her photography in natural 
history museums. She has collaborated with scientists as 
well as scholars of Shakespeare and magic on a range of 
publications and projects. Among the many books featur­
ing her photography is A Glorious Enterprise: The Acad­
emy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia and the Making 
of American Science, by Robert M. Peck and Patricia 
Tyson Stroud; and her reconstruction of an iconic curiosity 
cabinet by Ole Worm, a seventeenth-century Danish lin­
guist, physician, and philosopher, is now in the permanent 
collection of the Natural History Museum, in Copenhagen. 
A retrospective exhibition of her work, Rosamond Purcell: 
Nature Stands Aside, was held at the Addison Gallery 
of American Art, in Andover, MA, from September 2022 
through January 2023.
About the Authors
Elizabeth King, professor emerita of sculpture and 
extended media at Virginia Commonwealth University, is 
a sculptor and writer interested in the ways artists have 
crafted the human form, from sculptural traditions across
cultures, to medical models, puppets, and automata. She 
works in wood, porcelain, and bronze, and often ani­
mates her precisely movable sculptures on stop-motion 
film. Museums that own her work include the Hirshhorn 
Museum, in Washington, DC; the Minneapolis Institute of 
Art; the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, in Richmond; the 
Hood Museum of Art at Dartmouth; and the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, in New York. She is the author of Atten­
tion’s Loop: A Sculptor’s Reverie on the Coexistence of 
Substance and Spirit (1999).
From 1978 to 2005 W. David Todd was conservator of 
timekeeping at the Smithsonian Institution’s National 
Museum of American History, where he is now associate 
curator emeritus. Trained in his native England, he has 
been a practicing clockmaker since the late 1960s. He was 
accepted as a Craft Member of the British Horological 
Institute in 1973. An expert on sixteenth- to eighteenth-
century English, European, and American clockwork, David 
has conserved and restored some of the world’s finest 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

237
Front cover: photograph © Rosamond W. 
Purcell
Color plates on pp. ii, iv, vi, 5, 6, 8–9, 36, 38, 
39, 72, 74–75, 126, 128, 129, 166, 168, 169, 
197: photographs © Rosamond W. Purcell.
Figs. I.1–I.2, 10.20, 20.1: Image courtesy of the 
National Museum of American History, Smith­
sonian Institution. Fig. I.3: Image courtesy of 
the National Museum of American History/
Photograph by Margery Albertini. Fig. 1.1: 
Historic Collection/Alamy Stock Photo. Fig. 
1.2: Niday Picture Library/Alamy Stock Photo. 
Fig. 2.1: © Museu Nacional de Soares dos Reis 
Direção-Geral do Património Cultural/Arquivo 
de Documentação Fotográfica (DGPC/ADF). 
Fig. 3.1: Fundación Pública Andaluza Rodrí­
guez-Acosta. Photograph by Javier Algarra. 
Figs. 3.2, 12.2, 12.6a–12.6b, 14.2a, 16.2–16.3, 
17.1, 20.2: Photographs by Elizabeth King. 
Figs. 4.1–4.2: Span 165.1.7. Houghton Library, 
Harvard University. Fig. 4.3: Fundación 
Juanelo Turriano of Madrid. Fig. 4.4: © Archivo 
Fotográfico Museo Nacional del Prado. Figs. 
5.1, 15.1–15.2, 17.3a–17.3b, 17.5a–17.5b, 22.1: 
KHM-Museumsverband. Fig. 6.1: Museo Fran­
cescano dell’Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini di 
Roma. Figs. 8.1–8.6, 10.3a–10.3d, 10.4–10.5, 
10.6a–10.6b, 10.7, 10.8a–10.8b, 10.9a–10.9b, 
10.10–10.12, 10.13a–10.13c, 10.14, 10.16–
10.17, 10.18a–10.18b, 10.19: Courtesy of 
David Todd, Smithsonian Associate Curator 
Emeritus, from his Smithsonian project files. 
Fig. 8.7: Photograph © Rosamond W. Purcell. 
Fig. 9.1: Photograph by Margery Albertini. 
Fig. 10.1: National Museum of American 
History & Smithsonian Museum Conservation 
Institute (Radiograph taken by staff at the 
Museum Conservation Institute, formerly 
the Conservation Analytical Laboratory). Fig. 
10.2: Diagram by Carlton Newton (based on 
NMAH video, shot from above, of the monk in 
performance, by Scott Nolley, Conservator, 
Exhibits and Loans; Dawn P. Wallace, Objects 
Conservator; and the Conservation Depart­
ment of the National Museum of American 
History). Fig. 10.15: National Museum of 
American History & Smithsonian Museum 
Conservation Institute (radiograph taken by 
staff at the Museum Conservation Institute, 
formerly the Conservation Analytical Labora­
tory). Figs. 12.1, 12.3–12.4: Photo: Deutsches 
Museum/Konrad Rainer. Fig. 12.5: Courtesy 
of Bob Frishman. Figs. 13.1–13.3, 13.5: © 
Iparművészeti Múzeum/Photo by Ágnes 
Soltész-Haranghy. Fig. 13.4: © Iparművészeti 
Múzeum Archive. Fig. 14.1a: Division of Work 
and Industry, National Museum of Ameri­
can History, Smithsonian Institution. Figs. 
14.1b, 14.2b, 18.2: Courtesy of David Todd, 
Smithsonian Associate Curator Emeritus, 
from his Smithsonian project files/Photo by 
David Todd. Fig. 14.1c: National Museum of 
American History & Smithsonian Museum 
Conservation Institute (Radiograph taken by 
staff at the Museum Conservation Institute, 
formerly the Conservation Analytical Labora­
tory). Figs. 14.3a–14.3b: © Musée des arts et 
métiers-Cnam, Paris/photo J-C Wetzel. Fig. 
14.3c: © 1960 Conservatoire national des arts 
et métiers. Fig. 16.1: private collection, Milan, 
Italy/photo by Mario Liguigli ©. Fig. 17.2: © 
Musée des arts et métiers-Cnam, Paris/photo 
P. Faligot. Fig. 17.4: Musée d’horlogerie du 
Locle–Château des Monts, Switzerland/Photo 
R. Sterchi. Fig. 18.1: David Todd. Fig. 18.3: 
Photo by Murakami Kazuo. Fig. 19.1: Photo 
credit: bpk Bildagentur/Skulpturensammlung 
und Museum für Byzantinische Kunst, Berlin, 
Germany/Photo: Antje Voigt/Art Resource, 
NY. Figs. 21.1–21.3: SLUB Dresden/Digital 
Collections/Lit.Germ.rec.B.2039. Fig. 21.4: 
Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles (2020.
PR.2). Fig. 22.2: © LIECHTENSTEIN. The 
Princely Collections, Vaduz-Vienna. Fig. 
23.1: Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles 
(86-B22668). Fig. 23.2: Print Collection, 
University of San Diego, purchased through 
Illustration Credits
the Legler Benbough Student Acquisition fund 
by Katelyn Allen (Class of 2018). Fig. 23.3: 
Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles (2015.
PR.2). Fig. 23.4: © Museo Nacional del Prado. 
Fig. 23.5: Photo Credit: Copyright of the image 
Museo Nacional del Prado/Art Resource, NY. 
Fig. 24.1: Collection of Convento S. Maria La 
Nova, Naples. Fig. 24.2: Museo Francescano 
dell’Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini di Roma/
Photograph by Lydia Beerkens, Roma 2005. 
Figs. 25.1, 25.5: Instituto del Patrimonio 
Cultural de España, Ministerio de Cultura y 
Deporte. Fig. 25.2: The San Diego Museum of 
Art. Fig. 25.3: Photo by José Luis Gutiérrez–
jlgfotografo.com. Fig. 25.4: © Photography: 
Image M.A.S./photographers. Fig. 25.6: Pho­
tographer: Jose Luis Gutierrez. Bishopric of 
Malaga©. Fig. 25.7: © Photo José María Pérez 
Concellón. Fig. 25.8a: © Institut Amatller 
d’Art Hispànic (foto Mas C-85682 Foto Pelai 
Mas 1936) Image courtesy of Susan Verdi 
Webster. Fig. 25.8b: Courtesy of The Hispanic 
Society of America, New York/Image courtesy 
of Susan Verdi Webster. Figs. 25.9–25.11: 
Courtesy of The Hispanic Society of America, 
New York. Fig. 25.12: Photograph by Scott 
W. Nolley, then Conservator of Exhibits and 
Loans, National Museum of American History, 
Smithsonian Institution. Fig. 26.1: From the 
collection of the Minneapolis Institute of Art/
Photographer Charles Walbridge. Fig. 26.2: 
Photo Credit: © National Portrait Gallery, 
London/Art Resource, NY. Figs. 26.3, 26.4: © 
Musée des Beaux-Arts de Dijon/François Jay. 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

238
Aachen, Hans von, 148
Aghapour, Andrew Ali, 111
Álamo, Constancio del, 215n1
alarm clocks, 141, 145, 218n6
Ambras Castle, 116
Amman, Jost, 141–45, 142, 143, 218n5
androids, definition of, 1, 111, 113, 116, 119. 
See also automata
Anguisola, Sofonisba, 12
animism, 171
apparitions, 173–75, 224n11
arbors, 57. See also specific types
archetypes, 152
Archimedes, 60
Arcimboldo, Giuseppe, 148
arms: of Bavarian National Museum lute player, 
95; of cittern player, 104, 105; of mandolin 
player, 101; of musical saint, 88–91; of 
noble matron, 108, 109; of preaching 
monk, 82–83, 85, 208n2(ch12); 
similarities in, 121; of Smithsonian lute 
player, 93–95
arms of the monk: mechanical anatomy of, 
60, 60, 61, 62, 67, 68, 70; movements 
of, 49, 51, 62; vs. preaching monk, 82–83; 
sculptural detail of, 170
art, depictions of automata in, 155–58
Artificio, 137
Index
astraria, 141; by Dondi, 135, 136, 141, 
205n6(ch4), 211n6, 217n9; by Juanelo, 
123, 133, 158, 214n7, 221n7; Theoriam, 
135, 217n10
attribution: of cittern player, 27–28, 34–35, 
103–5, 135–38, 150, 210n5; of mandolin 
player, 98; of musical saint, 28, 
208n3(ch13); of noble matron, 108; of 
preaching monk, 85
attribution of the monk, 27–28; alternative 
scenarios for, 164; in The Clockwork 
Universe, 151; as collaboration of multiple 
artisans, 130–31, 164; García-Diego on, 
34–35; Geneva auction catalog on, 30, 31; 
Gieben on, 33, 35, 163
auction catalogs, 28–31, 29, 34, 198, 
205n1(ch6), 205n5, 223n16
Augsburg: clockmaking in, 133, 140–42, 215n4; 
craft guilds in, 131
Austrian Academy of Sciences, 91
automata: as archetypes, 152; artistic 
depictions of, 155–58; challenge of 
classifying, 110–11; contemporary 
reception of, 2–3, 171; countries of origin, 
124; criteria defining, 111–19; materials 
in dating of, 121–24; multiple artisans 
collaborating on, 130–33; original 
purposes of, 152–53; realism of, 116; 
signatures on, lack of, 120, 131, 133; 
significance of surviving, 2, 76; similarities 
among, 76–77, 120–25; sources on 
(See historical sources); table of 
comparisons of, 77, 121, 198–201. 
See also specific works
Babbage, Charles, 2, 202n2
Bachmann, Hans Jakob, 215n15
Barbour, Daphne, 207n3, 208n5(ch12)
barrel arbor, 54, 54
Barton, William M., 217n20, 221n10
Bassermann-Jordan, Ernst von: Alte Uhren 
und ihre Meister, 27, 104, 135–38, 
205n1(ch5); on Bulmann, 135–38; on 
cittern player, 27, 28, 103–5, 135–38, 161, 
201, 210n3; Gieben compared to, 163; on 
Juanelo’s workshop at San Yuste, 164
Bauer, Rotraud, 219n14, 219n16
Bavarian National Museum (BNM), 35, 76, 
95–98. See also Lute player
Baxandall, Michael, 124, 182, 216n5(ch19)
Bayerisches Nationalmuseum. See Bavarian 
National Museum
Bedini, Silvio: career of, 3; on cittern 
player, 210n5; on Dondi’s astrarium, 
205n6(ch4); García-Diego on, 28; on 
jacquemart, 118; in La misura del tempo, 
107, 211n1(ch16); on noble matron, 107; 
NOTE: Italic page numbers indicate illustrations.
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

239
INDEX
“The Role of Automata,” 138, 213n27; on 
San Yuste, 25
beech, 53, 124, 208n3(ch11)
Beerkens, Lydia, 222n10
bell ringing, 111, 113, 118–19. 
See also glockenspiel
Bertele, Hans von, 210n5
betony, 16, 203n8
Beuing, Raphael, 84, 98, 208n7
Beyer, Annette, 115–16
bezoars, 148, 219n7
Biblioteca Ambrosiana, 108, 151
Bibliothek des Regierenden Fürsten, 149
biological automata, 119, 213n27
birds, 25
Biringuccio, Vannoccio, 145
body, sixteenth-century understanding of, 
194–96
body shells: of Bavarian National Museum lute 
player, 98; of mandolin player, 100, 101; 
of the monk, 52–53, 83, 108; of musical 
saint, 87, 88; of noble matron, 108, 109; 
of preaching monk, 83
Boniface, Cyril, 3
Borromeo, Federico, 151, 218n22
Bosch, Hieronymus, 13, 185
Bouchardon, Edmé, 156
Brahe, Tycho, 148
brass clockwork, history of, 121–24, 142, 
214nn2–5. See also clockwork
Bray, Xavier, 174, 224n13
Bredekamp, Horst, 155
Britten, F. J., 98, 214n2, 214n4, 218n4
bronze, 121–22, 214n3
Brueghel, Jan, the Elder, 148, 155, 221n7
Bruno (saint), 178
Bruno, Giordano, 148
Brusa, Giuseppe, 107, 206n5, 214n7, 221n14
Budapest. See Iparművésti Múzeum
Bukovinská, Beket, 219n5, 219n13
Bulmann, Jakob, 133–39; Bassermann-Jordan 
on, 135–38; cittern player attributed 
to, 105, 135–38, 150, 210n10; in The 
Clockwork Universe, 35; eyewitnesses 
to automata of, 151, 217n19; as guild 
vs. court artisan, 131, 135; vs. Juanelo, 
135–38; Neudörfer on, 134–35, 141, 151, 
216n1, 216n3, 217n16, 219n16, 220n23; 
Theoriam planetarum repaired by, 135, 
217n10
Bürgi, Jost, 148
Burgundy, duchy of, 190
Burke, Peter, 171, 224n2, 224n11, 227n8
El caballero del reloj (Titian), 158, 159, 
221n12
calamine, 121, 214n3
Calle del Hombre de Palo, 139, 139
Calvin, John, 171
Campi, Antonio, 24–25, 133, 205n8
cams, 58–61, 60–69, 70
Cano, Alonso, 18, 19, 21, 174, 175, 225n18
Cardano, Gerolamo, 24
Carlos (crown prince of Spain), 15–17; accident 
of, 2, 16, 33, 161, 195, 203nn2–3; artistic 
depictions of, 14; death of, 15, 21, 31, 
204n5(ch3); Geneva auction catalog on, 
31; health problems of, 13, 15; medical 
treatment of, 16, 195, 203nn4–5, 203n8; 
on miracle book of Diego de Alcalá, 21, 
204n1(ch3); miraculous healing of, 2, 16–
17, 28, 33, 161, 162, 195, 203n9; the monk 
in possession of, 31, 163; public narratives 
about, 15, 203n1(ch2), 204n5(ch3); 
Rudolf II and, 148
Carlos V en Yuste (Jadraque), 157, 157–58, 161, 
192, 221n12, 221n15, 222n16
Carracci, Annibale, 21
Carrillo, Alonso, 21
catgut, 54, 206n3(ch10)
Catholic Church: in history of automata, 
118–19; images in, 171–73, 176–78
Catillon, Rémi, 101
Cellini, Benvenuto, 13
cenotaphs, 191, 226n3
Cervantes, Miguel de, 13, 221n3
Cetina, Melchor de, 204n2(ch4)
Challoner, Thomas, 203n2
Champmol, 189, 190–92, 226n2
Chapuis, Alfred: Les automates, 98, 
209n9(ch14), 221n8; on definition of 
androids, 111, 113, 116, 119; Le monde des 
automates, 27, 98, 104, 111, 113, 138, 164, 
217n14
Charet, Marie, 101
Charles IV (Holy Roman Emperor), 217n6
Charles V (Holy Roman Emperor), 11–13; 
abdication of, 11, 13, 25, 135, 147; artistic 
depictions of, 157, 157–58, 161; cittern 
player made for, 105, 210n6; death of, 13, 
160, 161, 164; on Dondi’s astrarium, 
135, 136; family of, 13, 148; geographic 
reach of rule, 11; Juanelo as clockmaker 
to, 2, 23, 24, 137, 205n6(ch4); Juanelo’s 
astrarium for, 123, 133, 214n7; Simancas 
archives under, 160; tomb of, 190, 226n2. 
See also San Yuste
Charliat, Georges, 209n9(ch14)
La charmante catin (Hortemels), 155, 
155–56, 221n8
La charmante catin (Tubières), 156, 156
Christian, William A., Jr., 193
cittern player automaton (Kunsthistorisches 
Museum), 26, 102, 103–5; attribution of, 
27–28, 34–35, 103–5, 135–38, 150, 210n5; 
challenge of classifying, 111; clockwork 
of, 27, 28, 103, 104, 105, 120–21, 124; 
country of origin, 104, 137–38; date of 
fabrication, 104; identity of instrument of, 
210n3; movements of, 104–5, 201, 210n6; 
vs. other extant automata, 76–77, 120–25, 
198–201; as prototype, 103; provenance 
of, 76, 105, 150, 210n10; rediscovery of, 
27, 103, 161; ship automaton and, 114
citterns, vs. lutes, 210n3
clickworks, 45, 54–56, 56
clockmaker workshops, 140–45, 142–44
clocks: escapements in, 118, 213n23; 
etymology of term, 118; origins of, 140. 
See also specific types
clockwheels, 56–57, 101, 122, 122–23, 123, 
214n2, 214n5
clockwork: of Bavarian National Museum lute 
player, 95, 97, 98, 122; of cittern player, 
27, 28, 103, 104, 105, 120–21, 124; history 
of materials used for, 121–23, 214nn2–5; 
of mandolin player, 100, 100–101, 
122, 123; of musical saint, 87–88, 91, 
209n11(ch13); of noble matron, 108, 109; 
of preaching monk, 81, 82–83, 84, 85, 98, 
209n11(ch13); as “self-contained,” 112–13; 
of ship, 114–15; similarities in, 77, 120–24; 
of Smithsonian lute player, 93, 93, 122, 
215n8
clockwork of the monk, 52–61; vs. cittern 
player, 27, 28; drawings of, 40–41, 
55–56, 65; lack of inscription on, 2; 
materials of, 42; mechanical anatomy of, 
52–62; number of pieces, 42; original vs. 
replaced, 41; vs. other extant automata, 
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

240
INDEX
77, 120–24; photographs of, 2, 52–54, 
57–61. See also specific parts
The Clockwork Universe exhibition: catalog 
for, 35, 76, 138, 151, 220n22; installation 
of, 95, 208n1(ch12); the monk in, 35, 
76, 138, 151; number of works in, 76; 
Smithsonian lute player in, 93
Cocart, Juan, 223n19
Cochin, Charles-Nicolas, the Younger, 155, 
155–56
computers, invention of, 2, 202n2
confraternities, 178, 181–82
Connecticut College, 30
Conservatoire national des arts et metiers 
(cnam), 98, 202n2, 209n7(ch14). 
See also mandolin player
copies of works, 133
copper, 121, 214n3
Corpus Christi, 178, 225n26
Correggio, 148
costumes: of cittern player, 104, 105, 
201; in definition of automata, 118; of 
mandolin player, 101, 152; of processional 
sculptures, 178; replacement of, 152
Council of Trent, 173, 224n9
Counter-Reformation, 11, 13, 173, 176
courts, imperial: cittern player as product of, 
138; the monk as product of, 130–33
craft guilds: cittern player as product of, 
138; the monk as product of, 130–33; in 
Nuremberg, 131, 133, 141, 218n4
crank, 62, 69, 70
Cremona, 23, 108
cross of the monk: kissing of, 1, 3, 46–47, 
62; movements of, 2–3, 46–47, 51, 62; 
as replacement of original, 4, 207n7; as 
symbol of Diego de Alcalá, 31
Dahlke, Carola, 84
Dales, Richard C., 162
dancing lady automaton, 23, 25–28, 
103–4, 108, 109, 150, 152, 164, 220n19. 
See also cittern player
Daston, Lorraine, 212n9
Daza Chacón, Dionisio, 203n5
death masks, 163, 164, 175, 223n22
della Porta, Giovanni Battista, 148
della Torre, Gianello, 164
Descent from the Cross (Weyden), 13
Desipientia (journal), 162, 163
Deutsches Museum, 76, 95–98, 111. 
See also preaching monk
Diana and centaur automaton, 131, 215n4, 
215n15
Diano, Jorge de, 164, 223n19
Diego de Alcalá, 19–21; artistic depictions of, 
18, 19–21, 29, 32, 33, 175–76, 176, 223n15, 
225n18, 225n24; biographies of, 21, 22, 
204n2(ch4); canonization of, 2, 21, 22, 
28, 33, 161, 162, 175, 203n9, 204n1; 
death of, 19, 21, 175, 225n19; feast day 
of, 163, 223n14, 227n6(ch27); miracle 
book of, 21, 203n1(ch3); in miraculous 
healing of Don Carlos, 2, 16–17, 33, 161, 
162, 195; the monk as representation of, 
2, 28, 29, 30–31, 35, 161–65, 194, 223n15; 
pilgrimages by, 193; reputation for healing, 
19–21; symbols of, 21, 31, 35; tomb of, 20, 
21, 22, 195, 227n6(ch27)
Dieulafoy, Marcel, 182
Discovery and Revelation exhibition, 111
Distelberger, Rudolf, 105
Dittmann, Frank, 84
Don Carlo (Verdi), 15, 203n3
Don Carlos (Saint-Réal), 203n1(ch2)
Dondi, Giovanni de’, 135, 136, 141, 
205n6(ch4), 211n6, 217n9
Donefer-Hickie, Ana Matisse, 116, 186
Doppelmayr, Johann Gabriel, 135, 137, 
151, 156, 218n1
double-ended lever, 60, 64, 67
drinking games, 113–16, 212n14
Droz, Edmond, 98, 209n9(ch14), 221n8
duck automaton, 111–12, 113, 212n6
dulcimer player automaton, 211n5(ch17)
Dürer, Albrecht, 11, 140, 148, 216n1
ebony, 215n11
Ecce Homo (Fernández), 179
Ecsedy, Anna, 208n2(chap 13)
L’Écrivain (Jaquet-Droz), 111, 112
El Greco, 13, 174
Elisabeth of Valois, 13
Emmoser, Gerhard, 148
erysipelas, 16, 203n3
escapements, 118, 213n23
Evalo, Hans de, 223n19
Evans, R. J. W., 148
eyes: of Bavarian National Museum lute player, 
95, 123; of cittern player, 104; of mandolin 
player, 101; of musical saint, 88, 154; of 
noble matron, 108–9; of preaching monk, 
81, 82, 83, 85, 154; similarities in, 121; of 
Smithsonian lute player, 93
eyes of the monk: mechanical anatomy of, 60, 
60–61, 61, 65, 66, 130–31; movements of, 
49, 51, 154
feet: of Bavarian National Museum lute 
player, 95; of cittern player, 104, 105; of 
mandolin player, 101; of musical saint, 
87–88; of noble matron, 108
feet of the monk: mechanical anatomy of, 
58, 59; movements of, 49, 51; paint on, 
42, 207n3; sandals on, 42, 46, 83, 162, 
202n1(Intro), 207n3, 222n11; size of, 
207n3
Fennesz-Juhasz, Christiane, 91
Ferdinand I (Holy Roman Emperor), 13, 131, 
134, 135, 147, 148, 219n4
Ferdinand II (Archduke), 116, 147
Ferdinand II (Holy Roman Emperor), 220n21
Ferdinand II of Aragon, 13, 19
Ferenczy, Ilona, 87
Fernández, Gregorio, 21, 173–75, 178, 179, 
180, 195, 225nn17–18
Fernández, Teresita, 223n14
Ferrari, Gaudenzio, 226n41
Fessard, Étienne, 156
Feyerabend, Sigmund, 218n5
figure clocks, 133, 140, 215n4
Findlen, Paula, 151
The Five Senses (Brueghel and Rubens), 
155, 221n7
fly, 57, 57, 69
fly stopwork lever, 57, 62, 63, 70
Foasso, Cyrille, 101
Ford, Richard, 173, 226n35
Francis (saint), 172, 173–76, 185, 194, 196
Franciscans, 162–64
Frauenkirche, 135, 216n6(ch20)
Freedberg, David, 171, 185, 224n3
French Revolution, 226n3
Freud, Sigmund, 224n1
friars, vs. monks, 202n1(Intro)
Friess, Joachim, 118
Friess, Peter: on Bavarian National Museum 
lute player, 95, 209n2; on Carlos V en 
Yuste, 158, 192, 221–22nn15–16; in The 
Clockwork Universe, 208n1(ch12); on 
preaching monk, 82–83, 85, 88, 199
Fröschl, Daniel, 150, 151, 219n13
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

241
Fučíková, Eliška, 147, 148, 219n4, 219n9, 
219n12
Fundación Juanelo Turriano, 108
Furman, Christopher, 3
fusee arbors: of Bavarian National Museum 
lute player, 95, 98; of the monk, 54, 55, 
56, 56, 64, 67, 70
fusee clickwork, 54–56, 56
fusee cone, 54–56
fusee wheels, 56, 56, 58, 70, 100
fusees: of cittern player, 210n2; history of, 54, 
206n2(ch10); of mandolin player, 100, 
101, 122; mechanisms and materials of, 
54–56, 122, 206n4(ch10); of the monk, 
54–56, 54–56
Gachard, Louis-Prosper, 160, 
203n1(ch2), 203n9
Galilei, Galileo, 150
Galle, Cornelius, 32, 33, 164, 223n15
Galle, John, 223n15
Galle, Theodore, 223n15
Galli, Cinzia, 108
García Lorca, Federico, 171, 224n1
García-Diego, José A.: on cittern player, 28, 
34–35; comparison of automata by, 77; 
on The Five Senses, 221n7; in Geneva 
auction catalog, 30–31; on the monk, 
34–35; Montañés Fontenla and, 223n19; 
on musical saint, 208n3(ch13); Los relojes 
y autómatas de Juanelo Turriano, 28, 30–
31, 34–35, 139, 205n3(ch5); Von Herz on, 
217n19; on wheel-cutting engine, 214n7
Gautier, Pierre, 98, 209n9(ch14)
gear (wheel) trains: of cittern player, 104; 
definition and use of term, 57, 207n6; of 
mandolin player, 100; mechanisms and 
materials of, 56–57, 122; of the monk, 
56–57, 57, 123; process of making, 122, 
122–23
Gélis, Édouard: on definition of androids, 111, 
113, 116, 119; Le monde des automates, 27, 
98, 104, 111, 113, 138, 164, 217n14
Geneva auction, 28, 29, 30–31, 34, 
205n1(ch6), 223n16
Germany, automata made in, 35, 124, 138
gesso, 83, 88
Giacomo della Marca, 163, 223n22
Giambologna, 148
Gian Galeazzo Visconti, 136
Gianello Torriano. See Juanelo Turriano
Gieben, Servus, 161–65, 165; on attribution 
of the monk, 33, 35, 163; career and life 
of, 35, 162, 222n7, 222n10; on cross of 
the monk, 207n7; on date of the monk’s 
fabrication, 28, 31–33, 35, 162; on death 
masks, 164, 175; letter to Sedlmajer from, 
31–33, 35, 161–63, 165, 223nn15–16; on 
the monk as Diego, 28, 31, 35, 161–65, 
194, 223n15
Gijón, Francisco Antonio, 174
glockenspiel, 82, 83, 85, 87, 87, 88, 91
Gondelautomat, 116–18, 117
González, Tomás, 160, 222n2
Grafton, Anthony, 191
Graminaeus, Dietrich, 153
Graves, Robert, 217n20
Gregato, Giorgio, 107, 108–9, 151, 
201, 211n4(ch16), 211n6
Gregory (pope), 173
Grosseteste, Robert, 162
guilds. See craft guilds
Habsburg, House of, 10, 11, 13, 131, 190
Half-Length Portrait Bust of Anna Imhoff 
(Schardt), 132
halos, 87
hands. See arms
harpsichord player automaton, 211n5(ch17)
Haupt, Herbert, 219n14, 219n16
head: of Bavarian National Museum lute player, 
95; of cittern player, 104, 105; of mandolin 
player, 101; of musical saint, 88, 91, 154; of 
noble matron, 108–9; of preaching monk, 
79–83, 80–82, 85, 154; similarities in, 121; 
of Smithsonian lute player, 93–95
head of the monk: mechanical anatomy of, 
60–62, 62–66; movements of, 49, 51, 62, 
154; process of making, 130–31; sculptural 
detail of, 170; seam in wood of, 130, 
208n3(ch11), 215n1; as shaved, 31, 162, 
164; X-ray of, 1, 41, 66, 130
Heintz, Joseph, the Elder, 146
Henlein, Peter, 138, 140, 217n10
Henry II (king of France), 227n1
Henry IV of Castile, 19
Hero of Alexandria, 116
Herrera, Juan de, 13
Hesdin, château of, 212n16
historical sources: on automata, 152–58; 
on Juanelo, 4, 23–28, 133, 138, 217n19. 
See also specific authors and automata
INDEX
Hoefnagel, Joris, 148
Hogenberg, Franz, 153
Holy Week, 178, 180, 181, 185
Hortemels, Louise-Magdalene, 155, 
155–56, 221n8
Houdin, Jacques, 209n5
Houdini, Harry, 209n5
Huerta, Juan de la, 188, 226n1
Ignatius of Loyola (saint), 185
imágenes de vestir, 178–81, 181–83, 185
images, religious, debates over, 171–73, 
176–78, 224nn8–9
Imhoff, Anna, 132
Imhoff, Willibald, 132
Inquisition, 13
inscriptions and signatures: on automata, 
lack of, 120, 131, 133; by guild vs. court 
artisans, 131, 133; by Juanelo, 35, 133; by 
Margraf, 220n20; on the monk, lack of, 
2, 42; on ship, 212n11
Iparművészeti Múzeum (im), 28. 
See also musical saint
iron clockwork, history of, 121–24. 
See also clockwork
Isabella I of Castille, 13, 19
Istituto Storico dei Cappuccini, 35, 
162–63, 222n7
Jacobs, Fredrika, 207n3, 226n41
Jacquard, Joseph-Marie, 2, 202n2
jacquemart, 118
Jadraque y Sánchez Ocaña, Miguel, 157, 
157–58, 161, 192, 221n12, 221n15, 222n16
Jamnitzer, Barthel, 133, 215n5
Jamnitzer, Wenzel, 133, 140, 148, 218n5
Janello Torriani exhibition, 108, 211n4(ch16)
Japanese automata, 124, 125
Jaquet-Droz, Henri-Louis, 2, 111, 112, 
113, 211n5(ch17)
Jaquet-Droz, Pierre, 2, 111, 112, 113, 211n5(ch17)
Jay, Ricky, 209n5
Jesús de la Pasión (Martínez Montañes), 
178, 181
John of the Cross, 176
John the Fearless, 188–91, 190–91, 
226n1, 227n7
Joueuse de mandoline. See mandolin player
Joueuse de théorbe, 115–16, 116, 156, 212n13
La joueuse de tympanon, 101
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

242
INDEX
Juana la Loca, 13
Juanelo Turriano, 23–25, 134–39; artistic 
depictions of, 24, 25, 157–58, 159, 
221n12; vs. Bulmann, 135–38; career of, 
23–25; as clockmaker to Charles V, 2, 
23, 24, 137, 205n6(ch4); death of, 161; 
Dondi’s astrarium repaired by, 135, 136; as 
engineer to Philip II, 23, 161; eyewitnesses 
to automata of, 151, 217n19; historical 
sources on, 4, 23–28, 133, 138, 217n19; 
life of, 23; at San Yuste, 25, 137, 160, 
164; signature and inscriptions of, 35, 
133; wheel-cutting engine of, 123, 214n7; 
workshop of, 145, 164. See also specific 
sources and works
Jugie, Sophie, 226nn2–3, 227n4(ch26)
Justi, Carl, 182
Kaufmann, Thomas DaCosta, 148, 219n9
Kepler, Johannes, 148
Kinzing, Peter, 101, 111, 211n5(ch17)
Kircher, Athanasius, 151
kiss of the monk, 1, 3, 46–47, 62
Koeppe, Wolfram, 116, 186, 208n6
Kowar, Helmut, 91, 212n11
Kreutner, Joachim, 98
Kubler, George, 125, 215n14
Kugellaufuhr. See rolling ball clocks
Kunsthistorisches Museum: catalog of, 
105, 138, 150, 210n6, 210n10, 217n16; 
Kunstkammer of, 4, 105, 111, 149, 150. See 
also cittern player
Kunstkammern: history of, 111, 147–48; of 
Kunsthistorisches Museum, 4, 105, 111, 
149, 150
Kunstkammern, of Rudolf II, 147–52; access 
to, 148, 151, 219n9; automata in, 4, 35, 
150–51, 210n10; diversity of objects in, 
148; halls housing, 148, 219n5; inventories 
of, 149, 149–52, 219nn12–14, 219n16, 
220n18, 220n21; posthumous dispersal 
of, 148–49
lady lute player (Smithsonian). See lute player
Lallemand, Jean Baptiste, 189
Laurent, Jean, 24
Le Moiturier, Antoine, 188, 190–91, 226n1
leaf springs, 54, 58, 64
leaves, pinion teeth as, 57, 91
Leonardo da Vinci, 206n2(ch10)
Leoni, Leone, 13, 25
Leoni, Pompeo, 13
Levkoff, Mary, 207n3
Liechtenstein, 149, 150
limewood, 124
linden, 77, 124
Lisboa, Marcos de, 175, 224n11, 225n16
Lochner, Georg Wolfgang Karl, 135, 216n3
looms, automated, 2, 202n2
López, Hernán, 203n9
Luchs, Alison, 207n3
lute player automaton (Bavarian National 
Museum), 95–98, 96; clockwork of, 
95, 97, 98, 122; date of fabrication, 95, 
122, 209n2; vs. mandolin player, 101; 
movements of, 95, 98, 123, 201; vs. other 
extant automata, 76–77, 120–25, 198–
201; provenance of, 76, 95; repairs to, 95, 
152–53, 201; wood of, 98, 124, 209n4
lute player automaton (Smithsonian), 92, 
93–95; clockwork of, 93, 93, 122, 
215n8; date of fabrication, 93, 95, 122; 
vs. mandolin player, 101; movements of, 
93–95, 201; vs. other extant automata, 
76–77, 120–25, 198–201; provenance of, 
76, 93, 209n1; X-ray of, 94, 95
lutes, vs. citterns, 210n3
Luther, Martin, 171, 173
Maddison, Francis R., 205n6(ch4)
magic, 113, 209n5, 212n9
maiden cups, 116, 212n14
mainspring barrel, 54, 54, 55
mainsprings: history of, 54; of the monk, 41–
45, 54, 54–56, 55; of musical saint, 88; 
of preaching monk, 81
Making Marvels exhibition, 116, 186, 
187, 212n14
male saint automaton. See musical saint
mandolin player automaton (cnam), 98–101, 
99; attribution of, 98; challenge of 
classifying, 111; clockwork of, 100, 
100–101, 122, 123; costume of, 101, 152; 
date of fabrication, 98, 100–101, 123–24; 
movements of, 101, 201; vs. other extant 
automata, 76–77, 120–25, 198–201; 
provenance of, 76, 98; restoration of, 98, 
100, 101, 201
Mannheimer, Edgar, 209n1
Männleinlaufen, 135, 216n6(ch20)
Manseau, Peter, 111
Margaret of Bavaria, 226n1
Margraf, Christoph, 105, 133, 148, 
150–51, 210n10, 220n20
Maria of Portugal, 16
Maria of Spain, 148, 219n4
Marie-Antoinette, 101
Martínez Montañes, Juan, 174, 178, 178, 
181, 182, 195
Mary Ingraham Bunting Institute, 3
Mary Tutor (queen of England), 13
Matthias (Holy Roman Emperor), 148
Maturaba, Pedro de, 21
Maurice, Klaus: career of, 207n1; in The 
Clockwork Universe, 35, 76, 138, 151, 
220n22; on dates of fabrication, 122; 
Die deutsche Räderuhr, 207n1, 215n5, 
217n10, 217n17; on figure clocks, 215n4; 
on Jamnitzer (Barthel), 215n5; on multiple 
artisans making automata, 131, 215n3; of 
theorbo player, 115, 212n13; on Theoriam 
planetarum, 135, 217n10
Maximilian II (Holy Roman Emperor), 13, 147, 
148, 219n4
Mayr, Otto: career of, 3, 207n1; in The 
Clockwork Universe, 35, 76, 138, 151, 
220n22; on escapements, 213n23; on 
Juanelo’s workshop, 164; in purchase of 
lady lute player, 93; in purchase of the 
monk, 2, 31; on significance of the monk, 
2, 76; on water clocks, 213n22
medicine, sixteenth-century, 16, 195, 
 203nn4–5, 203n8
Mena, Andrea de, 174
Mena, Pedro de: depictions of the body by, 
195–96; Saint Francis, 172, 173–75, 178, 
185, 196; San Diego de Alcalá, 21, 175, 
176, 225n18; San Pedro de Alcántara, 
176, 177; The Virgin of Sorrows, 179
Mendel Housebook, 218n5
Mendoza, Alonso de, 227n3
Mesa, Juan de, 174
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 116, 
186, 187, 191
microcosm, 24
Milan. See noble matron
Minesaki Sougo, 125
miracles: artistic depictions of, 195–96; the 
monk as, 196. See also Diego de Alcalá
Miseroni, Ottavio, 148
La misura del tempo exhibition, 107–8, 
211n1(ch16)
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

243
INDEX
monk, preaching. See preaching monk
the monk (Smithsonian): attribution of (See 
attribution); in auction catalogs, 28–31, 
29, 34, 205n1(ch6), 223n16; challenge 
of classifying, 110–11; in The Clockwork 
Universe, 35, 76, 138, 151; colloquial name 
of, 202n1(Intro); contemporary reception 
of, 2–3, 46–47, 171; country of origin, 35, 
124, 161, 165; date of fabrication, 28, 
31–33, 35, 42, 122, 162, 164; as Diego de 
Alcalá, 2, 28, 29, 30–31, 35, 161–65, 194, 
223n15; on display at Smithsonian, x, 3, 
4, 111; initial analysis of, 40–41, 41–42, 
65, 76; in Making Marvels, 116, 186, 187; 
mechanical memory of, 61; as miracle, 
196; as monk vs. friar, 202n1(Intro); vs. 
Mourners of Dijon, 192–93; movements 
of (See movements); vs. other extant 
automata, 76–77, 120–25, 198–201 (See 
also specific automata); power source of, 
54–56, 55; vs. processional sculptures, 
185–86, 193; provenance of, 1, 2, 28, 31, 
34, 209n1; repairs to, 42; replaced parts 
of, 4, 41; as resurrection image, 185; 
significance of, 2–3, 76; size of, 1, 45, 91, 
108; winding of, 46, 54; working model 
of, 42–44, 42–45, 122, 206n3(ch8), 
214n5; X-rays of, 1, 41, 48, 66, 130. 
See also specific parts
monks, vs. friars, 202n1(Intro)
Montañés Fontenla, Luis, 223n19
Montúfar, Antonio de, 173
Mor, Antonis, 13
Mora, José de, 174
Morales, Ambrosio de, 22–23, 23; as 
eyewitness, 151, 163, 164; on Juanelo’s 
astrarium, 133, 214n7; on Juanelo’s clocks, 
23, 35; on Juanelo’s dancing lady, 23, 
25–28, 103, 108, 109, 150, 152, 161, 164, 
220n19; on Juanelo’s signature, 35, 133; 
on Juanelo’s wheel-cutting engine, 214n7; 
on Juanelo’s workshop, 145
mountain ash, 98, 124
The Mourners exhibition, 188, 189–92, 227n4
Mourners of Dijon, 188–92, 189–93, 226n1, 
226n3
mouth: of Bavarian National Museum lute 
player, 95, 123; of cittern player, 104; of 
the monk, 49, 51, 60, 60–62, 61, 65, 66, 
154; of musical saint, 88, 154; of noble 
matron, 108–9; of preaching monk, 80, 
154; similarities in, 121
movements: of Bavarian National Museum lute 
player, 95, 98, 123, 201; of cittern player, 
104–5, 201, 210n6; of Gondelautomat, 
116–18; of mandolin player, 101, 201; of 
musical saint, 88–91, 154, 199; of noble 
matron, 108–9, 109, 121, 154, 201; of 
preaching monk, 82–83, 85, 154, 199; 
of processional sculptures, 178–85; 
similarities in, 121; of Smithsonian lute 
player, 93–95, 201
movements of the monk, 1–3, 46–47, 
199; The Clockwork Universe on, 35; 
mechanical anatomy behind, 52–61; vs. 
noble matron, 121; pace and sequence 
of, 51, 57; as performance, 2–3, 46–47, 
47; vs. processional sculptures, 185; 
synchronization of, 49, 51, 62, 70; walking 
paths in, 50, 51. See also specific parts
Müller, Johannes. See Regiomontanus
multipurpose cam, 60, 60–61, 61, 63, 
65, 68, 70
Munich. See Bavarian National Museum; 
Deutsches Museum
Muñoz Corchado, Andrés, 204n1(ch3)
Murakami Kazuo, 125, 215n12
Murillo, Bartolomé Estéban, 21, 174
Musée des Beaux-Arts, 191
Musée d’Horlogerie du Locle, 115, 156
Museo Francescano, 35, 162, 165, 222n7
musical saint automaton (Iparművésti 
Múzeum), 86–87, 87–91, 91; attribution 
of, 28, 208n3(ch13); challenge of 
classifying, 111; clockwork of, 87–88, 
91, 209n11(ch13); date of fabrication, 
88; glockenspiel in, 87, 87, 88, 91; 
movements of, 88–91, 154, 199; vs. other 
extant automata, 76–77, 120–25, 198–
201; provenance of, 77, 88; restoration 
of, 88, 199; as stationary figure, 87–88; 
wood of, 88, 124
National Gallery (London), 174, 224n13
National Gallery of Art (Washington), 
174, 224n13
National Museum of American History, 110. 
See also Smithsonian Institution
National Museum of History and Technology, 
110. See also Smithsonian Institution
Née, François Denis, 189
Nelson, Stan, 123, 123
Neudörfer, Johann, 134–35, 140, 141, 151, 
216n1, 216n3, 217n16, 219n16, 220n23
Neumann, Erwin, 149, 150, 210n10, 217n16, 
219n11, 219n12, 220n20
Nicholas IV (pope), 225n16
Nicholas V (pope), 173, 175, 193, 225n16
Nicholas of Lyra, 173, 224n8
noble matron automaton (Milan), 106–7, 
107–9; attribution of, 108; date of 
fabrication, 108; movements of, 108–9, 
109, 121, 154, 201; vs. other extant 
automata, 76–77, 120–25, 198–201; 
provenance of, 77, 108, 151; restoration of, 
107, 108, 109, 151, 201; wood of, 109, 124
Nolley, Scott, 206n1(ch10)
Nova Reperta, 144, 145, 218n11
Núñez, Lucio María, 203n9, 204n1(ch4)
Nuremberg, 140–45; clockmaking in, 141–45; 
craft guild system in, 131, 133, 141, 218n4; 
Frauenkirche of, 135, 216n6(ch20)
O’Malley, Charles Donald, 203n2, 203n4, 
203n5, 213n27, 227n1
On Time exhibition, 111
Ozone, Judy, 207n3, 208n5(ch12)
Pacheco, Francisco, 181
paint: on mandolin player, 101; on the monk, 
1, 41, 42, 83, 207n3; on preaching monk, 
83, 208n6
Palermo, 156
Paracelsus, 148, 214n3
Paris. See Conservatoire national des arts 
et metiers
Park, Katharine, 212n9
Parker, Geoffrey, 203nn1–2
pasos, 178–82, 185, 193
Pedro de Alcántara (saint), 176, 177
Peña, Francisco de la, 204n1, 225n24
Peñalver, Juan de, 21
Peninsular War, 160
perambulation arbor, 58, 58
perambulation pinion, 58
perambulation wheels: of Bavarian National 
Museum lute player, 95; of cittern player, 
104; of the monk, 35, 51, 58, 58, 61, 69, 
83, 207n8; of musical saint, lack of, 87, 
88, 89; of preaching monk, 83; of 
theorbo player, 115–16
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

244
INDEX
performance: interaction with spectators 
in, 115; movements of the monk as, 2–3, 
46–47, 47
Philip II (Anguisola), 12
Philip II (king of Spain), 12; ascension of, 13; 
Bosch in collection of, 13, 185; on Carlos’s 
accident and healing, 2, 16, 21; in Diego’s 
canonization, 2, 21, 22, 28, 33, 161, 162; 
holy relics of, 195, 227n6(ch27); Juanelo 
as court engineer to, 23, 161; Juanelo’s 
Artificio built for, 137; marriages of, 13, 16; 
Rudolf at court of, 148, 219n4; Simancas 
archives under, 160
Philip the Bold, 190, 192
Philip the Good, 212n16, 227n7
pilgrimages, 193
pillars, 52–53
pinion teeth (or leaves), 57, 82, 91, 
209n11(ch13), 214n5, 215n8
pinions, 57, 57–58, 70, 91, 100, 122, 214n5
Pippa, Luigi, 108, 211n6, 217n9
planetary clocks. See astraria
Planiscig, Leo, 105
plates, 52–53, 62, 69, 85, 87–88, 89
poplar, 53, 77, 109, 124, 208n3(ch11)
prayer, by Mourners of Dijon, 190–93
preaching monk automaton (Deutsches 
Museum), 78, 79–85; arms of, 82–83, 
85, 208n2(ch12); attribution of, 85; vs. 
Bavarian National Museum lute player, 
95–98; challenge of classifying, 111, 
211n2(ch17); clockwork of, 81, 82–83, 84, 
85, 98, 209n11(ch13); date of fabrication, 
85; glockenspiel in, 82, 83, 85; head of, 
79–83, 80–82, 85, 154; movements of, 
82–83, 85, 154, 199; vs. musical saint, 
91; vs. other extant automata, 76–77, 
120–25, 198–201; paint on, 83, 208n6; 
provenance of, 76–77, 208n1(ch12); 
as representation of monk, 82, 83; 
restoration of, 82–83, 85, 199; size of, 
91; wood of, 124
Prescott, William H., 16, 160, 203n3, 
204n5(ch3), 222n2
presentism, 171
El principe don Carlos (Sánchez Coello), 14
processions: Mourners of Dijon as, 189–93; 
Spanish sculptures used in, 178–86, 
180–84, 193; types of, 193
Protestant Reformation, 171–73
prototypes, 103, 124
punch cards, 202n2
Purcell, Rosamond, 4
Rácz, Jenö, 87–91, 199, 208n1(ch13), 
208n3(ch13)
Rainer, Paulus, 105, 116, 210nn2–3, 
212n14, 220n20
realism: in automata, 116; in Spanish 
sculpture, 173, 174, 178–85
Rebényi, Thomas, 79–85
Recio Veganzones, Alejandro, 204n1
reconstitution, 171
Regiomontanus, 135, 141, 217n10, 218n1
Renaissance art, 155
restoration: of Bavarian National Museum 
lute player, 95, 152–53, 201; of mandolin 
player, 98, 100, 101, 201; of the monk, 
4, 41, 42; of musical saint, 88, 199; of 
noble matron, 107, 108, 109, 151, 201; of 
preaching monk, 82–83, 85, 199
resurrection, 185
Retsch, Hanns, 135
Ribadeneira, Pedro de, 175, 224nn10–11, 
225n16
Richwine, Beth, 207n3
Riemenschneider, Tilman, 185
Riskin, Jessica, 112, 211n3(ch17), 212n6, 
212n16, 213n28
Robert-Houdin, Jean-Eugène, 98, 201, 209n5
robes, 118
Robotics exhibition, 111
Roentgen, Abraham, 111, 211n5(ch17)
Roentgen, David, 101, 111, 211n5(ch17)
Rojo, Antonio, 204n2(ch4), 225n19
Roldán, Luisa, 21, 174
Roldán, Pedro, 174
rolling ball clocks, 150–51, 220n20
Romero Torres, José Luis, 175, 204n2(ch4), 
224n15, 225nn18–19, 225n21
Rosser, Gervase, 215n2, 225n30
Rubens, Peter Paul, 155, 221n7
Rudolf II (Holy Roman Emperor), 13, 146, 
147–49. See also Kunstkammern
Ryder, Jeremie, 209n12
Sacco, Bernardo, 24, 133, 205n6(ch4)
Sachs, Hans, 140–45, 142, 143, 218n5
The Sacred Made Real exhibition, 174–75, 
178, 224n13
Sacro Monte, 226n41
Sadeler, Johann, 33, 223n15
Saint Francis (Mena), 172, 173–75, 178, 
185, 196
Saint-Cyr, Pierre Cornette de, 205n1(ch6)
Saint-Réal, César Vichard de, 203n1(ch2)
saints, Spanish sculptures of, 173–78, 185. 
See also specific saints
San Bruno (Martínez Montañes), 178
San Diego (California), 21
San Diego de Alcalá (Cano), 18, 19, 21, 225n18
San Diego de Alcalá (Mena), 21, 175, 176
San Diego Museum of Art, 175
San Lorenzo del Escorial, 13
San Pedro de Alcántara (Mena), 176, 177
San Yuste, Charles V at: artistic depictions 
of, 157, 157–58; death of, 13, 160, 161; 
inventory of, 157–58, 160, 221n11, 221n14; 
Juanelo with, 25, 137, 160, 164; the monk 
made for, 30, 164; Pedro de Alcántara 
with, 176
Sánchez Coello, Alonso, 13, 14
sandals, 42, 46, 83, 162, 202n1(Intro), 
207n3, 222n11
Santa Iglesia Catedral Primada, 173
Santa María de Jesús, 19, 175, 195, 
204n2(ch4)
Saxl, Fritz, 105
scales, 134
Schardt, Johan Gregor van der, 132, 133, 
208n3(ch11), 215n5, 226n38
Schiller, Friedrich, 15, 203n1(ch2), 203n3
Schlottheim, Hans, 113–15, 114, 133, 148, 150, 
212n11, 216n6(ch19)
Schott, Kaspar, 156, 216n5(ch20), 221n10
Schweinberger, Anton, 148
sculpture, Spanish. See Spanish sculpture
Sedlmajer, Georges, 31–33, 162–63, 165, 
223nn15–16
Semana Santa, 178
El Señor Atado (Fernández), 178, 180
serpentine lever, 56, 60, 62, 64
Settala, Manfredo, 108, 151
Sherwood, Merriam, 213n28
ship automaton, 114, 114–15, 133, 150, 
212n11, 216n6(ch19)
signatures. See inscriptions
Sigüenza, José de, 13
Simancas, royal archives in, 160, 204n1(ch4), 
204n5(ch3)
Simon of Cyrene (saint), 182, 182
Singer, Mark, 209n5
Sixtus V (pope), 2, 21, 33
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

245
INDEX
Sluter, Claus, 226n1
Smithsonian Institution, exhibitions at, 35, 76, 
93, 111. See also lute player; the monk
Solla Price, Derek J. de, 119, 138, 213n27, 
214n7
Soós, Katalin, 87–91, 199, 208n1(ch13), 
208n3(ch13)
Spain: cittern player’s origins in, 104, 138; 
fame of painters vs. sculptors from, 174; 
under House of Habsburg, 11–13; the 
monk’s origins in, 35, 124, 161, 165; 
wood species in, 124. See also specific 
locations and rulers
Spanish sculpture, 173–86; processional, 
178–86, 180–84, 193; realism in, 173, 174, 
178–85; saints depicted in, 173–78, 185. 
See also specific artists
Spranger, Bartholomeus, 148
Starck, Perrine, 101
steel, 214n4
Steiner, Reinhard, 158, 192, 221n15, 226n16
Stephens, Carlene, 3, 206n1(ch10), 
207n3, 211n1(ch17)
Stirling-Maxwell, John, 222n1
Stirling-Maxwell, William, 25, 160, 164, 
205n11, 219n7, 221n14, 222nn1–2
stopwork levers, 46, 57, 62, 63, 69, 70, 71, 88
Stoss, Veit, 140, 185, 216n5(ch19)
Strada, Famianus, 25, 28, 30, 205n9
Straet, Jan van der, 144, 218n11
Strasbourg Cathedral, 118–19, 213n26
table clocks, 141
talking heads, 154, 221n3
Teresa of Ávila, 176
theaters, mobile, 113–15, 125
theorbo player automaton, 115–16, 116, 212n13
Theoriam planetarum, 135, 217n10
Thirty Years’ War, 149, 220n21
Thüngen, Konrad Friedrich von, 156
Thwaites and Reed Ltd., 136, 217n9
Tintoretto, 148
Titian, 11, 13, 148, 157–58, 159, 221nn11–12
Toledo, 139, 139, 173. 
See also Juanelo Turriano
The Tomb of John the Fearless (Née), 189
tombs: of Charles V, 190, 226n2; of Diego 
de Alcalá, 20, 21, 22, 195, 227n6(ch27); 
of Saint Francis, 173, 196. See also 
Mourners of Dijon
Tormo y Monzó, Elías, 205n3 (ch6)
torque, 54–55
tower clocks, 118–19
Tractatus astrarii (Dondi), 217n9
train bars, 52–53
Trent, 107–8
Trevor-Roper, Hugh, 13
Trezzo, Jacopo Nizzola da, 25
Trompeterautomat, 113, 131
Truitt, E. R., 118–19, 212n16, 213n26
Trusted, Marjorie, 224n9, 225n17, 
225n26, 225n28, 227n6(ch27)
Tubières, Anne Claude Philippe de, 156
Turner, Eric, 214n3
turning pivots, 51, 58, 69, 82, 88, 93, 
95, 101, 121, 199, 201
Valin, Jean, 164, 223n19
Vaucanson, Jacques de, 2, 98, 111–12, 
113, 212n6
Vega, Cristóbal de, 203n9
Velázquez, Diego, 174
Verdi, Giuseppe, 15, 203n1(ch2), 203n3
Veronese, 148
vertical arbor, 68
Vesalius, Andreas, 16, 17, 195, 203n4, 
227n1, 227n5
Vida, Marco Girolamo, 24, 133, 138–39, 
145, 205n7
Vienna. See Kunsthistorisches Museum
Villalón, Cristóbal de, 205n7
Villalon, L. J. Andrew, 16, 203n1(ch3), 
203n5(ch2), 204n1(ch4), 225n19
Vincent, Clare, 216n6(ch19)
Virgin, depictions of, 179, 182, 183
The Virgin of Sorrows (Mena), 179
Virginia Commonwealth University, 3
Von Herz, Adelheid: “Androids of the Sixteenth 
Century,” 77, 135, 217n19; on Bulmann, 
134; on cittern player, 138; on the monk, 
82, 154; on movement of automata 
faces, 154; on musical saint, 91, 154, 
209n6(ch13); on preaching monk, 154, 
208n2(ch12); of theorbo player, 115–16, 
212n13
Vries, Adriaen de, 148, 215n4
Wagner, Michael, 214n1, 215n4
walking paths: of cittern player, 104; of the 
monk, 50, 51; of noble matron, 109; of 
preaching monk, 82; similarities in, 121; 
of Smithsonian lute player, 93
Washington, DC. See Smithsonian Institution
water clocks, 118, 213n22
Webster, Susan Verdi, 181, 185, 224n11, 227n8
Weinhold, Ulrike, 214n1, 215n4
Weiss, Eric, 209n5
Werve, Claus de, 226n1
Weyden, Rogier van der, 13
wheel teeth, 42, 82, 91, 101, 122, 122
wheel trains, 57, 207n6. See also gear trains
wheel-cutting engines, 101, 123, 123, 214n7
wheels, 57. See also specific types
Wilhelm, Gustav, 149
William of Orange, 203n1(ch2)
wind resistance, 57, 57
women, in clockmaking, 215n2
wood: of Bavarian National Museum lute 
player, 98, 124, 209n4; in geographic 
origins of automata, 124; of the monk, 
52–53, 77, 83, 124, 208n3(ch11); of 
musical saint, 88, 124; of noble matron, 
109, 124; of preaching monk, 83, 124. 
See also body shells
Woodbury, Robert S., 214n7
workshops, clockmaker, 140–45, 142–44
Würzburg Cathedral, 156
X-rays: of the monk, 1, 41, 48, 66, 130; of 
preaching monk, 79, 83; of Smithsonian 
lute player, 94, 95
Zanetti, Cristiano, 108, 204n5(ch4), 
211n2(ch16), 211n6
Zhao, Wenrui, 217n20, 221n10
zinc, 121, 214n3
zithers, 210n3
Zurbarán, Francisco de, 21, 173, 174–75
Zurich auction, 28, 198, 205n5, 223n16
Zwingli, Ulrich, 171
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images

© 2023 J. Paul Getty Trust
Published by Getty Publications, Los Angeles 
1200 Getty Center Drive, Suite 500
Los Angeles, California 90049-1682
getty.edu/publications
Tevvy Ball
PROJECT EDITOR
Sheila Berg
MANUSCRIPT EDITOR
Amy McFarland
DESIGNER
Michelle Deemer
PRODUCTION 
Danielle Brink
IMAGE AND RIGHTS ACQUISITION
Distributed in the United States and Canada 
by the University of Chicago Press
Distributed outside the United States and 
Canada by Yale University Press, London
Printed in China
FRONT COVER: Automaton of a Friar, mid-
sixteenth century. Spain or South Germany. 
Wood, fabric, iron clockwork (detail). National 
Museum of American History, Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, DC  
BACK COVER: X-ray of the automaton’s head 
(see FIG. 10.15)
PAGE II: Head and torso of the automaton, 
seen from the back 
PAGE IV: David Todd’s model of 
the automaton 
PAGE VI: Detail of the mainspring 
barrel clickwork 
Every effort has been made to contact the owners 
and photographers of illustrations reproduced here 
whose names do not appear in the captions or in the 
illustration credits listed on page 237. Anyone having 
further information concerning copyright holders is 
asked to contact Getty Publications so this informa­
tion can be included in future printings. 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Names: King, Elizabeth, 1950– author. | Todd, W. David, author. | Purcell, 
    Rosamond Wolff, photographer. | Getty Publications, publisher.  
Title: Miracles and machines : a sixteenth-century automaton and its legend 
    / Elizabeth King and W. David Todd ; with photographs by Rosamond 
    Purcell.  
Description: Los Angeles : Getty Publications, [2023] | Includes 
    bibliographical references and index. | Summary: “This richly 
    illustrated volume tells the uncanny story of a sixteenth-century 
    automaton and the legend that has grown up around it”— Provided by 
    publisher.  
Identifiers: LCCN 2023001741 (print) | LCCN 2023001742 (ebook) | ISBN 
    9781606068397 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781606068403 (ebook)  
Subjects: LCSH: Robots—Europe—History—16th century. | Sculpture, 
    European—16th century. | Art and technology—Europe—History—16th 
    century. | Monks in art. 
Classification: LCC NK3649 .K56 2023  (print) | LCC NK3649  (ebook) | DDC 
    629.8/92—dc23/eng/20230315 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023001741
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023001742
© J. Paul Getty Trust. See additional copyright notices and illustration captions to confirm copyright information for individual texts and images


