

Table of Contents
Series Page
Title Page
Copyright
Preface
Acknowledgments
Chapter 1: Changing Education with Mobile Learning
A Brief History of Educational Technology: What Will Revolutionize the System?
Mobile Learning: Reaching Kids Today
What Is Mobile Learning?
Benefits and Challenges of Mobile Learning
How to Make Mobile Learning Work
Conclusion
Notes
Section 1: The Mobile Classroom
Chapter 2: The Science of Learning
Introduction
Information Processing and Learning
Other Critical Facets of Learning
Implications for Mobile Learning
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 3: What Is It about These Devices?
Connected
Aware
Multimodal
Familiar
Personal
Comprehensive
Consolidated
Portable
Relevant
Secure
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 4: Creating the Mobile Classroom

Theoretical Foundations
Instructional Methods
Problem-Based, Inquiry-Based, and Experiential Learning
Alternative Learning Environments
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 5: Higher-Order Thinking Skills and Digital Fluency
Higher-Order Thinking Skills
Leveraging Mobile Learning
Critical Thinking
Classrooms for Higher-Order Thinking
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 6: Instructional Management and Levels of Technology Access
Mobile Learning Programs
Levels of Access in the Mobile Classroom
1:Teacher
1:Many
1:1
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
Conclusion
Notes
Section 2: Creating the Mobile Learning Experience
Chapter 7: Mobile Technology's Defining Features
Hardware
Software
Accessories
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 8: The Educational App Development Process
Research Stage: Is It a Good Idea?
Building the Right Team: Capturing a Variety of Expertise
Building the App
Case Study: App Development at SAS Curriculum Pathways
Conclusion
Notes

Chapter 9: Design and User Experience
Designing a Great App: Make It Easy
Putting Great Design to Work
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 10: Data, Evaluation, and Learning Analytics
Asking the Questions
Gathering Data
Sample Data Collection
Mobile Data Analytics: Turning Data into Information
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 11: The Business of Educational Apps
The Educational App Market Is…
How to Sell Your App: Pricing Models
How Users Buy Your App
Marketing
Conclusion
Notes
Section 3: Mobile Learning for Everyone
Chapter 12: Informal Learning
Developing Lifelong Learners
Bridging Formal and Informal Learning
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 13: Engaging Young Users: Apps for Preschoolers
Key Skills for Preschool Apps
What Makes an Engaging Preschool App?
Challenges
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 14: Making Accessible Apps: Autism and Visual Impairment
Introduction
Advantages of the iPad for Special Populations
Autism and Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)
Visual Impairment

Developing Accessible Apps
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 15: Balancing Power: Data Use, Privacy, and Digital Citizenship
Privacy
Privacy Legislation
Open Issues
Digital Citizenship: Teaching Responsible Use
Conclusion
Notes
Chapter 16: Mobile Learning Today and Tomorrow
Introduction
Making Mobile Learning Work
The Future
Conclusion
Notes
Appendix A: List of Apps by Chapter
Appendix B: The Great App Checklist
How to Use This Checklist
The Great App Checklist
Notes
About the Authors
Index
End User License Agreement

List of Illustrations
Figure 1.1
Figure 1.2
Figure 1.3
Figure 2.1
Figure 2.2
Figure 3.1
Figure 4.1
Figure 4.2
Figure 4.3
Figure 5.1
Figure 5.2
Figure 5.3
Figure 6.1
Figure 6.2
Figure 7.1
Figure 8.1
Figure 8.2
Figure 8.3
Figure 9.1
Figure 10.1
Figure 11.1
Figure 11.2
Figure 13.1
Figure 13.2
Figure 14.1
Figure 14.2
Figure 14.3
Figure 15.1
Figure 15.2

List of Tables
Table 2.1
Table 3.1
Table 4.1
Table 10.1


Wiley & SAS Business Series
The Wiley & SAS Business Series presents books that help senior-level managers with
their critical management decisions.
Titles in the Wiley & SAS Business Series include:
Analytics in a Big Data World: The Essential Guide to Data Science and its
Applications by Bart Baesens
Bank Fraud: Using Technology to Combat Losses by Revathi Subramanian
Big Data Analytics: Turning Big Data into Big Money by Frank Ohlhorst
Big Data, Big Innovation: Enabling Competitive Differentiation through Business
Analytics by Evan Stubbs
Business Analytics for Customer Intelligence by Gert Laursen
Business Intelligence Applied: Implementing an Effective Information and
Communications Technology Infrastructure by Michael Gendron
Business Intelligence and the Cloud: Strategic Implementation Guide by Michael S.
Gendron
Business Transformation: A Roadmap for Maximizing Organizational Insights by
Aiman Zeid
Connecting Organizational Silos: Taking Knowledge Flow Management to the Next
Level with Social Media by Frank Leistner
Data-Driven Healthcare: How Analytics and BI are Transforming the Industry by
Laura Madsen
Delivering Business Analytics: Practical Guidelines for Best Practice by Evan Stubbs
Demand-Driven Forecasting: A Structured Approach to Forecasting, Second Edition
by Charles Chase
Demand-Driven Inventory Optimization and Replenishment: Creating a More Efficient
Supply Chain by Robert A. Davis
Developing Human Capital: Using Analytics to Plan and Optimize Your Learning and
Development Investments by Gene Pease, Barbara Beresford, and Lew Walker
Economic and Business Forecasting: Analyzing and Interpreting Econometric Results
by John Silvia, Azhar Iqbal, Kaylyn Swankoski, Sarah Watt, and Sam Bullard
The Executive's Guide to Enterprise Social Media Strategy: How Social Networks Are
Radically Transforming Your Business by David Thomas and Mike Barlow
Financial Institution Advantage & the Optimization of Information Processing by
Sean C. Keenan
Foreign Currency Financial Reporting from Euros to Yen to Yuan: A Guide to
Fundamental Concepts and Practical Applications by Robert Rowan
Harness Oil and Gas Big Data with Analytics: Optimize Exploration and Production

with Data-Driven Models by Keith Holdaway
Health Analytics: Gaining the Insights to Transform Health Care by Jason Burke
Heuristics in Analytics: A Practical Perspective of What Influences Our Analytical
World by Carlos Andre, Reis Pinheiro, and Fiona McNeill
Human Capital Analytics: How to Harness the Potential of Your Organization's
Greatest Asset by Gene Pease, Boyce Byerly, and Jac Fitz-enz
Implement, Improve, and Expand Your Statewide Longitudinal Data System: Creating
a Culture of Data in Education by Jamie McQuiggan and Armistead Sapp
Killer Analytics: Top 20 Metrics Missing from your Balance Sheet by Mark Brown
Predictive Analytics for Human Resources by Jac Fitz-enz and John Mattox II
Predictive Business Analytics: Forward-Looking Capabilities to Improve Business
Performance by Lawrence Maisel and Gary Cokins
Retail Analytics: The Secret Weapon by Emmett Cox
Social Network Analysis in Telecommunications by Carlos Andre Reis Pinheiro
Statistical Thinking: Improving Business Performance, Second Edition by Roger W.
Hoerl and Ronald D. Snee
Taming the Big Data Tidal Wave: Finding Opportunities in Huge Data Streams with
Advanced Analytics by Bill Franks
Too Big to Ignore: The Business Case for Big Data by Phil Simon
The Value of Business Analytics: Identifying the Path to Profitability by Evan Stubbs
The Visual Organization: Data Visualization, Big Data, and the Quest for Better
Decisions by Phil Simon
Understanding the Predictive Analytics Lifecycle by Al Cordoba
Unleashing Your Inner Leader: An Executive Coach Tells All by Vickie Bevenour
Using Big Data Analytics: Turning Big Data into Big Money by Jared Dean
Win with Advanced Business Analytics: Creating Business Value from Your Data by
Jean Paul Isson and Jesse Harriott
For more information on any of the above titles, please visit www.wiley.com.


Mobile Learning


A Handbook for Developers,
Educators, and Learners
Scott McQuiggan
Lucy Kosturko
Jamie McQuiggan
Jennifer Sabourin

Cover image: Tammi Kay George and Lisa Morton
Cover design: Tammi Kay George and Lisa Morton
Copyright © 2015 by SAS Institute Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108
of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this
book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty
may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein
may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher
nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special,
incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer Care
Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-
4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included with
standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media
such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this material at
http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
ISBN 978-1-118-89430-9 (Hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-118-93895-9 (ePDF)
ISBN 978-1-118-89428-6 (ePub)


Preface
Mobile learning is an exciting and important movement, in our opinion. We, the authors,
are not in-service teachers. We are all employees at SAS Institute, a prominent statistical
software company. We work on Curriculum Pathways, educational software that SAS
provides for free to any educator. We work closely with teachers in the development of
this web and mobile content, and our research and work provides us with an altogether
unique perspective. Like scores of educators, researchers, developers, legislators, and
thought leaders, we think that mobile learning holds tremendous promise for our
educational system, with the potential to unlock a new world of educational opportunities
to today's kids.
We know, foremost, that to have quality educational apps that improve education,
developers need teachers, and teachers need developers. This symbiosis is vital to the field
of mobile learning, yet we find little written on the topic. In our development practice,
feedback from in-service teachers is so valuable, and frequently leads to new features or
new apps being created. If there is one takeaway from this book, it'd be that developers
and teachers, though their education and talents are likely very different, should work
together to make mobile learning tools that accomplish the goals of today's classroom. We
believe that mobile learning holds true promise for improving the educational system, the
economy, and the future success of our country. But make no mistake; actually delivering
on the promise of mobile learning is wholly dependent on having excellent teachers with
excellent educational resources, such as apps, at the service of our students. Through this
partnership, it is our hope that a shared understanding of what makes a great educational
app can take hold, shaping the future of mobile learning.
To facilitate this meeting of the minds, this need for mutual understanding and
communication, we've structured this book as a handbook for both teachers and
developers. In Section 1: The Mobile Classroom, we offer a pedagogically based
discussion of what mobile devices offer in terms of how students learn, fundamentals from
the science of learning that apply to mobile devices, as well as logistics and tips for
various implementations and technological set-ups that schools might offer. While this
section is geared toward educators, the content provides valuable insight into how and
why students learn, the demands and limitations of the modern classroom, and the
strategies used to integrate mobile devices into education; therefore, there is quite a bit
developers can glean from this section to better serve their audience and its needs.
Section 2: Creating the Mobile Learning Experience is designed to provide developers
with the information they need to enter the educational app market and develop quality
resources for teachers and students. We offer discussions of business models, design
principles, best practices for development cycles, the unique team structures that enable
educational apps to come to fruition, and how data analytics can optimize learning. We
also present the technological features and offer some guidelines on how to include what
is necessary to make an app do what it's intended to do and not be unreasonably large.
Again, while the intended audience for Section 2 is developers, we feel there is a benefit
for educators as well: an awareness of how educators fit into the software development
process, the rationale behind business models in the education market, and how
developers go about evaluating and refining their product, just to name a few.

One of the exciting things about mobile learning, in a general sense, is the wide-reaching
opportunity it presents. In Section 3: Mobile Learning for Everyone, we present three
niches that are especially primed for impact from mobile devices: informal learning,
preschool, and special populations. The accessibility features that mobile devices offer are
unprecedented, and developers and teachers will find valuable information on how to
optimize app features and how to choose accessible apps in this section. We finish this
section with a discussion of data privacy and digital citizenship, two pressing issues to
ensure safe mobile technology use for all of today's students.
In our Appendices section, we provide a list of all the apps mentioned in our book, for
easy reference. Additionally, we offer a definitive checklist for educators to use when
determining if a new app meets their needs. The Great App Checklist aims to help
educators sift through what's out there and determine what makes a good app.
For this book, we've interviewed dozens of in-service educators, to bring their perspective
to you, alongside academic research, popular press articles, and our experience as
developers of educational resources and apps. The mix of practical advice, experience,
academic research and methodology is a unique way to frame the field of mobile learning,
but one we feel is essential to fully comprehending the potential and realizing the promise
of it.


Acknowledgments
The journey of writing a book is, not surprisingly, long and laborious. When we started
our research and writing, we felt well prepared as a team of writers and experts in our
fields with cross-disciplinary perspectives. We were excited to fill a void we saw in the
field: take the world a step closer to having a theory of mobile learning and create a
resource for teachers and developers in the process.
While we trusted our own experience and skills, we knew we'd also rely on others to
complete this book. Reviewers, artists, editors, educators, and interviewees give this book
a level of credibility and expertise we alone couldn't have. We derived so much value from
the folks listed here. We are deeply grateful for the help, insight, and feedback we received
along the way. This truly shaped this book into what you hold before you.
First and foremost, we are grateful to Jim and Ann Goodnight for supporting us in this
project, and for their generous support of education (mobile and otherwise). We are so
appreciative of the leadership and guidance provided by Armistead Sapp. We are thankful
for the amazing group of reviewers who were candid and helpful with their feedback:
Elliot Inman, Robert Epler, Kristin Hoffmann, and Tim McBride.
We are so grateful for the artwork from the incomparable duo, Tammi Kay George and
Lisa Morton, who came up with the cover for the book and so many creative renderings of
concepts based on our confusing notes. Thank you so much for the drawings that make
this book so unique.
We are grateful to Wiley Business Press and SAS Press for guiding us in our efforts to get
the book we were envisioning published, especially Stacey Hamilton. We also are very
grateful for the research expertise of Jennifer Evans.
We made efforts to contact as many teachers as we could in our research for this book, and
we are very grateful for the following educators who indulged us by giving us a glimpse
of their world. They were honest with us about the realities of mobile learning in the
classroom, what is lacking, what is amazing, and what they wish was different. These are
also, incidentally, the educators and specialists who are shaping the minds of our youngest
Americans, which is a comforting thought to the authors. Thanks to: Amy Wilkinson, Julie
Stern, Rebecca Goddard, Tara Brooks, and Tricia Hudacek, to the team of teachers at
Brentwood Elementary in Raleigh, North Carolina (Sean Russell, Linnea Czerney, John
Silverthorn, Emily Hardy), and the teachers at Research Triangle High School in Durham,
North Carolina. Thank you to all of the respondents to the online surveys, and the teachers
who attended our focus groups. We are also very grateful to the scores of educators who
are sharing their experience on blogs and Twitter in the effort to improve others' usage of
educational technology.
We'd like to thank the other experts we consulted through our writing: Ed Summers, Diane
Brauner, Erica Roberts, Greer Aukstakalnis, Carrie Grunkemeyer, Kelly Stewart, Jamie
Hall, and Aaron Massey.
The feedback from countless educators with questions, suggestions, comments, and
recommendations regarding the mobile apps from SAS Curriculum Pathways has built,
and continues to build, our understanding of what makes a good app. We are particularly

grateful for the development partnership with Garrett-Keyser-Butler Community School
District, and their leadership from Dennis Stockdale and Tonya Weaver, which continue to
inform our own development efforts.
At SAS, we're thankful for the help of our coworkers, specifically Keli Lloyd, Ottis
Cowper, Connor Hickey, Ada Lopez, Trena Brantley, and Phil Issler. We are fortunate to
work with the SAS Curriculum Pathways team that has fundamentally shaped our
understanding of mobile learning development and practice.
And finally, each of us is grateful to our families and significant others for their support
and understanding through the writing of this book.


Chapter 1
Changing Education with Mobile Learning
We cannot always build the future for our youth, but we can build our youth for the
future.
—Franklin Delano Roosevelt
In our ever-changing marketplace, today's students are being educated, largely, for jobs
that haven't yet been invented. Technology is being created and updated at a frenetic pace,
and growing more pervasive and useful with each stride. As schools face dwindling
resources and higher stakes than ever, does mobile technology hold the key to improving
the educational system and reengaging students? Mobile technology offers a plethora of
features and benefits that enable it to break the educational system wide open, engaging
students in new ways and making educational experiences more meaningful, if schools
can effectively utilize structured, integrated approaches for implementation of this new
technology.
This interest in smartphones, tablets, and laptops is a major opportunity to present new
and exciting educational experiences. To what extent are schools capitalizing on this,
though? And how often are they getting in their own way in reaching students? One
teacher notes with frustration that her school has several iPad carts that teachers are
encouraged to use, but cellphones are banned categorically. “There are certain times we
might be doing a lesson and someone asks a question and I think ‘This'd be a great time to
all get out our devices and look something up,’ but we can't use cellphones and have to
reserve our iPad carts in advance, so the moment passes. It's frustrating because almost all
of the kids have phones and their parents are paying for data plans anyway, but we can't
use them.”1 In effect, schools with policies like these end up ignoring the technology and
the skillset necessary to effectively use it in learning and life, leaving students not fully
prepared for the real world.
In another school, eighth-grade teachers have access to iPads the school has purchased and
encourages them to use in their classrooms. Teachers are excited to have the devices, but
don't really know what to use them for, and they often sit unused. When asked what she
uses them for, one teacher suggested they can be used as calculators. Clearly handing a
device to a teacher with no guidance or training is not a way to make the best use of this
expensive, Internet-connected device.
Stories like these, of school policy being dictated to teachers and ineffective mobile
technology use, are, sadly, not difficult to find. Policies that categorically ban certain
devices that are used in everyday life are lazy, failing to see the possibilities that they have
to change and improve pedagogy. However, schools realize boundaries and acceptable
uses of mobile technology need to be clearly defined, but they may not know where to
begin. Rather than reimagining education and figuring out how to integrate modern
technology to effectively reach students, administrators too often ignore and put up walls
against new technologies. We present these stories not to discourage or say that there are
simply too many hurdles and poor implementations of mobile technology. We offer these
examples to illustrate the widespread misunderstandings about mobile learning and our
need to address some key challenges.

Ignoring mobile learning because of potential distraction or misuse results in missed
opportunities for teaching tomorrow's citizens how to find and use a seemingly limitless
source of information at their fingertips. Mobile technology offers a huge opportunity to
revolutionize education and learning, if knowledgeable, creative, and open-minded
teachers and administrators embrace it.

A Brief History of Educational Technology: What Will
Revolutionize the System?
A new classroom tool promises to improve student learning and enable a more enriching
learning experience. In a video promoting this tool, a student is seen answering questions
in class at his own pace, and receiving immediate feedback to know if he was wrong or
right. An expert notes some benefits of this tool: “There is also a motivating effect. The
student is free of uncertainty or anxiety about his success or failure. His work is
pleasurable. He does not have to force himself to study…it generates a high level of
interest and enthusiasm.” This expert notes that technology could enable students to cover
more than two times the information when compared to traditional classroom techniques.
B.F. Skinner gave this forecast on the potential for technology to revolutionize learning
and classroom procedures in 1954.2 His teaching machine sounds strikingly similar to
predictions today on how mobile technology can revolutionize classroom learning for
students, though these were based on Skinner's teaching machine, a clunky early
computing machine that offered students a new way to learn independently using targeted,
self-paced lessons. Similar predictions have since been made about personal computers,
netbooks, and other technologies. So, the question is, why were those predictions wrong in
1954, and subsequently, and why are they different with mobile learning?
While mobile technology offers a distinct difference from other technology, technology
itself is hardly a stranger to the educational setting. Computers have been in the classroom
and have been promising to revolutionize education for decades, though they haven't
changed education much. It's fair to say that while Skinner's teaching machine was novel,
it didn't do as much as he imagined it would to shake up the traditional and inefficient
classroom structure.
Over the past half century, as computers developed and became smaller, more efficient,
and easier to use, they increasingly found their way into the classroom. This technology
has changed the experience in schools, as well, as noted in Figure 1.1. Computers have
been in schools since the 1960s: first to store student data and eventually, for student use.
This changed in the early 1980s with the Apple II. Before the Apple II, large mainframe
computers had some presence in schools, though they were not very widespread.3 The first
affordable and widely adopted personal computer was the Apple II, which also happened
to be a watershed moment for personal computer technology. It offered a computer for
everyone, not just the hobbyists and folks who wanted a computer to tinker with. The
Apple II was ready to run for anyone, and it was widely adopted by educational markets
(which were also heavily marketed to4). By the mid-1980s, the Apple II was the
predominant computer in K–12 settings.5 In the 1980s, much of the curriculum
surrounding computers in the classroom related to teaching how computers worked
(programming languages, for instance) or for games (i.e., Oregon Trail) and less on using
them to perform other nontechnical educational functions.

Figure 1.1 Educational Technology Over Time
By 1990, most classrooms across the United States had access to computers in some way,
and their use in augmenting and supporting classroom instruction grew as the 1990s went
on. These systems provided a self-paced learning experience for each user; however each
learning experience followed a set trajectory that offered the same help, the same
questions and answers, and the same path. In short, there was no customization to the
learning, only an individualized pacing. There was often instant feedback, so it did offer
many benefits to old systems, though the true potential for an intelligent learning system
was not reached.6 Computers used CD-ROM disks, and with the growth and release of

new Microsoft products throughout the 1990s (Windows 95, Windows 98, most notably)
and the maturation of the software and hardware industries, computers became
commonplace in the classroom.7 Technological initiatives at the time focused on
connecting classrooms to the still very new Internet. As the World Wide Web grew to
show its use in homes and offices across America, government initiatives channeled funds
to get classrooms wired and students online, as well as to give students technological
literacy skills.8
Desktop computers, laptops, and netbooks were the most prevalent technologies utilized
by schools until early 2010 when Apple released the iPad, which created a new category
for mobile devices: the tablet computer. Featuring touchscreen technology, increased
portability, Wi-Fi, and an intuitive user interface, the iPad presented a major game-changer
for digital learning. Soon after, competing tablets emerged on the Android operating
system. Slowly, the tablet stole market share from netbooks, and in early 2013, Acer and
Asus, the top two netbook producers, officially phased out production of their netbooks,
effectively ending the netbook market.9
Computers, and subsequently tablets, began as novelties and eventually went on to create
entire markets and ways of functioning that are hard to imagine living without. Have they
changed education in the same, fundamental way? Are they being used to enhance
instruction and change the way we learn for the better, or are they just another tool in the
same old pedagogy? Looking at the past 60 years of computer technology and education,
we see a recurring pattern: The belief followed each advance and breakout technology that
it would solve all educational problems.10 Obviously, these promises were not met. While
computers have definitely been incorporated into existing structures, their impact hasn't
been as great as it has been on other sectors, nor as great as we expect mobile technology
to be.11 The benefits that mobile learning enables—personalized, on the go, and novel
learning environments—offer a chance to revolutionize the education system. As Bill
Gates noted in 2009, “The world of education is the sector of the economy so far the least
changed by technology. Ten years from now, that won't be the case.”12 We're entering a
new era for technology and education and mobile technologies. We believe mobile
technology with smart implementation and progressive school policies can lead the way.

Mobile Learning: Reaching Kids Today
At Research Triangle High School, a charter school in Durham, North Carolina, the ninth
graders are in English class. The BYOD (bring your own device) setup and flipped
classroom structure requires that the students watch a lesson the night before, and use their
tablet or laptop to supplement the discussion or project that is occurring in the classroom.
When you walk in the room, it feels different. It certainly isn't the typical classroom we
imagine with desks in a row and students sitting, looking to the teacher with their hands in
the air. Indeed, beside that image, it might even feel as if no one is paying attention, as
everyone is illuminated by a screen, and no one is watching the teacher. This perception is
quickly shattered, however, when the teacher surveys the students to gauge understanding,
and it's obvious that they are all paying attention, all are on task. Beyond that, the use of
certain mobile devices (this school prohibits cellphones for classroom use) enables and
even encourages students to multitask, collaborate, and teach each other—all skills
professionals practice daily in the modern workplace. This school, like many across the
country, is embracing the mobile technologies that exist, working with them instead of
against them, and giving their students a real-world education rather than clinging to
previous paradigms of education and learning.13
Mobile technologies offer a new paradigm in connectivity, communication, and
collaboration in our everyday lives. For education, these are huge opportunities to provide
an experience that is relevant and engaging. Using technology in the classroom is not a
new idea at all. Computers, laptops, and netbooks have all been added to classroom
settings with the hopes of revolutionizing education, promising vast improvements to
student outcomes. These technologies, largely, have left education unchanged and in a
continual state of need for improvement. All of these technologies can be thought of like
crayons, says James Paul Gee, a thought leader in games and learning: “They are just tools
that can make and do good things (e.g., art) or make a mess (e.g., crayon all over the
walls).”14 It matters tremendously not only that they be added to the educational process,
but that the educational process shift to incorporate new capabilities.
Ultimately, when considering the value of mobile learning initiatives in education, it is
most important to consider what is best and most valuable for the students. What
initiatives will provide them with the education that sets them up for a lifetime of success?
What technologies engage them and help them learn most effectively? Today's students
are fundamentally different from those who came before them. Christened as digital
natives by educational writer Marc Prensky in 2001, “today's students are no longer the
people our educational system was designed to teach.”15 If anything, the advent of mobile
devices has only served to further solidify these digital natives' different needs and
expectations when approaching education. Mobile learning offers a novel approach to
reach them—it offers flexibility in when the learning takes place, personalized content,
and teaches relevant skills for the future. It has the potential to create a generation of
learners who see the world as their classroom.
Tablets and smartphones have dramatically altered the technology landscape, and
transformed the way we as a society communicate and access information.16 In the
workplace and in homes, these technologies have been incorporated and used to change

and increase the efficiency of everyday activities, but traditional schools are still relatively
resistant to or untouched by these iconoclastic technologies.17 As schools continue to
negotiate acceptable usage, boundaries, and bans with students and parents over mobile
devices, many opportunities for educational innovation may be missed.

What Is Mobile Learning?
For the purposes of this book, we believe mobile learning has little to do with the physical
devices themselves. Rather, mobile learning is the experience and opportunity afforded by
the evolution of educational technologies. It is anywhere, anytime learning enabled by
instant, on-demand access to a personalized world filled with the tools and resources we
prefer for creating our own knowledge, satisfying our curiosities, collaborating with
others, and cultivating experiences otherwise unattainable. Mobile learning implies
adapting and building upon the latest advances in mobile technology, redefining the
responsibilities of teachers and students, and blurring the lines between formal and
informal learning. It embodies and facilitates the understanding of what it means to be a
lifelong learner and what it takes to thrive in today's workplace. So, while we do talk
about technology in this book, it's essential to understand that mobile learning is
something different than mobile devices. It is the outcome that these technologies enable
through creative and appropriate use.
At the time of writing this book, the fruition of mobile learning is made possible by the
proliferation of portable, Internet-enabled devices. Portability assumes it is a device that
can be easily accessed on the go, making this definition not simply any device that can
access the Internet. It also requires Internet capability that allows the user to access new
content on demand (rather than only what the device holds). In our discussions
surrounding how mobile learning can impact education and pedagogy, we primarily
discuss tablets, smartphones, and small personal media players. We also discuss Chrome
books and laptops to some extent because there are big areas of overlap in pedagogy and
implementation strategy. Tablets and smartphones offer substantial differences and
benefits, including making mobile learning more accessible and affordable in schools than
their predecessors.

Benefits and Challenges of Mobile Learning
Mobile learning is not a panacea for all the problems that plague our education system; we
don't suggest that by simply handing out iPads one can expect increases in student
achievement and enthusiasm for learning. Just like the personal computers that came
before them, mobile devices hold tremendous potential to change the way students learn
and our expectations of what should happen within the classroom walls. The ability of
tablets and other mobile technologies to shake up the current status quo of the educational
system and improve it is dependent on the pedagogy in which they are woven. It depends
on teachers' open minds, creativity, and preparation to integrate them in the curriculum;
school budgets and culture to allow for devices in the hands of students; and continued
innovation in how devices are used so they remain effective. Further, success also requires
banishing the assumption that digital natives, adept though they are with technology, know
how to use mobile devices for educational purposes without training. Just like their
teachers, administrators, and parents, students require guidance on how to learn with this
new educational technology.
There are many benefits and challenges with mobile learning, and many are associated
with different learning environments. For instance, a 1:1 mobile environment both
addresses and introduces different concerns than a classroom with a mobile-device cart.
We dive deeper into these learning environments, their related pedagogies, and how
mobile devices affect them in Chapters 4 and 6.
Benefits
Mobile learning offers many benefits and opportunities to reach students in different ways
and to improve and personalize the education they're receiving, as shown in Figure 1.2.

Figure 1.2 Benefits of Mobile Learning
The first major benefit is the ability to learn on the go. Traditionally, sitting in a classroom
between the hours of 8 a.m. and 3 p.m. is where and when we expect students to learn.
Increasingly, however, learning isn't limited to a predetermined location or time. Learning
can occur anytime and anywhere with mobile devices. In reality, given the prevalence of
smartphones among adults, this facet of mobile technology for K–12 simply brings the
children to the place where adults are, meaning the educational paradigm children
experience more closely mirrors the working paradigm. The ever-increasing rate of
smartphone usage is truly indicative of the changing norms of our culture in the ways we
“communicate, access information, connect with peers and colleagues, learn and even
socialize.”18 Educational experiences are meant to prepare students for real life, and as
such, should reflect the realities of the modern world.19 Smartphones and Internet-enabled
mobile devices are pervasive in our culture, and education shouldn't ignore this fact.
Mobile learning also is a potential way to reach underserved children and schools. Mobile
technology, when compared to other technology initiatives, provides a relatively lower
cost per student for a high powered and durable technology. Tablets are often less
expensive than computers, so when the inevitable upgrades and technology improvements
come along, updating the technology for an entire classroom (or school) is less

cumbersome. Indeed, this technological cycle has been a primary reason for resistance to
including newer technologies as they come along; the budget for technology easily gets
maxed out on maintaining current, secure computers in schools. Mobile devices offer a
different financial and technological model altogether, one that is much easier to maintain
under tight budgets. Many device manufacturers provide low-cost or even included
maintenance plans to insure the continued functioning of the devices. To aid the
acquisition of mobile devices many states (such as Indiana20) have led the way by
redefining what a textbook is and what funds allocated for textbooks can be used for (i.e.,
purchasing mobile devices). Mobile devices provide excellent, state of the art technology
for a relatively affordable price.
Additionally, mobile devices offer substantial power in taking learning opportunities
outside of the four walls of the classroom. Virtual museums, online classes, and simulated
experiences all come standard with a mobile device and the Internet. Especially for low-
wealth school districts or lower-income students, mobile technology could truly level the
playing field.
Mobile learning provides a medium that improves higher-order thinking skills. The
Partnership for 21st Century Skills has defined four key skills for students to master in
school: critical thinking and problem solving, communication, collaboration, and
creativity and innovation.21 The features of mobile learning inherently foster these
complex skillsets in students. The ability to easily share information with others,
creatively utilize a wide variety of resources and critically evaluate the veracity and value
of sources are just a few examples of the activities implicit to everyday use of mobile
technology in education. Higher-order thinking skills and mobile learning are explored
further in Chapter 5.
Many schools are offering alternative learning environments, such as flipped classrooms
or blended learning environments, which allow teachers to use class time more efficiently
and even cover more material, among other things. Mobile devices offer tremendous
opportunities for facilitating and enhancing these setups. There are, of course, still many
ways that mobile learning can enhance the traditional classroom setup as well and improve
pedagogy. This concept will be discussed in Chapter 3.
Mobile devices, especially in a 1:1 setup, better enable personalized learning to thrive.
Personalized learning environments enable teachers to more easily target which students
are struggling with which concepts and assign coursework and homework accordingly.
Mobile technology makes this process more seamless, enabling effective implementation
and tracking of student growth. Further, if the students have their own devices (or always
use the same device in the classroom), it is possible to easily track student data. This
provides a rich data set to add to the student record for future reference and research.
Mobile data and learning analytics will be discussed in Chapter 10.
And finally, mobile learning provides a new way to motivate students by providing high
levels of engagement and novelty, personalization, and autonomy. The ability to constantly
use new apps and find new ways to use the device keeps it fresh and interesting for
students. The use of cellphones and mobile devices is high among children, and there is
value in meeting students where they are rather than limiting them to older learning
methods when they clearly have an aptitude and passion for newer technologies. Allowing

and encouraging mobile use for academic purposes gives new meaning and excitement to
lessons. Julie Stern, a middle school teacher, says, “The kids are pushing mobile
(learning.) Some things you can get away with not doing every day but it's hard to get
away with not doing mobile once you've given the kids a taste of it.”22
Challenges
Mobile learning comes with its share of difficulties. Sometimes, even despite the
excitement and array of benefits, the challenges facing schools are difficult to overcome.
It's our hope that this book provides strategies in addressing these common obstacles, as
well as arguments against philosophical oppositions to mobile learning for education. The
most common challenges mobile learning faces are listed in Figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3 Challenges of Mobile Learning
One hurdle that mobile learning initiatives can face is the differentiated access to devices
and Internet across different audiences. Availability and cost of broadband in schools and
homes can be a big hurdle for smaller and low-wealth school districts, presenting a huge
disparity among students from different economic backgrounds. Federal and state
programs are closing the gap to some extent, like the ConnectED initiative that aims to get

high speed Internet into 99 percent of schools by 2017. While use of mobile devices offers
the chance to level the playing field for underprivileged districts, having wide access to
the Internet in school and at home is essential to taking advantage of the many benefits of
these devices. Implicit in the challenge of differentiated access is the cost factor, and we
acknowledge that a tablet is more expensive than a textbook, and some schools just might
not be able to afford them. Though recent studies have shown that the falling costs of
electronics has led to higher levels of device ownership among lower income and minority
families, there is still a notable (if closing) gap.23
When mobile devices are used by students in classrooms or at home, their use must be
monitored in some way. While mobile devices can be used for academic enrichment, the
opportunity also exists for them to be used for distraction or unethical behavior. There are
also health concerns stemming from increased screen time and privacy concerns about
students or the device, itself, oversharing personal information. Certainly, these concerns
could also be made for adults using mobile devices, and teaching responsible use and
digital literacy should become part of any lesson involving mobile technology and
children. Schools will need to develop an Acceptable Use Policy (AUP) and think about
which sites should be limited. While allowing mobile devices in school will undoubtedly
open the school up to increased liability, it is possible to mitigate this risk by teaching
responsible use and creating a disciplinary framework to enforce it. This is certainly
preferable to, as is often the case, letting the risk of liability lead to overly restrictive
policies.24 A discussion of data privacy and digital citizenship is given in Chapter 15.
There are many prevailing attitudes and prejudices against using technology for
instruction, and the system remains structured in a way that reinforces traditional
educational methods. Effectively incorporating mobile technologies into K–12 education
means abandoning some of these traditional structures, and many stakeholders are
resistant to this huge cultural shift.25 While there are many studies and anecdotal support
for the power of mobile learning, there is no accepted theory of mobile learning and,
hence, some disagreement among educators, administrators, and legislators on the actual
value of the paradigm. Sometimes these attitudes are reflected in laws prohibiting the use
of mobile technologies (including cellphones) in the classroom categorically. In 2006,
New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg enacted a citywide ban on cellphones in the
city's public schools, saying they were “a distraction in school and could be used to cheat
on exams.”26 Similar bans and severe limitations exist all over the country. It's worth
considering: Is this an effective restriction? In a recent study, more than 95 percent of
surveyed students admitted to using their cellphones for texting, emailing, social
networking, and browsing the Internet during class.27 The class time that is wasted arguing
with students and enforcing rules could be better spent capitalizing on the benefits and
opportunities (including teaching responsible use) of what is possible with appropriate
device use. Schools in Forsyth County, Georgia reported less in-class texting and off-task
behavior on cellphones when the devices were used in their BYOD classrooms for
schoolwork.28 Breaking through these philosophical barriers requires strong leadership
and professional development to ensure mobile learning is possible for each school.
While mobile phones and tablets offer many benefits over computers and laptops, there
are some limiting physical attributes that make them more difficult to use. For instance,

most tablets don't come with a keyboard, making typing more difficult. Typing on a
smaller interface, such as a smartphone or iPod Touch, is even more challenging.
However, while this sort of limitation might be a major hurdle for some groups, digital
natives seem to see it as less of a challenge than the adults who teach them. The need for a
device with a physical keyboard, for instance, is usually a preference of the administrator
who orders the devices rather than from complaints by students that they're tired of using
touch-only devices to type.
In some educational situations where mobile devices are shared among a group, the
functionality and benefits are impacted. Often a cart of mobile devices will be provided
for the school to share rather than a 1:1 arrangement simply because of budgetary
considerations. In this scenario, using them can be more difficult and less engaging.29
There are many ways that enable student data to be transferred across devices, particularly
by storing data and work in the cloud and offering logins for apps. While it's been shown
that mobile learning is optimal when students have their own devices and can fully
integrate their preferences and resources,30 having access to shared devices is not going to
nullify all of the benefits of mobile learning. In a device-sharing arrangement, however,
the lack of ubiquity—the access to devices anytime in the classroom—does compromise
some of the benefits of mobile learning. For instance, if teachers want to use Evernote to
demonstrate digital note taking one day, but don't have the mobile devices the next day, it's
hard to have a coherent process, let alone derive educational value from the lesson. Are
the kids to print out their notes? Visit them on the cloud? Just wait until they have the
devices again? When mobile devices are shared across classrooms or schools, some of the
potential for the device to offer personalized and instant access is necessarily lost. While
this challenge is worth noting, as it has impacts on how apps are developed and used, we
also note that having some access to mobile technology is certainly better than none.
And finally, the way in which the devices are implemented impacts the effectiveness of
them. Mobile devices shouldn't simply be added to existing curricula and used in place of
an old tool—they should be used to change the way lessons are structured to engage
students in new ways. In essence, teachers should first make a mobile-learning plan, then
get devices; not get devices and subsequently fold them into normal instructional methods.
Using the devices in innovative ways will make it so schools can sustain the wow factor
that technology currently brings to classrooms over the long term. Though we don't know
how students will react to these devices as they become more commonplace, we do know
that continually refreshing content and activities will keep the devices shiny and new even
after several years of use.

How to Make Mobile Learning Work
While mobile learning indisputably holds promise to change education and give students a
better, more valuable experience, the way it is implemented in schools makes a huge
difference. In fact, strong implementation is the deciding factor for mobile learning,
insofar as a bad implementation can stop a mobile learning program dead in the water. In
this book, the programs we discuss and the best practices we share are all contingent on
mobile learning initiatives with strong support, progressive policies, and smart
implementation.
The main criterion for a successful mobile learning program is to open the entire system
up to the change. By this we mean, administrators can't simply say, “Here's a tablet!” and
assume education will change in any fundamental way. Systemic changes need to occur to
facilitate the new devices and learning structures, teachers and users need to be educated
on new possibilities and paradigms in learning, and boundaries pushed. These systemic
changes can facilitate a more relevant and engaging learning experience for today's
students.
Professional Development
Teachers and administrators must have or obtain the requisite skills to incorporate mobile
devices and technology into their teaching. One theme we discuss in Section 1 is the
fallacy that since students are proficient with mobile devices, they're automatically able to
use them to learn. Indeed, learning to use mobile devices for education is an adjustment
for students, and it will be for teachers as well. Finding good apps, enhancing lessons
rather than retrofitting old lessons with an app, and ways to be prepared if the mobile
device fails you are all important skills for the mobile teacher. It cannot be assumed that
adapting to a mobile classroom will be easy or understood by all teachers, and
professional development can provide educators with the means to effectively use this
technology. Professional learning communities within the school or online are great
resources for teachers looking for mobile learning support and discussions.
Use Data to Personalize Learning
Mobile devices offer tremendous opportunities to harvest data on student usage and
knowledge, which can drive smarter decisions and personalized learning plans, among
other things. A smart mobile learning strategy will take advantage of this information and
use it to enhance the educational process. The flexibility offered with a device enables
students to explore content at their own pace, dive deeper into what is most interesting,
and reward their curiosity with instant answers. Based on what engages them most, apps
can suggest similar resources, or frame other lessons in terms of what he or she liked in
the past. In a 1:1 environment, a student's classwork is even more useful, as it can remain
on the device over an extended period of time for reference and analysis. A mobile
classroom can also enable instant data collection. For instance, the Socrative app enables
teachers to poll students during the lesson and instantly gauge understanding on a certain
topic.
Change Instruction

While using mobile devices does not require a teacher to completely abandon the way he
or she runs a classroom, it may require creative changes in how apps and devices are
incorporated to strengthen certain lessons or activities, and creative use of apps (such as
app stacking). Reimagining lessons is also necessary; adding an app as an afterthought is
not the best way to take advantage of the technology, nor is simply using devices for
content delivery. In the end, it's essential to remember that pedagogy still matters and
technology won't replace good teachers, ever. Adding new and engaging technology to the
classroom is a learning experience for all parties and often gives rise to more teachable
moments and opportunities to learn together. Tricia Hudacek, a reading specialist and
teacher reflected on her experience using iPads with her students: “If there are problems,
oftentimes the class as a whole can figure it out. This provides awesome teachable
moments.”31 Good teachers will be able to see the potential in mobile learning and adapt
their classroom structure accordingly.
Flexible Policies
While some schools and school districts have quickly, perhaps without much careful
consideration of the consequences, moved in the direction of bans and censorship, we
advocate creating more lenient policies to support a mobile learning plan—policies that
more closely resemble real-world usage. Digital citizenship is a key skill today's students
will need when they graduate, and teaching them how to participate in social media
responsibly, how to evaluate information found online, how to search using appropriate
criteria and act in a respectful way online are all skills that need to be cultivated. Teaching
these skills as part of an integrated mobile learning curriculum rather than completely
restricting use of certain sites, apps, or devices is important.
It's also important for schools to update and provide well-thought-out policies regarding
student privacy. There must be a balance between protecting student data and enabling
student data use by entitled individuals to enhance the learning process. Privacy is a
significant, and largely uncharted, area that is central to mobile learning. We discuss it at
length in Chapter 15.
Good Apps
Finally, a strong mobile learning plan cannot function without good apps to scaffold the
lessons. Teachers must figure out how to locate good content and tools, and how to
incorporate them into curriculum and lesson plans. Similarly, app developers must focus
on addressing the needs of the audience and tailoring app development to the educational
market. The best educational apps present necessary information in a fresh way and are in
tune with schools' needs. In essence, developing a quality educational app is not just
making a textbook into an ebook, and it's also not using all the available functions on the
mobile device just because they're there. Good educational apps, like all parts of mobile
learning, require a sense of balance to make them appropriately interactive and impactful.
We offer many examples of good educational apps and their classroom uses in APPendix
A.

Conclusion
The skills that used to be demanded of children upon the completion of school were good
handwriting, math fluency, and reading literacy, with education's focus being on creating a
consistent product: a similarly prepared student.32 The skills required today are less
concrete, and entail more critical reading and evaluation of material and the ability to seek
answers effectively using the technology available to them at any given time.33 Mobile
devices offer a tremendous opportunity to make education more engaging and relevant to
the next generation of learners. Digital natives don't want to have to power down during
school—they want to use the technology to make their experience more relevant.34
The key for successfully channeling the mobile learning revolution will not simply be
about digitizing current educational systems. The real appeal will be allowing people to
choose their own paths, leverage their talents, and pursue subjects of interest. Mobile
learning has huge business potential, but the most exciting and rewarding aspect of these
solutions is that students of any age or background might have the chance to pursue
knowledge that is meaningful and relevant to them. Integrating technology, and
specifically mobile technology, early and often prepares students for the new reality.

Notes
1 Anonymous, North Carolina Middle School, interview with authors, April 22, 2014.
2 Idea Learning Group, “History of eLearning: ‘E’ is for ‘Evolutionary,’” October 11,
2012, www.idealearninggroup.com/blog/history-of-elearning-e-is-for-evolutionary.
3 Everett Murdock, “History, the History of Computers, and the History of Computers in
Education,” www.csulb.edu/˜murdock/histofcs.html.
4 Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011).
5 Murdock, “History.”
6 Beverly Park Woolf, Building Intelligent Interactive Tutors (Burlington, MA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, 2009).
7 Murdock, “History.”
8 “Educational Technology Timeline: Highlights During the Clinton Administration 1993–
2000,” U.S. Department of Education,
www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/os/technology/reports/timeline.pdf.
9 Charles Arthur, “Sayonara Netbooks: Asus (and the Rest) Won't Make Any More in
2013,” The Guardian, www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/dec/31/netbooks-dead-
2013.
10 Alena R Treat, Ying Wang, Rajat Chadha, and Michael Hart Dixon, “Major
Developments in Instructional Technology: During the 20th Century,”
www.indiana.edu/∼idt/shortpapers/documents/ITduring20.html.
11 Isaacson, Steve Jobs.
12 Kathy Matheson, “Bill Gates: Better Data Mean Better Schools,” Seattle Times, July
21, 2009,
http://seattletimes.com/html/localnews/2009511088_apusbillgateseducation2ndldwriteth
13 Research Triangle High School, Durham NC; authors' notes from visit, April 15, 2014.
14 James Paul Gee, The Anti-Education Era: Creating Smarter Students through Digital
Learning (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013).
15 Marc Prensky, “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants,” On the Horizon 9, no. 5 (2001),
www.marcprensky.com/writing/Prensky%20-
%20Digital%20Natives,%20Digital%20Immigrants%20-%20Part1.pdf.
16 Fabio Sergio, “10 Ways That Mobile Learning Will Revolutionize Education,” Fast
Company, May 31, 2012, www.fastcodesign.com/1669896/10-ways-that-mobile-
learning-will-revolutionize-education.
17 Ibid.

18 L. Johnson, S. Adams, and M. Cummins, NMC Horizon Report: 2012 K–12 Edition
(The New Media Consortium: Austin, Texas, 2012),
www.iste.org/docs/documents/2012-horizon-report_k12.pdf?sfvrsn=2.
19 Ibid.
20 Kyle Stokes, “How State Dollars Could Fund Your District's Next Tech Initiative,”
StateImpact Indiana, http://indianapublicmedia.org/stateimpact/2012/05/11/how-state-
dollars-could-fund-your-districts-next-tech-initiative/.
21 Partnership for 21st Century Skills, www.p21.org. Accessed June 7, 2013.
22 Julie Stern, East Cary Middle School, interview with authors, May 2014.
23 Victoria Rideout “Learning at Home: Families' Educational Media Use in America,”
The Families and Media Project (New York: Joan Ganz Cooney Center, January 2014),
www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/publication/learning-at-home/.
24 Jennifer Fritschi and Mary Ann Wolf, “Turning on Mobile Learning in North America:
Illustrative Initiatives and Policy Implications,” UNESCO Working Paper Series on
Mobile Learning, 2012.
25 Johnson, Adams, and Cummins, NMC Horizon Report.
26 Celeste Katz, “Mayoral Hopefuls Vow to Lift Cell Phone Bans in Schools,” New York
Daily News, April 26, 2013, www.nydailynews.com/new-york/mayoral-hopefuls-vow-
lift-school-cell-phone-ban-article-1.1328874.
27 Lauren Barack, “High School Students Use Cell Phones in Class—but Not for
Schoolwork, Says Study,” The Digital Shift/School Library Journal, January 7, 2013,
www.thedigitalshift.com/2013/01/k-12/high-school-students-use-cell-phones-in-class-
but-not-for-schoolwork-says-study/.
28 Forsyth County Schools, “BYOT Frequently Asked Questions,”
www.forsyth.k12.ga.us/Page/34766. Accessed May 19, 2014.
29 Tanya Roscoria, “The Impact of the iPad on K–12 Schools,” Converge, February 9,
2011, www.convergemag.com/classtech/impact-ipad-k12-schools.html.
30 Project RED, The Research (summary), 2010, www.projectred.org/about/research-
overview.html.
31 Tricia Hudacek, Teacher and Reading Specialist, online survey response, March 2014.
32 Sugata Mitra, “Build a School in the Cloud,” TEDTalks, February 2013,
www.ted.com/talks/sugata_mitra_build_a_school_in_the_cloud.html.
33 Ibid.
34 Prensky, “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants.”

Section 1
The Mobile Classroom
When schools add mobile devices to their classrooms, how can educators and
administrators ensure they actually enable mobile learning and do not simply retrofit
lesson plans and create more stress for teachers? How can teachers make smart use of
devices in a small-scale implementation or in a 1:1 setup? In what ways do mobile devices
cultivate higher-order thinking skills in students and offer a more engaging way to
experience lessons? The mobile classroom offers many new and exciting promises, but it
also calls up many questions for educators faced with the reality of using mobile devices
for learning. In this section we answer these questions and many more to create a roadmap
for educators who use mobile technology to improve education.
In this section, we offer a thorough discussion of the research and theory behind the
science of learning as it applies to mobile devices and digital learning. We break down
what makes mobile devices unique and more promising than the technologies that have
preceded them. How does the standard pedagogy that prevails in today's classroom
support the use of mobile technology? We explore the ways classrooms and schools can
make smart use of technology, integrating it in lessons to enhance them rather than simply
adding it as an afterthought, or transferring old ideas into digital format.
There are many practical and theoretical discussions regarding mobile devices that help us
to better conceptualize the opportunities and overcome the challenges they present. This
section is designed to provide educators and developers with just that: a framework to
comprehend the wide range of possibilities within the lens of established educational
theory, and a roadmap to navigate the practical implementation of mobile devices in the
classroom. Mobile devices can enable mobile learning, but if they're used without
thoughtful strategy, they are no more revolutionary to our students than any other
technology.


Chapter 2
The Science of Learning

Introduction
Before determining how to appropriately use mobile learning in the classroom to enhance
and personalize learning, it is important to consider what we know about how we learn.
Many established theories of learning offer insights that apply to the use of mobile
technologies in particular. This chapter provides a theoretical framework for discussions
about educational app creation and evaluation, as well as use of mobile technology in the
classroom and pedagogy.
The science of learning describes the cognitive processes surrounding why and how we
learn. Historically, theoretical shifts in psychology have defined such processes in
different ways, consequently changing the study of learning over time. The majority of
late-nineteenth to mid-twentieth century education was dominated by behaviorists who
argued that empirical psychological research can only be conducted by measuring
observable behaviors and treating mental processes and the mind as a black box. Studies
of learning, such as Pavlov's famous salivating-dog conditioning experiments, concluded
that the construction of knowledge occurs through external conditioning and
reinforcement of behaviors from the environment.
However, concurrent with the behaviorist and other movements in the mid-twentieth
century, studies were being published that showed that learning could occur without strict
conditioning or external reinforcement. Learning often occurred after a single experience,
as in an animal that becomes unwell after eating something and never eats it again (one-
trial learning). Research accumulated showing that people used language in ways they had
not been formally taught.1 Learning could occur by one person simply watching another
person experience something, as in Bandura's social learning experiments, without any
direct reinforcement at all. People developed associative networks of related ideas, even
when they had not been strictly trained to do so.2 The human mind was more than just a
pre-programmed machine that has been taught to do a limited number of fixed operations.
The human mind was flexible, self-adapting, and, in many respects, self-taught. That
research reflected a paradigm shift from a behaviorist perspective to a cognitive
perspective; it is called the cognitive revolution.
Today, cognitive perspectives on learning represent the majority view and “explain
learning by focusing on changes in internal mental processes that people use in their
efforts to make sense of the world.”3 The dawning of the cognitive era yielded quite a few
innovative theories of learning that have been widely used to inform K–12 education
practices: Piaget's constructivist perspective, which emphasizes the roles prior knowledge
and experience have on learning, and Vygotsky and Bandura's more social-cognitive
theories of learning, which acknowledge the importance of social interactions and the
components of one's environment for learning.4,5 Therefore, within this book, we define
learning as long-term construction of and/or modifications to one's existing knowledge
structures in an effort to create personal understanding of incoming information and
experiences.
In this chapter, we provide evidence for how and why mobile technologies develop a
learner-centered approach that supports the way in which we learn. We present an
overview of the science behind learning in terms of both the how (the involved cognitive

processes) and the why (the metacognitive and motivational constructs that dictate our
actions). Throughout this discussion, mobile technologies are used as a lens for expanding
upon the educational implications of the way in which we go about constructing
knowledge. We highlight certain educational opportunities for capitalizing on the features
of mobile technologies as well as identify considerations for optimizing learner-centered
design.

Information Processing and Learning
We have defined learning as a construction and/or modification to the knowledge
structures of long-term memory. However, what defines a knowledge structure? What
processes generate the construction or modification of knowledge structures? What
aspects of the material and the student affect or determine the quality of learning? In the
following section, we dissect this definition by clarifying certain terms and phrases. To
explain the way we process new and incoming information and, consequently, learn, we
turn to the modal model of memory.6
Modal Model of Memory
As seen in Figure 2.1, the modal model divides memory into three main components:
sensory, working, and long-term memory. Long-term memory denotes the most typical
representation of memory—an unlimited storage unit housing everything an individual
knows and has experienced during a lifetime. Such experiences and acquired information
constitute what we previously referred to as knowledge structures. Knowledge structures
can take on one of three forms—declarative, procedural, or conditional knowledge (see
Table 2.1)—and are purposefully organized through meaningful connections within long-
term memory. Pieces of information that are closely related receive stronger connections
than more disparate information, and the more connections a knowledge structure attains,
the more pathways an individual can take to retrieve, or remember, the information in new
situations.7
Figure 2.1 Modal Model of Memory

Table 2.1 Types of Knowledge
Type
Definition
Declarative Episodic: Autobiographical memory of information pertaining to personal
experiences.
Semantic: General factual, world knowledge (e.g., vocabulary, facts).
Procedural Knowledge of how to carry out behaviors (e.g., riding a bike).
Conditional Knowledge of when or why to perform a particular action (e.g., when one
should take notes).
Amendments to our long-term memory, or learning events, occur as we perceive and
reason about new, incoming information based on our existing knowledge and previous
experiences. In terms of the modal model, this process begins in sensory memory.
Everything we see, feel, smell, hear, or taste at any given time is placed in this large
memory store for a brief period of time—even information we are not necessarily
concerned with. For instance, think about a time when you have attended a noisy social
event. Due to certain cognitive limitations (more on this later), we cannot process all
incoming sensory information, but we can, with minimal mental effort, filter out other
voices to allow you to focus on a particular conversation. In doing so, you are strategically
allocating attention toward the most important information in sensory memory, a concept
known as selective attention. Consequently, only sensory information receiving attention
is then transferred to working memory—the cognitive workbench and gateway to long-
term memory.
Working memory houses the crux of a learning event. As information is filtered and
transferred from sensory memory, it is temporarily placed in working memory; however,
working memory is theorized to be limited in both capacity and duration.8 As noted
previously, we cannot attend to all of the information placed in sensory memory. In other
words, we are constrained in the amount of information that can transfer from sensory to
working memory. One common rule-of-thumb for estimating the capacity of working
memory is Miller's “Magic Number,” approximately 7 +/– 2 units of information at any
given time,9 and for younger children, the magic number is believed to be closer to 4
units.10 Additionally, information in working memory will only remain there for about
five to twenty seconds before dissipating unless it is being actively processed by the
individual.11 Purposefully repeating the information—a process known as maintenance
rehearsal—or elaborating by forming connections with other information in working
memory, prior knowledge, and/or prior experiences, can mitigate the time constraints of
working memory, but also affect the quality of learning.
Quality of Learning
While the underlying cognitive processes involved in most learning events are generally
similar, not all learning events are created equal. For example, it is generally much easier
to recite the full names of our immediate family members than to recite the full names of
elementary school teachers who taught us 30 or more years ago. Differences in how easily
we can recall information and/or transfer that knowledge to new situations depends on
how often we use this information and the quality in which it was encoded. As mentioned,

information held in working memory is subject to fading, or forgetting, if not actively
retained in working memory and subsequently encoded into long-term memory. Thus, the
manner in which we handle information while in working memory dictates the degree of
learning.
Consider a time when you needed to memorize a phone number. You may have had this
experience when a cell phone battery had run low or you were simply someplace where
you could not just tap the digits into some computing device. To remember the number,
you probably did what many of us do: repeated the digits over and over again until you
were able to write the number down. This is a strategy known as maintenance rehearsal—
we are rehearsing the information and actively maintaining it in working memory in an
attempt to not forget. Although learners often use maintenance rehearsal to memorize
information for a test (e.g., vocabulary words, steps in a process), this technique is a very
shallow method of learning known as rote learning. Unless we continue to access
information learned via rote (i.e., multiplication tables), the information can be harder to
retain over time or to apply to new situations.
However, information in working memory can be processed through elaborative rehearsal.
With elaborative rehearsal, we actively reason about incoming information by generating
connections with prior knowledge or assigning some degree of practical organization. As a
result, meaningful learning occurs as the newly constructed knowledge structures are
encoded in long-term memory in a more robust, integrated manner. In the most abstract
terms, rote and meaningful learning describe the difference between memorizing and
understanding or comprehending information. For instance, one might use an analogy to
previously learned material to foster understanding of the novel information. Or, instead of
simply mechanically memorizing a list, one might organize the information into a matrix
or concept map. Even associating the material with a visual image can foster meaningful
learning.12 By deliberately assigning structure and/or comparing and integrating new
information with prior knowledge, we engage with the material at a much deeper level.
Although this process is more cognitively taxing than rote memorization, it is ultimately
more engaging, and it more readily ensures ease of remembering and the likelihood of
applying the information in new situations.
Optimizing Working Memory
Although it would be ideal if all students could engage in meaningful learning at all times
and make as many connections with prior knowledge as possible, cognitive load theory
suggests this goal is dependent upon the limitations of working memory. While some
cognitive tasks seem extremely simple or even automatic (e.g., solving the problem 2+2),
more complex activities can be quite difficult due to the demands on working memory as
it approaches capacity. Therefore, what must educators and developers consider when
developing instruction designed to effectively challenge the student while designing
within the constraints of working memory?
Above we noted Miller's magic number that defines the capacity of working memory as
approximately 7 +/– 2 units, or chunks, of information at any given time for adults
(approximately 4 chunks for children). The terms unit and chunk are intentionally vague,
yet have critical educational implications. For now, consider a chunk to be a single piece

of information like a digit or word. If we attempt to memorize a random list of letters or
solve a complex math problem that requires holding more than 7 +/– 2 numbers in
working memory, we often have great difficulty. However, when information is organized
into meaningful units or chunks, the capacity of working memory quickly increases. For
example, when memorizing a random list of 20 numbers and letters such as the one below,
the task is nearly impossible.
C I A F B I U S A 9 1 1 S O N Y 1 2 3 4
However, the following list also contains the same 20 numbers and letters, but is far more
manageable:
CIA FBI USA 911 SONY 1234
This is because while the second list is also 20 numbers and letters, it is really six
meaningful chunks of information. Similarly, mnemonics are another strategy for
increasing the capacity of working memory—memorizing the colors of the rainbow
becomes much easier when remembered it as the name Roy G. Biv (red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo, and violet). It should be noted, however, the efficacy of utilizing
mnemonics and meaningful chunks is dependent upon the individual—the chunking
scheme used above would be useless to an individual unfamiliar with the acronyms CIA,
FBI, or 911. Again, the more we know about what the learner already knows, the better
able we will be to position appropriate content. But in general, by organizing larger pieces
of information into meaningful units, we allow for greater processing capacity in working
memory, which allows the individual to engage in more complex thought or retrieve
additional information from prior knowledge, thereby increasing their depth of learning.
Another way in which we optimize the capacity of working memory is through
automization. With respect to cognitive processing, automization refers to practicing or
overlearning information or skills such that they become automatic and require very little
mental effort.13 Consequently, information and skills that have been automatized can be
accessed or enacted without requiring working memory resources, allowing for more
complex operations to occur without experiencing cognitive overload. Think about driving
from your home to the neighborhood grocery store. This seemingly complex task can
usually be done while engaging in other cognitive processes, such as listening and singing
along to the radio and thinking about what you will have for dinner. Your experience with
driving the familiar route has allowed for this skill to be automatized—you do not need to
actively think about hitting the brakes, pressing on the gas, turning the wheel, or reading
street signs. When you get home, you might not even remember all the details of the drive.
Now, think about driving a common route and finding a sudden detour forcing you to
travel along unfamiliar streets. As the same task of driving is now no longer automatized,
you immediately turn down the radio, forget about dinner plans, and focus on navigating
the unfamiliar streets all due to the limitations of working memory.
While automatized operations foster our ability to multitask, they also facilitate deep,
meaningful learning. For instance, compare a beginning reader to a fluent reader reading
this sentence: All square objects have four straight sides of equal length. A beginning
reader deciphers and sounds out the words individually and then holds each word in
working memory in order to derive the meaning of the sentence. However, the sentence is

quite long, likely generating an impossible cognitive load. In contrast, the fluent reader
has automatized the skill of decoding, reserving the majority of working memory capacity
for simply comprehending the sentence. The fluent reader can easily understand and learn
from this sentence, and she has cognitive resources to access information from long-term
memory and even think about times in which she has come across square-shaped objects.
In sum, the automatization of information and operations is what allows us build upon our
prior knowledge in order to acquire more complex information and skills when
encountering new information.
Finally, social cognitive perspectives of learning emphasize the importance of extending
working memory by utilizing external sources.14 Sources of external support range from
pieces of paper for taking notes to expert tutors, and encompass any resource that can be
used to scaffold, or assist, learning. By offloading information currently held in working
memory to external sources, capacity can be allocated to complex, critical thinking and/or
the integration of additional information from prior knowledge.15 Similarly, concepts such
as Vygotsky's zone of proximal development and distributed cognition suggest knowledge
acquisition can be optimized through collaboration by distributing cognition across two or
more individuals.16, 17 Therefore, external extensions of working memory are a common
and beneficial way to reach the potential of working memory.

Other Critical Facets of Learning
While we have described the how of learning in terms of underlying processes, the why
still needs to be considered. Factors such as motivation, interest, and metacognition also
play a pivotal role in the way we learn and help to explain why we approach learning
activities in many different ways. For example, why do we process certain information at a
nominal level while engaging in more higher-order thinking such as problem solving,
critical thinking and reasoning, and creativity for other material? Why might we observe
differences in performance between two equally well-prepared students?
Motivation
Motivation is an abstract term for the control center of our behavior. Motivation prescribes
our willingness to engage in tasks, determines the amount of cognitive effort we put forth
while participating in an activity, and dictates our persistence. In the previous section, we
distinguished the difference between rote and meaningful learning and highlighted the
benefits meaningful learning has for long-term retention and transfer. However, we also
emphasized all learning is not created equal. Although higher-level processes such as
critical thinking, creativity, and reasoning yield deeper understanding, such tasks require
additional effort on behalf of the learner—an effort mediated by motivation.
Academic motivation has been found to stem from a variety of sources and is commonly
categorized as either intrinsic or extrinsic.18 Intrinsic motivation refers to our inherent
inclination to engage in a task simply because of personal enjoyment, satisfaction, or
feelings of importance.19 Intrinsically motivated learners readily put forth the requisite
effort for deeper learning; consequently, intrinsic motivation has been associated with
increased academic achievement.20 On the other hand, extrinsic motivation stems from the
potential for external reward (e.g., praise, money, grades). Often, extrinsically motivated
students are not simply learning to learn, but rather learning to receive something in
return. Therefore, often when extrinsically motivated, there is little reason to go above and
beyond a required threshold, and, thus, has been shown to yield shallow processing and
minimal cognitive effort.21
However, a notable aspect of motivation is its malleability over time. Individuals who are
extrinsically motivated to complete a task can develop intrinsic motivation through, for
example, positive experiences that raise one's self-efficacy and nurture an individual's
beliefs about their own competencies.22 Therefore, carefully crafted instruction that fosters
confidence, appreciation, and autonomy can generate intrinsic motivation over time.
However, the malleability of motivation can also shift from intrinsic to extrinsic given
certain circumstances. In fact, overall trends suggest academic motivation declines as
students progress through school, especially in mathematics and science.23, 24 Through
middle and high school, external rewards such as grades are more heavily weighted as
measures of performance and sources of recognition, and they make students more
focused on getting the grade than mastering the material. Although we generally strive for
students to be intrinsically motivated, extrinsic motivation is not necessarily bad. For
example, helping students to realize the importance of deeply processing and
understanding academic material for achieving their extrinsically-motivated goals (e.g.,

college admission) can serve to stabilize the presence of intrinsic motivation over time.25
Interest
Although generally categorized within the larger umbrella of motivation, the concept of
interest has unique and important cognitive implications worth noting here. Due to the
frequency of its use in everyday conversation, connotations associated with the term
“interest” are vast; nonetheless, interest is often associated with conditions—internal or
external to the individual—that yield inclination for engaging in an activity. With respect
to education, a forefather of educational psychology, John Dewey (1859 to 1952),
suggested the degree to which a student learns is dependent upon effort he puts forth, and
effort is regulated by interest in the task.26 More recently, research has extended Dewey's
hypothesis and produced two significant findings:
1. The state of being interested manifests as heightened cognitive and affective processes
and, consequently, influences what and to what extent students learn.27
2. The instantiation of interest is highly dependent upon the interaction between person
and context.28
Related to the first point, interest in an activity or to-be-learned information appears to
have a powerful impact on cognitive processing. Previous research with reading
comprehension suggests we seem to automatically allocate attention toward segments of
text we perceive as interesting.29 In doing so, more cognitive capacity is available for
deeper, more complex thought. Consequently, several studies have found students highly
interested in the topic of an expository text performed better on high-level questions
requiring inferences, transfer, and synthesis than those reporting low levels of interest
independent of prior knowledge, cognitive ability, reading ability, and interest for
reading.30, 31, 32 Moreover, individuals, in general, are more motivated to engage in
activities that align with their existing interests,33 and this interest-based inclination has
been shown to foster academic achievement.34
The second notable implication of interest lies in the way we become interested. Interest
researchers differentiate between individual or personal interest and situational interest.35
Personal interests are what we typically think of when we refer to interest—an interest that
is “relatively stable and…usually associated with increased knowledge, positive emotions,
and increased reference value.”36 These are topics and activities that we enjoy and
habitually engage in because of the content, not the context or other task features.37 For
instance, a student might be more interested in math or a reading passage if it is taught
using baseball as a backdrop, as that is one of her personal interests. In contrast,
situational interest arises irrespective of personal interest in a topic due to components of
one's environment that that we find inherently stimulating.38 For example, while sitting in
a waiting room, a person might pick up a magazine and read an article on a topic of little
interest simply because the headline was surprising or relevant to our life—the article
itself, not previous experience or personal preferences, stimulated interest. Therefore, we
can experience the cognitive benefits of being interested without necessarily having
previous experience or preference for the material. Providing students with prerequisite

information, situating learning within a meaningful context, and activities such as hands-
on learning have all been shown to stimulate situational interest regardless of personal
interests.39
Interest can serve an integral role for both motivating students to engage in a task as well
as optimizing the functionality of working memory during knowledge construction.
Moreover, the concept of situational interest provides unique opportunities for generating
interest and learning for individuals less than enthusiastic about the material itself.
Metacognition and Strategy Use
In the most basic sense, metacognition refers to thinking about our own thinking.
Therefore, metacognition refers to an awareness of what we know (and what we do not
know) as well as a control for regulating, and optimizing, our thinking through the use of
strategies.40 Have you ever read a book or reached the bottom of the page and realized you
do not remember anything you just read? (We hope that doesn't happen in this book!) Such
a realization demonstrates metacognitive monitoring, and, as you go back to re-read the
page, you are implementing a strategy to compensate for your lack of understanding.
Similarly, recognizing our own cognitive limitations as students, we might write down
important information during a lecture as a strategy for remembering key points.
Metacognition has been described as the mission control of cognition, as it is this control
that regulates behaviors such as when and where we need to direct our attention or
assessments of progress toward a goal.41 Metacognition plays an extremely important role
across one's lifetime, as we are less often learning in a formal setting and more often
expected to take on the majority of responsibility for our own learning.
While this might seem simple, metacognition and strategy use are skills developed over
time and generally do not begin to emerge until late elementary school.42 Even through
middle and high school, and throughout college, there are distinct differences in students'
abilities to monitor and control their own learning.43 Thus, it cannot simply be assumed
that students who say they understand a lesson are making an accurate assessment. As
educators, it is important to develop these skills by helping students become more
metacognitively aware of their learning and develop effective strategies for coping with
cognitive limitations, filling holes in their current understanding, and identifying personal
learning preferences. For example, teaching students methods for self-testing on material
to ensure mastery, techniques for taking organized notes that facilitate meaningful
learning, procedures for knowing when and how to seek help, properties of a productive
study environment, and even ways to manage time wisely can all help to foster
metacognitive growth, efficient strategy use, and ultimately effective independent
learning.44

Implications for Mobile Learning
Although the way in which we process information can be modeled and generalized across
the population, this should not undermine the dependencies brought about by the unique
characteristics of an individual. Throughout this chapter, we have outlined the role certain
cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational factors play in the process of learning. Central
to the properties and behaviors of all of these components is their dependence on
characteristics of the individual learner. A learner's existing knowledge, previous
experiences, developmental level, and personal preferences are just a few of the many
variables one must account for when designing effective instruction. Therefore, we
propose seven essential implications that the science of learning has on the design of
mobile technologies for learning (Figure 2.2), and we give several tips for apps to
accommodate these well-established learning principles.
Figure 2.2 Seven Key Takeaways for Mobile Learning
Acknowledge the Bottleneck between Sensory and Working
Memory
Although we may be able to register all the sensory information provided at any given

moment, we simply cannot attend to every sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste at every
moment. Consequently, while mobile learning designers can present students with all of
the information they might need, the subset of information that actually reaches working
memory is dependent upon the memory constraints common to all people and, in some
cases, the unique characteristics of each learner. Information deemed critical and
important enough to receive attention by one student might not necessarily overlap with
that of another. For example, the information categorized as essential or important by an
instructor might be meaningless to a low-performing student or negligible to a high-
performing student. At the same time, erroneous information in sensory memory threatens
to distract learners by drawing attention away from elements of the task. This can include
sensory information from the environment, but also, without careful mobile design,
sensory information from the mobile learning device or app that distracts the learner from
the main point. Ensuring that every student in a classroom is attending to appropriate
information is an extremely difficult task for traditional classroom settings, especially with
larger classrooms. But effective mobile learning design may be able to overcome many of
those distractions, filtering out irrelevant sensory information and directing students to the
target content.
With the personalization enabled by mobile technologies, we can better traverse the
bottleneck between sensory and working memory. Formative assessments, or knowledge
checks, designed into the mobile learning device or app, can encourage on-track
performance and productivity, taking advantage of the principles of learning originally
discovered by the behaviorists. At the same time, mobile-learning devices can create a
context for the naturally occurring, elaborative, or enhanced interactions of students with
content, taking advantage of the kinds of learning principles discovered by the cognitive
psychologists. Personalized feedback and guidance further ensure that students are
attending to the information appropriate for them. Therefore:
Direct the learner to the most relevant content, taking advantage of multiple sensory
systems to attract attention.
Plan for cases in which important information is initially overlooked or neglected,
allowing that content to be re-presented or easily re-accessed.
Encourage effective allocation of attention by limiting the quantity of content
presented in one section, interaction, or app experience.
Facilitate Meaningful Learning through Organization and
Connections with Prior Knowledge
The ease and likelihood of retrieval of information stored in long-term memory is
dependent upon how often the information is accessed, and the quality and quantity of
associations it has with other existing knowledge structures. Therefore, true understanding
and comprehension of material does not occur through simple memorization of facts, but
rather by developing a sense of how such facts integrate with other information. Students
must actively transact with the material and create their own meaning rather than sit
passively and hope for the transmission of knowledge.
Techniques for encouraging such behavior include priming relevant prior knowledge,

providing partially-completed concept maps and matrices, utilizing visual information, or
creating analogies with familiar information. For example, teaching electrical circuits
might be easier to comprehend when compared to the properties of a water circuit. This
allows students to connect new learning to knowledge structures already in long-term
memory, thus increasing the likelihood that new learning will be transferred to long-term
memory. Given the uniqueness of any individual student's prior knowledge, in a traditional
classroom, it can be difficult to scaffold meaningful learning for a class of 25 or more
learners. With mobile technologies, learning can easily be more personalized. Students
without much prior knowledge can work at their own pace by first filling in their gaps in
prior knowledge necessary for mastering the task at hand, while students with high levels
of prior knowledge can go beyond the current assignment by researching and elaborating
on the material. When planning for or designing mobile learning:
Provide several levels of the same lesson to accommodate individual differences in
knowledge and ability.
Create lessons in which the student, not the teacher, is constructing meaning.
Utilize visual, auditory, and text information without overloading the student to
facilitate even more robust encoding.
Demand active construction of knowledge by encouraging interaction while
recognizing the difference between observable activity and cognitive activity—
provoking critical thinking in a student might manifest as internal thought, yet this
yields better learning than a student charged with actively filling in the blanks on a
worksheet.
When Appropriate, Encourage Automatization of Information and
Operations
Expanding upon the previous section, automatized information and operations
significantly reduce an individual's cognitive load, as well as allow for mastery in a given
area. For example, by automatizing number fluency and operations, students can handle
more complex math problems. By automatizing word decoding and text parsing, reading
becomes a modality by which new learning can take place. However, automaticity does
not come immediately, as it requires diligent practice over time. In a traditional classroom,
a teacher might not have time to accommodate the necessary practice for essential skills. It
might be particularly challenging to provide each individual learner with careful feedback.
But the ubiquitous nature of mobile technologies allows for practice anytime, anywhere.
Therefore, to encourage automatization:
Identify essential, foundational skills that can be practiced independently, and design
exercises within the app to allow for practice.
Provide multiple, interesting ways to practice the same skill so as not to compromise
motivation.
Accommodate practice anytime, anywhere—with consideration for the audio and
visual constraints presented by certain settings.

Be Aware of the Limitations of Working Memory
Unfortunately, the limitations of working memory can inhibit the depth of cognitive
processing; however, there are techniques for overcoming this obstacle. Aggregating
information into meaningful units, and automatizing information and operations,
significantly expands the capacity of our mental workbench for the meaningful
construction of knowledge. Moreover, peers, teachers, parents, books, worksheets,
technology, and other resources can also act as external extensions to working memory.
For example, actions as simple as offloading information (e.g., taking notes, drawing
pictures) can free up resources in working memory. Moreover, discussing topics with
peers and essentially pooling together everyone's prior knowledge and current
understanding—a process known as distributed learning—can reduce cognitive demands.
Lastly, utilizing technology as a means for presenting information to students visually
and/or interactively can be more effective than having students mentally visualize how a
process works on their own.45
Mobile technologies easily provide and facilitate an external extension of working
memory. For example, mobile technologies seamlessly take on the role of a multimedia
simulation, an interactive, organized note-taking space, or gateway to collaborative
learning scenarios. Acknowledge and cope with the limitations of working memory with
these ideas:
Know the developmental level of your user. Consider what skills and information are
likely automatized to facilitate higher-level thinking.
Facilitate opportunities for distributed cognition and collaborative learning via
multiuser apps, electronic sharing (with teacher or peers), and other methods for
sharing personal content (presentation projections, email, text messaging, etc.).
Display relevant information in a meaningful way and allow for user offloading.
Carefully and Strategically Incorporate Rewards
While some research suggests the use of rewards is detrimental to intrinsic motivation,
carefully and strategically implemented rewards can be viable instructional aids.46
Typically, there are quantitative and qualitative differences in the quality of learning
between a student who is intrinsically motivated and one who is extrinsically motivated;
ultimately, we want students to learn because they want and love to learn, not because they
are forced to or incentivized by some external reward system. Unfortunately, reality is far
from a world of intrinsically motivated students across all domains making the use of
rewards a strategic, yet complicated, tool.
Research-based best practices suggest tangible rewards should only be utilized when
absolutely necessary and should be reduced over time.47 Moreover, students should
receive rewards for productive behavior as opposed to a final product, and students should
be made explicitly aware why they are receiving the reward.48 Therefore, to effectively
implement a reward system, classroom teachers must pay close attention to the needs and
actions of each student—a problem solved by the use of mobile technologies. The
personalization of a mobile experience can effectively provide extrinsic motivation for

productive behavior, as opposed to a final product. As a result, students are encouraged to
try hard, transact with the material, generate connections with prior knowledge, and
implement effective strategies—the characteristics of an intrinsically motived student—
and high performance more likely becomes a by-product of these behaviors. When
utilizing rewards in the classroom:
Allow for flexible, personalized reward structures. In other words, reward only those
students who might benefit from rewards—refrain from rewarding students already
intrinsically motivated to complete the task.
Reward students for productive learning behaviors, not final products.
Adhere to best practices for reinforcement learning by devising a reward structure that
systematically fades as students approach mastery.
Appeal to and/or Generate Interest
When learners are interested, cognitive processes become more effective, effort increases,
and, consequently, the quality of learning goes up.49 However, it is safe to assume that not
all topics and activities mandated by a school's curriculum are as flexible, and we can
expect the cognitive advantages of interest will only manifest occasionally, even for the
best students. In order to work around lack of personal interest, we can achieve situational
interest by manipulating attributes of a learning task. For example, research suggests a
student that dislikes reading will put forth more effort if the topic of text aligns with her
interests.50 Integrating choice, novelty, surprise, narrative, hands-on activities, technology,
cohesion, social interactions, and personal relatedness are just some of the many ways in
which we can achieve situational interest in the classroom.51 Care should also be taken to
maintain situational interest for the entire class over the course of an activity.52 In other
words, be prepared for the novelty to wear off.
Several of the aforementioned sources of situational interest are easily attained through the
use of mobile technologies. For example, simply using technology has been shown to
trigger students' situational interest for a task.53 Similarly, the nature of mobile is very
accommodating to incorporating hands-on activities, providing choice and autonomy,
fostering social interaction, and presenting information in a novel manner. In fact, Mitchell
found interactivity through social interaction and hands-on activities to be one technique
for maintaining situational interest over time.54 To trigger and maintain interest in the
classroom:
Consider ways in which learning objectives can incorporate student personal interests
(e.g., reading about topics of interest).
Strategically incorporate other sources of situational interest. Do not assume that
simply presenting information via mobile technology will maintain interest over the
course of an activity.
Support Metacognitive Processes and Strategy Use, and Do Not
Assume Mastery of Such Skills
Metacognition and strategy use highly influence the efficiency and effectiveness of

learning and directly impact long-term academic success.55 As students progress through
middle and high school and prepare for the demands of college and careers, more
responsibility for learning is placed on the student. Students are charged with independent
learning and taught strategies for doing so. However, regulating one's own learning is a
learned skill developed over time through instruction and practice and typically does not
begin to emerge until late elementary or early high school.56 Even so, the rate of
development and proficiency of these skills can be vast from student to student.57
Teaching and supporting students' metacognition cannot be done through a one-size-fits-
all approach, as the best strategies for learning are developed through learner preference
and previous experiences.58
The ubiquity of mobile technologies in modern life facilitates independent learning as
users are free to utilize this instructional method anytime, anywhere. Therefore, mobile
technologies serve as a unique venue for supporting metacognition and strategies in the
form of tools as well as opportunities for practice. However, given varying degrees of
student metacognitive competency, completely independent learning can be particularly
challenging, even detrimental, for some. When integrating mobile technologies into
pedagogy:
Consider the role mobile learning can play as a tool for supporting metacognitive skills
and strategy use (e.g., note taking, organization, time management, goal monitoring).
Scaffold metacognitive behaviors, such as progress monitoring and concept mastery.
Support the use of various strategies for learning by providing opportunities for self-
assessment to reinforce the student's understanding of what he or she does and does
not know.

Conclusion
In this chapter, we highlighted the ways in which the science of learning should be
considered when designing and implementing instructional methods, especially app
development for mobile devices and mobile learning. Because we believe the learner must
be central in the development of mobile learning environments, we will refer to these
points throughout the book as we discuss what makes a good app, best practices for
integrating mobile into the classroom, and considerations for special populations. By
adhering to the cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational needs of the learner, a good
mobile app aligns with and supports the way in which we construct meaningful knowledge
—knowledge that represents true understanding, comprehension, and mastery.

Notes
1 Noam Chomsky, Knowledge of Language: Its Nature,Origin, and Use (Westport, CT:
Praeger Publishers, 1986).
2 J. Alba and L. Hasher, “Is Memory Schematic?” Psychological Bulletin 93, no. 2
(1983): 203–231.
3 P. D. Eggen and D. P. Kauchak, Educational Psychology, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1999): 242.
4 Lev Vygotsky, Mind and Society: The Development of Higher Mental Processes
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978).
5 Albert Bandura, “Human Agency in Social Cognitive Theory,” American Psychologist
44, no. 9 (1989): 1175–1184.
6 R. C. Atkinson and R. M. Shiffrin, “Human Memory: A Proposed System and Its
Control Processes,” Psychology of Learning and Motivation 2 (1968): 89–195.
7 J. E. Ormrod, Educational Psychology: Developing Learners, 6th ed. (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson, 2008).
8 J. Sweller, “Cognitive Load during Problem Solving: Effects on Learning,” Cognitive
Science 12 (2006): 257–285.
9 G. Miller, “The Magic Number Seven Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity
to Process Information,” Psychological Review 63, no. 2 (1956): 81–97.
10 N. Cowan, “The Magical Number 4 in Short-Term Memory: A Reconsideration of
Mental Storage Capacity,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (2001): 87–185.
11 A. D. Baddeley, “Is Working Memory Still Working?” American Psychologist 56, no.
11 (2001): 851–864.
12 M. Sadoski and A. Paivio, Imagery and Text: A Dual Coding Theory of Reading and
Writing (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, 2001).
13 W. Schneider and R. M. Shiffrin, “Controlled and Automatic Human Information
Processing: I. Detection, Search, and Attention,” Psychological Review 84, no. 1
(1977): 1–66.
14 Vygotsky, Mind and Society.
15 J. Sweller, “Cognitive Load During Problem Solving.”
16 Vygotsky, Mind and Society.
17 Edwin Hutchins, Cognition in the Wild (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995).
18 P. R. Pintrich and D. H. Schunk, Motivation in Education: Theory, Research, and
Applications (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice-Hall, 2002).

19 E. Deci, Intrinsic Motivation (New York: Plenum Press, 1975).
20 A. E. Gottfried, J. S. Fleming, and A. W. Gottfried, “Continuity of Academic Intrinsic
Motivation from Childhood through Late Adolescence: A Longitudinal Study,” Journal
of Educational Psychology 93, no. 1 (2001): 3–13.
21 E. L. Deci, R. Koestner, and R. M. Ryan, “A Meta-Analytic Review of Experiments
Examining the Effects of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation,” Psychological
Bulletin 125, no. 6 (1999): 627–668.
22 B. J. Zimmerman, “Self-Efficacy: An Essential Motive to Learn,” Contemporary
Educational Psychology 25, no. 1 (2000): 82–91.
23 Gottfried, Fleming, & Gottfried, “Continuity of Academic Intrinsic Motivation.”
24 M. R. Lepper, J. H. Corpus, and S. S. Iyengar, “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivational
Orientations in the Classroom: Age Differences and Academic Correlate,” Journal of
Educational Psychology 97, no. 2 (2005): 184–196.
25 Ormrod, Educational Psychology.
26 J. Dewey, Interest and Effort in Education (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1913).
27 G. Schraw and S. Lehman, “Situational Interest: A Review of the Literature and
Directions for Future Research,” Educational Psychology Review 13, no. 1 (2001): 23–
51.
28 S. Hidi and K. A. Renninger, “The Four-Phase Model of Interest Development,”
Educational Psychologist 41, no. 2 (2006): 111–127.
29 M. McDaniel, P. J. Waddill, K. Finstad, and T. Bourg, “The Effects of Text-Based
Interest on Attention and Recall,” Journal of Educational Psychology 92, no. 3 (2000):
492–502.
30 U. Schiefele, “Interest and Learning From Text,” Scientific Studies of Reading 3, no. 3
(1999): 257–279.
31 K. Renninger, L. Ewen, and A. K. Lasher, “Individual Interest as Context in Expository
Text and Mathematical Word Problems,” Learning and Instruction 12, no. 4 (2002):
467–490.
32 V. Clinton and P. van den Broek, “Interest, Inferences, and Learning from Texts,”
Learning and Individual Differences (2012),
www.academia.edu/5565152/Interest_Inferences_and_Learning_from_Texts.
33 J. J. A. Denissen, N. R Zarrett, and J. S. Eccles, “I Like to Do It, I'm Able, and I Know
I Am: Longitudinal Couplings Between Domain-Specific Achievement, Self-Concept,
and Interest,” Child Development 78, no. 2 (2007): 430–447.
34 J. I. Rotgans and H. G. Schmidt, “Situational Interest and Academic Achievement in
the Active-Learning Classroom,” Learning and Instruction 21 (2011): 58–67.

35 K. A. Renninger and S. Hidi, “Revisiting the Conceptualization, Measurement, and
Generation of Interest,” Educational Psychologist 46, no. 3 (2011): 168–184.
36 A. Krapp, S. Hidi, and K. A. Renninger, “Interest, Learning and Development,” in The
Role of Interest in Learning and Development, eds. A. Renninger, S. Hidi, and A.
Krapp (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1992): 3–25.
37 U. Schiefele, E. Schaffner, J. Moller, and A. Wigfield, “Dimensions of Reading
Motivation and Their Relationship to Reading Behavior and Competence,” Reading
Research Quarterly 47, no. 4 (2012): 427–463.
38 Hidi and Renninger, “The Four-Phase Model of Interest Development.”
39 J. T Gutherie, A. Wigfield, N. M. Humenick, K. C. Perencevich, A. Taboada, and P.
Barbosa, “Influences of Stimulating Tasks on Reading Motivation and
Comprehension,” The Journal of Educational Research 99, no. 4 (2006): 232–245.
40 L. Baker and A. Brown, “Metacognitive Skills and Reading,” 1980,
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED195932.pdf.
41 B. J. Zimmerman, “A Social Cognitive View of Self-Regulated Academic Learning,”
Journal of Educational Psychology 81 (1989): 329–339.
42 J. Alexander, M. Carr, and P. Schwanenflugel, “Development of Metacognition in
Gifted Children: Directions for Future Research,” Developmental Review 15 (1995): 1–
37.
43 Ibid.
44 B. J. Zimmerman, “Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner: An Overview,” Theory into
Practice 41, no. 2 (2002): 64–70.
45 R. E. Mayer, Multimedia Learning (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
46 J. Brophy, Motivating Students to Learn (Boston: McGraw-Hill, 1998).
47 Deci, Koestner, and Ryan, “A Meta-Analytic Review of Experiments.”
48 Brophy, Motivating Students to Learn.
49 Rotgans and Schmidt, “Situational Interest and Academic Achievement.”
50 U. Schiefele, “Interest, Learning, and Motivation,” Educational Psychologist 26, no.
3/4: 299–323.
51 D. A. Bergin, “Influences on Classroom Interest,” Educational Psychologist 34, no. 2
(1999): 87–98.
52 Hidi and Renninger, “The Four-Phase Model.”
53 M. Mitchell, “Situational Interest: Its Multifaceted Structure in The Secondary School
Mathematics Classroom,” Journal of Educational Psychology 85, no. 3 (1993): 424–

436.
54 Ibid.
55 B. Zimmerman, “Self-Regulated Learning and Academic Achievement: An Overview,”
Educational Psychologist 25, no. 1 (1990).
56 Zimmerman, “Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner.”
57 B. Zimmerman and D. Schunk, Self-Regulated Learning and Academic Achievement:
Theoretical Perspectives (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 2001).
58 Zimmerman, “Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner.”


Chapter 3
What Is It about These Devices?
There just seems to be something different about learning with mobile devices. In
interviews with classroom teachers, a persistent theme was clear: mobile devices add a
level of engagement to any activity, and seem to captivate those students who are often
otherwise disengaged. We've come across comments like “Some days, I have kids 100
percent on task, all day,” and “Students played games to prepare for final tests. Their test
scores have improved significantly.”1 Almost any task is more engaging on a device, be it
watching a video clip or using flashcards or taking notes in class.2
But what is it about these devices? We believe the answer lies in a synergy of
characteristics that yield a ubiquitous experience unmatched by other technologies. Based
on our research, interviews and experience, we've tried to unpack the familiar “there is just
something about these devices!” by positing 10 distinguishing factors that set the mobile
experience apart from other technologies (such as laptops) and the absence of electronic
technology altogether (i.e., books).
Many of the factors overlap to some degree, and the examples may cover one or more of
the factors (which we attribute largely to the ubiquity of mobile devices), but this list
(shown in Figure 3.1) provides a foundation for understanding mobile technology's impact
on students today.
Figure 3.1 Distinguishing Factors of the Mobile Learning Experience

Connected
The on-demand, perpetual connectivity of mobile devices changes the way we
communicate with one another, gather and store data, and indulge our curiosity—all of
which have great implications for education. Mobile devices enable users to not only be
constantly connected to their data and resources, but also to always be connected to one
another. Learning is no longer tethered to the teacher, classroom, or textbook; instead
students are connected to educational opportunities from virtually anywhere, making
almost every situation a potential learning environment. This anytime, anywhere access is
also popular among students, with a recent ECAR study showing that 78 percent consider
Wi-Fi “extremely valuable to their academic success.”3
Always Connected
Standard features such as email, text messaging, and video and voice calls allow educators
to maintain lines of communication with students outside of school. “Kids who never
speak would speak up. I have a better relationship with students,” one teacher
commented.4 Students can easily contact their teachers if they get stuck on a homework
assignment, and teachers can send out reminders and other resources after the school day
ends. In a recent interview, one high school student complimented her teachers for helping
her stay on track by sending out reminders, quizzes, and exercises during an extended
snow storm that closed her school for multiple days.5 Targeted apps, such as Remind,
allow teachers to communicate with students and parents without having to actually share
personal phone numbers or emails. This can be especially useful for younger students and
for communicating details about field trips or assignments to parents.6 Aside from
providing assistance day to day, “students who feel their teachers care and support them
are more likely to perceive themselves as successful and valued in their jobs later in life.”7
Furthermore, bringing mobile devices home has been associated with an increase in
parental involvement in students' education.8
Similarly, networking components like Bluetooth and Wi-Fi simplify group work and
collaboration. Discussing requirements, plans, and goals; sharing research and resources;
drafting documents, creating presentations, and generating other projects no longer require
face-to-face meetings or USB thumb drives. Collaboration and sharing apps—Google
Drive, Dropbox, NearPod, Padlet, Join.Me, Showbie, to name a few—furnish excellent
platforms for working together both in and out of class. Using mobile devices “has
increased our collaboration,” one student commented. “We look for information and form
groups to solve problems together.”9 An online lesson planning resource outlines the
following activity: for vocabulary lists, assign each student one word and have them find a
picture that represents the term using Safari or the camera on the device, mark up the
image using Comic Touch, Thinglink, or SAS Gloss, and share the image using AirDrop;
therefore, at the end of the activity, each student has a detailed flashcard deck filled with
text and images of the entire vocabulary list.10 Similarly, social apps, such as Twitter,
allow teachers to facilitate conversations outside of the classroom. “During the State of the
Union address I…offered them a variety of pathways to have a dynamic and connected
conversation…[via chat rooms, instant messaging, or a hash-tagged Twitter chat].”11

Therefore, students are able to virtually discuss current events that occur after school
hours.
The connected experience also dismantles acknowledged constraints of the classroom.
Virtual field trips, 3-D maps, simulations, and communication with individuals around the
world transform schools from brick-and-motor facilities to limitless spaces. Without
leaving the confines of the classroom, students can tour the Louvre in Paris, visit
laboratories around the world, design wind turbines,12 virtually walk around the Coliseum
in Rome, or interview experts, entrepreneurs, and other key individuals in their particular
areas of interest. For example, in a lesson about campaigns for the public good and
bravery, an eighth-grade class had the opportunity to tweet and video conference with
General John Michel of the U.S. Air Force who was deployed 8,000 miles away in
Afghanistan.13
Instantly Connected
Unlike laptop and desktop computers, mobile devices have the unique advantage of instant
connectivity. Many classroom teachers praise tablets and smartphones for their lack of
boot-up time allowing more time for on-task engagement. A ninth-grade geography
teacher noted, “Today I met the kids at the door, they signed in and took the iPads. By the
time the bell rang, they had the iPads and were ready to go; whereas in the media center,
you have to [finish up] five minutes earlier.”14 Likewise, Linnea Czerney, a technology
coordinator, argues that being able to Google something at any moment and find the
answer allows students to be more inquisitive and self-directed.15 Similarly, in an
interview about educational technology, a middle-school student cited his iPod Touch as a
more time-efficient way to find the definition of unknown words saying, “if I don't know a
word, I'll just say define whatever the word is so instead of using the dictionary and taking
that […] time, I just use the Internet [or the Dictionary.com app].”16 Other teachers note
the ease of looking up a word's meaning or pronunciation by simply highlighting it within
an ebook app.17

Aware
The myriad of sensors available on many devices—such as a camera, microphone,
touchscreen, gyroscope, and geolocation—combine to give the mobile experience a
unique quality. Devices can see what you see, know where you are, hear what you hear,
and consequently, respond accordingly. While this might feel overly intrusive, this
information can enhance the user experience. Information presented on your device is
contextualized and personally relevant. Additionally, several companies offer add-on
appcessories to further enhance the device's awareness by giving it more information
(e.g., heart rate monitor, blood sugar monitor, blood alcohol test attachment, carbon
monoxide, light intensity, thermometer, pressure sensor, iBeacons, and microscope). The
multitude of sensors and the variety of applications enable mobile devices to become
much more than a communication vehicle. Many integrated actions can be enabled
through these embedded sensors and add-ons—like geolocation-based scavenger hunts or
authentic experience with real-world equipment, such as stethoscopes and blood sugar
monitors. Here, however, we will focus on three key common tablet and smartphone
features: the built-in microphone, camera, and touchscreen.
Developers have taken advantage of the simple microphone to create ingenious
experiences. One student identified the robust speech-to-text engine available on many
iOS devices as particularly useful for dictating notes as opposed to typing or writing them
by hand.18 Also, several teachers note great advantages of allowing students to record and
listen to themselves reading aloud (e.g., SAS Reading Records).19 Sean Russell, a second-
grade teacher, had a student who typically struggled with reading-aloud activities, which
in turn affected his confidence. To record students reading a passage, they were using an
app that offered the ability to redo words if they stumbled, which Russell attributed as a
“huge factor,” enabling this student to show improvement in his overall performance and
have a more gratifying experience.20 Nature apps, such as Cicada Hunt, process ambient
noise to identify animals and other species in the student's vicinity. Devices are even being
used in music class with apps that simulate instruments (e.g., Ocarina, Pocket Trumpet,
Real Clarinet) by blowing into the microphone and pressing keys on the touchpad.
The camera has proven similarly powerful beyond providing the ability to document
information by taking pictures and video. Image-processing apps allow students to take
pictures of objects in their environment and instantly receive relevant information. A
popular example of this technology is the ability to scan QR codes, a classroom shortcut
that avoids having students enter long URLs. More complex systems leverage the
portability of mobile devices to let students snap images of everyday artifacts. For
example, students learning about their local flora and fauna in school can use Leafsnap to
immediately identify plants in their community. Some teachers even use the screenshot
functionality as a tool for students to turn in assignments, simply capturing a picture of
what they've created and emailing it to their teacher.21
The camera has also afforded the rapidly growing arena of augmented reality (AR) apps
that bring new meaning to learning in context. Similar to a tour guide, several apps utilize
location-detecting sensors and the camera to provide students with additional information
as they navigate around a particular space. Companion apps to the Smithsonian museums,

the American Museum of Natural History, and other popular venues offer immersive
experiences that let students angle the devices' camera toward exhibits in order to see a
display of bones render into a living dinosaur or a picture of a plant change into a 3D
model. Apps like acrossair permit users to create their own AR worlds by tagging specific
locations with images and text; thus, students become the curator of a space that can be
shared with other users. User-generated AR worlds affords alternatives to dangerous,
expensive, or otherwise unattainable experiences. The simulation app—Elements 4D—
turns 2D representations of the elements of the periodic table into 3D manipulatives,
which allow students to visualize their various properties and experiment with chemical
reactions.
Direct manipulation on a touchscreen appears to be more intuitive than input devices such
as a mouse or keyboard, as it more closely mimics our existing behaviors. With mobile
devices and gesture support like pinch to zoom, grab and rotate, and lasso, interactions
come naturally, and we are not charged with learning keystroke combinations or click
sequences. For example, a recent study found significant learning advantages for direct
gesture manipulation when learning scientific concepts.22 To determine best practices for
teaching challenging concepts like astronomical scale, students in the study were provided
the opportunity to navigate the universe using a simulation displayed on the iPad. Results
found the pinch to zoom and expand gestures helped students to better comprehend the
enormity of space and size differences between Earth and other planets and stars.23 The
Google Earth app allows for a similar experience by offering students a 3D, scale model
of the traditional, often-criticized 2D map of the world.
Finally, logging and analyzing sensor activity expands the options for assessment. Instead
of more traditional forms, such as tests or quizzes, apps can instead provide feedback
about user-interaction patterns. This might include how and when the student tapped on
the screen (touch screen), where the student was located or how she moved around a
certain space (geolocation, Bluetooth, and iBeacons), or a recording of students'
collaboration (microphone). State Farm's Driver Feedback app provides a great
example.24 Using the built-in gyroscope of the iPhone, the app monitors the driver's
behaviors and logs risky actions, such as sharp turns, speedy acceleration, and hard stops.
This information is then analyzed, for example, to assess the skills of young adults
learning to drive. Ultimately, the awareness of the mobile device can enable students to be
evaluated on authentic behaviors as opposed to a regurgitation of knowledge.

Multimodal
Mobile device sensors create rich, interactive learning environments that seem to outshine
the engagement inspired by other educational resources—the feeling that anything is more
interesting on a mobile device is prevalent among the teachers we interviewed.25 Although
common desktop and laptop computers can appeal to our auditory and visual senses,
mobile apps additionally support touch and movement for enhanced, immersive
multimodal experiences that adapt and respond to our commands and movements.
The multimodal space of mobile devices also expands the realm of possibilities for
student-generated work. Projects, presentations, study guides, and homework assignments
are no longer confined to what you can create with tangible materials. Instead, students
can easily integrate multimedia elements like, images, songs, and videos. As one student
said, “it's really cool.”26 While certainly novel and cool, these multimedia and interactive
elements often force students to think more creatively and critically about the subject
matter, thereby making a more meaningful learning experience. For instance, in a
kindergarten class at the Park Tudor School in Indiana young students were given iPads
and asked to create a video about the life cycle of butterflies. At first, students commented
about how they did not know how to make a video or use video-editing apps.27 With a
little guidance from their teacher, students were researching online, reading books,
drawing pictures, photographing butterflies and plants in their school garden, documenting
their research in the field with short videos, and finally, cutting the aggregated movie
filled with images, video clips, titles and subtitles, voice overs, and music.28 Beyond
learning more about butterflies, students were given the opportunity to practice using
mobile devices for research, collaboration, and communication, but also learned some new
skills along the way.

Familiar
The proliferation of mobile devices has yielded a particular advantage for the classroom.
According to a 2013 Pew survey, 77 percent of families reported having at least one
smartphone in their household, and 46 percent reported having at least one tablet.
According to this same survey, 43 percent of all children use a mobile device regularly.
Among teens, 74 percent use mobile devices to access the Internet on a regular basis.29
Devices are so familiar to students in their home and personal lives that teachers don't
need to spend lots of class time teaching basic functionality. Many students enter
kindergarten well versed in the use of devices, oftentimes to the amazement of their
teacher. Rebecca Goddard, a technology facilitator, recently watched in awe as classes of
kindergarteners made videos using green screening for their career fair. “It was amazing to
watch, they really get how to film each other and splice it together,” she said. While the
adults administering the education might feel otherwise, for the youngest students who
have been exposed to this technology since birth, Goddard notes, “they don't know any
other way of learning.”30 Thus, cognitive processing is not needed for simply using the
app, and more resources can be allocated to learning. Similarly, educators are quick to
note students' familiarity with mobile devices has given unexpected students the
opportunity to be leaders and experts. “One student does something, another asks how—
soon that student is teaching the class,” one teacher at Brentwood Elementary noted.31
Remarkably, familiarity with one device can often transfer to being well-acquainted with a
different mobile platform—something not necessarily true between other devices (e.g.,
computers running Mac versus Windows operating system). For example, both iOS and
Android operating systems use a similar application structure, where apps are programs
downloaded independently to the device, represented by an icon on the main screens, and
easily accessible with a simple touch. Touch devices also tend to use the same gestures for
common tasks, such as pinching to zoom.
Similar standards and conventions are apparent between apps themselves as well. For
example, Apple produces a set of guidelines for designing for iOS.32 This ensures that
apps behave in a similar and predictable way even between different developers. For
example, these guidelines propose a set of common navigation strategies and the UI
elements that are designed to support them. When app developers follow these guidelines
(which many do) the result is a set of applications that are consistent with one another,
making them easier to learn and reducing error.33
Educators are also finding ways to take advantage of the apps students are already using
outside of school to leverage both familiarity and motivation. Twitter, Instagram,
Facebook and other social apps have proven to be great resources for engaging students in
conversation both in and outside of class. Additionally, creativity and problem-solving
game apps are making their way into the classroom. One popular and cross-platform app,
Minecraft, has scores of associated lesson plans from geometry to ancient history.34

Personal
Mobile devices are also personal, especially if students have their own. Unlike other
technologies, mobile devices are designed to be a personal assistant carried with users
wherever they go. It is something that is brought along as opposed to something you go to,
like with personal computers. Many adults report feeling that their devices are an
extension of themselves, and younger users may feel the same way. This is especially true
when students have the opportunity to customize what is on the device. The variety and
placement of apps on a mobile device are unique to its user, tailored to his or her specific
preferences, interests, and needs.
The strategies we use and the scaffolding we need to optimize learning are unique to each
individual. For example, the way we take notes or the background information we need to
make sense of a particular concept can vary significantly from student to student.
Personalized mobile devices that can accommodate these individual differences are
consequently the perfect companion to education. Fortunately, the app stores provide a
range of apps for accomplishing almost any task. A search for note-taking or time-
management apps will return a plethora of resources, each offering different experiences
or features that distinctively appeal to different users; thus, educators do not need to
necessarily dictate the choice of apps but rather teach the more abstract skills and let
students adapt their learning environment to match their needs.
Likewise, mobile devices offer a private and safe space for working. Many educational
apps are designed to allow for differentiated instruction. Educators can also easily assign
different work to each student in order to deliver an appropriate level of challenge. When
all students are engaged with their own device, differentiation becomes less overt. It is not
necessarily noticeable that one student is working on a different activity or with a different
rubric from another student.
Another important benefit of a personal device is that mistakes are kept personal as well.
Many educational experts will agree that taking risks and overcoming failures are critical
for higher-order thinking skills such as creativity.35 However, nervousness or fear over the
possibility of mistakes often stifles students. When working independently in a classroom
setting, it is not necessarily noticeable if students make mistakes. Teachers can notice and
address mistakes with students, but these mistakes won't be obvious to the student's peers.
The safe-place nature of mobile devices is very valuable.
Having a personal device also means not having to split time with other students, thereby
reducing periods of inaccessibility. Compared to shared technologies, mobile-based
activities and projects can more easily straddle multiple days, weeks, or even academic
years. After learning with mobile devices, a student compared learning with tablets versus
learning in the computer lab by stating that with tablets, “We can do more assignments. In
the past, we [could] do only one project in the computer lab. For example, the
environment project, we could spend two days researching and type right away.”36
Through a personal device, students now have around-the-clock access to resources (e.g.,
online textbooks), notes, work and projects, and class portals and webpages (e.g., learning
management systems, class websites). Not surprisingly, this constant access has been
shown to increase average study time.37

Comprehensive
In 2013, the number of apps available in Apple's app store reached the 1 million mark
(adding great validity to the catchy tagline, “There's an app for that”). Through this
comprehensive access to apps, mobile devices transitioned from a simple cellphone to a
seemingly universal tool that fits in your pocket. Mobile devices become your watch,
camera, video camera, phonebook, calendar, filing cabinet, novel, notebook, textbook,
navigator, calculator, flashlight, compass, wallet, pedometer, media player, diary…the list
goes on. Therefore, investing in a single mobile device for students reduces the need for
additional expenses (for instance, textbooks, calculators, and laboratory equipment) while
providing access to a burgeoning arena of educational resources (environmental sensors,
augmented reality, and simulations, to name a few).
However, while the proliferation of apps might tempt one to scour the app store in search
for the perfect app, pedagogy should always precede technology or, in this case, pedagogy
should always be the primary consideration, rather than focusing only on the content of an
app. For example, instead of searching for an app that teaches students about the water
cycle, a more meaningful use of technology might be to use a video creation or annotation
app that allows students to demonstrate their understanding. Therefore, being aware of the
variety of apps, as seen in Table 3.1, can be beneficial as educators outline teaching
objectives and begin to design a lesson. For more app ideas, check out APPendix A.

Table 3.1 Types of Educational Apps
Type
Definition
Example
Game
Offers educational information in an
entertaining way, usually through
drills or competition-based
environments.
Math Chomp, Pocket Law Firm,
Stack the Countries, Rocket Math
Utility
Has no specific educational value, but
offers a basic function and can be
combined in ways to accommodate
projects, lessons, and learning.
Notes, iBooks, SAS Gloss,
Camera, Voice, Animoto Video
Maker, DropBox, Evernote
Administration Allows teachers to more efficiently
administer education and manage
their job responsibilities.
Poll Everywhere, Class Dojo, Too
Noisy
Tool
Designed for education, but offers a
blank slate. They provide scaffolding
to common education actions but
require the student or teacher to
supply the content.
SAS Flash Cards, Explain
Everything, Google Drive, SAS
Reading Records, SAS Gloss, SAS
Data Notebook, Popplet
Content
Specific
Provides a large amount of
information on one topic.
To The Brink, Elements 3D,
EcoMobile, SAS Math Stretch,
DuoLingo, companion apps for
Smithsonian American Museum of
Natural History.
Reference
Provides basic information in a
connected, searchable format.
Dictionary.com, Wolfram Alpha
Social
Enables the connection and easy
sharing.
Edmodo, Twitter, Edublogs

Consolidated
When asked what is the best device for conducting research and writing papers, one
student cited tablets because he could consult a variety of resources including download
books, search the Internet, and watch YouTube videos.38 With all the sensors and apps that
make mobile devices so flexible and comprehensive, consolidation makes productivity
seamless and efficient.
App stacking, also known as app smashing, is the process described by the student above:
easily switching between apps within the same activity. Activities are easily streamlined
by consolidating all the relevant resources on one device—which can also curb related
classroom management difficulties. Also, app stacking is a wonderful tool for designing
mobile learning experiences that directly align to teaching objectives. Instead of searching
for the one app that perfectly accommodates a lesson or need in the classroom, educators
can instead group several apps into a single folder and plan classroom activities around
them. For example, teachers can challenge students to determine the best location for a
wind turbine by analyzing wind data from multiple cities across the country using
Wolfram, graph their results using Numbers, and present their argument using Keynote.39
By having their own device, students are left with little excuse for not having class
materials, and the consolidated space is also a great resource for helping students stay
organized. Holding students accountable for coming to class prepared is much easier when
everything lives on their device. No pencil? No calculator? No book? No paper? No
problem. Additionally, features such as cloud storage and cross-platform apps make work
completed using any technology, whether at home, school, or otherwise, accessible.

Portable
As the name suggests, mobile devices make the aforementioned benefits available
anytime, anywhere. On-demand answers to any of your questions, problem-solving
resources, creativity spaces, data collection and documentation tools, vehicles for
communication and sharing, and much more reside easily in your pocket.
While learning has traditionally occurred with students sitting at desks in a classroom,
mobile devices change this. Inside the classroom, apps like Fetch! Lunch Rush! put
students in motion while applying their math skills. However, sturdy cases, extended
battery life, and connectivity let students learn in the field as never before. For example,
Merlin Bird ID, helps students identify birds outdoors by asking students a series of
questions.
Also, by capitalizing on the portability of mobile devices, what is taught in school can
easily be transferred outside, blurring the lines between formal and informal learning. In
essence, “Mobile technologies bring the real world into the classroom and they bring the
classroom into the real world.”40 For example, instead of using mobile technology to teach
students how to research, educators must teach them how to use mobile devices to acquire,
analyze, and synthesize information. Activities like having students take pictures of their
vocabulary or spelling words as they come across them in their daily lives help
contextualize and draw connections between home and school. Or, extend an astronomy
lesson by showing students how to use StarWalk or a related app to identify and observe
the differences between stars and planets at night.
Parallel to many of the benefits working adults experience from using a mobile device,
students gain on-the-go access to homework and communication with classmates and
teachers. In short spells of time (such as car trips, bus rides, or before soccer practice
starts), students can read a few pages of a novel that was assigned or check in with group
members on an assignment. These multitasking and time management skills are crucial to
success in our hyperconnected world.

Relevant
When students observe their parents or other adults in the workplace, they likely see
mobile devices being used for much more than games, social media, and communication
with friends. They see mobile devices being used for research, collaboration, data
collection and analysis, and a myriad of other applications. Therefore, when mobile
devices are integrated in the classroom, we are provided with the opportunity to teach
students how to use them productively and in ways that are relevant for thriving in today's
workplace. So, instead of 59 percent of working individuals reporting that “they
developed most of the skills they use in their current job outside of school,”41 we might
see more students entering the workforce with relevant and in-demand skills (and keep
pace with new skills as they're demanded.)
By giving students access to and experience with the exact devices that are used in the real
world at that point in time, we can teach them readily transferrable knowledge about how
to use tools to manage time and multitask, support creativity, communicate, offload
information to help solve problems, study, acquire information and research, among other
things. John Silverthorn, an elementary school teacher, notes his students seem “more
intrinsically motivated” when they use devices in class, empowered by seeing the
connections between the material they're currently studying and other things they've
learned, or connections to their nonacademic lives.42 Certainly, as today's students grow,
mobile devices will continue to evolve and improve; fluency with mobile devices is a vital
skill to succeed in the future.
The information presented on a mobile device is also more likely to be up-to-date than
sources such as a textbook. By refreshing content as necessary, apps are better positioned
to offer the most current information. Consider using Google Maps versus a printed atlas.
Aside from allowing students to virtually roam through streets (and even inside some
buildings) and zoom in and out at will, Google updates and expands their images and data
constantly. For example, Google Maps proved to be a useful tool to analyze current events
during the recent border crisis between Ukraine and Crimea. Seemingly in sync with the
debate, Google updated their maps with a line delineating the disputed border.43

Secure
There are many concerns about the security of mobile devices. Their portability makes
them easy to leave behind, and they often contain large amounts of personal or sensitive
data—a significant threat to student privacy. However, for this reason mobile platforms
have been designed to be even more secure than traditional desktop computers.44
For example, many mobile devices ship with specific protections against loss and theft. It
is easy for IT staff and app developers to require that users set up a password on the device
before they are able to use features that would make sensitive information available.
Requiring a password before a student can even enter sensitive information ensures that
once the information is stored on the device, it cannot be easily accessed by any other
individual. Additionally, GPS tracking can help locate devices (Find My iPhone does just
this), and device management systems can be set to identify atypical or malicious
activities.
In general, mobile devices tend to also mitigate concerns regarding malware attacks as
compared to desktop and laptop computers. One reason for this is that mobile devices are
often updated more regularly, meaning they have the latest security protocols to protect
users and their information. By utilizing device management systems, school technology
specialists can force operating system and app updates for school-issued devices. Apple's
iOS is particularly secure; it is estimated that only 0.7 percent of all mobile malware poses
a threat to Apple devices.45 For schools managing many devices, this is a huge benefit.

Conclusion
As most teachers we've interviewed have suggested, we agree that there certainly is
something different about mobile devices. While mobile devices enable the above 10
factors, the biggest perk is something bigger than any device: mobile learning. Sure, the
devices are shiny, exciting, and state of the art, but what we think is the most exciting
thing about them is all of the realities they bring to the classroom. Instead of learning
about classroom material and the world around us, mobile devices afford students the
opportunity to learn within, using the device in new and unprecedented ways every day.
Today's classrooms are patently different from what classrooms were even 10 years ago,
and updating pedagogy, classroom practices, and expectations is necessary. There are
myriad ways to make mobile devices tools in the modern classroom, and even more ways
to make education more relevant and engaging for students. Ultimately, it's not about what
the devices offer; it's about how they change the learning environment and experience for
the student.

Notes
1 C. C. Chou, L. Block, and R. Jesness, “A Case Study of Mobile Learning Pilot Project in
K–12 Schools,” Journal of Educational Technology Development and Exchange 5, no.
2 (2012): 11–26.
2 Amy Wilkinson, kindergarten teacher, Washington GT Elementary, Raleigh, NC,
interview with authors, April 9, 2014.
3 Eden Dahlstrom, Tom de Boor, Peter Grunwald, and Martha Vockley, ECAR National
Study of Undergraduate Students and Information Technology, 2011, EDUCAUSE
Center for Applied Research, October 2011, www.educause.edu/library/resources/ecar-
national-study-undergraduate-students-and-information-technology-
2011%C3%A2%E2%82%AC%E2%80%9Dslide-presentation.
4 Chou Block, and Jesness, “A Case Study of Mobile Learning.”
5 Project Tomorrow, “National Release of Speak Up 2013 National Findings: 2014
Congressional Briefing Recording,” April 8, 2014,
www.tomorrow.org/speakup/2013StudentFindings_CB_recording.html.
6 Julie Stern, sixth grade language arts teacher at East Cary Middle School, Cary, NC,
interview with authors, April 22, 2014.
7 Jenna Levy and Preety Sidhu, “In the U.S., 21st Century Skills Linked to Work
Success,” May 30, 2013, www.gallup.com/poll/162818/21st-century-skills-linked-
work-success.aspx.
8 Project K-nect NC, www.projectknect.org/Project%20K-Nect/Home.html. Accessed
June 26, 2014.
9 Chou and Jessness, “A Case Study of Mobile Learning,” 20.
10 Apptivities, “Social Learning with Digital Trading Cards and Bump,” August 30, 2013,
www.apptivities.org/?p=143.
11 Katherine Schulten, “What ‘Connected Education’ Looks Like: 28 Examples From
Teachers All Over,” New York Times online, The Learning Network, October 1, 2013,
http://learning.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/10/01/what-connected-education-looks-like-
28-examples-from-teachers-all-over/.
12 National Geographic, “Harness the Power of Wind,”
environment.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/wind-power-
interactive/.
13 Schulten, “What ‘Connected Education’ Looks Like.”
14 Chou, “A Case Study of Mobile Learning,” 19.
15 Linnea Czerney, STEM K–1 coordinator, technology coordinator, Brentwood
Elementary, Raleigh, NC, personal interview, August 22, 2013.

16 Project Tomorrow, “National Release of Speak Up 2013.”
17 Stern, interview.
18 Project Tomorrow, “National Release of Speak Up 2013.”
19 Jamie Hall, interview with authors, May 2, 2014.
20 Sean Russell, second grade teacher, Brentwood Elementary, Raleigh, NC, interview
with authors, August 22, 2013.
21 Rebecca Goddard, technology facilitator at Rowan-Salisbury Schools, NC, interview
with authors, May 5, 2014.
22 M. Schneps, J. Ruel, G. Sonnert, M. Dussault, M. Griffin, and P. Sadler,
“Conceptualizing Astronomical Scale: Virtual Simulations on Handheld Tablet
Computers Reverse Misconceptions,” Computers & Education 70 (2014): 269–280.
23 Ibid.
24 State Farm Insurance, www.statefarm.com/customer-care/download-mobile-
apps/driver-feedback-for-iphone.
25 Brentwood teachers' interview, Brentwood Elementary, Raleigh, NC, interview with
authors, August 22, 2013.
26 Chou, “A Case Study of Mobile Learning,” 20.
27 Park Tudor School, “Learning and Creating with iPads in Kindergarten,”
www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5b6y7DJuYk.
28 Students' Video, “Metamorphosis,” www.vimeo.com/32850366.
29 Mary Madden, Amanda Lenhart, Maeve Duggan, Sandra Cortesi, and Urs Gasser,
Teens and Technology 2013, Pew Research, March 13, 2013,
www.pewinternet.org/2013/03/13/teens-and-technology-2013/.
30 Rebecca Goddard, technology facilitator, Rowan-Salisbury schools, interview with
authors, May 5, 2014.
31 Brentwood interview.
32 Apple, iOS 7 Design Resources, 2014,
https://developer.apple.com/design/#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40013289.
33 Sakshat Virtual Labs, “Consistency and Inconsistency in Interaction,”
http://iitg.vlab.co.in/?sub=72&brch=170&sim=862&cnt=1.
34 MinecraftEDU, www.minecraftedu.com. Accessed 6/26/14.
35 Ken Robinson, “How Schools Kill Creativity,” February 2006,
www.ted.com/talks/ken_robinson_says_schools_kill_creativity.

36 Chou, “A Case Study of Mobile Learning,” 19.
37 Project K-nect NC.
38 Project Tomorrow, “National Release of Speak Up 2013.”
39 Apptivities.org.
40 Carly Shuler, “Pockets of Potential: Using Mobile Technologies to Promote Children's
Learning,” The Joan Ganz Cooney Center, New York, January 2009,
www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/pockets_of_potential_1_.pdf.
41 Gallup, “21st Century Skills and the Workplace.”
42 Brentwood interview.
43 Tess Vigeland, “With Crimean Borders in Dispute, Google Maps Has It Both Ways,”
National Public Radio, April 12, 2014, www.npr.org/2014/04/12/301795703/with-
crimean-borders-in-dispute-google-maps-has-it-both-ways.
44 Chad Udell, “10 Reasons Why Mobile Learning Is More Secure Than Desktop
Learning,” Float Learning, June 10, 2013, http://floatlearning.com/2013/06/10-
reasons-why-mobile-learning-is-more-secure-than-desktop-learning/.
45 Department of Homeland Security, “Public Intelligence Bulletin: Threats to Mobile
Devices Using the Android Operating System,” July 23, 2013,
http://publicintelligence.net/dhs-fbi-android-threats/.


Chapter 4
Creating the Mobile Classroom
Arguments for the educational use of mobile devices are abundant. They have been
credited for inspiring motivation, promoting self-confidence, supporting science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning, and overall academic
achievement.1, 2 However, mobile devices are not magic bullets, and putting mobile into
practice should not be done hastily. A truly mobile classroom does not treat mobile
devices as an add-on or supplement but rather as a fully integrated necessity for
instruction and learning. And mastery of technology integration is not universal, as there
are stark differences among teachers when it comes to technology integration and even
technology tolerance.3 In this chapter, we discuss considerations for optimizing the use of
mobile by redefining traditional instructional methods in a variety of settings.
Education expert Michael Horn offers a good baseline for the implementation of a mobile
learning program within a school. Acknowledging that devices are not the solution in and
of themselves, he argues technology is simply a single component among a host of other
fundamental changes for improving learning. In fact, Horn's model suggests that when
implementing a blended learning environment, schools should first conceptualize the rally
cry and measurable learning outcomes. From there, identify the team—leadership,
stakeholders, agents, and so on—and quantify current levels of student and teacher
experience related to this initiative. Then, consider technology as a potential aspect of the
overall solution. Purchasing and distributing devices should never mark the beginning of a
mobile learning initiative; successful technology integrations occur only after careful
planning, strategy, and continuous refinement.4 In this chapter we explore how mobile
learning implies diligent reconstruction of learning theories and what this looks like across
various settings.

Theoretical Foundations
Successful technology integration does not happen overnight. From professional
development to daily instruction, curricula must not be simply modified, they must be
reimagined. Knowing how to simply use a mobile device does not necessarily mean one
can effectively use a mobile device to teach. Educational Psychologists Punya Mishra and
Matt Koehler suggest successful technology integration hinges on a combination of
teachers' technology, pedagogy, and content knowledge (TPACK), as outlined in their
popular TPACK framework.5 As seen in Figure 4.1, when it comes to designing
instruction, knowledge of technology, pedagogy, and content can interplay at various
levels. For example, teachers' technological pedagogical knowledge (TPK) implies
creativity in the way technology is used for instruction; however, this intersection omits
the role content plays on lesson planning—for instance, consideration of the constraints
the content might have on how technology can be used for instruction.6 At the heart of the
TPACK model lies “the basis of effective teaching with technology, requiring an
understanding of the representation of concepts using technologies, pedagogical
techniques that use technologies in constructive ways to teach content, knowledge of what
makes concepts difficult or easy to learn, and how technology can help redress some of the
problems that students face, knowledge of students' prior knowledge and theories of
epistemology, and knowledge of how technologies can be used to build on existing
knowledge to develop new epistemologies or strengthen old ones.”7 Therefore, when
designing mobile learning lessons, teachers should consider how they have integrated each
of these areas and refine accordingly.

Figure 4.1 The TPACK Model.
Source: Reproduced by permission of the publisher, ©2012 by http://tpack.org.
Similarly, the educational technology guru, Ruben Puentedura, uses the SAMR
(substitution, augmentation, modification, redefinition) model, which provides another
nice theoretical framework for technology integration (see Figure 4.2). On one end of the
spectrum, technology is used to enhance the lesson by capitalizing on various components
of the device (e.g., using a digital textbook or utilizing a multimedia presentation). For the
most part, technology is retrofitted into previously designed lessons that are used as either
a substitute or slight augmentation of a previous resource. At the other end, technology is
used to transform learning by fostering deep understanding and engagement through
higher-order thinking and constructivist-style activities (e.g., having students create a
video to demonstrate their understanding)—lessons that would not be possible without the
mobile device. In these cases, technology is used to fundamentally modify a lesson or
redefine a lesson altogether. All the while, however, pedagogy and content are equally
weighted in terms of value and importance. Through his analysis of educational
technology implementations, Puentedura argues that as lessons shift along the spectrum—
for example, from augmentation to modification—there are greater opportunities for
learning.8

Figure 4.2 The SAMR Model.
Source: Image created by Dr. Ruben Puentedura,
www.hippasus.com/rrpweblog/archives/2014/08/22/SAMRInPractice.pdf.

Instructional Methods
As presented through the theoretical models of technology integration, a great benefit of
mobile technology is the ability to complement instructional methods, but this benefit
comes only through careful consideration. Based on the content and available
technologies, certain instructional methods might prove better than others. Moreover,
using a variety of teaching styles not only keeps daily activities from becoming stale, but
also provides students with the opportunity to develop a repertoire of strategies for
learning in any environment—a valuable skill for life-long learning and success. In the
following section, we will discuss advantages of and methods for implementing mobile
into several common instructional methods.
Traditional Instruction
For centuries, lecture-based, teacher-led instruction has dominated the world of education.
Think early twentieth-century schoolhouse: the teacher is speaking up front, occasionally
scribbling on the chalkboard, as the students write frantically at their desks. While this
method has been supplemented with more active, student-centric approaches, a quick walk
down the hallways of many schools today will tell you the traditional lecture still has a
presence in education. Since there is still a place for direct instruction, this old-school
style can at least be made more effective and engaging with some mobile enhancements.
Digital note-taking is perhaps the most obvious application of mobile for lecture-based
instruction. Popular apps such as Evernote, Google Drive, and inClass are great for taking
digital notes and provide tools beyond the traditional notebook, such as adding
voice/video recordings and images/photos. By aggregating all your work into one space, a
bulky collection of notebooks with ripped and missing pages is no longer necessary, and
cross-discipline connections and analyses are more easily prompted. Additionally, these
cloud-based systems eliminate the “I forgot my notebook” excuse by providing immediate
access across platforms and devices. More importantly, cloud-based functionalities allow
teachers to share templates and examples and provide feedback to students learning how
to take efficient, organized notes without collecting a pile of notebooks.
Audio/video recorders or conferencing apps are also great supplements to a lecture.
Conferencing and screen-sharing apps are especially advantageous for students with visual
or hearing impairments. For example, the Join.Me app allows the teacher to share a
SmartBoard screen with the students' mobile device. Instead of looking back and forth
between the board and notes, students can keep their focus on the mobile device. Students
with visual impairments can zoom in on the content or increase the contrast while students
with hearing impairments can increase the volume of the lecture through the use of
headphones. Moreover, creating a recording of a lecture allows absent students and those
with questions during homework to refer back to the in-class material.
Lastly, mobile devices can easily be integrated to promote student participation and assess
levels of understanding. Nonverbal response systems, such as Twitter, are wonderful tools,
especially for the more introverted student. For example, second-grade teacher Sean
Russell remembers using the GoSoapbox application in a lecture, which allows for
students to send questions during a video using their iPod touch devices. For him, it helps

to raise the levels of engagement in the class. It can be transformative for some students,
though. He mentioned Erin, a child who was a selective mute. He was amazed when one
day she asked her very first question in class, using GoSoapbox. For her, the forum made
the difference and literally gave her a voice.9 Many systems also allow for back
channeling that encourages class participation without the intimidation or humiliation
associated with speaking in front of the class. Polling or quizzing apps, like Poll
Everywhere or Socrative, present students with questions posed by the teacher during the
lecture. Similarly, discussion platforms, such as Padlet, provide students with an online,
collaborative discussion space. The benefits of such back channeling are threefold:
1. Students can monitor and calibrate their current level of understanding.
2. Students take on a more active role and are more likely to remain engaged and
attentive.
3. Teachers can use the data to make informed reflections about the lecture (e.g., specific
trouble areas, variance in affect throughout the lecture).
Blended and Flipped Classrooms
Blended learning is an overarching, categorical term for instruction that incorporates, at
least to some degree, online content. The theoretical benefit of a blended approach is the
opportunity for student-led, personalized learning. Moving away from the one-size-fits-all
model for education, supplementing instruction with online content allows students to
engage with concepts of interest at their own pace and find resources that fit their needs
and interests. And, with the proliferation of high-quality online and open learning
resources, blended instruction is rapidly growing in popularity. In fact, in 2009, over 3
million K–12 students took an online class, and it is projected that by 2019 approximately
50 percent of high school courses will be delivered online.10
Similarly, flipped classrooms, a trending and empirically proven11 subset of blended
learning, focus on integrating technology in order to capitalize on the higher-level learning
that can occur during student-instructor time. After surveying 403,000 K–12 students,
teachers, and other stakeholders, Project Tomorrow and the Flipped Learning Network
found one out of six math and science teachers have implemented a flipped classroom
model, and 75 percent of students feel it is a good way for them to learn.12 Using learning
theories as a foundation,13 flipped learning occurs when classroom structures are switched
so the student is presented with foundational material outside of school and takes part in
more collaborative, interactive, and creative exercises during actual class time. According
to the Flipped Learning Network, flipped classrooms can be characterized with four pillars
that manifest as:
1. Flexible environments that support a wide variety of instructional and assessment
methods that easily adapt to leverage the dynamics of the classroom activity.
2. A shift in learning culture that positions students as the driving force of learning with
teachers taking on a more supportive role.
3. An active learning environment that utilizes classroom activities as a vehicle for
engaging deeply with content beyond surface-level presentations of skills and

concepts.
4. Pedagogy proctored by trained, professional educators with experience and expertise
in optimizing conceptual understanding and promoting higher-order cognitive
processing.14
Under this paradigm, a typical homework assignment would involve students watching an
instructional video (e.g., prerecorded teacher lecture, prerecorded expert lecture,
educational video, lessons from resources like Khan Academy). This allows each student
to learn at their own pace and repeat sections if needed. They can also skip over material
they have already mastered, creating a more efficient, personalized environment. An
added benefit to this method is the opportunity for inclusion of the parents, giving them a
greater understanding of the subject their child is learning about and opportunity to help,
and even learn something new. Also, this method keeps the teacher as the center of the
content delivery (as opposed to outsourcing with open resources online), preserving the
teacher–student relationship and trust.
In class, students work with their instructor and classmates on activities that require
students to generate their own understanding by engaging deeply with the material and
guiding their own learning—lessons that involve skills beyond those outlined by the
curriculum, such as collaboration, creativity, problem solving, and critical thinking.
Moreover, as students demonstrate their understanding through classroom activities, the
instructor is present to quickly catch and clarify any misconceptions or trouble areas,
thereby ensuring a productive use of time. By flipping the class, time with the instructor
becomes more opportune than the more passive presentation of information that has
traditionally occupied class time. In Figure 4.3, the differences in homework and
classwork are illustrated.

Figure 4.3 The Flipped Classroom
While blending and flipped learning demonstrate unique opportunities for transforming
education, these styles of instruction rely heavily on technology—a requirement that
yields a host of challenges. Flipping the classroom, at least initially, requires a lot of work
on the teacher's part. Teachers have to rework their entire set of lesson plans and method
of teaching. It can also feel like a dramatic departure from the way they are used to doing
their job.15 However, the built-in functionalities of mobile devices and a flood of handy
apps available for download serve to mitigate these limitations making this style of
instruction far more feasible.
Creating, Deploying, and Viewing Videos
Perhaps the most time consuming component of deploying a flipped classroom model is
finding or creating videos for at-home instruction. However, the features of mobile
devices can significantly reduce this effort. Apps such as ShowMe, Knowmia Teach, and
Educreations are useful tools for creating videos. Using the built-in microphone and touch
screen, teachers can quickly make videos on the fly by narrating a lesson and recording a
screen capture of themselves writing on the provided whiteboard. Some systems utilize the
camera feature and allow teachers to record a video of themselves teaching to simulate the

personalization of face-to-face instruction. Cloud-based backup makes saving and sharing
videos simple, taking much of the difficulty of sharing large files away. Finally, another
practical option for deploying videos is utilizing open educational resources—reduce,
reuse, recycle. Highly reputable, mobile-friendly web resources, such as Khan Academy,
have a wealth of short, single-topic lectures that can be easily linked to for home access.
Students' mobile devices also mitigate the limitations of accessing videos at home. Built-in
audio and video capabilities and general portability make viewing videos an anytime,
anywhere activity. Students are not constrained to a specific location and can view videos
in their typical studying location. Additionally, 71 percent of teens say “the computer they
use most often is shared with other family members,”16 but 71 percent of children (ages 2
to 10) have access to a smartphone at home, and 74 percent of teens (ages 12 to 17) report
using mobile devices to access the Internet at home;17 therefore, mobile devices provide a
solution to watching videos at home for students fighting for access to home computers.
Other great mobile tools for students are video annotation apps that allow students to take
notes while watching videos—all within the same space. Tools such as Video Note
automatically sync with Google Drive as an added level of convenience. Using this
feature, teachers can view students' comments prior to class and use them to inform lesson
plans. Video annotations are also a great way to ensure students are completing their
homework assignments. Experienced flipped classroom teachers suggest easing students
into the flipped process by viewing a few videos in class and teaching students how to
engage with the video lectures. These tutorial videos create opportunities for teaching
students how to effectively use note-taking tools and prepare for classroom activities. And,
with mobile, students can directly apply instruction since they learn on the same device
they will use later.
Classroom Activities/Simulations/Tools
With an abundance of high-quality, technology-based interactive lessons available, mobile
devices are a great tool for facilitating active classroom activities that encourage
automatizing skills and processes, the construction of knowledge, and the application of
content while also increasing motivation. In a flipped classroom model, class time is
reserved for developing and inspiring higher-order thinking and engaging deeply with the
targeted material. Furthermore, as discussed in Chapter 5, mobile learning is highly
equipped for accomplishing this type of instruction. From moderating effective
collaboration to field-based, experiential learning, mobile devices support the active
learner.
Also, the proliferation of simulation and tool-based apps available for mobile devices has
significantly stretched the boundaries of in-class activities. Apps like Frog Dissection
allow students to participate in laboratory-like sessions in a more practical manner—
especially for low-income schools with minimal budgets, equipment, and space.
Moreover, 3D Brain, which allows users to explore the brain, and other simulation apps
let students experiment with concepts otherwise unattainable in the classroom. Social
studies tools like Time Maps and Google Maps give students access to relevant maps to
help visualize concepts. Also, tools such as Things to Think About, SAS InContext, SAS
Writing Reviser, and Popplet make brainstorming and planning more efficient; therefore,

time with the instructor can be more focused on constructive feedback on student-
generated material.

Problem-Based, Inquiry-Based, and Experiential
Learning
For teachers designing lessons for inquiry or experiential learning, the portability and
features of mobile provide a powerful supplement. As discussed in Chapter 2 and later in
Chapter 5, learning is optimized when students generate and construct their own
knowledge.18 As opposed to surface-level, rote memorization, inquiry-based learning
encourages students to engage deeply with the material, by analyzing and synthesizing the
foundational components that allow for transfer of the material to new situations, authentic
scenarios, and across domains.19 While this style of instruction can be quite time-
consuming and difficult to administer, mobile devices serve to eliminate some of the
outstanding barriers.
One prominent concern with inquiry-based instruction is the dependency on appropriate,
just-in-time scaffolding. Posing an open-ended, problem-solving scenario can be
extremely inefficient, if not detrimental, if the student does not have the prerequisite
knowledge and skills to solve the problem.20 Moreover, limitations of the classroom, such
as access to tools or materials, can impede the authenticity of the inquiry process. For
example, challenging students in chemistry to experiment with various chemical
compounds is not only impractical, but highly dangerous.
Instead, instructors can utilize apps such as Harvard's EcoMOBILE, Leafsnap, and apps
for geocaching. EcoMOBILE puts the power of inquiry at students' fingertips as they
explore actual pond ecosystems around their school. Posed with a scientific mystery
prompt, students can document their exploration and gather clues on the go using the
built-in GPS, camera, and microphone. Using mobile-compatible environmental probes,
students can collect data on the water composition and quality. Similarly, Mentira, a
Spanish-language learning activity, provides an authentic learning experience for students.
Utilizing an augmented reality mobile app, students are tasked with solving a murder
mystery in a Spanish-speaking neighborhood in Albuquerque, NM. Students must gather
clues by interviewing native language speakers and translate written resources. In sum,
these apps serve as inquiry scaffolds aiding the student in forming a hypothesis, collecting
relevant evidence, analyzing the data, and drawing conclusions. The experience becomes
an explicit application of abstract concepts fostering connections between educational
material and the real world.
Augmented reality apps like Elements 4D and StarWalk provide access to otherwise
unattainable experiences. With Elements 4D students can safely see the visual
representation of each element, but more importantly, they can combine elements, view
the resulting chemical equation, and see how they react. Similarly, StarWalk presents
visual support for the generally hard-to-grasp, abstract concepts of space. Without the use
of expensive telescopes, each student can simply hold their device up to the sky and see
the location, physical attributes, and movement of planets, stars, and satellites.
Through creative app stacking, almost any problem-based activity can be accomplished
efficiently with a single mobile device. Want students to make a movie? They can shoot,
edit, narrate, and annotate an entire short film on the same device. Want students to
experiment with Newton's laws? Give them a soccer ball and a GPS-enabled mobile

device, and they can run experiments, collect data, and document their findings in the
palm of their hand. Unbound by the restrictions of paper and pencil and computer cables,
mobile learning juxtaposes the power of technology with our innate knack for exploration
to produce irreplaceable opportunities for deep, meaningful learning.

Alternative Learning Environments
Referring back to the TPACK framework, the dotted line surrounding the model implies
that “technology, pedagogy, and content do not exist in a vacuum, but rather, are
instantiated in a specific learning and teaching contexts.”21 Therefore, a successful mobile
implementation strategy must also consider where it is being deployed. The majority of
our discussion is centered on the common, brick-and-mortar school setting; however,
mobile integration also fits nicely into alternative learning environments such as home and
virtual schools. Aside from the benefits for supporting learning and higher-level
engagement discussed throughout this chapter and book, there are specific ways to
leverage mobile for alternative environments.
Virtual School
Virtual schools, where students learn exclusively using online classes and curricula, have
seen increasing prominence. With greater access to technology and online educational
resources, virtual schools provide a viable alternative to traditional school for students
with disabilities, students with demanding schedules such as semi-professional athletes
and musicians, and students seeking greater challenge through higher-quality school
districts or college-level courses. Again, mobile devices provide great promise in
mitigating the current limitations of virtual schools.
For students with disabilities, the conventions of brick-and-mortar schools—noisy
classrooms, sitting quietly for long periods of time, and so on—can trigger certain
behaviors that might be disruptive and make learning challenging for everyone. However,
the feasibility of virtual schools as an alternative solution is highly dependent on the
accessibility of the curriculum.22 As discussed in depth in Chapter 14, mobile affords
several unique accessibility functionalities for special populations—support for screen
readers, Braille input, and nonverbal communication just to name a few.
Also, through the combination of mobile integration and virtual schools, ruining a
weekend or cutting into a summer break with school make-up days is no longer necessary.
Instead of cancelling school due to adversities such as weather, students can attend virtual
school from the safety of their home via home technologies or school-issued devices.
Devastating storms such as 2012's Hurricane Sandy, 2009's Hurricane Katrina, and even
2013–2014's unusually snowy winter, quickly use up a school district's allotted inclement
weather days; therefore, 1:1 technology schools like Pascack Valley Regional High School
in New Jersey have implemented virtual school days to avoid the dreaded make-up days.23
Teachers can easily facilitate lessons, assign and collect work, and provide feedback using
online resources and mobile apps just as they would in the classroom.
Finally, the portability aspect of mobile makes these devices a great tool for both students
and parents. For most students, the success of virtual school relies heavily on parental
involvement. With mobile devices, parents can stay up-to-date on progress and
performance in real-time without sitting next to the student as they complete classwork.
Also, students can easily communicate with teachers, parents, and academic coaches
through mobile communication for immediate feedback and support with features such as
video conferencing, phone calls, and text messaging. Lastly, mobile technologies provide

anytime, anywhere access to virtual school curricula for students with demanding
schedules and travel constraints, so students on the road can stay caught up on their
studies.
Homeschool
Similar to virtual schools, homeschool settings provide a useful alternative to traditional
school for many students—approximately 1.77 million American students in 2011–
2012.24 Homeschooling can be controversial. Arguments surrounding issues such as
socialization, instructor expertise for higher-level subjects, and underrepresentation of
subjects and teaching styles are often voiced when discussing the pros and cons of
homeschooling. While people often refute these claims with effective solutions, mobile
technologies can also serve to alleviate such concerns and perhaps enhance a homeschool
environment. For those who choose to homeschool their children, mobile devices can
provide a valuable opportunity to access extensive critical content, use standardized
appropriate learning resources, and engage in collaborative learning.
Arguably, mobile devices have made us more social than ever before. Although not face-
to-face, many of us are in constant communication with others in one form or another. By
establishing connections with other students through homeschool networks, mobile
devices and their various apps are a great way to develop collaboration and
communication skills. Moreover, through apps such as FaceTime and Join.Me,
homeschool students can practice the art of public speaking by presenting projects to a
virtual audience, participating in live debates with other students, and delivering speeches.
Similar to the flipped classroom approach, homeschool parents from across the country
can also team together and co-teach to take advantage of individual areas of expertise
while also exposing students to a variety of teaching styles.

Conclusion
Using theoretical models as a guide, successful integrations of mobile devices do not
mean retrofitting existing lessons but, instead, redefining them in terms of student
participation and scope. Therefore, mobile learning does not mean having students
complete the same worksheet as before on their devices; it means creating innovative
lessons that would otherwise be impossible without mobile devices by taking advantage of
their many capabilities and features. As shown in Table 4.1, enhancing and transforming
lessons with mobile devices—as defined by the SAMR model—is possible in all of the
environments discussed in this chapter. However, this does not mean teachers need to
abandon proven, effective instructional methods. Pedagogical knowledge is instead
juxtaposed with creativity with technology and content expertise to define new ways of
promoting active participation. As discussed throughout this chapter, mobile devices
create new opportunities to enhance traditional methods in order to further engage
students with the content in a variety of formal learning environments.

Table 4.1 Integration Levels by Environment
Environment Task
Substitution Augmentation Modification
Redefinition
Traditional,
direct
instruction
Note Taking Students
take notes
on their
device.
Students use a
note-taking
app or guide to
scaffold their
note taking.
Students use
cloud storage
to take their
notes so they
can access
them
anywhere.
Students
create and
share mind
maps using
Showbie to
demonstrate
their
understanding
of the
material.
Lecture
Present
PowerPoint
slides with
the device.
Students
follow along
by pulling
up the
presentation
on their own
device.
Teacher uses
Poll
Everywhere to
access
students'
understanding
and refine the
presentation
accordingly.
Students live
tweet during a
presentation
using Twitter.
Flipped
Remote
Lecture
Watch
videos at
home on
their mobile
devices.
Watch videos
and take notes
in a different
app.
Students use
app to
collaborate on
their
annotations in
real time from
their own
home.
Students
collaborate to
create their
own videos
for one
another.
Problem
Based
Problem
Solving
Students use
digital
textbooks
for research.
Students use
the Internet to
research.
Students
collect real
data around the
classroom or
outside and
share their
results.
Students
create a
multimedia
presentation
using their
device.
Virtual and
Homeschool
Student
Presentation.
Students
create a final
project
presentation
on their
device.
Students
present their
final project
presentation to
other students
using Skype.
Students create
presentations
collaboratively.
Students
make their
own
multimedia
websites that
provide an
overview of
the project.

Notes
1 Joshua Bolkan, “Report: Middle School Students Using Smartphones More Interested in
STEM,” The Journal (November 29, 2012),
http://thejournal.com/articles/2012/11/29/report-middle-school-students-using-
smartphones-more-interested-in-stem.aspx
2 Project Tomorrow, “Project K-Nect Mobile Learning Initiative Creates Personalized
Learning Environments for Math Students in Onslow County School System,” April
2012, www.tomorrow.org/publications/ProjectKnect.html.
3 “2014 National Survey on Mobile Technology for K–12 Education,” Amplify,
http://go.amplify.com/2014-mobile-report.
4 Michael B. Horn presentation at iNacol conference, November 7, 2014. Slides at
www.slideshare.net/DreamBoxLearning/blended-learning-in-k8-schools-expert-advice-
from-michael-horn.
5 P. Mishra and M. J. Koehler, “Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge: A New
Framework for Teacher Knowledge,” Teachers College Record 108, no. 6 (2006):
1017–1054.
6 M. J. Koehler, P. Mishra, and W. Cain, “What Is Technological Pedagogical Content
Knowledge (TPACK)?,” Journal of Education 193, no. 3 (2013): 13–20.
7 Ibid.
8 Ruben Puentedura, “SAMR: An Applied Introduction,” January 31, 2014,
www.hippasus.com/rrpweblog/archives/014/01/31/SAMRAnAppliedIntroduction.pdf.
9 Sean Russell, Brentwood Elementary School, Raleigh, NC, interview with authors,
August 22, 2013.
10 Knewton, “Blended Learning Infographic,” www.knewton.com/blended-learning.
Accessed July 17, 2014.
11 N. Hamdan, P. McKnight, K. McKnight, and K. M. Arfstrom, “A Review of Flipped
Learning,” Flipped Learning Network (2013),
www.flippedlearning.org/cms/lib07/VA01923112/Centricity/Domain/41/LitReview_Flip
12 Project Tomorrow, “Speak Up 2013 National Research Project Findings: A Second
Year Review of Flipped Learning,” 2014,
www.tomorrow.org/speakup/2014_FlippedLearningReport.html.
13 Hamdan, McKnight, McKnight, and Arfstrom, “A Review of Flipped Learning.”
14 Ibid.
15 Associated Press, “Teachers Flip for ‘Flipped Learning’ Class Model,” USA Today,
January 29, 2013, www.usatoday.com/story/tech/nation/2013/01/27/flipped-learning-
class/1868733/.

16 Mary Madden, Amanda Lenhart, Maeve Duggan, Sandra Cortesi, and Urs Gasser,
“Teens and Technology 2013,” www.pewinternet.org/2013/03/13/teens-and-
technology-2013.
17 Ibid.
18 John D. Bransford, Ann L. Brown, and Rodney Cocking, eds., How People Learn:
Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
1999).
19 R. D. Anderson, “Reforming Science Teaching: What Research Says About Inquiry,”
Journal of Science Teacher Education 13, no. 1 (2002): 1–12.
20 P. A. Kirschner, J. Sweller, and R. E. Clark, “Why Minimal Guidance During
Instruction Does Not Work: An Analysis of the Failure of Constructivist, Discovery,
Problem-Based, Experiential, and Inquiry-Based Teaching,” Educational Psychology
41, no. 2: 75–86.
21 MJ Koehler, P. Mishra, and W. Cain, “What Is TPACK?,” 13–20.
22 Katie Ash, “Educators Weigh Benefits, Drawbacks of Virtual Special Ed.,” Education
Week (2010), www.edweek.org/dd/articles/2010/06/16/03speed.h03.html.
23 Al Baker, “Snow Day? That's Great. Now Log in. Get to Class,” 2014, New York
Times, www.nytimes.com/2014/02/14/nyregion/snow-day-thats-great-now-log-in-get-
to-class.html?_r=0.
24 A. Noel, P. Stark, J. Redford, and A. Zuckerberg, “Parent and Family Involvement in
Education,” National Household Education Surveys Program of 2012, National Center
for Education Statistics, 2013.


Chapter 5
Higher-Order Thinking Skills and Digital Fluency
Higher-order thinking skills encompass behaviors associated with how we productively
utilize our knowledge. Productive, real-world skills such as thinking critically about
information, applying factual and procedural knowledge to efficiently solve problems,
effectively communicating and collaborating with others, and conceiving creative ideas
are ways to engage in deeper learning. However, after surveying over 400 employers, the
Partnership for 21st Century Skills found a frightening consensus that the majority of
high-school graduates are deficient in writing, mathematics, and reading comprehension
as well as skills such as critical thinking and problem solving.1 In a recent poll by
Microsoft, 59 percent of employed Americans aged 18 to 35 agree that the majority of the
skills they use every day were learned outside of school.2 In sum, there exists an alarming
gap in the ideal and reality when it comes to preparing our students for today's workforce.
Higher-order thinking skills are critical for thriving in today's digitally-connected society.
The Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills (AT21CS) is a research project that
advocates for greater adoption of teaching higher-order thinking skills. They categorize
these skills as ways of thinking (e.g., creativity, problem solving); ways of working (e.g.,
communication, collaboration); tools for working (e.g., content knowledge, digital
fluency); and living in the world (citizenship, cultural awareness).3 While it is important,
arguably obligatory, to acquire content knowledge (i.e., a business leader might study
economics or marketing), the way in which it is constructed and, consequently, how it is
applied to new situations are the skills that make us marketable. In fact, according to a
recent ranking by Forbes, the most desirable skills of today's workforce are critical
thinking, complex problem solving, judgment and decision-making, and active listening.
These skills beat out sales and marketing experience, programming fluency, and
proficiency with computer and electronics.4 What separates experts from innovators is not
content knowledge, but rather their fluency in higher-order thinking.
However, despite the demand and utility of higher-order thinking skills, results from the
2012 ACT indicate only 25 percent of tested high-school students demonstrated sufficient
mastery in English, reading, mathematics, and science for success in college and beyond.5
Moreover, after surveying over 400 employers, the Partnership for 21st Century Skills
found employers agreed. In sum, there exists a significant gap in the ideal and reality
when it comes to preparing our students for today's workforce.
Demand for deeper engagement with classroom material is in the heart of educators as
well. In a recent New York Times interview regarding the state of science education in
America, a group of 19 scientists, educators, and students almost unanimously pointed to
the need for authentic, active learning.6 Some made comments such as, “They should
learn how to be an applied problem solver, which is not the same thing as being a fantastic
book-based equation solver,” “Real science happens when you are immersed in a
question,” and “We want [students] to see what science and math can do when they are
used by a creative mind”; others praised the value of internships within the community,
mentorships, and bringing in experts for exposure to potential careers and real-life
applications for classroom material. One high school senior dreamed of “more hands-on

projects where I would learn something about what I'm doing instead of just memorizing
things from a textbook.” Another senior complained, “One of the problems I have during
math class is not understanding the reasoning behind what we are doing. The teacher will
put something on the board and say, ‘This is how you do it,’ and I'm thinking, ‘Why does
that make sense?’”7
Digital fluency is a facet of higher-order thinking. We believe experience with the popular
technologies of today and the more traditional representation of higher-order thinking
skills have a bidirectional relationship. Technologies such as mobile devices can serve as a
digital assistant for optimizing our problem-solving, critical-thinking, creativity, and
communication efficacy. Furthermore, effectively utilizing technology often requires a
great deal of complex cognitive processing, such as critical thinking. Given this
interconnectivity and the ever-increasing pervasiveness of technology in our lives, we
would be missing a critical learning opportunity by instructing twenty-first-century
students without such devices. Yet, technology in the classroom has always implied great
risk from off-task behaviors to more serious disciplinary infractions, which has created a
great deal of apprehension and even zero-tolerance policies in schools.8 However, we are
doing students a great disservice when we restrict access to mobile devices. We should be
teaching students how to leverage their devices for creative thought, problem solving, and
collaboration as opposed to treating them simply as a nuisance only valuable for texting
and non-educational social networking.
In this chapter, we highlight the cognitive processes underlying higher-order thinking and
identify suggestions for capitalizing on mobile technology for developing these skills.
Through this discussion, we pinpoint the disconnection between the traditional, lecture-
style classrooms and those positioned to realize the efficacy of new, innovative curricula.
Finally, we discuss strategies for mitigating the threats that come with implementing a
mobile-enhanced classroom so that students graduate comprehensively prepared for
college and the workforce.

Higher-Order Thinking Skills
When we reflect on the great innovators of the past and present, we can often apply such
adjectives as creative or analytical, and categorizations such as great problem-solver or
effective communicator. Innovators make their mark not only by mastering the content of
a particular domain but, more importantly, by questioning, expanding upon, and/or
applying such information in novel ways. The origins of everyday tools such as Liquid
Paper and the stethoscope highlight this point.
Liquid Paper. Bettie Nesmith Graham, an aspiring artist of the mid-twentieth century,
found herself working as a secretary when the fruits of her artistic labor fell short of
the needs of supporting her family. During this time, Graham inevitably made several
typing errors, which at the time had no practical solution. Frustrated, Graham
resolved the issue by applying her love for painting. By mixing water-based paints to
match the hue of paper, Graham simply placed a dab of paint on the page effectively
erasing the mistake and continued typing error-free. Ultimately, Graham went on to
found her own company, Liquid Paper, which she later sold for $47.5 million in
1980.9
The stethoscope. “Nineteenth-century French physician, Rene Laënnec, was
confronted with an uncomfortable situation. A patient arrived in his office
complaining of chest pains. At this time, physicians often employed the percussion
technique, which involves tapping the chest and listening for sounds that might
indicate a buildup of fluid around the heart or lungs. Unfortunately, Laënnec's patient
was overweight rendering the tapping method, as you could imagine, ineffective. The
young physician's second option was immediate auscultation, or pressing his ear
directly to the patient's chest. However, Laënnec's patient was also female. Polite and
embarrassed, Laennec began brainstorming alternatives. He quickly recalled a time
when he “observed two children sending signals to each other using a long piece of
solid wood and a pin. With an ear to one end, the child received an amplified sound
of the pin scratching the opposite end of the wood.” Laënnec's account explains, “I
then tightly rolled a sheet of paper, one end of which I placed over the precordium
[chest] and my ear to the other. I was surprised and elated to be able to hear the
beating of her heart with far greater clearness than I ever had with direct application
of my ear.”10 Through a moment of uncomfortable panic, Laënnec's domain expertise
and previous experience laid the foundation for one of the most pervasive medical
innovations.”11
Although the utility of higher-order thinking skills might seem to trump that of factual
knowledge, this should not undermine its importance. A closer look at our example
innovators reveals a key commonality: expertise in a particular domain. There is a reason
why you do not read of Laënnec's great literary works or Graham's scientific endeavors—
thinking critically or creatively demands content knowledge to think and reason about.
Previously acquired knowledge and experiences provide the foundation for higher-order
thinking. Cognitive scientist Daniel Willingham uses the following example to illustrate
this point:

A treasure hunter is going to explore a cave up on a hill near a beach. He suspected
there might be many paths inside the cave so he was afraid he might get lost.
Obviously, he did not have a map of the cave; all he had with him were some
common items such as a flashlight and a bag. What could he do to make sure he did
not get lost trying to get back out of the cave later?
The solution is to carry some sand with you in the bag, and leave a trail as you go, so
you can trace your path back when you're ready to leave the cave. About 75 percent
of American college students thought of this solution—but only 25 percent of
Chinese students solved it.12 The experimenters suggested that Americans solved it
because most grew up hearing the story of Hansel and Gretel, which includes the idea
of leaving a trail as you travel to an unknown place in order to find your way back.
The experimenters also gave subjects another puzzle based on a common Chinese
folk tale, and the percentage of solvers from each culture reversed.13
Therefore, while often referred to as separate entities, factual knowledge and higher-order
thinking skills are highly dependent upon one another. The term “higher-order thinking
skill” is derived from the additional cognitive effort it entails; effort that can require
significant working memory capacity (for a review of working memory, see Chapter 2).
Looking back on the discussion from Chapter 2: The Science of Learning, automatizing
knowledge structures and procedures through practice creates a cognitive advantage by
reducing cognitive load. Consequently, we can actively incorporate more pieces of
information or process information at a deeper level—in other words, engage in higher-
order thinking. For this reason, these complex cognitive skills are generally domain
specific.14 Any educator can relate to the student who demonstrates great scientific
reasoning, but has difficulty when charged with critically evaluating bias in two historical
documents. Therefore, as we delve into the details of specific higher-order thinking skills,
keep in mind the necessity of sufficient domain expertise.
Problem Solving
Most people are faced with solving a problem every day. Sometimes problems are simple
and well defined, such as solving the math problem 2 + 2. Other times, we are tasked with
more difficult, ill-defined problems like choosing a career or drafting a manuscript.
Nonetheless, problems can often be solved by repeating this general model: identify the
problem, define the problem, identify a strategy, implement the strategy, and evaluate the
results;15 familiarizing students with the generality of these steps can foster the
development of this higher-order skill.16 However, as concise as those five steps might
seem, problem solving can be quite complicated. Effective problem solving often requires
an individual to consult and apply prior knowledge and previous experiences while also
attending to and evaluating progression toward the overall goal (i.e., metacognitive
awareness). Furthermore, the same constructs enlisted to benefit our problem solving can
also impede the process. A closer look at each step in the problem-solving process sheds
light on these issues.
The Problem-Solving Process

Identify and Represent the Problem
To effectively solve a problem, you must first identify what will qualify as a solution and
deconstruct the problem into concrete subproblems. With well-defined problems, the goal
state is explicit; however, devising the goal state of an ill-defined problem requires
additional effort. For example, completing a jigsaw puzzle has a very clearly defined goal
state while the goal state is less explicit when asked to write an essay. Nonetheless,
defining what will suffice as a goal state affects the remaining steps in the problem solving
process.
Once the goal state has been identified, we must then represent the problem. This involves
understanding the specifics of the problem. For complex problems, this might involve
dissecting the problem into smaller, more manageable subproblems and synthesizing how
different components of the problem interact. Also, this step entails understanding any
constraints associated with the problem. Therefore, even when a problem is well defined,
incorrectly representing a problem can significantly impede one's ability to reach the goal
state. Take a try at solving the following scenario:
A man standing in a room is tasked with tying together the free ends of two cords that
are hanging from the ceiling. However, the cords are far enough apart that the man
cannot reach the two cords at the same time. On a chair in the corner of the room lies
a pair of scissors and tape. How will he tie the two cords together?
Adapted from Birch and Rabinowitz, 195117
The two-cord problem, as pictured in Figure 5.1, delineates a very explicit solution:
connect the two strings. However, solvers often shortsightedly represent the objects
involved in the problem—an oversight known as functional fixedness. In the two-cord
problem, we often view the scissors as a tool for cutting objects, but the weight of scissors
could also be used as a pendulum. To solve this problem, place the chair under one of the
cords, tie the scissors to the end of the other cord, set the scissors cord in motion, run stand
in the chair, catch the traveling cord, and successfully tie the two cords together.
Therefore, similar to other higher-order thinking skills, problem solving requires a
comprehensive understanding of the components and constraints of a problem and
oftentimes, a touch of creativity and critical thinking.

Figure 5.1 The Two-Cord Problem
Identify and Implement a Strategy
Once we have accurately understood and represented the problem at hand, we then must
select and implement a strategy for solving the problem. To do so, we commonly rely on
familiar heuristics and algorithms that have been successful in past experiences.
Algorithms involve following a proven, finite process that ultimately leads to the desired
goal state, such as mathematical theorems or cooking recipes. When problems are less
defined or quantitatively represented, we often utilize heuristics as a mental shortcut or
rule-of-thumb for attempting to solve a problem.
Regardless of the problem, we must be aware of strategies for solving it. When solving a
novel problem, awareness of and experience with similar problems can help us transfer
potential solutions; however, transferring information to new situations is generally a
difficult task especially for younger children.18 For example, we are often slow to apply
complex theories and formulas learned in math class to solve real-world situations (e.g.,
the Pythagorean theorem); therefore, teaching concepts in context by making explicit
references to authentic problems can support students' problem-solving skills (e.g.,
showing how the Pythagorean theorem can be used when building a tree house).

Evaluate the Results
After implementing a strategy, how do we know if the problem has been solved? With
well-defined problems, evaluating results is generally less taxing. With a clearly defined
goal state, comparing our results can be trivial. However, this process might be more
complicated with ill-defined problems. If the problem is “write a Haiku,” then judging the
result involves evaluating the quality of your work by comparing it to the problem
constraints (i.e., the syllable and line definitions of a Haiku) and making relative
comparisons to similar results.

Leveraging Mobile Learning
Researchers of problem-solving behaviors have identified several difficulties students face
while solving problems in the classroom as well as potential solutions to these
shortcomings. Such solutions often involve fostering meaningful associations between the
problem and previous experiences, prior knowledge, and interests. Others attempt to
reduce students' cognitive load by providing relevant resources and teaching strategies for
offloading and organizing information (for a review of cognitive load, see Chapter 3).
Fortunately, many of these solutions are offered through the affordances of mobile
technologies.
Using external representations (e.g., graphic organizers) is an effective method for helping
students define the problem space, gather and organize information, and evaluate results
by significantly reducing cognitive load,19 and they also provide a space to organize and
evaluate results. The problem-solving literature often points to gestalt psychologist Karl
Duncker's Monk Problem for highlighting the benefits of diagrams. In this problem, a
Buddhist monk travels from his village at the base of a mountain to a temple at the top of
the mountain.20 The next day, the monk travels back down the mountain to his village, but
obviously at a much faster pace. The problem is to identify a specific point in the journey
where the monk was at the same place on both days. Arriving at a solution to this problem
mentally is quite taxing; however, drawing a picture of the monk's journey up and then
back down the mountain—the solution is more easily found. Graphing out problem
constraints, creating diagrams, and building charts to analyze data are all exercises that
can be performed by hand, but mobile devices make them more readily available. As
demonstrated in the Monk Problem in Figure 5.2, knowing how and when to leverage
such tools can dictate problem solving efficiency.

Figure 5.2 The Monk Problem
As emphasized in the previous section, students should be provided opportunities to
practice problem solving in authentic scenarios. Simulations of real-world environments
and/or tools attainable through mobile technologies provide an excellent platform for
authentic problem solving. In controlled, simulated spaces, students are free to develop
and test hypotheses without great effort (e.g., travelling to a laboratory or setting,
investing in equipment) or risk. For example, researchers at Harvard have produced
EcoMOBILE, a virtual experience for learning about pond ecosystems.21 Through the
augmented reality interface, students get to go out in the field and view data about the
environment through the lens of their mobile device that would not otherwise be available
in the natural environment. Also, with the device, students can take samples from the
environment and run simulated analyses on the artifacts similar to the procedures followed
by actual biologists and conservationists. Likewise, mobile allows immediate access to
meaningful data. Relatable information like weather patterns and census data or interest-
aligned information such as record sales, Twitter analytics, and other pop culture
applications are readily available for making problem solving more meaningful.
Managing and Reducing Cognitive Load Is Critical for Successfully Solving Complex
Problems
Encourage students to offload information stored in working memory and use mobile
devices to create external representations when solving complex problems.

Take advantage of mobile devices' ability to connect students to authentic, meaningful
problem solving scenarios and tools.
Creativity
Left-brained, artsy, unstructured, free—on the surface, these are adjectives one might use
to describe the term creativity. In terms of domain, people often associate creativity with
the arts: painting, dance, music, or writing. Using this conceptualization, teaching and
encouraging creativity in the classroom is limited to certain activities and applies only to
those students with artistic talent. However, a quick survey of revolutionizing innovations
reveals creativity applies to all domains and all students. Therefore, in order to effectively
foster our students' creative aptitude, we must first understand the concept, which
education and creativity expert, Ken Robinson, claims is clouded by three main
misconceptions.22
First, what actually defines creativity? Einstein stated, “Creativity is seeing what others
see and thinking what no one else has ever thought.”23 To generalize this definition,
creativity encompasses productive, novel ideas or behaviors.24 Therefore, an important
defining feature of creativity is practicality. Randomly striking keys on a piano might
fulfill the requirement of novelty, but the composition might have little meaning and add
little value to society. Robinson explains “creativity is a disciplined process that requires
skill, knowledge and control…It's a process, not a single event, and genuine creative
processes involve critical thinking as well as imaginative insights and fresh ideas.”25
Therefore, the creative process encompasses a variety of components including content
knowledge, background information, problem solving and critical thinking skills, and
motivation.26
Second, creativity is applicable to all domains, not just the humanities. For example,
consider this example from Daniel Saunders and Paul Thagard's chapter “Creativity in
Computer Science”27 —a discipline commonly associated with structured, logical thought.
Another example of [creativity] is the invention of the first high-level language,
FORTRAN, by John Backus in 1953, which allowed computer programs to be
written in comprehensible, algebra-like commands instead of assembly code.28
Assembly code consists of lists of thousands of inscrutable three-letter commands,
designed to communicate with the machine at its lowest level.…The layer of
abstraction that FORTRAN placed between the underlying electronics and the human
was very important to the subsequent development of computer science.
Thus, students should be encouraged and equipped with strategies to think creatively
across the content areas. Teachers should encourage students to attain the common
prerequisites for creativity, such as gather background information and create a safe space
for creative thought. As demonstrated in the example above, students should be primed to
think about how information and processes can be integrated across disciplines or
challenged to understand how domain content can be applied outside of the classroom.
Furthermore, it is well documented that creativity is often preceded by a series of failures,
and classrooms should allow for trial and error without negative consequences.29

Third, everyone can be creative. Just as a talented young artist can create a beautiful,
original masterpiece, a budding scientist can transfer and apply information or processes
in a novel way. Although there are interesting cases of accidental creativity that have
generated great innovation, generally, the most creative minds are simply experts within a
domain, which allows them to critically reason about and integrate various components in
a novel way.30 Therefore, what differentiates an expert from a creative expert is not talent,
but rather disposition and awareness of resources. Creativity requires a passion for a
particular area that generates motivation to push the limits by thinking critically, taking
risks, utilizing strategies, and to constructively benefit from failures. Robinson recalls his
experience while consulting with a Native American tribe.31
They wanted me to talk to them about how they could promote innovation across
their tribe. We sat around a board room table for the first hour, and I guess they were
expecting me to get some flip charts out and show them some techniques. We did a
little of that, but what I actually got them to do was to get into groups and draw
pictures of some of the challenges they were facing as a community. Well, the minute
you get people to think visually—to draw pictures or move rather than sit and write
bullet points—something different happens in the room…So you can teach people
particular skills to free up their own thinking…
In sum, creativity should be conceptualized as a content-specific skill, not a trait someone
has or doesn't have. Any student can be encouraged and taught to think creatively. Using
the above characterization, educational psychologist Jeanne Ellis Ormrod suggests
fostering creativity in the classroom involves ensuring requisite prior knowledge,
demonstrating relevant strategies, appealing to individual students' interests and passions,
and generating an appropriate mindset by encouraging risk taking and allowing for failure
—some of which defy the capabilities of a single instructor and other constraints of a
classroom. Through mobile devices, however, adhering to these suggestions becomes
more reasonable.
Applications for Mobile Learning
Mobile devices afford a resource for encouraging creativity through individualized
instruction and seemingly unlimited access to background information. First, the
personalization of mobile allows one teacher to create lessons that appeal to the individual
interests of each student. Research suggests we are more creative when working within
our personal areas of expertise and/or interest because of the intrinsic motivation that
transpires and likelihood of content knowledge mastery. For example, a recent study found
professional artists working under commission—an extrinsic source of motivation—
produced significantly less-creative pieces than those artists painting on their own accord
—an indication of intrinsic motivation.32 Therefore, from essay writing to creating
geometric tessellations to devising an empirical research study, teachers can personalize
lessons by transitioning from whole class to individualized instruction through the use of
mobile devices.
Second, when the structure of a lesson cannot be tailored to one's interests, mobile devices
allow students to compensate for deficits in prior knowledge according to their individual
needs. A certain degree of mastery can facilitate creative thought; however, students often

come to a lesson with different levels of expertise. Instead of boring the more
knowledgeable students or confusing those less informed, teachers can lean on mobile's
wide-reaching access to relevant information for differentiating instruction. This serves a
dual purpose of engaging the student in challenging material, as well as teaching him how
to evaluate source validity and content on the Internet. Also, mobile technologies are an
excellent platform for external representations, known to promote brainstorming and
cognitive offloading as students gather and organize information.33
Third, to be creative, students must be able to take risks. Utilizing mobile as a venue for
simulations is a great way to mitigate the potential costs of failure. Simulation apps such
as those offered by Exploriments provide a space where students can experiment with
physics and chemistry concepts without the risk of injury or chemical combustion or the
need for a vacuum space. Similarly, students also must feel safe taking such risks, and in
this case, we see mobile as a powerful tool for overcoming the social anxiety surrounding
failure. Apps like Socrative or Padlet allow students to make comments or ask questions
within the app, which can take a large part of the intimidation factor of contributing in
class away from shy students. With mobile, students are free to experiment and brainstorm
within the privacy of their device, mitigating fears of looking dumb or being overpowered
by more eager, outgoing students. For example, when teaching young students to write
letters, mistakes using a writing app, as opposed to paper and pencil, feel like less of a
failure when being able to undo, erase, or start over is a simple button press, not throwing
away the paper.
Creativity Is Neither Person Nor Domain Specific—Everyone Is Capable of Creative
Thought
To foster creative thought, create lessons that allow students to work individually or in
small groups on activities and projects that appeal to their personal interests.
Creativity is often dependent upon background knowledge; therefore, encourage
students to use mobile devices as a research tool to supplement their current level of
expertise.
Use mobile to provide students with a safe space that does not penalize or publically
embarrass students as they explore through trial and error.
Communication and Collaboration
Communication and collaboration skills are vital for success in the modern workplace.
Communication extends the higher-order skills outlined above as it is the vehicle for
translating thoughts into words and actions. For example, in a group project, a student
might have a creative idea to share, but without the means to present those thoughts in a
coherent, persuasive way, the group may not understand her vision. Effective
communicators are often concise, using common, appropriate language. Such individuals
avoid slang and less-common words that might not be clear for the majority of the
intended audience. Similarly, complex information should be deconstructed and presented
at the lowest level in order to accommodate the listeners' limited attention and working
memory capacity. In this case, effective communicators leverage analogies, simulations,
and visual displays to scaffold listeners' understanding.34 Contrast the following methods

for teaching students about the circulatory system.
Using a traditional method, teacher A uses a textbook as a guide and presents the
circulatory system using a picture and the following description: “With each
heartbeat, blood is sent throughout our bodies, carrying oxygen and nutrients to every
cell.…The circulatory system is composed of the heart and blood vessels, including
arteries, veins, and capillaries.…Arteries carry blood away from the heart. They are
the thickest blood vessels, with muscular walls that contract to keep the blood
mobbing away from the heart and through the body.…Veins carry blood back to the
heart. They're not as muscular as arteries, but they contain valves that prevent blood
from flowing backward.…A network of tiny capillaries connects the arteries and
veins. Though tiny, the capillaries are one of the most important parts of the
circulatory system because it's through them that nutrients and oxygen are delivered
to the cells.”35
Teacher B teaches the same concept, but uses a picture and a familiar analogy: a
delivery truck delivering packages around a city. “The process starts with individual
homes, or tissue cells, placing orders for the oxygen stored in a large warehouse (the
lungs).…From the center, the oxygen-rich blood cells hop on bodily highways, or
arteries, to deliver their packages…When they near their destination, the delivery
trucks exit the highways and enter capillaries. Capillaries, similar to narrow roads in
a neighborhood, allow the trucks to reach homes in need of the oxygen shipments. As
a way of signing for the oxygen delivery, tissue cells hand over cellular waste like
carbon dioxide to the red blood cells.…Order fulfilled, the blood cells get back on the
capillary roads and exit onto a second set of highways called veins, which lead the
cells back to the heart. From here, the minute-long cycle begins anew: red blood cells
take a trip to the lungs, pick up an oxygen shipment while dropping off their carbon-
dioxide signature, travel back to the distribution center, then go off to the tissue cells
for delivery.”36
In this example, both teachers deconstruct the circulatory system into manageable pieces
and use illustrations to help articulate their point. However, teacher B also leverages
background knowledge and experience to help communicate ideas more clearly. While
students might not initially compare the circulatory system to a delivery truck, given the
similarities, the analogy helps to convey the concept.
However, articulating our own thoughts is only one half of the process of communication;
listening, receiving, and interpreting incoming information are also included.37 Effective
communication, then, transcends engaging in conversation since the skills associated with
receiving information are also applicable to acquiring knowledge in a variety settings such
as a classroom lecture. Therefore, aside from comprehending the explicit message, a good
communicator makes inferences about “knowledge, values, attitudes and intentions,”
summarizes and prioritizes incoming messages, and synthesizes information from multiple
sources.38 When the demands of listening overwhelm the limits of attention and working
memory, skilled communicators rely on note taking for offloading and organizing
information.39 Such careful analysis can more confidently yield an accurate representation
of the intended message, which can then benefit the production of an informed response, if
appropriate.

That being said, collaboration skills extend a student's ability to communicate well. Good
collaborators not only effectively speak and listen, but do so respectfully and deliberately.
Members of a successful team thoroughly understand the demands of the project as well
as the strengths of each individual and, consequently, allocate work in an informed and
balanced manner. Therefore, beyond communication, collaboration skills include valuing
the role of each teammate, accommodating the challenges of working with a diverse team,
maintaining a flexible work ethic, respecting scheduling conflicts, and graciously allowing
for compromise.40
Like other higher-order thinking processes, students develop communication and
collaboration skills through practice and guidance. Students should be encouraged to
practice verbally communicating their ideas across domains using a variety of resources.
Students should be exposed to resources for aiding communication, such as instruments
for visually presenting complex information or processes (e.g., charts, graphs) or
techniques for drawing attention toward main ideas (e.g., posters, PowerPoint
presentations). For becoming more attentive listeners, students should be instructed on
methods for generating useful notes and/or organizing information, as well as strategies
for monitoring comprehension. Furthermore, instructors should be prepared to provide
constructive feedback on areas in need of improvement.
In terms of collaboration, charging students with group work allows practice and exposure
to the demands of working together. Instructors can facilitate the dynamic by providing
tools and techniques for mitigating the challenges of collaboration. Moreover, integrating
explicit rubrics or systems (e.g., the Jigsaw method, Student Teams-Achievement
Divisions41) have been shown to help students work more cooperatively by overcoming
stereotypes and ensuring a balanced division of responsibility such that students can
ultimately understand the benefits of teamwork. For instance, the Jigsaw method involves
assigning each student a specific subtask or concept related to the problem. Once each
student has mastered or completed their task, the group reconvenes, presents their
individual findings, and, collaboratively aggregates their work to complete the
assignment.42
Applications for Mobile Learning
Mobile technologies provide a great deal of utility in terms of communication and
collaboration. For communicating information, students can utilize apps such as Keynote
to supplement verbal communication with visual aids. Moreover, video and audio
recording functionalities can be employed as students prepare and practice assignments
that require speaking in front of an audience. When acquiring skills associated with
attentive listening, Evernote and Google Drive provide excellent cloud-based, note-taking
facilities.
Mobile also has a reputation for solving many of the challenges surrounding effective
collaboration. For instance, Skype facilitates video conferencing anytime, anywhere,
allowing face-to-face communication among members. This overcomes one of the main
arguments against mobile that is often made, that it lacks the personal touch of face-to-
face communication. Cloud-based resources like those provided by the Google Drive suite
or screencast applications (e.g., Screenr) extend video conferencing by allowing several

users to view and edit documents in real time. In fact, a recent study found middle school
students are 50 percent more likely to collaborate and communicate with their fellow
classmates and teachers when using a tablet to complete school projects.43 Along this line,
mobile technologies can connect students with collaborators around the world. Whether
it's students interacting with peers in another country to gain a different perspective or
students interviewing real-world experts for a project or paper, mobile technologies allow
us to connect with practically anyone, anywhere. Furthermore, shared calendars and
scheduling tools provide an accessible platform for monitoring and maintaining
productivity and member accountability. Lastly, file-sharing tools, like Dropbox, make
sending and receiving even large files seamless and simple.
Nonetheless, fluency in leveraging mobile for communication and collaboration hinges on
awareness and practice. Unfortunately, data from a recent Gallup poll found 86 percent of
students say they often used computers or technology to complete assignments or projects,
but only 14 percent reported using technology for video conferencing or other
collaboration tools.44
Harness Students' Motivation to Socialize and Connect with Peers by Guiding, Not
Limiting, Communication and Collaboration
Use familiar media such as texting, text-based chat, and email to teach students the
difference between formal and informal communication.
Remember when teaching communication, listening skills are just as important as
speaking skills; therefore, show students techniques for utilizing mobile technology for
offloading and organizing information.
Foster students' understanding of the limitations of attention by encouraging the use of
analogies, examples, and external representation when communicating complex ideas.
Utilize collaboration methods (e.g., Jigsaw) and shared, cloud-based, mobile work
spaces to scaffold productive team work.

Critical Thinking
Critical thinking expert Diane Halpern defines critical thinking as “the use of those
cognitive skills or strategies that increase the probability of a desirable outcome. It is used
to describe thinking that is purposeful, reasoned, and goal directed—the kind of thinking
involved in solving problems, formulating inferences, calculating likelihoods, and making
decisions, when the thinker is using skills that are thoughtful and effective for the
particular context and type of thinking task.”45 Others have more generally categorized
critical thinking as being comprised of both dispositions and abilities.46 So, critical
thinking involves a magnitude of contexts and is applicable to several other higher-order
thinking skills. When communicating with others, we think critically as we draw
inferences about attitudes and dispositions from tone and language. We think critically
anytime we thoughtfully apply our knowledge and experiences creatively to new
situations as well as when we analyze information and use evidence to inform judgments
or decision making for problem solving.
In a society that consumes information for an estimated average of 12 hours per day,
effectively analyzing information has never been more relevant.47 Discriminating between
opinion and fact, comparing opposing perspectives, and developing logically sound,
compelling arguments all revolve around scrutinizing the foundational components or
information units. In the classroom, critical thinking is taught by inquiring beyond the
surface level. Teachers encourage the development of sophisticated epistemological
beliefs by having students question even the most renowned sources. Bloom's taxonomy
outlines a well-known framework for creating questions that assess a wide range of
cognitive skills, pictured in Figure 5.3. Specifically, Bloom's taxonomy recommends
asking students questions from the top three levels of the framework that involve verbs for
analysis, synthesis, and evaluation: for example, analyze, correlate, combine, generalize,
compare, support, persuade.48 To do so, students must be exposed to a variety of
information and instructed on relevant strategies. While these levels can be difficult to
measure in a controlled laboratory setting, the distinctions are so face valid that the
framework has been used for decades to encourage test-item writers to measure a wide
variety of skills.

Figure 5.3 Bloom's Revised Taxonomy
Prompting elementary students to think beyond a text or analyze bias by presenting high
school students with first-hand accounts of the Civil War as told by a slave, a politician,
and a soldier encourages critical thought.49 Consider a task as simple as having students
critically analyze advertisements, something they encounter every day. From
understanding the intended audience to parsing out fact from far-reaching claim, several
critical-thinking lessons are embedded within the world we live in.
Applications for Mobile Learning
Mobile learning and critical thinking go hand in hand. Although mobile devices can serve
as critical thinking assistants, the advent of these technologies has escalated the
importance of critical thinking skills. While mobile technology grants access to a variety
of sources and perspectives, the Internet is filled with compelling, yet false, information,
so critically analyzing the credibility of sources instead of taking information at face value
is extremely crucial. Therefore, from analyzing an argument in an English language arts
class to making inferences in social studies, these technologies provide a beneficial
instrument for practicing and developing critical thinking skills. In fact, a recent study
conducted in Australia found a positive correlation between the lengths of time students
spent learning in a technology-enriched environment and sophistication of critical thinking
skills.50 Interestingly, it is important to note that in this study, students were not explicitly
taught critical thinking skills, but rather taught and encouraged to use technology
throughout their studies.

One of the most useful applications of mobile is developing skills associated with
gathering evidence, evaluating source credibility, and applying the results. Millions of
terabytes of information are at your immediate disposal when equipped with a mobile
device. However, Diane Halpern argues the implications surrounding the abundance of
information in today's society mandate the necessity of critical thinking skills.51 She says,
“Relevant, credible information has to be selected, interpreted, digested, evaluated,
learned and applied or it is of no more use on a computer screen than it is on a distant
library shelf. If we cannot think intelligently about the myriad of issues that confront us,
then we are in danger of having all of the answers, but still not knowing what they mean.”
Teaching students to intelligently harness the advantages mobile affords can not only
foster cognitive growth through the acquisition of critical thinking skills, but also yields
one of the most sought after twenty-first century skills: media literacy.52
Aside from being a seemingly unlimited source of information, mobile devices can also
serve as critical thinking assistants. Like with problem solving and creativity, mobile can
be a wonderful tool for gathering, organizing, prioritizing, and synthesizing information.
Just as we encounter information everywhere, the portability of mobile devices allows us
to gather and offload information anywhere, anytime. Thinking critically is not reserved
for the classroom, and, with the opportunities of mobile, students are better equipped to
realize this firsthand and practice these skills in a variety of contexts.
Critical Thinking is Imperative in the Mobile-Enabled Classroom
Instead of protecting students from the unknown of the Internet, leverage this variance
by teaching students' how to critically analyze the credibility of sources.
Make connections across disciplines.
Access background knowledge.

Classrooms for Higher-Order Thinking
Throughout our discussion of higher-order thinking skills, a common theme arises:
complex cognition is just as much a mindset as it is a skill. Motivation and appropriate
beliefs about knowledge are as important as awareness of the strategies and skills
associated with complex cognition. Therefore, a space that encourages problem solving,
critical thinking, creativity, communication, and collaboration is one that empowers
students to dig deeper by bestowing to them the responsibility of learning and fostering
feelings of responsibility and worth. Such environments do so in a nurturing way by
providing practical resources and modeling effective use, allowing for failure, and
allotting appropriate time for learning. Consequently, students have the chance to engage
in meaningful learning, which has been positively associated with mastery and transfer,
two concepts related to higher-order thinking.
However, constructivist environments are hardly the norm. Furthermore, research on
students' epistemological beliefs, or beliefs about knowledge, indicates as students grow
older, their beliefs become more sophisticated as they begin to realize learning is an
ongoing process, bits of information are not necessarily isolated units, and knowledge can
be subject to change.53 Nonetheless, the majority of students are taught in a passive,
lecture-style manner,54 and instructional techniques that ignore the role of the student
diminish the very mindset we hope for. Therefore, as students begin to acquire more
sophisticated epistemological beliefs, instructional methods tend to remain the same,
yielding a problem known as the epistemological gap.55
A recent report put out by Adobe extends this depiction of the classroom.56 With respect
specifically to creativity, teachers and parents surveyed in the report claim insufficient
time, undervaluing creativity, a lack of tools and resources, testing, and state mandates that
hinder the development of creative minds at school. Parents and teachers both encourage
schools to create classroom environments that foster and value creativity by providing
resources to students and allotting sufficient time to creative thought.
Revamping lessons from lectures to breeding grounds for higher-order thinking is not a
simple task, but we believe it has been made easier through the mobile technologies
discussed at length in the previous sections. However, it is important to note, we
recommend the integration of mobile technologies to be only one factor of the classroom
rewiring, not the cornerstone. Assuming that sitting students down in front of a computer
or tablet will revolutionize their higher-order thinking skills is a fallacy. In fact, the LEAD
commission found that over $60 billion has been spent on computers in the past two
decades, and “most schools that use technology do so in a peripheral way, not a
transformative manner.”57 In other words, there is no app for higher-order thinking.
Instead, students must first realize that the most meaningful instruction occurs when they
take responsibility and guide their own learning. Through this process, educators can then
introduce students to the power of mobile for fluently and purposefully engaging in
higher-order thinking. After all, utilizing the power of mobile is in itself a marketable and
vital skill in today's society.
However, we are aware of the challenges surrounding the use of mobile in the classroom.
Many schools' acceptable use policies severely limit or prohibit mobile use altogether,

illustrating the deep distrust of devices and a perceived lack of educational value.
However, restricting students undermines their role in the classroom, drastically limits
access to powerful tools, and teaches students mobile devices are not a valuable
educational resource. Since 71 percent of teens admit to texting in class,58 some schools
are instead teaching and implementing responsible use policies so students are exposed to
the educational and practical advantages provided by mobile devices, and they are
explicitly taught how, why, and when to utilize them. Moreover, apps such as Remind, Poll
Everywhere, Celly, and StudyBoost have all leveraged the dreaded text message for on-
task, educational purposes.59 By approximating the technology use of today's workforce,
students enter the real world prepared to use technology productively as opposed to being
vulnerable and untrained. A discussion about digital citizenship is offered in Chapter 15.

Conclusion
There are limitless opportunities for leveraging the power of mobile for developing
higher-order thinking skills, and, equally important, the effective use of mobile relies on
complex cognition. As discussed in this chapter, complex processes such as problem
solving, creativity, critical thinking, collaboration, and communication entail great
prerequisites—background knowledge, motivation, and awareness of strategies, just to
name a few. For this reason, affordances such as ubiquitous access to information and
beneficial apps make mobile technologies the ideal higher-order thinking assistant.
Consequently, separating the wheat from the chaff when it comes to using mobile
effectively in itself requires critical reasoning and decision making. Although 44 percent
of high school students own a smartphone, today's employers continually complain that
recent graduates simply are not prepared for the workforce, often citing higher-order
thinking skills as a severe shortcoming.60 Given the pervasiveness and bidirectional
influence between mobile and complex cognition, teaching without mobile seems to be a
significant disservice to students.
While texting and off-task social networking in class pose a threat to classroom time,
mobile usage data suggests children are using their smartphones whether we like it or
not;61 therefore, instead of ignoring this resource because of the notable threats it entails,
why not teach students to harness this tool effectively before they enter the workforce?
Fortunately, promising findings from the Software & Information Industry Association's
Vision K–20 Survey indicate about 46 percent of K–12 districts allow mobile devices
now, a percentage they predict will grow significantly in the next five years.62 From
problem solving to creativity to effective communication, mobile technologies offer great
educational value.

Notes
1 Partnership for 21st Century Skills, “Are They Really Ready to Work? Employers'
Perspectives on the Basic Knowledge and Applied Skills of New Entrants to the 21st
Century US Workforce,” P21 (2006),
www.p21.org/storage/documents/FINAL_REPORT_PDF09-29-06.pdf.
2 Microsoft, “21st Century Skills and the Workplace: A Microsoft Partners in Learning
and Pearson Foundation Study,” 2013,
www.ferris.edu/HTMLS/administration/academicaffairs/extendedinternational/ccleaders
3 Anna R. Saavedra and V. Darleen Opfer, “Teaching and Learning 21st Century Skills:
Lessons from the Learning Sciences,” Asia Society (2012), Asiasociety.org/files/rand-
0512report.pdf.
4 Reuven Gorsht. “Are You Ready? Here Are the Top 10 Skills for the Future,” Forbes,
May 5, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/sap/2014/05/12/are-you-ready-here-are-the-top-
10-skills-for-the-future/.
5 ACT, “The Condition of College & Career Readiness 2012,”
www.act.org/research/policymakers/cccr12/readiness1.html.
6 Claudia Dreifus, “Ideas for Improving Science Education in the U.S.,” New York Times,
September 2, 2013, www.nytimes.com/2013/09/03/science/ideas-for-improving-
science-education-in-the-us.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
7 Ibid.
8 Rachel Monahan and Ben Chapman, “Mayor Bloomberg Insists on School Cellphone
Bans While Parents Demand Ban Lift for Communication,” New York Daily News, July
16, 2011, www.nydailynews.com/new-york/mayor-bloomberg-insists-school-cell-
phone-bans-parents-demand-ban-lift-communication-article-1.161049.
9 Liquid Paper, “About Us,” 2014, www.liquidpaper.com/about_us.html.
10 As cited by Ariel Roguin, MD, PhD, “Rene Tehophie Hyacinthe Laennec (1781–1826):
The Man Behind the Stethoscope,” Clinical Medicine and Research (September 2006),
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1570491/.
11 Ibid.
12 Z. Chen, L. Mo, and R. Honomichl, “Having the Memory of an Elephant: Long-Term
Retrieval and the Use of Analogues in Problem Solving,” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 133 (2004): 415–433.
13 Daniel Willingham, “Critical Thinking: Why Is It So Hard to Teach?,” American
Educator (Summer 2007),
www.aft.org/pdfs/americaneducator/summer2007/Crit_Thinking.pdf.
14 Ibid.

15 Roger H. Bruning, Gregory J. Schraw, Monica M. Norby, and Royce R. Ronning, eds.,
“Problem Solving and Critical Thinking,” in Cognitive Psychology and Instruction, 4th
ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2004).
16 Familiarity with the problem-solving model is good.
17 H. G. Birch and H.S. Rabinowitz, “The Negative Effect of Previous Experience of
Productive Thinking,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 41 (1951): 121–125.
18 Richard E. Mayer and M. Wittrock, “Problem-Solving Transfer,” in Handbook on
Educational Psychology, eds. D. C. Berliner and R. C. Calfee (New York: Macmillan,
1996), 47–62.
19 David Jonassen, “Using Cognitive Tools to Represent Problems,” Journal of Research
on Technology in Education 35, no. 3 (2003): 362–382.
20 K. Duncker, “On Problem Solving,” trans. L. S. Lees, Psychological Monographs 58
(1945): 270.
21 http://ecomobile.gse.harvard.edu/.
22 Amy M. Azzam, “Why Creativity Now? A Conversation with Sir Ken Robinson,”
2009, www.ascd.org/publications/educational-leadership/sept09/vol67/num01/Why-
Creativity-Now%C2%A2-A-Conversation-with-Sir-Ken-Robinson.aspx.
23 “Einstein Alive” website, edited by Arden Bercovitz, PhD,
www.einsteinalive.com/quotes/.
24 Jeanne E. Ormrod, Educational Psychology: Developing Learners, 6th ed. (Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2008).
25 Azzam, “Why Creativity Now?”
26 Ormrod, Educational Psychology.
27 D. Saunders, and P. Thagard, “Creativity and Computer Science,” in Creativity Across
Domains: Faces of the Muse eds. J. C. Kaufman and J. Baer (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates).
28 D. Shasha, Out of Their Minds: The Lives and Discoveries of 15 Great Computer
Scientists (New York: Copernicus, 1995), 5–20.
29 Ormrod, Educational Psychology.
30 Ibid.
31 Azzam, “Why Creativity Now?”
32 T. M. Amabile, Creativity in Context (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996).
33 David Jonassen, “Using Cognitive Tools to Represent Problems,” Journal of Research
on Technology in Education 35, no. 3 (2003): 362–382).

34 Partnership for 21st Century Skills, “P21 Framework Definitions,”
www.p21.org/storage/documents/P21_Framework_Definitions.pdf, accessed May 23,
2014.
35 Kidshealth.org, Kidshealth.org/parent/general/body_basics/heart.html.
36 Joseph Castro, “How Does the Cardiovascular System Work?,” Scienceline,
http://scienceline.org/2011/03/how-does-the-cardiovascular-system-work/.
37 National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, Common Core State
Standards, www.nga.org/cms/home/nga-center-for-best-practices/center-
divisions/page-edu-division/col2-content/list–edu-right/content-reference-
1@/common-core-state-standards.html.
38 Partnership for 21st Century Skills, “P21 Framework Definitions.”
39 Ormrod, Educational Psychology.
40 Partnership for 21st Century Skills, “P21 Framework Definitions.”
41 Robert E. Slavin, Cooperative Learning: Theory, Research, and Practice, 2nd ed.
(Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1994).
42 Elliot Aronson and Shelley Patone, Cooperation in the Classroom: The Jigsaw Method,
3rd ed. (London: Pinter & Martin, Ltd., 2011).
43 Project Tomorrow, “Making Learning Mobile 1.0: Leveraging Mobile Devices to
Transform Teaching and Learning in 8th Grade Classes at Stone Middle School:
Results from the Project Evaluation Study,” 2013,
www.kajeet.com/4u/education/MLM-
report/contentTop/0/text_files/file1/document/Kajeet%20Stone%20External%20Report%
44 Jenna Levy and Preety Sidhu, “In the U.S., 21st Century Skills Linked to Work
Success: Real-World Problem-Solving Most Strongly Tied to Work Quality,” 2013,
www.gallup.com/poll/162818/21st-century-skills-linked-work-success.aspx.
45 Diane Halpern, Thought and Knowledge: An Introduction to Critical Thinking
(Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2003), 6.
46 Roger H. Bruning, Gregory J. Schraw, Monica M. Norby, and Royce R. Ronning, eds.,
“Problem Solving and Critical Thinking,” in Cognitive Psychology and Instruction, 4th
ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2004).
47 Roger Bohn and James Short, “How Much Information? 2009 Report on American
Consumers,” University of California, San Diego,
http://hmi.ucsd.edu/pdf/HMI_2009_ConsumerReport_Dec9_2009.pdf.
48 D. R. Krathwohl, “A Revision of Bloom's Taxonomy: An Overview,” Theory into
Practice 41, no. 4 (2002): 212–218.
49 Ormrod, Educational Psychology.

50 G. McMahon, “Critical Thinking and ICT Integration in a Western Australian
Secondary School,” Educational Technology & Society 12, no 4 (2009): 269–281.
51 Halpern, Thought and Knowledge.
52 Devin Leonard, “The iPad Goes to School,” BusinessWeek, October 24, 2013,
www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-10-24/the-ipad-goes-to-school-the-rise-of-
educational-tablets.
53 M. Schommer, “Epistemological Development and Academic Performance Among
Secondary Students,” Journal of Educational Psychology 85, no. 3 (1993): 406.
54 R. C. Pianta, Jay Belsky, Renate Houts, and Fred Morrison, “Opportunities to Learn in
America's Elementary Classrooms,” Science 315, no. 5820 (2007): 1795.
55 C. C. Tsai, “Taiwanese Science Students' and Teachers' Perceptions of the Laboratory
Learning Environments: Exploring Epistemological Gaps,” International Journal of
Science Education 25, no. 7 (2003): 847–860.
56 David Nagel, “Education System Stifles Creativity, Survey Finds,” April 23, 2012,
http://thejournal.com/articles/2012/04/23/education-system-stifles-creativity-survey-
finds.aspx.
57 LEAD commission, “How Can We Help Administrators and Educators Find and Adapt
Best Practices from Other Schools, When Most of These Programs Are New?,”
www.leadcommission.org/challenge/how-can-we-help-administrators-and-educators-
find-and-adapt-best-practices-other-schools. Accessed September 22, 2014.
58 Amanda Lenhart, Rich Ling, Scott Campbell, and Kristen Purcell, “Teens and Mobile
Phones,” Pew Research, April 20, 2010, www.pewinternet.org/2010/04/20/teens-and-
mobile-phones/.
59 Audrey Watters, “Texting in the Classroom: Not Just a Distraction,” Edutopia
(September 21, 2010), www.edutopia.org/blog/texting-classroom-audrey-watters.
60 Susan Adams, “The College Degrees and Skills Employers Most Want,” Forbes, April
16, 2014, www.forbes.com/sites/susanadams/2014/04/16/the-college-degrees-and-
skills-employers-most-want/.
61 Common Sense Media, “Zero to Eight: Children's Media Use in American 2013,”
www.commonsensemedia.org/research/zero-to-eight-childrens-media-use-in-america-
2013.
62 MMS Education, “2014 Results from the SIIA Vision K-20 Survey,”
http://siia.net/visionk20/2014_VK20.pdf.


Chapter 6
Instructional Management and Levels of Technology
Access
According to a 2014 Pew poll, almost every American school today can technically be
defined as a bring your own device (BYOD) school, whether that is the official policy or
not. Approximately 77 percent of students of all ages admit to carrying cell phones to
school.1 However, since more than 80 percent of students cannot use their devices in the
classroom,2 the infiltration of mobile devices has become a behavior-management
nuisance. Easily accessible distractions such as texting and social media often win in the
battle for students' attention, which raises the question: If they're using their mobile
devices anyway, why not encourage and teach productivity and responsible use? In
essence, that question has fueled the recent mobile learning movement. Instead of fighting
against the current mobile movement and trying to hold back the wave with a policy
banning mobile devices, mobile learning programs suggest proctoring and monitoring the
use of mobile devices, bringing them out of the backpack, and more importantly, above
the desk (as seen in Figure 6.1).
Figure 6.1 Bringing Mobile Devices above the Desk
Approximately one-third of students nationwide have school-issued mobile devices, and
mobile adoption is increasing rapidly.3 Relying on best practices, anecdotal words of
wisdom, and a careful implementation plan, a mobile learning plan can enhance student
learning and improve student outcomes. Mobile learning is not only exciting for kids, but
an important component for developing college and career readiness in today's society.
And, with more affordable devices and a surge in federal funding for high-speed

broadband access in schools across the country,4 mobile learning is increasingly becoming
a norm.
In our interviews with teachers and administrators, we've seen a large variety of
implementations of mobile devices in schools—from just the teacher having an iPad to
1:1, bring your own device (BYOD) to device carts shared by several classes. We'll
discuss each of these implementation models in the sections that follow. There are many
ways to get mobile devices in the hands of students effectively, and ways to do it within
almost any budget. There are also many questions and logistical concerns about different
technology set ups. We address those issues in this chapter, as well as provide a roadmap
for operating different levels of technology access in schools. This chapter is divided by
level of access, with specific concerns and suggestions that are associated with each. As
the mobile learning landscape continues to shift rapidly, we feel it's important for
developers, educators, and administrators to be abreast on the latest trends, varieties of
implementations, and the best ways to create an environment where technology is a
valued, integral part of the classroom.

Mobile Learning Programs
Regardless of technology access, any mobile integration paradigm can benefit from
acceptable use policies, digital citizenship curricula, and professional development.5, 6 A
strong, forward-thinking leadership team is also obligatory for the success of mobile.7
Given the expense and infancy of mobile learning, leaders must be prepared to deal with
existing as well as unforeseen challenges that range from theoretical to practical, petty to
detrimental, technical to pedagogical. Therefore, before choosing to dive into mobile
learning, experts are almost unanimous in the opinion that mobile begins with thorough
planning with a diverse team comprised of all relevant stakeholders.8
Acceptable Use Policies and Digital Citizenship
Even if instructors are deliberately teaching students to be digital citizens as described in
Chapter 15, misbehavior is inevitable. A key tenet of digital citizenship is teaching
students to work with the resources available to them, rather than blocking them from
potentially subversive material. For instance, a school can block YouTube because there is
inappropriate content on the site. There are also, of course, volumes of useful, educational
content on that site. Teaching children how to be their own filter is important, a life skill.9
The acceptable use policy (AUP) will dictate what is okay and what is an infraction, and
students will be expected to comply with it as they do any other rule in the school. Of
course, school officials should consider general student characteristics when drafting an
AUP. For example, implications of student age and behavioral tendencies could impact
how an AUP in one grade or school compares to another. Nonetheless, in a classroom with
high access to mobile devices, digital citizenship can be a concept immersed in every
lesson.
Also, many students likely have their own or access to mobile devices outside of school,
and the boundaries established by parents for using a family's personal device differ from
those for school-owned technologies. Therefore, in order to prevent misconduct, whether
accidental or intentional, schools must establish clear and concise terms of use with direct
consequences for misuse.
Device Management
Physical
Laptops, tablets, and cellphones have been around long enough that we all understand
their fragility. Seeing an iPhone with a cracked screen, for instance, is not uncommon. It is
important for schools to encourage protective cases on mobile learning devices, as they
can cut down overall cost. One teacher noted a good way to protect the devices and curb
off-task device use is to have the students hug the iPads while walking in between
classes.10 Getting insurance through the device company (such as Apple's Applecare) is
another good option, as some device breakdown is inevitable. The Find my iPhone app is
a huge help in locating lost or missing devices connected to a Wi-Fi network. It is worth
mentioning, however, that in our discussions with teachers, this issue wasn't nearly as big
of a deal as we assumed it would be. Few administrators and teachers mentioned high

levels of devices breaking or malfunctioning.
Logistics
Many districts also invest in device-management systems to gain greater control over
students' interactions and permissions. With features such as web filtering, app blocking,
and wireless synching, device-management systems mitigate several of the concerns
stakeholders have with widespread mobile deployments. To eliminate cheating, instructors
from Franklin Academy in North Carolina report using their device management system
to put students into guided access, a mode available on iOS devices that locks users into a
particular app, when administering tests via the iPad.11 Getting high volumes of devices
set up quickly is another logistical issue for schools; tools like Apple Configurator can
address the launch of major mobile initiatives easily.
Another key to making effective use of mobile technology is to make it easy for teachers
to test and install apps. You may recall the teacher from Chapter, 1, who, according to her
school's policy, was required to jump through many hoops to simply test an app. When she
found an app that she might want to use in a lesson, she had to email the device cart
managers to get it approved, and the app was then downloaded on all three device carts
before she could even access and try out the app. So, simply to test an app, all the devices
now must have the app.12 Of course, not all apps are a good fit for the lesson, and
sometimes determining that is difficult simply based on online resources and app store
summaries. This process is overly difficult and discourages the kinds of innovative app
use mobile implementations should encourage.
Student Actions
Another aspect of device management is monitoring student actions on the devices.
Fortunately, just as academically appropriate actions are tracked (lessons accessed,
answers provided, etc.), off-task behavior can be tracked on mobile devices. For iOS
devices, instructors can ask students to close all open programs prior to class, then spot
check to see what apps are currently open. For lessons that do not integrate students'
devices, it is advised to remove the distraction. One elementary teacher found that having
students leave the devices facedown when not in use for schoolwork was an effective way
to monitor off-task use.13 More serious infractions, such as cyber-bullying and other
misuse, have also raised issues for 1:1 environments. For example, Title IX requires
schools to protect students from bullying, and victims could more easily bring charges
against a school when the bullying occurs on a school-owned device.14 While device
management systems can head some misuse, this is not a failsafe solution. Recently, Los
Angeles Unified School District, the largest implementation of mobile devices for
education to date, reneged students' permission to take their school-issued devices home.
The decision came after several students found ways to circumvent the device-
management software to gain free reign over the device.15
Mobile learning specialists often stress that when technology is used to complement
pedagogy, device management becomes less of a concern.16 Therefore, for minor
infractions, taking the device away from students and hindering their ability to engage in
classroom activities is counterproductive. “Definitely don't take away their device as a

consequence if they're off task. Don't take it away for abuse. You can lock down an app or
restrict their use,” Rebecca Goddard, a former classroom teacher currently serving as a
school technology specialist, says.17 It is important to view the mobile learning device just
as we would a textbook or a pencil: an invaluable tool. When students doodle, do we take
away their pencils? In sum, preparing for misuse can be more viable than relying solely on
preventative measures; thus, developing comprehensive AUPs appears to be the norm for
delineating clear lines regarding who is responsible in the event of accidental or
intentional misuse.
Teaching With Mobile Technology
Since students today seem to be born with a device in their hand, it is easy to assume
learning with technology would be instinctive; however, knowing how to use a device by
no means implies knowing how to use a device productively. Many students simply use
mobile technology for personal and social purposes and have little regard for how these
tools extend to their own learning.18 For example, 83 percent of classroom teachers
surveyed in a recent Pew survey agree that “the amount of information available online
today is overwhelming for most students.” Similar to the process of flipping the classroom
detailed in Chapter 4, the beginnings of a 1:1 learning environment should be spent
modeling and scaffolding productive uses of mobile devices.
Deploying a lesson with mobile devices requires unique strategies for classroom
management; while still grounded in good pedagogy, teaching with devices is different.
Aside from managing off-task behavior (described in the previous section), instructors
must remember engagement when learning with devices does not necessarily mean eyes
on the teacher. Students should often be looking down, working independently or
collaboratively in groups. Instead of leading the class, instructors more frequently take on
a facilitative role, walking around monitoring progress and interjecting as needed. Mobile-
enhanced lessons are expected to go at a slower pace. Time is obligatory for deep
engagement—teachers should allocate greater amounts of time for mobile-enhanced
lessons.
While student autonomy is often a goal of mobile learning, close and constant scaffolding
by modeling to students how to use their devices in novel ways is recommended in order
to maintain focus and on-task behavior. Give clear directions and teach kids how to use it
before implementing it. For Amy Wilkinson, who uses mobile devices to facilitate various
centers in her kindergarten class, this means “not just setting up an iPad and saying ‘use
this app.’ Instead, you have to model how to use it first to ensure they're using it how you
want them to use it.”19 Having a clear backup plan is a best practice in any mobile
classroom, as you just never know when the Internet will go out, or a device will not be
charged. As much as we all love technology, having a backup lesson plan that does not
rely on technology is a best practice.20
Being creative is an essential component of the mobile classroom. Rebecca Goddard,
formerly a classroom teacher and currently a technology specialist, notes that in teaching a
math lesson using complex equations she really wanted to incorporate technology, but
couldn't find an app or website that did what she wanted to do. She ended up using slides
in Keynote that enabled students to manipulate the numbers.21 Being forced to find her

own solution, one she engineered by creatively using existing resources, is the essence of
what it means to teach in the mobile classroom. And, conversely, it's also important to
remember that the mobile devices aren't for everything; it's okay (and advisable) to use
other materials for some lessons. For further discussion, see Chapter 4 about pedagogy.
When approaching how to incorporate a device or app into a lesson plan, think about tool-
oriented apps, not just content. Goddard, who helps teachers at her school to effectively
use mobile technology in their classes, says she tries to steer teachers away from drill and
practice apps. “The iPads aren't just for games; apps should focus on collaboration and
workflow, giving them skills they need for other aspects of their life.”22 App stacking, or
app smashing, the practice of using multiple apps to accomplish a classroom goal, can
often be the best alternative, allowing for maximum flexibility in the absence of the
perfect app. For instance, in a middle school English class, students might be asked to
create puppet shows depicting scenes from a book they've read. They use the browser
Safari to get images, the Brushes app to crop and edit the images, and the Puppet Pals app
to animate and record audio for the performance. Choosing good apps can also seamlessly
enable sharing of class material. Dropbox, GoogleDocs, Showbie, and Groupboard are all
ways to share documents and files that can be accommodated using apps and mobile
devices. In Goddard's school (which uses iOS devices exclusively), an Apple TV is used
to display screens and share work, serving the function an overhead projector did in years
past.
Since this is such a new field, and one many teachers weren't trained in while they were in
college, it's important to find a professional learning network to stay in touch with what is
new and useful in the field. Find someone who inspires you to use the technology in ways
that enhance your teaching, advises Goddard.23 Word of mouth among colleagues is a
huge resource. Tricia Hudacek, a reading specialist noted that one teacher at her school
discovered and piloted a program using ClassDojo to manage her classroom. After having
success with it, she offered a training session for her coworkers.24 Julie Stern suggests
social media as a resource for finding apps. Finding resources and thought leaders on
Twitter or Edmodo has been useful for her, as well as following hashtags for educational
technology conferences and chats.25
The most salient advice we received from experienced teachers in mobile classrooms was
to make gradual changes.26 Take one or two mobile modules and do them well, and
branch out from there. Mobile lessons hold the promise to be more effective and engaging,
but they are also new to everyone and can fall flat. Go slow, and learn together.

Levels of Access in the Mobile Classroom
When a school has mobile technology access, there are many ways that access can be
distributed. How many devices does the school have per student, and how are they shared
or parceled out? In this section we'll discuss the four most prominent access models:
1:Teacher, 1:Many, 1:1, and bring your own device (BYOD) (see Figure 6.2). For each,
we discuss concerns relating to professional development, strategies for implementation,
and methods for making it successful in practice. There is, of course, substantial overlap in
these environments, so each section may include anecdotes and discussions that are of
interest to other models.
Figure 6.2 Levels of Mobile Device Access

1:Teacher
Even without a classroom set, a single, personal mobile device is a powerful tool for
educators. Many implementations entail a tablet or laptop being given to the teacher to be
used in classroom management and assessment. There are many useful apps to make the
classroom run efficiently, even if it doesn't entail having a device in every student's hand.
Tony Vincent, an advocate and thought leader in the educational technology field, notes
seven functions for tablets as a “teacher's pet.” Tablets offer the ability to show classroom
materials and lessons on a big screen, manage the classroom, assess student work, interact
with students, manage teacher files, create instructional media, and the teacher can learn
new things.27 The perks for teachers who have mobile devices clearly go beyond using
them for one purpose; there are many ways to utilize their functionality to engage and
enrich the entire class.
The app most often mentioned in association with classroom management is ClassDojo. It
promotes tracking positive and negative behaviors, and allows teachers to share the
information with parents and students easily, motivating better behavior. It is free and
popular among the teachers we talked to in our research. One teacher noted that the app
makes a little ping sound when a good or bad behavior is assigned, and he typically sees
all the students sit up a little taller when that ping is heard; it reminds students the teacher
is watching and provides students with awareness of peer models for behavior.28 Tools
like ClassDojo allow teachers to track information they wouldn't otherwise have, and have
concrete data to share easily. Positive behavior is hard to note and reward.
Along those lines, there are many apps to support the other functions Vincent notes. (His
infographic, iPad as the Teacher's Pet v2.0, cited previously, also provides ample
resources on apps for each function. While we won't summarize each here, we recommend
exploring this resource online.) Finding the right blend of mobile support and traditional
methods in the classroom is a challenge each teacher will have to address individually. For
instance, not all schools (or districts, or states' board of education) allow certain tasks, like
online grade books, to be done on mobile devices. Like any mobile-learning deployment,
using a device for classroom management is a gradual process and requires balance.
Professional Development
Just as we can't expect students to automatically understand how to use mobile devices for
educational purposes, we should not assume teachers will receive an iPad and think of the
many ways it could improve or change their classroom. It is, therefore, essential to provide
ample professional development to garner these skills. This involves group training as
well as giving additional time to explore the devices and their capabilities. One really
beneficial professional development session for kindergarten teacher, Amy Wilkinson, had
the teachers playing the role of students. This simple twist allowed them to interpret the
devices as children and better evaluate their potential.29 Additionally, redefining what a
technologically integrated lesson is to teachers may be necessary. Goddard mentions that
the professional development session she administered to teachers at her school began
with her teachers believing researching online and having students create an outline and
slide show presentation was a fully integrated lesson. “Now,” she says, “they're Skyping

with classes across the country and collaborating outside the classroom.”30 Educating
teachers about what is possible and how to incorporate that into their classrooms is a key
function of professional development.

1:Many
1:many initiatives often manifest as tablet carts and/or classroom sets. In essence, schools
invest in enough devices to support a single classroom, and devices are restricted to in-
school use only. Alternatively, districts might allocate funds to provide individual
classrooms with a particular number of devices that can be shared among the students.
From a financial standpoint, a 1:many implementation is far more feasible while still
exposing students to a mobile-enhanced learning experience; however, the level of
integration is compromised. Nonetheless, with the proliferation of personal devices among
students today, exposing students to appropriate and effective use of mobile devices in the
classroom is a great tool for transferring such skills to use on their own devices. In other
words, a 1:many-based curriculum can easily transform into a 1:1 movement by utilizing
free and platform-general apps that students can use on any device outside of the
classroom.
Implementation Strategies
Device Protection and Accountability
When devices are shared, it can be difficult to hold students accountable for misuse. When
distributing devices to students, use a number system to maintain order. If a device is
damaged, stolen, or used inappropriately, instructors can simply match the device number
to the student to whom it was assigned. For easy access to the assigned number, Tony
Vincent recommends displaying the device's number in a large font on the wallpaper of
the device.31 Furthermore, Vincent suggests disabling certain personalization features
since the devices are being shared. Specifically, do not allow students access to app store
passwords and prevent the device from synching with other computers.
Classroom Access
The most common paradigm for 1:many implementations is the device cart—a mobile
unit with a classroom set of devices that travels around a school. However, many experts
argue sharing devices significantly undermines benefits of mobile learning—specifically
anytime, anywhere access to all one's personal data, resources, and tools. Also, findings
from researchers at Project RED found maximum benefits are only realized when
technology is integrated into daily teaching.32 Stern notes that the iPad carts available to
her classes must be reserved a week or two in advance, requiring a lot of planning.
Signing devices in and out also carves into instruction time and makes the cart more of an
inconvenience. Having a subset of devices in the classroom at all times, however, allows
teachers to take advantage of teachable moments. For example, Stern explained that when
a question from a student is posed, the moment is prime for getting out devices and
searching together for an answer. These teachable moments would give students a
simulation of the real world, as well as greater opportunities to learn practical, educational
uses for mobile technology.33 Without the elements of portability and ubiquity, mobile
devices do not provide much advantage over other technologies such as laptop or desktop
computers.
Instead, schools are encouraged to distribute devices such that they can be integrated into

daily instruction. iPad professional development expert Jamie Hall suggests dividing carts
up so that each classroom has access to a number of devices at all times.34 For early
elementary (K–3), sharing the classroom's devices might be more feasible when center-
based learning is more prevalent and activities that rely on personal data are less frequent.
For older grades (4+), schools could choose to pilot a classroom set of devices in order to
gather data for making the decision to invest in a 1:1 initiative. At a minimum, devices
should be allowed to remain in a single classroom for the length of a particular lesson. For
example, students should be allowed to interact with the same device during a single
project-based learning lesson, lessons that generally span multiple days. This way,
students can pick up where they left off, work at their own pace, and are not wasting class
time transferring and loading work from the previous day.
Professional Development
Device Management
A particular advantage of maintaining control of the devices is personally setting up the
device to eliminate wasted class time. Before the students access the device, teachers can
ensure all the apps and software are updated (a process that can be expedited by using a
device-management system), the device is connected to the network, and the device is
charged. Also, some instructors find it useful to group apps into folders, particularly for
younger students learning individually or in center-based activities. As a result, lessons
that require more than one app do not fall victim to wasting time searching for each app on
the home screen.
Also, a number system is not only beneficial for accountability, but also for more closely
realizing the personalization and ubiquity of mobile devices. Since devices were not
originally designed to be shared, many apps utilize local storage as opposed to storing
user-created data in a cloud database. Therefore, when the same device is checked out
each time, students can build projects, portfolios, and so on, using a single device without
having to worry about losing data. Note, however, that data privacy should be a concern
when storing data locally and among other students at the school. Constantly clearing data
at the end of each lesson can prevent unintentional privacy violations.
Lesson Planning
A classroom set of mobile devices is a great resource, even if access is subject to the
constraints of sharing among the school. As presented in Chapter 5, facilities for
promoting creativity, problem solving, collaboration, and critical thinking afforded by
mobile technologies have the potential to bring certain lessons to life and deeply engage
students with content. Wilkinson, a kindergarten teacher, notes one lesson that produced
particularly high levels of engagement and critical thinking from her students. Using the
app SlideStory, her students write their own books, record their voices, and share them
with the class. “They spend more time on their stories, and sharing makes it more evident
to them if their story doesn't make sense,” she says.35 Problem- or project-based learning
activities and lessons that benefit from virtually taking students outside of the walls of the
classroom through simulation apps are wonderful examples. Since such projects often
span multiple days, 1:many deployments that allocate a small number of devices per

classroom align well with supporting a one device per group set up. Creating groups and
defining specific roles for schools with shared classroom sets, instructors should ensure
extended availability so students do not have to shift to another tool mid-project.
Moreover, the reliability of Internet access must be considered. Apps that can be used
offline or those that do not require significant bandwidth can help to preserve the vision of
the lesson.
Conversely, 1:many best practices suggest avoiding tools for daily use, such as note taking
and time management tools, or those that rely on personal data. Study skills are best
learned when instruction is integrated into their daily activities.36
In other words, teaching a student to take organized notes on a device using Evernote will
be more beneficial if that student is allowed to continuously practice and receive feedback.
Thus, since mobile devices are often shared in 1:many scenarios, utility-based tools should
be limited to other materials that will be consistently available.

1:1
The 1:1 movement, wherein schools aim to provide one laptop or mobile device to each
student to facilitate truly integrated technology-based learning, is increasingly becoming a
reality as schools look beyond the initial financial investment and see the promise of a
mobile-enhanced education. With 1:1, the mobile device becomes an essential component
of students' education that takes full advantage of the many affordances discussed
throughout this book. The Franklin Academy in Wake Forest, North Carolina, has a 1:1
model and shares their experiences for other schools' benefit. They've noted that with the
use of iPads, the “submission of hard copy homework in the classroom” is reduced, as
well as “the number of separate notebooks maintained and carried around by students on a
given day.” They also note that there is a “general decrease in the need for face-to-face
meeting when students are completing group projects, thus increasing student interaction
with the material as a group outside the normal classroom times.”37
Implementation Strategies
1:1 initiatives must not be deployed hastily; they should be implemented only after careful
and thorough analysis and planning. Such planning includes establishing when and how
the roll out will occur, revamping existing curriculum so mobile is integrated as opposed
to retrofitted, developing policies for logistical management of devices, scheduling
ongoing professional development around mobile learning, and devising long-term plans
for continual support and refinement overtime. For instance, Franklin Academy's 1:1
deployment involved several years of using devices in a 1:many setup before the transition
occurred.38
Devise a Deployment Strategy
Moving to 1:1 affects all educational stakeholders including teachers, administrators,
parents, students, specialists, and IT personnel; therefore, all parties should be represented
when going 1:1. Deploying a 1:1 implementation has many implications—from technical
infrastructure to pedagogy—so developing a clear plan is critical for success, while
rushing into deployment leaves great room for error. Many technology specialists warn
that mobile devices are not appropriate in all situations; therefore, investment should never
precede an assessment of needs. If it becomes clear that mobile devices can serve a pivotal
role, piloting is strongly encouraged: identify teachers willing to participate in the program
and gather appropriate data by documenting successes as well as roadblocks and
challenges.
Finally, decisions should be made for what the fully deployed integration will look like in
both the short- and long-term. Will students take their devices home or leave them at
school? What precautions will be taken to prevent misuse? Who will be responsible for
damaged or destroyed devices? What defines acceptable use in school? How does
acceptable use differ outside of school? How will the content on the devices be managed?
What privileges will students have in terms of personalization and customization? What
professional development will be provided for teachers? These questions only scratch the
surface of things to consider.

Once a set of best practices has been established and details of the implementation have
been decided, leaders should begin to share their experiences and gather buy-in from other
teachers, students, administrators, specialists, and parents. Goddard, a technical specialist,
notes that parents in her district got enthusiastic and invested in the technology program.
She notes that you “have to work with the parents and ease into it,” by bringing them
along as you build the technology program. It takes a level of getting used to, but after
they see the benefits, many parents are on board. She notes, as did all of the teachers we
interviewed, there haven't been any major complaints from parents.39
Assess Technology Requirements and Update Infrastructure
Relevant to stakeholder buy-in, Tim Clark, chief technology and information officer for
Forsyth County Schools in Georgia, states, “If you don't have the infrastructure to back it
up when you need it, you're going to lose teachers and you're going to lose students
because they don't see it as reliable.”40 Unfortunately, although 92 percent of teachers
agree access to the Internet affects “their ability to access important teaching materials,”41
only about 30 percent of public schools have the broadband speed necessary to reliably
access the Internet. Currently, the federal government is pushing to provide connections at
no less than 100Mbps in all classrooms across the country; however, connections in
successful 1:1 schools often surpass that minimum with connection speeds exceeding
1Gbps.42 Aside from improving broadband capabilities, information technology
professionals at 1:1 schools also suggest investigating features such as private clouds,
network connections, and teacher/student and private/public networks. Thus, purchasing
devices is only a piece of the 1:1 investment—care should be taken prior to deployment to
ensure the infrastructure is in place to support widespread, concurrent use.
Ensure Access Outside of School
For 1:1 initiatives that allow students to take their devices home, it is important to ensure
students can access their materials both in and outside of school. However, this falls flat if
there is variance in students' access to broadband. To ensure equality, some districts, such
as Wisconsin's Green Bay Area Public School District, provide students with mobile
hotspots (e.g., Kajeet43) along with their mobile device that connect their device to
wireless service from a cellular network provider.44
Professional Development
Lesson Planning
Lesson planning in a 1:1 classroom parallels the process explained in the 1:many
discussion above with the distinctive advantage of ubiquity. As opposed to 1:many
installments, 1:1 classrooms are not limited to particular days, times, or lessons. Instead,
mobile devices can more deeply be integrated into daily instruction allowing instructors to
also demonstrate and teach strategies for utilizing productivity-style and tool-based apps
like digital note taking, content sharing, and identifying credible sources for on-demand,
online information. Constant access to a mobile device also provides great opportunity for
developing self-regulated learners. Data tracking apps, such as SAS Data Notebook, allow

students to set their own goals, collect and analyze performance data in order to monitor
their progress, communicate with teachers and parents, reflect on their work, and make
data-driven decisions accordingly.
Instructors should be cautious not to fall into the common assumption that devices are a
silver bullet or all-encompassing solution to quality education.45 According to iPad-for-
education advocate, Jamie Hall, the most successful 1:1 classrooms are those that use a
variety of resources in daily instruction. “There are many situations when [mobile devices]
are not the optimal solutions for a particular lesson…Technology should follow
pedagogy,” Hall explains.46 Furthermore, since approximately three out of four teachers
strongly agree that “search engines have conditioned students to expect to be able to find
information quickly and easily” and 7 out of 10 find “today's digital technologies
discourage students from finding and using a wide range of sources for their research,”
teaching students to look beyond their devices is a viable endeavor for producing lifelong
learners.47

Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
BYOD programs explicitly blur the lines between school-based activities and real-world
experience by seamlessly embedding educational tools within students' everyday lives. It
is no secret that students, especially teens, seem to be tethered to their mobile devices, but
the breadth of usage is limited. A recent study conducted with university-age students
revealed the majority of respondents were “largely unaware of their potential to support
learning.” 48 But, this should not come as a shock. Without moving cellphones above the
desk at school, students will continue to conceptualize mobile devices purely as means for
entertainment and socializing. BYOD programs, however, open students' eyes to the
opportunities afforded by mobile devices for learning and equip students with skills
necessary for college and career success. In fact, in the same investigation noted above,
researchers found that by briefly explaining a few applications of mobile devices for
learning, “the students quickly began to understand and consider the opportunity.” Led by
their instructor, BYOD allows students to explore and practice effective use of their own
mobile devices for productive and educational purposes. Consequently, these resources
live on their devices and become readily available beyond the classroom.
Also, although the educational benefits of a BYOD program might look similar to those
afforded by 1:1 initiatives, there is a strong case to be made for allowing students to use a
familiar device. The mobile-device market is ever-expanding, and individual devices offer
distinct differences, such as the underlying operating system, size, durability,
customization and personalization options, available apps, and accessibility tools. After
developing certain preferences, it can be difficult and even uncomfortable to transition to
using a new device. By capitalizing on the device familiarity established outside of school,
class time that might have been otherwise used to teach students how to use provided
technologies can instead be allocated to more productive activities.
Lastly, BYOD implementations also have the potential to bridge the gap between schools'
desired access to technology and tight budgetary allocations. Many schools simply cannot
afford a significant mobile implementation. Also, as of 2013, 37 percent of all teens have
their own smartphone,49 and more than 60 percent of parents indicated they would
purchase a mobile device for their students if the device could be used for schoolwork.50
Nonetheless, BYOD implementations are by no means simple. Concerns regarding
classroom management, safety, theft, privacy, and technology infrastructure often
complicate BYOD programs. However, the proliferation of successful BYOD initiatives
has yielded helpful lessons learned from wireless network considerations to professional
development.
Implementation Strategies
Many concerns raised in the discussion of 1:1 implementations are also issues for BYOD
programs. This section will further develop those mentioned previously.
Technology Requirements and Terms of Use
A unique challenge of BYOD is the property debate. Although the devices are being used
in school, it is important to draw hard lines between who is responsible for the device. For

example, who is responsible for keeping the device charged? What if it is stolen at school?
What about virus and malware attacks when students are connected to the school network?
On an even more serious note, rules also need to be put in place for what jurisdiction the
school has when it comes to seizing and searching students' personal devices. Under the
Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, it is illegal in most cases for school faculty
members to search and seize student- and parent-owned devices—a right that has been
upheld in BYOD-related court decisions.51 Thus, it is important to establish similar
policies to those regarding other student property such as backpacks before deploying a
BYOD program.
Also, similar to the technical requirements for deploying a 1:1 environment discussed in
the previous section, allowing students to connect their personal devices to a school
network introduces additional complications from connectivity issues to inappropriately
using apps for activities such as streaming videos and music. For BYOD implementations
that allow for generous use and student autonomy, it is difficult to control what students
are doing on their personal devices. In this case, exceptions should likely be made for
cases when students are engaging in activities that affect the productivity of others (e.g.,
needlessly consuming bandwidth for off-task activities).
Ensure Equity
Equitable access to mobile devices poses a significant threat to BYOD implementations in
many districts. Setting minimum technical specifications (e.g., Internet access, battery life)
for devices can promise all students can participate in all mobile-based activities while
also putting great financial burden on some families. In order to level the playing field,
some schools have adopted a hybrid BYOD-1:1 platform where students without adequate
devices are issued a school-owned device. Therefore, the school is only responsible for
buying a handful of devices as opposed to an entire school set. Moreover, from large,
charitable organizations to local PTAs, there are several options for low-income schools to
acquire supplemental devices for little to no cost. Finally, as mentioned in the 1:1
discussion above, out-of-school access to broadband can ruin the potential for mobile
integration; therefore, pointing students toward free Wi-Fi locations in the community or
providing students with mobile hotspots are great ways to support equal access.
Professional Development
Device Management
As previously mentioned, a significant concern with allowing personal devices in the
classroom is the lack of control over content and apps with personal devices. At the
classroom level, this concern manifests as a threat to behavior management given student
access to various off-task activities and distractions. Surprisingly, many BYOD veterans
attest that allowing students to use their own device actually decreases the instances of
off-task behavior. For example, leaders from Forsyth County Schools in Georgia note,
“We have noticed that disciplinary issues regarding technology have [gone] down since
the implantation of (BYOD). It is surprising in some ways how normal it seems with the
devices in the school.”52 Similarly, teachers at Oak Hill Local School District find,
“students text less in class when they have the opportunity to text their friends in the

hall.”53 When it does occur, off-task and inappropriate use provides a great opportunity to
teach students the differences between the use of mobile in professional and casual
settings. Regardless, best practices suggest that instructors be upfront and consistent with
their terms for acceptable use by clearly stating the consequences for misuse, as well as
stating a policy for notifying students when it is okay to use their devices and when they
should put them down and focus elsewhere.
Also, ensuring teachers are proficient on a wide variety of devices is important for minor
troubleshooting in the classroom. Proficiency across platforms can save both time and
resources; but keeping up with the constant availability of new devices and operating
systems can be quite difficult. Training staff to provide technical support for all mobile
devices would turn teachers into IT support staff or system administrations and take away
from the time they could spend teaching. There are two ways to avoid this. First,
instructors should not forget the expertise of their resident digital natives—the students in
the classroom. Students often already have exposure and are sometimes already experts at
using their own device. Second, key teaching personnel can play a larger support role by
serving as device experts armed with troubleshooting techniques and knowledge of the
latest features for particular families of devices.
Lesson Planning
Like 1:1, BYOD programs afford great opportunity to deeply engage students with the
content by utilizing techniques for encouraging higher-order thinking, as discussed in
Chapter 5. Therefore, instructors are charged with identifying and creating lessons that
leverage the advantages of mobile devices, such as access to rich content, interactive tools
and simulations, collaboration and communication tools, and taking advantage of device
use outside of the classroom. Also, the challenges present in all 1:1-style classrooms
should also be considered, such as choosing apps and designing activities that do not clog
the network's bandwidth, and always being prepared for offline use. Unique to BYOD,
lessons must be normalized to accommodate a classroom of different devices. The Oak
Hills Local School District in Ohio uses the following example:
A history teacher would like his students to turn in a history paper on George
Washington. Looking around the room, he notices the following:
Five students have Windows laptops with MS-Office.
Twelve students are using smartphones—Androids and iPhones.
Three students have MacBooks.
Four have iPads.
One has a Kindle.
One student has a Linux netbook.
Twelve students have nothing at all, which means they'll use the Media Center
computers [that do not have MS-Office on them].
The question is how to collect the history paper in a standardized format that won't
drive the history teacher crazy and be easy for the students.54

Given the variables of this scenario, finding resources that run on all platforms can be
difficult. Therefore, in a BYOD classroom it is important to identify mobile and web apps
that are available across platforms. For student-led activities that do not necessarily
require public sharing, allowing students to choose their own tool from a list of apps not
only alleviates the challenge of finding cross-platform tools but also allows students to
accommodate their own needs and preferences. Lastly, constraining the range of devices
acceptable for a BYOD program is another method for mitigating this issue. We suggest
putting minimum requirements on the devices students bring. Schools could stick with one
operating system or require a certain size screen and memory for BYOD devices.

Conclusion
There are many ways to implement a mobile plan, and each school should determine
which is the best fit. A mobile learning plan brings many variables into the school, but it
also brings many new and exciting ways to reach students and engage them in the learning
process. In schools with mobile learning plans, more than half of the parents and teachers
agreed that mobile learning “provides a way for students to review materials anytime,
extends learning beyond the school day, personalizes learning, increases student
engagement, and improves school to home communications.”55 School, and education,
should be engaging. The goal of education is to create a generation of curious, competent
learners who know how to function in a society. As mobile devices become a pervasive
tool in our society, our classrooms must adopt these technologies if we are to help students
achieve that goal.

Notes
1 Amanda Lehnhart, Rich Ling, Scott Campbell, and Kristen Purcell, “Chapter Four: How
Parents and Schools Regulate Teen's Mobile Phones” in Teens and Mobile Phones
report, www.pewinternet.org/2010/04/20/chapter-four-how-parents-and-schools-
regulate-teens-mobile-phones/.
2 Joshua Bolkan, “Report: Middle School Students Using Smartphones More Interested in
STEM,” The Journal, http://thejournal.com/articles/2012/11/29/report-middle-school-
students-using-smartphones-more-interested-in-stem.aspx. 11/29/12.
3 National Release of Speak Up 2013 National Findings, Congressional Briefing, April 8,
2014, www.tomorrow.org/speakup/2013StudentFindings_CB_recording.html.
4 White House, ConnectED Initiative, www.whitehouse.gov/issues/education/k-
12/connected.
5 Unesco, “Turning On Mobile Learning in North America,” Unesco, 2012,
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002160/216083E.pdf.
6 Elliot Soloway, Cathie Norris, “Realizing Increased Student Achievement with Mobile
Technologies: Here's the Plan,” The Journal, January 9, 2013,
http://thejournal.com/articles/2013/01/09/realizing-increased-student-achievement-
with-mobile-technologies.aspx.
7 Project RED, “Findings,” www.projectred.org/about/research-overview/findings.html.
8 Unesco, “Turning On Mobile Learning.”
9 Katrina Schwartz, “Teach Kids to Be Their Own Internet Filters,” MindShift, October 4,
2013, http://blogs.kqed.org/mindshift/2013/10/teach-kids-to-be-their-own-filter/.
10 Linnea Czerney, Brentwood Elementary School, Raleigh, NC, interview with authors,
August 22, 2013.
11 Franklin Academy High School iPad Initiative Wiki, “Changes for 2013–2014,”
ipadfa.wikispaces.com/Changes+for+2013-2014.
12 Anonymous, Cary, NC, teacher interview, May 2014.
13 Brentwood interview.
14 Jackie Wernz, “Legal Issues for BYOD and 1:1 Programs in Schools,” Edlawinsights,
February 12, 2013, http://edlawinsights.com/2013/02/12/byodprograms/.
15 Howard Blume, “LAUSD Halts Home Use of Ipads for Students after Devices
Hacked,” Los Angeles Times, September 25, 2013,
articles.latimes.com/2013/sep/25/local/la-me-ln-lausd-ipad-hack-20130925.
16 Forsyth County Schools, “BYOT Frequently Asked Questions,” August 4, 2013,
www.forsyth.k12.ga.us/Page/34766.

17 Rebecca Goddard, technology facilitator, Rowan–Salisbury Schools (North Carolina)
interview with authors, May 5, 2014.
18 Forsyth County, “BYOT.”
19 Amy Wilkinson, kindergarten teacher, Washington GT Elementary, Raleigh, NC,
interview with authors, April 9, 2014.
20 Julie Stern, sixth-grade language arts teacher at East Cary Middle School, Cary, NC,
interview with authors, April 22, 2014.
21 Rebecca Goddard, interview.
22 Ibid.
23 Ibid.
24 Tricia Hudacek, reading specialist, email correspondence, April 17, 2014.
25 Julie Stern, interview.
26 Brentwood interview.
27 Tony Vincent, “iPad as the Teacher's Pet,” Infographic, April 2014,
http://learninginhand.com/blog/2014/4/9/ipad-as-the-teachers-pet-version-20.
28 Brentwood, interview.
29 Wilkinson, interview.
30 Goddard, interview.
31 Tony Vincent, “Classroom iPod touches and iPads: Do's and Don'ts,”
http://learninginhand.com/blog/classroom-ipod-touches-ipads-dos-and-donts.html.
32 Project Red, “The Research,” www.projectred.org/about/research-overview.html.
33 Stern, interview.
34 Jamie Hall, interview with authors, May 2, 2014
35 Wilkinson, interview.
36 J. Hattie, J. Biggs, and N. Purdie, “Effects of Learning Skills Interventions on Student
Learning: A Meta-Analysis,” Review of Educational Research 66, no. 2 (1996): 99–
136.
37 Franklin Academy High School iPad Initiative Wiki,
ipadfa.wikispaces.com/Data+%26+Observations.
38 Franklin Academy High School iPad Initiative Wiki, Deployment Model,
http://ipadfa.wikispaces.com/Deployment+Model.
39 Goddard, interview.

40 Tim Clark, www.centerdigitaled.com/classtech/BYOD-Forsyth-Infrastructure.html.
41 Pew Research Center, “How Teachers Are Using Technology at Home and in Their
Classrooms,” Pew Research, 2013, www.pewinternet.org/2013/02/28/how-teachers-
are-using-technology-at-home-and-in-their-classrooms-2/.
42 Tonya Roscorla, “Bring Your Own Device Prompts School Infrastructure Investments,”
Center for Digital Education, March 13, 2012,
www.centerdigitaled.com/classtech/BYOD-Forsyth-Infrastructure.html.
43 Kajeet, www.kajeet.com/4u/education/index.html.
44 David Nagel, “Green Bay District Supports Chromebook Deployment with 4G LTE for
Access On and Off Campus,” The Journal, January 30, 2014,
http://thejournal.com/articles/2014/01/30/green-bay-district-supports-chromebook-
deployment-with-4g-lte-for-access-on-and-off-campus.aspx.
45 Bryan Goodwin, “Research Says…One-to-One Laptop Programs Are No Silver
Bullet,” ASCD 68, no. 5 (2011): 78–79,
www.ascd.org/publications/educational_leadership/feb11/vol68/num05/One-to-
One_Laptop_Programs_Are_No_Silver_Bullet.aspx.
46 Jamie Hall, interview with authors, May 2, 2014
47 Kristen Purcell, Lee Rainie, Alan Heaps, Judy Buchanan, Linda Friedrich, Amanda
Jacklin, Clara Chen, and Kathryn Zickuhr, “How Teens Do Research in the Digital
World,” Pew Research, November 1, 2012, www.pewinternet.org/2012/11/01/how-
teens-do-research-in-the-digital-world/.
48 Ben Woodcock, Andrew Middleton, and Anne Nortcliffe, “Considering the
Smartphone Learner: an Investigation into Student Interest in the Use of Personal
Technology to Enhance Their Learning,” Student Engagement and Experience Journal
1, no. 1 (2012): 2047–9476,
http://research.shu.ac.uk/SEEJ/index.php/seej/article/download/38/8.
49 Pew Research Center, “Teens and Technology 2013,” Pew Research,
www.pewinternet.org/2013/03/13/teens-and-technology-2013-2/.
50 Project Tomorrow, “Creating Our Future: Students Speak Up about their Vision for
21st Century Learning,”
www.tomorrow.org/speakup/pdfs/SU09NationalFindingsStudents&Parents.pdf.
51 Justin Bathon, “Your iPad Rollout Could Get You Sued,” The Journal,
http://thejournal.com/articles/2013/09/02/your-ipad-rollout-could-get-you-sued.aspx?
admgarea=Features1.
52 Forsyth County, “BYOT.”
53 Oak Hills Local School District, http://ohlsd.org/portfolio/byod-questions-and-answers,
accessed September 22, 2014.

54 Oak Hills Local School District, http://ohlsd.org/portfolio/byod-developing-the-tools/,
accessed September 22, 2014.
55 Speak Up, “The New Digital Learning Playbook: Understanding the Spectrum of
Students' Activities and Aspirations,” 2013 National Findings K–12 Student, April
2014,
www.tomorrow.org/speakup/SU13DigitalLearningPlaybook_StudentReport.html.

Section 2
Creating the Mobile Learning Experience
Creating educational apps presents a unique opportunity to developers, but also comes
with many hurdles and challenges. Section 1 presents developers with a thorough picture
of the underpinnings of educational theory, as well as the realities of using technology in
the classroom. It is essential for developers to understand what educators are looking for
and what their students need in an app to be able to create an innovative and appropriate
product.
Building upon that understanding, this section aims to present a discussion of the features
and methodologies that are best suited for developing mobile apps. We present key design
principles that set educational apps apart from their competitors, and enable a more
intuitive and usable experience. We also outline the key features of the app development
cycle and team, urging interdisciplinary support and frequent communication with
teachers and students.
An area of constant debate and discussion as it pertains to students is data privacy and
learning analytics, and mobile learning puts an even finer point on this issue. We discuss
the obligations developers have to their users' data, privacy policies, and the ethical ways
data can be collected and analyzed to provide a more personalized experience within the
app. Use of mobile features, bandwidth, and student data all center on one concept we
offer in this section: the good app citizen. We offer advice on how to make responsible use
of the technology with respect to schools' Wi-Fi, technology capabilities, and data privacy
by discussing what good app citizenship means.
Mobile learning is an exciting opportunity for today's students, and developing apps to
enhance their educational experience can be rewarding. This section is designed to provide
the background that developers need to create a better mobile learning experience and
succeed in the field.


Chapter 7
Mobile Technology's Defining Features
Mobile devices offer many exciting and distinct features in educational settings. When
educators and school districts embark on a mobile learning initiative, they're aiming to tap
into the 10 key differentiating factors (as discussed in Chapter 3) that enhance students'
learning experience. These factors set mobile devices apart from their predecessors and
make them appealing to students, teachers, and administrators: connectivity, awareness,
multimodal experience, familiarity, personalization, comprehensiveness, consolidation,
portability, relevancy, and security. But in this chapter we will focus on specific aspects of
the devices: hardware options, operating systems, and other features that, through sound
app development and thoughtful pedagogy, maximize the learning experience. In this
chapter, we provide a developer-focused discussion about the key features of mobile
learning—that is, how to tap into mobile devices' educational potential by making the best
use of its hardware, software, and accessories, as shown in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1 Mobile Technology's Defining Features
A key component of this discussion, and a theme of this section on developing educational
apps, centers on how apps can be good app citizens. This term, though nebulous, relates to
how apps work with the user and the device in a fair and neighborly way. This can mean
many different things as it relates to mobile technology features. Responsible use of
bandwidth and Internet connection, reasonable app size (so as to prevent using too much
device memory and precluding other apps), working well with other apps, and not
collecting more personal data than is required are all examples of what makes an app a
good citizen. It also encompasses the judicious use of technological features that mobile

devices offer. For instance, just because tablets have a gyroscope doesn't mean every app
should take advantage of the feature; it is clearly unnecessary in, say, an app that involves
learning to read. Making apps that are good app citizens should be a guiding principle in
app development for education, and it will guide our discussion of mobile technology
features.

Hardware
Current tablets and smartphones offer a wide range of hardware capabilities—a high-
quality camera, GPS and location services, and easy access to the Internet through Wi-Fi
and 3G—all on one device. Here, we list and describe the most notable hardware
components, including hardware add-ons, and some examples of excellent use of these
hardware capabilities into educational apps. One major item to consider is not only the
incorporation of a feature but the integration of the feature. Making an app that seamlessly
lets users add a photo or track their location is not considered a bonus anymore—it is
expected. And a caveat: though all of these functions are novel and cool, bear in mind the
distrust consumers have for an app with access to too much personal data. An app that is a
good app citizen will make sure that the information it is requesting to access is useful to
the functioning of the app. Think carefully about what is useful and what is just cool.
GPS
The Global Positioning System, commonly known as GPS, is primarily used to offer
locational services, making navigation personalized and accurate. GPS was one of the first
features of mobile devices, and has improved and been used in different ways ever since.
GPS's earliest and most common use is for navigation—using apps like Google Maps and
Apple's Maps to detect the user's location and provide turn by turn directions to a desired
destination. Besides uprooting the after-market automobile navigation system, GPS
introduced a wide range of features in apps that aren't dedicated solely to maps, such as
allowing users to check in at locations and share it with friends (FourSquare), finding
reviews of restaurants nearby (UrbanSpoon), and adding geotags to shared photographs
(e.g., Instagram and Facebook.) As it relates to education, GPS can add innovation with
exciting uses in geolocation. Firefly Counter is an app affiliated with the Vanishing Firefly
Project at Clemson University to track and monitor the population of these insects.
Eventually, they aim to identify the cause of growth or decreases in population, but they
rely on users counting and submitting data from all over the country. This crowdsourcing
approach relies on use of a free app and uses GPS functionality to track the location of the
data.1 This sort of activity gives students an active role in academic research while
cultivating an interest in nature, and simultaneously gives researchers data they need.
Enabling geotagging for user-generated content offers more possibilities for an
educational app. At DePaul University, Dr. Jane Baxter teaches an anthropology course
where students create a guide of historic cemeteries in Chicago using Evernote. The app's
geotagging feature is huge, as it allows the automatic input of the location of the sites they
wish to catalog. Making manual notes of precise locations can be difficult anyway, as
cemeteries aren't usually well marked and orderly. “I think it really helped the students
document their experience in diverse places in a much more effective way than I've seen
before in mobile learning,” says Baxter, of Evernote and the geotagging feature.2 This
function can be useful for general use of Evernote as well, allowing users to review notes
by location. Students who change classrooms or buildings for specialized courses might
want to browse notes by location. Geocoded notes could also help students determine
where homework was done, or where an interview or research was conducted.

Indoor positioning is another valuable manifestation of GPS technology, and while it is in
its early stages, it seems poised for big growth and contributions to the mobile-learning
market.3 This will be particularly useful for informal learning environments, such as
museums, by allowing learners to be guided directly to exhibits or works of interest. We
are only at the cusp of what can be imagined for education with the addition of indoor
positioning and geofencing (the location service that notifies users when they enter a
defined geographic area). This technology will be greatly enabled by new location
technologies such as iBeacons, which are discussed in this chapter as well.
In terms of app citizenship, one major caveat for the use of GPS in apps is to only use this
functionality if there is a reason. As we've shown, having location information and
geotags can enhance the value of the data. However, if it isn't vital, don't track it. With the
uptick in concern over data security and privacy, users will quickly turn away from an app
they feel is unnecessarily tracking personal information, and current location is especially
intrusive. Fear of how this information will be used is a big influencer of user actions in
the app space.
For example, in our development of the SAS Flash Cards app, we initially offered a
geotagging function that would enable users to see where else in the world other students
were working on the app, and showing where in the world the last 100 decks were played
and what those decks were. We thought it would be fun for users to see usage in this way.
We thought students might feel a sense of community with their neighbors or even other
students across the globe. But, given that many of our users are children, there is a risk of
this locational information being used by other users for less positive purposes. Initially,
we obscured the data so that the pins were not in the exact location of the user, however
by that point, we later reevaluated whether or not this functionality was truly necessary. It
was not; we eliminated it.
Camera and Video
Tablets and smartphones come with increasingly excellent cameras. While having a
camera on a mobile device isn't necessarily novel, the ability to easily integrate
photographs into apps offers many possibilities in the educational setting. Broadly, taking
photographs of the world around us is seen as a way to offload our memory. Whether it's a
picture of a white-board brainstorm or a bird that we saw outside, it is a quick and handy
way to remember (and make digital) more details than we could without a mobile device.
It further allows for notations and metadata to accompany those photographs. Knowing
the exact date and time a photo was taken, for instance, is helpful information that attaches
itself to any photograph without the user having to do anything. Figuring out how to
surface this information in a useful, enhancing way to the user is the challenge presented
to developers.
Besides simple point-and-shoot capability, cameras on mobile devices also facilitate easy
sharing of information. QR codes allow for simple sharing of URLs that use the camera,
so the whole class can visit the same website quickly. Some teachers tout the screenshot
functionality, using as a method for students to turn in work seamlessly via email.4
An app that is a good citizen, as with any of the robust hardware features that can be
incorporated, will evaluate whether it is necessary to access a user's photos or enable users

to take photos from within the app. Apps will need to ask the user for access to their
photos on the device, which comes in the form of a pop up. Developers should think about
how the app will be used, and consider whether or not there's an advantage to
incorporating photos or the ability to take pictures. Like any feature, adding it can enhance
the app, but if it doesn't, don't add in camera and video functionally.
Gyroscope and Accelerometer
These two hardware features enable some engaging and unique functionality for games,
simulations, and science experimentation. Games and game-based learning hold the most
promise as it relates to the gyroscope. Users can tilt the device to simulate motion and
measure pitch, roll, and yaw, creating a three-dimensional controller. This can be
particularly helpful in creating enhanced user experiences through immersive learning
environments. Another dimension for virtual control of the immersive learning experience
includes input from a manipulated accelerometer. Accelerometers are tools for
understanding vectors of force. Sensor Kinetics is an app that gives the user visualizations
of the gyroscope, allowing them to measure the effect of gravity and see graphical
representations of their motion. This enables students to conceptualize physics and motion
laws, as well as grasp concepts in a new way. StarWalk also uses the gyroscope to estimate
the angle at which you are holding the device. It also relies on GPS locational information
to identify the stars, constellations, and planets in real time. While these two hardware
additions differentiate mobile devices from most computers, there is still a vast
opportunity for integration into educational apps.
While the gyroscope and accelerometer offer interesting functionality, many times tilting
the device for actions can make it more difficult to use, and this is especially true for
special populations and young children.5 It is an advanced control, and understanding your
users' abilities before adding gyroscope functionality is important.
Wi-Fi and 3G Connectivity
A major advance of tablets and smartphones as it relates to education is the instant on,
instant access. In terms of hardware, this means 3G, 4G, and Wi-Fi connectivity that
enables apps to be connected anywhere, not just in the classroom. Leafsnap is an excellent
example of enabling learning outside of the brick and mortar classroom using 3G and
wireless connectivity, providing an electronic field guide to help the user identify different
species of trees and plants by photographing their leaves. The connectivity also enables
apps to be updated more frequently and provide the most current, relevant information.
One thing for developers to think about as it relates to being a good app citizen is how it
handles usage of the Internet. It is easy to accidently create an app that hogs the Wi-Fi by
constantly requesting and sending data. Through good testing and research, developers
should determine which content can be baked into the app versus which content should
exist outside the app, accessible via the Internet. With bandwidth issues and limited data
plans, getting a reasonable model for an app is essential for use in an educational setting.
This provides a backup plan in case of an Internet outage, or if the connection is too slow
to facilitate a whole class doing the same task simultaneously.

Software
The software capabilities and perks are largely determined by the operating system the app
will run on, as iOS and Android present very different requirements and overall
experiences for users and developers. We will attempt to discuss software in an agnostic
sense here and point out differences as needed.
One benefit of mobile app creation is the ease of updating. While updating desktop and
laptop computers can be cumbersome and easily put off by users (resulting in many users
running old versions of the software), updating on mobile systems is much easier and
painless; iOS now allows users to perform updates automatically, and users often don't
even know it is happening. For developers, it is important to understand what version of
the operating system your users have access to. At the very least, a good rule of thumb is
to select a minimum version of the OS that was available at the start of the summer
months, when most tablets in schools return to IT departments for updates. Simple web
searches can yield the latest upgrade statistics for both iOS and Android users. With auto-
updates and less fragmentation of devices Apple tends to have very high conversion rates
to the latest operating system. Android, with a larger user base and larger fragmentation of
devices and capabilities, has historically experienced smaller percentages on the most
recent operating system, and fairly even distribution across the latest two or three major
releases. As of July 2014, Apple was touting 90 percent of devices accessing the app store
were running the latest major release, iOS 7, with 9 percent on iOS 6.6 At the same time
Android found 17.9 percent on the latest OS, KitKat, 56.5 percent on the previous version,
Jellybean, and 11.4 percent and 13.5 percent on the previous two releases before that,
respectively.7, 8
Of course the major consideration for all of this data is to consider which application
programming interfaces (APIs) (new features and functions available in the OS)
developers can take advantage of.
Mobile OSs are stacked full of new features with each new release, some of which will
only be available to upgrading users. It is very important for developers to be in tune with
which OS their users are using, as this influences the user experience and which features
and functions are able to be accessed.
Creation
When the iPad was released, one big criticism was that it didn't appear to be ideal for user-
generated content; early impressions of the device often centered on user consumption but
not creation. In 2010, Lev Grossman opined in Time magazine, that while the iPad was a
“lovely device for consuming content, it doesn't do much to facilitate its creation…the
iPad shifts the emphasis from creating content to merely absorbing and manipulating it. It
mutes you, turns you back into a passive consumer of other people's masterpieces.”9 This
quote only serves to underscore the significant changes that have occurred for the iPad's,
and other tablets', abilities and reputations since entering the market. In fact, many of the
most popular and highly rated educational apps are oriented toward student and teacher
creation and inclusion of multimedia sources. Creation apps are growing in popularity in
the app market in general, too. Apple's GarageBand, for instance, allows users to create

songs and music (which could accompany a presentation or other work). The trend toward
user-created content is far reaching, and developers could take a cue from Apple itself to
dabble in this field. This amounts to creating a tool that can be used in multiple ways,
rather than a content-specific app with a very targeted focus.
ThingLink is an app that enables users to make an image interactive, by adding links to
videos, music, notes, and outside links. This basic concept presents limitless educational
options, since it isn't restricted in any way to one subject or targeted age range. It is used
in lesson plans that span subjects, whether it's a history report using an image in Creative
Commons, or creating maps showing events and attractions.10 SAS Data Notebook is
another example of a basic tool that enables inclusion of multimedia resources seamlessly
to let students curate their learning experiences in a way that is useful to them. Apps like
these, tools that provide basic structure and functionality, allow the user to add meaning to
information as well as facilitate unique creations, often things that developers would never
have imagined. This capability is important to keep in mind when developing, as
facilitating multimedia, adding voice, music, photographs, notation, and searching are all
things that give the user freedom to customize the experience to suit their needs.
Good citizen apps work well with other apps and features on the device. When developing
an app, think about how to allow access to all of the hardware features that mobile devices
have. Mobile devices come with all of this great content and hardware right on the device:
a camera, music, authoring tools, to name a few. These are valuable resources for the user,
and the ability to pull that content into an app is part of what makes the mobile experience
special. This ability to create using multiple sources on the device is often expected, as
well.
Accessibility
Mobile devices have been a breakthrough technology for those with special needs, and
especially so in the educational setting. iPads and Apple's iOS stand out as the most
accessible in the field. Their operating system and accompanying developing guidelines
offer a high level of accessibility automatically. To submit an app to the App Store and
win approval means that the app would generally score well for users with special needs.
There are additional measures to take when developing and coding your app to ensure full
accessibility, however. And if you're developing in Android, while there isn't the rigor of
an approval process requiring a certain level of accessibility, there are many resources on
how to develop in a way that provides maximum access to special populations. In Chapter
14, we discuss the innovative things mobile devices can do for users with autism and
visual impairment.
Security
Data privacy and security are important issues with mobile learning, even more so as most
users are young children. There are very specific and rigorous laws in place to safeguard
users (the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act and Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act are detailed in Chapter 15 with other data privacy discussions). There are
many innate software security features that mobile devices offer, so it is an easy feature
for developers to implement.

Touch ID is a new feature in Apple's iOS, enabling users to connect the fingerprint unlock
feature to passwords and access, a feature educational apps can tap into to make access
secure and simple. Apps that require parental consent will need the parent's thumbprint,
not just a password (which a child could certainly access). Single sign on uses other sites,
like the handshake agreements many apps for adults have with Facebook that permit
sharing of information and log in access. Parental notifications are another area of concern
for educational app development. Apple's Family Share program offers unprecedented
levels of control over children's usage. Security is an area that is experiencing a lot of
attention and change as we write this book, and it is very important to stay on top of this
topic as best practices continue to evolve.
The good app citizen takeaway from security is to be up front about what data you are
collecting and offer an easy-to-read privacy statement. Parental notifications and approval
are often required for school-age users, as well. Further, if you are collecting and storing
data about users, be sure the data is secure and that you're maintaining and destroying it
per the user agreement. And—we've mentioned it above but it bears repeating in a
discussion about security—if the data is not necessary, don't collect it.
Updated, Compatible Software
Being a good app citizen requires that apps be up to date. Developers should be sure to
perform updates as they become available, or even create new apps that take advantage of
the latest features offered by the OS. Even more important than the latest and greatest
features from the OS is integration into the OS in ways that users want to use the app or
move their content around.
Avoid big changes to your app updates that might break certain functionality, and reserve
them for only when they are truly needed. If you are updating your app, be sure to prepare
and test data migration for previous versions of your app. Analytics, as we will discuss in
Chapter 10, will help you understand the distribution of app versions and identify which
migration paths will be most common. Some schools don't update immediately when a
new version becomes available. While you want to take advantage of the latest and
greatest functionality, be sure you are not making the app unusable for users without the
latest upgrade. A good rule a thumb we follow is to take the OS available at the end of the
previous school year as the new minimum OS for future apps and updates. Of course, this
is only necessary when entertaining new OS features and functions for incorporation. The
assumption this rule makes is that the IT department is likely to have access to devices
over the summer and BYOD students are prepping devices for the start of new school
year.
Migration is an important step to provide a seamless user experience from one version to
the next. If you are changing the data model, take special care during migration. If you are
making changes server side that impact older versions, consider options for creating new
services, as opposed to modifying existing ones, so that users who may not upgrade are
not shut out of use of the app altogether. Rely on analytics to understand the user
community that is being left behind if breaking changes are not avoidable. Finally, we
recommend that developers find ways to communicate these forthcoming changes with
users, perhaps—even through a feature of the app—and explain why the upgrade will

improve the app experience.
Compatibility with other apps and operating systems is another factor to consider. App
smashing has become a regular, often discussed phenomena in mobile-learning
implementations. App smashing is made effective when apps are able to communicate
with one another. This can be accomplished via the cloud, but more often through the
operating system. For example, apps can now display a dialog to users that contains apps
that can handle particular file types. The app developers don't really need to know
anything about the other apps, other than it's possible for a particular file types to pass to
the OS and the OS will hand it off to the other app on the user's behalf. The resulting
behavior for users is successful app smashing. Multitasking is another feature that has
proved useful in app smashing. Android and Windows mobile operating systems both
allow split-screen behaviors so multiple apps can be viewed and interacted with
simultaneously. Actions like transferring content from one app to another can occur
seamlessly through the OS.
The Cloud
In many school settings, mobile devices aren't for only one student. Sharing devices
among classes or even among the whole school is sometimes the only way schools can get
devices in the hands of their students. So, if the work one student does on the device is to
be saved and useful after the class period ends, that student's work must be saved
somewhere common to allow access at a later time. The cloud offers the ability to save
work on a remote server by requiring authenticated access to differentiate users from one
another. It also opens the door to a more personalized app experience, should developers
choose to use that data. Google Chromebooks are the foremost example of success using
the cloud, with nearly all data being stored on the web, requiring web-based authentication
to access the device. Today an individual user's cloud experience is comprised of
numerous servers owned and operated by many parties. Mobile providers are offering
clouds with the OS for storing app data, backups, and other information. Developers can
even gain access to these clouds through APIs. Other developers, especially those offering
cross-platform experiences, are maintaining their own clouds to support their own apps.
While this infrastructure is often invisible to the user, it is very valuable to users to have
access to this content from multiple devices or the Internet. A good app considers the
user's experience, and if it makes sense for users to have access to their work across
devices, it should provide cloud service to facilitate that.
Push Notification
A major service offered by mobile providers is push notification. Push notification allows
developers to trigger messages to users outside of the main app interface. Providers have
maintained some oversight of such notifications, so developers that want to send a
notification to a user must do so through the services of the mobile provider. For example,
if the state of data for a particular app has changed (e.g., a teacher has posted a grade for a
student, or all students have submitted their homework), an app developer may decide to
notify users of such an event. The developer will then construct a notification, usually
through their own services, and automatically send it to the mobile provider to be placed
in a queue for the user and distributed appropriately. Push notification does require some

maintenance responsibilities for the developer to ensure clean push-notification data is
sustained to mobile providers and good user experiences are delivered. As with many of
the software features we note, to be a good app citizen means to only use push
notifications if they are appropriate; users tire quickly of having push alerts for things they
do not think are important enough to justify interrupting other tasks.
Integrated Packages: Health Kit and Google Fitness
As personalized user experiences expand, the information students can maintain in their
mobile devices grows. In 2014, both iOS and Android announced plans for their latest
operating systems to integrate health and fitness data from apps in a single location,
including more apps in the package, and all of this at the discretion of the user. So, one
app can track how many steps a student took while another app displays the data and
shares it with the physical fitness instructors. Principals might be interested to see if there's
a correlation between physical activity on a certain day and behavioral interventions. This
sort of connection and synergistic sharing of data can make the user experience even
richer, giving a less segmented experience. We expect the trend toward app integration
will continue, and developers will need to consider how and when to allow it with their
own app(s).

Accessories
One of the more exciting areas that set mobile devices significantly apart from other
technologies, in our view, is the plethora of accessories that are available. Each offers a
relatively simple, seamless add-on that improves the overall experience, sometimes even
transforming the device into something else altogether. There are many, many accessories
to change and personalize the user experience on a device, ranging from highly
specialized to more universal: keyboards, Bluetooth headsets, refreshable Braille displays,
thermometers for science experiments, and so on. This trend toward making mobile
devices more than just phones or web browsers is exciting, and presents developers with
even more features and options to work with. While there are many noteworthy
accessories, we will discuss three—Apple TV, iBeacons, and wearable technologies—as
they present the biggest opportunities to the mobile learning world. While developing an
app with a necessary accessory in mind isn't always a great idea, because it presents extra
financial hurdles for many users, accessories are worth considering as means to improve
the user experience and unlock more functionality in certain situations.
Apple TV
For classrooms that have iPads or iPod Touches, an Apple TV is an affordable and robust
accessory that enables sharing and projection. Using the AirPlay function, Apple's
“proprietary protocol stack for wireless streaming of media,”11 Apple TV acts as an instant
projector, enabling the teacher or any user in the room who is connected to the network to
share their screen. This has become very popular among teachers, as the number of
devices in classrooms continues to rise. In developing an app for education, plan on users
wanting to use AirPlay, and consider how the experience of using an app changes when
they do. For instance, you can allow screen mirroring (projecting the display on the device
and on the Apple TV simultaneously), which aids in usability. Using a “touch indicator” is
another way to make the viewing experience meaningful for the larger group, showing on
the projector what is being touched on the device screen. Developers can enable a circle to
display on the projector view where the screen is touched, so the audience can see what
button is being selected or which areas are being discussed.
For classrooms that don't have an Apple TV, but do have access to an Apple laptop or
desktop, the latest versions of Apple OS X support AirPlay as well. With a projector
connected to the computer, an iPad can be mirrored and thus displayed to the entire class.
Other operating systems are offering similar devices (most notably, the Google
Chromecast); however, we note the Apple TV here because it is the most mature and
popular device.
iBeacons
Low-energy Bluetooth devices are more commonly and memorably known as iBeacons.
Though they're little more than a Bluetooth chip that can be placed in a static location with
a powerful battery, iBeacons offer many exciting possibilities for education when paired
with mobile devices. iBeacons come with a major field and minor field that can contain
identifier information for the applications to which they connect. This allows an app to
display contextual information about the users' whereabouts after the mobile device is

detected in a defined range. Such devices are being rolled out in massive numbers at retail
locations to both track shopping habits and offer just-in-time information and discounts to
consumers traveling through the store. One exciting educational application for iBeacons
relates to museums, where iBeacons can be deployed at exhibits to alert applications to
display relevant information to users, such as video, pictures, and audio guides. This sort
of information will improve the overall learning experience of the museum and even guide
the learner to the most relevant information. While the GPS handles how to get there,
iBeacons can contextualize the experience for the user. In the classroom, iBeacons could
be set up as stations, pushing information to students as they arrive in the center with the
day's assignment. With an enabled app, teachers can trigger an iBeacon to inform an app
to load the desired warm up exercise as students enter the classroom. At the time of
writing this book, iBeacons are new and present many possibilities; we believe we are
only at the beginning of what will be possible with this technology in the future.
Wearable Technologies
Wearable technologies integrated with mobile devices are emerging now and offer broad
implications for education. Various wearables are readily available today and in mass
production, such as pedometers like Fitbit12 and Nike+.13 Other wearables, like smart
watches, are just beginning to emerge. Still others are being explored for practical
application and production, such as Google Glass.14 Many of today's consumer wearables
focus on health sensors, like counting steps, monitoring pulse, and respiration. For
education, they offer many possibilities for student health and fitness, such as providing
athletic coaches and physical education instructors with their students' and athletes' daily
information. Such tools could provide the diagnostics to educators to create individual
training plans. Physical education teachers can ensure students are working hard and
staying in safe zones. Smart watches have only begun to emerge as consumer products in
2014 with many rumored future enhancements anticipated in the near future. We can
expect that smart watches will work well with mobile devices and may contain many
sensors, including health-related sensors, but also GPS, gyroscopes, and accelerometers.
Such sensors will enable a range of applications yet to be thought of, and developers will
play a large role in finding ways to use these technologies in original ways. Much
innovative thought around smart watches in education revolves around teacher usage to
receive timely information during class without the need for a phone or tablet nearby.15, 16
Lastly, Google Glass has been one of this decade's largest, most widespread experiments
to date. As numerous practical applications are pursued, Glass presents some interesting
and innovative opportunities in education. For instance, teachers can assess student
attention through monitoring of gaze or even assess their own attention, perhaps
highlighting areas of the class or particular students that receive the most glances. As
wearable technologies continue to emerge from labs to consumer shelves we expect to see
innovation that will be worthy of educational use.
There are so many accessories being developed for mobile devices that can turn a mobile
device into an amp for musical instruments,17 a microscope for science class,18 a virtual
science lab,19 a wind meter,20 a water meter,21 and so much more. We highlighted just a
few of the accessories that seem ripe to impact classrooms now or in the not-so-distant

future. AirPlay and Apple TV are great for sharing device screens with the whole class
quickly and easily. iBeacons are emerging to provide contextual information to apps based
on microlocation. And wearable technologies move students and teachers closer to
ubiquitous computing with promises of innovative applications. These accessories
underscore the exciting and growing world of mobile technology, with a huge potential
impact for education.

Conclusion
The technological features that differentiate mobile devices from computers and other
technologies are groundbreaking. In a few short years, the iPad has created a whole new
market, and introduced more possibilities for education than we can possibly enumerate in
this book. Developers seeking to make apps for education should tread carefully when
deciding which features to incorporate, always thinking about the distinct needs of the
educational user and what a good app citizen would do.
As we write this chapter, these technology features and accessories are the state of the art,
and we've tried to outline the innovative and exciting things developers can do to
incorporate them and bring users an optimized mobile learning experience. However,
hardware and software capabilities are changing all the time. To be truly up to date with
mobile technology requires developers to stay in tune with each device's updates and
capabilities. Many of the principles we discuss, including how to make efficient use of the
right tools, will hold true.

Notes
1 Vanishing Firefly Project, Clemson University,
www.clemson.edu/public/rec/baruch/firefly_project/, accessed August 5, 2014.
2 DePaul Magazine, “Cellphone Anthropology,” February 28, 2014,
http://depaulmagazine.com/2014/02/28/cellphone-anthropology/.
3 Google, “Indoor Maps,” https://support.google.com/gmm/topic/3517937?
hl=en&ref_topic=3495909. Accessed 8/5/14.
4 Rebecca Goddard, technology facilitator, Rowan-Salisbury schools, interview with
authors, May 5, 2014.
5 Sesame Workshop, “Best Practices: Designing Touch Tablet Experiences for
Preschoolers,” www.sesameworkshop.org/assets/1191/src/Best percent20Practices
percent20Document percent2011-26-12.pdf.
6 Apple, Developer Support, https://developer.apple.com/support/appstore/. Accessed
August 5, 2014.
7 Android Developers Dashboards,
https://developer.android.com/about/dashboards/index.html, accessed August 5, 2014.
8 You can always find the latest appstore info here: on the iOS,
https://developer.apple.com/support/appstore/, and Android,
https://developer.android.com/about/dashboards/index.html developer pages.
9 Walter Isaacson, Steve Jobs (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011).
10 Thinglink, “73+ Interesting Ways to Use ThingLink in the Classroom,”
www.web2teachingtools.com/support-
files/thinglink_73pluswaystousethinglinkintheclassroom.pdf.
11 Seth Goldenberg, “Creating a Dual-Screen AirPlay Experience for iOS and Apple TV,”
Redfin Dev Blog, May 7, 2012,
http://blog.redfin.com/devblog/2012/05/creating_a_dual-
screen_airplay_experience_for_ios_and_apple_tv.html#.U860wvldUeF.
12 Fitbit, http://www.fitbit.com/.
13 NikePlus, https://secure-nikeplus.nike.com/plus/.
14 Google Glass, www.google.com/glass/start/.
15 Katie Lepi, “The Teacher's Guide to Wearable Tech in the Classroom,” Edudemic, May
29, 2014, www.edudemic.com/wearable-tech-in-the-classroom/.
16 NMC.org Wiki, “Wearable Technology,”
http://horizon.wiki.nmc.org/Wearable+Technology.

17 iRig, www.ikmultimedia.com/products/irighd/.
18 Olloclip, www.olloclip.com/4-in-1-iphone-lens/.
19 Pasco, www.pasco.com/ipad/#widget_1_slider_2.
20 Vaavud windmeter, http://vaavud.com/.
21 Sensorex, http://smartaquameter.com/.


Chapter 8
The Educational App Development Process
A great educational app meets the needs of educators, parents, school districts, and most
importantly, learners. It is engaging, easy to use, and effective, something that students
look forward to using and teachers look forward to incorporating. But how do developers
create such an app? The process, as pictured in Figure 8.1 and detailed in this chapter,
involves several key steps. First, a strong basis in educational research and pedagogy is
vital, as well as starting out with the right mix of individuals and expertise on the
development team, including educators, designers, and developers. The development cycle
for educational apps, like most other software products, involves a continuous cycle of
development, testing, release, evaluation, and user feedback that influences the next
iteration of the product. Developing educational apps is an exciting opportunity, and in
this chapter we lay out the key differentiators of the market. Special development
considerations apply to school settings and young audiences that are not true of other
genres of apps or software. We explore each of these issues as we describe how the right
development team and process can ensure the production of quality educational apps.
Figure 8.1 The Educational App Development Process

Research Stage: Is It a Good Idea?
App ideas come from all kinds of sources, whether it is an idea contributed by a teacher, a
developer responding to specific feedback about an existing app, or even turning existing
content or software into an educational app. There are certainly many avenues that lead to
the creation of educational apps, and the important point is this: make sure it is a good
idea. The first step in the development process is to do some further investigation to see if
the app is feasible, marketable, and useful. Along these lines, there are several important
questions app creators must ask at the beginning of the development cycle.
What Type of App Is It?
This will determine many decisions and questions throughout the development process.
Maybe the app is a tool, meant to be used repeatedly in various settings. If so, in what
settings and how often? Or perhaps the app is content driven, focusing on a particular era
of history or a literary movement. Then, it is important to identify the exact scope of the
content and how it will be delivered. Will it be an encyclopedia of content, a directed
tutorial, drill, and practice exercises, or maybe a game? These questions will help to
identify what your app will contain and how it will be used. A full discussion of the types
of educational apps is given in Chapter 3 (see Table 3.1).
What Else Is Out There?
Development teams should first see if other apps and tools do the same thing the app
intends to do. If an existing app has the exact same features, it may not be worth the effort
unless the app can outshine the competition. Looking through the reviews of existing apps
can help developers identify what features users like and dislike and identify opportunities
for new development. Nonmobile media should not be ignored either. In many cases
books, physical tools, websites, or traditional software packages may meet the same
needs. We recommend that developers explore everything that might be competition or
inspiration.
What Do Educators Already Do?
It is important to see what educators are currently doing to know how any potential app
fits into the curriculum and lesson plans. Will the app improve an existing process? Will it
supplement existing curriculum? Can it be used to meet multiple needs? Will it be used in
the classroom, for homework, or both? This is one opportunity to involve educator
feedback early on to understand how the app would actually be used.
Is There a Need?
After considering all of the questions above, development teams can determine if there is a
need for a particular app in the market. New products should offer something that similar
apps don't, be useful for educators, and provide unique educational opportunities. Hard-to-
teach topics and subjects are always a good place to start. Another angle is to focus on the
techniques teachers use that are inefficient or could benefit from technology. Developers
who keep in mind the exact need the app meets during its creation will be better prepared

to deliver a high-quality app and market it appropriately.
Will Students Like It?
For an app to be engaging and accomplish its goal (teaching the student what it aims to
do), it needs to appeal to students. “My philosophy for developing high-quality content for
children,” says Dr. Alice Wilder, the researcher behind great apps like Super Why! and
Blue's Clues, “is that the only way to know what kids like, what they understand, what
challenges them and what they learn from is to ask them.”1 Involving the target audience
in each step is a best practice, but especially in the early development and research stages,
it can lead the product in new directions. “The insights they give us along the way, while
often tweaky, make a huge difference in the end product,” says Wilder.2

Building the Right Team: Capturing a Variety of
Expertise
Educational mobile technology sits at the intersection of many different disciplines. It
involves an understanding of how students learn, effective classroom practices, intuitive
design, and innovative technologies. Apps that incorporate expertise from all of these
areas stand a better chance of being successful and useful. Such success requires a diverse,
interdisciplinary team made up of educators, researchers, designers, and developers, as
shown in Figure 8.2.
Figure 8.2 The Right Team
Interdisciplinary Expertise
Educators
While educators may not be the primary target audience of your mobile app, they often
dictate what apps are used by students and how often. Teachers and parents typically serve
as gatekeepers, selecting the educational apps they want their students to use and
encouraging fellow teachers and parents to do the same. School districts and
administrators also commonly identify software to invest in and recommend it to (or
require its use by) teachers. Consequently, it is critical for a successful app to have buy-in

from educators, administrators, and parents. Educators, specifically, have important
knowledge about classroom practices and limitations. They know what areas of learning
are difficult for students and what types of activities are effective and engaging. They
know the capabilities of their students and the limitations of their technology
infrastructure. And, educators also bring a strong understanding of the learning process
and pedagogy, a key tenet of any educational app.
Educators have historically been involved in the development of educational software in
two distinct ways.3 In the first, the educator is the designer, proposing new ideas for tools
and apps that suit a specific need. The educator thus assumes creative responsibility,
designing an app for a specific need. However, because educators often lack the technical
knowledge, translating an educational need into an app design is often difficult and time
consuming, and the results may leave much to be desired.
In the second approach, the educator is a consultant. In this scenario, app developers have
an idea or even a prototype and seek educator input. Educators are able to identify
important errors early on and make recommendations to improve ease of use. Educators
may also serve as evaluators at the end of a release cycle, providing feedback to inform
the next iteration of development. This approach is highly effective, though it requires the
developers to have a well thought out, specific idea before involving the educators. We
believe both approaches have merit, and selecting an approach depends largely on the
individuals and applications involved. Having educators as integral parts of the team also
allows them to serve a mixture of both roles, from designing the initial idea to refining and
evaluating throughout the process. Regardless of the approach, it is important to involve
the educator as early and often as possible to ensure the app meets the needs of those who
will be most responsible for how it is used.
Educational Researchers
It is important for teams to include both educators and educational researchers when
possible. Educational researchers have in-depth knowledge about the psychology and
theory behind how students learn. They have knowledge of how best to account for and
support different stages of cognitive development, an understanding about how students
acquire knowledge, and the implications cognitive processing and constructs, such as
motivation, have on instructional design. This awareness can help developers create apps
that follow the recommended best practices informed by state-of-the-field research on how
people learn. Furthermore, educational researchers can help in evaluating the effectiveness
of apps. They have expertise in designing rigorous research methods and ways to measure
learning and engagement. Evaluation can be used iteratively throughout the design process
or after the release of the app, providing public evidence of the app's effectiveness.
Involving educational researchers will help ensure the efficacy and success of the app.
Designers
While designers are already involved in the development of most mobile apps, their
expertise is crucial to the development of educational apps, especially given the needs of
the users involved. For example, time-strained teachers need an app that is easy to
navigate and has a low learning curve. They do not want to spend a large amount of their

classroom time guiding students through a difficult app. Another audience to consider is
young learners, who typically have different interactional needs from adults, and require
clean and simple user experiences. For example, preschool-aged children have very
predictable needs and abilities. With this demographic in particular, visual design is
critical. In an app for learning to read, the commands must be primarily visual, since the
user does not have the ability to read (yet). Visual design must highlight actionable items
and provide intuitive interaction without relying on major textual cues. Young children are
also more likely to be frustrated by unresponsive buttons or unclear instructions. They
may make more mistakes, so actions should be easily reversible.4 Preschoolers are more
susceptible to distractions or may be overwhelmed by too much content and complexity.
Furthermore, they may lack the skills necessary for understanding complex instructions or
methods of interaction.5 A full discussion of creating apps for preschoolers is given in
Chapter 13. Designers capable of balancing these needs while making an attractive,
engaging app are a valuable asset to the development team.
Software Developers
And finally, the team should include talented software developers responsible for creating
the app and implementing all the recommendations of the educators, researchers, and
designers. These individuals should be good communicators, capable of interpreting the
needs and recommendations of others, and integrating them into the final product.
Developers apprise the team of technical capabilities and constraints. They may be able to
suggest innovative ways that the newest features of mobile devices improve ease of use
and effectiveness. They also must be capable of developing apps that can meet the
technical limitations of classrooms such as low bandwidth and older devices. We believe
that beyond simply having developers on the team, it is important to have the right
developers, individuals who are flexible, interested in the educational market, good
communicators, and who are up to date in the latest technology trends and capabilities.
Communication
The most important part of having a diverse team is integrating each unique area of
expertise. It is only by incorporating all of this knowledge that the app will be successful
and effective. Therefore, communication among team members is critical. Everybody's
work is informed by the other experts on the team. For example, user experience design
should be informed by research findings on how individuals process information and
respond to visual stimuli. New technologies presented by developers may spark the
creativity of an educator to imagine an amazing new feature that will revolutionize her
teaching. These innovations and collaborations can only occur if team members have open
communication and respect for the expertise of the other team members. One way to
support these inspired interactions is to encourage team members to observe others at
work. For example, have developers visit classrooms and watch a lesson unfold. Educators
can also learn a lot and provide valuable insight if they watch a designer in the process of
creating a new educational interface.
It is also important to recognize that team members will have their own views concerning
objectives and limitations. In many cases, these may conflict. Educators may have ideas
beyond the technical capabilities of the devices or the developer. User experience may be

dictated by limitations of the classroom setting. It is important to discuss these limitations
in a respectful way recognizing each team member's opinions and reasoning. Assume that
everyone wants the app to be the best it can, but that may mean different things from
different perspectives. With mutual respect and communication, the most important
objectives of each member can be met resulting in a balanced and carefully designed app.
Frequent and open communication ensures that all elements of the app are developed to
the satisfaction of each member of the interdisciplinary group, preventing the need to
discard work that isn't in line with the group vision.
Other Stakeholders
Beyond the specific team members, other individuals can contribute to the development
process. Legal consultants are important, especially when dealing with apps that
disseminate content or collect data. Legal specialists help ensure that the app's content is
not bound by copyright or other restrictions. There may also be legal limitations regarding
what countries can use the app based on its content. Enlisting legal help will help avoid
serious issues later in the development cycle. Policymakers and other high-level school
officials are potential collaborators. They can often influence how mobile devices are
adopted and deployed throughout school systems. They may be able to suggest apps that
would help motivate legislation or use an app to demonstrate the power of mobile
technologies for education. Finally, the team should identify any other stakeholders that
may have interest in the app. Are there employers interested in the skills the app teaches?
Are there educational organizations in related areas? These individuals may be sources of
valuable information.

Building the App
With the right ideas in mind and a well assembled team, it is time to start creating a new
educational app. There are plenty of ideas about which development methods are best—
Agile, Waterfall, a hybrid of the two, or something else entirely. Whatever method is used,
the same basic steps apply: development, testing, refinement, and release. While we do not
describe general best practices for these, we do highlight some particular areas of
consideration when working on educational apps.
Development
Most development starts by crafting lists of requirements and stories of user-interaction
patterns. This is no different from the development of any other application, though there
are a few additional considerations for educational apps. First, what is the target age
group? This will dictate content, presentation, and interaction style. Second, what are the
technical specifications of the settings being targeted? Apps developed for 1:1 classrooms
may differ from those for classrooms with a shared-device cart. How will information be
stored and saved? Perhaps the classroom has just one device controlled by the teacher. On
the other hand, supporting BYOD programs requires implementing the same app on a
variety of platforms. Whichever interaction is targeted, the team should be mindful of the
implications for interaction styles and data persistence. It is not always possible to count
on the same student using the same device. Finally, developers should consider what
mobile affords that goes above and beyond other media. Some educational applications
may benefit from being on a lightweight, portable device. Others could take advantage of
hardware features such as built-in cameras, microphones, or GPS. Keeping these in mind
will help to create apps that take full advantage of all mobile offers and may
simultaneously help narrow the field of specific devices that need to be considered for
development. There are many more considerations to keep in mind when developing a
good educational app, such as the platforms available and privacy concerns, as well as
cost.
Being a good app citizen (see Figure 8.3) is a primary consideration when developing an
educational app. In Chapter 7, we discussed this concept as it relates to the incorporation
of unique mobile features, but there are other important ways throughout the development
process that apps can distinguish themselves as good app citizens. When developing an
app, it is especially important for the development team to understand how their app fits
into the device as a whole, ensuring it won't use too much bandwidth or storage, and will
perform as expected if a classroom full of users wants to access the app. Professional
development expert, Jamie Hall, says he pays special attention to features like these when
selecting apps.6 Although the students and teachers might use the same terms as
developers in describing what is wrong with an app, if an app doesn't perform as expected,
it will quickly be tossed aside for a more efficient app. Make no mistake; if an app doesn't
practice good app citizenship, it won't be recommended by teachers to others and won't be
used as often.

Figure 8.3 A Good App Citizen
Testing
As the app is being developed, it is important to continually test and check back against
the original specifications. The requirements may change after development begins, but it
is important to keep the original objectives and restrictions in mind. Specifically, this is
the time to consider the setting in which an app will be used, especially if it's a classroom
setting. Some classrooms have very poor Internet connectivity, which must be considered
if an app will have high bandwidth needs. It is also necessary to test the app on older
devices and older operating system versions, since many schools will not have the latest
and greatest technology available. Reports come out regularly that detail the age and type
of devices being used in classrooms, and it is important to stay up to date with this
information. Development teams should also consider what happens when 30 or more
devices use the same feature, at the same time, on the same network, as this is a common
classroom scenario. Furthermore, educational settings, especially those with BYOD
programs, need apps that can support multiple devices with different hardware
capabilities. Screen size and resolution, camera availability, and processing speed are
some examples of features that may vary widely and should be taken into account. Finally,
during testing, we recommend paying particular attention to the behaviors and skills of the

intended audience, especially if the app is for younger children. Testing by touching
everywhere and deliberately trying to misuse the app will help make sure that it responds
well and ensure that an app is accessible to young students.
Release
An app release may look very different depending on a developer or company's
philosophies. Some app creators prefer to focus on rapid releases with incrementally
increasing feature sets while others prefer to release a fully featured app on a delayed time
frame. Some apps may require all the features that have been specified in order to be
functional, in which case a full release is needed. We recommend considering the minimal
set of features required for an app to be useable for the first release. Afterwards, it's best to
focus on rapid releases with necessary improvements and added features. This approach
allows early user feedback that can inform the next set of features and may inspire ideas
that hadn't initially been imagined.
Other considerations for release timing are related to the educational market. For example,
with typical school years beginning in the fall, this may be an important release milestone
to consider. Other considerations could include education technology conferences or expos
where creators would benefit from demoing or promoting their app.
Additionally, app creators should focus on marketing and support strategies that align with
how educators and parents navigate the app market. Developers should think about the
materials educators may need in conjunction with the app, such as sample lesson plans.
Companies that offer professional development or lesson support for educational apps
may be more accessible to busy educators. We also recommend providing clear
demonstrations and videos that show how the app is used so educators and students can
get up and running quickly without wasting precious school time.
One strategy for helping to guide educators toward the right app out of the many available
is to focus on the specific functionality and features that are needed. We propose a set of
criteria for evaluating apps in Appendix B. It helps if educators can find the details needed
to evaluate an app quickly, perhaps even without downloading the app. We recommend
that app creators include details about how the app may be aligned to standards or used by
varied populations in the details before downloading the app. For example, if an app
supports students with visual impairments, it is best to make this clear in the list of app
features, rather than hoping an educator discovers this feature after downloading the app.
In a similar vein, any information related to research foundations or efficacy studies
should be easy to access and read. This helps educators be sure that the app they are
choosing has been well thought out and studied for effectiveness.
Another important consideration is cost. Free apps are great for educators and school
systems where there is often a limited budget. However, even paid apps can benefit from
having a freemium plan where users can at least explore an app for free before purchasing.
However, there are often many more factors to consider. A detailed discussion of different
pricing strategies can be found in Chapter 11.
Finally, development teams must keep in mind that educators often find apps through
word of mouth among colleagues or online blogs or review sites. Using social media

properly can help promote adoption. We recommend that you make information about
your app easy to share and digest in social media platforms and keep in touch with what
users and reviewers are saying. Responding to social media referrals shows app
developers care and are active participants with the community of users.
Evaluation and User Feedback
The final component of the development cycle is evaluation and feedback. This can
happen throughout the cycle or after the app has been released to market. During
development, the focus is typically on verification tests: Does the app meet the
requirements? Beyond this, app creators should make sure their project meets the specific
needs as described by educators and other consultants. Once the app is completed, or at
least a beta version is ready, it's common to do more validation testing: Does the app do
what it is supposed to? At this point, it is beneficial to involve students who may be the
actual users of the app. Developers should test the app for usability, engagement, and, of
course, learning.7 Once again, this testing is especially critical for apps targeted to younger
audiences, who use apps very differently from adults. While designers, researchers, and
educators can provide insight into best practices for the design and function of the app, it
is important to evaluate the final product. We agree with Juan Hourcade's sentiment that
“Knowing about children's development and being aware of potential risks does not
provide enough information to design technologies. Children need to be involved in some
way as well.”8 Studies that measure the efficacy of an app can help inform future
iterations and improve traction in the market as educators look for apps proven to be
beneficial. We provide more tips on how to evaluate your app in Chapter 10.
Once an app is released, app developers can begin thinking about future development by
asking questions: What did we learn from educator feedback or during your evaluation
studies? How can that inform future versions? Another important consideration is
feedback from the community at large once the app is available. Reviews can come in
through app stores and other social media. In many cases, it's possible to single out
reviewers and sources for more information. If a reviewer provide comments on features
she thinks would improve the app, follow up with the reviewer and ask more questions.
This individual clearly cares about the success of technology and wants to use it and see it
improved. Such feedback could be highly beneficial in improving the app. Moreover, it's
important to reply to every email that comes in, and fix problems that arise in a timely
fashion. Brian Bennett, a former teacher, recalls a program he used where he emailed the
developers when the program was misbehaving. He got a response back from the support
team within hours and “it made me more loyal to the program, and more willing to work
through problems rather than cut and run.”9
Again, it is important to consider the role of social media. App creators can solicit user
input on other social media channels like Facebook or Twitter. These are great
opportunities to make the public aware of an app and seek feedback from users. Users like
to see that developers care about their feedback and will be happy to provide it. Finally,
we recommend that app creators make every effort to incorporate feedback into future
versions of their apps and to let it be known. Showing that good ideas will be implemented
helps to encourage more feedback.

Case Study: App Development at SAS Curriculum
Pathways
The strategies and tips for developing educational apps have been heavily based on our
experience developing apps as part of SAS Curriculum Pathways. Throughout the
development of each app, we have learned a great deal about how to manage
interdisciplinary teams and involve educators, users, and consultants. To help illustrate our
points, we will briefly describe the lifecycle of some of our apps and how these strategies
came into play.
SAS Flash Cards is a tool-based app featuring user-created and uploaded content. Users
can create, share, and practice their own flashcard decks while accessing decks created by
users around the world. It was first released on the same day as the iPad in 2010, making it
one of the first educational apps on the market. Since its initial release, this app has seen
the introduction of many new features and revisions.
This project's development cycle demonstrates how user feedback can be effectively
incorporated into future versions of an app. For example, many added features, such as
audio uploads, auto-play features, and a scratchpad for showing work were all added
based on user feedback. Users provided this feedback through an in-app contact us feature,
as well as through reviews in the app store. Through these channels, we came in contact
with J.E. Ober (JEO) elementary school in Garrett, Indiana, which had been using SAS
Flash Cards for a variety of purposes. Establishing contact with this group of users
allowed frequent conversations and opportunities for feedback and opened the doorway
for future collaborations with their school district, such as SAS Data Notebook.
SAS Data Notebook is a data-management tool that allows students to track their own
educational goals and progress, as well as take and organize class notes. All of this can be
shared among classmates or with the teacher. It is modeled after paper-based notebooks
that have been used in schools to promote self-regulatory behaviors.10 It was developed
through significant collaboration with JEO.
This project demonstrates the role that educators can play in informing and guiding the
development of an app. Educators at JEO, a 1:1 iPad school, described the desire for an
app to replace the large, unwieldy paper-based binders that had been used in the
classroom. They provided guidance in the types of data that should be represented, how it
should be organized, and how students and teachers would likely interact with such an
app. Since its release, they have continued to collaborate with us by providing feedback on
what features and aspects of the app have been the most beneficial as well as areas that the
app could continue to improve to meet their needs. Because the team collaborated with
educators and administrators, the app has successfully been implemented not only in the
JEO school district but also in other schools worldwide.
SAS Read Aloud is an app for early literacy education. Its development was motivated by
national statistics claiming that proficient reading is a critical factor in academic and
lifelong success11 and that high numbers of students are not reading at a proficient level.12
Using these findings as a guide, we delved into related research on the phases of learning
and how students acquire important skills, like print knowledge and phonological

awareness. This research was incorporated into the design of the app so that the interface
conforms to research standards and best practices on introducing young children to
reading. For instance, research shows that drawing students' attention to salient text
features during shared reading experiences is critical for developing early reading,13 so
these features are highlighted in SAS Read Aloud.
This project, in particular, highlighted the need for a diverse team. Developers worked
closely with designers to ensure that the special interaction needs of young students were
being met. Legal consultants were critical in identifying content that could be included in
the app that was offered free of charge. Educational researchers guided leveling the
selection of pedagogical approaches while market researchers identified features, such as
parent recording, that were novel in the market. Together, the team helped to create a
research-based app tailored to the target audience and unique to the market.

Conclusion
The introduction of mobile devices has changed the way people interact with technology
and has also changed the way it is produced. Users now expect frequent releases and
updates, easy-to-use interfaces, and communication with the technology creators. This is
true for the educational app market as well, where apps are being used to meet specific
needs in very specific settings. App creators must keep these needs and constraints in
mind when developing and marketing their educational apps. We recommend taking
advantage of the shifts in social media in education to open up communication with users
and other experts to ensure that the apps being created will meet the needs of the target
audiences. Communication, collaboration, and awareness are key to developing apps that
can have a real impact in education.

Notes
1 U.S. Department of Education, EdTech Developer's Handbook (DRAFT), March 2014.
2 Ibid.
3 Enrique Hinostroza, Lucio E. Rehbein, Harvey Mellar, and Christina Preston,
“Developing Educational Software: A Professional Tool Perspective,” Education and
Information Technologies 5, no. 2 (2000): 103–117.
4 Juan Pablo Hourcade, “Interaction Design and Children,” Foundations and Trends in
Human–Computer Interaction 1, no. 4 (2007): 277–392.
5 Allison Druin, “The Role of Children in the Design of New Technology,” CiteSeerX,
2002, http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.134.4492.
6 Jamie Hall, interview with authors, May 2, 2014.
7 Gavin Sim, Stuart MacFarlane, and Janet Read, “All Work and No Play: Measuring Fun,
Usability, and Learning in Software for Children,” Computers & Education 46, no. 3
(April 2006): 235–248.
8 Hourcade, “Interaction Design.”
9 U.S. Department of Education, EdTech Developer's Handbook.
10 Sandra Byrne and Christine Schaefer, “The Baldridge Program: Self-Assessment for
Continuous Improvement,” Principal, March/April 2006, www.google.com/url?
sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCsQFjAA&url
IK4DA&usg=AFQjCNGPQsekSWJuaNH9QwUX2noZq0DoeA&sig2=efDMH4Umbw
11 Annie E. Casey Foundation, Early Warning! Why Reading by the End of Third Grade
Matters, Baltimore, MD, 2010, www.aecf.org/resources/early-warning-why-reading-
by-the-end-of-third-grade-matters/.
12 National Center for Educational Statistics, “The Nation's Report Card: Reading 2009:
National Assessment of Educational Progress at Grades 4 and 8,” Washington DC.,
2009, http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/pdf/main2009/2010458.pdf.
13 Shayne B. Piasta, Laura M. Justice, Anita S. McGinty, and Joan N. Kaderavek,
“Increasing Young Children's Contact with Print During Shared Reading: Longitudinal
Effects on Literacy Achievement,” Child Development 83, no. 3 (2012): 810–820.


Chapter 9
Design and User Experience
Though an app might be developed with attention to the best research and educational
practice, if the user interface and design aren't engaging and satisfying, the app will likely
fall flat. Design encompasses the look and feel of the app and the elements within it, the
navigation and layout of information, the ways functions and features are communicated,
and the ease with which users can accomplish tasks they need to. Good design is crucial to
the overall user experience, setting up the user to seamlessly engage with the app and
learn, rather than get frustrated and lost within complicated systems.

Designing a Great App: Make It Easy
In our research and development of educational apps at SAS Curriculum Pathways, we
have developed guidelines for how to design apps that are optimal for education and
accessibility. The following principles, shown in Figure 9.1, are ways in which apps are
judged by users (with or without their explicit use of the terms or concepts detailed here)
and guidance for developers on how to make design choices.
Figure 9.1 Design Principles
In writing this book we interviewed dozens of educators and administrators, and in
response to the question, “What makes a good app?” the most common answer was “It's
easy to use.” But, what does that really mean? We think for most users, being able to
pinpoint what exactly makes an app easy to use is difficult. Being able to open an app and
have it do what they think it will, and do it successfully and intuitively is all encapsulated
in this response. For developers, creating an easy-to-use app means thoughtful
consideration of their users' habits, needs, and abilities, and presenting their app in
adherence with good design principles. The educational benefit of an app's content is
contingent upon the way in which it is delivered.
First and foremost, the guiding principle we offer is to make the app easy—easy to use
and easy to process. From there, each of the principles detailed in this chapter are truly a
means to this end. The multimodal nature of mobile devices has introduced several new

techniques for producing simple, well-designed user experiences that align with the way
we cognitively process information. By providing a multimodal experience for users, that
is, offering different platforms of interaction in a mutually supportive way (like audio and
visual cues), developers can create an app that is easier to process, overall.
The argument for multimodal experiences complements the theoretical limitations of
working memory discussed in Chapter 2. To optimize instruction, it is vital to account for
students' current cognitive load—the amount of information the student is actively
processing at any given time. If students become overloaded, they quickly become
confused and frustrated; but, when too little load is being introduced, the learning
experience is not being optimized. However, as proposed by cognitive psychologist Allan
Paivio's dual-coding theory1 and Alan Baddeley's model of working memory,2 humans
rely on separate subsystems to process verbal (auditory) and nonverbal (visuospatial)
information. Thus, when information is presented as complementary verbal and nonverbal
components, students theoretically process the same information in two separate forms
thereby “additively [contributing] to memory performance.”3 Along the same line,
information associated with visual imagery is often more easily remembered. For
example, texts presented with corresponding images that support storing concrete, mental
imagery in memory are often found to be more interesting and more deeply
comprehended.4 However, it is important to note, redundant information is not necessarily
beneficial; thus, verbal and nonverbal information should be unique components working
together to convey a single meaning.5 (We wouldn't recommend providing, for instance, a
written and audio cue that gives the exact same information, verbatim, as that would be
redundant and provide no extra meaning.)
Keep It Simple
Keeping it simple is a basic, yet difficult principle to adhere to. For designers and
developers, the desire to dress it up, add features, and enhance the app can be strong, but
we urge you to check these reflexes and consider the app from the users' perspective.
Users of all ages are more successful at using interfaces with simple designs, and this is
amplified among younger users who exhibit less literacy and more impulsive behavior
when performing actions on the app.6
For the design of an app, what does it mean to keep it simple? Good apps don't have
extraneous graphics, icons, and themes; everything on the screen has a purpose and is
contextualized. Think about users of various ages and abilities—would it confuse
someone that a picture is in a square box that sort of looks like a button, but isn't a button?
Does that large character illustration draw the attention away from the functionality of the
app? Is the most important information displayed in adherence to the way most users scan
similar interfaces?7 Understanding the workflow of the app and thinking through where
the users will expect buttons and next steps to be, as well as what items are useful or just
decorative, requires testing and strong planning (usually using storyboards). This keeps
the theme and workflow coherent, with a compatible look and feel throughout. And, while
multimedia effects can enhance the functionality at times, using multimedia in a
supportive rather than a decorative way is very important.

Additionally, don't be afraid of negative space. Cluttered interfaces can confuse the user,
obscuring the intended next steps. Moreover, smaller devices like smartphones and iPod
Touches, have smaller screens, making reading text inherently more difficult. For these
users, less is definitely more. Just like good art and graphic design, apps with simple
interfaces that utilize negative space are seen as easier to use for everyone.
Smart Location of Items on Screen
When laying out the screens of an app, think about the locations that would optimize
understanding. Also, the actions that are the most common should be easy to find and
reach. This principle implies working within the users' typical actions to facilitate their
path through the app. For instance, if you want a user to read a paragraph then click a
button to go to the next page, it makes sense to put the Next button at the bottom right of
the screen rather than, say, the top left, because English speakers read from left to right
and top to bottom. Providing global navigation throughout the app, ideally, navigation that
mirrors app standards, is another best practice when adhering to this principle.
The “rule of thumb” applies here, which considers what areas of the screen the user can
comfortably reach when holding a device. For example, think about how a user holds a
mobile device, and taps icons with his thumb. The thumb has a certain reach on each hand,
and the most important actions should be within that area. The tray along the bottom with
the phone, email, and Internet apps are the most widely useful apps, and placed there for
that reason.8 By watching users try an app, developers can understand what their most
important features are (such as a Home icon) and place them in a central and logical
location. Think about different ways users might hold the app, as well as how the location
would affect the accessibility of the app.
Immediate Feedback
When users take an action (for example, click a button), they want to know that the action
was completed. How do apps do this? On mobile devices, as on computers, providing
visual or aural feedback for the users that corresponds to action being taken on the
application behind the scenes is the best way to let the user know their action is being
executed.9 If a user pushes a button, provide animation to make the button get smaller and
larger when released, simulating the pushing of an actual button. Also, if the task will take
several seconds to execute, provide a loading status so the user doesn't continue pushing
the button or feel it has failed. Feedback, in the form of audio or animation, can also be
used if a user is having trouble (or the developer can assume they're having trouble based
on length of time since the last action was executed) by providing guidance using
bouncing or a color change of next-step buttons. Glow hints are a good way to reengage
users that might be confused or stalled out in the app sequence. Audio cues to indicate
actions or prompts to action are other ways to provide feedback, though make sure the app
is coded to allow the user to mute the cues by muting their device. Some teachers note that
a classroom full of students working on the same app can become overwhelming if they
all have audio cues on,10 so enabling this action is important to some users.
Colocation of Feature and Function

A major idea behind all of these principles is to eliminate unnecessary mental processes
for users, so the workflow of the app aligns with the user's natural cognitive processes,
which means properly colocating features and functions. For example, if the app offers an
audio prompt to accompany a visual or written object (feature), the audio controls
(function) should be near the object, not in another area of the app. Or, if there is text that
accompanies an illustration, it should be close enough that the user can see both
simultaneously, without scrolling, to have the desired impact.11 Similarly, consider the
following scenario:
A bill-paying app presents users with their current balance on the home screen and
provides the option to make a payment. The user clicks the make a payment option
taking him to a new screen. Here, the user is asked to enter the payment amount
without providing information about the current balance of the account.
This example illustrates a violation of the colocation of feature and function principal. The
interface requires the user to memorize his current balance in order to input the payment
information on the next screen. Instead, the feature and function should be colocated: the
payment box and amount due should be presented in the same view. Placing supportive
multimedia in logical locations improves the overall user experience.
Smart Icon Use and Conventional Navigation
Icons, when used well, lighten the cognitive load of users when they navigate an app.
Rather than reading the word Help, using a picture of a question mark on a button
seamlessly communicates that that button will take the user to a help center. When using
icons to make app design and navigation simpler, it is important to work within the
conventions of the industry. For instance, a user is accustomed to a button with a house on
it indicating Home. A button with an H, for instance, wouldn't mean anything to a user.
Creating new buttons and norms for an app presents many hurdles for users. While we
understand the desire to set your app apart and create a unique look and feel, sticking to
industry standards for icons and buttons is a very important element of usability.
“People tend to be unaware of the navigation experience in an app unless it doesn't meet
their expectations,” says Apple in their developer library.12 While there are many
standards and ways to accommodate users in the navigational setup of an app, the primary
tenet is to provide consistency. Offering a logical and predictable way to navigate to
certain screens, always having the option to go back or Home, so users don't get lost
within the app or have to remember awkward symbols that are unique to the app. This
means that there is a proper way to do something: Consistent navigation that allows users
to successfully get where they intend to go is a basic concern of good design.
Segmentation
As discussed in Chapter 2, our ability to process information is limited. Adding 7 and 12
in our head is far easier than dividing 4,598 by 257. Why? The division problem creates
far more cognitive load (for more information, see Chapter 2). The limitations of working
memory can inhibit the density of our thinking. Users should not be obliged to hold
extraneous information in their working memory while interacting with an app.
Segmenting, or chunking, the content—that is, aggregating the information into

meaningful units—will make the app more usable. If you are presenting children with a
series of math problems, consider breaking each problem into its own screen. This
segmentation of content is advantageous because young users don't scroll often, and it is
generally less overwhelming to tackle one problem at a time. This helps kids to focus on
the task at hand rather than get ahead of themselves. This sort of segmentation is seen in
children's books as well. Consider Where the Wild Things Are and Madeline, classic
children's books that offer relatively few sentences, and often just a phrase on each page
that matches the illustration. This construction, though it might appear awkward to adult
readers at first glance, offers children the opportunity to process the content and
accompanying pictures in bite-sized chunks.
User Age and Experience
The design should be adapted and targeted toward the user. A 4-year-old will have
different interests and abilities from a 14-year-old, and a 40-year-old. For example, as
reading skills transition into more automatized processes, the cognitive demand of
processing texts decreases; therefore, while young readers can easily become cognitively
overloaded when presented with large amounts of text or long sentences, fluent readers
will not because the process of reading is likely automated. Similarly, apps designed for
young children should consider the fact that many of these users will not be able to read
directions or navigational cues; thus, these interfaces should rely more on icons and
images.
In terms of interface elements, one study surveyed users of different age groups, noting
that certain tasks that adults disliked or found difficult, such as “hunting for things to
click” and “animation and sound effects,” were things that young users enjoyed and found
useful in their navigation. Similarly, things kids found difficult to use, like scrolling,
search, and tabbed browsing were popular among older age groups.13 This is an important
finding, as age and ability have a huge impact on the way information is organized. Take
these demographic details into account when designing a supportive reward structure that
will entice and motivate these groups. Also, bear in mind that younger users process
information holistically; older users are better at ignoring unnecessary information.
Younger users tend to have a harder time distinguishing between actual content and
advertisements.14 For the look and feel of an app, user age can also have implications.
Children are very in tune with elements of design that they see as being for kids younger
than they are, and this can cause them to write off the app as boring or insulting.15
Understanding your demographic and their perceptions of design is a key consideration.
Direct Manipulation
With the many technological advances of mobile devices, offering more opportunities for
direct manipulation to control functions is a key differentiator. Think about interacting
with a map: using pinch to zoom and swiping to move the center are much more intuitive
and logical maneuvers than using the + or – buttons and arrows in the corner of the screen
to do the same functions. Further, in educational settings, direct manipulation increases
engagement and understanding for students.16 It's been shown that interacting with content
using pinching to zoom results in kids having a better understanding of the scale of the

universe (such as the size of the sun compared to the Earth, and the size of a planet
compared to a particle) than they did by traditional methods of teaching.17 Taking
advantage of the functionality that allows users to directly manipulate objects on screen
gives them a deeper learning experience, and should be employed wherever possible
within an app. It also offers an opportunity to provide feedback while executing a
command, like dragging and dropping a file to its storage location, that the command is
successful.18
User Interface Metaphors
Metaphors are a way of “understanding and experiencing one kind of thing in terms of
another.”19 On a mobile device, this means if a user reads several pages of text by
simulating a book and swiping to turn the page, rather than scrolling to see more text, it is
a metaphor used to enhance the user experience. Likewise, using sliders to change states
in settings or wheel pickers to select values are also considered metaphors. Use of these
symbols can ground functionality and icons in terms of the familiar, if used appropriately.
As we discussed in the principle above in relation to icons, using the outline of a house to
denote a way to get to the home screen of an app is very common, and good use of
metaphor (even more so as the home screen is not where a user actually lives). It is
important to keep metaphors clear and simple: for instance, using a phone book graphic to
indicate a directory is okay, but using a coffee mug to indicate a discussion forum
(because people chat in coffee shops), involves too many mental leaps and will confuse
users unnecessarily.20

Putting Great Design to Work
The design principles we enumerate above are a good starting point for discussions about
practical app functionality and navigation issues. While we can all agree in theory that
simple design and logical icons are great, in reality, how does this apply to creating and
using apps? Sure, you don't want to burden users with long paragraphs to read, but what if
you have a lot of information to convey? Below are discussions of some usability
challenges informed by strong design principles, tasks that most apps will need to
accomplish, or issues apps encounter.
First Launch
The user's first launch of an app is inherently different from what the typical day-to-day
launches will be. The first launch is full of questions; the user knows only what you've
told him in the App Store and nothing of the navigation, look, feel, and capabilities of
your app. But, paradoxically, users are notoriously unwilling to read instructions; so
guiding them through the functionality and features of the app is even more precarious.21
If the initial experience fails to hook the user, it's entirely possible that the app won't get a
second launch. Our discussion of what makes a good first launch and how to help users
through screen tips necessarily relies on the design principles we've itemized above.
It is a best practice to provide a welcome prompt, with a brief introductory tour of the app.
This could be in the form of an overlay that provides quick descriptions of the
functionality that might not be obvious (i.e., “swipe here to see more news”22), or a short
tutorial, if a step–by-step description is more appropriate. In keeping with our warning
about users' cognitive load limits, it is important to keep introductory tips brief and
focused; no need to provide a full user guide detailing the full functionality and quirks of
the app. The initial launch is designed to provide a quick overview, and since users can't
use the app and see the tips at the same time, whatever the user gleans from the first
launch screen will need to be held in the working memory. So, while a welcome prompt or
overlay is a great idea, keep it as simple and focused as possible. Finally, the welcome
guide should be constructed to activate upon the user's first launch, but not on subsequent
launches.
Tips and Help
A well-designed and constructed app should be intuitive and require little need for help. It
is, of course, the goal of all developers (or should be!) to make an app any user can pick
up and figure out without reading any help documentation or tips.
In reality, however, sometimes help is necessary to answer questions that arise, so it's
important for apps to address these needs with appropriate and easy-to-find tips. Two
levels of help are suggested: tips (either pushed on the user or appearing when certain
areas are active or touched), and a help book.
As people use an app, offer helpful tips at various intervals, pointing them to functionality
they might not have tried yet. While this is a great way to increase user engagement with
the app (if the tips are targeted to be useful to the user), it is a key consideration that the
help is offered in a way that users can dismiss it and not have to see it again. Tips should

be scannable and simple.23
Ultimately, a good rule of thumb for tips that might be pushed on users is: less is more.
The shorter the text and the greater the reliance on images, the more likely it is that users
will attend to them. Similarly, avoid long lists of tips, as they will likely overwhelm the
user.24 Using visual elements to communicate the information is a good idea, as users
might be able to glean the meaning without actually reading. If the app will offer tips to
users throughout their use of the app, the tip format should not be easily confused with the
actual interactive elements of the screen.25 Well-written, targeted tips can eliminate user
frustration and the need to read the full help documentation (which users generally think is
a hassle).
Apps should offer a Help menu within the app, offering answers and guidance on standard
questions and interactions with the app. Remember that Help documentation is a living
space—use log data as discussed in Chapter 10 to inform updates based on user
experiences. Having help documentation offered in a succinct, searchable manner is
essential to pass muster on usability. Understand that the user is likely frustrated if he is
visiting the help section, so make every effort to make this section easy to navigate and
within the same design paradigm as the rest of the app.26
Logical Navigation and Finding Content
How the information in the app is presented, or how the user navigates from screen to
screen or resource to resource, are important concerns when designing an app. While we
discuss conventional icons and navigation in the principles above, it's also important to
consider a few other factors when laying out content within an app.
Consider the concept of direct access versus sequential access. An example of sequential
access is reading a book: users must read page one, then page two, and so on. So, if the
information the user is searching for is on page 10, she must read nine pages of
information to get what she's looking for. Many apps offer similar construction, funneling
users through screens in a predetermined sequence and making it more difficult for the
user to get where she ultimately wants to go. This is, obviously, a usability headache at
best and a hurdle that could send users packing at worst. Allow for direct access whenever
possible.27
Further, it is vital that an app provide a logical and global navigation scheme: a consistent
way to get home. Always have necessary buttons in the same place on the screen and
accessible on all screens, (usually including Home, Help, and Back) to accommodate the
user's most frequent actions. If a user stumbles upon something buried deep within the
app, offer a path back, showing how he got there (i.e., breadcrumbs). Users should always
know where they are within an app, and know how to get to other useful resources.28
Login Walls
There are many advantages to getting users to create a unique profile and login credentials
to access an app. Among other things, for the user it means the ability to better access past
work and have a more customized experience within the app. For the developer, it means
having user data in a more usable format, as well as contact information. It can, however,

be seen as a hassle to users, especially for websites and apps that only provide basic
information. It requires that they fill out a form, remember a password, and potentially
share personal information. Oftentimes, apps are constructed to compel users to create
login credentials before seeing any or all of the resources contained within. The dilemma
for developers is just how much information to include behind the login wall. That is, how
much can the user navigate and sample the content before the app demands that the user
create an account to interact further?
Indeed, the login wall concept is similar to the first launch discussion: after users create an
account, they'll be automatically logged in next time and the conversation is irrelevant.
However, like the first launch, if the login wall is mishandled, the user may choose not to
return.
Our recommendation is to include enough information for users to get a taste of what the
app offers. Creating an account, entering a password, and filling out a form is tedious for
users, and even more so on a mobile device, and this process is a considerable deterrent.
Offering them the information to confirm that creating an account is worth their time and
effort is necessary.29
Forgiveness
While it might sound silly to say, your users are human. Being such, they are prone to
mistakes—double taps when a single tap was required, deleting data accidently, hitting
back or next too soon, and so on. Apps must provide affordances for this type of
accidental behavior. Students and younger users are even more prone to these errors, given
their impulsive clicking habits and limited experience with navigation. Apps can do this
by providing confirmation screens (e.g., “Are you sure you want to exit without saving
your work?”) to prevent unintentional navigational errors. This could also impact design
through the study of where users are prone to accidentally touch the screen, as that might
not be an ideal area for an important button. Beyond the accidental, users might also want
to explore the app, which is something that developers should encourage. Offering safety
nets (like an Undo or Revert to Saved button) makes users feel comfortable trying new
things within the app.30
Ultimately, when designing an app and its navigation, it is important not just to think
about the ideal test case, but to also consider the potential and probable pitfalls that can
occur.

Conclusion
Apps that succeed in the educational market are apps that pass the easy-to-use test. In
order to pass this test, it is essential that developers stick with the tried and true principles
of good design to ensure a positive user experience. Good design might sound like
something that's nice to have, and in the grand scheme of things, it's easier to focus on
other aspects of the app and let design come last. This all too common approach to app
design is a mistake, as design and usability are a huge determining factor on if an app gets
downloaded, and if it even gets a second launch. By designing the layout, content, and
navigation with the user in mind, and according to popular conventions, developers can
take advantage of the success of apps that have gone before them to offer mobile
education in a usable and accessible format.

Notes
1 A. Pavio, Mental Representations: A Dual Coding Approach (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1986).
2 A. D. Baddeley and G. J. Hitch, “Working Memory,” in The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory, ed. G. H. Bower (New York: Academic
Press, 1974): 47–89.
3 A. Paivio, Mental Representations, 226.
4 Mark Sardoski and Allan Paivio, Imagery and Text: A Dual Coding Theory of Reading
and Writing (New York: Routledge 2013).
5 Richard Mayer, The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning, 2nd ed. (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2005).
6 A. Bruckman and A. Bandlow, “Human–Computer Interaction for Kids,” in The
Human–Computer Interaction Handbook eds. A. Sears and J. A. Jacko (Mahway, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2003), 428–440.
7 Center for Parent Information and Resources, “How People Read on the Web,”
Nichcy.org/dissemination/tools/webwriting/reading.
8 Josh Clark, Tapworthy: Designing Great iPhone Apps (Sebastapol, CA: O'Reilly Media,
2010).
9 Alan Dix, Janet Finlay, Gregory Abowd, and Russell Beale, Human-Computer
Interaction, 2nd ed. (Essex, England: Pearson Education, 1998).
10 Brentwood Elementary teachers, interview, August 2013.
11 Mayer, Multimedia Learning.
12 Apple Developer Library, Navigation,
https://developer.apple.com/library/iOS/documentation/userexperience/conceptual/mobi
CH53-SW1.
13 Hoa Loranger and Jakob Niellsen, “Teenage Usability: Designing Teen-Targeted
Websites,” Nielsen Norman Group, February 4, 2013,
www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-of-websites-for-teenagers/.
14 Bruckman and Bandlow, “Human–Computer Interaction for Kids,” 428–440.
15 Shannon Halgren, Tony Fernandes, and Deanna Thomas, “Amazing Animation: Movie
Making for Kids Design Briefing,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, CO, 1995, 519–525.
16 Dan Saffer, Designing Gestural Interfaces: Touchscreens and Interactive Devices
(Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media, 2008).

17 Matthew H. Schneps, Jonathan Ruel, Gerhard Sonnert, Mary Dussault, Michael
Griffin, and Philip M. Sadler, “Conceptualizing Astronomical Scale: Virtual
Simulations on Handheld Tablet Computers Reverse Misconceptions,” Computers &
Education 70 (January 2014): 269–280.
18 Apple, “OSX Human Interface Guidelines: Feedback and Assistance,”
https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/OS
CH9-SW1.
19 G. Lakoff, and M. Johnson, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2008).
20 Jesse James Garrett, The Elements of User Experience: User-Centered Design for the
Web and Beyond (Berkeley, CA: New Riders, 2010).
21 Jakob Nielsen, “How Little Do Users Read?,” Nielsen Norman Group, May 6, 2008,
www.nngroup.com/articles/how-little-do-users-read/.
22 Aurora Bedford, “Instructional Overlays and Coach Marks for Mobile Apps,” Nielsen
Norman Group, February 16, 2014, www.nngroup.com/articles/mobile-instructional-
overlay/.
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid.
25 Ibid.
26 Apple, “OSX Human Interface Guidelines.”
27 Raluca Budiu, “Direct Access vs. Sequential Access: Definition,” Nielsen Norman
Group, July 13, 2014, www.nngroup.com/articles/direct-vs-sequential-access/.
28 Apple Developer Library, “Navigation.”
29 Raluca Budiu, “Login Walls Stop Users in Their Tracks,” Nielsen Norman Group,
March 2, 2014, www.nngroup.com/articles/login-walls/.
30 Apple, “OSX Human Interface Guidelines.”


Chapter 10
Data, Evaluation, and Learning Analytics
Data drives the modern world. As we continue to monitor and store it, the amount of data
available is growing at a rapid pace. In fact, in 2013 it was noted that 90 percent of the
world's data was generated between 2012 and 2013.1 The growth in data has been
powered both by new technologies that make it easier to collect, store, and analyze, as
well as a growing demand for data. Data has proven to be, if properly analyzed, an
incredibly powerful tool for providing insights about how the world operates and how its
people act. This is true both in the business world and for education. Data on how students
use educational technologies help tech companies improve the usability and effectiveness
of their apps. It can also inform changes to pedagogy and be used to create more
sophisticated learning systems. Developing mobile learning apps is an ongoing process,
and simply creating the app and distributing it is not enough; an ongoing evaluation and
improvement process is necessary. Here we discuss the important steps for evaluating an
educational app. They involve first identifying the questions to answer, then collecting the
necessary data, then using data analytics to gain actionable insight for improving the app.

Asking the Questions
To evaluate an app, keep in mind which aspects are being evaluating and why. Is it
primarily for product improvement? Is it to enable evidence-based claims about an app's
effectiveness? In Table 10.1, we highlight some of the key areas on which evaluation
should focus. Many of these overlap with the areas for evaluation we offer in the Great
App Checklist (Appendix B.) That is because we believe tech companies should be
evaluating their apps on the same set of criteria as educators, to make sure the apps meet
the needs of those who use them. We also include examples from the development process
involved in our own app, SAS Flash Cards.

Table 10.1 Areas for Evaluating Apps
Adoption (calculated metrics)
Conversion
What proportion of potential users
eventually purchase/download an app after
viewing it?
Retention
How long do users continue using the app
over time?
Growth
How does app usage change over time?
App downloads or launches
by date.
Usability (calculated metrics)
Completion
Rate
Are users able to successfully complete a
task?
Completion
Time
How long does it take a user to successfully
complete a task?
Time on task
Error Rate
How many errors does a user make when
attempting to complete a task?
Purpose/Alignment (consultations)
Standards
Alignment
Does the app align to state or common
standards?
Consult official standards
documentation
Instructional
Impact
How does the app facilitate, build upon, or
replace existing classroom practices?
SAMR rubrica
Efficacy
Does use of the app affect student
performance?
Classroom assessments and
teacher feedback
Pedagogical Soundness (validated surveys)
Motivation
Do users experience enjoyment and/or
attribute value to interacting with the app?
Intrinsic motivation
inventoryb
Cognitive
Demand
How difficult and demanding are the tasks in
the app?
NASA Task Load Indexc
Interest
Are users interested by the materials or
activities in the app?
Perceived Interest
Questionnaired
a Miguel Guhlin, “Classroom Learning Activity Rubric,” October 31, 2012, www.mguhlin.org/2012/10/classroom-
learning-activity-rubric.html.
b Edward Deci and Richard Ryan, “Self Determination Theory,” www.selfdeterminationtheory.org.
c Kim Chrestenson, Phil So, and Brian Gore, “NASA TLX: Task Load Index,”
http://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/groups/tlx/paperpencil.html.
d Gregory Schraw, Roger Bruning, and Carla Svaboda, “Sources of Situational Interest,” Journal of Literary Research
(June 24, 1994), http://jlr.sagepub.com/content/27/1/1.short.

Adoption
Measures of adoption help developers understand how regularly their app is being used
and by whom. Many of these metrics relate to app downloads and launches. For example:
How many new users are downloading the app per day?
How many users launch the app once, but never again?
Do English-speaking countries have higher download rates than other countries?
Did the latest marketing campaign increase app use?
Answers to these questions help developers understand if their app is actually reaching the
intended audience and allow them to see the impact of their actions on downloads and use.
For example, it can be expected that app downloads will increase after a marketing
campaign or release of an update. Or, for educational apps, there are predictable spikes in
downloads three times a year—early September, early June, and December (in accordance
with the traditional school calendar)—and developers can and should plan for these.2
Exploring usage patterns around these times can help differentiate campaigns or feature
sets that were particularly successful from those that did not have the desired impact.
Identifying these can also point the way to future investigations to understand why these
impacts did or did not occur. In our own experience, adoption analysis of SAS Flash Cards
showed that downloads commonly occurred in geographic pockets associated with school
districts. This let the development team know that the app was more commonly being
downloaded and distributed by school systems rather than individual users, which
highlighted the need to investigate ways to support in-school usage patterns.
Usability
Usability is often a key feature that separates the most successful apps from those that
never grow or sustain a user community. Two apps may support the same function, but if
one is easier to use and is more intuitive, it is likely to become adopted and more widely
used. Some sample questions to help evaluate usability include:
Do users interact with features in the order and frequency that is expected?
How much time is spent accomplishing an action?
Is there evidence of a lot of backward navigation, suggesting users have gone down
the wrong path?
Is the interface intuitive, or does it require a lot of instruction?
Some of these questions can be answered using data collected from real user interactions.
For example, logging the time of each action can allow developers to see how much time
it takes a user to complete a task. If it is more than expected, this may indicate a usability
flaw, a mistaken assumption on the part of a developer.
Understanding how users perceive an app's design can be difficult, and for this reason,
interacting with users directly is essential to understanding how usable the app is. For
example, teachers may be able to articulate what exactly makes an interface difficult for
second graders, while this may not be clear from the data. In the following sections we'll

discuss more about each of these types of investigation and the importance of choosing the
correct methods for the questions of interest. In the case of SAS Flash Cards, usage data
indicated that users were primarily using decks they had created themselves, rather than
those that had been downloaded from other users. This prompted a user interface change
to bring personal decks to the forefront and make them easier to access. We offer a
thorough discussion of app design and usability in Chapter 9.
Purpose and Alignment
Educators typically select an app with a purpose in mind. They may have some routine
task that they would like an app to support, or a topic area for which they would like to
have additional content. Since the goal of an educational app is to meet the needs of those
who use it, it is important for an evaluation to ensure that the app is actually addressing
those needs. Some questions that may be asked include:
Does the app actually accomplish the goals for the educator or for the student?
Is it aligned to standards or curricula?
Is it appropriately leveled for the target group?
Does the app replace existing activities or offer new methods for instruction?
This type of evaluation likely involves direct input from the target users—often educators
or students themselves. As mentioned in Chapter 8, getting their feedback on these areas is
critical for an app to be successful in the education field and should be part of every stage
of evaluation. For example, educators who provided feedback about SAS Flash Cards told
us that while the app was great for practice, it could also provide formative assessment on
how students were learning. They wanted to see the progress in how many cards students
were getting correct/incorrect over time. Therefore a feature to email session stats was
added so teachers could use it for this purpose.
Pedagogically Sound
In addition to purpose and alignment, developers may also be interested in exploring more
sophisticated pedagogical aspects of their app to ensure the app effectively promotes
learning. For example:
Are the problems leveled with appropriate difficulty?
Does the app put too much cognitive load on the user?
How does the reward structure support users' motivation?
These questions go beyond meeting a specific educational task and goal, by further
investigating if the educational process is being supported in the most beneficial way.
Many of these questions stem from a deeper understanding of learning processes (as
discussed in Chapter 2), and investigating them often requires the specialized knowledge
of educational researchers or other experts. However, addressing these questions can go a
long way in supporting the validity of an app, offering opportunities for improvement, and
promoting its efficacy to users. Providing leveled content in an app, for instance, is a huge
selling point that can set an app apart from competitors.

Gathering Data
Once app developers have an idea of the types of questions they may like to answer, they
next need to collect the data that allows them to do so. Mobile devices offer an
unprecedented data collection opportunity for developers, and, if used correctly, this can
facilitate smarter app development, updates, and design. There are two primary methods
for gathering mobile data: logging and sampling. Logging provides a snapshot of what is
happening as the app is being used in the field. Alternatively, with sampling, developers
can collect data from a group of users interacting with the app in a facilitated setting,
either a focus group or experimental population. This allows for manipulations designed to
answer specific questions or obtain data that goes beyond how the app is used (e.g.,
surveys). Google, for instance, tested 41 different shades of blue to see which its
customers preferred, by offering different versions to different users.3 When used together,
these types of data can paint a robust portrait of how an app is being used and how it can
be improved.
Log Data Collection
Even the simplest forms of data offer a wealth of opportunity to software developers and
technology providers. However, this data needs to be harnessed in a meaningful,
actionable way. Someone who is new to data collection may often wonder where to start.
What types of information can be collected? How should it be transmitted and stored? The
answers to many of these questions are dependent on the specifics of the app, the insights
gained from collecting data, and the expertise of the team.
Basic Usage
Perhaps the simplest and most informative data to collect relates to the broad usage of an
app. App stores can report how often an app has been viewed in the store, purchased, and
downloaded. The store may even track app purchases for you. For example, Apple's new
iTunes Analytics provides this information for apps in their App Store, along with details
about location and device type. However, this information is not all that is necessary to
measure if an app is successful. In some cases these numbers may be misleading.
Download statistics from schools or organizations that use a mobile device management
(MDM) system often download apps onto a large number of devices; therefore, download
reports may not accurately capture how many students now have access to an app. Repeat
downloads and updates may also skew information. Furthermore, these statistics only
provide information on the download of an app, and not how frequently it is launched.
These statistics are starting to be tracked by app stores, but there are many reasons for
developers to track downloads and usage themselves. Specifically, they can collect the
data and represent it in a way that is meaningful for their own questions of interest.
Beyond download and store statistics, some basic usage events that can be logged to
include when the app is launched and closed. Since many systems allow apps to run in the
background even if they are not in focus, it is often helpful to log times when the app is
hidden and brought back into view. Logging the time of each of these events allows
estimates of how long the app is being actively used at each launch as well.

Another critical piece of information to capture is any event that threatens the successful
use of an app. This is especially true if the event results in a crash of the app. Logging this
information will allow development teams to understand how stable their app is and
identify opportunities for bug fixes. However, if only the crash event itself is being
logged, it may not be possible to determine the cause of the error. For example, suppose an
impatient user clicks an unresponsive button repeatedly and in rapid succession and causes
a crash. This could highlight the need to improve responsiveness, or disable any input
during this time in order to prevent a future crash. In sum, logging more detailed user and
system actions can support interpretation of the information.
Detailed Action Logging
Beyond logging the most basic events, logging detailed user action information allows
developers to get a better sense of how users are interacting with an app. In order to
capture the most useful information, it is important to first consider the most basic actions
users perform within the app. Are they clicking buttons to accomplish a task? Are they
entering information through text fields, check boxes, or other forms? Are they dragging
and dropping, or otherwise using touch-based gestures? Some user actions don't have any
effect on the app (e.g., clicking in a noninteractive space) and probably aren't worth
logging. If, on the other hand, these user actions result in a meaningful change or response
in the app, they may be possible candidates for log events.
However, just because the user does something doesn't necessarily mean it's worth
logging. It all depends on what the app team would like to know. For example, if a user is
scrolling through content, they may or may not wish to capture this action. If the content is
dynamically loaded as the user scrolls, then capturing this user action may provide
beneficial information to inform how often the app should be prepared to load content. On
the other hand, if the content is static, this may not be a concern. However, the team may
be interested in knowing how long users spend attending to different components of the
content. In this case, logging scrolling events may provide a useful approximation of
which areas of content are visible at different points of time. Again, the decision of what
to log depends on the types of questions being asked.
The previous example also points to another important component of logging user actions.
In most cases, it is very beneficial to log both the start and end times of an action. This
allows for an understanding of the duration of activities and can help illuminate areas for
improvement. For example, if a user clicks a button to download some content, it would
be useful to log that action along with the time it occurred. Suppose the user's next action
is interacting with the content five minutes later. If only the start time of each action is
captured, the team may infer that it took approximately five minutes for the content to
download. However, if logs also captured the time that the download finished, the
developer might be able to see that it took only 20 seconds to download, and the user
simply didn't interact with the app during the rest of the five minutes. Capturing the
duration of actions allows developers to see how much time users spend engaged in
particular tasks, which provides insight into future app development.
One final piece of advice regarding logging is to consider the context of actions. This is
especially important if users can take the same action in many different contexts. For

example, is there a particular screen on which more people click the Help icon? Context
can also include information about a user's state within the app. For example, imagine an
app that focuses on learning puzzles. It may be interesting to note how close the user is to
completing the puzzle when they take particular actions. Users who ask for hints or help at
the very beginning of a puzzle may signal something quite different about the age
appropriateness of the activity than when a user reaches out for help at the end of the
puzzle. For each individual app, think about which types of contextual information may be
useful to paint a complete picture of the users' behaviors.
Rich Mobile Data
Mobile apps also allow for the simplified collection of other forms of data that were once
too complex. For example, we can now log the geographic location of the user. This can
help developers identify if their app is being used more in certain geographical locations
than others. As an example, if an app focuses on a historical event such as the Boston Tea
Party, it might be interesting to see if it used more in and around the Boston area. This
information, beyond being interesting, can influence marketing activities. Apps also have
access to a wide range of multimedia information such as pictures, audio, and video.
Synthesis of these types of data is often too complex for everyday purposes, but with
powerful automated tools it may be possible to use this data to better understand how
users interact with your app.
Transmitting the Data
There are many different strategies for capturing, storing, and transmitting log
information. The two most common are plain text log files and structured databases, each
with its own advantages and disadvantages (see Figure 10.1). One technique used by many
systems is to capture a stream of information in a plain text log file. This approach is
popular because it is easy to set up, requiring little advanced planning before
implementation. When an action or piece of information to be logged occurs, all the
relevant details are recorded (e.g., start time, end time, context), and then written to a
persistent file. It is easy to add log events or change the types of information that are being
captured. Developers can even make changes across different versions of the app without
having significant back-compatibility issues. The major downside to this approach comes
when it is time to retrieve information from the log files. Here, heavy post-processing
(editing, restructuring, aggregating, linking) is required to extract meaningful information.
The ease of this will depend heavily on any standardized formatting that is used. This type
of format is often more difficult to analyze, especially when attempting to explore
questions that were not originally in mind when the data was being collected.4

Figure 10.1 Logs versus Databases
An alternative approach is to log information directly to a database. This requires
significant up-front thought in designing the database to ensure that information can be
stored in a way that is meaningful and allows for desired analyses. One of the key benefits
is that “logging straight to a database supports immediate efficient access”5 of
information. This allows for real-time exploration of analyses. It also better supports
secondary analyses beyond what was originally intended. However, depending on design,
a database design can also be less flexible, requiring more effort when changes are made
to the kinds of data being logged.
One recommendation in either case is that developers should think carefully about the
types of questions they may wish to ask and how different pieces of information need to
be linked together to answer these questions. The process of figuring out what data to log
should start by figuring out the questions the data needs to answer. When thinking of how
to log, developers should consider which pieces of information need to be tied together to
answer these questions. For example, in order to tie a student's time spent interacting with
content features to their performance on a related quiz, it will be necessary to have a way
to identify the student, and link the relevant quiz and text reading behaviors. Logging a
unique user ID and timestamp with every piece of log information helps with this task.
These two data points allow you to identify who is doing an action and when. Without this
information, piecing together an understanding of user patterns or sequences of behavior
becomes difficult, if not impossible. Unfortunately, identifying a unique user in the
context of educational mobile software poses some challenges. Many classroom settings
use shared devices so data may not belong to an individual user. If an app involves a user
logging in, this can be alleviated. However, if this is not possible, it is important to keep in
mind that a device's data may not belong to an individual user, and it may be beneficial to
look at data in terms of active sessions rather than across a complete history.

However data is being stored, the information must be sent from the user's individual
device and to the developer or analyst. This requires some consideration of mobile data
transactions on the devices. For example, some devices have options for both cellular and
wireless Internet data. In these cases, cellular data may be limited or have an associated
cost, so it is advised not to transmit logging data in these cases. Another consideration is
whether the app is already transmitting data for purposes that are transparent to the user.
For example, if a user is already downloading content, then this may be an ideal time to
send information back to the server as the user is already expecting to be connected to the
Internet and transmitting data. Finally, it is important to consider how often to transmit
data. Developers may wish to transmit regularly to keep individual transactions to a
minimum size, or batch log data into larger sets in order to make fewer requests to the
server. The more often log data is transmitted the better real-time information can be
processed. This approach is also less likely to miss large chunks of information,
specifically from users who do not use the app regularly. However, there is a tradeoff to
consider in the number of times data is transmitted. App providers should carefully
consider these tradeoffs to decide the best frequency to transmit log data.

Sample Data Collection
Beyond collecting usage data, there are many other types of information that may be
beneficial, especially in an educational context. Surveys, case studies, focus groups, and
controlled studies allow developers to answer more specific questions about their products
but also require more time and forethought to set up properly.
Surveys
Surveys are a relatively low-cost way to get specific information about how users are
engaging with an app. They can often be easily administered online or even through the
app if desired. Surveys can be sent to the entire user base or a targeted subset depending
on the goals of the survey. When choosing to use surveys, there are some important things
to keep in mind. One of the most important first steps is to determine if the survey seeks to
measure variables associated with the student (e.g., intrinsic motivation) or aspects of the
interface (e.g., how much users like a feature).
Research-based surveys allow development teams to measure specific constructs. These
surveys typically include a specific set of questions and evaluation criteria. In most cases,
rigorous research has gone into developing these surveys to ensure that they are reliable
and truly measure the construct to which they are aligned. Using these surveys also allows
researchers to compare their results across studies.
Informal surveys are better if there are simple or specific questions that the developer is
interested in asking. For example, “Rate the usefulness of the Help feature on a scale of 1
to 7” will provide feedback on the feature of interest. Since the researcher develops these
questions, it is important to keep in mind how you intend to analyze the data. Ratings, or
items using a numeric Likert scale, can support quantitative analyses. Conversely,
multiple-choice questions may be more useful if there are a set of options for users to
consider, such as “I typically use this app: a. In the classroom; b. At home; c. Both.” These
results can be used to do categorical analyses. Finally, open-ended questions or structured
interviews can provide interesting feedback beyond what the researchers may have
imagined. For example, the question “Why do you like this app?” could yield a broad
range of results. However, it is more difficult to analyze these data points, as each
response typically needs to be read and interpreted by a human to gain any insight, and
they aren't easy to quantify.
Case Studies and Focus Groups
Case studies and focus groups are a great way to explore detailed questions about how an
app is being used and whether it is meeting users' needs. Focus groups typically involve
gathering a group of users or prospective users to get feedback over a short period of time.
It is important to have a careful agenda when organizing a focus group. Should there be
free-flowing dialog about what works and what doesn't? Should users be asked to propose
new features and changes, or should the focus be more on specifically critiquing existing
ones. Should the focus be on usability, curriculum alignment, or some other criteria? Our
Great App Checklist in Appendix B is a good place to start.
Case studies are an excellent opportunity to get detailed information about how an app is

actually used. For example, observing day-to-day classroom use of an app can provide
insightful feedback about what features are used most, where students are getting confused
about how to use the interface, how students and teachers respond to features, and what
types of things may be missing. This can be especially helpful for tool-based apps that can
be used in a variety of ways, including things developers may never have considered.
Careful observation of real-world use can provide far more insight that even the most
detailed usability logs because it provides something logs do not: context.
When selecting individuals for focus groups or case studies, consider how the population
you've chosen reflects the target population of users. For example, if an app is intended for
use in a 1:1 iPad setting, it is likely only useful to look at schools with this set up. Schools
using apps in a 1:many setting will not be able to provide the right kind of feedback
because of the constraints of their setup. Similarly, it is often most helpful to consider
users who are familiar with the technology and have access to it in the appropriate setting.
Getting feedback from teachers who do not have mobile devices in the classroom may not
be as useful as interviewing seasoned mobile veterans.
Controlled Studies
As mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, some types of questions can only be
answered through controlled experimental studies. This type of setup is best if the goal is
to compare two or more conditions on an outcome. It is also great for investigating
complex processes like learning gains, or changes in motivation or interest achieved
through using the app. However, this type of analysis takes a lot of background knowledge
and expertise to set up correctly. If developers are interested in this type of evaluation for
their app, they may wish to consider hiring research personnel or partnering with a local
university or agency. This type of evaluation can help push an app to the next level and is
great for proving efficacy to potential users.

Mobile Data Analytics: Turning Data into Information
Once the data starts rolling in, the exciting part begins: finding insights and answering
questions. While having data is nice, it is only once it has been turned into information
that it becomes truly useful. It is important to keep in mind throughout this process what
your initial questions were and how you intend to use the insights you gain from the
analyses.
App Improvement
One of the most common questions developers want to answer concerns product
improvement. How are users interacting with the app, and what can be done to make it
better? One of the first steps in exploring this area is to understand whether users are
interacting with the app in the intended way. Are they showing expected sequences of
behavior? Are there any features that are being over- or underused? Overused features
present an opportunity for expansion. Perhaps this feature should become a central
component of the app. Underused features suggest a problem. It may be too obscure or
hidden in the interface, or maybe too difficult to use. Perhaps it is not as useful a feature as
the development team thought it would be. This too presents opportunities for redesign.
There are many other problematic behaviors to be explored as well. For example, are there
common actions that precede app crashes? This could highlight flaws in the code or
memory management. Similarly, are there patterns that precede users quitting the app
voluntarily? This is especially important if the users never return, as it could indicate
something about your app that is too difficult or frustrating.
Another exciting opportunity presented by mobile-data analytics is the ability to explore
more explicit cause and effect questions through experimentation. This is a common
approach in the research community but can be used to help improve and understand any
type of app. One type of analysis that is growing in popularity centers on the selection and
presentation order of educational materials.6 If an app involves content provided
sequentially (such as levels in a game, puzzles, problem sets, etc.), then it may be possible
to investigate if presenting them in a particular order can improve the user experience. For
example, if in an initial version of the app, information is presented at random, log data
may capture how users respond to different orderings. This allows developers to explore
which sequences optimize a particular outcome, such as learning, engagement, or time
spent using the app. This helps developers better understand the best way to present
materials to future learners. Another possibility is to test the addition of a feature on a
subset of users before making it widely available to the public. For example, Paul Denny
sought to explore how the addition of badges would change students' interactions with the
PeerWise learning environment.7 Through a controlled experiment, he found that adding a
badging to the system increased the quantity of student interactions but did not have any
impact on quality. Furthermore, “students enjoyed being rewarded with badges for their
contributions and indicated a strong preference for having them in the interface.”8 This
experiment allowed Denny to see that adding badging might increase interest and
engagement without having a detrimental effect on learning, which is the ultimate goal of
the system.

Users and Personalization
Mobile data analytics also allow you to understand more about your users. Just as Amazon
collects data about shopping habits and preferences and makes suggestions for future
purchases,9 so too can educational apps collect data and tailor educational experiences
towards users.10 One interesting set of analyses is to identify patterns belonging to users
who use the app frequently. These users' patterns could be used to guide the behaviors of
less knowledgeable users. For example, imagine you have a note-taking app and you
notice that regular users of the app tend to organize their notes in a specific way. You
could use this information to provide hints to other users that may help them learn more
and better use the app.
App developers can also tailor information to a specific user's interests, abilities, and
learning preferences. Suppose an app provides leveled reading materials to young readers
on a variety of subjects. If the app can detect that a particular user tends to read books
about animals, the app can continue to recommend more books on animals at higher levels
of difficulty to allow individual user interests to guide academic growth. Analytics also
allow for powerful understandings of student misconceptions and learning needs. Detailed
data on student actions, such as correct and incorrect answers, can be used to build robust
models of what students know and do not know. For example, cognitive tutor systems
have been used to teach a variety of topics and are based on the idea that answering
problems correctly involves combining several pieces of individual knowledge or
subskills.11 For example, solving a physics problem involves knowing an equation as well
as being able to identify the relevant pieces of the problem (e.g., mass of the object,
velocity, etc.). Over time, with lots of different problem-solving activities, these tutors can
build up a representation of which subskills students struggle with.12 These can then be
used to guide personalized, targeted instruction in the areas students need it most.
Today's digital technologies, including mobile, have the potential to generate large
quantities of data about how students learn in a way that was not possible just a few short
years ago. The U.S. Department of Education further highlights the importance of this
shift in education and its “potential to make visible data that have heretofore gone unseen,
unnoticed, and therefore unactionable.”13 For example, for centuries teachers collected
paper-based copies of student writing, annotated it for correctness and clarity, then
returned it to the student. The teacher may notice some common patterns in a batch of 30
papers, but this pattern may only occur across a handful of students, and may not be clear
in her memory the next year. On the other hand, a digital writing and grading tool could
have thousands or millions of student essays, along with teacher grades and insights. This
data could be analyzed to provide insight about common mistakes students make, what
qualities are tied to good or poor writing, and even how students' writing improves over
time. More sophisticated techniques could help to automate grading processes by
identifying common weaknesses. They may even point to areas of instruction that need
improvement.
Data collection and analytics can also be directly incorporated into the apps themselves to
provide insights to teachers and other users. Teacher dashboards are becoming
increasingly popular, as they allow educators to see information about individual learning

that may be otherwise obscured. For example, the SAS Reading Records app, an app that is
used to measure reading proficiency in students throughout the year, provides a way for
teachers to evaluate recorded student readings, as well as let teachers view detailed
information about student fluency and reading behaviors. Teachers can see how student
reading improves over time, where entire classes and individual students are performing in
relation to their goals, and what areas are particularly difficult for students. Reports that
show that a student commonly makes reading mistakes related to errors in sounding out
words could signal to the teacher that the student is focusing too heavily on individual
sounds and words, and might benefit from additional support in considering the context of
the rest of the text.
When designing a dashboard for teachers or users, it is important to consider both what
information is most helpful and how it can be displayed clearly. For example, an
ineffective dashboard only provides teachers with information they can easily see for
themselves, such as how many students are on task. A better dashboard would synthesize
this information to show trends in off-task behavior over time and how it correlates with
different classroom activities. If a teacher could see that student engagement was
consistently lower during group reading activities, she would be able to act on this by
changing the activity or finding other improvements. It is also important that the data be
displayed to a teacher in a way that is meaningful and not overwhelming. For example,
grouping students into color-coded strategies based on how much they are struggling is a
simple and convenient way to represent complex data. We recommend using a drill-down
approach so that teachers can get a sense of information quickly, but they should be able to
look at the nitty-gritty details if they need to.

Conclusion
Constant evaluation of an app is a critical component to ensuring that it continues to meet
the needs of users. An app that stagnates will likely soon be forgotten. The best way to
identify areas of success and areas for improvement of an app is by collecting data for
evaluation and then acting upon it. There are many interesting and important questions
development teams can ask to get an understanding of their app, and equally many ways
to find the answers. Careful consideration and design is needed to do this properly, but
with the right approach, it can offer developers incredible insight. The important step is
acting upon this knowledge and using it to continually improve apps that result in truly
transformative educational technologies.

Notes
1 “Big Data, for Better or Worse,” Science Daily, May 22, 2013,
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/05/130522085217.htm.
2 WWDC 2014, “Optimizing your Earning Power with iAd,” Dave Wilson (presenter),
San Francisco, CA, 2014, https://developer.apple.com/videos/wwdc/2014/.
3 Laura M. Holson, “Putting a Bolder Face on Google,” New York Times, February 28,
2009, www.nytimes.com/2009/03/01/business/01marissa.html?pagewanted=1&_r=0.
4 J. Mostow and J. E. Beck, “Why, What, and How to Log? Lessons from LISTEN,”
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Educational Data Mining
(Córdoba, Spain: Educational Data Mining, 2009): 269–278.
5 Mostow and Beck, “Why, What, and How to Log?,” 269–278.
6 Kurt Van Lehn, “The Behavior of Tutoring Systems,” International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education 16, no. 3 (August 2006): 227–265.
7 Paul Denny, “The Effect of Virtual Achievements on Student Engagement,” Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Computer Interaction 2013, dl.acm.org.
8 Ibid.
9 Amazon, “About Recommendations,”
www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html/ref=hp_left_v4_sib?
ie=UTF8&nodeId=16465251.
10 Ryan Baker and Kalina Yacef, “The State of Educational Data Mining in 2009: A
Review and Future Visions,” Journal of Educational Data Mining 1, no. 1 (2009),
www.educationaldatamining.org/JEDM/index.php/JEDM/article/view/8/2.
11 John R. Anderson, Albert T. Corbett, Kenneth R. Koedinger, and Ray Pelletier,
“Cognitive Tutors: Lessons Learned,” Journal of the Learning Sciences 4, no. 2,: 167–
207.
12 Albert Corbett and John Anderson, “Knowledge Tracing: Modeling the Acquisition of
Procedural Knowledge,” User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 4 (1995): 253–
278.
13 U.S. Department of Education, “Enhancing Teaching and Learning through
Educational Data Mining and Learning Analytics,” October 2012,
http://tech.ed.gov/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/edm-la-brief.pdf.


Chapter 11
The Business of Educational Apps
Developing educational apps is an exciting and booming market to enter, once you
understand the audience and the unique constraints and affordances it presents. In addition
to presenting an opportunity to create a business and a profitable product, there's
opportunity to engage students and improve education, which are much loftier goals than
most industries can offer. Here we outline the factors that make the educational app
market different, detailing some challenges developers face and how to mitigate them,
pricing models to guide the creation of a business around an app, and other key
discussions necessary for working with the educational app market. The educational app
market offers interesting development constraints and opportunities, and with the right
background knowledge and navigation, a rewarding developing experience.

The Educational App Market Is…
Like any market, the educational app market comes with its fair share of quirks. While
there are many important distinguishing characteristics to the educational app market, here
are a few key things to know about this market and its audience (see Figure 11.1).
Figure 11.1 The Educational App Market Is…
…Not Going Anywhere
More money is being spent every year on technology resources in schools, demonstrating
a clear trend. “According to a January 2014 report released by the Software & Information
Industry Association based on 2012 sales data, total preK–12 nonhardware expenditures
on education software, digital content and resources totaled $7.97 billion.”1, 2
Additionally, the sector is expected to grow to $13.4 billion by 2017, more than double in
just five years.3 Some of that growth can be attributed to changes in state laws that allow
funds previously allocated to traditional textbooks to be used to buy mobile devices and
apps.4 Therefore, as schools and educators continue to buy-in—literally and figuratively—
into the mobile learning movement, there is clearly an opportunity to join the educational
app market.
Approximately one-third of students in the United States use a school-issued mobile
device in their education, according to a study by Project Tomorrow (2014).5 Even more

students have access to mobile devices at home, with 89 percent of high schoolers and 73
percent of middle schoolers having access to smart phones.6 As devices continue to rise in
ubiquity, interest in using them for education also rises. In a recent survey of teachers and
administrators about their interest in a one-to-one solution (either implementing or
expanding a current mobile learning program at their school), 82 percent of respondents
indicated a high level of interest at their school.7 As the mobile learning movement
continues to grow in popularity, more apps will be purchased, opening new demand in the
educational app market. Mobile devices are also increasingly used in homes as well,
opening up another area for educational apps outside of classroom. And this growth is
very focused in the mobile app arena, since there is less growth being seen in traditional
software. The PC isn't exactly dead, but it is a declining market compared to the tablet
market.8, 9
While we must caution the obvious—technological trends come and go—it is widely
predicted that mobile devices are the wave of the foreseeable future in educational
technology. After several years of consistent growth, tablet sales overall are plateauing (or
declining, according to some sources). It is largely attributed to the fact that most people
are getting more use out of their tablet and buying another one isn't necessary (yet).10
Google's Chromebooks are also competing in the mobile computing space, boasting huge
growth in 2013 with 20 percent coming of U.S. school purchases of mobile devices.11
However, the market for adding rich and dynamic educational apps to these popular
devices is still very good right now.
…Rich in Educational Standards
Developing an app that is appropriate for certain grade levels, covering skills and lessons
that are taught in the classroom might sound difficult for a developer who doesn't have
background in education. If a developer wants an app to be used in a certain grade or
subject, the standards can be accessed to ensure the app will accommodate the students'
requirements. Often these standards are established at the state or national level, but the
information is available to anyone who wants it. This is a boon for developers looking to
get their app in the hands of students. Aligning to standards is a key consideration in
discussions with state and district-level officials as they review an app. Some teachers
report that in their schools, only apps the district has approved as fitting in their standards
can be downloaded.12
…Full of Enthusiastic and Motivated Users
Teachers and students, in general, are very willing to give feedback and tell you about how
they use your app. With due diligence from the developer (responding to help requests in a
timely manner and reaching out to users for detailed feedback), app users can serve as a
valuable and accessible resource. In our development practice, we are constantly surprised
at the reactions we get when responding to users—they are often amazed to receive a
reply. Through these sorts of communications, we establish relationships with users and
get feedback that impacts our development and app updates.
App store reviews are another way of receiving feedback. Since app stores do not

currently provide ways for developers to respond to reviews, it leaves few ways to help
users overcome the challenge they face if they offer a negative review. Addressing
concerns in the product is often the only opportunity to speak directly to the anonymous
reviewer and show the problem has been solved. Reviews can also come from other
sources, such as independent experts. Moms With Apps, Teachers With Apps, and
Graphite all review apps and provide guidance for parents and teachers on their blogs and
social media platforms. A positive or negative review from a recognized group like these
can definitely affect an app's sales.
Be sure to create a role in your organization and dedicate time in development iterations to
respond to and incorporate user feedback. Word of mouth is one of the most powerful
sources for finding apps among teachers,13 and creating advocates is a critical step to be
include in such conversations. Responding to user questions leads to good reviews,
unsponsored tweets of support, and recommendations to colleagues. Efforts to implement
this sort of marketing are worth the investment.
…Varied in Resources and Policies
For all the promise that apps and mobile technology hold for education, there is little
control at the classroom level for purchasing. Budgets come from the school or district and
can severely restrict the options of a teacher who uses mobile devices in lessons and
activities. Many teachers we talked with had absolutely no funds for apps, a factor we
discuss in the Pricing Model section that follows.
Many schools are leading the way, offering bring your own device (BYOD) programs,
involving students in ubiquitous technological implementations. There are, of course,
many schools that are adverse to using technology in education. Many schools ban
cellphones altogether. When nearly every child has a device they're prohibited from using
in their backpacks, it can be frustrating for teachers who have few opportunities to use
mobile devices. Further, the school's mobile devices can be host to any number of
restrictive policies. As we mentioned earlier in the book, one teacher noted that to
download an app, she had to get it approved by the administrators, and if they approved it,
the app was downloaded on all three of the school's device carts. All of this had to happen
before the teacher could even see the app for herself!14 Bearing in mind that many policies
will restrict use of apps that promote social media tie ins (categorically banned in the
school referenced above, as the students are under 13), or even a login, developers should
consider if these components can be turned off or if they're completely necessary to
include in the first place. While it is certainly not feasible to anticipate or accommodate
every possible restrictive policy, the educational market retains many dated policies and a
wide variety of resources that shut out certain apps and learning opportunities.
…Catching up on Connectivity
While some schools have huge mobile device implementations and strong wireless
support, there are many schools where the bandwidth and technology support staff cannot
support the number of devices they must manage. “Even though the nation's tech goals are
to get wireless in every school, many schools deal with broken, blocked, and banned
technology,” says Dawn Casey-Rowe, a high school teacher. “EdTech developers and

startups must spend time getting to know the nuances of the schools they intend to
serve.”15 In fact, “60 percent of schools in America lack sufficient Wi-Fi capability to
provide students with 21st Century educational tools,” Tom Wheeler, the FCC chairman
notes.16 The reality for many schools is that the Internet is slow and that Wi-Fi bandwidth
is not what it should be in most educational settings, as schools add devices or allow
students to connect to the school's network. Developers face a big challenge to make their
app functional and successful in a potentially low-connectivity setting. There is a national
initiative to close the Wi-Fi gap in schools and libraries, which will address some of this
issue in the coming years.17 And, as mobile devices continue to mature and grow in
numbers within the educational setting, even greater bandwidth will be required. For app
developers, this means that an app that requires constant connectivity to the Internet or
offers online-based animation might not be usable in a classroom full of students.
Consider this, and other elements of being a good app citizen (as discussed in Chapters 7
and 8) when designing and coding your app.
…Has a Lot of Privacy Concerns
We dedicate a whole chapter to this issue (Chapter 15), but note here that the privacy
requirements for students and children under 13 are substantial. The challenge for
developers lies in complying with the relevant laws (COPPA and FERPA) and making
proactive and thorough disclosures. Developers should consider carefully what
information is necessary to collect, and communicate their policies clearly and
prominently with teachers and parents. It is a sensitive issue for many guardians, and apps
that are clear about what information is collected and what it is used for stand to gain
credibility and support. Secretive and shady data collection can quickly backfire, even if it
is technically compliant with the law.
…Competitive, But Working Toward a Common Goal
Educational apps are a huge swath of the overall app market, with more and more being
added all the time. There are a few byproducts of this saturation that pose additional
challenges to developers.
There is a high standard for educational quality, with many apps that are just for fun, or
even drill-and-practice-oriented games being seen as less worthy than more sophisticated
tool-based or curriculum-aligned ones. In and out of the classroom, there is an expectation
that if a child is playing on an iPad, they're learning something.18 When teachers have an
educational goal in mind while searching for an app, they'll likely have their pick among
dozens of good matches. Rising to the top of the pile is a challenge. Realizing that an app
will be compared to its competitors, developers will need to raise the bar on quality. This
means academic rigor, usability, mobile integration and privacy, among other factors.
Standing out in a saturated market is a challenge. Developers might think they have a
great idea, and it might even be a great idea, but that alone doesn't mean teachers will use
it. Further, with so many apps to choose from for any given purpose or topic, commitment
from a user is low. If someone downloads a free app to make an ebook and finds it doesn't
suit his needs, he can quickly delete that app and find dozens of other options in the app
store.

So much of what is succeeding in mobile learning apps surrounds student creation. The
full featured, topic specific, very focused apps are less discussed and shared by educators.
Apps that allow students to demonstrate new knowledge, make learning connections, and
even cross disciplines are increasingly popular. Explain Everything is an app that
facilitates presentation building through inclusion of multimedia elements, though it can
be used by students and teachers for a variety of purposes. It is a robust tool that allows
the users to supply the purpose and the educational content, and has proved very popular
in this role.
While the educational app industry is big, and growing, it is a unique industry. It has a
very philanthropic spirit, and the feeling of an industry with a common goal. It's a market
full of competitors who don't compete, at least not in the traditional, winner-take-all sense.
Most who enter this market, while they may be looking to earn a living, are also aiming to
improve education and provide an engaging experience for students.

How to Sell Your App: Pricing Models
It is important to consider the business model the app will use at the outset, as this will
impact other decisions. For instance, if you're planning to have advertisements in a certain
area of the screen on the app, incorporate this into the design. “Or, if the plan is to sell
units within the app for purchase, it will be developed in a different way,” says Bjorn
Jeffrey of TocaBoca. “The mistake I have seen done many times is people have a game in
the kid space or in the adult space and then they add freemium as an afterthought and then
you are just left with basically no business model at all.”19 Figuring out which model is
right requires forethought and careful consideration of the market and the product. And
especially in the case of educational apps, considering what users are able to pay should
be part of this initial process.
It's also worth considering how the pricing model and payment methods feel to the user.
Brian Bennett, a former teacher who used mobile technology in his classroom, emphasizes
the need for an honest user experience, noting that some apps offer a trial then forbid you
to go further until you pay. In this case, it would be better if the app were simply listed as
a paid app. Bennett says, “Yes, free is very good because there seems to be less and less
money every year,” but he adds that sometimes an app that provides value in his
classroom might be worth paying for.20 Free is certainly great, and can lead to more
downloads, but users may not mind paying for a quality app that meets their needs. Here
we discuss the three most prominent pricing structures for educational apps and their
limitations and allowances: free, freemium, and premium (see Figure 11.2).
Figure 11.2 Popular Pricing Models for Educational Apps
Free
A 2012 Forrester report noted that more than one-third of respondents said they “haven't
paid for any apps they own, and another one-third have only paid for a quarter of their
apps.”21 Even among the general population of mobile device users, the unwillingness to
pay for apps when so many free options exist is pervasive. In the education app market,

the free bias is strong, often due to lack of funding to purchase apps. Many educators we
interviewed for this book noted they had absolutely no funds to use for purchasing apps,
so the only apps they considered for class or professional use were free apps. Schools are
stretched thin to make technological upgrades; often funds aren't available or aren't
prioritized for purchasing apps. Whatever the reasoning may be, many schools and users
are in this situation, and developers need to be aware that anything above free may
eliminate their app from searches. Hence, a large part of their intended audience may
never organically see their product.
But, to state the obvious, many developers are not in the nonprofit business; so, how does
one make money by providing a product for free? Advertising within the app is one
option, though it is controversial at best, and ineffective at worst. Given that many users
are children, marketing is often frowned upon and restricted in many countries. Young
kids can accidentally touch the ad, especially if it is flashing to draw attention, launching a
link and grinding their app activity to a halt. This is a huge problem, since the whole point
is to get children using your app, and have a good experience doing so. Requiring frequent
adult intervention to get back to the app will quickly become cumbersome and
unsatisfying for the users and teachers. Beyond that, users are sometimes too young to
know how to read, making ads for preschool apps very ineffective.22 These things can
also, more importantly, impede the overall user experience of an app.
There are also some restrictions offered up by the operating systems on what is
permissible for apps marketing to kids. For iOS, if an app is classified as for Kids in the
app store, there are restrictions relating to advertisements that developers need to heed.
“Apps in the Kids Category may not include behavioral advertising (e.g., the advertiser
may not serve ads based on the user's activity within the App), and any contextual ads
presented in the App must be appropriate for kids,” Apple says in their Developer Guide.
Also, Kids apps must include “parental permission or use a parental gate before allowing
the user to link out of the app or engage in commerce.”23 These restrictions aim to limit
children's exposure to advertising that could impede the user experience. At the time of
this writing, there are no restrictions on ads in apps for children in the Android operating
system.
The apps that we develop at SAS Curriculum Pathways are free apps, funded through the
ongoing commitment to education and innovation that our software company has made.
Though we are certainly unique and lucky in this respect, we continually face this sort of
confusion and amazement in our conversations with customers. “Free” is a loaded word
these days. For apps like these—those that are truly free (i.e., no ads, no future costs)—
there's the constant need to differentiate themselves from apps that aren't truly free.
Additionally, free can mean low quality in the minds of consumers. Consumers have
grown wary of the word, assuming a free app comes with obtrusive ads or a catch (since
so often it does). Differentiating free from freemium can be surprisingly challenging.
Freemium
In most app categories, freemium, as a business model, is surging in popularity, eclipsing
paid or free with advertisement models.24 This essentially means the user is offered a free
version of the app, with certain additional functions or content available for a fee. There

are different opinions on the appropriateness of this model. Some say it exploits the
customers, getting them hooked and then coming in for the credit card, while others see it
as an opportunity for consumers to buy only what they'll use and to try the product before
purchasing anything at all. As the prevailing moneymaking model for mobile apps, it has
implications for the educational app market.
In a survey of top apps in the Apple App Store in 2013, freemium was found to be the
clear winner in almost all categories as the most prominent pricing structure. Education,
lagging somewhat in the trend, showed 43 percent used freemium and in-app purchases,
while 56 percent used one-time fees.25 “The games which consistently make the most
revenue are all freemium.”26 This suggests that although the model is widely popular,
there are some specific concerns and issues that the educational app market has that
changes the equation a bit.
The economics of the freemium model are basic: to make a profit, an app needs a vast
audience. “The typical conversion rate from freemium to paid ranges from 3 to 10 percent,
so the prospect pool needs to be deep to sustain your business,” says Anthony Smith, CEO
of Insightly in a blog post.27 Working closely with users and experimenting will help
developers determine the sweet spot of what functionality to include in the free version
and what to tack on as extras for a fee. If the delicate balance is not struck, “the free
version can cannibalize the paid offering.”28
Like all pricing structures we discuss, freemium requires a tremendous amount of
forethought when designing the app. Bjorn Jeffrey, founder and CEO of TocaBoca, one of
the most prominent children's app companies, notes that “being successful with freemium
almost requires that you to design from the freemium model from the beginning. It's not
something you can apply later.”29 If using a freemium model in an app is the goal, it needs
to be part of the discussion from the beginning.
While we certainly advise creating a high quality and engaging educational app, the
freemium model is an additional test to those criteria. Freemium allows—and with profit
in mind, requires—the app to show its worth up front. It essentially allows a free trial.
Only after the user has spent some time with it, does the app ask for a financial
commitment. This is a benefit for a good app; hooking users early makes them feel better
about spending money on an app purchase they know they'll value. There's more
opportunity for a customized user experience, and the user only pays for what he wants so
“spend perfectly matches the derived utility.”30 Bad apps won't survive in the freemium
space, which could explain its growing popularity.
As a prominent business model for all apps, freemium certainly is worth consideration for
educational apps. Many apps have been deployed using this model, like the Endless
Reader app, which sells packs of words to budding readers. As they master the level, a
new bundle of words is offered. This, of course, requires parental consent and a credit
card, the step that can prove the biggest hurdle for educational apps. Most students using
apps are unable or prohibited from making app purchases, not to mention that many
schools are limited in what apps they can purchase (if they can purchase anything at all).
Operating systems are making necessary upgrades constantly to facilitate in-app
purchasing while protecting users under 13 (a recent iOS upgrade introduced Family

Sharing, enabling an alert to be sent to parents if a child wants to purchase an app, among
other features31). While there certainly are reasons this model won't work in all
educational settings, the user community that would not be welcoming to this model
would mostly be schools that do not have funds to purchase any apps at all. If a school can
purchase apps, the freemium model would be acceptable, and perhaps even preferred.
Be sure to understand the user experience of in-app purchasing so your app fits in, as well
as how the purchasing power can remain with the teacher or guardian. A recent lawsuit
illustrates the importance of these measures. The lawsuit demonstrated that Amazon
allowed children to make in-app purchases without parental consent. The FTC also
recently settled with Apple to the tune of $32.5 million, and requires stricter in-app
purchasing consent and password protection.32 This area is certainly in flux as policies
continue to strengthen and create structure in this very new market, but the freemium
model and in-app purchasing are at the center of this debate.
Premium
On the opposite side of the freemium model is the premium model in which the user pays
a one-time fee for an app. Whereas the freemium experience can be seen by users as a
constant reminder of the developer's desire to make money rather than providing a user-
centered experience, a one-time fee offers an uninterrupted experience.33 Especially in an
educational setting where students, or even teachers, might not have authorization to make
in app purchases, the fewer roadblocks that exist, the better.
Finding the right price point can be a challenge. This is likely a determination each app
must make for itself based on the audience and quality of the app. Competitive analysis is
a good place to start, as well as advice from potential users. The evaluation of what an app
is worth versus what is charged for the app is an imprecise one; users usually don't have a
clear picture of what goes into an app or what it's worth to them, but they know when they
feel something isn't worth what they've paid. This is a challenging hurdle for developers.
While prices are steadily declining on apps,34 overall, some truisms remain about various
price points.
Users expect simple apps to be 99 cents, if not free.35 To charge $2.99 to $4.99, apps need
to offer robust features and a great user interface. Clearly, users can't know if an app is
truly worth a higher price tag until they download and start using it. However, if users feel
they spent more than they perceive the app provides, they're likely to give negative
feedback, which can quickly alienate future customers.36 Apps can come with very high
price tags as well, though if they offer substantial utility, the user may happily purchase it.
The costliest we mention in this book is Proloquo2Go, the accessibility app that enables
nonverbal users to communicate using their device ($219.99 at the time of this writing).
This high price tag is justified because it essentially turns a mobile device into an assistive
communication device, and while it costs a lot compared to other apps, it costs
substantially less than dedicated communication devices. It gives a high amount of
functionality and, often, life-changing abilities to users.
Deciding on a price is a big decision, but not a permanent one; prices can vary over time.
Experimenting and being flexible with the price is a good idea to stay competitive.

Offering promotional pricing, even offering the app for free in the app store for a few
hours, is a good way to stimulate sales and gain new users.

How Users Buy Your App
Part of the pricing and business model discussion must involve understanding how states,
districts, schools, teachers, and students acquire apps. There are many opportunities for
educators to access your app at discounted rates. Developers are increasingly able to
bundle apps together at discounted rates as well. Lastly, working directly with hardware
vendors that sell into schools to have your app available or as part of a package included
upon arrival at the school presents great opportunities to help educators discover your app
at discounted rates. In instances where schools dictate to teachers which apps can be used,
mass downloads and package deals at the district or school level might make an app more
appealing to an administrator hoping for a universal solution.
Volume Purchasing and Education Pricing
Many times, a choice will be made at the district level to use a certain app for teaching a
certain skill or at a grade level. If the app needs to be purchased in a high volume,
developers can offer discounted pricing to these districts. Typically, these discounts can be
up to 50 percent off for 20 or more units.37 To promote this practice, Apple offers
subsidies for educational pricing (in the form of taking a smaller share of the revenue).
This program also comes with features that appeal to districts—control of the app through
their mobile device management (MDM) system and a streamlined installation and
delivery process.38 Developers should know that this sort of discounted bulk purchasing is
the industry norm and an important consideration when trying to work with educational
institutions.
Bundling and Promotions
As the consumer purchasing experience in the app store continues to become more
sophisticated, iOS has recently started to allow selling apps in bundles. Developers can
group several apps together for one price (usually at a discount from what the apps would
cost separately), offering a new way to increase adoption of multiple apps. Promotions can
also stimulate downloads on an app and help to build a consumer base. Offering a
premium app for free for a limited time is a great marketing tool to boost downloads.
Another tactic is offering and promoting a free app that ties into a suite of apps, in hopes it
would be a gateway app for the user.
Preloaded and Curated Software
There are a few primary ways that schools set up mobile device implementations. In one
scenario, the school will purchase and distribute the devices, and individual users can
download apps. In another common setup, schools purchase the devices and provision the
apps, with an administrator controlling what goes on the devices. Sometimes schools offer
a curated purchasing experience, as in Google Play for Education where teachers can
purchase apps for their class and distribute them to their students' devices.39 Schools also
use a preloaded option, wherein the devices come with the apps and software that is
needed. Amplify tablets have offered large implementations using this approach, offering
content directly on the tablet (accessible with or without a Wi-Fi connection).40 This

preloaded experience offers out-of-the-box usability, with minimal device management
setup required. It is, understandably, quite appealing for schools, although it comes with a
higher price. Developers should be aware that there are many ways that users can come to
your app, and to pay attention to the various paths.
Disconnected Purchasing Process
One inherent struggle in producing educational apps is the disconnect between the user
and the buyer. Compared to a general market app—say, Angry Birds—where the user
searches, chooses, buys, downloads, and uses that app, educational apps often have
different people performing each of these actions. The user and the adopter are often two
different people in the education app market. Depending on the age of the user, parents or
teachers could be in control of finding the app and adopting (as children under 13 aren't
allowed to make app purchases). In schools, administrators or technology coordinators
may be customizing the app for teachers and students. When Apple admits schools to
participate in their volume purchasing plan, there are many restrictions on who can
purchase apps. Only certain authorized users (program facilitators) can purchase apps at a
discounted rate and distribute them to their colleagues.41 In a perfect world, teachers could
search the app store and find the apps they want, download, and use them. This is,
unfortunately, not the case for most schools, and it is an important consideration when
determining the appropriate marketing message.

Marketing
In an ideal world, the developer could sit down with a teacher and show them the app
they've created, demonstrating its functionality and answering any questions the potential
user might have. This is, obviously, not feasible, so the marketing and communications
activities discussed here serve the same purpose: to sell users on the app. The marketing
and communication activities are, essentially, geared toward creating fans of the app:
namely, users who purchase the app and have a good experience with it. These users will
recommend the app, blog about it, mention it on Twitter, and tell their colleagues. (They'll
also tell you what's weird about it, and offer suggestions on how to change it!) All of the
exercises we recommend to bring strong branding and messaging to your app are oriented
to that one goal: make users happy. Happy users, especially so in the educational world,
are advocates for your app.
Communicate
Knowing your market is essential, as we've said throughout the book. Often, the most
successful educational apps are made with teams that include educators (either as
consultants or paid members of the team). In our view, it's essential to have at least one
teacher, but preferably several, in the field to give feedback on the app as it is being
developed. They should ask questions such as “Is this something you'd use in your
classroom? What other features would be useful? How much would you pay for this?”
After the app is available, these allies can recommend it to their professional networks of
colleagues and coworkers, as well as give feedback on what is working in practice and
what needs improvement. Having a finger on the pulse of the educational user is vital to
developing and selling an app that is useful and does what it needs to do.
To this end, it is extremely important for developers to communicate with their audience.
If a user emails about a problem (or even a perceived problem), respond as soon as
possible. Follow up with more questions, and do what is necessary to help. Beyond being
responsive, having professional collateral material for when you visit with teachers (either
at conferences or other events within the professional community) is a great idea. Creating
an email list, newsletter, website, Twitter account—all of these things provide more
opportunities to engage with the user and increase your overall presence and opportunity
to be contacted (and respond).
In-App Marketing
If a developer offers a suite or several apps under the same brand, cross-promotional
efforts are important to boost this brand awareness. For instance, when starting any Toca
Boca app, a small link to a different Toca Boca app will come up in the bottom corner: a
simple, nonintrusive reminder that there are more apps like this that the user can purchase.
Other apps place this information in an info box or small advertisement. It need not be
flashy and distracting, but it's good to reinforce the brand to a user who has already
invested in it.
App Store Experience

What users see when they find your app in the app store is what we call the app store
experience. While most of what is allowed in this avenue is imposed by the operating
system and its regulations, these allowances are changing often. We suggest developers
make use of all the allotted features within the app store listing, as these help users find
the app and will be used to compare it to competitors. For instance, the Apple App Store
allows for a video preview of the app;42 Google Play has had this functionality for a while.
This preview functionality is an example of a new feature that gives apps an additional
avenue to make a positive impression on a potential user. As the app store experience
continues to be refined and enhanced, developers need to stay in tune with these updates
and increase their own offerings. Once an app preview becomes the norm, as it will, an
app that only offers screenshots will quickly be passed over for one that offers a more
thorough preview.
Outside Marketing
So, how do teachers hear about apps? How do teachers judge apps? With the limited time
and resources teachers have, the most common way for new apps to be discovered is
through word of mouth. In our interviews, it seems common for schools to establish a de
facto app guru, a peer who is good at finding good apps. This person will recommend apps
to other teachers. When one good app is found, it is quickly adopted across the school, as
searching and testing apps is seen as a burden. Social media is also very useful for
increasing the profile an app. Hashtags (for Twitter chats or industry conferences, for
example), infographics, and blogs are good tools to be discovered and shared on social
media outlets. Using social media to promote an app and engage with users is a best
practice. Be aware of these channels, and create materials to market and use them. There
are also entire conferences devoted to educational apps and the use of mobile devices in
the classroom, and schools often send their app guru to these events. Teachers share their
experience with apps at these conferences, which can drive downloads and buzz around an
app. Developers should monitor these events, attending them if possible.
Branding
Another way to create a cohesive user experience is to create distinct apps using a similar
name. This aids in discoverability. Parents or teachers may get one app and really like it.
The next logical step for them is to see if there are more from that company, assuming all
of their apps are of equal quality. It keeps developers on their toes, as one subpar product
could reflect poorly on the whole suite.43 Toca Boca and their apps are a great example of
the use of a brand to connect their products. All of Toca Boca's apps use Toca as the first
word, to help users find their apps easily. If developers aim to create more than one app, it
is worth considering how the apps relate and ways the names might convey that
relationship.
Lesson Plans (or Educational Context)
If an educational app aims to be included in a classroom setting as part of a lesson, it is a
great idea to include some suggested lessons where it would fit in. Hopscotch, a free app
that teaches the basics of computer programming, offers several companion lesson plans

to aid teachers in incorporating the app into their classroom activities. Hopscotch also has
a blog where they post other ideas for inclusion in the classroom. This level of support
shows that the developers are in tune with the needs of their users.

Conclusion
We hope this chapter illuminates the complex and exciting world of educational apps.
While there are certainly challenges that are unique to this market, there are many
opportunities to take part in reshaping the education system and make students more
engaged and curious. There are many apps to choose from but as the landscape is
changing and the number of students and teachers using devices increases, the
conventional wisdom, needs, and possibilities for mobile learning will change as well. It is
important for developers (or those who wish to be developers) of educational apps to keep
abreast of changes in the educational system as well as in technology.

Notes
1 U.S. Department of Education, EdTech Developer's Handbook (Draft), March 2014,
http://tech.ed.gov/developers-handbook/.
2 Software and Information Industry Association, “2014 Results from the SIIA Vision K–
20 Survey,” SIIA, June 2014, http://siia.net/visionk20/2014_VK20.pdf.
3 Ibid.
4 Geoffrey Fletcher, “Driving Digital Change,” The Journal, October 11, 2011,
http://thejournal.com/articles/2011/10/04/driving-digital-change.aspx.
5 Project Tomorrow, “The New Digital Learning Playbook: Understanding the Spectrum
of Students' Activities and Aspirations,” April 2014,
http://tomorrow.org/speakup/pdfs/SU13StudentsReport.pdf.
6 Ibid.
7 Interactive Educational Systems Design, Inc., “2014 National Survey on Mobile
Technology for K–12 Education,” May 2014, www.iesdinc.com/iesdnews.html.
8 Natasha Lomas, “Tablets to Grow 53.4% This Year, Says Gartner, as Traditional PC
Declines 11.2%,” TechCrunch, October 23, 2013,
http://techcrunch.com/2013/10/21/tablets-vs-pcs/.
9 Jay Yarow, “The Death of the PC: Tablet Sales Will Beat Notebook Sales This Year,”
Business Insider, www.businessinsider.com/the-death-of-the-pc-tablet-sales-will-beat-notebook-sales-this-
year-2013-1.
10 Christian de Looper, “Tablet Sales on the Decline, but Apple Not Feeling Any Pain,”
Tech Times, August 18, 2014, www.techtimes.com/articles/13357/20140818/tablet-
sales-decline-apple-feeling-pain.htm.
11 Rolfe Winkler, “Chromebooks Take Other Mobile PCs to School,” January 23, 2014,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB1000142405270230485650457933894119881235
Accessed July 16, 2014.
12 Third-grade teacher in North Carolina (anonymous), interview, June 30, 2014.
13 Brentwood teachers, interview with authors, Brentwood Elementary, Raleigh, NC,
August 22, 2013.
14 Anonymous, North Carolina Middle School, interview with authors, April 22, 2014.
15 U.S. Department of Education, EdTech Developer's Handbook.
16 Tom Wheeler, “Closing the Wi-Fi Gap in America's Schools and Libraries,” FCC Blog,
June 6, 2014, www.fcc.gov/blog/closing-wi-fi-gap-america-s-schools-and-libraries.
17 Federal Communications Commission, “News Release: FCC Releases Report Showing

State-By-State Impacts of E-Rate Proposal to Close Wi-Fi Gap in Schools and
Libraries,” July 1, 2014, www.fcc.gov/document/modernizing-e-rate-providing-21st-
century-wi-fi-schools-libraries.
18 “Björn Jeffrey on Why Toca Boca Won't Be Selling to Schools,” Games and Learning,
March 17, 2014, www.gamesandlearning.org/2014/03/17/bjorn-jeffrey-on-why-toca-
boca-wont-be-selling-to-schools/.
19 Ibid.
20 U.S. Department of Education, “EdTech Developer's Handbook.”
21 Steve Wadsworth, “How ‘Free’ Can Pay in Mobile Apps,” Wall Street Journal: The
Accelerators, March 4, 2013, http://blogs.wsj.com/accelerators/2013/03/04/how-free-
can-pay-in-mobile-apps/.
22 Ahmed Siddiqui, “App Purchasing (Paid, Lite, and Freemium): What's Working, and
What's Appropriate in Apps for Kids?,” MOMs with Apps blog, July 24, 2011,
http://blog.momswithapps.com/2011/07/24/app-purchasing-paid-lite-and-freemium-
whats-working-and-whats-appropriate-in-apps-for-kids/.
23 Apple, “App Store Review Guidelines,”
https://developer.apple.com/appstore/resources/approval/guidelines.html, accessed July
23, 2014.
24 Ben Holmes, “The Economics of Freemium,” Wall Street Journal: The Accelerators,
March 3, 2013, http://blogs.wsj.com/accelerators/2013/03/03/the-economics-of-
freemium/.
25 Zoe Fox, “Freemium Is the Most Profitable Pricing Strategy for Apps,” Mashable,
December 19, 2013, http://mashable.com/2013/12/19/paid-vs-free-apps/.
26 Holmes, “The Economics of Freemium.”
27 Anthony Smith, “Get Paying Users by Giving Your App Away,” Wall Street Journal:
The Accelerators, March 4, 2013, http://blogs.wsj.com/accelerators/2013/03/04/get-
paying-users-by-giving-your-app-away/.
28 David Sacks, “When Freemium Beats Premium,” Wall Street Journal: The
Accelerators, March 1, 2013, http://blogs.wsj.com/accelerators/2013/03/01/when-
freemium-beats-premium/.
29 Games and Learning, “Björn Jeffrey.”
30 Holmes, “The Economics of Freemium.”
31 Apple, “iOS8 Preview: Family Sharing,” www.apple.com/ios/ios8/family-sharing/.
32 Brett Molina and Mike Snider, “FTC Sues Amazon over in-App Purchases,” USA
Today, July 11, 2014, www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2014/07/10/ftc-
amazon/12478459/.

33 Andrew Flachner, “Freemium Limits User Experience,” Wall Street Journal: The
Accelerators, March 4, 2013, http://blogs.wsj.com/accelerators/2013/03/04/freemium-
limits-user-experience/.
34 Ryan Matzner, “How To: Determine the Right Price for Your Mobile App,” Mashable,
August 17, 2011, http://mashable.com/2011/08/17/price-mobile-app/.
35 Ibid.
36 Ibid.
37 Apple, “Volume Purchase Program for Education,” www.apple.com/education/it/vpp,
accessed July 17, 2014
38 Ibid.
39 Google for Education, www.google.com/edu/tablets/#case-study-carousel. Accessed
July 23, 2014
40 Christina Quattrocchi, “Q&A Jake Henry: Lessons from Guilford County's Amplify
Tablet Rollout,” EdSurge, September 23, 2014, www.edsurge.com/n/2014-09-23-q-a-
jake-henry-lessons-from-guilford-county-s-amplify-tablet-rollout.
41 Bob Dronski, “Making Sense of the Apple Volume Purchase Program,” Moms With
Apps blog, September 10, 2012, http://blog.momswithapps.com/2012/09/10/making-
sense-of-the-apple-volume-purchase-program/.
42 Turner, “Creating Great App Previews.”
43 Games and Learning, “Björn Jeffrey.”

Section 3
Mobile Learning for Everyone
One of the most exciting and appealing qualities of the mobile learning movement is how
learning on mobile devices makes learning more accessible and available to everyone. In
this section, we explore the many ways mobile devices can be used to reach different
groups or environments, as well as mobile learning issues and initiatives intended to
protect all users. This section provides useful background and discussions for educators
and developers.
We discuss informal learning, and how devices that can go with students create a plethora
of new learning opportunities and environments, truly breaking the mold of the classroom.
It's no secret that children love mobile devices and in Chapter 13, we explore the special
considerations when teaching and developing for the preschool group. Mobile devices also
have proven to be groundbreaking in accessibility for special populations; we discuss
students with autism and students with visual impairment and the affordances of mobile
devices for each. And in Chapter 15 we discuss the challenges and obligations relating to
data: data privacy for developers, and digital citizenship for students and educators. As
this topic continues to be at the heart of the mobile learning movement, and will surely
continue to evolve and become more nuanced, it is a vital concern for educators,
developers, and learners to be engaged with.


Chapter 12
Informal Learning
Learning environments can be thought of as a spectrum. At one end, we have the more
traditional notion of learning, known as formal learning, where instruction is structured,
grounded in curricula, teacher-led, and generally occurs in a school setting.1, 2 On the
other end lies informal learning, learning that often occurs spontaneously based on our
own interests and curiosities.3, 4, 5 This form of learning does not have a corresponding
curriculum or hours of operation; it happens as we drive around town, meet new people,
observe others and events, engage in new experiences, peruse parks and museums, and
follow our natural curiosities. Informal learning is especially critical for children as they
explore, play, and make sense of the world—they begin to conceptualize things like social
and cultural conventions, properties and processes of the natural world, and spoken
language vicariously through observation of others. Somewhere within this spectrum we
could make delineations, such as semiformal learning, to define activities such as after-
school programs and summer camps; however, for the sake of simplicity, we will use the
formal–informal dichotomy, where informal learning also encapsulates semistructured
activities that occur outside of school hours.

Developing Lifelong Learners
If you've ever watched someone play a videogame, hit a homerun, or drive a car, it
becomes clear that the majority of what we do in our everyday lives was not learned in the
classroom or in some structured environment. Rather, this learning occurrs in contexts
based on personal interests and due to our own impetus—qualities associated with
meaningful learning.6 After a quick conversation with an art enthusiast or classic car guru,
it is obvious that the learning we do outside of school seems to be more powerful and
passionate than learning prescribed by a curriculum.
While most of us think of school as the place where students go to learn, in reality, the
most common schoolhouse is our everyday lives. In fact, children ages 5 to 16 only spend
about 18 percent of their waking hours at school,7 leaving the “vast majority of all
learning throughout the adult life course” to occur informally.8 Moreover, the things we
learn informally are not limited to hobbies and life skills. Instead, the majority of working
individuals feel they developed most of the skills they use in their current occupation
outside of school.9 In essence, our informal learning skills dictate our ability to learn
independently across the lifetime and thrive in the real world.
Despite the prevalence, effectiveness, and importance of informal learning, the majority of
educational capital is targeted toward formal learning environments, as these
environments are typically more controlled and defined. Moreover, the variability in
students' personal lives creates a great challenge in encouraging an overlap between
formal and informal education. It is difficult to teach and model to students strategies for
answering their own questions outside of school without knowing what resources will be
available at any given time. However, the recent proliferation of mobile devices has the
potential to mitigate this challenge. There finally exists a pervasive resource that is not
only appropriate for use both in and out of school, but is also robust enough to provide
instruction for almost any domain. LeapFrog's director of learning, Jim Gray, feels,
“Mobile devices help kids make connections between different spheres of their everyday
world. It can help connect what they're doing in school with what they do in an afterschool
program with what they do at home.”10
But, while our curiosities might seem to come naturally, our knowledge of strategies for
satisfying them do not. More importantly, as we have emphasized in previous chapters, we
cannot assume our so-called digital natives are poised to use their mobile devices for
learning independently11—despite the incessant presence of their devices. In fact, recent
studies that analyze students' informal learning skills found students are only using a
handful of apps for learning outside of school and need more instructional support to take
advantage of mobile devices' capabilities.12, 13
Unfortunately, the overlap between the personal and educational use of mobile devices
manifests as obstructive as opposed to productive. For example, researchers found
students are more likely to text during class rather than use their mobile devices for
informal learning outside of school.14 Therefore, there appears to be a great need for
guided instruction that is directed at blurring the lines between formal and informal
learning. The behaviors we want our students to engage in outside of school in order to

develop lifelong learners must garner higher priority in more formal settings. Aside from
the classroom, after school and summer programs provide a wonderful venue for
modelling informal learning resources and behaviors, as these environments tend to
closely align with the attributes of our daily curiosities. Ultimately, in order to develop
lifelong learners, we need to take advantage of informal education to teach students how
to teach themselves.

Bridging Formal and Informal Learning
In order to prepare learners for tackling informal learning independently, we must first
identify common scenarios in which mobile devices might prove beneficial. Consequently,
instructors can use formal educational settings to introduce students to particular resources
and strategies for optimizing the learning experience outside of the classroom.
Supporting Informal Inquiry
What's the name of this song? How do I tie a bowtie? How many stitches are on a
baseball? Why is the sky so dark this afternoon? How do you play the guitar? Whether
solving a particular problem, looking to learn a new skill, or simply looking to satisfy our
curiosity, the plethora of apps available for download make our mobile devices a pocket
guide to almost anything, and information on topics that do not have a specific app can
likely be found through ebooks, podcasts, YouTube videos, or a simple Internet search.
However, not every reference tool is appropriate for every application or audience,
although you would not guess this based on students' research habits. A recent study found
94 percent of teachers say their students are far more likely to simply use Google when
finding information on their own, but also feel their students lack sophisticated research
skills.15 Introducing students to a variety of research tools—specific as well as general—
can prevent them from falling into the information abyss as well as promote effective time
management. For example, apps designed for reference within a specific domain expedite
the process by narrowing the focus of search and are oftentimes vetted and more credible
than information found through a Google search—especially for younger students.
Educators can help students populate a reference folder on their devices filled with
targeted apps like The Elements, Dictionary.com, Wolfram Alpha, Speak & Translate,
MyCongress, or MathRef. But, as there is not a tool for every scenario, modelling best
practices for navigating apps such as YouTube, Podcasts, Wikipedia, and mobile web
browsers ensure students can effectively indulge all their informal education needs.
Like static apps for reference, dynamic sources of regularly updated content are another
useful tool for informal learning. In fact, these ever-changing sources are often more
engaging, as each visit can differ from the last, and the information is more likely to be
relevant and novel. Up-to-date local, national, or global news headlines, sports scores, and
weather reports are available in an instant. Similarly, more novel presentations of
information, such as Mental Floss or Pinterest, also provide learning opportunities that
might appeal to our humor or interests—while delivering a unique opportunity to get
students reading. For younger students who might not be able to comprehend articles
written for the greater public, student-centered news outlets are available. For example,
CNN's student news, Go Go News, and NewsELA are wonderful resources for younger
learners. For ESL/ELL students, 22 Frames takes a more visual approach to current events
by helping students' comprehension through picture support.
In the case of more complex learning, we might need additional support beyond just the
presentation of information to make sense of the world around us. Developmental
psychologist and informal education researcher Katherine McMillan Culp explains,
“Learning…is not a matter of being informed of something you don't yet understand…

rather, moving from not knowing to knowing requires gaining access to a series of insights
—a type of relationship, a new pattern, a new possibility in the word—that was not
previously available to you.”16 This can be especially true for younger children who have
not yet mastered independent learning skills and cannot readily find (or realize they need
to find) supplemental information or resources to truly comprehend the information they
come across in their environment.
Students should be made aware of apps that support a direct input of information from
their environment. Such apps immediately contextualize the data to provide a more clear
and meaningful explanation of the question at hand. Consider the following example.
Jessica, a 10-year-old girl, is currently studying astronomy in school. She has seen
pictures of Venus in her textbook and online, but wants to see how the Earth's twin
looks from her front yard. She tried to use her textbook and her dad's star chart, but
both left her confused and unsure about where she was looking. Finally, Jessica
brought up the augmented reality app StarWalk on her mobile device. With the app,
she simply points the device to the night sky and the app readily identifies the stars,
constellations, and, finally, Venus.
As this example shows, Jessica was able to benefit from the context-aware sensors
embedded in her mobile device. Moreover, Jessica was able to observe Venus in an
authentic and contextualized manner. By directly imputing information from her
environment, there was little room for error, or even worse, misconception, which can be
difficult to overcome. Similarly, many inquiry apps allow users to directly input
information about their personal environment in order to identify various objects. Such
apps include Leafsnap (flora and fauna), Merlin Bird ID (birds), Shazam (music), QR code
scanners, Google Maps, and even Compass. For general inquiries, Google Goggles pulls
from Google's expansive database and allows users to point their device toward a painting,
landmark, barcode, QR code, printed foreign language, and even Sudoku puzzles to
receive information about the object (or solutions to the Sudoku puzzle!).
Lastly, students should be directed toward apps designed to teach new skills. Instead of
reading a static article online, these apps often come equipped with guided tutorials and
lessons that more readily support understanding. There are interactive training apps for
hobbies like creating origami (e.g., Dollar Origami), tying knots, playing chess, or
musical instruments (e.g, Ultimate Guitar Tabs); and apps for job or school-related skills
like performing CPR, reading (e.g., SAS Read Aloud), computer programming (e.g., Daisy
the Dinosaur, Hopscotch), and learning a new language (e.g., Duolingo).
Leveraging Popular Activities
Mobile devices also afford opportunities to demonstrate the educational value in activities
students engage in on a regular basis—overtly overlapping personal and educational use.
Therefore activities such as social media have been theorized to be an effective
mechanism for connecting informal and formal learning and developing self-regulated,
lifelong learners.17 Other examples include bringing awareness to the fact that text
messaging can be used to seek help or using Minecraft as a platform for modelling ancient
civilizations.

Social Networking
According to a survey by Common Sense Media, approximately 75 percent of kids 13 to
17 years old had an account on a social networking website in 2012.18 No surprise—
students are more inclined to use their social media accounts to connect with friends rather
than use them to find information. While we do not necessarily want youth to stop using
these outlets for their intended purpose, there is great value in teaching students how to
use their social media access for informal learning.
Twitter, for example, has garnered a lot of attention in the education world, but is
particularly relevant within the realm of informal learning. The microblogging nature of
Twitter allows users to view their own personal feed of short, concise messages that are
easier to digest than a long article, thus providing an at-a-glance and up-to-date view of
the topics you personally care about. In fact, Twitter has proven to be timelier than other
news outlets. For example, people were posting to Twitter about the 2008 earthquake in
China long before it was covered by the BBC news.19 Moreover, the breadth of
information on Twitter is infinite and allows users to find information about almost any
topic, such as current events, miscellaneous facts, ideas and inspiration, or simply what
your friends are up to today. However, by utilizing hashtags and hyperlinks, this broad
overview can quickly turn into an in-depth investigation of a particular topic. Many tweets
include hyperlinks that direct users to additional information, whereas hashtags filter the
twitterverse, allowing users to only view tweets on a specific conversation.
One illustration of using social media as a means for productive informal learning is
highlighted in a recent study that sought to understand the role Twitter can play in
informal learning about current events. In particular, this study focused on the Occupy
Wall Street (#OWS) campaign for social change. By analyzing various sets of tweets
tagged with the hashtag #OWS, findings from the report indicated that the magnitude of
user-generated content not only implied community engagement but also provided others
with easy and instant access to “a number of different perspectives in multiple modalities,
including text, video, audio, and image.”20
Several other social media outlets, such as Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, and Vine,
distribute information in a similar manner. Users choose who they wish to share
information with, create a feed of personalized headlines, and have the option to filter by
hashtags. Therefore, the informal acquisition of knowledge via social media can take
many forms, whether school-related (e.g., engaging in a hashtagged discussion about the
president's state of the union address in real time) or otherwise (viewing an infographic on
tricks for getting stains out of dirty laundry). Nonetheless, this mass posting of
information provides an excellent opportunity for teaching students about who is an expert
on a subject and, consequently, where to find sources for credible information. Students
can be encouraged to follow experts or leaders in a certain field, conferences aligned to
students' interests or class material, or even their instructor for immediate feedback during
homework. Additionally, through the use of hashtags and user comments, students can
often find a variety of perspectives on a single topic or details about the daily lives of
individuals from other countries or cultures.
Game-Based Learning

With many buzzwords in education, game-based learning has a split reputation among
educators and researchers. In general, it is hard to argue against the theory of game-based
learning—capturing disengaged students' attention by couching instruction within games,
an implicitly motivating and mesmerizing medium. Games researcher, Jordan Shapiro,
argues the power of game-based learning lies in the observation that games can encourage
educational risk-taking that would normally be hampered by a fear of failure. He notes
that “kids spend hours learning the underlying system of a video game. These kids will die
and hit replay thousands of times…They won't dive into learning about the real world in a
classroom without being terrified of failing. That's terrible. Game-based learning can fix
this.”21 Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis of 77 game-based learning studies conducted
between 2000 and 2012 found an overall trend supporting the use of games in the
classroom;22 therefore, the question surrounding game-based learning should no longer be
if games are good for learning, but rather how to optimize learning within games. In fact, it
is estimated the game-learning market is expected to top $2.3 billion by 2017 with a great
deal of this growth being attributed to mobile games.23
The game-based learning research community seems to agree that the theory of games for
learning warrants their use, but developing such games is quite a challenging endeavor.
Several camps argue that the power of games for learning lies in their ability to foster deep
learning,24 and programs that simply gamify instructional methods do not fulfill this
standard.25 Moreover, learning scientists developing games in academia have yet to
produce a repertoire of promising solutions.26, 27 Games expert, James Gee, attributes this
limitation to the fact that “We have good game designers who rarely communicate with
academics and content people and then we have academics and content people who try to
make their own games. They make terrible games, but the game designers make good
games but they don't really speak to the kind of content, the way problem solving should
work, when it's tied to a school-based topic.”28 Therefore, game-based learning research
needs to continue to evolve and grow as researchers and game experts collaborate to
investigate how to leverage games and game features for important tasks such as
implicitly encouraging higher-level thinking, providing a means for assessing these
previously elusive constructs, and developing professional development around this
instructional method. Only through this continued investigation will games for the
classroom finally shift from gamified quizzes to programs designed for long-term,
multisession engagement similar to popular entertainment games today.
When considering developing or integrating games for learning into the classroom, it is
important to consider the features of games that appear to not only trigger, but sustain
engagement over time. In other words, games appear to be more effective when they
explicitly integrate theoretical factors known to sustain interest,29 such as creating
adaptive challenge, contextualizing play within an engaging narrative, and emphasizing
interactivity.30, 31 Also, in order to achieve deeper learning gains, games should require
extended or multisession interaction—recent findings suggest an average of six hours of
total interaction has beneficial results.32 Successful implementations, such as Filament
Games' iCivics, allows for this extended, multisession experience. In fact, fourth-graders
interacting with the iCivics game suite during their civics curriculum twice a week for six
weeks scored an average of ten points higher on their civics tests.33 However, since

integrating such an extended experience during school hours might be impractical, mobile
devices are a great platform for providing students with access to the environment
anytime, anywhere.
Alternatively, instructors have the option to repurpose popular entertainment games for
educational purposes. As seen in the example below, Kristianna Luce, a high school math
teacher, uses Angry Birds in her algebra classes to teach parabolas and the quadratic
formula.34
To begin, Luce had her students play the game.…Soon, she directed the conversation
toward asking what would be the highest point for a bird. Such a point is called
vertex of the parabola. Given our work here, let's find the highest point for a bird
launched at 60 degrees. This occurs at x = −b/2a. For 60 degrees, a trajectory follows
y =1 +1.732x – 0.211x2. So, a = −0.211 and b =1.732. The vertex occurs at x
=1.732/(0.411) =4.214 at a height equaling 1 +1.732(4.214) – 0.211(4.214)2
=4.552…
The basics of algebra can be covered through these discussions, and in playing a widely
popular game. Luce even connected it to the state's standards, to further illustrate the
usefulness of these concepts.35 Through using an informal and popular game, Luce was
able to connect with the students, and show algebra's connections with their real and
digital worlds.
Similarly, teachers have developed lesson plans around other games. Lucas Gillispie, a
district technology specialist in North Carolina, found ways to leverage World of Warcraft
for poetry instruction by having students “study riddle poetry and share their notes within
the guild. They write their own riddle poems based on Azeroth (the world in which World
of Warcraft is set), edit and critique each other, then take their riddles into the wider game
world to challenge outsiders.”36 Larger efforts, such as MinecraftEdu, have developed
entire curricula around using the popular game, Minecraft, in the classroom. Equipped
with lesson plans, resource guides, discussion forums, live chat, and a wiki for instructors,
the MinecraftEdu campaign provides ideas for lessons and support across the content
areas including science, history/geography, English language arts, and math.37
Beyond gameplay, providing instructors with an assessment engine, a teacher dashboard to
monitor gameplay and generate reports with quantifiable learning outcomes, is a critical
component. Games for learning should also come packaged with implementation
strategies and lesson guides. Learning experiences using games should not be
implemented in isolation; utilizing supplemental instruction for contextualizing play is
key.38 For example, a recent project by GlassLab, a game-based learning research group,
situated the use of the popular game SimCity within environmental science instruction to
not only assess content knowledge but also higher-order thinking skills such as systems
thinking and problem solving.39 Following a supplemental lesson guide, gameplay serves
as an engaging vehicle for formative and summative assessment. In conjunction with a
teacher dashboard or assessment engine, data points during gameplay are used to inform
instruction. Moreover, by allowing access to a teacher dashboard on a mobile device,
instructors are free to analyze the data while walking around the room, monitoring and
scaffolding gameplay as needed, and as identified by real-time metrics. As we see both

mobile technologies and games proliferate in the classroom, collaboration between these
two fields seems like a natural fit.
Field Trips
Guided exploration outside of the classroom through events like fieldtrips offer great
opportunities for teaching students how to use their devices in a contextualized manner.
Many museums and other points of interest offer companion apps to add a level
interaction to the traditional museum excursion, and can be implemented while still
preserving informal behaviors.40
For added engagement, apps like Tale Blazer, and the British Museum's A Gift for Athena,
turn a field trip to the museum into an adventure. Equipped with their mobile devices,
scavenger hunts are presented, and students are tasked to complete a variety of activities
using information found throughout the museum exhibits. Also, augmented reality apps
bring objects in the real world to life, making what used to be a static exhibit into an
interactive space. For example, the Royal Ontario Museum's ROM Ultimate Dinosaurs
transforms a collection of dinosaur bones into a fully fleshed, breathing animal
transporting students back to the prehistoric age. Similar efforts have been created in
Europe at France's Cité de L'Espace aerospace museum and Greece's Acropolis Museum.
The museums' companion apps allow visitors to point their devices toward exhibits to
either see crumbing ancient statues in their original form or watch a rocket take off into
space. These efforts also incorporate storytelling elements to further engage and help
museum visitors understand how the exhibits fit into the historical timeline.41 And don't
forget about the bus ride. Google Field Trip uses GPS to gather relevant information for
students as they travel to their field-trip destination. From estimated time of arrival to
historical sights and landmarks along the way, this field-trip companion app allows
teachers to utilize every minute of the trip for learning.
Moreover, apps can be used to differentiate users' visits by accommodating special needs.
To date, most museums have little to offer visitors with visual impairments. The majority
of exhibits are primarily visual, with rotating exhibits and tricky floor plans, museums can
be extremely difficult to navigate for this population. However, mobile devices not only
enhance the experience through multimedia supplemental material, but also take
advantage of interactive maps, voice over, and Bluetooth beacons to aid navigation. For
example, the NC Museum of Natural Sciences Guide app (NC NatSci) integrates audio
content (data that would traditionally be housed on an audio guide or audio wand) within
an interactive, accessible map of the museum (that produces a more personalized
experience – allows user to see all dinosaur exhibits, etc.). Going one step further, the
Palmer Museum of Art at Penn State University plans to start using low-energy,
navigational iBeacons that transmit Bluetooth signals throughout the space.42 They
communicate with mobile devices running a companion app that is aware of the visitor's
location (similar to how we use GPS for outdoor navigation). Therefore, the device can
automatically identify where the visitor is standing and play the corresponding audio track
or supply key information about a piece of artwork. This system can also guide users
around the museum from their current location to points of interest as well as exits,
restrooms, and elevators. iBeacons are a huge area for potential growth in the museum and

mobile device world and something that we are very excited to see come to fruition.
Lastly, field trips are not just limited to museums and other landmarks. Students are also
leaving the classroom being exposed to real-world experiences, such as observing flora
and fauna, collecting data, and shadowing working adults—all of which can be enhanced
with mobile devices. For example, consider the following illustration.
Mrs. Johnson's seventh-grade class is practicing different styles of writing. This
week, the students are practicing descriptive writing, and Mrs. Johnson has asked her
students to describe their school and the surrounding property. Before they begin, she
asks the students to do a little research and document characteristics of the school by
taking pictures that they can then use to support their writing. Mrs. Johnson divides
students into groups and assigns them an area to take pictures with their devices.
Some children go outside, some go to the gymnasium and cafeteria, while the others
roam the hallways. Finally, she asks the students to upload their pictures to Instagram
using the hashtag #SchoolSearch. Consequently, students have access to a
collaborative scrapbook from which they can pull as they draft their essays.
Whether students are taking water samples from a local pond using EcoMobile or helping
a nurse monitor her patient's pulse, guided exploration outside of the classroom provides a
wonderful opportunity to show students how mobile devices are so much more than a
source of entertainment or a way to connect with their friends.

Conclusion
Humans are curious by nature. And while we identify schools as the place we go to learn,
we actually do the majority of our learning informally outside of the classroom. Also,
informal learning generally aligns better with the way we learn. Our own curiosities and
interests often guide it, and it occurs in context, which makes it seem more relevant than
the material presented formally in the classroom. As we conduct daily activities like
driving and cooking, meet new people, pick up new hobbies, or simply observe the world
around us, we are always taking in new information. However, it is what we do with this
information that can result in learning.
It is there, where information meets knowledge acquisition, that mobile devices serve to
enhance our informal learning experiences. Instead of asking yourself, “What kind of
flower is that?” on your morning walk, mobile devices provide you an opportunity to
research and find the answer to your question immediately. So, instead of simply
wondering, you have now learned another type of flower.
But, our ability to strategically use mobile devices to feed our curiosities does not come
naturally. Therefore, to optimize students' informal learning, we must first teach them how
to ask their own questions and effectively seek their own answers. Formal classroom
learning at school provides a great opportunity to do that. Simulating daily activities and
challenging students to solve real-world problems have not only been shown to encourage
deeper engagement with the material, but also give students a chance to use a variety of
tools and resources in a supervised setting. This way, instructors can guide students and
ensure they do not flounder in the mass of available apps and information on the Internet.
As a result, students learn their mobile devices are so much more than a means to
communicate with their friends and update their social media accounts. Instead, they are a
powerful tool for indulging curiosities individually. In short, by teaching how to use
mobile devices in informal settings, we are teaching students how to be lifelong learners.

Notes
1 H. Eshach, “Bridging In-School and Out-Of-School Learning: Formal, Non-Formal, and
Informal Education,” Journal of Science Education and Technology 16, no. 2 (2007):
171–190.
2 L. B. Resnick, Education and Learning toThink (Washington, DC: National Academies
Press, 1987).
3 Eshach, “Bridging In-School and Out-of-School Learning.”
4 J. Osborne and J. Dillon, “Research on Learning in Informal Contexts: Advancing the
Field?,” International Journal of Science Education 29, no. 12 (2007): 1441–1445.
5 K. W Lai, F. Khaddage, and G. Knezek, “Blending Student Technology Experiences in
Formal and Informal Learning,” Journal of Computer-Assisted Learning 29, no. 5
(2013): 414–425.
6 J. Lave, The Culture of Acquisition and the Practice of Understanding (Palo Alto, CA:
Institute for Research on Learning,1988): 259–286.
7 Osborne and Dillon, “Research on Learning.”
8 D. W. Livingstone, “Exploring the Icebergs of Adult Learning: Findings of the First
Canadian Survey of Informal Learning Practices,” Centre for the Study of Education
and Work, 1999, https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/retrieve/4451.
9 Microsoft Partners in Learning, The Pearson Foundation, Gallup, “21st Century Skills
and the Workplace: A 2013 Microsoft Partners in Learning and Pearson Foundation
Study,” 2013,
www.ferris.edu/HTMLS/administration/academicaffairs/extendedinternational/ccleaders
10 Carly Shuler, “Pockets of Potential: Using Mobile Technologies to Promote Children's
Learning,” Joan Ganz Cooney Center, New York, January 2009,
www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/wp-
content/uploads/2010/03/pockets_of_potential_1_.pdf.
11 B. Gurung and D. Rutledge, “Digital Learners and the Overlapping of Their Personal
and Educational Digital Engagement,” Computers & Education 77 (2014): 91–100.
12 Y. A. Rahim, A. N. Che Pee, and M. A. Othman, “Observation on the Uses of Mobile
Phones to Support Informal Learning,” International Journal of Interactive Mobile
Technologies 6, no. 4 (2012): 43.
13 I. M. Santos and N. Ali, “Exploring the Uses of Mobile Phones to Support Informal
Learning,” Education and Information Technologies 17, no. 2 (2012): 187–203.
14 Gurung and Rutledge, “Digital Learners.”
15 Pew Research Center, “How Teens Do Research in the Digital World: A Survey of
Advanced Placement and National Writing Project Teachers Finds That Teen's

Research Habits Are Changing in the Digital Age,”
www.pewinternet.org/2012/11/01/how-teens-do-research-in-the-digital-world/.
16 Katherine McMillan Culp, “Possible Worlds Creator: Developers Should Focus on
Function over Aesthetics,” Games and Learning,
www.gamesandlearning.org/2014/05/12/possible-worlds-creator-developers-should-
focus-on-function-over-aesthetics.
17 A. Kitsantas and N. Dabbagh, “The Role of Web 2.0 Technologies in Self-Regulated
Learning,” New Directions for Teaching and Learning 126 (2011): 99–106.
18 “Social Media, Social Life: How Teens View their Digital Lives,” Common Sense
Media, Summer 2012, www.commonsensemedia.org/research/social-media-social-life-
how-teens-view-their-digital-lives.
19 Clay Shirky, “How Social Media Can Make History,” 2009,
www.ted.com/talks/clay_shirky_how_cellphones_twitter_facebook_can_make_history.
20 B. Gleason, “# Occupy Wall Street: Exploring Informal Learning About a Social
Movement on Twitter,” American Behavioral Scientist 57, no. 7 (2013): 966–982.
21 “Shapiro: Games, Not Gamification, Can Help Solve the Education Crisis,” Games and
Learning, March 28, 2014, www.gamesandlearning.org/2014/03/28/shapiro-games-not-
gamification-can-help-solve-the-education-crisis/.
22 Douglas Clark, Emily Tanner-Smity, and Stephen Killingsworth, “Digital Games,
Design, and Learning: A Systematic Review and Meta Analysis,” SRI International,
2014, www.sri.com/work/publications/digital-games-design-and-learning-systematic-
review-and-meta-analysis-brief.
23 Lee Banville, “Driven by Mobile, Edu-Games Market Expected to Top $2.3 Billion by
2017,” Games and Learning, October 26, 2013,
www.gamesandlearning.org/2013/10/26/driven-by-mobile-edu-games-market-
expected-to-top-2-3-billion-by-2017.
24 Lee Banville, “Research Shows Games Have Significant Impact on Student
Performance,” Games and Learning, October 1, 2013,
www.gamesandlearning.org/2013/10/01/research-shows-games-have-significant-
impact-on-student-performance/.
25 “Shapiro: Games,”
26 L. Alfieri, P. J. Brooks, N. J. Aldrich, and H. R. Tenenbaum, “Does Discovery-Based
Instruction Enhance Learning?,” Journal of Educational Psychology 103, no. 1 (2011):
1–18.
27 R. E. Mayer and C. I. Johnson, “Adding Instructional Features That Promote Learning
in a Game-Like Environment,” Journal of Educational Computing Research 42, no. 3
(2010): 241–265.
28 Lee Banville, “Newsmaker: James Gee on Why the Power of Games to Teach Remains

Unrealized,” Games and Learning, February 10, 2014,
www.gamesandlearning.org/2014/02/10/newsmaker-james-gee-on-why-the-power-of-
games-to-teach-remains-unrealized/.
29 Clark, Tanner-Smity, and Killingsworth, “Digital Games.”
30 D. A. Bergin “Influences on Classroom Interest,” Educational Psychologist 34, no. 2
(1999): 87–98.
31 M. Mitchell, “Situational Interest: Its Multifaceted Structure in the Secondary School
Mathematics Classroom,” Journal of Educational Psychology 85, no. 3 (1993): 424.
32 Clark and others, “Digital Games.”
33 Games and Learning, “Study Highlights Effectiveness of iCivics at Raising Test
Scores,” February 21, 2014, www.gamesandlearning.org/2014/02/21/study-highlights-
effectiveness-of-icivics-at-raising-test-scores/.
34 Tim Charier, “Frustrated with Math? Try Angry Birds,” Huffington Post, June 11,
2012, www.huffingtonpost.com/tim-chartier/frustrated-with-math-try-
_b_1581042.html.
35 Ibid.
36 Ann Doss Helms, “Popular Video Games Integrated into K–12 Learning,” Education
Week, January 22, 2013, www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2013/01/23/18games.h32.html.
37 MinecraftEdu, www.minecraftedu.com.
38 Clark, Tanner-Smity, and Killingsworth, “Digital Games.”
39 GlassLab, “Psychometric Considerations in Game-Based Assessment,”
www.instituteofplay.org/work/projects/glasslab-research/.
40 Yoon, S. A., Elinich, K., Wang, J., J. B. Schoonveld, and E. Anderson, “Scaffolding
Informal Learning in Science Museums: How Much Is Too Much?.,” Science
Education, 97, no. 6 (2013): 848-877.
41 Yannis Ioannidis, Olivier Balet, and Dimitrios Pandermalis, “Tell Me a Story:
Augmented Reality Technology In Museums,” The Guardian, April 4, 2014,
www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-
blog/2014/apr/04/story-augmented-reality-technology-museums.
42 Katie Jacobs, “A Day at the Museum,” Penn State: IT News, October 21, 2014.
http://news.it.psu.edu/article/day-museum?
utm_content=buffer66d84&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campa


Chapter 13
Engaging Young Users: Apps for Preschoolers
Mobile devices offer an intuitive, simple interface that provides many benefits for all
populations. For preschoolers, children from ages one to five, these benefits enable them
to use mobile devices with an ease that often surprises their parents and teachers, and
opens doors to new, rich educational experiences. With the increasing prevalence of
mobile devices among parents and adults, preschoolers have access to this technology at
unprecedented levels. Therefore, there is a burgeoning market for educational apps
targeted toward preschoolers, leaving parents and teachers with many options and little
guidance on how to choose quality apps for children. Moreover, app developers need to be
in tune with what preschoolers are capable of and need to learn. This chapter will address
these concerns.
It's an understatement to say there are a lot of preschool apps to choose from. Of the top-
selling 200 educational apps, 58 percent are for toddlers and preschoolers,1 a statistic that
mirrors the Cooney Center's in-depth analysis in late 2010.2 The market is responding to
the increased demand from this demographic. More parents currently have smartphones
and tablet devices than ever before and preschool-aged children, looking to emulate their
parents' behaviors, have an unprecedented level of access. There is a tremendous
opportunity to use these devices for good. That is, they can be used to teach children the
skills they need for kindergarten in a fun, engaging, and effective way. It's an important
time to reach young learners; positive learning experiences set them up for future
academic success and lifelong learning. However, due to the market saturation and the
often fuzzy line between pure fun and educational activities, it's vital that users figure out
how to choose a good app and that developers develop useful apps. Providing good
information to developers on what preschoolers need and desire, as well as providing
information to parents on how to choose the best apps in a saturated market, are vital to
making the most of mobile learning for this group. Issues, such as privacy, security, and
screen time (the amount of exposure permitted to mobile devices) are important
considerations to determine which apps to use and how much time with them should be
allowed.

Key Skills for Preschool Apps
When students enter kindergarten, teachers look for proficiency in certain areas, skills that
prime young children for future learning. Parents are increasingly taking on the role of
teacher (or facilitator) in the preschool years to ensure that their children are developing a
strong foundation in a number of areas that prepare them for future academic success.
Tablets are making their way into many homes, and they provide a new opportunity for
preschoolers to learn these prerequisite skills in a fun, engaging way. Many preschool apps
are developed and marketed with these capacities in mind, and these areas should certainly
be used as a guide for parents in selecting apps (see Figure 13.1).
Figure 13.1 Key Skill for Preschool Apps
Language and Literacy
The ability to read and write is seen as a cornerstone skill for kids; both are used in all
other subjects and without them, a child can quickly fall behind across the board.
Providing quality instruction at the emergent-reader level has been identified as a powerful
technique for mitigating reading difficulties later in development.3 According to the 2013
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), on average only 42 percent of U.S.
fourth graders read at or above the proficient level; the majority of students were not
considered proficient readers.4 These national statistics highlight the importance of
creating valuable literary experiences for children during the emergent and early reader
phases (preschool through third grade), and mobile devices afford a great opportunity to
do this.

Emergent Reading Skills
Emergent reading skills—namely, written language awareness and phonological
awareness—are quite critical for later reading development and performance.5
Phonological awareness encompasses a child's knowledge of spoken language (e.g.,
phoneme identification and manipulation), whereas written language awareness involves
an understanding of print concepts (e.g., letter and word identification, print
conventions).6 Given the predictive power of these skills, encouraging literacy behaviors
at a young age is widely recommended.7
Two excellent ways to develop reading readiness translate well into the app space: shared
book reading and drill and practice activities. Shared book reading is a tried and true
means of developing reading readiness that precedes mobile learning by centuries. But
mobile devices provide a level of interactivity not afforded by print materials. Creating
apps that allow the users to read a book, or listen to a book being read to them, with print
highlighting is a way to convey phonological awareness and written language awareness
to the emergent reader. Another key way to develop reading readiness is through drill and
practice apps for letter identification, letter sounds, and phonological awareness.
Of course, while emergent reading activities are valuable, the utility of the session as an
instructional tool is dependent on the quality of the interaction.8 It is important, when
developing and using these emergent reader applications, that the mobile device not be
thought of as taking the place of the parent. Parental involvement is advised and can
enhance the outcomes further. The mobile device and reading app allow for a richer
reading experience for both the parent and the child, and the opportunity for more frequent
reading experiences.
Fine Motor Skills
Fine motor skills are a vital part of education. Writing and drawing, coloring within the
lines, cutting using scissors, and playing a musical instrument are all activities that require
strong fine motor skills. Handwriting is an important fine motor skill that is still very
relevant, despite the growing use of technology in classrooms. Handwriting is a
foundational literacy skill that enables learning of other skills. Children spend a substantial
amount of their school day writing and performing other fine motor skills, and “difficulty
in this area can interfere with academic achievement.”9 The inability to clearly and
quickly take notes interferes with the acquisition of other skills, such as spelling, and
impacts learning in every subject area. “Children with handwriting problems typically
have difficulty keeping up with the volume of written work required during the elementary
school years, which may impede academic progress and lead to lowered self-esteem and
behavioral problems.”10 Even in today's classrooms with the widespread use of computers
and mobile devices, handwriting remains a crucial developmental skill for a child to
master.11
Mobile devices offer several opportunities to improve a preschooler's fine motor skills,
which improve only through practice.12 While apps can't afford student practice with
scissors, glue, writing utensils, or other physical objects (yet!) they can support skills for
coloring, staying in the lines, tracing, writing, connecting dots, and other fine motor skill

development activities, with touch or using a stylus. The Little Writer app gives the
preschooler guidance while tracing a letter shape, showing the correct way to make the
letter, and forcing the user to stay within the letter shape.13 Apps like this allow mobile
devices to digitally scaffold the process of learning fine motor skills. A major benefit is
that it's easy to start over; the child doesn't need to get a new piece of paper or dwell on
mistakes. Additionally, tablets offer a direct transfer of skills; tracing a letter shape with
your finger or a stylus is very similar to writing the letter on a piece of paper. The
transferability of tracing using a mouse on a PC, for instance, is not nearly as high.
Fostering strong fine motor skills early in the learning process sets the preschooler up with
foundational skills upon which to build future learning.
Spatial Skills and Math
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) careers are in high demand and there
is an increasing focus on cultivating these skills in students. A national effort is being
made to expand participation in STEM subjects. Math proficiency denotes a broad set of
competencies. In the preschool years, learning numbers and operations, measurement and
analysis, algebraic thinking, and spatial reasoning are key subsets that lay the foundation
for future academic achievement in mathematical areas.14 Tablet and mobile devices hold
promise to enhance a preschooler's early math skills, especially spatial skills and number
fluency.
While advanced mathematical operations are typically beyond the reach of preschool-aged
children, a strong foundation for mathematical aptitude can also be enhanced through
developing basic numerical concepts. Ultimately, numerical literacy enables a person to
move from performing a direct computation to an automated computation that requires
few cognitive resources (see Chapter 2 for more on automaticity and other the
psychological processes involved in learning). At the preschool level, this involves
identifying numbers, recognizing amounts (1, 2, 3) without counting, comparing
quantities, estimation, identifying and copying patterns, sorting and classifying objects,
and performing operations on numbers.15 The SAS Math Stretch app features many games
that facilitate this number fluency and practice that lays the foundation for higher order
mathematics.
Spatial skills are an important component of STEM and have been linked through
extensive research with success in STEM careers. Spatial thinking concerns shapes, the
locations of objects, the potential paths they might take to move, and their relation to other
objects.16 Excellent spatial thinkers are able to easily conceptualize movement and
manipulation. While almost everyone thinks using verbal, mathematical, and spatial skills,
research suggests those with an increased aptitude for spatial thinking are more inclined to
pursue an interest in STEM subjects.17 Numerous studies have shown that spatial skills
begin developing in children at a very young age, but can be improved at all stages in a
person's life through practice.18 Indeed, the earlier these skills are fostered in children, the
better. For the preschool crowd, this means using apps as a play space to teach skills like
counting, number recognition, shapes, colors, spatial-relevant terms (i.e., in front of,
behind, etc.), pattern recognition, and creation.

Unfortunately, most K-12 schools don't teach and assess spatial skills explicitly and leave
it up to activities outside of the classroom to compensate for this lack of instruction. Given
the interactive, hands-on nature of mobile technologies, there are many opportunities for
valuable spatial skill development. For example, research has shown playing games like
Tetris can lead to improvements in players' spatial skills, with one study concluding that
regular Tetris playing leads to long-term improvement of spatial skills and was generalized
to other spatial tasks, and even improved academic outcomes.19 These results are not
limited to just Tetris; other video games have been linked to similar results.20
How do we teach spatial and math skills to preschoolers? In the years before a child enters
kindergarten, children often do the majority of their learning and development through
play. With a balance of instruction and play, a child can develop a strong spatial skill set.
Activities like putting together a jigsaw puzzle, using maps, and block building all
challenge children to reason about the world in terms of spatial relations. Activities like
these can easily be simulated in the appspace. For instance, in the Toca Doctor app, young
users are challenged to guide a marble through simulated arteries to reach the heart. It also
gives the child gears in different shapes and the user must find the right fit to make the
mechanical “brain” start turning.
Social Skills
Social skills are an important skillset for getting preschoolers ready for kindergarten.
Kindergarten readiness often entails the ability to listen, follow directions, play
cooperatively, display empathy and emotional intelligence, and respect others. These skills
can be fostered through time on mobile devices. In the popular press, some social skills
are thought to be stunted by device exposure. However, research generally shows the
opposite to be true. Through mobile play, preschoolers are developing several key social
skills including communication of feelings, empathy, patience, interpersonal relations, and
respect. The ability to regulate and communicate their emotions enables them to better
interact with grownups and other children, as well as understand and control their own
feelings. They figure out they can use communication to drive environmental changes to
help regulate emotion. Furthermore, empathy enables them to recognize how others feel
and act to improve others' situations. Beyond the emotional skills that are closely tied to
the development of social skills, specific abilities, like following instructions and
interacting with others, allow preschoolers to seamlessly transition to the structure of the
classroom.
Historically, technology has enabled simulating situations for children to practice tasks
such as social interaction, empathy, and following directions. The Next Generation
Preschool Math grant focuses on creating and testing iPad apps in the preschool setting,
noting the many instances of unprompted social sharing that take place among its users.21
In several noted instances, one child will successfully complete a task or figure out how to
do something and immediately look up to share this with his neighbor. Additionally, some
apps allow for several people to play, which teaches turn taking and collaborative skills.
Other apps, like Toca Tea Party, encourage interpersonal relationships to take place off
screen. This app allows the user to set an augmented reality tea party with drinks, treats,
music, and customizable décor. The user can invite friends (or stuffed animals) to drink tea

and eat treats, leaving plenty of room for imagination and social learning off screen.22
Many educational apps that convey social skills are less obvious to parents; Toca Tea
Party doesn't teach the alphabet or counting or any obvious reading and math skills.
However, it is play-based and encourages the child to imagine and interact socially on and
off screen.
Creativity
The Partnership for 21st Century Skills, a prominent advocate for empowering students
with the skills necessary to succeed in the information economy, identifies creativity as
one of the critical learning and innovation skills.23 A critical part of thinking creatively is
instilling strategies in students for when they are wrong. Being wrong is often a necessary
step in creating original solutions and products.24 It is important that students learn to
“elaborate, refine, analyze, evaluate ideas to improve and maximize creative efforts.”25
Further, the Partnership for 21st Century Skills stresses the ability to work creatively with
others and to produce tangible outcomes from creative thoughts.26
Preschoolers predominantly practice creative work with others through play. Play is a
broadly important concept in learning, especially for young children. But play also has
unique contributions to the development of creativity. The informal structure of play, as
opposed to more strictly formal settings, allows for risk-free exploration and
experimentation. Children are free to make mistakes without penalty. Consequently,
preschoolers are provided with opportunities to refine and elaborate their ideas and
mistakes to cultivate strategies relevant for lifelong learning. Exploring the intersection of
imagination and reality through play, either individually or collaboratively, has
tremendous value in the development of creativity.27
Great mobile apps need to incorporate and support the interesting, creative thoughts of
preschoolers. This includes everything from idea formation and refinement to supporting
collaboration and dissemination. Widely, today's mobile apps provide tools for creative art
exploration, learning, play, and practice. Students can play instruments, both real (such as
the guitar, piano, and bass found in Apple's GarageBand) and fantastical instruments
(such as those from Smule, like Ocarina which turns your iPhone into a musical
instrument). Numerous photo, drawing, and painting apps are also available to scaffold
student creativity. SAS Gloss provides drawing starters to help teachers demonstrate to
students their own creativity and how creativity can lead to different results from different
students.
Creating and sharing something is a big part of preschool life, as any parent or teacher
with walls, refrigerators or office bulletin boards filled with art work can attest. Capturing
students' creativity is important so that they or others can build on it. As we move deeper
into the twenty-first century, the creative productions of preschoolers are increasingly
becoming more and more digitized. Numerous mobile apps have already been designed to
harness the disseminative potential of creative productions of all ages, including
preschoolers. For instance, Toca Tailor lets children choose fabrics in various colors and
patterns, dressing their model in whatever way they want. When they're done, they can
take a picture (a screenshot) within the app and save it to share with others, preserving

their creative endeavor.

What Do Preschoolers Want to Learn in Your App?
Language and literacy skills, specifically fine motor skills that enable writing and
emergent reading skills (such as letters, sounds, and sight words), presented in a
fun way to make reading a positive experience from the beginning.
Spatial skills and early math activities are important to develop the child's
budding analytical skills.
Certain social skills can be developed through apps that cultivate emotional skills
(like empathy) and necessary skills for socialization, like listening and obeying
instructions.
Creativity should be involved wherever possible, allowing the preschooler to use
imagination and ingenuity.
An opportunity to try something and recover from failure in a positive
environment (which might include the use of verbal cues and encouragement).

What Makes an Engaging Preschool App?
A good preschool app is, above all, engaging. To retain preschoolers' relatively short
attention span and educate them, an app must make sure that it grabs and maintains their
interest. While many of these principles for preschool app design and development hold
true across the educational domain, they're amplified in importance for preschool.
Preschoolers come to the table with less developed literacy and mathematical skills and a
short attention span, so it's vital that any app marketed to this age group understand these
differences in ability.
There are several ways apps can engage this group, but a primary focus for the
development of any concept for preschool educational apps should be play-based learning.
The connotations of the term “play” should not undermine its educational importance. In
fact, play is regarded as one of the most powerful methods of instruction during early
childhood. Einstein knew the value of play when he said, “…play seems to be the essential
feature in productive scientific thought,” and researchers are in universal agreement that
play provides a strong foundation for intellectual growth, creativity, and problem
solving.28
The app developer's challenge then, is balancing humorous and playful aspects with
enriching content.29 Finding a fun concept in which to embed the educational content is
key. At some point, peeling back the play to expose just how much innate learning was
occurring will help children develop efficacy for future learning, because they become
aware of how learning was applied for enjoyment and growth. Additionally, they'll have
positive connotations with learning. While learning doesn't always have to be hidden—
some apps are very explicitly teaching an academic skill—it is one hallmark of preschool
apps. The literature on student engagement is vast. In our experience, there are several
relevant components of student engagement as they apply to preschool-aged children.
Motivation
Motivation is a powerful force: it drives humans to act.30 Extrinsic and intrinsic
motivations, discussed in Chapter 2, are two contrasting forces that compel us to act. For
preschoolers, it's important to use both, but focus on cultivating intrinsic motivation.
Intrinsic motivation refers to engaging in a behavior because it is inherently interesting.31
The behavior is undertaken solely for the challenge it poses, the enjoyment it yields, or the
curiosity it satisfies; the act has some internal utility. Intrinsic motivation is favored
because it has been associated with quality learning and creativity.32 Further, it is believed
that pedagogy that cultivates interest in a subject matter is more likely to lead to self-
initiated learning beyond instructional experiences.33 Intrinsic motivation is more
challenging in the app space, however, as it is very difficult to measure. Malone and
Lepper's taxonomy of intrinsic motivations consists of both individual and interpersonal
factors.34 The four individual intrinsic motivators—challenge, control, curiosity, and
fantasy—are useful guides in engaging preschoolers.
For an app to be challenging, the tasks presented to the preschooler must be neither too
easy nor unduly difficult. Either of the ends of the spectrum will foster little or no intrinsic

interest and may lead to user boredom or frustration. Designing optimally challenging,
leveled tasks will maximize the child's motivation and scaffold the learning experience by
providing differentiated instruction based on performance. This means that the app cannot
require a child to master too many new functions to play. It is difficult to develop for this
group, and this is a primary reason why. Continually refreshing content, integrating
leveled content, and knowing your intended audience well are key practices in ensuring
that your content is challenging.
Providing some level of control to the child is another way to promote intrinsic
motivation. Humans have a basic tendency to want to have a hand in their own fate.
Providing mechanisms that allow children to manipulate the learning experience results in
a sense of power and choice. Tablet devices inherently offer this control, if the child is
given free rein over which app he wants to play. (This may be restricted by the parents or
teachers.) Another way to offer control to young users is within the app: activity choice.
Toca House lets learners choose from several activities in different areas of the house.
Children are innately inquisitive, and apps can stoke this curiosity and use it to stimulate
interest. Student interest can be maintained by controlling an optimal level of discrepancy
between the student's current knowledge and skills and the expected knowledge and skills
following engagement in particular activities. Dinosaur Train Mesozoic Math Adventures
teaches math but sets these skills in a dinosaur world. Contextualizing concepts can often
be a way to invoke curiosity in a different subject. For instance, in Mesozoic Math, the
user collects, groups and counts fossils, learning to make bar charts and developing
statistical problem solving skills.35 Relating concepts to something students are interested
in encourages them to seek deeper understanding and identify how it relates to their
interest.
Fantasies can evoke intrinsic motivation and interest in ways that otherwise are
unavailable to the student in reality. Apps should enable students to develop mental
models of imaginary situations. A great example of a fantasy-based app is Toca Pet
Doctor, in which children see injured pets and apply bandages, ointments, and give them
food, in the imaginary setting of a veterinarian's office. Through the fantastical setting,
children learn actual ways to help animals. One important challenge to note with using this
type of motivation is to ensure that the app finds mechanisms to help learners translate
knowledge to real-world situations. Toca House offers several opportunities for users to
practice early math skills by doing chores within the virtual house, like sorting, matching,
comparing and measuring.
While developing intrinsic motivation in preschoolers is most desirable because of its
close relationship to their innate eagerness to learn, children don't always have this
motivation for all tasks. Young children exhibit some intrinsic motivation for certain tasks
(choosing an outfit or putting on shoes independently, for instance); however it is possible
to use rewards to enhance intrinsic motivation. Instilling feelings of competency is one
way to do this. A major way to motivate preschoolers uses rewards strategically and
methodically, which can provide the external scaffolding to autonomous educational tasks.
When incorporating rewards, it is important to understand what your target audience in
fact perceives as a reward. Rewards for an adult are often vastly different from what
preschoolers see as a reward. Simple acts such as providing clear goals and encouraging

feedback are often sufficient for motivating younger audiences. For instance, in guessing
“Which shape is a triangle?” providing positive reinforcement and tips to direct the child
to the correct answer after an incorrect answer is a good idea. (“A triangle has three sides,
try again!”)36 And finally, rewarding and acknowledging productive effort, as opposed to
correct answers alone, is important. For instance, the Super Why! app encourages players
by awarding stickers after the successful completion of a module, holding their interest
longer.37 It could, however, be something less concrete, even a trumpeting sound or
exuberant animation could be a reward for a success in an app.
Interest
There are several important considerations to be aware of regarding preschoolers' interest
in apps. To effectively engage this age group, the app needs to have developmentally
appropriate content to be interesting.38 It is important to carefully delineate content so it is
easy to find developmentally appropriate material. Consider apps with multiple levels, or
using a standardized leveling system for content. Caretakers, parents, and teachers should
be able to easily assess the appropriateness of an app for their preschooler. For developers,
this means having a strong understanding of the exact age group being developed for; one
year olds and four year olds have substantially different abilities and interests. Test your
app on these age groups to have a solid grasp on how they interact with the app and what
makes sense to them. The skills mentioned earlier in this chapter (reading readiness,
spatial skills, and so on) are a good starting place in determining what the user knows and
needs to know.
Consider your audience and how much new content they can attend to at one time. A
valuable method is to segment the content into chunks.39 For instance, preschoolers are
more engaged with books that have fewer sentences and words per page, and wouldn't be
as engaged with a long paragraph. Use similar principles to divide up the content into
manageable pieces, colocating it with contextually relevant media. This is of particular
importance to preschoolers since they tend to process information holistically.40
According to developmental psychologist Jean Piaget's seminal work, children progress
through a series of stages of cognitive development, and the majority of preschoolers
cannot think logically or abstractly. So, what might be an easy problem for an adult to
solve in his head is often very difficult for a preschooler. A common example is
conservation. Imagine two containers: one is tall and skinny like a beaker, and one is short
and wide like a baking dish. Even after pouring the same amount of water into each of the
containers in front of a preschooler, the child will often claim the tall, skinny container
contains more water than the short, wide container. The idea that the quantity is the same,
or conserved, regardless of the shape of the container is not readily apparent to a very
young child. In light of such psychological differences, developers should ensure that
features or activities within the app involve explicit and straightforward content and
presentation. Developers should take advantage of the mobile medium to provide the user
with several models and visual aids as opposed to relying on the child to remember or
process multiple concepts in working memory.41
Apps that keep users coming back are ones that have fresh and dynamic content and offer
users predictable but new experiences each time. Preschoolers often embrace seeing the

same movie again and again, and there is value to repetition. However, having content that
expands or increases in complexity as children master the previous content, or even
simply content that is refreshed periodically for new exploration, is critical to retain a
learner's interest.
Interface
While there are best practices to apply when developing apps for any user group, such
guidelines take on a special importance for preschool-aged children since they often have
shorter attention spans as well as limited literacy skills and dexterity. (We outline our
design principles for educational apps in Chapter 9.) Simple is almost always better, and
the following principles for developing a user-friendly interface are suggested. Apps for
preschoolers should offer a responsive interface, consistency, clarity of purpose, and
simple interactions.
It is important to develop a responsive app that quickly loads and performs functions when
instructed. No one likes to wait for an app to load, and preschoolers are even less patient
than the rest of us.42 When developing an app, it's therefore important to consider how
long the content will take to load and, where possible, preload some content. Content
should be threaded to improve processing efficiency. While the app is loading, give the
user an indication that it is loading and will only take a moment; a progress bar or icon can
usually accomplish this. Additionally, when the user presses a button, the app should
provide immediate feedback. If an app is too slow to respond, the initial reaction is to hit
more buttons or, ultimately, quit the app and move on.
The role of color, the sizes of buttons and shapes need to be considered and applied
consistently throughout the app. When designing the elements of an app, all should
contribute directly to the communication of function within the app, and be purposeful and
consistent. If a red exit button is used throughout the app, don't use a red enter button on a
certain screen to indicate a different action. Use larger buttons to dictate primary actions
and smaller buttons for options, settings, or secondary, less common actions. Since most
of the preschool audience cannot read, developers should rely on conventions (green
means go/launch, red means stop/exit) and screen placement for intuitive use. Use
concepts like flashing or flickering the button to draw attention to indicate the next step.43
Given preschoolers' developing dexterity, larger buttons should be used.
In a preschool app, everything on the screen should have a purpose. This criterion is an
important one for parents to use in evaluating which apps to purchase or download, and
for developers to keep in mind while designing their apps. If the goal of an app is to hold
educational value or lead to a specified educational outcome, then apps should remove
content and graphics that are extraneous and do not directly contribute to the learning
goals. There is certainly a fine line between making the learning environment visually
interesting and providing clear guidance on the app's use. While it is important to make
the learning environment visually interesting and fun, it should not be so busy that it
detracts from the content or interferes with correct use.
Provide simple interactions by relying on intuitive gestures. Preschoolers' dexterity varies
greatly, but big buttons are always best. Easy gestures are also preferable to more nuanced
ones. For instance, in iPad apps, tap, swipe, and drag gestures are intuitive. Pinching,

tilting, and double tapping aren't as instinctive for this group and should be avoided.44 The
sophistication of the touch functions and buttons should be scaled to the users' expected
fine motor skill level.

Tips for Making an Engaging Preschool App
Keep it playful. Play-based learning is an important concept for the preschool
user, as play is the primary way this age group learns.
Test your app with children. It is vital to watch a preschooler interact with the
device and your app to ensure you're producing something engaging and effective.
Use Malone and Lepper's four intrinsic motivators as guides: challenge, control,
curiosity, and fantasy.
Be sure the content in the app is leveled to the user's age, abilities, and interests.
Adhere strictly to principles of good design, especially focusing on consistency
and simplicity, as young users cannot read commands.

Challenges
Developing apps for preschoolers also comes with its share of challenges, as shown in
Figure 13.2. Parents and teachers are completely in control of the buying and usage
patterns for preschool apps, even more so than with older children. Growing concerns over
screen time and privacy are also under scrutiny and changing quickly for the preschool
demographic.
Figure 13.2 Challenges for Preschool Apps
Parents as Gatekeepers
One key challenge in developing apps for preschoolers is the lack of direct access to the
target audience. Children under five generally do not find and purchase their own apps and
are often secondary users of a parent's mobile device. They're not always given free rein
over the device, nor are they given unlimited time to play and learn. If children are given a
choice of which apps to play, it's likely to be limited by the parent in some way. Since the
parents are gatekeepers to this group—enabling or preventing their use of the device and
apps—developers have an added responsibility when creating apps for preschoolers to
make it attractive to parents, too. Making apps that address parents' questions, concerns,
and objectives is an added challenge in developing apps for preschoolers.
A common concern among parents is that too much time with the device can lead to
“physical and academic lethargy.”45 This view assumes that the time spent on the device is
not enhancing the child's education but rather reducing the child's potential in some way.
In a survey of parents conducted by the Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop, this was the
number one reason that parents restricted the use of the technology for their children.46
Unfortunately, this view is not necessarily unfounded. There are many noneducational
apps, and not all apps designed for learning are equal in their educational value. However,

there are also many educational apps that are enriching and well worth the time and effort
invested by the child and his or her parents. It is essential that the parent take an active
role in helping choose apps with their children that are both educational and engaging. To
that end, developers need to make parents feel comfortable with the app by providing
details on the educational skills to be taught through play in the app. Parents witnessing
the educational value through their child's interaction with it is a key in their willingness to
allow their child to continue to use the app.47
Apps and app developers have an additional responsibility in aiding parents who want to
know how to best guide and teach certain skills to their preschool-aged children
themselves. When you ask parents how to teach a very young child mathematical thinking,
for instance, they may not be sure where to start. However, through use of an app, parents
might pick up that number sense encompasses simple addition, numerical comparisons,
counting, and numeral recognition, and see specific activities within the app that are
teaching these skills to their child. Endless Numbers is an app that teaches these skills in a
fun setting, verbally reinforcing the skills. Now the parents can continue this learning
outside of the app, further developing a positive educational home environment.48
Involving the parents is an essential step in preschool apps, as parental guidance during
media consumption has been found to positively impact a child's learning, promoting
language development and increasing engagement.49 Sesame Workshop notes that a best
practice they use is to include information for parents under the Help icon. Since
preschoolers typically could not read a detailed how-to guide on the use of the app, this
section is essentially for the parents.50 While mobile devices possess engaging and
powerful ways to enhance the way a child learns essential preschool skills, parents are an
invaluable part of the equation. It is the parents who must help the child make connections
between the game and the world around them, engaging in discussions about the activity
and participating.51
Passback
An increasingly common exposure model for preschoolers to gain access to mobile
devices is what the Cooney Center refers to as the passback effect, where parents lend
their device to a child to keep them occupied.52 The passback is marked by short sessions
for the child to play and learn, and the parent will generally provide scaffolding on which
apps and programs are accessed. The mobile device is often used as an entertainment
source for the child while out and about—on the subway, in restaurants, and in the car, for
example—and represents an opportunity for preschoolers to have access to mobile
devices.53 It is also a relatively new opportunity to learn. In scenarios when parents are
busy, this is a chance for the child to engage in a learning task when otherwise there would
be no direct stimulation or instruction.
Teachers as Gatekeepers
Preschool is another setting where mobile learning can be introduced, though this avenue
hasn't been explored in preschool classrooms as much as elementary schools. To enable
effective use of technology, equipment and support must be provided to teachers to ensure

effective implementation. The Next Generation Preschool Math grant works to provide
quality math-centered apps, supporting classroom activities that reinforce skills learned in
the app, and a guide for teachers instructing them on how to integrate the technology.54
Like parents, it can't be assumed that teachers automatically understand what makes an
enriching app, or how to make the best use of it in their classroom. A 1:1 mobile-device
program in a preschool is uncommon, so apps intended to be used in preschool classrooms
might consider accommodating multiple players. Sharing is an important element of any
preschool curriculum, and playing collaborative games also enables social learning for the
child.55
Screen Time
While we know there are many benefits to early use of mobile learning devices and apps,
there is also a great deal researchers don't know about the long-term effects of exposure to
this relatively new media. “Screen time” is the term we use to describe how much time is
permitted by the parents for the child to use mobile devices, television, and computers.
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends no screen time for children
under two. The standards, though updated in 2011, offer no distinction between passive
television programming and interactive technology. However, touch-screen mobile
devices and computers offer a substantially different experience from sitting on the couch
watching a television show: interactivity. In 2014, Dr. Dimitri Christakis, a member of the
executive committee of the AAP's Council on Communications and Media, published an
opinion that all screen time is not created equal, and he sees major differences between
interactive, mobile device use and television screen time. He says, to promote brain
development and stimulate language development in young children, play should be
interactive. His research found that play on interactive apps can produce the same effects
(measured in cortisol levels in the brain) as playing with blocks.56 “The question at hand
then might well be: are interactive touchscreen technologies more likeable to passively
watching a screen or to playing with blocks? My hunch is that they are more akin to block
play and here is why: the one thing a child never says (or thinks) when he or she interacts
with passive media is “I did it!” This is, of course, quite different than what might be
experienced in the context of using a well-designed interactive app,” Christakis says.57
We see technology as being on a continuum of interactivity, and each medium offers
different benefits and disadvantages to children at different stages. On one end, a
television program with little or no educational value provides a passive viewing
experience. Not all television falls into this far end of the spectrum, as many educational
programs now have more interactive opportunities, such as the pause, an innovation
introduced by Blue's Clues that asks the viewer a question and pauses for his reply.58 On
the other end of the interactivity spectrum are tablet apps that facilitate collaborative and
interactive learning with other humans. The technology is moving quickly toward more
interactive and responsive features, which make this technology substantially more useful
to preschoolers. While unrestricted use of mobile devices isn't recommended, we do see
them as more valuable to the preschool set than technologies that have come before.
Christakis says he “believe(s) that judicious use of interactive media is acceptable for
children younger than the age of two years.”59 There has been very little research done on

this demographic regarding the use of mobile devices, but given the number of waking
hours and the fact that play on an interactive mobile device will displace other productive
learning experiences, Christakis advises a half hour to one hour as a good range for
children under two years. 60 While there is a lot that seems uncharted and new about the
educational mobile learning world, there is much that remains the same. Parental
involvement and discretion is a key determinant in how effective the technology is.
Christine Zanchi, executive producer of Children's Media at the WGBH Educational
Foundation, notes that “screen time isn't passive time, it can be a moment of active
engagement,” both individually and socially.61 For example, they noticed a wave when
groups of kids had their own iPads and freedom to choose from certain apps. “One child
would open Sara Skates (an app developed by NGPM), and the child next to her would
notice and do the same. Pretty soon all of the children at the table were playing the same
game (until, of course, someone decided to switch games and the whole thing started over
again).”62 Completing a level in the app, making a character smile, or solving a problem
will often result in the child showing his neighbor or teacher what he's done. And, what's
more, apps can even promote more than one player and instill social skills through play.63
This level of engagement and enjoyment in an educational activity holds tremendous
value, in our view, and should not be discouraged categorically.
Privacy
As we discuss in Chapter 15, privacy is an area within the app world that is very
intimidating and confusing for many users (and in this case, their gatekeepers). With older
users, teaching digital citizenship is a primary defense against the inadvertent sharing of
information or wandering outside of the approved areas of use within the app, but for
users who can't read yet, developers need to be even more meticulous with the way the
app is constructed and the gates put in place. The “parental gate” is a common way to
prevent a young user from straying within the app (often to an area of the app where
purchases can be made, sensitive data accessed, or information shared through social
networks). A parental gate requires an adult to input a code or perform a sophisticated task
(e.g. a math problem or reading) to confirm user age.64
Developers of preschool apps should also think twice about what user data is collected,
how it is used and be very rigorous on how it is stored and when it is destroyed. Only
collect data that is necessary; for instance, don't collect video or location for this
demographic due to their high sensitivity to privacy issues. Many free or lite versions of
apps will come with advertisements, which pose an additional privacy concern for young
users. Preschoolers are naturally less dexterous (and therefore prone to accidentally touch
areas on the screen), and drawn to flashing or moving areas within the screen. Launching
an advertisement often takes the user out of the app and out of the preschool learning
space, so this is an important consideration for preschool apps. Developers should be
aware that advertisements are notoriously ineffective for this demographic, as users cannot
read and make purchases independently; it also ruins the user experience.
Further, apps for preschoolers should be clear and up-front with the disclosures about what
information is being collected and how it is being used. Preschool apps are compelled to
comply with the existing legislation (The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act

(FERPA) and Children's Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA)), but there are additional
lengths developers can go to in order to communicate privacy affordances to adults and
ensure the online safety of the youngest users. Parents of this age group are particularly
concerned about privacy issues, so we recommend that developers make every effort to
clearly communicate their privacy policies and provide a safe area for young users to
learn.

Conclusion
While there is a tremendous opportunity to provide an academic advantage to preschoolers
using mobile devices and apps that develop key skills, it is important that parents and
caregivers understand the power of the device. James Paul Gee says, “the point is not to
keep digital and social media away from kids early, but to build on experiences with these
media to create a pathway toward higher-order and complex thinking skills, talk, and texts,
just as we want to do with books.”65
For adults, mobile technologies play an increasing role in our daily lives, a fact that
preschoolers won't fail to notice. It's incumbent on parents to determine the value of these
technologies for their children. Passback or hold back? Should we treat mobile apps as
junk food or nutritious vegetables? Some apps are clearly one or the other, and some apps
seem to be a bit of both. Parents should be encouraged to share well-designed, age-
appropriate apps with their preschoolers. Developers should strive to provide parents with
the information necessary to make an informed choice to separate the good from the bad.
By adhering to the principles of good app design and taking into consideration the unique
psychological capabilities of very small children, developers can make their app a more
acceptable choice.

Notes
1 “Back to School: Apps for Primary School Children and Younger,” Adjust, August 2014,
www.adjust.com/assets/downloads/back-to-school-app-report-2014-adjust.pdf.
2 Cynthia Chiong and Carly Shuler, “Learning: Is There an App for That? Investigations
of Young Children's Usage and Learning With Mobile Devices,” The Joan Ganz
Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop, 2010, New York,
http://pbskids.org/read/files/cooney_learning_apps.pdf.
3 M. Senechal and J. LeFevre, “The Influence of Home-Based Reading Interactions on 5-
Year-Olds' Reading Motivations and Early Literacy Development,” Early Childhood
Research Quarterly 17 (2002): 318–337.
4 National Center for Education Statistics, “2013 National Assessment of Educational
Progress in Reading,” United States Department of Education, May 1, 2014,
http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/reading/.
5 A. G. Bus, , M. H. van IJzendoorn, and A. D. Pellegrini, “Joint Book Reading Makes for
Success in Learning to Read: A Meta-Analysis on Intergenerational Transmission of
Literacy,” Review of Educational Research 65, no. 1 (1995): 1–21.
6 L. M. Justice and C. Lankford, “Preschool Children's Visual Attention to Print During
Storybook Reading,” Communication Disorders Quarterly 24, no. 1 (2002): 11–21.
7 Bus, van IJzendoorn, and Pellegrini, “Joint Book Reading.”
8 B. A. Wasik and M. A. Bond, “Beyond the Pages of a Book: Interactive Book Reading
and Language Development in Preschool Classrooms,” Journal of Educational
Psychology, 93, no. 2 (2001): 243–250.
9 Katya P. Feder and Annette Majnemer, “Handwriting Development, Competency and
Intervention,” Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology 49, no. 4,
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2007.00312.x/pdf.
10 M. D. Levine, F. Oberklaid, and L. Meltzer, “Developmental Output Failure: A Study
of Low Productivity in School-Aged Children,” Pediatrics 67 (1981): 18–25.
11 Katya P. Feder and Annette Majnemer, “Handwriting Development, Competency and
Intervention,” Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology 49, no. 4 (2007),
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2007.00312.x/pdf.
12 Teacher Renee, “Helping Children Develop Fine Motor Skills,” HubPages,
www.squidoo.com/helping-children-develop-strong-fine-motor-skills.
13 “Little Writer—The Tracing App for Kids,” Innovative Mobile Apps,
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/little-writer-tracing-app/id515890480?mt=8.
14 “PBS Kids Ready to Learn, Ready to Learn Math Framework,”
http://pbskids.org/readytolearn/media/math_framework_final.pdf.

15 Betsy McCarthy, Linlin Li, and Michelle Tiu, “PBS KIDS Mathematics Transmedia
Suites in Preschool Homes: A Report to the CPB-PBS Ready to Learn Initiative,”
WestEd, September 2012, www.wested.org/resources/pbs-kids-mathematics-
transmedia-suites-in-preschool-homes-a-report-to-the-cpb-pbs-ready-to-learn-
initiative/.
16 Nora S. Newcombe, “Picture This: Increasing Math and Science Learning by
Improving Spatial Thinking,” American Educator (Summer 2010): 29–35.
17 Ibid.
18 Doug Boari, Mike Fraser, Danae Stanton Fraser, and Kirsten Cater, “Augmenting
Spatial Skills with Mobile Devices,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York: ACM, 2012): 1611–1620.
19 Melissa S. Terlecki, Nora S. Newcombe, and Michelle Little, “Durable and
Generalized Effects of Spatial Experience on Mental Rotation: Gender Differences in
Growth Patterns,” Applied Cognitive Psychology 22, no. 7 (2008): 996–1013.
20 Boari and others, “Augmenting Spatial Skills.”
21 “Next Generation Preschool Math Project,” http://nextgenmath.org/.
22 Hanna Rosen, “The Touchscreen Generation,” The Atlantic, April 2013,
www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2013/04/the-touch-screen-generation/309250/?
single_page=true.
23 Partnership for 21st Century Skills, “P21 Framework Definitions,” 2009,
www.p21.org/storage/documents/P21_Framework_Definitions.pdf.
24 Sir Ken Robinson, The Element: How Finding Your Passion Changes Everything (New
York: Penguin, 2013).
25 Partnership for 21st Century Skills, “P21 Framework Definitions.”
26 Ibid.
27 R. A. Chávez-Eakle, “Creativity and Personality,” in Measuring Creativity, ed. E.
Villalba (Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2009).
28 K. Hirsh-Pasek and R. M. Golinkoff, Einstein Never Used Flash Cards: How Our
Children Really Learn and Why They Need to Play More and Memorize Less (Emmaus,
PA: Rodale Press, 2003).
29 Christine Zanchi, “Producers and Researchers: Making Technology PreK Ready,”
SXSWEdu Session, March 6, 2013, https://soundcloud.com/sxswedu/producers-and-
researchers.
30 Dale H. Schunk, Paul R. Pintrich, and Judith R Meece, Motivation in Education:
Theory, Research, and Applications, 3rd ed. (New York: Pearson, 2013).
31 T. Malone, “Toward a Theory of Intrinsically Motivating Instruction,” Cognitive

Science 5, no. 4 (1981): 333–369.
32 R. Ryan and E. Deci, “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: Classic Definitions and New
Directions,” Contemporary Educational Psychology 25 (2000): 54–67.
33 A. Bandura, Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control (New York: Freeman, 1997).
34 T. W. Malone and M. R. Lepper, “Making Learning Fun: A Taxonomy of Intrinsic
Motivations for Learning,” in Aptitude, Learning and Instruction III: Conative and
Affective Process Analyses, eds. R. E. Snow and M. J. Farr (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum,
1987), 223–253.
35 Mesozoic Math Adventures, Dinosaur Train Math,
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=air.org.pbskids.dtmesozoicmath&hl=en.
36 Sesame Workshop, “Best Practices: Designing Touch Tablet Experiences for
Preschoolers,” December 26, 2012,
www.sesameworkshop.org/assets/1191/src/Best%20Practices%20Document%2011-26-
12.pdf.
37 Chiong and Shuler, “Learning: Is There An App For That?”
38 Ibid.
39 R. E. Mayer, Multimedia Learning, 2nd ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2009).
40 M. Rose, G. M. Rose, and J. G. Blodgett, “The Effects of Interface Design and Age on
Children's Information Processing of Web Sites,” Psychology and Marketing 26, no. 1
(2009).
41 J. D. Ormrod, Educational Psychology (New York: Pearson, 2010).
42 Sesame Workshop, “Best Practices.”
43 Ibid.
44 Ibid.
45 Chiong and Shuler, “Learning: Is There an App for That?”
46 Ibid.
47 Ibid.
48 McCarthy, Li, and Tiu, “PBS KIDS Mathematics.”
49 S.M. Fisch, Children's Learning from Educational Television: Sesame Street and
Beyond (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004).
50 Sesame Workshop, “Best Practices.”
51 James Paul Gee, The Anti-Education Era: Creating Smarter Students through Digital

Learning (New York: Palgrave McMillan, 2013).
52 Chiong and Shuler, “Learning: Is There an App for That?”
53 Ibid.
54 Next Generation Preschool Math, “About,” http://nextgenmath.org/about/.
55 Next Generation Preschool Math, Play Patterns and Game Mechanics (video),
http://nextgenmath.org/videos/.
56 Dimitri A Christakis, “Interactive Media Use at Younger Than the Age of 2 Years:
Time to Rethink the American Academy of Pediatrics Guideline?,” May 2014,
http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1840251&resultClick=3.
57 Ibid.
58 Rosen, “The Touchscreen Generation.”
59 Christakis, “Interactive Media Use.”
60 Ibid.
61 Zanchi, “Producers and Researchers.”
62 Next Generation Preschool Math blog, February 21, 2013, http://nextgenmath.org/.
63 Zanchi, “Producers and Researchers.”
64 Apple: Developer, “Parental Gates,” https://developer.apple.com/app-store/parental-
gates/.
65 Gee, The Anti-Education Era, 201.


Chapter 14
Making Accessible Apps: Autism and Visual
Impairment

Introduction
When it comes to mobile devices in education, they present a distinct opportunity to reach
all students. Where certain populations might have been marginalized by past technologies
or traditional classroom structures, mobile technology offers a new way to personalize and
make learning accessible for those with special needs. In this chapter, we'll discuss the
functions that set Apple's iOS apart as the market leader for accessibility and how this
impacts two specific populations: those on the autism spectrum and students with visual
impairments. We also present things to consider when making an app to ensure it is
accessible to all users.

Advantages of the iPad for Special Populations
Students with autism or with low or no vision face many challenges in traditional
education settings, as do others with special behavioral and physical needs. Autism
typically is diagnosed by the prevalence of three key symptoms: difficulty with social
interactions, verbal and nonverbal communication, and self-regulation.1 To participate in
lecture-style classroom education, proficiency in these areas is key, so students with
autism quickly fall behind or, often, require a separate classroom for learning. Students
with visual impairments are most often mainstreamed, placed into typical classroom
settings, but, depending on the severity of their visual impairment these students have
different tools with which to learn. Audio, braille, and magnification are just a few ways to
adapt existing classroom structures to be accessible to the visually impaired. For both
students with autism and visual impairment, there are expensive and dominant
accessibility and assistive communication devices.
After it hit the market in 2010, the iPad became very popular with special populations. Ed
Summers, an assistive technology guru, says, “We love the iPad because it is a mainstream
device with built in accessibility at no extra cost.”2 The iPad brought a few key advantages
to students with visual impairments and students on the autism spectrum, and most other
special populations, changing the face of assistive technology as show in Figure 14.1:
affordability, a mainstream device, built-in accessibility features, and easy to use, effective
design.3, 4

Figure 14.1 Advantages of the iPad for Special Populations
Affordability
While iPads are not low cost, they do represent a large step toward affordability for special
populations when compared to previous augmentative-communication devices. Prior to
the iPad's release, the most popular and successful augmentative-communication devices
to aid nonverbal individuals ran about $8,000. Certainly an iPad (even combining the cost
of the device with a $219 app to give the needed functionality—Proloquo2Go, discussed
below) offers a vast cost benefit, as well as improved functionality.5 For instance, the
flicker of screens in older computers, a factor that individuals with autism are
hypersensitive to, is not an issue with the iPad. Likewise for the visually impaired, the
iPad and its native functionality offers a substantially cheaper alternative to previous
devices. Before the iPad, JAWS was the most prominent screen reader, and it cost around
$1000 and provided a more difficult user experience. Even with a Bluetooth braille-
display attachment, the iPad offers a substantially more affordable option to previous
accessibility tools.
Mainstream
The iPad also offers high levels of portability and prominence in social situations.
Students in special-needs populations often find themselves distanced from their peers

socially, if not in a different classroom altogether. The iPad offers an assistive
technological device that is not different than their peers' mobile devices, which is
important for reducing social alienation and promoting equity. Instead of carrying around
a clunky, expensive augmentative alternative communication device, using something that
doesn't set them apart as different.6 “The small size and portability of the iOS devices
allows [students with autism and visual impairments] to easily integrate into regular
education environment without making anyone stand out or look different,” according to
Erica Roberts, a speech language pathologist specializing in assistive technology.7
Accessibility
Apple's iOS is the most accessible in the mobile market, making the iPad, iPhone, and
iPod Touch the most accessible devices. The operating system's architecture and app-
approval process automatically gives a developer about 80 percent accessibility, though
there are still important design and coding exercises developers should be aware of to
make their app fully accessible. There is a strict approval process for an app to be
authorized for the App Store, which might require developers to make a few changes to
fully comply with the accessibility guidelines. What this means is that each app in the
Apple App Store has some level of accessibility, not just apps developed for a special-
needs population. Android, the other prominent operating system for mobile devices, also
provides guidance on developing accessible apps.8 However, the accessibility checklist
and measures for developers are optional. While, on an Apple device, a user with special
needs can play virtually any app whether or not it's specifically designed for their access,
Android's operating system is not innately as accessible. For this reason, apps on the iPad
and iPhone are hugely popular among populations with special needs, and thus the
primary focus of this chapter.
Individuals with motor skill challenges can utilize the Multi-Touch functionality, for more
distinct controls, as well as Siri to access the features of the device. Guided Access can aid
in educational use in general and for those with special needs in particular. This feature
can help to minimize visual stimulation and retain attention on the task at hand by limiting
user access to other apps (including disabling the home button).9 Being able to zoom
easily and change the contrast of text screens makes it more accessible to those with visual
impairments. Apple provides this functionality as part of their iOS, meaning that most
apps on the device will accommodate these features easily, if coded correctly. We discuss
how to accommodate these features at the end of this chapter.
Usable and Effective
Mobile also presents myriad ways for the individual to socialize and communicate with
peers using the device in a variety of social situations.10 In the past, clunky and heavy
devices (like the DynaVox for nonverbal individuals) required motivation and
technological savvy to navigate difficult systems. The iPad offers a huge variety of apps to
support educational and communication needs for students with special needs, as well as
the device's ability to quickly connect to the Internet, take pictures, and use email gives
iPads unprecedented utility. It is also innately easy to use, a huge benefit compared to
difficult-to-use devices of the past. The usability and effectiveness of the devices is a huge

advantage for special populations.

Autism and Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)
Autism is often referred to as autism spectrum disorder (ASD), meaning that each
individual will present certain symptoms to a varying degree. Individuals with ASD range
from completely unable to communicate verbally (an estimated 25 percent) to high
functioning and able to be placed in traditional classroom settings with or without learning
intervention program support.11 Symptoms present themselves at a young age, and most
ASDs are diagnosed before the child enters school, or when “social demands exceed
capacity.”12 ASDs are diagnosed by the presence and severity of three main symptoms:
social reciprocity, communicative intent, and regulation of self, behaviors, and interests.13,
14 It is assumed that cognitive processing of individuals with an ASD is unaffected by
their disease; it's primarily a disorder affecting behavior and communication abilities. The
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that 1 in 88 American
children register on the autism spectrum, over 2 million individuals.15
While communication and social interactions can be very difficult for individuals with
ASD, many on the spectrum show propensity toward visual skills, music, math, and art.16
Furthermore, it is believed that, with therapy, everyone on the spectrum, even individuals
who are unable to verbally communicate, can be taught to communicate using other means
(signing, technology, etc.).17 Breaking through barriers to give these individuals the
opportunity to communicate and investigate their interests helps teachers and caregivers
better address their academic and social needs, which in turn enables people with ASD to
live more normal and socialized lives.18 The tablet, and the iPad specifically, are proving
invaluable in reaching individuals with autism.
Mobile devices are being used in separate special education settings, in homes
(administered by parents or caregivers), and to facilitate children with ASD to remain in
mainstream classrooms. As the presence of mobile devices in classrooms continues to
grow, use of these devices as an aid to mainstreaming students with ASD is a major
benefit. In the following discussion, we address some of the very specific challenges faced
by learners with autism and how the iPad and iOS devices help them to overcome those
challenges.
Key Skills to Develop through App Usage
Computers generally, and mobile devices specifically, offer many benefits in teaching
individuals with autism the skills they need to thrive academically and socially.
Technology presents a predictable, controlled experience, something that day-to-day social
interactions do not.19 For teaching basic skills, this feature can be a huge benefit.20 It is
also a medium that presents perfectability, a big draw for individuals with autism who
show propensity toward repetitive behaviors.21 Studies have consistently shown that
individuals with autism are more enthusiastic about learning using computers and
technology and showed greater growth in the intended areas when these media were
used.22 Using iPads as a classroom tool for children with autism, as one teacher reports,
improved “the children's willingness to socialize, and it enhanced their attention spans.”23
It also gives teachers a tool to better understand how to reach the student, since they're not

always able to communicate their interests or abilities in productive ways.24
When considering which apps to use for individuals with autism, or which skills to focus
on in development, keep in mind that each user on the spectrum has various needs and
abilities.25 Another benefit of today's technology is the ability to customize the experience
to the users' abilities, or find apps with very targeted user skills.
Social Interactions
Individuals with ASD show varying levels of ability to read social situations and interpret
what others are thinking.26 Social reciprocity is a prime factor in the diagnosis of ASD,
and one that can be problematic in day-to-day interactions for individuals with autism.
Many with autism are unable to read subtle social cues, such as a smile, wave, grimace,
and other facial cues that indicate meaning in conversation. Without these nonverbal
methods of communicating, social interactions become difficult and bewildering.27
Making eye contact in social situations, as well as emotion recognition and nonverbal
social cues, are key social skills to be developed through apps.
For instance, the app Look in My Eyes was developed specifically for individuals with
autism who struggle with this part of social interaction. This app employs a token
economy and rewards users for looking into the eyes of the faces on the screen. Different
settings, such as a restaurant, train station, or dinosaur landscape offer the ability to
customize it to the user's unique and specialized interests.28 Another app, Training Faces,
poses social situations where users are asked to recognize and name the emotions
displayed by the characters on screen (e.g., happy, sad, excited).29
Beyond the basics of social situations, diving deeper into social thinking is important to
help individuals with autism adjust to everyday social interactions. Social thinking is our
understanding of our emotions, the emotions of those we're interacting with, as well as the
understanding that actions affect emotions of others.30 Roberts notes that it's essential to
understand why paying attention to someone's emotional state is important. For instance,
Roberts suggests this example: “Mom looks mad right now, I probably shouldn't ask her to
buy me that new video game right now.”31 Getting past the concrete social skills of
looking at faces and eyes and into the deeper meanings is something that mobile apps also
enable. Social Skill Builder is an app that shows the user videos of good and bad social
interactions (e.g., children bullying another student, children taking turns and sharing) and
asks the user to determine what happened that was good or bad. It further asks the user to
determine how they know these things (“How do you know the girl was sad?”).32 Video
modeling is a strategy some use, including Roberts, to teach “expected and unexpected
social behaviors in our everyday environments.”33 Roberts notes that mobile devices
enable ease of recording short videos of students. Then, in near-real time, the student and
teacher can “go back and analyze how the student did in that social interaction. The
student can see what he or she was doing, determine what type of impression he or she
was making, and then make adjustments to behavior if needed the next time that type of
social situation occurs to make a positive impression,” Roberts says.34

What Apps Can Do to Develop Social Interaction
Skills
Apps aiming to help individuals with ASD learn social skills should:
Teach emotion recognition, as well as encourage a deeper understanding of why
understanding others' emotions is an important exercise.
Cultivate skills within the user on how to read and respond to others' emotions.
Encourage socially customary behavior and interpretation of social cues.
Verbal and Nonverbal Communication
Limited or no verbal communication is another defining trait of the autism spectrum. With
a quarter of those on the spectrum being completely unable to communicate verbally, there
is high demand for ways to unlock these individuals.35 While ASD shows a range of
abilities, the most severe cases leave individuals without the ability to communicate.36
Parents and caregivers note that these individuals can understand more than it might seem,
and they are isolated by the fact that they are unable to take part in conversation with their
peers, teachers, parents, and others.
Giving individuals with ASD the ability to converse and communicate what is inside them
is an invaluable opportunity, and one that mobile devices are especially qualified to do.
Almost all with a verbal communication impairment can learn to use spoken language,
and all can learn to communicate through therapy; however, the strides seen through use
of certain apps and mobile technology are broadly unprecedented.37
When selecting an app for communication, it is important to think about the student's
unique language needs and abilities. “Many communication apps are complex and the
language is organized in layers that require the student to navigate between many pages,”
says Roberts. Certainly a complex communication app would work for some students and
not others, based on their cognitive abilities. “While I do not believe that there are
cognitive prerequisites a student ‘must have’ in order to use AAC [augmentative and
alternative communication]—every child has a right to communicate,” says Roberts, “I do
believe the language and cognitive skills of the child need to be carefully considered when
selecting an app and that the features of the app be matched to the skills and needs of the
child.”38 Identifying the right app for the student's needs and abilities is vital.
Apps like Proloquo2Go provide a voice for individuals who are unable to verbally
communicate (a disability that goes beyond the autism spectrum, including ALS, Down
syndrome, traumatic brain injury, and many other developmental or cognitive impairments
affecting speech).39 Proloquo2Go allows the user to construct sentences using many word
badges to do simple tasks such as order dinner at a restaurant, or to communicate their
needs with caregivers.40
Carrie Grunkemeyer, a speech language pathologist, works with students on the autism

spectrum. In her first year of teaching, she struggled to reach a first grade boy, Johnny,41
who had “literally never said a word.” She worked for months to “get him to communicate
with me, and finally by around February, I realized he loved computers and he loved to
type and write.” This breakthrough coincided with the district's iPad initiative for assistive
devices, which allowed for the real breakthrough in Johnny's communication. “When
Johnny was given his iPad and we started to work on Proloquo2Go, it was like a whole
world opened up. He knew so many words. He could spell anything. He even asked for
Skittles! I saw him smile for the first time! He is now able to write whole sentences and
answer comprehension questions on his device.” For Grunkemeyer, and Johnny, the
device and the Proloquo2Go app made all the difference in enabling not only education,
but simple communication, to take place.42


What Apps Can Do to Develop Communication
Skills
Provide an easy-to-use interface that allows users to quickly access what is used
most frequently. This is critical for taking part in regular conversation.
Provide a natural-sounding voice for natural use in conversation.
Provide an intuitive interface to enable quick navigation, differentiated depending
on the educational level of the user.
Self-Regulation
Self-regulation, the third category of characteristics denoting the autism spectrum, means
“people's ability to adjust their level of alertness and how they display their emotions
through their behavior to attain goals in socially adaptive ways.”43 A person with strong
self-regulation is able to balance their sensory needs, emotions, and impulses in a socially
appropriate way for their environment. Successful self-regulation incorporates “sensory
processing, executive functioning and emotional regulation.”44
According to Zones of Regulation, a popular curriculum among therapists treating students
with these difficulties, self-regulation is a broad category, encompassing many behaviors
of children on the autism spectrum (as well as other mental health disorders, such as
attention deficit hyperactive disorder and Tourette syndrome, for example).45 Sensory
challenges are described by Greer Aukstakalnis, an occupational therapist, as “over- and
under-responding to both environmental and internal sensations, as well as difficulty
adjusting their responses to these sensations.”46 Executive functioning, another branch of
self-regulation, denotes behaviors like planning and organizing, impulse control,
internalization of speech and multitasking.47 Emotional regulation difficulties could mean
the child is unable to have proper perspective on the size a problem at hand and trouble
understanding others' perspectives.48
Mobile technologies present an opportunity for individuals struggling with self-regulation.
Features like Guided Access in iOS allow teachers, caregivers, or therapists to restrict the
learner to only one app, disable the home button, and even disable certain areas of the
screen.49 This can be very useful for learners who engage in unproductive, repetitive
behaviors or struggles relating to impulse control or focus. The iPad, and other mobile
devices, offer a streamlined process for video modeling. As we described in this chapter,
some therapists use the iPad for social interaction, though it can also be used to provide
visual guidance for individuals with difficulty regulating their reactions to change.
Aukstakalnis uses this method. “I had a preschooler who exhibited extreme behaviors
when moving to structured activity.” This student had difficulty with a verbal demand,
such as ‘pick up your crayon.’ [The difficulty] completely resolved when I was able to
quickly video model the expected behaviors for transitioning and show a proper crayon
grasp using the iPad,” Aukstakalnis said.50

For students with emotional regulation challenges, the Relax Lite app offers a guided
deep-breathing exercise, an ideal exercise to help calm an emotionally volatile child who
may be suffering from a disruptive episode.51 Another useful app for emotional regulation
and planning is Breathe, Think, Do with Sesame, by Sesame Street. The user gets to “help
a Sesame Street monster friend calm down and solve everyday challenges.”52
Aukstakalnis likes this app because it helps with “learning deep breathing, developing
strategies to deal with basic problems and recognition of emotions.”53

What Apps Can Do to Work With Self-Regulation
Limit animation and opportunities for overstimulation, or include functionality to
easily turn off animation and sound.
Foster skills for relaxation, emotion recognition, and problem solving.
Offer a simple storyline or simple commands.

Visual Impairment
The term “visual impairment” covers a broad range of medical conditions. In developing
accessible apps and programs, students are generally separated into two categories for
usability purposes: low vision and functionally blind. Low vision constitutes the majority
of the visually impaired, including low visual acuity, loss of visual field or low peripheral
vision, photophobia (inability to look at light), diplopia (double vision), visual distortion,
perception difficulties, or color blindness.54 Students with severe visual impairments have
different needs. The difference between those with low vision and severe visual
impairments often lies in how they are able to consume content. While persons with low
vision will be able to make adjustments to devices to read (by enhancing contrast or text
size, for instance), persons with severe visual impairment will use braille or audio to
adapt.
Today, the vast majority of visually impaired students are educated in mainstream
classrooms.55 A major factor in their success in the mainstream classroom is mobile
devices, specifically touch-screen tablets. The iPad provides an accessibility device that's
also a popular, mainstream device, which is a huge factor in the mind of Ed Summers, a
software manager for Accessibility and Applied Assistive Technology, who is severely
visually impaired himself. The features that enable the child to learn in a classroom of
their peers, being “built into a mainstream device, just like everyone else has, is huge. Not
some big clunky device off to the side that says ‘I'm different.’ These kids with visual
impairments, before the iPad, they had these big, expensive things on carts, sitting beside
them in class, and the kids just felt like major dorks,” Summers says, with a smile. Again,
the iPad offers the assistive functionality for special populations without the distinctive
and alienating devices that might make a student with special needs feel…different.
All the Tools in the Toolbox
The iPad and iOS provide an array of native functionality that give students with low or
no vision the ability to participate in education much more easily. With all the touch
screen functionality and audio cues, is it necessary to even learn braille? Since most users
with visual impairment still have some vision, it's helpful to think of their ability to access
and consume content as a toolbox. A student with a severe visual impairment might use
braille at certain times, listen to an audio book with a screen reader, or use visual contrast
and zoom settings to make better use of his or her own visual capabilities.56 Mobile
technology gives the visually impaired learner easier access to these tools. “I believe in
using all the tools in the toolbox,” says Summers. While current technologies provide
ample options for the visually impaired, Summers suggests relying only on one won't be
enough for the student to keep up with his peers intellectually. For instance, braille is
essential for learning math and reading poetry, Summers says.
However, braille has its limitations, and in certain cases other methods of reading and
communicating are more effective. “I could not imagine reading Moby Dick with my
fingers, because they'd get tired and fall off,” Summers says with a smile. Summers also
notes a braille calculus book he has in two large boxes in his office, corresponding to a
12th-grade textbook. It is 36 volumes, “so you can't really just put it in your backpack,” he

says. However, punched volumes of books aren't the only manifestation of braille
currently; refreshable braille displays that use Bluetooth technology to communicate with
tablets are a practical way for the visually impaired to use their devices with or without a
screen reader.57
It comes down to numbers, ultimately. Average reading speeds for students with normal
vision in high school are around 250 to 350 words per minute (wpm). Braille gives the
reader 115 to 150 wpm, on average. Large print provides 7 to 75 wpm, and audio (using
compressed speech) allows for 350 to 550 wpm. With increases in comprehension as the
student learns to read, the student can increase his or her listening speed.58
“You've heard the adage: before third grade you're learning to read and after that you're
reading to learn. For kids with severe visual impairments, reading with your fingers is
(equivalent to) learning to read,” Summers says.59 After these literacy skills are
established early, using ears and eyes to fill in the gaps is more efficiently done. Summers
says, “I can hear 600 words per minute, but I know how to read. I'm a huge proponent of
learning to read with your fingers and then augmenting that with ears and eyes.”60
So, for students with visual impairments, learning the accessibility affordances of mobile
devices is essential to their education in a mainstream environment. In Summers's
example, the mobile device is the toolbox, containing nearly all the tools a student needs
to adapt the technology to meet his or her needs, as shown in Figure 14.2. It can be used to
read and write braille (with a refreshable braille-reader attachment), used to input
information using dictation and speech to text functionality, used to read with the ears
(using audio books and screen readers), and can be customized to allow the student's
remaining vision to be optimized (using changed contrast, zoom, and large print.)
Figure 14.2 All the Tools in the Toolbox for the Visually Impaired
Key Accessibility Features for the Visually Impaired

Students with low vision and students with severe visual impairments will not necessarily
benefit from the same apps. Apps and functionality for students with low vision allow for
enhancements to visual cues, supported by some nonvisual functionality. Apps for blind
students focus on auditory and sensory adaptations. The two groups aren't without
overlap; certain functionalities may work for both populations.
“I feel strongly that people with disabilities don't want separate materials,” Summers said.
“We want to be able to access the same materials as everybody else, but in a way that
adapts to individual needs.”61 Summers, working with a NASA scientist and curriculum
specialist, recently helped develop a fully accessible ebook called Reach for the Stars. It is
a 90-page book that explores the Tarantula Nebula using Hubble Space Telescope images.
It is an excellent example of a way to present material for all audiences.
Users with Low Vision
Built-in features like Voiceover, Siri, Speak Selection, and Dictation allow users with
limited or no vision to use the phone and access most of the key features.62 Making text
bigger or changing the contrast of the screen is also simple, and a good way to use limited
vision to navigate. In the same vein, the ability to zoom and magnify anything on the
screen is a huge plus. All of these features come built in on Apple iOS devices.
Many of iOS's native apps are popular for low vision users: Safari, Mail, iBooks, and
Pages all receive high marks for usability. Read2Go offers books in the huge Bookshare
library (containing books for all reading abilities, and most books a student would read in
high school).63 Join.Me, a free screen-sharing app used in many classrooms, is great for
accessibility as well, allowing the student to pull up the screen the teacher is showing,
changing contrast and size easily.64
Diane Brauner, an orientation mobility specialist who trains teachers and students on how
to use mobile devices for students with low vision or severe visual impairment, offers
Maya as an example .65 Maya was a high school student with low vision who was reading
by using the zoom function. However, she had to enlarge it to the point where she had to
scroll back and forth frequently, and the motion of the screen caused her to feel ill and
have severe migraines. She was a smart student with college aspirations, but was falling
behind in class and unable to keep up with her assignments. Because of all of these
negative effects from academic reading, had never read a book for fun. “I put her on the
iPad and encouraged her to use VoiceOver. She resisted initially, because she's not an
auditory learner and was trying to use her eyes still.” Brauner showed Maya how to use
the VoiceOver function with a book. Maya asked to use the device over the weekend and
excitedly came back Monday, having finished the book. “It was the first time she'd ever
read a book for pleasure. That is life changing.” Now Maya is able to get her textbooks on
the iPad, keep up with assignments better, and complete reading tasks. “We see this over
and over with children with low vision,” Brauner says. “It's very typical for students with
low vision to get migraines from eye fatigue,” she notes.66
There are a few apps that aid those with low vision in navigating the world around them.
The LookTel Money Reader enables users with low vision to scan currency and the app
will read the denomination out loud.67 TapTapSee provides an explanation of what is

pictured. These sorts of apps provide the opportunity to do things independently, with the
help of the touch device.

What Apps Can Do for Users with Low Vision
Support key iOS accessibility features: ability to change contrast, pinch to zoom,
adjust font size and style.
Provide an uncluttered, simple user interface.
Avoid using color alone to communicate something.
Promote or allow independence for the user.
Users with Severe Visual Impairment
iOS provides many options for users to consume content using touch and audio. Users
with severe visual impairment will almost always require a screen reader or braille display
to interact with their device. VoiceOver is a built-in screen reader that, with a simple tap,
enables the user to hear the contents of the screen.68 This facilitates use of websites, email,
and most native iOS apps.
This functionality can be paired with refreshable braille displays. If a blind student knows
braille, this provides another tool for them to use these devices and for independence.
Refreshable braille displays use Bluetooth technology to synch with a device. Highlighted
text, such as a line on a website, is produced in braille on the touch pad. As the user
navigates through the text on the page, the display changes to produce different text. It
also has buttons to allow clicking, as well as the ability to type in Braille. These devices
vary in size, with some the size of an iPhone and others the size of a typical computer
keyboard.69
Another way to communicate media to learners with severe visual impairment is through
sonification. The Reach for the Stars ebook is able to communicate the brightness and
placement of stars using sound to a blind user via sonification. Using headphones, the user
is able to hear the stars, which are represented using changes in pitch and changes in
location of sound. To get a sense of the brightness of a star, the pitch varies when touched.
“The brighter the star, the higher the pitch. The temperature of a star will be conveyed
through either the left or right ear…Readers will hear about a cooler star through their left
ear and hotter stars through their right ear.”70 Sonification is one innovative way to
communicate a visually rich subject matter to those without sight, one that relies on
mobile devices and their functionality.

What Apps Can Do for Users with Severe Visual
Impairment
Code and test using VoiceOver to ensure content is taking full advantage of the
benefits of Voiceover
Provide clear and easy to navigate audio cues.
Enforce consistency of button placement on screens within the app.

Developing Accessible Apps
While iOS gives many affordances for those with special needs, achieving a high level of
accessibility requires developers to pay attention to certain design principles and code to
accessibility guidelines. We think there are simple ways developers can make their apps
more accessible and more widely used. Indeed, if you are making an app for any broad use
that you hope to be included in a curriculum or used by a very large audience, considering
accessibility should be a priority. To make an app fully accessible, as shown in Figure
14.3, the developer must ensure that the code and auditory and visual cues are optimized
for all learners. The following are some basic guidelines to consider in developing
accessible apps.
Figure 14.3 Developing Accessible Apps
Test It with All Populations
If you're developing an educational app and your goal is to enable that technology to be
included in a standard curriculum or widely used, you must test the app with multiple
populations of different kinds of leaners. It is vital that you think about all potential users
and whether or not they'll be able to access your app. Brauner notes that with the growing
use of online state and benchmark testing, there are many that are simply inaccessible to
visually impaired students.71 “The most frequent problems I have seen are that the buttons

and images are not labeled properly, and words that are highlighted, underlined, or
italicized are not coded to reflect these formats when read using a screen reader,” Brauner
says. For instance, If a question asks “define the underlined word,” a learner using
VoiceOver will not know how to answer the question if there's no indication when read
aloud which word is underlined.72 When developing an app, consider users with
exceptional needs and, if possible, solicit feedback in the early stages from these learners
and their teachers.
A best practice in testing your app for accessibility would be to test it not only using the
native iOS features (like VoiceOver), but also testing it using popular accessibility devices,
such as a refreshable Braille display. Consulting with experts on accessibility or users
from special populations is also advised.
Think Auditory
For users with visual impairments, using apps with their ears is often the most efficient
way, if not the only way, to use them. It is, therefore, important for developers to think
about the user experience for someone who might not be able to read the text on a button.
For instance, in an app there might be a Next button to move to the next screen. If that
button is not coded in a way that the button can sound specific text in the button graphic
(saying, for instance, “Next,” “Yes/No,” “Start,” “Done”), a screen reader will simply say
“Button,” and the student using VoiceOver will be stuck.73 When coding an app, be sure to
define the role, state, value, and description for each item to get the highest level of
accessibility for users with visual impairments.74 Using auditory cues in this case is also
the best practice, Brauner says.75
In an early iteration of the SAS Flash Cards app, Brauner noticed that the app was not
totally accessible to her students. She met with the developers of the product and showed
them the areas in the app that were not accessible to her visually impaired users. “One of
the issues with SAS Flashcards was that the right/wrong answer was displayed visually;
the next release added an auditory award sound or a wrong answer sound,” says Brauner.76
Keep It Simple
For most special populations, and definitely for those on the autism spectrum and with
visual impairments, a simple, uncluttered interface is a major factor in an app's usability.
Following the design principles enumerated in Chapter 9 is a start. A lot of what makes an
app simple and easy to maneuver for the widest demographics—from children through
adults and every unique learner in between—means making the interface as simple as
possible. Big buttons, high contrast images, and minimal animation are all best practices
that enhance the accessibility of an app.77 Additionally, coding the app in a way that
allows for users to use zoom on all text, shift to landscape mode, or change contrast
provides even greater accessibility.
Navigation
For the user to navigate through the app successfully, we recommend a consistent user
experience. This is especially important for users with special needs. The predictability of

the Next button being at the bottom right of the screen in a book, for instance, is essential
for a user with limited vision to be able to use an app through its completion. Each app
doesn't need to invent its own placement for all of these things. Another navigational
challenge developers should consider is that entering text takes time and is a challenge for
some users; use drop down menus when possible.
For users with visual impairment, dragging is a difficult command to execute without the
proper affordances. For instance, Brauner notes, a student with low vision can begin the
drag but unless the app is programmed to indicate when the item has arrived where it
should be dropped, the student won't be able to complete the task.78

Conclusion
Mobile learning presents new and exciting opportunities in education for educating special
populations. By and large, the iPad and Apple devices present a consistent, natural user
experience that opens doors that were otherwise closed to students with special needs. We
discussed autism spectrum disorders and visual impairment in this chapter. However, these
same technologies and design guidelines can enable developers to build apps to help many
other special needs learners overcome obstacles. Learners with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, degenerative diseases affecting dexterity or communication (like
ALS), and hearing impairment are all populations with tremendous opportunity where
mobile devices are concerned. We believe the ease of including affordances for these
populations is an amazing, singular feature of iOS, and an important exercise in creating
an app accessible to all users.

Notes
1 Susan L. Hyman, “New DSM-5 Includes Changes to Autism Criteria,” AAP News, June
4, 2013,
http://aapnews.aappublications.org/content/early/2013/06/04/aapnews.20130604-1.
2 Ed Summers, senior manager of accessibility and applied assistive technology, SAS
Institute Inc., interview with authors, January 23, 2014.
3 Carrie Grunkemeyer, speech language pathologist, Churchwell Museum Magnet
Elementary School, Nashville, TN, interview with authors, September 2013.
4 Erica Roberts, speech language pathologist, Derry Township School District, interview
with authors, January 9, 2014.
5 Lois Jean Brady, Apps For Autism: A Must-Have Resource for the Special Needs
Community: (Arlington, TX: Future Horizons, 2011).
6 Ibid.
7 Roberts, interview.
8 Google, “Making Applications Accessible,”
http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/accessibility/apps.html.
9 Apple, “Accessibility,” www.apple.com/accessibility/ios/.
10 Kevin Michael Ayres, Linda Mechling, and Frank J. Sansosti, “The Use of Mobile
Technologies to Assist with Life Skills/Independence of Students with
Moderate/Severe Intellectual Disability and/or Autism Spectrum Disorders:
Considerations for the Future of School Psychology,” Psychology in Schools 50, no. 3
(2013).
11 CBS News, Apps for Autism, 60 Minutes, October 23, 2011,
www.cbsnews.com/video/watch/?id=7385686n.
12 Hyman, “New DSM-5.”
13 Ibid.
14 Joseph Mintz, Corinne Branch, Caty March, and Stephen Lerman, “Key Factors
Mediating the Use of a Mobile Technology Tool Designed to Develop Social and Life
Skills with Autistic Spectrum Disorders,” Computers & Education 58 (2012): 53–62.
15 “What Is Autism?,” Autism Speaks, www.autismspeaks.org/what-autism.
16 Ibid.
17 CBS News, Apps for Autism.
18 Ibid.

19 Stuart Powell and Rita Jordan, Autism and Learning: A Guide to Good Practice (David
Fulton Publishers: London, 1997).
20 Ayres, Mechling, and Sansosti, “The Use of Mobile Technologies.”
21 Powell and Jordan, Autism and Learning.
22 Valerie Herskowitz, Autism and Computers: Maximizing Independence Through
Technology (Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse, 2009).
23 CBS News, Apps for Autism.
24 Ibid.
25 Brady, Apps For Autism.
26 “What Is Autism?”
27 Ibid.
28 Look In My Eyes, Fizzbrain LLC, https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/look-in-my-eyes-1-
restaurant/id349835339?mt=8&ign-mpt=uo%3D4.
29 Training Faces, Training with Gaming, https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/training-
faces/id522989729?mt=8.
30 Michelle Garcia Winner, “What is Social Thinking?,” Social Thinking,
www.socialthinking.com/what-is-social-thinking.
31 Roberts, interview.
32 Social Skill Builder, App Promo, www.youtube.com/watch?v=cHtZwCZNZKc.
33 Roberts, interview.
34 Ibid.
35 CBS News, Apps for Autism.
36 Ibid.
37 “What Is Autism?,” Autism Speaks, www.autismspeaks.org/what-autism/symptoms.
38 Roberts, interview.
39 Proloquo2Go, AssistiveWare,
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/proloquo2go/id308368164?mt=8.
40 CBS News, Apps for Autism.
41 Names have been changed to protect the identity of the student.
42 Grunkemeyer, interview.

43 Leah M. Kuypers, The Zones of Regulation: A Curriculum Designed to Foster Self-
Regulation and Emotional Control (San Jose, CA: Social Thinking Publishing, 2011).
44 Ibid.
45 Ibid.
46 Greer Aukstakalnis, occupational therapist, email correspondence, January 25, 2014.
47 Kuypers, The Zones of Regulation.
48 Ibid.
49 Apple, “Accessibility.”
50 Aukstakalnis, email.
51 Kelly Stewart, occupational therapist, Derry Township School District, email
correspondence, January 26, 2014.
52 Breathe, Think, Do with Sesame, Sesame Street,
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/breathe-think-do-with-sesame/id721853597?mt=8.
53 Aukstakalnis, email.
54 Dr. Ananya Mandal, “What is Visual Impairment?” News-Medical, September 17,
2013, www.news-medical.net/health/What-is-visual-impairment.aspx.
55 Summers, interview.
56 Ibid.
57 Ibid.
58 Diane Brauner, orientation mobility specialist, interview with authors, February 3,
2013.
59 Summers, interview.
60 Ibid.
61 “News Release: Electronic Book for Students with Visual Impairments Reaches for the
Stars,” HubbleSite, January 9, 2014,
http://hubblesite.org/newscenter/archive/releases/2014/02/full/.
62 Apple, “Accessibility.”
63 Summers, interview.
64 Brauner, interview.
65 Names have been changed to protect the identity of students in examples.
66 Brauner, interview

67 LookTel Money Reader, IPPLEX, https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/looktel-money-
reader/id417476558?mt=8.
68 Apple, “Accessibility,” https://www.apple.com/accessibility/ios/voiceover/.
69 Summers, interview.
70 HubbleSite, “News Release.”
71 Brauner, interview.
72 Ibid.
73 Ibid.
74 Summers, interview.
75 Brauner, interview.
76 Ibid.
77 Ibid.
78 Ibid.


Chapter 15
Balancing Power: Data Use, Privacy, and Digital
Citizenship
Educational data, whether it comes from school systems, mobile applications, or other
technology-based resources, has immense power to transform our education system for the
better. The more we understand how students learn new concepts, retain information, and
apply it in the future, the better able we are to prepare students for success. Rich, high-
quality data is necessary for this transformation. In fact, a recent report estimates that the
appropriate use of educational data could result in an annual added economic value of $1.2
trillion worldwide.1 Educational data can be used to improve instruction, ensure more
efficient management of administrations and financing, and match students to programs
and employment, all resulting in positive economic outcomes. What's more, the high
number of data points, often called Big Data, allows for statistical sampling to be a thing
of the past; using all the data to analyze trends and make decisions is the new normal.2
Data has become, in almost all sectors, an asset that holds the power to improve all aspects
of operation.
The outstanding benefits of educational data are more than just hypothetical. For example,
through the use of student data, New York City school districts learned that nearly four out
of five high school graduates were not sufficiently prepared when beginning community
college.3 This insight allows the district to make changes to its practices in order to better
student outcomes whereas prior to this data being collected, there was no indication that
students were so poorly prepared. On a broad scale, educational data has the power to
build powerful predictors and allow better analysis of the causal factors in the educational
systems.4 More and more, we're seeing this data used to populate early warning systems
for predicting students who are likely to drop out or be retained to repeat a grade.5 It can
be used to identify factors that lead to academic and career success,6 as well as highlight
teachers who are particularly effective.7
On a more local scale, educational data allows individual educators to better understand
the impacts of their teaching techniques. They can more easily identify topics that
individual students struggle with and how effective different interventions are.8
Developers can also use data they collect to paint a rich picture of student learning that
can be used to automatically guide more effective instruction. This data helps developers
to create apps that better meet the needs of students and educators.
While educational data in all its forms offers significant power to help students, educators,
and administrators, this benefit comes at a cost: privacy. The high volumes of data
collected provide ever more opportunities for misuse; personally identifiable information
could be shared inadvertently, and vendors could take advantage of underage users' trust.
And while there is little to no evidence that this abuse is happening,9 there is still concern
over the implications of all this data collection. In this chapter, we discuss privacy and the
risks associated with big data in the educational setting. We also discuss digital citizenship
and the teaching of responsible use, which is the primary defense users have against these
threats.

Privacy
Privacy of student data has become an increasingly controversial topic in recent years. In a
recent survey, 89 percent of adults expressed concern about the use of student's personal
data for secondary means.10 Furthermore, the majority of adults expressed a concern that
they are not kept well informed about the details of how their students' data is being
collected, accessed, and stored.11 These parents felt that privacy of student data should be
a primary concern and that more restrictions are needed at the school district and company
levels. Surveys have also shown the primary concerns of parents are varied and have
changed over time.
Privacy Concerns
There are many concerns relating to student data privacy, with some of these concerns
having more validity than others. However, like many public-relations issues, if enough
parents and educators believe there is a problem, the public's negative perception will start
to grow. Below we address six of the top concerns related to student data privacy and how
these fears are reflected in reality (pictured in Figure 15.1.)
Figure 15.1 Privacy Concerns
Stranger Danger
When the Internet started to become more prolific in the lives of teens and young children
in the early 2000s, one of the primary concerns of parents and adults was the presence of
online predators who could take advantage of naïve youth. This concern led parents to
limit technology use and monitor what their children were doing on the Internet.
Technology providers responded by providing tools that offer protection against these
fears. For example, there are many social networks designed specifically for children with
special safety measures in place, such as Jabbersmack, which keeps children from adding
strangers as friends by requiring a code that has to be shared outside of the app.12 These
protections help allay many parental fears, though recent surveys suggest that 72 percent
of parents are still concerned about interactions with strangers online.13 However, while
this still represents the majority of parents, other fears have recently taken center stage and

concern a greater proportion of parents whose children use the Internet and related
technologies.
Targeted Marketing to Children
Targeting marketing to users based on their behaviors and usage data is a practice that has
been pervasive on the Internet for years. Simply look at the ads on Facebook or at the top
of Gmail and you'll see obvious correlations with the content of your pages, pages you've
visited, and messages you've received and sent. Many parents are angry at the practice of
targeting of advertisements to children, with 81 percent showing concern that data being
collected about their children may be made available to advertisers.14 For example, an app
that helps students manage sports practices and games could collect data that would be
useful for sporting goods stores who could specifically market items at important times
during the sport season. Alternatively, apps that gather data about student performance in
class could be used to market tutoring services. These types of targeted advertising are
seen as an invasion to individual privacy. While many of the fears parents have related to
the Internet and their students' privacy are unlikely to occur, marketing based on data
collected from students is very real and has been highlighted by large and prominent
providers of educational technology.15, 16 Furthermore, a recent study shows that only 7
percent of school contracts with technology vendors explicitly restrict the sale of student
data to third parties.17 However, while the sale and use of this data may feel like a major
breach in privacy, the types of data and analyses involved have little capabilities for
malicious outcomes. In fact, recommendations for tutoring services or educational
products in the exact area where a child needs further support could be a great benefit.18
Persistence of Data over Time
Another concern extends beyond what is being done with student data now and what
could be done in the future. Many worry that data could be used in making future
decisions about their students (e.g., college acceptance or career placement) that could be
unfair. This is a concern that is growing both with the amount of data that is being
collected and the sophistication of the analyses that can be applied to it. Social media in
particular has been a major concern for parents who are worried about how their child
develops an online reputation that is available to future employers. However, this concern
now extends to applications that collect data in a more subtle manner, as apps often do.
Privacy specialists warn that new technologies allow the classification of academic
performance from low-level data (such as keystrokes) that would previously be perceived
as harmless.19 While this type of technology is still on the horizon and not yet in practice,
the concern that this type of data could be used by colleges or employers to make
admission or hiring decisions persists.
Security of Personally Identifiable Student Data
There is additional concern about the collection, storage, and access of personally
identifiable information. Many parents are extremely concerned about their child's
personal data being collected and stored, with or without their knowledge. The Children's
Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (COPPA) requires many disclosures and parental

consent to collect information, and also places parameters on how the company collecting
the data must handle it (i.e., the procedures for storage and destruction, as well as
reasonable security procedures to maintain confidentiality of the data it obtains).20
However, though the law offers protection against the collection of personally identifiable
information on minors, the rapidly expanding capabilities of technology stand to reduce
the effectiveness of these restrictions.
The quantity of data that is being collected is driving parents' concerns. While many
companies that collect data strive for anonymization, so that no data is personally
identifiable, the sheer quantity of data collected about individuals makes it so that
identifying information can be reverse engineered or exploited for strictly commercial
purposes. In these cases “the data may not even explicitly seem like personal information,
but with big-data processes it can easily be traced back to the individual it refers to.”21 As
an example, consider the anonymized data Netflix has publicly released as part of their
challenge for innovation,22 which includes user ratings and viewing history. As a proof of
concept, data scientists have demonstrated how this data can be used in conjunction with
publicly visible review data on IMDB.com to identify individuals and link the two
accounts, essentially de-anonymizing the data.23 While these actions require a substantial
amount of effort on the part of malicious individuals or companies, and the information
would be difficult to come by, it is not completely implausible. Also worth noting, big-
data sources are generally not the issue when discussing security; small data are the ones
more prone to fraud and security breaches. A large educational database, the kind required
for these kinds of analyses, will have strong security (firewalls, tiered access, and strong
data-quality protocols), while something like a personal banking password isn't generally
as strong, and is more prone to being hacked.24
The security of student data, while governed by tight restrictions, is still a valid area for
concern. It is important for those who develop and market apps to be diligent and
transparent about the data they're collecting. But the laws, rules, regulations, and common
practices around collection of such data are constantly changing, and it is important for
developers to stay informed of the most recent changes.
Poor Communication
The disclosures to parents under COPPA, often part and parcel of the lengthy privacy
policy that requires a parent to click a button if they agree, are less than ideal. Apps are
required to provide a privacy policy, but these are often lengthy and are not written in
understandable terms. Therefore, these terms are seldom read and even less frequently
understood by guardians.25 Furthermore, parents, educators, and administrators often have
a difficult time communicating with each other as well as developers, leading to many
unanswered questions and increasing frustration.26 So, while there are valid and strong
regulations governing the collection of data for children under 13, there are also many
gray areas for parents and educators on these practices, simply because of confusing
communication practices. This concern is, we feel, warranted. Research into the practices
of apps as they relate to privacy laws and disclosures has noted an appalling lack of
transparency in the privacy policies of children's apps.27 It represents a major area for
improvement in the educational app market. Without proper communication, it is

impossible for users and guardians to feel knowledgeable and comfortable about what data
is being shared and how data is being used. These concerns can quickly escalate as users
become afraid of hypothetical scenarios.
The Unknown
Perhaps the scariest privacy concerns are the ones that cannot be voiced. Many parents do
not know exactly why it feels wrong to have their student's data collected, they just know
that it feels creepy. And this fear is not without good reason. Some of the largest
educational technology providers are collecting up to 100 million data points, per child,
per day.28 That's an astounding amount of data, and it's not clear what companies are using
it for, or what they could use it for. While there isn't any clear evidence that this data is
being used for malicious purposes,29 the unknown allows imaginations to wander to the
worst possible fears. Fears that cannot be articulated are often the most difficult to quell.

Privacy Legislation
To help protect the privacy of student data, there are several pieces of legislation that have
been put in place. The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) was initially
adopted in 1974, before many issues surrounding digital data arose. The key provision of
FERPA is to establish students as the owners of their educational data, and educators and
administrators as the custodians. It specifies how the educational records of students under
18 can be used and accessed. Primarily, it states that parents and eligible students have a
right to view and request corrections to their records, since they are, in fact, the owners of
these records.30 Records can also be released for purposes related to evaluation, audit, and
compliance. All other purposes require consent from the parent or eligible student. For
example, teachers and federal officials can use data to understand student achievement and
make policy changes. However, they are prohibited from using the data for marketing or
advertisement.31 FERPA has been amended many times since 1974 to address the latest
technological concerns and data sharing practices, and it continues to evolve to address the
ever-changing world of student data collection and sharing.
COPPA is designed specifically to protect the online data of children under the age of 13.
Its primary goals are to increase parental involvement in children's online activities,
protect the online safety of children, ensure security of children's personal information,
and limit the collection of data from children without parental consent.32 The primary
requirements of COPPA are that website or online entities with users under the age of 13
require parental consent and notification about use and data collection policies. They are
also expected to secure this data and dispose of it after a reasonable amount of time has
passed. Parents are further given the right to revoke permissions at any time.

Open Issues
Unfortunately, the existence of these legislative measures is not enough to remove the
issue of data privacy or allay many concerns, since there are many entities affected by it.
One is a matter of compliance. For example, in 2012 the Federal Trade Commission
conducted a survey of the top 960 apps for children in the Apple App Store and the
Google Play Android Market.33 The survey revealed startling information about the state
of compliance in the children's mobile app market. In fact, “most apps failed to provide
any information about the data collected through the app, let alone the type of data
collected, the purpose of the collection, and who would obtain access to the data. Even
more troubling, the results showed that many of the apps shared certain information—such
as device ID, geolocation, or phone number—with third parties without disclosing that
fact to parents. Further, a number of apps contained interactive features—such as
advertising, the ability to make in-app purchases, and links to social media—without
disclosing these features to parents prior to download.”34 These applications are using
child data in a way that violates many parental expectations without proper notification.
Another issue is that even when privacy policies are provided they can often be difficult to
read and understand and may not contain information of value to users in making
decisions about their use of the app. For instance, a readability analysis of a sample of
online privacy policies indicated that approximately 70 percent of policies were written at
a level higher than what the average adult user of the Internet finds easy to comprehend,
and an even higher proportion of policies were beyond the grasp of the general public.35 In
the FTC's study of the children's mobile app market, they found that of the few apps that
provided a privacy disclosure (20 percent), many used external links to often-irrelevant
information that was difficult to read. The disclosures often failed to alert parents to what
types of data were actually being collected.36 According to Dr. Aaron Massey, a post-
doctoral researcher specializing in interactive computing at Georgia Tech University, “a
lot of the privacy policies that are pretty detailed are mostly detailed in terms of the things
that they [developers] are not doing for you. One of the common misconceptions about
privacy policies is that if you have a policy then they are protecting privacy. That's not the
case. You can have a privacy policy that says we're collecting all this information and
selling it to third parties.…There is no minimum standard of conduct that (developers)
have to meet.”37 So, reading and understanding what a privacy policy says is more
important than noting that an app has a privacy policy. This, unfortunately, is something
most parents do not take the time to do, or, if they do read it, they don't know to look for.
In addition to issues of how users are notified of privacy policies, there are further issues
related to parental consent. When interacting with digital technologies it is very difficult to
verify that individuals are who they claim to be. This is especially important when apps
are required to obtain parental consent before collecting and using student data. Often
websites will simply ask users if they are over the age of 13 before they are allowed in.
This is very easy to bypass without parental permission. Other forms of parental
notification involve email or password checks that, again, do not guarantee the parental
consent has truly been given. Under current COPPA guidelines, consent should be
verifiable, by using signed consent forms, credit card account information, or phone or

video conferencing staffed by trained personnel.38 However, the numbers of organizations
that use these techniques are still very few.
Another critical issue is that of recourse. If parents notice that a company violated their
child's privacy and seek to take action, there are limited means for doing so. First, it must
be something that explicitly violates the company's stated privacy policies, so even if the
act is perceived as egregious to the individual, this not enough to prosecute a company.
Furthermore, an individual alone is often not enough to begin any investigation by the
FTC or legal entity. There often must be multiple complaints or publicity before a
violation will be investigated.39 For example, the successful suit against educational app
provider 24x7 for unauthorized sharing of users' personal information to third parties was
filed by Attorney General Jeffry Chiesa, on behalf of the state of New Jersey.40
One final issue relates to rapid changes in technology over time. While the government
seeks to protect students and their privacy, the current technological landscape makes it
very difficult to do so For example, when COPPA was first passed in 1998, approximately
3 million children under the age of 18 had access to the Internet. As of 2012, this number
has risen to approximately 61.7 million children.41 There are far more products being
marketed to young children, and it is difficult to ensure that all entities are adhering to the
law. Furthermore, data is becoming increasingly valuable to companies. They are now
able to store, process, and use it much more efficiently, which increases incentives to
collect it. Individual data is a highly valued commodity to developers and individual
companies, as well as third-party entities. This leads to a difficult balance between what is
appropriate to collect and use and what is not.
What You Can Do
In the challenging world of big data, with so much of our personal activity on the Internet
stored in permanent data logs, what can you actually do to ensure the security of any one
student's data? This depends a lot on your role: school faculty, caregiver of a student, or
software developer. These tips are shown in Figure 15.2.

Figure 15.2 What You Can Do
Privacy in School
School systems should be proactive and ensure they evaluate the software products they
adopt, and maintain clear communications with parents and legislators. They have
significant power to determine which apps are used and, consequently, what types of
student data to collect and share. Schools often serve as intermediaries between parents
and the technology providers.42 They often act on behalf of parents and, in some cases,
have authorization to provide consent. For that reason, schools should still be expected to
do their own due diligence by investigating the companies they interact with and
communicating with parents. The FTC recommends that schools and/or individual faculty
members ask the following questions of any tech provider before engaging with them:43
What personal information is collected?
How is it used?
Is the information shared in any way?
Are there mechanisms in place for parental control of student data?
How is the data kept secure?
What are the retention and deletion policies?
Common Sense Media, an organization committed to promoting responsible media
fluency for children and families, has also been leading initiatives to ensure that schools'

policies are up to date and that all stakeholders are kept informed. In October of 2013,
they launched the School Privacy Zone campaign with the goal of promoting national
standards centered around the use of student data.44 This campaign focuses on promoting
three core principles: Student data should be used only for educational purposes, student
data should never be used for targeted advertising, and schools and technology providers
should adopt policies in line with these objectives.45
Many states have already begun advocating for stronger regulations of student data in their
school systems. For example, the state of California enacted a law in 2014 that prevents
the collection or use of student data for any reason other than for purposes intended by the
school, or required for product maintenance. This is the strictest data regulation in the
country.46 These endeavors are important as school systems are often large disseminators
of educational technology, and this responsibility will only increase as technology
becomes increasingly pervasive in the classroom. As the prevalence of statewide
longitudinal data systems continues to grow, these issues are becoming more relevant (and
controversial) as states draw lines on what is acceptable use of student data.47
Privacy at Home
Parents should be aware of the apps used by their children and how these apps collect and
use personal data. This involves reading privacy policies and making informed judgments
about what level of data collection and usage they view as appropriate for their children.
Unfortunately, as Dr. Aaron Massey points out, this is not an easy task. “It is very difficult
to evaluate these things. Often it ends up…where success is a non-story and failure is a
front page headline.…All that tells you as a consumer is ‘that's one company I don't want
to do business with.’ It doesn't give you any information about who you should trust.”48
Massey goes on to recommend that parents talk with one another about their concerns.
Often sharing information in this way is one of the best method for parents to stay
informed about the apps their children are using and any privacy concerns that may
warrant investigation.
Another important responsibility is to pay attention to requests for consent. Requests for
children to use an app often come through email and may look like spam or may be
otherwise easy to ignore. It is important that parents read the email understand what is
being asked, and provide consent only when appropriate. Parents should also feel
comfortable contacting the company for clarification if they are unsure about what data is
being collected and how it will be used. By asking these questions, parents can
communicate to companies that their privacy policies may need updating. Parents should
also be aware that they have the right to view the information that is being collected about
their student and withdraw consent at any time. Companies that comply with COPPA are
required to provide a mechanism for this, though it may not be a simple task. However, if
a parent is truly concerned, it is an available course of action.
Finally, we recommend that parents model good digital citizenship behaviors to their
children so they can learn how to make these evaluations on their own. Parents should talk
openly with their children about data privacy concerns and how to identify trustworthy
apps or websites. The goal should be to teach students how to recognize when companies
may be using their data and how to be proactive about managing their personal

information.
Privacy for the Student
In many ways, digital dangers are like any other risk children face in their analog lives.
“Swimming pools can be dangerous for children. To protect them, one can install locks,
put up fences, and deploy pool alarms. All these measures are helpful, but by far the most
important thing that one can do for one's children is to teach them to swim.”49 Similarly,
the new digital landscape and associated privacy issues, lead many to be nervous about the
safety of their children. However, when navigating the potentially scary waters of student
privacy, it is important to consider one key component of keeping young children safe
from having their data misused: teaching them to be digital citizens who can assess the
risk associated with putting information on the Internet and identify trustworthy software
providers. As schools transition from outright bans on technology to policies of
responsible use, it is imperative that students see mobile devices as tools for their
everyday life and be taught the skills needed to guard secure information and evaluate
threats.

Digital Citizenship: Teaching Responsible Use
Instead of ignoring the issue by restricting students' use of technology, students should be
explicitly aware of the dangers of digital media and instructed on how to make ethical
choices to mitigate these threats. For example, Common Sense Media provides a
comprehensive, free digital citizenship curriculum equipped with lesson plans, interactive
tools, and assessments for K to 12 students. For elementary-age children, they also
provide an interactive world equipped with games and videos that ultimately allows
students to acquire their digital passport. Similarly, Project New Media Literacies provides
a free curriculum for high school students, Our Space: Being a Responsible Citizen of the
Digital World.50 Through this lesson plan, students are exposed to activities designed to
address privacy, identity, credibility, authorship and ownership, and participation.
Moreover, a case has been made for schools to replace the more typical acceptable use
policy with the more appropriate responsible use policy that teaches students the dangers
of mobile and how to use their devices responsibly.51 This slight semantic adjustment
shifts responsibility to the student to make responsible choices. In her book, One-to-One
Learning: Laptop Programs that Work, Pamela Livingston describes a successful
implementation of using the LARK (legal, appropriate, responsible, kind) framework for
drafting responsible use policies.52 Beyond teaching students how to use technology
responsibly, Livingston explains how the LARK framework can also be used productively
when violations occur. “They're considered opportunities for students to reflect on their
actions both in light of LARK and in terms of their own reputations and membership in a
community of learners,” Livingston writes.53
Using some of these methods, Kelly Walsh, CIO at The College of Westchester and author
of the EmergingEdTech blog, reports school districts across the country have opted to
embrace and moderate as opposed to ignore and restrict when it comes to cellphones in the
classroom.54 Allen Independent School District in Texas established a productive use of
cellphones by instating an acceptable use policy for technology and providing a guide for
parents.55 Katy Independent School District took a different approach and transformed
students' devices into mobile learning devices by disabling texting and calling features.
Also, the Oak Hills Local School District in Ohio believes in the benefits of mobile
devices and has published a bring your own device framework, complete with lessons
learned so other schools can successfully adopt a similar policy.
The fact is students are using and will continue to use mobile devices. Therefore, by
restricting their use in schools, we are missing two valuable teaching points: the
responsible use of mobile devices and the power of mobile devices for productivity and
engagement. With respect to the former, students use mobile devices outside of the
classroom, and this use is rarely monitored; therefore, by ignoring mobile in the
classroom, students are not learning the potential dangers of their actions. Instead of
fighting the inevitable and infinite battle of restricting use, educators should leverage
students' desire to use mobile devices and introduce students to tools and strategies for
making learning more efficient and effective. Teaching digital citizenship will ultimately
lead to smarter use of technology and fewer security issues, as students internalize the
principles for what is appropriate to share and how to make those decisions independently.

Privacy for the App Developer
In many cases, privacy concerns portray app developers as the villain. However,
companies that put careful thought into how they manage student data and how they
communicate with the public about their practices are increasingly viewed in a positive
light. Furthermore, failure to take initiative in this arena could have disastrous
consequences. For example, the software company inBloom was viewed as a well-funded
educational powerhouse as it grew in 2011 to 2013, and many states chose its services.
However, a failure to address the privacy concerns of parents and schools districts led
states to pull out and ultimately resulted in the closing of the company in 2014, shortly
after its inception.56
Developers must ensure that they are complying with the appropriate legislation. If an app
has access to student educational records, this means complying with FERPA. Many apps
must also comply with COPPA if they have material that is intended or may be used by
children under the age of 13. The FTC has created clear guidelines for compliance that
involve six key steps.
Step 1 Determine if your company is a website or online service that collects personal
information from kids under 13.
Step 2 Post a privacy policy that complies with COPPA.
Step 3 Notify parents directly before collecting personal information from their kids.
Step 4 Get parents' verifiable consent before collecting information from their kids.
Step 5 Honor parents' ongoing rights with respect to information collected from their
kids.
Step 6 Implement reasonable procedures to protect the security of kids' personal
information.57
These steps are a bare minimum. We advise communicating and sharing as much as
possible with users and responsible parties. Developers should strive to offer transparency
in their privacy and data security practices, offering plain-text summaries of their legalese
policies. Text should be at a level that is easy to read by the majority of the expected users.
For example, Moms with Apps, an online advocacy group, recommends using an icon-
based system to disclose policies to reduce the need to read complex texts in order to
understand a company's privacy policy.58 Companies should clearly disclose what they
will and will not do with student data. LinkedIn.com, the networking site for
professionals, does a commendable job with this.59 They break each section of their
privacy policy down to an unintimidating, colloquial sentence or two, and also provide a
brief video explaining how they treat the information you share in your profile. They even
give a few benefits to them using your data, like providing you with more relevant
connections and personalized suggestions. It is important to show a use of the data that
benefits users rather than allow them to assume their data is being harvested and stored
somewhere to be used against them or to exploit them. The things that apps and
developers do to safeguard user data and keep it secure, as well as new features to enable
that, should be touted as any other updates would. It is also important to let users know

what their rights and options are. How can they remove data about themselves? Who
should they contact with questions and concerns? Treat privacy like a feature and discuss
it openly; by showing it is something you take seriously, you make the users better
informed and more comfortable. Massey recommends that companies take steps to
facilitate communication among users and parents where privacy concerns can be voiced
and addressed.60 By supporting and addressing this type of dialog, a company can be
aware of the needs of its users and demonstrate a clear commitment to transparency and
respect of student privacy. Anything that can be done to demonstrate honesty and
compassion towards user concerns is likely to be well received.

Conclusion
There are advantages and disadvantages to sharing data. It often feels as though keeping
data private and choosing not to share usage patterns and location is a default practice:
When in doubt, don't share. Sharing data for personalization and customized experiences
within an app or website is certainly a tradeoff. Collecting detailed personalized data about
students is the only way to offer truly customized instruction. But what are the risks
associated with allowing this data collection and use? Dr. Aaron Massey, digital privacy
researcher, notes, frankly, that “most people who are freaking out about this are concerned
about a hypothetical that isn't reflective of what's really happening.”61 Perhaps the biggest
issue surrounding data privacy and security is misunderstanding and the big scary
unknown. Certainly there are many possibilities, but there's not much hard evidence (at
this point in time) to point to actual malfeasance or misuse. The best defense educators
and parents have against this threat is to be educated on their students' device use,
questioning tech providers if something feels off. Educational tech companies can be up
front and transparent, openly sharing their privacy policies in plain text. As the digital
world continues to expand and mature at breakneck speed, it is vital, in our opinion, that
all parties take a seat at the table and, without fear, shape the future of privacy.

Notes
1 James Manyika, Michael Chui, Diana Farrell, Steve Van Kuiken, Peter Groves, and
Elizabeth Almasi Doshi, “Open Data: Unlocking Innovation and Performance with
Liquid Information,” McKinsey & Company, October 2013,
www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_technology/open_data_unlocking_innovation_an
2 Viktor Mayer-Schonberger and Kenneth Cukier, Big Data (New York: Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt Publishing Company, 2013).
3 Anya Kaminetz, “Mass Collection of Student Data Raises Privacy Concerns,” National
Public Radio, May 26, 2014, www.npr.org/2014/05/26/316110345/mass-collection-of-
student-data-raises-privacy-concerns?ft=1&f=.
4 Vasuki Rethinam, “Predictive Analytics in K–12: Advantages, Limitations and
Implementations,” The Journal, June 12, 2014,
http://thejournal.com/articles/2014/06/12/predictive-analytics-in-k-12-advantages-
limitations-implementation.aspx#0qwJQppfRl40cfYM.99.
5 Hansheng Chen, “Identifying Early Indicators for College Readiness,” Research paper,
www.gse.harvard.edu/cepr-resources/files/news-events/sdp-fellowship-capstone-
chen.pdf.
6 Vasuki Rethinam, “Grade 9 Indicators Influencing High School Graduation and College
Readiness in Montgomery County Public High Schools,” May 2011,
http://montgomeryschoolsmd.org/departments/sharedaccountability/reports/2011/Grade%
25-11%20FINAL.pdf.
7 Laura Pappano, “Using Research to Predict Great Teachers,” Harvard Education Letter,
May/June 2011, http://hepg.org/hel-home/issues/27_3/helarticle/using-research-to-
predict-great-teachers_501.
8 Data Quality Campaign, Infographic, “Ms. Bullen's Data-Rich Year,”
www2.dataqualitycampaign.org/files/Data-Rich%20Year%20Infographic.pdf.
9 Stephanie Simon, “Data Mining Your Children,” Politico,
www.politico.com/story/2014/05/data-mining-your-children-
106676.html#ixzz34pis4dlx.
10 Student Privacy Infographic, Common Sense Media, http://cdn2-
d7dev.ec.commonsensemedia.org/sites/default/files/uploads/about_us/csm-
school_privacy-infographic_feb14-lores.pdf.
11 Ibid.
12 “Social Networking for Kids,” Common Sense Media,
www.commonsensemedia.org/lists/social-networking-for-kids.
13 Mary Madden, Sandra Cortesi, Urs Gasser, Amanda Lenhart, and Maeve Duggan,
“Parents, Teens and Online Privacy,” Pew Research, November 20, 2012,

www.pewinternet.org/2012/11/20/main-report-10/.
14 Ibid.
15 Melissa Block, “Who's Using the Data Mined from Students?,” National Public Radio,
May 26, 2014, www.npr.org/2014/05/26/316110352/whos-using-the-data-mined-from-
students.
16 Amy Gesenhues, “Google Says It Will No Longer Scan and Collect Data from Student
Gmail Accounts for Ad Purposes,” MarketingLand, April 30, 2014,
http://marketingland.com/google-says-will-longer-scan-student-gmail-accounts-ad-
purposes-82213.
17 Fordham University Center on Law and Information Policy, “Privacy and Cloud
Computing in Public Schools (2013),” December 13, 2013,
http://law.fordham.edu/center-on-law-and-information-policy/30198.htm.
18 Block, “Who's Using the Data?”
19 Natasha Singer, “Schools Use Web Tools, and Data Is Seen at Risk,” New York Times,
December 12, 2013, www.nytimes.com/2013/12/13/education/schools-use-web-tools-
and-data-is-seen-at-risk.html?_r=2&.
20 COPPA, “Children's Online Privacy Protection Act,” www.coppa.org/coppa.htm.
21 Mayer-Schonberger and Cukier, Big Data.
22 Elliot Van Buskirk, “How the Netflix Prize Was Won,” Wired, September 22, 2009,
www.wired.com/2009/09/how-the-netflix-prize-was-won/.
23 Mayer-Schonberger and Cukier, Big Data.
24 Executive Office of the President, “Big Data: Seizing Opportunities, Preserving
Values,” The White House, May 1, 2014,
www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/big_data_privacy_report_5.1.14_final_prin
25 Carlos Jenson and Colin Potts, “Privacy Policies as Decision-Making Tools: An
Evaluation of Online Privacy Notices,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2004,
pdf.aminer.org/000/088/850/privacy_policies_as_decision_making_tools_an_evaluation
26 Simon, “Data Mining.”
27 Federal Trade Commission, “Mobile Apps for Kids: Current Privacy Disclosures are
Disappointing,” FTC, February 2012, www.ftc.gov/reports/mobile-apps-kids-current-
privacy-disclosures-are-disappointing.
28 Simon, “Data Mining.”
29 Ibid.
30 U.S. Department of Education, “Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act

(FERPA),” www.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html.
31 Joel Reidenberg, “Parents Worry Student Data Will Be Used for Marketing, Not
Education,” Fordham University Newsroom, January 23, 2014,
http://law.fordham.edu/center-on-law-and-information-policy/32351.htm.
32 Bureau of Consumer Protection, “Complying with COPPA: A Guide for Business and
Parents and Small Entity Compliance Guide,” July 16, 2014,
www.business.ftc.gov/documents/0493-Complying-with-COPPA-Frequently-Asked-
Questions.
33 Federal Trade Commission, “Mobile Apps for Kids.”
34 Ibid.
35 Jenson and Potts, “Privacy Policies.”
36 Federal Trade Commission, “Mobile Apps for Kids.”
37 Dr. Aaron Massey, post-doctoral fellow in interactive computing at Georgia Tech
University, interview with authors, March 20, 2014.
38 Federal Trade Commission, “The Children's Online Privacy Protection Rule: A Six-
Step Compliance Plan for Your Business,” FTC,
http://business.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/BUS84-coppa-6-steps.pdf.
39 Massey, interview.
40 Davis & Gilbert LLP, “Mobile App Developer Settles COPPA Suit,” DGLaw, July
2012, www.google.com/url?
sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CDQQFjAA&ur
supU7PgJJTJsATFrICIAQ&usg=AFQjCNHRibfn2dmevQMf36DOxivLkFGRMQ&sig
41 New Jersey Office of the Attorney General, “New Jersey Attorney General and
Division of Consumer Affairs File Federal Suit against App Developer Accused of
Collecting, Transmitting Children's Personal Information without Parental Notification
or Consent,” June 6, 2012, www.nj.gov/oag/newsreleases12/pr20120606a.html.
42 Bureau of Consumer Protection, “Complying with COPPA FAQ.”
43 New Jersey Office of the Attorney General, “New Jersey Attorney General.”
44 “Protect Students' Data: Schools Must be Privacy Zones,” Common Sense Media,
www.commonsensemedia.org/school-privacy-zone.
45 Ibid.
46 Sharon Noguchi, “California Legislature Passes Stiffest US Bill to Protect K–12
Students' Online Data,” San Jose Mercury News, August 31, 2014,
www.mercurynews.com/education/ci_26444107/online-privacy-california-passes-
nations-stiffest-protections-k.

47 Jamie McQuiggan and Armistead W. Sapp, Implement, Improve, and Expand Your
Statewide Longitudinal Data System (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
48 Massey, interview.
49 National Research Council, Youth, Pornography, and the Internet (Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press, 2002).
50 Project New Media Literacies and The GoodPlay Project, “Our Space: Being a
Responsible Citizen of the Digital World,” www.newmedialiteracies.org/our-space-
being-a-responsible-citizen-of-the-digital-world/.
51 Carly Shuler, Niall Winters, and Mark West, “The Future of Mobile Learning:
Implications for Policymakers and Planners,” UNESCO, 2013,
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002196/219637e.pdf.
52 Pamela Livingston, 1-To-1 Learning: Laptop Programs That Work (Washington, DC:
International Society for Technology in Education, 2006).
53 Ibid.
54 Kelly Walsh, “Making BYOD Work in Schools—Three School Districts That Have
Figured It Out,” EmergingEdTech, December 16, 2012,
www.emergingedtech.com/2012/12/making-byod-work-in-schools/.
55 Ibid.
56 Benjamin Herold, “inBloom to Shut Down Amid Growing Data-Privacy Concerns,”
Education Week, April 21, 2014,
http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/DigitalEducation/2014/04/inbloom_to_shut_down_ami
57 Federal Trade Commission, “Children's Online Privacy.”
58 Moms with Apps, “Privacy Icon,” http://blog.momswithapps.com/privacy-icon/
59 LinkedIn, “Your Privacy Matters,” www.linkedin.com/legal/privacy-policy.
60 Massey, interview.
61 Ibid.


Chapter 16
Mobile Learning Today and Tomorrow

Introduction
The ability to create rich, meaningful, and engaging learning experiences for students has
never been more attainable. With the proliferation of powerful devices and the significant
momentum toward widespread access to broadband, the nuts and bolts are in place waiting
for developers, educators, students, and other stakeholders to take the benefits of mobile
learning from theory to practice. Trailblazers have already set the stage for this movement,
creating and documenting best practices as well as failures. The potential for leveraging
today's technologies for education has driven these leaders to take great risks and
demonstrate unwavering perseverance. As more teachers on the front lines of education
have positive experiences with mobile learning, more advocates and leaders are created to
improve it.
The motivation behind mobile learning has never been about the devices themselves but
rather the empowerment and opportunity they provide to the student. Few educators would
argue that taking the SAT outdoors on an iPad represents mobile learning. Instead, mobile
learning embodies those lessons that would otherwise be impossible without synergizing
the affordances of mobile technologies. Using a mobile device to identify a bird by
searching key features on a birding app, or sharing work in real time with others working
on a group project are key differentiators for the mobile experience that facilitate deeper
learning and a more engaging experience. These possibilities and new ways of connecting
learning experiences are the essence of mobile learning, and embody more than a simple
mobile learning device.
The leaders of the educational technology movement will forever remain as restless as
technology developers, given “education and technology can and should co-evolve in
mutually supportive ways.”1 As new ideas and functionalities arise, the potential for
mobile learning experiences will evolve—just as the iPad allowed for experiences above
and beyond those available through the Palm Pilot. So, while it is important to understand
how to make mobile work today, it is equally as critical to keep an eye on the horizon. The
mobile devices we discuss in this book are state of the art today; we fully expect in a few
years that the technology will be radically different. What is most important when
engaging in and developing apps for mobile learning is to embrace and try new
technology as it enters the market.

Making Mobile Learning Work
We hold that mobile learning offers a unique and unrivaled learning opportunity, one that
offers significant implications for teaching and learning; however, the shift from potential
to realization is rife with challenges. Grounded in the research and analysis conducted in
writing this book, we uncovered five critical themes for making mobile learning work:
prioritizing pedagogy over technology; favoring tools over content; collaborative efforts in
development and implementations; a strong feedback loop; and an openness to using
mobile technology rather than a fear of the unknown.
From the development of apps to the student experience, we believe the success of mobile
learning lies in communication and collaboration among all stakeholders. By being aware
of these five themes, developers and educators alike can use mobile learning to improve
education, not as an accessory or an afterthought. After all, a poor mobile implementation
won't change any educational outcomes or increase enthusiasm about learning; it takes a
concerted and pedagogically-grounded approach to successfully use mobile devices for
learning.
Pedagogy Leads Technology
In our definition of mobile learning, we argue this experience cannot be simplified to
learning with a mobile device. Instead, instances of mobile learning are defined by
leveraging mobile devices and empowering students to actively transact with the
curriculum in ways that align with the science behind how we learn best (Chapter 2).
Therefore, mobile learning is not about novelty or cool apps, but rather redefining
pedagogy to capitalize on the affordances of mobile devices to empower students. Mobile
learning environments enable empowerment to take many forms: it lets students take
control of their own learning, personalize their experience, pose an authentic problem,
provide a meaningful purpose or audience, or connect with others.
When transitioning to a mobile classroom, leaders must encourage educators to consider
the research behind learning and higher-order thinking. That is, we must think about how
the affordances of mobile devices can be used to induce active, meaningful learning where
students are charged with constructing their own meaning through deep engagement with
the material. Educational models, such as the SAMR and TPACK models discussed in
Chapter 4, suggest that mobile devices be wrapped with pedagogy to generate lessons not
otherwise possible. In a recent interview, Scott Smith, chief technology officer at
Mooresville Graded School District, said, “The technology is a tool. The technology gives
us exponential potential to do things we haven't been able to do before. But the focus is on
curriculum and instruction.”2
App developers face a challenge in this respect too: it is simple to create an app version of
an existing educational resource (say, an ebook version of a textbook or videos of
lectures), but what will be most valuable is to break out of the familiar and create a
different kind of experience, an opportunity for deeper learning.3 While mobile devices
significantly expand the opportunities for classroom activities, even less active
instructional strategies, such as lectures, can utilize specific functionalities to encourage
active engagement. Apps like Twitter or Padlet are great tools for backchanneling. Entry

and exit tickets, or knowledge checks using Google Forms or Poll Everywhere, help to
ensure engagement and monitor understanding. Furthermore, apps like Educreations and
Explain Everything provide a perfect space to demonstrate deep understanding by having
students show what they know as opposed to stating what you know with a simple quiz or
test. Other strategies for enhancing instructional methods are detailed throughout Section
1.
In sum, pedagogy must lead technology. Both developers and educators should maintain
awareness of the science behind optimizing learning. When designing apps or lessons,
both parties should consider how an app can be used to enhance current instructional
strategies. Dressing up previous resources in a digital costume is insufficient, as true
mobile learning experiences lie in the potential for experiences previously impossible.
Tools over Content
In line with the previous discussion, apps that are tool based, as opposed to content based,
tend to more closely align with creating the optimal mobile learning experience. The
objective underlying most content apps is simply to teach students about a specific topic;
thus, such apps are generally used to replace teacher-led instruction as opposed to redefine
the way in which the lesson is presented. That being said, there is nothing wrong with
additional practice. Drill and practice, exploratory, and game-based apps present
wonderful opportunities for students to continue engaging with the material or develop
automaticity for basic skills (for more information, see Chapter 2).
Nonetheless, we believe the promise of mobile learning lies in tool-based apps—apps that
allow students to create, collaborate, and solve meaningful problems. Such apps can often
be used in several different ways across domains to encourage higher-order thinking and
construct their own meaning. Moreover, practice with and exposure to such apps more
closely aligns to the way mobile devices are used in the real world, both in our careers and
for lifelong learning. These are the skills—efficiency with using devices to solve our own
problems, answering our own questions, and communicating with others—in which
employers are most interested. Content- and job-specific knowledge can be, and often is,
taught through training.
Therefore, while it is important for students to learn about the events leading up to World
War II, for instance, students are better served when this subject is taught in ways that that
charge students to practice and develop skills associated with conducting research, critical
analysis, and communication. Using this example, apps designed to help students filter
through information, analyze primary and secondary sources, and demonstrate and
communicate deep levels of understanding often are in greater demand than a World War
II content app. Just because a video or textbook is presented on an iPad does not make it
mobile learning.
Collaborative Effort
Mobile learning efforts cannot be achieved in a vacuum. This applies both to the
developer side—in that an interdisciplinary team is ideal—and in the education setting.
Implementing a mobile learning plan requires adequate staff and expertise, and wide
support for the initiative.

From a development point of view, apps for education should stand on a solid pedagogical
foundation. As highlighted in Chapter 8, best practices emphasize interdisciplinary
teamwork to be sure the app meets the needs of educators and is grounded in the science
of learning. Effective teams generally require not only programming expertise, but also
careful, user-centered design in terms of instruction, usability, and design. For example,
button size and placement might have different requirements for preschoolers versus
adults. Lastly, rigorous testing can determine whether your app sinks or swims in the
education market. Apps that do not withstand weak network strength or significant load do
not accommodate the demands of in-school use.
A similar story applies to integrating mobile devices into the classroom. Administrators,
teachers, students, IT staff members, curriculum specialists, and parents must work
together to get the most out of a mobile initiative. As many teachers can attest, an inferior
infrastructure can quickly ruin perceptions of the benefits of mobile and turn believers into
doubters. Moreover, without adequate training, many teachers are left overwhelmed with
the daunting pressure of creating instructional magic with mobile devices. Buying the
devices and ramping up the Wi-Fi network is only the beginning. Providing professional
development and helping teachers create a supportive personal learning network helps get
the creative juices flowing.
Feedback Loop
Once an app has been released, the development process still continues. As in the planning
and initial development phase, we believe the most integral components for creating
mobile learning experiences are teachers and students in the classroom today. These are
the individuals who know exactly what their objectives are, what engages their students,
and what they need to achieve. With the recent pace of educational policy changes, even
the newly retired teacher might not be able to provide the most accurate feedback and
direction. Therefore, close partnerships with in-service teachers round out the expertise
needed on a development team.
Further, developers need to be sure their app is engaging to students, if that is their
audience. Engagement is a key tenet of pedagogy: “If kids don't like it, then it doesn't
work. It's as simple as that,” says Bjorn Jeffrey of Toca Boca.4 Taking students'
perspective into account is important because an app can be cool to developers, and hit all
the key educational standards, but if the kids don't enjoy it and aren't engaged by it, it
won't be effective. This aspect can be easily lost in the mix, and it is worth remembering.
Educators should be aware of this need for two-way communication. Software
development models emphasize the importance of user feedback, and the best companies
are indeed seeking such guidance. Teachers should not just accept what's out there. We
encourage teachers to get involved in the process by communicating with developers on
what the app did or what is making the experience less than perfect. It's an iterative
process, and this input is critical. In our experience, working with in-service teachers has
yielded invaluable expertise to our development process. Understanding not only what
teachers and students need, but also the constraints in which they operate has greatly
influenced the development of SAS Curriculum Pathways's products. Similarly, informing
educators about the latest and greatest in the mobile technology field has inspired

wonderful ideas of innovation. This partnership is instrumental for advancing the field of
educational technology.
Leverage It, Don't Fear It
Initially, when one suggests letting students use cellphones in class, the reaction might be
mixed. In the recent past, many students had their own mobile devices and used them for
off-task texting or inappropriate posting to social media sites or even, in some cases,
cheating on exams. Much as students in previous generations used passing notes for the
same purposes, some students use mobile devices to disrupt learning in the classroom.
Often, the school's response is to ban the devices, and hopefully, ban the actions that
students are taking part in. However, our suggestion is different: incorporate mobile
devices into learning to leverage their ubiquity and engaging qualities. In fact, successful
BYOD implementations have found that allowing students to use their devices actually
decreases misuse.5
Through training teachers, developing guidelines, and, ultimately, relinquishing control,
mobile learning initiatives can become a reality—a reality that will likely exceed
expectations. Like any other resource, setting appropriate guidelines and teaching
responsible use has proven successful in many districts. Even large districts with high
rates of poverty and disciplinary infractions have devised workable models for mobile
learning implementations.
Almost every best-practices resource for mobile learning emphasizes the importance of
mindset, buy-in, and teacher training. Best practice guides typically include advice for
communicating the need for mobile devices, addressing common concerns, budgeting,
preventing and managing misuse, and preparing infrastructure. With such a
comprehensive set of well-known obstacles, it is easy to see why schools might resist
implementing a mobile program. However, we believe fearing mobile devices does not
save teachers from headaches and behavior management; fearing mobile simply poses a
significant disservice to today's learners. Digital media specialist, Mimi Ito, argues “We
tend to see [mobile devices] as a distraction from learning because adults aren't
participating in [formalizing the process]…It's a bit of a chicken or the egg problem.
They're not participating in shaping the kind of influence these devices [could have]. By
embracing mobile devices in our classrooms, we empower students in the learning
process.”6
While BYOD and school-provided initiatives are on the rise, a surprising number of
schools still subscribe to a strict no-cellphone policy. For many mobile learning pioneers,
fears were common, but many were short lived. In a recent interview regarding the
essentials of mobile learning, BYOD expert, Tim Clark, “noted that it's natural for schools
to worry about the technical aspects of a rollout, but the novelty of the devices wears off
quickly and when it does, the whole school community can become even more focused on
how to use the devices to offer the best learning opportunities possible.”7 Similarly, for
skeptical districts where fear outweighs perceived benefit, consider educational
technology specialist Michelle Bourgeois' experience. In her schools, she found that “once
devices were in the hands of teachers and students there was far more potential for
creativity and student empowerment than district officials had imagined. The district has

been working to get out of the way of that generative energy.”8 There are clear benefits
and possibilities that mobile learning enables; however, states and districts must play their
part in setting fair and open guidelines to facilitate mobile learning.9 This means states
need to not only ensure their laws aren't overly restrictive (such as no-cellphones in
school) but are geared toward finding innovative and progressive ways to use mobile
learning to teach kids. In Chapter 1, we offered an example of a teacher in a Cary, NC
middle school who, by her school's policy, was compelled to have an app downloaded
onto all of the school's 90 devices before being able to test it. After working with the
school's policies and the person responsible for the iPad carts, she was able to help create
a policy that enables new apps to be downloaded and updated more regularly, and for the
devices to be more useful. This sort of organic, teacher-led change is a common way for
mobile learning initiatives to better meet the needs of their users and evolve over time.
Teaching digital citizenship is a necessary companion to any mobile learning initiative.
While there are certainly many things to be wary of in the digital age, there are also many
useful and robust resources that can help students. Embracing the enormity and
unpredictability of the digital age as a resource is a necessary step, and teaching students
how to navigate this world as it continues to grow and evolve is important. Through
mobile learning programs, students can also learn when, where, and why mobile devices
are appropriate, learning how to use them for productivity, knowledge, and
communication, as opposed to simply informal communication and gameplay. Class
discussions can develop on unfavorable outcomes (be they abuses of the acceptable use
policy or a search that yielded a noneducational outcome), where students learn how to
avoid them in the future. Teaching students to be responsible digital citizens also
encompasses teaching good judgment about sharing on social media sites, the reading of
privacy statements, and evaluating the security and validity of websites.

The Future
The future adoption of mobile learning and the success of such efforts require continuous
awareness and integration of new technologies and functions. Thus, as we have
emphasized before, the leaders of mobile learning must stay informed of the latest changes
to these devices. The landscape of mobile learning has shifted dramatically just in the past
five years with the advent of the iPad and the proliferation of other tablet devices; we have
no doubt this momentum will continue at an equally rapid pace. As we continue to be part
of the mobile-learning world, we are monitoring a few areas very closely.
What Can We Do with All This Educational Data?
Collecting usage and user data enables all kinds of possibilities in personalization of the
educational experience, as well as insight into how students learn in the digital world. A
personalized learning environment has been discussed for years among educational
technologists and teachers, but with the rich datasets provided through use of mobile
devices in classrooms—both by students and teachers—the dream of personalized
learning is closer to realization than it has ever been. Harvesting the huge amounts of data
that are available, both from one student and from other users, it is possible to make
connections and suggestions for each student based on patterns of performance for large
numbers of students.
Further, using educational data for embedded, summative assessment has the potential to
revolutionize the way we currently assess learning. Embedded, or stealth, assessments use
a variety of data points to gauge students' understanding in real time while completing a
lesson or game, which provides feedback to the teacher on how well the students are
grasping the material and what concepts might need to be reframed. We are beginning to
explore these possibilities with apps like Poll Everywhere, that poll a classroom for
general understanding, but we believe there are big gains to be made in the area of
personalized learning and embedded assessment.
Educational data also present a huge opportunity for fostering accountability among
teachers and schools, with data tracked about effectiveness in the classroom. Combined
with a potential move away from formative assessments, there will be more voluminous
and more accurate data points to judge teacher and school performance.
Ultimately, using these mobile devices to harvest more valuable data and turn that data
into actionable information leads to better educational decisions. An abundance of
contextualized data that users can parlay into directed actions in the classroom is a huge
step for education as a whole. Decisions are made all the time in the classroom; providing
educators with data to make those decisions even better just makes good sense, and is
something that mobile devices can make a reality.
The Continued Shift in the Way We Think of Education
As we have discussed, fear is one of the biggest obstacles schools face when pursuing a
mobile implementation. Fear of distraction and misbehavior, fear of failure, fear of the
unknown. Many of these are valid concerns. However, with the increasing number of
success cases in districts ranging in socioeconomic status, academic achievement,

geographic location, and the like, it is time for districts to face these fears. Case studies,
research investigations, and anecdotal evidence continue to surface leaving skeptics with
few points to debate. As the trend of smartphone and tablet ownership becomes ever more
ubiquitous, we believe their presence in the classroom will become as common as
backpacks and students themselves. Parents, administrators, teachers, and students are
beginning to realize restricting the use of mobile devices in the classroom is like giving
Archimedes a calculator and telling him not to use it. These devices touch every other
aspect of our lives, and schools provide the perfect environment to teach students
responsible and effective use for thriving in today's connected society.
Exciting Research
While it might seem surprising, at the time of writing the book, the iPad is only five years
old, schools are only now beginning to support widespread use, and the price points on
smartphones and tablets are only recently becoming affordable for the general public. That
being said, the field of mobile-learning research is only starting to take form. While
mobile learning devices have been around for a while (e.g., books, cameras, voice
recorders), the capabilities of today's smartphones and tablets have revolutionized the
concept of mobile learning. Similarly, although the theoretical foundations behind mobile
learning remain relevant (e.g., constructivism, problem- and project-based learning, etc.;
see Section I), synthesizing the research within this scope has yet to be fully articulated.
Several important research questions remain unanswered, questions that have significant
implications for how developers go about making apps, as well as how educators integrate
mobile devices within their curriculum. How pervasive should mobile use be within the
curriculum? What concepts and skills are most benefited by mobile devices? How can we
scale or generalize integration techniques? What professional development has the most
success among teachers? What concepts and skills must be taught that are not already
covered by the curriculum? Beyond the classroom, it will be interesting to see the
longitudinal effects mobile deployments have on students' college and career readiness.
Do mobile device implementations truly blur the lines between formal and informal
learning? Do students see connections about how devices can be used similarly both inside
and outside of school? In other words, how can we quantify the benefits of mobile devices
and measure the return on investment?
In mobile learning, we see a world full of data just waiting for research to make
connections. While there is currently no official and acknowledged theory of mobile
learning, the field is wide open and full of interesting insights.
Increased Connectivity
Although there is great interest among educators to invest in a 1:1 mobile initiative, many
schools simply do not have the infrastructure to support it. A survey conducted in 2014 by
the Consortium for School Networking (CoSN) found that only “Forty-five percent of
school districts indicated they do not have the capacity to deploy a 1:1 initiative.”10 Even
though the report notes there are substantial financial and logistical hurdles for schools in
increasing their bandwidth and connectivity, they are improving.11 In 2014, the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) approved “an additional $5 billion for Wi-Fi over

the next five years”12 giving high priority to providing sufficient connectivity across the
country.
Furthermore, as one of the goals of 1:1 or BYOD implementations is the opportunity for
anytime, anywhere learning, schools must also be concerned with access to the Internet
outside of school. As of 2013, approximately 70 percent of American households had
Internet connections at home, leaving a significant number of students without access.13
Fortunately, an increasing number of public locations now offer free Internet connections.
Over 15,000 libraries across the country provide free Wi-Fi. The same free Wi-Fi can
increasingly be found in commercial establishments such as Starbucks and McDonalds,
with 7,000 and 12,000 connected locations respectively as of early 2013.14 Public parks
and city centers have also started to extend the mesh of connectivity bringing anytime,
anywhere learning for everyone closer to a reality.
Better Integration and Better User Experiences
With 90 percent of American adults owning a cellphone and 58 percent owning a
smartphone, it is no surprise that we find ourselves going to our mobile devices more and
more to accomplish everyday activities.15 As of 2012, 86 percent of smartphone users
reported using their device to do tasks such as coordinate meetings, solve unexpected
problems, find information to settle an argument, read the news, navigate through traffic,
and get help in an emergency.16 As features continue to be added to the repertoire of
mobile devices' abilities, additional data about our everyday lives are being integrated.
The hardware and software that mobile devices offer will continue to become more
intuitive and user centered, and apps will necessarily become more mature.
The current movement in the mobile market is toward integrated packages, like Apple's
medical, fitness, and home kits. Offering compatibility among apps that are all geared
toward one purpose to gain a more holistic image of something, whether it is the user's
medical health or fitness, is a key trend to keep an eye on. Wearable technology and other
accessories that extend the reach and features of mobile devices are also on the cusp and
can enable a fuller mobile-user experience. Google Glass also has many promising
features that could impact education in the near future.
Equalizing Effect on Education
One of the great features of mobile devices, as discussed in Chapter 1, is their relative
affordability. As mobile technology continues to grow, we see it as a major force in
opening educational doors to underserved populations, equalizing opportunity among the
haves and have nots. Compared with the prevailing classroom technology that came
before, the laptop, a tablet is a bargain. Outfitting a classroom, or a school, with these
lower-cost devices is much more doable. As the other pieces of the puzzle begin to fall in
place—the loosening of restrictions on device use, improvement of Wi-Fi networks and
connectivity, the continuing improvement of devices and apps—we think that more
widespread use of mobile devices can have an equalizing effect on education. There are
many positive effects the use of mobile devices can have on children's learning and
opportunities, such as the ability to take online classes that aren't offered at their school;
access to more books than their school's library holds; apps that teach math in a way that

speaks to that student's interests and abilities; or a way to create something that doesn't
require any additional supplies. Mobile devices teach students a suite of skills that are in
high demand in the workplace and the world, and as these devices become common in all
schools, irrespective of socioeconomic level, students will receive a more equal and useful
education. It is our belief and fervent hope that widespread access to mobile learning can
improve educational opportunity for all students. We feel the benefits of mobile
technology are within reach of the majority of the population, and that these exciting
possibilities are closer than they've ever been.

Conclusion
Investing in mobile learning, both financially and as an educational tool, requires a mind
that is open to change. This open mind is what paves the way to positive changes in the
educational system, as it has become clear that in today's digital world, doing it the way
it's always been done is no longer an effective option. Being in tune with what the
technology, in this case mobile devices, can do to better educate kids is essential for
educators. Education is evolving—it must evolve to give students the skills they need—
and being open to the newest technologies is essential for educators.
If we had written this book 15 years ago, it would have been about laptops, and surely in
another 15 years there will be another as yet unthought-of technology to revolutionize the
field. The nature of technology is that it is constantly changing; it is important that schools
do not shy away from technology simply because it presents technical and social
challenges. It is a necessary investment of time and resources to update curriculum and
methods, to update devices and tools, all with the eventual goal of giving students a more
relevant and engaging education. With broader implementation, technology will continue
to prove its utility in engaging students and enhancing education and, we think, will come
to be thought of as invaluable to the classroom experience.
And, make no mistake—the changes will continue to come. It may seem impossible to
imagine what devices and apps will look like in even a few years. These changes will start
happening at an even faster pace once the children who were the first generation of mobile
learning students become the next generation of mobile developers. To think we are
currently in the infancy of the mobile learning movement is truly exciting, as the issues we
explore and decisions we make will influence the field for decades to come.17 Developers
and educators alike have the duty to continue looking forward and considering new
innovations as they arise.
In the end, mobile devices are great, but mobile learning is less about the cool new
gadgets, and more about what and how those gadgets enable children to learn. The ability
to unlock the potential of the 10 factors that make mobile learning revolutionary, as
detailed in Chapter 3, is the ultimate benefit to any mobile learning implementation, app,
or activity. As early adopters in the mobile learning movement, you—the educators,
developers, and learners—are pioneers, navigating the new and often rough landscape,
paving the way for generations to come. There are still many roadblocks for mobile
learning to overcome, but with intelligent and thoughtful conversation, passionate
advocacy and support, and the spirit of adventure, we are certain mobile learning will
become the dominant form of education in the coming years.

Notes
1 Carly Shuler, Niall Winters, and Mark West, “The Future of Mobile Learning:
Implications for Policymakers and Planners,” UNESCO, 2013,
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002196/219637e.pdf.
2 Katrina Schwartz, “5 Essential Insights About Mobile Learning,” KQED Mind/Shift,
July 15, 2014, http://blogs.kqed.org/mindshift/2014/07/5-essential-insights-about-
mobile-learning.
3 Justin Reich, “Ed Tech Start-Ups and the Curse of the Familiar,” Education Week,
November 20, 2013,
http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/edtechresearcher/2013/11/edtech_start-
ups_and_the_curse_of_the_familar.html.
4 “Björn Jeffrey on Why Toca Boca Won't Be Selling to Schools,” Games and Learning,
March 17, 2014, www.gamesandlearning.org/2014/03/17/bjorn-jeffrey-on-why-toca-
boca-wont-be-selling-to-schools/.
5 Forsyth county schools document.
6 Mimi Ito, quoted in “Mobile Devices for Learning: What You Need to Know,” Edutopia,
www.edutopia.org/mobile-devices-learning-resource-guide.
7 Schwartz, “5 Essential Insights.”
8 Ibid.
9 Jennifer Fritschi and Mary Ann Wolf, “Turning on Mobile Learning in North America,”
UNESCO, 2012, http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002160/216083E.pdf.
10 COSN, “COSN's Second Annual E-Rate and Infrastructure Survey,” 2014,
http://cosn.org/cosns-second-annual-e-rate-and-infrastructure-survey.
11 Ibid.
12 FCC. News Release, “FCC Modernizes E-Rate Program to Expand Robust Wi-Fi
Networks in the Nation's Schools and Libraries,” July 11, 2014,
www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-modernizes-e-rate-expand-robust-wi-fi-schools-libraries.
13 “Broadband Technology Fact Sheet,” Pew Research, September 2013,
www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/broadband-technology-fact-sheet/.
14 Anton Troianovski, “The Web-Deprived Study at McDonald's,” Wall Street Journal,
January 28, 2013,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB1000142412788732473130457818979416105695
15 Pew Research, “Broadband Technology.”
16 Ibid.

17 Shuler, Winters, and West, “The Future of Mobile Learning.”


Appendix A

List of Apps by Chapter
A complete list of the apps mentioned in this book, in order of their mention within the
chapter.
Chapter 1: Changing Education with Mobile Learning
Evernote is an organizational, tool-based app that enables users to create and search
lists. By Evernote. Free.
Socrative is a student response system, enabling student participation via smart
phones, tablets, and laptops. By Socrative. Free.
Chapter 2: The Science of Learning
None.
Chapter 3: What Is It about These Devices?
Remind is a way for teachers to send text messages to students and parents and keep
all phone numbers private. By Remind. Free.
Google Drive provides cloud-based storage, making it great for taking notes and
having access from anywhere. By Google.
Dropbox allows access to documents and photos from anywhere, secure sharing, and
collaborative editing capabilities. By Dropbox. Free.
Nearpod. Facilitates interactive mobile presentations. By Nearpod. Free.
Join.me. Classroom app shows the teacher's screen on a mobile device and allows
invited users to join and interact with the content. By LogMeIn. Free trial with cost for
more features.
Showbie is a tool enabling teachers to easily “assign, collect and review student work
in the tablet classroom.” By Showbie Inc. Free.
Comic Touch 2 Take user photos and add filter, texture, and words in the style of a
comic strip. by Plasq. Free with in-app purchases.
SAS Gloss can facilitate paperless workflow in a classroom setting, as well as the
opportunity to creatively construct notes and drawings. By SAS Institute Inc. Free.
Dictionary.com app allows offline word look up. By Dictionary.com LLC. Free.
SAS Reading Records is a tool for teachers to administer reading proficiency tests by
using a variety of passages. By SAS Institute Inc. Free.
Cicada Hunt allows the user to take an audio recording of their surroundings,
determine if cicadas are present, and report the data back to the New Forest Cicada
Project. Developed by RareLoop. Free.
Ocarina turns your phone into an ancient flute; you make music by blowing into the
microphone. By Smule. Premium.
Pocket Trumpet simulates a trumpet. The user blows into the microphone and uses
valves to play real songs. By 10 Startups. Premium.

Real Clarinet simulates a clarinet. The user blows into the microphone and plays notes
by placing fingers on specific positions. By Mauro apps. Premium.
Leafsnap is an electronic field guide that helps users identify tree species using visual
recognition software on user photos. By Columbia University, University of Maryland,
and Smithsonian Institution. Free.
acrossair is an augmented reality browser that provides context for users when
navigating in real time, providing points of interest around the user. By acrossair. Free.
Elements 4D conceptualizes chemistry in an augmented reality, story- and game-based
activity. By Augmented Dynamics. Free.
Companion apps for Smithsonian American Museum of Natural History. These apps
provide an additional way to interact with the museum's exhibits, providing a content-
specific experience. The Power of Poison: Be a Detective, Pterosaurs: Flight in the
Age of Dinosaurs, and Creatures of Light (exploring light-producing organisms) are all
examples of their apps that dive deep into exhibit topics, with their offerings changing
frequently. By American Museum of Natural History. Free.
Google Earth enables users to “fly around the planet with a swipe of your finger,”
using Google's Street View images and aerial shots. It also shows 3D recreations of
certain cities. By Google. Free.
Driver Feedback gives users scores based on their driving (using the accelerometer
and GPS hardware), and offers suggestions to improve driving habits and safety. By
State Farm. Free.
Twitter is a microblogging social networking site, allowing users to interact with one
another via tweets. By Twitter Inc. Free.
Instagram facilitates taking, editing photographs and sharing. By Instagram. Free.
Facebook is a website and app that enables users to connect socially, share photos, and
report updates. Free for all operating systems. By Facebook. Free.
Minecraft (Pocket Edition). Minecraft is a popular, multiplayer, social computer game
about “placing blocks and going on adventures.” By Mojang. Premium.
iBooks is Apple's ebook reader application. By Apple. Free.
To The Brink provides all of the information in the National Archives and JFK Library
and Museum's exhibit about the Cuban Missile Crisis for users who are unable to visit
the exhibit, or want to dive deeper. By National Archives and Records Administration.
Free.
Edmodo is an app to facilitate teachers and students collaboration and engagement. By
Edmodo. Free.
WolframAlpha powers a suite of apps offering “deep computational knowledge in
specific educational, professional and personal areas,” including algebra, calculus,
physics, and astronomy. By WolframAlpha. Free.
Numbers is a robust spreadsheet app. By Apple. Premium.

Keynote is a robust presentation app. By Apple. Premium.
Fetch! Lunch Rush! Is an augmented reality game where users help Ruff Ruffman, a
cartoon character keep lunch orders straight for a movie crew. By PBS Kids. Free.
Merlin Bird ID provides a tool to instantly identify 400 North American birds. By The
Cornell Lab. Free.
StarWalk is an “interactive astronomy guide,” identifying celestial objects for users.
By Vito Technology. Premium.
Google Maps provides interactive maps with local attractions identified, to aid
navigation. By Google. Free.
Find my iPhone enables a device to use another device to locate a missing iOS device
and control data loss. By Apple. Free.
MyFitnessPal is a tool for users to track calories and physical activities. By
MyFitnessPal, Inc. Free.
ThingLink lets users make more dynamic and informational images by adding links,
music, notes to them. By ThingLink. Free.
Math Chomp is an app suitable for all ages that teaches basic mathematics using a
cartoon crocodile. By Mike Irving. Premium
Pocket Law Firm has users match clients and lawyers up, challenge cases and grow
law firms. By iCivics and Filament Games. Free.
Stack the Countries teaches world countries, capitals, landmarks, and geography,
allowing users to manipulate continents and achieve new levels within the app. By
Freecloud Design, Inc. Premium.
Rocket Math is an app (backing up to an established curriculum) designed to teach
quick addition skills in students. By Rocket Math. Free.
Animoto Video Maker enables the creation of videos and slide shows using media on
the user's device. By Animoto, Inc. Free.
ClassDojo. Realtime classroom management tool to track participation and behavior;
enables sharing data with parents and students. By Class Twist Inc. Free.
Poll Everywhere allows real-time audience participation via SMS voting in polls. By
PollEverywhere. Free.
SAS Flash Cards is an app that allows users to upload decks of informational
flashcards, sharing them with other users, and be quizzed on the information. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Explain Everything is an app that facilitates presentation building through inclusion of
multimedia elements. By MorrisCooke. Premium.
SAS Reading Records is a tool for teachers to administer reading proficiency tests,
using a variety of passages. By SAS. Free.
SAS Data Notebook is a data management tool that allows students to track their own

educational goals and progress, as well as take and organize class notes. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Popplet is a tool to capture and collaborate on ideas using sharable mind maps. By
Notion. Premium.
EcoMOBILE. (Ecosystems Mobile Outdoor Blended Immersive Learning
Environment) is a virtual representation of a pond ecosystem that lets students collect
and analyze clues to solve an environmental mystery. By Ecomobile. Free
SAS Math Stretch teaches elementary math skills, such as operations, telling time,
pattern identification, and comparing numbers. SAS Institute Inc. Free.
Duolingo teaches Spanish, French, German, Portuguese, Italian, and English,
providing a fun experience with levels and competition among friends. By Duolingo.
Free.
Chapter 4: Creating the Mobile Classroom
Evernote is an organizational tool-based app that enables users to create and search
lists. By Evernote. Free.
Google Drive provides cloud-based storage, making it great for taking notes and
access from anywhere. By Google.
inClass is an organization app that allows students to keep their notes, schedules, and
assignments in one location. By inClass. Free.
Join.me. Classroom app shows the teacher's screen on a mobile device and allows
invited users to join and interact with the content. By LogMeIn. Free trail with cost for
more features.
GoSoapbox offers a web-based clicker system to allow student response and increase
student engagement in lectures. By Go Education, LLC. Free.
Poll Everywhere allows real-time audience participation via SMS voting in polls. By
PollEverywhere. Free.
Socrative is a student response system, enabling student participation via smart
phones, tablets, and laptops. By Socrative. Free.
Padlet enables the creation of walls and collaboration among students by organizing
and sharing information and multimedia, and allowing for student creativity. By
Padlet. Free.
ShowMe is a tool that allows for simple creation and viewing of tutorials on the iPad.
By ShowMe. Free.
Knowmia Teach is a tool enabling easy lesson planning, video recording, and sharing
among students and teachers. By Knowmia. Free.
Educreations is an interactive whiteboard app that allows annotation, animation, and
narration of any type of content. By Educreations, Inc. Free.
Video Note allows screen and audio capture of sketch drawings. By TopLineSoft
Systems. Premium.

Frog Dissection offers a more economical, greener alternative to dissection in biology
class. By Emantras. Premium.
3D Brain allows users to interact with and learn about different brain regions, as well
as explore brain injuries and functions. By Cold Springs Harbor Laboratory. Free.
TimeMaps show a sequence of interactive maps, illustrating the different stages of
history. For instance, The Rise of the Roman Empire shows Rome's expansion.
Available for other regions and time periods. By TimeMaps. Premium.
Google Maps provides interactive maps with local attractions identified, to aid
navigation. By Google. Free.
Things to Think About offers prompts or writing and discussion lessons to encourage
conversation about ideas and issues relevant to kids. By Jackson County Intermediate
School District. Free.
SAS InContext is a web-based language arts tool that allows students to explore new
terms, topics, and definitions. By SAS Curriculum Pathways. Free.
SAS Writing Reviser is a web-based tool that provides assistance for revising student
writing. By SAS Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Popplet is a tool to capture and collaborate on ideas using sharable mind maps. By
Notion. Premium.
EcoMOBILE. (Ecosystems Mobile Outdoor Blended Immersive Learning
Environment) is a virtual representation of a pond ecosystem that lets students collect
and analyze clues to solve an environmental mystery. By Ecomobile. Free.
Leafsnap is an electronic field guide that helps users identify tree species using visual
recognition software on user photos. By Columbia University, University of Maryland,
and Smithsonian Institution. Free.
Mentira is a place-based augmented reality game, offering informative text and
Spanish dialog that guides students through a murder mystery. By University of
Wisconsin-Madison. Free.
Elements 4D conceptualizes chemistry in an augmented reality, story- and game-based
activity. By Augmented Dynamics. Free.
StarWalk is an “interactive astronomy guide,” identifying celestial objects for users.
By Vito Technology. Premium.
FaceTime is the iOS video calling app, facilitating collaboration over wireless
networks. By Apple. Free (on iOS devices).
Chapter 5: Higher-Order Thinking Skills and Digital Fluency
EcoMOBILE. (Ecosystems Mobile Outdoor Blended Immersive Learning
Environment) is a virtual representation of a pond ecosystem that lets students collect
and analyze clues to solve an environmental mystery. By Ecomobile. Free.
Exploriments. Offers simulation-based, interactive learning for deeper conceptual
understanding of science and math concepts. By IL&FS Education and Technology

Services Ltd. Premium.
Socrative is a student response system, enabling student participation via smart
phones, tablets, and laptops. By Socrative. Free.
Padlet enables the creation of walls and collaboration among students by organizing
and sharing information and multimedia and allowing for student creativity. By Padlet.
Free.
Keynote is a native iOS app for creating presentations. By Apple. Premium.
Evernote is an organizational tool-based app that enables users to create and search
lists. By Evernote. Free.
Google Drive provides cloud-based storage, making it great for taking notes and
having access from anywhere. By Google. Free.
Skype enables free video calls on computers and tablets. By Skype. Free.
Screenr allows the user to record and share screencasts, capturing screen and voice. By
Articulate Global, Inc. Free.
Dropbox allows access to documents and photos from anywhere, secure sharing, and
collaborative editing capabilities. By Dropbox. Free.
Poll Everywhere allows real-time audience participation via SMS voting in polls. By
PollEverywhere. Free.
Celly enables creation of private social networks (cells) of groups of family members,
friends, classes, or teammates. By Celly. Free.
StudyBoost allows students to study using text messaging. By StudyBoost. Free.
Chapter 6: Instructional Management and Levels of Technology Access
Find my iPhone enables a device to use another device to locate a missing iOS device
and control data loss. By Apple. Free.
Apple Configurator. Facilitates mass deployments of Apple devices. By Apple. Free.
Keynote is a native iOS app for creating presentations. By Apple. Premium.
Safari is a web browser. By Apple. Free.
Brushes 3 is a painting app that provides a suite of tools for the creation and sharing of
art. By Taptrix. Free.
Puppet Pals facilitates the creation animated puppet shows with audio. By Polished
Play, LLC. Free.
Dropbox allows access to documents and photos from anywhere, secure sharing, and
collaborative editing capabilities. By Dropbox Free.
GoogleDocs is a website and app to facilitate creating and sharing documents. By
Google. Free.
Showbie is a tool enabling teachers to easily “assign, collect and review student work
in the tablet classroom.” By Showbie. Free.

Groupboard Collaborative Whiteboard allows users to draw and chat in real time. By
Group Technologies Inc. Free.
ClassDojo. Realtime classroom management tool to track participation and behavior;
enables sharing data with parents and students. By Class Twist Inc. Free.
SlideStory allows users to present pictures with recorded narration. By nanameue, Inc.
Free.
SAS Data Notebook is a data management tool that allows students to track their own
educational goals and progress, as well as take and organize class notes. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Chapter 7: Mobile Technology's Defining Features
Google Maps provides interactive maps with local attractions identified, aiding in
navigating. By Google. Free.
Apple Maps offers maps and directions to aid in navigation. By Apple. Free.
UrbanSpoon enables users to find restaurants nearby and see reviews. By
UrbanSpoon. Free
FourSquare provides a personalized search for area attractions and restaurants, and
allows users to check in on their social networks. By Foursquare Labs, Inc. Free.
Instagram facilitates taking and editing photographs and sharing. By Instagram. Free.
Facebook is a website and app that enables users to connect socially, sharing photos
and updates. Free for all operating systems. By Facebook. Free.
Firefly Counter is an app that crowdsources the monitoring of firefly populations,
allowing users to log sightings. By Clemson University. Free.
Evernote is an organizational tool-based app that enables users to create and search
lists. By Evernote. Free.
SAS Flash Cards is an app that allows users to upload decks of informational
flashcards, sharing them with other users, and be quizzed on the information. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Sensor Kinetics uses the iPhone's gyroscope and accelerometer sensors to measure the
effect of gravity, among other physics concepts. By INNOVENTIONS, Inc. Free.
StarWalk is an “interactive astronomy guide” that identifies celestial objects for users.
By Vito Technology. Premium.
Leafsnap is an electronic field guide that helps users identify tree species using visual
recognition software on user photos. By Columbia University, University of Maryland,
and Smithsonian Institution. Free.
GarageBand allow users to use simulated instruments to record music. By Apple.
Free.
ThingLink lets users make more dynamic and informational images by adding links,
music, and notes to them. By ThingLink. Free.

SAS Data Notebook is a data management tool that allows students to track their own
educational goals and progress, as well as take and organize class notes. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Chapter 8: The Educational App Development Process
SAS Flash Cards is an app that allows users to upload decks of informational
flashcards, sharing them with other users, and be quizzed on the information. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
SAS Data Notebook is a data management tool that allows students to track their own
educational goals and progress, as well as take and organize class notes. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
SAS Read Aloud provides books that are read aloud to the user, with word by word
highlighting. By SAS Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Chapter 9: Design and User Experience
None.
Chapter 10: Data, Evaluation and Learning Analytics
SAS Flash Cards is an app that allows users to upload decks of informational
flashcards, sharing them with other users and be quizzed on the information. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
SAS Reading Records is a tool for teachers to administer reading proficiency tests,
using a variety of passages. By SAS. Free.
Chapter 11: The Business of Educational Apps
Explain Everything is an app that facilitates presentation building through inclusion of
multimedia elements. By MorrisCooke. Premium.
Endless Reader is an app for early readers, introducing sight words and sentence
construction with fun characters and animation. By Originator, Inc. Freemium.
Proloquo2go allows nonverbal users to create sentences by sequencing symbols to
take part in conversations and communicate needs. By AssistiveWare. Premium.
Hopscotch is a programming app “for everyone” that allows manipulation of
characters through code. By Hopscotch Technologies. Free.
Chapter 12: Informal Learning
The Elements: A Visual Exploration is an app that provides an engaging experience, a
new way to understand the elements. By Touch Press. Premium.
Dictionary.com app allows offline word look up. By Dictionary.com LLC. Free
Wolfram Alpha powers a suite of apps offering “deep computational knowledge in
specific educational, professional and personal areas,” including algebra, calculus,
physics, and astronomy. By Wolfram Alpha. Free.
Speak & Translate turns your mobile device into an instant interpreter, detecting and
converting speech into one of 100 foreign languages. For iOS and Android. By Appic

Fun. Free.
MyCongress provides a portal for users to find and see communications from their
elected officials, and contact them directly. By Objective Apps, LLC. Free.
MathRef is a quick reference to over “1,400 formulas, figures, and examples to help
you with math, physics, chemistry, and more.” By Happy Maau Studios, LLC.
Premium.
YouTube is a website and app that enables users to search, watch, and share videos. By
YouTube. Free.
Podcasts facilitates finding, subscribing to and playing podcasts. By Apple. Free.
Wikipedia Mobile is a robust encyclopedia, “the most comprehensive and widely used
reference work humans have ever compiled.” By Wikimedia Foundation. Free.
Mental Floss is filled with eclectic material for the user: stories, lists, quizzes about
math and history, and pop culture articles By The Week Publications, Inc. Free with
magazine subscription.
Pinterest is a website and app that allows users to discover and pin items of interest,
curating and organizing boards of ideas for anything at all. By Pinterest, Inc. Free.
Leafsnap is an electronic field guide that helps users identify tree species using visual
recognition software on user photos. By Columbia University, University of Maryland,
and Smithsonian Institution. Free.
Merlin Bird ID provides a tool to instantly identify 400 North American birds. By The
Cornell Lab. Free.
Shazam is a tool that identifies music from a small sound byte. By Shazam
Entertainment Ltd. Free with upgrade available.
Google Maps provides interactive maps with local attractions identified, aiding in
navigating. By Google. Free.
Compass is an app that displays true north and aids in navigation. By gabenative. Free.
Google Goggles allows users to search using photographs (including QR codes,
barcodes, and images of the world around them). By Google. Free.
Dollar Origami shows the user how to make various origami creations out of a dollar
bill using visual cues. By LEARN2MAKE. Premium with in-app purchases.
Ultimate Guitar Tabs offers a “catalog of songs with guitar and ukulele chords, tabs,
and lyrics.” By Ultimate Guitar. Paid.
SAS Read Aloud provides books that are read aloud to the user, with word by word
highlighting. By SAS Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Daisy the Dinosaur teaches the basics of computer programming, using drag and drop
for kids of all ages. By Hopscotch Technologies. Free.
Hopscotch is a programming app “for everyone” that allows manipulation of
characters through code. By Hopscotch Technologies. Free.

Duolingo teaches Spanish, French, German, Portuguese, Italian, and English,
providing a fun experience with levels and competition among friends. By Duolingo.
Free.
Minecraft (Pocket Edition). Minecraft is a popular, multiplayer, social computer game
about “placing blocks and going on adventures.” By Mojang. Premium.
World of Warcraft Mobile Armory is a tool to keep track of the users' characters,
adventures, and guild activities. By Blizzard Entertainment. Free.
SimCity allows users to create simulated cities. By Aspyr Media. Premium.
TaleBlazer is an augmented reality game platform, enabling users to create games. By
MIT STEP Lab. Free.
A Gift for Athena is an augmented reality scavenger hunt that guides users through the
British Museum. By British Museum. Free.
ROM Ultimate Dinosaurs uses augmented reality to bring dinosaurs to life, from the
(now closed) special exhibit at Royal Ontario Museum. By Royal Ontario Museum.
Free.
Google Field Trip provides contextualized, local information to guide the way on trips
in new cities. By NianticLabs@Google. Free.
NC NatSci app is a digital guide for visitors to the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences in Raleigh, NC, allowing users to filter exhibits by topic and location and to
receive additional audio and visual aids. By North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences. Free.
EcoMOBILE. (Ecosystems Mobile Outdoor Blended Immersive Learning
Environment) is a virtual representation of a pond ecosystem that lets students collect
and analyze clues to solve an environmental mystery. By Ecomobile. Free.
Chapter 13: Engaging Young Users: Apps for Preschoolers
Little Writer is a tracing app that shows young users how to properly write letters,
numbers, shapes, and three- and four-letter words. By Innovative Mobile Apps. Free.
SAS Math Stretch teaches elementary math skills, such as operations, telling time,
pattern identification, and comparing numbers. SAS Institute Inc. Free.
Toca Doctor is an app geared toward young users, where they're challenged with many
puzzles taking place in the human body to cultivate fine motor skills. By Toca Boca.
Premium.
Toca Tea Party allows young users to choose the place settings and refreshments for
their tea party, and facilitates social play with others (real or make believe). It ends
with washing the dishes. By Toca Boca. Premium.
Toca Pet Doctor for preschoolers simulates 15 different animals that need help. Users
simulate feeding, playing, and taking care of animals. By Toca Boca. Premium.
GarageBand lets you use simulated instruments to record music. By Apple. Free.
Ocarina turns your phone into an ancient flute, making music by blowing into the

microphone. By Smule. $0.99.
SAS Gloss can facilitate paperless workflow in a classroom setting, as well as the
opportunity to creatively construct notes and drawings. By SAS Institute Inc. Free.
Toca Tailor is a kid-friendly app where the user designs and constructs clothes. By
Toca Boca. Premium.
Toca House lets learners choose from several chores in different areas of the house. By
Toca Boca. Premium.
Dinosaur Train Mesozoic Math Adventures teaches early math and science skills using
characters from the popular PBS cartoon. By PBS Kids. Premium.
Super Why! Uses the characters from the popular PBS television show to teach users
spelling, letter sounds, and early reading skills using a reward system. By PBS Kids.
Premium.
Endless Numbers focuses on early numeracy skills (number recognition, sequences,
quantity, patterns, and simple addition). By Originator Inc. Freemium.
Chapter 14: Making Accessible Apps: Autism and Visual Impairment
Proloquo2go allows nonverbal users to create sentences by sequencing symbols to
take part in conversations and communicate needs. By AssistiveWare. Premium
Look In My Eyes, designed for users with autism who struggle with social interaction.
Employs a token economy that rewards users for making eye contact with faces on the
screen. By FIZZBRAIN LLC. Premium.
Training Faces teaches emotion recognition and is geared toward individuals with
autism or other special needs. By Training With Gaming. Premium.
Social Skill Builder shows the user videos of good and bad social interactions (e.g.,
children bullying another student, children taking turns and sharing) and asks the user
to determine what happened that was good or bad. By Social Skill Builder, Inc.
Premium.
Relax Lite offers a guided deep-breathing exercise, perfect for a student who struggles
with self-regulation and who needs a few minutes to calm down. By Saagara. Free.
Breathe, Think, Do with Sesame teaches users to stay calm, solve everyday problems,
and recognize emotions in others. By Sesame Street. Free.
Safari is a web browser. By Apple. Free.
Mail is Apple's email application. By Apple. Free
iBooks is Apple's ebook reader application. By Apple. Free.
Pages is a word processing app for Apple devices. By Apple. Premium.
Read2Go offers books in the huge Bookshare library (containing most books a student
would read in high school). Excellent for low vision and blind users. By Benetech.
Premium.
Join.me. Classroom app showing teacher's screen on mobile device, allowing invited

users to join and interact with the content. By LogMeIn. Free trial with cost for more
features.
LookTel Money Reader enables users with low vision to scan currency and the app will
read the denomination out loud. By IPPLEX. Premium.
TapTapSee provides an audio identification of what is pictured. By Image Searcher.
Free.
Reach for the Stars. Ebook designed for the visually impaired, providing audio and
pitch-based cues to facilitate the exploration of the Tarantula Nebula. By SAS
Institute. Free.
SAS Flash Cards is an app that allows users to upload decks of informational
flashcards, sharing them with other users and be quizzed on the information. By SAS
Curriculum Pathways. Free.
Chapter 15: Balancing Power: Data Use, Privacy, and Digital Citizenship
Jabbersmack is an app and website that provides a “safe and secure social playspace”
for kids to interact with other kids. Google Play App. Free.
Chapter 16: Mobile Learning Today and Tomorrow
Twitter is a microblogging social networking site, allowing users to interact with one
another via tweets. By Twitter Inc. Free.
Padlet enables the creation of walls and collaboration among students, organizing and
sharing information and multimedia and allowing for student creativity. By Padlet.
Free.
Poll Everywhere allows real-time audience participation via SMS voting in polls. By
PollEverywhere. Free.
Educreations is an interactive whiteboard app, allowing annotation, animation, and
narration of any type of content. By Educreations, Inc. Free.
Explain Everything is an app that facilitates presentation building through inclusion of
multimedia elements. By MorrisCooke. Premium.


Appendix B

The Great App Checklist
In our conversations with educators, one of the biggest gray areas we found was how to
determine which app is a good one. Many teachers rely on colleagues or word of mouth,
or go with the first app they find that meets their needs. There's no denying that the
educational app marketplace is full of options, but this poses the problem of how to find
and choose good apps. With the high volumes of apps available in app stores, and
numbers only increasing, there is a strong need for ways to clearly differentiate apps and
guidance on how to decide which should be downloaded and which should be used in the
classroom. It's an important discussion because there simply isn't time to download and try
each app that might seem to meet the needs of the user. Learning how to swiftly and
accurately judge an app without investing a lot of time (and, if it's not a free app, money)
is essential to the mobile classroom. For educators the challenge of finding a good app is
surprisingly hard.
Developers have a different problem: standing out in a crowded market. This is certainly
an exciting and active sector of development and technology to be involved with, and one
that we feel will continue to raise the bar on the caliber of educational technology
available and demanded in the classroom. However, this also means that making an app
that stands out and meets the needs of the educational market and your intended audience
is even more important.
We offer this checklist as an answer to these issues, as a way to help educators zero in on
what app they need, and to judge how well it performs. This rubric can also inform
developers as to how educators choose apps—the types of information that would be
helpful to someone in this audience, things to mention in the app store summary, and
functionality that is essential.

How to Use This Checklist
To fully evaluate an app using our checklist, downloading the app will be necessary.
Therefore, some judgment will need to be exercised based on the app summary and
ratings. While exploring the app's supporting materials, app store description, and user
reviews you can learn some information, but the best way to determine an app's ultimate
use and value is to try it out. The following checklist is designed to guide educators
through the process of determining if the app they've chosen is good for their purposes, in
their classroom. The list is a meta-analysis, based on several popular app checklists1, 2, 3, 4
as well as our own contributions.
This checklist is designed to be completed in sequential order. Ultimately, we feel the
purpose, what the educator's need is, will guide the evaluation. For instance, if a teacher
needs a note-taking app for general use, or if he needs a game that offers a chance for his
students to practice math concepts, very different lessons and learning objectives are at
play in each. We urge educators to first consider their purpose for the app and evaluate the
app within that context.
These questions are also designed to steer the person choosing the apps—the teacher or
technology specialist—toward thinking about how an app should be evaluated; with the
breadth of educational apps out there it is impossible to create a checklist that addresses all
possible apps and their value in different settings. Therefore, the answer need not be yes
for each question for an app to be great.
And finally, when evaluating apps, search for answers, but if the information isn't
apparent, consider reaching out to the developer with the question. Developers should
strive to make this information accessible to users and potential users. Further,
communicating with app developers is certainly something educators shouldn't shy away
from.

The Great App Checklist
Purpose
Does this app meet my needs, as an educator, for the lesson at hand?
Alignment
Does it fit into my school's standards?
Does it relate to the curriculum?
Is it leveled appropriately for my students?
Pedagogical Framework
Does the app provide appropriate and immediate feedback?
Does it provide a properly scaffolded learning experience?
Does the app facilitate higher-order thinking skills?
Does it provide an authentic experience that mirrors the real world (e.g., a note-taking app
with the same processes as the way students take notes with pencil and paper)?
Does it facilitate or enable collaboration?
1. Does it make the task at hand more efficient?
2. Does it make the task more engaging?
Personalization
Does the app enable (or require) students to create logins?
Does the app offer a different experience for students based on their interest?
1. Does the app allow for differentiation and challenge based on the student's ability and
knowledge?
Sharing and Access to Work
What happens to work created in the app? Can it be exported or shared on social media
sites?
Does their work live on the cloud? Can it be accessed using computers?
Can I see reports of my students' usage?
Ease of Use
Is the app well designed? Can my students figure this out without guidance?
Is navigating logical and simple?
Does the app offer intuitive support?
Privacy
(We suggest searching the app's privacy policy, if one exists, to answer these
questions. If the answers aren't obvious, contact the developer.)

Does the app have a privacy policy?
Is student data shared, sold, or kept private?
Is the student data that the app collects stored and maintained in a responsible manner?
App Citizenship
Is the app priced reasonably or free? Based on what it offers, does the app provide
good bang for the buck?
Does my school's network support the classroom-wide use of this app?
Is the size of the app appropriate?
Does it provide support or ideas on how to integrate with lesson plans?
Is the app updated frequently?
Is it ad free? If not, are the ads appropriate for students?
Accessibility
Is the app available on the necessary platform(s) to accommodate the devices in my
classroom?
Does the app allow the accessibility framework on the mobile devices to be used (i.e.,
manipulation of font size, contrast, use of voiceover, etc.)?
Is language support necessary and available?

Notes
1 Tony Vincent, “Ways to Evaluate Educational Apps,” Learning In Hand, March 4, 2012,
http://learninginhand.com/blog/ways-to-evaluate-educational-apps.html.
2 Kathy Schrock, “Critical Evaluation of a Content-Based IPAD/IPOD App,” 2014,
www.kathyschrock.net/uploads/3/9/2/2/392267/evalipad_content.pdf.
3 Jeff Dunn, “The Must-Have App Review Rubric,” Edudemic, November 22, 2011,
www.edudemic.com/app-review-rubric/.
4 eSpark, “Unpacking the Common Core with iPad Apps: Middle School, Webinar (and
evaluation rubric),” www.esparklearning.com/blended-learning-webinars/unpacking-
common-core-middle-school.html.


About the Authors
Scott McQuiggan leads SAS Curriculum Pathways, an interdisciplinary team focused on
the development of no-cost educational software in the core disciplines at SAS Institute
Inc. He received his PhD in computer science from North Carolina State University, where
his research focused on affective reasoning in intelligent game-based learning
environments. McQuiggan also holds an MS in computer science from North Carolina
State University and a Bachelor of Science in computer science from Susquehanna
University. He developed his first app, SAS Flash Cards, in 2010.
Lucy Kosturko is a research scientist and curriculum specialist for SAS Curriculum
Pathways in Cary, North Carolina. She holds a PhD in educational psychology (2013) and
a Master's in computer science (2010) from North Carolina State University. She received
a Bachelor of Arts in computer science and psychology (2008) from Rhodes College in
Memphis, Tennessee. Kosturko's research interests include reading comprehension, self-
regulated learning, and educational technologies.
Jamie McQuiggan is a writer for SAS Institute Inc. She earned her Master's degree in
technical communication from North Carolina State University in May 2011. She earned a
Bachelor of Arts in corporate communication from Susquehanna University in
Selinsgrove, Pennsylvania, with a minor in writing. She also co-authored Implement,
Improve and Expand your Statewide Longitudinal Data System: Creating a Culture of
Data in Education in 2014.
Jennifer Sabourin is a research scientist and a software developer at SAS Institute Inc. She
received a BS (2008), Masters (2012), and PhD (2013) in computer science from North
Carolina State University, where she graduated as valedictorian. She is a recipient of the
U.S. National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship award. Her research
focuses on educational technologies and data analytics.


Index

A
academic motivation
accelerometer
acceptable use policies (AUP)
accessibility
of accessible apps
on app checklist
of software
Accessibility and Applied Assistive Technology
accessible apps
about
autism/autism spectrum disorders (ASD)
developing
iPad advantages for special populations
visual impairment
accessories
about
Apple TV
iBeacons
wearable technologies
accountability, for devices
acrossair app
activities, leveraging popular
administration apps
adoption, questions to evaluate
affordability, of accessible apps
Agile development
AirDrop app
AirPlay
Allen Independent School District
alternative learning environments
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)

analytics
Android
Angry Birds app
Animoto Video Maker app
App Store
appcessories
Apple Configurator app
Apple II
Apple iOS
Apple TV
Apple’s Family Share program
Apple’s iOS
apps
See also accessible apps
See also educational apps
See also preschool apps
See also specific apps
administration
audio recorder
building
checklist for
collaboration
companion
conferencing
content specific
designing
developing
evaluating
free
freemium
game
improving

nature
polling
premium
quality of
quizzing
recommended
reference
releasing
selling
simulation
social
testing
tool
types of
user feedback for
utility
video recorder
asking questions
Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills (AT21CS)
audio recorder apps
auditory features, in accessible apps
augmented reality (AR) apps
Aukstalkalnis, Greer
autism/autism spectrum disorders (ASD)
automatization, encouraging for information and operations
awareness, with devices

B
Bandura, Albert
Baxter, Jane
Bennett, Brian
Big Data
blended classrooms
blended learning environments, as benefit of mobile learning
Bloom’s taxonomy
Blue’s Clues app
Bluetooth
Bourgeois, Michelle
braille
branding
Brauner, Diane
Breathe, Think, Do with Sesame app
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
about
implementation strategies
lesson planning
professional development
bundling
business aspects, of educational apps
about
market for educational apps
marketing
pricing models
purchase methods
BYOD
See Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)

C
camera
Camera app
case studies
Casey-Towe, Dawn
Celly app
challenges, with preschool apps
change instruction
checklist, for apps
Chiessa, Jeffry
children, targeted marketing to
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) 152
Christakis, Dimitri
Cicada Hunt app
Clark, Tim
ClassDojo app
classroom activities/simulations/tools
classrooms
See also mobile classroom
blended
flipped
for higher-order thinking
1:Many
cloud
cognitive load, managing and reducing
collaboration
communication and
mobile learning and
collaboration apps
colocation of feature and function, as design principle
Comic Touch app
Common Sense Media

communication
with app building team
collaboration and
in marketing
poor
companion apps
Compass app
compatibility, of software
competitiveness, educational app market
comprehensiveness, of devices
conditional knowledge
conferencing apps
ConnectED initiative
connectivity
of devices
educational app market
increases in
consolidated nature, of devices
Consortium for School Networking (CoSN)
content
finding, for app design
tools and
content specific apps
controlled studies
Council on Communications and Media
creativity
critical thinking
Culo, Katherine McMillan
curated software
Czerney, Linnea

D
Daisy the Dinosaur app
data
about
persistence over time
using to personalize learning
data collection
about
log data
sample data
databases, logs compared with
declarative knowledge
Denny, Paul
deployment strategy:1 movement
designers, on app building team
designing
about
apps
finding content
first launch
forgiveness
logical navigation
login walls
principles of
tips and help for
detailed action logging
developing apps
devices
about
accountability for
awareness
comprehensiveness

connectivity
consolidated nature
familiarity
managing
multimodality
personal nature of
portability
protecting
relevance
security
Dewey, John
Dictation feature
Dictionary.com app
differentiated access to devices and Internet, as challenge of mobile learning
digital citizenship
about
on app checklist
privacy for app developer
digital fluency
See also higher-order thinking skills
digital note-taking
Dinosaur Train Mesozoic Math Adventures app
direct manipulation, as design principle
disconnected purchasing process
Dollar Origami app
Driver Feedback app
Dropbox app
dual-coding theory
Duncker, Karl
Duolingo app

E
ease of use, on app checklist
EcoMOBILE app
Edmodo app
Edublogs app
education
about
benefits and challenges of mobile learning
changing with mobile learning
effects of mobile learning on
history of educational technology
making mobile learning work
mobile learning
pricing
shifts in the way we think of
educational apps
See also business aspects, of educational apps
about
building the app
building the team
case study
research stage
educational context
educational data, uses for
educational researchers, on app building team
educational technology, history of
educators, on app building team
Educreations app
effectiveness
of accessible apps
of devices, as challenge of mobile learning
Einstein, Albert

Elements 3D app
Elements 4D app
The Elements app
emergent reading skills
EmergingEdTech blog
Endless Numbers app
Endless Reader app
equity, ensuring with Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
evaluating
about
apps
Evernote app
experiential learning
Explain Everything app
Exploriments app
extrinsic motivation

F
Facebook app
FaceTime app
familiarity, of devices
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) 152
Family Share program (Apple)
Family Sharing
feedback, immediate, as design principle
feedback loop
Fetch! Lunch Rush! app
field trips
Find My iPhone app
fine motor skills
Firefly Counter app
first launch
Fitbit
flexible policies
flipped classrooms
Flipped Learning Network
focus groups
forgiveness, in app design
formal learning, bridging with informal learning
Forsyth County Schools
FourSquare app
Franklin Academy
free apps
freemium apps
Frog Dissection app

G
game apps
game-based learning
GarageBand app
gatekeepers
parents as for preschool apps
teachers as for preschool apps
Gates, Bill
Gee, James Paul
geotagging feature
Gift for Athena app
Gillispie, Lucas
GlassLab
glow hints
Goddard, Rebecca
Google Chromebooks
Google Drive app
Google Earth app
Google Field Trip app
Google Fitness
Google Forms
Google Glass
Google Goggles app
Google Maps app
Google Play for Education
GoogleDocs app
GoSoapbox app
GPS (Global Positioning System)
Graham, Bettie Nesmith
Graphite
Gray, Jim
Green Bay Area Public School District

Grossman, Lev
Groupboard app
Groupboard Collaborative Whiteboard app
Grunkemeyer, Carrie
Guided Access feature
gyroscope

H
Hall, Jamie
Halpern, Diane
hardware
about
accelerometer
camera
GPS (Global Positioning System)
gyroscope
3G connectivity
video
Wi-Fi
Health Kit
higher-order thinking skills
about
as benefit of mobile learning
classrooms for
critical thinking
leveraging mobile learning
problem solving
home, privacy at
homeschool
Hopscotch app
Horn, Michael
Hudacek, Tricia

I
iBeacons
iBooks app
iCivics app
icon use, as design principle
implementation strategies
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
1:Many
1:1 movement
in-app marketing
in-app purchases
inBloom
inClass app
indoor positioning
informal inquiry, supporting
informal learning
about
bridging formal learning and
developing lifelong learners
information processing, learning and
infrastructure, updating
inquiry-based learning
Instagram app
instructional management
instructional methods
integrated packages
integration, improved
interdisciplinary expertise, of app building team
interest
appealing to and generating
as component of preschool apps
as critical facet of learning

interface
as component of preschool apps
as design principle
intrinsic motivation
iPad, advantages of for special populations
item location, as design principle
iTunes Analytics

J
Jabbersmack app
J.E. Ober (JEO) school district
Jeffrey, Bjorn
Join.Me app

K
Katy Independent School District
Keynote app
Khan Academy
knowledge
connections with
types of
Knowmia Teach app
Koehler, Matt

L
Laënnec, Rene
language, as skill for preschool apps
LARK (legal, appropriate, responsible, kind) framework
Leafsnap app
learning
See also informal learning
See also mobile learning
See also science of learning
critical facets of
experiential
game-based
information processing and
inquiry-based
personalizing with data
problem-based
quality of
learning analytics
learning on the go, as benefit of mobile learning
legislation, for privacy
Lepper, M.R.
lesson planning
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
marketing
1:Many
1:1 movement
levels of access
about
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
1:Many
1:1 movement
1:teacher

outside of school
leveraging
fear of
mobile learning
popular activities
lifelong learners, developing
limiting physical attributes, as challenge of mobile learning
LinkedIn
Liquid Paper
literacy, as skill for preschool apps
Little Writer app
Livingston, Pamela
One-to-One Learning: Laptop Programs that Work
log data collection
about
basic usage of
detailed action logging
rich mobile data
transmitting data
logical navigation, for app design
login walls
logistics, of device management
Look In My Eyes app
LookTel Money Reader app
Luce, Kristianna

M
Mail app
mainstream, accessible apps
malleability, of motivation
Malone, T.
Maps app
marketing
about
App Store
branding
communication
educational context
in-app
lesson plans
outside
targeted to children
Massey, Aaron
math, as skill for preschool apps
Math Chomp app
MathRef app
meaningful learning, facilitating
memory, modal model of
Mental Floss app
Mentira app
Merlin Bird ID app
metacognition
as critical facet of learning
supporting
Michel, John
migration
Miller’s “Magic Number”
Minecraft app

Mishra, Punya
mobile classroom
about
alternative learning environments
experiential learning
inquiry-based learning
instructional methods
levels of access in
problem-based learning
theoretical foundations
mobile data analytics
about
app improvement
users and personalization
mobile learning
about
acceptable use policies (AUP)
accessories
applications for
benefits and challenges of
communication and collaboration
creativity
critical thinking
device management
digital citizenship
future of
implications of
leveraging
making it work
teaching with mobile technology
today
mobile technology

about
accelerometer
camera
GPS (Global Positioning System)
gyroscope
hardware
software
teaching with
3G connectivity
video
Wi-Fi
Moby Dick app
modal model of memory
Moms With Apps
monitored use, as challenge of mobile learning
Monk Problem
Mooresville Graded School District
motivated students
motivation
as component of preschool apps
as critical facet of learning
multimodality, of devices
Multi-Touch functionality
MyCongress app
MyFitnessPal app

N
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP)
nature apps
navigation
in accessible apps
as design principle
NC NatSci app
NearPod app
Netflix
Next Generation Preschool Math grant
Nike+
nonverbal communication, as skill developed through accessible apps
Notes app
Numbers app

O
Oak Hill Local School District
Ocarina app
Occupy Wall Street campaign
1:Many initiatives
1:1 movement
1:teacher, access level of
One-to-One Learning: Laptop Programs that Work (Livingston)
online classes, as benefit of mobile learning
open issues
optimizing working memory
Ormrod, Jeanne Ellis
Our Space: Being a Responsible Citizen of the Digital World lesson plan
outside marketing

P
Padlet app
Pages app
Paivio, Allan
“parental gate”
parental notifications
parents, as gatekeepers for preschool apps
Partnership for 21st Century Skills
Pasack Valley Regional High School
passback, as challenge for preschool apps
pedagogical soundness, questions to evaluate
pedagogy
on app checklist
technology and
pedometers
PeerWise learning environment
personal nature, of devices
personalization
personalized learning, as benefit of mobile learning
personally identifiable student data, security of
physical device management
Piaget, Jean
Pinterest app
Pocket Law Firm app
Pocket Trumpet app
Podcasts app
policies, educational app market
Poll Everywhere app
polling apps
Popplet app
populations, testing apps with
portability, of devices

preloaded software
premium apps
Prensky, Marc
preschool apps
about
challenges with
components of
key skills for
prevailing attitudes and prejudices, as challenge of mobile learning
pricing models, for apps
privacy
about
on app checklist
for app developer
concerns about
educational app market
at home
legislation for
with preschool apps
in school
for students
problem solving
problem-based learning
procedural knowledge
professional development
1:Many
1:1 movement
1:teacher
about
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
Project Tomorrow
Proloquo2Go app

promotions
protecting devices
Puentedura, Ruben
Puppet Pals app
purchase methods, for your apps
purpose/alignment
on app checklist
questions to evaluate
push notifications

Q
QR codes
quality
of apps
of learning
questions, asking
quizzing apps

R
Reach for the Stars app
Read2Go app
Real Clarinet app
reference apps
Relax Lite app
releasing apps
relevance, of devices
Remind app
research, in mobile learning
research stage, of education app development process
resources, educational app market
rewards, incorporating
rich mobile data
Roberts, Erica
Robinson, Ken
Rocket Math app
ROM Ultimate Dinosaurs app
Russell, Sean

S
Safari app
sample data collection
about
case studies
controlled studies
focus groups
surveys
SAMR (substitution, augmentation, modification, redefinition) model
Sara Skates app
SAS Curriculum Pathways
SAS Data Notebook app
SAS Flash Cards app
SAS Gloss app
SAS InContext app
SAS Math Stretch app
SAS Read Aloud app
SAS Reading Records app
SAS Writing Reviser app
Saunders, Daniel
school, privacy in
School Privacy Zone campaign
science of learning
about
critical facets of learning
implications of mobile learning
information processing and learning
screen time, as challenge for preschool apps
Screenr app
security
of devices
of personally identifiable student data

of software
segmentation, as design principle
self-regulation, as skill developed through accessible apps
selling apps
Sensor Kinetics app
sensory memory, bottleneck between working memory and
Shapiro, Jordan
sharing
on app checklist
apps
as challenge of mobile learning
Shazam app
Showbie app
ShowMe app
Silverthorn, John
SimCity app
simplicity
of accessible apps
as design principle
simulated experiences, as benefit of mobile learning
simulation apps
Siri
Skinner, B.E.
Skype app
SlideStory app
smart watches
Smith, Anthony
Smith, Scott
Snapchat app
social apps
social interactions, as skill developed through accessible apps
social networking/media

Social Skill Builder app
social skills, as skill for preschool apps
Socrative app
software
about
accessibility
cloud
compatibility
creation
curated
integrated packages
preloaded
push notifications
security
updating
software developers, on app building team
Software & Information Industry Association
sonification
spatial skills, as skill for preschool apps
Speak Selection feature
Speak & Translate app
Stack the Countries app
stakeholders, app building team and
StarWalk app
STEM (science, technology, engineering and math)
Stern, Julie
stethoscope
stranger danger
strategy use
as critical facet of learning
supporting
students

actions for device management
autonomy of, as goal of mobile learning
motivated
privacy for
StudyBoost app
Summers, Ed
Super Why? app
surveys

T
TaleBlazer app
TapTapSee app
targeted marketing, to children
teachers, as gatekeepers for preschool apps
Teachers With Apps
teaching with mobile technology
team, building for app development
technological pedagogical knowledge (TPK)
technology
See also mobile technology
levels of access
pedagogy and
wearable
technology, pedagogy, and content knowledge (TPACK)
technology requirements
assessing
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
terms of use
testing apps
Thagard, Pat
theoretical foundations
ThingLink app
Things to Think About app
3D Brain app
3G connectivity
TimeMaps app
To The Brink app
Toca Boca app
Toca Doctor app
Toca House app
Toca Pet Doctor app

Toca Tailor app
Toca Tea Party app
TocaBoca
Too Noisy app
tool apps
tools, content and
Touch ID
traditional instruction
Training Faces app
transmitting data
22 Frames
Twitter app

U
Ultimate Guitar Tabs app
underserved children/schools, reaching, as benefit of mobile learning
updating software
UrbanSpoon app
usability
of accessible apps
questions to evaluate
user age, as design principle
user experience
See also designing
about
as design principle
improved
user feedback, for apps
users
utility apps

V
Vanishing Firefly Project
verbal communication, as skill developed through accessible apps
video modeling
Video Note app
video recorder apps
videos
Vincent, Tony
Vine app
virtual museums, as benefit of mobile learning
virtual school
Vision K-20 Survey
visual impairment
about
key accessibility features for
toolbox for
Voice app
VoiceOver feature
volume purchasing
Vygotsky, Lev

W
Walsh, Kelly
Waterfall development
wearable technologies
WGBH Educational Foundation
Wheeler, Tom
Wi-Fi
Wikipedia Mobile app
Wilder, Alice
Wilkinson, Amy
Willingham, Daniel
Wolfram Alpha app
working memory
about
bottleneck between sensory memory and
limitations of
optimizing
World of Warcraft app

Y
YouTube app

Z
Zanchi, Christine
Zones of Regulation app


WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley's ebook EULA.

