mobile communications series
Mobile-to-Mobile 
Wireless 
Channels
Alenka Zajic
DVD 
Included

Mobile-to-Mobile Wireless Channels

DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY
The technical descriptions, procedures, and computer programs in this book 
have been developed with the greatest of care and they have been useful to 
the author in a broad range of applications; however, they are provided as is, 
without warranty of any kind. Artech House, Inc. and the author and editors of  
the book titled Mobile-to-Mobile Wireless Channels make no warranties, ex-
pressed or implied, that the equations, programs, and procedures in this book 
or its associated software are free of error, or are consistent with any particular 
standard of merchantability, or will meet your requirements for any particular  
application. They should not be relied upon for solving a problem whose in-
correct solution could result in injury to a person or loss of property. Any use 
of the programs or procedures in such a manner is at the user’s own risk. The 
editors, author, and publisher disclaim all liability for direct, incidental, or con-
sequent damages resulting from use of the programs or procedures in this book 
or the associated software.
For a listing of recent titles in the  
Artech House Mobile Communications Series, turn to the back of this book.

Mobile-to-Mobile Wireless Channels
Alenka Zajic´
artechhouse.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN-13: 978-1-60807-495-2
Cover design by Adam Renvoize
© 2013 Artech House
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part
of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service
marks have been appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the
accuracy of this information. Use of a term in this book should not be regarded
as affecting the validity of any trademark or service mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To
my husband, Miloš, and daughter, Mia
for their encouragement, support, and patience.


vii
Contents
PREFACE
xi
Chapter 1
Inroduction	
1
1.1  Mobile-to-Mobile Communication Systems
2
1.1.1  Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication Systems
2
1.1.2  Air-to-Ground Communication Systems
3
1.1.3  Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Systems
5
1.2  The Wireless Channel
6
1.2.1  Fading
7
1.2.2  Statistical Properties of Channels
8
1.3  Overview of Remaining Chapters
9
1.3.1  Chapter 2: Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
9
1.3.2  Chapter 3: Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
10
1.3.3  Chapter 4: Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
10
1.3.4  Chapter 5: Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater  
Vehicle Acoustic Channels
10
1.3.5  Appendixes
10
References
10
Chapter 2
Fixed-To-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels	
13
2.1  Propagation Principles
13
2.1.1  Free Space Propagation
14
2.1.2  Reflection
14
2.1.3  Diffraction
15
2.1.4  Scattering
15
2.2  Propagation Modeling
16
2.2.1  Large-Scale Fading—Pathloss
16
2.2.2  Large-Scale Fading—Shadowing
17
2.2.3  Small-Scale Fading—Multipath Propagation
19
2.2.4  Factors Influencing Small-Scale Fading
19
2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in  
F-to-M Cellular Radio Channels
21
2.3.1  Received Envelope Distribution
21

viii	
Contents
2.3.2  Clarke’s Model for F-to-M Frequency Flat Multipath  
Fading Channels
22
2.3.3  Correlation Functions and Doppler Power Spectra for  
Isotropic Scattering Channels
24
2.3.4  Correlation Functions and Doppler Power Spectrum for  
Nonisotropic Scattering Channels
27
2.3.5  Second-Order Statistics—Level Crossing Rates  
and Fade Durations
30
2.3.6  Modeling of F-to-M Frequency-Selective Multipath  
Fading Channels
33
2.3.7  Correlation Functions for F-to-M Frequency-Selective  
Multipath Fading Channels
34
2.3.8  Channel Characteristic Parameters—Delay Spread,  
Power Delay Profile, and Channel Coherence
36
2.3.9  MIMO F-to-M Cellular Radio Channels
38
2.4  Simulators for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
39
2.4.1  Simulation Models for F-to-M Frequency-Flat Multipath  
Fading Channels
39
2.4.2  Deterministic and Statistical SoS Simulation Models for  
F-to-M Frequency-Flat Multipath Fading Channels
39
2.4.3  Simulation Models for F-to-M Frequency-Selective Multipath  
Fading Channels
47
2.5  Small-Scale Channel Measurement Techniques
49
2.5.1  Direct Pulse–Based Channel Impulse Response Measurements
50
2.5.2  Spread Spectrum–Based Channel Impulse Response  
Measurements
50
2.5.3  Frequency Domain–Based Channel Impulse Response  
Measurements
52
2.6  Summary
53
References
54
Chapter 3
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
57
3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling
57
3.1.1  Large-Scale Fading—Pathloss and Shadowing
57
3.1.2  Small-Scale Fading—Multipath Propagation
60
3.1.3  Akki and Haber’s Model for V-to-V Frequency-Flat Multipath 
Fading Channels
60
3.1.4  Temporal Fading Characteristics of V-to-V Frequency-Flat  
Multipath Fading Channels
62
3.1.5  Two-Dimensional Model for MIMO V-to-V Frequency-Flat  
Multipath Fading Channels
67
3.1.6  Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of V-to-V Frequency- 
Flat Multipath Fading Channels
72
3.1.7  Estimation of Mobile Velocities in V-to-V Channels
85
3.1.8  Estimation of Direction of Movement in V-to-V Channels
88

Contents	
ix
3.1.9  Modeling of V-to-V Frequency-Selective Multipath  
Fading Channels
90
3.1.10  Spectral-Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of V-to-V  
Frequency-Selective Multipath Fading Channels
97
3.2  Impact of Antenna Coupling on MIMO V-to-V Channels
116
3.2.1  MIMO V-to-V System Model
117
3.2.2  Modeling of MIMO V-to-V Channels with Mutual Coupling
119
3.2.3  Analysis of MIMO V-to-V Channel with Mutual Coupling
120
3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
127
3.3.1  Simulators for V-to-V Frequency-Flat Multipath Fading  
Channels 
128
3.3.2  Simulators for V-to-V Frequency-Selective Multipath Fading  
Channels
138
3.4  Vehicle-to-Vehicle Measurement Campaigns and Modeling
144
3.4.1  Validation of the 3-D Wideband Model for V-to-V Frequency- 
Selective Multipath Fading Channels
145
3.5  Summary
150
References
150
Chapter 4
Air-To-Ground Radio Channels	
155
4.1  A-to-G Propagation Modeling
155
4.1.1  Large-Scale Fading—Pathloss
157
4.1.2  Large-Scale Fading—Shadowing
159
4.1.3  Small-Scale Fading—Multipath Propagation
160
4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in  
A-to-G Radio Channels
160
4.2.1  Received Envelope Distribution
161
4.2.2  Statistical Modeling of A-to-G Multipath Channels
161
4.2.3  Two-Ray Model for A-to-G Multipath Fading Channels
161
4.2.4  A Scattering Model for A-to-G Multipath Fading Channels
163
4.2.5  Three-Dimensional Model for MIMO A-to-G Multipath  
Fading Channels
165
4.2.6  Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of A-to-G Multipath  
Fading Channels
169
4.3  Simulators for Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
177
4.3.1  Sum-of-Sinusoids Simulators for A-to-G Channels
178
4.4  Summary
181
References
182
Chapter 5
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels	
185
5.1  Underwater Propagation Principles
186
5.1.1  An Underwater Communication System
187
5.1.2  Underwater Noise
188
5.1.3  Propagation Principles
189

x	
Contents
5.1.4  Refraction
189
5.1.5  Reflection
193
5.1.6  Scattering
196
5.2  UV-to-UV Acoustic Propagation Modeling
196
5.2.1  Large-Scale Fading—Path Loss
196
5.2.2  Large-Scale Fading—Shadowing
198
5.2.3  Small-Scale Fading—Multipath Propagation
200
5.2.4  Factors Influencing Small-Scale Fading
201
5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV  
Acoustic Channels
203
5.3.1  Received Envelope Distribution
203
5.3.2  Statistical Modeling of UV-to-UV Frequency Flat Acoustic  
Fading Channels
204
5.3.3  Temporal Fading Characteristics of UV-to-UV Frequency Flat 
Acoustic Fading Channels
209
5.3.4  Two-Dimensional Model for MIMO UV-to-UV Frequency-Flat 
Acoustic Fading Channels
220
5.3.5  Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of UV-to-UV  
Frequency-Flat MIMO Acoustic Fading Channels
224
5.3.6  Modeling of Underwater Acoustic Particle Velocity Channels
228
5.3.7  Modeling of UV-to-UV Frequency-Selective Acoustic Fading  
Channels
230
5.3.8  Spectral-Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of UV-to-UV 
Frequency-Selective Acoustic Fading Channels
232
5.4  Simulators for UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels
239
5.4.1  Simulators for UV-to-UV Frequency-Flat and Frequency- 
Selective Acoustic Fading Channels
240
5.5  Underwater Acoustic Channel Measurement Campaigns and  
Modeling
243
5.5.1  Validation of the Model for UV-to-UV Frequency-Selective  
Acoustic Fading Channels
243
5.6  Summary
245
References
245
Appendix A
Probability and Random Processes
249
A.1  Random Variables and Probability
249
A.1.2  Functions of Random Variables
257
A.2  Random Processes
258
A.2.1  Moments and Correlation Functions
259
A.2.3  Complex-Valued Random Processes
262
A.2.4  Power Spectral Density
263
A.2.5  Deterministic Continuous-Time Signals
264
References
265

xi
Appendix B
Description of Simulators for Fixed-to-mobile Cellular,  
Vehicle-to-vehicle, Air-to-ground, and Underwater Vehicle-to- 
underwater Vehicle Channels
267
B.1  Simulator for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Channels
B.2  Simulator for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Channels	
272
B.3  Simulator for Air-to-Ground Channels	
276
B.4  Simulator for Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater  
Vehicle Channels
280
References
283
About the Author
285
Index
287


xiii
Preface
Mobile communications are rapidly becoming the communications in most people’s 
minds, because they provide the ability to connect people anywhere and at any 
time, even on the move. While present-day mobile communications systems can be 
classified as “fixed-to-mobile” because they allow mobility only on one end (e.g., 
the mobile phone), while the other end (e.g., the base station) is immobile, emerg-
ing “mobile-to-mobile” communications systems allow mobile users or vehicles to 
directly communicate with each other.
The driving force behind mobile-to-mobile communications is consumer de-
mand for better coverage and quality of service (e.g., in rural areas where base 
stations or access points are sparse or not present or in disaster-struck areas where 
the fixed infrastructure is absent), as well as increased mobility support, location-
based services, and energy efficient communication (e.g., for cars travelling in op-
posite directions that exchange information about traffic conditions ahead or when 
mobile devices “gang together” to reach a far-away base station so that none of 
them expends a lot of powers). Although mobile-to-mobile is still a relatively young 
technology, it is already finding its way into wireless standards, such as IEEE 802.22 
for cognitive radio, IEEE 802.11p for intelligent transportation systems, and IEEE 
802.16 for WiMax systems.
Propagation in mobile-to-mobile (M-to-M) wireless channels is different from 
traditional fixed-to-mobile channels, and the quality of service, energy efficiency, 
mobility support, and other advantages of M-to-M communication all depend on 
having good models of the M-to-M propagation channels. This book provides a 
detailed introduction into the state of the art in M-to-M wireless propagation and 
models for such propagation. It is intended to serve as an educational tool for those 
just entering this exciting area and to serve as a reference for practitioners and de-
signers of M-to-M communication systems.
The book begins with a brief introduction, review of radio propagation, and 
statistical characteristics used to describe wireless communication channels. The 
book continues with a description of fixed-to-mobile channel modeling to allow 
existing practitioners to contrast the M-to-M channel to the more familiar F-to-M 
channels. The book then covers typical mobile-to-mobile communication scenarios: 
vehicle-to-vehicle communications, air-to-ground communications, and underwa-
ter autonomous vehicle communications. Finally, the book provides a CD with 
MATLAB implementations of key channel models described in the book. More 
about the contents of the CD can be found in the README.TXT file. This CD is 
intended to facilitate use of these models in future systems and to provide a starting 
point for development of new models and algorithms. The author hopes that the 
book will be very useful to practitioners, researchers, and students at graduate and 
post-graduate level.


1
C H A P T E R  1
Introduction
Mobile communications are one of the most active and rapidly growing areas of the 
telecommunications industry. The primary reason for this is that mobile communi-
cations offer connectivity to people “on the move.” Over the past several decades, 
all mobile communications systems in widespread use offered mobility only on the 
user’s end, while the other (service provider’s) end is fixed (immobile). Examples of 
these fixed-to-mobile (F-to-M) communications include cellular telephony, WiFi, 
and aircraft-tower communication. 
In contrast to this provider-to-user communication approach, several emerging 
wireless communication systems allow (or even depend on) direct communication 
between mobile users, who can be either people or vehicles. Such systems are often 
called mobile-to-mobile (M-to-M) communication systems, and the driving factors 
behind them are consumer demand for better quality of service, new applications, 
increased mobility support, the telecommunications industry’s desire to expand its 
service offerings (and thus sources of revenue), and the governmental and military 
needs for more robust communications in disaster recovery and battlefield scenarios 
where fixed infrastructure may not be available or may not adapt quickly enough to 
the changing situation in the field. As a result, M-to-M systems are finding applica-
tions in mobile ad-hoc wireless networks, intelligent transportation systems, future 
cellular systems that employ cooperative diversity techniques, underwater commu-
nication systems, and in emerging disaster recovery and battlefield communication 
systems. Although M-to-M is a relatively young technology, it is already finding its 
way into wireless standards, such as IEEE 802.22 for cognitive radio, IEEE 802.11p 
for intelligent transportation systems, and IEEE 802.16 for WiMax systems. 
Channel models and channel characterization are very important in traditional 
F-to-M communications, where the models are used for estimating channel capacity 
and other characteristics in the design phase, and for managing transmitted power 
(using channel sounding and feedback techniques) during actual communication. 
However, F-to-M communications systems can be designed with only basic channel 
models, using worst-case analysis and careful placement of fixed stations to provide 
good coverage to mobile users. In contrast, good channel models and channel char-
acterization are absolutely essential for successful design of M-to-M systems, where 
channel capacity and link quality can vary greatly from one environment to another 
and change rapidly as one or both users move, and where energy for communication 
is often battery-supplied at both endpoints (in contrast to F-to-M communications  
where the fixed end of the communications is often far less energy-constrained).

2	
Introduction
The goal of this book is to describe wireless propagation, statistical character-
ization, and simulation models for M-to-M systems. To help understand this mate-
rial, this book also compares and contrasts the propagation, characterization, and 
models for M-to-M channels to the relatively well-known modeling and simulation 
results for F-to-M cellular radio channels. 
To introduce the reader to M-to-M channels, this chapter first presents an over-
view of M-to-M systems and introduces some key concepts in wireless propagation 
and statistical characterization of these channels. After that, the rest of this chapter 
consists of a brief overview of each remaining chapter in this book. 
1.1  Mobile-to-Mobile Communication Systems
Wireless technology has become a part of our daily lives. Probably the most wide-
spread use of wireless technology is mobile telephony, which is nearly ubiquitous 
throughout the world because it allows people to be connected to each other any-
where and at any time, even in places where little or no other high-technology 
infrastructure exists. In developed countries, wireless access to the Internet is also 
nearly ubiquitous, both through WiFi and through 3G/4G mobile access. It can be 
argued that any connectivity service, be it telephony, Internet access, music distribu-
tion, or social networking, cannot be called pervasive until it is available wirelessly 
to people on the go. This growing demand for new applications, better quality of 
service, and improved mobility support has been noticed by both service provid-
ers and consumers, and rapid development of M-to-M communications is a direct 
consequence of this trend. Although the field of M-to-M communications is still in 
its infancy, several specific technologies in this domain are already clearly defined: 
­vehicle-to-vehicle communications, air-to-ground communications, and under­
water vehicle-to-underwater vehicle communications. Here, we briefly overview 
these technologies as examples of M-to-M use scenarios and also as an illustra-
tion of the diversity of propagation environments and potential impact of future  
M-to-M communications. 
1.1.1  Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication Systems
Vehicle-to-vehicle (V-to-V) communications systems have recently drawn great at-
tention because they have the potential to improve convenience, efficiency, and 
safety of automotive traffic (e.g., by allowing drivers or their vehicles to know in 
real time if a collision or a traffic jam is present further down the road, or by notify-
ing police when the traffic situation demands their presence). Some of this may be 
possible using existing F-to-M technology, but it would become much more efficient 
and timely with a multi-hop network between vehicles equipped with communica-
tion devices. This mobile ad hoc network can then pass along relevant information 
about road conditions, accidents, and congestion without congesting the cellular 
network. Additional services that would be difficult to implement using F-to-M 
communications include making drivers aware of emergency braking by a preced-
ing vehicle, efficient roadway utilization by platooning vehicles (strings of vehicles 
that communicate with each other so they can maintain tight intervehicle spacing) 

1.1  Mobile-to-Mobile Communication Systems	
3
and enabling safe traffic through critical points like blind crossings (intersections 
without traffic lights) and entries to highways. Finally, future vehicles will allow 
for in-vehicle Internet access and intervehicle communication [1, 2] that can be 
provided much more efficiently and cost-effectively using a cooperative vehicle-
to-vehicle network. Figure 1.1 illustrates one possible scenario where distributed 
vehicles cooperate to facilitate delivery of information. 
There are currently many initiatives across the globe in V-to-V communica-
tions. An international standard, IEEE 802.11p, also known as Wireless Access 
in Vehicular Environments (WAVE), was recently published [3]. The simulation 
and performance evaluation of V-to-V systems, as well as the design of future, 
improved systems, requires a deep understanding of the underlying propagation 
channels. However, the time-frequency selective fading nature of such V-to-V chan-
nels is significantly different from the better-explored F-to-M cellular channel, and 
thus requires distinct measurement campaigns and models. Hence, Chapter 3 of 
this book presents the recent progress and current state of the art in V-to-V channel 
modeling and simulation. This will help communications system designers acquire 
an understanding of the pertinent channel characteristics and will help propagation 
researchers assess where the need for further work is the most pressing. 
1.1.2  Air-to-Ground Communication Systems
Air-to-ground (A-to-G) communications systems have recently drawn great at-
tention because they have potential to support a wide spectrum of applications 
ranging from two-way telecommunications (e.g., interactive video, and Inter-
net access) to emergency response, intelligent transportation systems, remote 
Figure 1.1  A distributed vehicle-to-vehicle communication scenario.

4	
Introduction
sensing, earth observation, navigation applications, pollution monitoring, me-
teorological measurements, real-time earth monitoring, land management and 
agriculture, and so on [4]. For example, emergency response A-to-G communi-
cations can have a significant advantage in emergency situations because they 
can be deployed very rapidly, can cover a large area, and are immune to many 
natural disasters such as floods and earthquakes. Rapid deployment of A-to-G 
systems, operating as airborne base stations capable of establishing “on-the-fly” 
cellular links (i.e., having rapid restoration capability) while allowing users to 
operate their existing mobile handsets also presents an attractive concept (e.g., 
when terrestrial networks are overloaded, perhaps due to a large concentration 
of users at a major event). A-to-G systems can also be deployed in military ap-
plications, where they can function as surrogates for satellites or as efficient and 
cost-effective relays for ground-based communications or for sensor surveil-
lance to help battleships acquire ground targets [5]. Another example where 
A-to-G communication systems can play an important role is in environmental 
monitoring, such as on-board aerial imaging of forest fires, disaster monitor-
ing of earthquake-stricken areas, volcanic eruptions, industrial accidents, land 
slides, avalanches, and oil spills. 
An A-to-G communication system consists of sky and ground segments. The 
sky segment consists of a platform (i.e., an airplane or a lighter-than-air airship) 
positioned in the stratosphere. The aircraft is kept relatively stationary with re-
spect to the ground by flying in a tight circle, while the airships employs station-
ary technology to counteract movements due to wind and remain stationary. The 
ground segments consist of mobile units, such as cellphones. An A-to-G com-
munication system may provide mobile cellular coverage to regions ranging from 
high-density (urban) areas to low-density (rural) areas. The choice of the energy 
source is of fundamental importance. Fossil fuels are heavy, and therefore expen-
sive to lift and maintain at altitude. The preferred form of energy source is solar 
power, since A-to-G systems are designed to have large surfaces (to maintain a 
steady position) that are suitable for lining solar panels. The A-to-G systems are 
situated at 17–22 km altitude (above flying civil aircraft) where the effect of winds 
is relatively small. The A-to-G systems can be linked to a satellite system, can be 
linked with each other, and can be linked with mobile nodes on the ground (see 
Figure 1.2). 
One of the main advantages of A-to-G communication links, compared to 
terrestrial­ wireless links, is their line-of-sight (LoS) path loss profile. In terrestrial sys-
tems, the received power usually decays as a power-of-four function of the ­transmitter- 
receiver distance because of scattering along the propagation path. In contrast, in 
A-to-G links the dominant signal component is line of sight, whose power decays as 
a power-of-two function of the transmitter-receiver distance. Compared to satellite 
channels, A-to-G communication channels provide much lower propagation loss 
because high-altitude platforms are located in the stratosphere so the signals do not 
go through the (high-loss) ionosphere. 
Simulation and performance evaluation of A-to-G systems requires understand-
ing of the underlying propagation channels. Hence, Chapter 4 of this book presents 
recent progress and the current state of the art in A-to-G channel modeling and 
simulation. 

1.1  Mobile-to-Mobile Communication Systems	
5
1.1.3  Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Systems
The need for underwater communications exists in applications such as data har-
vesting for environmental monitoring, communication between manned and/or 
unmanned underwater vehicles, and transmission of diver speech. An example of 
communications between fixed submerged devices are sensor networks deployed on 
the ocean bottom for seismic monitoring (e.g., to predict tsunamis), monitoring of 
deep-water oil wells, analysis of resource deposits, oceanographic studies, tactical 
surveillance, and pollution monitoring. Another example of underwater commu-
nications with fixed devices is the triggering of an event or action on a submerged 
device (e.g., a release device that allows an instrument package deployed on the 
ocean bottom to return to the surface) [6–8]. 
Underwater communication is also needed between underwater vehicles, such 
as unmanned or autonomous underwater vehicles (UUVs/AUVs) for deep-water 
construction, repairs of deep-water oil wells, scientific or resource exploration, or 
military UUVs (submarine drones), as illustrated in Figure 1.3. 
Unfortunately, underwater communication is extremely challenging: use of 
wires/cables either severely limits or entirely precludes most of the important un-
derwater communication scenarios, whereas existing wireless communications still 
provide extremely low data rates, work over very limited distances, and/or have low 
energy efficiency. The main reason for such poor performance is that the underwater­ 
environment is very harsh for traditional wireless communication approaches: ­radio 
signal range is only several meters because of severe losses, especially in seawater 
(which is a relatively good conductor), while optical communication has a very 
short range because of high dispersion due to murkiness and particles suspended 
Figure 1.2  Integrated terrestrial, air-to-ground, and satellite systems.

6	
Introduction
in the water. As a result, underwater wireless communication mostly uses acoustics 
(sound), which can travel long distances in water. Unfortunately, acoustic commu-
nication suffers from its own set of problems—the available spectrum is measured 
in kilohertz instead of gigahertz, propagation is orders of magnitude slower than 
with radio or optics, and there are many sources of signal distortion that further 
limit data rates that can be achieved using simple modulations and coding. 
More advanced modulations and coding, especially those that exploit mul-
tipath propagation and provide bandwidth and energy efficiency, can dramatically 
improve data rates in acoustic underwater communication. However, the acoustic 
underwater propagation environment differs significantly from the air- and space-
based radio propagation environment, so this environment must be studied in order 
to exploit advanced modulations and coding. Hence, Chapter 5 of this book pres-
ents recent progress and the current state of the art in UV-to-UV channel modeling 
and simulation. 
1.2  The Wireless Channel
Understanding of wireless propagation is key to improving the performance of 
wireless communication systems. While each type of wireless channel has its own 
characteristics, many of the key concepts are common to all of the propagation 
environments presented in this book. We now briefly review these concepts, which 
are described in more detail in Chapter 2. 
Figure 1.3  An acoustic network of autonomous underwater vehicles.

1.2  The Wireless Channel	
7
1.2.1  Fading
In general, fading refers to variation of received signal power over time, due to 
changes in the transmission medium or path. Fading is usually classified as large-
scale fading or small-scale fading. 
Large-scale fading effects are dominant when the transmitter or receiver moves 
over distances greater than several tens of the signal’s wavelength, and they play an 
important role in determining the cell coverage area, outages, and handoffs. The 
main large-scale fading effects are pathloss and shadowing. 
Pathloss
•	
. The pathloss is calculated by averaging the received power at a 
particular distance over a sufficiently large area. Pathloss limits interference 
between sufficiently separated transmitters, but also rapidly diminishes the 
useful signal power. Any technique that improves pathloss is thus highly ap-
preciated by network planners. 
Shadowing.
•	
 Variation in the received power around the level predicted by 
pure pathloss is called shadowing. It is calculated by averaging the received 
power at a particular distance over an area whose radius is similar to the 
shadowing coherence distance. Shadowing is traditionally modeled as a 
random process, and is one of the most detrimental performance factors  
in modern communications systems—it cannot be absorbed by suitable chan-
nel codes, so it can result in link outages. As a result, any technique that 
improves shadowing outages is highly appreciated. 
Small-scale fading is caused by multipath propagation. This effect plays an 
important role in determining link level performance in terms of bit error rates, 
average fade durations, and so on. 
Multipath
•	
. Not averaging the signal at all allows one to observe additional 
signal fluctuation beyond pathloss and shadowing. This fluctuation is caused 
by constructive and destructive addition of signal components traveling 
along multiple propagation paths. If channel fading changes from symbol 
to symbol due to fast variations of channel amplitude, then the channel is 
called fast-fading; otherwise, it is called a slow-fading channel. A fast-fading 
channel offers temporal diversity, which can be exploited by a suitable chan-
nel coder; a slow-fading channel does not offer temporal diversity, which can 
lead to significant outage periods. If multiple copies (path components) of 
the symbol can be resolved because their propagation delays are larger than 
the symbol duration, then the channel is called a frequency-selective fading 
channel; otherwise, it is called a frequency-flat or simply flat fading channel. 
A frequency-selective fading channel offers frequency diversity, which can 
be exploited by suitable signal processing coupled with a channel coder; a 
flat fading channel does not offer frequency diversity, which again can lead 
to prolonged outages. In terms of outages, the worst-case scenario is a slow 
and flat fading channel, while the best case is a fast and frequency-selective 
fading channel. Modern communications systems can be fast or slow fading, 

8	
Introduction
depending on the mobility they are subjected to; however, due to increasingly 
short symbol durations, they are typically frequency selective and hence in-
herently offer a healthy amount of diversity. 
1.2.2  Statistical Properties of Channels
Modeling of the wireless channel has been one of the most difficult parts of the 
wireless system design. Propagation models are the base for channel modeling, 
as they try to describe the way a wireless signal changes during its travel from 
the transmitter to the receiver. Propagation models have traditionally focused on 
predicting large-scale and small-scale fading. Propagation modeling can be done 
using ray-tracing tools, which determine the field behavior for a deterministically 
predefined scenario. However, when the number of multipath components is large, 
or when the geometry and dielectric properties of the propagation environment 
are unknown, this approach is impractical. Similarly, if the number of reflectors in 
the environment is very large and/or reflector surfaces are not smooth, ray-tracing 
tools become less useful and we typically must use statistical approximations to 
characterize the propagation medium. Most mobile-to-mobile propagation envi-
ronments are very complex, so this book focuses mainly on statistical character-
ization. For wireless communication systems, statistics of special importance are 
the correlation functions, Doppler spectrum, level crossing rate, and average fade 
duration. 
Correlation functions
•	
. The measure of how fast a wireless channel changes 
with time, movement, or frequency is very important for the design of wire-
less systems. This measure is provided by temporal, spatial, and frequency 
correlation functions. 
The temporal autocorrelation function describes how fast the wireless 
channel is changing over time. If the channel does not change at all, it 
does not fade and instead remains at some particular level (i.e., its auto-
correlation is very high for a long time). However, separate instances of 
this channel (e.g., different paths) will be uncorrelated with one another, 
assuming that each of the scattered components fades independently. 
Once relative motion is introduced to the transmitter, receiver, and/or 
scatterers, the fading becomes both correlated and varying in time. Tem-
poral autocorrelation is important for estimating the quality of commu-
nication, as it determines how long a measured property will be present 
in a wireless channel. For example, the temporal autocorrelation function 
determines how often training sequences should be sent to estimate the 
wireless channel. 
The spatial correlation function measures a correlation between the re-
ceived average signal gain and the angle of arrival of a signal. Rich multipath 
propagation decreases spatial correlation by spreading the signal such that 
multipath components are received from many different spatial directions. 
Similarly, small antenna separations increase spatial correlation, as adjacent 

1.3  Overwiew of Remaining Chapters	
9
antennas will receive similar signals. Spatial correlation is important for 
­estimating the potential benefit from path diversity—whether multiple-input- 
multiple-output (MIMO) techniques can be effective—and/or for judging  
the need for techniques that reduce or eliminate intersymbol interference due 
to different delays along different paths. 
The frequency correlation function measures a channel’s frequency selectiv-
ity. As the channel’s frequency response becomes more varied, an interacting 
signal will exhibit a broader envelope in the delay domain. In practice, delay 
spread is the result of different propagation delays of received signals from 
reflectors at large distances compared to the LoS path between the transmit-
ter and the receiver. 
Doppler power spectral density
•	
. In wireless communications, the transmit-
ter, the receiver, and/or scatterers are moving. The faster they are moving, 
the faster the wireless channel changes, and the more Doppler shift will be 
present. The Doppler power spectral density of a fading channel measures 
the Doppler spread (twice the Doppler shift); that is, it describes how much 
spectral broadening it causes. 
Level crossing rate and average fade duration
•	
. The level crossing rate is a 
measure of how often the wireless channel changes over time. It quantifies 
how often the fading crosses some threshold, usually in the positive-going 
direction. The average fade duration quantifies how long the signal spends 
below the threshold. 
1.3  Overview of Remaining Chapters
The remainder of the book is organized as follows: 
1.3.1  Chapter 2: Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
Chapter 2 of this book reviews statistical characterization, modeling, and simu-
lation of fixed-to-mobile (F-to-M) radio channels. The goal of this chapter is to 
define important wireless propagation concepts used throughout the book and 
to allow easy comparison between F-to-M and M-to-M channels. This chapter 
first describes the propagation principles that govern signal propagation in F-to-M 
cellular radio channels. The chapter proceeds to describe important concepts of 
propagation modeling such as large-scale and small-scale fading effects. Then, the 
statistical characterization of multipath propagation in F-to-M cellular radio chan-
nels is detailed. Several reference models and their statistics, such as correlation 
function, Doppler spectrum, power delay profile, and level crossing rate are de­
tailed. Furthermore, this chapter describes the simulators for frequency-flat and 
frequency-selective multipath fading. Finally, because of the importance of the multi­
path structure in determining the small-scale fading effects, the rest of the chapter 
describes several wideband channel sounding techniques that are commonly used 
for channel measurements. 

10	
Introduction
1.3.2  Chapter 3: Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
Chapter 3 of this book details statistical characterization, modeling, and simula-
tion of vehicle-to-vehicle (V-to-V) radio channels. It first details the propagation 
principles that govern signal propagation in V-to-V channels and describes large-
scale and small-scale fading effects. Then, statistical characterization of multipath 
propagation in V-to-V channels is discussed and several two-dimensional (2-D) and 
three-dimensional (3-D) models are detailed. Finally, a validation of the 3-D wide-
band models against the measurements are presented. 
1.3.3  Chapter 4: Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
Chapter 4 of this book details the propagation principles that govern signal propa-
gation in air-to-ground (A-to-G) channels and describes large-scale and small-scale 
fading effects. Then, statistical characterization of multipath propagation in A-to-G 
channels is discussed and several 3-D models are detailed. 
1.3.4  Chapter 5: Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
Chapter 5 of this book details statistical characterization, modeling, and simula-
tion of underwater vehicle–to–underwater vehicle (UV-to-UV) acoustic channels. It 
first briefly describes the propagation principles that govern signal propagation in 
acoustic underwater UV-to-UV channels and then proceeds to describe important 
concepts of propagation modeling such as large-scale and small-scale fading effects. 
Then, statistical characterization of multipath propagation in UV-to-UV channels is 
presented. Finally, several models for frequency-flat and frequency-selective chan-
nels and their validation against the measurements is presented. 
1.3.5  Appendixes
Appendix A presents a brief review of the basic concepts of probability theory and 
random processes used in this book. 
To help readers better understand, use, and implement the propagation theory 
presented in Chapters 2–5, this book also provides MATLAB-based simulators 
for fixed-to-mobile, vehicle-to-vehicle, air-to-ground, and underwater vehicle–to–
­underwater vehicle channels. Appendix B of this book explains how to use these  
simulators.
References
[1]  FleetNet project Internet on the road, Available: www.et2.tu-harburg.de/fleetnet, 2000. 
[2]  Car2Car Communication Consortium, Available: www.car-to-car.org, 2005. 
[3]  802.11p-2010-IEEE Standard for Information Technology, Available: ieeexplore.ieee.org. 
[4]  Elabdin Z., O. Elshaikh, R. Islam, A.P. Ismail, and O.O. Khalifa, “High altitude platform 
for wireless communications and other services,” International Conference on Electrical and 
Computer Engineering ICECE ’06, 19–21 Dec. 2006, pp. 432–438. 

1.3  Overwiew of Remaining Chapters	
11
[5]  Jamison L., G. S. Sommer, and I.R. Porche, “High-altitude airships for future force army,” 
Technical Report, RAND Corporation, 2005. 
[6]  Lynn W., “3D, 4D, and beyond,” Journal of Petroleum Engineering, Jan. 1998, p. 35. 
[7]  Proakis J. G., J. Rice, E. Sozer, and M. Stojanovic, “Shallow water acoustic networks,” 
­Encyclopedia of Telecommunications, J. G. Proakis, Ed. John Wiley and Sons, 2003. 
[8]  Akyildiz I. F., D. Pompili, and T. Melodia, “Underwater acoustic sensor networks: Research 
challenges,” Ad Hoc Networks (Elsevier), Vol. 3, March 2005, pp. 257–279. 


13
C H A P T E R  2
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
The design of spectrally and energy efficient cellular communication systems re-
quires a detailed understanding of the fixed-to-mobile (F-to-M) cellular radio propa­
gation environment. The characteristics of the radio channel vary greatly with the 
operating frequency and the propagation environment (i.e., rural, urban). A typical 
F-to-M cellular radio system consists of a collection of fixed base stations (BSs) 
that define the radio coverage areas, as shown in Figure 2.1. Typically, the BS an-
tennas are usually well elevated above the local terrain and relatively free of local 
scatterers, as shown in Figure 2.2. In contrast, a mobile station (MS) moves, and 
its antennas have low elevation and are surrounded by buildings, mountains, and 
foliage. The BS communicates with the MS through either a line-of-sight (LoS) link 
or through a non-line-of-sight (NLoS) link, due to natural and man-made objects 
that are situated between the BS and MS. This chapter describes the propagation 
principles that govern signal propagation in F-to-M cellular radio channels and 
then explains how such channels are modeled, simulated, and measured. 
2.1  Propagation Principles
The modulated signal at the BS is fed into an antenna of length l from which it is 
radiated in the form of electromagnetic (EM) waves with wavelength λ. The propa-
gation of an EM wave through a medium is governed by Maxwell’s equations. In 
the far field, where the distance between the BS and MS, d, is significantly larger 
than the wavelength, the EM waves can be approximated as the planar waves with 
electric and magnetic components E = E0ej(w · t – k · r) and H = H0ej(w · t – k·r), respectively. 
Here, r = d × nr is the spatial translation vector, where nr is a unit vector pointing 
from the BS to the observation point, k = k × nk is the wave vector, where nk is a 
unit vector pointing into the direction of wave propagation, w = 2p f is the angular 
frequency, and t is time. 
The waves propagate toward the MS via four main propagation mechanisms: 
free-space propagation, reflection, diffraction, and scattering. Free-space propaga-
tion occurs when energy from the BS makes its way directly to the MS via a LoS 
path. The other three propagation mechanisms are created by objects in the chan-
nel, such as buildings, trees, mountains, and other obstacles, which we collectively 
call the channel scatterers. The received waves are a superposition of the wave com-
ing from the LoS path and all waves coming from different directions due to the 
scatterers in a channel. This effect is known as multipath propagation. 

14	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
2.1.1  Free Space Propagation
The EM waves undergo free space propagation when BS and MS antennas are in 
the far field of each other (i.e., d >> λ) and there is an unobstructed LoS path be-
tween them. Under these assumptions, the received signal power is [1] 
	
(
)
2
4
R
T
T
R
P
P G G
d
λ
π
=

(2.1)
where PT is the transmitted power, GT and GR are the transmit and receive antenna 
gains, respectively, λ is the carrier wavelength, and d is the distance between the BS 
and MS. The free space equation in (2.1) (also known as the Friis equation) shows 
that the received power falls off as the square of the distance d. This implies that the 
received power decays with distance at a rate of 20 dB/decade.
2.1.2  Reflection
Reflection arises when an EM wave propagating in one medium impinges upon 
another medium having different electrical properties, as shown in Figure 2.2. The 
EM wave is then split into a reflected component and a transmitted (continuing) 
component. For example, the EM wave impinging on the building wall will be 
partially transmitted through the wall into the building (thereby providing indoor 
coverage), but part of it will be reflected on the building wall back into the sur-
rounding air. Flat surfaces that are much larger than the wavelength may be mod-
eled as reflective surfaces with specular reflection. The electric field intensity of the 
reflected and transmitted waves is related to the incident wave in the medium of 
origin through the Fresnel reflection coefficient G [2]. The reflection coefficient is a 
function of the material properties and generally depends on the wave polarization, 
angle of incidence, and frequency of the propagation wave. 
Figure 2.1  Illustration of a F-to-M cellular radio coverage.

2.1.3  Diffraction
Diffraction occurs according to Huygen’s principle, which states that when there is 
an obstruction between the BS and MS antennas, the secondary wavelets are cre-
ated and combined to produce a new wavefront behind the obstructing body and 
in the direction of propagation, as shown in Figure 2.2. The field strength of a dif-
fracted wave is the vector sum of the electric filed components of all the secondary 
wavelets in the space around the obstacle. Diffraction allows EM signals to propa-
gate around the curved surface of the earth, beyond the horizon, and to propagate 
behind obstructions. Although the received field strength decreases rapidly as a 
receiver moves deeper into the obstructed region, the diffraction field still exists and 
often has sufficient strength to arrive at the MS. 
2.1.4  Scattering
As mentioned in Section 2.1.2, flat surfaces that have much larger dimensions than 
a wavelength may be modeled as reflective surfaces. However, the texture (rough-
ness) of such surfaces often also creates scattering—a propagation effect different 
from the specular reflection. Depending on the scatterer’s surface characteristics, 
different scattering phenomena can be observed. Generally, the rougher the surface, 
the less the impact of the specular reflected component and the stronger the impact 
of the scattered component, as shown in Figure 2.3.
The effect of scattering is due to the constructive and destructive addition of 
waves reflected off different points on a rough surface. For carrier frequencies that 
are typically used in telecommunications, the well-established Rayleigh criterion [1] 
can be used to determine whether a surface is smooth (i.e., it exhibits only a specular 
BS
MS
Shadowing
BS      -  Base station
MS     -  Mobile station
LoS    -  Line-of-sight
NLoS -  Nonline-of-sight
Reflection
LoS
Scattering
Diffraction
Scattering
NLoS
Figure 2.2  Typical F-to-M cellular radio propagation environment.
 2.1  Propagation Principles	
15

16	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
component) or rough (i.e., it also exhibits a scattering components). The Rayleigh 
criterion states that a surface is considered smooth if its minimum to maximum 
protuberance h is less than hc = λ/(8sinqi), where qi denotes the angle of incidence, 
otherwise, a surface is considered rough. For an example, a GSM system operating 
at ¦ = 900 MHz in an urban environment with houses having balconies with undu-
lation Dh = h/sinqi » 1m reveals that the surfaces need to be considered rough since 
significant scattering occurs when Dh/λ > 1/8 (Rayleigh criterion).
2.2  Propagation Modeling
As pointed out in Section 1.2.1, fading refers to time variation of the received signal 
power due to changes in the transmission medium. Fading is usually classified into 
large-scale fading and small-scale fading. Large-scale fading is dominant when the 
receiver moves over distances greater than several tens of the carrier wavelength 
and includes pathloss and shadow fading. Large-scale fading plays an important 
role in determining cell coverage area, outage, and hand-offs. On the other hand, 
small-scale fading is caused by multipath propagation. This effect plays an impor-
tant role in determining link level performance in terms of bit error rates, average 
fade durations, and so on.
2.2.1  Large-Scale Fading—Pathloss
Pathloss is the attenuation of the transmitted signal as it propagates from the BS 
to the MS. This attenuation may be caused by effects such as free-space loss, dif-
fraction, reflection, and absorption. Pathloss is also influenced by terrain contours, 
environment (e.g., a city or a muddy path in the woods), propagation medium (e.g., 
dry or moist air), the distance between the BS and MS, and the height and location 
of antennae. 
The simplest pathloss model assumes a LoS link between the BS and MS and 
propagation in free space. Under these assumptions, the received signal power is 
given as in (2.1), (i.e., it assumes a loss of 20 dB/decade). It can be formalized as 
L(d) = L(d0) × (d/d0)2, where d0 is the reference distance and L(d0) is the power mea-
sured at the reference distance d0. Note that the pathloss exponent (the power of the 
distance dependence) in this equation is 2 for free-space propagation. It is generally 
not applicable to terrestrial scenarios but finds some applicability in satellite and 
A-to-G channels as well as for short LoS channels. 
The signals in wireless communications, however, do not experience free space 
propagation. Single-slope pathloss model assumes a loss of 10 × n dB/dec, where n 
Figure 2.3  Reflection of a smooth surface, a rough surface, and a random surface.

is the pathloss exponent, which can range from n = 1.5 for waveguides, to n = 2,...,  
4 for LoS + clutter, to n = 4,..., 8 for NLoS + clutter. This model can be formalized 
as L(d) = L(d0) × (d/d0)n­. This model has applications in all forms of terrestrial com-
munication systems including cellular radio systems. 
However, the pathloss in terrestrial systems does not always follow the single- 
slope pathloss model. In the presence of two strong wave components (e.g., one 
direct and one reflected), the pathloss experiences a double-slope pathloss behav-
ior [3]. The double-slope model assumes that for distances smaller than a given 
breakpoint dbp, the decay follows a pathloss coefficient n1 and thereafter a path-
loss coefficient n2. This can be formalized as L(d) = L(d0) × (d/d0)n1 with typically  
n1 = 2 for d < dbp and L(d) = L(d0) × (d/d0)n2, with typically n2 = 2, ..., 6 for d ³ dbp. 
It is well applicable to long-range communication systems, such as cellular sys-
tems. The break point distance can be calculated approximately as dbp » 4hrht /λ, 
where hr and ht are the elevations of MS and BS, respectively. 
More advanced modeling of pathloss can be done using ray-tracing and ray-
launching tools, which determine the field behavior for a deterministically predefined 
scenario. It is generally a very complex modeling approach that finds applications in 
very specific propagation environments such as propagation behavior close to the 
head, within mobile phone, and so on. However, this approach is not necessarily 
better than the (much simpler) single- and double-slope modeling for other propa-
gation environments. 
Another very popular way to model pathloss is to use empirically fitted data. 
This approach is based on real measurements for a given environment. Once the 
measurements are taken, statistical fitting techniques are used to obtain the pathloss 
coefficients that match well-measured data. Examples of such a modeling approach 
are the Okumura-Hata, Lee, and Walfish-Ikegami, models [4]. The models are gen-
erally difficult to obtain, but once the statistical fitting is performed, they are very 
simple and fairly accurate models. They are typically used in academic simulators 
and in planning and optimization tools. 
Finally, a very accurate approach to model the pathloss is to take real measure-
ments for each point in the plane (or space) according to a predefined grid (e.g., 
every 20m in urban areas). While this approach is difficult and expensive, it is often 
used by large operators in order to optimize planning and rollout of their real-world 
cellular systems, especially in densely populated areas.
2.2.2  Large-Scale Fading—Shadowing
The pathloss models described in Section 2.2.1 assume that the pathloss is constant 
at a given distance. However, obstacles such as buildings and trees result in random 
variations of the received power at a given distance. This effect is called shadow 
fading. 
Experimental results show that shadow fading can be modeled as a log-normal 
random variable with a distribution given as [4]
	
2
10
(dBm)
2
(10log
)
10
( )
exp
2
2 ln10
p
p
x
f
x
x
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω
µ
σ
σ
π
-
é
ù
=
-
ê
ú
ë
û

(2.2)
 2.2  Propagation Modeling	
17

18	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
where Wp denotes the mean squared envelope level, mWp is the area mean expressed 
in dBm, and sW is the standard deviation of the shadow fading. Typical sW values 
range from 5 to 12 dB. 
The random shadowing components are usually correlated in space. The degree 
of correlation mainly depends on the environment. We can distinguish two types of 
correlated shadowing: the auto-correlated shadowing and the site-to-site correlated 
shadowing, as illustrated in Figure 2.4.
The autocorrelated shadowing quantifies how shadowed power changes over 
time as the MS moves (i.e., over the MS spatial separation of Dd). This metric is very 
important for power control algorithms in general and for diversity gains in cooper-
ative systems. The auto-correlation shadowing coefficient can be written as [6, 7] 
	
corr
(
)
E[ ( )
(
)]
d
d
R
d
S d
S d
d
e
D
-
D
=
×
+ D
µ

(2.3)
where E[·] denotes the expectation with respect to the random realizations of signal 
S, and dcorr is the correlation distance, which heavily depends on the distance d be-
tween the BS and MS. In cellular systems, the typical experimentally observed value 
for dcorr is 112 m for d = 4.8 m [3].
The site-to-site shadowing quantifies how shadowed power changes over an-
gular separation between two BS stations Df. This metric is used for quantifying 
interference power from adjacent cells in cellular systems and for macro-diversity 
gains in distributed antenna systems. The cross-correlation shadowing coefficient 
can be written as 
	
1
2
thr
1
2
thr
1
2
thr
 for 0
(
)
E[ (
)
(
)]
 for 
d
d
R
S d
S d
d
d
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
π
φ
ì
£ D
£
ïï
D
=
×
µ í
ï
< D
£
D
ïî

(2.4)
where d1 and d2 are the respective distances between the MS and the BSs, and fthr = 
2arcsin (dcorr /(2d1)). 
Shadowing is one of the most detrimental performance factors of modern com-
munication systems because it diminishes the useful signal power in a difficult-to-
predict fashion. Since it cannot be compensated for by using suitable channel codes, 
shadowing causes outages (nonavailability of a link). However, shadowing can also 
be useful—it limits interference from nearby BSs. 
Figure 2.4  Auto-correlated shadowing (left) and site-to-site correlated shadowing (right).

2.2.3  Small-Scale Fading—Multipath Propagation
Multipath propagation is the propagation mechanism manifested when the trans-
mitted signal reaches the receive antenna along two or more paths. The presence of 
local scattering objects, such as mountains and buildings, often obstructs a direct 
path between the BS and MS. This leaves only NLoS propagation paths between the 
BS and MS (i.e., the waves must propagate via reflection, diffraction, and scatter-
ing). Such waves typically arrive at the MS from many different directions and with 
different delays, and combine vectorially at the receiver antenna (a phenomenon 
called multipath fading) to produce a composite received signal.
Here, we consider the transmission of the pass-band signal 
	
2
ˆ
( )
( )
c
j
f t
s t
s t e
π
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
= Â

(2.5)
where ŝ(t) is the complex envelope of the transmitted signal, f­c is the carrier fre-
quency, and Â[·] denotes the real part operation. Due to multipath propagation, the 
received signal is a superposition of many attenuated, delayed, and phase-shifted 
replicas of the transmitted signal, each influencing each other. If the channel is com-
prised of L multipath components, then the noiseless1 received pass-band wave-
form is 
	
( )
1
ˆ
( )
(
)
l
L
j
t
l
l
l
r t
C e
s t
φ
τ
-
=
é
ù
= Â
-
ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
å

(2.6)
where Cl, fl(t), and tl are the amplitude, phase, and time delay, respectively, associ-
ated with the lth propagation path. From (2.6), it follows that the multipath chan-
nel can be modeled as a linear time-variant filter whose complex baseband impulse 
response is [4]
	
( )
1
( , )
(
)
l
L
j
t
l
l
l
h t
C e
φ
τ
δ τ
τ
-
=
=
-
å

(2.7)
where h(t, t) is the channel response at time t due to an impulse applied at time t ­– t , and 
d(×) is the Dirac delta function. The channel amplitude, phase, and time delay strongly 
depend on time and location. For example, for a fixed MS location, these values change 
with time due to mobility in the environment itself (scatterers move). Similarly, for a 
given time, these values differ from one location to another. Because of that, they are 
often modeled as statistical random variables (see Section 2.3 for more details).
2.2.4  Factors Influencing Small-Scale Fading
Many physical factors such as multipath propagation, speed of the MS, speed of the 
surrounding objects, and bandwidth of the transmitted signal influence small-scale 
fading. In this section, we will focus on the impact of multipath propagation, move-
ment of the MS, and physical location of the MS on small-scale fading. 
Each communication system is affected by the noise. However, in this book we are focused on understand-
1.	
ing and modeling multipath propagation, and without loss of generality we can neglect the effect of noise 
because they are two independent mechanisms that affect communication systems.
 2.2  Propagation Modeling	
19

20	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
2.2.4.1  Impact of Multipath Propagation on Small-Scale Fading
The movement of MS and the presence of reflecting objects and scatterers in the 
channel create multiple versions of the transmitted signal that arrive at the receiving 
antenna, displaced with respect to one another in time and frequency. The random 
phase and amplitudes of the different multipath components cause fluctuations in 
signal strength, thereby inducing small-scale fading, signal distortion, or both. 
As indicated in (2.6), the received signal is a sum of many attenuated, delayed, 
and phase-shifted replicas of the transmitted signal, each influencing each other. 
A sum of these delayed signals creates time dispersion of the original signal. In 
the frequency domain, this manifests as frequency selectivity (i.e., the channel dis-
torts the frequency response characteristic of the transmitted signal). Based on their 
degree of frequency selectivity, channels may be classified as frequency-flat or as 
­frequency-selective channels. If all the transmitted frequencies undergo approxi-
mately identical amplitude and phase changes, the channel is called frequency flat. 
On the other hand, if all transmitted frequencies experience different amplitude 
and phase changes, the channel is called frequency selective. Frequency selectivity is 
measured in terms of the coherence bandwidth Bc (i.e., the bandwidth over which 
the channel’s frequency response remains constant). The system is said to undergo 
flat fading if the coherence bandwidth is bigger than the symbols’s bandwidth Bs = 
1/Ts (i.e., the transmission is narrowband), and frequency selective otherwise.
The selectivity in the frequency domain leads to intrasymbol and intersymbol 
interference. The first one refers to the overlap of symbol replicas within the sym-
bol duration, while the second refers to the overlap of symbol replicas belonging 
to different symbols. While the intrasymbol interference is generally irreversible, 
the intersymbol interference can be reversed by means of suitable transceivers. 
One realization of such a transceiver includes use of an equalizer, which effectively 
performs the inverse filter function to the one given in (2.7). However, given the 
increasing number of multipath components that need equalization, this becomes 
more and more difficult. The second transceiver realization includes use of spread 
spectrum techniques, which is facilitated by the use of Rake receivers. However, 
the limitation might be the number of Rake fingers that can be implemented. 
The third transceiver realization includes the use of low-complexity orthogonal  
frequency division multiplexing (OFDM)–like techniques that essentially trans-
form the f­requency-selective time domain into a flat-frequency domain system. 
However, several drawbacks related to implementation prevail here also.
2.2.4.2  Impact of the MS Movement on Small-Scale Fading
A transmitted signal is impacted not only by multipath propagation, but also by 
other factors such as the speed of MS as well as its direction of movement. Due to 
the movement of the MS, the Doppler effect causes a frequency shift of each of the 
waves. The angle of arrival α, which is defined by the direction of arrival of the 
nth incident wave and the direction of motion of the MS, determines the Doppler 
frequency of the nth incident wave according to the relation f = f­max cos a. This 
effect is called time selectivity. When viewed in the frequency domain, time selec-
tivity manifests as Doppler shifts in the transmitted signal, causing a broadening 

of the transmitted signal spectrum, which is called frequency dispersion. A good 
measure of time selectivity is given by the channel coherence time, or equivalently, 
the Doppler spread (i.e., the time duration for which the channel can be considered 
as approximately time invariant). Based on the coherence time (rate with which the 
channel impulse response changes relative to the signal transmission rate), channels 
may be classified as fast fading or slow fading. Fast fading implies that the channel 
changes within the transmitted symbol duration, while slow fading implies that 
the channel is approximately constant within a symbol duration. The distinction 
between slow and fast fading has a profound impact on the choice of modulation, 
frequency of pilot symbols, and so on.
2.2.4.3  Impact of the MS Location on Small-Scale Fading
The channel also varies in the spatial domain due to the dependency of amplitudes, 
phases, and time delays on the physical location. This is important for multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO) systems, which deploy several transmit and receive 
antennas. A good measure of channel spatial selectivity is given by the channel 
coherence distance. The coherence distance depends on the environment where 
some heuristics suggest that it is inversely proportional to the angular spread of the 
incoming/outgoing signal. The system is said to undergo spatially nonselective fad-
ing if antenna spacing is smaller than the coherence distance and spatially selective 
otherwise. The distinction between selective and nonselective spatial fading has an 
important impact on the performance of MIMO systems, where a high correlation 
between antenna elements incurs significant performance losses. 
2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in F-to-M 
Cellular Radio Channels
Propagation modeling can be done using ray-tracing tools, which determine the 
field behavior for a deterministically predefined scenario. However, when the num-
ber of multipath components is large, or when the geometry and dielectric proper-
ties of the propagation environment are unknown, this approach is impractical. 
Similarly, if the number of reflectors is very large or the reflector surfaces are not 
smooth, ray-tracing tools become less useful and we typically must use statistical 
approximations to characterize the propagation medium. This section details statis-
tical characterization of multipath propagation in F-to-M cellular radio channels. 
2.3.1  Received Envelope Distribution
Under NLoS propagation conditions, the statistical time–varying nature of the re-
ceived envelope of a flat fading signal, or the envelope of an individual multipath 
component, are commonly described by the Rayleigh distribution, whose proba-
bility density function (pdf) is given by
	
2
2
2
( )
exp
2
x
x
p x
σ
σ
ì
ü
ï
ï
=
-
í
ý
ï
ï
î
þ

(2.8)
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
21

22	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
where s is the root mean square (rms) value of the received voltage signal and s 2 is 
the time-average power of the received signal. 
When a specular component (i.e., LoS or a strong reflected path) also arrives at 
the receiver, the fading is described by a Rician distribution, whose pdf is 
	
2
2
0
2
2
2
( )
exp
2
x
x
A
Ax
p x
I
σ
σ
σ
ì
ü
+
ï
ï
æ
ö
=
-
í
ý
ç
÷
è
ø
ï
ï
î
þ

(2.9)
where parameter A denotes the peak amplitude of the dominant signal and I0(×) is 
the modified Bessel function of the first kind and zero-order. Note that the Rayleigh 
distribution is a special case of the Ricean distribution, so the Ricean distribution 
is often described in terms of a parameter K = A2/(2s 2) (i.e., K is the ratio between 
the deterministic signal power and the variance of the multipath). When K = 0, the 
channel exhibits Rayleigh fading; when K = ¥, the channel does not exhibit any 
fading at all; and when 0 < K < ¥, the channel exhibits Ricean fading.
2.3.2  Clarke’s Model for F-to-M Frequency Flat Multipath Fading Channels
Clarke [8] was the first to propose a channel model for NLoS F-to-M frequency 
flat multipath fading channels based on the statistical characteristics of the electro-
magnetic fields of the received signal. The model assumes a fixed transmitter with 
a vertically polarized antenna. The field incident on the mobile antenna is assumed 
to consist of N plane waves propagating in x-y plane. Each plane wave has random 
phase and random azimuth angle of arrival, and all waves have equal average am-
plitudes. It should be noted that the equal average amplitude assumption is based 
on the fact that, in the absence of a direct line-of-sight path, the scattered com-
ponents arriving at a receiver will experience similar attenuation over small-scale 
distances.
Figure 2.5 illustrates a plane wave incident on a MS traveling with a velocity u 
in the x direction. The angle of arrival is measured in the x-y plane with respect to 
the direction of motion. Every wave that is incident on the MS undergoes a Doppler 
shift due to the motion of the receiver and arrives at the receiver at the same time. 
Note that no variation in delay due to multipath is assumed in this model—this is a 
consequence of the frequency flat fading assumption. For the nth wave arriving at 
an angle an relative to the x-axis, the Doppler shift in Hertz is given by 
	
cos
cos
n
n
d
n
v
f
f
α
α
λ
=
=

(2.10)
where fd is the maximum Doppler frequency in Hertz, λ is the carrier wavelength, 
and u is the speed of the MS. The angle of arrival, an, depends on the scattering 
environment and the antenna radiation pattern.
The vertically polarized plane waves arriving at the mobile have electric and 
magnetic field components given by
	
0
1
( )
cos(2
2
)
N
z
n
c
n
n
n
E t
E
C
f t
f t
π
π
φ
=
=
+
+
å

(2.11)

	
0
1
( )
sin
cos(2
2
)
N
x
n
n
c
n
n
n
E
H t
C
f t
f t
α
p
p
φ
η
=
= -
+
+
å

(2.12)
	
0
1
( )
cos
cos(2
2
)
N
y
n
n
c
n
n
n
E
H t
C
f t
f t
α
p
p
φ
η
=
= -
+
+
å

(2.13)
where E0 is the real amplitude of local average E-field (E0 is assumed to be con-
stant), Cn is a real random variable representing the amplitude of individual waves, 
h is the intrinsic impedance of free space (377W), and fc is the carrier frequency. The 
random phase of the nth arriving component is denoted by fn. 
The amplitudes of the E- and H-field are normalized such that the ensemble 
average of the Cn ’s is given by
	
2
1
[
]
1
N
n
n
E C
=
=
å

(2.14)
Since the Doppler shift is very small when compared to the carrier frequency, 
the three field components may be modeled as narrowband random processes with 
mutually independent random variables Cn, an, and fn. If N is sufficiently large, the 
three components Ez, Hx, and Hy can be approximated as Gaussian random variables 
(according to the central limit theorem [4]). The phase angles fn are assumed to have 
a uniform probability density function (pdf) on the interval (0, 2p]. Based on the 
analysis in [9], the E-field can be expressed in an in-phase and quadrature form as
	
( )
( )cos(2
)
( )sin(2
)
z
i
c
q
c
E t
h t
f t
h t
f t
p
p
=
-

(2.15)
Figure 2.5  Illustration of plane wave arriving at the MS at random angle an.
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
23

24	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
where
	
0
1
( )
cos(2
)
N
i
n
n
n
n
h t
E
C
f t
p
φ
=
=
+
å

(2.16)
and
	
0
1
( )
sin(2
)
N
q
n
n
n
n
h t
E
C
f t
p
φ
=
=
+
å

(2.17)
Both hi(t) and hq(t) are Gaussian random processes which are denoted as hi and 
hq, respectively, at any time t. Then, hi and hq are uncorrelated zero-mean Gaussian 
random variables with an equal variance given by 
	
2
2
2
2
0
[
]
[
]
[
]
2
q
z
i
E h
E h
E E
E
=
=
=
/ 
(2.18)
where E[×] denotes the ensemble average.
The envelope of the received E-field is given by
	
( )
z
E t
+
2
2
=
i
q
h
h 
(2.19)
and has a Rayleigh distribution with the time-average power of the received signal 
equal to 
2
2
0 /2
E
σ
=
.
In Section 2.2.3, we noted that the multipath channel is generally modeled as 
a linear time-variant filter with low-pass impulse response in (2.7). The Clarke’s 
model can be related to this general channel model by characterizing flat frequency 
fading as the transmission of an unmodulated carrier. Then, ŝ(t) becomes 1 in (2.5), 
and the received pass-band signal in (2.6) obtains the quadrature form as in (2.15). 
Then, the multipath channel has the complex baseband impulse response 
	
(2
)
0
1
ˆ
ˆ
( , )
( ( )
( )) (
)
(
)
n
n
N
j
f t
i
q
n
n
h t
h t
jh t
E
C e
p
φ
τ
δ τ
τ
δ τ τ
+
=
=
+
-
=
-
å

(2.20)
where all time delays tn are equal to ˆτ due to flat frequency fading.
In the presence of a specular component, (i.e., LoS or a strong reflected path), 
the complex baseband impulse response becomes a superposition of a strong specu-
lar component and scattered components in (2.20). To account for a specular com-
ponent, the Clarke’s model needs to be modified as follows
	
0
0
0
(2
cos
)
(2
)
1
( )
1
1
d
n
N
j
f t
j
f t
n
n
n
E
K
E
h t
e
C e
K
K
p
α
p
φ
+
=
=
+
+
+ å

(2.21)
where K is the ratio of the received specular to scattered power (i.e., Ricean factor) 
and a0 is the angle of arrival of the specular component.
2.3.3  Correlation Functions and Doppler Power Spectra for Isotropic 
Scattering Channels
The correlation function and the Doppler spectrum are important statistics that 
characterize temporal selectivity of a communication system. As pointed out in Sec-
tion 1.2.2, these statistics enable the system designer to make informed decisions 

when choosing modulation, interleaving, and coding schemes at the transmitting 
end and the type of channel estimator and decoder at the receiving end. 
Assuming that the received pass-band signal r(t) is wide sense stationary (WSS),2 
the autocorrelation of r(t) is 
	
h h
c
h h
c
R
f
R
f
τ
π τ
τ
π
τ
( ) (
) cos(2
)]
[
( ) (
)]sin(2
)
h t h t
f
h t h t
fc
τ
π τ
τ
τ
+
-
+
π
[
]
E[
]
= E
E
=
( )
( ) (
)
( )cos(2
)
( )sin(2
)
i i
q i
rr
i
i
c
q
i
R
τ
τ
=
-
r t r t +

(2.22)
where
	
( )
( )
i i
q q
h h
h h
R
R
τ
τ
=

(2.23)
	
( )
( )
i q
i
q
h h
h h
R
−R
τ
τ
=

(2.24)
It is reasonable to assume that the phases fn and fm are independent for m ¹ n since 
their associated delays and Doppler shifts are independent. Furthermore, since the 
phases are uniformly distributed over [0, 2p), the autocorrelation 
( )
i i
h h
R
τ  can be 
obtained as follows:
	
2
0
( )
E
[
( )
(
)]
E
[cos(2
cos
)]
2
i i
n
n
h h
i
i
d
n
R
h t h t
E
f
τ α
α
τ
τ
π
τ
α
,
=
+
=
 
(2.25)
Similarly, the cross-correlation 
( )
i q
h h
R
τ  is 
	
2
0
( )
E
[
( )
(
)]
E
[sin(2
cos
)]
2
i q
n
n
h h
i
q
d
n
R
h t h t
E
f
τ α
α
τ
τ
π
τ
α
,
=
+
=
 
(2.26)
To evaluate the expectations in (2.25) and (2.26), statistical channel models assume 
a particular distribution of incident power on the receiver antenna p(a). Recall 
from Section 2.3.2 that Clarke’s two-dimensional (2-D) isotropic scattering model 
assumes that the plane waves propagate in the x-y plane and arrive at the MS from 
all directions with equal probability—that is, p(a) = 1/(2p), for a Î [0, 2p) with an 
isotropic receiver antenna with gain G(a) = 1. Then, the expectation in (2.25) can 
be obtained as follows: 
	
2
0
2
0
2
0
0
2
0
0
( )
cos(2
cos ) ( ) ( )
2
1
cos(2
cos )
2 2
1
cos(2
sin )
2
(2
)
2
i i
h h
d
d
d
d
E
R
f
p
G
d
E
f
d
E
f
d
E
J
f
π
π
π
π
π
τ
π
τ
α
α
α
α
π
τ
α
α
π
π
τ
α
α
π
π
τ
-
-
=
=
=
=
ò
ò
ò

(2.27)
where J0(×) is the zeroth-order Bessel function of the first kind.
    2.	
See Section 2.3.7 for details on WSS.
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
25

26	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
Similarly, the cross-correlation function for 2-D isotropic scattering and an iso-
tropic antenna with G(a) = 1 becomes 
	
2
0
1
( )
sin(2
cos )
2 2
0
i q
h h
d
E
R
f
d
π
π
τ
p
τ
α
α
π
-
=
=
ò

(2.28)
This result implies that hi(t) and hq(t) are uncorrelated functions. Furthermore, 
because hi and hq are Gaussian random variables, it means that they are also in-
dependent random processes. However, note that the fact that hi(t) and hq(t) are 
independent is a direct result of the symmetry of the 2-D isotropic scattering envi-
ronment and the isotropic antenna gain pattern. In case of an un-isotropic scatter-
ing environment, hi(t) and hq(t) may not be independent random processes. 
The autocorrelation of the complex baseband impulse response h(t) = hi(t) + 
jhq(t) can be written as 
	
1
( )
E[
( ) (
)]
( )
( )
2
i i
i q
hh
h h
h h
R
h t h t
R
jR
τ
τ
τ
τ
*
=
+
=
+

(2.29)
The autocorrelation function of the complex baseband impulse response in the pres-
ence of both a strong specular component and a scatter component can be obtained 
by substituting (2.21) into (2.29) and evaluating the expectation, and the result is 
	
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1
( )
(2
)
cos(2
cos
)
1 2
1 2
sin(2
cos
)
1 2
hh
d
d
d
E
E
K
R
J
f
f
K
K
E
K
j
f
K
τ
π
τ
π
τ
α
π
τ
α
=
+
+
+
+
+

(2.30)
The power spectral density (psd) of hi(t) and hq(t) is the Fourier transform of 
( )
i i
h h
R
τ  or 
( )
q q
h h
R
τ . For autocorrelation in (2.27), the corresponding psd is ([10], 
eq. 6.6711.7) 
	
2
0
2
( )
[
( )]
1
2
1 (
)
0
otherwise
i i
i i
d
d
h h
h h
d
S
f
R
E
f
f
f
f f
τ
π
=
ì
|
| £
ï
-
/
= í
ïî
F

(2.31)
The power spectral density of the complex impulse response h(t) = hi(t) + jhq(t) is 
	
( )
( )
( )
i i
i q
hh
h h
h h
S
f
S
f
jS
f
=
+

(2.32)
Often, Shh ( f ) is called the Doppler power spectrum. For 2-D isotropic scattering and 
isotropic antennae, 
( )
0
i q
h h
R
τ =
 and the Doppler power spectrum is 
( )
( )
i i
hh
h h
S
f
S
f
=
 
(which is real and even). If both a specular component and a scattered component 
are present, the Doppler power spectrum becomes 

	
2
2
0
0
2
0
1
1
(
cos
)
2
2
1
1
1 (
)
( )
0
otherwise
d
d
d
d
hh
E
E
K
f
f
f
f
f
K
K
f f
S
f
δ
α
π
ì
+
-
|
| £
ï
+
+
-
/
= í
ïî
 
(2.33)
The pass-band Doppler power spectrum of the received pass-band signal r(t) 
can be obtained from the baseband Doppler power spectrum as follows 
	
1
( )
[
(
)
(
)]
2
rr
hh
c
hh
c
S
f
S
f
f
S
f
f
=
-
+
- -

(2.34)
For 2-D isotropic scattering and isotropic antennae, the pass-band Doppler 
poer spectrum becomes
	
2
0
2
1
4
( )
1
((
)/
)
0
otherwise
c
d
d
rr
c
d
E
f
f
f
f
S
f
f
f
f
π
ì
-
£
ï
= í
-
-
ï
î
	
(2.35)
2.3.4  Correlation Functions and Doppler Power Spectrum for Nonisotropic 
Scattering Channels
One of the main assumptions in the Clarke’s channel model is that scattering is isotro­
pic (i.e., angles of arrival of multipath components at the MS are uniformly distributed). 
However, it has been argued [11–15] and experimentally demonstrated [16–22] that 
scattering encountered in many environments, such as suburban area, urban area be-
tween buildings, street canyons, and highways, is nonisotropic, resulting in a nonuni-
form probability density function (pdf) for angles of arrival (AoA) at the MS. As has 
been discussed in [21], the assumption of a uniform pdf for the AOAs introduces small 
errors on the first-order statistics of the received signal, but a significant error on the 
second-order statistics, like correlation functions and level crossing rates. 
In the literature, several different scatterer distributions, such as quadratic pdf 
[23], cosine pdf [24], Laplace and Gaussian pdfs [25], and von Mises pdf [26], 
have been used to characterize a nonuniform scattering environment. In addition 
to showing good fit to measurements [27], the von Mises pdf approximates many 
of the other distributions (e.g., uniform, sinusoid, and Gaussian) and, in contrast to 
most other distributions, leads to closed-form solutions for many useful statistics. 
Hence, this distribution is often used to characterize nonisotropic scattering. 
The von Mises pdf was introduced by R. von Mises in 1918 to study the devia-
tions of measured atomic weights from integral values [28]. This pdf plays a promi-
nent role in statistical modeling and analysis of angular variables [24]. 
The von Mises pdf is defined as [28] 
	
0
1
( )
exp[ cos(
)]
2
( )
p
k
I k
a
α - m
π

 
(2.36)
where α Î [– p, p) represents AoAs, I0(∙) is the zeroth-order modified Bessel function 
of the first kind, μ Î [– p, p) is the mean angle at which the scatterers are distributed, 
and k controls the spread of scatterers around the mean. When k = 0, p(α) = 1/(2p) is 
a uniform distribution yielding 2-D isotropic scattering. As k increases, the scatterers 
become more clustered around angle μ and the scattering becomes increasingly noniso-
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
27

28	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
tropic. For small k, this function approximates the cardioid pdf [29], which is similar to 
the cosine pdf [24], while for large k it resembles a Gaussian pdf with mean μ and stan-
dard deviation 1
k
/
 [29]. In general, the von Mises pdf can approximate the wrapped 
Gaussian pdf [29]. It is interesting to note that the von Mises pdf appears in a number 
of other applications in telecommunications. For example, this pdf is referred to as the 
Tikhonov pdf in partially coherent communications [30] and has been used in phase-
locked loop–related problems [31]. It also has been shown that the phase of a sine wave 
with Gaussian noise for large signal to noise ratios has a von Mises pdf [32]. 
Assuming that the received band-pass signal r(t) is wide sense stationary, the 
autocorrelation of r(t) can be evaluated starting from (2.22), as in Section 2.3.3. By 
assuming that the phases fn and fm are independent for m ¹ n and uniformly distrib-
uted over [0, 2p), the autocorrelation 
( )
i i
h h
R
τ  and the cross-correlation 
( )
i q
h h
R
τ  can 
be written as in (2.25) and (2.26), respectively. To evaluate the expectations in (2.25) 
and (2.26), the nonisotropic scattering model assumes that the plane waves propagate 
in the x-y plane and arrive at the MS from all directions with nonequal probability 
(i.e., the von Mises pdf describes the angles of arrival). To simplify calculations, the 
nonisotropic scattering model still assumes an isotropic receiver antenna with gain 
G(α)=1. Then, the autocorrelation function in (2.25) can be calculated as follows: 
	
2
0
2
0
0
( )
cos(2
cos ) ( ) ( )
2
1
cos(2
cos )exp( cos(
))
2 2
( )
i i
h h
d
d
E
R
f
p
G
d
E
f
k
d
I k
π
−π
π
−π
τ =
π τ
α
α
α
α
=
π
τ
α
α - µ
α
π
ò
ò

(2.37)
Using the quality 
sin( )
cos( )
2
2
0
2
a
c
b
c
e
dc
I
a
b
π
æ
ö
+
ç
÷
è
ø
−π
=
π
+
ò
 [10, eq. 3.338-4], the auto­
correlation 
( )
i i
h h
R
τ  becomes 
	
2
2
2 2
2
0
0
0
4
4
cos
( )
2
( )
d
d
i i
h h
I
k
f
j
kf
E
R
I k
æ
ö
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
ì
ü
- π
τ +
π
τ
µ
ï
ï
τ =
Â í
ý
ï
ï
î
þ

(2.38)
where Â{×} denotes the real part operation. For k = 0, the von Mises pdf becomes 
the uniform pdf and the autocorrelation function in (2.38) becomes identical to the 
autocorrelation function in (2.25). To illustrate how the autocorrelation function 
( )
i i
h h
R
τ  changes as the spread of scatterers k changes, Figure 2.6 plots the normal-
ized autocorrelation function 
2
0
( ) (
2)
i i
h h
R
E
τ /
/
 against the normalized time delay fdt 
for several values of k Î {0,1,2,5,10} and m = 0°.
Similarly, the cross-correlation function for 2-D nonisotropic scattering and an 
isotropic antenna with G(α) = 1 is 
	
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
4
4
cos
( )
2
( )
d
d
i q
h h
I
k
f
j
kf
E
R
I k
π
τ
π
τ
µ
τ
æ
ö
ç
÷
è
ø
ì
ü
-
+
ï
ï
=
Á í
ý
ï
ï
î
þ

(2.39)
where Á{×} denotes the imaginary part operation. Note that the cross-correlation 
function is not zero in nonisotropic scattering channels. 
The autocorrelation of the complex impulse response h(t) = hi(t) + jhq(t) can be 
obtained as 

	
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
1
( )
E[
( ) (
)]
( )
( )
2
4
4
cos
2
( )
i i
i q
d
d
hh
h h
h h
R
h t h t
R
jR
I
k
f
j
kf
E
I k
τ
τ
τ
τ
π
τ
π
τ
µ
æ
ö
ç
÷
è
ø
*
=
+
=
+
-
+
=

(2.40)
The autocorrelation function of the complex impulse response in the presence of 
both specular and scattered components can be obtained by substituting (2.21) into 
(2.40) and evaluating the expectation, and the result is [26] 
	
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
4
4
cos
1
( )
2
( )
1
exp( 2
cos(
))
2
1
d
d
hh
d
I
k
f
j
kf
E
R
I k
K
E
K
j
f
K
π
τ
π
τ
µ
τ
π
τ
α
æ
ö
ç
÷
è
ø
-
+
=
+
+
+

(2.41)
The Doppler power spectrum of the complex impulse response h(t) = hi(t) + jhq(t) can 
be obtained by calculating Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function of the 
complex impulse response in (2.41). The result of this Fourier transform is [26] 
	
(
)
2
0
0
2
2
0
2
0
exp(
cos
)cosh
sin
1
(
)
1
( )
( )
1 2
1 (
)
(
cos
)
2
1
d
d
d
d
hh
d
d
kf
f
k
f f
E
S
f
I k
K
f
f f
E
K
f
f
f
f
K
µ
µ
π
δ
α
/
-
/
=
+
-
/
+
-
, |
|£
+

(2.42)
Figure 2.6  The normalized autocorrelation function 
2
0
( ) (
2)
i i
h h
R
E
τ /
/
 as a function of the normalized 
time delay wdt for k Î {0,1,2,5,10}.
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
29

30	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
where cosh (∙) is the hyperbolic cosine. For k = 0, this Doppler power spectrum 
reduces to (2.33) (i.e., the Doppler power spectrum for the Clarke’s 2-D isotropic 
scattering). Figure 2.7 illustrates the effect spread of scatterers k has on the normal-
ized Doppler power spectrum 
2
0
( ) (
(2
))
hh
d
S
f
E
f
/
/
π
 for m = 0° and K = 0. 
2.3.5  Second-Order Statistics—Level Crossing Rates and Fade Durations
Two important second-order statistics associated with envelope fading are the level 
crossing rate (how often the envelope crosses a specified level) and the average fade 
duration (how long the envelope remains below a specified level). These quanti-
ties are second-order statistics because they are affected not only by the scattering 
environment but also by the velocity of the MS. These statistics are very useful for 
designing error control codes and diversity schemes in communication systems, 
because they relate the rate of change of the received signal over time to the signal 
level and velocity of the MS. 
2.3.5.1  Envelope Level Crossing Rate
The level crossing rate (LCR), L(R), is defined as the rate at which the signal enve-
lope crosses level R in the positive (or negative) direction and can be written as [4] 
	
0
( )
(
)
L R
p
R
d
¥
β,β
=
β×
,β
β
ò




 

(2.43)
Figure 2.7  The normalized Doppler power spectrum as a function of the normalized Doppler fre-
quency f/fd for k Î {0,1,2}. 

where β = |h(t)| is the envelope level, b
.
 = |h
.
(t)| is the envelope slope, 
(
)
p
R
β,β
,β

  
is the joint pdf of the envelope level and the envelope slope, and |∙| denotes the 
absolute value operation. To evaluate the LCR, we need to know the pdf of the 
fading envelope b  
 
= |h(t)|, the pdf of the envelope slope b
.
 = |h
.
(t)|, and the joint pdf  
(
)
p
R
β,β
,β

 . 
For 2-D isotropic scattering channels that have both specular and scattered 
components, the joint pdf (
)
p β,β  can be separated into a product of a Ricean pdf  
p|h (t)|(b) and a Gaussian pdf 
( )( )
h t
p
β
|
|

 , because the in-phase and quadrature compo-
nents of the complex faded envelope h(t) are uncorrelated. Then, the joint pdf (
)
p β,β  
can be written as [4] 
	
2
2
2
0
2
0
0
0
(
(
1))
1
1
(
)
exp
exp
2
2
2
( )
( )
K
K K
K
p
I
b
b
b
b
b
p
p
β
β
β
β
β β
β
β
æ
ö
æ
ö
+ /
+
æ
ö
ç
÷
+
,
=
-
×
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
π
è
ø
ç
÷
è
ø
=
×




(2.44)
where K denotes the Rice factor (ratio of specular to scatter received power), the 
parameters b0 and b2 are defined as [9] 
	
2
2
0
0
E [
( ) ]
E [
( ) ]
( )
i
q
hh
b
h t
h t
R
α
α
τ
τ | =
=
=


(2.45)
	
2
2
2
2
2
|
0
( )
E [ ( ) ]
E [
( ) ]
hh
i
q
d R
b
t
t
h
h
d
α
α
τ
τ
τ
=
=
= -




(2.46)
( )
i t
h
 and 
( )
q t
h
 denote the first derivative of hi(t) and hq(t) with respect to time t, 
and Rhh(t) denotes the autocorrelation function of the complex low-pass impulse 
response defined in (2.29). For 2-D isotropic scattering, the parameters b0 and b2 
simplify to 
	
2
0
0
1
2
1
E
b
K
=
+

(2.47)
	
2
0
2
(2
)
2
d
b
f
b
π
=

(2.48)
Substituting the joint pdf in (2.44) into (2.43) gives the envelope level crossing 
rate [4] 
	
2
(
1)
0
( )
2 (
1)
2
(
1)
K
K
d
L R
K
f
e
I
K K
-
-
+ ρ
æ
ö
è
ø
=
π
+
ρ
ρ
+

(2.49)
where 
	
rms
2
0
R
R
R
E
ρ =
=

(2.50)
and 
2
rms
0
R
E

 is the root mean square of the envelope level. For Rayleigh fading 
(K = 0) and isotropic scattering, the previous expression simplifies to 
	
2
( )
2
d
L R
f
e-r
=
π
ρ

(2.51)
For 2-D nonisotropic scattering channels that have both specular and scattered 
components, and have correlated in-phase and quadrature components of the  
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
31

32	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
complex faded envelope h(t), the joint pdf p(b, b
.
) cannot be separated into the 
product of a pdf p|h(t)| (b) and a pdf p|h.(t)| (b
.
). Instead, the joint pdf p(b, b
.
) for the 
complex faded envelope h(t) with the correlated in-phase and quadrature compo-
nents is calculated in [33] and can be written as 
	
[
2
 sin ]
β
χξδ
θ
2
2
2
1
(
) (2
)
0
2
0
3 2
0
2
(
)cos
0
(
)
(2 )
b
b
e
p
e
e
d
b
β
δ
χ
π
βδ
θ
χ
β
β β
θ
π
-
+
/
/
-
-
/
,
=
ò



(2.52)
where 
(
1)
K K
δ =
/
+
, 
2
2
0
1
b
b b
χ =
-
/
, 
0
1
0
(2
cos
)
2
df
b b
ξ =
π
α -
/
/
c, the parameters 
b0, b1, and b2 are 
	
2
2
0
b
E[ ( ) ]
E[
( ) ]
i
q
h t
h t
=

 
(2.53)
	
1
b
E[ ( )
( )]
E[
( ) ( )]
i
q
q
i
h t
t
h t
t
h
h
=



 
(2.54)
	
2
2
2
b
E[ ( ) ]
E[
( ) ]
i
q
t
t
h
h
=



 
(2.55)
and ( )
i t
h
 and 
( )
q t
h
 denote the first derivative of hi(t) and hq(t) with respect to time 
t. When 2-D nonisotropic scattering is characterized using the von Mises pdf, the 
parameters b0, b1, and b2 can be evaluated and become 
	
2
0
0
1
2
1
E
b
K
=
+  

(2.56)
	
1
0
1
0 2
cos( ) ( )
( )
df
I k
b
b
I k
π
µ
=

(2.57)
	
2
2
0
2
0
2
0
2
[ ( ) cos(2 ) ( )]
( )
df
I k
I k
b
b
I k
π
 µ
+
=
 

(2.58)
where I1(∙) and I2(∙) denote the first- and the second-order modified Bessel func-
tion of the first kind, respectively. By substituting (2.52) into (2.43) and solving 
the integral, the LCR for LoS conditions (Ricean fading, correlated in-phase and 
quadrature components) becomes [33] 
	
é
ù
´
+
2
2
0
2
/ 2
(
)/(2
)
3 2
0
0
0
(
sin )
2
( )
cosh
cos
sin
erf(
sin )
R
b
R
R
L R
e
b
b
e
d
π
δ
ξδ
θ
χ
δ
θ
π
π ξδ
θ
ξδ
θ
θ
-
+
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
è
ø
ê
ú
ë
û
ò

(2.59)
where cosh(∙) is the hyperbolic cosine function and erf(∙) is the error function. The 
LCR for NLoS conditions can be obtained from (2.59) by setting K = 0; that is
	
2
2
2
1
2
0
0
( )
R
e
b
R
b
L R
b
b
-
π
=
-
 

(2.60)
2.3.5.2  Average Envelope Fade Duration
Another quantity of interest is the average duration that the envelope level remains 
below a specified level R. Although the pdf of the envelope fade duration is gener-
ally unknown, the average fade duration can still be calculated. Consider a very 

long time interval of length T and let ti be the duration of the ith fade below the 
level R. The probability of the received envelope level being less than R is 
	
1
(
)
i
i
P
R
t
T
β £
=
å
 
(2.61)
The average envelope fade duration is equal to
	
1
(
)
( )
( )
( )
i
i
P
R
T R
t
TL R
L R
β £
=
=
å

(2.62)
where L(R) denotes the envelope level crossing rate. If the envelope has the Rice 
distribution in (2.9), then
	
2
0
(
)
( )
1
2
2(
1)
R
P
R
p
d
Q
K
K
R
β
β
β
æ
ö
ç
÷
è
ø
£
=
=
-
,
+
ò

(2.63)
where Q(a, b) is the Marcum Q function. When a LoS component is present, the 
average envelope fade duration becomes [4] 
	
2
1–
2
2(
1)
( )=
( )
Q
K
K
R
L R
é
ê
ë
,
+
T R
ù
ú
û
 

(2.64)
For NLoS conditions, the average envelope fade duration in (2.64) simplifies to 
	
2
1
( )
( )
R
e
T R
L R
-
-
=
 
(2.65)
Note that both the level crossing rate and average fade duration depend on the 
velocity of the MS. Also note that very deep fades tend to occur infrequently and 
do not last very long. For example, at v = 60 miles/h and fc = 900 MHz, the maxi-
mum Doppler frequency is fd = 88 Hz [4]. Therefore, with isotropic scattering and 
Rayleigh fading (K = 0), there are L(R) = 81 fade/s at R = 0 dB with an average fade 
duration of 7.8 ms. On the other hand, at R = –20 dB, there are only 2.2 fades/s 
with an average fade duration of 45 ms. 
2.3.6  Modeling of F-to-M Frequency-Selective Multipath Fading Channels
Up to this point, we have considered channel models that are appropriate for narro­w­
band transmission, where the inverse signal bandwidth is much greater than the 
time spread of the propagation path delays. Such a channel introduces very little 
or no distortion into the received signal and is said to exhibit flat fading. For digi-
tal communication systems, this means that the duration of a modulated symbol 
is much greater than the time spread of the propagation path delays. Under this 
condition, all frequencies in the transmitted signal will experience the same random 
attenuation and phase shift due to multipath fading. 
On the other hand, if the range in the propagation path delays is large com-
pared to the inverse signal bandwidth, then the frequency components in the trans-
mitted signal will experience different phase shifts along the different paths. As 
differences between path delays become large, even closely separated frequencies 
in the transmitted signal can experience significantly different phase shifts. Under 
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
33

34	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
this condition, the channel introduces amplitude and phase distortion in the signal 
waveform. Such a channel is said to exhibit frequency-selective fading. 
For frequency-selective fading, multipath-fading channels are modeled as time-
varying in addition to being time-dispersive. The input delay-spread function func-
tion h(t,t) is defined as the response of the channel at time t to a unit impulse at time 
t – t. This function is useful to analyze how rapidly the channel varies in time and 
quantify how dispersive the channel is. 
If we take the Fourier transform of h(t, t) with respect to time t, we can quantify 
how much the channel varies over time (delay). Analytically, the delay Doppler-
spread function function U(v, t) is defined as [35] 
	
2
(
)
[ (
)]
(
)
j
t
t
U
h t
h t
e
dt
πν
ν τ
τ
τ
¥
-
-¥
,
=
,
=
,
ò
F
 

(2.66)
where v is the Doppler frequency in hertz. This function provides a measure of 
the scattering amplitude of the channel in terms of the time delay t and Doppler 
frequency v. 
On the other hand, if we take the Fourier transform of h(t, t) with respect to 
delay t, we can quantify how dispersive the channel is at a given time. Analytically, 
the time-variant transfer function T(t, f) is defined as 
	
2
( , )
[ ( , )]
( , )
j
f
T t f
h t
h t
e
d
¥
-
π τ
τ
-¥
=
τ
=
τ
τ
ò
F
 

(2.67)
This function characterizes the frequency selectivity of the channel at a given instant 
in time. 
Finally, the output Doppler-spread function is obtained by taking the double 
Fourier transform of both time and delay simultaneously; that is, 
	
2
2
,
( , )
[ ( , )]
( , )
j
vt
j
f
t
G v f
h t
h t
e
e
dtd
¥
¥
-
π
-
π t
τ
-¥ -¥
=
τ =
τ
τ
ò ò
F

(2.68)
This function explicitly shows the effect of Doppler shift or spectral broadening 
on the output spectrum. Note that these four functions are related to each other 
through Fourier transform pairs. 
2.3.7  Correlation Functions for F-to-M Frequency-Selective  
Multipath Fading Channels
Here we note that the channel impulse response h(t,t) = hi(t,t) + jhq(t,t) can be 
modeled as a complex Gaussian random process, where the in-phase and quadra-
ture components (i.e., hi(t,t) and hq(t,t)) are correlated Gaussian random processes. 
Hence, all of the transmission functions defined in Section 2.3.6 are random pro-
cesses. A thorough characterization of a channel requires knowledge of the joint 
pdf of all the transmission functions. However, this is a difficult task, and a more 
reasonable approach is to obtain statistical correlation functions for the individual 
transmission functions. If the underlying process is Gaussian, then a complete sta-
tistical description is provided by the means and autocorrelation functions. Here, 
we assume zero-mean Gaussian random processes so that only the autocorrelation 

functions are of interest. Since there are four transmission functions, there are four 
autocorrelation functions that can be defined as follows [4]: 
	
1
(
)
E[ (
) *(
)]
2
h
R t s
h t
h
s
τ η
τ
η
, ; ,
=
,
,

(2.69)
	
1
(
)
E[ (
)
*(
)]
2
U
R
U
U
τ η ν µ
τ ν
η µ
, ; ,
=
,
,

(2.70)
	
1
(
)
E[ (
) *(
)]
2
T
R
f m t s
T f t T
m s
,
; ,
=
,
,

(2.71)
	
1
(
)
E[ (
)
*(
)]
2
G
R
f m
G f
G
m
ν µ
ν
µ
,
; ,
=
,
,

(2.72)
where (×)* denotes the complex conjugate operation. Note that these autocorrela-
tion functions are related to each other through double Fourier transform pairs. 
The channel is said to be wide sense stationary if the fading statistics remain con-
stant over short periods of time. This implies that the channel correlation functions 
depend on the time variables t and s only through the time difference D t = s – t. 
Hence for WSS channels, the correlation functions become 
	
(
)
(
)
h
h
R t t
t
R
t
τ η
τ η
, + D ; ,
=
D ; ,

(2.73)
	
(
)
(
) (
)
U
U
R
τ η ν µ
ψ
τ η ν δ ν
µ
, ; ,
=
, ;
-

(2.74)
	
(
)
(
)
T
T
R
f m t t
t
R
f m
t
,
; , + D
=
,
;D 
(2.75)
	
(
)
(
) (
)
G
G
R
f m
f m
ν µ
ψ
ν δ ν
µ
,
; ,
=
,
;
-

(2.76)
where
	
2
( , ; )
(
; , )
j
t
U
h
R
t
e
d t
¥
-
πnD
-¥
ψ
τ η ν =
D τ η
D
ò

(2.77)
	
2
( ,
; )
( ,
;
)
j
t
G
T
f m
R
f m
t e
d t
¥
-
πνD
-¥
ψ
ν =
D
D
ò

(2.78)
are Fourier transform pairs. It can be shown that WSS channels give rise scattering 
with uncorrelated Doppler shifts. This behavior suggests that signal components 
with different Doppler shifts have uncorrelated attenuations and phase shifts. 
The channel is said to exhibit uncorrelated scattering if the contributions from 
elemental scatterers corresponding to different delays are uncorrelated. This implies 
that the channel correlation functions depend on the frequency variables f and m 
only through the frequency difference Df = m – f [36]. Hence, for US channels, the 
correlation functions become 
	
(
)
(
) (
)
h
h
R t s
t s
τ η
ψ
τ δ η
τ
, ; ,
=
, ;
-

(2.79)
	
(
)
(
) (
)
U
U
R
τ η ν µ
ψ
τ ν µ δ η
τ
, ; ,
=
; ,
-

(2.80)
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
35

36	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
	
(
)
(
)
T
T
R
f f
f t s
R
f t s
,
+ D ; ,
=
D ; ,

(2.81)
	
(
)
(
)
G
G
R
f f
f
R
f
ν µ
ν µ
,
+ D ; ,
=
D ; ,

(2.82)
where
	
2
(
)
(
) j
f
h
T
t s
R
f t s e
d f
¥
πD τ
-¥
ψ
; ,τ =
D ; ,
D
ò

(2.83)
	
(
)
(
)
R
f
e
d f
; ,
=
D ; ,
D
2
j
f
U
G
π
τ
ψ
τ ν µ
ν µ
¥
D
-¥
ò

(2.84)
Wide sense stationary uncorrelated scattering (WSSUS) channels are a very special 
type of multipath-fading channels. These channels display uncorrelated scattering 
in both the time-delay and Doppler shift, and hence reduce to the following simple 
forms: 
	
(
)
(
) (
)
h
h
R t t
t
t
τ η
ψ
τ δ η
τ
, + D ; ,
=
D ;
-

(2.85)
	
(
)
(
) (
) (
)
U
U
R
τ η ν µ
ψ
τ ν δ η
τ δ ν
µ
, ; ,
=
,
-
-

(2.86)
	
(
)
(
)
T
T
R
f f
f t t
t
R
f
t
,
+ D ; , + D
=
D ;D 
(2.87)
	
(
)
(
; ) (
)
G
G
R
f f
f
f
ν µ
ψ
D
ν δ ν
µ
,
+ D ; ,
=
-

(2.88)
Fortunately, many radio channels can be accurately modeled as WSSUS channels.
2.3.8  Channel Characteristic Parameters—Delay Spread, Power Delay Profile, 
and Channel Coherence
In order to evaluate the characteristics of a propagation channel, a set of mea-
sured impulse responses needs to be analyzed. This section presents a number 
of parameters describing different aspects of the radio channel. In general, their 
computation requires the WSSUS assumption. As it is not practically feasible to 
collect a set of statistical channel realizations, we generally assume that the chan-
nel system functions are ergodic. Hence, it is for instance possible to approximate 
the statistical expectation using a temporal (or spatial) average over a set of suc-
cessive measurements. 
A channel’s frequency selectivity is quantified by its span in the delay domain 
(i.e., its delay spread). As the channel’s frequency response becomes more varied, an 
interacting signal will exhibit a broader envelope in the delay domain. In practice, 
delay spread is the result of different propagation delays of received signals from 
reflectors at large distances compared to the LoS path between the BS and MS. 
To introduce the power delay profile, we observe the channel for a short period 
over which it is time-invariant (i.e., h(t,t) does not depend on t and can be expressed 
as h(t)). The power delay profile (PDP) is defined as the envelope of h(t),
	
2
( )
( )
P
h
τ
τ
=

(2.89)

The root means square (RMS) delay spread is related to the statistics of the PDP. 
Specifically, the RMS delay spread 
2
τ
σ  is defined as the second central moment of 
the PDP; that is, 
	
2
2
2
[ ( ) ]
[ ( )]
E P
E P
τ
τ
τ
σ
τ
τ
=
-

(2.90)
where
	
( )
[ ( ) ]
( )
n
n
P
d
E P
P
 d
τ
τ
τ
τ
τ
τ
τ
= ò
ò

(2.91)
The RMS delay spread is a significant parameter for the analysis of the intersymbol 
interference.
Closely related to the RMS delay spread is the concept of coherence bandwidth 
Wc. Coherence bandwidth is inversely proportional to coherence time. The coher-
ence bandwidth is a statistical measure of the bandwidth over which the channel 
exhibits approximately equal gain. In other words, the coherence bandwidth is 
the frequency bandwidth Wc = f1 – f2 within which the frequency autocorrelation 
function crosses a given threshold. For the 90 percent threshold, the coherence 
bandwidth can be approximated from the RMS delay spread as 
	
1
50
c
W
τ
σ
»

(2.92)
In the literature, the coherence bandwidth is most often defined for the 50 percent 
correlation threshold, in which case
	
1
5
c
W
τ
σ
»

(2.93)
A channel’s time variance is qualified by the Doppler spread (i.e., by the span of the 
channel’s Doppler spectrum), because channels that vary faster exhibit a broader 
frequency range in the frequency domain. Similar to the RMS delay spread, the RMS 
Doppler spread 
2
ν
σ  is the second central moment of the Doppler spectrum; that is,
	
2
2
2
E [
]
E [ ( )]
( )
S
S
ν
ν
ν
σ
ν
ν
=
-

(2.94)
where
	
( )
[ ( ) ]
( )
n
n
S
d
E S
S
d
ν
ν
ν
ν
ν
ν
ν
= ò
ò

(2.95)
Closely related to the Doppler spread is the coherence time Tc. The coherence 
time is a statistical measure of the time period over which the channel does not 
change appreciably. Put differently, the channel will affect two signals differently if 
the period between their arrival times exceeds Tc. The coherence time is inversely 
proportional to RMS Doppler spread. In the literature, the following ratio is used 
to estimate Tc: 
	
1
5
c
T
ν
σ
»

(2.96)
 2.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation	
37

38	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
In mobile channels where time–variation can be mainly attributed to movement at 
the transmitter or receiver, the coherence time is often estimated using the maxi-
mum Doppler shift fd; that is,
	
0 423
d
c
T
f
.
»

(2.97)
2.3.9  MIMO F-to-M Cellular Radio Channels
In previous sections, we discussed cases where BS and MS are equipped with one 
antenna each. In the following, we consider the case where BS and MS are equipped 
with multiple antennas, as illustrated in Figure 2.8. 
Wireless communication systems employing multiple antennas at both the BS 
and MS have been shown to offer significant gains over single-antenna systems. 
Often, especially in urban and indoor environments, there is no clear line of sight 
between the BS and MS. Instead, the signal is reflected along multiple paths before 
finally being received. Each of these bounces can introduce phase shifts, time de-
lays, attenuations, and distortions that can destructively interfere with one another 
at the aperture of the receiving antenna. Antenna diversity is especially effective at 
mitigating these multipath situations. This is because multiple antennas provide the 
receiver with several observations of the same signal, as each antenna experiences 
a different interference environment. Thus, if one antenna is experiencing a deep 
fade, it is likely that another has a sufficient signal, providing the overall system 
with a more robust link. 
There are several degrees of freedom in realizing antenna diversity: polarization 
diversity (i.e., uncorrelated fading between different antenna polarizations), spatial 
diversity (i.e., different fading for spaced-apart antennas because that changes the 
direction of the incoming waves), and angular diversity (i.e., directive antenna pat-
terns can be rotated to receive from different directions). Note that more than one 
of these techniques can be deployed together. 
When a system is equipped with multiple antennas at the BS and MS, a MIMO 
channel separates them. To simplify our discussion, the MIMO channel can be 
Transmit antenna 1
Transmit antenna 2
Receive antenna 2
Receive antenna 1
Figure 2.8  A 2 ´ 2 MIMO channel.

viewed as a collection of many, correlated, single-input single-output (SISO) 
channels. The narrowband (frequency-flat) MIMO channel can be described by 
an Lr ´ Lt matrix 
( )
[
( )]
r
t
ij
L
L
t
h t
´
=
H
 of complex faded envelopes, where Lt and Lr 
enote the number of BS and MS antennas, respectively. Similarly, the wideband 
(frequency-selective) MIMO channel can be described by an an Lr ´ Lt matrix 
(
)
[
(
)]
r
t
ij
L
L
t
h t
´
,τ =
,τ
H
 of the input delay-spread functions. 
2.4  Simulators for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
Channel models detailed in Section 2.3 are very useful mathematical tools for un-
derstanding propagation mechanisms and for statistical characterization of chan-
nels. However, these models assume large number of propagation rays, making 
these models impractical for simulators. The following sections describe practical 
simulators for frequency-flat and frequency-selective multipath fading with a small 
number of propagation rays that still match the statistical properties of the channel 
models detailed in Section 2.3. 
2.4.1  Simulation Models for F-to-M Frequency-Flat Multipath Fading Channels
There are several different methods for simulating fading channels. The most ac-
cepted of these methods are filtered noise models [37–40] and sum-of-sinusoids 
(SoS) models [43–46]. The filtered noise models filter Gaussian noise through ap-
propriately designed filters to generate the channel waveform with the desired chan-
nel power spectral density (the Doppler spectrum). The main limitation with this 
approach is that only rational forms of the Doppler spectrum can be produced, 
whereas the Doppler spectrum is typically nonrational [4]. To approximate the 
nonrational Doppler spectrum, a high-order filter is required. Unfortunately, a high-
order filter has a long impulse response, which significantly increases run times 
for software simulation. Furthermore, the Doppler spectrum obtained using this 
method is not bandlimited because filters with sharp stop-bands are difficult to 
implement in practice. On the other hand, the SoS models generate the channel 
waveform by superimposing a finite number of properly selected sinusoids. In con-
trast to filtered noise models, SoS models have low complexity and produce channel 
waveforms that have high accuracy and a perfectly band-limited Doppler spectrum. 
In addition, SoS models can be easily extended to develop space-time correlated 
channel models for MIMO antenna systems. Due to these advantages, the next sec-
tion focuses on SoS models. 
2.4.2  Deterministic and Statistical SoS Simulation Models for F-to-M Frequency-
Flat Multipath Fading Channels
Generally, SoS models can be classified as either deterministic or statistical. Deter-
ministic SoS models have fixed random phases, amplitudes, and Doppler frequen-
cies for all simulation trials. In contrast, statistical SoS models leave at least one of 
the parameter sets (amplitudes, phases, or Doppler frequencies) as random vari-
ables that vary with each simulation trial. The statistical properties of statistical SoS 
 2.4  Simulators for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels	
39

40	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
models also vary for each simulation trial, but converge to the desired properties 
when averaged over a number of simulation trials. A statistical model is said to be 
ergodic if it converges to the desired properties in a single simulation trial. 
Clarke’s reference model described in Section 2.3.2 assumes an infinite number 
of propagation rays, which makes this model impractical for use in simulators. 
Hence, it is desirable to design simulation models with a small number of propaga-
tion paths, while still matching the statistical properties of the Clarke’s model; that 
is, [4] 
	
0
( )
E
(
)
( )
(
)
i q i q
h
h
i q
i q
d
R
h
t
h
t
J
τ
τ
ω τ
/
/
/
/
é
ù
=
+
=
ë
û

(2.98)
	
( )
( )
E
(
)
( )
0
i q
q i
h h
h h
i q
q i
R
R
h
t
h
t
τ
τ
τ
/
/
é
ù
=
=
+
=
ë
û

(2.99)
	
l
k
0
1
2
(
)
( )
E
(
) ( )
0
k l
d
h h
k
l
J
l
k
R
h t
h t
ω τ
τ
τ
*
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
=
ì
=
+
= í
¹
î

(2.100)
	
2
2
2
2
0
( )
E
(
)
( )
4
4
(
)
k
k
k
k
d
h
h
R
h t
h t
J
τ
τ
ω τ
é
ù
=
+
=
+
ë
û

(2.101)
where E[×] is the statistical expectation operator, (×)* denotes the complex conjugate 
operator, and J0(×) is the zeroth-order Bessel function of the first kind. 
Many approaches have been suggested for deterministic SoS simulation of  
F-to-M Rayleigh fading channels. Several different approaches are described next. 
2.4.2.1  Jakes’s Model—Model I
Jakes derived his well-known deterministic simulation model for F-to-M Rayleigh 
fading channels [9] starting from (2.20) and assuming equal-strength multipath 
components (Cn = 1). Then, the complex low-pass impulse response has the form 
	
(2
cos
)
1
( )
d
n
n
N
j
f
t
n
h t
e
π
α
φ
+
=
= å

(2.102)
where N is the number of propagation rays and fn are random phases associated 
with each propagation ray. Jakes approximated a 2-D isotropic scattering environ-
ment by using a ring of discrete effective scatterers with the receiver at the center 
of the ring, as shown in Figure 2.9. The directions to the scatterers can be fixed, so 
that the moving MS “sees” each scatterer at the same bearing as it moves; or the 
effective scatterers are spatially fixed so that as the receiver moves, the angles to 
the sources change. The former technique is more computationally efficient, since 
the distances to the individual scatterers do not need to be calculated. In the latter 
technique, the distances to the scatterers can be made large so that it gives essen-
tially the same situation as fixed bearing angle scatterers. Jakes’s model uses the first 
technique (scatterers follow the MS) and chooses the N scatterers to be uniformly 
distributed in angle; that is, 
	
2
1 2
n
n
n
… N
N
π
α
=
,
 = , ,
,

(2.103)

Using the symmetry of the 2-D ring in Figure 2.9, Jakes further reduced the number 
of sinusoidal components necessary for simulation from N to M = (N – 2)/4. Then, 
the complex faded envelope can be written as h(t) = hi(t) + jhq(t), where 
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
1
4
8
2
( )
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
M
i
d
n
d
n
n
h t
t
t
N
N
N
π
β
ω
β
ω
=
é
ù
æ
ö
=
+
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
ë
û
å

(2.104)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
1
8
2
4
( )
sin
cos
sin
cos
cos
M
q
d
n
d
n
n
h t
t
t
N
N
N
π
β
ω
β
ω
=
é
ù
=
+
ê
ú
ë
û
å

(2.105)
and where wd is the maximum angular Doppler frequency. The parameter bn is 
defined as bn = pn/M for n = 0, ..., M.
It is often desirable to generate multiple uncorrelated faded envelopes (e.g., for 
simulation of MIMO systems), something that model I cannot do. Dent et al. [43] 
modified Model I by using orthogonal Walsh-Hadamard codewords to decorrelate 
the multiple faded envelopes. The kth complex faded envelope is defined as 
hk(t) = hik(t) + jhqk(t), where 
	
( )
1
2
2
(
1)
( )
cos
cos
cos
1
1
1
M
ik
k
d
n
n
n
n
n k
h
t
A
n
t
M
N
M
M
=
ì
ü
π
π
π
π
-
æ
ö
æ
ö
=
ω
+
+
í
ý
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
+
+
+
î
þ
å

(2.106)
	
( )
(
)
(
)
{
}
1
2
(
1)
2
( )
sin
cos
cos
1
1
1
M
qk
k
d
n
n k
n
n
n
h
t
A
n
t
M
N
M
M
=
π
-
π
π
π
=
w
+
+
+
+
+
å

(2.107)
M = (N – 2)/4, k = 1,…,M, and Ak(n) is the nth element of the kth row of a Had-
amard matrix HM of dimension M × M. 
By reducing the number of sinusoidal components, Jakes simplified simulation 
of F-to-M Rayleigh fading channels. However, his model does not satisfy most of 
the statistical properties of Clarke’s model [41], and it is not wide-sense stationary 
Figure 2.9  A receiver moving through directive scatterers is modeled by a ring of scatterers at a 
large radius.
 2.4  Simulators for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels	
41

42	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
(WSS) [42]. Specifically, Model I satisfies only the following properties: the in-phase 
and quadrature components of the complex faded envelope are Gaussian random 
processes for N ® ¥, and the auto-correlation function of the complex faded enve-
lope is equal to J0(wdt). Also, the model of Dent et al. [43] (modified Model I) yields 
a cross-correlation between different faded envelopes that is strictly zero only for 
time lag t = 0. As a result, various modifications of Model I have been proposed in 
the literature [42], [44–46]. 
2.4.2.2  Pop and Beaulieu’s Model—Model II
Pop and Beaulieu [42] showed that Model I is not WSS and modified Model I to fix 
this problem. This was done by removing the constraint fn = 0 from Model I and al-
lowing the phases fn to be independent random variables uniformly distributed on 
the interval [0, 2p). The procedure yields a deterministic simulator, since the same 
(random) phases are used for all simulation trials. The kth complex faded envelope 
is defined as hk(t) = hik(t) + jhqk(t), where 
	
ë
û
( )
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
ik
d
k
n
d
nk
h
t
t
t
N
N
N
ê
ú
ê
ú
=
β
ω
+φ
+
β
ω
+φ
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
0
1
8
2
4
M
n
n
é
ù
=
π
å
(2.108)
	
h
t
t
t
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
0
1
8
2
4
( )
sin
cos
sin
cos
cos
M
qk
d
k
n
d
nk
n
n
N
N
N
π
β
ω
φ
β
ω
φ
é
ù
ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
=
=
+
+
+
å
(2.109)
M = (N – 2)/4, and k = 0, …, M – 1. The parameter bn is defined as bn = p n/M for 
n = 0, …, M. Although it is WSS, Model II inherits its statistical properties from 
model I. Hence, this model does not satisfy most of the other statistical properties 
required by Clarke’s model. 
2.4.2.3  Li and Huang’s Model—Model III
To improve model II, Li and Huang [44] proposed a deterministic model that gener-
ates multiple uncorrelated faded envelopes hk(t). Model III assumes P independent 
complex faded envelopes, each with M = N/4 sinusoidal terms in the I and Q com-
ponents. The kth complex faded envelope is hk(t) = hik(t) + jhqk(t), where 
	
1
0
( )
2
cos
cos
M
i
ik
d
nk
nk
n
h
t
C
t
ω
α
φ
-
æ
ö
ç
÷
è
ø
=
=
+
å

(2.110)
	
1
0
( )
2
sin
sin
M
q
qk
d
nk
nk
n
h
t
C
t
ω
α
φ
-
æ
ö
ç
÷
è
ø
=
=
+
å

(2.111)
and where k = 0, ..., P – 1, 
i
nk
φ
 and q
nk
φ
 are independent random phases uniformly 
distributed on the interval [0, 2p), ank is the nth angle of arrival in the kth complex 
faded envelope, and C is a constant gain. The angles of arrival are ank = (2pn)/N + 
(2pk)/(PN) + a00 for n = 0, ..., M – 1, k = 0, ...,P – 1, where a00 is an initial angle of 
arrival, chosen to be 0 < a00 < (2p)/(PN) and a00 ¹ p/(PN).
Model III preserves the desirable statistical properties of Model II, while gener-
ating multiple uncorrelated faded envelopes. Compared to Model II, the in-phase 

and quadrature components of the complex faded envelope in Model III are less 
correlated. However, Model III still fails to satisfy equations (2.98) and (2.101) of 
Clarke’s model. 
2.4.2.4  MEDS Model—Model IV
To resolve the remaining disadvantages of Model II, Pätzold et al. [45] proposed 
a deterministic model called the Method of Exact Doppler Spreads (MEDS). The 
auto-correlation functions of the in-phase and quadrature components of the com-
plex faded envelope are designed to satisfy (2.98). The kth complex faded envelope 
is defined as hk(t) = hik(t) + jhqk(t), where
	
(
)
1
2
( )
cos
sin
i q
Ni q
i q
i q
i q k
d
n
nk
n
h
t
t
N /
/
/
/
é
ù
/
ê
ú
ë
û
=
=
ω
α
+ φ
å

(2.112)
for k = 0, …, P – 1 and where i q
nk
/
φ
 are independent random phases uniformly dis-
tributed on the interval [0, 2p), P is the number of desired faded envelopes, and  
Ni/q is the number of sinusoidal terms in the in-phase and quadrature components 
of hk(t), respectively. The nth angle of arrival is given by 
(
0 5) (2
)
i q
n
i q
n
N
/
/
α
= π
- .
/
 for 
n = 1,..., Ni/q. 
Model IV preserves the desirable properties of Model II. In addition, the auto-
correlation functions of the I and Q components in Model IV satisfy (2.98). Com-
pared to Model II, the in-phase and quadrature components of the complex faded 
envelope in Model IV are less correlated if Nq = Ni + 1. However, Model IV pro-
duces multiple faded envelopes that are correlated. 
2.4.2.5  Zajić and Stüber’s Model—Model V
Models I – IV have difficulty creating uncorrelated in-phase and quadrature compo-
nents of each complex faded envelope and generating multiple uncorrelated faded 
envelopes. Zajić and Stüber [46] proposed to solve these problems by using or-
thogonal functions for the in-phase and quadrature components of the complex 
faded envelope. 
The following function is considered as the kth complex faded envelope
	
1
(
cos
)
0
( )
d
nk
nk
N
j
t
k
n
n
h t
C e ω
α
φ
-
+
=
= å

(2.113)
where 
(2
)
n
j
n
C
e
N
β
=
/
, ank, fnk, and wd are the random path gain, the angle of 
arrival, the phase associated with the nth propagation path, and the maximum 
angular Doppler frequency, respectively. It is assumed that P independent complex 
faded envelopes are required (k = 0, ..., P – 1), each consisting of N sinusoidal 
components. 
To reduce the number of sinusoidal components needed for simulation, this 
model uses a method similar to the one described in [44]. Specifically, by choosing 
M = N/4 to be an integer and by taking into account shifts of the angles ank and fnk 
in each quadrant of the circle, the sum in (2.113) can be split into four terms, viz. 
 2.4  Simulators for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels	
43

44	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
	
[
cos
]
[
cos(
0 5 ) (
0 5 )]
1
1
[
cos(
) (
)]
[
cos(
1 5 ) (
1 5 )]
1
1
2
2
( )
2
2
n
d
nk
nk
n
d
nk
nk
n
d
nk
nk
n
d
nk
nk
M
M
j
j
t
j
j
t
k
n
n
M
M
j
j
t
j
j
t
n
n
h t
e
e
e
e
N
N
e
e
e
e
N
N
β
ω
α
+φ
β
ω
α
+ . π + φ
+ . π
=
=
β
ω
α
+π + φ
+π
β
ω
α
+ . π + φ
+ . π
=
=
=
+
+
+
å
å
å
å
(2.114)
and then simplified to
	
( )
(
)
1
1
2
( )
2cos(
)cos(
cos
)
2
2sin
sin
sin
M
k
n
d
nk
nk
n
M
n
d
nk
nk
n
h t
t
N
j
t
N
=
=
=
β
ω
α
+ φ
+
β
ω
α
+ φ
å
å

(2.115)
Then, the kth complex faded envelope is defined as hk(t) = hik(t) + jhqk(t), where 
	
0
2
( )
cos(
cos
)
M
ik
n
d
nk
nk
n
h
t
a
t
N
=
é
ù
=
ω
α
+ φ
ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
å

(2.116)
	
0
2
( )
sin(
sin
)
M
qk
n
d
nk
nk
n
h
t
b
t
N
=
é
ù
=
ω
α
+ φ
ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
å

(2.117)
The motivation for this model originates in Model II. As in Model II, the phases 
fnk are chosen to be independent random variables uniformly distributed on the 
interval [0, 2p), and the path gains bn are defined as bn = pn/M for n = 0, ..., M. 
By including b0 = 0 in (2.115), the total number of propagation paths is increased 
slightly to N = 4M + 2. Parameters an and bn are defined as follows: 
	
( )
( )
2cos
1
0
2 cos
n
n
n
n
M
a
n
ì
β
,
= , ...,
ï
= í
=
β
,
ïî

(2.118)
	
( )
( )
2sin
1
0
2 sin
n
n
n
n
M
b
n
ì
β
,
= , ...,
ï
= í
=
β
,
ïî

(2.119)
The angles of arrival ank are defined as in Model III: 
	
ank = (2p n)/N + (2p k)/(PN) + a00 for n = 0, ..., M, k = 0, ..., P – 1.
This ensures an asymmetrical arrangement of arrival angles, which minimizes the 
cross-correlation between different faded envelopes. In addition, the initial angle 
of arrival a00 is optimized (through an exhaustive search) to minimize the cross-
correlation between the in-phase and quadrature components of each complex 
faded envelope. The result is a00 = (0.2p)/(PN). In [46], if is shown that Model V  
satisfies (2.99) and (2.100) of Clarke’s model. However, the auto-correlations of 
the quadrature components and the auto-correlation of the squared envelope do 
not satisfy (2.98) and (2.101), respectively. 

2.4.2.6  Zheng and Xiao’s Statistical Models
To improve on previously reported models, Zheng and Xiao proposed several new 
statistical simulation models [47–49]. By allowing all three parameter sets (ampli-
tudes, phases, and Doppler frequencies) to be random variables, Zheng and Xiao’s 
models obtain statistical properties similar to ones required by Clarke’s model. How-
ever, the models are no longer ergodic. The statistical properties of these models vary 
for each simulation trial, but they converge to desired properties when averaged over 
50 to 100 simulation trials. A detailed comparison of the statistical properties for 
Zheng and Xiao’s models is presented in [50]. It is shown that the model presented in 
[48] has the statistical properties closest to those of the reference model and requires 
the fewest simulation trials (50). We will refer to this model as Model VI. 
Model VI: The kth complex faded envelope is defined as hk(t) = hik(t) + jhqk(t),  
where 
	
1
2
( )
cos
cos
M
i
ik
d
nk
nk
n
h
t
t
M
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
=
=
ω
α
+ φ
å

(2.120)
	
1
2
( )
cos
sin
M
q
qk
d
nk
nk
n
h
t
t
M
ω
α
φ
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
=
=
+
å
 

(2.121)
for k = 0, …, P – 1 and where 
i
nk
φ
 and 
q
nk
φ
 are independent random phases uni-
formly distributed on the interval [–p, p). Model VI assumes P independent com-
plex envelopes, each with M = N/4 sinusoidal terms in the in-phase and quadrature 
components. The nth angle of arrival in the kth complex envelope ank is ank = (2pn –  
p + qk)/(4M) for n = 1,..., M, where the qk are independent random variables uni-
formly distributed on the interval [–p, p). 
2.4.2.7  Zajić and Stüber’s Statistical Model—Model VII
Model V (which is a deterministic model) can be modified to possess all statisti-
cal properties of Clarke’s model by letting all three parameters 
(2
)
nk
j
nk
C
e
N
β
=
/
, 
ank, and fnk be random variables, similar to Model VI. The kth complex faded 
envelope is defined as hk(t) = hik(t) + jhqk(t), where 
	
(
)
(
)
1
( )
2cos
cos
cos
M
ik
nk
d
nk
nk
n
h
t
t
=
=
β
ω
α
+ φ
å
2
N

(2.122)
	
(
)
(
)
1
2
( )
2sin
sin
sin
M
qk
nk
d
nk
nk
n
h
t
t
N
=
=
β
ω
α
+ φ
å

(2.123)
It is assumed that P independent complex envelopes are desired (k = 0, ..., P – 1), each 
having M = N/4 sinusoidal terms in the in-phase and quadrature components. The 
parameters fnk, bnk and q are independent random variables uniformly distributed 
on the interval [–p, p). The angles of arrival are chosen as follows: ank = (2pn)/N +  
(2pk)/(PN) + (q - p)/N, for n = 1, ..., M, k = 0, ..., P – 1. The angles of arrival in the 
kth complex faded envelope are obtained by rotating the angles of arrival in the  
(k – 1)th complex envelope by (2p)/(PN). 
 2.4  Simulators for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels	
45

46	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
2.4.2.8  Performance Evaluation of Models I–VII
This section compares the performance and complexity of the models I – VII. In all 
simulations, a normalized sampling period fdTs = 0.05 (fd is the maximum Doppler 
frequency and Ts is the sampling period) and M = P = 8 are used. However, for 
Model IV we use Ni = 8 and Nq = 9 to obtain uncorrelated quadrature components 
of the complex envelope. Note that in models I – V, the random phases associated 
with the nth propagation path are computed before the actual simulation starts, be-
cause a deterministic simulator needs only one simulation trial. During each simula-
tion, all parameters are kept constant to provide simulation results that are always 
the same (i.e., deterministic). 
To compare the complexity of Models I – VII, Table 2.1 summarizes the num-
ber of simulation trials required to obtain desired statistical properties, the number 
of operations needed to generate one sample of the complex faded envelope, and 
the relative simulation times needed to generate a sample of the complex faded 
envelope with desired statistical properties, in Matlab on a Pentium III laptop. 
Here, we count only the frequently executed operations and the number of random 
variables. Table 2.1 shows that the choice of cosine functions in models V and VII, 
which makes the in-phase and quadrature components of the complex faded enve-
lope uncorrelated, slightly increasing the complexity of the models. 
As pointed out earlier, Models I – IV have difficulty creating uncorrelated in-
phase and quadrature components of each complex faded envelope and generat-
ing multiple uncorrelated faded envelopes. To illustrate this, Figures 2.10 and 2.11 
compare the cross-correlation functions of the in-phase and quadrature compo-
nents and the cross-correlation functions of two faded envelopes obtained by deter-
ministic models (Models I – V), respectively. The results show that Model V yields 
the lowest cross-correlation between the in-phase and quadrature components of 
the complex faded envelope and the lowest cross-correlation between two different 
faded envelopes compared to Models I – IV. 
Similarly, Figures 2.12 and 2.13 compare the cross-correlation functions of the 
in-phase and quadrature components and the cross-correlation functions of two 
faded envelopes obtained by Models VI and VII, respectively. For Model VI, we 
average over Nstat = 100 trials, while for Model VII, we average over Nstat = 30 and 
Table 2.1  Complexity of Different SoS Simulation Models for F-to-M Frequency-Flat Multipath  
Fading Channels
Simulators
Number of 
Simulation 
Trials
Relative Sim.
Time to
Generate a
Sample of hk(t)  
with desired 
Stat Properties
Estimate Number of Computations Needed to Generate 
One Sample of hk(t)
Cosine
Addition/
Multiplication
Number of
Random Variables 
Model I
1
Tx
4M
2M / 2M
None
Model II
1
1.03Tx
4M
3M / 2M
M + 1
Model III
1
1.52Tx
4M
4M / 0
2M
Model IV
1
1.52Tx
4M
4M / 0
2M
Model V
1
1.98Tx
6M
4M / 2M
M + 1
Model VI
50
4.85Tx
4M
4M / 0
2M + 1
Model VII
30
3.15Tx
6M
4M / 2M
2M + 1

Nstat = 50 trials. The results show that Model VII with Nstat = 30 has similar pefor-
mance as models VI with Nstat = 100. An increase of the number of trials to Nstat = 
50 yields significantly lower cross-correlations. Note that the scale on Figures 2.12 
and 2.13 is different from that of Figures 2.10 and 2.11, and that statistical simula-
tors tend to have significantly lower cross-correlations than deterministic models. 
2.4.3  Simulation Models for F-to-M Frequency-Selective Multipath  
Fading Channels
In frequency-selective fading channels, frequency components in the transmitted 
signal experience different phase shifts along the different paths. As the differences 
in path delays become larger, even closely separated frequencies in the transmitted 
signal can experience significantly different phase shifts. This type of propagation 
can be characterized by a geometrical channel model illustrated in Figure 2.14. 
Considering only single reflections, all scatterers that are associated with a particu-
lar path length are located on an ellipse with the transmitter and receiver located at 
the foci. Different delays correspond to different co-focal ellipses. 
Frequency-selective channels have strong scatterers that are located on several 
ellipses that represent significantly different delays (compared to a symbol dura-
tion). This means that, if the bandwidth of the signal is W, we can differentiate 
between signals arriving at least Dt = 1/W s apart. As we move outward, energy 
reflected from successive ellipses takes longer to get to the receiver. In this way, at 
the receiver, we observe multiple copies of the transmitted signal, with each copy 
taking progressively longer to reach the receiver. This model does not consider 
second- or higher-order reflections, where energy is reflected between scatterers. 
Indeed, most ray-tracing models (such as Jake’s model) are single-bounced scatter-
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-0.30
-0.25
-0.20
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
 Model I
 Model II
 Model III
 Model IV
 Model V
Rhihq(τ)
Normalized time delay [ωdt]
Figure 2.10  The normalized cross-correlation function of the in-phase and quadrature components 
of Models I – V.
 2.4  Simulators for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels	
47

48	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
ing models—they assume that most of the scattered energy arriving at the receiver 
is due to single-bounced scattering. 
This geometrical model can be described using a tapped-delay line with number 
of taps at different delays. Each tap is the result of a large number of multipath 
components, and, therefore, the taps will experience muptipath fading. If we use 
sˆ (t) to denote the complex envelope of the transmitted signal, the complex envelope 
of the received signal can be written as
	
1
ˆ
ˆ
( )
( ) (
)
L
l
l
l
r t
h t s t
=
=
- τ
å

(2.124)
where L is the number of taps hl(t) and tl are the complex gains and path delays 
associated with each tap. It follows that the impulse response of this channel is
	
1
( , )
( ) (
)
L
l
l
l
h t
h t
t
=
τ =
δ
- τ
å

(2.125)
where d(×) is the Dirac delta function. Sometimes it is convenient if the tap delays 
are multiples of some small number t, leading to the t-spaced tapped delay line 
channel model shown in Figure 2.15. Many of the tap coefficients in the tapped 
delay line are zero (i.e., no energy is received at these delays). The time variant chan-
nel tap coefficients {hl(t)} can be generated using the channel models described in  
Section 2.4.2. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
 Model I
 Model II
 Model III
 Model IV
 Model V
Rh1h2(t)
Normalized time delay [wdt]
Figure 2.11  The normalized cross-correlation function of the first and the second complex enve-
lope of Models I – V.

In a typical digital communication system, data symbols are sent to the transmit-
ter every T seconds, and T-spaced samples are taken at the output of the receiver, 
where T is the baud duration. Hence, it is desirable to have a channel model with  
T-spaced impulse response. The T-spaced channel model is similar to the t-spaced 
channel model, except that the channel taps are T-spaced. This discrete system model 
is by far the most popular in the literature (see, for example, [4, 35]). This is largely 
due to the prevalence of digital hardware for measuring and/or computing the channel 
i­mpulse response. Most channel sounding devices operate in the digital domain and 
thus sample the power delay profile at discrete intervals. Each delay bin is the sum of all 
energy received over the duration of that bin. This is analogous to discrete frequency 
spectra, in which each frequency bin is the sum of all energy over the bandwidth 
that bin occupies. Details on how the t-spaced channel model can be converted into  
T-spaced channel model can be found in [4]. 
2.5  Small-Scale Channel Measurement Techniques
Because of the importance of the multipath structure in determining the small-
scale fading effects, a number of channel sounding techniques have been developed. 
These techniques may be classified as direct pulse–based channel impulse response 
measurements, spread spectrum–based channel impulse response measurements, 
and frequency domain–based channel impulse response measurements. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
 Model VI,  Nstat=100
 Model VII, Nstat=30
 Model VII, Nstat=50
Rhihq(t)
Normalized time delay [wdt]
Figure 2.12  The normalized cross-correlation function of the in-phase and quadrature components 
of Models VI and VII.
 2.5  Small-Scale Channel Measurement Techniques	
49

50	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
2.5.1  Direct Pulse–Based Channel Impulse Response Measurements
A simple channel sounding approach is the direct pulse–based system, shown in 
Figure 2.16. This technique allows us to easily determine the power delay profile 
of any channel. This system transmits a repetitive pulse of width tp and uses a receiver 
with a wide bandpass filter (B = 2/tp Hz) to receive the signal. The signal is then 
amplified, detected with an envelope detector, and displayed and stored on a high 
speed oscilloscope. This gives an immediate measurement of the square of the chan-
nel impulse response convolved with the probing pulse. If the oscilloscope is set 
to averaging mode, this system can provide a local average power delay profile. 
Another attractive aspect of this system is the lack of complexity, since off-the-shelf 
equipment may be used. 
The minimum resolvable delay between multipath components is equal to the 
probing pulse width tp. The main problem with this system is that it is subject to 
interference and noise, due to the wide pass-band filter required for multipath time 
resolution. Another disadvantage is that phases of the individual multipath compo-
nents are not received, due to the use of an envelope detector. However, a coherent 
detector can be used with this technique to measure the multipath phases. 
2.5.2  Spread Spectrum–Based Channel Impulse Response Measurements
A block diagram for a spread spectrum–based channel sounding system is shown 
in Figure 2.17. Compared to the direct pulse system, the advantage of a spread 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
 Model VI, Nstat=100
 Model VII, Nstat=30
 Model VII, Nstat=50
Rh1h2(t)
Normalized time delay [wdt]
Figure 2.13  The normalized cross-correlation function of the first and the second fader of Models 
VI and VII.

spectrum–based system is that, while the probing signal may be wideband, it is 
possible to detect the transmitted signal using a narrowband receiver preceded by a 
wideband mixer, thus improving the dynamic range of the system. 
In a spread spectrum–based channel sounder, a carrier signal is “spread” over 
a large bandwidth by mixing it with a binary pseudo-noise sequence having a chip 
duration Tc. The spread spectrum signal is then received, filtered, and despread us-
ing a pseudo-random sequence generator identical to that used at the transmitter. 
Synchronization between the transmitter and the receiver is eliminated using 
a sliding correlator. Sensitivity is adjustable by changing the sliding factor and the 
post-correlator filter bandwidth. Also, required transmitter powers can be consid-
erably lower than comparable direct pulse systems because the spread spectrum 
systems have better resilience to noise. 
Compared to the direct pulse–based system, a disadvantage of the spread  
spectrum–based system is that measurements are not made in real time; instead, 
they are compiled as the pseudo-random codes slide past one another. Depend-
ing on system parameters and measurement objectives, the time required to make 
power delay profile measurements may be excessive. Another disadvantage of 
the system described here is that a noncoherent detector is used, so that phases of 
Figure 2.14  Geometrical model for F-to-M frequency-selective multipath fading channels.
Figure 2.15  F-to-M frequency-selective multipath fading channel model with discrete multipath 
components.
 2.5  Small-Scale Channel Measurement Techniques	
51

52	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
­individual multipath components cannot be measured. Even if coherent detection is 
used, the sweep time of a spread spectrum signal induces delay such that the phases 
of individual multipath components with different time delays would be measured 
at substantially different times, during which the channel might change. 
2.5.3  Frequency Domain–Based Channel Impulse Response Measurements
Because of the dual relationship between time-domain and frequency-domain tech-
niques, it is possible to measure the channel impulse response in the frequency 
domain. Figure 2.18 shows a frequency domain–based channel sounder used for 
measuring channel impulse responses. A vector network analyzer controls a syn-
thesized frequency sweeper, and an S-parameter test set is used to monitor the 
frequency response of the channel. The sweeper scans a particular frequency band 
(centered around the carrier) by stepping through discrete frequencies. The number 
and spacing of these frequency steps impact the time resolution of the impulse re-
sponse measurement. Four each frequency step, the S-parameter test set transmits a 
known signal level at port 1 and monitors the received signal level at port 2. These 
signal levels allow the analyzer to determine the complex response of the channel 
over the measured frequency range. The transmissivity (S21(f )) response is a fre-
quency domain representation of the channel impulse response. This response is 
then converted to the time domain using inverse discrete Fourier transform process-
ing, giving a band-limited version of the impulse response. In theory, this technique 
Transmit antenna
Wireless link
Pulse
generator
Receive antenna
Digital
oscilloscope
Figure 2.16  A direct pulse–based channel impulse response measurement system.

works well and indirectly provides amplitude and phase information in the time 
domain. However, the system requires careful calibration and hardwired synchro-
nization between the transmitter and receiver, making it useful only for very close 
measurements (e.g., indoor channel measurements). Another limitation with this 
system is the non-real-time nature of the measurement. For time varying channels, 
the channel frequency response can change rapidly, giving an erroneous impulse re-
sponse measurement. To mitigate this effect, fast sweep times are necessary to keep 
the total swept frequency response measurement interval as short as possible. A 
faster sweep time can be accomplished by reducing the number of frequency steps, 
but this sacrifices time resolution and excess delay range in the time domain. 
2.6  Summary
This chapter first briefly described the propagation principles that govern signal 
propagation in F-to-M cellular radio channels. The chapter proceeded to describe 
important concepts of propagation modeling such as large-scale and small-scale 
fading effects. Then, the statistical characterization of multipath propagation in 
F-to-M cellular radio channels is detailed. Several reference models and their statis-
tics such as correlation function, Doppler spectrum, power delay profile, and level 
crossing rate are detailed. Furthermore, this chapter also described the simulators 
for frequency-flat and frequency-selective multipath fading with a small number of 
Figure 2.17  A spread spectrum–based channel impulse response measurement system.
 2.6  Summary	
53

54	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
propagation rays that still match the statistical properties of the F-to-M channel. 
Finally, because of the importance of the multipath structure in determining the 
small-scale fading effects, the rest of the chapter described several wideband chan-
nel sounding techniques that are commonly used for channel measurements. 
References
[1]	 Rappaport, T.,Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pretince Hall PTR, 2001. 
[2]	 Vaughan, R. and J. Andersen, Channels, Propagation and Antennas for Mobile Communi-
cations, The IEE, UK, 2003. 
[3]	 Saunders, S. R., Antennas and Propagation for Wireless Communication Systems, New 
York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1999. 
[4]	 Stüber, G. L., Principles of Mobile Communication, 2nd ed., Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 
2001. 
[5]	 Pätzold, M., Mobile Fading Channels, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 2002. 
[6]	 Gudmundson, M., “Correlation model for shadowing fading in mobile radio systems,” 
Electronic Letters, Vol. 27, Nov. 1991, pp. 2145–2146. 
[7]	 Pätzold M, U. Killat, and F. Laue, “A deterministic digital simulation model for Suzuki 
processes with application to a shadowed Rayleigh land mobile radio channel,” IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 45, May 1996, pp. 318–331. 
[8]	 Clarke, R. H., “A statistical theory of mobile-radio reception,” Bell Systems Technical 
Journal, July 1968, pp. 957–1000. 
[9]	 Jakes, W. C., Microwave Mobile Communications, 2nd ed. Piscataway, NJ: Wiley-IEEE 
Press, 1994. 
[10]	 I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press, 1980. 
[11]	 Sadowsky, J. S. and V. Kafedziski, “On the correlation and scattering functions of the 
WSSUS channel for mobile communication,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 
Vol. 47, Feb. 1998, pp. 270–282. 
Transmit antenna
Receive antenna
Vector network analyzer
with S-parameter test set
Inverse DFT
processor
Figure 2.18  A frequency domain–based channel impulse response measurement system.

[12]	 Pätzold M., Y. Li, and F. Laue, “A study of a land mobile satellite channel model with asym-
metrical Doppler power spectrum and lognormally distributed line-of-sight component,” 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 47, Feb. 1998, pp. 297–310. 
[13]	 Pätzold M., U. Killat, Y. Li, and F. Laue, “Modeling, analysis, and simulation of nonfre-
quency-selective mobile radio channels with asymmetrical Doppler power spectral density 
shapes,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 46, May 1997, pp. 494–507. 
[14]	 Fontan F. P., M. A. V. Castro, J. Kunisch, J. Pamp, E. Zollinger, S. Buonomo, P. Baptista, 
and B. Arbesser, “A versatile framework for a narrow-and wide-band statistical propaga-
tion model for the LMS channel,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, Vol. 43, Dec. 1997, 
pp. 431–458. 
[15]	 Braun W. R. and U. Dersch, “A physical mobile radio channel model,” IEEE Transactions 
on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 40, May 1991, pp. 472–482. 
[16] 	 Kuchar A., E. A. Aparicio, J. P. Rossi, and E. Bonek, “Azimuth, elevation, and delay of 
signals at mobile station site,” Wireless Personal Communications: Emerging Technologies 
for Enhanced Communications, Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1999, pp. 99–110. 
[17] 	 Rossi J. P., J. P. Barbot, and A. J. Levy, “Theory and measurement of the angle of arrival 
and time delay of UHF radio waves using a ring array,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. 45, May 1997, pp. 876–884. 
[18] 	 Fuhl J., J. P. Rossi, and E. Bonek, “High-resolution 3-D direction-of-arrival determina-
tion for urban mobile radio,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 45, 
Apr. 1997, pp. 672–682. 
[19] 	 Fannin P. C. and A. Molina, “Analysis of mobile radio channel sounding measurements 
in inner city Dublin at 1.808 Ghz,” IEE Proceedings in Communications, Vol. 143,  
Oct. 1996. pp. 311–316. 
[20] 	 Reudink D. O., “Large-scale variations of the average signal,” Microwave Mobile Com-
munications W. C. Jakes, Jr., Ed., New York: Wiley, 1974, pp. 79–131. 
[21] 	 Lee W. C. Y., “Finding the approximate angular probability density function of wave ar-
rival by using a directional antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 
Vol. 21, May 1973, pp. 328–334. 
[22] 	 Petrus P., J. H. Reed, and T. S. Rappaport, “Effects of directional antennas at the base 
station on the Doppler spectrum,” IEEE Commununications Letters, Vol. 1, Mar. 1997, 
pp. 40–42. 
[23] 	 Anim-Appiah K., “Complex envelope correlations for non-isotropic scattering,” Electronic 
Letters, Vol. 34, Apr. 1998, pp. 918–919. 
[24] 	 Austin M. D. and G. L. Stüber, “Velocity adaptive handoff algorithms for microcellular 
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 43, Aug. 1994, pp. 549–561. 
[25] 	 Pedersen K. I., P. E. Mogensen, and B. H. Fleury, “Power azimuth spectrum in outdoor 
environments,” IEEE Electronics Letters, Vol. 33, Aug. 1997 pp. 1583–1584. 
[26] 	 Abdi A., J. A. Barger, and M. Kaveh, “A parametric model for the distribution of the angle 
of arrival and the associated correlation function and power spectrum at the mobile sta-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 51, May 2002, pp. 425–434. 
[27] 	 Pedersen K. I., P. E. Mogensen, and B. H. Fleury, “A stochastic model of the temporal and 
azimuthal dispersion seen at the base station in outdoor propagation environments,” IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 49, Mar. 2000, pp. 437–447. 
[28]	 Von Mises R. “Über die “Ganzzahligkeit” der Atomgewicht und verwandte Fragen,” Phy-
sikal. Z., Vol. 19, 1918, pp. 490–500. 
[29] 	 Mardia K. V., Statistics of Directional Data, London, UK: Academic, 1972. 
[30] 	 Simon M. K., S. M. Hinedi, and W. C. Lindsey, Digital Communication Techniques: Signal 
Design and Detection Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1995. 
[31] 	 Viterbi, A. J., “Phase-locked loop dynamics in the presence of noise by Fokker–Planck 
techniques,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 51, Dec. 1963, pp. 1737–1753. 
 2.6  Summary	
55

56	
Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Radio Channels
[32] 	 Leib H. and S. Pasupathy, “The phase of a vector perturbed by Gaussian noise and dif-
ferentially coherent receivers,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 34,  
Nov. 1988, pp. 1491–1501. 
[33] 	 Pätzold M., U. Killat, and F. Laue, “An extended Suzuki model for land mobile satel-
lite channels and its statistical properties,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,  
Vol. 47, May 1998, pp. 617–630. 
[34]	 Abdi A., H. Zhang, and C. Tepedelenlioglu, “A unified approach to the performance analy-
sis of speed estimation techniques in mobile communication,” IEEE Transactions on Com-
munications, Vol. 56, Jan. 2008, pp. 126–135. 
[35] 	 Costa N. and S. Haykin, Multiple-Input Multiple-Output Channel Models: Theory and 
Practice, New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2010. 
[36]	 Bello P., “Characterization of random time-variant linear channels,” IEEE Transactions on 
Communications, Vol. 11, Dec. 1963, pp. 360–393. 
[37] 	 Young D. J. and N. C. Beaulieu, “A quantitative evaluation of generation methods for cor-
related Rayleigh random variates,” Proc. GLOBECOM ’98, Sydney, Australia, November 
1998, pp. 3332–3337. 
[38] 	 Young D. J. and N. C. Beaulieu, “The generation of correlated Rayleigh random variates 
by inverse discrete Fourier transform,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 48, 
July 2000, pp. 1114–1127. 
[39] 	 Verdin D. and T. C. Tozer, “Generating a fading process for the simulation of land- 
mobile radio communications,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 29, No. 23, November 1993,  
pp. 2011–2012. 
[40]	 Fechtel S. A., “A novel approach to modeling and efficient simulation of frequency-selective 
fading radio channels,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 11, April 
1993, pp. 422–431. 
[41]	 Pätzold M. and F. Laue, “Statistical properties of Jakes’ fading channel simulator,” Proc. 
IEEE VTC’98, Ottawa, Canada, May 1998, pp. 712–718. 
[42]	 Pop M. F. and N. C. Beaulieu, “Limitations of sum-of-sinusoids fading channel simula-
tors,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 49, April 2001, pp. 699–708. 
[43]	 Dent P. et al., “Jakes fading model revisited,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 29, June 1993, 
pp. 1162–1163. 
[44] 	 Li Y. X. and X. Huang, “The simulation of independent Rayleigh faders,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Communications, Vol. 50, Sept. 2002, pp. 1503–1514. 
[45] 	 Pätzold M. et al., “On the statistical properties of deterministic simulation models for 
mobile fading channels,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 47, Feb. 1998, 
pp. 254–269. 
[46]	 Zajic´ A. G. and G. L. Stüber, “A efficient simulation of Rayleigh fading with enhanced 
de-correlation properties,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 5, July 
2006, pp. 1866–1875. 
[47] 	 Zheng Y. R. and C. Xiao, “Simulation models with correct statistical properties for Ray-
leigh fading channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 51, June 2003, 
pp. 920–928. 
[48] 	 Zheng Y. R. and C. Xiao, “Improved models for the generation of multiple uncorrelated 
Rayleigh fading waveforms,” IEEE Communication Letters, Vol. 6, June 2002, pp. 256–258. 
[49]	 Zheng Y. R. and C. Xiao, “A statistical simulation model for mobile radio fading chan-
nels,” Proc. IEEE WCNC’03, New Orleans, LA, March 2003, pp. 144–149. 
[50]	 Patel C. S. et al., “Comparative analysis of statistical models for the simulation of Rayleigh 
faded cellular channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communicaitons, Vol. 53, June 2005, 
pp. 1017–1026.

57
C H A P T E R  3
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
Vehicle-to-vehicle (V-to-V) communication systems have recently drawn great 
attention, because they have the potential to improve convenience and safety of 
automobile transportation. For example, sensor-equipped cars that communicate 
via wireless links and thus create adhoc networks can be used to reduce traf-
fic accidents and facilitate traffic flow. V-to-V communication systems also find 
applications in intelligent transportation systems, relay-based cellular networks, 
and future combat systems. The design of highly reliable V-to-V wireless com-
munication systems requires a detailed understanding of multipath propagation 
among vehicles. V-to-V channels have characteristics that are very different from 
F-to-M cellular radio channels. In V-to-V channels, both the transmitter (Tx) 
and the receiver (Rx) are in motion, equipped with low elevation antennas, and 
surrounded by local scatterers, as shown in Figure 3.1. Furthermore, the channel 
characteristics of V-to-V channels are influenced by the properties of environment 
around the communicating vehicles and by typical traffic patterns. In general, the 
following environment categories can be distinguished: (a) highways: two to six 
lanes in each direction, few surrounding buildings, and high speeds; (b) urban 
streets: two to four lanes, tall buildings close to the curb, and high traffic density; 
(c) suburban streets: one to two lanes, low surrounding buildings, and low traffic 
density, and (d) rural streets: few or no surrounding buildings, but possibly hills 
or forests, and very light traffic. As shown in Figure 3.1, the Tx communicates 
with the Rx through either LoS link or through the NLoS link, because of natural 
and manmade objects that are situated between the Tx and Rx. This chapter de-
tails how V-to-V channels differ from F-to-M cellular radio channels and how to 
model and simulate V-to-V channels. 
3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling
Similar to F-to-M cellular radio channels, propagation in V-to-V channels is gov-
erned by the four propagation mechanisms described in Section 2.1 (i.e., free-space 
propagation, reflection, diffraction, and scattering). The differences between F-
to-M cellular and V-to-V channels arise due to the differences in propagation envi-
ronments. Section 3.1 describes the modeling of large-scale and small-scale fading 
in V-to-V channels. 
3.1.1  Large-Scale Fading—Pathloss and Shadowing
A popular way to model pathloss and shadowing is to use empirically fitted data. 
This approach is based on experimental measurements for a given environment. 

58	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
Once the measurements are taken, statistical fitting techniques are used to obtain 
the pathloss and shadowing coefficients that match measured data. 
There have been several measurement campaigns that resulted in pathloss and 
shadowing models for V-to-V channels [1–7]. In these measurements, it has been 
found that pathloss and shadowing coefficients depend on the type of the environ-
ment, so different models have been derived for highway [4–6], rural [4–6], urban 
[5, 6] and suburban [3–6] environments. 
Here, we detail the most recent pathloss and shadowing models [6]. Propaga-
tion channel measurements were conducted in Lund, Sweden, at 5.2 GHz. Four dif-
ferent traffic environments were measured: highway measurements were performed 
on a 5.5 km-long two-lane highway strip; rural measurements were taken on a 
one-lane road, with the roadside environment contain mostly cornfields with a few 
houses and road signs; urban measurements were conducted along a one-lane city 
street, where four-story buildings were on both sides of the street; and suburban 
measurements were performed on a one-lane street that was 9m wide with buildings 
sparsely placed on both sides of the street. For each environment, measurements 
were made with cars driving in the same direction (convoy) or in the opposite direc-
tions. The measurements were mainly performed under LoS conditions between Tx 
and Rx, although occasionally obstruction of the LoS path occured. 
The results in [5, 6] show that a single-slope pathloss model can be used to 
characterize the pathloss for highway, suburban, and urban environments. The 
pathloss and shadowing in dB can be written as [6] 
	
1
0
10
0
  0
( )
(
)
10 log
( /
)
,
c
PL d
PL d
n
d d
X
PL
 d
d
σ
ς
=
+
+
+
 >
	
(3.1)
Figure 3.1  Typical vehicle-to-vehicle propagation environment.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
59
where n is the pathloss exponent, d is the propagation distance between the Tx and 
the Rx, PL(d0) is the pathloss at a reference distance d0 =10m, shadowing Xs1 is mod-
eled as a zero-mean normally distributed random variable with standard deviation 
s1, PLc is a correlation term that accounts for the offset between forward pathloss 
(cars drive in opposite directions and away from each other) and reverse pathloss 
(cars drive in opposite directions and toward each other), and z is defined as  
	
1,for reverse pathloss
1, for forward pathloss
0, for convoy pathloss
ς
ì
ï
=
-
í
ïî
	
(3.2)
The estimated parameters PL(d0 ), n, s1, and PLc are summarized in Table 3.1 
for highway, urban, and suburban environments.  
It is worth noting that all extracted pathloss exponents are lower than 2, which 
implies better-than-free-space propagation. This can be explained by observing that 
in addition to the LoS path energy, there is more energy available due to multipath 
propagation. Similar results are observed in [5, 7]. Note that the pathloss expo-
nents in V-to-V channels differ from the typical pathloss exponents (2–4) in F-to-M 
cellular channels with LoS + multipath propagation. Possible explanation for this 
difference is that the communication distances in V-to-V channels are significantly 
shorter than those in F-to-M cellular channels (100m vs. 1000m) and the signal is 
less attenuated than when traveling longer distances. 
For the rural environment, the pathloss and shadowing are represented by a 
two-ray model [6]; that is, the pathloss and shadowing are given by 
	
æ
ö
(
)
(
)
2
10
2
2
0
0
10
2
2
( )
20log
(4
/ )
7.3
exp
4
exp
20log
4
c
c
PL d
f
c
X
PL
jk
d
h
jk d
d
d
h
σ
π
ζ
ρ
=
-
+
+
-
+
-
ç
÷
-
+
ç
÷
+
ç
÷
è
ø
	
(3.3)
where d is the propagation distance between the Tx and the Rx, h = 2.53m is the 
antenna height (which is equal on both link ends), r = 0.44e–j131 is the ground reflec-
tion coefficient, k0 = 2pfc/c is the propagation number at the center frequency fc, c 
is the speed of light, shadowing Xs2 is modeled as a zero-mean normally distributed 
random variable with standard deviation s2 = 2.6 dB, PLc = 2.3 dB is a correlation 
term that accounts for the offset between the forward and reverse pathloss, and z  
is defined as in (3.2). Since the two-ray behavior was not observed in the measure-
ment data for small d, the validity of the model is limited to d ³ 20m. 
In contrast to F-to-M cellular systems, V-to-V systems are composed of trans-
mitting and receiving nodes with similar characteristics in terms of antenna height, 
Table 3.1  The Estimated Parameters PL(d0), n, s1, and PLc in Highway, Urban, and Suburban Environments
Scenario
PL(d0) [dB]
n
s1 [dB]
PLc [dB]
Highway
63.3
1.77
3.1
3.3
Urban
62.0
1.68
1.7
1.5
Suburban
64.6
1.59
2.2
N/A

60	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
mobility pattern, and so on. The shadowing fluctuations seen by the nodes at both 
ends of the radio link are therefore statistically identical [8]. This leads to a cor-
relation function that is different from the the auto-correlated shadowing and the 
site-to-site correlated shadowing of the F-to-M cellular channels detailed in Section 
2.2.2. In V-to-V channels, shadowing correlation function is referred to as joint 
correlation function (JCF). Extensive ray-tracing simulations have revealed that the 
JCF is well approximated by [8]
	
corr
(
,
)
d
d
t
r
d
t
r
R
d
d
e
D
+D
-
D
D
µ
	
(3.4)
where Ddt and Ddr are the displacement distances of the transmitter and receiver, re-
spectively, and dcorr is the spatial correlation distance observed in the given environ-
ment. This spatial correlation distance is often smaller than in the F-to-M systems, 
where a typical mean value in urban environments is dcorr = 40m [1]. 
3.1.2  Small-Scale Fading—Multipath Propagation
Similarly to small-scale fading in F-to-M channels, small-scale fading in V-to-V 
channels is influenced by multipath propagation, speed of the Tx and Rx, speed of 
the surrounding objects, bandwidth of the transmitted signal, and so on. Hence, fol-
lowing the reasoning in Section 2.2.3, the V-to-V multipath channel can be modeled 
as a linear time-variant filter whose complex baseband impulse response is [9]
	
f
t
d t
t
−
=
=
−
∑
( )
1
( , )
(
)
l
L
j
t
l
l
l
h t
C e
	
(3.5)
where h(t,t) is the channel response at time t due to an impulse applied at time t – t, 
and d(·) is the Dirac delta function. The channel amplitude, phase, and time delay 
strongly depend on time and location and are modeled statistically. 
It has been found [10,11] that the received envelope in V-to-V channels is Ray-
leigh faded under NLoS conditions and is Ricean faded under LoS conditions, but 
the statistical properties such as correlation function, Doppler spectrum, level cross-
ing rate, and so on differ from F-to-M cellular channels. More details on Rayleigh 
and Ricean faded received signal envelopes can be found in Section 2.3.1. 
3.1.3  Akki and Haber’s Model for V-to-V Frequency-Flat  
Multipath Fading Channels
Akki and Haber were the first to propose a single-input single-output (SISO) 
V-to-V channel model [10]. This model is based on the following assumptions:  
(a) NLoS propagation conditions (i.e., there is no direct propagation path between 
the Tx and Rx); (b) all waves are double bounced (i.e., the waves from the Tx 
­antenna elements impinge on the scatterers located around the Tx and scatter from 
the scatterers located around the Rx before arriving at the Rx antenna); (c) waves 
that are reflected off scatterers that are further away are negligible because they 
are significantly attenuated; (d) waves that experience more reflections are negli-
gible because each reflection leads to significant power loss; and (e) the number of 

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
61
­scatterers is very large (approaches infinity), so the power of each scattered wave is 
negligible compared to the total mean power. 
According to this model, the complex faded envelope under frequency-flat fad-
ing can be written as [10]
	
(2
)
,
1
1
( )
lim
mn
mn
M
N
j
f
t
mn
M N
m
n
h t
a
e
π
φ
+
®¥
=
=
=
W
×
å å
	
(3.6)
where W is the averaged total power ( W is assumed to be constant), and amn and 
fmn are the joint channel gain and phase shift caused by the interaction of the mth 
scatterer at the Tx and the nth scatterer at the Rx, respectively. Furthermore, fmn is 
the Doppler shift caused by the movement of the Tx and Rx and experienced by the 
wave that is reflected of the mth and nth scatterers. The amplitudes, Doppler shift 
frequencies, and phases in this model can be calculated as follows: 
Channel gain a
•	
mn. The channel gain amn can be split into two independent 
parts, am and an. The first part of the channel gain amn is introduced by the 
mth scatterer located near the Tx, while the second part of the channel gain 
amn is introduced by the nth scatterer located near the Rx. Furthermore, the 
gains am and an are normalized such that the ensemble averages of the ams 
and ans are given by 
	
2
1
[
]
1
M
m
m
E a
=
=
å
	
(3.7)
	
2
1
[
]
1
N
n
n
E a
=
=
å
	
(3.8)
Then the gain amn can be calculated as  
	
=
⋅
=
1
mn
m
n
a
a
a
MN
	
(3.9)
where the last part of (3.9) results from the normalizing conditions in (3.7) 
and (3.8).
Doppler shift
•	
 fmn. The Doppler shift introduced by the mth scatterer located 
near the Tx is independent of the Doppler shift introduced by the nth scat-
terer located near the Rx; that is, 
	
fmn = fm + fn	
(3.10)
where
	
fm = fTmax × cos aTm	
(3.11)
	
fn = fRmax × cos aRn	
(3.12)
aTm and aRn are the angles of departure (AoD) and the angles of arrival 
(AoA), respectively, and fTmax and fRmax are the maximum Doppler shifts 

62	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
experienced at the Tx and Rx respectively. These frequencies are given as 
fTmax = fc×uT/c and fRmax = fc×uR/c, where fc is the carrier frequency and uT 
and uR are the Tx and Rx velocities, respectively. Since the locations of the 
scatterers are not known a priori, the AoDs aTm and the AoAs aRn are dis-
crete random variables. However, since the number of scatterers at each end is 
approaching infinity, these discrete random variables become continuous vari-
ables with probability density functions (pdfs) p(aT) and p(aR), respectively. 
Phase
•	
 fmn. The phase shift introduced by the mth scatterer located near the 
Tx  is independent of the phase shift introduced by the nth scatterer located 
near the Rx; that is,
	
fmn = fm + fn	
(3.13)
These phase shifts are ramdom, and, since the number of scatterers at either 
end is approaching infinity, these discrete ramdom variables become continu-
ous with pdfs p(fT) and p(fR), respectively. Since all phase shifts are equally 
probable, it can be assumed that they are uniformly distributed in [0,2p); that 
is, p(fT) = 1/(2p) and p(fR) = 1/(2p).
In the presence of a specular component (i.e., LoS or a strong reflected path), 
the complex baseband impulse response becomes a superposition of a strong specu-
lar component and scattered components in (3.6). To account for a specular com-
ponent, the Akki and Haber’s model can be modified as follows  
	
Tmax
Rmax
(2
cos(
) 2
cos
)
(2
)
,
1
1
( )
1
lim
1
LoS
LoS
mn
mn
j
f
t
f
t
M
N
j
f
t
mn
M N
m
n
K
h t
e
K
a
e
K
π
π α
π
α
π
φ
-
+
+
®¥
=
=
W
=
+
W
+
×
+
å å
	
(3.14)
where K is the ratio of the received specular to scattered power (i.e., Ricean factor) 
and aLoS is the angle of arrival of the specular component.
3.1.4  Temporal Fading Characteristics of V-to-V Frequency-Flat Multipath 
Fading Channels
3.1.4.1  Temporal Autocorrelation Function and Doppler Power Spectrum for 
V-to-V Isotropic Scattering Channels
The temporal autocorrelation function (ACF) of the complex fading channel h(t) is 
an important quantity since it allows the quantification of the required pilot density 
and interleaver depths for coherent systems or the performance degradation for 
both coherent and noncoherent systems. 
The normalized ACF is defined as  
	
E[ ( ) (
) ]
( ) =
Var[ ( )]Var[ (
) ]
h t h t
R
h t
h t
τ
τ
τ
*
*
+
+
	
(3.15)

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
63
where the variance Var[×] and the expectation E[×] are taken with respect to the set 
of variables t, aT, aR, fT, and fR. Then, the normalized ACF can be written as 
	
-
+
+
+
+
(2 (
)(
)
)
,
,
,
,
,
1
1
(2 (
)
)
,
1
1
1
( )
E
 
lim
1
lim
                                                  
m
n
m
n
T
R
T
R
m
n
m
n
M
N
j
f
f
t
M N
m
n
M
N
j
f
f
t
M N
m
n
R
e
MN
e
MN
π
τ
φ
φ
τ α
α
φ
φ
π
φ
φ
τ
¢
¢
¢
¢
®¥
=
=
+
+
+
®¥
=
=
¢
¢
é
=
ê
êë
ù
´
ú
úû
å å
å å
	
(3.16)
It is reasonable to assume that the phases fm and fm′ as well as fn and fn′ are 
independent for m ¹ m′ and n ¹ n′, respectively, since their associated Doppler shifts 
are independent. Furthermore, since the phases are uniformly distributed over [0, 
2p), the ACF R(t) becomes 
	
ê
ú
ê
ú
Tmax
Rmax
2
cos
1
2
cos
1
1
( )
lim
1
 
lim
Tm
Tm
Rn
Rn
M
j
f
M
m
N
j
f
N
n
R
E
e
M
E
e
N
π
α
τ
α
π
α
τ
α
τ
-
®¥
=
-
®¥ =
é
ù
=
ê
ú
ë
û
é
ù
´
ê
ú
ë
û
å
å
	
(3.17)
For isotropic scattering, the model in Section 3.1.3 assumes that the planar 
waves depart and arrive from all directions with equal probability; that is, p(aT) = 
1/(2p) and p(aR) = 1/(2p), for aT/R Î [0,2p). Then, the normalized ACF can be writ-
ten as 
	
-
-
ò
ò
( )
(
)
(
)
R
e
p
d
e
p
d
τ
α
α
α
α
-
-
ò
ò
Tmax
Rmax
Tmax
Rmax
2
cos
2
cos
2
cos
2
cos
0
max
0
max
1
1
2
2
(2
)
(2
)
T
R
T
R
j
f
j
f
T
T
R
R
j
f
j
f
T
R
T
R
e
d
e
d
J
f
J
f
π
π
π
α τ
π
α
τ
π
π
π
π
π
α
τ
π
α
τ
π
π
α
α
π
   π
π
τ
π
τ
-
-
-
-
=
=
=
	
(3.18)
where J0(×) is the zeroth order Bessel function of the first kind. Note that ACF 
of V-to-V channel consists of a product of two Bessel functions in contrast to 
F-to-M cellular radio channel, where the ACF involves only a single Bessel func-
tion. Figure 3.2 compares the ACF for F-to-M cellular channels given in (2.29) of 
Section 2.3.3 with that of the V-to-V channel at fc = 0.5 GHz carrier frequency. 
We assume that  ut = 0 and ur = 20 m/s for F-to-M channel, while ut = ur = 20 m/s  
for V-to-V channel. From Figure 3.2, we can observe that the V-to-V channel decor-
relates faster than the F-to-M channel. This has several implications on the system 
design: (a) better temporal diversity is available in the channel, which leads to bet-
ter system performance and reduced outages; and (b) noncoherent systems suffer 
from increased performance losses, while coherent systems may need to insert pilot 
symbols more often. 
The normalized temporal autocorrelation function of the complex impulse re-
sponse in the presence of both a strong specular component and a scatter component 

64	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
can be obtained by substituting (3.14) into (3.15) and evaluating the expectation, 
and the result is  
	
Tmax
Rmax
0
Tmax
0
R max
(2
cos(
) 2
cos
)
1
( )
(2
)
(2
)
1
1
LoS
LoS
j
f
f
R
J
f
J
f
K
K
e
K
π
τ
π α
π
τ
α
τ
π
τ
π
τ
-
-
+
=
+
+
+
	
(3.19)
The Doppler power spectrum of the complex channel h(t) is the Fourier trans-
form of its temporal autocorrelation function, R(t); that is,
	
2
( )
( )
j
f
S f
R
e
d
π τ
τ
τ
¥
-
-¥
= ò
	
(3.20)
Applying the Fourier transform to (3.17) yields [10]  
	
2
2
Tmax
Tmax
1
1
( )
1
(1
)
2
s
f
S f
s f
s
sf
κ
π
é
ù
+
æ
ö
ê
ú
=
- ç
÷
+
ê
ú
è
ø
ë
û
	
(3.21)
where k [×] is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind and s is the ratio of the 
maximum Doppler frequencies fRmax and fTmax (i.e., s = fRmax /fTmax). This function 
exhibits two peaks at ± (fTmax - fRmax) and, for isotropic scattering, this function is 
symmetrical with respect to the motion of Tx or Rx. In the presence of both a strong 
specular component and a scatter component, the Doppler power spectrum can be 
obtained by substituting (3.19) into (3.20), and the result is
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
-1.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F-to-M autoccorelation function
V-to-V autocorrelation function
Normalized autocorrelation function R( )
Time lag  [s]
Figure 3.2  Normalized temporal autocorrelation functions of F-to-M cellular channel and V-to-V 
channel.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
65
	
+
-
-
+
2
2
Tmax
Tmax
Tmax
R max
1
1
( )
1
(1
)
2
(
1)
(
(
cos(
)
cos
)
1
LoS
LoS
s
f
S f
s f
s
K
sf
K
f
f
f
K
κ
π
δ
π
α
α
é
ù
+
æ
ö
ê
ú
=
- ç
÷
+
ê
ú
è
ø
+
ë
û
+
	
(3.22)
where d (×) is the Dirac delta function.  
3.1.4.2  Temporal Autocorrelation Function and Doppler Power Spectrum for 
V-to-V Nonisotropic Scattering Channels
One of the main assumptions in the Akki and Haber’s channel model is that scatter-
ing is isotropic. However, it has been experimentally demonstrated [11] that scat-
tering encountered in V-to-V environments is nonisotropic, resulting in nonuniform 
pdfs for AoDs and AoAs. Using similar reasoning as in Section 2.3.4, we use the von 
Mises pdf to characterize nonisotropic scattering. 
The von Mises pdfs for the Tx and Rx scatterers can be written as [12] 
	
α
µ
α
π
-
=
0
exp[
cos(
)]
(
)
2
(
)
T
T
T
T
T
k
p
I k
	
(3.23)
	
α
µ
α
π
−
=
0
exp[
cos(
)]
(
)
2
(
)
R
R
R
R
R
k
p
I
k
	
(3.24)
where aT(R) Î [-p, p) represents AoDs (AoAs), I0(×) is the zeroth-order modified 
Bessel function of the first kind, mT(R) Î [-p, p) is the mean angle at which the scat-
terers are distributed, and kT(R) controls the spread of scatterers around the mean. 
To evaluate the normalized temporal autocorrelation function, we start from (3.15) 
and follow the derivations in [14]. The nonisotropic scattering model assumes that 
planar waves propagate in the x-y plane and arrive from all directions with nonequal 
probability, where the von Mises pdf describes the angles of departure and the angles of 
arrival. Then, the normalized autocorrelation function can be calculated as follows:  
	
-
-
-
-
( )
(
)
(
)
R
e
p
d
e
p
d
τ
α
α
α
α
-
-
ò
ò
Tmax
Rmax
Tmax
0
Rmax
0
2
cos
2
cos
2
cos
[
cos(
)]/(2
(
))
2
cos
[
cos(
)]/(2
(
))
t
r
t
T
T
T
T
r
R
R
R
R
j
f
j
f
t
t
r
r
j
f
k
I k
t
j
f
k
I k
r
e
e
d
e
e
d    
π
π
π
α τ
π
α τ
π
π
π
π
α τ
α
µ
π
π
π
π
α τ
α
µ
π
π
α
α
-
-
-
-
=
=
´
ò
ò
	
(3.25)
Using the equality 
(
)
sin( )
cos( )
2
2
0
2
a
c
b
c
e
dc
I
a
b
π
π
π
+
-
=
+
ò
 (eq. 3.338-4 in [13]) to 
evaluate the integrals, the normalized autocorrelation function becomes [14]
	
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
2
2
2
2
0
Tmax
Tmax
0
2
2
2
2
0
Rmax
R max
0
4
+ 4
cos
( )
4
+ 4
cos
T
T
T
T
R
R
R
R
I
k
f
j
k f
R
I
k
I
k
f
j
k f
I
k
π
τ
π
τ
µ
τ
π
τ
π
τ
µ
-
=
-
´
	
(3.26)

66	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
In the presence of both a strong specular component and a scatter component, 
the temporal autocorrelation becomes
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
Tmax
Rmax
2
2
2
2
0
Tmax
Tmax
0
2
2
2
2
0
R max
R max
0
2
cos
2
cos
4
4
cos
1
( )
1
4
4
cos
1
LoS
LoS
T
T
T
T
R
R
R
R
j
f
f
I
k
f
j
k f
R
K
I
k
I
k
f
j
k f
I
k
K
e
K
π
τ
π α
π
τ
α
π
τ
π
τ
µ
τ
π
τ
π
τ
µ
-
-
+
-
+
=
+
-
+
´
+
+
	
(3.27)
The Doppler power spectrum can be obtained as the Fourier transform of the 
temporal autocorrelation function R(t ) in (3.26). To calculate the Fourier trans-
form, we first observe that Bessel functions in (3.26) can be written as  
	
ê
ú
ç
÷
ç
÷
2
2
0
Tmax
Tmax
Tmax
cos
sin
2
2
2
T
T
T
T
jk
jk
I
j
f
f
f
µ
µ
π
τ
π
π
é
ù
-
æ
ö
æ
ö
-
+
ê
ú
è
ø
è
ø
ë
û
	
(3.28)
	
2
2
0
R max
Rmax
Rmax
cos
sin
2
2
2
R
R
R
R
jk
jk
I
j
f
f
f
µ
µ
π
τ
π
π
é
ù
-
æ
ö
æ
ö
ê
ú
-
+
ç
÷
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
è
ø
ë
û
	
(3.29)
Then, using the equality
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
cos(
)
cosh
I
t
u
t dt
u
α
β
α
β
α
β
¥
+
=
-
-
ò
 (eq. 6.677-3 in [13]), 
the Doppler power spectrum becomes  
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
Tmax
Rmax
2
cos
Tmax
2
0
Tmax
Tmax
2
cos
R max
2
0
R max
R max
cosh
sin
1
( )
1
cosh
sin
1
1
T
T
R
R
jk
f f
T
T
T
jk
f f
R
R
R
k
f f
e
S f
I
k
f
f f
k
f f
e
I
k
f
f f
µ
µ
µ
π
µ
π
é
ù
-
ê
ú
ë
û
=
-
é
ù
-
ê
ú
ë
û
-

	
(3.30)
where  denotes convolution function and |f | £ fTmax + fRmax. To validate the de-
rived Doppler power spectrum, we can compare this expression for kT = kR = 0 with 
the Doppler power spectrum for isotropic scattering given in (3.21). For different 
ratios s = fRmax/fTmax, Figure 3.3 shows good agreement between the Doppler spec-
tra in (3.21) and (3.30).  
In the presence of both a strong specular component and scattered components, 
the Doppler power spectrum can be obtained by substituting (3.27) into (3.20), and 
after integration the result is 

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
67
	
+
-
-
+
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
Tmax
Rmax
2
cos
Tmax
2
0
Tmax
Tmax
2
cos
R max
2
0
R max
R max
Tmax
R max
cosh
sin
1
1
( )
(
1)
1
cosh
sin
1
1
(
cos
cos
1
T
T
R
R
jk
f f
T
T
T
jk
f f
R
R
R
LoS
LoS
k
f f
e
S f
K
I
k
f
f f
k
f f
e
I
k
f
f f
K
f
f
f
K
µ
µ
µ
π
µ
π
δ
π
α
α
é
ù
-
ê
ú
ë
û
=
+
-
é
ù
-
ê
ú
ë
û
-
+

	
(3.31)
where d(×) is the Dirac delta function.  
3.1.5  Two-Dimensional Model for MIMO V-to-V Frequency-Flat  
Multipath Fading Channels
The design of high-speed wireless communication systems often requires the use of mul-
tiple antennas as well as multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) diversity techniques. 
To model such a propagation environment, Pätzold et al. were the first to propose a 
2-D model for MIMO V-to-V channels [15–17]. This model considers outdoor radio 
propagation where all rays are only double-bounced, similar to the SISO model detailed 
in Section 3.1.3. Zajić and Stüber [18] have noticed that if the ­double-bounced rays 
can be detected, then the single-bounced rays, which bear more energy than double- 
bounced rays, can also be detected. Hence, they extended this model to include the 
LoS, single-bounced rays at transmitter and single-bounced rays at receiver. The para-
metric nature of the model in [18] makes it more flexible and adaptable to a variety of 
-1.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
(fRmax-fTmax)=0,
 (s=1)
(fRmax-fTmax)/(fTmax+fRmax)=1/3,
 (s=0.5)
(fTmax-fRmax)/(fTmax+fRmax)= -1/3,
 (s=0.5)
 Doppler power spectrum in (3.30), s=1
 Doppler power spectrum in (3.21), s=1
 Doppler power spectrum in (3.30), s=0.5
 Doppler power spectrum in (3.21), s=0.5
Normalized Doppler power spectrum 
Normalized Doppler frequency f/(fTmax+ fRmax)
Figure 3.3  Comparison of the normalized Doppler power spectra in (3.21) and (3.30) for kT = kR = 0 
and different ratios s = fRmax /fTmax×

68	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
propagation environments. For example, this model describes the radio propagation 
on highways as a combination of single- and double-bounced rays, taking into ac-
count that single-bounced rays bear more energy than the double-bounced rays [11]. 
In particular, if there are no single-bounced and LoS rays, this model simplifies to the 
model proposed in [15–17]. Hence, we will detail the model in [18] here. This model 
follows the same assumptions as outlined in Section 3.1.3. 
The geometry of the model in [18] originates in [19] and is shown in Figure 3.4. 
This elementary 2 ´ 2 antenna configuration is used later to construct uniform lin-
ear antenna arrays with arbitrary number of antennas. The spacing between two 
adjacent antenna elements at the Tx and Rx is denoted by dT and dR, respectively, 
while angles qT and qR describe the orientation of the Tx and Rx antenna array, 
respectively, relative to the x-axis. 
The two-ring model defines two rings of fixed scatterers, one around the Tx 
and another around the Rx, as shown in Figure 3.4. Around the transmitter, M 
omnidirectional scatterers lie on a ring of radius Rt, and the mth transmit scatterer 
is denoted by (
)
m
T
S
. Similarly, around the receiver, N omnidirectional scatterers lie 
on a ring of radius Rr and the nth receive scatterer is denoted by ( )
n
R
S
. The Tx and 
Rx are moving with speeds uT and uR in directions described by angles gT and gR, 
respectively. 
In Figure 3.4, the symbols 
(
)
m
T
α
 and 
( )
n
T
α
 are the angles of departures (AoD) of 
the waves that bounce off the scatterers (
)
m
T
S
 and ( )
n
R
S
, respectively. Similarly, the 
symbols 
(
)
m
R
α
 and 
( )
n
R
α
 are the angles of arrivals (AoA) of the waves scattered from 
(
)
m
T
S
 and ( )
n
R
S
, respectively. Finally, 
LoS
Rq
α
 denotes the AoA of the LoS path (not shown 
in Figure  3.4 to reduce clutter). This model assumes max{dT , dR} << min{Rt , Rr}, 
which allows us to approximate the angles of departure from different transmit an-
tennas 
(
)
pm
T
α
 and 
(
)
pn
T
α
 with 
(
)
m
T
α
 and 
( )
n
T
α
, respectively. Using similar reasoning, the 
angles of arrival from different receive antennas 
(
)
mq
R
α
 and 
(
)
nq
R
α
 are approximated 
with 
(
)
m
R
α
 and 
( )
n
R
α
, respectively. 
Figure 3.4  Two-ring model for 2-D MIMO V-to-V channels with Lt = Lr = 2 antenna elements. For 
simplicity, only double-bounced rays are depicted.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
69
The distance between the Tx and Rx is D, and D is assumed to be smaller than 
4RtRrLr/(l(Lt – 1)(Lr – 1)) (the channel does not experience keyhole behavior [20]), 
where l denotes the carrier wavelength. Distance epm is the distance between the pth 
antenna 
( )
p
T
A
 and the mth scatterer placed around the Tx (i.e., 
( )
(
)
p
m
T
T
A
S
-
). Similarly, 
symbols emq, epn, enq, and emn denote distances 
( )
(
)
q
m
R
T
S
A
-
, 
( )
( )
p
n
R
T
A
S
-
, 
( )
( )
q
n
R
R
S
A
-
, 
and (
)
( )
m
n
R
T
S
S
-
, respectively. Finally, LoS
pq
ε
 denotes the distance 
( )
( )
p
q
R
T
A
A
-
. 
The complex faded envelope under frequency-flat fading can therefore be writ-
ten as a superposition of (a) LoS, (b) single-bounced rays that have been reflected 
once at the transmitter (SBT) or at the receiver (SBR), and (c) double-bounced (DB) 
rays. For the channel between the pth transmit and qth receive antenna the channel 
impulse response is [18]
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
SBT
SBR
DB
LoS
pq
pq
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
=
+
+
+
	
(3.32)
where the respective components are
	
2
2
( )
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
j
f
t j
d
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
pq
h
t
a
e
π
π
λ
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
W
	
(3.33)
	
,
,
2
2
,
1
( )
lim
SBT
SBT
SBT
m
pq m
pq m
M
j
f
t j
d
j
SBT
SBT
pq
pq
pq m
M
m
h
t
a
e
π
π
φ
λ
æ
ö
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
®¥
=
=
W
å
	
(3.34)
	
,
,
2
2
,
1
( )
lim
SBR
SBR
SBR
n
pq n
pq n
N
j
f
t j
d
j
SBR
SBR
pq
pq
pq n
N
n
h
t
a
e
π
π
φ
λ
æ
ö
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
®¥ =
=
W
å
	
(3.35)
	
,
,
2
2
,
,
1
1
( )
lim
DB
DB
DB
mn
pq mn
pq mn
M
N
j
f
t j
d
j
DB
DB
pq
pq
pq mn
M N
m
n
h
t
a
e
π
π
φ
λ
æ
ö
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
®¥
=
=
=
W
å å
	
(3.36)
where Wpq is the power associated with the pqth planar wave. For max{dT , dR}  
min{Rt, Rr}, we can assume that the total power is equally split among all antenna 
elements (i.e., Wpq = W for all p Î {1,…,Lt} and q Î {1,…,Lr}). The channel gains, 
Doppler shift frequencies, phases, and path lengths in this model can be calculated 
as follows: 
Channel gains
•	
. The channel gains in this model are normalized such that the 
ensemble averages of the 
,
SBT
pq m
a
s, 
,
SBR
pq n
a
s and 
,
DB
pq mn
a
s are given by 
	
(
)
2
,
1
1
M
SBT
pq m
m
E
a
=
é
ù =
ê
ú
ë
û
å
	
(3.37)
	
(
)
2
,
1
1
N
SBR
pq n
n
E
a
=
é
ù =
ê
ú
ë
û
å
	
(3.38)
	
(
)
,
2
,
,
1
1
M N
DB
pq mn
m n
E
a
=
é
ù =
ê
ú
ë
û
å
	
(3.39)

70	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
In addition, Kpq describes how the total signal power between the pth transmit 
and the qth receive antenna is split between the LoS and NLoS components: the 
power allocated to the LoS component between the pth transmit and qth receive 
antenna is Kpq /(1 + Kpq), while the total power allocated to the NLoS components 
between the pth transmit and qth receive antenna is 1/(1 + Kpq). For max{dT , dR}  
min{Rt , Rr}, we can assume that the Ricean fading factor is the same between all 
antenna elements (i.e., Kpq = K for all pÎ{1,…,Lt} and qÎ{1,…,Lr}). Furthermore, it 
is assumed that the relative power allocated to the SBT, SBR, and DB components 
is respectively hT, hR, and hTR such that hT + hR + hTR = 1. These parameters have 
to be either set during simulations or estimated from measurements. Having all this 
in mind, the channel gains can be written as follows: 
	
1
LoS
pq
K
a
K
=
+
	
(3.40)
	
,
1
1
T
SBT
pq m
a
K
M
η
=
+
	
(3.41)
	
,
1
1
R
SBR
pq n
a
K
N
η
=
+
	
(3.42)
	
,
1
1
TR
DB
pq mn
a
K
MN
η
=
+
	
(3.43)
Doppler shifts
•	
. Doppler shifts depend on the geometrical relation between 
directions of movement of Tx and Rx (gT and gR) and the directions of AoDs 
and AoAs. For this model, the Doppler shifts can be written as
	
cos
cos
pq
T
R
Rq
Rq
π
α
γ
α
γ
=
-
-
+
-
(
)
(
)
Tmax
Rmax
LoS
LoS
LoS
f
f
f
	
(3.44)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
Tmax
R max
(
)
(
)
Tmax
Rmax
cos
cos
cos
sin
sin
cos
m
m
SBT
m
T
R
R
T
m
m
T
T
R
R
T
T
f
f
f
f
f
α
γ
α
γ
α
γ
γ
α
γ
=
-
+
-
=
-
+
D
-
	
(3.45)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
( )
Tmax
Rmax
( )
( )
Tmax
Rmax
cos
cos
sin
sin
cos
cos
n
n
SBR
n
T
R
R
T
n
n
R
T
T
R
R
R
f
f
f
f
f
α
γ
α
γ
γ
α
γ
α
γ
=
-
+
-
=
D
+
+
-
	
(3.46)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
Tmax
Rmax
cos
cos
m
n
DB
mn
T
R
R
T
f
f
f
α
γ
α
γ
=
-
+
-
	
(3.47)
where frequencies fTmax = uT /l and fRmax = uR /l are the maximum Doppler 
frequencies associated with the Tx and Rx, respectively, and l is the carrier 
wavelength. For max{dT , dR}  min{Rt , Rr}, the LoS AoAs are approxi-
mately equal to p (i.e., 
LoS
Rq
α
π
=
). Since the location of the scatterers is not 
known a priori, the AoDs (
(
)
m
T
α
and 
( )
n
T
α
) and the AoAs (
(
)
m
R
α
 and 
( )
n
R
α
) are 

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
71
modeled as random variables. However, note that when the number of scat-
terers at each end is approaching infinity, these discrete random variables can 
be characterized as continuous random variables with given pdfs. Note that 
double-bounced rays have the AoD, 
(
)
m
T
α
, independent from the AoA, 
( )
n
R
α
 
[20], whereas single-bounced rays have the AoA, 
(
)
m
R
α
, dependent on the AoD, 
(
)
m
T
α
, and the AoD, 
( )
n
T
α
, dependent on the AoA 
( )
n
R
α
 [18]. The geometry that 
propagating waves create traveling from the transmitter to the receiver dictates 
the relationship between the AoDs and AoAs. Since single-bounced rays form 
a triangle between the transmit and the receive antennas, only one angle can 
be independently selected—either AoDs or AoAs. On the other hand, double-
bounced rays form a quadrilateral between the transmit and receive antennas, 
and there can be two independently selected angles—AoDs and AoAs. 
Phases
•	
. First, we note that the phase shift introduced by the mth scatterer 
located near the Tx is independent of the phase shift introduced by the nth 
scatterer located near the Rx. Then, without loss of generality, we can assume 
that the phases 
,
SBT
pq m
φ
, 
,
SBR
pq n
φ
, 
,
DB
pq mn
φ
 and  are independent random variables. 
Here, it is assumed that they are uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 2p) 
and independent from any other random variable. 
Path lengths
•	
. From Figure 3.4, the path lengths of the respective waves can 
be written as 
	
LoS
pq
pq
d
ε
=
	
(3.48)
	
,
SBT
pq m
pm
mq
d
ε
ε
=
+
	
(3.49)
	
,
SBR
pq n
pn
nq
d
ε
ε
=
+
	
(3.50)
	
,
DB
pq mn
pm
mn
nq
d
ε
ε
ε
=
+
+
	
(3.51)
For outdoor propagation,which is typical for V-to-V communications, we 
can assume the radii Rt  and Rr are much smaller than the distance D between 
the Tx and Rx; that is, max {Rt , Rr}  D (local scattering condition). Under 
this assumption, the distances epq, epm, emq, epn, enq, and emn can be approxi-
mated as follows [18]: 
	
-
+
-
-
0.5
0.5
cos
r
R
R
(
)
(
)
(
)
ε
δ
θ
δ
π
θ
»
-
+
-
0.5
0.5
cos
pq
t
T
T
D
L
p
L
q
	
(3.52)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
0.5
0.5
cos
m
pm
t
t
T
T
T
R
L
p
ε
δ
θ
α
»
-
+
-
-
	
(3.53)
	
(
) (
)
(
)
0.5
0.5
sin
sin
cos
m
mq
r
R
T
R
R
T
D
L
q
ε
δ
θ
α
θ
»
-
+
-
D
-
	
(3.54)
	
(
) (
)
( )
0.5
0.5
sin
sin
cos
n
pn
t
T
R
T
T
R
D
L
p
ε
δ
θ
α
θ
»
-
+
-
D
+
	
(3.55)
	
(
)
(
)
( )
0.5
0.5
cos
n
nq
r
r
R
R
R
R
L
q
ε
δ
α
θ
»
-
+
-
-
	
(3.56)

72	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
mn
D
ε
»
	
(3.57)
where parameters p and q take values from the sets p Î{1,…,Lt} and qÎ 
{1, …, Lr}, respectively, DT  = Rt/D, and DR  = Rr/D. 
Here, we note that the complex faded envelope in (3.32) also can be written as 
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
Q
I
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
jh
t
=
+
 where
	
( )( )
{
( )}
{
( )}
{
( )}
{
( )}
I
SBT
SBR
DB
LoS
pq
pq
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
= Â
+ Â
+ Â
+ Â
	
(3.58)
	
(
)( )
{
( )}
{
( )}
{
( )}
{
( )}
Q
SBT
SBR
DB
LoS
pq
pq
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
= Á
+ Á
+ Á
+ Á
	
(3.59)
are the in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) components of the complex faded envelope, 
and R{×} and J{×} denote the real and imaginary operation, ­respectively.   
3.1.6  Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of V-to-V Frequency-Flat 
Multipath Fading Channels
Using the model described in Section 3.1.5, we can now derive the key temporal and 
spatial characteristics of V-to-V frequency-flat multipath fading channels. 
3.1.6.1  Space-Time Correlation Function
Assuming a 2-D nonisotropic scattering environment characterized by von Mises 
pdfs (defined in 3.23 and 3.24), we derive the space-time correlation function 
(ST-CF) of the complex faded envelope in (3.32). 
The normalized space-time correlation function between two complex faded 
envelopes hpq(t) and 
( )
pq
h
t

 is defined as 	
	
(
)
*
,
*
E
( )
(
)
,
,
Var
( ) Var
(
)
pq
pq
pq pq
T
R
pq
pq
h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
τ
δ
δ
τ
τ
é
ù
+
ë
û
=
é
ù
+
é
ù
ë
û
ë
û



	
(3.60)
where (·)* denotes complex conjugate operation, E[×] is the statistical expectation 
operator, and Var[×] is the statistical variance operator. Since 
( )
SBT
pq
h
t , 
( )
SBR
pq
h
t , and 
( )
DB
pq
h
t  are independent complex Gaussian random processes with zero means, 
(3.60) can be simplified to  
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
LoS
SBT
pq pq
T
R
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
SBR
DB
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
R
R
R
R
R
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
=
+
+
+









	
(3.61)
where 
(
)
,
,
,
LoS
T
R
pq pq
R
δ
δ
τ

, 
(
)
,
,
,
SBT
T
R
pq pq
R
δ
δ
τ

, 
(
)
,
,
,
SBR
T
R
pq pq
R
δ
δ
τ

, and 
(
)
,
,
,
DB
T
R
pq pq
R
δ
δ
τ

 
denote  the normalized ST-CFs of the LoS, single-bounced transmit, single-bounced 
receive, and double-bounced components, respectively. 
Following the reasoning similar to one in Section 3.1.4.2, the space-time cor-
relation functions of the LoS, SBT, SBR, and DB components can be obtained as 
follows [18]  

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
73
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
max
*
,
*
2
2
(
)
cos
(
)
cos
2
cos
cos
E
( )
,
,
Var
( ) Var
1
T
T
R
R
T
T
R
R
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
LoS
T
R
pq pq
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
j
p p
j
q q
j
f
f
h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
K
e
K
π
π
δ
θ
δ
θ
πτ
γ
γ
λ
λ
τ
δ
δ
τ
τ
-
-
-
+
-
é
ù
+
ë
û
=
é
ù
é
ù
+
ë
û
ë
û
=
+





	
(3.62)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
max
*
,
*
1
2
(
)
cos
(
)
sin
sin
cos
2
cos
( )
(
)
,
,
Var
( ) Var
(
)
1
lim
1
m
m
T
T
R
T
R
R
T
T
m
T
m
T
T
T
R
SBT
SBT
pq
pq
SBT
T
R
pq pq
SBT
SBT
pq
pq
M
T
M
m
j
p p
q q
j
f
f
E h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
K
M
E
e
e
π
δ
θ
α
δ
θ
α
θ
λ
α
πτ
α
γ
τ
δ
δ
τ
τ
η
®¥
=
é
ù
-
-
+
-
D
-
ë
û
-
-
+
é
ù
+
ë
û
=
é
ù
é
ù
+
ë
û
ë
û
=
+
é
ê
êë
´
å





(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
sin
sin
cos
max
2
2
2 (
)
cos
2
cos
0
0
1
m
T
R
R
T
R
R
R
R
j
q q
j
f
SBT
SBT
T
T
I
x
y
e
K
I
k
γ
α
γ
π
δ
θ
πτ
γ
λ
η
D
-
é
       ù
ê
       ú
ë
       û
-
-
+
ù
ú
ú
û
+
=
+

	
(3.63)
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
max
,
,
1
2 [(
)
cos(
) (
)
(
sin
sin
cos
)]
2
[
(
sin
sin
( )
(
)
(
, )
Var[
( )]
[
(
) ]
1
lim
1
n
n
R
R
T
R
T
T
R
R
n
R
n
T
R
T
R
SBR
SBR
pq
pq
SBR
T
R
pq pq
SBR
SBR
pq
pq
N
R
N
n
j
q q
p p
j
f
h
t h
t
R
h
t Var h
t
K
N
E
e
e
π
δ
α
θ
δ
θ
α
θ
λ
α
πτ
γ
α
τ
δ
δ
τ
τ
η
*
*
®¥
=
-
-
+
-
D
+
-
D
+
é
ù
E
+
ë
û
=
+
=
+
é
êë
´
å





(
)
( )
max
max
cos
)
cos(
)]
2
2
2
0
(
)
cos
2
cos
0
1
(
)
n
T
R
R
R
T
T
T
T
f
SBR
SBR
j
p p
j
f
R
R
I
x
y
e
K
I k
γ
α
γ
π
δ
θ
πτ
γ
λ
η
+
-
-
-
ùû
+
=
+

	
(3.64)
	
(
)
*
,
*
,
1
1
E
( )
(
)
,
,
Var
( ) Var
(
)
1
lim
1
DB
DB
pq
pq
DB
T
R
pq pq
DB
DB
pq
pq
M
N
TR
M N
m
n
h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
K
MN
τ
δ
δ
τ
τ
η
®¥
=
=
é
ù
+
ë
û
=
é
ù
é
ù
+
ë
û
ë
û
=
+
å å



	
(3.65) 

74	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
(
)
( )
max
max
(
)
( )
2
cos
cos
,
2
(
)
cos
(
)
cos
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
E
1
(
)
m
n
T
T
R
R
R
T
m
n
R
T
n
m
R
R
T
T
R
T
j
f
f
j
   q q
                 p p
DB
DB
DB
DB
TR
T
R
e
e
I
x
y
I
z
w
K
I
k
I k
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
α
α
π
δ
θ
δ
θ
α
λ
-
-
+
-
ù
-
-
+
-
-
úû
é
ë
´
+
+
=
+


α
η
ù
úû
é
ë
	
(3.66)
where I0(×) is the zeroth-order modified Bessel function of the first kind and the 
parameters xSBT, ySBT, xSBR, ySBR, xDB, yDB, zDB, and wDB are 
	
max
2
(
)
cos
2
cos
cos
SBT
T
T
T
T
T
T
x
j
p
p
j
f
k
π
λ
=
-
-
+

	
(3.67)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
max
2
sin
sin
2
sin
sin
sin
SBT
T
T
R
T
R
T
T
R
T
R
T
T
y
j
p
p
q
q
j
f
f
k
π
λ
=
-
+
-
D
-
+
D
+


	
(3.68)
	
(
)
max
2
cos
2
cos
cos
SBR
R
R
R
R
R
R
x
j
q
q
j
f
k
π
λ
=
-
-
+

	
(3.69)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
max
2
sin
sin
2
sin
sin
sin
SBR
T
R
T
R
R
T
R
T
R
R
R
R
y
j
p
p
q
q
j
f
f
k
π
λ
=
-
D
+
-
-
D
+
+


	
(3.70)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
 K=0, vT=10 m/s, vR=5 m/s, T= R= /2
 K=10, vT=10 m/s, vR=5 m/s, T= R= /2
 K=0, vT=1 m/s, vR=10 m/s, T= R=
Envelope of normalized ST-CF R( )
Time lag  [s]
Figure 3.5  Envelope of the correlation function versus time lag for several scenarios: (a) K = 0, vT = 
10 m/s, uR = 5 m/s, dT = dR = l/2, (b) K = 10, vT = 10 m/s, vR = 5 m/s, dT = dR = l/2, and (c) K = 0, vT = 
1 m/s, uR = 10 m/s, dT  = dR  = l.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
75
	
=
-
-
+
max
2
(
)
cos
2
cos
cos
DB
T
T
T
T
T
T
x
j
p
p
j
f
k
π
λ

	
(3.71)
	
max
2
(
)
sin
2
sin
sin
DB
T
T
T
T
T
T
y
j
p
p
j
f
k
π
λ
=
-
-
+

	
(3.72)
	
max
2
(
)
cos
2
cos
cos
DB
R
R
R
R
R
R
z
j
q
q
j
f
k
π
λ
=
-
-
+

	
(3.73)
	
max
2
(
)
sin
2
sin
sin
DB
R
R
R
R
R
R
w
j
q
q
j
f
k
π
λ
=
-
-
+

	
(3.74)
The MIMO V-to-V space-time correlation function in (3.61) can be simplified 
for many special cases. The simplest special case is Clarke’s temporal correlation 
function J0(2p fRmaxt) [21], obtained for K = 0 (NLoS condition), kR = 0 (2-D iso-
tropic scattering around Rx), fTmax = 0, kT = 0, hT = 0, hTR = 0 (fixed Tx, no scat-
tering around Tx), and dT = dR = 0 (single-antenna Tx and Rx), where J0(×) is the 
first kind zeroth-order Bessel function. Expressions for other space-time correlation 
functions based on the “one-ring” model [22, 23] can be similarly obtained. The 
temporal correlation function for V-to-V channels, assuming 2-D isotropic scat-
tering, J0(2pfTmaxt) J0(2pfRmaxt) [10] is obtained for K = 0, hT  = hR = 0, kT = kR = 
0, and dT = dR = 0. Similarly, the spatial correlation function for V-to-V channel  
J0(2p(p~ – p) dT / l)J0(2p(q~ – q)dR/ l) [24] is obtained for K = 0, hT = 0, hR = 0, kT = 0, 
kR = 0, and t = 0. Finally, the space-time correlation function for V-to-V channels, 
when isotropic scattering is assumed and there is only the double-bounced compo-
nent, is obtained for K = 0, hT = hR = 0, kT = kR = 0, p = 1, p~ = 2, q = 1, and q~ = 2, 
and can be written as [15, 16] 
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
0
Tmax
Tmax
2
2
0
Rmax
Rmax
,
,
2
2
cos
2
2
cos
T
T
R
T
T
T
R
R
R
R
R
J
f
f
J
f
f
δ
δ
δ
τ
π
δ
λ
τ
τ
γ
θ
λ
δ
π
δ
λ
τ
τ
γ
θ
λ
æ
ö
=
+
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
´
+
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø 	
(3.75)
The space-time correlation function in (3.61) exhibits some interesting proper-
ties, which are illustrated in Figure 3.5. As an example, we plot three ST-CFs that are 
obtained with the following parameters: l = 0.3m, qT = p/3, qR = p /4, gT = gR = p / 2, hT = 
hR = 0.45, hTR = 0.1, kT = 3, kR = 5, mT = mR = 0, DT = DR = 0.001, p = 1, p~ = 2, q = 1, 
and q~ = 2. The first curve plots the ST-CF for the propagation environment with high 
mobility and NLoS (i.e., K = 0, vT = 10 m/s, vR = 5 m/s, dT = dR = l/2). The second 
curve plots the ST-CF for the propagation environment with high mobility and LoS 
(i.e., K = 10, υT = 10 m/s, υR = 5 m/s, dT = dR = l/2). Finally, the third curve plots the 
ST-CF for the propagation environment with low mobility, NLoS, and larger antenna 
spacings i.e., K = 0, υT = 1 m/s, uR = 10 m/s, dT = dR = l. It can be observed that the 
largest space-time correlation value is not necessarily at zero delay, as usually observed 
in F-to-M cellular channels. Furthermore, it can be observed that the Rice faded chan-
nel is more correlated than Rayleigh faded channel. 

76	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
The space-time correlation functions of the I and Q components of the complex 
faded envelope can be obtained by substituting (3.58) and (3.59) into (3.61). Using 
similar derivations as discussed earlier, it can be shown that for a large number of 
scatterers (M, N ® ¥) and nonisotropic scattering, the space-time auto- and cross-
correlation functions of the I and Q components of the complex faded envelope are 
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
{
}
(
)
(
)
( , )
( , )
,
,
,
max
max
max
2
2
0
0
,
,
,
,
,
,
2
2
cos
(
)
cos
(
)
cos
1
2
cos
2
cos
2
cos 2
cos
(
)
cos
1
Q Q
I I
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
T
R
T
T
R
R
T
T
R
R
T
R
R
R
R
SBT
SBT
T
R
R
R
K
p
p
q
q
K
f
f
f
q
q
K
I
x
y
I
k
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
π
π
δ
θ
δ
θ
λ
λ
πτ
γ
πτ
γ
η
π
πτ
γ
δ
θ
λ
=
=
æ
=
-
-
-
çè
+
ö
+
-
÷ø
æ
ö
+
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
ì
+
ïí
´
R
R






(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
2
2
0
0
max
2
2
0
0
max
2
sin 2
cos
(
)
cos
1
2
cos
(
)
cos
2
cos
1
2
sin
(
)
cos
2
cos
1
T
R
R
R
R
SBT
SBT
T
R
T
T
T
T
SBR
SBR
R
R
T
T
T
T
f
q
q
K
I
x
y
I
k
p
p
f
K
I
x
y
I
k
p
p
f
K
η
π
πτ
γ
δ
θ
λ
η
π
δ
θ
πτ
γ
λ
η
π
δ
θ
πτ
γ
λ
üïý
ï
ï
î
þ
æ
ö
-
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
ì
ü
+
ï
ï
í
ý
´
ï
ï
î
þ
æ
ö
+
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
ì
ü
+
ï
ï
í
ý
´
ï
ï
î
þ
æ
ö
-
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
F
R



(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
0
0
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
1
SBR
SBR
R
DB
DB
DB
DB
TR
T
R
DB
DB
DB
DB
TR
T
R
I
x
y
I
k
I
x
y
I
z
w
K
I
k
I
k
I
x
y
I
z
w
K
I
k
I
k
η
η
ì
ü
+
ï
ï
í
ý
´
ï
ï
î
þ
ì
ü
ì
ü
+
+
ï
ï
ï
ï
í
ý
í
ý
+
ï
ï
ï
ï
+
î
î
þ
þ
ì
ü
ì
ü
+
+
ï
ï
ï
ï
í
ý
í
ý
-
ï
ï
ï
ï
+
î
î
þ
þ
F
R
R
F
F
	
(3.76)

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
77
	
(
)
(
)
{
}
(
)
(
)
( ,
)
,
,
max
max
max
2
2
0
0
,
,
,
,
2
2
sin
(
)
cos
(
)
cos
1
2
cos
2
cos
2
sin 2
cos
(
)
cos
1
cos 2
1
I Q
T
R
pq pq
T
R
pq pq
T
T
R
R
T
T
R
R
T
R
R
R
R
SBT
SBT
T
T
R
R
R
K
p
p
q
q
K
f
f
f
q
q
K
I
x
y
I k
f
K
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
π
π
δ
θ
δ
θ
λ
λ
πτ
γ
πτ
γ
η
π
πτ
γ
δ
θ
λ
η
πτ
=
æ
=
-
-
-
çè
+
ö
+
-
÷ø
æ
ö
+
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
ì
ü
ï
ï
+
í
ý
´
ï
ï
î
þ
+
+
F
R





(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
2
2
0
0
max
2
2
0
0
max
2
2
0
0
2
cos
(
)
cos
2
sin
(
)
cos
2
cos
1
2
cos
(
)
cos
2
cos
1
R
R
R
SBT
SBT
T
R
T
T
T
T
SBR
SBR
R
R
T
T
T
T
SBR
SBR
R
q
q
I
x
y
I k
p
p
f
K
I
x
y
I k
p
p
f
K
I
x
y
I
k
π
γ
δ
θ
λ
η
π
δ
θ
πτ
γ
λ
η
π
δ
θ
πτ
γ
λ
æ
ö
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
ì
ü
ï
ï
+
í
ý
´
ï
ï
î
þ
æ
ö
+
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
ì
ü
ï
ï
+
í
ý
´
ï
ï
î
þ
æ
ö
+
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
ì
+
í
´
F
R
F



(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
1
DB
DB
DB
DB
TR
T
R
DB
DB
DB
DB
TR
T
R
I
x
y
I
z
w
K
I k
I k
I
x
y
I
z
w
K
I k
I k
η
η
ü
ï
ïý
ï
ï
î
þ
ì
ü
ì
ü
+
ï
ï
ï
ï
+
í
ý
í
ý
+
ï
ï
+
ï
ï
î
þ
î
þ
ì
ü
ì
ü
+
+
ï
ï
ï
ï
í
ý
í
ý
+
ï
ï
ï
ï
+
î
þ
î
þ
R
F
F
R
	
(3.77)
3.1.6.2  Doppler Power Spectrum
The Doppler power spectrum can be obtained by taking the Fourier transform of 
the ST-CF in (3.61) with respect to time lag t, which essentially leads to a space-
Doppler power spectral density (sD-psd). Applying (3.20) to (3.61) yields the fol-
lowing results [18]: 
	
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
LoS
SBT
pq pq
T
R
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
SBR
DB
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
S
f
S
f
S
f
S
f
S
f
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
,
,
,
,
,
=
+
+
+









	
(3.78)

78	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
where 
(
,
, ),
(
,
, ),
(
,
, ),
LoS
SBT
SBR
T
R
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
S
f
S
f
S
f
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
δ
,
,
,






 and 
(
,
, )
DB
pq pq
,
 denote 
the normalized sD-psds of the LoS, single-bounced transmit, single-bounced re-
ceive, and double-bounced components, respectively. 
By calculating the Fourier transformation of the space-time correlation func-
tion in (3.62), we obtain the space-Doppler power spectral density of the LoS 
­component:  
	
[
]
2
(
)
cos
(
)
cos
max
max
(
,
, )
1
(
cos
cos
)
T
T
R
R
j
p p
q q
LoS
T
R
pq pq
T
T
R
R
K
S
f
e
K
f
f
f
π
δ
θ
δ
θ
λ
δ
δ
δ
γ
γ
-
-
-
,
=
+
´ 
-
+



	
(3.79)
where (·) denotes the Dirac delta function. 
By observing that functions (
)
2
2
0
SBT
SBT
I
x
y
+
 and (
)
2
2
0
SBR
SBR
I
x
y
+
 can be 
written as 
	
2
2
0
max
max
max
max
2
(
)
2
SBT
SBT
SBT
SBT
SBT
x
y
y
x
y
T
SBT
T
T
T
p
q
p
q
w
I
j
f
A
f
f
f
π
τ
π
é
ù
æ
ö
ê
ú
-
+
-
+
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
ë
û	
	
2
2
0
max
max
max
max
2
(
)
2
SBR
SBR
SBR
SBR
SBR
x
y
y
x
y
R
SBR
R
R
R
p
q
p
q
w
I
j
f
A
f
f
f
π
τ
π
é
ù
æ
ö
ê
ú
-
+
-
+
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
ë
û	
and by using the equality 
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
cos(
)
cosh
/
I
t
u
t dt
u
α
β
α
β
α
β
¥
+
=
+
-
ò
 
(eq. 6.677-3 in [13]), we obtain sD-psds of the SBT and SBR components as follows:
	
´ 
-
+
-
-
-
-
[
]
[
]
max
2
0
max
max
max
2
max
max
exp{
2
2 (
cos
)
}
(
,
, )
(
1) (
)
1
(
cos
)/
cosh (
sin(
)
2
2
)
1
(
cos
)/
SBR
SBT
SBT
SBT
SBT
x
R
R
SBT
T
SBT
T
R
pq pq
T
T
R
R
T
T
T
T
x
y
y
x
R
R
T
j
p
j
f
f
A
S
f
K
I k
f
f
f
f
k
j
p
q
j
p
q
f
f
f
π
π
γ
η
δ
δ
π
γ
µ
γ
π
π
γ
,
=
+
-
-
é
êë
ù
              ´
-
-
úû

	
(3.80)
	
´ 
-
+
-
  
[
]
[
]
max
2
0
max
max
max
2
max
max
exp{ 2
2 (
cos
)
}
(
,
, )
(
1)
(
)
1
(
cos
)/
cosh (
sin(
)
2
2
)
1
(
cos
)/
SBT
SBR
SBR
SBR
SBR
x
T
T
SBR
R
SBR
T
R
pq pq
R
R
T
T
R
R
R
R
x
y
y
x
T
T
R
j
p
j
f
f
A
S
f
K
I k
f
f
f
f
k
j
p
q
j
p
q
f
f
f
π
π
γ
η
δ
δ
π
γ
µ
γ
π
π
γ
,
-
+
=
+
+
+
éë
ù
   ´ 
-
+
      
úû

	 (3.81)
where cosh(×) is the hyperbolic cosine, çf  –  fRmax cos gRç£  fTmax , çf  +  fTmax cos gT ç£ 
fRmax, and the auxiliary variables are 

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
79
	
(
)(
/ )cos
SBT
x
T
T
p
p
p δ
λ
θ
=
-

	
(3.82)
	
cos
SBT
x
T
q
γ
=
	
(3.83)
	
max
(2
2
)/2
SBT
SBT
SBT
SBT
SBT
SBT
x
x
y
y
x
T
A
p
q
p
q
w
f
π
π
π
=
+
+
	
(3.84)
	
=
-
+
-
D
[(
)
sin
(
)
sin
]/
SBT
y
T
T
R
T
R
p
p
p
q
q
δ
θ
δ
θ
λ


	
(3.85)
	
sin
SBT
y
T
q
γ
»
	
(3.86)
	
max
(2
2
)/2
R
f
π
π
π
=
+
+
SBR
SBR
SBR
SBR
SBR
SBR
x
x
y
y
x
A
p
q
p
q
w
	
(3.87)
	
= -
-
x
T
T
T
cos(
)
γ
µ
SBT
w
jk
	
(3.88)
	
= -
-
y
T
T
T
sin(
)
γ
µ
SBT
w
jk
	
(3.89)
	
(
)(
/ )cos
SBR
x
R
R
p
q
q δ
λ
θ
=
-

	
(3.90)
	
cos
SBR
x
R
q
γ
=
	
(3.91)
	
cos(
)
SBR
x
R
R
R
w
jk
γ
µ
= -
-
	
(3.92)
	
=
-
D
+
-
[(
)
sin
(
)
sin
]/
SBR
y
T
R
T
R
R
p
p
p
q
q
δ
θ
δ
θ
λ


	
(3.93)
	
sin
SBR
y
R
q
γ
»
	
(3.94)
	
= -
-
sin(
)
SBR
y
R
R
R
w
jk
γ
µ
	
(3.95)
Similarly, the space-Doppler power spectral density of the double-bounced 
component can be written as [18]  
	
max
,
2
0
Tmax
max
(2
2
cos(
)) /
2
Tmax
(2
2
cos(
(
,
, )
(
1)
(
)
1
/
)
cosh (
sin(
)
2
2
)
1
( /
)
x
x
y
y
T
T
T
T
DB
DB
DB
DB
DB
DB
DB
DB
z
z
w
w
R
R
R
DB
DB
DB
DB
TR
DB
T
R
pq pq
T
T
j
p
q
p
q
jk
f f
T
T
T
x
y
y
x
j
p
q
p
q
jk
S
f
K
I k
f
f f
e
k
j
p
q
j
p
q
f f
e
π
π
γ
µ
π
π
γ
µ
η
δ
δ
π
µ
γ
π
π
-
+
+
-
-
+
+
-
=
+
-
´
é
´
-
+
-
êë
ù
´
-
úû


max
)) /
2
0
max
max
2
R max
(
)
1
( /
)
cosh (
sin(
)
2
2
)
1
( /
)
R
DB
DB
DB
DB
f f
R
R
R
R
R
R
z
w
w
z
I k
f
f f
k
j
p
q
j
p
q
f f
π
µ
γ
π
π
-
é
´
-
+
-
êë
ù
´
-
úû
(
	
(3.96)

80	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
where  is the convolution operation, çf ç£ fTmax + fRmax and the auxiliary vari-
ables are
	
(
)(
/ )cos
DB
x
T
T
p
p
p δ
λ
θ
=
-

	
(3.97)
	
cos
DB
x
T
q
γ
=
	
(3.98)
	
(
)(
/ )sin
DB
y
T
T
p
p
p δ
λ
θ
=
-

	
(3.99)
	
sin
DB
y
T
q
γ
=
	
(3.100)
	
(
)(
/ )cos
DB
z
R
R
p
q
q δ
λ
θ
=
-

	
(3.101)
	
cos
DB
z
R
q
γ
=
	
(3.102)
	
(
)(
/ )sin
DB
w
R
R
p
q
q δ
λ
θ
=
-

	
(3.103)
	
sin
DB
w
R
q
γ
=
	
(3.104)
In Figures 3.6 and 3.7, we plot the sD-psd, 
,
pq pq
S
(dT, dR, f), for several MIMO 
systems with parameters fRmax = fTmax = 200 Hz, dT = dR Î{0.5l, 1l , 5l , 10l}, qT = p/3, 
qR = p/4, gT = gR = p/2, and Lt = Lr = 2. In these figures, we analyze the radio propaga­
tion in outdoor urban environments, assuming 2-D isotropic scattering (kT = kR = 0)  
and LoS (K = 10) conditions between the transmitter and receiver. In Figure 3.6, 
we assume that the single-bounced rays bear more energy than the double-bounced 
rays (i.e., hT = hR = 0.4 and hTR = 0.2), which is characteristic for propagation on 
highways. We can observe that this spectrum is similar to the U-shaped spectrum of 
F-to-M cellular channels. In Figure 3.7, we consider propagation on surface streets 
where the double-bounced rays bear more energy than the single-bounced rays (hT = 
hR = 0.1 and hTR = 0.8). In this case, the sD-psd differs from the U-shaped spectrum 
of cellular channels. Note that this agrees with measurements, because similar ef-
fects are observed with measured Doppler spectra [25, 26].  
3.1.6.3  Level Crossing Rate and Average Fade Duration for V-to-V Channels
The level crossing rate (LCR), L(R), is introduced in Section 2.3.5.1 and defined as 
the rate at which the signal envelope crosses level R in the positive direction. The 
LCR can be written as [9] 
	
,
0
( )
( , )
L R
p
R
d
β β
β
β
β
¥
= ò




	
(3.105)
where b = çh(t)çis the envelope level, b× = çh·(t)ç is the envelope slope, and pb,b
.(R,b
.
) 
is the joint probability density function (pdf) of the envelope level and the envelope 
slope. 
Here, we will deploy the model described in Section 3.1.5 to calculate the LCR. 
First, we observe that the joint pdf 
, ( , )
pβ β β β

  cannot be represented as a product of 

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
81
a Rice pdf pçh(t)ç(b) and a Gaussian pdf 
( ) ( )
h t
p
β

 , because the I and Q components of 
the complex faded envelope h(t) are correlated (i.e., 
,
hi hq
R
 (t) given in (3.77) is not 
zero). Then, the LCR for LoS conditions (Ricean fading, correlated in-phase and 
quadrature components) can be written as [27]  
	
2
2
0
2
(
)/(2
)
3/ 2
0
/ 2
(
sin )
0
0
2
( )
cosh
cos
sin  erf(
sin )
R
b
R
L R
e
b
R
e
d
b
δ
π
ξδ
θ
χ
π
δ
θ
π ξδ
θ
ξδ
θ
θ
-
+
-
=
æ
ö é
ù
+
ç
÷ ê
ú
ë
û
è
ø
ò
	
(3.106)
where cosh(×) is the hyperbolic cosine function and erf(×) is the error function. The 
rest of the parameters are 
2
2
0
1
/(
1),
/
,
K K
b
b b
δ
χ
=
+
=
-
 
1
0
(2
/
)/ 2 ,
f LoS
pq
b b
 
and  
	
2
2
0
( )
( )
i
q
b
h t
h t
Ε
Ε
é
ù
é
ù
=
ë
û
ë
û

	
(3.107)
	
1
( )
( )
( )
( )
i
q
q
i
b
h t h t
h t h t
Ε
Ε
é
ù
é
ù
=
ë
û
ë
û



	
(3.108)
	
2
2
2
( )
( )
i
q
b
h t
h t
Ε
Ε
é
ù
é
ù
=
ë
û
ë
û



	
(3.109)
where 
( )
ih t

 and 
( )
q
h t

 are first derivatives of hi(t) and hq(t) with respect to time t. 
When 2-D nonisotropic scattering is characterized using the von Mises pdfs defined 
in (3.23) and (3.24), closed-form expressions for b0, b1, and b2 can be obtained by 
substituting (3.58) into (3.107). Parameter b0 then becomes  
-160
-120
-80
-40
0
40
80
120
160
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
 T= R=0
 T= R=0.5
 T= R=1
 T= R=5
 T= R=10
Normalized Doppler power spectrum [dB]
Doppler frequency f [Hz]
Figure 3.6  The normalized space-Doppler power spectra characteristic for the outdoor M-to-M  
micro-cells. The curves are obtained with parameters s = fRmax/fTmax = 1, qT = p/3, qR = p/4, gT = gR = p/2,  
hT = hR = 0.4, hTR = 0.2, kT = kR = 0, K = 10, and Lt = Lr = 2.

82	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
1
1
SBT
SBR
DB
b
b
b
b
K
=
+
+
=
+
	
(3.110)
where 0
SBT
b
, 0
SBR
b
, and 0
DB
b
 are, respectively,  
	
0
0
exp[
cos(
)]
2
1
2
(
)
1
T
T
T
T
SBT
T
T
T
k
b
d
K
I k
K
π
π
η
α
µ
α
π
η
-
-
=
+
=
+
ò
	
(3.111)
	
0
0
exp[
cos(
)]
2
1
2
(
)
1
R
R
R
R
SBR
R
R
R
k
b
d
K
I k
K
π
π
η
α
µ
α
π
η
-
-
=
+
=
+
ò
	
(3.112)
	
0
0
0
exp[
cos(
)] exp[
cos(
)]
2
1
2
(
)
2
(
)
1
TR
T
T
T
R
R
R
DB
T
R
T
R
TR
k
k
b
d
d
K
I k
I k
K
π
π
π
π
η
α
µ
α
µ
α
α
π
π
η
-
-
-
-
=
+
=
+
ò ò
	 (3.113)
Similarly, parameters b1 and b2 can be obtained as follows:  
	
SBT
SBR
DB
n
n
n
n
b
b
b
b
=
+
+
	
(3.114)
where n Î{1, 2} and SBT
n
b
, SBR
n
b
, and DB
n
b
 are, respectively, 
-200
-160
-120
-80
-40
0
40
80
120
160
200
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
 T= R=0
 T= R=0.5 
 T= R=1 
 T= R=5 
 T= R=10 
Normalized Doppler power spectum [dB]
Doppler frequency f [Hz]
Figure 3.7  The normalized space-Doppler power spectra characteristic for the outdoor M-to-M 
macro-cells. The curves are obtained with parameters s = fRmax/fTmax = 1, qT = p/3, qR  = p/4, gT = 
gR = p/2, hT = hR = 0.1, hTR = 0.8, kT = kR = 0, K=10, and Lt = Lr = 2.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
83
	
[
]
0
0
max
R max
exp[
cos(
)]
(2 )
2
(
)
cos(
)
(cos
sin
sin
)
T
T
T
SBT
n
SBT
n
T
n
T
T
T
R
T
R
T
T
k
b
b
I k
f
f
d
π
π
α
µ
π
π
α
γ
γ
γ
α
α
-
-
=
´
-
+
- D
ò
	
(3.115)
	
[
]
0
0
R max
Tmax
exp[
cos(
)]
(2 )
2
(
)
cos(
)
(cos
sin
sin
)
R
R
R
SBR
n
SBR
n
R
n
R
R
T
R
T
R
R
k
b
b
I k
f
f
d
π
π
α
µ
π
π
α
γ
γ
γ
α
α
-
-
=
´
-
+
+ D
ò
	
(3.116)
	
[
]
0
0
0
max
Tmax
exp[
cos(
)] exp[
cos(
)]
(2 )
2
(
)
2
(
)
cos(
)
cos(
)
T
T
T
R
R
R
DB
n
DB
n
T
R
n
R
R
R
T
T
R
T
k
k
b
b
I k
I k
f
f
d
d
π
π
π
π
α
µ
α
µ
π
π
π
α
γ
α
γ
α
α
-
-
-
-
=
´
-
+
-
ò ò
	
(3.117)
Using the equality 
sin
2
( )
jm
jz
m
e
d
J
z
π
θ
θ
π
θ
π
-
+
-
=
ò
 (eq. 8.411 in [13]), where Jm(×) 
is the mth-order Bessel function of the first kind, parameters 1
SBT
b
, 1
SBR
b
, 1
DB
b
, 2
SBT
b
, 
2
SBR
b
, and 2
DB
b
 become:  
	
2
cos(
)
π
µ
γ
+
+ D
ê
ú
=
-
1
1
0
0
1
0
(
)
(
)
(
)
cos
sin
sin
(
)
T
SBT
SBT
T
T
T
T
R
T
R
T
T
I k
b
b
f
I k
I k
f
I k
γ
γ
µ
ì
íî
ü
é
ù
ý
ë
ûþ
	
(3.118)
	
1
R max
1
0
0
1
Tmax
0
(
)
2
cos(
)
(
)
(
)
cos
sin
sin
(
)
R
SBR
SBR
R
R
R
R
T
R
T
R
R
I k
b
b
f
I k
I k
f
I k
π
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
ì
=
-
íî
ü
é
ù
+
- D
ý
ê
ú
ë
ûþ	
(3.119)
	
1
Tmax
1
0
0
1
max
0
(
)
2
cos(
)
(
)
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
T
DB
DB
T
T
T
R
R
R
R
R
I k
b
b
f
I k
I k
f
I k
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
ì
=
-
íî
ü
+
-
ýþ
	
(3.120)
	
0
2
2
2
2
0
Tmax
0
2
Tmax R max
0
1
2
2
2
2
2
Tmax R max
R max
R max
0
0
2
(
)
cos(2(
))
(
)
(2 )
2
(
)
(
)
sin
sin(2
)
sin
(
)
(
)
2
cos
cos(
)
cos
sin
(
)
(
)
cos(2
)
(
T
T
T
T
SBT
SBT
T
T
T
R
T
T
T
T
T
R
T
T
R
R
T
T
T
T
T
I k
I k
b
b
f
I k
I k
f
f
I k
I k
f
f
f
f
I k
I k
I k
µ
γ
π
γ
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
ì
+
-
=
íî
æ
ö
+
D
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
+
-
+
+
D
-
´
1
2
max
0
0
)
(
)
sin(2
)sin
2
(
)
(
)
T
T
R
T
R
T
T
I k
f
I k
I k
γ
µ
ü
+
D
ýþ
	
(3.121)

84	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
0
2
2
2
R max
2
0
0
2
R max Tmax
0
1
2
2
2
2
2
R max Tmax
Tmax
Tmax
0
0
2
(
)
cos(2(
))
(
)
(2 )
2
(
)
(
)
sin
sin(2
)
sin
(
)
(
)
2
cos
cos(
)
cos
sin
(
)
(
)
cos(2
)
(
R
R
R
R
SBR
SBR
R
R
R
T
R
R
R
R
R
T
R
R
R
T
T
R
R
R
R
I k
I k
b
b
f
I k
I k
f
f
I k
I k
f
f
f
f
I k
I k
I k
µ
γ
π
γ
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
ì
+
-
=
íî
æ
ö
+
D
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
-
-
+
+
D
-
´
1
2
Tmax
0
0
)
(
)
sin(2
)sin
2
(
)
(
)
R
R
T
R
R
R
I k
f
I k
I k
γ
µ
ü
-
D
ýþ
	
	
	
(3.122)
	
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
+
-
-
0
2
2
2
2
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
2
2
0
(
)
cos(2(
))
(
)
(2 )
2
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
cos(2(
))
(
)
2
(
)
T
T
T
T
DB
DB
T
T
R
T
T
R
R
T
R
R
R
R
R
R
I k
I k
b
b
f
I k
I k
I k
f
f
I k
I k
I k
I k
f
I k
µ
γ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
µ
γ
ì
+
-
=
íî
ü
+
-
+
ýþ
	
(3.123)
The derived LCR in (3.106) can be simplified for many special cases. For ex-
ample, the LCR for NLoS conditions can be obtained from (3.106) by setting K = 0;  
that is,  
	
2
2
2
1
2
0
0
( )
R
b
b
R e
L R
b
b
π
-
=
-
	
(3.124)
Furthermore, for an NLoS isotropic scattering environment where only double-
bounced rays are present, the LCR further simplifies to [28] 
	
2
2
2
R max
Tmax
( )
2 (
)
R
L R
f
f
R e
π
=
+
×
×
	
(3.125)
by setting K = 0, kT = 0, kR = 0.
The average fade duration (AFD) is the average time that the envelope spends 
below level R. When a LoS component is present, the AFD can be written as [9]  
	
(
)
2
1
2
, 2(
1)
( )
( )
Q
K
K
R
T R
L R
-
+
=
	
(3.126)
where Q(a,b) is the Marcum Q function. For NLoS conditions, the AFD in (3.126) 
simplifies to  
	
2
1
( )
( )
R
e
T R
L R
-
-
=
	
(3.127)
Furthermore, for an NLoS isotropic scattering environment where only double-
bounced rays are present, the AFD further simplifies to

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
85
	
2 1
2
2
1
( )
2 (
)
R
T R
e
f
f
π
-
=
+
	
(3.128)
3.1.7  Estimation of Mobile Velocities in V-to-V Channels
Estimation of a mobile user’s speed plays an important role in a variety of wireless 
applications. For example, it is used for energy-efficient routing in wireless networks 
[29], for mobility and resource management in wireless multimedia networks [30], 
and for handoff, adaptive transmission, dynamic channel assignment, localization [9, 
31–33]. In the last two decades, a F-to-M cellular mobile user’s speed estimation has 
been extensively studied in the literature (e.g., [9, 31–41] and references therein. Speed 
estimation techniques can be classified into four major classes: crossing-based [9, 34], 
covariance-based [31, 3], power spectrum-based [39], and maximum like­lihood-based 
[33, 40] methods. Among these, crossing-based and covariance-based methods have 
low complexity and have been extensively used to estimate the speed of the mobile 
user (relative to the fixed base-station). 
For V-to-V channels, the first crossing-based estimator that jointly estimates 
velocities of both the Tx and Rx in V-to-V systems has recently been proposed in 
[41]. In adhoc networking, where no node is a master node, knowing the actual 
(not just relative to one node) velocities of other nodes in the network is very im-
portant. Without knowing the velocity and direction of other nodes, it is hard to 
predict which route is the optimal choice. Similarly, if the goal is energy-efficient 
routing, it is useful to have a list of all velocities in the network, rather than having 
only relative velocities with respect to a given node. In addition, in safety applica-
tions, knowing the velocity of the car that is approaching us at the intersection may 
help us decide to speed up or to slow down to avoid a collision. Knowing only the 
relative velocity between the vehicles cannot help in this situation (i.e., we would 
not know whether we will reach the intersection simultaneously). 
The velocities estimator in [41] is designed for narrowband wireless V-to-V 
communications. To derive closed-form expressions for estimation of Tx and Rx 
velocities, a noise-free isotropic scattering environment with no LoS component 
is assumed and the SISO version of the model in Section 3.1.5 is utilized. In the 
absence of noise and LoS component, the received complex faded envelope h(t) is 
equal to the multipath component of the channel impulse response hd(t) = hSBT(t) + 
hSBR(t) + hDB(t), i.e., h(t) = hd(t). Furthermore, since the Tx and Rx velocities vT and 
vR are proportional to the maximum Doppler angular frequencies wTmax = 2pfTmax 
and wRmax = 2pfRmax, respectively, in the rest of this section we will focus on the 
estimation of wTmax and wRmax to simplify the notation. 
First, we define 
(0, )
d
ih
L
T  as the count of how many times the in-phase compo-
nent 
( )
{
( )}
d
d
ih t
h t
= Â
 crosses the zero-level threshold with a positive slope, counted 
over the time interval (0,T]. Similarly, we define 
(0, )
dq
h
L
T  as the count of positive-
slope zero-level crossings for the quadrature component 
( )
{
( )}
d
d
q
h t
h t
= Á
 counted 
over the time interval (0,T]. Here, Â{×} denotes the real part operation and Á{×} 
denotes the imaginary part operation. Also, we define 
( )
d
ih
M
T  as the number of 
maxima in 
( )
d
ih t  during the time interval (0,T]. Similarly, 
( )
dq
h
M
T  is the number of 
maxima in 
( )
d
q
h t  during the time interval (0,T]. 

86	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
To estimate the Tx and Rx angular frequencies wTmax and wRmax, we combine 
the number of zero-crossings with the number of maxima in the in-phase and the 
quadrature component of hd(t). This crossing-based estimation approach is chosen 
because it does not depend on the type of propagation environment (i.e., it does not 
depend on the parameters hT, hR, and hTR). 
For stationary zero-mean Gaussian processes 
( )
d
ih t  and 
( )
d
q
h t , the number of 
zero crossings can be written as [34]  
	
2
0
[
(0, )]
[
(0, )]
2
d
dq
ih
h
T
b
E L
T
E L
T
b
π
=
=
	
(3.129)
and the number of maxima can be written as [34]
	
4
2
[
( )]
[
( )]
2
d
dq
ih
h
T
b
E M
T
E M
T
b
π
=
=
	
(3.130)
The parameters b0, b2, and b4 are defined as [42] 
	
2
2
0
( )
( )
d
d
q
i
b
h t
h t
é
ù
é
ù
E
= E
ë
û
ë
û

	
(3.131)
	
2
2
2
( )
( )
d
d
q
i
b
h t
h t
é
ù
é
ù
E
= E
ë
û
ë
û



	
(3.132)
	
2
2
4
( )
( )
d
d
q
i
b
h t
h t
é
ù
é
ù
E
= E
ë
û
ë
û



	
(3.133)
where E[×] denotes the statistical expectation operator, 
( )
d
ih t

 and 
( )
d
q
h t

 denote the 
first derivative of 
( )
d
ih t  and 
( )
d
q
h t  with respect to time t, and 
( )
d
ih t

 and 
( )
d
q
h t

 denote 
the second derivative of 
( )
d
ih t  and 
( )
d
q
h t  with respect to time t. Using the model in 
Section 3.1.5, the parameters b0, b2, and b4 can be written as [41]  
	
0
1
2(
1)
b
K
=
+
	
(3.134)
	
é
ù
=
+
ë
û
0
2
2
2
max
max
2
R
T
b
b
ω
ω
	
(3.135)
	
ë
û
ω
ω
ω
ω
=
+
+
ê
ú
4
4
2
2
4
0
max
max
max
max
3
3
3
8
8
2
b
b é
ù	
(3.136)
Substituting (3.134), (3.135), and (3.136) into (3.129) and (3.130), the number 
of zero crossings and the number of maxima in 
( )
d
ih t  or 
( )
d
q
h t  become, respectively,  
	
=
+
2
2
max
max
[
(0, )]
[
(0, )]
2 2
d
dq
ih
h
R
T
E L
T
E L
T
T
ω
ω
π
=
	
(3.137)

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
87
	
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
4
4
2
2
max
max
max
max
2
2
max
max
[
( )]
[
( )]
3
3
3
8
8
2
1
1
2
2
2
d
dq
ih
h
R
T
E M
T
E M
T
T
π
=
+
+
=
+
	
(3.138)
Solving this set of equations with respect to wTmax and wRmax, the following expres-
sions for potential estimators can be obtained:  
	
2
4
2
2
2
ˆ
(0, )
3
(0, )
4
(0, )
( ) /3
d
d
d
d
i
i
i
i
i
T
h
h
h
h
L
T
L
T
L
T
M
T
T
π
ω
=
+
-
	
(3.139)
	
2
4
2
2
2
ˆ
(0, )
3
(0, )
4
(0, )
( ) /3
d
d
d
d
i
i
i
i
i
R
h
h
h
h
L
T
L
T
L
T
M
T
T
π
ω
=
-
-
	
(3.140)
	
2
4
2
2
2
ˆ
(0, )
3
(0, )
4
(0, )
( ) /3
d
d
d
d
q
q
q
q
q
T
h
h
h
h
L
T
L
T
L
T
M
T
T
π
ω
=
+
-
	
(3.141)
	
2
4
2
2
2
ˆ
(0, )
3
(0, )
4
(0, )
( ) /3
d
d
d
d
q
q
q
q
q
R
h
h
h
h
L
T
L
T
L
T
M
T
T
π
ω
=
-
-
	
(3.142)
From the analysis of candidate estimators in (3.139)–(3.142), it is not clear if 
the estimator in (3.139) outperforms the estimator in (3.141) or vice versa. Fur-
thermore, the estimated velocities have to have nonnegative, noncomplex values. 
To ensure that the estimated velocities have nonnegative, noncomplex values and 
to capture the best performance between the estimators in (3.139) and (3.141), 
it has been empirically found that the best results are obtained by combining 
the estimators in (3.139) and (3.141) as described in the following algorithm: if 
{
}
4
4
2
2
4
3
(0, ) /
4
(0, )
( ) /(3
)
2
d
d
d
i
i
i
h
h
h
L
T
T
L
T
M
T
T
Â
-
<
or {
}
4
4
2
2
4
3
(0, ) /
4
(0, )
( ) /(3
)
2
d
d
d
q
q
q
h
h
h
L
T
T
L
T
M
T
T
Â
-
<
, the angular velocity ˆ T
ω  is 
estimated as [41]  
	
{
}
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
min (
,
)
T
Ti
Tq
ω
ω
ω
= Â
	
(3.143)
where ˆ Ti
ω  and ˆ Tq
ω
 are defined as in (3.139) and (3.141), respectively, and min(×) 
denotes the minimum function. On the other hand, if 
{
}
4
4
2
2
4
3
(0, ) /
4
(0, )
( ) /(3
)
2
d
d
d
i
i
i
h
h
h
L
T
T
L
T
M
T
T
Â
-
³
 or    
{
}
4
4
2
2
4
3
(0, ) /
4
(0, )
( ) /(3
)
2
d
d
d
q
q
q
h
h
h
L
T
T
L
T
M
T
T
Â
-
³
, the angular Doppler frequency 
ˆ T
ω  is estimated as 
	
{
}
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
max (
,
)
T
Ti
Tq
ω
ω
ω
= Â
	
(3.144)

88	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
where max (×) denotes the maximum function. Using the obtained results , the an-
gular Doppler frequency wˆR is estimated as  
	
2
2
2
4
ˆ
ˆ
[max( [
(0, )], [
(0, )])]
[
]
d
dq
i
R
T
h
h
L
T
L
T
T
ω
ω
ì
ü
ï
ï
= Â
E
E
- E
í
ý
ï
ï
î
þ
	
(3.145)
To illustrate the performance of the velocities estimator, Figure 3.8 shows the effect 
of white Gaussian noise on the velocities estimator. Here, an isotropic scattering 
environment with no LoS component is assumed. The estimation error for the ve-
locities estimator is evaluated using the root mean square error (RMSE) given by 
	
(
)
1/ 2
2 1/ 2
2
max
max
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
[(
) ]
Var[
]
[
]
)
T
T
T
T
T
f
f
f
f
f
E
-
=
+ E
-
	
(3.146)
where Var[×] denotes the variance operation, 
2
max
ˆ
( [
]
)
T
T
f
f
E
-
 represents the bias, 
and ˆ
ˆ
/(2 )
T
T
f
ω
π
=
 and fTmax = wTmax/(2p) denote the estimated and actual Doppler 
frequencies at the Tx, respectively. Figure 3.8 plots the RMSE of estimated Doppler 
frequency ˆT
f  versus actual Doppler frequency, when signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio is 
set to SNR = 10 dB. The results show that the velocities estimator performs rela-
tively well in the presence of noise for all estimated velocities.  
3.1.8  Estimation of Direction of Movement in V-to-V Channels
As pointed out in Section 3.1.7, knowing velocities of both the Tx and Rx plays an 
important role in adhoc networking, energy efficient routing, and safety applica-
tions. Furthermore, these applications also require knowledge of the relative direc-
tion of movement of the Tx and Rx. 
0
20
40
60
80
0
2
4
6
8
 RMSE of fTmax, fRmax=1 Hz, SNR=10 dB   
 RMSE of fTmax, fRmax=10 Hz, SNR=10 dB  
 RMSE of fTmax, fRmax=30 Hz, SNR=10 dB  
 RMSE of fTmax, fRmax=60 Hz, SNR=10 dB  
Root mean square error of  fTmax [Hz]
Actual frequency [Hz]
Figure 3.8  The RMSE of estimated Doppler frequency fˆT versus the actual Doppler frequency ­fTmax, 
in a noisy isotropic scattering environment with no LoS component and with SNR = 10 dB.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
89
This section describes the first direction-of-movement estimator, which was re-
cently proposed in [41]. To derive the closed-form expression for the estimation of 
the relative direction of movement, we make similar assumptions to those we used 
for the velocities estimator. A noise-free isotropic scattering environment with no LoS 
component is assumed and the SISO version of model in Section 3.1.5 is utilized. The 
cross-correlation between the in-phase component of h(t) (i.e., hi(t) = Â{h(t)}) and 
the quadrature component of h(t) (i.e., hq(t) = Á{h(t)}) is used to estimate the relative 
direction of movement of Tx and Rx. The cross-correlation between the in-phase and 
and quadrature component of h(t) is given in (3.77). For a small time-lag t ® 0, the 
cross-correlation function in (3.77) can be approximated as [41]  
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
τ
ω τ
γ
ω τ
γ
η τω
γ
η τω
γ
τ ω
τω
µ
γ
η
η
é
ê
»
-
+
-
ê
+
êë
ù
ì
ü
-
-
-
ï
ïú
+
+
í
ýú
ï
ïú
î
þû
J
max
max
2
2
2
0
max
max
0
0.5
( )
cos
cos
cos
cos
1
2
cos
IQ
T
T
R
R
T
R
R
R
T
T
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
TR
R
R
K
K
K
I
k
j k
I
k
	
	
	
(3.147)
Without loss of generality, we assume that the coordinate system is aligned with the 
receiver (i.e., gR = 0) and that the angle gT represents the relative direction of move-
ment of Tx and Rx. Then, (3.147) can be simplified to  
	
(
)
τ
ω τ
γ
ω τ
η τω
η τω
γ
η
η
=
+
é
ù
´
-
+
-
+
+
ë
û
J{ }
max
max
0.5
( )
1
cos
cos
IQ
T
T
R
T
R
R
T
T
R
TR
R
K
K
K
B
	
	
	
(3.148)
where 
=
-
-
-
B
I
k
j k
I
k
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
0
max
0
max
2
cos
τ ω
τω
µ
γ
. Finally, solving 
(3.148) with respect to gT, the relative direction of movement of Tx and Rx is esti-
mated as 
	
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2(
1)
( )
{ }
ˆ
arccos
ˆ
ˆ
IQ
T
R
R
T
TR
T
R
T
T
K
R
K
B
K
τ
η ω τ
ω τ
η
η
γ
η ω τ
ω τ
æ
ö
-
+
+
-
+
+
=
ç
÷
-
è
ø
J
	
(3.149)
where 0 
ˆ
180
T
γ
≤
≤
° and the angular Doppler frequencies ˆ T
ω  and ˆ R
ω  are estimated 
using (3.143), (3.144), and (3.145), respectively. 
To illustrate the performance of this estimator, Figure 3.9 shows the effect of 
white Gaussian noise on the direction estimator. Here, an isotropic scattering envi-
ronment with no LoS component is assumed. The estimation error for the direction 
estimator is evaluated using the the root mean square error (RMSE) given by 
	
(
)
[ ]
[ ]
(
)
(
)
1/2
1/ 2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
E
Var
E
T
T
T
T
T
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
é
ù
-
=
+
-
ë
û
	
(3.150)
where 
[
]
(
)
2
ˆ
E
T
T
γ
γ
-
 represents the bias. Figure 3.9 plots the RMSE of the esti-
mated direction ˆT
γ  versus the actual direction gT, when signal-to-noise (SNR) ra-
tio is SNR = {5,10,15,20} dB and the estimated results for Doppler frequencies 

90	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
fTmax  =  fRmax  =  100 Hz are selected. As expected, the performance of the direction 
estimator improves as the SNR increases. However, even for low SNR, (e.g., SNR= 
5 dB), the RMSE does not exceed 15°. Although a 15° error may not be acceptable 
for localization purposes, it can be tolerable in adhoc or energy-efficient routing al-
gorithms, where only general orientation is needed (e.g., we typically need to know 
if vehicles are moving in the same, orthogonal, or opposite directions).  
3.1.9  Modeling of V-to-V Frequency-Selective Multipath Fading Channels
The V-to-V channel models described Sections 3.1.3 and 3.1.5 assume that the 
fields incident on the Tx or Rx antennas are composed of a number of waves 
traveling only in the horizontal plane. This assumption is valid only for certain 
environments (e.g., rural areas) and seems inappropriate for urban environ-
ments where the Tx and Rx antenna arrays are often located in close proximity 
to and lower than the surrounding buildings. Scattered waves may propagate by 
­diffraction from the edges of buildings down to the street and, thus, not necessarily  
travel horizontally. 
Zajic´ et al. were the first to propose a 3-D model for MIMO V-to-V multi-
path fading channels [43]. They introduced a two-cylinder geometrical propagation 
model for narrowband MIMO V-to-V multipath fading channels. To completely 
characterize MIMO V-to-V multipath fading channels, they also developed the 3-D 
model for wideband MIMO V-to-V channels [44] that will be detailed in this section. 
The concentric-cylinders model [44] with LoS, single-bounced at transmitter 
(SBT), single-bounced at the receiver (SBR), and double-bounced (DB) rays for a 
MIMO V-to-V channel with Lt = Lr  = 2 antenna elements is shown in Figure 3.10. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
5
10
15
RMSE of est. angle , SNR=5 dB
RMSE of est. angle , SNR=10 dB
RMSE of est. angle , SNR=15 dB
RMSE of est. angle , SNR=20 dB
Root mean square error of estimated angle 
Actual angle [°]
Figure 3.9  The RMSE of the estimated direction gˆT versus the actual direction gT, in a noisy isotropic 
scattering environment with no LoS component and with SNR = {5,10, 15, 20} dB.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
91
Vertical concentric cylinders are chosen to model the scattering surfaces and dif-
fracting edges because most of the structures in outdoor metropolitan environments 
(e.g., buildings, highway dividers) have vertical surfaces. 
The concentric-cylinders model defines four vertical cylinders, two around the 
Tx and another two around the Rx, as shown in Figure 3.10. Around the transmit-
ter, M fixed omnidirectional scatterers occupy the volume between cylinders of radii 
Rt1 and Rt2. The model assumes that the M scatterers lie on L cylindric surfaces of 
radii 
( )
1
2
l
t
t
t
R
R
R
£
£
, where 1 £ l £ L. The lth cylindric surface contains M(l) fixed 
omnidirectional scatterers, and the (m,l)th transmit scatterer is denoted by (
, )
m l
T
S
, 
where 1£ m £ M(l). Similarly, around the receiver, N fixed omnidirectional scatter-
ers occupy a volume between cylinders of radii Rr1 and Rr2, where they lie on F 
cylindric surfaces of radii 
( )
1
2
k
r
r
r
R
R
R
£
£
, where 1 £  k £  F. The kth cylindric sur-
face contains N(k) fixed omnidirectional scatterers, and the (n,k)th receive scatterer 
is denoted by ( , )
n k
R
S
, where 1 £ n £ N(k). 
The distance between the centers of the Tx and Rx cylinders is D. It is also as-
sumed that the radii Rt2 and Rr2 are sufficiently smaller than the distance D (local 
scattering condition), while the distance D is smaller than 4Rt1Rr1Lr/(l(Lt – 1)(Lr – 
1)), where l denotes the carrier wavelength, so that the channel does not experi-
ence keyhole behavior [20]. Distance ep,m,l is the distance between the pth antenna 
( )
p
T
A
 and the (m,l)th scatterer placed around the Tx (i.e., 
( )
(
, )
p
m l
T
T
A
S
-
). Similarly, 
Figure 3.10  The concentric-cylinders model with LoS, single-bounced at the transmitter (SBT), 
single-bounced at the receiver (SBR), and double-bounced (DB) rays for a wideband MIMO V-to-V 
channel with Lt = Lr = 2 antenna elements.

92	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
­symbols em,l,q, ep,n,k, en,k,q, em,l,n,k, and ep,q denote distances 
( )
(
, )
q
m l
R
T
S
A
-
, 
( )
( , )
p
n k
R
T
A
S
-
, 
( )
( , )
q
n k
R
R
S
A
-
, (
, )
( , )
m l
n k
R
T
S
S
-
, and 
( )
( )
p
q
R
T
A
A
-
, respectively, as shown in Figure 3.10. 
For ease of reference, Figure 3.11 shows one of the L cylindric surfaces around 
the Tx and one of F cylindric surfaces around the Rx, and, to reduce clutter, only 
shows the geometry of double-bounced rays. The spacing between antenna ele-
ments at the Tx and Rx is denoted by dT and dR, respectively. It is assumed that dT 
and dR are much smaller than the radii Rt1 and Rr1 (i.e., the Tx and Rx antenna 
arrays are much smaller than the Tx-to-scatterer and scatterer-to-Rx distances). The 
Tx and Rx antenna heights are denoted hT and hR, respectively; angles qT and qR in 
Figure 3.11 describe the orientation of the Tx and Rx antenna array in the x-y plane, 
respectively; and angles yT and yR describe the elevation of the Tx’s antenna array 
and the Rx’s antenna array relative to the x-y plane, respectively. The Tx and Rx are 
moving  with speeds uT and uR in directions described by angles gT and gR in the x-y 
plane (relative to the x-axis), respectively.
Symbols 
(
, )
m l
T
α
 and 
( , )
n k
T
α
 represent the azimuth angles of departures (AAoD) 
of the waves that impinge on the scatterers 
(
, )
m l
T
S
 and 
( , )
n k
R
S
, respectively, whereas 
(
, )
m l
R
α
 and 
( , )
n k
R
α
 are the azimuth angles of arrivals (AAoA) of the waves scattered 
from 
(
, )
m l
T
S
 and 
( , )
n k
R
S
, respectively. Similarly, the symbols 
(
, )
m l
T
β
 and 
( , )
n k
R
β
 denote 
the elevation angle of departure (EAoD) and the elevation angle of arrival (EAoA), 
respectively. Finally, symbols 
LoS
Tp
α
 (not shown in Figure 3.11 for figure clarity) and 
LoS
Rq
α
 denote the AAoDs and AAoAs of the LoS paths. This model assumes {dT, 
dR}  {Rt1, Rr1}, which allows us to approximate the angles of departure from 
different transmit antennas 
( ,
, )
p m l
T
α
 and 
( , , )
p n k
T
α
 with 
(
, )
m l
T
α
 and 
( , )
n k
T
α
, respectively. 
The AAoA, EAoD, and EAoA angles can be similarly approximated. For ease of 
Figure 3.11  The lth and kth cylinders from Figure 3.10 with the detailed geometry. For simplicity, 
only double-bounced rays are depicted.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
93
reference, the parameters introduced in this model are summarized in Table 3.2. 
We can observe from the 3-D geometrical model in Figure 3.10 that some waves 
from the Tx antenna elements may traverse directly to the Rx antenna elements (LoS 
rays), while others are single-bounced at the Tx (i.e., waves from the Tx antenna 
elements scatter from the scatterers located around the Tx before arriving at the 
Rx antenna elements), single-bounced at the Rx (i.e., waves from the Tx antenna 
elements scatter from the scatterers located around the Rx before arriving at the 
Rx antenna elements), and/or double-bounced (i.e., waves from the Tx antenna ele-
ments impinge on the scatterers located around the Tx and scatter from the scatter-
ers located around the Rx before arriving at the Rx antenna elements). Hence, the 
input delay-spread function of the link 
( )
( )
p
q
R
T
A
A
-
 can be written as a superposition 
of the LoS, SBT, SBR, and DB rays:  
	
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
LoS
SBT
SBR
DB
pq
pq
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
=
+
+
+
	
(3.151)
To simplify further analysis, the time-variant transfer function is used instead 
of the input delay-spread function. The time-variant transfer function is the Fourier 
transform of the input delay-spread function (see Section 2.3.6 for more details) 
and can be written as
Table 3.2  Definition of the Parameters Used in the Concentric-Cylinders Geometrical Model
D
Distance between the center of the Tx and Rx cylinders
( )
( )
,
l
k
r
t
R
R
Radius of the lth Tx and kth Rx cylinder, respectively.
,
T
R
d
d
Spacing between two adjacent antenna elements at the Tx 
and Rx, respectively.
,
T
R
θ
θ
Orientation of the Tx and Rx antenna array in the x-y plane 
(relative to the x-axis), respectively.
,
T
R
ψ
ψ
Elevation of the Tx’s and Rx’s antenna array relative to the 
x-y plane, respectively.
,
T
R
υ
υ
Velocities of the Tx and Rx, respectively.
,
T
R
γ
γ
Moving directions of the Tx and Rx, in the x-y plane (rela-
tive to the x-axis), respectively.
,
T
R
h
h
Distances (
,
)
T
T
d O
O′  and (
,
)
R
R
d O
O′ , respectively.
1
2,
1,
2
,
t
t
r
r
R
R
R
R
Minimum and maximum radii of the cylinders around the 
Tx and Rx respectively.
(
, )
( , )
,
m l
n k
T
T
α
α
Azimuth angles of departure (AAoD) of the waves that 
impinge on the scatters (
, )
m l
T
S
 and ( , )
n k
R
S
, respectively.
(
, )
( , )
,
m l
n k
R
R
α
α
Azimuth angles of arrival (AAoA) of the waves scattered 
from (
, )
m l
T
S
 and ( , )
n k
R
S
 respectively.
(
, )
( , )
,
m l
n k
T
T
β
β
Elevation angles of departure (EAoD) of the waves that 
impinge on the scattered from (
, )
m l
T
S
 and ( , )
n k
R
S
, respectively.
(
, )
( , )
,
m l
n k
R
R
β
β
Elevation angles of arrival (EAoA) of the waves scattered 
from (
, )
m l
T
S
 and ( , )
n k
R
S
, respectively.
,
LoS
LoS
Rq
Tp
α
α
AAoA and the AAoD of the LoS paths, respectively.
,
,
, , ,
, ,
, ,
, , ,
,
,
and 
p m l
m l q
p n k
n k q
m l n k
pq
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
Distances (
)
( )
(
, )
,
p
m l
T
T
d A
S
,
 (
)
( )
(
, ),
q
m l
R
T
d S
A
,
 (
)
( )
( , )
,
p
n k
R
T
d A
S
,  
(
)
( )
( , ),
q
n k
R
R
d S
A
, (
)
(
, )
( , )
,
m l
n k
R
T
d S
S
, and (
)
( )
( )
,
p
q
R
T
d A
A
, respectively.

94	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
{
}
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
LoS
SBT
pq
pq
pq
pq
SBR
DB
pq
pq
T
t f
h
t
T
t f
T
t f
T
t f
T
t f
τ
τ
=
=
+
+
+
F
	
(3.152)
where the four components (LoS, SBT, SBR, DB) are
	
2
2
2
( , )
LoS
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
pq
j
f
t j
f
j
d
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
T
t f
a
e
π
π
π τ
λ
æ
ö
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
	
(3.153)
	
( )
,
,
2
2
2
,
1
1
( , )
lim
l
SBT
SBT
SBT
SBT
ml
ml
pq ml
pq ml
L M
j
f
t j
f
j
d
j
SBT
SBT
pq
pq ml
M
l
m
T
t f
a
e
π
π
π τ
φ
λ
æ
ö
-
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
®¥ =
=
=
å å
	
(3.154)
	
( )
,
,
2
2
2
,
1
1
( , )
lim
k
SBR
SBR
SBR
SBR
nk
nk
pq nk
pq nk
F N
j
f
t j
f
j
d
j
SBR
SBR
pq
pq nk
N
k
n
T
t f
a
e
π
π
π τ
φ
λ
æ
ö
-
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
®¥ =
=
=
å å
	
(3.155)
	
( )
( )
,
,
2
,
,
2
2
,
,
,
1
,
1
( , )
lim
l
k
DB
DB
DB
DB
mlnk
mlnk
pq mlnk
pq mlnk
L M
F N
j
f
t j
f
j
d
j
DB
DB
pq
pq mlnk
M N
l m
k n
T
t f
a
e
π
π
π τ
φ
λ
æ
ö
-
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
®¥
=
=
=
å å
	
	
	
(3.156)
and the amplitudes, Doppler shift frequencies, phrases, path lengths, and time de-
lays in this model can be calculated as follows:
Amplitudes
•	
. The total signal power between the pth transmit and the qth 
receive antenna is split between the LoS and NLoS components: the power 
allocated to the LoS component between the pth transmit and qth receive 
antenna is Kpq/(1 + Kpq), while the total power allocated to the NLoS com-
ponents between the pth transmit and qth receive antenna is 1/(1 + Kpq). 
For {
}
{
}
1
1
,
,
T
R
t
r
d
d
R
R

, we can assume that the Ricean fading factor is 
the same between all antenna elements (i.e., Kpq = K for all pÎ{1, … ,Lt} and 
qÎ{1, … ,Lr}). Furthermore, it is assumed that the relative power allocated 
to the SBT, SBR, and DB components is, respectively, hT, hR, and hTR such 
that hT + hR + hTR = 1. We also assume that a power Ppq is channelled from 
transmit antenna p to receive antenna q. These parameters have to be either 
set during simulations or estimated from measurements. Having all this in 
mind, the amplitudes can be written as follows: 
	
1
LoS
pq
pq
K
a
K
= W
+ 	
(3.157)
	
T
R
a
d O
S
d S
O
=
+
ë
û
(
)
(
)
2
(
, )
(
, )
,
( )
1
,
,
1
4
1
1
1
2
pq
T
SBT
m l
m l
pq ml
l
T
t
pq
P
K
M
R
K
M
D
γ
λ
η
π
η
γ
-
é
ù
+
æ
ö
»
W
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
	
(3.158)

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
95
	
ë
û
(
)
(
)
2
( , )
( , )
,
( )
1
,
,
1
4
1
1
1
2
pq
R
SBR
n k
n k
T
R
pq nk
k
R
r
pq
P
a
d O
S
d S
O
K
N
R
K
N
D
γ
λ
η
π
η
γ
-
é
ù
=
+
+
æ
ö
»
W
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
	
(3.159)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
2
(
, )
(
, )
( , )
( , )
( )
( )
1
1
4
,
 
,
,
1
1
1
2
2
pq
TR
DB
pq mlnk
m l
m l
n k
n k
T
R
l
k
TR
r
t
pq
P
a
K
MN
d O
S
d S
S
d S
O
R
R
K
MN
D
γ
λ
η
π
η
γ
=
+
é
ù
¢
´
+
+
¢
ë
û
æ
ö
+
»
W
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
	
(3.160)
where g is the pathloss exponent, d(×,×) denotes distance between two points, 
and 
2
4
pq
pq
D
P
γ
λ
π
-
W
=
.
Doppler shifts
•	
. Doppler shifts depend on the geometrical relation between 
directions of movement of Tx and Rx (i.e., gT and gR and the directions of 
AAoDs, EAoDs, AAoAs, and EAoAs). For this model, the Doppler shifts can 
be written as 
	
cos
cos
f
f
f
LoS
LoS
LoS
pq
T
R
π
α
γ
α
γ
(
)
(
)
=
-
-
+
-
	
(3.161)
	
+
- D
D
+ D
=
-
=
-
+
-
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
, )
(
, )
(
, )
(
, )
Tmax
R max
(
, )
(
, )
Tmax
( )
(
, )
( ) (
, )
R max
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
sin
sin
cos
m l
m l
m l
m l
SBT
T
R
R
R
T
T
ml
m l
m l
T
T
T
l
m l
l
m l
R
R
H
T
T
T
T
f
f
f
f
f
D
α
γ
β
α
γ
β
α
γ
β
γ
γ
α
β
	
(3.162)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
Tmax
Rmax
( )
( , )
( ) ( , )
Tmax
( , )
( , )
Rmax
cos
cos
cos
cos
sin
sin
cos
cos
cos
cos
n k
n k
n k
n k
SBR
T
R
R
R
T
T
nk
k
n k
k
n k
T
T
H
R
R
R
R
n k
n k
R
R
R
f
f
f
f
D
f
α
γ
β
α
γ
β
γ
α
γ
β
α
γ
β      
=
-
+
-
=
D
+
D
- D
+
-
	
(3.163)
	
(
)
(
)
(
, )
(
, )
( , )
( , )
Tmax
Rmax
cos
cos
cos
cos
m l
m l
n k
n k
DB
T
R
R
R
T
T
mlnk
f
f
f
α
γ
β
α
γ
β
=
-
+
-
	 (3.164)
where frequencies fTmax = vT/l and fRmax = vR/l are the maximum Doppler  
frequencies associated with the Tx and Rx, respectively, 
( )
( )
l
l
t
T
R
D
D
=
, 
( )
( )
k
k
r
R
R
D
D
=
, DH = hT – hR, and l is the carrier wavelength. For {dT, dR}  
{Rt1, Rr1}, the LoS AAoDs are 
=
-
LoS
LoS
Rq
Tp
, and AAoAs are ap-
proximately equal to p (i.e., 
LoS
Rq
α
π
=
). Since the location of the scatter-
ers is not known a priori, the AAoDs (
(
, )
m l
T
α
 and 
( , )
n k
T
α
), the EAoDs (
(
, )
m l
T
β
 
and 
( , )
n k
T
β
), the AAoAs (
(
, )
m l
R
α
 and 
( , )
n k
R
α
), and the EAoAs (
(
, )
m l
R
β
 and 
( , )
n k
R
β
) 

96	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
are modeled as random variables. However, note that when the number of 
scatterers at each end is approaching infinity, these discrete random variables 
can be characterized as continuous random variables with given pdfs. As in 
Section 3.1.5, note that double-bounced rays have the angles of departure 
(
(
, )
m l
T
α
 and 
(
, )
m l
T
β
) independent from the angles of arrival (
( , )
n k
R
α
 and 
( , )
n k
R
β
) 
[20]. On the other hand, single-bounced rays have angles of arrival (
(
, )
m l
R
α
 and 
(
, )
m l
R
β
) that are dependent on the angles of departure (
(
, )
m l
T
α
 and 
(
, )
m l
T
β
) and 
angles of departure (
( , )
n k
T
α
 and 
( , )
n k
T
β
) that are dependent on the angles of ar-
rival (
( , )
n k
R
α
 and 
( , )
n k
R
β
) [44].
Phases
•	
. As in Section 3.1.5, we first note that the phase shift introduced by 
the (m,l)th scatterer located near the Tx is independent of the phase shift 
introduced by the (n,k)th scatterer located near the Rx. Then, without loss 
of generality, we can assume that the phases 
,
SBT
pq ml
φ
, 
,
SBR
pq nk
φ
, and 
,
lnk
DB
pq m
φ
 are 
independent random variables. Here, it is assumed that they are uniformly 
distributed on the interval [0,2p) and independent from any other random 
variable. 
Path lengths.
•	
 From Figure 3.10, the path lengths of the respective waves can 
be written as 
	
LoS
pq
pq
d
ε
=
	
(3.165)
	
,
,
, ,
,
SBT
p m l
m l q
pq ml
d
ε
ε
=
+
	
(3.166)
	
, ,
, ,
,
SBR
p n k
n k q
pq nk
d
ε
ε
=
+
	
(3.167)
	
,
,
, , ,
, ,
,
DB
p m l
m l n k
n k q
pq mlnk
d
ε
ε
ε
=
+
+
	
 (3.168)
For outdoor propagation, which is typical for V-to-V communications, we 
can assume the radii Rt2 and Rr2 are much smaller than the distance D be-
tween the Tx and Rx (local scattering condition). Under this assumption, 
distances ep,q, ep,m,l, em,l,q, ep,n,k, en,k,q and em,l,n,k can be approximated as 
follows: 
	
(
)
,
1
2
cos
cos
2
1
2
cos
cos
2
t
p q
T
T
T
r
LoS
R
R
R
Rq
L
p
D
d
L
q d
ε
ψ
θ
ψ
α
θ
+
-
»
-
+
-
-
-
	
(3.169)
	
( )
,
, ,
(
, )
(
, )
(
, )
(
, )
(
, )
1
2
2
cos
cos
sin
cos
sin
x
t
l
p m l
t
m l
m l
m l
m l
m l
T
Ty
Tz
T
T
T
T
T
L
p
R
d
d
d
ε
α
β
α
β
β
+
-
»
-
é
ù
´
+
+
ë
û	
(3.170)

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
97
	
( )
(
, )
, ,
1
2
cos
sin
sin
cos
2
r
l
m l
m l q
R
R
R
R
T
T
L
q
D
d
ε
ψ
θ
α
θ
+
-
é
ù
»
-
D
-
ë
û	
(3.171)
	
( )
( , )
, ,
1
2
cos
sin
sin
cos
2
t
k
n k
p n k
T
T
T
T
R
R
L
p
D
d
ε
ψ
θ
α
θ
+
-
é
ù
»
-
D
+
ë
û	
(3.172)
	
( )
, ,
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
1
2
2
cos
cos
sin
cos
sin
r
k
n k q
r
n k
n k
n k
n k
n k
Rx
Ry
Rz
R
R
R
R
R
L
q
R
d
d
d
ε
α
β
α
β
β
+
-
»
-
é
ù
´
+
+
ë
û	
(3.173)
	
, , ,
m l n k
D
ε
»
	
(3.174)
where p and q take values from the sets 
{1,...,
}
t
p
L
∈
 and 
{1,...,
}
r
q
L
∈
, 
respectively, 
=
 cos
 cos
Tx
T
T
T
d
d
, 
=
cos
sin
Ty
T
T
T
d
d
ψ
θ , 
=
sin
Tz
T
T
d
d
ψ , 
=
cos
cos
,
Rx
R
R
R
d
d
ψ
θ  
=
cos
sin
Ry
R
R
R
d
d
ψ
θ , 
=
sin
Rz
R
R
d
d
ψ .
Multipath time delays
•	
. The time delays of the multipath components can 
be inferred from the traversed distances and are given by the following 
­expressions:  
	
2
2
0
H
LoS
pq
D
c
τ
+ D
=
	
(3.175)
	
(
)
( )
(
, )
,
(
, )
0
1
cos
cos
l
m l
t
T
SBT
m l
m l
T
D
R
c
α
τ
β
+
-
=
	
(3.176)
	
(
)
( , )
( )
,
( , )
0
1
cos
cos
n k
k
r
R
SBR
n k
n k
R
D
R
c
α
τ
β
+
+
=
	
(3.177)
	
(
)
(
)
( )
(
, )
( , )
( )
, , ,
(
, )
( , )
0
0
0
1
cos
1
cos
cos
cos
l
m l
n k
k
r
t
T
R
DB
m l n k
m l
n k
R
T
R
R
D
c
c
c
α
α
τ
β
β
-
+
=
+
+
	
(3.178)
where c0 is the speed of light. 
3.1.10  Spectral-Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of V-to-V Frequency-
Selective Multipath Fading Channels
Using the model described in Section 3.1.9, we can now derive the key temporal, 
spatial, and spectral characteristics of V-to-V frequency-selective multipath fading 
channels. 
3.1.10.1  Space-Time-Frequency Correlation Function (STF-CF)
 The normalized STF-CF between two time-variant transfer functions Tpq (t,f ) and 
( , )
pq
T
t f 

, which were defined in (3.152), is 

98	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
,
E[
( , )
(
,
)]
(
,
)
Var
( , )
Var
(
,
)
pq
pq
pq pq
pq
pq
T
t f
T
t
t f
f
R
t
f
T
t f
T
t
t f
f
*
*
+ D
+ D
D D
=
é
ù
é
ù
+ D
+ D
ë
û
ë
û



	
(3.179)
where (×)* is the complex conjugate operation, E[×] is the statistical expectation 
operator, Var[×] is the statistical variance operator, and indices ,
{1, ...,
}
t
p p
L
 Î 

 and 
,
{1, ...,
}
t
q q
L
 Î 

. Since 
( , )
SBT
pq
T
t f  
( , )
SBR
pq
T
t f , and 
( , )
DB
pq
T
t f  are independent zero-mean 
complex Gaussian random processes, (3.179) can be simplified to [44]  
	
,
,
,
,
,
(
,
)
(
,
)
(
,
)
(
,
)
(
,
)
LoS
SBT
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
SBR
DB
pq pq
pq pq
R
t
f
R
t
f
R
t
f
R
t
f
R
t
f
D D
=
D D
+
D D
+ 
D D
+
D D









	
(3.180)
where 
,
(
,
)
LoS
pq pq
R
t
f
∆∆

, 
,
(
,
)
SBT
pq pq
R
t
f
∆∆

, 
,
(
,
)
SBR
pq pq
R
t
f
∆∆

, and 
,
(
,
)
DB
pq pq
R
t
f
∆∆

 are the nor-
malized STF-CFs of the LoS, SBT, SBR, and DB components, respectively, and are 
defined as  
	
*
,
2
( , )
(
,
)
(
,
)
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
LoS
pq pq
pq
T
t f T
t
t f
f
R
t
f
é
ù
E
+ D
+ D
ë
û
D D
=
W


	
(3.181)
	
*
,
2
( , )
(
,
)
(
,
)
SBT
SBT
pq
pq
SBT
pq pq
pq
T
t f
T
t
t f
f
R
t
f
é
ù
E
+ D
+ D
ë
û
D D
=
W


	
(3.182)
	
*
,
2
( , )
(
,
)
(
,
)
SBR
SBR
pq
pq
SBR
pq pq
pq
T
t f
T
t
t f
f
R
t
f
é
ù
E
+ D
+ D
ë
û
D D
=
W


	
(3.183)
	
*
,
2
( , )
(
,
)
(
,
)
DB
DB
pq
pq
DB
pq pq
pq
T
t f
T
t
t f
f
R
t
f
é
ù
E
+ D
+ D
ë
û
D D
=
W


	
(3.184)
To characterize the Tx and Rx azimuth angles, we use the von Mises pdfs in 
(3.23) and (3.24), respectively. Prior work uses several different scatterer distribu-
tions, such as uniform, cosine, and Gaussian, to characterize the random elevation 
angles of departure and arrival, 
(
, )
m l
T
β
 and 
( , )
n k
R
β
. We use the pdf [45] 
	
ϕ
ϕ
cos
4 |
|
2
( )
,
2
, otherwise
0
m
p
π
π ϕ
π
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ì
æ
ö
£
£
ï
ç
÷
= í
ïî
	
(3.185)
where jm is the maximum elevation angle and lies in the range 0° £ |jm| £ 20° [46]. 
Such maximum elevation angles have experimentally been found to be typical for 

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
99
the “street-canyon” type of propagation, which is prevalent in V-to-V communi-
cations where both the Tx and Rx are in motion and equipped with low elevation 
antennas. The pdfs for the Tx and Rx elevation angles are denoted as  
	
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
cos
2
4
m
m
T
T
T
T
p β
π
πβ
β
β
=
 	
(3.186)
	
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
cos
2
4
m
m
R
R
R
R
p β
π
πβ
β
β
=
	
(3.187)
respectively. Finally the radii 
( )l
t
R  and 
( )
k
r
R
 are characterized using the pdf 
(
)
2
2
2
1
( )
2
p R
R
R
R
=
-
. Such a distribution implies that scatterers in the horizontal 
plane will have a uniform density between the cylinders Rt1 and Rt2 at the transmit-
ter and cylinders Rr1 and Rr2 at the receiver, if scattering is isotropic in the horizon-
tal plane. The pdfs for the Tx and Rx radii are denoted as  
	
(
)
2
2
2
1
2
t
t
t
t
R
p R
R
R
=
-
	
(3.188)
	
(
)
r
=
-
2
2
2
1
2
r
r
r
R
p R
R
R
	
(3.189)
respectively.
It has been shown [44] that the STF-CFs of the LoS, SBT, SBR, and DB compo-
nents can be closely approximated as  
	
-
D
+D
[
]
[
]
max
max
2
2
0
2
(
)
(
)
2
cos
cos
,
2
(
,
)
1
Tx
Rx
T
T
R
R
H
j
p p d
q q d
j
t f
f
LoS
pq pq
j
f
D            
c
K
R
t
f
e
K
e
π
π
γ
γ
λ
π
-
-
-
+
D
-
D D
»
+
´



	
(3.190)
	
-
-
-
D
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
2
0
1
2 (
)
2
cos
,
2
2
0
2
2
0
2
2
2
1
2
cos
(
)
(
,
)
4
(
)
1
1
(
1)
2
Rx
R
R
t
t
t
Tm
Tz
j
q q d
j
tf
SBT
pq pq
Tm
Tz
j
f D R
R
T
t
c
R
T
t
t
SBT
SBT
t
t
p
p d
R
t
f
e
p
p d
R
e
I
k
K
D
R
I
x
y
dR
R
R
π
π
γ
λ
π
π β
λ
β
λ
η
γ
-
D
+
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
D D
»
-
æ
ö
- ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
´
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
´
+
-
ò




	
(3.191)

100	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
-
+
D
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
2
0
1
2 (
)
2
cos
,
2
2
0
2
2
0
2
2
2
1
2
cos
(
)
(
,
)
4
(
)
1
1
(
1)
2
Tx
T
T
r
r
r
Rm
Rz
j
p p d
j
tf
SBR
pq pq
Rm
Rz
j
f D R
R
R
r
c
R
R
r
r
SBR
SBR
r
r
q
q d
R
t
f
e
q
q d
R
e
I
k
K
D
R
I
x
y
dR
R
R
π
π
γ
λ
π
π β
λ
β
λ
η
γ
-
D
+
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
D D
»
-
æ
ö
- ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
´
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
´
+
-
ò




	
(3.192)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
2
2
0
,
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
(
,
)
2
1
2
1
t
t
t
r
r
r
r
r
r
t
t
t
j
fR
R
DB
c
DB
t
t
DB
DB
pq pq
R
j
fR
R
r
c
r
r
DB
DB
R
j
fR
R
c
DB
r
r
DB
DB
R
j
fR
R
t
c
t
t
DB
DB
R
R
t
f
A
e
R I
x
y
dR
R
e
R I
w
z
dR
D
A
e
R I
w
z
dR
R
e
R I
x
y
dR
D
π
π
π
π
γ
γ
-
D
-
D
-
D
-
D
D D
»
+
æ
ö
´
+
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
+
æ
ö
´
+
-
ç
÷
è
ø
ò
ò
ò
ò

	
(3.193)
where parameters xSBT, ySBT, xSBR, ySBR, xDB, yDB, zDB, wDB, and ADB are  
	
+
D
+
»
-
+
D
(
)
max
0
2
(
)
2
cos
2
cos
SBT
Tx
T
T
t
T
T
x
j
p
p d
j
tf
j
fR c
k
π λ
π
γ
π
µ

	
(3.194)
	
(
)
max
max
2
(
)
(
)
sin
sin
sin
SBT
Ty
Ry
T
T
T
R
T
R
T
T
y
j
p
p d
q
q d
t f
f
k
π
λ
λ
γ
γ
µ
»
-
+
-
D
éë
ù
+ D
+
D
+
û


	
(3.195)
	
-
D
+
»
-
+
D
(
)
max
0
2
(
)
2
cos
2
cos
SBR
Rx
R
R
r
R
R
x
j
q
q d
j
tf
j
fR c
k
π λ
π
γ
π
µ

	
(3.196)
	
(
)
max
max
2
(
)
(
)
sin
sin
sin
SBR
Ry
Ty
R
R
R
T
R
T
R
R
y
j
q
q d
p
p d
t f
f
k
π
λ
λ
γ
γ
µ
»
-
+
-
D
éë
ù
+ D
+
D
+
û


	
(3.197)
	
+
D
+
»
-
+
D
(
)
max
0
2
(
)
2
cos
2
cos
DB
Tx
T
T
t
T
T
x
j
p
p d
j
tf
j
fR c
k
π λ
π
γ
π
µ

	
(3.198)
	
(
)
max
2
(
)
2
sin
sin
DB
Ty
T
T
T
T
y
j
p
p d
j
tf
k
π λ
D
γ
µ
»
-
+
p
+

	
(3.199)
	
-
D
+
»
-
+
D
(
)
max
0
2
(
)
2
cos
2
cos
DB
Rx
R
R
r
R
R
z
j
q
q d
j
tf
j
fR c
k
π λ
π
γ
π
µ

	
(3.200)

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
101
	
(
)
max
2
(
)
2
sin
sin
DB
Ry
R
R
R
R
w
j
q
q d
j
tf
k
π λ
D
γ
µ
»
-
+
p
+

	
(3.201)
	
(
) (
)
(
)(
)
0
2
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
cos
(
)
4
(
)
1
2
cos
(
)
4
(
)
1
Tm
Tz
TR
DB
T
R
Tm
Tz
Rm
Rz
j
fD c
Rm
Rz
t
t
r
r
p
p d
A
I
k
I
k
p
p d
q
q d
e
R
R
R
R
q
q d
π
π β
η
λ
β
λ
π β
λ
β
λ
-
D
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
-
æ
ö
- ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
´
-
-
-
æ
ö
- ç
÷
è
ø




	
(3.202)
Note that the STF-CFs for the SBT, SBR, and DB components of the time-vari-
ant transfer function must be evaluated numerically because the integrals in (3.191) – 
(3.193) do not have closed-form solutions. However, if we assume that the time and 
frequency dispersion are statistically independent, closed-form expressions for these 
STF-CFs can be obtained. For this reason, in the literature it is often assumed that the 
time dispersion (i.e., the time delays) and the frequency dispersion (i.e., the Doppler 
spreads) are statistically independent because the time delays depend on the relative 
locations of random scatterers (i.e., the angles of arrival, the angles of departure, and 
the distances among the Tx, Rx, and scatterers), whereas the Doppler spreads depend 
on the motions of the Tx and Rx [47, 48]. However, the Doppler spread depends not 
only on the speeds of the Tx and Rx, but also on the angles of departure and the angles 
of arrival. Hence, both the time delays and the Doppler spreads depend on the relative 
location of the random scatterers, which implies that they are not statistically indepen-
dent. Since the angles of departure and the angles of arrival cannot be neglected in the 
Doppler spreads, another way to obtain the independence between the time delays and 
the Doppler spreads is to assume that the waves scattered from the relatively closely 
spaced scatterers have equal time delays. Then, the influence of the angles of arrival and 
the angles of departure on the time delays can be neglected, making the time delays and 
the Doppler spreads statistically independent. In 2-D geometry-based statistical models, 
this is often achieved by the independence between the time delays and the Doppler 
spreads, assuming that all waves scattered from the scatterers lying on the same circle 
have equal time delays [9]. These time delays are equal to the average of all time delays 
obtained from the scatterers lying on the same circle. The equivalent assumption in the 
3-D concentric cylinders model is that all waves scattered from the scatterers lying on 
the same cylindric surface have equal (averaged) time delays. Using this approach, the 
time delays in (3.176)–(3.178) can be approximated as  
	
( )
,
0
l
t
m l
l
D
R
c
τ
τ
+
»
=
	
(3.203)
	
( )
,
0
k
r
n k
k
D
R
c
τ
τ
+
»
=
 
	
(3.204)

102	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
( )
( )
, , ,
,
0
l
k
r
t
m l n k
l k
D
R
R
c
τ
τ
+
+
»
=
	
(3.205)
Under these assumptions, the space-time-frequency in (3.180) can be factored 
as [48] 
	
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
(
,
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
SBT
SBT
SBR
SBR
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
DB
DB
LoS
LoS
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
R
t
f
R
t R
f
R
t R
f
R
t R
f
R
t R
f
D D
=
D
D
+
D
D
+
D
D
+
D
D

















	
(3.206)
where the closed-form expressions for the LoS, SBT, SBR, and DB components are 
given in [44]. 
Figures 3.12–3.14 compare the space-time correlation functions, the frequency 
correlation functions, and the space-time-frequency correlation functions in (3.180) 
and (3.206). The parameters used to obtain the results shown in Figures 3.12–3.14 
are D = 500m, l = 0.3m, dT = 0.5l, dR = 0.5l, q T = p /4, qR = p /4, yT = p /6, yR = p /6, 
gT = 40°, gR = 20°, DH = 0, fTmax = 200 MHz, fRmax = 200 MHz, g = 4, K = 0, mT = 
p /2, mR = 3p /2, bTm = 15°, bRm = 15°, Rt1 = 10m, Rt2 = 100m, Rr1 = 10m, Rr2 = 100m, 
hT = 1/3, hR = 1/3, and hTR =1/3. Figure 3.12 shows excellent agreement between 
space-time correlation functions from (3.180) and from (3.206). This is an expected 
result, because the approximations in (3.203)–(3.205) affect only time delays, which 
are set to zero in both the closed-form and numerically obtained space-time correlation 
functions. Figure 3.13 shows relatively good agreement between the frequency corre-
lation functions. Note that the frequency correlation functions are obtained from the 
space-time-frequency correlation functions by eliminating the space and time compo-
nents (i.e., by setting dT = dR = Dt = 0). Hence, this result shows that the ­approximated 
0
2
4
6
8
10
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
 |R11,22
SBT[ t, f=0]|      
 |R11,22
SBT[ t] R11,22
SBT[ f=0]|
 |R11,22
SBR[ t, f=0]|      
 |R11,22
SBR[ t] R11,22
SBR[ f=0]|
 |R11,22
DB[ t, f=0]|       
 |R11,22
DB[ t] R11,22
DB[ f=0]|
Envelopes of the normalized ST-CFs
Normalized time delay [fTmax t]
Figure 3.12  Comparison of the envelopes of normalized space-time correlation functions in (3.180) 
and (3.206).

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
103
and exact time delays have similar values (i.e., verifies the approximations in (3.203)–
(3.205)).  
However, Figure 3.14 shows that STF-CF in (3.206) underestimates the space-
time-frequency correlation function. This discrepancy is due to the fact that the time 
delays in closed-form correlations are not functions of the angles of departure or the 
angles of arrival, while the time delays in the numerically obtained correlations are 
0
2
4
6
8
10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
 |R11,22
SBT [ t, f=1MHz]|   
 |R11,22
SBT [ t] R11,22
SBT [ f=1MHz]|
 |R11,22
SBR [ t, f=1MHz]|   
 |R11,22
SBR [ t] R11,22
SBR [ f=1MHz]|
 |R11,22
DB [ t, f=1MHz]|    
 |R11,22
DB [ t] R11,22
DB [ f=1MHz]|
Envelopes of STF-CFs
Normalized time delay [fTmax t]
Figure 3.14  Comparison of the envelopes of space-time-frequency correlation functions in (3.180) 
and (3.206).
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
 |R11,22
SBT( t=0, f)|   
 |R11,22
SBT( t=0)R11,22
SBT( f)|
 |R11,22
SBR( t=0, f)|   
 |R11,22
SBR( t=0)R11,22
SBR( f)|
 |R11,22
DB( t=0, f)|    
 |R11,22
DB( t=0)R11,22
DB( f)|
Envelopes of frequency CFs
Frequency f [MHz]
Figure 3.13  Comparison of the envelopes of frequency correlation functions in (3.180) and (3.206).

104	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
functions of the angles of departure and the angles of arrival. Hence, the influence 
of the angles of arrival and the angles of departure on the time delays cannot be 
neglected, and the numerically obtained space-time-frequency correlation function 
in (3.180) should be used. Note that similar results are obtained for 2-D models 
(i.e., for bTm = bRm = 0°). These results are not surprising because, in practice, time 
delays and Doppler spreads are not independent [49].  
3.1.10.2  Space-Doppler Power Spectral Density (sD-psd)
The sD-psd of the time-variant transfer function Tpq (t, f ) is the Fourier transform 
of the space-time correlation function Rpq,p˜q˜ (Dt, Df = 0). From (3.180), it follows 
that the sD-psd is a summation of the sD-psd functions of the LoS, single-bounced 
transmit, single-bounced receive, and double-bounced components; that is,  
	
=
+
+
+









,
,
,
,
,
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
LoS
SBT
SBR
DB
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
S
v
S
v
S
v
S
v
S
v 	
(3.207)
It has been shown [44] that the sD-psds of the LoS, single-bounced transmit, single-
bounced receive, and double-bounced components are, respectively,  
	
ë
û
{
}
(
)
2
(
)
,
,
max
max
( )
(
,
0)
1
(
cos
cos
)
T
Rx
x
j
p p d
q q d
LoS
LoS
t
pq pq
pq pq
T
T
R
R
K
S
v
R
t
f
e
K
v
f
f
π
λ
δ
γ
γ
é
ù
-
-
-
D
=
D D =
=
+
´
+
-






F
	
(3.208)
	
{
}
{
}
[
]
π β
η
λ
β
λ
π
γ
π
π
γ
γ
γ
D
=
D D =
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
+
-
æ
ö
- ç
÷
è
ø
+
-
´
-
+
-
-
-
´
-




,
,
2
0
max
2
max
max
max
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
( )
(
,
0)
2
cos
(
)
(
)(
1)
4
(
)
1
exp
2 (
cos
)
2
1
(
cos
)/
(3
2
/
)
(3
2
/
)
3
m
m
SBR
SBT
SBT
t
pq pq
pq pq
T
Tz
T
T
T
Tz
R
R
SBT
x
T
R
R
T
t
t
t
t
t
S
v
R
t
f
p
p d
I k
K
p
p d
j
v
f
A
j
p
f
v
f
f
R
D R
R
D R
R
F
(
)
(
)
[
]
µ
γ
π
γ
π
γ
γ
é
´
-
+
-
ë
ù
´
-
+
úû
2
1
2
max
max
cosh
sin(
)
2
sin
2
cos
1
(
cos
)/
SBT
SBT
t
T
T
T
x
T
y
T
R
R
T
R
k
j
p
j
p
v
f
f
	
(3.209)

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
105
	
´
-
+
-
-
-
-
(
)
{
}
{
}
[
]
,
,
2
0
max
2
max
max
max
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
( )
,
0
2
cos
(
)
(
)(
1)
4
(
)
1
exp
2 (
cos
)
2
1
(
cos
)/
(3
2
/
)
(3
2
/
)
3
SBT
SBR
SBR
t
pq pq
pq pq
Rm
Rz
R
R
Rm
Rz
T
T
SBR
x
R
T
T
R
r
r
r
r
r
r
S
v
R
t
f
q
q d
I k
K
q
q d
j
v
f
A
j
p
f
v
f
f
R
D R
R
D R
R
R
π β
η
λ
β
λ
π
γ
π
π
γ
γ
γ
D
=
D D =
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
+
-
æ
ö
- ç
÷
è
ø
-
+
´
-
-
´
-






F
(
)
(
)
[
]
2
1
2
max
max
cosh
sin(
)
2
sin
2
cos
1
(
cos
)/
SBR
SBR
R
R
R
x
R
y
R
T
T
R
k
j
p
j
p
v
f
f
µ
γ
π
γ
π
γ
γ
éë
ù
´
-
-
úû
	
(3.210)
	
´
-
+
-
´
+
-
-
æ
ö
æ
ö
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
{
}
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
{
}
,
,
2
2
0
0
max
( )
(
,
0)
2
2
cos
cos
(
)
(
)(
1)
4
4
1
1
exp
2
cos
2
sin
cos
/
cosh
DB
DB
DB
DB
t
pq pq
pq pq
Tm
Tz
Rm
Rz
TR DB
T
R
Tm
Tz
Rm
Rz
x
T
y
T
T
T
T
T
S
v
R
t
f
p
p d
q
q d
I
I k
I k
K
p
p d
q
q d
j
p
p
jk
v f
k
π
π
β
β
η
λ
λ
β
β
λ
λ
π
γ
π
γ
µ
γ
D
=
D D =
æ
ö
æ
ö
-
-
=
+
-
-
-
-
è
ø
è
ø
´








F
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
{
}
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
max
max
max
max
2
2
max
max
max
sin(
2
sin
2
cos
)
1
/
/
1
( /
)
exp
2
cos
2
sin
cos
/
cosh
sin
2
sin
2
cos
1
/
/
1
/
DB
DB
DB
DB
DB
DB
T
T
T
x
T
y
T
T
T
T
z
R
w
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
z
R
w
R
R
R
R
j
p
j
p
v f
f
v f
j
p
p
jk
v f
k
j
p
j
p
v f
f
v f
µ
γ
π
γ
π
γ
π
π
γ
π
γ
µ
γ
µ
γ
π
γ
π
γ
π
é
-
+
-
ëï
ù
´
-
-
úû
+
-
-
éë
ù æ
ö
´
-
-
ç
÷
ú è
ø
û

	(3.211)
where F{×} is the Fourier transform,  cosh(×) is the hyperbolic cosine, d(×) is the Dirac 
delta function,  is convolution,½v + fRmax cos gR½£ fTmax  and ½v – fTmax cos gT½£ fRmax 

106	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
for the single-bounced sD-psds, |v| £ fTmax + fRmax for the double-bounced sD-psd, 
and 
	
max
(2
cos
2
sin
)/2
SBT
SBT
SBT
SBT
x
T
y
T
x
T
A
p
p
w
f
π
γ
π
γ
π
=
+
-
	
(3.212)
	
(
)
/
SBT
x
Tx
p
p
p d
λ
=
- 
	
(3.213)
	
cos(
)
SBT
x
T
T
T
w
jk
γ
µ
=
-
	
(3.214)
	
2
1
1
(
)
(
)
(
0.5(
))/
/
SBT
y
Ty
Ry
t
t
t
p
p
p d
q
q d
R
R
R
D
λ
é
ù
=
-
+
-
+
-
ë
û


	
(3.215)
	
max
(2
cos
2
sin
)/2
SBR
SBR
SBR
SBR
x
R
y
R
x
R
A
p
p
w
f
π
γ
π
γ
π
=
+
+
	
(3.216)
	
(
)
/
SBR
x
Rx
p
q
q d
λ
=
- 
	
(3.217)
	
cos(
)
SBR
x
R
R
R
w
jk
γ
µ
= -
-
	
(3.218)
	
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
(
)
(
)
0.5
/
/
SBR
y
Ry
Ty
r
r
r
p
q
q d
p
p d
R
R
R
D
λ
é
ù
=
-
+
-
+
-
ë
û


	
(3.219)
	
(
)
/
DB
x
Tx
p
p
p d
λ
=
- 
	
(3.220)
	
(
)
/
DB
y
Ty
p
p
p d
λ
=
- 
	
(3.221)
	
(
)
/
DB
z
Rx
p
q
q d
λ
=
- 
	
(3.222)
	
(
)
/
DB
w
Ry
p
q
q d
λ
=
- 
	
(3.223)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
1
2
2
1
1
0.5
/(3 )
0.5
/ 3
DB
t
t
r
r
r
r
I
R
R
R
R
D
R
R
D
γ
γ
=
-
-
-
+
	
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
3
2
3
2
1
2
2
1
1
0.5
/ 3
0.5
/ 3
r
r
t
t
t
t
R
R
R
R
D
R
R
D
γ
γ
+
-
-
-
+
	
(3.224)
Figure 3.15 plots several SISO and MIMO sD-psds, assuming 3-D nonisotro-
pic scattering and LoS conditions between the Tx and Rx. These sD-psds are typi-
cal of urban street environments. First, we compare the analytical SISO sD-psd in 

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
107
(3.207) with the measured SISO sD-psd in Figure 8(a) of [25]. The measurements 
in [25] were performed in the urban street area, at 5.2GHz, and the maximum 
Doppler frequencies were fTmax = fRmax = 75 Hz. The Tx and Rx were equipped 
with one omnidirectional antenna each. The distance between the Tx and Rx was 
approximately D = 300m. The moving directions were gT = gR = 90°, the antenna 
orientations were qT = qR = yT = yR = 0°, and the difference in the Tx and Rx an-
tenna heights was DH = 0. The same parameters are used to obtain all analytical 
results in Figure 3.15. The rest of the parameters in the 3-D model (i.e., K = 4,  
mT = 70°, kT = 5, 
20
m
T
β
=
, Rt1 = Rr1 = 9m, Rt2 = Rr2 = 90m, m­R = 250°, kR = 3.3,  
20
m
R
β
=
, ­hT = hR = 0.1, and hTR = 0.8), are estimated to fit the SISO sD-psd 
reported in [25]. Figure 3. 15 shows the close agreement between the theoretical 
and the empirical SISO sD-psds. Furthermore, we note that the V-to-V sD-psd in 
an urban area differs from the U-shaped sD-psd of F-to-M cellular radio channels. 
As noted in Section 3.1.6.2, this is because the DB rays are more dominant than 
the SBT and SBR rays (i.e., hT = hR = 0.1, and hTR = 0.8) in an urban street area, 
whereas F-to-M cellular channels have only SBR and LoS rays (i.e., hT = 0, hR = 1,  
hTR = 0). To illustrate the importance of combining the DB, SBT, and SBR rays, 
Figure 3.15 also plots the SISO sD-psd with only DB and LoS rays. The results 
show that for higher frequencies, the model with only DB and LoS rays overesti-
mates the sD-psd. Furthermore, Figure 3.15 shows that the 2-D model (i.e., bTm = 
bRm = 0°) underestimates the sD-psd (i.e., a 3-D model should be used in urban 
environments). Finally, Figure 3.15 plots the MIMO sD-psd, S11,22(v), with dT = 
d­R = 1l. The results show that the sD-psd decreases with increased antenna ele-
ment separation.  
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
 3-D SISO, all rays                    
 3-D SISO, DB+LoS rays
 3-D MIMO, dT=dR=1 , all rays  
 2-D SISO, all rays
Measured SISO [25]                  3-D SISO for F-to-M channel
Normalized space-Doppler spectrum [dB]
Doppler frequency f [Hz]
Figure  3.15  The normalized theoretical and measured sD-psd in an urban street environment.

108	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
Similarly, Figure 3.16 plots several SISO and MIMO sD-psds that can be found 
in the interstate-highway environments. First, we compare the analytical SISO sD-
psd with the measured SISO sD-psd in Figure 4(d) of [26]. The measurements in 
[26] were performed on the highway, at 2.4 GHz, and the maximum Doppler fre-
quencies were fTmax = fRmax = 200 Hz. The vehicles were driven in the rightmost 
lane and very close to the sound blockers on the edge of the highway. The Tx and 
Rx again had one omnidirectional antenna each, and the distance between the Tx 
and Rx was approximately D = 300m. The moving directions were gT = gR = 0°, 
and the antenna orientations were qT = qR = 90°, yT = yR = 0°, 
0
H
D
= . The same 
parameters are used for all analytical results in Figure 3.16. The rest of the param-
eters in the 3-D model (i.e., K = 1.5, mT = 0°, kT = 4, 
15
m
T
β
=
, Rt1 = Rr1 = 9.6m, 
Rt2 = Rr2 = 96m, mR = 180°, kR = 4, 
20
m
R
β
=
, hT = hR = 0.3, and hTR = 0.4), are 
manually estimated to match the SISO sD-psd in Figure 4(d) of [26]. Figure 3.16 
shows close agreement between the theoretical and the empirical SISO sD-psds. 
Furthermore, we can observe that this spectrum is similar to the U-shaped spectrum 
of cellular channels. This is not a surprising result because the SBT and SBR rays 
are prevalent (i.e., hT = hR = 0.3, and hTR = 0.4) when the vehicles are driven very 
close to the sound blockers on the edge of the highway. To illustrate the importance 
of combining the DB, SBT, and SBR rays, Figure 3.16 also plots the SISO sD-psd 
with only DB and LoS rays. The results show that the model with only DB and LoS 
rays has a sD-psd with a significantly different shape as compared to the model with 
SBT, SBR, DB, and LoS rays. Furthermore, Figure 3.16 shows that the 2-D model  
(i.e., 
0
m
m
T
R
β
β
=
=
) underestimates the sD-psd (i.e., a 3-D model should be used in 
urban environments). Finally, Figure 3.16 plots the MIMO sD-psd, S11,22(v), for the  
antenna elements separation of dT = dR = 1l and again shows that the sD-psd de-
creases with increased antenna element separation.  
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
 3-D SISO, all rays                       
 3-D SISO, DB+LoS rays
 3-D MIMO, dT=dR=1 , all rays    
 2-D SISO, all rays
Measured SISO [26]
 3-D SISO for F-to-M channel
Normalized space-Doppler spectrum [dB]
Doppler frequency f [Hz]
Figure 3.16  The normalized theoretical and measured sD-psd in an interstate-highway environment.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
109
3.1.10.3  Power Space-Delay Spectral Density (psds)
The psds of the time-variant transfer function is the inverse Fourier transform of 
the space-frequency correlation function 
,
(
0,
)
pq pq
R
t
f
D =
D

. From (3.180), it follows 
that the psds is a summation of the psds functions of the LoS, SBT, SBR, and DB 
components, which have been shown [44] to be  
	
(
)
{
}
1
rel
,
,
2
2
2
(
)
(
)
0
(
)
0,
1
T
R
x
x
LoS
LoS
pq pq
pq pq
f
j
p p d
q q d
H
P
R
t
f
D
K
e
K
c
π
λ
τ
δ
τ
-
D
-
-
-
é
ù
ë
û
=
D =
D
æ
ö
+ D
ç
÷
=
-
è
ø
+






F
	
(3.225)
	
{
}
0 rel
0
1
rel
,
,
2 (
)
2
0
2
(
/
1)
2
2
2
1
0 rel
0
(
)
(
0,
)
2
cos
(
)
(
)(
1)
4
(
)
1
2
1
cosh 2
1
2
m
z
x
m
z
t
SBT
t
tb
ta
SBT
SBT
pq pq
pq pq
f
T
T
j
q q dR
T
T
T
T
j
R B
c
R
R
t
c
t
R
t
t
SBT
t
P
R
t
f
p
p d
e
I k
K
p
p d
R
R e
D
R
R
c
c
jC
R
π
λ
π
τ
τ
π β
η
λ
β
λ
γ
τ
-
D
-
-
-
=
D =
D
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
+
-
æ
ö
- ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
´
-
ç
÷
è
ø
-
-
´
ò







F
rel
0 rel
0 rel
0
2
2
1
2
2
t
t
t
t
t
R
dR
c
c
R
c
R
R
τ
π
τ
τ
æ
ö
æ
ö
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
	
(3.226)
	
{
}
0
0
1
rel
,
,
2 (
)
2
0
2
(
/
1)
2
2
2
1
0
(
)
(
0,
)
2
cos
(
)
(
)(
1)
4
(
)
1
2
1
cosh 2
m
Tx
m
r
SBR
r
rb
ra
SBR
SBR
pq pq
pq pq
f
R
Rz
j
p p d
R
R
R
Rz
j
R B
c
R
R
r
c
r
R
r
r
SBR
P
R
t
f
q
q d
e
I k
K
q
q d
R
R e
D
R
R
c
jC
π
λ
π
τ
τ
π β
η
λ
β
λ
γ
τ
-
D
-
-
=
D =
D
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
+
-
æ
ö
- ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
    ´ 
-
ç
÷
è
ø
-
    ´
ò







F
rel
re
0
0
0
0
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
r
r
r
r
r
r
c
R
R
dR
c
c
R
c
R
R
τ
π
τ
τ
æ
ö
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
l
rel
rel
rel
	
(3.227)

110	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
 
	
æ
ö
æ
ö
æ
ö
æ
ö
æ
ö
æ
ö
è
ø
è
ø
ç
÷
ç
÷
{
}
0
0
1
,
,
0
0
2
2
2
(
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
(
)
(
0,
)
(
)
(
)(
1)
2
2
cos
(
)
cos
(
)
4
(
)
4
(
)
1
1
2
(
)(
)
m
m
t
DB
DB
DB
pq pq
pq pq
f
TR
T
R
T
T
j
R B
c
c
t
t
t
r
r
P
R
t
f
I k
I k
K
p
p d
q
q d
p
p d
q
q d
R e
R
R
R
R
π
τ
τ
η
π
π
β
β
λ
λ
β
β
λ
λ
-
D
=
D =
D
=
+
æ
ö
æ
ö
-
-
´
-
-
-
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
´
-
-








re
rel
F
1
0
1
0
/
)
0
0
0
0
0
2
(
/
)
0
0
0
0
cosh 2
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
cosh 2
1
2
2
2
1
2
t
tb
ta
r
DB
r
rb
ra
R
R
R
DB
t
t
t
t
t
t
j
R D
c
R
R
r
c
r
R
DB
r
r
r
r
c
c
jC
R
R
dR
c
c
R
c
R
R
R
R e
D
c
c
jE
R
R
c
R
c
R
π
τ
τ
τ
π
τ
τ
γ
τ
τ
π
τ
-
-
é
ê
êë
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
´
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
´
-
ò
ò

l
rel
rel
rel
rel
rel
rel
rel
rel
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
2
(
/
)
0
0
0
0
0
2
(
/
)
0
0
2
1
cosh 2
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
cosh 2
1
2
t
DB
t
tb
ta
r
DB
r
rb
ra
r
r
j
R B
c
R
R
t
c
t
R
DB
t
t
t
t
t
t
j
R D
c
R
R
c
r
R
DB
r
dR
c
R
R
R e
D
c
c
jC
R
R
dR
c
c
R
c
R
R
R e
c
c
jE
R
π
τ
π
τ
τ
γ
τ
τ
π
τ
τ
τ
τ
-
-
æ
ö
ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
+
-
ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
´
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
-
´
ò
ò

rel
rel
rel
rel
rel
rel
rel
rel
r
0
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
r
r
r
r
r
R
dR
c
c
R
c
R
R
π
τ
τ
ù
æ
ö
ú
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
ú
è
ø
ú
æ
ö
ú
-
ç
÷
ú
è
ø
û
el
rel
rel
Tz
Tz
Rz
Rz
Rm
Rm
1
/
)
t
R -
	
(3.228)

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
111
where cosh(×) is the hyperbolic cosine, ⊙ denotes convolution, d(×) denotes the Dirac 
delta function, and trel = t – D/c0. The integrals in (3.226)–(3.228) need to be nu-
merically evaluated over the range of possible radii Rt and Rr. For the range 0 £ 
trel £ 2Rt1/c0 , the integration limits are Rta = Rt1, Rtb = Rt2, Rra = Rr1, and Rrb = 
Rr2. On the other hand, when 2Rt1/c0 £trel £ 2Rt2 /c0, the integration limits are 
Rta = c0trel /2, R­tb = Rt2, Rra = c0trel/2, and Rrb = Rr2. Finally, the parameters in 
(3.226)–(3.228) are defined as  
	
0
(2 (
)
/
cos
)
/(2
)
SBT
Tx
T
T
t
B
p
p d
jk
c
R
π
λ
µ
π
=
-
-

	
(3.229)
	
1
2
1
(2 (
)
/
2 (
)
(
0.5(
))/(
)
sin
)
SBT
Ty
Ry
t
t
t
T
T
C
p
p d
q
q d
R
R
R
D
jk
π
λ
π
λ
µ
=
-
+
-
+
-
-


	
(3.230)
	
0
(2 (
)
/
cos
)
/(2
)
SBR
Rx
R
R
r
B
q
q d
jk
c
R
π
λ
µ
π
=
-
-

	
(3.231)
	
1
2
1
(2
(
)
/
2 (
)
(
0.5(
))/(
)
sin
)
SBR
Ry
Ty
r
r
r
R
R
C
q q d
q
q d
R
R
R
D
jk
π
λ
π
λ
µ
=
-
+
-
+
-
-


	
(3.232)
	
0
(2 (
)
/
cos
)
/(2
)
DB
Tx
T
T
t
B
p
p d
jk
c
R
π
λ
µ
π
=
-
-

	
(3.233)
	
2 (
)
/
sin
DB
Ty
T
T
C
p
p d
jk
π
λ
µ
=
-
-

	
(3.234)
	
0
(2 (
)
/
cos
)
/(2
)
DB
Rx
R
R
r
D
q
q d
jk
c
R
π
λ
µ
π
=
-
-

	
(3.235)
	
2 (
)
/
sin
DB
Ry
R
R
E
q
q d
jk
π
λ
µ
=
-
-

	
(3.236)
Note that power delay spectra that were derived assuming “one-circular-ring” 
model [50] are special cases of (3.227). For example, the 2-D nonisotropic power 
delay spectrum in [50] is obtained for 
0
m
R
β
= , yR = 0, and dT = dR = 0. 
Figures 3.17 and 3.18 show several SISO and MIMO psds that can be found in 
highway environments and compares them with the measured SISO psds in [51]. 
The measurements in [51] were performed on the highway, at 2.4 GHz, and with 
maximum Doppler frequencies fTmax = fRmax = 200 Hz. The vehicles were driven 
in the rightmost lane of the highway, and the sound blockers on the edge of the 
highway were periodically present. The Tx and Rx were equipped with one omni­
directional antenna each. The distance between the Tx and Rx was approximately 
D = 300m. The moving directions were gT = gR = 90°, the antenna orientations were 
qT = qR = yT = yR = 0°, and the relative antenna elevation was DH = 0. The same 
parameters are used to obtain all analytical results in Figures 3.17 and 3.18. The 
measured SISO psds in Figure 3.17 is obtained on the part of the highway without 
sound blockers. The estimated parameters for the analytical SISO psds shown in 
Figure 3.17 are K = 0, g = 4, mT = 90°, kT = 9.1, β
=

15
m
T
, Rt1 = Rr1 = 13m, Rt2 = 
Rr2 = 130m, mR = 270°, kR = 9.1, 
15
m
R
β
=
°, hT = hR = 0.2, and hTR = 0.6. Fig-
ure 3.17 shows the close agreement between the theoretical and empirical SISO psds. 

112	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
The results show that DB rays are prevalent on the part of the highway without 
sound blockers (i.e., hT = hR = 0.2, and hTR = 0.6). In this case, the psds closely fol-
lows the one-sided exponential function and dies out after 0.8 ms. 
The measured SISO psds in Figure 3.18 is obtained on the part of the highway 
with sound blockers. The estimated parameters for the analytical SISO psds shown 
in Figure 3.18 are K = 0, g = 4, mT = 90°, kT = 9.4, 
15
m
T
β
°
=
, 
=
=
1
1
12m
t
r
R
R
, 
Rt2 = Rr2 = 120m, mR = 270°, kR = 9.4, 
15
m
R
β
=
°, hT = hR = 0.45, and hTR = 0.1. 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
-32
-28
-24
-20
-16
-12
-8
-4
0
Analytical SISO
Measured SISO 
 MIMO, dT=dR=1 
 MIMO, dT=dR=2 
 MIMO, dT=dR=4 
Relative power space-delay spectrum [dB]
Delay [ s]
Figure 3.17  The analytical and measured psds in the rightmost lane of an interstate highway with-
out sound blockers.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
-32
-28
-24
-20
-16
-12
-8
-4
0
Analytical SISO
 Measured SISO
 MIMO, dT=dR=1 
 MIMO, dT=dR=2 
 MIMO, dT=dR=4 
Relative power space-delay spectrum [dB]
Delay [ s]
Figures 3.18  The analytical and measured psds in the rightmost lane of an interstate highway with 
sound blockers.

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
113
Figure 3.18 shows the close agreement between the theoretical and empirical SISO 
psds. The results show that SBT and SBR rays are prevalent on the part of the high-
way with sound blockers (i.e., hT = hR = 0.45, and hTR = 0.1). We can observe that 
this psds does not follow the one-sided exponential function, which is characteristic 
for F-to-M cellular channels. The V-to-V psds has two distinct slopes and dies out 
after 0.6 ms. Figures 3.17 and 3.18 also show several MIMO psds, P11,22 (trel), with 
dT = dR = {1l, 2l, 4l}. The results show that the psds decreases with increased an-
tenna element separation.  
3.1.10.4  Level Crossing Rate (LCR)
The level crossing rate of the channel envelope can be calculated using similar rea-
soning as in Section 3.1.6.3. The LCR for LoS conditions (Ricean fading, corre-
lated in-phase and quadrature components) is given in (3.106) and the parameters 
b0, b1, and b2 are defined in (3.107)–(3.109), respectively. When 3-D nonisotropic 
scattering is characterized by pdfs given in (3.23), (3.24), and (3.186)–(3.189), the 
parameters b0, b1, and b2 can be written as [11]
	
SBT
SBR
DB
n
n
n
n
b
b
b
b
=
+
+
	
(3.237)
where n Î{0, 1, 2} and parameters 0
0
0
1
1
1
2
2
2
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
SBT
SBR
DB
SBT
SBR
DB
SBT
SBR
DB
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
 
and 2
DB
b
 are
	
(
)
0
2
1
T
SBT
b
K
η
=
+
	
(3.238)
	
(
)
0
2
1
R
SBR
b
K
η
=
+
	
(3.239)
	
(
)
0
2
1
TR
DB
b
K
η
=
+
	
(3.240)
	
2
1
2
1
Tmax
1
0
2
2
0
1
R max
2
2
0
2
1
2
2
2
2
cos
(
)
2
cos(
)
(
)
4
(
)
2
sin
sin
cos
(
)
cos
cos
2
4
m
m
t
t
m
m
m
T
T
SBT
SBT
T
T
T
T
R
t
T
t
R
T
R
R
T
t
t
t
H
t
H
T
T
t
T
I k
b
b
f
I k
R
I k
R
f
D
I k
R
R
R
R
D
D
D
D
dR
R
D
π
β
π
µ
γ
π
β
γ
µ
γ
π
β
β
π
β
ì
ï
=
-
ï
-
í
ï
ïî
é
ù
+
+
ê
ú
-
ë
û
é
ù
D
D
æ
ö
æ
ö
+
+
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
è
ø
ë
û
´
é
ù
æ
ö
-
ê
ú
ç
÷
è
ø
ë
û
ò
t
ü
ïïý
ï
ïþ 	
(3.241)

114	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
2
1
2
1
max
1
0
2
2
0
1
max
2
2
0
2
1
2
2
2
2
cos
(
)
2
cos(
)
(
)
4
(
)
2
cos
sin
sin
(
)
cos
cos
2
4
m
m
r
r
m
m
m
R
R
SBR
SBR
R
R
R
R
R
R
r
R
r
T
T
R
T
R
R
r
r
r
H
r
H
R
R
r
R
I k
b
b
f
I k
R
I k
R
f
D
I k
R
R
R
R
D
D
D
D
dR
R
D
π
β
π
µ
γ
π
β
γ
γ
µ
π
β
β
π
β
ì
ï
=
-
ï
-
í
ï
ïî
é
ù
+
-
ê
ú
-
ë
û
é
ù
D
D
æ
ö
æ
ö
+
+
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
è
ø
ë
û
´
é
ù
æ
ö
-
ê
ú
ç
÷
è
ø
ë
û
ò
r
ü
ïïý
ï
ïþ 	
(3.242)
	
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
2
1
max
1
0
2
2
0
2
1
max
2
2
0
cos
2
cos(
)
4
cos
cos
4
m
m
m
m
T
T
DB
DB
T
T
T
T
T
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
I
k
b
b
f
I
k
I
k
f
I
k
π
β
π
µ
γ
π
β
π
β
µ
γ
π
β
ìï
=
-
í
-
ïî
üï
+
-
ý
-
ïþ
	
(3.243)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) ( )
(
)
2
1
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
0
max
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
2
2
4
cos 2
16
cos 2
2
2
2
16
4
8
4
4 8
16
16
8
32
cos
m
m
m
m
m
m
t
t
m
m
m
m
m
T
T
T
T
T
T
SBT
SBT
T
T
T
t
t
T
T
T
R
R
t
t
t
T
T
T
T
T
t
I
k
I
k
b
b
f
I
k
R
R
D
D
R
R
R
D
D
D
R
π
β
π
β
µ
γ
π
π
β
β
β
π
β
β
π
β
π
β
π
β
β
ì
+
-
+
-
ï
=
í
-
ïî
æ
ö
+
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
+
æ
ö
æ
ö
æ
ö
æ
ö
-
-
-
+
+
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
´
ò
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
max
max
0
1
max
max
0
1
cos
1
cos
1
cos
1
sin
sin 2
sin
2
cos
cos
m
m
m
m
H
t
H
T
T
t
H
t
H
T
T
T
t
T
R
R
T
T
T
T
T
T
R
R
T
T
T
R
β
D
D
D
D
R
R
D
D
D
D
I
k
R
f
f
D
I
k
I
k
f
f
I
k
β
β
γ
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
γ
é
æ
ö
æ
ö
D
D
æ
ö
æ
ö
-
+
+
+
+
ç
÷
ç
÷
ê
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
ë
ù
æ
ö
æ
ö
D
D
æ
ö
æ
ö
+
-
-
+
+
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
ú
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø û
é
æ
ö
´
-
+
ê
ç
÷
è
ø
êë
ù
+
-
ú
û
β

3.1  V-to-V Propagation Modeling	
115
	
( )
(
) (
)
(
)
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
max
max
0
cos 2
2
32
4
16
cos 2
4
16
cos 2
cos
sin2
2
m
m
m
m
m
t
H
t
T
T
t
T
t
H
T
t
T
T
T
T
t
R
R
R
R
T
R
R
D
D
D
R
D
R
D
D
R
D
I
k
I
k
R
f
f
D
I
k
β
π
π
β
π
β
β
π
π
β
µ
γ
γ
é
é
ù
D
æ
ö
æ
ö
+
+
-
ê
ç
÷
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
è
ø
ë
û
ê
+ ê
é
ù
æ
ö
ê
-
ê
ú
ç
÷
è
ø
ê
ë
û
ë
ù
é
ù
D
æ
ö
-
ú
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
ë
û
ú
+
ú
é
ù
æ
ö
ú
-
ê
ú
ç
÷
è
ø
ú
ë
û
û
é
-
æ
ö
´
+
ç
÷
è
ø
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
max
2
2
0
2
1
2
sin 2
sin
T
t
t
R
T
t
R
T
t
t
I
k
R
R
f
dR
D
I
k
R
R
γ
µ
ê
êë
ù
ü
+
ú
ý
-
û
þ
	
	
	
	
(3.244)
	
ê
ú
ç
÷
è
ø
ê
ú
ê
ú
ç
÷
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
è
ø
-
-
´
-
+
+
-
-
+
+
-
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
-
+
+
+
+
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
ç
÷
è
ø
+
-
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
2
1
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
max
2
0
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
2
2
4
cos 2
16
cos 2
2
2
2
16
4
8
4
4 8
16
16
8
32
cos
m
m
m
m
m
m
r
r
m
m
m
m
m
R
R
R
R
R
R
SBR
SBR
R
R
R
r
r
R
R
R
R
R
r
r
r
R
R
R
R
R
r
I
k
I
k
b
b
f
I
k
R
R
D
D
R
R
R
D
D
D
R
π
β
π
β
µ
γ
π
π
β
β
β
π
β
β
π
β
π
β
π
β
β
ì
+
-
ï
=
í
-
ïî
æ
ö
+
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
+
æ
ö
æ
ö
æ
ö
æ
ö
-
-
-
+
+
ç
÷
ç
÷
ç
÷
è
ø
è
ø
è
ø
´
ò
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
(
)
2
max
max
0
1
max
max
0
1
cos
1
cos
1
cos
1
sin
sin 2
sin
2
cos
cos
m
m
m
m
H
r
H
R
R
r
H
r
H
R
R
R
r
R
T
T
R
R
R
R
R
R
T
T
R
R
R
R
D
D
D
D
R
R
D
D
D
D
I
k
R
f
f
D
I
k
I
k
f
f
I
k
β
β
β
β
γ
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
γ
é
æ
ö
æ
ö
D
D
æ
ö
æ
ö
êë
ù
æ
ö
æ
ö
D
D
æ
ö
æ
ö
úû
é
æ
ö
ê
ç
÷
è
ø
ë
ù
úû
+
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
cos 2
2
32
4
16
cos 2
4
16
m
m
m
m
m
r
H
r
R
R
r
R
r
H
R
r
R
R
R
D
D
D
R
D
R
D
D
R
D
β
π
π
β
π
β
β
π
π
β
é
é
ù
D
æ
ö
æ
ö
+
+
-
ê
ë
û
ê
ê
é
ù
æ
ö
ê
-
ç
÷
è
ø
ê
ë
û
ë
é
ù
D
æ
ö
-
ë
û
+
é
ù
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
ë
û
ù
ú
ú
ú
ú
ú
û
	

116	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
max
max
0
cos 2
cos
sin
2
R
R
R
r
T
T
T
T
R
I
k
I
k
R
f
f
D
I
k
µ
γ
γ
é
-
æ
ö
´
+
ê
ç
÷
è
ø
ë
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
max
2
2
0
2
1
2
sin 2
sin
R
r
r
T
R
r
T
R
r
r
I
k
R
R
f
dR
D
I
k
R
R
γ
µ
ê
ù
ü
-
ú
ý
-
û
þ
	
	
	
	
(3.245)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
max
2
2
0
2
2
max
max
2
2
2
2
1
1
0
0
2
2
max
2
2
cos 2
cos 2(
)
1
2
2
2
2
16
cos
cos
2
4
4
(
)
(
)
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
)
(
)
cos 2
1
2
2
16
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
T
T
T
T
T
DB
DB
T
T
T
T
R
T
R
T
R
T
R
T
T
R
R
T
R
R
R
R
I
k
I
k
b
b
f
I
k
f
f
I k
I k
I k
I k
f
π
β
µ
γ
π
π
β
π
β
π
β
π
β
π
β
µ
γ
µ
γ
π
β
π
β
ì
é
ù
+
-
ï
ê
ú
=
+
í
ê
ú
-
ï
ë
û
î
+
-
-
´
-
-
é
ê
+
+                                                              
ê
-
ë
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
2
0
cos 2(
)
2
R
R
R
R
R
I
k
I
k
I
k
µ
γ
ü
ù
+
-
ï
ú
ý
ú
ï
û
þ
	
	
	
	
(3.246)
Figure 3.19 compares the analytical LCR with the measured LCR in an ur-
ban environment. The measured data is from Figure 8(a) of [25]. The narrowband 
measurements were performed at 5.2 GHz, and the maximum Doppler frequencies 
were 
max
max
T
R
f
f
=
=  500 Hz. Both, the Tx and Rx were equipped with omnidirec-
tional antennas. The distance between the Tx and Rx was approximately D = 300m.  
The moving directions and the antenna elevations are 
0
H
T
R
γ
γ
=
= D
= . The ana-
lytical LCR is obtained using the parameters K = 3.43, mT = 12.5°, kT = 15.2, bTm = 
10°, DT = DR = 0.6, mR = 143.4°, kR = 12.5, bRm = 5°, hT =0.053, hR = 0.057, and 
hTR = 0.9377.
3.2  Impact of Antenna Coupling on MIMO V-to-V Channels
The V-to-V channel models discussed in previous sections neglect mutual coupling 
among Tx and Rx antenna elements by using wide spacing between antenna ele-
ments (i.e., several wavelengths l). However, in V-to-V communications, it is often 
desirable to use robust compact antennas with reduced visual presence and low 
aerodynamic drag. For an example, a car owner would not be happy with an an-
tenna array that occupies the entire roof of the car. Hence, Tx and Rx antennas with 
wide interelement spacings are usually not practical, and close antenna element 
spacing inevitably leads to mutual coupling [52] that must be accounted for. Hence, 
this section focuses on the impact of mutual coupling on MIMO V-to-V systems. 

3.2  Impact of Antenna Coupling on MIMO V-to-V Channels	
117
3.2.1  MIMO V-to-V System Model
Here, we consider a wideband MIMO V-to-V communication system with Lt trans-
mit and Lr receive omnidirectional antenna elements, as shown in Figure 3.20. It is 
assumed that both Tx and Rx are in motion and equipped with vertically polarized 
half-wavelength electric dipole antenna elements. We also assume here that the 
propagation occurs in an outdoor metropolitan environment characterized by 3-D 
nonisotropic scattering with either LoS or NLoS conditions between the Tx and Rx. 
Finally, we assume that the Tx and Rx antennas and the scatterers are in the far-field 
of one another.  
3.2.1.1  Transmit and Receive Antenna Subsystems
The voltage sources Vsi in Figure 3.20, for i = 1,…, Lt have impedances Zsi and feed 
Lt antenna elements at the Tx. The mutual coupling among the Tx antenna elements 
in Figure 3.20 is characterized by an Lt × Lt impedance matrix ZTT. The vector of 
voltages at the entrance of Tx coupling network, VT is defined as [53–54] 
	
T
S
S T
=
-
V
V
Z i  	
(3.247)
where 
1
2
[
,
,...,
]
t
T
S
s
s
sL
V
V
V
=
V
 is the vector of source voltages, 
1
2
i
[
,
,...
]
t
T
T
t
t
tL
i
i
i
=
 
is the vector of Tx currents, ZS is the diagonal matrix of source impedances, and 
[×]T denotes transpose operation. Figure 3.20 also shows the Rx that consists of Lr 
antenna elements and the load impedances ZLi, for i = 1, …, Lr. The mutual coupling 
among the Rx antenna elements is characterized by an Lr × Lr impedance matrix ZRR. 
The vector of voltages at the exit of the Rx coupling network, VR, is defined as  
	
i
L R
R =
Z
V
−
 	
(3.248)
where 
1
2
[
,
,...
]
r
T
R
r
r
rL
i
i
i
=
i
 is the vector of Rx currents, and ZL is the diagonal matrix  
of load impedances. 
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
0.01
0.1
1
Measured level crossing rate (urban area)
Theoretical level crossing rate for fading with LoS component
Normalized level crossing rate L(R)/fTmax
R [dB]
Figure 3.19  Comparison of the analytical LCR and measured LCR in an urban environment.

118	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
3.2.1.2  Impedance Matching Networks
The antenna pattern characteristics and the power collection capability of coupled an-
tennas strongly depend on the impedance matching between the antenna inputs/outputs 
and the rest of the communication network [55]. Therefore, source and load imped-
ances in Figure 3.20 need to be selected carefully. This section briefly reviews four dif-
ferent impedance matching networks that are often used in the literature [55, 56]. 
The first matching network is the characteristic impedance matching network 
that has the Tx and Rx antenna elements terminated with the same characteristic 
impedance Zc (i.e., Zsi = Zc for i = 1,…, Lt and ZLk = Zc, for k = 1,…, Lr [56]).  
The matching quality of the network depends on the difference between actual antenna 
impedances and the characteristic impedance. The second is the self-impedance match-
ing network, where Tx and Rx antenna elements are terminated with the complex- 
conjugated self-impedances (i.e., 
*
ii
si
TT
Z
Z
=
 for i = 1,…, Lt and 
*
kk
Lk
RR
Z
Z
=
, for  
k = 1,…, Lr [56]). This matching network facilitates the maximum power transfer be-
tween the antennas and communication electronics when there is no mutual coupling. 
However, when mutual coupling is present, the matching depends on the behavior 
of antenna mutual impedances. The third is the input-impedance matching network, 
where Tx and Rx antenna elements are terminated with the complex-conjugate input 
impedances (i.e., 
*
in
si
Ti
Z
Z
=
 for i = 1,…, Lt and 
*
in
Lk
Rk
Z
Z
=
 for k = 1,…, Lr, where 
in
Ti
Z  and 
in
Rk
Z
 are calculated using (10) in [56]). Similar to the self-impedance match-
ing network, the input-impedance matching network has a single-branch matching. 
However, while the self-impedance matching network takes into account only the 
self-impedances of antenna elements, the input-impedance matching network takes 
Propagation
Environment
Figure 3.20  An Lt × Lr MIMO V-to-V system with mutual coupling.

3.2  Impact of Antenna Coupling on MIMO V-to-V Channels	
119
into account both the self and mutual impedances. Finally, the fourth is the multiport 
conjugate matching network [55] that, similarly to the input-impedance ­matching 
network, takes into account mutual coupling among the antenna elements [55]. How-
ever, unlike the input-impedance match, it allows interconnections among the ports. 
Although this matching network offers both zero return loss and zero correlation for 
uniformly distributed angles of departure and arrival, it has very narrow bandwidth 
and high complexity, which prevents practical implementation. In this section, we will 
focus only on the first three matching networks. 
3.2.2  Modeling of MIMO V-to-V Channels with Mutual Coupling
To evaluate the channel with mutual coupling, we model the MIMO V-to-V system 
in Figure 3.20 as a multiport network with the voltages and currents related as 
­follows: 
	
i
i
R
RR
RT
R
T
TR
TT
T
é
ù
é
ù é
ù
=
ê
ú
ê
ú ê
ú
ë
û
ë
û ë
û
V
Z
Z
V
Z
Z
	
(3.249)
The subblock matrices ZTT and ZRR in (3.249) denote mutual coupling among Tx 
and Rx antenna elements, respectively, the subblock matrix ZRT represents propa-
gation form the Tx to the Rx, and the subblock matrix ZTR represents propagation 
form the Rx to the Tx. In the analysis that follows, we assume that backscattering 
from the Rx to the Tx is negligible, (i.e., ZTR = 0). 
3.2.2.1  MIMO V-to-V Channel without Mutual Coupling
The MIMO V-to-V channel without mutual coupling can be described by an Lr  ´  Lt 
matrix 
[
(
0,
0)] r
t
ij
L
L
h t
τ
×
=
=
=
H
 of input delay-spread functions that is defined as
	
=
 
V
H V
Ro
To	
(3.250)
where 
1
2
[
,
, ...,
]
r
T
Ro
ro
ro
roL
V
V
V
=
 
V
 and 
1
2
[
,
, ...,
]
t
T
To
to
to
toL
V
V
V
=
 
V
 vectors contain 
open circuited voltages for the Rx and Tx, respectively. To characterize input delay-
spread functions of matrix H, we use the 3-D MIMO V-to-V channel model de-
scribed in Section 3.1.9. 
3.2.2.2  MIMO V-to-V Channel with Mutual Coupling
To include the effects of mutual coupling into MIMO V-to-V channel matrix H, we 
use an Lr ´ Lt channel matrix Hc, defined as [53] 
	
=
V
H V
c
R
S	
(3.251)
It has been shown [54] that the channel matrix Hc can be written as  
	
(
)
(
)
=
=
+
+
Z
Z
H
H
Z HZ
Z
Z
Z
Z
L
TT
c
R
T
L
RR
S
TT
	
(3.252)

120	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
where ZR = ZL(ZL + ZRR)–1 and ZT = ZTT(ZS + ZTT)–1. Then, the input delay-spread 
functions of the MIMO V-to-V channel matrix with mutual coupling, Hc, can be 
written as  
	
1
1
t
r
L
L
c
pq
Tmq
Rpn nm
m
n
h
Z
Z
h
=
=
= å
å
	
(3.253)
3.2.3  Analysis of MIMO V-to-V Channel with Mutual Coupling
This section discusses the impact of mutual coupling on Tx and Rx antenna pat-
terns, spatial correlation, received power, and capacity of MIMO V-to-V systems. 
The Tx and Rx are equipped with two identical vertically polarized half-wavelength 
( /2)
λ
 electric dipole antennas with radii l /600, where l = 123.3 m. The antenna 
dipoles are modeled using a software package based on the method of moments 
[57]. Characteristic impedances of Tx and Rx antenna elements, Zc, are chosen to 
be 50W, an assumption commonly used in practice. 
3.2.3.1  Antenna Patterns and Matching Networks
To illustrate the effect of mutual coupling on the dipole antenna pattern, Fig-
ure 3.21 plots the radiation pattern of one of the Tx dipoles for several different 
antenna spacings, 
{0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 1}
T
d ∈
. The other Tx dipole is terminated with 
the characteristic impedance Zc. The Rx antenna elements have negligible effect on 
the Tx antenna patterns because they are in the far-field of Tx antenna elements. 
From Figure 3.21, we can observe that the isolated dipole antenna (i.e., dT = 0) has 
the omnidirectional pattern. When the second antenna element is introduced and 
their spacing is very small (i.e., dT = 0.1l), the pattern remains omnidirectional, but 
the radiated power is significantly reduced. For the distances 0.3l–0.5l, mutual 
coupling noticeably changes the radiating pattern and the radiated power. The an-
tenna pattern does not remain omnidirectional, and the radiated power becomes a 
function of the angles of departure and arrival. Finally, for antenna spacings greater 
than or equal to l, mutual coupling has less impact on the antenna radiation and 
the pattern resembles that of an isolated dipole antenna.  
To characterize the influence of different matching networks on the dipole an-
tenna pattern, Figure 3.22 plots the radiation pattern of one of the Tx dipoles, when 
all antenna elements are terminated with characteristic impedance, self-impedance, 
or input-impedance matching networks. For comparison, we also plot the antenna 
pattern of an isolated dipole antenna. The coupling impedance matrices ZTT and 
ZRR are obtained using antenna-analysis software [57], the input impedances are 
calculated using the results in [56], and the spacing between antenna elements is d­T = 
0.3l. The results in Figure 3.22 show that mutual coupling noticeably impacts 
the radiating pattern and the radiated power, even in the presence of a match-
ing network. The coupled dipole antenna pattern is not omnidirectional, and 
the radiated power strongly depends on the angles of departure and arrival. For 
example, the radiated power of a coupled dipole antenna is larger than that of an 
isolated dipole for angles of departure/arrival between 120° and 240°. However, 
for the rest of angles of departure/arrival, the radiated power of a coupled dipole 

3.2  Impact of Antenna Coupling on MIMO V-to-V Channels	
121
antenna is smaller than that of an isolated dipole. Finally, Figure 3.22 shows that 
input-impedance and self-impedance matching networks significantly improve the 
radiated power of coupled antennas, while the characteristic impedance matching 
network is less effective.  
3.2.3.2  Spatial Correlation and Received Power
The normalized spatial correlation function between two input delay-spread func-
tions with mutual coupling defined in (3.253), i.e., c
pq
h  and c
pq
h is defined as 
	
*
,
E
Var
Var
c
c
pq pq
c
pq pq
c
c
pq
pq
h
h
R
h
h
é
ù
ë
û
=
é
ù
é
ù
ë
û
ë
û



*
	
(3.254)
where E[×] is the statistical expectation operator, Var[×] is the statistical variance 
operator, , , {1, ...,
p p
L
 
Î 

t}, and , , {1, ...,
}
r
q q
L
 
Î 

. Substituting (3.253) into (3.254), the 
normalized spatial correlation with mutual coupling becomes 
	
*
*
,
,
*
*
1
1
1
1
t
t
r
r
L
L
L
L
Tmq
Tnq
Rpk
Rpl
c
pq pq
pq pq
T
R
T
R
m
n
k
l
Z
Z
Z
Z
R
R
C
C
C
C
=
=
=
=
= å å
å å




	
(3.255)
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
 dT=0
 dT=0.1 
 dT=0.3 
 dT=0.5 
 dT=1 
Figure 3.21  The coupled dipole antenna pattern in the azimuthal plane as a function of antenna 
element spacings. The second dipole antenna is terminated with Zc = 50W. 

122	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
where 
,
pq pq
R
 denotes the normalized spatial correlation function defined in (3.180), 
and CT and CR are normalization factors that lead to VT = VS and VR = VRo for zero 
mutual coupling at the Tx and Rx, respectively. 
Figure 3.23 shows the effect of mutual coupling on the spatial correlation. The 
coupled Tx and Rx antennas are terminated with the characteristic, self-, or input-
­impedance matching networks. We assume 3-D nonisotropic radio propagation 
(kT = kR = 3, bTm = bRm = 10°) in an urban street environment (hT = hR = 0.05,  
hTR = 0.9). The curves are obtained for parameters mT = mR = 0°, Rt1 = Rr1 = 3m, Rt2 = 
Rr2 = 30m, and K = 0. The distance between the Tx and Rx is D = 300m and the 
antenna array elements at both vehicles have azimuth and elevation angles qT  = qR = 
0° and yT  = yR = 0°, respectively. All antenna elements have the same height, DH = 0, 
and the pathloss exponent g is set to 4. The results show that, for antenna element 
spacings 0l to 0.4l, the system with the input-impedance matching network has 
the smallest spatial correlation, while the spatial correlations of systems with self- 
and characteristic impedance matching networks are slightly smaller or equal to 
that of the system without mutual coupling. The system with the input-impedance 
matching network has the smallest spatial correlation because it has the largest dis-
similarity in radiation patterns (see Figure 3.22). On the other hand, for distances 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
No coupling (single dipole)
 Coupling with characteristic-impedance matching 
 Coupling with self-impedance matching
 Coupling with input-impedance matching
Figure 3.22  The coupled dipole antenna patterns in the azimuthal plane for antenna elements termi-
nated with the characteristic impedance, self-impedance, and input-impedance matching ­networks.

3.2  Impact of Antenna Coupling on MIMO V-to-V Channels	
123
larger than 0.5l, dissimilarity in antenna patterns is less dominant and the system 
without mutual coupling has the smallest spatial correlation.  
Figure 3.24 shows the effect of mutual coupling on the spatial correlation in 
interstate-highway (IH) environments. We assume 3-D nonisotropic radio propa-
gation (kT = kR = 3, 
10
m
m
T
R
β
β
=
=
°) in IH environments (hT = hR = 0.35, hTR = 
0.3). The coupled Tx and Rx antennas are terminated with characteristic, self-, or 
input-impedance matching networks. The rest of the parameters in Figure 3.24 are 
chosen as in Figure 3.23. The results show that for the antenna element spacings 0l 
to 0.3l, the system with the input-impedance matching network has the smallest 
spatial correlation, while spatial correlations of systems with self- and characteristic 
impedance matching network are smaller than that of the system without mutual 
coupling. On the other hand, for distances larger than 0.3l, the system without 
mutual coupling has the smallest correlation. Figures 3.23 and 3.24 show that the 
correlation of system with mutual coupling depends on the type of propagation 
environment and the type of matching network.  
Low correlation between coupled antenna elements does not necessarily lead to 
maximum diversity gain. Since mutual coupling may cause unequal power distribu-
tion in Tx and Rx branches, power collection capabilities of MIMO V-to-V system 
are also important. To assess this property of the system, we analyze the received 
power of the coupled-dipole antenna elements normalized to the received power of 
the single-dipole antenna. Figure 3.25 compares the normalized received power of 
systems without and with mutual coupling. The parameters used to obtain curves 
in Figure 3.25 are the same as those in Figure 3.23, and the system with mutual 
coupling is terminated with an input-impedance matching network. The results 
show that, for the antenna element spacings 0l to 0.3l, the received power of a 
system with mutual coupling is significantly smaller than that of the system without 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 |R2,1,1,2(dT,dR)|
 |R
c
2,1,1,2(dT,dR)|, characteristic-impedance matching
 |R
c
2,1,1,2(dT,dR)|, self-impedance matching
 |R
c
2,1,1,2(dT,dR)|, input-impedance matching
Correlation function
Normalized antenna spacing [dT/ ]
Figure 3.23  The spatial correlation function with and without mutual coupling in urban street 
environments.

124	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
mutual coupling, even though the input-impedance matching network increases 
decorrelation of the antenna elements. The results also show that two coupled an-
tenna elements with spacings between 0.3l–0.6l can collect more power than two 
widely separated ones (i.e., the normalized received power is greater than two). 
One possible explanation for this increased effectiveness of coupled dipoles is that 
a portion of the power is scattered by one receiving antenna and can be recaptured 
by the other receiving antenna. The received power of systems with characteristic 
and self-impedance matching networks are similar to that of the system with input-
impedance match and hence omitted in Figure 3.25.  
Figure  3.26 shows the normalized received power of a system with input-
­impedance matching as a function of the orientations of local scatterers in the azi-
muthal plane (i.e., mT and mR) around the Tx and R­x, respectively. The parameters 
used to obtain the curve in Figure 3.26 are the same as those in Figure 3.23. The re-
sults show that the received power with coupled antenna elements strongly depend 
on the position of local scatterers and how they interact with directional radiating 
patterns caused by coupling. Finally, Figure 3.26 shows that available diversity may 
vary between one and two antenna elements.  
3.2.3.3  Channel Capacity
The instantaneous channel capacity (in bit/s/Hz) of a stochastic MIMO V-to-V 
channel with mutual coupling, under an average transmit power constraint is [16] 
Figure 3.24  The spatial correlation function with and without mutual coupling in interstate high-
way environments.

3.2  Impact of Antenna Coupling on MIMO V-to-V Channels	
125
	
2
2
2
log det
H
c
c
c
Lr
t
T
R
C
L
C
C
ρ
æ
ö
=
+
ç
÷
ç
÷
|
| |
|
è
ø
H H
I
 	
(3.256)
 
under the assumptions that Lt  ³  Lr , that Tx has no channel knowledge, and that 
Rx has perfect channel knowledge. In (3.256), 
r
t
c
c
ij L
L
h
´
é
ù
= ë
û
H
 is the Lr ´ Lt matrix 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
 No mutual coupling
 Mutual coupling with input-impredance matching
Relative received power
Normalzed antenna spacing [dT/ ]
Figure 3.25  The normalized received power with and without mutual coupling as a function of the 
normalized antenna spacing.
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
360
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
 Input-impedance matching network
Relative received power
T [°]
Figure 3.26  The normalized received power with mutual coupling as a function of the orientations 
of local scatterers in the azimuthal plane.

126	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
defined in (3.252), (×)H denotes the transpose conjugate operation, det(×) denotes 
the matrix determinant, ½×½denotes the absolute value operation, ILr is the Lr ´ 
Lr identity matrix, and r is the average signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Similarly, the 
instantaneous channel capacity (in bit/s / Hz) of a stochastic MIMO V-to-V channel 
without mutual coupling, under an average transmit power constraint is 
	
2
log det
r
H
L
t
C
L
ρ
æ
ö
=
+
ç
÷
è
ø
I
HH
 	
(3.257)
where 
r
t
ij L
L
h
´
é
ù
= ë
û
H
 is the Lr ´ Lt matrix defined in (3.250). 
Figures 3.27 and 3.28 compare mean capacities of MIMO V-to-V channels 
in urban street and interstate highway environments, respectively. The parame-
ters used to obtain curves in Figures 3.27 and 3.28 are the same as those in Fig-
ures 3.21 and 3.22, respectively. The coupled Tx and Rx antennas are terminated 
with the characteristic, self-, and input-impedance matching networks, respec-
tively. The instantaneous capacity is averaged over 5000 channel realizations. The 
results in Figures 3.27 and 3.28 show that the capacities in urban street and inter-
state  highway environments are relatively similar. This is in contrast to the results 
obtained for the correlation and received power, which are strongly dependent 
on the propagation environment. Figures 3.27 and 3.28 show that for antenna  
element spacings 0l–0.3l, the system with an input-impedance matching network 
provides the smallest capacity, while the capacity of systems with self- and Zc im-
pedance matching networks are slightly smaller than that of the system without 
mutual coupling. These results show that the MIMO V-to-V channel model with-
out mutual coupling overestimates the available capacity, which illustrates the im-
portance of incorporating the effect of mutual coupling into propagation ­models. 
Furthermore, these results differ from the results obtained for F-to-M channels, 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
11.0
 No coupling
 Coupling with characteristic-impedance matching
 Coupling with self-impedance matching
 Coupling with input-impedance matching
Mean capacity [bits/s/Hz]
Normalized antenna spacing [d/ ]
Figure 3.27  The mean capacity with and without mutual coupling in urban street environments.

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
127
where the capacity with mutual coupling is larger than the capacity without mu-
tual coupling, regardless of which antenna spacing is used [55]. On the other hand, 
for the antenna element spacings 0.3l–0.5l, the results show that all three systems 
with mutual coupling have similar capacities and outperform the system without 
mutual coupling. Finally, for the antenna spacings larger than 0.8l, the capacities 
of systems with mutual coupling converge to that of the system without mutual 
coupling.
3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
Simulation of V-to-V channels is a crucial part of link layer simulations and of 
the overall characterization of a V-to-V system performance. The channel models 
detailed in Section 3.1 are very useful mathematical tools for understanding propa-
gation mechanisms and for statistical characterization of channels. However, these 
models assume an infinite number of scatterers, making these models impractical 
for simulators. We now describe simulation models with finite numbers of scatter-
ers that still match the statistical properties of reference models. 
The following approaches are available when simulating the V-to-V fading 
channels: 
Discrete line spectrum method
•	
. This method generates the channel impulse 
response by discretizing the power spectral density prior to transforming it 
back into the time domain.Wang and Cox [59] introduced a model that ap-
proximates the continuous Doppler spectrum by a discrete line spectrum. 
This model can be written as follows: 
	
(2
)
1
1
( )
(
)
n
n
N
j
f t
n
n
h t
S f
e
A
π
φ
-
+
=
=
å
	
(3.258)
where
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
11.0
No coupling
 Coupling with characteristic-impedance matching
 Coupling with self-impedance matching
 Coupling with input-impedance matching
Mean capacity [bits/s/Hz]
Normalized antenna spacing [d/ ]
Figure 3.28  The mean capacity with and without mutual coupling in interstate-highway environments.

128	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
1
1
(
)
( )
(
)
n
n
N
F
n
n
F
n
S f
S f df
f
f
δ
+
=
æ
ö
=
-
è
ø
å ò
	
(3.259)
	
1
1
( )
( )
n
n
n
n
F
F
n
F
F
fS f df
f
S f df
+
+
= ò
ò
	
(3.260)
The constant A is used to normalized the power of h(t) to unity. Frequency 
bins Fn are equispaced in frequency with the starting point F1 = – (fTmax + 
fRmax) and the ending point FN + 1 = fTmax + fRmax. The center-of-mass frequen-
cies fn and the corresponding masses S(fn) are obtained by numerically integrat-
ing over the sampled Doppler spectra discussed in Section 3.1 Drawbacks of 
this simulation approach are that the correlation functions vary with simula-
tion trials, the in-phase and quadrature components are statistically correlated, 
the autocorrelation function exhibits periodicities, and the need for numerical 
integration [60]. 
Sum-of-sinusoids method
•	
. SoS models generate the channel waveform by 
superimposing a finite number of properly selected sinusoids. These models 
have low complexity, produce channel waveforms that have high accuracy 
and can be easily extended to develop space-time-frequency correlated chan-
nel models for MIMO antenna systems. Due to these advantages, this chap-
ter focuses on SoS models. 
As pointed out in Section 2.4, SoS models can be classified as either deter-
ministic or statistical. Deterministic SoS models have random phases that are 
fixed in all simulation runs, deterministic amplitudes, and deterministic Dop-
pler frequencies. In contrast, statistical SoS models leave at least one of the 
parameter sets (amplitudes, phases, or Doppler frequencies) as a random vari-
able that varies with each simulation trial. The statistical properties of statisti-
cal SoS models also vary for each simulation trial, but converge to the desired 
properties when averaged over a sufficient number of simulation trials. 
3.3.1  Simulators for V-to-V Frequency-Flat Multipath Fading Channels
3.1.1.1  SoS Simulation Models for SISO V-to-V Channels
Patel et al. [60] were the first to propose SoS simulation models for SISO V-to-V 
channels. They used the two-ring concept [19] to derive their models. Using this 
model, the received complex faded envelope under narrowband, frequency flat fad-
ing, and NLoS propagation assumptions is defined as [60] 
	
1
2
1
1
2
( )
exp { [
cos(
)
cos(
)
]}
N
M
n
m
nm
n
m
h t
j
t
t
NM
ω
α
ω
β
φ
=
=
  =  
 
+
+
å å
	
(3.261)
where NM is the number of propagation paths, w1 and w2 are the maximum angu-
lar Doppler frequencies, fmn denotes the phase, and an and bm denote the angles of 
departure and arrival, respectively. 

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
129
The first model proposed by Patel et al. [60] is a deterministic statistical SoS 
model. By choosing only the phases to be random variables, the statistical proper-
ties of this model converge to the desired properties in a single simulation trial. We 
refer to this model as SISO V-to-V Model I. 
SISO V-to-V Model I  The complex faded envelope is h(t) = hi(t) + jhq(t), where  
	
1
2
1
1
2
( )
cos(
cos(
)
cos(
)
)
i
i
M
N
i
i
i
i
n
m
nm
i
i m
n
h t
t
t
N M
ω
α
ω
β
φ
=
=
  =  
+
+
å å
	
(3.262)
	
1
2
1
1
2
( )
cos(
cos(
)
cos(
)
)
q
q
M
N
q
q
q
q
n
m
nm
q
q m
n
h t
t
t
N M
ω
α
ω
β
φ
=
=
  =  
+
+
å å
	
(3.263)
and where 
i
nm
φ
 and 
q
nm
φ
 are independent random phases uniformly distributed on 
the interval [–p, p). The nth angle of departure and the mth  angle of arrival are 
	
/
/
(
0.5)
(2
)
i q
n
i q
n
N
π
α
-
=
	
(3.264)
	
/
/
(
0.5)
(
)
i q
m
i q
m
M
π
β
-
=
	
(3.265)
for n = 1, 2, …, Ni/q and m = 1, 2, …, Mi/q, respectively. 
This model has the disadvantage that its statistical properties match those of 
the reference model only for a small range of normalized time delays (0 £ f1Ts £ 3, 
where Ts denotes the sampling period). To improve these statistical properties, ­Patel 
et al. [60] also proposed a statistical SoS model. We refer to this model as SISO  
V-to-V Model II. 
SISO V-to-V Model II  The complex faded envelope is defined as h(t) = hi(t) + jhq (t), 
where
	
1
2
1
1
2
( )
cos(
cos(
)
cos(
)
)
N
M
i
i
n
m
nm
n
m
h t
t
t
NM
ω
α
ω
β
φ
=
=
  =  
+
+
å å
      
	
(3.266)
	
1
2
1
1
2
( )
cos(
sin(
)
cos(
)
)
N
M
q
q
n
m
nm
n
m
h t
t
t
NM
ω
α
ω
β
φ
=
=
  =  
+
+
å å
	
(3.267)
and where i
nm
φ
 and q
nm
φ
 are independent random phases uniformly distributed on the 
interval [–p,p). Model II assumes N scatterers located on the Tx ring and M scatterers 
located on the Rx ring. The nth angle of departure and the mth angle of arri­val are 
	
2
4
n
n
N
π
π
θ
α
-
+
=
	
(3.268)
	
2
2
m
m
M
π
π
ψ
β
-
+
  =  
	
(3.269)

130	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
where q and y are independent random variables uniformly distributed in the in-
terval [–p, p). 
SISO V-to-V Model II obtains better statistical properties than SISO V-to-V 
Model I. However, this model requires a large number of simulation trials (at least 
50) to obtain adequate ensemble averaged statistical properties. Furthermore, Mod-
els I and II have a noted difficulty in producing time averaged auto- and cross-
correlation functions that match those of the reference model. The solution to 
this problem is offered by Zajić et. al in [61] by using a two-ring concept and by 
choosing orthogonal functions for the I and Q components of the complex faded 
envelope. Also, this model is designed to directly generate multiple uncorrelated 
complex envelopes. We refer to this model as SISO V-to-V Model III. 
SISO V-to-V Model III  The kth complex faded envelope is hk(t) = hik(t) + jhqk(t), 
where
	
  =  
+
0
2
1
0
1
1
2
( )
cos(
cos
)cos(
cos
)
N
M
ik
mk
nk
nmk
n
m
h
t
t
t
N M
ω
β
ω
α
φ
=
=
å å
	
(3.270)
	
0
2
1
0
1
1
2
( )
sin(
cos
)sin(
sin
)
N
M
qk
mk
nk
nmk
n
m
h
t
t
t
N M
ω
β
ω
α
φ
=
=
  =  
+
å å
	
(3.271)
It assumed that P independent complex envelopes are desired (k = 0, …, P – 1) 
each having MN0 sinusoidal terms in the I and Q components. The angles of depar-
tures and the angles of arrivals are chosen as follows:  
	
0
0
0
2
2
4
4
4
nk
n
k
N
PN
N
π
π
θ
π
α
-
  =  
+
+
	
(3.272)
	
2
2
0.5
mk
m
k
M
PM
M
π
π
ψ
π
β
-
æ
ö
  =  
+
+
ç
÷
è
ø	
(3.273)
for n = 1, …, N0, m = 1,…, M, k = 0,…, P – 1. The angles of departures and the 
angles of arrivals in the kth complex faded envelope are obtained by rotating the 
angles of departures and the angles of arrivals in the (k – 1)th complex envelope by 
(2p)/(4PN0) and (2p/2PM), respectively. The parameters fnmk, q, and y are inde-
pendent random variables uniformly distributed on the interval [–p, p).
To compare complexity of the SISO V-to-V Models I–III, Table 3.3 summarizes 
the number of simulation trials required to obtain desired statistical properties, 
the number of operations needed to generate one sample of the complex envelope, 
and the relative simulation times needed to generate a sample of the complex faded 
envelope with desired statistical properties, in Matlab on a Pentium III processor. 
Here, we count only the frequently executed operations and the number of random 
variables. Table 3.3 shows that Model III has slightly higher complexity compared 
to Models I and II. 
Figures 3.29 and 3.30 compare the variances of the auto-correlation functions 
of the in-phase components averaged over 103 simulation trials for the SISO V-to-V 

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
131
Aki and Haber’s theoretical model and Models I–III. For the statistical models, the 
variance is calculated as [62] 
	

2
Var[ ()]
[
()
lim
()
]
N
R
E R
R
®¥
×  = 
|
× -
× |
	
(3.274)
where ()
R ×  denotes time-averaged correlations and R(×) denotes the statistical corre-
lation function. For the deterministic model, the equivalent quantity is the squared 
error 
2
()
()
R
R
|
× -
× | . The variance for the Akki and Haber’s theoretical model de-
scribed in Section 3.1.3 is obtained using [61] 
	
é
ù = 
ë
û
ë
û
é
ù
= 
+
-
ë
û
,
,
2
2
0
1
0
2
1
2
0
0
Var
( )
Var
( )
1
(2
)
(2
)
2
(
)
(
) /(2
)
i
i
q
q
h h
h h
R
R
J
J
J
J
N
τ
τ
ω τ
ω τ
ω τ
ω τ
é
ù
	
(3.275)
The variance provides a measure of the usefulness of the model in simulating the 
desired channel with a finite N. A lower variance means that a smaller number of 
simulation trials are needed to achieve the desired statistical properties and, hence, 
the corresponding model is better. Since the theoretical model does not exploit the 
Table 3.3  Complexity of Different SISO V-to-V Models
Simulation Models
Number of  
Simulation Trials
Estimated Number of Computations Needed 
to Generate One Sample of 
( )
k
h t
Relative Simulation  
Time for One 
Simulation Trial
Cosine
Addition
Random Variable
SISO V-to-V Model I
1
6MN
4MN
2MN
Tx
SISO V-to-V Model II
50
6MN
4MN
2MN + 2
1.25Tx
SISO V-to-V Model III 30
8MN
2MN
MN + 2
1.65Tx
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
.
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
Var(Rhi,hi( ))
Normalized time delay [f1 ]
 Akki and Haber's
theoretical model
 Model I
 Model II Nstat=1
Model III Nstat=1
Figure 3.29  The variances of the auto-correlation functions of the in-phase components for the 
SISO V-to-V Aki and Haber’s theoretical model and Models I–III and Nstat = 1.

132	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
symmetry of the double ring model, for fair comparison, we use N = 4N0 × 2M = 512 
sinusoids for simulation of the theoretical model. In all simulations, we use a normal-
ized sampling period f1Ts = 0.01(f1 = f2 are the maximum Doppler frequencies and Ts 
is the sampling period) and M = N0 = P = 8. For Model II, we use Ni = Mi = 8 and Nq = 
Mq = 9 to obtain a complex envelope with uncorrelated quadrature components. 
From Figure 3.29, we can observe that SISO V-to-V Model III with Nstat = 1 has 
a similar variance to the SISO V-to-V Model I and a lower variance than SISO V-to-V 
Model II with Nstat = 1. However, Figure 3.29 shows that none of the three models 
performs as well as the theoretical model. An increase in the number of simulation tri-
als to Nstat  = 30 in the SISO V-to-V Model III yields a significantly lower variance of 
the autocorrelation function of the in-phase component. Figure 3.30 shows that the 
SISO V-to-V Model III with Nstat = 30 outperforms SISO V-to-V Models I and II. 
3.3.1.2  2-D SoS Simulation Models for MIMO V-to-V Channels
V-to-V Models I–III were developed for SISO V-to-V channels. Recently, efforts 
have been made to develop the 2-D simulation models for MIMO V-to-V channels. 
Hogstad et al. [16] were the first to propose a deterministic MIMO V-to-V SoS 
model called the Modified Method of Exact Doppler Spreads (MMEDS). By choos-
ing only the phases to be random variables, the statistical properties of this model 
converge to those of the theoretical model in a single simulation trial. 
The MMEDS simulator defines the received complex faded envelope as [16] 
	
(
)
( )
max
max
,
2
cos(
) 2
cos(
)
,
,
,
,
1
( )
m
n
T
T
R
R
mn
R
T
M N
j
f
t
f
t
p m m n n q
pq
m n
a
c
b
h
t
e
MN
π
α
γ
π
α
γ
φ


−
+
−
+


=
 = ∑
 	
(3.276)
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
 Akki and Haber's theoretical model
 
 
 M
Nstat=30
 M
Nstat=30
Var(Rhi,hi( ))
Normalized time delay [f 1 ]
Model III
Model I
Model II
Model I
Figure 3.30  The variances of the auto-correlation functions of the in-phase components for the 
SISO V-to-V Aki and Haber’s theoretical model, Model I, and Models II and III with Nstat = 30.

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
133
where
	
 = 
+
-
-
(
)
(
)
,
exp
(
1
2 )
cos(
)/
m
p m
t
T
T
T
a
j
L
p
π
δ
α
θ
λ 	
(3.277)
	
 = 
 
-
(
)
(
)
( )
,
exp
2 (
cos
cos
)/
m
n
m n
t
r
R
T
c
j
R
R
π
α
α
λ
	
(3.278)
	
 = 
+
-
-
(
)
( )
,
exp
(
1
2 )
cos(
)/
n
n q
r
R
R
R
b
j
L
q
π
δ
α
θ
λ 	
(3.279)
and parameters p and q take from the sets p Î {1, …, Lt} and q Î {1, …, Lr}, re-
spectively, where Lt and Lr are numbers of the Tx and Rx antenna elements, respec-
tively. Parameters qT and qR are the Tx and Rx antenna array orientations, dT and 
dR are the Tx and Rx spacings among antenna elements, Rt and Rr are the radii of 
circles around the Tx and Rx, gT and gR are the directions of movement of the Tx 
and Rx, and fTmax, and fRmax are the Tx and Rx maximum Doppler frequencies, 
respectively. With the MMEDS model, the phases fmn are independent random 
variables uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 2p), and the angles of departure 
(
)
m
T
α
 and the angles of arrival 
( )
n
R
α
 are chosen as follows:  
	
(
)
( )
2 (
0.5)
2 (
0.5)
m
T
T
n
R
R
m
M
n
N
π
α
γ
π
α
γ
 = 
-
+
 = 
-
+
	
(3.280)
	
	
(3.281)
for m = 1, …, M, n = 1, …, N, respectively.
Another deterministic and a statistical simulation model has been proposed 
in [18]. These models are based on the theoretical MIMO 2-D model detailed in 
Section 3.1.5. In these models, a received complex faded envelope is defined as 
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
Q
I
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
jh
t
 = 
+
 where  
	
+  
D
+
D
-
+
-
é
ù
+  
+
+
ë
û
+  
D
+
D
+
´  
-
+
-
é
ù
 = 
-
-
ë
û
(
)
(
)
( )
max
1
(
)
(
)
max
(
)
(
)
max
max
1
(
2
( )
cos
cos
2
cos
cos
cos
2
cos
sin
sin
2
sin
sin
2
cos
cos
2
cos
cos
cos
M
T
I
m
q
R
R
R
pq
m
m
m
p
T
T
T
T
T
m
m
q
T
R
R
T
R
m
T
T
N
R
n
p
T
T
T
n
n
q
R
P
h
t
K
tf
M
K
tf
K
tf
P
K
tf
N
K
β
θ
π
γ
θ
α
π
α
γ
θ
α
π
γ
α
φ
β
θ
π
γ
α
=
=
é
ë
ùû
´  
å
å
(
)
(
)
)
( )
max
( )
max
2
cos
sin
sin
2
sin
sin
n
R
R
R
R
n
p
R
T
T
R
T
R
tf
K
tf
θ
π
α
γ
θ
α
π
γ
é
ë
ùû
α
φn
R +
( )
n
	

134	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
é
ù
+  
-
+
-
p
T
T
T
ë
û
cos
cos
2
cos
K
tf
θ
α
π
α
γ
θ
π
ë
û
é
ù
-
+
+
 
K
tf
´  
-
+
-
+
ë
û
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
(
)
max
,
1
( )
( )
max
2
cos
cos
2
cos
cos
cos
cos
M N
TR
m
(m)
T
T
m n
n
n
q
R
R
R
mn
R
R
Lo
LoS
p
T
q
Rq
P
MN
P
K
K
α
θ
π
α
γ
φ
θ
α
=
é
ù
+ 
+
å
(
)
(
)
2
S
LoS
LoS
R
R
T
t f
f
	
(3.282)
	
Rq
R
α
θ
π
-
+
+
sin
sin
2
sin
q
R
R
R
mn
R
R
α
θ
π
α
γ
φ
ë
û
sin
cos
2
cos
p
T
T
T
T
T
θ
α
π
α
γ
ë
û
sin
cos
2
sin
cos
p
R
T
T
R
T
n
R
R
θ
α
π
γ
α
φ
2
sin
R
R
R
θ
π
α
γ
sin
cos
2
sin
cos
q
T
R
R
T
R
m
T
T
θ
α
π
γ
α
φ
+  
D
+
D
+
cos
sin
2
sin
p
T
T
T
T
T
θ
α
π
α
γ
´  
-
+
-
( )
sin
cos
2
cos
m
q
R
R
R
β
θ
π
γ
é
ù
ë
û
sin
cos
2
cos
n
p
T
T
T
β
θ
π
γ
(
)
(
)
(
)
max
1
(
)
(
)
max
(
)
(
)
max
max
1
(
2
2
cos
sin
M
Q
T
pq
m
m
m
m
m
N
R
n
n
q
R
P
h
t
K
tf
M
K
tf
K
tf
P
K
tf
N
K
α
=
=
 = 
-
-
é
ë
ùû
é
ù
+  
+
+
ë
û
´  
å
å
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
)
( )
max
( )
( )
max
,
(
)
max
,
1
( )
( )
max
2
sin
cos
cos
n
R
n
n
M N
TR
m
(m)
m n
n
n
LoS
p
T
q
tf
K
tf
P
K
tf
MN
K
tf
P
K
K
θ
=
é
-
+
-
ë
ù
+  
D
+
D
+
û
é
ù
+  
-
+
-
é
ù
´  
-
+
-
+
+ 
+
å
(
)
(
)
2
LoS
LoS
LoS
R
T
t f
f
é
ù
ë
û 	
(3.283)
are the in-phase and quadrature components of the complex faded envelope and bm 
and bn are the random path gains. The rest of the parameters are
	
1
T
T
P
K
h W
   =   
+ 	
(3.284)
	
1
R
R
P
K
h W
   =   
+ 	
(3.285)
	
1
TR
TR
P
K
h
W
   =   
+
	
(3.286)
	
2 (0.5
0.5
)
r
R
q
L
q
K
π
δ
λ
+
-
   =   
	
(3.287)

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
135
	
1
LoS
K
P
K
W
   =   
+
	
(3.288)
	
2 (0.5
0.5
)
t
T
p
L
p
K
π
δ
λ
+
-
   =   
	
(3.289)
	
(
)
max cos
LoS
LoS
T
T
Rq
T
f
f
π
α
γ
   =   
-
-
	
(3.290)
	
   =   
-
(
)
max cos
LoS
LoS
R
R
R
Rq
f
f
α
γ
	
(3.291)
The following two modeling methods are considered that trade simulation preci-
sion for simulation speed and complexity: 
Modified MMEDS model
•	
. The deterministic SoS model needs only a single 
simulation trial to obtain a channel impulse response with desired statisti-
cal properties. Here, only the phases fn, fm, and fmn are generated as inde-
pendent random variables uniformly distributed on the interval [–p, p). The 
AoDs, AoAs, and path gains are deterministically fixed to  
	
(
)
(
0.5)
m
T
T
m
M
π
α
γ
=
-
+
	
(3.292)
	
( )
2 (
0.5)
n
R
R
n
N
π
α
γ
=
-
+
	
(3.293)
	
(
0.5)
m
m
M
π
β
-
=
	
(3.294)
	
2 (
0.5)
n
n
N
π
β
-
=
	
(3.295)
for m = 1, …, M, n = 1, …, N, respectively.
Statistical model
•	
. The statistical SoS model generates channel realizations 
with statistical properties that vary with every simulation run. However, the 
statistical properties converge to the desired ones when averaged over a suf-
ficient channel ensemble. The angles of departures and the angles of arrivals 
are chosen as follows:  
	
æ
ö
=
+
ç
÷
(
)
2
0.5
m
T
m
M
M
π
ψ
π
α
-
è
ø 
	
(3.296)
	
( )
2
n
R
n
N
N
π
θ
π
α
-
=
+
 
	
(3.297)
for m = 1, …, M, n = 1, …, N, respectively. The parameters fmn, bm, bn, q, 
and y are independent random variables uniformly distributed on the inter-
val [–p, p). 

136	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
Here we compare the performance and complexity of the modified MMEDS 
model, statistical model, and MMEDS model. For meaningful comparison, we re-
move the LoS and single-bounced components of the complex faded envelope from 
the first two models. 
Figure 3.31 compares the temporal auto-correlation functions of the complex 
faded envelopes obtained by the modified MMEDS, the statistical, and the MMEDS 
model. For the MMEDS model and the modified MMEDS model, the temporal 
correlation functions are obtained using M = 40, N = 38 and M = 22, N = 40 scat-
terers, respectively. For the statistical model, the temporal correlation function is 
obtained using N = M = 14 scatterers and Nstat = 50 trials. In all simulations, we 
use a normalized sampling period fTmaxTs = 0.01. (fTmax = fRmax are the maximum 
Doppler frequencies, and Ts is the sampling period.) The orientations of the Tx and 
Rx  antenna arrays are chosen to be qT = qR = p /2. The angles of motion for the Tx 
and Rx are chosen to be gT = p /4 and gR = 0, respectively. Figure 3.31 shows that the 
temporal correlation function of the MMEDS model approaches the theoretical one 
for normalized time delays in the range 0 £ fTmax Ts £ 6. The temporal correlation 
function of the modified MMEDS model approaches the theoretical one in the same 
range of the normalized time delays but requires a smaller number of scatterers. 
Finally, the temporal correlation function of the statistical model approaches the 
theoretical one in a wider range of normalized time delays (i.e., 0 £ fTmax Ts £ 10)  
than the MMEDS and the modified MMEDS model.  
Figure 3.32 compares the space-time correlation functions of the complex faded 
envelopes for system with Lt = Lr = 2 antennas, obtained by the modified MMEDS, 
the statistical, and the MMEDS model. For the MMEDS model and the modified 
MMEDS model, the space-time correlation functions are obtained using the same 
number of scatterers as in Figure 3.31 and antenna distances dT = dR = 1l. For the 
0
2
4
6
8
10
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 MMEDS Model N=38, M=40
 Modified MMEDS Model N=40, M=22
 Statistical Model M=N=14, Nstat=50
 Theoretical correlation J0(
T )J0(
R )
Temporal autocorrelation function
Normalized time delay [fT ]
Figure 3.31  The normalized temporal autocorrelation function (dT = dR = 0) of the complex faded 
envelope of the statistical, modified MMEDS, MMEDS, and 2-D MIMO V-to-V theoretical model.

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
137
statistical model, the space-time correlation function is obtained using N = M = 22 
scatterers, antenna distances dT = dR = 1l, and Nstat = 50 trials. Figure 3.32 shows 
that the space-time correlation function of the MMEDS model approaches the theo-
retical one for normalized time delays in the range 0 £ fTmax Ts £ 5. The space-time 
correlation function of the modified MMEDS model approaches the theoretical one 
in a somewhat wider range of normalized time delays (i.e., 0 £ fTmaxTs £ 6), while 
requiring a smaller number of scatterers than the MMEDS model. The space-time 
correlation function of the statistical model approaches the theoretical one in the 
widest range of normalized time delays (i.e., 0 £ fTmaxTs £ 10). 
Simulation results presented in Figure 3.32 indicate that larger distances be-
tween antenna elements require a larger number of scatterers to match theo-
retical statistics for the same normalized time delays as in Figure 3.31. For the 
statistical model, instead of using many scatterers (e.g., 40) in all simulations, 
we can adaptively select the number of scatterers depending on the distances 
between antenna elements. If we assume that a mean square error (MSE) of  
£ 10-3 is required for the simulated space-time correlation function of the com-
plex faded envelope (relative to the theoretical one), we need at least M = 14 + 2 
édT/0.3lù and N = 14 + 2 édR/0.3lù scatterers.1 This methodology can also be ap-
plied to the modified MMEDS and MMEDS models. However, to obtain similar 
statistics as with the statistical model, the number of scatterers needs to be larger 
(i.e., 70 + 10 édT/R/0.3lù).
To compare complexity of the various models, Table 3.4 summarizes the num-
ber of simulation trials and the number of scatterers required to obtain similar 
statistical properties, the number of operations in one simulation trial needed to 
generate the complex faded envelope, and the relative simulation times (including 
1.	
Operation é×ù denotes rounding up to the next integer.
Figure 3.32  The normalized space-time correlation functions (dT = dR = 1l) of the complex faded 
envelope of the statistical, modified MMEDS, MMEDS, and 2-D MIMO V-to-V theoretical model.

138	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
averaging over Nstat simulation trials) needed to generate the complex faded enve-
lopes, in Matlab on a Pentium III laptop. Here, we count only the frequently executed 
operations and the number of random variables. Table 3.4 shows that the modified 
MMEDS model has a lower complexity then the MMEDS model, whereas the statisti-
cal model has the highest complexity. Note that the modified MMEDS and statistical 
model require a smaller number of scatterers than the MMEDS model, which leads to 
shorter simulation times. 
From Table 3.4, Figure 3.31, and Figure 3.32 we can conclude that the modified 
MMEDS model performs similarly to the MMEDS model but has lower complexity and 
shorter simulation time. On the other hand, the statistical model, with a slight increase 
in complexity, outperforms both the modified MMEDS and the MMEDS models. 
3.3.2  Simulators for V-to-V Frequency-Selective Multipath Fading Channels
The propagation model for the wideband MIMO V-to-V channel described in Sec-
tion 3.1.9 assumes an infinite number of scatterers, which prevents practical imple-
mentation. It is desirable to design simulation model with a finite (preferably small) 
number of scatterers, while still matching the statistical properties of the reference 
model. 
Assuming 3-D nonisotropic scattering and using the reference model described 
in Section 3.1.9, the following function is used as a time-variant transfer function 
[44]:
(
)
( )
( , )
( , )
( , )
Q
I
pq
pq
pq
T
t f
T
t f
jT
t f
=
+
 where
	
R
R
R
π
γ
γ
α
β
T
T
m i l
π
α
γ
β
φ
+
- D
D
+
-
+
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
( )
,
,
( )
( )
,
,
1
(
, )
( , )
max
, ,
( )
(
, )
( )
( , )
max
( , )
1
cos
2
2
cos
cos
2
cos
sin
sin
cos
l
l
E
A
L M
M
l
SBT
I
SBT
SBT
t
p
q
pq
R
T
l m i
m l
i l
T
T
l
m l
l
i l
T
T
T
T
R
T
t f =
K D
K D
D
M
tf
tf
ρ
γ
=
æ
ö
é
-
+
ç
÷
ë
è
ø
å
	
Table 3.4  Complexity of Different MIMO V-to-V Models
Simulation 
Models
Number of 
Simulation 
Trials
Estimated Number of Computations Needed to Generate 
( )
pq
h
t  (one simulation trial)
Relative 
Simulation 
Time Needed 
to Generate 
hpq(t)
Number of 
­Scatterers
Cosine
Addition
Random  
Variable
MMEDS 
  Model
1
MN
7MN
10MN
MN
T
Modified 
MMEDS 
  Model
1
=
/2
d
d
M N
MN
12
6
d
d
M N
MN
=
14MdNd =  
7MN
MdNd = MN / 2
0.24T
Statistical 
  Model
50
MsNs » MN/25
12MsNs = 
0.48MN
14MsNs = 
0.56MN
MsNs + 2  
= MN/  
25 + 2
0.95T 
(including 
averaging 
over 50 
trials)

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
139
	
f
D
K d
+
-
+ D
+
p
q
T
T
T
T
T
π
α
γ
β
R
R
π
α
γ
β
T
T
T
π
γ
α
γ
+
-
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
-
´
+
+
-
´
D
-
+
+
+
D
+
+
-
+
(
)
(
)
( )
(
, )
0
2
1
cos
1
l
m l
t
T
SBR
f D
R
c
N
π
α
ρ
γ
ù
-
+
-
úû
+
-
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
,
,
( )
, ,
1
( , )
( , )
max
, ,
( )
( , )
max
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
0
,
,
,
,
1
cos
2
2
cos
cos
2
sin
sin
cos
2
cos
1
cos
1
k
k
E
A
l
l
E
A
F N
N
k
r
SBR
SBR
p
q
R
T
k n g
g k
n k
R
R
n g k
R
R
k
n k
R
R
g k
k
n k
k
r
R
R
R
L M
M
DB
l m i
R
K D
K D
D
tf
tf
f D
R
c
MN
π
α
γ
β
φ
π
β
α
ρ
=
=
æ
ö
é
+
ç
÷
ë
è
ø
ù
úû
+
å
å
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
( )
,
,
( )
( )
, ,
1
(
, )
( , )
max
( , )
( , )
max
( )
(
, )
( , )
( )
, , , , ,
0
2
2
cos[
2
cos
cos
2
cos
cos
2
1
cos
1
cos
cos 2
k
k
E
A
F N
N
l
k
r
t
k n g
m l
i l
DB
DB
R
g k
n k
R
R
l
m l
n k
k
r
m i l n g k
t
R
T
LoS
LoS
T
R
R
D
K D
K D
tf
tf
f D
R
R
c
t f
γ
π
α
α
φ
ρ
π
=
æ
ö
+
-
ç
÷
è
ø
ù
úû
+
å
(
)
(
)
2
2
0
2
cos
cos
R
R
LoS
H
p
Tx
R
LoS
q R
Rq
c
K d
π
ψ
α
θ
é
êë
ù
û
f
	
(3.298)
	
2
cos
cos
R
R
n g k
π
α
γ
β
φ
R
R
R
π
γ
γ
α
β
T
T
m i l
+
-
+
+
- D
D
π
α
γ
β
φ
+
-
+
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
( )
,
,
( )
(
)
,
,
1
(
, )
( , )
max
, ,
( )
(
, )
( )
( , )
max
( )
(
, )
0
( , )
1
sin
2
2
cos
cos
2
cos
sin
sin
cos
2
1
cos
1
l
l
E
A
L M
M
l
Q
SBT
SBT
SBT
t
p
q
pq
R
T
l m i
m l
i l
T
T
l
m l
l
i l
T
T
T
T
l
m l
t
T
SBR
R
T
t f
K D
K D
D
M
tf
tf
f D
R
c
N
ρ
γ
π
α
ρ
γ
=
æ
ö
é
=
-
+
ç
÷
ë
è
ø
ù
-
+
-
úû
+
-
å
(
)
( )
( )
,
,
( )
, ,
1
( , )
( , )
max
, ,
sin
2
k
k
E
A
F N
N
k
r
SBR
SBR
p
q
R
T
k n g
g k
n k
R
R
R
K D
K D
D
tf
=
æ
ö
é
+
ç
÷
ë
è
ø
å
 	

140	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
2
sin
sin
cos
cos
k
n k
k
R
R
R
R
q
R
R
R
ψ
α
θ
R
R
π
α
γ
β
p
q
T
T
π
α
γ
β
T
T
π
γ
α
β
+
-
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
-
´
+
+
-
+
D
+
D
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( , )
( )
( , )
( )
max
( , )
( )
0
( )
( )
2
1
cos
1
2
2
g k
n k
k
r
R
l
k
DB
r
t
tf
f D
R
c
R
R
D
MN
γ
π
α
ρ
γ
ù
-
+
+
úû
æ
ö
+
+
-
ç
÷
è
ø
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
,
,
,
,
,
,
1
, ,
1
(
, )
( , )
max
( , )
( , )
max
( )
(
, )
( , )
( )
, , , , ,
0
sin
2
cos
cos
2
cos
cos
2
1
cos
1
cos
sin 2
l
l
k
k
E
E
A
A
L M
M
F N
N
l m i
k n g
DB
m l
i l
DB
R
T
T
T
g k
n k
R
R
l
m l
n k
k
r
m i l n g k
t
R
T
LoS
LoS
T
K D
K D
tf
tf
f D
R
R
c
t f
π
α
α
φ
ρ
π
=
=
éë
ù
úû
+
å
å
(
)
(
)
2
2
0
2
cos
cos                   
q
LoS
H
p Tx
R
LoS
R
f
f
D
K d
c
K d
π
é
+
-
+ D
+
êë
ù
úû
T
	
(3.299)
are the in-phase (I) and the quadrature (Q) components of the time-variant transfer 
function. The rest if the parameters are	
	
( )
( )
( )
1
1
L
L
l
l
l
E
A
l
l
M
M
M M
=
=
=
=
å
å
	
(3.300)
	
( )
( )
( )
1
1
F
F
k
k
k
E
A
k
k
N
N
N
N
=
=
=
=
å
å
	
(3.301)
	
1
T
SBT
K
η
ρ
=
+ 	
(3.302)
	
1
R
SBR
K
η
ρ
=
+ 	
(3.303)
	
1
TR
DB
K
η
ρ
=
+ 	
(3.304)
	
1
LoS
K
K
ρ
=
+
	
(3.305)
	
(
1
2 )
t
p
L
p
K
π
λ
+
-
=
	
(3.306)

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
141
	
(
1
2 )
r
q
L
q
K
π
λ
+
-
=
	
(3.307)
	
(
, )
(
, )
( , )
cos
sin
sin
m l
m l
i l
SBT
Tx
Ty
Tz
T
T
T
T
D
d
d
d
α
α
β
=
+
+
	
(3.308)
	
( )
(
, )
sin
l
m l
SBT
Ry
Rx
R
T
T
D
d
d
α
=
D
-
 	
(3.309)
	
( )
( , )
sin
k
n k
SBR
Ty
Tx
R
R
T
D
d
d
α
=
D
+
 	
(3.310)
	
( , )
( , )
( , )
cos
sin
sin
g k
n k
n k
SBR
Rx
Ry
Rz
R
R
R
R
D
d
d
d
α
α
β
=
+
+
 	
(3.311)
	
(
, )
(
, )
( , )
cos
sin
sin
m l
m l
i l
DB
Tx
Ty
Tz
T
T
T
T
D
d
d
d
α
α
β
=
+
+
	
(3.312)
	
( , )
( , )
( , )
cos
sin
sin
g k
n k
n k
DB
Rx
Ry
Rz
R
R
R
R
D
d
d
d
α
α
β
=
+
+
	
(3.313)
	
T
T
=
-
-
max cos(
)
LoS
LoS
Rq
T
f
f
π
α
γ
	
(3.314)
	
R
Rq
=
-
max cos(
)
R
LoS
LoS
R
f
f
α
γ
	
(3.315)
	
cos
cos
Tx
T
T
T
d
d
ψ
θ
=
	
(3.316)
	
cos
sin
Ty
T
T
T
d
d
ψ
θ
=
	
(3.317)
	
sin
Tz
T
T
d
d
ψ
=
	
(3.318)
	
cos
cos
Rx
R
R
R
d
d
ψ
θ
=
	
(3.319)
	
cos
sin
Ry
R
R
R
d
d
ψ
θ
=
 	
(3.320)
	
sin
Rz
R
R
d
d
ψ
=
 	
(3.321)
As before, the following two modeling methods are considered. They trade simula-
tion precision for simulation speed and complexity: 
Deterministic MIMO 3-D wideband SoS model
•	
. The deterministic SoS model 
needs only a single simulation trial to obtain a channel impulse response with 
desired statistical properties. The AAoDs, 
(
, ),
m l
T
α
 and the AAoAs, 
( , ),
n k
R
α
 are 
modeled using the von Mises pdf and are generated as follows:  

142	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
	
(
, )
1
( )
0.5
m l
T
l
A
m
F
M
α
-
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
è
ø 	
(3.322)
	
( , )
1
( )
0.5
n k
R
k
A
n
F
N
α
-
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
è
ø 
	
(3.323)
for m = 1, …, 
( ),
l
A
M
 n = 1, …, 
( ),
k
A
N
 where F( × )–1 denotes the inverse cumula-
tive von Mises distribution function and is evaluated using the method from 
[63]. The EAoDs, 
( , )
i l
T
β
, and the EAoAs, 
( , )
g k
R
β
, are modeled using pdfs from 
(3.186) and (3.187), and are generated as follows:  
	
( , )
2
Tm
i l
T
β
β
π
=
 arcsin 
( )
2
1
1
l
E
i
M
æ
ö
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø 
	
(3.324)
	
( , )
2
g k
Rm
R
β
β
π
=
 arcsin 
( )
2
1
1
k
E
g
N
æ
ö
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø 
	
(3.325)
for i = 1,…, 
( )l
E
M , g = 1,…, 
( )
k
E
N
. The radii 
( )l
t
R  and 
( )
k
r
R
 are modeled using pdfs 
(3.188) and (3.189), and are generated as follows:  
	
2
2
( )
2
2
1
1
(
0.5)(
)
l
t
t
t
t
l
R
R
R
R
L
-
-
=
+
	
(3.326)
	
2
2
( )
2
2
1
1
(
0.5)(
)
k
r
r
r
r
k
R
R
R
R
F
-
-
=
+
	
(3.327) 
for l = 1, …, L, k = 1, …, F. Phases fm,i,l, fn,g,k, and fm,i,l,n,g,k are generated as 
independent uniform random variables on the interval [–p, p). 
Statistical MIMO 3-D wideband SoS model
•	
. The statistical SoS model gen-
erates channel realizations with statistical properties that vary with every 
simulation run but converge to the desired properties when averaged over a 
sufficient channel ensemble. The AAoDs, the AAoAs, the EAoDs, the EAoAs, 
and the radii are generated as follows:  
	
( )
(
, )
1
( )
1
l
m l
A
T
l
A
m
F
M
θ
α
- æ
ö
+
-
=
ç
÷
è
ø 
	
(3.328)
	
( )
( , )
1
( )
1
k
n k
A
R
k
A
n
F
N
ψ
α
- æ
ö
+
-
=
ç
÷
è
ø 
	
(3.329)
	
( , )
2
Tm
i l
T
β
β
π
=
 arcsin 
( )
( )
2(
1)
1
l
E
l
E
i
M
θ
æ
ö
+
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø 
	
(3.330)

3.3  Simulators for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels	
143
	
æ
ö
(
)
( )
( , )
( )
2
1
2
arcsin
1
k
E
g k
Rm
R
k
E
g
N
ψ
β
β
π
+
-
ç
÷
=
-
ç
÷
è
ø 	
(3.331)
	
2
2
( )
2
2
1
1
(
1)(
)
T
l
t
t
t
t
l
R
R
R
R
L
σ
+
-
-
=
+
	
(3.332)
	
2
2
( )
2
2
1
1
(
1)(
)
R
k
r
r
r
r
k
R
R
R
R
K
σ
+
-
-
=
+
	
(3.333)
for m = 1, …, 
( ),
l
A
M
 n = 1, …, 
( ),
k
A
N
 i = 1, …, 
( ),
l
E
M
 g = 1, …, 
( ),
k
E
N
 l = 1, …, L, 
and k = 1, …, K respectively. The parameters ( )l
A
θ , 
( )
k
A
ψ
, ( )l
E
θ , 
( )
k
E
ψ
, 
T
σ , and 
R
σ  are 
independent random variables uniformly distributed on the interval [0,1). The 
function F–1(×) denotes the inverse von Mises cumulative distribution function. 
Here we compare the deterministic and statistical simulation model with the 
theoretical model detailed in Section 3.1.9. In all simulations, we use a normalized 
sampling period fTmaxTs = 0.01, (fTmax = fRmax are the maximum Doppler frequen-
cies, and Ts is the sampling period.) The number of transmit and receive antennas 
is set to Lt = Lr = 2. The parameters used to obtain curves in Figure 3.33 are bTm = 
bRm = 15°, qT = qR = p/4, yT = yR = p/3, gT = 0, gR = p/3, kT = kR = 0, l = 0.3 m, Rt1 = 
Rr1 = 30m, Rt2 = Rr2 = 300 m, D = 5000 m, and g  = 4. 
Figure 3.33 compares the space-time-frequency correlation functions (dT  = dR = 
0.5l, Df = 100 Hz) of the theoretical, deterministic, and statistical models. The 
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
 R11,22(0.5 ,0.5 , t, 100 Hz) of the theoretical model 
 R11,22(0.5 ,0.5 , t, 100 Hz) of the deterministic model 
 R11,22(0.5 ,0.5 , t, 100 Hz) of the statistical model
Space-time-frequency correlation function
Normalized time delay [fTmax ]
Figure 3.33  The normalized space-time-frequency correlation functions (dT = dR = 0.5l, Df =  
100 Hz) of the theoretical, deterministic, and statistical models.

144	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
space-time-frequency correlation function of the deterministic model is obtained 
with 
( )
32,
l
A
M
=
 
( )
7
l
E
M
= , 
( )
32
k
A
N
=
, and 
( )
7
k
E
N
=  scatterers and six tap-delays (L = 
3 and K = 3), whereas the space-time-frequency correlation function of the statisti-
cal model is obtained with 
( )
12
l
A
M
=
, 
( )
3
l
E
M
=
, 
( )
12
k
A
N
=
, and 
( )
3
k
E
N
=
 scatterers, 
six tap-delays (L = 3 and K = 3), and Nstat = 10 simulation trials. The results in 
Figure 3.33 show that the space-time-frequency correlation function of the deter-
ministic model closely matches the theoretical one in the range of normalized time 
delays, 0 £ fTmaxTs £ 4, whereas the space-time correlation function of the statistical 
model approaches the theoretical one in a wider range of normalized time delays 
(i.e., 0 £ fTmaxTs £ 10).  
3.4  Vehicle-to-Vehicle Measurement Campaigns and Modeling
A large number of papers have reported measurement results, and channel models 
based on these measurements, for vehicle-to-vehicle channels [64]. 
Harley [65] was one of the first to highlight that traditional F-to-M cellular 
propagation models do not apply to short-range communications systems with low 
antenna heights at both the transmitting and receiving ends. He also conducted 
measurements and extracted a suitable propagation model. 
One of the first measurements conducted explicitly for the vehicle-to-vehicle 
scenario have been reported in [66]. The authors conducted an extensive measure-
ment campaign at 900 MHz with the aim of determining the pathloss and delay 
spread probability distribution parameters, such as Ricean K. 
Kovacs et al. [67] investigated the mobile-to-mobile radio channel in different 
suburban outdoor-to-indoor environments. As already discussed in Section 3.1, the 
measured signal envelope statistics were found to be a combination of single and 
double Rayleigh distributions, which generally leads to a system performance deg-
radation. A through description of conducted measurement campaigns and derived 
propagation models are presented in [68]. 
Maurer et al. characterized the narrowband intervehicle transmission channel at 
5.2 GHz. Based on realistic road traffic scenarios, measurements were obtained for 
four different classes of environments: urban, suburban, motorway, and highway. 
The measured channel was then characterized in terms of the CDF of the received 
signal, the average Doppler power density spectrum, and the LCR. These measure-
ments were then used to develop channel models that are detailed in [25, 69, 70]. 
Acosta et al. [26] measured the per-tap Doppler spectra for a frequency selec-
tive vehicle-to-vehicle wireless communications link at 2.4 GHz. The campaign was 
conducted in various multipath environments in Atlanta, Georgia. Chosen for their 
exceptionally long delay spreads, environments such as an expressway, an urban 
T-intersection, and an exit ramp were measured, all of which induced fairly differ-
ent spectra. Interestingly, for a given channel, the spectra corresponding to different 
delays were different, implying a nonseparable channel model, which is also theo-
retically demonstrated in Section 3.1.10.1. An extension to these modeling efforts 
was presented in [51, 71, 72]. 
Sen and Matolak [73] analyzed the results of a channel measurement campaign 
for the vehicle-to-vehicle channel at 5 GHz. They analyzed the delay spread and 

3.4  Vehicle-to-Vehicle Measurement Campaigns and Modeling	
145
amplitude statistics as well as correlations. From these measurements, several sta-
tistical channel models were developed, and, using simulation results, they gauged 
tradeoffs between model implementation complexity and modeling precision. The 
results are presented in [74–76]. 
A comprehensive measurement and modeling campaign has also been con-
ducted by the European IST WINNER and WINNER 2 projects [77]. Most notably, 
the publicly available Winner II [78] covers propagation scenarios that are pertinent 
to mobile-to-mobile communications. 
The disadvantage of all channel models derived from measurements is that 
they are site specific (i.e., there is no guarantee that the model will be applicable 
to other environments). On the other hand, the theoretical models and simulators 
detailed in Sections 3.1 and 3.3 need to be validated against the measurements. To 
validate these theoretical and simulation models, an experimental MIMO V-to-V 
channel-sounding campaign was conducted for V-to-V vehicular communication 
with vehicles traveling along surface streets near to Georgia Tech campus and along 
the interstate highways near midtown in the Atlanta metropolitan area [11]. 
Furthermore, to compare the first- and second-order channel statistics obtained 
from the theoretical model described in Section 3.1.9 with those obtained from the 
empirical measurements, a maximum likelihood–based stochastic estimator was de-
rived to extract the parameters needed for the theoretical model from the measured 
data [11]. Now, we present a comparison between the measured data and the model 
detailed in Section 3.1.9. 
3.4.1  Validation of the 3-D Wideband Model for V-to-V Frequency-Selective 
Multipath Fading Channels
The wideband channel measurements collected in the urban street area were per-
formed at 2.435 GHz, and the maximum Doppler frequencies were fTmax = fRmax = 
90.86 Hz. The distance between the Tx and Rx was approximately D = 300m and 
the moving directions were g T = g R = 90°. Both, the Tx and Rx were equipped with 
two omnidirectional antenna elements with the azimuth and elevation angles qT = 
qR = 0° and yT = yR = 0°, respectively. All antenna elements have the same height, 
DH = 0, and the distance between the antenna elements is dT = dR = 2.943l. It is as-
sumed that the pathloss exponent g is 4, which is typical for radio propagation over 
a flat reflecting surface [9]. 
The theoretical model in Section 3.1.9 assumes an infinite number of scatter-
ers around the Tx and Rx (i.e, M, N® ¥). Using the Central Limit Theorem [9], 
we can conclude that the theoretical time-variant transfer function Tpq(t, f) is a 
complex Gaussian random process with the mean [
( , )]
( , )
LoS
pq
pq
E T
t f
T
t f
=
 and the 
variance Var[Tpq(t, f)] = Wpq/(K + 1). Before we compare the theoretical and mea-
sured sD-psd, psds, and LCR, we need to confirm that the measured time-variant 
transfer functions are also complex Gaussian random processes with the means 
and variances similar to those of the theoretical model. Figure 3.34 compares the 
cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of the real and imaginary components 
of the measured time-variant transfer function, 11
ˆ ( ,180 MHz)
T
t
, with the CDFs of 
the real and imaginary components of the complex Gaussian process. The complex 
Gaussian process is obtained with the mean E[T11(t,180 MHz)] and the variance 

146	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
Var[T11(t,180 MHz)], respectively, where T11(t,180 MHz) is the time-variant trans­fer 
function of the theoretical model. The results show that CDFs of the real and imagi-
nary components of the measured time-variant transfer function, 11
ˆ
( ,180 MHz)
T
t
, 
can be closely approximated by the Gaussian distributions and that the theoretical 
model and measured data have the similar means and variances. Furthermore, the 
CDFs of the measured amplitude and phase can be closely approximated by a Rice 
and uniform distribution,2 respectively.  
Figures 3.35–3.37 compare theoretical and measured sD-psd, psds, and LCR 
for the urban street environment, respectively. The analytical curves are obtained 
with the parameters bTm = 5.1°, bRm = 10.2°, mT = 73.3°, mR = 264.7°, kT = 5.7,  
kR = 6.4, hT = 0.043, hR = 0.137, hTR = 0.82, Rt1 = Rr1 = 9.6 m, Rt2 = Rr2 = 96 m, 
and K = 2.41. These parameters are estimated from the measured data using the 
parameter estimator in [11]. The parameters g, D, gT, gR, qT, qR, yT, yR, dT, dR, DH, 
fTmax, and fRmax are selected to match the measurement conditions as described ear-
lier. Figures 3.35–3.37 show close agreement between the theoretical and empirical 
curves. The results for urban street environments show that double-bounced rays 
bear more energy than the single-bounced rays. Note also that the estimated scatter-
ing radii Rt2 = Rr2 = 96 m are sufficiently small compared to the distance D = 300 m  
in which the local scattering condition is satisfied.  
The wideband channel measurements, collected on an interstate highway, were 
performed at 2.435 GHz, and the maximum Doppler frequencies were fTmax = fRmax = 
181.72 Hz. The distance between Tx and Rx was approximately D = 180 m, and the 
moving directions were gT  = gR = 90°. The Tx was equipped with two and the Rx was 
equipped with four omnidirectional antenna elements. The antenna array elements 
2.	
With nonisotropic scattering, the phase may not be uniformly distributed.
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 Empirical CDF of Re(h11(t))
 Empirical CDF of Im(h11(t))
 Empirical CDF of amplitude(h11(t))
 Empirical CDF of phase(h11(t))
Theoretical Gaussian CDF
Theoretical Rice CDF
Theoretical uniform CDF
Cumulative distribution function (CDF)
Normalized level
Figure 3.34  Theoretical and empirical distribution functions of h11(t,t) in an urban street area.

3.4  Vehicle-to-Vehicle Measurement Campaigns and Modeling	
147
at both vehicles have the azimuth and elevation angles qT = qR = 0° and yT = yR = 0°, 
respectively. All antenna elements have the same height, DH = 0, and the distance be-
tween the antenna elements is dT = dR = 2.943l. The pathoss exponent γ  is set to 4. 
Figures 3.38–3.40 compare the theoretical and measured sD-psd, psds, and 
LCR, respectively, on the interstate highway. The analytical curves are obtained 
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
 Theoretical sD-psd dT=dR=0
 Measured sD-psd dT=dR=0
 Theoretical sD-psd dT=dR=2.943 
 Measured sD-psd dT=dR=2.943 
Normalized power spectral density [dB]
Doppler frequency  [Hz]
Figure 3.35  Theoretical and the measured sD-psd in an urban street area.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
 Measured psds dT=dR=0
 Theoretical psds dT=dR=0
 Measured psds dT=dR=2.943 
 Theoretical psds dT=dR=2.943 
Relative power space-delay spectrum [dB]
Delay  [ s]
Figure 3.36  Theoretical and measured psds in an urban street area.

148	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
with the parameters bTm = 7.4°, bRm = 8.3°, mT = 101.4°, mR = 281.5°, kT = 5.5, kR = 
5.2, hT = 0.358, hR = 0.288, hTR = 0.354, Rt1 = Rr1 = 4.5 m, Rt2 = Rr2 = 45 m, and 
K = 1.29. The remaining parameters D, g, gT, gR, qT, qR, yT, yR, dT, dR, DH, fTmax, 
and fRmax are selected as in the highway measurement setup, described earlier. 
Figures 3.38–3.40 show close agreement between the theoretical and empirical 
curves. In this set of data, single-bounced rays are more dominant than double-
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
0.01
0.1
1
 Measured level crossing rate in urban area
 Theoretical level crossing rate
Normalized level crossing rate L(R)/fTmax
R [dB]
Figure 3.37  Theoretical and measured LCR in an urban street area.
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
 Theoretical sD-psd dT=dR=0
 Measured sD-psd dT=dR=0
 Theoretical sD-psd dT=dR=2.943 
 Measured sD-psd dT=dR=2.943 
Normalized power spectral density [dB]
Doppler frequency  [Hz]
Figure 3.38  Theoretical and measured sD-psd on an interstate highway.

3.4  Vehicle-to-Vehicle Measurement Campaigns and Modeling	
149
bounced rays. This effect can be explained by the fact that both vans were in the 
rightmost lane and very close to the sound blockers on the edge of the highway 
(this was verified using a video recording of the campaign). Finally, the estimated 
scattering radii Rt2 = Rr2 = 45 m are sufficiently small compared to the distance D = 
180 m in which the local scattering condition is satisfied.  
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
-32
-28
-24
-20
-16
-12
-8
-4
0
 Measured psds dT=dR=0
 Theoretical psds dT=dR=0
 Measured psds dT=dR=2.943 
 Theoretical psds dT=dR=2.943 
Relative power space-delay spectrum [dB]
Delay  [ s]
Figure 3.39  Theoretical and measured psds on an interstate highway.
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
0.1
1
10
 Measured level crossing rate on a highway
 Theoretical level crossing rate
Normalized level crossing rate L(R)/f Tmax
R [dB]
Figure 3.40  Theoretical and measured LCR on an interstate highway.

150	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
By analyzing the data collected at four different locations along the highway, it 
can be observed that if the vehicles are driven in the rightmost or the leftmost lane 
and close to large objects such as highway dividers or sound blockers on the edge 
of the highway, the single-bounced rays bear more energy than the double-bounced 
rays. However, if the vehicles are driven in the middle lanes of the highway, the 
double-bounced rays are prevalent. 
Figures  3.34–3.40 show the close agreement between the theoretical and 
empirical curves. These results confirm the utility of the 3-D model detailed in 
Section 3.1.9. From the results we can observe that, in the urban area, the double-
bounced rays bear more energy than the single-bounced rays, whereas, on the high-
way, the single-bounced rays may be prevalent. 
3.5  Summary
This chapter first briefly described the propagation principles that govern signal 
propagation in vehicle-to-vehicle channels, and then proceeded to describe impor-
tant concepts of propagation modeling such as large-scale and small-scale fading 
effects. Then, statistical characterization of multipath propagation in V-to-V chan-
nels was presented, and several 2-D and 3-D models and their statistics, such as 
correlation function, Doppler spectrum, power delay profile, and level crossing rate 
were detailed. These reference models are very useful mathematical tools needed for 
statistical characterization of channels. However, these models assume a large num-
ber of scatterers, making these models impractical for simulators, so simulators for 
2-D frequency-flat and 3-D frequency-selective multipath fading were presented, 
with a small number of propagation rays that still match the statistical properties 
of the V-to-V channel. Finally, V-to-V measurement campaigns were reviewed, and 
validation the 3-D wideband model for V-to-V frequency-selective multipath fading 
channels against the measurements was presented.  
References 
[1]  Konstantinou, K., S. Kang, C. Tzaras, “A measurement-based model for mobile-to-­mobile 
UMTS links,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, VTC2007-Spring, Apr. 2007,  
pp. 529–533. 
[2]  Wang Z., E.K. Tameh, A.R. Nix, “Statistical peer-to-peer channel models for outdoor 
urban environments at 2 GHz and 5 GHz,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 
VTC2004-Fall, Vol.7, Sept. 2004, pp. 5101–5105. 
[3]  Cheng L., B.E. Henty, D.D. Stancil, F. Bai, P. Mudalige, “Mobile vehicle-to-vehicle nar-
row-band channel measurement and characterization of the 5.9 GHz dedicated short range 
communication (DSRC) frequency band,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, Vol. 25, Oct. 2007, pp. 1501–1516. 
[4]  Cheng L., B.E. Henty, F. Bai, D.D. Stancil, “Highway and rural propagation channel mod-
eling for vehicle-to-vehicle communications at 5.9 GHz,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation 
Society International Symposium, AP-S 2008, July 2008, pp. 1–4. 
[5]  Kunisch, J., J. Pamp, “Wideband Car-to-Car Radio Channel Measurements and Model at 
5.9 GHz,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, VTC 2008-Fall, Sept. 2008, pp. 1–5. 
[6]  Karedal, J., N. Czink, A. Paier, F. Tufvesson, A.F. Molisch, “Pathloss modeling for vehicle-
to-vehicle communications,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 60, Jan. 
2011, pp. 323–328. 

3.5  Summary	
151
[7]  Paschalidis, P., K. Mahler, A. Kortke, M. Peter, W. Keusgen, “Pathloss and multipath 
power decay of the wideband car-to-car channel at 5.7 GHz,” IEEE Vehicular Technology 
Conference, VTC 2011-Spring, May 2011, pp. 1–5. 
[8]  Wang Z., E.K. Tameh, A. R. Nix, “Joint shadowing process in urban peer-to-peer radio 
channels,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 57, Jan. 2008,   pp. 52–64. 
[9]  Stüber, G. L., Principles of mobile communication, 2nd ed., Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2001. 
[10]  Akki A. S. and F. Haber, “A statistical model for mobile-to-mobile land communication  
channel,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 35, February 1986, pp. 2–10. 
[11]  Zajic´ A. G., G. L. Stüber, T. G. Pratt, and S. Nguyen, “Wideband MIMO mobile-to-
­mobile channels: geometry-based statistical modeling with experimental verification,” 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 58, Feb. 2009, pp. 517–534. 
[12]  Von Mises R. “Über die “Ganzzahligkeit” der Atomgewicht und verwandte Fragen,” Phy-
sikal. Z., Vol. 19, 1918, pp. 490–500. 
[13]  Gradshteyn I. S. and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, San Diego CA: 
Academic Press, 1980. 
[14]  Zajic´ A. G. and G. L. Stüber, “Space-time correlated MIMO mobile-to-mobile channels,” 
IEEE 17th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communica-
tions, PIMRC 2006, Sept. 2006, pp. 1–5. 
[15]  Pätzold M, B.O. Hogstad, N. Youssef, and D. Kim, “A MIMO mobile-to-mobile channel 
model: part I-the reference model,” IEEE 16th International Symposium on Personal, In-
door and Mobile Radio Communications, PIMRC 2005, Vol. 1, Sept. 2005, pp. 573–578. 
[16]  Hogstad B. O., M. Pätzold, N. Youssef and D. Kim, “A MIMO mobile-to-mobile channel 
model: part II-the simulation model,” IEEE 16th International Symposium on Personal, In-
door and Mobile Radio Communications, PIMRC 2005, Vol. 1, Sept. 2005, pp. 562–567. 
[17]  Pätzold M, B.O. Hogstad, and N. Youssef, “Modeling, analysis, and simulation of MIMO 
mobile-to-mobile fading channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 
7, Feb. 2008, pp. 510–520. 
[18]  Zajić A. G. and G. L. Stüber, “Space-time correlated mobile-to-mobile channels: modeling and 
simulation,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 57, Mar. 2008, pp. 715–726. 
[19]  Byers G. J. and F. Takawira, “Spatially and temporally correlated MIMO channels: mod-
eling and capacity analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 53, May 
2004, pp. 634–643. 
[20]  Gesbert D. , H. Bölcskei, D.A. Gore, and A.J. Paulraj, “Outdoor MIMO wireless channels: 
models and performance prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 50, 
Dec. 2002, pp. 1926–1934. 
[21]  Clarke, R. H., “A statistical theory of mobile-radio reception,” Bell Systems Technical 
Journal, July 1968, pp. 957–1000. 
[22]  Shiu D., G. J. Foschini, M. J. Gans, and J. M. Khan, “Fading correlation and its effect on 
the capacity of multielement antenna systems,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, 
Vol. 48, Mar. 2000, pp. 502–513. 
[23]  Abdi A. and M. Kaveh, “A space-time correlation model for multielement antenna systems 
in mobile fading channels,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 20, 
Apr. 2002, pp. 550–560. 
[24]  Kang H., G. L. Stüber, T. G. Pratt, and M. A. Ingram, “Studies on the capacity of MIMO 
systems in mobile-to-mobile environment,” IEEE Wireless Communications and Net-
working Conference, WCNC 2004, Vol. 1, Atlanta, GA, Mar. 2004, pp. 363–368. 
[25]  Maurer J., T. Fügen, and W. Wiesbeck, “Narrow-band measurement and analysis of the 
inter-vehicle transmission channel at 5.2 GHz,” IEEE 55th Vehicular Technology Confer-
ence, VTC Spring 2002, Vol. 3, Birmingham, AL, May 2002, pp. 1274–1278. 
[26]  Acosta G., K. Tokuda, and M. A. Ingram, “Measured joint Doppler-delay power profiles 
for vehicle-to-vehicle communications at 2.4 GHz,” IEEE Global Telecommunications 
Conference, GLOBECOM ’04, Vol. 6, Dallas, TX, Nov. 2004, pp. 3813–3817. 

152	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
[27]  Pätzold M., U. Killat, and F. Laue, “An extended Suzuki model for land mobile satellite 
channels and its statistical properties,”IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 
47, May 1998, pp. 617–630. 
[28]  Akki A. S., “Statistical properties of mobile-to-mobile land communication channels,” 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 43, November 1994, pp. 826–831. 
[29]  Zhang J., Q. Zhang, B. Li, X. Luo, and W. Zhu, “Energy-efficient routing in mobile and 
ad-hoc networks: mobility-assisted case,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 
Vol. 55, Jan. 2006, pp. 369–379. 
[30]  Akyildiz I. F. and W. Wang, “The predictive user mobility profile framework for wireless 
multimedia networks,” IEEE Transactions on Networking, Vol. 12, Dec. 2004, pp. 1021–
1035. 
[31]  Holtzman J. and A. Sampath, “Adaptive averaging methodology for handoffs in cellular 
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 44, Feb. 1995, pp. 59–66. 
[32]  Chu M. J. and W. E. Stark, “Effect of mobile velocity on communications in fading chan-
nels,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 49, Jan. 2000, pp. 202–210. 
[33]  Krasny L., H. Arslan, D. Koilpillai, and S. Chennakeshu, “Doppler spread estimation in 
mobile radio systems,” IEEE Communication Letters, Vol. 5, May 2001, pp. 197–199. 
[34]  Abdi A., H. Zhang, and C. Tepedelenlioglu, “A unified approach to the performance anal-
ysis of speed estimation techniques in mobile communication,” IEEE Transactions on 
Communications, Vol. 56, Jan. 2008, pp. 126–135. 
[35]  Anim-Appiah K. D., “On generalized covariance-based velocity estimation,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 48, Sept. 1999, pp. 1546–1557. 
[36]  Xiao C., K. D. Mann, and J. C. Olivier, “Mobile speed estimation for TDMA-based hi-
erarchical cellular systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 50, July 
2001, pp. 981–991. 
[37]  Tepedelenlioglu C. and G. B. Giannakis, “On velocity estimation and correlation proper-
ties of narrow-band mobile communication channels,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, Vol. 50, July 2001, pp. 1039–1052. 
[38]  Zheng Y. R. and C. Xiao, “Mobile speed estimation for broadband wireless communi-
cations over rician fading channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 
Vol. 8, Jan. 2009, pp. 1–5. 
[39]  Baddour K. and N. C. Beaulieu, “Nonparametric Doppler spread estimation for flat fading 
channels,” IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking, WCNC 2003, Vol. 2 New 
Orleans, LA, Mar. 2003, pp. 953–958. 
[40]  Dogandzic A. and B. Zhang, “Estimating Jakes’ Doppler power spectrum parameters us-
ing the Whittle approximation,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 53, March 
2005, pp. 987–1005. 
[41]  Zajić A. G., “Estimation of mobile velocities and direction of movement in mobile-to-
mobile wireless fading channels,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol.61, 
Jan. 2012, pp. 130–139. 
[42]  Jakes, W. C., Microwave Mobile Communications, 2nd ed., Piscataway, NJ: Wiley-IEEE 
Press, 1994. 
[43]  Zajić A. G. and G. L. Stüber, “Three-dimensional modeling, simulation, and capacity 
analysis of space-time correlated mobile-to-mobile channels,” IEEE Transactions on Ve-
hicular Technology, Vol. 57, July 2008, pp. 2042–2054. 
[44]  Zajić A. G. and G. L. Stüber, “Three-dimensional modeling and simulation of wideband 
MIMO mobile-to-mobile channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 
Vol. 8, Mar. 2009, pp. 1260–275. 
[45]  Parsons J. D. and A.M.D. Turkmani, “Characterisation of mobile radio signals: model 
description,” IEE Proceedings I, Communications, Speech, and Vision, Vol. 138, Dec. 
1991, pp. 549–556. 

3.5  Summary	
153
[46]  Kuchar A., J.-P. Rossi, and E. Bonek, “Directional macro-cell channel characterization 
from urban measurements,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 48, 
Feb. 2000, pp. 137–146. 
[47]  Hoeher P., “A statistical discrete-time model for the WSSUS multipath channel,” IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 41, Nov. 1992, pp. 461–468. 
[48]  Chiavaccini E. and G.M. Vitetta, “GQR models for multipath Rayleigh fading channels,” 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 19, June 2001, pp. 1009–1018. 
[49]  Kennedy R. S., Fading dispersive communication channels, New York: Wiley-Interscience, 
1969. 
[50]  Latinovic Z., A. Abdi, and Y. Bar-Ness, “On the utility of the circular ring model for 
wideband MIMO channels,” IEEE 60th Vehicular Technology Conference, VTC2004-
Fall,vol. 1, Los Angeles, CA, Sept. 2004, pp. 96–100. 
[51]  Acosta G. and M. A. Ingram, “Model development for the wideband expressway vehicle-
to-vehicle 2.4 GHz channel,” IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Confer-
ence, WCNC 2006.,Vol. 3, Las Vegas, NV NE, USA, April 2006, pp. 1283–1288. 
[52]  Balanis C. A., Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, Wiley, 1997. 
[53]  Zajić A. G., “Impact of mutual coupling on MIMO vehicle-to-vehicle systems,” IEEE 
Global Telecommunications Conference, GLOBECOM 2009, Honolulu, HI, December 
2009, pp. 1–6. 
[54]  Zajić A. G., “Effects of mutual coupling on capacity of MIMO vehicle-to-vehicle systems,” 
IEEE Military Communications Conference, MILCOM 2009, Boson, MA, October 2009, 
pp. 1–5. 
[55]  Wallace J. W. and M. A. Jensen, “Mutual coupling in MIMO wireless systems: A rigorous 
network theory analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 3, July 
2004, pp. 1317–1325. 
[56]  Lau B. K., J. B. Andersen, G. Kristensson, and A. F. Molisch, “Impact of matching network 
on bandwidth of compact antenna arrays,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propaga-
tion, Vol. 54, Nov. 2006, pp. 3225–3238. 
[57]  Djordjević A. R., M. B. Bazdar, T. K. Sarkar, and R. F. Harrington, AWAS for Windows: 
Analysis of Wire Antennas and Scatterers, Software and User’s Manual, Boston: Artech 
House, 2002. 
[58]  Rappaport, T., Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pretince Hall PTR, 2001. 
[59]  Wang R. and D. Cox, “Channel modeling for ad hoc mobile wireless networks,” IEEE 
55th Vehicular Technology Conference, VTC Spring 2002, Vol. 1, Birmingham, AL, May 
2002, pp. 21–25. 
[60]  Patel C. S. et al., “Simulation of Rayleigh-faded mobile-to-mobile communication chan-
nels,” IEEE Transaction on Communication, Vol. 53, November 2005, pp. 1876–1884. 
[61]  Zajić A. G. and G. L. Stüber, “A new simulation model for mobile-to-mobile Rayleigh 
fading channels,” IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, WCNC 
2006, Vol. 3, Las Vegas, NE, April 2006, pp. 1266–1270. 
[62]  Xiao C., Y. R. Zheng and N. Beaulieu, “Statistical simulation models for Rayleigh and 
Ricean fading,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, ICC ’03., Vol. 65, 
Anchorage, AK, May 2003, pp. 3524–3529. 
[63]  Mardia K. V. and E. P. Jupp, Directional Statistics, New York: John Wiley and Sons, 
1999. 
[64]  Dohler M. and Y. Li, Cooperative Communications: Hardware, Channel & PHY.New 
York: John Wiley and Sons, 2010. 
[65]  Harley, P., “Short distance attenuation measurements at 900 MHz and 1.8 GHz using 
low antenna heights for microcells,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 
Vol. 7, Jan. 1989, pp. 5–11. 

154	
Vehicle-to-Vehicle Radio Channels
[66]  Davis, J. S. and J. P. M. G. Linnartz, “Vehicle to vehicle RF propagation measurements,” 
Conference Record of the Twenty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and 
Computers, 1994, Vol. 1, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 1994, pp. 470–74. 
[67]  Kovács I. Z., P. C. F. Eggers, K. Olesen, and L. G. Patersen, “Investigations of outdoor-to-
indoor mobile-to-mobile radio communication channels,” IEEE 56th Vehicular Technol-
ogy Conference, VTC 2002-Fall, Vancouver, Canada, Vol. 1, Sept. 2002, pp. 430–434. 
[68]  Kovács I. Z., Radio Channel Characterization for Private Mobile Radio Systems: Mobile-to-
Mobile Radio Link Investigations. PhD Dissertation, Aalborg University, Denmark, 2002. 
[69]  Maurer J., T. Fugen, T. Schafer, and W. Wiesbeck, “A new inter-vehicle communications 
(IVC) channel model,” IEEE 60th Vehicular Technology Conference, VTC-2004-Fall, Los 
Angeles, CA, Vol. 2, Sept. 2004, pp. 9–13. 
[70]  Maurer J., T. Fugen, and W. Wiesbeck, “Physical layer simulations of IEEE802.11a for 
vehicle-to-vehicle communications,” IEEE 62nd Vehicular Technology Conference, VTC-
2005-Fall, Dallas, TX, Vol. 3, Sept. 2005, pp. 1849–1853. 
[71]  Acosta G. and M. A. Ingram, “Six time- and frequency-selective empirical channel models 
for vehicular wireless LANs,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, Vol. 2, Dec. 2007, 
pp. 4–11. 
[72]  Acosta G. and M. A. Ingram, “Six time- and frequency-selective empirical channel models 
for vehicular wireless LANs,” IEEE 66th Vehicular Technology Conference VTC-2007-
Fall, Baltimore, MD, Sept. 2007, pp. 2134–2138. 
[73]  Sen I. and D. W. Matolak, “Vehicle-vehicle channel models for the 5-GHz band,” IEEE 
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol. 9, June 2008, pp. 235–245. 
[74]  Matolak D.W., I. Sen, W. Xiong, and N. T. Yaskoff, “5 GHz wireless channel character-
ization for vehicle to vehicle communications,” IEEE Military Communications Confer-
ence, MILCOM 2005, Vol. 5, Atlantic City, NJ, Oct. 2005, pp. 3016–3022. 
[75]  Matolak D.W., “Channel modeling for vehicle-to-vehicle communications,” IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, Vol. 46, May 2008, pp. 76–83. 
[76]  Wang B. I. Sen, and D.W. Matolak, “Performance evaluation of 802.16e in vehicle to ve-
hicle channels,” IEEE 66th Vehicular Technology Conference VTC-2007-Fall, Baltimore, 
MD, Sept. 2007, pp. 1406–1410. 
[77]  IST-4-027756 Wireless World Initiative Radio, WINNER, Available: www.ist-winner.
org.
[78]  D.1.1.2 WINNER II Channels, IST-4-027756 WINER, Available: http://www.ist-winner.
org/WINNER2-Deliverables/D1.1.2.zip. 

155
C H A P T E R  4
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
Air-to-ground (A-to-G) communications systems have drawn great attention as a 
possible alternative to traditional terrestrial or satellite-based communication sys-
tems [1–4]. A-to-G systems can have a large footprint on earth, offering the possibil-
ity of providing services over large regions at low traffic cost. The major advantages 
for future services integrating A-to-G communication systems are cost-effective cov-
erage of rural and maritime regions (similar to satellite systems), system flexibility 
due to the platforms’ mobility on demand (e.g., in emergency situations), and the 
possibility of upgrading the platforms’ payload to reduce the risk of technology 
obsolescence (this is the main problem of satellite systems). An A-to-G communica-
tion system consists of sky and ground segments, as shown in Figure 4.1. Ground 
segments consist of mobile units, such as cellphones or vehicles, while the sky seg-
ment consists of a platform (i.e., an airplane or a lighter-than-air airship) positioned 
in the stratosphere. This platform is often called a high-altitude platform (HAP) or 
high-altitude very long endurance (HAVE) vehicle. HAPs usually fly at an altitude 
ranging between 17 and 30 km in the stratosphere and are able to stay aloft for long 
periods of time. There are several projects addressing the design of telecommunica-
tion networks based on the use of these manned and unmanned aerial vehicles [5–8]. 
A successful design of such A-to-G communication systems requires a detailed un-
derstanding of multipath propagation between sky and ground segments.
A-to-G channels have characteristics that are very different from F-to-M cel-
lular and satellite radio channels. In A-to-G channels, the transmitter (Tx) and 
possibly the receiver (Rx) are in motion as shown in Figure 4.2. Furthermore, in 
contrast to F-to-M radio channels, A-to-G channels are not significantly affected 
by shadowing due to high elevation angles. In contrast to satellite channels, A-to-G 
channels provide much lower propagation loss because HAP stations are located 
in the stratosphere so the signals do not go through the (high-loss) ionosphere. As 
shown in Figure 4.2, the Tx communicates with the Rx through either a LoS link or 
through a NLoS link when natural and manmade objects are situated between the 
Tx and Rx. This chapter details how A-to-G channels differ from F-to-M cellular 
radio channels and how to model and simulate A-to-G channels.
4.1  A-to-G Propagation Modeling
Like in F-to-M cellular radio channels, propagation in A-to-G channels is gov-
erned by the same four propagation mechanisms described in Section 2.1 (i.e., free-
space propagation, reflection, diffraction, and scattering). The differences between 
F-to-M cellular and A-to-G channels arise due to the differences in propagation 
environments, and these differences are important for modeling of large-scale and 
small-scale fading in A-to-G channels.

156	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
High altitude platform
Mobile users
Fixed users
Figure 4.1  Illustration of an A-to-G radio system.
High altitude platform
LoS
NLoS
NLoS
Mobile user
Figure 4.2  Typical A-to-G radio propagation environment.

4.1  A-to-G Propagation Modeling	
157
4.1.1  Large-Scale Fading—Pathloss
The minimum pathloss that A-to-G communication link experiences is equal to the 
free space loss, which is defined in Section 2.2.1. The A-to-G link experiences ad-
ditional pathloss due to passing through troposphere.
The troposphere is the nonionized lower portion of the earth’s atmosphere covering 
altitudes from the ground surface up to a height of about 15 km of the atmosphere.
It consists of a mixture of particles having a wide range of sizes and charac-
teristics, from the molecules in atmospheric gases to raindrops and hail. The total 
pathloss resulting from an electromagnetic wave passing through such a medium 
can be classified into rain attenuation, gaseous absorption, and scintillation [9].
Rain attenuation 
• 
is the attenuation of the received signal amplitude caused 
by absorption and scattering of the radio waves from raindrops. The at-
tenuation is measured as a function of rainfall rate and increases with the 
increase of operating frequency, with increased rainfall rates, and with 
decrease of elevation angles [10]. Modeling of rain attenuation is discussed 
in Section 4.1.1.1
Gaseous absorbtion 
• 
occurs when molecules found in the atmosphere absorb 
energy from radio waves passing through them, thereby causing attenuation. 
The principal cause of signal attenuation due to atmospheric gases is molecu-
lar absorption. Among different gases found in the atmosphere, only water 
vapor and oxygen have resonant frequencies in the frequency band of inter-
est (up to 100 GHz), and gaseous attenuation in the atmosphere is normally 
neglected at frequency bands below 10 GHz. The amount of fading due to 
gases depends on altitude above sea level, frequency, temperature, pressure, 
and water vapor concentration. Modeling of gaseous absorbtion is discussed 
in Section 4.1.1.2.
Scintillation 
• 
is the result of small random variations in the refraction index of 
the air caused by the air turbulence and/or rain. This effect generates construc-
tive and destructive interference at the receiver, causing the received signal 
strength variations. Modeling of scintillation is discussed in Section 4.1.1.3.
4.1.1.1  Modeling of Rain Attenuation
Rain attenuation is a function of the number and size of raindrops and the path 
length through the rain. It was found experimentally that, if the density and shape 
of the raindrops in a given region is constant, the received power Pr(d) decays ex-
ponentially with distance d; that is,
	
( )
(0)
d
r
r
P d
P
e α
−
=
	
(4.1)
where l/α is the distance at which the receive power reduces to e–1 of its initial value. 
Then, the pathloss in decibels can be calculated as 
	
10
( )
10log
4.343
t
r
P
L d
P
d
α
=
=
	
(4.2)

158	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
The value of a can be calculated as
	
¥
=
= ò
0
( ) ( )
r
N r C r dr
α
	
(4.3)
where N(r) is the drop size distribution (i.e., the number of drops in the area with 
radius r per meter of path length) and C(r) is the effective attenuation per raindrop 
cross-section. One way to solve the integral in (4.3) is to take a particular drop size 
distribution and integrate the result. Large raindrops were found to be less probable 
than small ones, and exponential distribution was found to be a good approxima-
tion for this finding [11]. Hence, the drop size distribution is modeled as
	
(
)
=
-
0
( )
exp
m
r
N r
N
r
	
(4.4)
where N0 = 8 × 103m–2mm–1 and rm = 0.122R0.21mm are empirical parameters and 
R denotes raindrop rate. The cross-section attenuation C(r) can be found theoreti-
cally by calculating the attenuation due to each spherical raindrop illuminated by a 
plane wave and then adding those attenuations together. For low frequencies, where 
the drop is small compared with the incident wavelength, most of the attenuation 
is due to absorption in rain. In this region, the cross-section attenuation increases 
with frequency according to the Rayleigh approximation; that is,
	
µ
3
( )
r
C r
λ 	
(4.5)
where λ is the wavelength. At higher frequencies, when the raindrops are similar in 
size with wavelength, the cross-section attenuation increases more slowly, converg-
ing toward a constant value known as the optical limit. At these frequencies, scat-
tering forms a significant part of the attenuation, so the cross-section attenuation is 
calculated using scattering theory.
In practice, pathloss is often modeled using empirical models that implicitly 
combine all of these effects. These empirical models can have quite sophisticated 
expressions and can be found, for example, in [12, 13].
4.1.1.2  Modeling of Gaseous Absorbtion
Gaseous molecules found in the atmosphere may absorb energy from radio waves pass-
ing through them, thereby causing attenuation. This attenuation is greatest for polar 
molecules (such as water), where the molecules align with an applied electric field and 
thus absorb some of the field’s energy. Since the electric field in the radio wave changes 
its direction twice per period, this realignment of molecules occurs continuously and 
can cause a significant loss. Also, this realignment occurs faster at higher frequencies, so 
the absorption loss has an overall tendency to increase with frequency. Nonpolar mol-
ecules, such as oxygen, may also absorb electromagnetic energy due to the existence of 
magnetic moments that interact with the magnetic field in the radio wave. Each type of 
absorbing molecule tends to contribute both a general background level of absorption, 
which rises with frequency, and several resonance peaks, each corresponding to differ-
ent modes of vibration specific to the molecule. In normal atmospheric conditions, only 
oxygen and water contribute significantly to absorption, although other atmospheric 
gases may be significant in very dry air at frequencies above 70 GHz.

4.1  A-to-G Propagation Modeling	
159
The total attenuation due to gaseous absorbtion La (in decibels) for a particular 
path can be calculated by integrating the total specific attenuation over the total 
path length r; that is,
	
0
0
( )
( )
(
( )
( ))
r
a
r
w
o
L
r
l dl
l
l dl
γ
γ
γ
=
=
+
ò
ò
a
	
(4.6)
where gw(l) and go(l) are attenuation in dB/km for water vapor and oxygen, respec-
tively. The attenuations for water vapor and oxygen are functions of frequency and 
the empirical values for them can be found in [9].
4.1.1.3  Modeling of Scintillation
As pointed out in Section 4.1.1, scintillation is the result of small random variations 
in the refraction index. These variations can be caused by air turbulence (wind) 
and rain. When the wind blows, the layers of the troposphere are mixed, leading to 
rapid variations of the refractive index over small distances and over short intervals 
of time. On the other hand, rain leads to slower variations of refractive index over 
small distances and over short intervals of time.
Scintillation is strongly frequency dependent. Higher frequencies are more af-
fected then lower frequencies. The magnitude of scintillation is measured by its 
standard deviation or intensity (in decibels). The distribution of the fluctuation in 
decibels is approximately a Gaussian distribution with the intensity of scintillation 
as a standard deviation. The scintillation intensity ss can be calculated from the 
ITU-R model [13] as follows:
	
/
.
=
7 12
1 2
( )
sin( )
ref
s
f
g D
σ
σ
θ
	
(4.7)
where f is the carrier frequency, θ is the elevation angle, σref is a typical standard de-
viation for a given region and depends on temperature, atmospheric pressure, and 
water vapor pressure, and g(D) accounts for averaging of the scintillation intensity 
for large aperture diameter D.
Scintillation is most noticeable in warm, humid climates and is greatest during 
summer days. One way to reduce the effect of scintillation is to use an antenna with 
a wide aperture, since this produces averaging of the scintillation across the slightly 
different paths taken to each point across the aperture. Another approach is to use 
spatial diversity, where the signals from two antennas are combined to reduce the 
overall fade depth [9]. The best results for a given antenna separation are produced 
using vertically separated antennas because of the strong relationship between scin-
tillation and the horizontal stratification of the troposphere.
4.1.2  Large-Scale Fading—Shadowing
In addition to signal power loss due to passage through the troposphere, partial or total 
signal obstruction can be caused by large objects, such as buildings and hills, as well 
as vegetation and foliage. As a result, the power of the received signal varies around 
the mean power predicted by the pathloss. This type of variation in the received signal 
power is called shadowing and is usually formulated as log-normally distributed over 

160	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
the ensemble of typical locals. Shadowing creates holes in coverage areas and results 
in poor coverage and poor carrier-to-interference ratio (CIR) in different places. The 
probability density function of the received signal envelope affected by shadowing fol-
lows lognormal distribution given in (2.2) of Section 2.2.2. Shadowing is particularly 
dominant in the Ka-band (26–40 GHz), where signals are easily dispersed.
4.1.3  Small-Scale Fading—Multipath Propagation
In A-to-G communications, the motion of the transmitter and/or the receiver causes 
rapid fluctuations in the amplitude of the received signal, which is called small-scale 
fading. This small-scale fading is caused by the interference between two or more 
versions of the transmitted signal that reach the receiver at slightly different times 
because they travel along different paths.
The multipath that affects A-to-G systems is caused by reflections and scattering 
from buildings, trees, parts of a HAPs, and so on. Reflection occurs when an electro-
magnetic wave impinges on a surface that is smooth, where roughness dimensions 
are relatively large compared to the wavelength [14]. In contrast, scattering occurs 
when an electromagnetic wave impinges on a surface that is rough. To determine 
the surface roughness, the Rayleigh criterion (defined in Section 2.1.4) is often used, 
which determines when a surface can be considered smooth. For frequencies in the 
Ka-band (26–40 GHz), the critical height that determines roughness is relatively 
small (0.2 cm), implying that most of the surfaces can be considered rough. On the 
other hand, for a 2.1 GHz IMT-2000 system, the critical roughness height can be 
as much as 3.5 cm [15], implying that a surface that appears rough for the Ka-band 
is smooth for 2.1 GHz and will produce specular reflections and hence produce 
multipath. Many building components, such as windows, walls, and metal beams 
(including parts of the HAPs payload), are smooth enough to give rise to specular 
reflections. A study by Andreyev and Bugaev [16] provides a full-wave model of the 
reflected fields. Their results, both measured and modeled, show that a typical wall 
may have a reflection coefficient of up to 98 percent if the whole of the main beam 
is incident on the wall, hence giving rise to interference. Hence, specular reflections 
should be accounted for when designing an A-to-G communication system.
Similarly to F-to-M channels, the A-to-G multipath channel can be modeled as 
a linear time-variant filter whose complex baseband impulse response is [17]
	
-
=
=
-
å
( )
1
( , )
(
)
l
L
j
t
l
l
l
h t
C e
φ
τ
δ τ
τ 	
(4.8)
where h(t, t) is the channel response at time t due to an impulse applied at time 
t – t, and d(·) is the Dirac delta function. The channel amplitude, phase, and time 
delay strongly depend on time and location and are modeled statistically, which is 
the topic of Section 4.2.
4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G 
Radio Channels
Performance of A-to-G communication links depends on the operating frequency, 
geographical location, climate, elevation angle to the HAPs, and so on. The link re-

4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G Radio Channels	
161
liability decreases with the increase in operating frequency and with the decrease of 
elevation angles. In addition, the random and unpredictable nature of the propaga-
tion environment increases the modeling complexity of A-to-G channels. Therefore, 
it is suitable to describe propagation phenomena in stochastic manner to account 
for random fluctuations in the A-to-G channel. This section details statistical char-
acterization of multipath propagation in A-to-G radio channels.
4.2.1  Received Envelope Distribution
Similarly to F-to-M channels, the received envelope in A-to-G channels can be modeled 
as Rayleigh-faded under NLoS conditions and as Ricean-faded under LoS conditions. 
However, in contrast to F-to-M channels where urban areas are characterized with Ray-
leigh fading (because the LoS is often obstructed by buildings), the A-to-G channel expe-
riences Ricean fading in urban areas (because the LoS is not obstructed and the reflected 
signals are significantly attenuated). Similarly, while the F-to-M channel experiences 
Ricean fading in suburban areas (the LoS is not obstructed), the A-to-G channel experi-
ences Rayleigh fading (because there are one or two reflected signals that can be stronger 
than LoS). Finally, in rural areas, shadowing is the predominant factor in A-to-G chan-
nels and a lognormal distribution is used to characterize fading in this environment.
For Ricean fading, several values of parameter K are reported in the literature 
for the 1–2 GHz (L-band) frequency range [18–21]. In contrast to F-to-M channels, 
in A-to-G channels the Ricean parameter K depends on the elevation angles. In [18], 
the Ricean parameter K takes values 8.5 dB and 6 dB for elevation angles of 45° and 
55°, respectively. In [19], the parameter K takes values 12 dB and 20 dB for eleva-
tion angles 60° and 80°, respectively, both under clear-sky conditions. In [20], the 
Ricean parameter K is 14 dB for open areas. Finally, in [21], the Ricean parameter 
K is 11 dB for 43° elevation angle.
4.2.2  Statistical Modeling of A-to-G Multipath Channels
Since A-to-G systems share some similarities with both F-to-M cellular and satellite 
systems, channel models already developed for these systems have been applied to  
A-to-G systems. However, satellite channel models [21–26] do not characterize prop-
erly A-to-G propagation because of different propagation loss and multipath propa-
gation characteristics. Similarly, 2-D and 3-D F-to-M channel models [27–30] are 
not applicable to A-to-G systems due to very different elevation angles. Hence, in the 
following sections we detail channel models derived for A-to-G communications.
4.2.3  Two-Ray Model for A-to-G Multipath Fading Channels
The two-ray model for A-to-G channels is proposed in [31]. This model assumes 
that the HAP is quasi-stationary with an altitude of 20–25 km. The geometrical 
characteristics of the channel are shown in Figure 4.3. The model assumes two-ray 
propagation (i.e., the LoS ray and one reflected ray). The parameters that describe 
the geometry of the system are
a
• 
: the elevation angle in degrees;
h
• 
: the HAP height in meters;

162	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
r
• 
: the horizontal distance between the transmitter and the receiver in  
meters;
Δ
• 
r: the horizontal distance between the receiver and the reflector in meters.
Propagation Delay
The horizontal distance between the transmitter and the receiver (i.e., the radius of 
the coverage area of the HAP) can be computed as
	
=
-
(
)
(
)
1
4
cos
cos
R
r
R
R
h
α
α
-
+
 	
(4.9)
where R = 6378 km is the radius of the earth. From Figure 4.3, for a given elevation 
angle a, coverage can be approximated as
	
» tan
h
r
α	
(4.10)
In this approximation, the curvature of the earth is neglected. Once the radius 
of the coverage area is obtained, the distance between the HAP and the user can be 
computed. The LoS distance dLoS is given by
	
2
2
sin
LoS
d
r
h
h
α
=
+
=
	
(4.11)
Similarly, the horizontal distance between the receiver and the reflector can be 
calculated as
	
2
2
ref
(
)
d
r
r
h
r
=
+ D
+
+ D 	
(4.12)
Since electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light, using these calcula-
tions, we can estimate the time needed for each ray to reach the receiver. Hence, 
we can calculate the relative delay of each reflected ray with respect to the LoS. 
This method can also be used to estimate the power delay profile of the system, for 
wideband channel modeling. The total delay Dt is given by
Figure 4.3  A geometry model for two-ray A-to-G channel.

4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G Radio Channels	
163
	
(
)
D
=
+ D
+
+ | D | -
2
2
1
(
)
sin
h
r
r
h
r
c
τ
α
	
(4.13)
where c is the speed of light. The best delay is achieved when the HAP height ap-
proaches infinity (i.e., h → ¥) and is equal to Dt  = (1 + cos α)|Dr|/c. On the other 
hand, the worst delay occurs when the HAP height approaches zero. (i.e., h → ¥) 
and is equal to Dt = 2|Dr|/c.
Received Envelope Distribution
The two-ray model assumes that the received envelope has a Ricean distribution. 
The Ricean factor (i.e., the ratio of the LoS path and the reflected path) is a function 
of the elevation angle a and can be calculated in dB as
	
é
ù
ê
ú
=
ê
ú
+ D
+
+ | D |
ë
û
10
2
2
/sin
( )
20log
(
)
h
K
r
r
h
r
α
α
	
(4.14)
Here we can observe that, when the elevation angle approaches a = 90°, the 
Ricean parameter K approaches infinity and the received amplitude follows Gaussian 
distribution. If the elevation angle is between 12° < α < 90°, the received amplitude 
follows Ricean distribution. Finally, for low elevation angles (i.e., α < 12°) the Ricean 
factor approaches zero and the received amplitude follows Rayleigh distribution.
4.2.4  A Scattering Model for A-to-G Multipath Fading Channels
The two-ray model described in the previous section assumes that there is only 
one reflection from the objects on the ground. However, that is often not a realistic 
assumption, especially in urban areas where users are usually surrounded by tall 
buildings. To address this issue, the model in [32] focuses on theoretical derivation 
of small-scale fading for A-to-G channels while taking into account the presence of 
scatterers in the terrain.
The model in [32] is based on the theoretical model proposed by Rappaport 
and Liberty [27] but assumes that the receiver and the transmitter are no longer 
both in the horizontal plane and so the height of the transmitter must be taken into 
account. The geometry of the model in [32] is shown in Figure 4.4. The receiver Rx 
is located on the ground, in the point with coordinates (x0, 0, 0). The transmitter Tx 
is elevated above the ground in the point with coordinates (0, 0, z0). It is assumed 
that all scatterers that cause excess delays less than t  are inside the ellipsoid shown 
in Figure 4.4.
The LoS propagation path has length r0 that can be calculated as
	
=
+
2
2
0
0
0
r
x
z 	
(4.15)
Consequently, the LoS propagation delay is obtained as
	
=
0
0
r
c
τ
	
(4.16)
where c is the speed of light. Reflected waves with excess delay t will travel a path 
length given by

164	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
	
=
+
0
( )
k
r
c
τ
τ	
(4.17)
Hence, the ellipsoid shown in Figure 4.4, with Tx and Rx as foci, is defined by the set of 
points for which the sum of the distance from the Tx and the distance from the Rx equals 
k(t). All the scatterers located inside the ellipsoid generate a total path length smaller 
than k(t). For this reason, a reflected ray with an excess delay smaller than t must be 
associated with a scatter S located inside the ellipsoid. Since the scatterers are mainly 
tall buildings, trees, hills, and so on, they cannot be too high (above a certain height h, 
there are no scatterers). Thus scatterers can be assumed to be uniformly distributed in 
a thin layer close to the ground. As a result, the volume V(t ) containing obstacles that 
cause scattered rays with the excess delay smaller than t  is the intersection of the ellip-
soid shown in Figure 4.4 and the space between the ground and the z = h plane. More 
formally, the volume V(t ) is defined as the set of points (x, y, z) that satisfy
	
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
(
)
(
)
( ) 0
x
x
y
z
x
y
z
z
k
z
h
τ
-
+
+
+
+
+
-
<
,
<
<
	
(4.18)
The volume V(t ) is obtained by integrating the area A(z,t ) of the ellipse for z 
varying from 0 to h,  and the result is
	
-
+
é
ù
=
-
-
ê
ú
ë
û
+
3
2
0
0
2
3
0
( )(
) 4
( )
2
( )
3
4 (
( ))
w
r
c
V
h
z h
w
h
z
w
π
τ
τ
τ
τ
τ
	
(4.19)
where w(t ) = c2t 2 + 2r0ct.
The cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the excess delay Fps(t ) can be cal-
culated as the ratio between the volume V(t ) and the volume that corresponds to 
the maximum excess delay of the system, V(tm),
	
=
( )
( )
(
)
PS
m
V
F
V
τ
τ
τ
	
(4.20)
Figure 4.4  Multipath channel model for A-to-G channels.

4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G Radio Channels	
165
The knowledge of the cdf of the excess delay allows us to evaluate the average 
number of echoes n(t) having excess delay t. The power of a single echo having 
excess delay t, Ps(t) can be evaluated using a free-space model with modified path 
lengths. The power delay profile of the system can then be obtained as the product 
of n(t) and the power Ps(t); that is,
	
( )
( ) ( )
s
P
n
P
=
	
(4.21)
4.2.5  Three-Dimensional Model for MIMO A-to-G Multipath Fading Channels
The design of high-speed A-to-G communication systems often requires the use of mul-
tiple antennas as well as multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) diversity techniques. 
To address this problem, a 3-D model for MIMO A-to-G frequency-flat multipath fad­
ing channels is proposed in [33]. This model considers outdoor radio propagation where 
direct path and single-bounced reflections are present. The MIMO channel is described 
by an LR × LT matrix H(t) = [hij(t)]LR × TR of complex low-pass faded envelopes.
Figure 4.5 shows the geometry of the 3-D cylinder model for a MIMO A-to-G 
channel with LT = LR = 2 antenna elements. This elementary 2 × 2 antenna con-
figuration is used later to construct linear multielement antenna arrays. The spacing 
between two adjacent antenna elements at the transmitter Tx and the receiver Rx is 
denoted by δT and δR, respectively. The Tx and Rx antenna array heights are denoted 
HT and HR, respectively; angles θT and θR in Figure 4.5 describe the orientation of 
the Tx and Rx antenna array in the x-y plane, respectively; and angle ψR describes 
the elevation of the Rx’s antenna array relative to the x-y plane, respectively. It is 
assumed that the elevation angle of the Tx’s antenna array is small compared to the 
elevation angle of the Tx and can be neglected. Note also that HT >> HR and the 
elevation angle of the transmitter relative to the receiver can be approximated as
	
æ
ö
»
è
ø
arctan
T
T
H
D
β
 	
(4.22)
where D is the horizontal distance between the Tx and the Rx.
The cylinder model assumes that the Tx is highly elevated (i.e., a stratospheric plat-
form) and free of local scatterers. On the other hand, the Rx is on the ground and 
surrounded by local scatterers. Around the receiver, N → ¥ fixed omnidirectional 
scatterers lie inside of a cylinder of radius RSmax. The nth scatterer is denoted S(n), the 
distance between the scatterer’s projection to the x-y plane and Or is denoted d(Sˆ(n), 
OR) = 
( )
n
s
R
Î (0, RSmax], and its height is denoted d(Sˆ(n), S(n)) = 
( )
n
s
H
 Î (0, HSmax], where 
RSmax and HSmax represent the radius and the height of the cylinder, respectively. 
Note that HSmax << Ht and that the elevation angle of the nth scatterers relative to 
OR is given by
	
æ
ö
»
ç
÷
è
ø
( )
( )
( )
arctan
n
n
S
S
n
S
H
R
β
	
(4.23)
Note that the cylinder model assumes almost the same geometry as the model in 
Section 4.2.4. For HSmax << HT , the volume V(τ) can be approximated by a cylinder 
because V(τ) is a small horizontal slice of the ellipsoid, and the vertical curvature of 
the surface at the circumference of the slice can be neglected. The Tx and Rx are mov-
ing with speeds uT and uR in directions described by angles γt and γR, respectively. 

166	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
Since the aircraft flies in a circle, vT is related to the angular velocity of the transmit-
ter. Then, we can observe that
	
2
T
T
T
v
R
R
T
ω
π
=
=
/
	
(4.24)
where ω is the angular frequency, T is the period, and Rt is the radius of the rota-
tion. Therefore, γt is always perpendicular to Rt.
In Figure 4.5, angle 
( )
n
T
α
 is the azimuth angle of departure (AAoD) of the waves 
that impinge on scatterer S(n) and angle 
( )
n
R
α
 is the azimuth angle of arrival (AAoA) 
of the waves that bounce off the scatterer S(n). It is assumed that 
( )
n
T
α
, 
( )
n
R
α
, 
( )
n
S
R
, 
( )
n
S
H
, 
and 
( )
n
S
β
 are random variables. From Figure 4.5, we can observe that 
( )
n
T
α
 is de-
pendent on 
( )
n
R
α
 and 
( )
n
S
R
, while 
( )
n
S
β
 is dependent on 
( )
n
S
R
 and 
( )
n
S
H
. However, 
( )
n
R
α
, 
( )
n
S
R
, and 
( )
n
S
H
 are independent random variables. Finally, 
LoS
Rq
α
 denotes the AAoA 
of the LoS path (not shown in Figure 4.5 to reduce clutter).
This model assumes that the radius of the cylinder RSmax is much smaller than the 
distance D (i.e., RSmax << D). Furthermore, it is assumed that the spacings between 
antennas (δT and δR) are much smaller than the distance 
( )
n
S
R
 (i.e., δT, δR << min 
{
( )
n
S
R
}), which allows us to approximate the AAoD of the LoS as 
LoS
Tp
α
 ≈ π. For ease 
of reference, the parameters of the proposed model are summarized in Table 4.l.
The complex faded envelope under frequency-flat fading can therefore be written 
as a superposition of LoS and NLoS rays. For the channel between the pth transmit and 
qth receive antenna, the channel impulse response is [33]
Figure 4.5  Three-dimensional model for MIMO A-to-G channels with Lt = Lr = 2 antenna  
elements.

4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G Radio Channels	
167
	
( )
( )
( )
LoS
NLoS
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
h
t
=
+
	
(4.25)
where the respective components are
	
2
2
( )
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
j
f
t j
d
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
pq
h
t
a
e
π
π
λ
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
W
	
(4.26)
	
( )
( )
( )
2
2
( )
1
( )
lim
n
n
n
pq
pq
N
j
f
t j
d
j
n
NLoS
pq
pq
pq
N
n
h
t
a
e
π
π
φ
λ
-
+
®¥ =
=
W
å
	
(4.27)
where Wpq is the power associated with the pqth planar wave. For  
max{dT, dR} << min {
( )
n
S
R
}, we can assume that the total power is equally split among 
all antenna elements (i.e., Wpq = W for all p Î {1,..., Lt} and q Î {1,..., Lr}). The  
channel gains, Doppler shift frequencies, phases, and path lengths in this model can 
be calculated as follows:
Channel gains
• 
. The channel gains in this model are normalized such that the 
ensemble averages of the ( )
n
pq
a
’s are given by
	
[
]
1
=
=
å
2
( )
1
N
n
pq
n
E a
	
(4.28)
In addition, Kpq describes how the total signal power between the pth transmit 
and the qth receive antenna is split between the LoS and NLoS components: 
the power allocated to the LoS component between the pth transmit and qth 
receive antenna is Kpq /(1 + Kpq), while the total power allocated to the NLoS 
components between the pth transmit and qth receive antenna is 1/(1 + Kpq). 
For max{δ T, δR} << min{Rt, Rr}, we can assume that the Ricean fading factor 
is the same for all antenna elements (i.e., Kpq = K for all p Î {1,..., Lt} and q Î 
{1, ..., Lr}). Having all this in mind, the channel gains can be written as follows:
Table 4.1  Definition of the Parameters Used in the Cylinder Geometrical Model
D
The distance between the horizontal projections of the centers of the Tx and Rx 
antenna arrays. 
RSmax, HSmax
The radius and the height of the cylinder with scatterers, respectively.
dT, dR
The spacing between two adjacent antenna elements at the Tx and Rx, respectively.
qT, qR
The azimuth angles of the transmit and the receive antenna elements (relative to 
the x-axis), respectively.
yR
The elevation angle of receive antenna elements (relative to the x-y plane).
vT, vR
The velocities of the transmitter and receiver, respectively.
gT, gR
Moving directions of the transmitter and receiver, respectively.
( )
( )
,
n
n
R
T
α
α
The azimuth angle of departure (AAoD) and the azimuth angle of arrival (AAoA), 
respectively.
bT
The elevation angle of the transmitter (relative to the x-y plane).
HT , HR, HS
(n)
The heights of the transmit antenna array, the receive antenna array, and the nth  
scatterer, respectively. 

168	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
	
=
+ 1
LoS
pq
K
a
K
	
(4.29)
	
=
+
( )
1
1
1
n
pq
a
K
N
	
(4.30)
Doppler shifts
• 
. Doppler shifts depend on the geometrical relation between 
directions of movement of Tx and Rx (g T and g R) and the directions deter-
mined by the angles of departure and angles of arrival. For this model, the 
Doppler shifts can be written as
	
=
-
-
+
-
Tmax
Rmax
cos(
)
cos(
)
LoS
LoS
LoS
pq
T
R
Rq
Rq
f
f
f
π
α
γ
α
γ
	
(4.31)
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
max
Rmax
( )
( )
Tmax
( )
( )
( )
Rmax
cos(
)
cos(
)cos
cos(
sin
sin
/
)
cos(
)(cos(arctan(
/
))
n
n
n
n
T
T
R
R
T
S
n
n
T
T
R
S
n
n
n
R
R
S
S
f
f
f
f
R
D
f
H
R
α
γ
α
γ
β
γ
α
γ
α
γ
=
-
+
-
=
+
+
-
	
(4.32)
where frequencies fTmax = vT/l and fRmax = vR/l are the maximum Doppler 
frequencies associated with the Tx and Rx, respectively, and l is the carrier 
wavelength. For max{dT, dR} << min{
( )
n
S
R
}, the LoS AAoAs are approximately 
equal to p (i.e., 
LoS
Rq
α
π
=
).
Phases
• 
. This model assumes that the phase shifts 
( )
n
pq
φ
 are random variables 
uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 2p) and independent from any other 
random variable in this model.
Path lengths
• 
. From Figure 4.5, the path lengths of the respective waves can 
be written as
	
=
( , )
LoS
pq
d
d p q 	
(4.33)
	
=
+
( )
( , )
( , )
n
pq
d
d p n
d n q 	
(4.34)
where d(a, b) denotes the distance between two points a and b. As pointed out 
earlier, this model assumes that RSmax << D (local scattering condition). Under 
this assumption, the distances d(p,q), d(p,n), and d(n,q) can be approximated 
as follows [33]:
	
-
+
»
1
1
( , )
cos
T
R
T
D
D
D
d p q
β
	
(4.35)
	
-
-
»
( )
( )
1
2
( , )
cos
n
n
T
T
R
S
T
D
D
D
R
d p n
α
β
	
(4.36)

4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G Radio Channels	
169
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
( )
2
3
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
2
( )
( )
(
3
( , )
/ cos
cos
cos
sin
sin
cos
/cos(arctan(
/
))
cos
cos(arctan(
/
))
sin(arctan(
/
))
sin
cos(arctan(
/
n
n
n
n
R
R
S
S
S
n
n
n
R
R
R
S
S
n
n
n
S
S
S
n
n
n
R
R
S
S
n
n
R
S
S
n
n
R
R
S
S
d n q
R
D
D
D
R
H
R
D
H
R
D
H
R
D
H
R
β
α
β
β
α
β
α
α
»
-
-
-
=
-
-
-
)))
n
	
(4.37)
where parameters p and q take values from the sets p Î{1,..., Lt} and q Î{1,..., Lr}, 
respectively, and
	
=
+
-
1
(0.5
0.5
)
cos
T
t
T
T
D
L
p δ
θ 	
(4.38)
	
2
(0.5
0.5
)
sin
/
T
t
T
T
D
L
p
D
δ
θ
=
+
-
	
(4.39)
	
1
(0.5
0.5
)
cos
cos
R
r
R
R
R
D
L
q δ
θ
ψ
=
+
-
	
(4.40)
	
=
+
-
2
(0.5
0.5
)
sin
R
r
R
R
D
L
q δ
ψ 	
(4.41)
	
=
+
-
3
(0.5
0.5
)
sin
cos
R
r
R
R
R
D
L
q δ
θ
ψ 	
(4.42)
4.2.6  Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of A-to-G Multipath 
Fading Channels
Using the model described in Section 4.2.5, we can now derive the key temporal and 
spatial characteristics of A-to-G frequency-flat multipath fading channels.
4.2.6.1  Space-Time Correlation Function
Assuming a 3-D nonisotropic scattering environment, we derive the space-time cor-
relation function (ST-CF) of the complex faded envelope in (4.25). The normalized 
space-time correlation function between two complex faded envelopes hpq(t) and 
( )
pq
h
t

 is defined as
	
,
[
( )
(
) ]
(
,
, )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
pq
pq
pq pq
T
R
pq
pq
E h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
τ
δ
δ
τ
τ
*
*
+
=
+



 
	
(4.43)
where (×)* denotes complex conjugate operation, E[×] is the statistical expectation op-
erator, Var[×] is the statistical variance operator. Since 
( )
LoS
pq
h
t  and 
( )
N LoS
pq
h
t  are indepen-
dent complex Gaussian random processes with zero means, (4.43) can be simplified to

170	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
	
,
,
,
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
LoS
NLoS
pq pq
T
R
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
R
R
R
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
δ
δ
τ
=
+





	
(4.44)
where 
,
(
,
, )
LoS
T
R
pq pq
R
δ
δ
τ


 and 
,
(
,
, )
N LoS
T
R
pq pq
R
δ
δ
τ


 denote the normalized ST-CFs of the 
LoS and NLoS components, respectively.
To calculate the normalized spatial-temporal autocorrelation function, we start 
from (4.44) and follow the derivations in [33]. The LoS component can be obtained 
as follows
	
max
max
,
2
2
(
)
cos
(
)
cos
cos
2
cos
2
cos
E[
( )
(
) ]
(
,
, )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
1
T
T
R
R
R
T
T
R
R
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
LoS
T
R
pq pq
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
j
p p
j
q q
j
f
j
f
h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
K
e
K
e
π
π
δ
θ
δ
θ
ψ
λ
λ
πτ
γ
πτ
γ
τ
δ
δ
τ
τ
∗
∗
−
−
−
−
+
=
+
=
+
×





	
(4.45)
Similarly, the NLoS component can be obtained as follows
	
( )
( )
sin
max
( )
( )
( )
( )
max
,
1
sin
2
cos
,
,
2
cos(
)cos arct
E[
( )
(
) ]
(
,
, )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
1
1
lim
1
E
n
n
T
R
S
T
T
n
n
n
R
S
S
n
R
R
R
NLoS
NLoS
pq
pq
NLoS
T
R
pq pq
NLoS
NLoS
pq
pq
N
N
n
R
j
f
D
R
H
j
f
h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
K
N
e
e
γ
α
πτ
γ
α
πτ
α
γ
τ
δ
δ
τ
τ
∗
∗
→∞
=


−
+




−
−
+
=
+
=
+





×
∑



(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
an
/
2 (
)
sin
sin
2 (
)
cos
cos
cos
2 (
)
sin
sin arctan
/
2 (
)
sin
cos
sin
cos arctan
/
2 (
)
cos
n
n
S
S
n
n
T
T
T
T
R
S
T
T
n
n
R
R
S
S
n
n
n
R
R
R
R
S
S
R
H
R
p p
R
p p
j
j
D
q q
H
R
j
q q
H
R
j
q q
j
e
e
e
e
e
π
δ
θ
α
π
δ
θ
λ
β
λ
β
π
δ
ψ
λ
π
δ
θ
ψ
α
λ
π
δ
θ






−
−


−






−




−
×
×
×
×





(
)
( )
( )
( )
cos
cos
cos arctan
/
n
n
n
R
R
R
S
S
H
R
ψ
α
λ









	
(4.46)

4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G Radio Channels	
171
The model in [33] assumes that the number of scatterers is infinite. Thus, the dis-
crete variables 
( )
n
R
α
, 
( )
n
S
R
, and 
( )
n
S
H
 can be replaced with continuous random variables 
aR, RS, and HS, respectively. Since these parameters are random variables, they 
can be characterized with a joint probability density function (pdf) p(aR,RS,HS). 
However, since aR, RS, and HS are independent, the joint pdf p(aR,RS,HS) can be  
decomposed into the product of three pdfs, (i.e., p(aR)p(RS)p(HS)). Hence, the 
space-time correlation function of the NLoS component becomes
	
max
max
max
max
,
0
0
sin
sin
2
cos
2 (
)
cos
2
cos(
)cos[arctan(
/
)]
cos
2 (
)
sin
sin
2 (
cos
(
,
, )
1
(
) (
) (
)
1
S
S
S
T
R
T
T
T
T
R
R
R
S
S
T
T
T
S
R
T
NLoS
T
R
pq pq
H
R
R
S
S
R
j
f
D
p p
j
j
f
H
R
p p
R
q
j
j
D
R
p
p R p H
K
e
e
e
e
e
π
π
γ
α
πτ
γ
π
δ
θ
πτ
α
γ
λ
β
π
δ
θ
α
π
λ
β
δ
δ
τ
α
-
æ
ö
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
-
-
-
-
-
=
=
+
´
´
´
ò
ò
ò




[
]
)
sin
sin arctan(
)
2 (
)
sin
cos
sin
cos[arctan(
/
)]
2 (
)
cos
cos
cos
cos[arctan(
/
)]
R
R
S
S
R
R
R
R
S
S
R
R
R
R
S
S
q
H R
q q
H
R
j
q q
H
R
j
R
S
S
e
e
d
dR dH
δ
ψ
λ
π
δ
θ
ψ
α
λ
π
δ
θ
ψ
α
λ
α
/
-
-
´
´


	
(4.47)
Several different distributions, such as uniform [34], von Mises [35], and Laplacian 
[36], were used in prior work to characterize the azimuth angle aR. In [33], the von 
Mises pdf is used because it approximates many of the aforementioned distributions 
and is empirically justified in urban and suburban areas [28]. The von Mises pdf can be 
written as [37]
	
-
=
0
exp[
cos(
)]
(
)
(2
(
))
R
R
R
R
R
k
p
I k
α
µ
α
π
	
(4.48)
where aR Î[-p, p) represents AAoAs, I0(·) is the zeroth-order modified Bessel function of 
the first kind, mR Î[-p, p) is the mean angle at which the scatterers are distributed, and kR 
controls the spread of scatterers around the mean. The distance RS is characterized using 
the hyperbolic pdf [38], which is empirically justified in [39]. This approach is more re-
alistic than other commonly used distributions such as the uniform distribution [27, 32],  
because it allows scatterers to assume higher concentration in a specific (determined by a 
parameter) area in the vicinity of the Rx. The hyperbolic pdf is defined as [38]
	
=
<
£
max
2
max
(
)
,
0
tanh(
)cosh (
)
S
S
S
S
S
a
p R
R
R
aR
aR
	
(4.49)
In this hyperbolic pdf, parameter a controls the spread (standard deviation) of the 
scatterers around the Rx, and its applicable value is in the interval (0,1). Decreasing 
the value of a increases the spread of the pdf of RS. As the elevation angle of the 
platform decreases, the effective scatterers are expected to be more widely distrib-
uted, which corresponds to decrease in value a.

172	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
Depending on the environment (urban or suburban) and the geographical lo-
cation, several different distributions, such as Gaussian [40], log-normal [41, 42], 
and Rayleigh distribution [43], are used to characterize the hight of scatterers HS. 
In [33], the lognormal pdf is used, which is defined as
	
-
-
=
<
£
2
mean
2
[ln(
) ln(
)]
2
max
(
)
,
0
2
S
S
H
H
S
S
S
S
e
p H
H
H
H
σ
σ
π
	
(4.50)
where parameters HSmean and s are the mean and the standard deviation of HS, 
respectively.
Finally, using (4.48)–(4.50) and the equality 
sin( )
cos( )
2
2
0
2
(
)
a
c
b
c
e
dc
I
a
b
π
π
π
+
−
=
+
∫
(equation 3.338-4 in [44]), the space-time correlation function of the NLoS com-
ponent becomes [33]
	
(
)
max
max
2
2
1
2 0
3
4
,
0
0
(
,
, )
S
S
H
R
NLoS
T
R
S
S
pq pq
R
r
r I
r
r
dR dH
δ
δ
τ  = 
+
 
ò
ò

	
(4.51)
where parameters r1, r2, r3, and r4 are, respectively,
	
max
(
)
cos
2
cos
cos
1
max
0
2
tanh(
)
(
)(
1)
T
T
T
T
T
p p
j
f
S
R
a e
r
aR
I k
K
δ
θ
π
τ
γ
λ
β
σ
π
-
 
é
ù
- 
 
ê
ú
 
ë
û
×
= 
+

 	
(4.52)
	
2
mean
2
[ln(
) ln(
)]
2 (
)
sin
sin[arctan(
/
)]
2
2
2
cosh (
)
S
S
R
R
S
S
H
H
q q
H R
j
S
S
e
e
r
H
aR
π
δ
ψ
σ
λ
 
-
-
 
- 
=  

	
(4.53)
	
3
max
max
2 (
)
sin
2
sin
/
cos
2 (
)
sin
cos
cos[arctan(
/
)]/
2
sin
cos[arctan(
/
)]
sin
T
T
S
T
T
S
T
R
R
R
S
S
R
R
S
S
R
R
p
p
R
r
j
j
f
R D
D
j
q
q
H R
j
f
H R
k
π
δ
θ
πτ
γ
λ
β
π
δ
θ
ψ
λ
πτ
γ
µ
-
=
-
 
+ 
-
- 
 
+
 


	
(4.54)
	
4
max
2 (
)
cos
cos
cos[arctan(
/
)]/
2
cos
cos[arctan(
/
)]
cos
R
R
R
S
S
R
R
S
S
R
R
r
j
q
q
H
R
j
f
H
R
k
π
δ
θ
ψ
λ
πτ
γ
µ
=
-
-
 
+

	
(4.55)
To obtain the space-time correlation function of the NLoS component, the integral in 
(4.51) has to be numerically evaluated, since there is no closed-form solution. Although 
this was not described in [33], a closed-form expression for the space-time correlation 
function of the NLoS component can be obtained if the elevation angles of arrival bS 
are directly modeled as the random variables instead of using two random variables RS 
and HS to define the elevation angles of arrival as in (4.23). Prior work uses several dif-
ferent scatterer distributions, such as uniform, cosine, and Gaussian, to characterize the 
random elevation angles of arrival 
( )
n
S
β
. Here, we use the cosine pdf [45]
	
cos
,
4
2
2
(
)
0
, otherwise
S
S
Sm
Sm
Sm
S
p
π
π β
π
β
β
β
β
β
ì
æ
ö    
£
£
ï
ç
÷
è
ø
= í
ï
  
î
	
(4.56)
where bSm is the maximum elevation angle.

4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G Radio Channels	
173
Then, the space-time correlation function of the NLoS component can be 
­obtained as
	
(
)
max
2 (
)
2
cos
,
2
2
2
0
0
2
cos
(
)
(
,
, )
4
(
)
1
1
(
)(
1)
Tx
T
T
Sm
Rz
j
p p d
j
f
NLoS
T
R
pq pq
Sm
Rz
R
q
q d
R
e
q
q d
I
x
y
I k
K
π
π τ
γ
λ
π β
λ
δ
δ
τ
β
λ
−
+
 


−




=
−


−



×
+
+




	
(4.57)
where the parameters x and y are
	
max
(2
/ )(
)
2
cos
cos
Rx
R
R
R
R
x
j
q
q d
j
f
k
π λ
πτ
γ
µ
=
-
+
 
+

	
(4.58)
	
(
)
max
max
2
(
)
/
(
)
(
/
)/
sin
(
/
)sin
sin
Ry
Ty
S
R
R
T
S
T
R
R
y
j
q
q d
p
p d
R
D
f
f
R
D
k
π
λ
λ
τ
γ
γ
µ
=
-
+
-
éë
ù
+
+
+
û


 	
(4.59)
and dTx = dT cosqT , dTy = dT sin qT, dRx = dR cosyRcosqR, dRy = dR cosyR sinqR, dRz = 
dRsinyR.
As an example, Figure 4.6 depicts the A-to-G spatial correlation as a function of 
the antenna separation at the Tx for different degrees of local scattering in the azi-
muth domain around the Rx. The curves in Figure 4.6 are obtained with the following  
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 kR=0
 kR=2
 kR=5
 kR=10
Envelope of normalized spatial correlation R( T, R=0)
T/  
Figure 4.6  Envelope of the spatial correlation function as a function of the antenna separation at 
the Tx for different degrees of local scattering in the azimuth domain around the Rx.

174	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
parameters: l = 0.3m, K = 0, qT = qR = 90°, yR = 0°, dR = 0, dT Î {0,1,5,10,50}· 
l, g T = gR = 90°, uT » 0 m/s, uR = 30 m/s, kR Î {0,1,5,10}, mT = mR = 0, DS = 0.01,  
bSm = 60°, and Lt = Lr = 2. From Figure 4.6 we can observe that, as kR increases, 
(the scattering becomes increasingly nonisotropic), the separation at Tx needed 
for uncorrelated subchannels also increases. For highly concentrated scatterers 
around the mean angle (i.e., for kR = 10) the required separation at the Tx for 
uncorrelated subchannels is dT > 50l. The effect of nonisotropic scattering on 
the correlation at the receiver is the same as that described in [35] for fixed-to-
mobile cellular systems. In particular, as kR increases, the correlation significantly 
increases.
4.2.6.2  Space-Doppler Power Spectral Density (sD-psd)
The space-Doppler power spectral density (sD-psd) of the complex faded en-
velope hpq(t) is the Fourier transform of the space-time correlation function
,
(
,
, )
pq pq
T
R
R
δ
δ
τ

. From (4.44) follows that the sD-psd is a sum of the sD-psd 
functions of the LoS and NLoS components; that is,
	
,
,
,
( )
( )
( )
N LoS
LoS
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
S
v
S
v
S
v
=
+





	
(4.60)
After computing the Fourier transform of the space-time correlations of the LoS 
and NLoS components in (4.45) and (4.57), respectively, the sD-psds of the LoS and 
NLoS components can be written as
	
{
}
2 [(
)
cos
(
)
cos
cos
]
,
,
max
max
( )
(
,
, )
1
(
cos
cos
)
T
T
R
R
R
j
p p
q q
LoS
LoS
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
T
T
R
R
K
S
v
R
e
K
v
f
f
π
δ
θ
δ
ψ
θ
λ
τ
δ
δ
τ
δ
γ
γ
−
−
−
=
=
+
×
+
−






F
	
(4.61)
	
{
}
,
,
2
0
max
2
max
max
max
( )
(
,
, )
2
cos
(
)
sin
1
(
)(
1)
4
(
)
sin
1
exp{ 2 (
cos
)
2
}
1
[(
cos
)/
]
cosh (
sin(
)
2
sin
N LoS
NLoS
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
Sm
R
R
R
Sm
R
R
T
T
NLoS
R
T
T
R
R
R
R
x
R
S
v
R
q
q
I k
K
q
q
j
v
f
A
j
p
f
v
f
f
k
j
q
τ
δ
δ
τ
π β
δ
ψ
λ
β
δ
ψ
λ
π
γ
π
π
γ
µ
γ
π
γ
=


−




=
+
−


−



−
+
×
−
−
×
−
+






F
2
max
max
2
cos
)
1
[(
cos
)/
]
y
R
T
T
R
j
q
v
f
f
π
γ
γ
−


×
−
−

	
(4.62)

4.2  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in A-to-G Radio Channels	
175
where F{·} is the Fourier transform, cosh(·) is the hyperbolic cosine, d(·) is the Dirac 
delta function, ½v + fRmaxcosgR½£ fTmax,½v – fTmaxcosg T½ £ fRmax, and
	
(
)
cos
/
T
T
p
p
p δ
θ
λ
=
- 
	
(4.63)
	
ANLoS = (2pqx cos gR + 2pqy singR – jkR cos(gR – mR))/2p fRmax	
(4.64)
	
(
)
cos
cos
/
x
R
R
R
q
q
q δ
ψ
θ
λ
=
- 
	
(4.65)
	
=
-
+
-
[
]
max
(
)
cos
sin
(
)
sin
/
/
y
R
R
R
T
T
S
q
q
q
p
p
R
D
δ
ψ
θ
δ
θ
λ


	
(4.66)
As an example, Figure 4.7 plots a SISO sD-psd, assuming 3-D nonisotropic scatter-
ing and LoS conditions between the Tx and Rx. This sD-psd is typical for A-to-G 
propagation environments. Here, we assume that the wavelength is l = 0.3m, the 
Ricean parameter is K = 2, the transmitter and the receiver directions are gT = gR = 
90°, the transmitter velocity is vT » 0 m/s, the receiver velocity is vR = 30 m/s, the 
spread around scatterers around the receiver is kR = 2, and the elevation angle is 
bSm = 60°. The results show this spectrum is similar to the U-shaped spectrum of 
F-to-M cellular channels.
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
 SISO Doppler spectrum
Normalized power spectral density [dB]
Doppler frequency  [Hz]
Figure 4.7  The normalized sD-psd in an A-to-G environment.

176	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
4.2.6.3  Level Crossing Rate (LCR)
The level crossing rate of the channel envelope can be calculated using similar rea-
soning as in Section 3.1.8.4. The LCR for LoS conditions (Ricean fading, correlated 
in-phase and quadrature components) can be written as [46]
	
ë
û
´
+
 
 
é
ù
2
2
0
2
/2
(
)/(2
)
3/ 2
0
0
0
(
sin )
2
( )
cosh
cos
sin
erf(
sin )
R
b
R
R
L R
e
b
b
e
d
π
δ
ξδ
θ
χ
δ
θ
π
πξδ
θ
ξδ
θ
θ
-
+
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
è
ø
ò
	
(4.67)
where cosh(·) is the hyperbolic cosine function and erf(·) is the error function. The 
rest of the parameters are 
2
2
0
1
/(
1),
/
K K
b
b
b
δ
χ
=
+
=
-
, 
1
0
(2
/
)/ 2
LoS
pq
f
b b
ξ
π
χ
=
 
-
, 
and
	
2
2
0
( )
( )
i
q
b
h t
h t
é
ù
é
ù
E
= E
ë
û
ë
û

	
(4.68)
	
1
( )
( )
( ) ( )
i
q
q
i
b
h t h t
h t h t
é
ù
é
ù
E
= E
ë
û
ë
û



	
(4.69)
	
2
2
2
( )
( )
i
q
b
h t
h t
é
ù
é
ù
E
= E
ë
û
ë
û



	
(4.70)
where 
( )
ih t

 and h
.
q(t) are first derivatives of hi(t) and hq(t) with respect to time t. 
Note that the LCR for the NLoS conditions can be obtained by setting parameter K 
to zero. When 3-D nonisotropic scattering is characterized by pdfs given in (4.48), 
and (4.56), the parameters b0, b1, and b2 can be written as
	
0
1
2(
1)
b
K
=
+
	
(4.71)
	
é
ù
ë
û
+
- D
ê
ú
=
-
[
]
2
1
1
0
max
2
2
0
1
0
2
max
2
2
2
(
)
cos
2
cos(
)
(
)
4
(
)
cos
sin
sin
(
)
cos(
)
cos(
)
2
4(
)
R
Sm
R
R
R
R
Sm
R
T
S
T
R
R
S
Sm
S
Sm
T
S
Sm
I k
b
b
f
I k
I k
I k
f
π
β
π
µ
γ
π
β
γ
γ
µ
π
β
β
π
β
ìïí
-
ïî
é
ù
ë
û
ü
D
+
D
ï
´
ý
-
D
ïþ
	
(4.72)

4.3  Simulators for Air-to-Ground Radio Channels	
177
	
´
+
D
é
ù
ë
û
D
+
-
D
cos[2(
)]
2
32(
)
S
Sm
S
β
π
π
β
-
-
´
D
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
D -
+
D +
´
D -
+
D +
+
-
(
)
(
)
[
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
0
max
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
2
2
2
2
4
cos(2
)
16
(
)
cos(2(
))
(
)
(2 )
2
(
)
2
16
4
8
4(
)
4 8
16
16(
)
8
(
)
32(
)
cos((
1)
)
cos((
1)
)
c
Sm
R
R
R
R
Sm
R
R
Sm
S
S
Sm
Sm
Sm
S
S
S
Sm
Sm
Sm
Sm
Sm
S
Sm
S
Sm
I k
I k
b
b
f
I k
π
β
π
β
µ
γ
π
π
β
β
β
π
β
β
π
β
π
β
π
β
β
β
β
ì
+
-
ï
=
í
-
ïî
+ D
-
+
D
+
-
-
-
D
+
D
+
D
+
]
2
max
max
0
1
max
max
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
os((
1)
)
cos((
1)
)
(
)
sin
sin(2
)
sin
(
)
(
)
2
cos
cos(
)
(
)
4
16(
)
cos[2(
)]
4
S
Sm
S
Sm
R
R
T
S
T
R
R
R
R
R
R
T
T
R
R
R
Sm
S
Sm
S
Sm
I k
f
f
I k
I k
f
f
I k
β
β
γ
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
γ
π
β
β
π
π
é
æ
ö
ê
ë
ù
úû
é
+ ê
-
D
êë
D
+
-
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
max
max
0
1
2
max
0
16(
)
(
)
cos(2
)
(
)
cos
(
) sin
2
(
)
(
)
sin(2
)sin
(
)
S
Sm
R
R
R
S
T
T
T
T
R
R
S
T
R
T
R
I k
I k
f
f
I k
I k
f
I k
β
µ
γ
γ
γ
µ
ù
ú
é
ù
D
ú
ë
û û
-
é
êë
ü
ù
-
D
ý
úûþ
	
	
	
	
(4.73)
where DS = RSmax/D.
As an example, Figure 4.8 plots a LCR, assuming 3-D nonfisotropic scattering 
and LoS conditions between the Tx and Rx. Here, we use the same model param-
eters as in Figure 4.7.
4.3  Simulators for Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
Simulation of A-to-G channels is a crucial part of characterization of A-to-G sys-
tems. The channel models detailed in Section 4.2.2 are very useful mathematical 
tools for understanding propagation mechanisms and for statistical characteriza-
tion of channels. However, these models are not practical for simulation. Some of 
them have long simulation times, while the others assume an infinite number of 
scatterers, making these models impractical for simulators. We now describe mod-
els that can be used for simulation of A-to-G channels.
The following approaches are available when simulating the A-to-G fading 
channels:

178	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
Markov chains
• 
. Markov chains are often used to model A-to-G chan-
nels [31]. As the transmitter and the receiver move from one location 
to another, the environment properties vary resulting in a nonstationary 
statistical character of the received signal. Experimental data, however, 
indicate that A-to-G channels can be viewed as quasi-stationary The quasi- 
stationary nature of the model is based on the assumption of slowly vary-
ing environment characteristics such as elevation angle, obstacle type, and 
surface roughness. The environment attributes are assumed to be constant 
within a small area. Consequently, channels can be viewed as operating 
in one of a finite number of possible channel states and can be modeled 
as a finite state Markov model, as proposed in [20, 21]. These models can 
accurately generate amplitude and phase channel distortions. However, 
Markov chains are only suitable for modeling very slowly fading chan-
nels or in applications that require analysis over only a short duration of 
time.
Sum-of-sinusoids Method
• 
. SoS models generate the channel waveform by 
superimposing a finite number of properly selected sinusoids. These models 
have low complexity and produce channel waveforms that can model both 
fast and slow variations of the channel with high accuracy. Due to these ad-
vantages, this chapter focuses on SoS models.
4.3.1  Sum-of-Sinusoids Simulators for A-to-G Channels
The propagation model for MIMO A-to-G channel described in Section 4.2.5 as-
sumes an infinite number of scatterers, which prevents practical implementation. 
It is desirable to design simulation model with a finite (preferably small) number 
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
 Level crossing rate
Normalized level crossing rate L(R)/fTmax
R [dB]
Figure 4.8  The level crossing rate in an A-to-G environment.

4.3  Simulators for Air-to-Ground Radio Channels	
179
of scatterers, while still matching the statistical properties of the reference model. 
Assuming 3-D nonisotropic scattering and using the reference model described in 
Section 4.2.5, the following function can be used as a channel impulse response: 
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
Q
I
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
jh
t
=
+
 where
	
+
+
+
 
-
+
+
 
D
+
D
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
( )
,
1
( )
( )
max
( )
( )
max
,
(
1
2 )
(
1
2 )
( )
cos
2
sin
sin
cos
cos
2
cos
cos
cos 2
(
)
(
1
2 )
(
1
2 )
A
E
NLoS
N
N
t
r
I
T
R
pq
A
E
n i
n
i
T
S
T
T
S
R
S
n
i
R
R
n i
R
S
LoS
LoS
LoS
R
T
t
r
Tx
Rx
L
p
L
q
h
t
D
D
N N
t f
t f
t f
f
L
p
L
q
d
d
ρ
π
π
λ
λ
π
γ
α
γ
β
π
α
γ
β
φ
ρ
π
π
π
λ
λ
=
+
-
+
-
é
=
+
êë
ù
úû
é
êë
+
-
+
-
ù
+
-
û
å
ú
	
(4.74)
	
+
+
+
 
-
+
+
 
D
+
D
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
(
)
,
1
( )
( )
max
( )
( )
max
,
(
1
2 )
(
1
2 )
( )
sin
2
sin
sin
cos
cos
2
cos
cos
sin 2
(
)
(
1
2 )
(
1
2 )
A
E
NLoS
N
N
Q
t
r
T
R
pq
A
E
n i
n
i
T
S
T
T
S
R
S
n
i
R
R
n i
R
S
LoS
LoS
LoS
R
T
t
r
Tx
Rx
L
p
L
q
h
t
D
D
N N
t f
t f
t f
f
L
p
L
q
d
d
ρ
π
π
λ
λ
π
γ
α
γ
β
π
α
γ
β
φ
ρ
π
π
π
λ
λ
=
+
-
+
-
é
=
+
êë
ù
úû
é
êë
+
-
+
-
ù
+
-
û
å
ú
	
(4.75)
are the in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) components of the channel impulse re-
sponse. The rest of the parameters are
	
1
1
NLoS
K
ρ
=
+
	
(4.76)
	
1
LoS
K
K
ρ
=
+
	
(4.77)
	
( )
sin
n
T
Ty
S
Tx
R
D
d
d
α
=
D
+
	
(4.78)
	
( )
( )
( )
cos
sin
sin
n
n
i
R
Rx
Ry
Rz
R
R
S
D
d
d
d
α
α
β
=
+
+
	
(4.79)

180	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
	
max cos(
)
LoS
LoS
T
T
Rq
T
f
f
π
α
γ
=
-
-
	
(4.80)
	
max cos(
)
LoS
LoS
R
R
R
Rq
f
f
α
γ
=
-
	
(4.81)
	
cos
Tx
T
T
d
δ
θ
=
	
(4.82)
	
sin
Ty
T
T
d
δ
θ
=
	
(4.83)
	
cos
cos
Rx
R
R
R
d
δ
ψ
θ
=
	
(4.84)
	
cos
sin
Ry
R
R
R
d
δ
ψ
θ
=
	
(4.85)
	
sin
Rz
R
R
d
δ
ψ
=
	
(4.86)
The following two modeling methods that trade simulation precision for simulation 
speed and complexity are considered:
Deterministic MIMO 3-D SoS model
• 
. The deterministic SoS model needs 
only a single simulation trial to obtain a channel impulse response with de-
sired statistical properties. The AAoAs aR
(n) are modeled using the von Mises 
pdf and are generated as follows:
	
( )
1
0.5
n
R
A
n
F
N
α
-
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
è
ø
	
(4.87)
for n = 1,..., NA, where F(·)–1 denotes the inverse cumulative von Mises dis-
tribution function and is evaluated using the method from [47]. The EAoAs 
( )i
R
β
, are modeled using pdf in (4.56) and are generated as follows:
	
( )
2
2
1
arcsin
1
Sm
i
S
E
i
N
β
β
π
-
æ
ö
=
-
ç
÷
è
ø
	
(4.88)
for i = 1,..., NE. Phases fn,i are generated as independent uniform random 
variables on the interval [-p,p).
Statistical MIMO 3-D SoS model
• 
. The statistical SoS model generates chan-
nel realizations with statistical properties that vary with every simulation run 
but converge to the desired properties when averaged over a sufficient chan-
nel ensemble. The AAoAs and the EAoAs are generated as follows:
	
( )
1
1
A
n
R
A
n
F
N
ψ
α
-
+
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
è
ø
	
(4.89)
	
( )
2
2(
1)
arcsin
1
Sm
E
i
S
E
i
N
β
ψ
β
π
+
−


=
−




	
(4.90)

4.4  Summary	
181
for n = 1,...,NA and i = 1,...,NE. The parameters yA and yE are independent random 
variables uniformly distributed on the interval [0,1). The function F–1(·) denotes the 
inverse von Mises cumulative distribution function.
To illustrate how the statistical simulator works, we plot two different channel 
impulse responses that illustrate how changes in the receiver’s velocity impact the 
channel impulse response. We use the statistical simulator and select the following 
channel parameters: carrier frequency is 2 GHz, sampling frequency is 100 kHz, 
number of samples is 10,000, and distance between the transmitter and the receiver 
is 20,000 km. The isotropic and non-line-of-sight type of propagation is selected. 
The remaining simulator parameters are qT = qR = 90°, yR = 0°, dr = dt = 0, gT = 
gR = 90°, vT » 0 m/s, kR = 0, mT = mR = 0, DS = 0.01, bSm = 60°, Lt = Lr = 1, and uR Î 
{10 m/s, 30 m/s}. The results obtained for the channel impulse response are shown 
in Figure 4.9. The results show that, as the velocity of the receiver increases, the 
variability of the channel impulse response increases.
4.4  Summary
This chapter first briefly described the propagation principles that govern signal 
propagation in A-to-G channels, and then proceeded to describe important concepts 
of propagation modeling such as large-scale and small-scale fading effects. Then, 
statistical characterization of multipath propagation in A-to-G channels was pre-
sented, and several models and their statistics such as correlation function, Doppler 
spectrum, and level crossing rate were detailed. Finally, practical simulators, for 
A-to-G multipath fading channels were presented, with a small number of propa­
gation rays that still match the statistical properties of theoretical A-to-G channel 
models. Note that modeling of frequency-selective A-to-G channels and verification 
of A-to-G models against measurements is still an open area for research.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
 Channel impulse response for v=10 m/s
 Channel impulse response for v=30 m/s
Amplitude level [dB]
Normalized time t/T
Figure 4.9  Channel impulse response for two different receiver velocities.

182	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
References
  [1]  Djuknic, G. M., J. Freidenfelds, and Y. Okunev, “Establishing wireless communications 
services via high altitude platforms: A concept whose time has come?,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, Sept. 1997, pp. 128–135.
  [2]  Robinson Jr., C. A., “High capacity aerial vehicles aid wireless communications,” Signal, 
Apr. 1997, pp. 16–20.
  [3]  Grace, D., N. E. Daly, T. C. Tozer, and A. G. Burr, “LMDS from high altitude aeronauti-
cal platforms,” IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, GLOBECOM ‘99, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil, Dec. 1999, pp. 2625–2629.
  [4]  Dovis, F., M. Mondin, and P. Mulassano, “On the use of HALE platforms as GSM base-
stations,” IEEE Personal Communications Magazine, Apr. 2001, pp. 37–44.
  [5]  HeliNet project. Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy, Available: http://www.helinet.polito.it.
  [6]  Global Hawk. Northrop Grumman, Los Angeles, CA, Available: http://www.northgrup.com.
  [7]  HALOstar Network. Angel Technologies Corporation, Washington, DC, Available: http: //
www.angeltechnologies.com.
  [8]  Sky Station International, Washington, DC, Available: http://www.skystation.com.
  [9]  Saunders, R., and A. Aragón-Zavala, Antennas and Propagation for Wireless communica-
tion systems, 2nd ed., John Wiley and Sons Ltd, London: 2007.
[10]  Ippolito, J. L., Jr., Satellite Communications Systems Engineering: Atmospheric Effects, 
Satellite link Design and System Performance, London: John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 2008.
[11]  Marshall, J. S., and W. M. K. Palmer, “The distribution of raindrops with size,” Journal of 
Metrology, 1948, pp. 1965–1966.
[12]  International Telecommunication Union, ITU-R Propagation Recommendation P. 838: 
Specific Attenuation Model for Rain for Use in Prediction Methods, Geneva, 1992.
[13]  International Telecommunication Union, ITU-R Propagation Recommendation P. 618-5: 
Propagation Data and Prediction Methods Required for the Design of Earthspace Tele-
communication Systems, Geneva, 1997.
[14]  Cuevas-Ruíz, J. L., and J. A. Delgado-Penín, “Channel model based on semi-Markovian 
processes, an approach for HAPS systems,” XIV International Conference on Electron-
ics, Communications, and Computers, CONIELECOMP’04, Vevacruz, Mexico, February 
2004, pp. 52–56.
[15]  Cuevas-Ruíz, J. L., and J. A. Delgado-Penín, “Channel model for millimetre bands for 
HAPS based systems,” XVIII Simposium Nacional Unión Cientiífica International de Ra-
dio URSI 2003, La Corufia, Spain, September 2003.
[16]  Andreyev, G. A., and A. S. Bugaev, “mm-Wave propagation in urban and rural environ-
ment,” COST-280 Joint Workshop with COST-272, Noordwijk, Netherlands, 2003.
[17]  Stüber, G. L., Principles of Mobile Communication, 2nd ed., Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2001.
[18]  Jahn, A., “Propagation considerations and fading countermeasures for mobile multimedia 
service,” International Journal of Satellite Communications, Vol. 19, 2001, pp. 223–250.
[19]  Butt, G., M. A. N. Parks, and B. G. Evans, “Measurements and modeling of wireless chan-
nel for satellite mobile and personal communication systems” 10th International Confer-
ence on Digital Satellite Communications, May 1995, pp. 106–114.
[20]  Vucetic, B., and J. Du, “Channel modeling and simulation in satellite mobile communica-
tion systems,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas on Communications, Vol. 10, October 
1992, pp. 1209–1218.
[21]  Lutz, E., D. Cygan, M. Dippold, F. Dolainsky, and W. Papke, “The land mobile satellite 
communication channel-recording, statistics and channel model,” IEEE Transactions on 
Vehicular Technology, Vol. 40, May 1991, pp. 375–386.
[22]  Xie, Y., and Y. Fang, “A general statistical channel model for mobile satellite system,” 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 49, May 2000, pp. 744–752.

4.4  Summary	
183
[23]  Li, W., C. L. Law, J. T. Ong, and V. Dubey, “Ka band land mobile satellite channel model 
with rain attenuation and other impairments in the equatorial zone,” IEEE 51st Vehicular 
Technology Conference Proceedings, VTC’00, Tokyo, Japan, May 2000, pp. 2468–2472.
[24]  Loo, C., “A statistical model for a land mobile satellite link,” IEEE Transactions on Ve-
hicular Technology, Vol. 34, August 1985, pp. 122–127.
[25]  Loo, C., “Land mobile satellite channel measurement at Ka band using olympus,” IEEE Ve-
hicular Technology Conference, VTC’94, Stockholm, Sweden, June 1994, pp. 919–923.
[26]  Loo, C., and J. Butterworth, “Land mobile satellite channel measurements and modeling”, 
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, July 1998, pp. 1442–1446.
[27]  Rappaport, T. S., and J. C. Liberti, “A geometrical-based model for line-of sight multipath 
radio channel,” Proceedings of IEEE 46th Vehicular Technology Conference VTC’96,  
Atlanta, GA, Apr./May 1996, pp. 844–48.
[28]  Abdi, A., and M. Kaveh, “A space-time correlation model for multielement antenna sys-
tems in mobile fading channels,” IEEE Journal of Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 
20, April 2002, pp. 550–560.
[29]  Abdi, A., J. A. Barger, and M. Kaveh, “A parametric model for the distribution of the angle 
of arrival and the associated correlation function and power spectrum at the mobile sta-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 51, May 2002, pp. 425–434.
[30]  Leong, S.-Y., Y. R. Zheng, and C. Xiao, “Space-time fading correlation functions of a 3-D 
MIMO channel model,” Proceeding of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking 
Conference WCNC’04, Atlanta, GA, 2004, pp. 112–1132.
[31]  Aragn-Zavala, A., J. L. Cuevas-Ruz, and J. A. Delgado-Penn, High-altitude Platforms for 
Wireless Communications, John Wiley and Sons Ltd, London: 2008.
[32]  Dovis, F., R. Fantini, M. Mondin, and P. Savi, “Small-scale fading for high-altitude plat-
form (HAP) propagation channels,” IEEE Journal of Selected Areas in Communication, 
Vol. 20, Apr. 2002, pp. 641–647.
[33]  Michailidis, E. T., and A. G. Kanatas, “Three-dimensional HAP-MIMO channels: model-
ing and analysis of space-time correlation,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 
Vol. 59, Jun 2010, pp. 2232–2242.
[34]  Salz, J., and J. H. Winters, “Effect of fading correlation on adaptive arrays in digital mo-
bile radio,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 43, Nov. 1994, pp. 1049–
1057.
[35]  Abdi, A., and M. Kaveh, “A space-time correlation model for multielement antenna systems 
in mobile fading channels,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 20,  
Apr. 2002, pp. 550–560.
[36]  King, P. R., B. G. Evans, and S. Stavrou, “Physical-statistical model for the land mobile-
satellite channel applied to satellite/HAP MIMO,” Proceeding of 11th European Wireless 
Conference, Nicosia, Cyprus, Apr. 2005, pp. 198–204.
[37]  Von Mises, R. “Über die ‘Ganzzahligkeit’ der Atomgewicht und verwandte Fragen,” 
Physikal. Z., Vol. 19, 1918, pp. 490–500.
[38]  Mahmoud, S. S., Z. M. Hussain, and P. O’Shea, “Space-time model for mobile radio chan-
nel with hyperbolically distributed scatterers,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propagation Let-
ters, Vol. 1, May 2002, pp. 211–214.
[39]  Mahmoud, S. S., F. S. Al-Qahtani, Z. M. Hussain, and A. Gopalakrishnan, “Spatial and 
temporal statistics for the geometrical-based hyperbolic macrocell channel model,” El-
sevier Digital Signal Processing, Vol. 18, March 2008, pp. 151–167.
[40]  Vzquez-Castro, M. A., F. Perez-Fontan, and S. R. Saunders, “Shadowing correlation assess-
ment and modeling for satellite diversity in urban environments,” Wiley International Jour-
nal of Satellite Communications and Networking, Vol. 20, Mar./Apr. 2002, pp. 151–166.
[41]  Vzquez-Castro, M. A., D. Belay-Zeleke, and A. Curieses-Guerrero, “Availability of sys-
tems based on satellites with spatial diversity and HAPS,” IEEE Electronics Letters, Vol. 
38, March 2002, pp. 286–288.

184	
Air-to-Ground Radio Channels
[42]  Tzaras, C., B. G. Evans, and S. R. Saunders, “Physical-statistical analysis of land mobile-
satellite channel,” IEEE Electronics Letters, Vol. 34, June 1998, pp. 1355–357.
[43]  Saunders, S. R., and B. G. Evans, “Physical model of shadowing probability for land mobile 
satellite propagation,” IEEE Electronics Letters, Vol. 32, Aug. 1996, pp. 1548–1549.
[44]  Gradshteyn, I. S., and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, A. Jeffrey, Ed., 
5th ed., New York: Academic, 1994.
[45]  Parsons, J. D., and A.M.D. Turkmani, “Characterisation of mobile radio signals: model 
description,” IEEE Proceedings I, Communications, Speech, and Vision, Vol. 138, Dec. 
1991, pp. 549–556.
[46]  Pätzold, M., U. Killat, and F. Laue, “An extended Suzuki model for land mobile satel-
lite channels and its statistical properties,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 
Vol. 47, May 1998, pp. 617–630.
[47]  Mardia, K. V., and E. P. Jupp, Directional Statistics, New York: John Wiley and Sons, 
1999.

185
C H A P T E R  5
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater 
Vehicle Acoustic Channels
Many scientific, defense, and safety endeavors require communications between 
submerged devices and/or vehicles. An example of communications between fixed 
submerged devices are sensor networks deployed on the ocean bottom for seismic 
monitoring (e.g., to predict tsunamis), monitoring of deep-water oil wells, analy-
sis of resource deposits, oceanographic studies, tactical surveillance, and pollution 
monitoring. Examples of communications between underwater vehicles (UV) are 
unmanned or autonomous underwater vehicles (UUV or AUV) for deep-water con-
struction, repairs of deep-water oil wells, scientific or resource exploration, de-
fense applications (e.g., between submarines), and so on. From the communications 
perspective, the ultimate goal is to create an underwater network that consists of 
distributed underwater sensors and underwater vehicles that perform collaborative 
monitoring and communication as illustrated in Figure 5.1. 
Unfortunately, underwater communications are extremely challenging—use of 
wires/cables either severely limits or entirely precludes most of the important un-
derwater communication scenarios, whereas existing wireless communications still 
provide extremely low data rates, work over very limited distances, and/or have low 
energy efficiency. The main reason for such poor performance is that the underwater 
environment is very harsh for traditional wireless communication approaches: ra-
dio signal range is only several meters because of severe losses, especially in sea wa-
ter (which is a relatively good conductor), while optical communication has a very 
short range because of high dispersion due to murkiness and particles suspended 
in water. As a result, underwater wireless communications mostly use acoustics 
(sound), which can travel long distances in water. Unfortunately, acoustic commu-
nication suffers from its own set of problems—the available spectrum is measured 
in kilohertz instead of gigahertz, propagation is orders of magnitude slower than 
with radio or optics, and there are many sources of signal distortion that further 
limit data rates that can be achieved using simple modulations and coding. 
More advanced modulations and coding, especially those that exploit multi-
path propagation and available bandwidth can dramatically improve data rates in 
acoustic underwater communication. However, the acoustic underwater propaga-
tion environment differs significantly from the air- and space-based radio propaga-
tion environment, so this environment must be accounted for in order to exploit 
advanced modulations and coding. This chapter describes the principles that gov-
ern signal propagation in UV-to-UV acoustic channels, discusses how UV-to-UV 
acoustic channels differ from terrestrial RF radio channels, and then details how to 
model, simulate, and measure UV-to-UV acoustic channels. 

186	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
5.1  Underwater Propagation Principles
The underwater environment is very challenging for electromagnetic (radio) and 
optical communications. Electromagnetic waves propagate to long distances only 
at extra low frequencies (30–300 Hz through conductive sea water), which requires 
large antennas and high transmission power. Optical waves do not suffer from such 
high attenuation but are affected by scattering. As a result, underwater communica-
tions primarily use acoustic (pressure) waves [1]. 
The underwater acoustic (UWA) channel is still one of the most challenging 
wireless communication environments for several reasons: 
Acoustic signals propagate through water at a very low speed (1500 m/s), five 
•	
orders of magnitude slower than radio waves. This low propagation speed 
significantly increases the latency in the communication system.
Acoustic propagation through the sea water is characterized by significant 
•	
frequency-dependent attenuation. Three primary mechanisms that attenuate 
underwater acoustic signals are spreading loss, absorption loss, and scatter-
ing loss, which will be discussed in Section 5.2.1.
The available bandwidth of an UWA channel depends critically on transmis-
•	
sion loss, which increases with both range and frequency, and severely limits 
the available bandwidth [2, 3]. For example, long-range systems operating 
over several tens of kilometers may have only a kilohertz of bandwidth, while 
short-range systems operating over several tens of meters may have one or a 
few hundred kilohertz of bandwidth [4]. 
AUV
AUV
UW Sensors
Ship
Satellite
Figure 5.1  An acoustic network of underwater sensors and autonomous underwater vehicles.

5.1  Underwater Propagation Principles	
187
Acoustic signals are greatly affected by variations in the speed of sound at 
•	
different water depths, by reflections from the ocean surface and ocean floor, 
and by the location of the transmitter and receiver. As a result, a received sig-
nal is impacted by time-varying multipath, which may result in intersymbol 
interference and Doppler spreads that are much more severe than in radio 
channels, especially in shallow water channels [2]. 
Together, all these factors produce a communication medium that combines the 
worst of traditional radio propagation environments: the poor link quality of a 
terrestrial system and the high latency of a satellite system. To make the prob-
lem even more complex, there is no “typical” underwater acoustic environment, 
so there is no “typical” underwater acoustic communication channel. In differ-
ent environments, different physical processes pose significant problems to reliable 
communications, resulting in different challenges to a system. Thus, a system that 
works effectively in one environment (e.g., a shallow water environment) may fail 
completely in another environment (e.g., a deep water environment). The design of 
reliable general purpose systems that work effectively across a broad spectrum of 
ocean environments is an open problem. 
5.1.1  An Underwater Communication System
A simple schematic of an underwater communication scheme, involving a projector 
(transmitter) and a hydrophone (receiver), is presented in Figure 5.2. The projector 
takes the data and creates modulated signals. The modulated signals are then ampli-
fied to a level sufficient for successful reception and converted from the electrical to 
acoustical signals. On the receiver side, the sensitivity of the hydrophone converts 
Figure 5.2  A simple schematic of an underwater communication scheme.

188	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
the sound pressure that reaches the hydrophone to electrical energy. This signal is 
then detected, amplified, and demodulated at the receiver. 
5.1.2  Underwater Noise
Underwater communication is impacted by frequency-dependent noise, which con-
sists of ambient noise and site-specific noise. 
Ambient noise is always present in the background of the quiet deep sea and 
comes from the sources such as turbulence, breaking waves, rain, and distant ship-
ping. On the other hand, site-specific noise is present only in certain places. For 
example, ice cracking in polar regions or snapping shrimp in warmer waters create 
site-specific acoustic noise. 
The noise level contains a lot of information concerning the state of the ocean 
surface, the atmosphere over the ocean, tectonic processes in the earth’s crust under 
the ocean, the behavior of marine animals, and so on. The total noise level in deci-
bels can be written as [5]
	
traffic
turb
vessel
bio
term
( ,
,
,
)
( )
( )
( ,
)
( ,
)
( ,
)
( )
s
w
s
ss
w
N f
SL
N
f
N
f
N
f
N
f SL
N
f
N
f
u
u
u
u
=
+
+
+
+
+
	
(5.1)
where
N
•	
traffic (f ) [dB] is shipping noise (traffic) at 10–300 Hz and can be expressed 
as
	
8
traffic
10
4
4
3 10
( )
10 log
1
10
N
f
f
æ
ö
×
=
×
ç
÷
+
×
è
ø
	
(5.2)
where f is the frequency in kHz.
N
•	
turb(f ) [dB] is turbulence noise and can be expressed as 
	
turb
10
( )
30
30 log
( )
N
f
f
=
−
⋅
	
(5.3)
where f is the frequency in kHz.
N
•	
vessel(f, υs) [dB] is noise of a vessel. The noise level of a vessel is a function of 
frequency f and vessel speed υs and is usually experimentally determined.
N
•	
bio(f, SL) [dB] is biological noise (fishes, shrimp, and so on) and depends 
on frequency f and season-location SL. The noise level of biological noise is 
usually experimentally determined.
N
•	
ss(f, υw) is sea state noise, depends on frequency f [kHz] and wind speed 
υw [kn], and can be expressed as

5.1  Underwater Propagation Principles	
189
	
2
ss
10
5/3
( ,
)
40
10 log
1
w
w
v
N
f v
f
æ
ö
=
+
×
ç
÷
+
è
ø
	
(5.4)
N
•	
term(f) is thermal noise and occurs due to molecular agitation (Brownian mo-
tion). Thermal noise is a function of frequency f [kHz] and can be expressed as
	
term
10
( )
15
20 log
( )
N
f
f
= -
+
×
	
(5.5)
At low frequencies (0.1–10 Hz), the main noise sources are earthquakes, underwa-
ter volcanic eruptions, distant storms, and turbulence in the ocean and atmosphere. 
In the 50–300 Hz frequency band, underwater noise is mainly due to distant ship 
traffic. In the 0.5–50 kHz frequency band, underwater noise is directly associated 
with the state of the ocean surface and the wind in the immediate area. At frequen-
cies above 100 kHz, thermal noise is dominant. 
In underwater communication system simulations, ambient noise is often ap-
proximated as Gaussian, but not white. Unlike ambient noise, site-specific noise 
often contains significant non-Gaussian components, so it cannot be modeled as 
Gaussian noise.
5.1.3  Propagation Principles
Acoustic waves propagate toward the receiver (hydrophone) via four main propa-
gation mechanisms: direct propagation, refraction, reflection, and scattering. Direct 
propagation occurs when sound energy from the transmitter makes its way directly 
to the receiver along a LoS path. Refraction occurs due to spatial variability of the 
speed of sound. Finally, reflection and scattering are created by sound interaction 
with the surface, bottom, or other objects in the channel (such as fish). The received 
acoustic waves are a superposition of the wave coming from the LoS path and all 
waves coming from other directions due to refraction, reflection, and scattering. 
This effect is known as multipath propagation and is similar in its effects to (but 
much more pronounced than) multipath propagation in radio channels. 
5.1.4  Refraction
The refraction of sound in the ocean occurs due to spatial variability of the speed 
of sound. When a sound wave propagating in a medium with speed of sound c1 
impinges upon another medium having different speed of sound c2, the sound wave 
changes its direction, as shown in Figure 5.3. Variations of the sound velocity c in 
the ocean are relatively small (i.e., c lies between 1450 m/s and 1540 m/s). How-
ever, such small changes of c still result in significant refraction effects. 
Numerous laboratory and field measurements have shown that the sound 
speed increases with temperature T, hydrostatic pressure P (which is a function of 
depth z), and the salinity S. An empirical formula for the speed of sound is [5]
	
2
3
1449.2
4.6
0.055
0.00029
(1.34
0.01
) (
35)
0.016
c
T
T
T
T
S
z
=
+
×
-
×
+
×
+
-
×
-
+
×
	
(5.6)

190	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
where temperature T is expressed in °C, salinity S in percentiles, depth z in meters, 
and sound velocity c in m/s. Equation (5.6) is valid for 0°C £ T £ 35°C, 0 £ S £ 
45%o, and 0 £ z £ 1000m.
5.1.4.1  Typical Vertical Profiles of Sound Velocity and Corresponding Conditions 
of Sound Propagation
As pointed out in Section 5.1.4, sound velocity varies with temperature, salinity, 
and depth. The sound velocity profile c(z,T(z), S(z)) and the distribution of the 
sound velocity gradient with depth are the most important parameters for deter-
mining the type of sound propagation in the ocean. For one type of profile c(z,T(z), 
S(z)), sound can propagate hundreds of kilometers, while for another type, sound at 
the same frequency can propagate only a few tens of kilometers (or even less). 
The sound velocity profiles are different in various regions of the ocean, and 
they also vary with time. The largest fluctuations are in the upper ocean, mainly 
due to seasonal variations of temperature and salinity. For ocean depths smaller 
Figure 5.4  (a) Profile of an underwater sound channel of the first kind (c0 < ch), and (b) ray diagram 
of the underwater sound channel of the first kind.
Figure 5.3  Refraction at two different interfaces.

5.1  Underwater Propagation Principles	
191
than 200m, temperature is the dominant factor that impacts the velocity of sound. 
Between 200m and 400m, both temperature and depth have a significant impact on 
the velocity of sound. Finally, at ocean depths bigger than 400m, the sound velocity 
almost purely depends on the depth. The velocity of sound also depends on salin-
ity S. As S increases, c also increases, but the shape of the speed-of-sound profile 
remains unchanged. 
Next, we describe four main forms of the sound-velocity profile and the cor-
responding acoustic channel types: underwater sound channel, surface sound chan-
nel, antiwaveguide sound channel, and shallow water sound channel. 
5.1.4.2  Underwater Sound Channel
In deep-water regions, the typical sound velocity profile is characterized by the 
existence of a minimum sound velocity at a certain depth zm, as shown in Figure 
5.4(a). The depth zm is an axis of the underwater sound channel. Above this axis, 
the sound velocity increases mainly due to temperature increase. Below this axis, 
the sound velocity increases mainly due to hydrostatic pressure. If a sound source 
is located on the axis of the underwater sound channel or near it, some part of the 
sound energy is trapped in the underwater sound channel because of refraction 
(i.e., refraction bends the sound waves back toward the axis). Hence, the sound 
propagates within the channel, not reaching the bottom or surface, and therefore, 
not undergoing scattering and absorption at these boundaries [5]. Depending on the 
ratio of the sound velocity at the surface c0 and the sound velocity at the bottom ch, 
there are two types of underwater sound channels: 
When 
•	
c0 is smaller than ch, the rays leave the source at small or moderate 
grazing angles and return to the channel axis repeatedly, causing a waveguide- 
type propagation. This type of channel is called underwater sound channel 
of the first kind.
In this type of underwater sound channel, waveguide propagation can be 
observed in the interval depths of 0 £ z £ zc. The depths z = 0 and z = zc are 
the boundaries of the underwater sound channel. The channel traps all sound 
rays that leave the source (which is located on the underwater sound channel 
axis) at grazing angles χ < χmax, where
	
0
max
2(
)
m
m
c
c
c
χ
-
=
	
(5.7)
and cm and c0 are the sound velocities at the axis and boundaries of the 
channel, respectively. Hence, the greater the difference c0 – cm, the larger the 
interval of angles in which the rays are trapped is (i.e., the waveguide is more 
effective). 
When 
•	
c0 is greater than ch, the sound bounces between the bottom and the 
depth zc, as shown in Figure 5.5. This type of channel is called underwater 
sound channel of the second kind. As shown in Figure 5.5(b), trapped rays 
do not extend above the depth zc.

192	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
5.1.4.3  Surface Sound Channel
This type of sound channel occurs when the axis is at the surface (i.e., when cm = c0). 
A typical profile for this channel is shown in Figure 5.6. The sound velocity increases 
with the depth until z = h and then begins to decrease, as shown in Figure 5.6(a). 
Rays leaving the source at grazing angles χ < χb (where χb is the grazing angle of 
the boundary ray tangent to the lower boundary of the channel as shown in Figure 
5.6(b)) propagate with multiple reflections from the surface [5]. If the ocean surface 
is smooth, these rays remain in the sound channel regardless of distance from the 
source and give rise to waveguide propagation. If the ocean surface is rough, part of 
the sound energy is scattered into angles χ > χb at each contact with the surface and, 
therefore, leaves the sound channel. As a result, the sound field decays in the sound 
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6  (a) Profile of a surface sound channel, and (b) ray diagram of the surface sound 
c­hannel.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5  (a) Profile of an underwater sound channel of the second kind (c0 > ch), and (b) ray 
diagram of the underwater sound channel of the second kind.

5.1  Underwater Propagation Principles	
193
channel, but in the area below the channel its level increases. This type of channel 
occurs in the tropical and moderate zones of the ocean, where the temperature and 
salinity in the upper ocean layer are almost constant. 
5.1.4.4  Antiwaveguide Sound Channel
The antiwaveguide sound channel occurs when the sound velocity monotonically 
decreases with depth as shown in Figure 5.7(a). Such sound velocity profiles are 
often a result of intensive heating by solar radiation of the upper ocean layer. From 
Figure 5.7(b) we can observe that all rays refract downward. The ray that propa-
gates farthest in this type of channel is one that is tangent to the surface. For typical 
conditions in the ocean, the distance from the source to the shadow zone is only a 
few kilometers.
The shadow zone shown in Figure 5.7(b) is not a region of zero sound intensity. 
In the ideal case, the sound energy penetrates into the shadow zone due to diffrac-
tion. In practice, sound waves reflected from the bottom and scattered by random 
inhomogeneities of the medium also produce some sound in this zone.
5.1.4.5  Shallow Water Sound Channel
This type of sound propagation corresponds to the case when each ray emitted 
from the source, when continued long enough, is reflected at the bottom. A typical 
sound velocity profile is shown in Figure 5.8(a), and the corresponding ray diagram 
is shown in Figure 5.8(b). This type of propagation is characteristic for shallow seas 
and the ocean shelves, especially during the summer-autumn period when the upper 
water layers are well heated. 
5.1.5  Reflection
Reflection arises when a sound wave propagating in one medium (e.g., water, im-
pinges upon another medium having different properties such as air or ground). In 
(a)
(b)
Shadow zone
Figure 5.7  (a) Profile of an antiwaveguide sound channel, and (b) ray diagram of the antiwave-
guide sound channel.

194	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
addition of being refracted (continuing component of the wave), the sound wave is 
also reflected, as shown in Figure 5.9.
The surface and bottom of the ocean are highly complex boundaries. They are 
usually rough, and underwater ground is essentially an inhomogeneous medium. 
However, to analytically obtain the reflection coefficient, we can roughly approxi-
mate the surface and bottom as flat surfaces. This allows us to model them as re-
flective surfaces with specular reflection. Furthermore, we will consider here the 
simplest case of plane waves. 
Figure 5.9 shows reflection at an interface separating two homogeneous fluid 
media with densities ρi and sound speeds ci, for i = 1, 2. The pertinent incident 
angles in the x–z plane are denoted by θi, for i = 1, 2. Assuming that the incident 
wave has the unit amplitude, and denoting the amplitudes of the reflected and the 
refracted wave as R and T, respectively, we can write the acoustic pressures as [5]
	
1
1
1
exp(
( sin
cos
)
2
)
ip
jk x
z
j
ft
θ
θ
π
=
+
-
	
(5.8)
Figure 5.9  Reflection and refraction at two different interfaces.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8  (a) Profile of a shallow water sound channel, and (b) ray diagram of the shallow water 
sound channel.

5.1  Underwater Propagation Principles	
195
	
1
1
1
exp(
( sin
cos
)
2
)
r
p
R
jk x
z
j
ft
θ
θ
π
=
-
-
	
(5.9)
	
2
2
2
exp(
( sin
cos
)
2
)
tp
T
jk x
z
j
ft
θ
θ
π
=
+
-
	
 (5.10)
where k1 = 2pf/c1 and k2 = 2pf/c2. In the subsequent equations, the common time 
factor exp(–j2pft) is omitted for brevity. 
The unknown quantities R, T, and q2 are determined from boundary conditions 
that require continuity of pressure and vertical particle velocity at the interface  
z = 0. With the total pressure in medium 1 given by p1 = pi + pr and the pressure in 
medium 2 by p2 = pt, the boundary conditions can be written as
	
1
2
p
p
=
	
 (5.11)
	
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
dp
dp
j
f
dz
j
f
dz
π ρ
π ρ
=
	
(5.12)
where d/dz denotes the first derivative with respect to z. It can be shown that the re-
quirement of continuity of pressure and vertical particle velocity at z = 0 leads to
	
2
2
1
 1
1
exp( (
cos
cos
) )
R
T
j k
k
x
θ
θ  
+
=
-
	
 (5.13)
	
1
2
1
 2
1
 2
(1
)cos
cos
k
k
R
T
θ
θ    
ρ
ρ
-
=
	
 (5.14)
Since the left side is independent of x, this yields to Snell’s law of refraction:
	
1
1
2
 2
cos
cos
k
k
θ
θ
=
	
 (5.15)
	
1
1
1
2
2
2
sin
sin
k
c
n
k
c
θ
θ
=
=
= 	
 (5.16)
This law simply states that the horizontal component of the wave vector does not 
vary across the interface. From (5.13) and (5.15), we can write
	
1
R
T
+
=
	
 (5.17)
From (5.16), we can write
	
1
2
(1
)cos
cos
m
R
nT
θ
θ
-
=
	
 (5.18)
where m = r2/r1. From (5.17) and (5.18), the reflection and transmission coeffi-
cients R and T can be written, respectively, as
	
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
cos
sin
cos
cos
cos
cos
cos
sin
m
n
m
n
R
m
n
m
n
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ 
-
-
-
=
=
+
+
-
	
(5.19)
	
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
cos
2
cos
cos
cos
cos
sin
m
m
T
m
n
m
n
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
=
+
+
-
	
(5.20)

196	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
5.1.6  Scattering
Scattered waves arise when a sound wave in water hits a rough surface. There are 
coherent and incoherent components in the scattered sound field. The coherent 
component is a wave propagating in the direction of specular reflection and can be 
calculated through statistical averaging of the scattered field. Often, the effect of 
scattering from a rough surface is considered as additional loss to the specularly re-
flected (coherent) component resulting from the scattering of energy away from the 
specular direction. If the ocean bottom or surface are modeled as randomly rough 
surfaces, and if the roughness is small with respect to the acoustic wavelength, the 
reflection loss can be considered to be modified in a simple fashion by the scattering 
process. A formula often used to describe reflectivity from a rough boundary is 
	
2
0 5
ˆ( )
( )
R
R
e
θ
θ
- . G
=
	
 (5.21)
where ˆ( )
R θ  is the new reflection coefficient reduced because of scattering at the  
randomly rough interface. G is the Rayleigh roughness parameter defined as
	
2
sin
kσ
θ
G =
	
 (5.22)
where k = 2p/l, s is the root mean square displacement of the rough surface and 
q is the grazing angle of the sound wave relative to the horizontal plane. For large 
values of the Rayleigh parameter (G >> 1), the coherent component is close to zero, 
and the scattered field is almost completely incoherent. Note that this is the general-
ized definition of Rayleigh roughness parameter, first defined in Section 2.1.4.
5.2  UV-to-UV Acoustic Propagation Modeling
Similarly to fading in F-to-M, V-to-V, and A-to-G channels, fading in UV-to-UV acous-
tic channels can be classified into large-scale and small-scale fading. We now describe 
modeling of large-scale and small-scale fading in UV-to-UV acoustic channels.
5.2.1  Large-Scale Fading—Pathloss
A distinguishing property of acoustic channels is the fact that pathloss depends on 
the signal frequency. Spreading loss, absorption loss, and scattering loss are the 
three primary mechanisms that attenuate underwater acoustic signals.
5.2.1.1  Spreading Loss
Spreading loss is a weakening of the signal due to the geometrical spreading of wave 
propagating away from the source. This loss occurs because the fixed amount of 
transmitted energy spreads over a larger surface area as the signal propagates away 
from the its source. Two types of spreading are important in underwater propa-
gation: spherical spreading and cylindrical spreading. The loss due to spherical 
spreading is dominant at shorter ranges, while the loss due to cylindrical spreading 
is dominant at medium and longer ranges. 

5.2  UV-to-UV Acoustic Propagation Modeling	
197
Spherical Spreading 
In a homogeneous and infinitely extended medium, the power generated by a point 
source is radiated in all directions on the surface of a sphere—thus the name spheri-
cal spreading. Since the sound intensity is proportional to the sound power per area, 
the intensities at ranges r0 and r can be written as 
	
0
2
0
4
P
I
r
π
=
	
(5.23)
	
2
4
P
I
r
π
=
	
(5.24)
respectively, where r0 is the reference distance, P is the acoustic power of the source, 
I0 is the acoustic intensity of the source at the reference distance r0, and I is the 
acoustic intensity of the source at distance r. Then, the loss due to spherical spread-
ing can be defined as
	
é
ù2
0
0
( )
s
I
r
L r
I
r
=
= ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
	
 (5.25)
At some range from the source, the acoustic signal can no longer spread vertically, 
and the nature of spreading changes from spherical to cylindrical spreading. This 
transition typically occurs at ranges greater than the water depth.
Cylindrical Spreading 
Cylindrical spreading exists when the medium is confined by two reflecting planes 
separated by at least h > 10l, where l is the wavelength of the sound wave. Since 
the sound intensity is proportional to the sound power per area, the intensities at 
ranges r0 and r can be written as
	
0
0
2
P
I
hr
π
=
 
	
(5.26)
	
2
P
I
hr
π
=
 
	
(5.27)
respectively, where r0 is the reference distance, P is the acoustic power of the source, 
I0 is the acoustic intensity of the source at the reference distance r0, I is the acoustic 
intensity of the source at distance r, and h is the water depth. Then, the loss due to 
cylindrical spreading is
	
0
0
( )
c
r
I
L r
I
r
=
=
	
(5.28)
5.2.1.2  Absorption and Scattering Loss
When sound propagates in the ocean, part of the acoustic energy is continuously 
transformed into heat. This absorption is primarily a result of relaxation processes 
in sea water at frequencies 100 Hz–100 kHz. The absorption loss at frequencies of 
interest for UV-to-UV communications (3 kHz–0.5 MHz) can be written as [5]

198	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
( )
( , )
r
f
a
L r f
e
β
-
=
	
(5.29)
where
	
2
2
3
4
2
2
( )
8.68 10
(1
6.54 10
)[dB/km]
T
c
T
c
T
Sl A f
f
B f
f
P
f
f
f
β
-
æ
ö
×
×
×
×
=
×
+
-
×
×
ç
÷
+
è
ø
	
 (5.30)
and A = 2.34 × 10–6, B = 3.38 × 10–6, Sl is salinity (in ‰), P is hydrostatic pressure 
[kg/cm2], fc is the carrier frequency [kHz], fT = 21.9 × 106–1520/(T+273) is relaxation 
frequency [kHz], and T is the temperature [°C].
Another reason for the decay of the sound intensity with range in the ocean is 
the scattering of sound waves by inhomogeneities such as bubbles. Bubbles gener­
ated by breaking waves at the sea surface can have a major influence on high- 
frequency acoustic propagation, both in the open ocean and near shore regions. 
Layers of bubbles near the surface can result in significant attenuation of surface-
scattered signals. In one experiment at 30 kHz, the reported signal attenuation due 
to scattering at the surface bubble layer was 3 dB per surface bounce [6]. Further-
more, bubble clouds injected down into the water column also significantly attenuate 
propagating signals with rates as high as 26 dB/m [7]. In shallow water, the injection 
of bubbles by a breaking wave can thus result in a sudden channel outage.
5.2.1.3  Total Pathloss
The overall pathloss can be written as [8]
	
0
( , )
( , )
k
a
r
L r f
L r f
r
æ
ö
= ç
÷
è
ø
	
(5.31)
where k is the spreading factor and ranges between 1 and 2 (cylindrical or spherical 
spreading) and La(r, f ) is defined in (5.29). 
Two characteristics of spreading and absorption loss are worth noting. First, 
at short ranges, the spreading loss dominates the absorption loss. Second, even at 
short ranges (e.g., approximately 400m) the absorption loss at 100 kHz exceeds 
that at 25 kHz by 15 dB. The practical impact of the frequency dependence of 
absorption loss is that the communications channel is effectively band-limited, and 
the available bandwidth is a decreasing function of range. This characteristic can 
significantly impact the choice of modulation and multiaccess techniques as well as 
the problem of optimizing network topology.
5.2.2  Large-Scale Fading—Shadowing
Pathloss models described in Section 5.2.1 assume that the pathloss is constant 
at a given distance and frequency. However, variations in the ocean surface as 
well as obstacles (such as fish) result in random variations of the received power, 
which are called shadow fading. Very little is known about statistical modeling of 
shadow fading in underwater communications. Hence, to address this issue, we 
have recently performed some measurements. 

5.2  UV-to-UV Acoustic Propagation Modeling	
199
The experimental data was collected during the Naval Research Laboratory 
(NRL) ACOMMS09 experiment, held near the New Jersey shore in May 2009. 
The water depth was about 80m. The stationary vertical transmit array was about 
45.57m below the surface float, and it had eight hydrophones with the aperture of 
0.8m, where we only used the first, fourth, and eighth hydrophone for transmission. 
In this experiment, we used two stationary receive arrays. The first receive array 
was 19.66m below the surface float, while the second receive array was 41.96m be-
low the surface float. Both receive arrays had eight hydrophones with the aperture 
2.06m, where we only used the first, fourth, and eighth hydrophone for reception. 
The first receiver was in one direction from the transmitter, 2,000m away, while the 
second receiver was in the opposite direction from the transmitter, 1,500m away. 
The center frequency was fc = 17 kHz, and the signal bandwidth was B = 4 kHz. 
Finally, the sampling rate was fs = 93.75 kHz.
Figure 5.10 shows a comparison of the experimentally obtained probability 
density function and a log-normal probability density function. The results show 
that the effect of shadowing can be modeled as a log-normal process
	
( )
exp(
( ))
t
x t
α
µ
σ
=
+
	
(5.32)
where x(t) is a real Gaussian random process with zero mean and unit variance, 
m is the local mean and represents the effect of the pathloss, and s is the standard 
deviation of the log-normal process.
The autocorrelated shadowing quantifies how shadowed power changes over 
time as the transmitter, receiver, and ocean move (i.e., over a temporal separation 
Dt). This metric is very important for power control algorithms in general and for 
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
 Lognormal PDF ( =8.141, =0.13)
 Measured PDF for shadowing
Probability density function (PDF)
Normalized level
Figure 5.10  Comparison of the measured probability density function of shadowing and the log-
normal probability density function.

200	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
diversity gains in cooperative systems. The autocorrelation of the shadowing pro-
cess can be obtained as follows:
	
=
+
-
+
+ D
D
=
+ D
2
2
2
(
) 1 2
1 2
1
2
2
2(1
(
))
1
2
1 2
1 2
1 2
2
(
)
1
2
2
2
2
(
/
)
(
)
[ ( ) (
)*]
E[exp(
( ))exp( (
(
)))]
1
2
1
(
)
exp(
[1
(
)])
exp(
[1
])
x
C
t x x
x
x x
C
t
x x
x
x
x x
x x
t Lc
R
t
E
t
t
t
x t
x t
t
e
e
dx dx
C
t
C
t
e
σ
α
α
µ
σ
µ
σ
π
σ
σ
-
D
+
-
D
-
¥
¥
-
-¥
-¥
- D
=
-
D
=
+
D
=
+
ò
ò
	
(5.33)
where x1 = x(t), x2 = x(t + Dt), 
1
2 (
)
x x
C
t
D  is the covariance between x1 and x2, and Lc 
is the correlation distance, which is usually obtained from measurements. In Figure 
5.11, we compare the measured autocorrelation with the theoretical one derived in 
(5.33). The estimated correlation distance is Lc = 0.828s. The results show a good 
match between the measured and simulated autocorrelation functions. Further-
more, we can observe that signal decorrelates quickly in the first several seconds, 
then reaches the level of 0.33 and does not converge toward zero, implying that the 
received symbols are always slightly correlated.
5.2.3  Small-Scale Fading—Multipath Propagation
Multipath propagation in the ocean is a result of the sound reflection from the sur-
face, bottom, and/or any other objects in the water and of the sound refraction in 
the ocean. When a source launches a beam of rays, each ray will follow a slightly 
Figure 5.11  Comparison of the measured and simulated shadowing autocorrelation functions.

5.2  UV-to-UV Acoustic Propagation Modeling	
201
different path, and a receiver placed at some distance will observe multiple signal 
arrivals. In contrast to EM terrestrial propagation where the LoS ray (if it exists) 
always arrives at the receiver first, in underwater acoustic propagation, a ray trav-
eling over a longer path may do so at a higher speed and thus reach the receiver 
before the LoS ray.
The impulse response of an acoustic channel is influenced by the geometry of 
the channel and its reflection and refraction properties, which determine the num-
ber of significant propagation paths, and their amplitudes, phases, and delays. Simi-
larly to radio channels, the multipath acoustic channel can be modeled as a linear 
time-variant filter whose complex baseband impulse response is
	
( )
1
( , )
(
)
l
L
j
t
l
l
l
h t
C e
φ
τ
δ τ
τ
-
=
=
-
å
	
(5.34)
where h(t, t) is the channel response at time t due to an impulse applied at time t – t, 
d(×) is the Dirac delta function, and Cl, fl(t), and tl are the amplitude, phase, and 
time delay, respectively, associated with the lth propagation path.
5.2.4  Factors Influencing Small-Scale Fading
Small-scale fading is influenced by many factors, such as multipath propagation, 
speed of the transmitter and receiver, inherent changes of the ocean, and bandwidth 
and carrier frequency of the transmitted signal. Here, we will focus on multipath 
propagation, movement of the transmitter and receiver, and on ocean variations 
induced by surface waves and how these factors impact small-scale fading. 
5.2.4.1  Impact of Multipath Propagation on Small-Scale Fading
As indicated in (5.34), the received signal is a sum of many attenuated, delayed, and 
phase-shifted replicas of the transmitted signal. A sum of these delayed signals cre-
ates time dispersion of the original signal. In the frequency domain, this manifests 
as frequency selectivity (i.e., the channel distorts the frequency response character-
istic of the transmitted signal). 
The total delay spread in the ocean is governed by the longest path delay. A 
value typically observed in shallow water experiments is on the order of tens of 
milliseconds. Channel coherence times below 100 ms have been observed [9], but 
not often. For a general-purpose design, one may consider coherence times on the 
order of hundreds of milliseconds. Due to long delay spreads and limited available 
bandwidth, the underwater channel is often classified as frequency-selective. The 
frequency-selectivity of the channel leads to intrasymbol and intersymbol interfer-
ence. While the intrasymbol interference is generally irreversible, the intersymbol 
interference can be reversed using equalizers, spread spectrum techniques, or low-
complexity orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM)-like technique­s. 
For modern underwater systems, the individual path dispersion is much less than 
the total delay spread and can be ignored for systems whose maximal frequency lies 
well below the channel cutoff. However, as transducer technology advances and 
larger bandwidths become available, this effect may become significant. 

202	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
5.2.4.2  Impact of the Relative Movement of Transmitter, Receiver, and 
Ocean Surface on Small-Scale Fading
A transmitted signal is impacted not only by multipath propagation, but also by 
other factors such as movement of the ocean surface, transmitter, and receiver. The 
variations in the ocean range from those that occur over very long timescales and do 
not affect the instantaneous level of a communication signal (e.g., monthly changes 
in temperature) to those that occur over short timescales and affect the transmitted 
signal. Prominent among the fast variations of the ocean are those induced by sur-
face waves and by the motion of the transmitter and receiver. These variations effec-
tively cause the displacement of the reflection point, resulting in both scattering of 
the signal and Doppler spreading due to the changing path length. The magnitude 
of the Doppler shift is proportional to the ratio d = v/c of the relative transmitter-
receiver-surface velocity v to the speed of sound in water c. Because the speed of 
sound is very low compared to the speed of electromagnetic waves, motion-induced 
Doppler distortion can be significant.
In UV-to-UV communications, there is always some motion present in the sys-
tem: autonomous underwater vehicles move at speeds of a few meters per second; 
submarines move at speeds of tens of meters per second; and even fixed underwater 
systems experience some motion due to drifting with waves, currents, and tides, and 
the velocity of such a system can reach several meters per second. In other words, 
there is always some motion present in the underwater system, and a communica-
tion system has to be designed to take this into account. The only comparable situ-
ation in radio communications occurs in low Earth orbiting (LEO) satellite systems, 
where the relative velocity of satellites flying overhead is extremely high (the chan-
nel there, however, is not nearly as dispersive). 
The way in which motion-induced distortions affect signal detection depends 
on the actual value of factor d. For comparison, let us look at a highly mobile radio 
system. At 160 km/h, the Doppler shift is proportional to d = 1.5/107. This value is 
low enough that Doppler spreading can be neglected. In contrast to mobile radio 
 systems, a stationary acoustic system may experience unintentional motion of 0.5 m/s,  
which leads to Doppler shift of d = 3/104. For an AUV moving at several meters per 
second, factor d will be on the order of 1/103, a value that cannot be ignored. 
The motion-induced distortion mainly impacts the design of synchronization 
and channel estimation algorithms. In multicarrier systems, the Doppler effect cre-
ates a particularly severe distortion. Unlike radio systems, in which time compres-
sion/dilation is negligible and the Doppler shift appears equal for all subcarriers, in 
an acoustic system each subcarrier may experience a significantly different Doppler 
shift, creating nonuniform Doppler distortion across the signal bandwidth. 
As the history of underwater acoustic communications testifies, major advances 
in signal processing were made when the physical nature of propagation was taken 
into account through proper channel modeling. Examples are combined modeling 
of multipath and phase distortion for equalization in single-carrier wideband sys-
tems [10], detection of multicarrier signals using explicit modeling of Doppler shift 
[11], and sparse channel estimation using the fact that the underwater multipath is 
not contiguous but consists of isolated signal arrivals [12]. Hence, to address the 
challenges in underwater wireless communications, one must understand, charac-
terize, and model the acoustic wireless communication channel. 

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
203
5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV 
Acoustic Channels
Sound propagation in the ocean is mathematically described by the wave equation, 
whose parameters and boundary conditions describe the ocean environment. There 
are five types of models that describe sound propagation in the sea: fast field pro-
gram, normal mode, parabolic equation, direct finite-difference (or finite-element), 
and ray theory. In practice, the ray theory is most often used for sound propagation 
modeling [5]. 
In most environments and at the frequencies of interest for communications sig­
nals, the ocean can be modeled as a waveguide with reflecting surfaces and a spatially 
variant sound speed. Recent references commonly use ray tracing for determining 
the deterministic multipath structure for communication channel modeling [13, 14]. 
Associated with each of the deterministic propagation paths (macro-multipaths), 
random signal fluctuations (micro-multipaths), account for the time variability of 
the channel response. In shallow water, the most dominant contributor to the over-
all time variability is surface scattering due to waves. In deep water, in addition to 
surface scattering, internal waves contribute to the time variations of the signal 
propagation along each of the deterministic paths. 
Addressing the challenges in underwater wireless communications requires sta-
tistical characterization and modeling of acoustic wireless communication channels. 
While there exist a large number of both deterministic and statistical models that 
characterize underwater sound propagation [3, 13–17], a statistical framework for 
these channels, (i.e., correlation functions, Doppler power spectral density, power 
delay spectral density, level-crossing rate, and so on) has been only recently pro-
posed. These statistics are necessary tools for a successful design of underwater 
communication systems. They are commonly used to determine available capac-
ity, investigate spatial diversity, determine propagation delay spread, and so on. 
Furthermore, the closed-form expressions of these statistics can be used to estimate 
physical parameters such as angle spread and mean angles of departure and arrival. 
The following sections detail the most recent results on statistical characterization 
of multipath propagation in UV-to-UV acoustic channels.
5.3.1  Received Envelope Distribution
A time-varying multipath communication channel is commonly modeled as a 
tapped delay line, with tap spacing equal to the reciprocal of twice the channel 
bandwidth and the tap gains modeled as stochastic processes with certain distribu-
tions and power spectral densities. Unlike RF radio channels, where a number of 
models for both the probability distribution (e.g., Rayleigh fading) and the power 
spectral density of the fading process (e.g., the Jakes model) are well accepted and 
even standardized, there is no consensus yet on the statistical characterization of 
underwater acoustic communication channels. For a shallow-water medium-range 
channel, some experimental results suggest that this channel may be characterized 
as K-distributed fading [18], while others suggest Ricean or Rayleigh fading [17]. 
The deep water channel has also been modeled as a Rayleigh fading channel, but 
the available measurements are scarce. 

204	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
5.3.2  Statistical Modeling of UV-to-UV Frequency Flat  
Acoustic Fading Channels
The first attempts to statistically characterize UV-to-UV acoustic channels are re-
ported in [19–23]. Abdi and Guo [19] were the first to propose a statistical model 
for time-invariant stationary shallow water acoustic channels, by taking into ac-
count only macro-multipath effects. Later, a time-varying shallow water acoustic 
channel that takes into account both macro- and micro-multipath effects was pro-
posed in [23], which we detail here.
In [23], the UV-to-UV acoustic channel is modeled as a 2-D waveguide bounded 
from the top and bottom. The surface and bottom boundaries reflect the acoustic 
signal, which results in multiple macro-eigenrays traveling between the transmit-
ter (Tx) and receiver (Rx), as shown in Figure 5.12. In contrast to fixed-to-mobile 
cellular radio channels and air-to-ground radio channels (where single-bounced 
eigenrays are dominant [24, 25]), or vehicle-to-vehicle radio channels (where  
single-bounced and double-bounced eigenrays are dominant [26]), in shallow water 
acoustic (SWA) channels the energy stays trapped in the waveguide and the number 
of bounces (i.e., interactions with the surface and bottom) can be large [5]. How-
ever, the experimental results for medium- and long-range acoustic channels show 
that the number of different macro-eigenrays that arrive at the Rx rarely exceeds 
eight [17, 27, 28]. Hence, we cannot simply assume a very large number of macro- 
eigenrays. Furthermore, the locations where macro-scatterers interact with the  
surface/bottom are deterministic and depend only on the waveguide geometry and 
the number of macro-eigenrays [5]. Hence, the deterministic ray-tracing theory can 
be used to model these macro-eigenrays. 
However, in each of the deterministic macro-eigenrays, random signal fluc-
tuations (micro-eigenrays) account for the time variability of the channel impulse 
z
x
Bottom
Surface
h
R
h
T
h
)
(
ˆ
S
b
s
S
)
(
ˆ
B
s
b
S
UA
s
Tb
0
ˆ,1 =
=
UA
s
Rb
0
ˆ,1 =
=
R
DA
b
Ts
1
ˆ,2
=
=
DA
b
Rs
1
ˆ,2
=
=
TR
Macro-scatterer
b
DAs ˆ
s
UAb ˆ
T
O
R
O
DA
b
Ts
1
ˆ,1 =
=
UA
s
Tb
1
ˆ,1 =
=
UA
s
Rb
1
ˆ,1 =
=
DA
b
Ts
0
ˆ,1 =
=
DA
b
Rs
0
ˆ,1 =
=
DA
b
Rs
1
ˆ,1 =
=
Figure 5.12  Illustration of the line-of-sight path and several macro-eigenrays traveling between the 
Tx and Rx in a shallow water acoustic channel.

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
205
response [5, 15]. For example, the roughness of the sea surface and the sea bottom 
is characterized by random micro-scatterers, as shown in Figure 5.13. Each macro-
eigenray is thus modeled as an average of a large number of micro-eigenrays, where 
the possible positions of micro-scatterers are clustered around the positions of macro- 
scatterers, as shown in Figure 5.13. Note the contrast to radio channel propagation, 
where scatterers can be randomly placed anywhere in a 2-D or 3-D plane. 
The underwater acoustic channel model in [23] is based on the following 
assumptions: 
Propagation occurs in a shallow water environment with constant sound 
•	
speed (i.e., sound energy propagates along the plane waves); 
The T
•	
x is an omnidirectional transducer and therefore produces a spherical 
wavefront in this isovelocity medium; 
Propagation is characterized with either LoS or NLoS conditions between 
•	
the Tx and Rx. 
In Figure 5.13, the depths of Tx and Rx are denoted by hT and hR, respectively, 
while the orientations of Tx and Rx transducer arrays in the x-z plane are denoted 
by qT and qR, respectively, relative to the x-axis. The Tx and Rx are moving with 
constant speeds vT and vR in directions described by angles gT and gR in the x-z 
plane (relative to the x-axis), respectively. 
At any instant in time t, the Rx receives 2S downward arriving (DA) macro-
eigenrays (whose last reflection was from the surface), each one having different 
number of s surface and ˆb bottom reflections, where S denotes the maximum 
number of interactions between any DA macro-eigenray and the surface, 1 £ s £ 
S, and 
ˆ
1
s
b
s
-
£
£ . For example, if a DA macro-eigenray has only one interaction  
n
b
Rs
,0
ˆ,1 =
=
z
x
Bottom
Surface
h
x
T
x
R
R
h
T
h
)
(
ˆ
S
n
b
s
S
)
(
ˆ
B
m
s
b
S
m
s
Tb
,0
ˆ,1 =
=
m
s
Rb
,0
ˆ,1 =
=
TR
R
n
b
Ts
,0
ˆ,1 =
=
n
b
Ts
,1
ˆ,1 =
=
n
b
Rs
,1
ˆ,2 =
=
n
b
Rs
,1
ˆ,1 =
=
Macro-scatterer
Micro-scatterer
T
T
T
v
R
v
R
R
Figure 5.13  The geometry-based model for UV-to-UV SWA channels. Each macro-eigenray is rep-
resented as a large number of micro-eigenrays.

206	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
with the surface (i.e., S = 1) there are two possible paths that this eigenray trav-
eled. The first path is a single-bounced path, where a DA macro-eigenray started 
upward, interacted with the surface, and arrived at the Rx (i.e., 
ˆ
1,
0
s
b
=
 = ). 
The second path is a double-bounced path, where a DA macro-eigenray started 
downward, interacted with the bottom, then interacted with the surface, and 
arrived at the Rx (i.e., 
ˆ
1,
1
s
b
=
 = ). Note that, for S = 1, both macro-eigenrays 
will reach the Rx because they have similar energy [5, 17]. Similarly, there are 
2B upward arriving (UA) macro-eigenrays (i.e., the last reflection is from the 
bottom) with b bottom and ˆs surface reflections, where B denotes the maximum 
number of interactions between a UA macro-eigenray and the bottom, 1 £ b £ B 
and 
ˆ
1
b
s
b
-
£
£
. As noted earlier, each macro-eigenray is modeled as an average 
of micro-eigenrays. Thus, each UA macro-eigenray is modeled as an average of 
ˆ
sb
N  DA micro-eigenrays, and each UA macro-eigenray is modeled as an average 
of 
ˆ
bs
M  UA micro-eigenrays. 
The symbols 
ˆ
Tsbn
α
 and 
ˆ
Tbsm
α
 are the angles of departure (AoD) of micro-eigenrays 
that start from Tx and impinge on the scatterers ( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
 and ( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
, respectively, whereas 
ˆ
Rsbn
α
 and 
ˆ
Rbsm
α
 are the angles of arrival (AoA) of the micro-eigenrays scattered 
from ( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
 and ( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
 and arriving at Rx, respectively. Finally, the symbol aTR denotes 
the AoA of LoS ray. For ease of reference, Figure 5.14 details the geometry of the LoS 
path as well as the geometry of single-bounced surface and single-bounced bottom 
micro-eigenrays (i.e., 
ˆ
1,
0
s
b
=
 =
, 
ˆ
1,
0
b
s
=
 =
) scattered from the 
( )
ˆ
1
0
S
s
b
n
S = , = , -th and 
( )
1 ˆ
0
B
b
s
m
S = , = , -th micro-scatterer, respectively. The geometry of multiple-bounced micro-
eigenrays is defined similarly, but omitted from Figure 5.14 for ease of reference. 
z
x
Bottom
Surface
h
x
T
x
R
R
h
Th
)
(
ˆ
S
n
b
s
S
)
(
ˆ
B
m
s
b
S
n
b
Ts ˆ
n
b
Rs ˆ
R
TR
m
s
Tbˆ
2
n
b
Ts ˆ
m
s
Rbˆ
n
b
Rsˆ
m
s
Rbˆ
m
s
Tbˆ
TR
Figure 5.14  The detailed geometry of the LoS path, single-bounced surface, and single-bounced 
bottom micro-eigenrays scattered from the 
, ,
( )
ˆ
S
s b n
S
 and ( )
ˆ
B
b s m
S , ,  micro-scatterers, respectively.

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
207
The horizontal spacing between the Tx and Rx is denoted by R and the water 
depth is denoted by h. Here, we are interested in medium- and long-range shallow-
water communications. Hence, we assume that the depths h, hT, and hR are much 
smaller than the distance R. The symbols 
ˆ
Tsbn
ε
 and 
ˆ
Tbsm
ε
 denote distances 
( )
ˆ
S
x
sbn
T
S
-
 
and 
( )
ˆ
B
x
bsm
T
S
-
, respectively, where 
( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
 and 
( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
 denote the nth and mth micro-​
scatterers located around the macro-scatterers ( )
ˆ
S
sb
S
 and ( )
ˆ
B
bs
S
 at the surface and bot-
tom, respectively, for 
ˆ
1
sb
n
N
£
£
 and 
ˆ
1
bs
m
M
£
£
, as shown in Figure 5.13. Finally, 
eTR denotes the distance Tx – Rx. 
The complex faded envelope under frequency-flat fading can therefore be writ-
ten as a superposition of the LoS, the UA bounced macro-eigenrays (i.e., the last 
reflection is from the bottom), and the DA bounced macro-eigenrays (i.e., the last 
reflection is from the surface). Furthermore, each DA macro-eigenray is represented 
as an average of 
ˆ
sb
N  DA micro-eigenrays, while each UA macro-eigenray is repre-
sented as an average of 
ˆ
bs
M  UA micro-eigenrays. Then, for the channel between the 
Tx and Rx, the channel impulse response is [23] 
	
LoS
UA
DA
( )
( )
( )
( )
h t
h
t
h
t
h
t
=
+
+
	
(5.35)
where the respective components are [23]
	
LoS
LoS
LoS
2
( )
j
f
t
h
t
a
e
π
=
W ×
×
	
(5.36)
	
π
φ
+
®¥
=
= -
=
=
W
×
å å
å
ˆ
UA
UA
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
(2
)
UA
UA
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
1
( )
lim
bs
bsm
bsm
bs
M
B
b
j
f
t
bsm
M
b
s b
m
h
t
a
e
	
(5.37)
	
π
φ
+
®¥
=
=
= -
=
W
×
å å
å
ˆ
DA
DA
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
(2
)
DA
DA
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
1
( )
lim
sb
sbn
sbn
sb
N
S
s
j
f
t
sbn
N
s
n
b s
h
t
a
e
	
(5.38)
and where W is the averaged total power ( W is assumed to be constant). The chan-
nel gains, Doppler shift frequencies, and phases in this model can be calculated as 
follows: 
Channel gains
•	
. The channel gains in this model are normalized such that the 
ensemble averages of the UA
ˆ
bsm
a
s and DA
ˆ
sbn
a
s are given by 
	
ˆ
2
UA
ˆ
1
ˆ
1,
for
,
bs
M
bsm
m
E a
b s
=
é
ù =
"
ê
ú
ë
û
å
	
(5.39)
	
ˆ
2
DA
ˆ
1
ˆ
1, for
,
sb
N
sbn
n
E a
s b
=
é
ù =
"
ê
ú
ë
û
å
	
(5.40)
In addition, let’s introduce parameter K, which describes how the total signal 
power is split between the LoS and NLoS components: the power allocated 
to the LoS component is K/(1 + K), while the total power allocated to the 
NLoS components is 1/(1 + K). Furthermore, it is assumed that the relative 
power allocated to the UA and DA components is respectively hB and hS such 

208	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
that hB + hS = 1. These parameters have to be either set during simulations 
or estimated from measurements. Having all this in mind, the channel gains 
can be written as follows: 
	
1
LoS
K
a
K
=
+ 	
(5.41)
	
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
1
2
B
UA
bsm
bs
a
K
B
M
η
=
+
	
(5.42)
	
ˆ
ˆ
1
2
1
2
S
DA
sbn
sb
a
K
S
N
η
=
+
	
(5.43)
Doppler shifts
•	
. Doppler shifts depend on the geometrical relation between di-
rections of movement of Tx and Rx (gT and gR), the vertical displacements of 
surface micro-scatterers due to surface motion (
ˆ ( )
sbn
Z
t
D
 and 
ˆ ( )
bsm
Z
t
D
), and 
the directions of AoDs and AoAs. For this model, the Doppler shifts are 
	
α
π
γ
α
γ
=
+
-
+
-
Tmax
R max
cos(
)
cos(
)
LoS
TR
T
TR
R
f
f
f
	
(5.44)
	
α
α
γ
λ
α
γ
=
D
+
-
-
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
1
( )sin
cos(
)
cos(
)
UA
bsm
Rbsm
Tbsm
T
bsm
Rbsm
R
f
Z
t
f
t
f
+
	
(5.45)
	
+
-
=
D
+
-
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
1
( )sin
cos(
)
cos(
)
DA
T
sbn
Rsbn
Tsbn
sbn
R
Rsbn
f
Z
t
f
t
f
α
α
γ
λ
α
γ
	
(5.46)
where the frequencies fTmax = vT /l and fRmax = vR/l are the maximum 
Doppler frequencies associated with the Tx and Rx, respectively, and l is 
the carrier wavelength. Since the location of the scatterers is not known a 
priori, the AoDs 
ˆ
Tsbn
α
 and 
ˆ
Tbsm
α
, the AoAs 
ˆ
Rsbn
α
 and 
ˆ
Rbsm
α
, and the verti-
cal displacements 
ˆ ( )
sbn
Z
t
D
 and 
ˆ ( )
bsm
Z
t
∆
 are modeled as random variables. 
However, since the number of micro-eigenrays is approaching infinity, these 
discrete random variables become continuous with pdfs 
ˆ
(
)
Tsb
p α
, 
ˆ
(
)
T bs
p α
­, 
ˆ
(
)
Rsb
p α
­, 
ˆ
(
)
Rbs
p α
, 
ˆ
(
( ))
sb
p
Z
t
D
, and 
ˆ
(
( ))
bs
p
Z
t
∆
, respectively. Since the geometry 
that propagating waves experience while traveling from the transmitter to 
the receiver dictates the relationship between the AoDs and AoAs, the AoAs 
(­
ˆ
Rsbn
α
 and 
ˆ
Rbsm
α
) are dependent on the AoDs (
ˆ
Tsbn
α
 and 
ˆ
Tbsm
α
, respec-
tively). Assuming that each micro-eigenray, when interacting with the sur-
face and the bottom, has equal incident and reflecting angles, we can observe 
that 
ˆ
ˆ
Tsbn
Rsbn
α
π
α
=
-
 and 
ˆ
ˆ
3
Tbsm
Rbsm
α
π
α
=
−
. 
Phases
•	
. First, we note that the phase shift introduced by the scatterer located 
near the Tx is independent of the phase shift introduced by the scatterer lo-
cated near the Rx. Then, without loss of generality, we can assume that the 

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
209
phases 
ˆ
sbn
φ
 and 
ˆ
bsm
φ
 are independent random variables. Since the number of 
micro-eigenrays approaches infinity, these discrete random variables become 
continuous with pdfs 
ˆ
(
)
sb
p φ
 and 
ˆ
(
)
bs
p φ
, respectively. Here, it is assumed that 
they are uniformly distributed on the interval [–p, p) and independent from 
any other random variable. 
5.3.3  Temporal Fading Characteristics of UV-to-UV Frequency  
Flat Acoustic Fading Channels
Using the model described in Section 5.3.2, we can now derive the key temporal 
characteristics (i.e., temporal autocorrelation function, Doppler spectrum, and level 
crossing rate) of UV-to-UV frequency-flat acoustic fading channels. 
5.3.3.1  Temporal Autocorrelation Function
The temporal autocorrelation function (ACF) of the complex fading channel h(t) is 
an important quantity since it allows the quantification of necessary communica-
tion parameters such as the required number of pilot symbols and/or the system 
performance degradation. 
The normalized ACF is defined as 
	
τ
τ
*
*
é
ù
+
ë
û
=
+
( ) (
)
(τ)
Var[ ( )]Var[ (
) ]
E h t h t
R
h t
h t
	
(5.47)
where the variance Var[×] and the expectation E[×] are taken with respect to the set 
of random variables 
ˆ
Rsb
α
, 
ˆ
Rbs
α
, 
ˆ( )
sb
Z
t
∆
, 
ˆ( )
bs
Z
t
∆
, 
ˆ
sb
φ , and 
ˆ
bs
φ . 
The angles of arrival 
ˆ
Rsb
α
 and 
ˆ
Rbs
α
 are modeled using the following Gaussian 
probability density functions [23] 
	
α
α
µ
σ
α
π
πσ
=
-
-
/
,
<
<
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
top
ˆ
DA
DA
2
ˆ
DA
1
(
)
exp{
(
) (2
)} 0
2
Rsb
Rsb
sb
Rsb
sb
sb
p
	
(5.48)
	
α
α
µ
σ
π
α
π
πσ
=
-
-
/
,
<
<
2
2
bottom
ˆ
ˆ
UA ˆ
ˆ
UA ˆ
2
UA ˆ
1
(
)
exp{
(
) (2
)}
2
2
Rbs
Rbs
bs
Rbs
bs
bs
p
	
(5.49)
where 
ˆ
DAsb
µ
 and 
UA ˆ
bs
µ
 are the mean AoAs, and 
ˆ
DAsb
σ
 and 
UA ˆ
bs
σ
 are the angle 
spreads. The vertical displacements 
ˆ( )
sb
Z
t
∆
 and 
ˆ( )
bs
Z
t
∆
 are modeled as zero-mean 
Gaussian random processes with stationary and independent increments and can be 
written as 
	
ˆ
DA
ˆ
DA
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
1
(
( ))
exp( (
( )) (2
))
2
sb
sb
sb
sb
Z
Z
p
Z
t
Z
t
t
t
ζ
π ζ
∆
∆
∆
=
−∆
/
	
 (5.50)

210	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
UA ˆ
UA ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
1
(
( ))
exp( (
( )) (2
))
2
bs
bs
bs
bs
Z
Z
p
Z
t
Z
t
t
t
ζ
π ζ
∆
∆
∆
=
−∆
/
	
(5.51)
where 
ˆ
DA
2
sb
Z
tζ ∆
 and 
UA ˆ
2
bs
Z
tζ ∆
 denote their respective variances. 
Here, we note that the locations of micro-scatterers that contribute to one 
macro-eigenray are independent from the locations of micro-scatterers that con-
tribute to a different macro-eigenray because different macro-eigenrays have 
d­ifferent angles of departure and arrival. Using the assumptions introduced ear-
lier and the Central Limit Theorem [25], we can conclude that each macro- 
eigenray is an independent complex Gaussian process with a zero mean. A sum 
of several complex zero-mean Gaussian processes results in a new complex  
zero-mean Gaussian process, so hUA(t) and hDA(t) are also independent complex 
Gaussian random processes with zero means. Then, the normalized ACF can be 
simplified to 
	
R(t)  =  RLoS(t)  +  RUA(t)  +  RDA(t)	
(5.52)
where RLoS(t), RUA(t), and RDA(t) denote the normalized ACFs of the LoS, upward-
arriving, and downward-arriving eigenrays, respectively. 
The temporal autocorrelation function of the LoS component can be obtained 
as follows 
	
Tmax
Rmax
LoS
LoS
LoS
LoS
LoS
2
[
cos(
)
cos(
)]
1
E
( )
(
)
( )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
TR
T
TR
R
j
f
f
K
K
h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
e
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
τ
τ
τ
∗
∗
−
−
−
+


+


=
+
=
	
 (5.53)
Noting that the phases 
ˆ
bsm
φ
 and 
ˆ
sbn
φ
 are independent and uniformly distributed 
over [–p, p), the ACFs of the UA and DA components can be written as
	
ç
÷
ç
÷
-
D
+
- D
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
exp
(
(
)
( ))sin
bs
bs
Rbs
j
Z
t
Z
t
exp
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
j
f
f
[
]
(
)
α
τ
τ
τ
η
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
π
τ
α
λ
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
,D
=
= -
æ
ö
è
ø
*
+
=
*
+
=
+
é
+
-
-
êë
ù
úû
å å
ˆ
ˆ
UA
UA
UA
UA
UA
( )
1 ˆ
1
Tmax
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
E
( )
(
)
( )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
E
2 (
1)
2
Rbs
bs
B
b
B
Z
t
b
s b
Rbs
T
Rbs
R
h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
B K
	
(5.54)

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
211
	
ç
÷
ç
÷
-
D
+
- D
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
DA
DA
DA
DA
DA
,
( )
ˆ
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
Rmax
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
E
( )
(
)
( )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
E
2 (
1)
exp
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
2
exp
(
(
)
( ))sin
Rsb
sb
S
s
S
Z
t
s
b s
T
R
Rsb
Rsb
sb
sb
Rsb
h
t h
t
R
h
t
h
t
S K
j
f
f
j
Z
t
Z
t
α
τ
τ
τ
η
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
π
τ
α
λ
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
D
=
= -
æ
ö
è
ø
*
+
=
*
+
=
+
é
é
ù
+
-
-
ê
ë
û
ë
ù
úû
å å
	
(5.55)
where 
ˆ
ˆ( )
E
[ ]
Rbs
bs
Z
t
α
,∆
⋅ and 
ˆ
ˆ( )
E
[ ]
Rsb
sb
Z
t
α
,∆
⋅ denote the statistical expectations. Since ran-
dom variables 
ˆ
Rbs
α
, 
ˆ
Rsb
α
, 
ˆ( )
bs
Z
t
∆
, and 
ˆ( )
sb
Z
t
∆
 are independent random variables, 
these expectations can be evaluated as follows: 
	
B K
2 (
1)
[
]
(
)
η
π
π
π
λ
τ
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
τ
α
α
+
=
= -
D
=
+
-
-
é
ù
-
D
+
- D
ë
û
å å
ò
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
2
Tmax
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
2
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
( )
exp
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
E
exp
(
(
)
( ))sin
(
)
B
bsm
B
b
UA
b
s b
Rbs
T
Rbs
R
Z
t
bsm
bsm
Rbs
Rbs
R
j
f
f
j
Z
t
Z
t
d
	
(5.56)
	
(
)
π
π
λ
τ
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
τ
α
α
=
= -
D
=
é
ù
+
-
-
ë
û
é
ù
-
D
+
- D
ë
û
å å
ò
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
Rmax
0
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
( )
( )
exp
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
E
exp
(
(
)
( ))sin
(
)
sbn
S
s
DA
s
b s
T
R
Rsb
Rsb
Z
t
sbn
sbn
Rsb
Rsb
R
j
f
f
j
Z
t
Z
t
d
2 ( +1)
s
S K
η
	
(5.57)
Since 
ˆ( )
bs
Z
t
D
 has stationary and independent increments with pdfs defined in (5.51), 
the expectation 
ˆ( )
E
[ ]
bs
Z
t
D
×  in (5.56) can be calculated as follows 
	
D
+
- D
D
+
- D
é
ù
Z
t
bsm
bsm
Rbsm
j
Z
t
Z
t
ç
÷
ç
÷
-
D
+
- D
ê
ú
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
2
ˆ
2
E
exp
(
(
)
( ))sin
exp
(
(
)
( ))sin
(
(
)
( )) (
(
)
( ))
exp
sin
2
bsm
UAbs
bs
bs
Rbs
bs
bs
bs
bs
Z
Rbs
j
Z
t
Z
t
p
Z
t
Z
t d
Z
t
Z
t
π
λ
π
λ
π
τ
α
λ
τ
α
τ
τ
τ ζ
α
æ
ö
D
è
ø
¥
-¥
D
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
ë
û
=
-
D
+
- D
ì
ü
ï
ï
=
-
í
ý
ï
ï
î
þ
ò
	
(5.58)

212	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
Similarly, the expectation 
ˆ( )
E
[ ]
sb
Z
t
D
×  in (5.57) becomes
	
ì
ü
ï
ï
ç
÷
ç
÷
ê
ú
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
( )
2
2
ˆ
2
E
exp
(
(
)
( ))sin
2
exp
sin
2
sbn
DAsb
Z
t
sbn
sbn
Rsbn
Z
Rsb
j
Z
t
Z
t
π
τ
α
λ
τζ
π
α
λ
æ
ö
D
è
ø
D
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
é
ù
-
D
+
- D
ë
û
=
-
í
ý
ï
ï
î
þ
	
(5.59)
Substituting (5.58) and (5.49) into (5.56), and (5.59) and (5.48) into (5.57), we 
obtain the ACFs of the UA and DA components, respectively: 
	
é
ù
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
ë
û
æ
ö
æ
ö
[
]
(
)
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
1 ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
(
)
1
( )
exp
2 (
1)
(2
)
2
exp
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
2
2
exp
sin
2
UAbs
B
b
Rbs
UAbs
b
s b
UAbs
UAbs
Rbs
T
Rbs
R
Z
Rbs
Rbs
UA
B
R
B K
j
f
f
d
π
π
η
α
µ
τ
σ
πσ
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
τζ
π
α
α
λ
=
= -
D
-
=
-
ç
÷
+
è
ø
+
-
-
-
å å ò
	
(5.60)
	
(
)
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
ˆ
(
)
1
(2
)
0
2
ˆ
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
Rmax
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
( )
exp
2 (
1)
exp
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
exp
sin
Rsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
ZDAsb
S
s
DA
S
s
b s
T
R
Rsb
Rsb
Rsb
Rsb
R
S K
j
f
f
d
π
α
µ
σ
πσ
τ ζ
π
λ
η
τ
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
α
α
D
-
=
= -
æ
ö
é
ù
ç
÷
ê
ú
è
ø
ë
û
æ
ö
=
-
ç
÷
+
è
ø
é
ù
+
-
-
ë
û
-
å å ò
	
(5.61)
For small angle spreads, the AoAs 
ˆ
Rsb
α
 and 
ˆ
Rbs
α
 are mainly concentrated around 
the mean AoAs 
ˆ
DAsb
µ
 and 
ˆ
UAbs
µ
, respectively. Using the first-order Taylor expan-
sion, the AoA angles can be approximated as follows 
»
-
-
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
cos(
)
cos(
)
sin(
)(
)
Rsb
DAsb
DAsb
Rsb
DAsb
α
µ
µ
α
µ
	
(5.62)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
sin(
)
sin(
)
cos(
)(
)
Rsb
DAsb
DAsb
Rsb
DAsb
α
µ
µ
α
µ
»
+
-
	
(5.63)
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
sin(
)
sin(
)
2sin(
)cos(
)(
)
Rsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
Rsb
DAsb
α
µ
µ
µ
α
µ
»
+
-
	
(5.64)
	
   
α
µ
µ
α
µ
µ
1
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
sin(
)
sin(
)
cos(
)(
) sin(
)
Rsb
DAsb
DAsb
Rsb
DAsb
DAsb
-
-
-
»
-
-
/
	
(5.65)
and similar approximations can be applied to the AoAs 
ˆ
Rbs
α
. Using these trigono­
metric approximations and the equality
2
2
2
2
2
1 2
(2
)
2
(2
)
j x
x
e
e
dx
e
α
σ
σ α
πσ
- /
-
/
-
/
=
ò
 [19], 
the ACFs of the UA and DA components can be written as

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
213
	
[
]
[
]
2
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
2
1 ˆ
1
Rmax
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
2
2
2
2
( )
exp
sin
2 (
1)
exp(
2
cos(
)
cos(
) )
exp
2
sin(
)
sin(
)
sin
[
ZUAbs
UAbs
UAbs
B
b
B
UA
UAbs
b
s b
UAbs
R
UAbs
T
UAbs
R
UAbs
T
Z
R
B K
j
f
f
f
f
τ ζ
π
λ
σ
π
λ
η
τ
µ
πτ
µ
γ
µ
γ
πτ
µ
γ
µ
γ
τ ζ
D
æ
ö
é
ù
ç
÷
ê
ú
ë
û
ç
÷
è
ø
=
= -
D
=
-
+
-
-
-
+
ì-
-
-
+
íî
é
ù
+
ë
û
å å
]
2
ˆ
ˆ
cos
UAbs
UAbs
µ
µ
ìíî
	
(5.66)
	
(
)
2
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
2
ˆ
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
Rmax
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
Tmax
2
2
2
2
( )
exp
sin
2 (
1)
exp
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
exp
2
sin(
)
sin(
)
[
ZDAsb
DAsb
DAsb
S
s
DA
S
DAsb
s
b s
T
R
DAsb
DAsb
R
T
DAsb
DAsb
Z
R
S K
j
f
f
f
f
τ ζ
π
λ
σ
π
λ
η
τ
µ
πτ
µ
γ
µ
γ
πτ
µ
γ
µ
γ
τ ζ
D
æ
ö
é
ù
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ë
û
è
ø
=
= -
D
=
-
+
é
ù
+
-
-
ë
û
ì
é
ù
-
-
-
+
í
ë
û
î
é
+
ë
å å
}
2
ˆ
ˆ
sin
cos
]
DAsb
DAsb
µ
µ
ùû
	
(5.67)
From (5.53), (5.66), and (5.67), we can observe that the ACF of a shallow-­water 
acoustic channel follows an exponential function. This result is in agreement with 
the experimentally obtained ACFs [3, 27, 28]. Furthermore, this result differs 
from the traditional Bessel-shaped ACFs that are typical for radio channels. These  
differences are due to different propagation mechanisms in SWA and radio channels. 
To illustrate this exponential behavior, Figure 5.15 plots ACF R(t) as a function 
of time. This curve is obtained assuming that the carrier frequency is fc = 1.7 kHz 
and the speed of sound is c = 1500 m/s. The distance between the Tx and Rx is set to 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Temporal autocorrelation function
Normalized temporal ACF |R( )|
Time t [s]
Figure 5.15  The magnitude of temporal autocorrelation function as a function of time.

214	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
R = 2 km, while the water, Tx, and Rx depths are h = 100m, h = 50m, and hR = 50m, 
respectively. It is assumed that the Tx and Rx are stationary (i.e., vT = vR = 0 m/s). 
For illustration purposes, the rest of the model parameters are chosen to be: K = 0.6,  
S = B = 1, 
10
11
10
11
0 1
DA
DA
UA
UA
Z
Z
Z
Z
ζ
ζ
ζ
ζ
D
D
D
D
=
=
=
=
. , hS = 0.6, mDA10 = 166°, 
mDA11 = 163.5°, mUA10 = 191.9°, mUA11 = 192.9°, sDA10 = 2.5°, sDA11 = 4°, sUA10 = 
2.4°, sUA11 = 3°, aTR = 180°.
5.3.3.2   Doppler Power Spectrum
The Doppler power spectrum of the complex channel h(t) is a Fourier ransform of 
its temporal autocorrelation function R(t); that is,
	
π τ
S f
R
e
d
τ
τ
2
( )
( )
j
f
¥
-
-¥
= ò
	
(5.68)
Applying the Fourier transform to (5.52) yields 
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
LoS
UA
DA
S f
S
f
S
f
S
f
=
+
+
	
(5.69)
By calculating the Fourier transform of the ACF in (5.53), we obtain the Doppler 
power spectrum of the LoS component as follows 
	
(
)
τ
τ
δ
α
γ
α
γ
=
=
-
-
+
-
+
Rmax
Tmax
( )
{
( )}
cos(
)
cos(
)
1
LoS
LoS
TR
R
TR
T
S
f
R
K
f
f
f
K
F
	
(5.70)
The Fourier transforms of the ACFs RUA(t) and RDA(t) from (5.66) and (5.67) can 
be written as 
	
[
]
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
Rmax
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
2
( )
exp
2
sin
2 (
1)
2
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
2
exp
sin
cos
2
sin(
)
UAbs
UAbs
B
Z
B
UA
UAbs
s b
b
UAbs
R
UAbs
T
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
Z
UAbs
R
b
S
f
j
f
B K
j
f
f
f
τζ
η
π
π
τ
µ
λ
πτ
µ
γ
µ
γ
σ
π
τζ
µ
µ
λ
τ
µ
γ
¥
D
-¥
= -
=
D
é
ù
=
-
-
ê
ú
+
ë
û
-
-
-
+
ì
é
ï
é
ù
-
ê
í
ê
ú
ë
û
ê
ï
ë
î
+
-
-
å å ò
2
Tmax
ˆ
sin(
)
UAbs
T
f
d
τ
µ
γ
τ
ü
ù ï
+
ú ý
ú ï
û þ
ö
÷ø
æ
çè
	
(5.71)
	
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
Tmax
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
ˆ
Rmax
2
( )
exp
2
sin
2 (
1)
2
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
exp
[
sin
cos
sin(
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
S
s
Z
S
DA
DAsb
s
b s
R
T
DAsb
DAsb
Z
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
S
f
j
f
S K
j
f
f
f
σ
π
λ
τ ζ
η
π
π τ
µ
λ
πτ
µ
γ
µ
γ
τζ
µ
µ
τ
µ
γ
¥
D
-¥
=
= -
D
æ
é
ù
ç
=
-
-
ê
ú
+
ë
û
çè
ö
÷
é
ù
-
-
-
+
ë
û÷ø
ì
é
ù
-
í
ë
û
î
+
-
å å ò
2
ˆ
Tmax
)
sin(
)]
R
T
DAsb
f
d
τ
µ
γ
τ
üï
-
+
ý
ïþ
	
(5.72)

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
215
Using the equality 
2
2
2
2
(4
)
p x
qx
q
p
e
dx
e
p
π
¥
-
±
/
-¥
=
/
ò
 (3.323-2, [29]) to solve the in-
tegrals in (5.71) and (5.72), we obtain the Doppler power spectrum of the LoS 
component as follows:
	
1 ˆ
1
2
ˆ
4
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
( )
2 (
1)
( 2
)
exp
0.5
B
b
B
UA
b
s b
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
S
f
B K
j
f
C
A
A
η
π
π
σ
σ
=
= -
=
+
é
ù
+
ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
å å
	
(5.73)
	
ˆ
1
1
2
ˆ
4
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
( )
2 (
1)
( 2
)
exp
0.5
S
s
S
DA
s
b s
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
S
f
S K
j
f
C
A
A
η
π
π
σ
σ
=
= -
=
+
é
ù
+
ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
å å
	
(5.74)
where 
ˆ
UAbs
A
, 
ˆ
UAbs
C
, 
ˆ
DAsb
A
, and 
ˆ
DAsb
C
 are 
	
[
]
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
sin
cos
2
sin(
)
sin(
)
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
Z
R
UAbs
R
T
UAbs
T
A
v
v
π
ζ
µ
µ
λ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
λ
D
é
ù
=
+
ê
ú
ë
û
-
-
+
	
(5.75)
	
[
]
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
sin
2
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
UAbs
Z
UAbs
UAbs
R
UAbs
R
T
UAbs
T
C
j
v
v
ζ
π
µ
λ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
λ
é
ù
D
ê
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
=
+
-
-
+
	
(5.76)
	
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
sin
cos
2
sin(
)
sin(
)
DAsb
Z
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
R
R
T
T
DAsb
DAsb
A
v
v
π
ζ
µ
µ
λ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
λ
D
é
ù
=
ê
ú
ë
û
é
ù
+
-
-
+
ë
û	
(5.77)
	
é
ù
+
-
-
+
ë
û
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
sin
2
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
DAsb
Z
DAsb
DAsb
R
R
T
T
DAsb
DAsb
C
j
v
v
ζ
π
µ
λ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
λ
D
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
=
 
	
(5.78)

216	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
Figure 5.16 shows an example of Doppler power spectrum. Isovelocity scatter-
ing environment with the carrier frequency fc = 10 kHz and the speed of sound  
c = 1,500 m/s is assumed. The distance between the Tx and Rx is set to be R = 2 km. 
The water, Tx, and Rx depths are chosen to be h = 50m, hT = 18m, and hR = 18m, 
respectively. The Tx and Rx are moving with speeds uT = uR = 2 m/s and have ori-
entations gT = gR = 40°. The rest of the model parameters are chosen to be K = 0.6,  
S = B = 1, 
10
11
10
11
0 09
DA
DA
UA
UA
Z
Z
Z
Z
ζ
ζ
ζ
ζ
D
D
D
D
=
=
=
=
.
, 
10
178
DA
µ
=
, 
11
177
DA
µ
=
 , 
10
182
UA
µ
=
, 
11
183
UA
µ
=
, 
10
10
DA
σ
=
, 
11
13 6
DA
σ
=
. , 
10
10
UA
σ
=
, 
11
13 6
UA
σ
=
. , 
180
TR
α
=
, h S = 0.4, and hB = 1 – hS. We can observe that the Doppler power spec-
trum of SWA channels differs from the Doppler power spectrum in F-to-M cellular, 
A-to-G, and V-to-V radio channels due to different propagation mechanisms. 
5.3.3.3  Level Crossing Rate and Average Fade Duration for  
UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels
The level crossing rate (LCR), L(R), is introduced in Section 2.3.5.1 and defined as 
the rate at which the signal envelope crosses level R in the positive direction. The 
LCR can be written as [25] 
 	
0
( )
(
)
L R
p
R
d
α α
α
α
α
¥
,
=
,
ò




	
(5.79)
where a = |h(t)| is the envelope level, 
| ( )|
= h t
α


 is the envelope slope, and 
, ( , )
p
R
α α
α

  
is the joint pdf of the envelope level and the envelope slope. 
Here, we will deploy the model described in Section 5.3.2 to calculate the LCR. 
First, we observe that the envelope |h(t)| of the model described in Section 5.3.2 has a 
Ricean distribution. Then the envelope slope | ( )|
h t

 has a Gaussian distribution. Further-
more, the joint pdf 
(
)
pα α α α
,
,

  cannot be represented as a product of a Rice pdf p|h(t)|(a) 
and a Gaussian pdf 
( ) ( )
h t
p
α
|
|

 , because the real and imaginary components of the com-
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Doppler power spectrum
Normalized Doppler power spectrum S(f) [dB]
Doppler frequency f [Hz]
Figure 5.16  The normalized Doppler power spectrum.

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
217
plex faded envelope h(t) are correlated. Hence, the LCR for LoS conditions (Ricean 
fading, correlated in-phase and quadrature components) can be written as [30]
	
πξδ
θ
ξδ
θ
θ
ê
ú
ë
û
é
ù
e
d  
´
+
erf(
sin )
2
2
0
2
(
)/(2
)
3/ 2
0
0
0
(
sin )
2
( )
cosh
cos
sin
R
b
R
R
L R
e
b
b
π
δ
ξδ
θ
χ
δ
θ
π
-
+
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
è
ø
ò
/2
	
(5.80)
where cosh(×) is the hyperbolic cosine function and erf(·) is the error function. The rest of 
the parameters are 
/(
1),
K K
δ =
+
 
2
2
0
1 /
,
b
b
b
χ =
-
 
1
0
(2
/
)/
2
LoS
f
b
b
ξ
π
χ
=
-
 , and 
	
2
2
0
[
( ) ]
[
( ) ]
i
q
b
E h t
E h t
=

	
(5.81)
	
1
[
( )
( )]
[
( ) ( )]
i
q
q
i
b
E h t h t
E h t h t
=



	
(5.82)
	
2
2
2
[
( ) ]
[
( ) ]
i
q
b
E h t
E h t
=



	
(5.83)
where hi(t) and hq(t) denote the real and imaginary part of h(t), respectively, and 
( )
i t
h
 and 
( )
q t
h
 are first derivatives of hi(t) and hq(t) with respect to time t. 
When SWA scattering is characterized using the probability density functions 
in (5.48)–(5.51), closed-form expressions for b0, b1, and b2 can be obtained by 
substituting (5.35) into (5.80). Parameter b0 then becomes 
	
0
0
0
1
2
2
2
1
UA
DA
b
b
b
K
=
+
=
+  	
(5.84)
where 0
UA
b
 and 0
DA
b
 are, respectively, 
	
0
0
}
2
{
( )|
(
1)
UA
UA
B
b
R
K
τ
τ
η
=
= Â
=
+
	
(5.85)
	
0
{
( )|
0)
(
1)
DA
DA
b
S
R
K
τ τ
η
= Â
=
=
+
2
	
(5.86)
and where Â{×} denotes the real part operation. Similarly, parameters b1 and b2 can 
be obtained as follows: 
	
UA
DA
n
n
n
b
b
b
=
+
	
(5.87)
where n Î {1, 2} and UA
n
b
 and DA
n
b
 can be written as 

218	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
[
]
0
1
0
Tmax
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
1
( )
2
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
2
UA
UA
B
b
UAbs
T
UAbs
R
b
s b
dR
b
d
b
f
f
B
τ
τ
τ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
ì
ü
ï
ï
í
ý
=
ï
ï
î
þ
=
= -
= Á
|
=
+
-
-
å å
	
(5.88)
	
0
1
0
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
Rmax
ˆ
1
1
1
( )
2
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
2
DA
DA
S
s
T
R
DAsb
DAsb
s
b s
dR
b
d
b
f
f
S
τ
τ
τ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
ì
ü
ï
ï
í
ý
=
ï
ï
î
þ
=
= -
= Á
|
é
ù
=
+
-
-
ë
û
å å
	
(5.89)
	
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
0
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
( )
1
2
2
2
UA
UA
B
b
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
b
s b
d R
b
d
b
b
a
c
B
τ
τ
τ
ì
ü
ï
ï
í
ý
=
ï
ï
î
þ
=
= -
= -Â
|
=
-
+
å å
	
(5.90)
	
2
0
2
2
0
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
1
( ) |
2
2
2
DA
DA
S
s
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
s
b s
d R
b
d
b
b
a
c
S
τ
τ
τ
=
=
= -
ì
ü
ï
ï
= -Âí
ý
ï
ï
î
þ
=
-
+
å å
 	
 
(5.91)
and where {}
Á ×  denotes the imaginary part operation, and 
ˆ
UAbs
a
, 
ˆ
UAbs
b
, 
ˆ
UAbs
c
, 
ˆ
DAsb
a
, 
ˆ
DAsb
b
, and 
ˆ
DAsb
c
 are, respectively, 
	
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
sin
2
ZUAbs
UAbs
UAbs
a
ζ
π
µ
λ
D
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
=
 	
(5.92)
	
[
]
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
UAbs
UAbs
R
UAbs
T
b
f
f
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
=
-
-
+
	
(5.93)
	
ζ
µ
µ
=
-
-
+
]
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
sin(
)
sin(
)
2
2
sin
cos
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
R
UAbs
T
UAbs
UAbs
Z
c
f
f
σ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
π
λ
D
é
ù
+
ê
ú
ë
û
é
ë
ù
û
[
	
(5.94)
	
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
sin
2
ZDAsb
DAsb
DAsb
a
ζ
π
µ
λ
∆






=
	
(5.95)
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
Tmax
2
cos(
)
cos(
)
R
T
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
b
f
f
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
é
ù
=
-
-
+
ë
û 	
(5.96)

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
219
	
=
-
-
+
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
Tmax
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
[2
sin(
)
sin(
)
2
2
sin
cos
]
DAsb
DAsb
R
T
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
Z
DAsb
DAsb
c
f
f
σ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
π
ζ
µ
µ
λ
D
é
ù
ë
û
é
ù
+
ê
ú
ë
û
	
(5.97)
The average fade duration (AFD) is the average time that the envelope spends below 
level R. When a LoS component is present, the AFD can be written as [25]
	
2
1
( 2
, 2(
1)
)
( )
( )
Q
K
K
R
T R
L R
-
+
=
 	
(5.98)
where Q(a, b) is the Marcum Q function.
In the presence of shadowing, the envelope |h(t)| can be modeled using the ex-
tended Suzuki process (i.e., as a product of the Ricean process with cross-correlated 
components and the log-normal process). The LCR for LoS conditions with shad-
owing can thus be written as [30] 
	
ê
ç
÷ ú
sin
erf
(
)
2
2
2
2
0
2
( n )
2
/ 2
((
/ )
/(2
)
3/ 2
0
0
0
0
sin
( , )
cos
2
( , )
( )
cosh
2
sin
( , )
l
R l
b
F R l
R
lb
R
F R l e
L R
e
l
l
b
e
d dl
F R l
F
σ
π
δ
ξδ
θ
δ
θ
χ
πσ
π
θ
θ
πξδ
ξδ
θ
-
¥
-
+
æ
ö
-ç
÷
è
ø
=
é
ù
ê
ú
´
+
ê
ú
ë
û
ò
ò
l
R,l
)
æ
ö
è
ø
ç
÷
æ
ö
è
ø
ç
÷
	
(5.99)
where cosh(×) is the hyperbolic cosine function, erf(×) is the error function, and s 
is the variance of shadow process. The rest of the parameters are 
(
1)
K K
δ =
/
+
, 
2
2
0
1
b
b b
χ =
-
/
, 
1
0
(2
)
2
LoS
f
b b
ξ
π
χ
=
-
/
/
, 
2
(
)
1
(
)(
)
F R l
R l
γ χ σ
,
=
+
/
/
, 
2
2
c
L
γ =
/
, and Lc 
is the correlation distance. 
To verify these models for LCR, we compare the theoretical results with those 
obtained from measured data. The experimental data was collected during the NRL 
ACOMMS09 experiment described in Section 5.2.2. The channel measurements 
are collected at fc = 17 kHz and the speed of sound is c = 1440 m/s. The distance 
between the Tx and Rx is R = 1.5 km. The water, Tx, and Rx depths are h = 80m,  
hT = 41m, and hR = 45m, respectively. It is assumed that the Tx and Rx are relatively 
stationary—that is, slightly moving with waves (i.e., gT = gR = 90°). 
Figures 5.17 and 5.18 compare the analytical LCRs with and without shadow-
ing with the measured LCRs with and without shadowing, respectively. 
The analytical curves in Figures 5.17 and  5.18 are obtained with the parame­
ters K = 0.56, S = B = 1, vT = vR = 0.001m/s, mDA10 = 168.5°, mDA11= 167.5°,  
mUA10 = 185.5°, mUA11 = 186°, sDA10 = 1.4°, sDA11 = 1.9°, sUA10 = 2.1°, sUA11 = 2.6°, 
10
11
0 9
DA
DA
Z
Z
ζ
ζ
D
D
=
=
. , 
10
11
1 6
UA
UA
Z
Z
ζ
ζ
D
D
=
= . , g = 0.621, s = 3.55, hS = 0.58, and 
hB = 1 – hS. The results show good match between the measured and simulated 
results.

220	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
5.3.4  Two-Dimensional Model for MIMO UV-to-UV Frequency-Flat  
Acoustic Fading Channels
The use of multiple hydrophones together with MIMO diversity techniques can im-
prove the data rate or spectral efficiency of underwater acoustic communications. 
To model such a propagation environment, the model described in Section 5.3.2 is 
extended in [21] to include the effect of spatial diversity. 
Here, we consider a medium- or long-range MIMO communication system with 
Lt transmit and Lr receive transducers. Like in Section 5.3.2, the propagation occurs 
in a shallow-water environment with constant sound speed (i.e., sound energy propa-
gates along the plane waves) and the propagation is characterized with either LoS or 
NLoS conditions between the Tx and the Rx. The MIMO M-to-M SWA channel can 
be described by an Lr ´ Lt matrix H(t) = [hij(t)]Lr × Lt of channel impulse responses. 
Figure 5.19 shows a SWA channel with Lt = Lr = 2 transducer elements. This 
elementary 2 ´ 2 transducer configuration will be used later to construct uniform 
linear arrays with an arbitrary number of transducer elements. As in Section 5.3.2, 
-15
-12
-9
-6
-3
0
3
6
9
1E-6
1E-5
1E-4
1E-3
0.01
Theoretical LCR without shadow fading
 Measured LCR without shadow fading
Level crossing rate L(R)
R [dB]
Figure 5.17  Measured and simulated level crossing rates without shadow fading.
-15
-12
-9
-6
-3
0
3
6
9
12
0.01
0.1
1
 Theoretical LCR with shadow fading
 Measured LCR with shadow fading
Level crossing rate L(R)
R [dB]
Figure 5.18  Measured and simulated level crossing rates with shadow fading.

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
221
the depths of Tx and Rx are denoted by hT and hR, respectively, while the orientations 
of Tx and Rx transducer arrays in the x–z plane are denoted by qT and qR, respectively, 
relative to the x-axis (as shown in Figure 5.20). The spacing between two adjacent 
transducer elements at the Tx and Rx is d­T and dR, respectively. Finally, the Tx and Rx 
are moving with constant speeds vT and vR in directions described by angles gT and gR 
in the x-z plane (relative to the x-axis), respectively. 
The symbols 
( )
ˆ
p
Tsbn
α
 and 
( )
ˆ
p
Tbsm
α
 are the angles of departure (AoDs) of micro-
eigenrays that start from 
( )
p
x
T
 and impinge on scatterers ( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
 and ( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
, respectively, 
while 
( )
ˆ
q
Rsbn
α
 and 
( )
ˆ
q
Rbsm
α
 are the angles of arrival (AoAs) of micro-eigenrays scattered 
from ( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
 and 
(
)
ˆ
B
bsm
S
, respectively, and arriving at 
( )
q
x
R
. 
Assuming small angle spreads, dT << min(hT, h – hT), and dR << min(hR, h – hR), 
we can approximate the AoDs and AoAs in Figure 5.19 as 
( )
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
p
p
Tsbn
Tsbn
Tsbn
α
α
α
»
»

, 
( )
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
p
p
Tbsm
Tbsm
Tbsm
α
α
α
»
»

, 
( )
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
q
q
Rsbn
Rsbn
Rsbn
α
α
α
»
»

, and 
( )
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
q
q
Rbsm
Rbsm
Rbsm
α
α
α
»
»

, where 
ˆ
Tsbn
α
, 
ˆ
Tbsm
α
, 
ˆ
Rsbn
α
, and 
ˆ
Rbsm
α
 are defined in Figure 5.19. Finally, the symbol aTR 
denotes the AoA of the LoS ray. For ease of reference, Figure 5.20 details the ge-
ometry of the LoS path, as well as the geometry of single-bounced surface and  
single-bounced bottom micro-eigenrays (i.e., 
ˆ
1
0
s
b
, b = 1, sˆ = 0) scattered from 
the ( ) ˆ
1
0
S
s
b
n
S = , = , -th and ( )
1 ˆ 0
B
b
s
m
S = , = , -th micro-scatterers, respectively. 
The horizontal spacing between the Tx and Rx is denoted by R, and the water 
depth is denoted by h. For medium- and long-range shallow-water communication, 
we can assume that the depths h, ­hT, and hR are much smaller than the distance R. 
Symbols ( )
ˆ
p
T sbn
ε
 and ( )
ˆ
p
T bsm
ε
 denote distances from 
( )
p
x
T
 to ( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
 and ( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
, respectively, 
where ( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
 and ( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
 denote the nth and mth micro-scatterers located around the 
macro-scatterers ( )
ˆ
S
sb
S
 and ( )
ˆ
B
bs
S
 at the surface and bottom, respectively, for 
ˆ
1
sb
n
N
£
£
 
)
~
(
,0
ˆ,1
q
n
b
Rs
=
=
z
x
Bottom
Surface
h
)
( p
x
T
)
~
( p
x
T
2
T
d
2
T
d
)
~
(q
x
R
)
(q
x
R
2
R
d
2
R
d
R
h
T
h
)
(
ˆ
S
n
b
s
S
)
(
ˆ
B
m
s
b
S
)
~
(
,0
ˆ,1
p
m
s
Tb
=
=
)
(
,0
ˆ,1
p
m
s
Tb
=
=
)
(
,0
ˆ,1
q
n
b
Rs
=
=
)
(
,0
ˆ,1
q
m
s
Rb
=
=
)
~
(
,0
ˆ,1
q
m
s
Rb
=
=
q
p~
R
)
~
(
,0
ˆ,1
p
n
b
Ts
=
=
)
(
,0
ˆ,1
p
n
b
Ts
=
=
q
p~
~
q
p~
pq
)
(
,1
ˆ,1
p
n
b
Ts
=
=
)
~
(
,1
ˆ,2
q
n
b
Rs
=
=
)
~
(
,1
ˆ,1
q
n
b
Rs
=
=
Macro-scatterer
Micro-scatterer
Figure 5.19  The geometry of MIMO UV-to-UV SWA channels with Lt = Lr = 2 transducer elements. 
Each macro-eigenray is represented as a large number of micro-eigenrays.

222	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
and 1£ m £ Mbsˆ , as shown in Figure 5.19. Similarly, symbols ( )
ˆ
p
Tsbn
ε 
, ( )
ˆ
p
Tbsm
ε 
, ( )
ˆ
q
Rsbn
ε
, 
( )
ˆ
q
Rbsm
ε
, ( )
ˆ
q
Rsbn
ε 
, ( )
ˆ
q
Rbsm
ε 
, pq
ε
, pq
ε , pq
ε , and pq
ε denote distances 
( )
p
x
T  – ( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
, 
( )
p
x
T  – ( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
, ( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
– 
( )
q
x
R
, 
( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
–
( )
q
x
R
, 
( )
ˆ
S
sbn
S
–
( )
q
x
R  , 
( )
ˆ
B
bsm
S
–
( )
q
x
R  , 
( )
p
x
T
–
( )
q
x
R
, 
( )
p
x
T  –
( )
q
x
R
, 
( )
p
x
T
–
( )
q
x
R  , and 
( )
p
x
T  –
( )
q
x
R  , 
respectively. Finally, hTR denotes the distance Tx – Rx. 
Like in Section 5.3.2, the complex faded envelope under frequency-flat fading 
can be written as a superposition of LoS, upward-arriving (UA), and downward-
arriving (DA) rays; that is, 
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
LoS
UA
DA
pq
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
=
+
+
 	
(5.100)
but the respective components are now
	
2
2
( )
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
j
f
t j
d
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
pq
h
t
a
e
π
π
λ
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
W
	
(5.101)
	
ç
÷
è
ø
ˆ
,
,
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
, ˆ
1 ˆ
1
1
( )
lim
UA
UA
UA
bs
bsm
pq bsm
pq bsm
bs
B
b
M
j
f
t j
d
UA
UA
pq
pq
pq bsm
M
b
s b
m
h
t
a
e
π
π
φ
λ
æ
ö
-
+
®¥
=
= -
=
=
W
×
å å
å
	
(5.102)
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
,
,
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
,
ˆ
1
1
1
( )
lim
DA
DA
DA
sb
sbn
pq sbn
pq sbn
sb
N
S
s
j
f
t j
d
DA
DA
pq
pq
pq sbn
N
s
n
b s
h
t
a
e
π
π
φ
λ
æ
ö
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
®¥
=
=
= -
=
W
×
å å
å
	
(5.103)
where Wpq is the power associated with the pqth planar wave. For 
max{
}
min{
}
T
R
t
r
d
d
h h h
,
,
,

, we can assume that the total power is equally split 
among all transducer elements (i.e, Wpq = W for all p Î {1,…, Lt} and q Î {1,…, Lr}). 
z
x
Bottom
Surface
h
)
(p
x
T
)
~
(p
x
T
2
T
d
)
~
(q
x
R
)
(q
x
R
2
R
d
R
h
Th
)
(
ˆ
S
n
b
s
S
)
(
ˆ
B
m
s
b
S
)
(
ˆ
p
n
b
Ts
)
~
(
ˆ
p
m
s
Tb
)
~
(
ˆ
q
n
b
Rs
)
~
(
ˆ
q
m
s
Rb
R
)
(
ˆ
p
n
b
Ts
Tv
R
v
R
TR
R
T
O
R
O
m
s
Tbˆ
2
n
b
Ts ˆ
)
(
ˆ
2
p
m
s
Tb
)
~
(
ˆ
p
n
b
Ts
)
(
ˆ
q
n
b
Rs
m
s
Rbˆ
n
b
Rsˆ
)
(
ˆ
q
m
s
Rb
)
(
ˆ
q
m
s
Rb
)
(
ˆ
p
m
s
Tb
T
T
)
(
ˆ
q
n
b
Rs
TR
Figure 5.20  The detailed geometry of the LoS path, single-bounced surface, and single-bounced 
bottom micro-eigenrays scattered from the ( )
ˆ
S
s b n
S , ,  and ( )
ˆ
B
b s m
S , ,  micro-scatterers, respectively.

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
223
The channel gains, Doppler shift frequencies, phases, and path lengths in this model 
can be calculated as follows: 
Channel gains
•	
. The channel gains in this model are normalized such that 
the ensemble averages of the 
ˆ
UA
pq bsm
a
,
s and 
ˆ
DA
pq sbn
a
,
s are equal to 1. In addi-
tion, we introduce a set of parameters 
pq
K
 that describe how the total signal 
power between the pth transmit and the qth receive hydrophone is split be-
tween the LoS and NLoS components: between the pth transmit and qth re-
ceive hydrophone the power allocated to the LoS component is Kpq/(1+Kpq), 
while the total power allocated to the NLoS components is 1/(1+Kpq). For
max{
}
min{
}
T
R
t
r
d
d
h h h
,
,
,

, we can assume that the Ricean fading factor is 
the same between all transducer elements (i.e., Kpq = K for all pÎ{1,…,Lt} and 
q Î{1,…,Lr}). Furthermore, it is assumed that the relative power allocated to 
the UA and DA components is respectively hB and hS such that hB + hS = 1. 
These parameters have to be either set during simulations or estimated from 
measurements. Having all this in mind, the channel gains can be written as 
follows: 
	
1
LoS
pq
K
a
K
=
+  	
(5.104)
	
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
1
2
UA
B
pq bsm
bs
a
K
B
M
η
,
=
+
 	
(5.105)
	
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
2
1
DA
S
pq sbn
sb
a
N
S
K
η
,
=
+
 	
(5.106)
Doppler shifts
•	
. As in Section 5.3.2, the Doppler shifts are 
	
Tmax
Rmax
cos(
)
cos(
)
LoS
pq
TR
T
TR
R
f
f
f
α
π
γ
α
γ
=
+
-
+
-
 	
(5.107)
	
+
-
=
D
+
-
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
1
( )sin
cos(
)
cos(
)
UA
bsm
Rbsm
Tbsm
T
bsm
Rbsm
R
f
Z
t
f
t
f
α
α
γ
λ
α
γ
	
(5.108)
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
1
( )sin
cos(
)
cos(
)
DA
T
sbn
Rsbn
Tsbn
sbn
R
Rsbn
f
Z
t
f
t
f
α
α
γ
λ
α
γ
=
D
+
-
+
-
	
(5.109)
Phases
•	
. As in Section 5.3.2, we assume that the phases 
ˆ
pq sbn
φ
,
 and fpq,bsˆm are 
independent random variables uniformly distributed on the interval [–p,p) 
and independent from any other random variable. 
Path lengths
•	
. From Figure 5.19, path lengths of the LoS, UA, and DA waves 
can be written as
	
LoS
pq
pq
d
ε
=
 	
(5.110)
	
( )
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
p
q
UA
UA
UA
pq bsm
Tbsm
Tbs
Rbsm
Rbs
d
ε
ε
ε
ε
,
=
-
+
-
 	
(5.111)

224	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
( )
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
p
q
DA
DA
DA
pq sbn
Tsbn
Tsb
Rsbn
Rsb
d
ε
ε
ε
ε
,
=
−
+
−
ˆ
 	
(5.112)
For shallow water acoustic propagation, we can assume that the water depths hT, 
hR, and h are much smaller than the distance R between the Tx and Rx—that is, 
max{
}
t
r
h h h
R
,
,

 (local scattering condition). Under this assumption, the distances 
( )
ˆ
ε p
Tsbn, 
( )
ˆ
ε p
Tbsm, 
( )
ˆ
ε q
Rsbn, 
( )
ˆ
ε q
Rbsm, and εpq can be approximated as follows [23]: 
	
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1 2
cos(
)
sin
2
p
t
T
T
T
Rsbn
Tsbn
Rsbn
L
p
h
d
ε
α
θ
α
+ −
≈
+
+
	
(5.113)
	
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1 2
cos(
)
sin
2
p
t
T
T
Rbsm
T
Tbsm
Rbsm
L
p
h
h
d
ε
α
θ
α
+ -
-
≈-
+
+
	
(5.114)
	
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1 2
cos(
)
sin
2
q
r
R
R
R
Rsbn
Rsbn
Rsbn
L
q
h
d
ε
α
θ
α
+ −
≈
−
−
	
(5.115)
	
( )
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1 2
cos(
)
sin
2
q
r
R
R
Rbsm
R
Rbsm
Rbsm
L
q
h h
d
ε
α
θ
α
+ −
−
≈−
−
−
	
(5.116)
	
1
2
cos(
)
2
1
2
cos(
)
2
t
pq
T
TR
T
r
R
TR
R
L
p d
L
p d
ε
α
θ
α
θ
+
-
»
-
+
-
-
-
	
(5.117)
where p and q take values from the sets p Î{1,…,Lt} and q Î{1,…,Lr}, respectively. 
Similarly, 
ˆ
DA
Tsb
ε
, 
ˆ
DA
Rsb
ε
, 
ˆ
UA
Tbs
ε
, and 
ˆ
UA
Rbs
ε
 can be written as
	
ˆ
ˆ
sin
T
DA
Tsb
Dasb
h
ε
µ
=
	
(5.118)
	
ˆ
ˆ
sin
R
DA
Rsb
DAsb
h
ε
µ
=
	
(5.119)
	
ˆ
ˆ
sin
T
UA
Tbs
UAbs
h
h
ε
µ
-
= -
	
(5.120)
	
ˆ
ˆ
sin
R
UA
Rbs
UAbs
h
h
ε
µ
-
= -
	
(5.121)
where the mean AoA angles 
ˆ
DAsb
µ
 and mUAbsˆ are as depicted in Figure 5.12. 
5.3.5  Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of UV-to-UV Frequency-Flat 
MIMO Acoustic Fading Channels
Using the model described in Section 5.3.4, we can now derive the key temporal and 
spatial characteristics of UV-to-UV frequency-flat MIMO acoustic fading channels. 

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
225
5.3.5.1  Space-Time Correlation Function
Assuming a shallow water acoustic scattering environment characterized by Gauss-
ian pdfs in (5.48)–(5.51), we will now derive the space-time correlation function 
(ST-CF) of the complex faded envelope in (5.100). 
The normalized space-time correlation function between two complex faded 
envelopes hpq(t) and 
( )
pq
h
t

 is defined as 
	
,
[
( )
(
) ]
(
,
, )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
pq
pq
pq pq
T
R
pq
pq
E h
t h
t
R
d
d
h
t
h
t
τ
τ
τ
∗
∗
+
=
+



	
(5.122)
where (×)* denotes complex conjugate operation, E[×] is the statistical expectation opera-
tor, and Var[×] is the statistical variance operator. Since 
( )
UA
pq
h
t  and 
( )
DA
pq
h
t  are independent 
complex Gaussian random processes with zero means, (5.122) can be simplified to 
	
,
,
,
,
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
LoS
UA
DA
pq pq
T
R
T
R
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
R
d
d
R
d
d
R
d
d
R
d
d
τ
τ
τ
τ
=
+
+







	 (5.123)
where 
(
)
LoS
T
R
pq pq
R
d
d
τ
,
,
,

, 
(
)
UA
T
R
pq pq
R
d
d
τ
,
,
,

, and 
(
)
DA
T
R
pq pq
R
d
d
τ
,
,
,

 denote the normalized 
ST-CFs of the LoS, upward-arriving, and downward-arriving components, respectively. 
Following a line of reasoning similar to Section 5.3.3, the space-time correla-
tion functions of the LoS, UA, and DA components can be obtained as follows: 
	
Tmax
Rmax
2
E
( )
(
)
(
)
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
2
[
cos(
)
cos(
)]
1
[(
)
cos(
) (
)
cos(
)]
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
LoS
T
R
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
TR
T
TR
R
T
TR
T
R
TR
R
h
t h
t
R
d
d
h
t
h
t
j
f
f
K e
K
j
p p d
q q d
e
π
λ
τ
τ
τ
πτ
α
γ
α
γ
α
θ
α
θ
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
*
+
,
,
=
*
+
-
-
-
=
+
-
-
-
-
-
´


	
(5.124)
	
[
]
(
)
*
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
[
( )
(
) ]
(
,
, )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
2
exp
sin
2 (
1)
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
exp
2
co
UA
UA
pq
pq
UA
T
R
UA
UA
pq
pq
B
b
Z
B
UAbs
UAbs
b
s b
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
E h
t h
t
R
d
d
h
t
h
t
B K
j
p
p d
q
q d
j
f
π
λ
τ
τ
τ
τ ζ
η
π
µ
λ
µ
θ
µ
θ
πτ
*
æ
ö
D
é
ù
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ë
û
ç
÷
=
= -
è
ø
+
=
+
=
-
+
´
-
+
-
-
-
´
-
å å


[
]
(
)
[
]
[
]
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
ˆ
Tmax
ˆ
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
s(
)
cos(
)
2
exp
(
)
sin(
)
(
)
sin(
)
2
2
sin(
)
sin(
)
2
sin
cos
UAbs
UAbs
R
UAbs
T
UAbs
R
UAbs
R
T
UAbs
T
UAbs
R
UAbs
T
UAbs
UAbs
Z
f
q
q d
p
p d
f
f
µ
γ
µ
γ
σ
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ
πτ
µ
γ
µ
γ
π
τζ
µ
µ
λ
D
-
-
+
ì
é
ï
ê
´
-
-
-
-
-
+
í
ê
ï
ë
î
+
-
-
+
ü
ù ï
é
ù
+
ú ý
ê
ú
ë
û
ú ï
û þ


	
(5.125)

226	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
(
)
2
ˆ
*
2
2
ˆ
2
ˆ
1
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
[
( )
(
) ]
(
,
, )
Var[
( )]Var[
(
) ]
exp
sin
2 (
1)
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
exp
2
c
ZDAsb
DA
DA
pq
pq
DA
T
R
DA
DA
pq
pq
S
s
S
DAsb
s
b s
R
R
T
T
DAsb
DAsb
E h
t h
t
R
d
d
h
t
h
t
S K
j
q
q d
p
p d
j
f
τ ζ
π
λ
π
λ
τ
τ
τ
η
µ
µ
θ
µ
θ
πτ
D
*
æ
ö
é
ù
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ë
û
è
ø
=
= -
+
=
+
=
-
+
é
ù
´
-
-
-
-
+
ë
û
´
å å


(
)
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
Rmax
Rmax
2
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
os(
)
cos(
)
exp
(
)
sin(
)
(
)
sin(
)
2
sin(
)
sin(
)
sin
cos
DAsb
DAsb
T
R
DAsb
DAsb
R
R
T
T
DAsb
DAsb
R
T
DAsb
DAsb
Z
DAsb
DAsb
f
q
q d
p
p d
f
f
σ
π
λ
π
λ
µ
γ
µ
γ
µ
θ
µ
θ
πτ
µ
γ
µ
γ
τζ
µ
µ
D
é
ù
+
-
-
ë
û
ìï
é
ù
´
-
-
-
-
-
+
í
ë
û
ïî
é
ù
+
-
-
+
ë
û
ü
ù
é
ù
+
ë
û
úû


ïý
ïþ
ù
úû
(5.126)
5.3.5.2  Space-Doppler Power Spectral Density
The Doppler power spectrum can be obtained by taking the Fourier transform of 
the ST-CF in (5.123) with respect to time lag t, which essentially leads to a space-
Doppler power spectral density (sD-psd). Applying (5.68) to (5.123) yields the fol-
lowing results [23]:
	
,
,
,
,
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
(
,
, )
LoS
UA
DA
pq pq
T
R
T
R
T
R
T
R
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
S
d
d
f
S
d
d
f
S
d
d
f
S
d
d
f
=
+
+







	
(5.127) 
where 
(
)
LoS
T
R
pq pq
S
d
d
f
,
,
,

, 
(
)
UA
T
R
pq pq
S
d
d
f
,
,
,

, and 
(
)
DA
T
R
pq pq
S
d
d
f
,
,
,

 denote the normalized sD-
psds of the LoS, upward-arriving, and downward-arriving components, respectively. 
By calculating the Fourier transformation of the space-time correlation func-
tion in (5.124), we obtain the space-Doppler power spectral density of the LoS 
component: 
	
f
f
f
δ
α
γ
α
γ
-
-
+
-
(
cos(
)
cos(
))
Rmax
Tmax
TR
R
TR
T
[
]
(
)
2
(
)
1
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
LoS
T
R
pq pq
T
TR
T
R
TR
R
K
S
d
d
f
K
j
p
p d
q
q d
π
λ
α
θ
α
θ
,
,
,
=
+
-
-
-
-
-



	(5.128)
Similarly, the D-psds of the UA and DA components are, respectively,

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
227
	
(
)
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
4
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
(
)
exp
2 (
1)
2
2
2
0 5
exp
0 5
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
B
b
UA
B
UAbs
T
R
pq pq
UAbs
b
s b
UAbs
UAbs UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
S
d
d
f
B
B K
j
f
C
A
B
A
A
j
p
p d
q
q d
σ
η
π
σ
π
σ
σ
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ
æ
ö
ç
÷
ç
÷
,
ç
÷
è
ø
=
= -
,
,
=
-
+
æ
ö
+
+ .
ç
÷
ç
÷
.
ç
÷
è
ø
-
+
-
-
-
å å



[
]
(
)
)
R
	
	
	
(5.129)
	
2
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
4
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
(
)
exp
2 (
1)
2
2
2
0 5
exp
0 5
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
S
s
DA
S
DAsb
T
R
pq pq
DAsb
s
b s
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
T
T
R
R
DAsb
DAsb
S
d
d
f
B
S K
j
f
C
A
B
A
A
j
p
p d
q
q d
σ
η
π
σ
π
σ
σ
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ



	
	
	
	
(5.130)
where AUAbsˆ, CUAbsˆ, 
ˆ
DAsb
A
, and 
ˆ
DAsb
C
 are defined in (5.75)–(5.78), and 
ˆ
UAbs
B
 and 
ˆ
DAsb
B
 are, respectively 
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
(
)
sin(
)
(
)
sin(
)
UAbs
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
B
p
p d
q
q d
π
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ
λ
= −
−
+
+
−
−


	
(5.131)
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
 sD-psd, dT=dR=0
 sD-psd, dT=dR=0.5
 sD-psd, dT=dR=1
Normalized space-Doppler spectrum [dB]
Doppler frequency f [Hz]
Figure 5.21  The normalized MIMO space-Doppler power spectral density for dT = dR = [0,0.5l,1l].

228	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
(
)
sin(
)
(
)
sin(
)
T
T
R
R
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
B
p
p d
q
q d
π
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ
λ
= -
-
+
+
-
-


 	
(5.132)
Figure 5.21 plots several sD-psds. Here, we assume isovelocity scattering environ-
ment with carrier frequency fc = 10 kHz and speed of sound c = 1500 m/s. Further-
more, we choose the distance between the Tx and Rx to be R = 2 km. The water, Tx, 
and Rx depths are chosen to be h = 50m, hT = 18m, and hR = 18m, respectively. The 
Tx and Rx have Lt = Lr = 2 transducer elements with orientations qT  =  qR = 90°. The Tx 
and Rx are moving with speeds vT = vR = 2 m/s and have orientations gT = gR = 40°. The 
spacing between the Tx and Rx transducer elements are chosen from the set dT = dR 
Î[0, 0.5l, 1l]. The rest of the model parameters are chosen to be K = 0.6, S = B = 1, 
zDZDA10 = zDZDA11 = zDZUA10 = zDZUA11 = 0.09, mDA10 = 178°, mDA11 =  177°, mUA10 = 182°, 
mUA11 = 183°, sDA10 = 10°, sDA11 = 13.6°, sUA10 = 10°, sUA11 = 13.6°, aTR = 180°,  
hS = 0.4 and hB = 1–hS. From Figure 5.21, we can observe that the sD-psd magni-
tude and the Doppler spread decrease as the spacings between the Tx and Rx ele-
ments increase, while the Doppler shift remains unchanged. 
5.3.6  Modeling of Underwater Acoustic Particle Velocity Channels
A vector sensor package (VSP) generally consists of three orthogonally oriented sen-
sors and an omnidirectional hydrophone, all packed in a compact housing. Because 
of its small size, the VSP might be more useful than a hydrophone array. In contrast 
to the hydrophone array, which has a nonnegligible vertical aperture and is difficult 
to deploy on an autonomous underwater vehicle AUV, the VSP can be easily de-
ployed on the AUV and used for underwater acoustic communications. 
A vector sensor package measures important nonscalar components of the 
acoustic field such as particle velocity and acceleration, which cannot be measured 
by a single scalar pressure sensor [31]. They have been used for sonar and target lo-
calization, to accurately estimate the azimuth and elevation of a source, to avoid the 
left-right ambiguity in linear towed arrays of scalar sensors, and to reduce acoustic 
noise due to their directive beam pattern [32–35]. Application of vector sensors as 
multichannel underwater equalizers was recently studied in [36, 37]. 
In general, there are two types of vector sensors: inertial and gradient. Inertial 
sensors truly measure the velocity or acceleration by responding to the acoustic 
particle motion, whereas gradient sensors employ a finite-difference approxima-
tion to estimate the gradients of the acoustic field such as velocity and acceleration. 
Each sensor type has its own merits and limitations. Depending on the application, 
system cost, required precision, and so on, one can choose the proper sensor type 
and technology. 
Here, we consider a vector sensor system implemented in shallow water, as 
shown in Figure 5.22. In the two-dimensional x-z plane, there is one pressure trans-
mitter and one vector sensor that measures in a single point, the pressure, as well as 
the x and z components of the particle velocity. In Figure 5.22, the pressure channel 
is represented by a straight line, whereas the pressure-equivalent velocity channels 
are shown by curved dashed lines. To define pressure-equivalent velocity channels 
px(t) and pz(t), we first define the velocity channels vx and vz in m/s. According to 

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
229
the linearized momentum equation [38], the x and z components of the velocity at 
the frequency fc at the receive side can be written as 
	
0
( )
1
( )
x
c
dp t
v
t
j
dx
ρ ω
= −
	
(5.133)
	
0
( )
1
( )
z
c
dp t
v t
j
dz
ρ ω
= −
	
(5.134)
where p0 is the density of the fluid in kg/m3 and wc = 2pfc is the angular carrier fre­
quency in rad/s. These equations imply that the velocity in a certain direction is pro-
portional to the spatial pressure gradient in that direction [38]. Then, the associated 
pressure-equivalent velocity channels can be defined as 
	
0
( )
( )
( )
2
x
x
p t
cv
t
dp t
j
dx
ρ
λ
π
= -
=
	
(5.135)
	
0
( )
( )
( )
2
z
z
p t
cv t
dp t
j
dz
ρ
λ
π
= -
=
	
(5.136)
z
x
Bottom
Surface
h
R
h
T
h
x
T
x
R
)
(t
p
)
(t
px
)
(t
pz
Figure 5.22  A system with one pressure transmitter and one vector sensor that measures the pres-
sure, and the x and z components of the acoustic particle velocity.

230	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
where l is the carrier wavelength. Finally, note that signal pressure p(t) can be mod-
eled using (5.35) in Section 5.3.2. 
5.3.7  Modeling of UV-to-UV Frequency-Selective Acoustic Fading Channels
Up to this point, we have considered frequency-flat channel models that are appro-
priate for narrowband transmission, where the reciprocal of signal bandwidth is 
much greater than the time spread of the propagation path delays. However, this is 
not often the case in underwater communications. In shallow-water acoustic (SWA) 
channels, the range in the propagation path delays is usually much larger than the 
inverse signal bandwidth, causing frequency-selective fading. 
Here, we extend the model described in Section 5.3.4 to account for frequency-
selective fading. To account for frequency-selective fading, multipath-fading channels 
are modeled as time-varying in addition to being time-dispersive. Then, the input  
delay-spread function under frequency-selective fading can be written as a superposition  
of LoS, upward-arriving (UA), and downward-arriving (DA) rays; that is,
	
( , )
( , )
( , )
( , )
LoS
UA
DA
pq
pq
pq
pq
h
t
h
t
h
t
h
t
τ
τ
τ
τ
=
+
+
	
(5.137)
To simplify further analysis, the time-variant transfer function is used instead of 
the input delay-spread function. The time-variant transfer function is the Fourier 
transform of the input delay-spread function and can be written as [23]
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
LoS
UA
DA
pq
pq
pq
pq
T
t f
T
t f
T
t f
T
t f
,
=
,
+
,
+
,
	
(5.138)
where the the respective components are
è
ø
ç
÷
2
2
2
( , )
LoS
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
pq
j
f
t j
f
j
d
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
T
t f
a
e
π
π
π τ
λ
æ
ö
-
-
=
	
(5.139)
	
(
)
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
1
(
)
lim
UA
UA
UA
UA
bs
bsm
bsm
pq bsm
pq bsm
bs
M
B
b
j
f
t j
f
j
d
UA
UA
pq
pq bsm
M
b
s b
m
T
t f
a
e
π
λ
π
π τ
φ
,
,
-
-
+
,
®¥
=
= -
=
,
=
×
å å
å
	 (5.140)
	
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
1
(
)
lim
DA
DA
DA
DA
sb
sbn
sbn
pq sbn
pq sbn
sb
N
S
s
j
f
t j
f
j
d
DA
DA
pq
pq sbn
N
s
n
b s
T
t f
a
e
π
λ
π
π τ
φ
,
,
æ
ö
-
-
+
ç
÷
è
ø
,
®¥
=
=
= -
,
=
×
å å
å
	
(5.141)
The Doppler shift frequencies, phases, and path lengths are defined as in Section 5.3.4, 
while the amplitudes and time delays in this model can be calculated as follows: 
Amplitudes
•	
. The total signal power between the pth transmit and the qth 
receive hydrophone is split between the LoS and NLoS components: between 
the pth transmit and qth receive hydrophone the power allocated to the LoS 
component is Kpq /(1 + Kpq), while the total power allocated to the NLoS 
components is 1/(1 + Kpq). For {
}
{
}
,
,
,
T
R
T
R
d
d
h h h

, we can assume that 

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
231
the Ricean fading factor is the same between all hydrophone elements, (i.e.,  
Kpq = K for all p Î{1,…,Lt} and q Î{1,…,Lr}). Furthermore, it is assumed that 
the relative power allocated to the UA and DA components is, respectively, 
hB and hS such that hB + hS = 1. We also assume that a power Ppq is chan-
neled from transmit hydrophone p to receive hydrophone q. These parame-
ters have to be either set during simulations or estimated from measurements. 
Having all this in mind, the amplitudes can be written as follows: 
	
1
(
)
(
)
LoS
K
pq
S
TR
A
TR
K
a
L
L
ε
ε
+
=
	
(5.142)
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
UA
UA
UA
UA b
B
S
A
B
pq bsm
bs
bs
bs
bs
a
L D
L
D
L
K
B
M
η
θ
,
=
+
	
(5.143)
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
DA
DA
DA
DA b
S
S
A
B
pq sbn
sb
sb
sb
sb
a
L D
L
D
L
K
S
N
η
θ
,
=
+
	
(5.144)
where LS(eTR) and LA(eTR) are the LoS losses due to spherical spreading and ab-
sorption, respectively, 
ˆ
(
)
UA
S
bs
L D
 and 
ˆ
(
)
DA
S
sb
L D
 are the macro-eigenray propagation 
losses caused by spherical spreading, 
ˆ
(
)
UA
A
bs
L
D
 and 
ˆ
(
)
DA
A
sb
L
D
 are the macro-eigenray 
propagation losses caused by absorption, and 
ˆ
UA
bs
D
 and 
ˆ
DA
sb
D
 are the total distances 
traveled by UA and DA macro-eigenrays with sˆ,  b and 
ˆ
s b
,
 surface-bottom interac-
tions, respectively. Finally, 
ˆ
(
)
DA
B
sb
L θ
 and 
ˆ
(
)
UA
B
bs
L θ
 represent the impedance mismatch 
between the seawater and seabed. 
The propagation loss caused by the spherical spreading is calculated as 
LS(D)=1/D, while the absorbtion loss LA(D) is calculated using (5.29). Distances 
ˆ
UA
bs
D
 and 
ˆ
DA
sb
D
 are obtained using the method of images and can be written as [5] 
	
2
(
ˆ)
2
ˆ
ˆ
(2
( 1)
)
UA
b s
R
T
bs
D
R
sh
h
h
-
=
+
-
+ -
	
(5.145)
	
ˆ
2
(
)
2
ˆ
ˆ
(2
( 1)
)
DA
s b
R
T
sb
D
R
bh
h
h
-
=
+
+
- -
	
(5.146)
Finally, the impedance mismatch between the sea water and seabed is calculated [5]
	
2
2
2
2
cos
sin
( )
cos
sin
B
x
y
L
x
y
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
−
−
=
+
−
	
(5.147)
where x = r1/r, y = c/c1, r and c denote the density and sound speed, respectively, in 
sea water, whereas r1 and c1 denote the density and sound speed, respectively, in the 
seabed, and incidence angles 
ˆ
UA
bs
θ
 and 
ˆ
DA
sb
θ
 are obtained as follows: 

232	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
1
ˆ
(
ˆ)
tan
ˆ
2
+ ( 1)
UA
bs
b s
R
T
R
sh h
h
θ
-
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
-
-
è
ø
	
(5.148)
	
1
ˆ
ˆ
(
)
tan
ˆ
2
( 1)
DA
sb
s b
R
T
R
bh
h
h
θ
-
-
æ
ö
=
ç
÷
+
- -
è
ø
	
(5.149)
Multipath time delays.
•	
 The time delays of the multipath components can be in-
ferred from the traversed distances and are given by the following expressions: 
	
0
pq
LoS
pq
c
ε
τ
=
	
(5.150)
	
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
( )
UA
p q
bs
bsm
D
t
c
τ
,
=
	
(5.151)
	
ˆ
(
)
ˆ
( )
DA
p q
sb
sbn
D
t
c
τ
,
=
	
(5.152)
where c is the speed of sound.
To simplify further analysis, we normalize all time delays with respect to 
the LoS arrival time. This normalization is reflected in the distances 
ˆ
DA
sb
D
 and 
ˆ
UA
bs
D
, and they can be rewritten as 
	
ˆ
2
(
)
2
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
(2
( 1)
)
(
)
s b
DA
R
T
sb
T
R
R
bh
h
h
D
R
h
h
-
=
+
+
- -
-
+
-

	
(5.153)
	
2
(
ˆ)
2
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
(2
( 1)
)
(
)
b s
UA
R
T
bs
T
R
R
sh
h
h
D
R
h
h
-
=
+
-
+ -
-
+
-

	
(5.154)
Since the depths h, hT, and hR are much smaller than the distance R, dis-
tances 
ˆ
DA
sb
D
 and 
ˆ
UA
bs
D
 in (5.153) and (5.154) can be approximated, using 
1
1
2
x
x
+
»
+
/  for small x, as follows: 
	
ˆ
2
2
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
( 1)
(
)
s b
DA
R
T
T
R
sb
b h
bhh
bhh
s
b h h
R
D
é
ù
-
ê
ú
ë
û
»
+
- -
+
-
/

	
(5.155)
	
2
2
(
ˆ)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
( 1)
(
)
b s
UA
R
T
T
R
bs
s h
shh
shh
b
s h h
R
D
-
é
ù
ê
ú
ë
û
»
-
+ -
+
-
/

	
(5.156)
5.3.8  Spectral-Spatial-Temporal Fading Characteristics of UV-to-UV  
Frequency-Selective Acoustic Fading Channels
Using the model described in Section 5.3.7, we can now derive the key temporal, spatial, 
and spectral characteristics of UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic fading channels. 

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
233
5.3.8.1  Space-Time-Frequency Correlation Function and Space-Doppler  
Power Spectral Density
Assuming a shallow water acoustic scattering environment characterized by Gauss-
ian pdfs in (5.48)–(5.51), we derive the space-time-frequency correlation function 
(STF-CF) of the complex faded envelope in (5.137). 
The normalized STF-CF between two time-variant transfer functions 
1
1
(
)
pq
T
t
f,
 
and 
2
2
(
)
pq
T
t
f,

, is defined as 
	
*
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
* 2
2
1
1
2
2
E
(
)
(
)
(
)
Var[|
(
) | ]Var[|
(
)| ]
pq
pq
pq pq
pq
pq
T
t
f
T
t
f
R
t
f t
f
T
t
f
T
t
f
,
é
ù
,
,
ë
û
,
,
,
=
,
,



	
(5.157)
where (×)* denotes complex conjugate operation, E[×] is the statistical expectation op-
erator, Var[×] is the statistical variance operator, 
{1
}
t
p p
… L
,
Î ,
,

, and 
{1
}
r
q q
… L
,
Î ,
,

. 
Since 
(
)
UA
pq
T
t f,
 and 
(
)
DA
pq
T
t f,
 are independent zero-mean random processes, (5.157) 
can be simplified to 
	
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
LoS
UA
DA
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
R
t
f t
f
R
t
f t
f
R
t
f t
f
R
t
f t
f
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
=
,
,
,
+
,
,
,
+
,
,
,







	
(5.158)
where 
1
1
2
2
(
)
LoS
pq pq
R
t
f t
f
,
,
,
,

, 
1
1
2
2
( ,
)
UA
pq pq
R
t
f t
f
,
,
,

 and 
1
1
2
2
(
)
DA
pq pq
R
t
f t
f
,
,
,
,

 are the normal-
ized STF-CFs of the LoS, UA, and DA components, respectively. 
Following reasoning similar to Section 5.3.3, the space-time-frequency corre-
lation functions of the LoS, UA, and DA components can be obtained as follows 
[23]: 
	
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
(
)
E[
(
)
(
) ]
Var[
(
)]Var[
(
) ]
2
exp
[
(
)cos(
)
(
)cos(
)]
1
2
exp
[
(
)cos(
)
(
)c
LoS
pq pq
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
LoS
LoS
pq
pq
c
T
TR
T
R
TR
R
T
TR
T
R
R
t
f t
f
T
t
f T
t
f
T
t
f
T
t
f
K
f
j
v
t
t
v
t
t
K
c
f
j
v
t
t
v
t
t
c
π
α
γ
α
γ
π
α
γ
,
*
*
,
,
,
,
,
=
,
,
æ
ö
=
-
-
-
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
-
-
-
-



2
1
2
2
os(
)]
2 (
)
exp
[
cos(
)
cos(
)]
2
exp
[(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)]
TR
R
T
TR
T
R
TR
R
c
T
TR
T
R
TR
R
f
f
j
v t
v t
c
f
j
p
p d
q
q d
c
α
γ
π
α
γ
α
γ
π
α
θ
α
θ
æ
ö
-
ç
÷
è
ø
-
æ
ö
-
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
-
-
-
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø


	
(5.159)

234	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
1
ˆ
ˆ
)
sin
cos
ζ
µ
µ
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
+
+
-
-
è
ø
ç
÷
-
+
-
-
-
è
ø
-
+
-
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
[
]
[
]
1
1
2
2
2
1
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
1
2
1
ˆ
2
1
ˆ
(
)
2 (
)
exp
2 (
1)
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
2 (
)
exp
(
)cos(
)
(
)cos(
)
UA
pq pq
B
b
B
UA
bs
b
s b
c
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
c
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
R
t
f t
f
f
f
j
D
B K
c
f
j
p
p d
q
q d
c
f
f
j
v
t
t
v
t
t
c
π
η
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
,
=
= -
,
,
,
-
æ
ö
=
-
ç
÷
+
è
ø
æ
ö
+
æ
ö
ç
å å




[
]
ˆ
ˆ
2
1
2
ˆ
2
ˆ
2
2
2
1
1
ˆ
2
2
2
2
1
ˆ
2
2
1
ˆ
2 (
)
exp
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
)
2 (
)
exp
sin
2
2 (
)
exp
sin
2
2 (
)
exp
2
UAbs
UAbs
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
Z
c
UAbs
Z
UAbs
UAbs
R
f
f
j
v t
v t
c
t
t
f
f
c
t
f
f
c
f
f
h
c
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
ζ
π
µ
ζ
π
µ
σ
π
æ
ö
é
ù
ç
÷
D
ê
ú
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ë
û
ç
÷
è
ø
æ
ö
é
ù
ç
÷
D
ê
ú
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ë
û
ç
÷
è
ø
÷
-
æ
ö
+
-
-
-
+
-
-
-
-
+
-
[
]
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
1
2
ˆ
2
ˆ
1
2
1
ˆ
2
1
ˆ
2
2
2
(
)
sin(
)
sin
tan
2
(
)
sin(
)
2 (
)
+
sin(
)
sin(
)
2 (
)
+
     (
)sin(
)
(
)sin(
)
+ (
c
T
R
UAbs
R
c
UAbs
UAbs
c
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
T
UAbs
T
c
R
UAbs
R
T
UAbs
T
f
h
h
q
q d
f
p
p d
c
f
f
v t
v t
c
f
f
v
t
t
v
t
t
c
t
π
µ
θ
µ
µ
π
µ
θ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
ìï
-
í
ïî
-
-
-
+
+


ˆ
ˆ
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2 (
)
2 (
)
+
sin
cos
UAbs
UAbs
c
UAbs
UAbs
Z
UAbs
UAbs
Z
f
f
t
c
f
f
t
c
π
π
ζ
µ
µ
D
D
+
é
ù
-
ê
ú
ë
û
ü
ù
-
ï
é
ù
ú ý
ê
ú
ë
û
ú ï
û þ
ù
ú
úû
]
[
	(5.160)

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
235
	
1
1
2
2
2
1
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
2
1
2
1
(
)
2 (
)
exp
2 (
1)
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
2 (
)
exp
(
)cos(
)
(
)cos(
)
DA
pq pq
S
s
S
DA
sb
s
b s
c
T
T
R
R
DAsb
DAsb
c
T
T
R
R
DAsb
DAsb
R
t
f t
f
f
f
j
D
S K
c
f
j
p
p d
q
q d
c
f
f
j
v
t
t
v
t
t
c
η
π
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
,
=
= -
,
,
,
-
æ
ö
=
-
ç
÷
è
ø
+
æ
ö
é
ù
-
+
-
-
-
ç
÷
ë
û
è
ø
+
é
-
+
-
-
-
å å




ˆ
ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
ˆ
2
2
2
2
1
ˆ
2
ˆ
2
2 (
)
exp
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
)
2 (
)
exp
sin
2
2 (
)
exp
sin
2
2 (
exp
2
DAsb
DAsb
T
T
R
R
DAsb
DAsb
Z
c
DAsb
Z
DAsb
DAsb
f
f
j
v t
v t
c
t
t
f
f
c
t
f
f
c
f
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
ζ
π
µ
ζ
π
µ
σ
π
æ
ö
é
ù
D
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ë
û
è
ø
æ
ö
é
ù
D
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ê
ú
ç
÷
ë
û
è
ø
æ
öù
ç
÷
ë
û
è
ø
-
æ
ö
é
ù
+
-
-
ç
÷
ë
û
è
ø
-
+
-
-
-
-
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
2
1
2
1
2
1
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
)
2
(
)
sin(
)
sin
tan
2
(
)
sin(
)
2 (
)     (
)sin(
)
(
)sin(
)
2 (
)
 sin(
)
sin(
R
T
c
R
R
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
c
T
T
DAsb
c
R
R
T
T
DAsb
DAsb
R
R
T
DAsb
DAsb
f
h
h
f
q
q d
c
c
f
p
p d
c
f
f
v
t
t
v
t
t
c
f
f
v t
v t
c
π
µ
θ
µ
µ
π
µ
θ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
ì
é
-
+
ï
+
-
-
ê
í
ê
ï
ë
î
-
-
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
-
+


ˆ
ˆ
2
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
)
2 (
)
(
)
sin
cos
2 (
)
sin
cos
DAsb
DAsb
T
c
Z
DAsb
DAsb
Z
DAsb
DAsb
f
f
t
t
c
f
f
t
c
π
ζ
µ
µ
π
ζ
µ
µ
D
D
+
é
ù
+
-
ê
ú
ë
û
ü
ù
-
ï
é
ù
+
ú ý
ê
ú
ë
û
ú ï
û þ
]
[
]
[
2
	
	
	
	
(5.161)
Under wide sense stationary uncorrelated scattering (WSSUS) conditions, the space-
time-frequency correlation functions of the LoS, UA, and DA components simplify 
to [23] 

236	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
-
-
-
-
-
ç
÷
è
ø
=
D
-
-
D
-
ç
÷
è
ø
(
)
2
exp
[
cos(
)
cos(
)]
1
2
exp
[(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)]
LoS
pq pq
c
T
TR
T
R
TR
T
c
T
TR
T
R
TR
R
R
t
f
K
f
j
t
t
K
c
f
j
p
p d
q
q d
c
π
υ
α
γ
υ
α
γ
π
α
θ
α
θ
,
D ,D
æ
ö
+
æ
ö



	
(5.162)
	
ˆ
2
2
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
(
)
2
exp
sin
2 (
1)
2
2
2
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
cos(
)
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
cos(
UAbs
UA
pq pq
B
b
Z
B
UAbs
b
s b
UA
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
bs
R
UAbs
R
T
U
R
t
f
t
B K
f
j
p
p d
j
j
v
t
D
c
j
q
q d
v
t
ζ
η
π
µ
λ
π
π
π
µ
θ
µ
γ
λ
λ
π
µ
θ
µ
λ
,
æ
ö
ç
÷
é
ù
D
ç
÷
ê
ú
ë
û
ç
÷
=
= -
ç
÷
è
ø
D ,D
D
=
-
+
D
æ
ö
-
+
-
-
D
-
ç
÷
è
ø
æçè
æ
çè
-
-
-
+
D
å å




[
]
[
]
[
]
ˆ
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
)
2
2
exp
2
sin
tan
2
)
sin((
)
(
)
sin(
)
2
sin(
)
sin(
)
2
sin
cos
UAbs
Abs
T
UAbs
R
T
UAbs
UAbs
R
UAbs
R
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
T
UAbs
T
UAbs
UAbs
Z
f
h
h
h
c
q
q d
p
p d
v
t
v
t
t
γ
σ
π
µ
µ
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
λ
π
ζ
µ
µ
λ
D
+
ì
D
ï
é
+
-
-
í
êë
ïî
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
D
-
-
D
+
ü
ù ï
é
ù
+ D
ý
ú
ê
ú
ë
û
û ïþ


	
(5.163)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
-15
-14
-13
-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
 psds, dT=d R =0
 psds, dT=d R =1
 psds, dT=d R =2
Normalized power space-delay spectral density [dB]
Delay  [mS]
Figure 5.23  Normalized power space-delay spectral density (psds) for dT = dR = [0,1l,2l].

5.3  Statistical Characterization of Multipath Propagation in UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
237
	
-
-
-
-
D
-
ç
÷
è
ø
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
(
)
2
exp
sin
2
2 (
1)
2
2
exp
(
)
cos
cos
2
exp
(
)
cos
cos
DA
pq pq
S
s
Z
S
DAsb
DAsb
s
b s
DA
R
R
R
DAsb
DAsb
sb
T
T
DAsb
DAsb
R
t
f
t
S K
f
j
q
q d
j
D
v
t
R
c
j
p
p d
v
t
T
T
ζ
η
π
µ
λ
π
π
µ
θ
µ
γ
λ
π
µ
θ
µ
γ
λ
,
æ
ö
D
ç
÷
é
ù
ç
÷
ê
ú
ë
û
ç
÷
ç
÷
=
= -
è
ø
D ,D
D
=
-
+
D
æ
ö
é
ù
-
-
+
+
D
+
ë
û
å å




(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
exp
2
sin
tan
2
(
)
sin
(
)
sin
2
sin
sin
2
sin
cos
DAsb
R
T
DAsb
DAsb
R
R
T
T
DAsb
DAsb
R
R
T
T
DAsb
DAsb
Z
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
h
h
f
c
q
q d
p
p d
v
t
v
t
fc
t
c
σ
π
µ
µ
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ
π
µ
γ
µ
γ
λ
π
ζ
µ
µ
D
ì
é
ï
+
D
-
í
êë
ïî
é
ù
+
-
-
-
-
+
ë
û
é
ù
+
D
-
-
D
+
ë
û
üï
é
ù
ù
+ D
ý
û
ê
ú
ë
û
ïþ


	
	
	
	
(5.164)
where l denotes the carrier wavelength. 
Here we note that the space-Doppler power spectral density of the time-variant 
transfer function is the Fourier transform of the space-time-frequency correlation 
function 
(
0)
pq pq
R
t
f
,
D ,D =

 with respect to Dt, and is the same as the space-Doppler 
power spectral density in (5.127) of Section 5.3.5.2. 
5.3.8.2  Power Space-Delay Spectral Density
The power space-delay spectral density (psds) of the time-variant transfer function 
is the inverse Fourier transform of the space-time-frequency correlation function 
(
0
)
pq pq
R
t
f
,
D = ,D

 with respect to Df [25]. From (5.158), it follows that the psds is a 
summation of the psds functions of the LoS, UA, and DA components; that is, 
	
( )
( )
( )
( )
LoS
UA
DA
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
pq pq
P
P
P
P
τ
τ
τ
τ
,
,
,
,
=
+
+







	
(5.165)
By calculating the inverse Fourier transform of the STF-CF in (5.162), we obtain the 
psds of the LoS component as follows [23]:
	
(
)
1
( )
{
(
0
)}
1
2
exp
[(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)]
( )
LoS
LoS
pq pq
pq pq
f
T
TR
T
R
TR
R
K
P
R
t
f
K
j
p
p d
q
q d
τ
π
α
θ
α
θ
δ τ
λ
-
,
,
D
=
D = ,D
=
+
-
-
-
-
-






F
	 (5.166)
Similarly, psds of the UA and DA components are, respectively,

238	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
[
]
(
)
(
)
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
4
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
( )
exp
2 (
1)
2
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
2
2
2
0 5
exp
0 5
B
b
UA
B
UAbs
pq pq
UAbs
b
s b
T
UAbs
T
R
UAbs
R
UA
UAbs UAbs
bs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
P
B
B K
j
p
p d
q
q d
j
j
c
E
B
D
E
E
σ
η
τ
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ
π τ
π
σ
π
σ
σ
,
=
= -
æ
ö
=
-
å
å
÷
ç
+
è
ø
-
+
-
-
-
æ
ö
-
/ -
.
÷
ç
÷
ç
.
ç
÷
è
ø




	
	
	
	
(5.167)
	
(
)
(
)
2
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
ˆ
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
4
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
( )
exp
2 (
1)
2
2
exp
(
)
cos(
)
(
)
cos(
)
2
2
2
0 5
exp
0 5
S
s
DA
S
DAsb
pq pq
DAsb
s
b s
T
T
R
R
DAsb
DAsb
DA
DAsb
DAsb
sb
DAsb
D
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
P
B
S K
j
p
p d
q
q d
j
j
c
E
B
D
E
E
σ
η
τ
π
µ
θ
µ
θ
λ
πτ
π
σ
π
σ
σ
,
=
= -
æ
ö
÷
=
-
ç
å
å
+
ç
÷
è
ø
é
ù
-
+
-
-
-
ë
û
æ
ö
-
/ -
.
÷
ç
÷
ç
.
÷
çè
ø




ˆ
Asb
	
	
	
	
(5.168)
where BUAbsˆ and BDAsbˆ are defined in (5.131) and (5.132), respectively, and EUAbsˆ 
and 
ˆ
DAsb
E
 are defined as
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
2
sin
tan
R
T
UAbs
UAbs
UAbs
h
h
h
E
c
π
µ
µ
+
-
=
	
(5.169)
	
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
sin
tan
R
T
DAsb
DAsb
DAsb
h
h
E
c
π
µ
µ
+
=
	
(5.170)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Theoretical temporal correlation
 Simulated temporal correlation
Temporal correlation |R( )|
Time  [s]
Figure 5.24  The magnitudes of simulated and theoretical temporal correlation functions. 

5.4  Simulators for UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
239
Figure 5.23 plots several SISO and MIMO psds, assuming a WSSUS isovelocity scat-
tering environment. We assume that the carrier frequency is fc = 17 kHz and the speed 
of sound is c = 1500 m/s. The distance between the Tx and Rx is set to R = 2 km,  
while the water, Tx, and Rx depths are h = 50m, hT = 18m, and hR = 18m, respec-
tively. The Tx and Rx have Lt = Lr = 2 vertically oriented elements (i.e., qT = qR = 90°).  
It is assumed that the Tx and Rx are stationary (i.e., vT = vR = 0 m/s). The spacing be-
tween the Tx and Rx transducer elements are chosen from the set dT = dR Î[0, 1l, 2l].  
The rest of the model parameters are set to K = 0, S = B = 1, 
10
z∆
DA
Z
 = 
11
z∆
DA
Z
 = 
10
z∆
UA
Z
= 
11
ζD
UA
Z
 = 0.1, mDA10 = 160°, mDA11 = 157°, mUA10 = 190°, mUA11 = 191°, sDA10 = 2.55°, 
sDA11 = 3.1°, sUA10 = 4°, sUA11 = 6°, aTR = 180°, hS = 0.8, and hB = 1 – hS. From 
Figure 5.23, we can observe that the magnitude of the psds and the multipath spread 
decrease as the spacing between the Tx and Rx elements increases. In contrast to radio 
channels, where the later arriving multipaths carry less energy than the earlier arriv-
ing multipaths (i.e., the psds decays exponentially), in SWA channels, it is often the 
case that the later arriving multipaths are received as stronger signals than the earlier 
arriving multipaths. This phenomenon can be explained by observing how macro-
eigenrays propagate through the waveguide. Note that macro-eigenrays cannot be 
received with equal strength at all vertical locations in water because their angles 
of departure and arrival are predetermined by the waveguide geometry. For exam-
ple, if the hydrophone is placed near the center of waveguide (water column), most 
of the arriving macro-eigenrays can be detected and the psds decays exponentially  
(dT = dR = 0 in Figure 5.23). As the hydrophones move away from the center of wave-
guide, some macro-eigenrays, although arriving, cannot be recorded at that vertical 
location, causing the imbalance in the psds function (dT = dR = 2l in Figure 5.23). 
5.4  Simulators for UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels
Simulation of UV-to-UV channels is a crucial part of link layer simulations and 
of the overall characterization of a UV-to-UV system performance. The channel 
models detailed in Section 5.3 are very useful mathematical tools for understanding 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Theoretical time-frequency correlation
Simulated time-frequency correlation
Time-frequency correlation |R( t, f=1Hz)|
Time t [s]
Figure 5.25  The magnitudes of simulated and theoretical time-frequency correlation functions.

240	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
propagation mechanisms and for statistical characterization of channels. However, 
these models assume an infinite number of scatterers, which makes them impractical 
for simulators. We now describe simulation models with finite numbers of scatter-
ers that still match the statistical properties of the reference models in Section 5.3. 
5.4.1   Simulators for UV-to-UV Frequency-Flat and Frequency-Selective 
Acoustic Fading Channels
Assuming an isovelocity SWA environment and using the reference model described 
in Section 5.3.2, the frequency-flat complex faded envelope can be written as 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Analytical temporal correlation
Measured temporal correlation
Normalized temporal correlation |R11,11( t, f=0)|
Time t [s]
Figure 5.26  The magnitudes of analytical and measured temporal correlation functions.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Analytical frequency correlation
Measured frequency correlation
Frequency correlation |R( t=0, f,dT=0,dR=0)|
Frequency f [Hz]
Figure 5.27  The magnitudes of analytical and measured frequency correlation functions.

5.4  Simulators for UV-to-UV Acoustic Channels	
241
h(t)=hLoS(t)+hUA(t)+hDA(t) where
	
Tmax
Rmax
2
[
cos(
)
cos(
)]
( )
1
TR
T
TR
R
LoS
j
t f
f
K
h
t
e
K
π
α
π
γ
α
γ
+ −
+
−
=
+
	
(5.171)
	
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
1
Tmax
Rmax
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
1
2
( )sin
cos(3
)
cos(
)
1
( )
2 (
1)
λ
φ
π
α
π α
γ
α
γ
η
=
= −
=
∆
+
−
−
+
−
=
+
×
∑∑
∑
bs
bsm
bsm
R bsm
Rbsm
T
Rbsm
R
t
B
b
M
UA
j
bs
b
s b
m
j
t
Z
t
f
f
B
h
t
e
B K
M
e
	(5.172)
-1.2
-1.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
 Analytical D-psd
 Measured D-psd
Normalized Doppler power spectral density [dB]
Doppler frequency f [Hz]
Figure 5.28  The normalized analytical and measured Doppler power spectral density.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
 Analytical psds
 Measured psds
Normalized delay cross-power spectrum [dB]
Delay  [mS]
Figure 5.29  The normalized analytical and measured delay cross-power spectral density.

242	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
	
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
Rmax
ˆ
ˆ
1
1
1
2
( )sin
cos(
)
cos(
)
1
( )
2 (
1)
sb
sbn
T
R
sbn
R sbn
R sbn
Rsbn
t
N
S
s
j
D A
S
sb
s
n
b s
j
t
Z
t
f
f
h
t
e
S K
N
e
λ
φ
π
α
π α
γ
α
γ
η
=
=
= −
∆
+
−
−
+
−
=
+
×
∑∑
∑
	
(5.173)
Similarly, using the reference model described in Section 5.3.7, the frequency-​selective 
input delay-spread function can be written as T(t, f ) = TLoS(t, f ) + TUA(t, f ) + TDA(t, f ) , 
where the components are 
	
Tmax
Rmax
2
[
cos(
)
cos(
)]
(
)
1
TR
T
TR
R
LoS
j
t f
f
K
T
t f
e
K
π
α
π γ
α
γ
+ −
+
−
,
=
+
	
 (5.174)
	
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1
Tmax
Rmax
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
2
ˆ
1 ˆ
1
1
2
( )sin
cos(3
)
cos(
)
1
( , )
2 (
1
UA
bs
bsm
bs
bsm
Rbsm
Rbsm
T
Rbsm
R
t
f
M
B
b
j
j
D
B
UA
c
bs
b
s b
m
j
t
Z
t
f
f
T
t f
e
B K
M
e
λ
π
φ
π
α
π
α
γ
α
γ
η
-
=
= -
=
D
+
-
-
+
-
=
+
´
å å
å

(
	
(5.175)
	
(
)
ˆ
2
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Tmax
Rmax
1
ˆ
1
1
1
2
( )sin
cos(
)
cos(
)
(
)
2 (
1)
f
sb
DA
sbn
c
sb
sb
T
R
sbn
Rsbn
Rsbn
Rsbn
t
N
S
s
j
j
D
S
DA
N
s
n
b s
j
t
Z
t
f
f
T
t f
e
S K
e
π
λ
φ
π
α
π α
γ
α
γ
η
-
=
=
= -
D
+
-
-
+
-
,
=
+
´
å å
å

	
(5.176)
In these two models, the angles of arrival aRbsˆm and aRbsˆn are modeled using the 
Gaussian pdfs from (5.48) and (5.49) and are generated as follows:
	
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
0 1
0 5
Rbsm
UAbs
UAbs
bs
m
F
M
α
µ
σ
æ
ö
-
÷
ç
è
ø
+
.
=
,
,
. ×
	
(5.177)
	
1
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
0 1
0 9
Rsbn
DAsb
DAsb
sb
n
F
N
α
µ
σ
æ
ö
-
÷
ç
ç
÷
è
ø
+
.
=
,
,
. ×
	
(5.178)
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Model [23]
Particle-velocity model [19]
Exponential model [27]
AS COT01 measured data [27]
Spatial correlation |R( t=0), f=0,dT=0,dR)|
Array element number
Figure 5.30  Comparison of the analytical spatial correlations in [19, 23, 27] with the measured 
spatial correlation in [27].

5.5  Underwater Acoustic Channel Measurement Campaigns and Modeling 	
243
for m = 0,0.5,1,…, Mbsˆ /2, n = 0,0.5,1,...,Nsbˆ /2, where F(×)–1 denotes the inverse 
cumulative Gassian distribution function. The surface displacements Zbsˆm(t) and 
ˆ ( )
sbn
Z
t  are modeled using Gaussian pdf from (5.50) and (5.51), and are generated 
as follows: 
	
ˆ
ˆ
1
0 1
ˆ
1 8
( )
0
UAbs
bs
m
bsm
Z
M
Z
t
F
ζ
æ
ö
ç
÷
è
ø
-
+ .
D
. ×
=
, ,
	
(5.179)
	
ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
0 1
( )
0
2 1
DAsb
Z
sbn
sb
n
Z
t
F
N
ζ









−
∆
+
.
=
, ,
. ⋅
	
(5.180)
for m = 0,0.5,1,…, Mbsˆ/2, n = 0,0.5,1...,Nsbˆ /2, where F(×)–1 denotes the inverse  
cumulative Gassian distribution function. Finally, phases 
ˆ
bsm
φ
 and 
ˆ
sbn
φ
 are gener-
ated as independent uniform random variables on the interval [–p,p). 
To verify these models, we compare frequency-flat and frequency-selective simu-
lation models with the theoretical models detailed in Sections 5.3.2 and 5.3.7, respec-
tively. Figures 5.24 and 5.25 compare the simulated temporal and time-frequency 
correlation functions with the theoretical temporal and time-frequency correlation 
functions in (5.52) and (5.158), respectively. The theoretical and simulated curves in 
Figures 5.24 and 5.25 are obtained with the parameters fc = 17 kHz, c = 1470 m/s, 
R = 5 km, h = 20m, hT = 19m, hR = 18m, K = 0.8, S = B = 1, vT = 0.0006 m/s, 
vR = 0.00025 m/s, mDA10 = 166.5°, mDA11 = 169°, mUA10 = 194.9°, mUA11 = 195.9°, 
sDA10 = 3.25°, sDA11 = 5°, sUA10 = 2.7°, sUA11 = 3.2°, 
10
ζD
DA
Z
 = 
11
ζD
DA
Z
 = 0.0097, 
10
ζD
UA
Z
 = 
11
ζD
UA
Z
 = 0.0087, hB = 0.28, and hS = 1 – hB. It is assumed that the Tx 
and Rx are relatively stationary, or slightly moving with waves (i.e., gT = gR = 90°). 
Finally, the number of scatterers in the simulators is set to 
ˆ
10
bs
M
=
 and 
ˆ
10
sb
N
=
. 
We observe a good match between theoretical and simulated curves. An even better 
match can be obtained by simulating with larger numbers of scatterers, at a cost of 
proportionally longer simulation times.
5.5  Underwater Acoustic Channel Measurement  
Campaigns and Modeling
A large number of papers have reported measurement results, and channel models 
based on these measurements, for underwater acoustic channels (e.g., [7–39]). The dis-
advantage of all channel models derived from measurements is that they are site specific 
(i.e., there is no guarantee that the model will be applicable to other environments). On 
the other hand, the theoretical models and simulators detailed in Sections 5.3 and  5.4 
need to be validated against the measurements. Section 5.5.1 presents a comparison 
between the measured data and the model detailed in Section 5.3.7. 
5.5.1  Validation of the Model for UV-to-UV Frequency-Selective  
Acoustic Fading Channels
In this section, we compare the theoretical results in Section 5.3.8 with the AUVFest07 
measured data in [28], collected at calm sea. Furthermore, we compare the derived 
spatial correlation function 
(
0
0)
pq pq
R
t
f
,
D = ,D =

 in (5.158) with the spatial correla-
tion functions of the exponential model in [27], the particle-velocity model in [19], 
and the ASCOT01 measured data in [27]. 

244	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
The channel measurements in [28] are collected at fc = 17 kHz, and the speed of 
sound is c = 1470 m/s. The distance between the Tx and Rx is R = 5 km. The water, 
Tx, and Rx depths are h = 20m, hT = 019m, and hR = 18m, respectively. The Tx and 
Rx are equipped with vertically oriented transducer elements (i.e., qT = qR = 90°), 
and are relatively stationary, or slightly moving with waves (i.e., g T = g R = 90°). 
Figures 5.26 and 5.27 compare the analytical temporal and frequency correla-
tion functions (i.e., R11,11(Dt,0)) and R11,11(0,Df) in (5.158), respectively with their 
measured counterparts, and Figures 5.28 and 5.29 show similar comparisons for 
sD-psds and psds, respectively. 
The analytical curves in Figures  5.26–5.29 are obtained with the parameters 
K = 0.8, S = B = 1, uT = 0.0006 m/s, uR = 0.00025 m/s, mDA10 = 169°, mDA11 = 167°, 
mUA10 = 194°, mUA11 = 195°, sDA10 = 3.25°, sDA11 = 5°, sUA10 = 2.7°, sUA11 = 3.2°, 
10
ζD
DA
Z
 = 
11
ζD
DA
Z
 = 0.0097, 
10
ζD
UA
Z
 = 
11
ζD
UA
Z
 = 0.0087, hS = 0.28, and hB = 1 – hS. The 
Rice factor K is estimated using the moment-method in [41], and the parameters 
S and B are visually estimated from Figure 3c in [28]. The rest of the parameters (i.e., 
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
[
]
UAbs
DAsb
T
R
Z
Z
UAbs
UAbs
S
DAsb
DAsb
v
v
ζ
ζ
µ
µ
σ
σ
η
D
D
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
 are estimated jointly using 
the maximum-likelihood approach from [26] and under the constraint hS + hB = 1.  
The maximum-likelihood function is optimized using the sequential quadratic program-
ming algorithm [42], which is implemented in Matlab as a “fminsearch” function. 
The results in Figures 5.26–5.29 show a good match between the measured and 
analytical data. This result illustrates the validity of the derived statistics and vali-
dates the estimation methods used to find the model parameters. Furthermore, the 
results in Figures 5.26 and 5.27 show that both temporal and frequency correlation 
functions decay exponentially with Dt and Df, respectively. Finally, in contrast to 
radio channels where signals decorrelate relatively fast, in shallow-water acoustic 
(SWA) channels signals stay highly correlated. The reason for this behavior is the 
reduced amount of randomness in SWA channel. Note that macro-eigenrays are 
deterministic and the only randomness is introduced by micro-eigenrays that have 
small variations around macro-eigenrays. 
Finally, Figure 5.30 compares the spatial correlation 
(0 0)
pq pq
R
,
,

 in (5.158) (the 
model from [23]) with the analytical spatial correlation in [19] and the analytical 
and empirical spatial correlations in [27]. The ASCOT01 channel measurements 
are collected at the carrier frequency 1.2 kHz, and the speed of sound is c = 1440 m/s 
(i.e., l = 1.2m) [27]. The distance between the Tx and Rx is R = 10 km. The water, 
Tx, and Rx depths are h = 103m, hT = 50m, and hR = 50m, respectively. The Rx is 
equipped with 33 vertically oriented transducer elements (i.e., qR =  90°) with L = 
dR = 0.5m element spacing, while the Tx is equipped with one vertical transducer 
(i.e., qT = 90°). The vertical correlation is calculated with respect to the eighth ele-
ment from the bottom of the 33-element array. The analytical spatial correlation 
in (5.158) is obtained with the estimated parameters K = 0.71, S = B = 1, mDA11 = 
173.8°, mUA11 = 173.4°, mUA10 = 183° , mUA11 = 184.5°, sDA10 = 9.1°, sDA11 = 
10.2°, sUA10 = 5.59°, sUA11 = 8.89°, hS = 0.44, 
10
ζD
DA
Z
 = 
11
ζD
DA
Z
 = 0.019, 
10
ζD
UA
Z
 = 
11
ζD
UA
Z
 = 0.015, and hB = 1 – hS. Model parameters R, h, hT, hR, qT, qR, and aTR » p 
are selected to match the measurement conditions described earlier. For the reference, 
Figure 5.30 also shows the spatial correlation functions of the exponential model 
in [27] (i.e, exp{–L2/(2l)2}) and the particle-velocity model in [19] (with parameters 
Lb = 0.56, mb = 183°, ms = 173°, sb = 2.29°, and ss = 8°). One can observe that the  

5.6  Summary	
245
model from Section 5.3.7 provides a closer match with the experimental correla-
tion than the models from [19] and [27]. Although the model from Section 5.3.7 
has a large number of parameters that can be adjusted, they are not the reason 
for the improved fidelity to experimental data. The exponential model in [27] fits 
an exponential function with distance between hydrophones as a parameter into 
the measured data. On the other hand, the particle-velocity model in [19] mod-
els a channel impulse response in the SWA channel as a large number of random 
macro-eigenrays, which is an unrealistic assumption because the experimental re-
sults show that the number of different macro-eigenrays that arrive at the receiver 
rarely exceeds eight [17, 27, 28]. In contrast, the model in [23] (and detailed in 
Section 5.3.7) characterizes the SWA channel as a superposition of a LoS com-
ponent and several macro-eigenrays, where each macro-eigenray is modeled as a 
large number of micro-eigenrays. This approach leads to a closer match with the 
experimental data. 
The close agreement between the analytical and measured statistics in Fig-
ures 5.26–5.30 confirms the utility of the derived statistics. 
5.6  Summary
This chapter first briefly described the propagation principles that govern signal 
propagation in acoustic underwater vehicle-to-underwater vehicle channels, then 
proceeded to describe important concepts of propagation modeling such as large-
scale and small-scale fading effects. Then, statistical characterization of multi­
path propagation in UV-to-UV channels was presented, and several models for 
frequency-flat and frequency-selective channels and their statistics such as correla-
tion function, Doppler spectrum, power delay profile, and level crossing rate, were 
detailed. Furthermore, simulators for frequency-flat and frequency-selective acous-
tic channels were presented, with a small number of propagation rays that match 
the statistical properties of the UV-to-UV channel. Finally, UV-to-UV measurement 
campaigns were reviewed, and validation of the frequency-selective model for UV-
to-UV acoustic channels against the measurements was presented. 
References
  [1]  Stojanovic´, M., “Acoustic (underwater) communications,” Encyclopedia of Telecommuni-
cations, J. G. Proakis, Ed., New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2003. 
  [2]  Stojanovic´, M., “Recent advances in high-speed underwater acoustic communications,” 
IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 21, April 1996, pp. 125–136. 
  [3]  Kilfoyle, D. B., and A. B. Baggeroer, “The state of the art in underwater acoustic telem-
etry,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 25, January 2000, pp. 4–27. 
  [4]  Catipovic´, J., “Performance limitations in underwater acoustic telemetry,” IEEE Journal 
of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 15, July 1990, pp. 205–216. 
  [5]  Brekhovskikh, L. M., and Y. Lysanov, Fundamentals of Ocean Acoustics, 2nd ed., Berlin: 
Springer, 1991. 
  [6]  Dahl, P. H., “High-frequency forward scattering from the sea surface: the characteristic 
scales of time and angle spreading,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 26, Janu-
ary 2001, pp. 141–151. 

246	
Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Acoustic Channels
  [7]  Farmer, D. M., G. B. Deane, and S. Vagle, “The influence of bubble clouds on acoustic 
propagation in the surf zone,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 26, January 
2001, pp. 113–124. 
  [8]  Stojanovic´, M., and J. Preisig, “Underwater acoustic communication channels: propaga-
tion models and statistical characterization,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 47, 
January 2009, pp. 84–87. 
  [9]  Preisig, J., “Acoustic propagation considerations for underwater acoustic communications 
network development,” ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Compomputing and Communications 
Review, Vol. 11, Oct. 2007, pp. 2–10. 
[10]  Stojanovic´, M., J. Catipovic´, and J. G. Proakis, “Adaptive multichannel combining and 
equalization for underwater acoustic communications,” Journal of the Acoustical Society 
of America, Vol. 94, Sept. 1993, pp. 1621–1631. 
[11]  Stojanovic´, M., “Low complexity OFDM detector for underwater channels,”MTS/IEEE 
Proceedings of OCEANS’06, Boston, MA, Sept. 2006, pp. 1–6. 
[12]  Li, W., and J. Preisig, “Estimation of rapidly time-varying sparse channels,” IEEE Journal 
of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 32, Oct. 2007, pp. 927–939. 
[13]  Owen, R. H., B. V. Smith, and R. F. W. Coates, “An experimental study of rough sur-
face scattering and its effects on communication coherence,” MTS/IEEE Proceedings of 
OCEANS’94, Vol. 3, Brest, France, Sept. 1994, pp. 483–488. 
[14]  Essebbar, A., G. Loubet, and F. Vial, “Underwater acoustic channel simulations for com-
munication,” MTS/IEEE Proceedings of OCEANS’94, Vol. 3, Brest, France, Sept. 1994, 
pp. 495–500. 
[15]  Zielinski, A., Y-H. Yoon, and L. Wu, “Performance analysis of digital acoustic communi-
cation in a shallow water channel,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 20, Oct. 
1995, pp. 293–299. 
[16]  Bjerrum-Niese, C., L. Bjorno, M. A. Pinto, and B. Quellec, “A simulation tool for high 
data-rate acoustic communication in a shallow-water, time-varying channel,” IEEE Jour-
nal of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 21, Apr. 1996, pp. 143–149. 
[17]  Chitre, M., “A high-frequency warm shallow water acoustic communications channel 
model and measurements,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Vol. 122, Nov. 
2007, pp. 2580–2586. 
[18]  Yang, W. B., and T. C. Yang, “High-frequency channel characterization for M-ary frequen-
cy-shift-keying underwater acoustic communications,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, Vol. 120, Nov. 2006, pp. 2615–2626. 
[19]  Abdi, A., and H. Guo, “Signal correlation modeling in acoustic vector sensor arrays,” 
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 57, Mar. 2009, pp. 892–903. 
[20]  Radosevic,´ A., J. G. Proakis, M. Stojanovic´, “Statistical characterization and capacity of 
shallow water acoustic channels,” MTS/IEEE Proceedings of OCEANS’09-EUROPE, Bre-
men, Germany, May 2009, pp. 1–8. 
[21]  Zajic´, A. G., “Statistical space-time-frequency characterization of MIMO shallow wa-
ter acoustic channels,” MTS/IEEE Proceedings of OCEANS’09, Biloxi, MS, Oct. 2009, 
pp. 1–6. 
[22]  Zajic´, A. G., “Statistical modeling of underwater wireless channels,” IEEE Proceedings of 
Global Telecommunications Conference, GLOBECOM’10, Miami, FL, Dec. 2010, pp. 1–5. 
[23]  Zajic´, A. G., “Statistical modeling of MIMO mobile-to-mobile underwater channels,” 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 60, April 2011, pp. 1337–1351. 
[24]  Jakes, W. C., Microwave Mobile Communications, 2nd ed. Piscataway, NJ: Wiley-IEEE 
Press, 1994. 
[25]  Stüber, G. L., Principles of Mobile Communication, 2nd ed., Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2001. 
[26]  Zajic´, A. G., G. L. Stüber, T. G. Pratt, and S. Nguyen, “Wideband MIMO mobile-to- 
mobile channels: geometry-based statistical modeling with experimental verification,” 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 58, Feb. 2009, pp. 517–534. 

5.6  Summary	
247
[27]  Yang, T. C., “A study of spatial processing gain in underwater acoustic communications,” 
IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 32, July 2007, pp. 689–709. 
[28]  Yang, T. C., “Toward continuous underwater acoustic communications,” MTS/IEEE Pro-
ceedings of OCEANS’08, Quebec City, Canada, Sept. 2008, pp. 1–6. 
[29]  Gradshteyn, I. S. and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products, San Diego, 
CA, 5th ed., 1994. 
[30]  Pätzold, M., U. Killat, and F. Laue, “An extended Suzuki model for land mobile satel-
lite channels and its statistical properties,”IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,  
Vol. 47, May 1998, pp. 617–630. 
[31]  Nehorai, A., and E. Paldi, “Acoustic vector-sensor array processing,” IEEE Transactions 
on Signal Processing, Vol. 42, Sept. 1994, pp. 2481–2491. 
[32]  Hochwald, B., and A. Nehorai, “Identifiably in array processing models with vector-sensor 
applications,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 44, Jan. 1996, pp. 83–95. 
[33]  Zoltowski, M. D., and K. T. Wong, “Closed-form eigenstructure-based direction finding 
using arbitrary but identical subarrays on a sparse uniform Cartesian array grid,” IEEE 
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 48, Aug. 2000, pp. 2205–2210. 
[34]  Hawkes, M., and A. Nehorai, “Wideband source localization using a distributed acous-
tic vectorsensor array,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 51, June 2003, 
pp. 1479–1491. 
[35]  Hawkes, M., and A. Nehorai, “Acoustic vector-sensor beamforming and Capon direc-
tion estimation,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 46, Sept. 1998, pp. 2291–
2304. 
[36]  Abdi, A., and H. Guo, “A new compact multichannel receiver for underwater wireless 
communication networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communication, Vol. 8, July 
2009, pp. 3326–3329. 
[37]  Yang, T. C., and A. G. Zajic´, “Using the vector sensors as receivers for underwater acous-
tic communications,” 159th Acoustical Society of America Meeting, Baltimore MD, April 
2010. 
[38]  Cray, B. A., V. M. Evora, and A. H. Nuttall, “Highly directional acoustic receivers,” Jour-
nal of Acoustical Society of America, Vol. 113, Mar. 2003, pp. 1526–1532. 
[39]  Aik, T. B., Q. S. Sen, and Z. Nan, “Characterization of multipath acoustic channels in 
very shallow waters for communications,” MTS/IEEE Proceedings of OCEANS’06 Asia-
Pacific, Singapore, May 2007, pp. 1–8. 
[40]  Badiey, M., Y. Mu, J. A. Simmen, and S. E. Forsythe, “Signal variability in shallow-water 
sound channels,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 25, Oct. 2000, pp. 492–500.
[41]  Greenstein, L., J., D. G. Michelson, and V. Erceg, “Moment-method estimation of the 
Ricean K-factor,” IEEE Communication Letters, Vol. 3, June 1999, pp. 175–176. 
[42]  Fletcher, R., Practical Methods of Optimization: Constrained Optimization, 2nd ed., New 
York: John Wiley and Sons, 1981. 


249
A p p e n d i x  A
Probability and Random Processes
The theory of probability and random processes is an essential part in the design 
and performance analysis of communication systems. This appendix presents a 
brief review of the basic concepts of probability theory and random processes used 
in this book. A thorough treatment of this subject is available in a large number of 
textbooks such as [1, 2].
A.1  Random Variables and Probability
In many experiments, the outcomes of the experiment can be assigned numerical 
values. For instance, if we roll a die, each outcome has a value from 1 through 6. 
Another example is a midterm test score of a student in a class, which is again a 
number.
An experiment whose outcome is not known in advance is called a random 
experiment, and a value representing the outcome of a random experiment is called 
a sample point and will be denoted as s. A collection of possible outcomes of a 
random experiment is called an event and will be denoted as A. The event A= {s} 
consisting of a single element s is called an elementary event. The set of all possible 
outcomes of a given random experiment is called the sample space of that experi-
ment and will be denoted as W. Hence, a sample point is an element of the event 
(i.e., s Î A), and the event itself is a subset of the sample space (i.e., A Ì W).
The sample space W is called the certain event, and the empty set, denoted by 
Æ, is the impossible event. 
For example, if we assemble a deck of 52 playing cards with no jokers and draw 
a single card from the deck, then that card represents a sample point s; all 52 cards 
create a 52-element set called the sample space W; and an event A is any subset of 
the sample space W, including any singleton set (an elementary event), the empty set 
(an impossible event, with probability zero) and the sample space itself (a certain 
event, with probability one).
Random variables can be either discrete or continuous. Discrete random vari-
ables take integer values, usually as a result of counting. On the other hand, contin-
uous random variables, in contrast, can take any value within a range of values. 
Probability
A mapping P:  ®  is called probability if the following conditions are fulfilled:
(i) If 
•	
A Î , then 0 £ P (A) £ 1.
(ii) 
•	
P (W) = 1.
(iii) If 
•	
An Î , (n = 1, 2, . . .) with 
1
Un
∞
=  An Î  and An Ç Ak = 0 for any n ¹ k, 
then also P (
1
Un
∞
=  An) = 
1 (
)
n
n
P A
∞
=
å
.

250	
Probability and Random Processes
Cumulative distribution function
The function Fh, defined as
	
:
[0,1],
( )
(
)
F
x
F x
P
x
η
η
η
→
→
=
≤

	
(A.1)
is called the cumulative distribution function of random variable h. The cumu-
lative distribution function Fh(x) has the following properties: (a) Fh (–¥) = 0; 
(b) Fh (¥) = 1; and (c) Fh (x) is nondecreasing (i.e., Fh (x1) £ Fh (x2) if x1 £ x2).
Probability density function
Function ph, defined as
	
( )
:
,
( )
dF x
p
x
p x
dx
η
η
   
→
→
=


η
 	
(A.2)
is called the probability density function of the random variable h, under the 
a­ssumption that the cumulative distribution function Fh (x) is differentiable with 
respect to x. The probability density function ph (x) has the following properties: 
(a) ph (x) ³ 0 for all x; (b) 
( )
1
p x dx
η
∞
−∞
=
∫
; and (c) 
( )
( )
n
F x
p x dx
η
x
−∞
= ∫
.
Joint cumulative distribution function
Function Fh1,h2, defined as
	
1
2
1
2
2
,
1
2
,
1
2
1
1
2
2
:
[0,1],
(
,
)
(
,
)
(
,
)
F
x
x
F
x
x
P
x
x
η η
η η
η
η
→
→
=
£
£

	
(A.3)
is called the joint cumulative distribution function of random variables h1 
and h2. 
Joint probability density function
The function ph1,h2, defined as
	
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
,
1
2
2
,
1
2
,
1
2
1 2
(
,
)
:
,
(
,
)
(
,
)
d F
x
x
p
x
x
p
x
x
dx x
η η
η η
η η
→
→
=


	
(A.4)
is called the joint probability density function of random variables h1 and h2, 
under the assumption that the joint cumulative distribution function Fh1,h2 (x1, x2) 
is partially differentiable with respect to x1 and x2.
Random variables h1 and h2 are said to be statistically independent, if the 
events {s | h1 (s) £ x1} and {s | h2 (s) £ x2} are independent for all x1, x2 Î . In this 
case, we can write Fh1,h2 (x1, x2) = Fh1 (x1) Fh2 (x2) and ph1,h2 (x1, x2) = ph1 (x1) 
ph2 (x2). Marginal probability density functions: Given two random variables X 
and Y whose joint probability density function is known, the marginal probability 
density function of X is the probability distribution of X averaged over information 
about Y and is typically calculated by summing or integrating the joint probability 
distribution over Y. Hence, marginal probability density functions of the joint prob-
ability density function ph1,h2 (x1, x2) can be obtained as
	
1
1
2
1
,
1
2
2
(
)
(
,
)
p
x
p
x
x dx
η
η η
∞
-∞
= ò
	
(A.5)

A.1  Random Variables and Probability	
251
	
2
1
2
2
,
1
2
1
(
)
(
,
)
p
x
p
x
x dx
η
η η
∞
−∞
= ò
	
(A.6)
Expected value (mean value)
Value
	
E[ ]
( )
n
xp x dx
η
∞
−∞
= ∫
	
(A.7)
is called the expected value of the random variable h, and E [×] is called the expected 
value operator. The expected value operator E [×] is linear (i.e., E[ah] = aE[h] for a 
constant a Î , and E [h1 + h2] = E [h1] + E [h2]). Furthermore, the expected value 
of a function f (h) of random variable h is
	
E[ ( )]
( )
( )
f
f
p x dx
η
η
η
∞
-∞
= ò
	
(A.8)
and a generalization to two random variables h1 and h2 leads to
	
1
2
1
2
1
2
,
1
2
1
2
E[ (
,
)]
(
,
)
(
,
)
f
f x
x
p
x
x dx dx
η η
η η
∞
∞
-∞
-∞
= ò
ò
	
(A.9)
Variance
Value
	
2
2
2
Var[ ]
E[(
E[ ]) ]
[
]
( [ ])
E
E
η
η
η
η
η
=
-
=
-
	
(A.10)
is the variance of random variable h, and Var[×] is the variance operator. The vari-
ance of a random variable h is a measure of how much h is concentrated near its 
expected value. 
Covariance
Value
	
1
2
1
1
2
2
1 2
1
2
Cov[
,
]
E[(
E[
])(
E[
])]
E[
]
E[
]E[
]
η η
η
η
η
η
η η
η
η
=
-
-
=
-
	
(A.11)
is the covariance of two random variables h1 and h2. The covariance is a measure 
of how much random variables h1 and h2 change together. 
Moments
Value
	
E[
]
( )
,
0,1,...
k
k
x p x dx
k
η
η
∞
−∞
=
=
∫
	
(A.12)
is the kth moment of a random variable h. Note that a knowledge of all the mo-
ments of h determines its distribution function ph completely.

252	
Probability and Random Processes
Characteristic function
The characteristic function of a random variable h is defined as the expected value
	
Ψ
2
2
( )
E[
]
( )
j
v
j
vx
v
e
p x e
dx
π η
η
π
η
∞
-∞
=
= ò
	
(A.13)
where h is a real-valued valuable. Note that Yh(–v) is the Fourier transform of 
the probability density function ph(x). The characteristic function often provides 
a simple technique for determining the probability density function of a sum of 
statistically independent random variables.
Central limit theorem
Let hn (n = 1,2, . . . , N) be statistically independent random variables with mean 
values E[hn] and variances Var[hn]. Then, the random variable
	
1
1
lim
(
E[
])
N
n
n
N
n
N
η
η
η
→∞
=
=
-
å
	
(A.14)
is normally distributed with the expected value E[h] = 0 and variance
	
1
1
Var[ ]= lim
Var[
]
N
n
N
n
N
η
η
→¥
=å
	
(A.15)
A.1.1  Important Probability Density Functions
This section presents a summary of several probability density functions that are 
often used in channel modeling. The corresponding statistical properties, such as 
the expected value and variance, are also discussed here.
Uniform distribution
Let q Î[–p, p) be a real-valued random angle with the probability density function
	
1
( )
,
[
, )
2
p x
x
θ
π π
π
=
Î  -
	
(A.16)
and zero otherwise. Then, pq(x) is called the uniform distribution. The expected 
value and variance of a uniformly distributed random variable q are E[q] = 0 and 
Var[q] = p2/3, respectively. This distribution is often used to characterize phases in 
channel impulse responses and/or angles of arrival/departure. 
Gaussian distribution
Let m be a real-valued random variable with the probability density function
	
2
2
(
)
2
1
( )
,
2
x m
p
x
e
x
µ
µ
σ
µ
µ
πσ
−
−
=
∈	
(A.17)

A.1  Random Variables and Probability	
253
Then pm(x) is called Gaussian distribution. In (A.17), the quantity mm Î  denotes 
the expected value and 
2
(0,
)
µ
σ
∈
∞ is the variance of m; that is, 
	
E[ ]
mµ
µ =
	
(A.18)
and
	
2
2
2
Var[ ]
E[
]
x =
mµ
µ
µ
σ
−
=
	
(A.19)
To describe the distribution properties of a Gaussian distributed random vari-
able m, we often use the notation m ~ N(mm, 
2
µ
σ ) instead of giving the complete 
expression (A.17). For mm = 0 and sm = 1, N(0,1) is called the standard normal 
distribution.
This distribution is used to characterize angles of arrival/departure in underwa-
ter acoustic channels.
Multivariate Gaussian distribution
Let us consider n real-valued Gaussian distributed random variables m1, m2, . . . , mn 
with expected values mmi, (i = 1, 2, . . . , n) and variances smi, (i = 1, 2, . . . , n). The 
multivarite Gaussian distribution of the Gaussian random variables m1, m2, . . . , mn 
is defined by
	
1
1 2
1(x m ) C
(x m )
2
...
1
2
1
(
,
,...,
)
( 2 )
detC
T
n
n
n
p
x
x
x
e
µ
µ
µ
µ µ
µ
µ
π
−
−
−
−
=
	
 (A.20)
where (·)T denotes the transpose of a vector (or a matrix). In (A.20), x and mm are 
column vectors given by
	
1
2
1
n
n
x
x
x
x
×






=
∈








	
(A.21)
and
	
1
2
1
2
1
E[
]
E[
]
m
E[
]
n
n
n
m
m
m
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
×






= 











=
∈









	
(A.22)
respectively, detCm is the determinant, and (
1
Cµ
−) is the inverse of the covariance 
matrix

254	
Probability and Random Processes
	
1 1
1
2 1
2
1
C
n
n
n
n
n
n n
C
C
C
C
C
C
µ µ
µ µ
µ µ
µ µ
µ
µ µ
µ µ
×
é
ù
ê
ê
ê
ê
=
Î
ê
ê
ê
ê
ë
û







	
(A.23)
The elements of the covariance matrix Cm are given by
	
Cov[
,
]
E[(
)(
)],    ,
1,2,..., .
i
j
i
j
i
j
i
j
C
m
m
  i  j
 n
µ µ
µ
µ
µ µ
µ
µ
=
=
−
−
  
 =
	
(A.24)
If the n random variables mi are normally distributed and each pair of these variables 
is uncorrelated, then the covariance matrix Cm is a diagonal matrix with diagonal 
entries 
2
i
µ
σ . In this case, the joint probability density function (A.20) decomposes 
into a product of n Gaussian distributions, and the random variables mi are said to 
be statistically independent. 
Rayleigh distribution
Let us consider two zero-mean statistically independent  normally distributed ran-
dom variables m1 and m2, each having a variance s 2 [i.e., m1, m2 ~ N(0, s 2)]. Further-
more, let 
2
2
1
2
µ
µ
µ
=
+
 be a new random variable. Then, m represents a Rayleigh 
distributed random variable. The probability density function pm(x) of Rayleigh 
distributed random variable m is
	
2
2
2
2
,
0,
( )
0,
0,
x
x e
x
p
x
x
σ
µ
     
σ
                   
−


≥

= 

<

	
(A.25)
A Rayleigh distributed random variable m has an expected value
	
E[ ]
2
π
µ
σ
=
	
(A.26)
and variance
	
2
Var[ ] =
2
2
π
µ
 σ   

−
½
½


	
(A.27)
This distribution is often used to characterize a received signal envelope under NLoS 
propagation conditions. Figure A.1 illustrates the probability density function pm(x) 
of Rayleigh distributed random variable x with variance s 2 = 2.
Rice distribution
Let m1, m2 ~ N(0, s2) and ρ ∈. Then, random variable 
2
2
1
2
(
)
µ
µ
ρ
µ
=
+
+
 is a 
Rice distributed random variable. The probability density function pm(x) of Rice 
distributed random variable m is
	
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
( )
,
0
x
µ
x
x
p x
e
I
x
ρ
σ
ρ
   
σ
σ
+
−


=
≥




	
(A.28)

A.1  Random Variables and Probability	
255
where I0(×) denotes the modified Bessel function of zeroth order. For r = 0, the Rice 
distribution pm(x) results in the Rayleigh distribution described earlier. The mean 
and the variance of Rice distributed random variable m are
	
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
0
1
2
2
2
2
E[ ]
1
2
2
4
2
4
e
I
I
ρ
σ
π
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
µ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
−










=
+
+


















	
(A.29)
	
2
2
2
Var[ ]
2
E[ ]
=
µ
σ
ρ
µ
+
-
	
(A.30)
respectively, where In(×) denotes the modified Bessel function of nth order. This dis-
tribution is often used to characterize a received signal envelope under LoS propa-
gation conditions. 
Lognormal distribution
Let m be a Gaussian distributed random variable with an expected value mm and 
variance 
2
µ
σ  (i.e., m ~ N(mm, 
2
µ
σ )). Then, random variable l = em is said to be lognor-
mally distributed. The probability density function pl(x) of a lognormally distrib-
uted random variable l is
	
2
2
(ln
)
2
1
,
0
( )
2
0,
0
x m
e
x
p
x
x
x
µ
µ
σ
λ
µ
     
πσ
                                    
−
−


≥

= 


<

	
(A.31)
The expected value and variance of a lognormally distributed random variables l are
	
2
2
E[ ]
m
e
µ
µ
σ
λ
+
=
	
(A.32)
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
 Rayleigh probability density function
Rayleigh pdf (x)
x
Figure A.1  Illustration of Rayleigh probability density function.

256	
Probability and Random Processes
	
2
2
2
Var[ ] = 
1
m
e
e
µ σ
σ
µ
µ
λ
+




−




	
 (A.33)
This distribution is often used to characterize shadowing in wireless channels. Fig-
ure A.2 illustrates the probability density function pm(x) of lognormal distributed 
random variable x with mean mm = log10(20000) and variance 
2
1
µ
σ
=
.
Suzuki distribution
Let us assume that a random variable m is Rayleigh distributed with the distribu-
tion defined in (A.25), that a random variable l is lognormally distributed with the 
distribution defined in (A.31), and that m and l are statistically independent. Then, 
a random variable h defined by the product h = m ∙ l is said to be Suzuki distributed. 
The probability density function of a Suzuki distributed random variable h is
	
2
2
2
2
(ln
)
2
2
2
3
0
1
.
,
0
( )
2
0,
0
y m
x
y
x
e
e
dy
x
p x
y
x
µ
µ
σ
σ
η
µ
     
πσ σ
−
−
−
∞


 
≥

= 


<

∫
	
(A.34)
A Suzuki distributed random variable h has an expected value and variance
	
2
2
E[ ]
2
m
e
µ
µ
σ
π
η
σ
+
=
	
(A.35)
	
2
2
2
2
Var[ ] =
2
2
m
e
e
µ
µ
µ
σ
σ
π
η
σ
+


⋅
⋅
−




	
(A.36)
This distribution is often used to characterize joint small-scale and large-scale  
effects in radio wireless channels.
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
0.00000
0.00005
0.00010
0.00015
0.00020
0.00025
0.00030
0.00035
 Lognormal probability density function
Lognormal pdf (x)
x
Figure A.2  Illustration of lognormal probability density function. 

A.1  Random Variables and Probability	
257
Nakagami distribution
Let us consider a random variable w distributed according to the probability density 
function
	
2
2
1
(
/
)
2
,
0.5,
0
( )
( )
0,
0
x
m
m
m
m
m x
e
m
x
p
x
m
x
ω
     
 
                                                   
- 
ì
³
ô
ô
=
G
W
í
ô
<
î
³
-
W
	
(A.37)
Then, w is a Nakagami distributed random variable and the corresponding prob-
ability density function pw(x) is called the Nakagami distribution. Symbol  G(×) 
in (A.37) denotes the Gamma function, W is the second moment of the random 
variable w (W = E[w 2]), and m denotes the reciprocal value of the variance of w 2 
normalized to W2 (m = W2/E[(w 2 – W2)]). From the Nakagami distribution, we can 
obtain the one-sided Gaussian distribution and the Rayleigh distribution as special 
cases for m = 0.5 and m = 1, respectively.
Von Mises distribution
The von Mises distribution (also known as the circular normal distribution or  
Tikhonov distribution) is a continuous probability distribution defined on a circle. 
The von Mises probability density function for the angle a Î [–p, p) is given by [3]:
	
0
1
( )
exp[ cos(
)]
2
( )
p
x
k
x
I k
α
µ
π
=
−
 	
(A.38)
where I0(×) is the zeroth-order modified Bessel function of the first kind, m Î [–p, p) 
is a measure of location (the distribution is clustered around m), and k is a measure 
of concentration. When k = 0, the von Mises probability density function becomes 
a uniform probability density function on [–p, p) (i.e., pa(x) = 1/(2p)). A von Mises 
distributed random variable a has the expected value and the variance given by
	
1
0
( )
E[ ]
( )
j
I k e
I k
µ
α =
	
(A.39)
	
1
0
( )
Var[ ] = 1
( )
I k
I k
α
−
	
(A.40)
This distribution is often used to characterize angles of arrival/departure in radio 
wireless channels.
A.1.2  Functions of Random Variables
In this book, we often use addition and multiplication of random variables. Hence, 
here we briefly review these mathematical principles. 

258	
Probability and Random Processes
Addition of two random variables
Let m1 and m2 be two random variables that are statistically characterized by the 
joint probability density function 
1 2
1
2
(
,
)
p
x
x
µ µ
. Then, the probability density func-
tion of the sum m = m1 + m2 is
	
1 2
1 2
1
1
1
2
2
2
( )
(
,
)
(
,
)
p
y
p
x y
x dx
p
x
y
x dx
µ
µ µ
µ µ
∞
-∞
∞
-∞
=
−
=
-
ò
ò
	
(A.41)
If the two random variables m1 and m2 are statistically independent, then the prob-
ability density function of m is given by the convolution of the probability density 
functions of m1 and m2; that is,
	
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
( )
( )
( )
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
p
y
p
y
p
y
p
x p
y
x dx
p
y
x
p
x dx
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
∞
−∞
∞
−∞
=
∗
=
−
=
−
∫
∫
	
(A.42)
where (·)* denotes the convolution operator.
Multiplication of two random variables
Let m and l be two random variables that are statistically described by the joint 
probability density function pml(x,y). Then, the probability density function of the 
random variable h = m × l is
	
1
( )
,
z
p
z
p
y
dy
y
y
η
µλ
∞
-∞


=




ò
 	
(A.43)
If the random variables m and l are statistically independent, the probability density 
function of the random variable h becomes
	
1
( )
( )
z
p z
p
p y dy
y
y
η
µ
λ
∞
−∞


=
⋅




∫
	
(A.44)
A.2  Random Processes
A random process, also called a stochastic process, X(t), is an ensemble of sample 
functions {X1(t), X2(t), . . . , Xh(t)} together with a probability rule that assigns a 
probability to any event associated with the observation of these functions. Then, 
the sample function Xi(t) corresponds to the sample point si in the sample space 
and occurs with probability P(si). The number of sample functions, h, in the en-
semble may be finite or infinite. The function Xi(t) is deterministic once the index 
i is known. Sample functions may be defined at discrete instants or be continuous 
in time, and their values at these time instants may also be discrete or continuous. 

A.2  Random Processes	
259
Suppose that we observe all the sample functions at some time instant t1 and their 
values form the set of numbers {Xi(t1)}, i = 1, 2, . . . , h. Since Xi(t1) occurs with 
probability P(si), the collection of numbers {Xi(t1)}, i = 1, 2, . . . , h forms a random 
variable, denoted by X(t1). By observing the same set of functions at another time 
instant t2 we obtain a different random variable X(t2). A collection of n such ran-
dom variables, X(t1), X(t2), . . . ,X(tn) has the joint cdf
	
1
( ),...
(
)
1
1
1
(
,...,
)
( ( )
,...,
( )
)
n
X t        X t
n
n
n
F
x
x
P X t
x
X t
x
=
<
<
	
(A.45)
A more compact notation can be obtained by defining vectors
	
1
2
x
(
,
,...,
)
n
x
x
x
=
	
(A.46)
	
1
2
X
( ( ),
( ),...,
( ))
n
X t
X t
X t
=
	
(A.47)
Then, the joint cdf and joint pdf are, respectively,
	
x( )(x)
(X( )
x)
t
F
P
t
=
£
	
(A.48)
	
x( )
( )
1
2
(x)
n
t
x t
n
d F
p
dx dx
dx

=
	
(A.49)
A random process is strictly stationary if and only if the joint density function  
px(t)(x) is invariant under shifts of the origin along the time axis; that is, when
	
x( )
x(
)
(x)
(x)
t
t r
p
p
+
=
	
(A.50)
holds for all sets of time instants {t1, t2, . . . , tn} and all time shifts t. Many impor-
tant random processes that are encountered in practice are strictly stationary.
A.2.1  Moments and Correlation Functions
To describe the moments and correlation functions of a random process, it is useful 
to define the operator E[×] as an ensemble average and < × > as a time average. 
The ensemble average of a random process at time t is
	
( )
E[ ( )]=
( )
X t
X t
xp
x dx
∞
-∞
ò
 	
(A.51)
(i.e., it is the expected value of process X(t) at time t).
The time average of a random process is
	
1
( )
lim
( )
2
T
T
T
X t
X t dt
T
−
®¥
<
> =
ò
	
(A.52)
(i.e., it is a function that represents an average of a particular sample function over 
all possible time instances). In general, the time average < X(t) > is still a random 
variable, because it depends on the particular sample function that is selected for 
time averaging.

260	
Probability and Random Processes
The autocorrelation of a random process X(t) is defined as
	
1
2
1
2
( ,
)
E[ ( ) ( )]
XX
R
t t
X t X t
=
	
(A.53)
The autocovariance of a random process X(t) is defined as	
	
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
( ,
)
E[( ( )
E[ ( )])( ( )
E[ ( )])]
( ,
)
E[ ( )]E( ( )]
XX
C
t t
X t
X t
X t
X t
R
t t
X t
X t
=
−
−
=
−
XX
	
(A.54)
From (A.50) follows that a random process is strictly stationary only if
	
E[
( )]
E[
]
,
n
n
X
t
X
t n
=
∀
	
(A.55)
Then, for a strictly stationary random process, the following statements are also 
true:
	
E[ ( )]
E[
]
X t
X
=
	
(A.56)
	
Var[ ( )]
Var[
]
X t
X
=
	
(A.57)
	
1   2
1
2
(
 )
(
)
( )
XX
  XX
XX
R
t ,t
R
t
t
R
τ
=
-
=
	
(A.58)
	
1
2
(
)
( )
XX        XX                       XX
C
C
t
t
C
τ
=
−
=
	
(A.59)
where t = t1 – t2.
If a random process satisfies the following conditions
	
E[ ( )]
E[
]
X t
X
=
	
(A.60)
	
1
2
( ,
)
( )
XX
XX
R
t t
R
τ
=
	
(A.61)
then it is said to be wide sense stationary. Note that a strictly stationary random 
process is always wide sense stationary, but the converse may not be true. However, 
a Gaussian random process is strictly stationary if it is wide sense stationary. The  
reason is that a joint Gaussian probability density function of the vector X = (X(t1), 
X(t2), . . . , X(tn)) is completely described by the means and covariances of X(ti).
Properties of autocorrelation function
The autocorrelation function Rxx(t ) of a stationary random process satisfies the 
following properties:
	
2
2
(0)
E[
( )]
( )
(
)
( )
(0)
( )
E[ ( )]
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
R
X
t
R
R
R
R
R
X t
τ
τ
τ
=
=
−
≤
∞=
	
(A.62)

A.2  Random Processes	
261
Also, if X(t) = X(t + t), then RXX(t) = RXX(t + T) (i.e., if X(t) is periodic, then 
RXX(t) is also periodic). 
A random process is said to be ergodic if for all X and any function of X; that 
is, g(X),
	
( )
E[ (X)]
(X)
X   (x)dx
1
lim
[X( )]
2
[X( )]
t
T
T
T
g
g
p
g
t dt
T
g
t
∞
−∞
−
→∞
=
=
= <
>
∫
∫
	
(A.63)
For a random process to be ergodic, it must be strictly stationary. However, not 
all strictly stationary random processes are ergodic. A random process is ergodic in 
the mean if
	
( )
E[
]
X t
X
<
> =
	
(A.64)
and ergodic in the autocorrelation if
	
(
) ( )
( )
XX
X t
X t
R
τ
τ
<
+
> =
	
(A.65)
A.2.2  Crosscorrelation and Crosscovariance
Consider two random processes X(t) and Y(t). The crosscorrelation of X(t) and 
Y(t) is
	
1
2
1
2
( ,
)
E[ ( ) ( )]
XY
R
t t
X t Y t
=
	
(A.66)
	
1
2
1
2
( ,
)
E[ ( ) ( )]
YX
R
t t
Y t X t
=
	
(A.67)
The correlation matrix of X(t) and Y(t) is	
	
1
2
1
2
1
2
( , )
1
2
1
2
( ,
)
( ,
)
( ,
)
( ,
)
XX
XY
t t
YX
YY
R
t t
R
t t
R
R
t t
R
t t
   
é                                       ù
= ê                                         ê
   
ë                                        û
	
(A.68)
The crosscovariance of X(t) and Y(t) is	
	
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
( ,
)
E[( ( )
E[ ( )])( ( )
E[ ( )])]
( ,
)
E[ ( )E[ ( )]
XY
XY
C
t t
X t
X t
Y t
Y t
R
t t
X t
Y t
=
-                          -
=
-
	
(A.69)
The covariance matrix of X(t) and Y(t) is
	
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
( ,
)
( ,
)
( ,
)
( ,
)
( ,
)
XX
XY
YX
YY
C
t t
C
t t
C t t
C
t t
C
t t
   


= 

   


	
(A.70)

262	
Probability and Random Processes
If X(t) and Y(t) are each wide sense stationary and jointly wide sense stationary, 
then
	
1
2
1
2
R( ,
)
R(
)
R( )
t t
t
t
τ
=
−
=
	
(A.71)
	
1
2
1
2
C( ,
)
C(
)
C( )
t t
t
t
τ
=
−
=
	
(A.72)
where t = t1 – t2.
Properties of the crosscorrelation function
The crosscorrelation function RXY (t) has the following properties:
	
2
( )
(
)
1
( )
[
(0)
(0)]
2
( )
(0)
(0), if X(t) and Y(t) have zero mean.
XY
XY
XY
XX
YY
XY
XX
YY
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
t
t
t
t
=
-
£                   +
£
Classifications of random processes
Two random processes X(t) and Y(t) are said to be
uncorrelated
•	
 if and only if CXY (t) = 0.
orthogonal
•	
 if and only if RXY(t) = 0.
statistically independent 
•	
if and only if
	
X( )Y(
)
x( )
Y(
)
(x,y)
(x)
(y)
t
t
t
t
p
p
p
τ
τ
+
+
=
	
(A.73)
Note that if E[X] = 0 or E[Y] = 0, then the orthogonal random processes are un-
correlated and vice versa. Similarly, under the same conditions, the statistically 
independent random processes are also uncorrelated. However, the uncorrelated 
random processes are not necessarily statistically independent.
A.2.3  Complex-Valued Random Processes
A complex-valued random process is given by
	
Z(t) = X(t)+ jY(t),	
where X(t) and Y(t) are real random processes.
Autocorrelation function 
The autocorrelation function of a complex-valued random process is
	
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
( ,
)
[ ( )
( )]
2
1 E[( ( )+
( ))( ( )
( ))]
2
1 {
( ,
)
( ,
)
2
[
( ,
)
( ,
)]}
ZZ
XX
YY
YX
XY
R
t t
E Z t Z t
X t
jY t
X t
jY t
R
t t
R
t t
j R
t t
R
t t
∗
=
=
-
=
+
=
-
	
(A.74)

A.2  Random Processes	
263
where (×)* is the complex conjugate operation. If Z(t) is wide sense stationary, then
	
1
2
1
2
 (
, 
) 
 
 (
−   ) 
 
  ( )
ZZ
ZZ
ZZ
R
t
t
R
t
t
R
τ
=
=
	
(A.75)
Crosscorrelation function
Consider two complex-valued random processes
	
Z(t) = X(t) + jY(t)	
	
W(t)= U(t) + jV(t)	
The crosscorrelation function of Z(t) and W(t) is
	
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
( ,
)
E[ ( )
(
)]
2
1 {
( ,
)
( ,
)
2
[
( ,
)
( ,
)]}
ZW
XV
YV
YU
XV
R
t t
Z t W
t
R
t t
R
t t
j R
t t
R
t t
∗
=
=
+
+
-
	
(A.76)
If X(t), Y(t), U(t), and V(t) are pairwise wide sense stationary random processes, 
then
	
1
2
1
2
( ,
)
(
)
( )
ZW
ZW
ZW
R
t t
R
t
t
R
τ
=
−
=
	
(A.77)
The crosscorrelation function of a complex wide sense stationary random process 
has the following properties
	
( )
(
)
ZW
ZW
R
R
τ
τ
∗
=
-
	
(A.78)
	
( )
(
)
XX
XX
R
R
τ
τ
∗
=
- 	
(A.79)
	
( )
(
)
XX
XX
R
R
τ
τ
∗
=
−
	
(A.80)
A.2.4  Power Spectral Density
The power spectral density (psd) of a random process X(t) is the Fourier transform 
of the autocorrelation function; that is, 	
/
	
2
( )
( )
j
f
XX
XX
S
f
R
e
d
π τ
τ
τ
∞
−
−∞
= ∫
	
(A.81)
If X(t) is real, then RXX(t) and SXX(f) are also real and even. If X(t) is complex, 
then 
( )
(
)
XX
XX
R
R
τ
τ
∗
=
-
 and 
( )
( )
XX
XX
S
f
S
f
∗
=
, meaning that SXX(f) is real but not 
necessarily even.

264	
Probability and Random Processes
The power of a random process X(t) is
	
2
E[
(t)]
(0)
( )
XX
XX
P
X
R
S
f df
∞
−∞
=
=
= ∫
	
(A.82)
This re
lt is known as Parseval’s theorem.
The cross power spectral density between two random processes X(t) and Y(t) is
	
2
( )
( ) j
f
XY
XY
S
f
R
e
d
π τ
τ
τ
∞
-∞
= ò
	
(A.83)
If X(t) and Y(t) are both real random processes, then
	
(  )
( )
XY
YX
R
R
τ
τ
=
	
(A.84)
	
( )
(
)
XY
YX
S
f
S
f
=
-
	
(A.85)
On the other hand, if X(t) and Y(t) are complex random processes, then
	
( )
(
)
XY
YX
R
R
τ
τ
∗
=
−
	
(A.86)
	
( )
( )
XY
YX
S
f
S
f
∗
=
	
(A.87)
A.2.5  Deterministic Continuous-Time Signals
A deterministic (continuous-time) signal is usually defined over a set of real num-
bers . The set  is the temporal space in which the variable t takes its values, 
(i.e., t Î ). A deterministic signal is described as a function (mapping) ˆµ, in which 
each value of t is assigned to a real-valued (or complex-valued) number ˆµ(t). (i.e.,
ˆµ:  ®  or ()). The following functions are of importance when operating with 
deterministic continuous-time signals.
Mean value
The mean value of a deterministic signal ˆµ(t) is defined as
	
1
ˆ
ˆ
E[ ( )]= lim
( )
2
T
T
T
t
t dt
T
µ
µ
−
®¥
∫
	
(A.88)
Mean power
The mean power of a deterministic signal ˆµ(t) is defined as
	
2
ˆ
1
ˆ
lim
( )
2
T
T
T
P
t
dt
T
µ
µ
-
→¥
=
ò
	
(A.89)
Autocorrelation function
The autocorrelation function of a deterministic signal ˆµ(t) is defined as

A.2  Random Processes	
265
	
ˆ ˆ
1
ˆ
ˆ
( )
lim
( ) (
)
2
T
T
T
R
t
t
dt
T
µµ τ
µ
µ
τ
∗
-
→∞
=
+
ò
	
(A.90)
Crosscorrelation function
The crosscorrelation function of deterministic signals 1ˆ ( )t
µ
 and 2ˆ ( )t
µ
 is defined as
	
1 2
ˆ ˆ
1
2
1
ˆ
ˆ
( )
lim
( )
(
)
2
T
T
T
R
t
t
dt
T
µ µ τ
µ
µ
τ
∗
−
→∞
=
+
∫
	
(A.91)
Power spectral density
Power spectral density is defined as the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation 
function 
ˆ ˆ ( );
Rµµ τ  that is,
	
2
ˆ ˆ
ˆ ˆ
( )
( )
j
f
S
f
R
e
d
π τ
µµ
µµ τ
τ
∞
-
-∞
= ò
	
(A.92)
Crosspower spectral density
Cross-power spectral density is denned as the Fourier transform of the crosscorrela-
tion function 
1 2
ˆ ˆ ( );
Rµ µ τ  that is,
	
1 2
1 2
2
ˆ ˆ
ˆ ˆ
( )
( )
j
f
S
f
R
e
d
π τ
µ µ
µ µ τ
τ
∞
-
-∞
= ∫
	
(A.93)
References
[1]	
Papoulis A., Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes, New York: McGraw 
Hill, 1984.
[2]	
Leon-Garcia A., Probability and Random Processes for Electrical Engineering, Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[3]	
Von Mises R. “Über die ‘Ganzzahligkeit’ der Atomgewicht und verwandte Fragen,” Physi-
kal. Z., Vol. 19, 1918, pp. 490–500.


267
A P P E N D I X  B
Description of Simulators for Fixed-
to-Mobile Cellular, Vehicle-to-vehicle, 
Air-to-Ground, and Underwater Vehicle-
to-Underwater Vehicle Channels
The purpose of a channel simulator is to reproduce the features of a physical chan-
nel that are critical for testing the performance of a communication system. These 
features include effects of large-scale fading (i.e., path loss and shadowing), effects 
of small-scale fading (i.e., multipath fading), and channel statistics such as corre-
lation function, Doppler spectrum, and level crossing rate. To help readers better 
understand, use, and implement the propagation theory presented in Chapters 2–5, 
this book also provides MATLAB-based simulators for fixed-to-mobile (F-to-M) cel-
lular, vehicle-to-vehicle (V-to-V), air-to-ground (A-to-G), and underwater ­vehicle-
to-underwater vehicle (UV-to-UV) channels. This chapter explains how to use these 
simulators.
B.1  Simulator for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Channels
This section describes the MATLAB-based simulator for fixed-to-mobile (F-to-M) 
cellular channels, which can be found on the CD associated with this book, in 
the F-to-M Channel directory. This simulator is based on the 2-D channel models 
described in Sections 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.4, 2.3.5, and 2.4.2 and on the 3-D model 
described in [1].
The simulator is initiated by running the F_to_M_channel_start.m file. This 
starts the graphic user interface (GUI) shown in Figure B.l. The input parameters 
are divided into five categories: system, type of propagation, mobile movement, 
SISO/MIMO block, and antenna orientation parameters.
Among the system parameters are the carrier frequency (in GHz), sampling 
frequency (in kHz), number of samples for the baseband signal that is modulated 
onto the carrier signal, and the distance between the transmitter and the receiver 
(in meters).
The “type of propagation” parameters allow one to choose between Rayleigh 
fading and Ricean fading (i.e., between non-line-of-sight and line-of-sight propaga-
tion). If Ricean fading is selected, the value for parameter K should also be specified. 
For F-to-M cellular systems, the parameter K ranges between 1 and 10. The spread 
of scatterers and maximum elevation angle around the receiver implicitly select 
between isotropic and nonisotropic scattering and between 2-D and 3-D models, 
respectively. If the spread of scatterers around the receiver is zero, the simulator 

268	
Description of Simulators
assumes isotropic scattering and uses the narrowband model described in Sec-
tions 2.3.2 and 2.3.3. On the other hand, when the spread of scatterers around the 
receiver is larger than zero, the simulator assumes nonisotropic scattering and uses 
the narrowband model described in Section 2.3.4. For F-to-M cellular systems, this 
value varies between 1 and 10. Similarly, if the maximum elevation angle around 
the receiver is zero, the simulator uses 2-D narrowband model described in Sec-
tions 2.3.2 and 2.3.4. If the maximum elevation angle around the receiver is greater 
than zero, the simulator uses the 3-D model from [1]. For F-to-M cellular systems, 
the elevation angle in 3-D models is typically between 10° and 80°.
In the mobile movement category, the user selects the velocity of the receiver (in 
m/s) and its direction of movement (in degrees).
In the SISO/MIMO block category, the user chooses between a single-input 
single-output (SISO) and a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) system. If the 
MIMO option is selected, the user needs to specify the number of transmit anten-
nas and the spacing among them, as well as the number of receive antennas and the 
spacing among them.
Finally, in the antenna orientation category, the user specifies the azimuthal and 
elevation angles for antennas. Here, we assume that a MIMO system is using same 
antenna elements at the transmitter and at the receiver.
The simulator generates the channel impulse response as well as the channel 
statistics (the auto- and cross-correlation functions, the Doppler spectrum, and the 
level crossing rate). The channel impulse response is obtained when the “Channel” 
Figure B.1  GUI for fixed-to-mobile (cellular) channel simulator.

button is pressed, while the statistics are obtained when the “Statistics” button 
is pressed. The results for the channel impulse response are saved in a file named 
channel.m. This file contains the matrix H with channel impulse responses and 
the time array t. The results for the channel statistics are saved in a file named 
channel_statistics.mat. The file contains the correlation matrix called SpaceTime_
CorrelationFunction and the corresponding time delay tau, the Doppler spectrum 
matrix called sDoppler_psd and the corresponding frequency array f, and the level 
crossing rate LCR and the average fade duration AFD with the corresponding 
crossing levels Rs.
To illustrate how this simulator works, here we present several examples.
Example 1:  Varying the Receiver Velocity
To illustrate how changes in the receiver’s velocity impact the channel impulse re-
sponse, we select the following channel parameters: carrier frequency is 2 GHz, 
sampling frequency is 100 kHz, number of samples is 10,000, and distance between 
the transmitter and the receiver is 1000m. The 2-D, isotropic, and non-line-of-sight 
type of propagation is selected and the SISO block is chosen. The channel param-
eters are shown in Figure B.2. In the first simulation run, the receiver velocity is 
set to 10 m/s, and in the second to 30 m/s. The results obtained for the channel 
impulse response are shown in Figure B.3. The results show that, as the velocity of 
the receiver increases, the variability of the channel impulse response increases. To 
quantify this variability in the channel, we can use the level crossing rates generated 
by the simulator for these two channels. These level crossing rates are shown in Fig-
ure B.4. The results show that the channel impulse response with the receiver velocity 
uR = 30 m/s is varying three to four times more than the channel impulse response 
with the receiver velocity uR=10 m/s.
Example 2:  Line-of-Sight vs. Non-Line-of-Sight Propagation
To illustrate how LoS propagation differs from NLoS propagation, we select the 
following channel parameters: carrier frequency is 1 GHz, sampling frequency is 
10 kHz, number of samples is 10,000, and distance between the transmitter and the 
receiver is 500m. The 2-D and isotropic type of propagation is selected. The veloc-
ity and direction of the receiver are set to uR = 10 m/s and gR = 0°, respectively. We 
choose the SISO option and set the antenna directions to 0°. In the first simulation 
run we select the Rayleigh fading, and in the second simulation run we select the 
Rician fading with K = 5. The results shown in Figure B.5 illustrate the impact of 
direct path on channel correlation: when present, the LoS path increases the auto-
correlation with respect to time.
Example 3:  Isotropic vs. Nonisotropic Scattering
To illustrate how isotropic scattering differs from nonisotropic scattering, we select 
the same parameters as in Example 2 and choose NLoS propagation. In the first 
simulation run, we select the spread of scatterers around the receiver to be 0, and, 
in the second simulation run, we select it to be 5. The results shown in Figure B.6 
B.1  Simulator for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Channels	
269

270	
Description of Simulators
Figure B.3  Channel impulse response for two different receiver velocities (uR = 10 m/s and 
uR = 30 m/s).
Figure B.2  Model parameters in Example 1: varying the receiver velocity.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000 10000
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
Channel impulse response for v=10 m/s
Channel impulse response for v=30 m/s
Amplitude level [dB]
Normalized time t/T

Figure B.5  Correlation function for NLoS and LoS propagation.
Figure B.4  Level crossing rate for two different receiver velocities (uR = 10 m/s and uR = 30 m/­s).
B.1  Simulator for Fixed-to-Mobile Cellular Channels	
271
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
NLoS propagation
LoS propagation (K=5)
Magnitude of correlation function
Time delay [s]
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Level crossing rate for v=10 m/s
Level crossing rate for v=30 m/s
Level crossing rate
R [dB]

272	
Description of Simulators
illustrate the impact of scattering distribution on the channel correlation: the chan-
nel gets more decorrelated when nonisotropic scattering is present. 
B.2  Simulator for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Channels
This section describes the MATLAB-based simulator for vehicle-to-vehicle (V-to-V) 
channels, which can be found on the CD associated with this book, in the V-to-V 
Channel directory. This simulator is based on the 2-D channel models described in 
Sections 3.1.3, 3.1.4, 3.1.5, and 3.1.6, and on the 3-D model described in Sections 
3.1.7 and 3.1.8. The simulator is initiated by running the V_to_V_channel_start.m 
file. This starts the graphic user interface (GUI) shown in Figure B.7, Similarly to 
the simulator described in Section B.l, the input parameters of the V-to-V simulator 
are divided into five categories: system, type of propagation, movement of vehicles, 
SISO/MIMO block, and antenna orientation parameters.
Among the system parameters are the carrier frequency (in GHz), sampling fre-
quency (in kHz), number of samples for the baseband signal that is modulated onto the 
carrier signal, and the distance between the transmitter and the receiver (in meters).
The “type of propagation” parameters allow one to choose between Rayleigh 
fading and Ricean fading (i.e., between non-line-of-sight and line-of-sight propaga-
tion). If Ricean fading is selected, the value for parameter K should also be speci-
fied. For V-to-V channels, we also must choose between “V-to-V Channel_SB” and 
“V-to-V Channel_DB” options. As discussed in Section 3.1.5, the single-bounced or 
double-bounced rays can be prevalent type of propagation. If option “V-to-V Chan-
nel_SB” is selected, the simulator randomly selects values for parameters kT and 
kR such that kR + kT  ³ 0.5. On the other hand, if option “V-to-V Channel_DB” is 
selected, the simulator randomly selects values for parameters kT and kR such that 
kT + kR £ 0.5. If the user wants to change the policy for selecting single-bounced 
versus double-bounced rays, this can be done in the file Input_Parameters.m. The 
spreads of scatterers and maximum elevation angles around the transmitter and 
Figure B.6  Correlation function for isotropic and nonisotropic scattering.
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 Isotropic scattering
Nonisotropic scattering (k=2)
Magnitude of correlation function
Time delay [s]

receiver implicitly select between isotropic and nonisotropic scattering and between 
2-D and 3-D models, respectively. If the spreads of scatterers around the transmit-
ter and receiver are zero, the simulator assumes isotropic scattering, while when 
the spreads of scatterers around the transmitter and receiver are larger than zero, 
the simulator assumes nonisotropic scattering. Similarly, if the maximum elevation 
angles around the transmitter and receiver are zero, the simulator uses the 2-D  
narrowband model described in Sections 3.1.5 and 3.1.6. If the maximum elevation 
angles around the transmitter and receiver are greater than zero, the simulator uses 
the narrowband version of the 3-D model described in Sections 3.1.7 and 3.1.8. For 
V-to-V systems, the elevation angles typically vary between 0° and 20°.
In the movement of vehicles category, the user selects the velocities and direc-
tions of movement for both the transmitter and the receiver.
In the SISO/MIMO block category, the user chooses between a single-input 
­single-­output (SISO) and a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) system. If the 
MIMO option is selected, we must also specify the number of transmit antennas and 
the spacing among them, as well as the number of receive antennas and the spacing 
among them.
Finally, in the antenna orientation category, the user specifies the azimuthal and 
elevation angles for antennas. Here, we assume that a MIMO system is using same 
antenna elements at the transmitter and at the receiver.
Figure B.7  GUI for vehicle-to-vehicle channel simulator.
B.2  Simulator for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Channels	
273
Similar to the F-to-M channel simulator, the V-to-V channel simulator gener-
ates the channel impulse response as well as the channel statistics (the auto- and 

274	
Description of Simulators 
channel impulse response are saved in a file named channel.m. This file contains 
the matrix H with channel impulse responses and the time array t. The results for 
the channel statistics are saved in a file named channel_statistics.mat. The file con-
tains the correlation matrix called SpaceTime_CorrelationFunction and the cor-
responding time delay tau, the Doppler spectrum matrix called s_Doppler_psd and 
the corresponding frequency array f, and the level crossing rate LCR and the average 
fade duration AFD with the corresponding crossing levels Rs.
To illustrate how this simulator works, here we present several examples. 
Example 1:  Varying the Transmitter and the Receiver Velocities
To illustrate how the velocities of the transmitter and the receiver affect the Doppler 
spectrum, we select the following channel parameters: carrier frequency is 2.4 GHz, 
sampling frequency is 10 kHz, number of samples is 10,000, and distance between 
the transmitter and the receiver is 300m. The 2-D, isotropic, and non-line-of-sight 
type of propagation is selected, and the SISO block is chosen. Finally, double-
bounced rays are chosen to be more dominant. The channel parameters are shown 
in Figure B.8. In the first simulation run, the transmitter and receiver velocities are 
10 m/s and 20 m/s, respectively, and in the second simulation run, they are 30 m/s 
and 50 m/s, respectively. The obtained Doppler spectra are shown in Figure B.9. 
The results show that, as the velocities of the transmitter and the receiver increase, 
the Doppler spread increases and the Doppler amplitude decreases.
Example 2:  Single-Bounced vs. Double-Bounced Rays
In contrast to F-to-M cellular channels, where only single-bounced rays can be 
dominant under NLoS conditions, in V-to-V channels double-bounced rays can 
also be dominant. For example, single-bounced rays are prevalent on interstate 
highways, while double-bounced rays are prevalent in surface street environments 
[2]. To illustrate how the channel differs when single-bounced or double-bounced 
rays are prevalent, we select the following channel parameters: carrier frequency is 
1 GHz, sampling frequency is 10 kHz, number of samples is l0,000, and distance 
between the transmitter and the receiver is 500m. The 2-D and isotropic type 
of propagation is selected. The velocities of the transmitter and the receiver are 
υT = 10 m/s and υR = 10 m/s, respectively. The directions of the transmitter and 
the receiver are γT = 0° and γR = 0°, respectively. We choose the SISO option and 
set the antenna directions to 0°. In the first simulation run, we select the “V-to-V 
Channel_SB” option, and, in the second simulation run, we select the “V-to-V 
Channel_DB” option.
Figure B.10 compares the autocorrelation functions of the channel impulse re-
sponses for these two simulation runs. The results show that the signals are more 
self-correlated when the single-bounced rays are dominant. This is an expected 
result because double-bounced signals experience more phase shifts, which decor-
relates them faster.
cross-correlation functions, the Doppler spectrum, and the level crossing rate). The 
channel impulse response is obtained when the “Channel” button is pressed, while 
the statistics are obtained when the “Statistics” button is pressed. The results for the 

Figure B.8  Model parameters in example 1: varying the transmitter and the receiver ­velocities.
-700 -600 -500-400-300-200 -100
0
100 200 300 400 500 600 700
-30
-28
-26
-24
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
Doppler spectrum, vT=10 m/s, vR=20 m/s
 Doppler spectrum, vT=30 m/s, vR=50 m/s
Doppler spectrum [dB]
f [Hz]
Figure B.9  The Doppler spectrum for two different sets of velocities: υT = 10 m/s, υR = 20 m/s and 
υT = 30 m/s, υT = 50 m/s. 
B.2  Simulator for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Channels	
275

276	
Description of Simulators
B.3  Simulator for Air-to-Ground Channels
This section describes the MATLAB-based simulator for air-to-ground (A-to-G) 
channels. The simulator can be found on the CD associated with this book, in the 
A-to-G Channel directory. This simulator is based on the 3-D model described in 
Sections 4.2.5, 4.2.6, and 4.3.1.
The simulator is initiated by running the A_to_G_channel_start.m file. This file 
starts graphic user interface (GUI) shown in Figure B.11. The model used for the 
air-to-ground simulator is very similar to the model for F-to-M cellular channels. 
The only differences are that both the transmitter and the receiver move in the air-
to-ground simulator, and that we need to use a 3-D model.
To illustrate how the A-to-G channel simulator works, here we present several 
examples.
Example 1:  2-D vs. 3-D Model
This example illustrates why a 3-D model should be used for air-to-ground (A-to-G) 
channels. We obtain 2-D results by artificially setting the elevation in the 3-D model 
to zero. Figure B.12 shows the spatial correlation functions of two uniformly and 
vertically spaced antennas at the receiver for several maximum elevation angles. 
Here, we select the following channel parameters: carrier frequency is 2 GHz, sam-
pling frequency is 100 kHz, number of samples is 10,000, and distance between the 
transmitter and the receiver is 10,000m. The isotropic and non-line-of-sight type 
of propagation is selected. The MIMO block is selected and the distance between 
transmit antennas is set to zero (to model only one antenna at the transmitter), 
while the distance between receive antennas is varied from zero to 5 l. The trans-
mitter velocity is υT = 100 m/s, the receiver velocity is υR = 50 m/s, and the orienta-
tions of the transmitter and the receiver are γT = 0° and γR = 0°, respectively. We run 
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Correlation with single-bounced rays dominant
Correlation with double-bounced rays dominant
Correlation function
Time delay [s]
Figure B.10  Comparison of the autocorrelation functions of the channel impulse responses with 
the single-bounced rays dominant and the double-bounced rays dominant.

multiple simulations with different values for the “Rx Antenna Spacing” parameter 
(X-axis in Figure B.l2) and for the “Max. elevation angle around Rx” parameter 
(different lines in Figure B.12). The GUI with one such set of the channel param-
eters is shown in Figure B.13.
The results in Figure B.12 show that, as the maximum elevation angle increases 
from 1° to 80° and beyond, the correlation between the two receive antennas is dra-
matically reduced. This means that, if we ignore the 3-D aspect of the propagation, 
it will appear that no diversity gain is possible from using more than one antenna, 
whereas in reality significant diversity is present even if the elevation angles of the 
scatterers are modest (e.g., 20°).
Example 2:  Varying the Receiver Velocity
To illustrate how the change in receiver velocity impacts the A-to-G channel impulse 
response, we select the following channel parameters: carrier frequency is 2.1 GHz, 
sampling frequency is 100 kHz, number of samples is 10,000, and distance between 
the transmitter and the receiver is 20,000m. The 3-D, nonisotropic, and non-line-
of-sight type of propagation is selected, and the SISO block is chosen. The GUI with 
these parameters is shown in Figure B.14. In the first simulation run, the receiver 
velocity is set to 50 m/s, and in the second to 100 m/s. To quantify the variability in 
the channel, Figure B.15 compares the level crossing rates for the two different ve-
locities of the receiver. The results show that the channel impulse response with the 
Figure B.11  GUI for air-to-ground channel simulator.
B.3  Simulator for Air-to-Ground Channels	
277

278	
Description of Simulators
Figure B.12  The normalized spatial correlation functions of two uniformly and vertically spaced 
antennas at the receiver, for several maximum elevation angles­.
Figure B.13  The channel parameters used in Example 1: 2-D vs. 3-D model.
0
1
2
3
4
5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
 Tm=1
o    
 Tm=5
o
 Tm=10
o  
 Tm=20
o
 Tm=80
o
Spatial correlation function
dR/

Figure B.15  Level crossing rate for receiver velocities (υR = 50 m/s and υR = 100 m/s).
Figure B.14  Model parameters in Example 2: varying the receiver velocity.
B.3  Simulator for Air-to-Ground Channels	
279
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
 Level crossing rate for v R =50 m/s
 Level crossing rate for v R =100 m/s
Level crossing rate [dB]
R [dB]

280	
Description of Simulators
receiver velocity υR = 100 m/s is varying two to three, times more than the channel 
impulse response with υR = 50 m/s.
B.4  Simulator for Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Channels
This section describes the MATLAB-based simulator for underwater vehicle-to-
underwate­r vehicle (UV-to-UV) channels. The simulator can be found on the CD as-
sociated with this book, in the UV-to-UV Channel directory. This simulator is based 
on 2-D channel models described in Sections 5.3.2, 5.3.3, 5.3.4, 5.3.5, and 5.4.1.
The simulator is initiated by running the UV_to_UV_channel_start.m file. This 
starts the graphic user interface (GUI) shown in Figure B.16. Similarly to the ­simulators 
that were already described in this appendix, the input parameters of the UV-to-UV 
simulator are divided into five categories: system, type of propagation, movement of 
vehicles, SISO/MIMO block, and hydrophone (acoustic “antenna”) orientation pa-
rameters. However, the actual parameters in each category are somewhat different.
The system parameters category, similarly to the previous simulators, allows 
specification of the carrier frequency (this time in KHz), sampling frequency (this 
time in Hz), number of samples, and distance between the transmitter and the re-
ceiver (in meters). The new parameters for a UV-to-UV simulator are the speed of 
sound in the water (in m/s), surface-to-bottom water depth (in meters), and the 
water depths (in meters) at which the transmitter and the receiver are located.
Figure B.16  GUI for underwater vehicle-to-underwater vehicle channel simulator. 

Like in other models in this appendix, the “type of propagation” parameters 
allow us to choose between Rayleigh fading and Ricean fading (i.e., between non-
line-of-sight and line-of-sight propagation). If Ricean fading is selected, the value 
for parameter K should also be specified. For UV-to-UV systems, the parameter K 
ranges between 0.2 and 5. Additional “type-of-propagation” parameters for UV-
to-UV channels allow us to specify the impact of surface movement (variance of 
surface) on upward- and downward-arriving rays. These numbers vary between 
0 and 1. Finally, we can specify the mean angles and the spread angles of scatter-
ers that impact the upward- and downward-arriving rays, respectively. The mean 
angle of scatterers that impacts the upper-arriving rays varies between 0° and 180°, 
while the mean angle of scatterers that impacts the downward-arriving rays ­varies 
between 180° and 360°. The spread angle is typically between 0° and 10°. In the 
movement of vehicles category, the user selects the velocities of the transmitter 
and the receiver (in m/s) and their directions of movement (in degrees). In the 
SISO/MIMO block category, the user chooses between a single-input single-output 
(SISO) option and multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) option. If the MIMO 
option is selected, user needs to specify the number of transmit hydrophones and 
the spacing among them, as well as the number of receive hydrophones and the 
spacing among them.
Finally, in the hydrophone orientation category, the user specifies the azimuthal 
angles for the hydrophones. Here, we assume that MIMO system is using the same 
hydrophone elements at the transmitter and at the receiver.
Figure B.17  Model parameters for example 1 of UV-to-UV channel simulator.
B.4  Simulator for Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Channels	
281

282	
Description of Simulators
The simulator provides the channel impulse response as well as the channel 
statistics (the auto- and cross-correlation functions and the Doppler spectrum). The 
channel impulse response is obtained when the “Channel” button is pressed, while 
the statistics are obtained when the “Statistics” button is pressed. The results for the 
channel impulse response are saved in a file named channel.m. This file contains 
the matrix h with channel impulse responses and the time array t. The results for 
the channel statistics are saved in a file named channel_statistics.mat. The file con-
tains the correlation matrix called corr and the corresponding time delay tau, along 
with the Doppler spectrum matrix called Dopp and the corresponding frequency 
array f. To illustrate how this simulator works, here we present several examples.
Example l:  Varying Transmitter and Receiver Velocities
To illustrate how the change in receiver velocity impacts the channel impulse re-
sponse, we select the following channel parameters: carrier frequency is 17 kHz, 
sampling frequency is 100 Hz, number of samples is 10,000, and distance between 
the transmitter and the receiver is 1000m. The speed of sound in water is 1500 m/s, 
water depth is 20m, transmitter depth is 19m, and receiver depth is 18m. The vari-
ance of surface is 0.01 for upward-arriving rays and 0.02 for downward-arriving 
rays, while the mean angle and the spread angle are 164° and 2°, respectively, for 
upward-arriving rays and 195° and 3°, respectively, for downward-arriving rays. 
Non-line-of-sight propagation is selected, and the SISO block is chosen. The GUI 
with these channel parameters is shown in Figure B.17. In the first simulation run, 
the transmitter and the receiver velocities are set to 0.1 m/s and 0.2 m/s, respectively. 
In the second simulation run, these velocities are set to 1 m/s and 2 m/s, respectively. 
The results obtained for the channel impulse response are shown in Figure B.18. 
These results show that, as the velocities of the transmitter and the receiver increase, 
the variability of the channel impulse response increases.
Figure B.18  Channel impulse response for two different transmitter and receiver velocities.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Channel impulse response for vT=0.1 m/s and vR =0.2 m/s
Channel impulse response for vT =1 m/s and vR =2 m/s
Amplitude level [dB]
Normalized time t/T

Example 2:  Line-of-Sight vs. Non-Line-of-Sight
To illustrate how LoS propagation differs from NLoS propagation, we select the 
following channel parameters: carrier frequency is 20 kHz, sampling frequency 
is 10 Hz, number of samples is 10,000, and distance between the transmitter and 
the receiver is 2000m. The speed of sound in water is 1500 m/s, water depth is 
100m, transmitter depth is 50m, and receiver depth is 50m. The variance of sur-
face is 0.1 for both upward- and downward-arriving rays. The mean angle and 
the spread angle are 166° and 2°, respectively, for upward-arriving rays and 192° 
and 3°, respectively, for downward-arriving rays. The velocities and directions 
of both the transmitter and the receiver are υT = υR = 0.05 m/s and γT = γR = 0°, 
respectively. We choose the SISO option and set the hydrophone directions to 0°.  
In the first simulation run we select Rayleigh fading, while for the second run 
we select Rician fading with K = 0.6. The results for channel autocorrelation are 
shown in Figure B.19. These results illustrate the impact of a direct (LoS) path on 
channel autocorrelation: when present, the LoS path increases the autocorrelation 
with respect to time.
References
[1]	
Parsons J. D. and A. M. D. Turkmani, “Characterisation of mobile radio signals: model de-
scription,” IEE Proceedings I, Communications, Speech, and Vision, Vol. 138, Dec. 1991, 
pp. 549–556.
[2]	
Zajić A. G., G. L. Stüber, T. G. Pratt, and S. Nguyen, “Wideband MIMO mobile-to-mo-
bile channels: geometry-based statistical modeling with experimental verification,” IEEE 
Transactions on Vekicular Technology, Vol. 58, Feb. 2009, pp. 517–34.
Figure B.19  Correlation function for NLoS and LoS propagation.
B.4  Simulator for Underwater Vehicle-to-Underwater Vehicle Channels	
283
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 NLoS propagation
 LoS propagation (K=0.6)
Correlation function
Time delay [s]




287
Index
A
Absorption loss, 199–200
Air-to-ground (A-to-G) communication systems
 
advantages of, 4
 
deﬁ ned, 3
 
deployment, 4
 
ground segment, 4
 
illustrated, 5
 
radio propagation environment, 158
 
simulation and performance evaluation, 4
 
sky segment, 4
 
See also A-to-G channels
Akki and Haber model
 
channel gain, 63
 
Doppler shift, 63–64
 
phase, 64
Ambient noise, 190
Amplitudes
 
cocentric-cylinders model, 96–97
 
UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic 
fading channels, 232–33
Angles of arrival (AoA), 27
Antenna coupling, impact on MIMO V-to-V 
channels, 118–29
Antiwaveguide sound channel, 195
A-to-G channels, 157–83
 
characteristics of, 157
 
gaseous absorption, 159
 
large-scale fading, 159–62
 
level crossing rate (LCR), 178–79
 
performance of, 162–63
 
propagation modeling, 157–62
 
rain attenuation, 159–60
 
received envelope distribution, 163
 
scattering model for, 165–67
 
scintillation, 159, 161
 
simulators for, 179–83
 
small-scale fading, 162
 
space-Doppler power spectral density 
(sD-psd), 176–77
 
space-time correlation function (ST-CF), 
171–76
 
spatial-temporal fading characteristics, 
171–79
 
statistical characterization of multipath 
propagation, 162–79
 
statistical modeling, 163
 
summary, 183
 
three-dimensional model for, 167
 
two-ray model, 163–65
Autocorrelation function
 
of complex impulse response, 28–29
 
complex-valued random processes, 262–63
 
deterministic continuous-time signals, 
264–65
 
normalized, 29, 211
 
properties of, 260–61
 
random process, 260
 
See also Temporal autocorrelation function
Autocovariance, random process, 260
Average fade duration (AFD)
 
calculation, 32–33
 
deﬁ ned, 9, 30, 86
 
envelope, 32–33
 
with LoS component, 86
 
for NLoS conditions, 33, 86
 
UV-to-UV acoustic channels, 218–22
 
V-to-V propagation modeling, 82–87
C
Carrier-to-interference ratio (CIR), 161
Central limit theorem, 252
Certain events, 249

288 
Index
Channel capacity, MIMO V-to-V channels, 
126–29
Channel gains
 
Akki and Haber model, 63
 
MIMO A-to-G multipath fading channels, 
169–70
 
MIMO UV-to-UV frequency-ﬂ at acoustic 
fading channels, 225
 
two-dimensional MIMO V-to-V modeling, 
71–72
 
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels, 209–10
Channel scatterers, 13
Chapter overview, this book, 9–10
Characteristic function, 252
Characteristic impedance matching network, 
120
Clarke’s model, 22–24
Cocentric-cylinders model
 
amplitudes, 96–97
 
cylinders, 94
 
deﬁ ned, 92
 
deﬁ nition of parameters, 95
 
Doppler shifts, 97–98
 
illustrated, 93
 
multipath time delays, 99
 
path lengths, 98–99
 
phases, 98
Coherence bandwidth, 37
Coherence time, 37
Complex baseband impulse response, 24
Complex-valued random processes, 262–63
Correlation functions
 
for F-to-M frequency-selective multipath 
fading channels, 34–36
 
isotropic scattering channels, 24–27
 
joint (JCF), 62
 
nonisotropic scattering channels, 27–30
 
random processes, 259–61
 
space-time, 74–79, 171–76
 
space-time-frequency (STF-CF), 99–106
 
spatial, 8–9
Covariance, 251
Covariance-based estimator, 87
Covariance matrix, 253–54
Crosscorrelation, 261–62
Crosscorrelation function
 
deterministic continuous-time signals, 265
 
normalized, 48, 49
 
random processes, 263
 
for 2-D nonisotropic scattering, 28
Crosscovariance, 261–62
Crossing-based estimator
 
classes, 87
 
crossing-based, 87
 
estimation, 88
 
performance, 90
 
stationary zero-mean Gaussian processes, 88
Crosspower spectral density, 264, 265
Cumulative distribution function (cdf), 250
Cylindrical spreading, 199
D
Delay Doppler-spread function, 34
Delay spread, 36, 37
Deterministic continuous-time signals
 
autocorrelation function, 264–65
 
crosscorrelation function, 265
 
crosspower spectral density, 265
 
deﬁ ned, 264
 
mean power, 264
 
mean value, 264
 
power spectral density, 265
Deterministic MIMO 3-D SoS model, 182
Deterministic MIMO 3-D wideband SoS 
model, 143–44
Deterministic models, 46
Diffraction, Huygen’s principle, 15
Direction-of-movement estimator, 91
Direct propagation, 191
Direct pulse-based channel impulse response 
measurement, 50
Discrete line spectrum method, 129–30
Doppler power spectra
 
deﬁ ned, 26
 
isotropic scattering channels, 24–27
 
nonisotropic scattering channels, 27–30
 
normalized, 218
 
pass-band, 27
 
space, normalized, 83, 84
 
spatial temporal V-to-V propagation 
modeling, 81–82

Index 
289
 
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels, 216–18
 
V-to-V nonisotropic scattering channels, 
68–69
Doppler power spectral density, 9
Doppler shifts
 
Akki and Haber model, 63–64
 
cocentric-cylinders model, 97–98
 
maximum, 38
 
MIMO A-to-G multipath fading channels, 
170
 
MIMO UV-to-UV frequency-ﬂ at acoustic 
fading channels, 225
 
multipath propagation, 23
 
two-dimensional MIMO V-to-V modeling, 
72–73
 
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels, 210
 
V-to-V channels, 97–98
Doppler spread, 37
E
Elementary events, 249
Empty sets, 249
Ergodic models, 40
Expected value (mean value), 251
Exponential functions, 215
F
Fading
 
deﬁ ned, 7
 
pathloss, 7, 16
 
Rayleigh, 31
 
shadow, 7, 16, 17–18
 
See also Large-scale fading; Small-scale 
fading
Fast-fading channels
 
classiﬁ cation, 21
 
deﬁ ned, 7
Fixed-to-mobile (F-M) communications
 
channel models, 1
 
examples of, 1
 
system components, 13
Flat fading channels
 
classiﬁ cation, 20
 
deﬁ ned, 7
Fourier transforms, 216
Free-space propagation, 13, 14
Frequency correlation function, 9
Frequency dispersion, 21
Frequency domain-based channel impulse 
response measurements, 52–53, 54
Frequency-ﬂ at fading channels. See UV-to-
UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels; V-to-V frequency-ﬂ at 
multipath fading channels
Frequency-selective fading channels
 
classiﬁ cation, 20
 
deﬁ ned, 7
 
with discrete multipath components, 51
 
geometric model for, 51
 
scatterers, 47
 
simulation models, 47–49
 
UV-to-UV, 232–41
 
V-to-V, 140–46
Frequency selectivity, 20
F-to-M cellular radio channels
 
Clarke’s model for, 22–24
 
coverage illustration, 14
 
MIMO, 38–39
 
modeling, 33–34
 
propagation environment, 15
 
propagation modeling, 16–21
 
propagation principles, 13–16
 
simulation models, 39–49
 
statistical characterization of multipath 
propagation, 21–39
 
summary, 53–54
G
Gaseous absorption
 
A-to-G channels, 160–61
 
deﬁ ned, 159
 
modeling, 160–61
Gaussian distribution, 252–53
H
High-altitude platforms (HAPs)
 
altitudes, 157
 
multipath propagation, 162
High-altitude very long endurance (HAVE) 
vehicle, 157

290 
Index
I
Impedance matching networks, MIMO V-to-V 
system model, 120–21
Impedance mismatch, UV-to-UV frequency-
selective acoustic fading channels, 233
Impossible events, 249
Input-impedance matching networks, 120
Isotropic scattering channels
 
NLoS environment, 86
 
specular and scattered components, 31
 
V-to-V, 64–67
Isotropic scattering model, 25
J
Jake’s model (Model I), 40–42
Joint correlation function (JCF), 62
Joint cumulative distribution function, 250
Joint probability density function, 250–51
L
Large-scale fading
 
A-to-G channels, 159–62
 
deﬁ ned, 7
 
pathloss, 7, 16–17
 
shadowing, 7, 17–18
 
UV-to-UV acoustic channels, 198–202
 
V-to-V channels, 59–62
Level crossing rate (LCR)
 
A-to-G channels, 178–79
 
analytical, 118
 
deﬁ ned, 9, 30
 
envelope, 30–32
 
for LoS conditions, 32, 115, 178
 
measured, 118
 
for NLoS conditions, 32, 178
 
theoretical and measured, 148, 150, 151
 
UV-to-UV acoustic channels, 218–22
 
V-to-V channels, 82–87, 115–18
Li and Huang’s model (Model III), 42–43
Lognormal distribution, 255–56
M
Macro-eigenrays, 206
Marginal probability density function, 250
Markov chains, 180
Maximum likelihood estimation, 87
Measurements (V-to-V)
 
campaigns and modeling, 146–52
 
IST WINNER/WINNER 2 projects, 147
 
results analysis, 146–47
 
theoretical and measured LCR, 148, 150, 
151
 
theoretical and measured psds, 148, 149, 
151
 
theoretical and measured sD-psd, 148, 149, 
150
 
theoretical model, 147–48
 
validation, 147–52
MEDS model (Model IV), 43
Method of Exact Doppler Spread (MEDS), 43
Microscatterers, 207
MIMO 3-D wideband SoS models
 
deterministic, 143–44
 
statistical, 144–45
MIMO A-to-G multipath fading channels
 
channel gains, 169–70
 
Doppler shifts, 170
 
geometry, 167
 
model illustration, 168
 
parameters, 169
 
path lengths, 170–71
 
phases, 170
 
three-dimensional model for, 167–71
MIMO UV-to-UV frequency-ﬂ at acoustic 
fading channels
 
channel gains, 225
 
Doppler shifts, 225
 
geometry, 223
 
geometry of LoS path, 224
 
path lengths, 225–26
 
phases, 225
 
spatial-temporal fading characteristics, 
226–30
 
two-dimensional model, 222–26
MIMO V-to-V channels
 
antenna coupling impact, 118–29
 
channel capacity, 126–29
 
channel gains, 71–72
 
complex fading envelope, 71
 
deﬁ ned, 69–70
 
Doppler shifts, 72–73

Index 
291
 
geometry, 70
 
mean capacity comparison, 128, 129
 
narrowband, 92
 
path lengths, 73–74
 
phases, 73
 
SoS simulation models for, 134–40
 
space-time correlation function, 77
 
system model, 119–21
 
two-dimensional, 69–74
 
two-ring, 70
 
wideband, 92
 
without mutual coupling, 121
MIMO V-to-V channels with mutual coupling
 
analysis of MIMO V-to-V channels with, 
122–26
 
antenna patterns, 122–23
 
matching networks, 122–23
 
modeling, 121–22
 
received power, 123–26
 
spatial correlation, 123–26
MIMO V-to-V simulation models, 134–40
 
complexity comparison, 139–40
 
MMEDS model, 134, 138
 
modiﬁ ed MMEDS model, 137, 138
 
performance comparison, 138–39
 
statistical model, 137, 138
MIMO V-to-V system model, 119–21
 
impedance matching networks, 120–21
 
transmit and receive antenna subsystems, 
119
MMEDS model
 
complexity comparison, 139–40
 
deﬁ ned, 134–35
 
performance comparison, 138–39
 
phases, 135
Mobile stations (MS)
 
location impact on small-scale fading, 21
 
movement impact on small-scale fading, 
20–21
Mobile-to-mobile (M-to-M) communications, 
2–6
 
air-to-ground (A-to-G) systems, 3–5
 
deﬁ ned, 1
 
design of, 1
 
development of, 2
 
UV-to-UV systems, 5–6
 
vehicle-to-vehicle (V-to-V) systems, 2–3
Model I (Jake’s model), 40–42
Model II (Pop and Beaulieu’s model), 42
Model III (Li and Huang’s model), 42–43
Model IV (MEDS model), 43
Model V (Zajic´ and Stüber model), 43–44
Model VI (Zheng and Xiao’s statical models), 
45
Model VII (Zajic´ and Stüber statistical model), 
45
Modiﬁ ed Method of Exact Doppler Spreads. 
See MMEDS model
Modiﬁ ed MMEDS model
 
complexity comparison, 139–40
 
deﬁ ned, 137
 
performance comparison, 138–39
Moments, 251
Multipath, 7–8
Multipath propagation
 
A-to-G channels, 162
 
channel characteristic parameters, 36–38
 
correlation functions, 34–36
 
deﬁ ned, 19, 191
 
impact on small-scale fading, 20, 203
 
isotropic scattering channels, 24–27
 
modeling, 33–34
 
nonisotropic scattering channels, 27–30
 
received envelope distribution, 21–22
 
second-order statistics, 30–31
 
statistical characterization of, 21–39
 
UV-to-UV acoustic channels, 202–3
 
V-to-V propagation modeling, 62
Multipath time delays
 
cocentric-cylinders model, 99
 
UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic 
fading channels, 234
Multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO)
 
channels, 38–39
 
F-to-M cellular radio channels, 38–39
 
systems, 9, 21
Multiport conjugate matching network, 121
Multivariate Gaussian distribution, 253–54
Mutual coupling
 
analysis of MIMO V-to-V channels with, 
122–26
 
modeling of MIMO V-to-V channels with, 
121–22

292 
Index
N
Nakagami distribution, 257
Narrowband MIMO V-to-V multipath fading 
channels, 92
Noise
 
ambient, 190
 
site-speciﬁ c, 190
 
total level, 190–91
 
underwater propagation principles, 190–91
Nonisotropic scattering channels
 
correlation functions for, 27–30
 
Doppler power spectrum for, 27–30
 
specular and scattered components, 31–32
 
V-to-V, 67–69
Normalized temporal autocorrelation function, 
64–66
O
Orthogonal frequency division multiplexing 
(OFDM), 20
P
Path lengths
 
concentric-cylinders model, 98–99
 
MIMO A-to-G multipath fading channels, 
170–71
 
two-dimensional MIMO V-to-V modeling, 
73–74
Pathloss
 
A-to-G channels, 159–61
 
absorption and scattering loss, 199–200
 
deﬁ ned, 7, 16
 
exponent, 17
 
modeling methods, 16–17
 
spreading loss, 198–99
 
total, 200
 
UV-to-UV acoustic channels, 198–200
 
V-to-V channels, 59–62
Performance evaluation, simulation models 
(Models I–VII), 46–47
Phases
 
Akki and Haber model, 64
 
cocentric-cylinders model, 98
 
MIMO A-to-G multipath fading channels, 
170
 
MIMO UV-to-UV frequency-ﬂ at acoustic 
fading channels, 225
 
MMEDS model, 135
 
two-dimensional MIMO V-to-V modeling, 
73
 
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels, 210–11
Polarization diversity, 38
Pop and Beaulieu’s model (Model II), 42
Power delay proﬁ le (PDP), 36
Power space-delay spectral density (psds)
 
deﬁ ned, 111
 
MIMO, 113
 
SISO, 113, 114–15
 
theoretical and measured, 148, 149, 151
 
UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic 
fading channels, 239–41
Power spectral density
 
of complex impulse response, 26
 
cross, 264
 
deterministic continuous-time signals, 265
 
random processes, 263–64
 
space-Doppler (sD-psd), 106–10, 228–30
Power spectrum-based estimator, 87
Probability, 249
Probability density functions
 
deﬁ ned, 250
 
Gaussian distribution, 252–53
 
important, 252
 
joint, 250–51
 
lognormal distribution, 201, 255–56
 
marginal, 250
 
multivariate Gaussian distribution, 253–54
 
Nakagami distribution, 257
 
Rayleigh distribution, 254
 
Rice distribution, 254–55
 
of shadowing, 201
 
Suzuki distribution, 256
 
uniform distribution, 252
 
von Mises distribution, 257
Propagation
 
delay, 164–65
 
diffraction, 15
 
direct, 191
 
free-space, 13, 14
 
principles, 13–16

Index 
293
 
reﬂ ection, 14
 
scattering, 15–16
 
underwater principles, 188–98
 
See also Multipath propagation
R
Rain attenuation
 
deﬁ ned, 159
 
modeling, 159–60
Random experiments, 249
Random processes, 258–65
 
autocorrelation of, 260
 
autocovariance of, 260
 
classiﬁ cations of, 262
 
complex-valued, 262–63
 
crosscorrelation, 261–62
 
crosscovariance, 261–62
 
deﬁ ned, 258
 
deterministic continuous-time signals, 
264–65
 
ensemble average of, 259
 
as ergodic, 261
 
moments and correlation functions, 259–61
 
power spectral density, 263–64
 
as strictly stationary, 259
 
time average of, 259
 
wide sense stationary uncorrelated scattering 
(WSSUS) channels, 260
Random variables, 249–58
 
addition of, 258
 
central limit theorem, 252
 
characteristic function, 252
 
covariance, 251
 
expected value (mean value), 251
 
functions of, 257–58
 
moments, 251
 
multiplication of, 258
 
variance, 251
Rayleigh criterion, 15–16
Rayleigh distribution, 254
Rayleigh fading, 31
Received envelope distribution
 
A-to-G channels, 163
 
two-ray A-to-G channel model, 164–65
Received power
 
MIMO V-to-V channels with mutual 
coupling, 123–26
 
normalized, 127
Reﬂ ection
 
coefﬁ cients, 14, 197
 
illustrated, 16
 
specular, 14
 
at two interfacing surfaces, 196
 
underwater propagation principle, 195–97
Refraction (underwater)
 
antiwaveguide sound channel, 195
 
shallow sound channel, 195
 
sound propagation, 192–93
 
sound speed, 191
 
sound velocity proﬁ les, 192–93
 
surface sound channel, 194–95
 
at two interfaces, 192
 
at two interfacing surfaces, 196
 
underwater sound channel, 193–94
Rice distribution, 254–55
RMS Doppler spread, 37
Root mean square error (RMSE)
 
estimated direction versus actual direction, 
92
 
estimated Doppler frequency, 90
Root means square (RMS) delay spread, 37
S
Sample points, 249
Sample space, 249
Scattering
 
deﬁ ned, 15
 
effect of, 15–16
 
loss, 199–200
 
SWA, 219
 
underwater propagation principle, 198
Scattering model
 
A-to-G channels, 165–67
 
cumulative distribution function (cdf), 166
 
excess delay, 166
 
illustrated, 166
 
LoS propagation delay, 165
 
LoS propagation path, 165

294 
Index
Scintillation
 
climate and, 161
 
deﬁ ned, 159
Second-order statistics, 30–33
 
average fade duration, 32–33
 
level crossing rate (LCR), 30–32
Self-impedance matching network, 120
Shadowing
 
A-to-G channels, 161–62
 
autocorrelated, 18, 201, 202
 
deﬁ ned, 7, 17, 161, 200
 
illustrated, 18
 
modeling, 17–18
 
as outage cause, 18
 
probability density function of, 201
 
random components, 18
 
site-to-site, 18
 
UV-to-UV acoustic channels, 200–202
 
V-to-V channels, 59–62
Shallow water acoustic (SWA) channels, 206
Shallow water sound channel, 195
Simulation models (F-to-M cellular radio 
channels)
 
deterministic, 46
 
ergodic, 40
 
F-to-M frequency-ﬂ at multipath fading 
channels, 39–47
 
F-to-M frequency-selective multipath fading 
channels, 47–49
 
Jake’s model (Model I), 40–42
 
Li and Huang’s model (Model III), 42–43
 
MEDS model (Model IV), 43
 
performance evaluation, 46–47
 
Pop and Beaulieu’s model (Model II), 42
 
Zajic´ and Stüber model (Model V), 43–44
 
Zajic´ and Stüber statistical model (Model 
VII), 45
 
Zheng and Xiao’s statical models (Model 
VI), 45
Simulators (A-to-G channels)
 
approaches, 179–80
 
deterministic MIMO 3-D SoS model, 182
 
GUI, 276, 277
 
level cross rate, 279
 
Markov chains, 180
 
statistical MIMO 3-D SoS model, 182–83
 
sum-of-sinusoids method, 180–83
 
2-D versus 3-D model, 276–77, 278
 
varying receiver velocity, 277–80
Simulators (ﬁ xed-to-mobile cellular channels)
 
correlation function for isotropic and 
nonisotropic scattering, 272
 
correlation function for NLoS and LoS 
propagation, 271
 
GUI, 267, 268
 
isotropic versus nonisotropic scattering, 
269–72
 
level crossing rate (LCR), 271
 
LoS versus NLoS propagation, 269
 
varying receiver velocity, 269, 270
Simulators (UV-to-UV acoustic channels), 
241–45
 
GUI, 280
 
LoS versus NLoS propagation, 283
 
propagation parameters, 281
 
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels, 242–45
 
UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic 
fading channels, 242–45
 
varying transmitter/receiver velocities, 282
Simulators (V-to-V channels)
 
approaches, 129–30
 
discrete line spectrum method, 129–30
 
Doppler spectrum for different velocities, 
275
 
frequency-ﬂ at multipath fading, 130–40
 
frequency-selective fading, 140–46
 
GUI, 273
 
single-bounced versus double-bounced rays, 
274
 
sum-of-sinusoids method, 130
 
varying transmitter/receiver velocities, 274, 
275
Single-bounced at receiver (SBR), 92
Single-bounced at transmitter (SBT), 92
SISO V-to-V simulation models
 
complexity of, 133
 
Model I, 131
 
Model II, 131–32
 
Model III, 132–34
 
overview of, 130–313
 
variances of autocorrelation functions, 133, 
134

Index 
295
Site-speciﬁ c noise, 190
Slow-fading channels
 
classiﬁ cation, 21
 
deﬁ ned, 7
Small-scale channel measurement
direct pulse-based channel impulse response, 50
 
frequency domain-based channel impulse 
response, 52–53
 
spread spectrum-based channel impulse 
response, 50–53
 
techniques, 49–53
Small-scale fading
 
deﬁ ned, 7–8
 
factors inﬂ uencing, 19–21
 
A-to-G channels, 162
 
impact of multipath propagation on, 203
 
impact of transmitter, receiver, ocean surface 
movement on, 204
 
MS location impact on, 21
 
MS movement impact on, 20–21
 
multipath propagation, 19, 20
 
UV-to-UV acoustic channels, 202–4
 
V-to-V propagation modeling, 62
 
See also Large-scale fading
Sound channels
 
antiwaveguide, 195
 
shallow water, 195
 
surface, 194–95
 
underwater, 193–94
Space-Doppler power spectral density (sD-psd)
 
A-to-G channels, 176–77
 
deﬁ ned, 106
 
double-bounced, 108
 
LoS component, 106–7, 176
 
MIMO, 109–10
 
NLoS component, 176
 
normalized, in A-to-G environment, 177
 
normalized theoretical and measured, 110
 
SISO, 108–9
 
theoretical and measured, 148, 149, 150
 
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels, 228–30
 
UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic 
fading channels, 235–39
 
V-to-V channels, 106–10
Space-time correlation function
 
A-to-G channels, 171–76
 
envelope of, 175
 
of I and Q components, 78–79
 
MIMO V-to-V, 77
 
NLoS component, 173, 174, 175
 
normalized, 74
 
properties, 77
 
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels, 227–28
Space-time-frequency correlation function 
(STF-CF), 99–106
 
angle characterization, 100
 
envelope comparison, 104–5
 
normalized, 99–100
 
normalized, of theoretical, deterministic, and 
statistical models, 145
 
parameters, 102–3
 
for SBT, SBR, and DB components, 103
 
UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic 
fading channels, 235–39
Spatial correlation
 
function, 8–9
 
MIMO V-to-V channels with mutual 
coupling, 123–26
 
mutual coupling effect on, 124, 125, 126
 
normalized, 123–24
Spatial diversity, 38
Spatial selectivity, 21
Spatial-temporal fading characteristics
 
A-to-G channels, 171–79
 
UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic 
fading channels, 234–41
 
V-to-V channels, 74–87
Specular reﬂ ection, 14
Spherical spreading, 199
Spreading loss
 
cylindrical spreading, 199
 
spherical spreading, 199
 
types of, 198
 
See also UV-to-UV acoustic channels
Spread spectrum-based channel impulse 
response measurement, 50–52
Statistical MIMO 3-D wideband SoS model, 
144–45

296 
Index
Statistical model
 
channel realizations, 137
 
complexity comparison, 139–40
 
deﬁ ned, 135–36
 
A-to-G channels, 163
 
parameters, 136–37
 
performance comparison, 138–39
Sum-of-sinusoids method
 
simulators (A-to-G channels), 180–83
 
simulators (V-to-V channels), 130
Surface sound channel, 194–95
Suzuki distribution, 256
T
Temporal autocorrelation function
 
of complex fading channels, 64
 
deﬁ ned, 8
 
Fourier transform of, 216
 
LoS component, 212
 
magnitude of, 215
 
normalized, 64–66
 
UA and DA components, 212
 
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels, 211–16
 
V-to-V isotropic scattering channels, 64–67
 
V-to-V nonisotropic scattering channels, 
67–69
Time dispersion, 20
Time selectivity, 20
Total pathloss, 200
T-spaced channel model, 49
Two-cylinders model. See Cocentric-cylinders 
model
Two-dimensional MIMO V-to-V modeling
 
channel gain, 71–72
 
complex fading envelope, 71
 
deﬁ ned, 69–70
 
Doppler shift, 72–73
 
geometry, 70
 
path lengths, 73–74
 
phase, 73
 
two-ring, 70
Two-ray A-to-G channel model, 163–65
 
deﬁ ned, 163
 
illustrated, 164
 
parameters, 164–65
 
propagation delay, 164–65
 
received envelope distribution, 164–65
U
Uncorrelated scattering, 35
Underwater communication systems, 189–90
Underwater propagation principles
 
direct propagation, 191
 
noise, 190–91
 
reﬂ ection, 195–97
 
refraction, 191–95
 
scattering, 198
Uniform distribution, 252
Unmanned or autonomous underwater vehicles 
(UUVs/AUVs), 5
UV-to-UV acoustic channels, 187–247
 
absorption loss, 199–200
 
acoustic network, 6
 
average fade duration, 218–22
 
bandwidth, 188
 
challenge of, 188–89
 
deﬁ ned, 5
 
factors inﬂ uencing small-scale fading, 203–-
4
 
large-scale fading, 198–202
 
level crossing rate (LCR), 218–22
 
measurement campaigns and modeling, 
245–47
 
model assumptions, 207
 
motion, 204
 
multipath propagation, 202–3
 
pathloss, 198–200
 
propagation modeling, 198–204
 
received envelope distribution, 205
 
scattering loss, 199–200
 
shadowing, 200–202
 
simulators, 241–45
 
small-scale fading, 202–4
 
spreading loss, 198–99
 
statistical characterization of multipath 
propagation, 205–41
 
statistical modeling, 206–11
 
summary, 247
 
temporal fading characteristics, 211–22
 
total pathloss, 200
 
variations, 189

Index 
297
 
See also Underwater propagation principles
UV-to-UV frequency ﬂ at acoustic fading 
channels
 
channel gains, 209–10
 
complex faded envelope, 209
 
Doppler power spectra, 216–18
 
Doppler shifts, 210
 
geometry-based model, 207
 
model assumptions, 207
 
phases, 210–11
 
simulators (UV-to-UV acoustic channels), 
242–45
 
space-Doppler power spectral density (sD-
psd), 228–30
 
space-time correlation function, 227–28
 
spatial-temporal fading characteristics, 
226–30
 
statistical modeling, 206–11
 
temporal autocorrelation function, 211–16
 
two-dimensional model, 222–26
UV-to-UV frequency-selective acoustic fading 
channels
 
amplitudes, 232–33
 
impedance mismatch, 233
 
modeling, 232–34
 
multipath time delays, 234
 
power space-delay spectral density (psds), 
239–41
 
propagation loss, 233
 
simulators (UV-to-UV acoustic channels), 
242–45
 
space-Doppler power spectral density (sD-
psd), 235–39
 
space-time-frequency correlation function 
(STF-CF), 235–39
 
spectral-spatial-temporal fading 
characteristics, 234–41
 
as time varying, 232
 
validation of model for, 245–47
V
Variance, random variables, 251
Vector sensor package (VSP), 230
Vehicle-to-vehicle (V-to-V) communications 
systems
 
deﬁ ned, 2
 
distributed scenario, 3
 
measurement campaigns and modeling, 
146–52
 
performance evaluation, 3
 
propagation environment, 60
 
propagation modeling. see V-to-V 
propagation modeling
von Mises distribution, 257
von Mises pdf, 27, 28, 67
V-to-V channels
 
average fade duration, 82–87
 
channel characteristics, 59
 
crossing-based estimator, 87–90
 
estimation of direction of movement, 90–92
 
estimation of mobile velocities in, 87–90
 
isotropic scattering, 64–67
 
joint correlation function (JCF), 62
 
level crossing rate (LCR), 82–87, 115–18
 
power space-delay spectral density (psds), 
111–15
 
simulators, 129–46
 
space-Doppler power spectral density (sD-
psd), 106–10
 
space-time-frequency correlation function 
(STF-CF), 99–106
V-to-V frequency-ﬂ at multipath fading channels
 
Akki and Haber model, 62–64
 
Doppler power spectrum, 79–82
 
simulators for, 130–40
 
SISO, SoS simulation models, 130–34
 
space-time correlation function, 74–79
 
spatial temporal fading characteristics, 
74–87
 
temporal fading characteristics, 64–69
 
two-dimensional, 69–74
V-to-V frequency-selective multipath fading 
channels
 
modeling, 92–99
 
simulators for, 140–46
 
spectral-spatial-temporal fading 
characteristics, 99–118
 
validation of 3-D wideband model for, 
147–52
V-to-V propagation modeling
 
estimated parameters, 61
 
highway measurements, 60
 
large-scale fading, 59–62

298 
Index
V-to-V propagation modeling (continued)
 
multipath propagation, 62
 
pathloss, 59–62
 
rural measurements, 60
 
shadowing, 59–62
 
small-scale fading, 62
 
suburban measurements, 60
W
Wideband MIMO V-to-V multipath fading 
channels, 92
Wide sense stationary (WSS) channels, 35, 
41–42
Wide sense stationary uncorrelated scattering 
(WSSUS) channels, 36
Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments 
(WAVE), 3
Wireless channels
 
average fade duration, 9
 
correlation functions, 8–9
 
Doppler power spectral density, 9
 
fading, 7–8
 
level crossing rate, 9
 
propagation, 6
 
statistical properties of, 8–9
Z
Zajic´ and Stüber model (Model V), 43–44
Zajic´ and Stüber statistical model (Model VII), 
45
Zheng and Xiao’s statical models (Model VI), 
45

