
Mobile Security: How to 
Secure, Privatize, and  
Recover Your Devices
Keep your data secure on the go
Tim Speed
Darla Nykamp
Mari Heiser
Joseph Anderson
Jaya Nampalli
   BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

Mobile Security: How to Secure, Privatize, and Recover 
Your Devices
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: September 2013
Production Reference: 1300813
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
Livery Place 
35 Livery Street 
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84969-360-8
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Amit Gajera (86amitpixs@gmail.com)

Credits
Authors
Tim Speed
Darla Nykamp
Mari Heiser
Joseph Anderson
Jaya Nampalli
Reviewers
Michael Clarkson
Jason Slater
Acquisition Editor
Martin Bell
Lead Technical Editor
Mayur Hule
Technical Editors
Jalasha D'costa
Larissa Pinto
Amit Ramadas
Project Coordinator
Anugya Khurana
Proofreader
Maria Gould
Indexer
Mariammal Chettiyar
Graphics
Abhinash Sahu
Production Coordinator
Nilesh R. Mohite
Cover Work
Nilesh R. Mohite

Foreword
Today, nearly every individual uses some kind of intelligent mobile device and for 
you, the end user, it is important to understand the risks inherent in using these 
devices. The benefit is obvious, but keeping yourself and your family safe in this 
mobile world is more essential than ever. Mobile Security: How to Secure, Privatize, 
and Recover Your Devices will be invaluable to those who want to know how to 
protect themselves in this new mobile world. The authors explain how to protect 
your device, as well as the actions you should take in the event that your personal 
information or device is compromised. This book is intended as a guide; it has thus 
been organized for convenient reference in addressing the issues and challenges 
inherent in navigating the new mobile world.
Contained within this book is a list of available mobile devices and their uses. Also, 
features such as Facebook, LinkedIn, Connection, Groupon, and others are discussed 
with regards to their potential for exposing users to risk. Mobile banking and 
purchases are also included in this discussion. Exposure of our financial information 
to potential hackers should be of major concern to those that participate in these 
activities. On a related note, Cloud computing is addressed and defined, with 
particular attention paid to the risks and security weaknesses of this increasingly 
important popular technology.
The inclusion of Mobile Device Management (MDM) is significant because of the 
increasing number of personal devices, which are used at work. When your personal 
device connects to a company's trusted network, your employer's security measures 
must be put into effect. These security measures go far beyond simply creating 
new passwords. One issue identified and discussed in this book is personally 
downloaded programs. These applications may contain viruses, which may therefore 
place your employer's proprietary information at risk. This handbook will help you 
to understand how to protect yourself and your employer.

We all interact with our world using a variety of mobile devices. To verify our 
identification, we are forced to enter personal information. This information is  
now held by numerous sites, banks, social media, mobile storefronts, cell phone 
carriers, and many more. This book explains what these sites do with your 
information and the control you, as an individual, have. Everyone needs to 
understand the privacy and customer information polices of any business to  
which they provide their personal information.
The threats and challenges, which users in the mobile world may encounter, are 
presented in a detailed and easy-to-understand format. This book provides a list 
of actions the users can take to protect themselves, such as how to strengthen 
passwords and techniques for encrypting personal data. The possibility that a 
hacker is able to circumvent such preventative measures is also addressed. You as 
an end user are not helpless against hackers. A comprehensive list of steps to take 
in case a hacker is successful is included. There is also a guide on how to inform law 
enforcement, and what to expect afterwards.
Protecting your devices is, however, the primary focus of this book. Therefore, 
a discussion of insurance and third-party tools that can keep your device and 
information safe is included. Monitoring your credit through services such as 
Lifelock is also covered. As part of this discussion, this handbook also covers in 
detail the steps you can take to remove your private information from websites  
such as Facebook or Twitter.
The section on future scenarios is useful and timely, as it discusses the trajectory of 
mobile technology and security. Some of the options mentioned are already available 
to the general public; those that are not yet publicly available may be in the very near 
future. Our society is moving away from the brick-and-mortar consumer world of 
yesterday. Paper money is slowly going the path of paper checks. Our information 
will have to be available in this virtual society and therefore, the value of such 
information will only increase. Correspondingly, it is more essential than ever that 
we learn how to better protect ourselves; this book provides techniques tailored for 
this new and more challenging environment.
Chapter 8, Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked, is a template where the 
reader can enter the information they will need in case their information is in danger 
of being compromised. It is a useful tool, as reacting in a timely manner is essential.  
I recommend you take time to fill it out.
Steve Robinson
VP of Development, Product Management and Strategy,  
IBM Security Systems Division

About the Authors
Tim Speed is an IBM Senior Certified Systems Architect with IBM Software Services 
for Collaboration. In that capacity, he is responsible for designing, implementing, 
and supporting various engagements with IBM customers. Tim has been an IBM 
employee for over 18 years in a variety of networking, technical, hardware, and 
software support and consulting positions. He has been working with Lotus Notes 
for over 20 years, focusing on administration roles and infrastructure. He also has 
international experience with working on infrastructure engagements in Spain, The 
Bahamas, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, the UK, and Indonesia.
A very special acknowledgment to the Commissioner of Police, 
Ellison Greenslade, of The Royal Bahamas Police Force. 
 
Also, thanks to the IBM management team that provided approval to 
publish this book: Walter L Berthelsen, Jack Shoemaker, Luis Pineda, 
Mark Guerinot, and thanks to our sponsor, Steve Robinson. Thanks 
to Steve Robinson for writing the foreword for this book. Thanks 
to the Packt Publishing team for their help and support, specially 
Anugya Khurana and Martin Bell. Special thanks to Victor Ross 
for reviewing many of my books. Thanks to Vijay Dheap for your 
comments and feedback on this book. 
 
Also I thank my wife, Linda Speed, and son, Johnathon Speed, 
for helping me with the book and providing some of the editing 
throughout the various chapters. Next, I want to thank my 
mother, Lillian Speed, for teaching me to "think big". Thanks to Jo 
Stinebaugh; also thanks to all the co-authors—you all did a great job!

Other acknowledgments include: Katherine and Sean Mullins, Chris 
Cotton, Steven Stansel, Mark Steinborn, Jason Erickson, John Allessio, 
Tony Higham, Brad Schauf, Scott Souder, David Byrd, Jeff Pinkston, 
David Bell, Gary Wood, Robert Thietje, Jessie and Wanda Rodgers, 
Marlene Botter, Mike Dudding, Stephen Cooke, Dr Seshagiri Rao, 
Jose Burbano, Alistair Rennie, Amanda Vance, Barry Rosen, Charles 
K. DeLone, Don Bunch, Ed Speed, Matthew Speed, Chuck Stauber, 
David R. Hinkle, Doug Parham, Frederic Dahm, Gary Ernst, William 
and Sherry Destache, Gary Desmarais, Hissan C Waheed, Jay 
Cousineau, Jayasree Nampalli, Dr. John Lamb, and special thanks 
to "John Norton"; also thanks to: Kevin Lynch, Marc Galeazza, 
Marco M Noel, Steve Matrullo, Steven J Amadril, Terry Fouchey, 
Dellareece Ferguson, Kimbler Smith, Kevin Roberts, Shona Woods, 
Jevone Ferguson, Karoldann Darville, Harry Dolce, Zhivago Dames, 
Anthony DiDonato, Tim Cardwell, Barry Heinz, Cynthia L. Oehmig, 
Scot Bentley, Brian C Erle, Peter Volkmar, Claude Roy, David 
Saunders, Dieter Poetzschke, Hunter Medney, David and Dana Jea, 
Joe Christopher, Dennis Anderson, John J Johnson, William Nunez, 
Kevin Mills, Kevin Pare, Kevin Peake, Melanie Skinner, Pam Fryer, 
Rahul Vyas, Robert McDonald, Steven Kramer, and Jim and Nadia 
Kilnoski, Clark and Stephanie Oberly, and Tony Cusato.
Darla Nykamp is an Internal Auditor with IBM, joining the company in 1996 
after more than a decade in the IT industry. She has focused on software design and 
development, security policy design and implementation, business controls and 
compliance, and served as IBM's first Global Privacy Delivery Leader.
In her spare time, Darla earned a Doctorate of Law, a Master's degree in International 
Business Management, a Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, and certifications in 
security and privacy professions.
Deep thanks to my loving family and friends whose support and 
encouragement were always available. 
 
Thanks also to my sweet basset hound, Princess, who sacrificed 
walks to allow me to finish "just one more page".

Mari Heiser is an IBM and Open Group Master Certified Architect with  
over 20 years of architecture, governance, risk, compliance, and technical 
management experience in networks and web technologies, specializing in  
security, compliance, and Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). Mari is also an  
expert in Identity and Access Management, Cloud, Security Analytics, and leads  
the IBM internal Information Security Community of Practice for the Americas. 
Mari's industry-specific experience has been concentrated in banking, 
manufacturing, distribution, bio-tech, education, and aerospace industries.
Thanks to Packt Publishing for their support and editing over  
this process. 
 
My sincere thanks to Jim for his patience while I worked late nights, 
and to Heather for keeping me grounded and on the right path.
Joseph Anderson is an IBM Certified Managing Consultant from the IBM 
Collaboration Solutions Software Team. Joseph has worked with IBM Notes/
Domino, IBM Connections, IBM Sametime, IBM WebSphere Portal, and IBM Quickr 
since the early 1990s, primarily as a consultant. He is currently responsible for 
managing complex Customer Engagements focusing on assisting customers with the 
development, licensing, and deployment of complex environments. Prior to working 
in the consulting industry, Joseph worked in the legal industry as a Director of 
Operations, where he leveraged his Master's of Science in Legal Administration from 
the University of Denver College of Law. Joseph is the co-author of two books: IBM 
Lotus Notes and Domino 8.5.3: Upgrader's Guide by Packt Publishing and Lotus Notes 
Domino 8: Upgrader's Guide by Packt Publishing. Additionally, Joseph was a Technical 
Reviewer for IBM Lotus Notes 8.5.3 How-to by Packt Publishing.

I would like to dedicate my efforts towards this book to Lisa, my 
loving wife and best friend, and to my father, Gary, who without 
knowing it led me to technology and ultimately my career, I miss 
you. Additionally, I would like to thank the following individuals 
who helped me through the writing process: Andy Higgins, Tad 
Siminitz, Palma Bickford, Charles Lin, and Mark Dudding; Bart 
Lautenbach and Adam Hannah for their support and giving me the 
time to do the writing; Tim for including me as an author and for 
his tireless efforts in editing my content; my family including my 
mother, Donna, I love you Dad, my brother Gary, sisters Debbie, 
Dara, and Denise; and finally my love to Kylie, Jacob, and Jolie for 
being so patient with daddy as he was taking time away from "play" 
to write this book.
Jaya Nampalli is a Managing Consultant for IBM Software Services for 
Collaboration.  She is responsible for the development of high quality solutions 
for IBM customers in response to specific business requirements. She is a technical 
lead developer working on solution feasibility studies or requirements analysis, 
application assessments, custom design, implementation, testing, and system 
integration. She works with clients to facilitate the execution of information strategies 
that are innovative and well aligned based on a client's business needs. At IBM, 
she considers working on the IBM Centennial project as one of the highlights of her 
career. Jaya has worked on both small- and large-scale projects. Jaya stays current 
with web technology advances and other IBM product offerings by self-education 
and collaborating with other IBM team members. Jaya has been an IBM employee for 
over 12 and half years.
I wish to thank, first and foremost, Tim Speed for giving me this 
opportunity to help him write this book. This would not have 
happened without his support. A very special thanks to my mentor, 
Raj Balasubramanian, for guiding me to grow both personally and 
professionally. Also, for motivating me to think beyond my potential.

Also, thanks to the IBM management team that provided approval to 
publish this book: Walter L Berthelsen, Jack Shoemaker, Luis Pineda, 
Mark Guerinot, and thanks to our sponsor, Steve Robinson. Thanks 
to Steve Robinson for writing the foreword on this book. Thanks to 
the Packt team for their help and support, specially Anugya Khurana 
and Martin Bell. 
 
A very special thanks to my family for always being there for me. 
Also, I send thanks to Linda Speed for helping me with this book 
and providing some of the editing throughout the chapters.  I would 
like to express my gratitude to Jon Czernel for encouraging me to do 
things beyond my regular scope of work. 
 
Other acknowledgments include: Pam Fryer, Melanie Skinner, 
Louis Stanley, Leslie Hans, Brad Schauf, David Byrd, Robert Thietje, 
Stephen Cooke, Marc Galeazza, John Murphy, Barry Rosen, David R. 
Hinkle, Doug Parham, Gary Ernst, Kevin Mills, and Hunter Medney.

About the Reviewers
Michael Clarkson is an experienced IT and Security Architect with more than 20 
years IT experience for large blue chip organizations, and over 13 years experience 
in enterprise mobility, security, and infrastructure solutions, he has experience in all 
aspects of mobile technology.
He has previously held roles as a Principal Architect at Sun Microsystems and 
Oracle, and now works as an independent consultant in mobile solution architecture 
and technology consulting, providing expertise in the subject of mobile technologies 
(mobile consumerization, mobile device management, mobile OS vulnerabilities,  
and so on).
He currently holds the following industry certifications: Certified Information 
Systems Security Professional (CISSP), TOGAFv9 Practitioner, ISEB Enterprise & 
Solution Architecture Practitioner, Informa Telecoms & Media Academy – Diploma 
in Mobile Communications (Distinction), ITILv3, Prince2, Sun Solaris SCSA.
Jason Slater is a technology journalist, blogger, and software developer with 
over 25 years industrial experience building, managing, and writing about scalable 
distributed and web-based applications. Jason is a member of the British Computer 
Society and holds a Master's degree in Computer Science (Internet technologies)  
with Distinction.
Jason is the editor of a popular technology blog (http://www.jasonslater.co.uk) 
and is a regular contributor to technology publications, radio, and television. Jason 
founded Micromicon Media Limited (http://www.micromicon.com) in 2010, which 
builds mobile apps and helps people with their Web and technology problems.
You can reach and follow Jason on Twitter @jasonslater.

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers  
and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to 
your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and 
ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and 
as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch 
with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up 
for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books 
and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.



To Linda, my favorite wife
—Tim Speed
To Bonnie and Josh, my life began on the days you were born
—Darla Nykamp
To my family
—Jaya Nampalli


Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Living in a Mobile World	
7
The dangers of mobile computers	
7
A widespread lack of awareness	
8
Malware and viruses	
9
Understanding legitimate programs	
9
Precursors to the smartphone revolution – Internet,  
social-networking, and spam	
10
Social networking	
10
The two-way street of social networking	
11
2012 is the new 1984 – how companies track us	
11
Facebook and customer tracking	
12
The new mobile world	
13
Making a smartphone smart	
14
The iPhone – why every phone secretly wants to be a smartphone	
14
The difference between Android and iOS	
15
Mobile purchasing and identification methods – who  
needs credit cards?	
17
CueCats and QR codes	
17
Mobile finance – buying and selling in the mobile marketplace	
20
The cloud	
21
The risks of cloud computing	
23
Summary	
23
Chapter 2: Users and Mobile Device Management	
25
Protecting the corporations	
26
Corporate security policies	
26
Corporate security procedures	
26
Frontend network protection	
26
Mobile and business	
26

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Buying your device	
27
Mobile Device Management	
27
Does your company trust your device?	
28
Details of MDM	
28
MDM end user benefits and impacts	
30
Jailbreak and rooting	
31
MDM solutions and products	
32
Acceptable use policy (AUP)	
32
Power users	
33
Power user tools	
34
iPhone configuration tools	
35
Android configuration tools	
36
The hidden world (some advanced information)	
38
Summary	
40
Chapter 3: Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences	
41
Troy and You	
42
Data good enough to steal	
43
Cookies, cookies everywhere	
43
They are watching you…and they know your name	
44
What's in it for the information thieves?	
45
Good idea, mixed results	
46
Reach out and touch	
46
Touch, but don't break	
46
And that's only the first part…	
48
Hidden "features"	
49
The fallout	
50
Who has your data? Round 1…	
52
The truth is out there	
52
And now the rest of the story	
54
Who has your data? Round 2…	
56
Who has your data? Round 3…	
57
Who has your data? The final stretch…	
58
Your data in their hands	
61
Will your money be "too" mobile?	
62
Bring your mobile device to work day	
63
Steps you can take to protect yourself	
64
Summary	
66
Chapter 4: Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should  
Know About	
67
A prediction of the future (and the lottery numbers for  
next week) scams	
68

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Malware	
68
Toll fraud	
69
SMS spoofing	
71
Social engineering	
72
Phishing	
73
Types of phishing	
74
Spear phishing	
75
How spear phishing works	
76
Other examples	
76
How it works	
80
The mobile user's security	
82
Virus/worms/others	
84
Future threats	
85
Steps you can take to protect yourself	
85
Summing it up	
86
Summary	
87
Chapter 5: Protecting Your Mobile Devices	
89
Identifying your phone – the numbers that set your device apart	
89
Preventative measures – how to reduce the likelihood that your  
device will be hacked	
92
iPhone	
92
Android	
93
For any device	
94
Think twice before jailbreaking or rooting	
94
Safety in numbers – passwords and user IDs	
95
Using strong passwords	
96
Longer and varied passwords	
97
Changing passwords	
99
Data encryption	
99
Encryption on iOS	
100
Encryption on Android	
100
Downloaded applications	
101
Antivirus software on smartphones	
101
Verifying that an application is legitimate	
102
In the event that your device has been compromised	
103
Has your device been hacked?	
103
Social engineering	
105
Trojans and malware on your smartphone	
105
SMS messaging attacks	
106
Attacks through attachment and application downloads	
106
Compromised accounts	
107
Stolen or lost devices	
108
Wiping an iOS device	
108
Wiping an Android device	
109

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Summing up	
109
Summary	
110
Chapter 6: Support and Warranty Insurance	
111
Toby's story	
112
The smartphone – a personal device, a company device, or both?	
113
The wide world of customer service and technical support	
114
Customer support in the mobile space – phone, chat, and text	
116
Customer support by phone	
116
Chat and texting solutions	
118
SMS text	
119
The Service Level Agreement (SLA)	
120
OS operators, manufacturers, and service providers	
122
Hardware	
123
Other device issues	
123
Operating system or user interface	
123
Application issues	
124
How to get the most out of your technical support experience if  
you have a malfunction	
125
Before you make the call – information, password problems,  
and your malfunction	
126
How to make the most of your time while on the line	
127
Answer every question	
127
Do not skip steps when describing your problem	
128
Test your device	
128
What to do if your malfunction has not been resolved	
129
Warranties in the mobile space	
129
Basic terms	
129
Navigating the web of warranties	
132
Summing it up	
133
Warranties	
133
Definitions	
134
Types of extended warranties	
135
Extended warranty coverage	
135
Extended warranty considerations	
136
To purchase an extended warranty or not?	
137
In a nutshell	
138
Summary	
139
Chapter 7: Baby Boomers, Teens, and Tweens	
141
The boom in baby boomers	
142
Colliding generations	
143

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Speaking of the younger generation…	
145
Texting, sexting, and the Internet	
146
Strangers and dangers	
147
And unlimited damage	
148
Summary	
150
Chapter 8: Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked	
151
Device profiles	
151
The Apple profile	
152
Apple backup	
153
The Android profile	
153
Android backup	
154
Have you been hacked?	
155
Knowing the difference – device hacks, profile hacks, or both	
156
In the event of a hack	
157
The device type (BYOD or the corporate device)	
157
BYOD	
157
Who to contact	
159
To wipe or not to wipe – partial or complete	
159
What to do and when to do it – a list in the event that you've  
been hacked	
160
Summing it up	
162
Summary	
162
Appendix A: IBM Notes Traveler	
163
The architectural design of the IBM Notes Traveler service	
164
Determining the correct deployment approach	
164
Review of the IBM Notes Traveler Server	
164
Overview of different clients	
165
Access to the IBM Notes Traveler Servers	
165
Communication to the devices	
165
Location of the IBM Notes Traveler Servers	
166
Location of the mail servers	
166
Connection methodologies to the Traveler servers	
166
Direct connection	
167
Reverse proxy	
167
IBM Mobile Connect	
167
VPN connection	
169
Establishing appropriate security settings	
170
Important review information	
170
Licensing information for IBM Notes Traveler	
171

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Appendix B: Mobile Device Management	
173
Types of devices in the environment	
174
Consumer-focused devices	
174
Mobile information	
175
Messaging, calendar, and personal information management	
175
Collaboration and corporate applications	
176
Generally available applications	
176
Mobile security policies in the environment	
176
Corporate data and information	
177
Network/communications	
177
Devices	
177
Legal requirements and government regulations	
178
Determining the types of devices that will be supported	
178
Determine if a pure MDM solution is required in the environment	
179
Elements of device management	
179
Specific management of the device	
179
Leveraging MDM for application management	
180
Management of data on the device	
180
Access control	
181
Potential solutions	
182
Summary	
182
Appendix C: Tips to Help You Protect Your Mobile Device	
183
Appendix D: Mobile Acceptable Use Policy Template	
185
Mobile device acceptable use policy	
185
Overview	
186
Policy applicability	
186
Rules	
186
Company owned devices	
187
Overview	
188
Rules for corporate devices	
188
Glossary	
189
Procedure to enable a device for corporate access	
190
Appendix E: The History of Social Networking, the Internet,  
and Smartphones	
193
The Internet	
194
Social networking	
196
Mobiles	
198
The difference between Android and iOS	
200
Let's not forget Windows	
201
Text messaging, chatting, and video chatting	
202
Index	
205

Preface
Welcome to the world of mobile devices. Very soon there will be more smart devices 
than there are people on the planet Earth. Today, nearly every individual uses some 
kind of mobile device. This is a wonderful time and devices are today's future now. 
This book, Mobile Security: How to Secure, Privatize, and Recover Your Devices, will not 
only introduce you to this wonderful mobile world, but also help you manage the 
basic risk that comes with these devices. This book also covers the topic of the day, 
privacy. This book will provide you with a step-by-step template on what you need 
to do to protect yourself, and will also give you instructions on what to do if you 
have an issue with your device.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Living in a Mobile World, starts by taking you down the road of mobile 
devices. We cover how mobile devices are used, definitions like BYOD, and a bit of 
history. All of this information is to get you ready to understand how to best use 
your device.
Chapter 2, Users and Mobile Device Management, talks about MDM, which may be a 
new concept to many device users. MDM is used by many companies in order to 
keep a firewall between the device and the corporate network. MDM is also used 
to manage devices and make sure that your device does not adversely impact the 
corporate network.
Chapter 3, Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences, talks about privacy, which is a  
very important consideration in the world of "instant" data. You can Google yourself 
and find all types of information about you. This chapter will help you understand 
your Internet identity as well as understanding the type of data that can be found 
about you.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 4, Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About, will help you to 
understand the various scams and social engineering that can impact you. We all live 
in a social world of Facebook, LinkedIn, or even IBM Connections. These very cool 
tools can also be used against you. Let's not forget the cloud, another great feature 
of the social world, but it also has its risks. We will show you how to safely navigate 
this social world.
Chapter 5, Protecting Your Mobile Devices, shows you the various features smart devices 
provide that can help you keep your device safe. This can include how to create 
"good" passwords, using encryption, and whom to contact if you have a problem.
Chapter 6, Support and Warranty Insurance, talks about insurance and support, which 
can be very confusing. You may get your device from one vendor, your phone 
service from another, and your e-mail from another. This chapter will show you 
what you need to do if you have an issue. Also discussed in this chapter is the 
extended warranty.
Chapter 7, Baby Boomers, Teens, and Tweens – Sorry, we don't have next week's lottery 
numbers, but we can tell you that the growth of smart mobile devices is significant. 
Mobile-based solutions using small handheld devices are becoming the standard 
for personal and business use. In the future, more and more computing will be 
conducted via these small devices. This chapter will show you what is upcoming and 
its impact.
Chapter 8, Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked, is not only a summary of 
what has been reviewed in this book, but most importantly this is a checklist of steps 
that the end user can use in order to get their life back if they are hacked or if their 
device is lost.
Appendix A, IBM Notes Traveler, explains the IBM Notes Traveler software, which is a 
mobile device product that provides access to IBM Lotus e-mails. This product, along 
with IBM Domino, provides an end-to-end solution for mobile access to corporate 
e-mail via a mobile solution.
Appendix B, Mobile Device Management, is an advanced chapter that shows the 
management side of MDM, while Chapter 2, Users and Mobile Device Management,  
shows the end user impact. This appendix shows the solutions and choices  
for a corporate environment.
Appendix C, Tips to Help You Protect Your Mobile Device, is a supporting appendix for 
Chapter 3, Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Appendix D, Mobile Acceptable Use Policy Template, discusses the Mobile Acceptable Use 
Policy (MAUP) document that many companies ask end users to sign. This "sample" 
template is provided as part of this book in order to show you, the end user, what you 
may need to sign. Also, the MAUP template may be used by a company as a starting 
point to create a corporate Mobile Acceptable Use Policy for enterprise rollout.
Appendix E, The History of Social Networking, the Internet, and Smartphones, provides 
additional information about the history of the Internet and mobile technologies.
What you need for this book
In order to use this book you need:
•	
A desire to learn about how to keep yourself safe using your mobile device.
•	
A mobile device.
•	
Time – take time to follow the steps and ask for information. Chapter 8, 
Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked, is not only a great summary 
chapter, but also provides a table that you should fill out (keep it safe and 
don't post it on a social site).
Who this book is for
This book is primarily for you, the person that has a smart device. The appendices 
have a few sections that include more advanced information on Traveler and  
MDM. But overall, this book is for anyone that would like to stay safe using their 
mobile device.
This book provides details on the threats that are manifested daily in our Internet 
world. Also, this book provides a special list of actions you can take to protect yourself.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "In this case, we've used example.com to 
test the QR codes."

Preface
[ 4 ]
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Enter 
the information you wish to encode into the QR box, and click on the Submit or 
Generate button."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us 
to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do 
happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or the 
code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can save 
other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book. 
If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.com/
submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


Living in a Mobile World
Smartphones are the essential devices of the modern mobile world. We use 
smartphones to tackle seemingly limitless tasks such as texting, chatting, shopping 
online, updating our social networking status, researching, emailing, creating 
documents, making phone calls, video conferencing, and banking. The list will only 
grow as smartphone capabilities continue to expand. 50.4 percent of US consumers 
own a smartphone; a percentage which is projected to increase as it has, every 
previous year (http://techcrunch.com/2012/05/07/nielsen-smartphones-
used-by-50-4-of-u-s-consumers-android-48-5-of-them/).
Smartphones are attractive devices that can simplify many of our most essential 
and mundane tasks. Not only do they allow us to connect and interact with others 
in a simplified manner, but they also allow us to conduct many essential business 
tasks without the need for comparatively bulky laptops. However, in addition to the 
seeming wealth of capabilities provided by these devices, smartphones also carry a 
certain number of risks.
The dangers of mobile computers
Most consumers are aware of the risks that viruses and malware pose for computers, 
but how many are aware that smartphones are vulnerable to the same sort of 
pernicious attacks? In a study in the year 2012, antivirus program developer McAfee 
found that 19.32 percent of consumers either had disabled or nonexistent antivirus 
software. Assuming that this figure is correct, the vast majority of computers in the 
United States do possess some sort of active antivirus software. Therefore, most 
consumers in the US are aware of the risks posed by malware and viruses, and take 
active steps to protect themselves against such risks.

Living in a Mobile World
[ 8 ]
Compare this with the percentage of smartphones that do not possess some form 
of antivirus protection, that is, 40 percent. Even worse little more than one third 
of iPhone users actually have antivirus software installed on their device. Why? 
According to a research firm, Kaspersky, this is because mobile users feel relatively 
safe. Many consumers underestimate the danger that malware and viruses pose for 
their smartphones, even while they recognize the similar risk malicious software 
poses for their personal computers (http://www.kaspersky.com/au/about/
news/press/2012/number-of-the-week-40-percent-of-modern-smartphones-
owners-do-not-use-antivirus-software).
A widespread lack of awareness
When we consider the number of reported malware attacks, the lack of awareness 
on the part of consumers becomes truly alarming. Between January and June 2012, 
Kaspersky recorded over 50,000 malware or virus attacks on smartphones. The 
number of attacks between January and March eclipsed the number of attacks for 
the entire year of 2011. In other words, there is a staggering amount of malware 
programs targeted at smartphones and that number is multiplying at an alarming 
rate (http://www.kaspersky.com/images/Kaspersky_Lab_Infographics_
Android_Malware_Growth_2012-10-156085.png).

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Malware and viruses
Because of the nature of smartphones as multi-purpose devices, the risk posed by 
malware or viruses can manifest in surprising ways. Consider the Geinimi Trojan, 
a malware that is embedded in certain apps and games. For a user to contract this 
Trojan, all they need to do is download an infected application. After installing 
the app, the Trojan allows hackers to remotely control the device; these criminals 
can use smartphones to place phone calls, send and delete text messages, and even 
locate the device geographically using the phone's maps application via the GPS 
(Global Positioning System) functionality that is embedded in the device. If the 
smartphone's owner had been using the device to conduct mobile banking, then the 
hackers would even be able to access their banking account or to record their account 
information. Once the customer data has been identified or captured, then the hacker 
can send the data back to the "mother ship" via a number of mechanisms, including 
e-mail and/or text messages (http://www.nbcnews.com/technology/technolog/
smart-phone-malware-six-worst-offenders-125248).
Understanding legitimate programs
Malware and viruses represent a significant risk for smartphones; a risk of which 
many consumers remain unaware. Unfortunately, this threat to smartphone security 
is not limited to illicit programs, such as malware or viruses. Legitimate programs 
produced by respected companies are also used to collect and disseminate our 
personal information. In addition to the well-known companies such as Facebook, 
smartphone-specific companies, such as our cell phone carriers, also track and 
monitor our usage. Occasionally, these companies even sell this information, thus 
further removing our ability to control our privacy. All of this means that containing 
security risks to our smartphone is not as simple as downloading and installing an 
antivirus program. In fact, many antivirus products for smartphones are relatively 
ineffective at stopping threats (http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/45292075/ns/
technology_and_science-security/t/study-some-free-android-anti-virus-
apps-fail-miserably/#.UPRrEYYkKSo).
While risks to our smartphone security may seem daunting, there are steps that 
consumers can take to protect their devices. Using this book, we will teach you how 
to protect yourself against threats to your smartphone, as well as how to respond in 
the event that you become a victim of an attack.

Living in a Mobile World
[ 10 ]
Precursors to the smartphone revolution 
– Internet, social-networking, and spam
By and large, the conveniences we enjoy on our smartphones duplicate the tasks we 
could only do previously on our laptops and desktops. From tweets to spam, it all 
started on our computers, and only later moved into the mobile space.
Social networking
Facebook was not the first social networking site. Social networking, or the  
concept of using the Internet to form relationships and keep in touch with friends, 
may have begun as early as the mid 90s when sites such as Classmates.com and 
Geocities.com first gained prominence.
Facebook, the successful social networking site, was launched in 2004. Many of us 
already know the story of Facebook and its founder. Facebook originally began as a 
social networking site exclusive to Harvard students and alumni, but later expanded; 
first to all universities, and then to the general public. Today, Facebook has evolved 
into a complex and effective site which allows people to connect with one another 
in the online space. Members are no longer necessarily required to find and create 
their own friends network; Facebook has algorithms and automated processes which 
attempt to find friends for its members. In addition to the basic degrees method first 
pioneered by Friendster, Facebook also attempts to connect people based on criteria 
such as hobbies and geographical location.
The method by which Facebook collects this sort of information has even begun 
to expand beyond the details explicitly provided by members in their profiles. For 
example, Facebook has developed methods for monitoring external sites that its 
members visit. One that many may be aware of is the Facebook icon that adorns 
many websites. If a user clicks on one of these buttons, this provides Facebook with 
a method of linking a member's interests to their profile. What's more, this is done 
even if a Facebook member did not intend to provide such information to the site.
In 2006, Twitter launched with the concept that social networking may be best enjoyed 
in a smaller and more digestible format. Twitter's approach to social networking 
created a multi-layered network, whereby a visitor would easily be able to read both 
a particular member's post as well as the posts of that member's followed accounts. 
Of all of the social networking sites, Twitter may have been the most successful in 
the migration to the mobile space. The reason for this should be understandable; the 
screens on smartphones are smaller than laptop or desktop screens, and smartphones 
are often used in far more limited durations than computers.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
The two-way street of social networking
It is important to remember that social networking is a two-way street. Users sign up 
for these services so that they can interact with friends and colleagues. However, many 
social networking sites are interested in collecting our personal information. As part 
of the relationship between users and social networking sites, users routinely provide 
personal information to these sites. Because social networking sites are businesses, they 
often consider customer information as one of their most valuable commodities.
With customer information, social networking sites are able to target their customer 
demographics for presentation to potential advertisers. In some cases, these sites 
even turn customer information into a commodity by selling it to other companies or 
parties. Finally, this information is useful as a method for pinpointing demographic 
deficiencies; Facebook, for example, may decide to expand its marketing for 21 to 45 
year olds if it discovers a shrinking user base in that demographic.
This is important to you, the end user, because these practices place your personal 
information at risk; remember that protecting your information is one of the primary 
objectives in mobile and electronic security. As will be discussed in Chapter 3, Privacy 
– Small Word, Big Consequences, social networking sites do not always use personal 
information in the way you might intend. Also, these sites routinely share user's 
personal information with numerous third parties, thus further decreasing a user's 
ability to control their information.
2012 is the new 1984 – how companies  
track us
Companies have always been interested in the demographics of their customers. 
Before the rise of the Internet, one of the more common methods of assessing 
customer demographics was through polling. A company spokesman might contact 
a customer after they have purchased a product or service and ask the customer 
about their experience. The company spokesman would then use this polling 
information to create a profile which might represent hundreds or even thousands 
of potential customers; demographic information, such as race, gender, income level, 
geographic locale, and personal hobbies or interests might all be incorporated into 
such a profile.

Living in a Mobile World
[ 12 ]
Today, companies still create exactly these sorts of profiles, but their methods for 
collecting our demographic information might be surprising; they do so by tracking 
our computer and smartphone activities. Do you shop on Amazon or at the online 
stores for Target or Walmart? Do you download music through iTunes? How about 
social networking sites? Do you use Facebook, LinkedIn, or Twitter? If the answer to 
any of these questions is yes, then you have provided some or all of these companies 
with demographic and personal information about yourself. Just like the polls 
mentioned previously, many company websites use monitoring algorithms to collect 
information on their visitors in an effort to understand their demographics. So, you 
might be wondering; how do they get this information? You may think that because 
you didn't purchase anything from Amazon or because you provided incomplete or 
inaccurate information on your Facebook account, that the company does not have 
your personal information. However, you would be surprised at exactly how much 
information a company is able to collect regardless of what you choose to provide. 
For example, you may have only browsed the products on Amazon.com, but not 
actually purchased anything. What you may not know is that sites, such as Amazon 
often have monitoring algorithms that trace their visitors back to their geographic 
point of origin. What's more, by browsing for certain items, Amazon can infer what 
age group you're likely to be in, what your gender is likely to be, and even whether 
you're married or have children. This may not worry you, but consider this; if you 
have an account on Amazon, they can use this information on your browsing habits 
to target you for particular sales. Some companies, though not necessarily Amazon, 
even sell these profiles to other companies.
Facebook and customer tracking
The tracking habits of social networking sites can be even more worrisome. Let's 
consider the activities of Facebook. As a part of a Facebook profile, a user is 
requested to provide numerous personal details, including age, race, sex, marital 
status, geographic location, alma mater, and so on. Many users do not complete 
all of this information, choosing only to provide those details that they consider 
necessary for connecting with their friends. However, what many of us don't know 
is that Facebook can infer some of these details because the site monitors both your 
activities and the activities of your network of friends. The company can infer, for 
example, your geographic location based on the geographic location of your friends.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
The danger of this sort of a practice has, unfortunately, been demonstrated by several 
scandals that have marred Facebook's reputation in recent years. In 2007, Facebook 
launched Facebook Beacon, which was a system that monitored the activity of 
Facebook members both within their profiles and through external sites, such as 
Fandango. What this means is that, if you purchased some tickets through Fandango, 
Fandango might, as a partner with Facebook Beacon, send this information to 
Facebook. The purpose of Facebook Beacon was to target advertising efforts to their 
members. Facebook addressed privacy concerns by arguing that no information 
was collected without a member's explicit approval, but they failed to specify 
that such approval was interpreted through acceptance of the privacy agreement. 
Practically, this means that every Facebook member's personal information could be 
collected and released to other Facebook partner companies, because everyone with 
a Facebook account was required to accept the privacy agreement upon signing up 
(http://www.zdnet.com/blog/btl/facebook-beacon-update-no-activities-
published-without-users-proactively-consenting/7188).
Though Facebook Beacon was discontinued not long after its launch, other privacy 
scandals have continued to rock the company. In 2012, a number of users discovered 
that what they thought were private messages were appearing publicly on timelines 
(http://hypervocal.com/news/2012/facebook-bug-hack-private-messages-
timeline/#). In 2011, Facebook even had to settle a lawsuit with the FTC, admitting 
that they had engaged in deceptive privacy practices; between 2007 and 2011, 
Facebook had altered their privacy agreement numerous times. Some have argued 
that this practice was an attempt to mislead users about their privacy rights. 
After all, how many of us really read the privacy agreements on websites, such 
as Facebook in any great depth before clicking on Accept? The manner by which 
these same companies, as well as hackers and other criminals, track our activities 
on smartphones and other mobile devices is covered in greater detail in Chapter 3, 
Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences.
The new mobile world
Throughout the 90s, computer and Internet technology revolutionized the way we 
socialized, purchased goods, and even found employment. By the end of the decade, 
many essential tasks could be completed without the need to leave the comfort of 
our homes. New concepts like "social networking", "telecommuting", and "digital 
goods" entered our collective vocabularies. Smartphones may represent a natural 
evolution of this process. While shopping for Christmas gifts from the comfort of 
our homes can be convenient, it can be even more convenient to shop for Christmas 
gifts from a smartphone while away from home. However, these new capabilities 
can be something of a double-edged sword; in some ways, smartphones are more 
vulnerable than laptops that have traditional antivirus software.

Living in a Mobile World
[ 14 ]
Making a smartphone smart
Originally, smartphones were any cell phones designed to perform tasks in addition 
to just making phone calls. These early smartphones had a dedicated and limited 
operating system. Today, however, smartphones are a specific class of device with 
a broad array of capabilities and features; what this is means is that the operating 
systems on smartphones are similar to the fully featured operating systems, such as 
Windows that run on our computers. Regular cell phones, by contrast, run on Real 
Time Operating Systems (RTOS) operating systems, which possess more limited 
capabilities and are designed to be more streamlined in nature. A smartphone is 
merely a mobile phone/cell phone that has more advanced computing capabilities, 
connectivity, and functionality than a conventional phone, which is limited in 
functionality to a basic handset or feature phone. The latter usually having the ability 
to run the third party apps via J2ME or BREW, but which have limited integration 
with the phone capabilities. Smartphones, on the other hand, usually have more 
advanced APIs that allow the third party apps to have tighter integration with 
the phone features and capabilities. Beyond this basic requirement, the variety of 
functions that smartphones can perform is seemingly limitless. Smartphones can 
organize our calendar and fax our documents, but they can also be used to update 
our Facebook status, download movies, and countless more functions through a 
variety of applications. You might say that this is what makes them smart; their focus 
on their additional functions as opposed to their ability to serve as mobile telephones.
The iPhone – why every phone secretly wants 
to be a smartphone
The iPhone is the elephant in the room when it comes to smartphones. According  
to a report by technology publication Engadget, the iPhone commanded a  
staggering 34.3 percent of the cell phone market share in the US as of October 2012 
(http://www.engadget.com/2012/10/02/comscore-iphone-moved-up-to-34-
percent-us-share-in-august/).
When you consider that the remaining market share is spread out across all other 
cell phone manufacturers, from Samsung to Motorola, you can see why Apple's 
competitors might be envious of the iPhone's success. After all, according to Engadget, 
three out of every ten cell phones in the US are iPhones. But this data is changing 
quickly. Smart mobile devices, including notebooks, smartphones, and tablets, shipped 
308.7 million units during the first quarter of 2013. This shows a net increase of 37.4 
percent over the figures compiled from the previous year. The Android operating 
system, accounted for a hefty 59.5 percent. Apple's iOS took 19.3 percent of the market 
share, just 1.2 percent ahead of Microsoft's share of 18.1 percent.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Released in 2007, the iPhone was originally conceived as an iPod with the added 
functionality of a cell phone. The original iPhone could make and receive phone calls, 
but it could also play music and interact online. Subsequent iterations of the iPhone 
only cemented the success of the first release. In July 2008, Apple released the iPhone 
3G. The primary feature of this device was in the title; it ran on the third generation of 
the mobile telecommunications network. The iPhone 3G was also the first generation 
of the device to include GPS functionality and included a maps application.
As you can see, in the years since the iPhone's release, functionality has been 
expanded that might allow the device to be easily tracked and monitored. Of course, 
users benefit from this functionality because they are able to find their iPhone, 
should they misplace it or should it be stolen. However, other parties may be able 
to use this same functionality. As will be discussed further in Chapter 3, Privacy – 
Small Word, Big Consequences, Apple is able to use the GPS functionality to track your 
phone's geographical location. Ostensibly, this is only for the purposes of targeted 
advertising and customizing consumer support. However, even if you consider 
Apple to be a trustworthy company, their ability to track your phone's location does 
render you vulnerable to an outside party. In addition to legitimate parties, such 
as corporations, illegitimate parties may also be able to utilize these new features. 
Consider that a hacker may be able to locate your phone geographically through 
the iPhone's Find my iPhone cloud feature; all a hacker would need is your user 
identification information and a working knowledge of iTunes (http://ign.com/
articles/2010.06/24/the-history-of-the-iphone).
The difference between Android and iOS
Most of Apple's competitors use the Android mobile operating system to run their 
user interface.
Comparatively, the iPhone runs on iOS (iPhone Operating System). This is Apple's 
internally developed operating system, which cannot be used to operate other 
devices without Apple's permission (and Apple has not, as of the time of this writing, 
provided such permissions to any other manufacturers). From the perspective of 
maintaining your mobile security, this is significant because Apple is the sole entity 
which is able to operate and monitor this platform. Apple protects this operating 
system (OS), so that it is not easy for the standard end user to alter and/or modify 
the OS. The best way to understand the difference between the Android and the 
iOS operating systems for smartphones is by considering the difference between the 
Windows and Apple operating systems that run on PCs and Macintosh computers. 
The latter, like iOS on iPhones, only runs on Apple products. The former, like the 
Android, runs on a variety of devices produced by a variety of manufacturers.

Living in a Mobile World
[ 16 ]
The Android operating system, like the iOS on iPhone, is an operating system 
designed for the use on smartphones with a multi-touch screen. The Android 
operating system is currently open source, which means that anyone can access the 
code and make alterations. What this means for the consumer is that the Android 
operating system can run quite differently on different phones that use it.
The Android OS is being used in a variety of electronics, including laptops, TVs, 
cameras, smart glasses, treadmills, headphones, and many other items. This is due to 
the customizable open and native nature of the Android operating system. One cool 
use of Android is the Android@Home technology that provides home automaton. This 
technology provides a mechanism to remotely manage smart house devices, including:
•	
Thermostats
•	
Power sockets
•	
Light switches
•	
Scheduling for powered devices
•	
Using an Android OS these home services allows end users to manage their 
home devices using a PC, phone, or tablet
As one might imagine, this lack of parity between the Android phones can also 
create some problems for the end user, in terms of performance and functionality. 
Some apps purchased on the Android App Store may only work on certain phones, 
and thus it is the user's responsibility to ensure that their phone can run the 
application in question before they choose to download it.
Google introduced a security service to automatically scan applications that 
are posted in the Google Play Store known as bouncer. This service reviews the 
applications to determine if there are any malicious applications. This service is not 
a 100 percent solution and there is no guarantee that this will block all malicious 
applications. The bouncer program does the following:
•	
As soon as an application is uploaded into the Google Play Store, the bouncer 
program starts to analyze the application for known spyware, malware,  
and Trojans
•	
Based on a set of rules, the bouncer program looks at an application for any 
code that may cause issues with the OS
•	
Also the bouncer program will review the uploaded application against other 
applications to identify possible issues
•	
There is also an emulation process that Google executes to determine how 
the application may run on the Android OS
•	
The bouncer program will also check the hosting account to determine if this 
account is known for posting a bad code

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Because of the open source nature of Android, Android phones are at a greater 
risk to security infringements than the iOS phones. According to Bloomberg news, 
Android phones are far more vulnerable to malware and virus attacks than the 
Apple devices (http://www.kansascity.com/2011/11/15/3267279/android-
more-virus-prone-than.html). The primary reason for this is the lack of a rigid 
infrastructure like the one that exists with Apple's products. While you may utilize 
Google's official Android App Store to purchase apps, you may also choose from half 
a dozen other application markets that are available for Android users (http://www.
techrepublic.com/blog/smartphones/iphone-or-android-five-questions-
to-help-you-decide/4456). The oversight on these alternative application markets 
varies, which means a user may be less assured that a particular app does not contain 
a virus or malware.
Mobile purchasing and identification 
methods – who needs credit cards?
Social networking and shopping aren't the only things that have gone mobile. Just as 
other activities have been modified for the mobile space, so have our identification 
and payment methods. If a customer is not physically present, but is instead ordering 
an item through a virtual store accessed by their smartphone, how can they present 
their ID?
CueCats and QR codes
There was a time when, if someone wanted to purchase something, they might write 
a check. By the late 1990s, checks had been largely replaced by credit cards for most 
transactions. In either case, however, a customer would often be asked to provide a 
form of ID such as a driver's license to verify that the name on the check or credit card 
was their own. The next evolution in this vein might well be the usage of smartphones, 
thus eliminating the need to carry both a credit card and an ID to make purchases.
In 1999, Digital Convergence Corporation released the CueCat. The CueCat was a 
small device which was, appropriately enough, shaped like a house cat. The purpose 
of the device was to redirect a user, through scanning a barcode or through an audio 
tone broadcast during a television program, to a particular website. The idea was 
that a user could automatically be routed to a website through another medium, such 
as print or television without the need to enter in a URL or to search for a company 
through a search engine. While the device was ultimately unsuccessful, it foretold 
the later developments in the mobile space.

Living in a Mobile World
[ 18 ]
Today, the concept of a barcode containing a variety of personal or company 
information has evolved into the Personal QR, or Quick Response Code (QR Code). 
To many, the Personal QR Code will look like little more than a random series of 
black and white pixels within a small box. However, this box can contain a website 
address, product specifics, or even personal information. Put another way, a QR box 
can contain any sort of information. So, you might ask, how does one access this 
information? You may be surprised; all you need is your smartphone.
To enable your smartphone to read the QR boxes, whether it is an iPhone or a 
Galaxy S, all you need to do is download a QR reader app. There are a bewildering 
number of apps which can perform this function; a search on the Apple App Store 
for QR Reader, for example, will yield 559 results. Once downloaded, a user can use 
this app wherever they see a QR code box. Recently, big-box stores have been the 
most aggressive in creating these QR boxes for customer convenience; a March 2012 
article by consumer advocate website Adage relates how Macy's, BestBuy, and Post 
Cereals were just a few of the companies that were expanding the QR box usage 
in their stores and on their products (http://adage.com/article/digital/qr-
codes-gaining-prominence-macy-s-buy-post/149474/). In the case of Bestbuy 
and Macy's, the companies attached the QR boxes next to the product information 
displays in their stores. If a customer so chose, they could scan this box using a QR 
app on their smartphone and obtain pricing and product information.
Recently, some governments and companies have even begun to use the QR codes 
for official uses. In China, the tickets for bullet trains have been augmented with 
a QR code to combat ticket fraud and passenger impersonation. Placed on the 
bottom-right corner of a ticket, the QR code can contain the passenger's name and 
more worryingly, the passenger's passport or other personal identification number 
(http://www.techinasia.com/qr-train-tickets/). In 2011, the Royal Dutch 
Mint even issued an official coin with a QR code which would route a user to a 
website about the Royal Mint's centennial. The company Hackerspace created the 
world's largest QR code in 2010 by painting on the top of their company building 
in Charlotte, North Carolina (http://www.wcnc.com/news/neighborhood-news/
Rooftop-QR-code-in-NoDa-verified-as-worlds-largest-146726605.html).
Keep an eye out for updates; see http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/ for the 
latest record for the largest QR code.
Creating a QR code is actually a relatively simple process. With the following steps, 
you can create your own QR code box for personal use:
•	
First, find a QR code generator online. This can be done by simply  
searching for one, through the search engine of your choice. Kaywa.com,  
for example, hosts a reliable QR code generator on their website.  
(http://qrcode.kaywa.com/)

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
•	
Next, choose what sort of information you wish to enter into your QR 
code. Different generators will provide you with different categories. Using 
Kaywa's generator as an example, allows you to categorize your information 
as a phone number, an SMS text message, a URL, or as a plain text. Enter the 
information you wish to encode into the QR box, and click on the Submit or 
Generate button.
•	
The QR code should appear on your screen. Where it appears may vary 
depending on the automated generator you chose.
•	
Now, you can simply save the image to your hard drive. (Right-click on the 
image and click on save as.)
The following screenshot shows the basic process:
•	
Congratulations! You have created a QR code. It should look something  
like this:

Living in a Mobile World
[ 20 ]
Now that the QR box image is saved to your hard drive, all you have to do is choose 
where to post it. The options are numerous, and should depend upon what sort of 
information you've chosen to place into your QR code. If the information is about 
your company or business venture, you might place the QR code on your company's 
website. If it's a URL for your personal portfolio, you might place the QR code on 
your resume to allow potential employers a convenient and automated link to your 
work. The QR box can, as mentioned previously, contain almost any information 
imaginable. How you use it, of course, is up to you.
You may notice that we are using http://www.example.
com as the destination for our QR code. This URL, originally 
reserved by Internet Engineering Task Force in 1999, is a 
common tool for technology experts when they wish to test 
certain technologies. In this case, we've used example.com 
to test the QR codes. Did it work for you?
Mobile finance – buying and selling in the 
mobile marketplace
The advent of smartphones, along with their associated App Stores, has allowed 
for new methods of monitoring and spending money. While mobile banking has 
been around for a while now, banks including Chase and Washington Mutual 
have recently released apps that allow their customers to conduct all necessary 
transactions from the convenience of their smartphones.
The convenience of this new ability is evident; imagine that you just went to the store 
to purchase some Christmas gifts, but you didn't remember which account you'd 
organized the necessary funds for in anticipation of your purchase. Normally, you 
might have to find the nearest bank branch to check on your balance and rearrange 
funds. With these banking apps, you can simply log into your account and make 
the necessary changes while you wait in line to purchase your gifts. Recently, Chase 
has even added a new feature that allows their customers to transfer funds to other 
Chase bank customers by simply having their smartphone and the smartphone 
of their recipient in close proximity. In later chapters, we'll discuss how this 
convenience carries with it a number of associated risks, and why it may, in some 
cases, not always be the best idea.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
On some occasions, smartphones have even made it possible to purchase goods 
without needing a credit card or cash. Recently, Salt Lake City has implemented a 
method of paying for parking by using smartphones. To be able to pay for parking 
with this method, visitors only need to download the Quick Pay app from the Android 
or Apple App Stores. After setting up an account through the app, customers can 
then automate the process through their smartphone (http://www.deseretnews.
com/article/865562673/No-quarters-No-credit-card-No-problem-Just-use-
your-phone.html?pg=all). One early example of using a device for e-commerce is 
from an example in Asia. In Singapore, one can even buy a Coca-Cola with only your 
smartphone. This development may be one of the oldest applications of smartphone 
purchasing possibilities, as it was first introduced back in 2001 (http://articles.
cnn.com/2001-06-20/tech/phone.buys.coke.idg_1_singtel-vending-
machines-cell-phone-users?_s=PM:TECH). Although these purchasing methods 
have not yet spread to other cities, these practices should still be seen as a sign of 
things to come; the ease of using a smartphone for transactions may be too alluring for 
businesses to long ignore.
Because of the bewildering possibilities afforded by App Stores, smartphones are 
increasingly being utilized as a method of simplifying our most common financial 
transactions. Today, we can use our smartphones to check our account balance, 
transfer funds from one account to another, pay for parking, purchase products 
through various online outlets, and even take payment for goods on those occasions 
when we are the ones selling goods. Although there are still some limits to what our 
smartphones can do, we should expect that these limits will only continue to recede 
as the capabilities of these devices are further realized.
The cloud
Our increasingly mobile world has necessitated new methods of saving and 
accessing data. Smartphones can be very convenient, as they are mobile and can 
perform a wide variety of tasks. Unfortunately, smartphones are like computers, 
vulnerable to data loss through corruption or user error. Additionally, should you 
forget your smartphone at home, you will be unable to access whatever data it 
contains until you retrieve it. Cloud technology is an effort to subvert and address 
these problems.
While the origin of cloud computing is the subject of some debate, the technology 
was propagated most successfully by Amazon. In 2006, Amazon released Amazon 
Web Service, which is a cloud computing application designed for data retrieval. In 
the years since, cloud computing has become one of the major sources of innovation 
in popular computing, being released on consumer platforms, such as iPhone and 
even game consoles, such as the PlayStation 3.

Living in a Mobile World
[ 22 ]
The essential concept of cloud computing is not, in itself, necessarily a revolutionary 
idea; data is saved at an external location so that it can be retrieved from numerous 
devices. What is novel about the concept is that, in addition to data, basic computing 
and software can also be outsourced and accessed remotely. This means that a user 
might be able to use a bargain-basement laptop to conduct operations that would 
require far more powerful and expensive hardware. By outsourcing computing 
power to an external and more powerful server, such a user would be able to 
perform power-hungry tasks by connecting to this server over the Internet. This is 
only one possibility that cloud computing presents; new applications for this model 
are being developed even as of this writing.
Right now, cloud computing provides some of the following benefits. With cloud 
computing, if your computer were to crash or if your home burned down, you 
wouldn't have to worry about losing your data. That, at least, would be recoverable 
for a reasonable charge. You would only need to access the server from another 
device, such as a smartphone or laptop, and re-download your data. With the cloud, 
data is no longer divided by the hard drives of our various devices. Instead, our data 
can be considered more holistically, and shared among devices as needed to perform 
various tasks. Put another way, with the cloud, we no longer need to consider one 
laptop for work and another for home.
For an illustration of how this works in practice, see the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
The risks of cloud computing
Although the benefits of cloud computing are numerous, there are also some risks 
of which we should be aware. Clouds are hosted by an external provider. It is the 
provider's server, after all, that we use to store our data. Thus, just as we can access 
our data, so can the provider; how safe the data is depends upon the provider you 
have chosen. There are safe providers out there, but how do you decide which one 
to use? It is important that each user conducts some requisite research regarding the 
security protocols of each provider. Apple's security protocol, for example, which 
may be found in its service agreement, pays particular attention to those sections 
which concern the iCloud and user privacy.
Regardless of the service provider, it is important to remember that uploading data 
to a cloud carries some inherent risks. By deciding to place your data on a cloud, 
you are sacrificing your ability to control that data. Consider the case of Mat Honan; 
hackers were able to use some of Honan's personal information to convince both 
Apple's and Amazon's tech support departments to provide them with Honan's 
cloud login information. Once they had Honan's login for these services, the hackers 
were able to access all of the data Honan had chosen to upload to both clouds. 
Unfortunately for Honan, he had chosen to upload certain sensitive documents that 
allowed the hackers to extrapolate his login information for his Facebook and Twitter 
accounts. The result was that Honan's online persona was hijacked because hackers 
were able to access his cloud data (http://www.wired.com/gadgetlab/2012/08/
apple-amazon-mat-honan-hacking/). To mitigate the risk of something similar 
happening to you, it is important to carefully choose which sorts of data you 
wish to upload to the cloud. Documents or data which contain sensitive personal 
information should not be considered for upload; should you wish to back up these 
sorts of documents, you should instead use an external hard drive or thumb drive.
Summary
Our world is increasingly going mobile. Where we once had to use our computer to 
surf the Internet or had to go to the store to shop, we can now use our smartphone 
for both. What's more; we can often do these tasks simultaneously. This multi-
tasking capability presents the possibility for new takes on old activities. Today, we 
might go to the store instead of shopping from our computer, but by bringing our 
smartphone, we're able to compare prices online while we visit the store, so we can 
touch and see the item we wish to purchase. In other words, we no longer have to 
choose between visiting the store and shopping online. Smartphones have allowed 
us to do both simultaneously.

Living in a Mobile World
[ 24 ]
Despite the advantages that this new mobile world offers, it is important to 
remember that there are also some distinct disadvantages. Facebook, Twitter, Target, 
Amazon, some government organizations, and even our phone carriers are able to 
track our activities on our smartphones. This may seem rather innocuous at first 
glance, but there is more to worry about than simply targeted sales. These tracking 
methods can be used to spread your personal information to numerous other entities 
for both legal and illegal purposes. After all, once the information is compiled, it 
becomes just like any other container of sensitive information; it can be stolen or 
utilized for purposes that we did not originally intend. Consider your wallet as an 
example, you keep your driver's license and credit cards in this container so that 
you can easily access them to purchase items or to prove your identity. However, 
just like with online data tracking, this wallet can be stolen and used to impersonate 
you or even be used to steal your resources. In Chapter 2, Users and Mobile Device 
Management, you will learn about the impacts you can experience based on how you 
company can control your device.
In this chapter, we discussed the ways in which mobile and smartphone technology 
has changed the way we live. Topics we discussed include:
•	
Social networking sites
•	
How sites we visit track us
•	
The iPhone as the most ubiquitous smartphone
•	
iOS and Android mobile operating systems
•	
How commerce is increasingly going mobile, from banking to shopping
•	
QR codes as a convenient method of creating an identity verifier in the 
mobile space
•	
Cloud computing and its applications
Also the specifics of the risks inherent in the new mobile world will be discussed and 
expanded upon in the later chapters. We are here to help you navigate this social 
world and to help keep you safe.

Users and Mobile  
Device Management
The world of computing is changing, again. This history of computing is more than 
just personal computers. It was not too many years ago that punch cards were being 
used and there were jobs just for people to enter data. Today, we are living in a truly 
mobile world, complete with a variety of devices that we use for talking, playing 
games, sending messages, and even work. The important term for this chapter is 
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) to work. This chapter will focus on the impact of 
BYOD on the workplace. BYOD brings several impacts to you, as follows:
•	
Many companies are installing what is known as Mobile Device 
Management (MDM) solutions. This solution is a part of a holistic  
corporate security policy.
•	
MDM solutions provide two basic types of corporate security policy 
management for mobile devices:
°°
How to securely access your corporate e-mail: This normally includes 
specialized network devices and a controlled corporate network
°°
A description on what you can do with your device on the corporate 
network; this is also known as a Mobile Acceptable Use policy
•	
This discussion on MDM will provide you with information about what you 
can expect and what a company can do to your tablet and/or smartphone.

Users and Mobile Device Management
[ 26 ]
Protecting the corporations
Before we go too far, we need to define a few elements for you:
•	
Corporate security policies
•	
Corporate security procedures
•	
Frontend network protection
Corporate security policies
Corporate security policies provide a best practice outline that can be implemented 
by a company to all their employees. These corporate policies help companies 
minimize risks and provide a framework on how to respond to security issues or 
incidents. Corporate security polices can include:
•	
Rules on how employees connect to the corporate network
•	
High-level network configuration information
•	
Security definitions and descriptions on how security issues are managed
Corporate security procedures
Corporate security procedures provide details on how a security policy is 
implemented. One example is if a mobile device is lost then the company will execute 
a remote wipe on the device. A remote wipe can remove all the data on the device.
Frontend network protection
Frontend network devices are corporate network components that will help protect 
the company network from hackers. These frontend devices can help manage 
inbound Internet traffic and can also help manage smart device access.
Mobile and business
Using a mobile device is not new for business access and/or work. BlackBerry (www.
rim.com) devices have been around and have provided e-mail (and application) 
access for years. The history with most companies is that a BlackBerry device would 
be provided to the employee, and then the employee would have access to the 
corporate e-mail and/or application systems. This history also shows that more 
than one BlackBerry would be presented to a select part of a corporate population. 
Today's companies have to deal with the fact that mobile devices are being used by 
more than just salespeople, doctors, and corporate executives.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Now, let's introduce you to your company IT administrator, his name is Roger. Our 
story is now about you and your new IT friend, Roger. In the following section, we 
will share this story with you that is very common in many of today's companies.
Buying your device
Off to the mobile store you go; you are buying a mobile device today. You saw the 
advertisement on the TV and now you must have the new mobile phone/tablet. 
Now that you have the new device, you are ready to start reading your corporate 
e-mail and/or accessing the expense system. Being a five year employee at ACME 
Anvil Corporation, you know the head of the corporate e-mail system. You bring 
your new super tablet to your computer friend and tell him, "put our e-mail on my 
tablet, please!" As noted, Roger has been your working friend for many years and he 
is happy to help you. Roger tells you the following rules:
•	
You need to use a special Internet address: www.mobile.example.com/
mailsystem
•	
Once you connect to your company server, you may need to use your normal 
username and password (or a special one that was provided by Roger) that 
you use to connect your PC to the network when you come to work.
•	
Roger may also say, "Use your one time use Personal Identification Number 
(PIN) that I will give you in order to get to the corporate cloud".
•	
If you lose your device; "Tell me as soon as possible. I will need to wipe it. 
(remove all the e-mails or all the device contents)", Roger tells you.
•	
You will be forced to put a device password on your device/tablet.
At this point you stop and ask Roger, "What device password?"
Roger answers your question, by saying, "Now, this gets interesting. Have you ever 
heard of Mobile Device Management?"
Mobile Device Management
Bringing your own device to work is not totally new. Many employees have 
been using their own devices, which they themselves purchased, for years. Many 
companies run software to check a user's computer before the user is permitted to 
connect to a corporate network. The growth of the home office changed the rules of 
corporate computing. IBM's policies provide a good example of how home offices 
can be integrated into the modern workplace; many of the authors of this book 
have not had a dedicated office space for years. Some companies will allow users to 
connect with an employee-owned computer from their home, while others will allow 
only a corporate computer to connect to a corporate network.

Users and Mobile Device Management
[ 28 ]
One very important point to understand is that the use of BYOD can be different 
from company to company and also can be impacted via various government rules.
Does your company trust your device?
There is an initial issue with bringing your own device to work (in this case,  
the corporate network). If the process for BYOD is not managed properly then 
corporate data could be exposed outside of the trusted network. The authors have 
worked with many companies where the smart device, with corporate data, is lost. 
In this case, confidential data that could be stored on the phone is now available to 
hackers or competitors.
Another big issue is scalability. For example, if one person at a company requests 
access to the corporate network using a smartphone, then that is normally not a big 
issue (there is always a security concern). But if there are 10,000 requests, then this 
becomes a management scaling (running large number of devices) issue. Now, there 
are issues with the ability to support the users, keep the data secure, and keep a 
certain access quality service-level.
Most companies provide a basic trust in the employees within a computing 
environment. Also, these same companies will verify that the computing 
environment is protected and that the bad people, also known as hackers,  
don't get into the trusted network.
Internet facing companies have built a strong set of defenses to protect the trusted 
internal network. These defenses, up to this point, have focused on Personal 
Computers (PC) and not as much on the new smartphones and/or tablets.
Many companies will verify the use of your PC and/or BYOD and then make sure 
the devices are safe to be used on the corporate environment. This verification 
process includes: policies, procedures, and specialized products.
As a part of the specialized products that the companies use to protect their frontend 
network, a device known as Mobile Device Management (MDM) is being installed. 
The use of a MDM is basically between you and your company, but many companies 
will not allow access into their network and/or e-mail unless an MDM style product 
is used. Also, the MDM software is used to verify the use of the mobile device and to 
help remotely fix any issues that may occur on the device.
Details of MDM
MDM is a product that is normally installed by a specific corporate computing 
enterprise. Overall end users will not purchase the MDM solutions, but end users 
will be impacted (and potentially benefited) by MDM.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
So, let's jump into MDM; this book is about the end user experience, but we will also 
share the names of the products. Most end users will not be buying these products 
but, as noted before, will experience the result of having these products installed. 
The diagram and description shows how easy it is for you, the end user, to get 
connected to your corporate computing network.
The following diagram shows the basics of a simple MDM end user access:
The steps shown in the preceding figure are simple:
1.	 Open your device.
2.	 Access the URL from your company.
3.	 Now it is automatic; the MDM server will access the e-mail.
Or
The MDM will access your applications via a set of corporate rules.

Users and Mobile Device Management
[ 30 ]
Access to your corporate data is very transparent to the end user. Overall you,  
the end user, will not even notice that your device is being managed by the  
MDM software.
MDM end user benefits and impacts
Today's MDM solutions will provide organizations with end-to-end security.  
This is a complex expression, but overall this means that your data is safe (possibly 
encrypted) from the point it is sent on your device to the mail server way back at the 
corporate server or the cloud solution that you are using.
MDM features include:
•	
If a device has been jailbroken or rooted
•	
Safe data transfer
•	
Password management: Both for access to your corporate data and a device 
password; including password lockout management
•	
Corporate authentication: This can be the same password that you use for 
your Windows account and/or special passwords
•	
Configuration management to corporate services, e-mail, and VPN
•	
Ability to wipe a device if the device is lost or stolen
•	
Application inventory management
•	
Policy management: This controls what you can access on the corporate 
network
•	
Some MDM solutions provide mechanisms for end users to reset their 
passwords without having to call a help desk
•	
A formal process to enrol the devices into the mobile management solution: 
The enrolment process may require you (as an end user) to put in a 
temporary password, in order to gain initial access to the corporate server 
and/or corporate cloud
•	
Backup and restore: This is a cool feature that many MDMs and cloud 
solutions include
In some cases companies, via the MDM solution, will automatically install 
encryption technologies. This technology can provide an end-to-end encryption 
solution for any data that is sent from your phone to a corporate network. This is not 
the case with all companies, check with your company and ask if this solution has 
been enabled for you.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Jailbreak and rooting
When you purchase a mobile device (phone or tablet) you will find that a specific 
type of software is installed, also known as an operating system (OS), for example:
•	
Windows Mobile
•	
IOS (Apple)
•	
Android
Many of these operating systems are known as closed systems; overall that means 
that you cannot make changes to the basic software that runs the device. You can 
still download your applications, games, and e-mail, but you cannot modify the OS 
and add your custom changes. This OS restriction is there to provide a consistent 
and secure user experience as well as to protect the end user and to help keep the 
applications at a high quality.
There have been several postings on the Internet on how to jailbreak your device. This 
jailbreak process can allow you to install applications that have not been approved 
applications for that vendor. As a part of this term you will see rooting; this is the 
same step, removing the protections so additional applications can be installed.
The authors of this book do NOT recommend that 
anyone jailbreak/root a device.
Digital Rights Management
Many devices include a special layer of software known as Digital Rights 
Management (DRM). This is a code that protects the device from bad applications. 
This is one reason not to jailbreak a device. Be sure and understand your rights and/
or your rights based on the country you live in before you make any core changes to 
the base device.
Check this link for more information about DRM: http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Digital_rights_management.
A company may allow an employee to use their own BYOD or issue a device. If 
the employee then jailbreaks (or roots) the device, then the employee can put the 
company at risk. Bad software, hacks, and bots can all be infected into the phone 
and if the end user breaks the security on a device and ignores the DRM, then the 
company can be put at great risk.

Users and Mobile Device Management
[ 32 ]
MDM solutions and products
There are several MDM products on the market, the following is a short list for you 
and your management team to review, if you don't have an MDM solution already:
•	
Good technology: http://www1.good.com/mobility-management-
solutions/mobile-device-managemen
•	
Sybase
•	
Airwatch: http://www.air-watch.com/?gclid=CJfsidy0-
rMCFc5cMgod7i8AIQ
•	
MobileIron: http://www.mobileiron.com/
•	
SmartMan: http://www.dialogs.de/en_US/produkte/smartman.
html?hl=en_US
•	
IBM Endpoint Manager: http://www.ibm.com/
Acceptable use policy (AUP)
Back to our story, Roger got you connected to the corporate network via your smart 
device. You now have an e-mail access to the corporate mobile expense system; all is 
good in your world. Later that day, you receive a message titled Corporate Mobile 
Acceptable Use Policy.
The corporate mobile acceptable use policy is starting to be used by many 
companies. This policy describes how you can use the device and/or access to the 
corporate networks. The standard acceptable use policy (AUP) normally includes 
what you can and can't do on the corporate network. Many people find this to be 
a basic conflict of rights due to the fact that the device was purchased by the end 
user. This book does not review these rights and please do not send messages to the 
authors regarding this issue; this is between you and your company.
Most acceptable policies follow a basic format which includes:
•	
Purpose: This is the definition of the AUP and why it is needed.
•	
Applicability: Who does this apply to; employees, contractors, students, 
guests, and others.
•	
Employee responsibility: It is the responsibility of the employee that uses 
a mobile device to follow the AUP and/or other corporate rules regarding 
the corporate networks and/or resources. Also, most AUPs will have rules 
requiring the employee to keep the device safe.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
•	
Device impacts: What are the rules if the device is lost, stolen, or broken? 
Also many AUPs will include rules that prevent the end user from 
jailbreaking and/or installing any specific applications. Also there may be 
rules about software licenses. One big point that AUPs may include concerns 
what will occur if the device is infected with malware.
•	
Malware: A definition of viruses, worms, and spyware.
•	
Corporate rights: The AUP may define how the company reserves the right 
to limit and/or refuse the right of any end user to connect to the corporate 
network and/or resources.
•	
Device list: This is normally a list of devices that are supported by  
the company.
•	
Non-compliance: AUP will describe the impact to end users if the rules and/or 
AUP are not followed. Some rules may include having the device cleared (data 
is wiped off including e-mail and applications). The device may be locked off 
the system. The end user may be put on suspension and/or terminated.
This book provides a sample AUP in the appendix.
Power users
A power user is an interesting term; in general a power user is an expert user. This 
is the person that you would go to and say, "do you know how to do this?" In many 
cases a power user actually knows what they are doing, while others may guess and 
mess up your phone. Power users are the ones that install the cool applications and 
know how to quickly solve simple problems.
Bring Your Own Device is causing several issues with large companies as follows:
•	
End users call the help desk and will ask how to do simple things on  
their phones
•	
E-mail may need to be fixed and/or reconfigured on a device and/or  
smartphone
•	
End users may call the help desk and complain about the speed of  
the connection
Many corporate help desks will not help users on phone questions, for example:
•	
"How can I install the Angry Birds game?"
You may agree this is not normally a critical business request! 
•	
But the corporation help desk may answer questions like:
"My e-mail was working, but now it is not working?"

Users and Mobile Device Management
[ 34 ]
The end user is getting frustrated and may say, "The help desk is no help; I need 
Angry Birds." The concept is really lost on most end users, BYOD really means 
"Bring YOUR OWN Device". The help desk with many companies will not help you 
install games or even your favorite Star Trek episode. The help desk will help you 
with business required applications and/or e-mails only.
So what does the end user do? They will ask, "Do you know how ….." This is the 
birth of the power user. We saw this with PCs and now with mobile devices.
The risk is, not all power users are the same. Here is our story:
Troy really wanted to get Angry Birds installed. So he went to Bob and said, "The 
help desk will not help me install any games." Bob tells Troy, "I am an expert, bring 
your device to me."
Bob gets Troy's iPhone and starts making changes. Bob, not being an expert with the 
iPhone, resets the device to factory mode, losing all of Troy's applications and e-mail. 
Now, Troy really needs help to get his e-mail and/or corporate expense system back 
on his device, and Troy still does not have any games.
The moral of this story is, "not all power users are powerful and/or knowledgeable; 
be careful!"
In the later chapters, we will tell you how to back up your device and how to  
protect it.
Power user tools
We introduced you to the concept of power users so that you can understand this 
next section. Most end users will never use these tools. This is an advanced section 
of this chapter, please be careful; you may end up with a dead device if you are 
not careful. There are several tools you can use to customize your mobile devices, 
including the following list of tools:

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
iPhone configuration tools
The iPhone configuration utility lets the end user create configuration files that can 
install specialized setup configurations to install applications and manage the device.
These configuration profiles are saved and transferred in a special format known as 
XML. XML (Extensible Markup Language) is a type of coding used for web access 
via a browser and other technologies. The use of XML and/or iPhone configurator is 
normally done by administrators and/or real power users.
Two basic terms will be used as a part of using the iPhone configurator, as follows:
•	
Payload
•	
Configuration file
A payload is a collection of a specific set of configurations that can be pushed into 
your iPhone. One example of this is a Virtual Private Network (VPN), which is used 
to connect to your corporate network via a special set of software and/or hardware.
The configuration profile normally includes several sets of payloads.
You need to tether (connect) your device to a PC in order to use this configuration.
The iPhone configurator is available at http://help.apple.com/ 
iosdeployment-ipcu/win/1.1/.

Users and Mobile Device Management
[ 36 ]
Android configuration tools
The authors found several sets of tools that can potentially be used by power users 
and/or administrators. These tools are available at https://play.google.com/
store. Some tools to consider are as follows:
•	
Configuration
•	
Simple tether configuration
•	
Simple router configuration
•	
Lookout
•	
Quick settings
Let's review these tools.
Configuration
Configuration is a basic application that will display and save the device 
configuration. This type of tool can be used by developers to determine what  
is running on the devices.
Simple tether configuration tool
The simple tether configuration tool was created to circumvent a bug in Samsung 
Galaxy's software that prevented it from remembering the configuration for a  
tether configuration.
Simple router configuration
This application is used to change and browse router settings on your network.  
This application will also scan your system to find your IP routers.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
Lookout
Lookout offers essential protection against all the bad stuff that can happen to your 
phone or tablet, such as malware and viruses, loss, and theft. See the following 
screenshot for an example:
Quick settings
This application provides a quick review of your phone settings.

Users and Mobile Device Management
[ 38 ]
The hidden world (some advanced information)
Once you connect to your corporate network, you will be connected to a hidden 
world of network access and protection. Overall, most end users will not care 
about this world and/or the access connections. This book will show you some of 
the systems that you will be connecting to, once your phone opens your corporate 
network. This world is obfuscated from end users and hackers, by design. Each 
component is installed in order to protect the end user as well as the corporate 
network and corporate data. Let's review each of the following basic components:
•	
Firewall
•	
Reverse Proxy
•	
Mail Routing Server
•	
Mobile Device Management
•	
Application Servers
•	
Messaging Servers
Firewall: This is the basic frontend interface into the corporate network. Another 
term you may hear is DMZ. A DMZ (demilitarized zone) is a computer network 
inserted between the untrusted Internet and the corporate, trusted network, as a 
neutral zone between a company's private network and the Internet. The goal of the 
DMZ is to prevent unauthorized users from getting access to a corporate service.
Reverse Proxy: This is normally an extension of the Firewall and/or the DMZ. The 
reverse proxy will provide access to the corporate environment by a pass through a 
process that will hide the internal servers to the outside Internet world.
Mail Routing Server: This server provides a special access to mobile devices into 
the corporate mail servers. This is a specialized server that also provides the sync 
processes used to keep the server in sync with the mobile device.
Mobile Device Management: This is a set of tools, servers, and processes that 
are used to help manage end user mobile devices. A detailed description on 
administrative MDM is included in the appendix of this book.
Application Servers: These are the servers that a company will host their  
corporate applications on, for example, sales tracking and/or accounting  
tools for mobile devices.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Messaging Server: These are the servers that host a corporation's messaging  
e-mail system.
The preceding example shows the sample placements of these components. Keep 
in mind that these configurations are not published outside of the corporate 
administration teams in each company.

Users and Mobile Device Management
[ 40 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the impacts of the mobile device on the end user. 
This is a very big topic for managers and administrators. The important point for end 
users is that you can be forced to follow specific rules on your device; yes, even the 
device that you really own. Bring Your Own Device does not really mean that you 
can use it for anything on a corporate network. Some of the items we discussed in 
this chapter included:
•	
What is MDM and how does it impact you
•	
Why do companies use MDM solutions
•	
What rules can be applied (such as passwords) and how you can be  
locked out
•	
We discussed what jailbreak means
•	
Also we reviewed a few MDM solutions that may be used at your company
•	
Acceptable use policies were reviewed and why you may need to sign one if 
you want to use your device on your company's network
•	
Power users were defined and some of the risks were identified; not all 
power users are the same
•	
Finally, we learned about some power user tools (or administrators) that may 
be used to help manage your device
In the next chapter we will review privacy.

Privacy – Small Word,  
Big Consequences
Troy roused from somewhere in the depths of his sleep to silence the alarm on his 
smartphone. He tried to clear his mind to think. Was this the third or fourth city in 10 
days? What city was this, anyway? A quick glance at his calendar app reminded him 
that he was in Copenhagen, Denmark.
He checked his messages. There were three: his wife had paid his speeding ticket, his 
flight was on time, and his assistant had scheduled him into a conference call in two 
hours. It was going to be another busy day.
Troy finished his conference call, called his wife, and headed to the airport. He had 
already checked in on his smartphone and only had carry-on luggage, so he figured 
he should be able to speed through the airport. A quick look at his checking account 
balance assured him his account was fine.
Troy's flight home was a long one, so he connected to the airport's Wi-Fi network 
and searched for an app to play on the plane. Advanced knitting techniques? No. 
Multiplication table practice? That would be good for his son. Space motorcycle 
racing? That would be fun! He downloaded both apps, clicking through the 
agreement screens quickly.
After landing, Troy rushed through the airport, paid his parking fee with a few 
quick taps on his smartphone, and headed for the exit. As he drove by a flower shop, 
he received a spoken text message announcing a 20 percent off sale on roses and a 
reminder that his mother's birthday was in two days. His mom loved roses, so he 
made a quick stop at the florist shop and finished his drive home.

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 42 ]
Troy and You
Did some of Troy's day sound familiar? Smartphones have become multifunctional 
tools for many of us. We use them for communicating, surfing the Internet, checking 
sports scores, and even shopping and banking. Some of these actions can be done 
semi-anonymously, while others require information about who we are or even 
sensitive information, such as credit card and bank account numbers. It is the same 
in the physical world: we can do some activities without anyone knowing who we 
are, while other activities require us to share very personal information. The digital 
world generally feels more anonymous than the physical world because it appears 
we are only interacting with machines. However, the reality is very different.
In the physical world, you are an individual who can be recognized on sight by 
anyone who knows you. You can prove who you are to those who don't know you by 
offering proof of identity such as a driver's license or passport. It is your choice when 
and with whom you share that information. A pickpocket could steal your wallet 
with your driver's license in it, and your passport. With either item, the pickpocket 
would know your identity, street address, date of birth, and a few other pieces of 
information, but that is all. Within minutes, hours, or days, you would know your 
items had been stolen because you would no longer have them in your possession.
In the digital world, your identity is digital information, which can be copied, 
combined, analyzed, and tracked. A person anywhere in the world can steal your 
information by copying it, and then adding it to other information about you. The 
additional information may have been copied by the same person who previously 
stole information about you, or it may have been purchased on the Internet black 
market as part of a set of information on thousands or even millions of people. 
You may never know your information has been copied unless it is later used to 
steal your identity. Unlike a missing driver's license or passport, only a copy of the 
information is taken while the original information remains intact.
With your digital identity, another person, or even many other people, can become 
you. They can obtain credit in your name, buy cars or houses in your name, sell your 
house (as was done to Roger Mildenhall of South Africa), or even commit crimes 
while masquerading as you (http://www.identitytheft.info/criminal.aspx). 
If you have plenty of free time and extra money to spare sorting out messes such as 
these, then you probably don't need to worry about protecting your digital identity. 
Otherwise, fasten your seatbelt.

Chapter 3
[ 43 ]
Data good enough to steal
Data on your mobile device is valuable to you for performing your daily tasks 
and being available for reference when you need it. It is also valuable to others for 
purposes that may not benefit you.
Cookies, cookies everywhere
When you visit a website, information about your actions while visiting that website 
is saved. For example, if you visit an electronics store's website and view three flat-
screen televisions, the information may be stored regarding the specific televisions 
you viewed. The information is stored in temporary computer memory called a 
session cookie. The purpose of a session cookie is two-fold: one, to make it easier for 
you to return to the same televisions if you want to order one, and two, to help the 
store's website suggest specific items for you to consider purchasing based on what 
you have already viewed. Once you close the browser, the cookie is deleted.
There are other types of cookies called persistent cookies. These are not deleted and 
can be stored on your computer for months or even years. Generally, these cookies 
are designed to improve your experience each subsequent time you visit a website. 
Some cookies, however, are designed for malicious purposes. They may capture 
information about you with the sole purpose of sending it to a server anywhere 
in the world without your knowledge or permission. The information captured 
can include the websites you frequent, your user IDs and associated passwords, 
and even credit card information you provided to purchase items (http://www.
wisegeek.com/what-does-an-adware-tracking-cookie-do.htm, http://www.
reputation.com/reputationwatch/articles/how-companies-collect-manage-
and-use-your-private-information-when-you-browse-online).
One stolen credit card number can cause you harm, but that can be undone with 
a call to the credit card issuer. However, a digital file of your actions and multiple 
credit card numbers built over the course of months or years can be used to develop 
a profile about you and your very sensitive personal information.
The information captured can be enough for a stranger to duplicate your identity and 
use your credit or even live as you without your knowledge. The profile built about 
you can be used to fool people who know you into thinking they are interacting with 
you via digital means. Some people may even be convinced to drop their guard and 
provide their own sensitive personal information to your digital twin, who then uses 
it to start building profiles on your friends. How long will you maintain friendships 
when the information provided to "you" is used to steal your friends' identities?

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 44 ]
They are watching you…and they know  
your name
The previous paragraph may sound like the start of a movie plot, but it is very real. 
And it is only one way strangers steal your information. Look at David Crouse's 
story, documented by The Wall Street Journal. In 2009, David went from a happy 
man with a solid retirement account and a 780 credit score to a worn out man 
with drained bank and retirement accounts and a ruined credit score. The entire 
loss happened in less than six months. What caused this? While visiting a website, 
malicious software (called malware) was secretly downloaded to his computer, 
which captured every key stroke he made, including credit card numbers and bank 
account login credentials. His information was then sold to individuals who used it 
to access his debit card to gamble, make long-distance calls, and buy electronic toys. 
The charges totaled over $900,000 (http://articles.marketwatch.com/2010-02-
10/finance/30765048_1_new-bank-debit-identity).
David Crouse was a victim of identity fraud due to the theft of personal information 
entered into websites through his personal computer. Identity fraud is defined by 
the U.S. Department of Justice as "all types of crime in which someone wrongfully 
obtains and uses another person's personal data in some way that involves fraud 
or deception, typically for economic gain" (http://www.justice.gov/criminal/
fraud/websites/idtheft.html). Javelin Strategy & Research, an oft-referenced 
research firm, reported that approximately seven percent of all smartphone owners 
were victims of identity fraud in 2011 (http://spectrum.ieee.org/riskfactor/
telecom/wireless/smartphones-becoming-gateways-to-identity-theft). One 
main difference between David's computer and most smartphones is the level of care 
people take with the devices and the access to those devices. Personal computers, 
whether desktop or laptop, tend to be handled carefully when transported and 
often have antivirus software installed to protect against malware. Smartphones 
and tablets tend to be tucked into bags or pockets, or left on a nearby table or desk, 
and frequently contain no antivirus software (40 percent as of May 2012, according 
to Kaspersky Lab (http://www.kaspersky.com/about/news/press/2012/
number-of-the-week-40-percent-of-modern-smartphones-owners-do-not-
use-antivirus-software). In addition, according to Javelin Research, 62 percent 
of mobile device users do not use passwords to protect the contents of their devices. 
Compared to personal computers, the casual handling and lack of antivirus software 
make mobile devices more prone to theft, data exposure, and malware.

Chapter 3
[ 45 ]
What's in it for the information thieves?
There is no financial safety net for people like David. He estimated it would take five 
years to eliminate the debt caused by the identity thieves and save a small amount 
of his original retirement account. His target age for reaching that goal was 61 years 
old, leaving him little time to rebuild the funds for the retirement he had planned.
The people stealing and selling David's personal information gained a small amount 
for their efforts while David suffered a significant loss, which impacted his life for 
years. Just how much was David's personal information worth? According to MSN 
Money, the electronic version of a person's credit card information (the type of 
information captured by malware) is worth between $2 and $90, depending on how 
many details are available. Physical credit cards using that same information can 
be purchased for an additional $180. Credentials for logging into a person's bank 
account can be purchased for $3,500 (http://money.msn.com/identity-theft/
what-you-are-worth-on-black-market-credit-cards.aspx). The cost to create 
and distribute malware is minimal. A thief has only to write the software or obtain 
prewritten malware from the Internet, and distribute it through e-mails or mobile 
device software (apps). The thief may even profit from selling the app containing 
the malware, benefitting twice. One app or e-mail with widespread distribution can 
install malware on thousands or even hundreds of thousands of devices. And there 
is an always-ready black market for personal information.
Let's return to Troy's story and the information, which could have been captured 
during his first waking hours. Malware exists, which will allow a person to take 
over someone's mobile device, making it possible to record calls and read and send 
text messages and e-mails (http://spectrum.ieee.org/riskfactor/telecom/
wireless/smartphones-becoming-gateways-to-identity-theft).
A stranger using such malware to infect Troy's phone, we'll call him Mr. X, would 
know that Troy had a significant other, that he had parked illegally in a certain city 
and incurred a fine for that behavior. Mr. X would also know that Troy had a flight 
on a particular airline, had a conference call scheduled, that Troy had checked into 
his flight, and what bank Troy used. Depending on the malware used to steal Troy's 
data, Mr. X also may have the access credentials to Troy's bank account. What started 
out as a busy but good day for Troy, has gone decidedly bad.

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 46 ]
Good idea, mixed results
Mobile devices are a good idea. They allow us to live untethered to hardwired 
computers and telephones while remaining in contact with people and information. 
They allow us to have a pipeline to the world no matter where we are. However, 
they also allow the world to have a pipeline to us, often without our permission or 
even knowledge.
Reach out and touch
In a Bell System telephone commercial released in 1979, people were encouraged to 
"reach out and touch someone". The commercial's intent was to encourage people to 
spend more time talking to others in distant locations. The creators of that message 
never intended the action to be harmful, but times have changed and phones, as well 
as other communications devices, have become a source of potential harm even as 
they've grown in functionality and use.
Today's devices can function as phones, address books, cameras, Internet browsers, 
alarm clocks, gaming consoles, personal organizers, libraries, jukeboxes, and 
financial planners; all while fitting in a pocket or purse. In October 2012, the number 
of smartphones in use topped one billion globally (http://www.telegraph.co.uk/
finance/9616011/Number-of-smartphones-tops-one-billion.html) and 100 
million in the U.S. In the U.S., the market was mainly divided between Android (51 
percent) and Apple's iPhone (30.7 percent), and smartphones in general contained 
an average of 41 apps (http://money.cnn.com/2012/05/16/technology/
smartphones/index.htm).
With an explosion in the number of smartphones and a dramatic increase in the 
amount and diversity of data stored in them, the potential for harm has grown in 
equal proportion. A stranger, copying the information from your smartphone, can 
know as much about you as you have told the phone. However, unlike the phone, 
you normally can neither delete your information from the stranger's inventory nor 
control how it is used.
Touch, but don't break
Apps can be downloaded to devices to perform an almost unlimited number of 
functions. At the same time, the apps can introduce malware into a device without 
warning. Because devices are mainly either Apple- or Android-based, the apps are 
broken into corresponding groups. In the third quarter of 2012, Apple had 250,000 
apps available (http://www.apple.com/ipad/from-the-app-store/), while 
Android apps numbered almost 550,000 (http://www.appbrain.com/stats/
number-of-android-apps).

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
Apple apps may be downloaded only from approved websites unless a device is 
altered to allow the user to manipulate its operating system. The apps are approved 
prior to being made available on those websites, although the exact approval process 
is a tightly-held secret. It was believed for years that this restriction prevented 
malware from infecting Apple devices. However, early in 2012, unadvertised 
software was found hidden inside an app without Apple's knowledge and made 
available from Apple's App Store. The hidden software was not malicious; it simply 
allowed the user to create an Internet connection. However, it demonstrated to the 
world that Apple apps were not as safe as once believed, nor inspected as thoroughly 
as once thought.
Apps may be downloaded to Android devices from approved websites or from 
independent app providers as long as the device is set to allow the installation of 
non-Market applications. According to Google's Developer Distribution Agreement, 
apps offered through Google Play (Google's app market) are not officially approved 
by Google; Google simply provides the marketplace for the apps. Also, the apps are 
not necessarily monitored for content, although Google reserves the right to remove 
an app if it is found to violate laws or Google policies (http://play.google.com/
about/developer-distribution-agreement.html).
Apps downloaded from independent providers carry an inherent risk of malware. 
There is also a chance that apps from approved websites contain malware, and that 
risk is higher than originally thought. During the second half of 2011, the number 
of unique pieces of malware in Android apps found through sampling increased 
by 472 percent according to research performed by Jupiter Networks (http://www.
computerworlduk.com/news/security/3319719/google-android-malware-
sees-exponential-growth/).

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 48 ]
Apps may appear to be legitimate, yet may actually be counterfeit versions of real 
apps. Lookout is a leading smartphone security company offering anti-malware and 
anti-spyware software. Data thieves created an app designed to appear as an update 
to the Lookout software and embedded malware inside the update app. They posted 
the app on Google's online marketplace and waited for people to be fooled into 
downloading it. The malware is able to copy sensitive personal information from 
Android phones and transmit it to a server in Thornton, Colorado. The information 
stolen may include messages, video files, and the contents of SD cards (http://www.
pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2411163,00.asp).
In addition to potential hidden malware on your device is the possibility of 
approvals you may have given to an identity thief without being aware you were 
doing so. These approvals are typically requested as part of the download process. 
Once you approve, the thief may collect any personal information you enter on your 
device any time it is entered. Not possible, you say? How closely did you read the 
permissions you agreed to the last time you downloaded an app? Did any of the 
permissions seem more extensive than necessary to run the app? Did you download 
the app from a trusted source? For example, why would a child's puzzle game need 
access to your address book or calendar?
Looking again at Google's Developer Distribution Agreement, we find a curious 
section about your personal information. The section begins with standard language 
warning the developer to protect any personal information collected from users in 
a manner consistent with most privacy laws. However, later in the section we find 
this interesting language: "But if the user has opted into a separate agreement with 
you that allows you or your Product to store or use personal or sensitive information 
directly related to your Product (not including other products or applications), then 
the terms of that separate agreement will govern your use of such information." Is it 
possible you made such an agreement with an app developer while quickly clicking 
through the agreement screens? If so, you may have given that developer the right to 
use your personal information, including login credentials and payment information.
And that's only the first part…
Data thieves are not the only ones who can benefit from your information. Legitimate 
companies also collect and use it for their purposes, and they may not have your best 
interests in mind.

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Hidden "features"
Antivirus and other anti-malware tools will not protect against all malware. The tools 
can protect you against apps designed to cause harm to your device and steal your 
data if the apps are recognized as malware by the antivirus vendor. However, there 
are also valid apps written with "hidden features". These valid apps would not be 
classified as malware by antivirus software. Some of the hidden features in these apps 
are harmless, such as the unadvertised app hidden inside the Apple software. Other 
apps are put there only to benefit the author and those whom the author selects.
Hidden apps may be beneficial to the device's owner, at least when installed. 
However, over time the functionality of a hidden app may become harmful. For 
example, the hidden app may contain a vulnerability similar to those found on 
personal computers, which require software updates to correct. Because the app 
is hidden, the chance of an update being issued to correct the vulnerability is very 
small. The vulnerability can be exploited if a hacker learns of it and chooses to use it 
as a way to gain access to all devices with the app installed.
In November 2011, security researcher Trevor Eckhart exposed a little-known app 
running on most smartphones (http://www.networkworld.com/news/2011/113011-
mobile-privacy-253621.html). Eckhart discovered traffic on his company's network 
that didn't fit expected patterns. By tracing the traffic, he located data being created 
and routed by an unknown app. The data was coming from colleagues' smartphones 
and routed to an external company called Carrier IQ (http://www.foxnews.com/
tech/2011/12/06/in-tracking-companies-reveal-their-low-iq/).

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 50 ]
Carrier IQ is the creator of the app and provides it to phone manufacturers, such as 
AT&T, Sprint, and T-Mobile. The purpose of the app is to help the carriers improve 
their service to customers by measuring the performance of mobile devices and 
providing that information to the carriers.
The app has been found on both Android and Apple devices and is configurable to 
the specifications of individual cell phone providers. Functions of the app include 
call logging, keystroke monitoring, location monitoring, web browsing history, 
and application tracking. Before Eckhart's discovery, most smartphone users did 
not know the hidden app was running on their phones. At that time, the app was 
installed on over 141 million devices; a number that is growing as more smartphones 
are sold.
The app is not included in the list of apps active on a phone, so phone users cannot 
accidently learn about it while viewing phone details. In addition, the app does not 
include an option to turn it off or remove it from the phone.
The functions of this app already listed allow considerable information to be 
collected about a person. When the app was discovered, Carrier IQ claimed that 
none of the information is recorded, stored, or transmitted. One additional function 
of the app contradicts that claim. The app also allows Carrier IQ administrators 
to tell the device to contact Carrier IQ, opening a gateway between the phone and 
the administrator. The administrator can then select data to be sent from the phone 
to Carrier IQ for analysis. According to a Carrier IQ patent application, the data 
collected from the phone may include data related "to an end user's interaction 
with the device… where in the interaction with the device comprises the end user's 
pressing of keys on the device" (http://www.engadget.com/2011/12/01/carrier-
iq-what-it-is-what-it-isnt-and-what-you-need-to/). That sounds very 
similar to keystroke logging on demand.
Not only is information gathered from phones on demand, the information is sent 
to Carrier IQ unencrypted, whether or not it is encrypted on the phone. Thus, any 
protection the phone owner installed to prevent others from viewing information on 
the phone is lost when Carrier IQ requests transmission of the information.
The fallout
Carriers have stated they use the information collected by Carrier IQ to gather data 
speed, battery life, and app usage pattern information and to learn what smartphone 
users do with their phones. Some carriers deny having the app active on their 
devices, while Carrier IQ lists the carriers as partners.

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
Concerns over the Carrier IQ app triggered a U.S. Senate investigation and 
raised questions of potential violations of federal wiretapping laws. In addition, 
multiple classaction lawsuits were filed against Carrier IQ, Samsung, HTC, 
Apple, AT&T, Sprint, and T-Mobile (http://www.forbes.com/sites/
andygreenberg/2011/12/02/and-now-the-lawsuits-class-actions-hit-
carrier-iq-htc-and-samsung/). These actions brought even more attention to the 
app and prompted frenzied activity to figure out exactly on which devices the app 
was running.
Gizmodo, a website offering information on technology's current events, created  
a list by carrier and model of the phones with the app installed. They provided  
the list to assist the Senate investigation and published it online at this website: 
http://gizmodo.com/5868732/the-complete-list-of-all-the-phones-with-
carrier-iq-spyware-installed.
As information on Carrier IQ piled up, it became clear they had been collecting 
information since 2007; far longer than originally believed (http://betanews.
com/2011/12/16/does-your-phone-have-carrier-iq-now-you-can-know/).
What does this mean to you? If you own or owned one or more of the smartphones 
on Gizmodo's list, your personal information, potentially including phone logs, 
web browsing history, app usage, physical locations visited while carrying your 
smartphone, and the content of text messages may all be stored in the databases of 
Carrier IQ and your carrier.

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 52 ]
Who has your data? Round 1…
Even the app stores want your data. Who knew a mobile device could make  
you so popular?
The truth is out there
So far, we have seen that Carrier IQ and your service provider may have copies of 
your call and text logs and even your text message contents. But it doesn't end there.
The Carrier IQ app is just that, an app. It has the possibility of gathering vast 
amounts of information about you. Because the Carrier IQ app can do it, so can other 
apps. Smartphones are equipped with unique device identifiers, which generally 
cannot be removed. This allows cell phone service providers to recognize your 
phone. It also allows apps and ad companies to do so.
Studies on Android apps have shown that several apps collect personal information, 
such as device identifier, passwords, age, gender, contact information, and location. 
Apps collecting this information often do so without the user's awareness or consent, 
and frequently transmit the information to other locations, which often mean ad 
companies. Popular apps found to follow this practice include TextPlus4, Pandora, 
and Paper Toss. Studies on Apple apps have revealed similar results with even  
more data being collected and transmitted (http://timesnewsworld.com/
iphone-and-android-apps-collect-and-share-sensitive-user-data-with-
advertisers.html).
MIT researchers studied 36 popular Android apps and found that many of them 
collected information on users. The guilty app makers included Rovio (developer 
of Angry Birds) and News Corporation (maker of MySpace); refer to http://
online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704694004576020083703574602.
html. The apps collected information such as address book contacts, web browsing 
history, and GPS location whether or not the app was running (http://malkist.
com/mit-finds-android-apps-still-collect-user-data-even-after-
shutdown-130184.php3). MySpace sent age, gender, income, ethnicity, sexual 
orientation, political views, and parental status.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
The Wall Street Journal (WSJ) performed an even more in-depth study, evaluating 
101 apps for collecting and transmitting device users' personal information. Of the 
101 apps, 50 were Android, 50 were Apple, and one was the WSJ's own. Of the 
101 apps, 47 transmitted location information and five (5 percent) transmitted age, 
gender, and other personal information (http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100
01424052748704694004576020083703574602.html). If we accept the five percent 
found in WSJ's study as standard across apps in general, of the approximately 
800,000 apps available in the third quarter of 2012, an estimated 40,000 would be 
transmitting personal information. Some apps transmit location information as often 
as every 30 seconds (http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-11443111).
One Apple app, Pumpkin Maker, allows a person to virtually carve pumpkins as 
part of a game. The app transmits location information without notifying the user 
or requesting permission. According to the app's developer, he was unaware that 
Apple required apps to ask a user's approval before taking personal information 
(http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527487046940045760200837035
74602.html).
If you use your mobile device strictly for calls and text messages, then you probably 
only need to worry about what Carrier IQ and your carrier are doing with your 
personal information. However, if you use apps on your mobile device, your 
personal information is alive and well and running wild in cyberspace. A commercial 
appeared on television in the mid-2000s showing the harm done to a high school girl 
after her friends posted very personal photos of her on a social networking website. 
The girl endured laughter and suggestive comments from classmates and strangers 
as she went about her day. The commercial's point was that information posted 
online lasts forever. To illustrate that point, the commercial portrayed one of the 
photos as posted on a school's physical bulletin board. No matter how many times 
the girl tore the photo off the bulletin board, the photo remained. Your personal 
information suffers the same fate whether you make it available on the Internet or 
someone else does. Once available on the Internet or to an app, you no longer have 
control over that information.
Some malware even goes so far as to take control of the device. In doing so, it can 
cause considerable harm to other devices and the finances of the owner. For example, 
malware can cause a device to send short message service (SMS) text messages to 
premium rate services, incurring massive bills for the device's owner. The developer 
of the malware benefits by owning the company providing the service requested 
by the SMS. Or, the malware can replicate itself through the USB port to infect a 
computer when the device is attached to it. Once the infected computer is connected 
to a recognized network, such as a company network, the malware spreads quickly 
because any firewalls or other protection mechanisms recognize the computer and 
do not stop it from connecting. As a result, you could unintentionally infect your 
home or work network without intending to or even knowing about it.

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 54 ]
And now the rest of the story
Google (Android) and Apple sell most of the apps through their stores. Why, then, 
are they not ensuring the apps are secure for users? They claim they do. According to 
Google, they scan apps using a tool called Bouncer. The tool recognizes when an app 
has been uploaded and immediately analyzes it for known issues. These issues include 
embedded malware, spyware, Trojans, and malicious behavior. Google also publishes 
policies for app developers, which include mandatory security requirements. Apps 
failing Bouncer's testing or found to violate Google's policies are removed from Google 
Play. However, Google cannot restrict the developers from offering the same apps on 
third-party app websites (http://techcrunch.com/2012/11/05/android-malware-
surges-despite-googles-efforts-to-bounce-dodgy-apps-off-its-platform-
f-secure-ids-51447-unique-samples-in-q3/). So an app determined as unsafe for 
your mobile device by Google or Apple may still be available to you for downloading 
without a warning that it failed the security check.
Apple's track record for dangerous apps is better than Android's; however, it is 
not perfect, as noted earlier. A flaw was found in Apple's iOS code, which allowed 
the introduction of malware into Apple apps, and several developers have been 
able to find loopholes in Apple's security restrictions. In addition, Apple is slow 
to patch identified security holes, waiting four months to release a patch when 81 
vulnerabilities were found in its iOS 5.0.1. During those four months, any number 
of viruses and Trojans could have been installed on devices running iOS 5.0.1 by 
hackers taking advantage of the vulnerabilities. A hacker would then have had an 
open door to steal information from, or even take control of, a compromised device.

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
Google and Apple are finding it difficult to stay ahead of the malware developers 
and the challenge is only growing. Some companies are actively finding ways to 
exploit Android and Apple flaws. Take a look at this job posting, reprinted from a 
June 2012 Naked Security article:
Refer to http://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2012/06/29/ 
apple-mobile-device-security/
So, Google and Apple are striving to make it a safer world for mobile devices? Ad 
companies are not the only recipients of your information. In the WSJ study, Google 
received the most data, collecting information from 38 of the apps. Google also has 
information-collecting wallpaper apps available in its digital store, 80 of them as of 
the last count. These apps collect and transmit personal information similar to the 
apps described previously. One in particular, Jackeey Wallpaper, was presented as 
an app of concern at a Black Hat security conference by Kevin MaHaffey, Lookout's 
Chief Technology Officer. According to MaHaffey, Jackeey Wallpaper had been 
downloaded millions of times and transmitted the data collected to a server in China. 
Google suspended the app after the Black Hat conference (http://www.telegraph.
co.uk/technology/google/7918536/Google-Android-apps-collecting-
personal-data.html).
Apple also values your personal information. In a patent application filed by Apple, 
the company indicated its plans to target marketing to people based on the contents 
of their media libraries and their friends' media libraries. According to the patent, 
Apple plans to use "known connections on one or more social-networking websites" 
or "publicly available information or private databases describing purchasing 
decisions, brand preferences" (http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527
48704694004576020083703574602.html). With friends like that…

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 56 ]
Who has your data? Round 2…
The United States Department of Justice (US DoJ) created a report in 2010, which 
detailed the length of time each major cell phone company retained records of call 
and text activities by their customers. The report, Retention Periods of Major Cellular 
Providers (http://www.aclu.org/files/pdfs/freespeech/retention_periods_
of_major_cellular_service_providers.pdf), was followed up by American Civil 
Liberties Union (ACLU) research in August 2011. The ACLU's goal was to determine 
how law enforcement agencies used the data retained by the providers. The ACLU 
found that, of the 230 law enforcement agencies willing to provide information, 217 
tracked cell phones with frequencies varying from emergency use only to regularly.
What information about you is available to law enforcement agencies? The answer 
depends on your cell phone provider. According to the US DoJ report, call and 
text message detail records are retained for one to seven years, while text message 
content is retained for zero to 90 days.
How legal is it for police officials to use this information? Is a warrant required 
before your local police department is allowed to track your movements through 
your cell phone? The answer is an uncomfortable one for many people. While a GPS 
tracker placed on a car is considered an unreasonable search by the U.S. Supreme 
Court, warrants for cell phone tracking are not required in all jurisdictions. However, 
tracking by cell phone is far more invasive unless the phone is always in the car.
Carriers have determined how to profit from law enforcement agencies' desire to 
use this readily available information. In fact, some carriers have published price 
lists to the agencies for various surveillance services. It's not just the carriers playing 
the cell phone tracking game. The ACLU learned that California state prosecutors 
provided instructions to local police departments on cloning cell phones to be able 
to download text messages even when the phones are turned off. In Arizona, local 
police departments built their own tracking equipment. On the positive side, the 
Michigan police used cell phone tracking to help locate and save a stabbing victim. 
Many police departments who responded to the ACLU's questionnaire indicated 
that they felt the benefit of helping people more than compensated for any legal 
uncertainties (http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/01/us/police-tracking-of-
cellphones-raises-privacy-fears.html).
One additional fact to keep in mind: you may not be "you" if someone else is using 
your mobile device. Thus, the tracking information that points to you may in fact be 
about the person using your device.

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
You can lose out in at least three ways if law enforcement officers misunderstand or 
misuse your mobile device information. First, a false profile of you can be developed 
simply by putting your actual information together incorrectly. Second, the actions 
of someone you know who used your device can be attributed to you. It would be 
very difficult to prove actions performed with your device were done by someone 
else. Third, a false profile of you can be developed by putting together information 
created by someone masquerading as you as a result of stealing your information 
from your device.
Who has your data? Round 3…
Retailers also learned about the benefits of knowing where people are based on 
the location of their cell phones. They developed a technique called location-
based marketing, which allows them to determine how to interact with a potential 
customer based on the customer's location. One type of this marketing technique 
is called check-in services, in which a customer shares their location in exchange 
for special deals on merchandise and services. The retailer builds a location and 
purchase profile of the customer and fine-tunes future offers based on that profile 
(http://www.retailtouchpoints.com/shopper-engagement/1355-forrester-
research-highlights-impact-of-location-based-marketing-).
Now, you may be thinking that this sounds like a pretty sweet deal. You can have 
bargains find you rather than you having to find them. In one sense, that is true. In 
another sense, what have you paid for that bargain with besides money? You have 
paid with your personal information compounded into a detailed picture of where 
you go, what you buy, and what you are willing to spend. Take a few minutes to 
let that sink in. What is the harm? Once retailers know you are willing to pay $x for 
an item, they have no incentive to offer the item for less. However, your neighbor 
two doors down may not be willing to pay as much as you. Retailers will have that 
information, also. The "bargains" sent to your phone maybe far different from those 
received by your neighbor. Or, to state it another way, you may pay $200 more for 
the same television that your neighbor just bought from the same store.

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 58 ]
Two shopping malls had a surprise planned for shoppers on Black Friday 2011. Two 
malls, one in Virginia and one in California, installed antennas throughout their 
buildings to anonymously track shoppers and analyze their shopping patterns. The 
antennas picked up cell phone signals and tracked their owners as they shopped. 
Small signs warned shoppers about the tracking, but provided no escape from the 
surveillance other than shutting off the phones. According to the company that 
manages both malls, the information collected did not include the shoppers' names 
or phone numbers, only their locations (http://money.cnn.com/2011/11/28/
news/economy/malls_track_shoppers_cell_phones/index.htm).
The mall management company decided to find more agreeable ways to track 
shoppers in the future; however, Black Friday 2011 shows that the technology  
is available.
Who has your data? The final stretch…
A March 2012 news article by The Telegraph (www.telegraph.co.uk) revealed  
that Twitter and Path acknowledged copying entire address books from their  
users' smartphones without the users' consent or knowledge. Add that to retailers 
tracking you by your mobile device, app developers collecting your personal 
information, your cell phone provider and their software providers collecting your 
call and text information, law enforcement agencies mapping where you go, and a 
comprehensive picture of who you are, what you do, what you own, and where you 
go begins to emerge.
Let's go back to the persistent cookies, both friendly and malicious. They have been 
busy collecting information about you while you surf the Web, Internet bank, and 
shop online. The bad guys who planted the malicious cookies on your machine have 
already sold your information, probably several times, for a small amount each time. 
But there is another market, a legal one, which also trades in your information.
Predictive analytics is a data analysis approach in which historical information 
is studied to gain insights, which are used to make decisions on future actions. 
The goal for marketers and retailers is to increase profits (http://www.forbes.
com/2010/04/01/analytics-best-buy-technology-data-companies-10-
accenture.html).

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Retailers, both physical and online, have learned that they can make money twice 
on the same customers: the first time by selling products or services, and the second 
time by selling information about their customers. They do not sell the information 
to competitors, but rather to companies in other industries or, more likely, to data 
dealers. The data dealers consolidate data from many sources, combine it into profiles 
based on predictive analytics, and sell it to interested buyers who use it for targeted 
marketing. Imagine the value of the analysis after combining all of your calling, 
texting, banking, and shopping habits. If all of this sounds like science fiction, take a 
few minutes to review www.digby.com/localpoint/ and www.digby.com/mobile-
statistics/, where you will find marketing information such as the following:

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 60 ]
Also, some more details are seen in the following screenshot:
These are actual marketing messages to companies, offering your information 
consolidated, reformatted, and analyzed to help those companies determine new 
ways to target ads to your lifestyle and preferences.
From the research gathered by Digby, we can learn of the widespread impact 
of targeted marketing and shopping via mobile devices. People have become 
comfortable with this, even somewhat dependent on it. In the U.S., over 74 million 
people shop using their mobile devices. By 2015, retailers predict that consumers will 
spend $119 billion on goods and services purchased through their mobile devices.
Of the people surveyed by Digby, 33 percent used a check-in service to share their 
location with retailers; 64 percent had made at least one mobile purchase after seeing 
a mobile ad. Twenty-five percent of the respondents stated they do online shopping 
using their mobile devices exclusively.
Online payments (banking, bill paying) are also growing in popularity. Eighty-two 
percent of consumers made at least one mobile payment by the end of 2012, with an 
estimated total paid of over $171.5 billion.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Over one-third of consumers surveyed prefer mobile shopping through an app 
rather than a web browser. However, apps are better able to collect and transmit 
data. For the 64 percent mobile shoppers and 82 percent mobile payers, the risk 
of stolen personal information is very high. The use of mobile devices for many 
activities, which require personal and sensitive personal information, is expected to 
continue to grow and grow quickly. The amount of information generated through 
those activities will grow just as quickly. You may be comfortable with a stranger 
knowing that much about you and seeking to influence your decisions based on it. 
Or, you may wish to keep most or all of that information to yourself. Each person has 
a different privacy comfort level; no one can make that decision for you. Regardless 
of your comfort level, there are tools to help you control access to your information. 
The goal is to align how much information you want to share with how much 
information you are sharing. Before making that decision, there are other things  
you need to know.
Your data in their hands
Unlike physical theft, data theft is not limited by proximity to the victim. A person 
in any country is at risk of having data stolen by a thief in any other country. The 
Internet makes this possible and relatively easy. Not only is the risk of data theft 
increased by ease, it is also increased by sheer volume when compared to physical 
theft. There may be a few thieves within driving distance of your home; however, 
there are an unlimited number of data thieves with access to the Internet.
A thief looking for the right home to rob will search for the building offering the least 
resistance to intrusion. Data thieves use the same approach. Because mobile devices 
tend to be protected less than personal computers, they make better targets.
Once thieves have your data, they can sell it to buyers on the black market, once 
or many times over, or they can use it to steal your identity. They can also do both. 
In David Crouse's situation, several people bought his information and stole his 
identity. The options are only limited by preventive and corrective actions you take 
to stop the use of your data.
How long does your data "live out there" once it is stolen? The surprising answer 
is forever. Forever is also the length of time data that you intentionally provide 
survives. Once the data is out there, it cannot be pulled back. It resides in data files 
on servers owned by many entities including retailers, cell phone carriers, Internet 
Service Providers, marketing firms, data resellers, law enforcement agencies, 
employers, and even thieves. Some entities may agree to delete your information if 
you request it, while others may only remove the portions of data required by law.

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 62 ]
Will your money be "too" mobile?
With all the concerns over mobile device malware and data theft, should you 
even consider using your device for mobile banking or bill paying? The answer 
is a surprising "Yes, but with precautions." Banks typically have strong security 
protections, which can work to your advantage. They understand the additional 
risks inherent in mobile devices. This allows them to implement measures specific to 
mobile banking, which increase the security of your transactions.
For example, a bank can authenticate you through your phone's unique ID. That 
would prevent anyone else, using a different device, from accessing your account. 
A bank can also limit transactions to certain cell tower areas that coincide with your 
home, office, or school, adding additional security.
Use your bank's app rather than a web browser on your mobile device to ensure 
use of the highest available protection. You will want to ensure your bank enforces 
adequate security measures before initiating mobile banking, to be safe (http://www.
dailyfinance.com/2012/07/17/why-banking-on-your-smartphone-is-safer-
than-using-your-pc/). If you choose to use mobile banking, you should ensure that 
your bank follows safe mobile banking, including making a safe app available. Not 
doing so greatly increases the risk that your bank accounts will be compromised.
For paying bills with your mobile device, there are measures you can take to increase 
security, also. Rather than using Wi-Fi, use your carrier's network when transmitting 
login credentials and payment information. If the company you are paying has 
an app, use it to make payments rather than a web browser; the app is likely to be 
more secure. Ensure you have a mobile security product on your device, including 
an option to wipe the device remotely if you lose it.  Lastly, enable the lock setting 
on your device to be triggered after a certain number of minutes have passed 
with no activity; 15 minutes is a good limit (http://www.infosecisland.com/
blogview/20669-How-Safe-is-Paying-Online-with-Your-Smart-Phone.html).

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Bring your mobile device to work day
A recent poll by an access-management company Courion found that 69 percent 
of the corporations contacted said their employees use personally-owned mobile 
devices to connect to the corporate network (http://www.informationweek.com/
mobility/security/personal-mobile-devices-still-vex-it/231002676).  
This practice introduced a whole new security risk to companies through devices 
over which they have little control. Initially, companies fought the practice but 
eventually chose to accept the inevitable. Employees won the battle by sheer 
numbers. "Mobile devices are now accepted as necessary tools for productivity  
in the enterprise, regardless of how they affect data security. That is the new reality"  
(www.informationweek.com/news/mobility/security/231002676).
The idea of carrying only one mobile device to fill multiple roles appeals to many 
employees. One device can handle personal and business calls, personal and 
business e-mails, report writing, and presentation development. It can also allow the 
on-the-road employee to keep up with sports scores, bill paying, and the occasional 
Internet surfing.
Before embracing the single-device practice, there are things to consider. For 
example, if you use your personal device for work purposes, is your employer 
allowed to view all of the content to determine policy compliance, or only the content 
that is business-related? Is your employer allowed to use your personal content 
against you for disciplinary actions? Must you screen what is said even during 
personal calls and texts? The answers to these questions are not clear-cut.
Many companies are only just beginning to consider and implement personal device 
policies for the workplace. For those companies that have such a policy in place, it 
typically includes some or all of the following requirements:
•	
Sign an agreement to perform certain tasks and allow the company  
certain rights
•	
Download and install a security and monitoring app that must remain active
•	
Authorize the company to limit the websites accessible and/or the apps, 
which can be downloaded
•	
Authorize the company to limit the file types and/or type of data, which can 
be saved to the device
•	
Automatically lock your device after a set amount of idle time, requiring you 
to enter a password before using the device again
•	
Authorize the company to track your device via the phone's global 
positioning system (GPS)

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 64 ]
•	
Authorize the company to remotely wipe all data, or at least all corporate 
data, from your device in the event that your device is lost or stolen
•	
Hold the company harmless for the loss or destruction of any personal data
Refer to http://www.experts.com/Articles/Risk-With-
Using-Personal-Devices-For-Work-By-Robert-Siciliano, 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240531119045832
04576542342696584366.html, and http://www.businessweek.
com/articles/2012-10-02/the-risks-and-rewards-of-
personal-electronics-in-the-workplace for more information.
One thing to keep in mind: with the GPS feature activated, an employer can track 
where you are during both work and personal time (http://www.businessweek.
com/articles/2012-10-02/the-risks-and-rewards-of-personal-
electronics-in-the-workplace).
The questions posed earlier regarding your rights are not easily answered and there 
is no solid guidance for companies to follow. Like most new concepts, it will take 
time for laws to catch up with life. In the meantime, employers will strive to protect 
the company and employees will strive to protect themselves. If you choose to use 
a personal mobile device for work purposes, you will need to determine how much 
personal information you are willing to make available to your employer beyond 
that which you gave when you were hired. Without taking this important step, you 
may be handing over information that could jeopardize your career, even if the 
information is viewed as innocuous outside the workplace.
Steps you can take to protect yourself
People define privacy in many different ways. Some people are comfortable sharing 
all the details of their lives in very public social forums, while others prefer to keep 
a low electronic profile. You can choose how much others may learn about you via 
your devices, or you can let others make that decision for you. It is important to 
determine your privacy comfort level before taking steps to protect the information 
on your mobile device. If you fail to properly define your privacy requirements, you 
may end up with less protection than you need.
Once you have defined how much protection you need, you can take steps to ensure 
that protection. Anti-malware and anti-spyware software is now available for mobile 
devices. It helps to identify software on your mobile device, which may present a 
threat to you, either through stealing your information or tracking you.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
Educating yourself on risks and how to avoid them is a good practice, one that 
should be followed consistently, such as physical exercise. As Sun Tzu wrote in  
The Art of War:
"If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of 
a hundred battles. If you know yourself but not the enemy, for every victory 
gained you will also suffer a defeat. If you know neither the enemy nor yourself, 
you will succumb in every battle."
Before downloading an app, verify that it is a legitimate one. Malicious developers 
create knock-offs of real apps to fool people into downloading the fakes. Included in 
the fake versions are malware, spyware, and/or Trojans that are just waiting to steal 
your data or take control of your device. Clues to watch for include the developer's 
name, the number of positive ratings and total ratings, and comments by users. 
Check more than one source for ratings to ensure a consistency across the sites 
(http://blog.trendmicro.com/trendlabs-security-intelligence/checking-
the-legitimacy-of-android-apps/). If any of the information does not seem 
legitimate, you are better off not downloading the app.
Be aware of what you agree to when you download apps. Once you have agreed  
to share information, you cannot stop sharing without uninstalling the app. 
Understand what your phone model shares by default and what your phone's 
operating system allows apps to do. For example, Android apps may collect the 
phone's unique identification number without notifying the user. Familiarize 
yourself with your phone's logs and the meaning of their contents. From the logs, 
you can learn which apps are transmitting data and notice when log contents change 
after installing new apps.
The United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the National White 
Collar Crime Center (NW3C) established a unit called the Internet Crime Complaint 
Center (IC3) to provide a single point of contact for people reporting Internet-related 
criminal complaints. After researching the complaints, the IC3 refers them to the 
appropriate law enforcement or regulatory agency. The IC3 also publishes warnings 
on new threats to people via technology. The unit developed a list of tips to help 
you protect your mobile device, found at http://www.fbi.gov/scams-safety/e-
scams, and included in Appendix C, Tips to Help You Protect Your Mobile Device.

Privacy – Small Word, Big Consequences
[ 66 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at privacy consequences and their triggers related to the 
use of mobile devices, including:
•	
Session and persistent cookies, which capture your activities on the Internet
•	
Malicious software (malware): applications (apps) written to benefit others at 
your expense
•	
Apps hidden inside other apps, both innocent and malicious
•	
Carrier IQ's data collection and transmission app to benefit cell  
phone providers
•	
The collection of your personal information through apps, by developers and 
app distributors including Google and Apple
•	
Tracking you through you mobile device, and law enforcement agencies' use 
of that information
•	
The increased use of mobile devices for shopping, banking, and other 
activities requiring personal and sensitive personal information
•	
Targeted marketing and data analytics using your personal information  
and habits
•	
The consolidation and sale of your information
•	
The theft of your personal information and its value to identity thieves
•	
The permanence of your data once it reaches the Internet
•	
Lack of clarity regarding your rights if you use your personal mobile device 
to perform work for an employer
•	
Steps you can take to protect yourself
The next chapter deals with types of scams and threats related to the use of mobile 
devices and makes you aware of all the necessary threats that are out there.

Mobile and Social – the 
Threats You Should  
Know About
Due to the increasing use of smart and mobile phones, the threats against these 
mobile devices have increased/risen over the last few years. We will take an  
in-depth look at various scams, phishing, spear phishing, social engineering, Cloud 
security, viruses, worms, and other threats a user may encounter, and future threats.
In this chapter, we will review various threats that you need to be aware of.  
They are as follows:
•	
Scams
•	
Malware
•	
SMS spoofing
•	
Social engineering
•	
Phishing
•	
Cloud computing 
•	
Virus

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 68 ]
A prediction of the future (and the lottery 
numbers for next week) scams
Security threats, such as malware, are starting to be manifested on mobile devices, 
as we are learning that mobile devices are not immune to virus, malware, and other 
attacks. As PCs are increasingly being replaced by the use of mobile devices, the 
incidence of new attacks against mobile devices is growing. The user has to take 
precautions to protect their mobile devices just as they would protect their PC.
One major type of mobile cybercrime is the unsolicited text message that captures 
personal details. Another type of cybercrime involves an infected phone that sends 
out an SMS message that results in excess connectivity charges.
Mobile threats are on the rise according to the Symantec Report of 2012; 31 percent 
of all mobile users have received an SMS from someone that they didn't know. An 
example is where the user receives an SMS message that includes a link or phone 
number. This technique is used to install malware onto your mobile device. Also, 
these techniques are an attempt to hoax you into disclosing personal or private 
data. In 2012, Symantec released a new cybercrime report. They concluded that 
countries like Russia, China, and South Africa have the highest cybercrime incidents. 
Their rate of exploitation ranges from 80 to 92 percent. You can find this report 
at http://now-static.norton.com/now/en/pu/images/Promotions/2012/
cybercrimeReport/2012_Norton_Cybercrime_Report_Master_FINAL_050912.pdf.
Malware
The most common type of threat is known as malware. It is short for malicious 
software. Malware is used or created by attackers to disrupt many types of computer 
operations, collect sensitive information, or gain access to a private mobile device/
computer. It includes worms, Trojan horses, computer viruses, spyware, keyloggers 
and root kits, and other malicious programs.
As mobile malware is increasing at a rapid speed, the U.S. government wants 
users to be aware of all the dangers. So in October 2012, the FBI issued a warning 
about mobile malware (http://www.fbi.gov/sandiego/press-releases/2012/
smartphone-users-should-be-aware-of-malware-targeting-mobile-devices-
and-the-safety-measures-to-help-avoid-compromise).
The IC3 has been made aware of various malware attacking Android operating 
systems for mobile devices. Some of the latest known versions of this type of 
malware are Loozfon and FinFisher. Loozfon hooks its victims by emailing the user 
with promising links such as: a profitable payday just for sending out email.

Chapter 4
[ 69 ]
It then plants itself onto the phone when the user clicks on this link. This specific 
malware will attach itself to the device and start to collect information from your 
device, including:
•	
Contact information
•	
E-mail address
•	
Phone numbers
•	
Phone number of the compromised device
On the other hand, a spyware called FinFisher can take over various components 
of a smartphone. According to IC3, this malware infects the device through a text 
message and via a phony e-mail link. FinFisher attacks not only Android devices, but 
also devices running Blackberry, iOS, and Windows.
Various security reports have shown that mobile malware is on the rise. Cyber 
criminals tend to target Android mobile devices. As a result, Android users are 
getting an increasing amount of destructive Trojans, mobile botnets, and SMS-
sending malware and spyware. Some of these reports include:
•	
http://www.symantec.com/security_response/publications/
threatreport.jsp
•	
http://pewinternet.org/Commentary/2012/February/Pew-Internet-
Mobile.aspx
•	
https://www.lookout.com/resources/reports/mobile-threat-report
As stated recently in a Pew survey, more than fifty percent of U.S. mobile users are 
overly suspicious/concerned about their personal information, and have either 
refused to install apps for this reason or have uninstalled apps.
In other words, the IC3 says:
Use the same precautions on your mobile devices as you would on your computer 
when using the Internet.
Toll fraud
Since the 1970s and 1980s, hackers have been using a process known as phreaking. 
This trick provides a tone that tells the phone that a control mechanism is being 
used to manage long-distance calls. Today, the hackers are now using a technique 
known as toll fraud. It's a malware that sends premium-rate SMSs from your device, 
incurring charges on your phone bill. Some toll fraud malware may trick you into 
agreeing to murky Terms of Service, while others can send premium text messages 
without any noticeable indicators. This is also known as premium-rate SMS 
malware or premium service abuser.

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 70 ]
The following figure shows how toll fraud works, portrayed by Lookout  
Mobile Security:
How
Toll Fraud
SMS Messages
Works
Step One - User
inadvertently download
malicious app
Step Two - Malware
sends premium SMS
without the user’s
knowledge.
Step Three - Via
Aggregator and
Wireless provider, a
message is sent to user to
confirm the order.
Step Four - Malware
blocks message and
confirms charge
Step Five -
is
User
billed fraudulently
Step Six - Malware
coder makes money
$5
$
,,,,,,
According to VentureBeat, malware developers are after money. The money 
is in the toll fraud malware. Here is an example from http://venturebeat.
com/2012/09/06/toll-fraud-lookout-mobile/:
•	
Remember commercials that say, "Text 666666 to get a new ringtone 
everyday!"? The normal process includes: Customer texts the number, 
alerting a collector—working for the ringtone provider—that he/she wants 
to order daily ringtones.
•	
Through the collector, the ringtone provider sends a confirmation text 
message to the customer (or sometimes two depending on that country's 
regulations) to the customer.
•	
That customer approves the charges and starts getting ringtones.
•	
The customer is billed through the wireless carrier.
•	
The wireless carrier receives payment and sends out the ringtone payment to 
the provider.

Chapter 4
[ 71 ]
Now, let's look at the steps when your device is infected with the malware known  
as FakeInst:
•	
The end user downloads a malware application that sends out an SMS 
message to that same ringtone provider.
•	
As normal, the ringtone provider sends the confirmation message. In this 
case, instead of reaching the smartphone owner, the malware blocks this 
message and sends a fake confirmation message before the user ever knows.
•	
The malware now places itself between the wireless carrier and the ringtone 
provider. Pretending to be the  collector, the malware extracts the money that 
was paid through the user's bill.
FakeInst is known to get around antivirus software by identifying itself as new or 
unique software.
Overall, Android devices are known to be impacted more by malware than iOS. One 
big reason for this is that Android devices can download applications from almost 
any location on the Internet. Apple limits its users to downloading applications from 
the Apple App store.
SMS spoofing
The third most common type of scam is called SMS spoofing. SMS spoofing allows 
a person to change the original mobile phone number or the name (sender ID) where 
the text message comes from. It is a fairly new technology that uses SMS on mobile 
phones. Spoofing can be used in both lawful and unlawful ways. Impersonating a 
company, another person, or a product is an illegal use of spoofing. Some nations 
have banned it due to concerns about the potential for fraud and abuse, while 
others may allow it. An example of how SMS spoofing is implemented is as follows: 
SMS spoofing occurs when the message sender's address information has been 
manipulated. This is done many times to impersonate a cell phone user who is 
roaming on a foreign network and sending messages to a home area network. Often, 
these messages are addressed to users who are outside the home network, which is 
essentially being "hijacked" to send messages to other networks.
The impacts of this activity include the following:
•	
The customer's network can receive termination charges caused by the valid 
delivery of these "bad" messages to interlink partners.
•	
Customers may criticize about being spammed, or their message content 
may be sensitive. Interlink partners can cancel the home network unless 
a correction of these errors is implemented. Once this is done, the phone 
service may be unable to send messages to these networks.

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 72 ]
•	
There is a great risk that these messages will look like real messages, and real 
users can be billed for invalid roaming messages that they did not send.
There is a flaw within iPhone that allows SMS spoofing. It is vulnerable to text 
messaging spoofing, even with the latest beta version, iOS 6. The problem with 
iPhone is that when the sender specifies a reply-to number this way, the recipient 
doesn't see the original phone number in the text message. That means there's no 
way to know whether a text message has been spoofed or not. This opens up the 
user to other spoofing types of manipulation where the recipient thinks he/she is 
receiving a message from a trusted source.
According to pod2g (http://www.pod2g.org/2012/08/never-trust-sms-ios-
text-spoofing.html):
In a good implementation of this feature, the receiver would see the original phone 
number and the reply-to one. On iPhone, when you see the message, it seems to 
come from the reply-to number, and you loose track of the origin.
Social engineering
For many attacks to exist, the victim is required to disclose personal information in 
some way; this is known as social engineering. Hackers are everywhere and they 
never sleep, whether it might be an SMS text message with an evil intention or a 
phishing e-mail that is watching every step of yours on your mobile devices.
Whether you're an IT manager protecting employees and corporate systems or 
you're simply trying to keep your own personal data safe, these threats—some 
rapidly growing, others still emerging—pose a potential risk.
A good source for a definition of social engineering is http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Social_engineering_(security).
Social engineering is committing an act of manipulating people into executing 
actions or disclosing confidential information, such as an ID and password or 
bank account, credit card, or social security number. There are two forms of 
social engineering: one is phishing and the other is spear phishing, where persons 
represent themselves as trustworthy entities in an electronic communication.

Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
Phishing
Phishing is the fraudulent act of attempting to capture personal-sensitive  
information by masquerading through a trustworthy/legitimate source e-mail.  
These types of attacks can utilize social engineering tactics. Phishing e-mails may 
include links leading to websites that are infected with malware. Using this trust, 
they then attempt to acquire sensitive information such as usernames, account 
passwords, credit card data, and sensitive corporate information. These attacks 
are pretty broad-based, typically involving spam e-mail or other communications 
distributed to many people. An example is the kind of e-mail requesting 
"verification" of information while warning of some dire consequence if it is not 
provided. Be particularly wary of unsolicited communications. It is better to type  
the URL out directly than copy and paste it.
Here is an example:
A user receives an e-mail from their bank, asking them to verify their account 
information such as username and password. The user clicks on the link where they 
enter their username and password.
1. You receive an e-mail from your bank.
2. The end-user will select the link: http://
www.yourbankname.example.com.
3.The URL link will actually point to - http://
badbackersite.example.com.
The best method around this is:
A. Never press a link directly in a mail message.
B. If you are not sure - contact your bank an ask
if they are sending messages with Links. Most
banks today are not sending messages with URL
in s.
C. If you still think this is a real message - don’t
select the link inside the message. Copy the link
and paste the link into a browser.
D. Finally - most to all banks will use encryption.
This is the HTTPS that you will see as part of a
URL. If you get any ‘strange' prompts when you
use HTTPS - then contact your bank and ask
them if they sent you this message.
Hello ‘User’
We are from your bank - please open this
link to check your account:
http://www.yourbankname.example.com
Thanks
Your Bank
Back Hacker Site
3
2
1

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 74 ]
Here is another example:
If the Groupon application on the iPhone wants to share something on Facebook, the 
program typically pops up a window that invites the user to sign into that website. 
But, there's usually no way to be sure that the login site is legitimate and that the 
phone's owner is really sending their username and password to Facebook. Users are 
manipulated this way; therefore, you should never enter any sensitive information 
and always use extra caution.
Overall, it is difficult for mobile phone users to distinguish real websites from fake 
ones. The smaller screens on mobile phones don't help this identification process.
Types of phishing
There are a variety of attack types; let's review a few:
•	
Malware-based phishing: This type of phishing involves running malicious 
software on users' devices. It is easy to introduce malware as a downloadable 
file on a website or an e-mail. One easy target is smaller companies  
and/or end users that don't keep their devices up to date with the latest 
antivirus software.
•	
Deceptive phishing: Using e-mail as a primary delivery mechanism, 
deceptive phishing uses e-mail to trick the end user into sharing information 
about their account information. Though not totally limited to e-mail, this 
type of trickery will try to tell you that you have fictitious account fees. As a 
result, end users share personal information.
•	
DNS-based phishing (pharming): This is an advanced type of phishing. 
Pharming, specially, is the modification of a system host's file. This can also 
impact a Domain Name System (DNS). This is as dangerous as it sounds. 
Hackers are messing with a corporate host file and/or the DNS system and 
as a result, they can route URLs to the hacker's sites.
•	
Content Injection phishing: Content Injection is where a hacker replaces 
some part of a legitimate website in order to redirect the user to a fake site. 
This can also be a modified site where information is in effect stolen from the 
end user and sent directly to the hacker.
•	
Data theft: This is the most common type of phishing. PCs that are not well 
managed are easy targets for hackers. These types of PCs are not authorized 
PCs, or PCs that don't have all of the needed virus scanning software 
installed. These unsecure PCs can be used to access corporate servers and 
steal a business's intellectual data.

Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
•	
Search engine phishing: This phishing type provides a user with very 
sophisticated, attractive, and legitimate sounding genuine offers that 
shows up in the proper index of the search engine. Hackers create these 
searchable websites. These websites show up during the normal course 
of a user searching for products or services and are tricked into giving up 
their sensitive information. A prime example of this type of scam is where 
scammers set up false banking sites with lower credit rates or better interest 
rates for mortgages or personal loans. Victims are lured to these sites in order 
to make more interest or even save themselves from interest charges. The 
victim is encouraged to give up their personal information.
Other types of attacks include:
•	
System reconfiguration attacks: This type of attack will modify configuration 
settings on a user's desktop. Once these malicious settings have been 
installed, hackers can control devices.
•	
Keyloggers and screenloggers: This is a very old type of attack. Keyloggers 
have been around for a long time. This attack will actually track each of the 
keys pushed and then send that data out to the hackers' servers.
Spear phishing
Now that we have introduced you to phishing, let's now talk about spear phishing. 
Spear phishing is another method that can be used to steal your identity. Spear 
phishing targets individuals. This type of attack is customized to one person at a 
time. This type of attack is on the rise mostly on mobile devices. Mobile devices are 
being used more and more for corporate access. This attack exposes not only the end 
user, but also the corporation's network they connect to. Spear phishing uses data 
that is directly from an end user; for example, social media information or e-mail. 
These are very personalized attacks.
BYOD devices today are hooked into the corporate network. This access includes 
access not only to the end user's information, but also corporate information, like a 
corporate directory of users. If the corporate directory is compromised, hackers now 
have a larger set of end users they can attack.

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 76 ]
How spear phishing works
Spear phishing normally uses e-mail as the delivery mechanism. One example 
includes an e-mail that has a URL (hyperlink) that points to a fake website. The fake 
website will collect personal information once it is accessed. In many cases a file is 
attached. This can be very convincing, as the source message looks to be real. The 
user launches the attachment and then executes the malware that can destroy the 
device, or in this example, will extract personal information from the device and 
send it directly to the hacker.
1. You receive an e-mail from a shipping vendor.
2. You may have ordered something lately - or
you may not- it does not matter. The point is this
can be confusing.
3. The attachment has malware and can harm the
device and/or install some type of monitoring
program.
4. The user launches the attachment and the bad
code is installed. At this point you can be in bad
trouble and your PC may not be useable. In many
cases data is extracted from your PC and sent to
the hacker.
The message here is - don’t open attachments
that you are not sure of.
Hello ‘User’
The item you ordered is in transit Please open the
attachment for more information.
Thanks
The Shipping Company
Other examples
Let's have a look at some examples of spear phishing.
Receiving e-mails from a "friend"
The spear phisher grows vigorously by using familiarity. Cyber criminals know your 
first and last name, your e-mail address, and at least a little something personal about 
yourself. The e-mail message salutation is very likely to be personalized: "Hi Steve" 
instead of "Dear Sir/Madam." The e-mail may make reference to a "mutual/common 
friend",  to a recent search you've made about a product or an item, or a recent online 
purchase you've made. Because the e-mail sender's information is from someone 
you are very familiar with, you may be less vigilant and provide them with any 
information they ask for. With an urgent request for action, you may be tempted to act 
before thinking, especially when it's a company you frequently access that is asking.

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
Using your web presence against you
Do you know you are becoming a target for spear phishing? The information you 
are providing on the Internet from your PC or a smartphone can make you a target. 
For example, they might scan social networking sites, find your e-mail address, your 
page, a recent post by you telling friends about the cool new laptop or a tablet you 
bought at an online retail site, and your friends list. By using this information, a 
spear phisher could pose as a friend, send you an e-mail, and ask you for personal 
information or a password to your photo page. If you respond with the password, the 
phishers will try that password and many combinations of it in order to try to access 
your personal accounts on that online shopping site you mentioned. If they find the 
right one, they'll use it to run up a nice big expensive tab for you; or the spear phisher 
might pose as somebody from the online retailer by using the same information and 
ask you to reset your password, or re-verify your credit card number. If you do this, 
you'll mess up your financial information and cause yourself harm.
Keeping your secrets secret
Are you safe and is your information safe? It really depends in part on you being 
careful. Check your online presence with your names. Check your social networking 
threads. Be aware of your information and how much is out there about you that 
could be pieced together for someone to scam you. Also, the data you put on the 
Internet "stays on the Internet". Some of this information can include:
•	
Your name.
•	
E-mail address.
•	
Friends' names.
•	
Your friends' e-mail addresses.
•	
Are you on, for example, any of the popular social networking sites?
•	
Be sure and look at your daily posts on various social networking sites.
•	
Beware of giving too much information on social sites. Don't over share.
•	
Be proactive and don't reveal too much.
•	
Is there anything you don't want a scammer to know?
•	
Have you posted something on a friend's page that might reveal too much?

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 78 ]
Be sure to ask yourself all these questions. Google your name and be aware. Refer to 
the following example screenshot:
Passwords that work
A lot of people have common passwords. They use the same password on multiple 
sites and services, use "easily guessed passwords", or both. Rethink about all of your 
passwords. Do you use just one or easy to figure out variations on just one? If you do 
either, you shouldn't, because you're making yourself a target for a scammer to get 
access to your sensitive financial information. Every password for every site you visit 
should be different, really unique. Random letters, upper or lower cases, and numbers 
work best. Change them frequently, every two to three months. Your Internet security 
software and operating system can help you keep track of your passwords.
Here is a common technique that hackers use to find your passwords:
Hackers will obtain information about you: your name, your e-mail, or other 
personal information. Also, the hacker will find where your bank is and/or what 
corporate sites you use. Word lists are very common on the Internet; hackers 
will obtain these lists as a starting point. Hackers will write simple code to create 
password lists. Each password will be modified so it can be used as an attack against 
your websites; for example, e-mail.
Passwords will be created using a simple algorithm: [Base word] & [character 
change] & [Character add].
For example, Base words – password, or your last name.
Formula, "password" & [change the letter a to @] & [add a "01"].
This creates the following potential passwords:
•	
p@ssword01
•	
p@ssword02
•	
p@ssword03
•	
p@ssword04
•	
p@ssword05

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
•	
p@ssword06
•	
p@ssword07
•	
p@ssword08
•	
p@ssword09
Follow the Johnson example: "johnson" & [change the letter 's' to $] & 
[add a "01" to "09"].
•	
John$on01
•	
John$on02
•	
John$on03
•	
John$on04
•	
John$on05
•	
John$on06
•	
John$on07
•	
John$on08
•	
John$on09
Based on the preceding example, you can see why you need more complex 
passwords and why passwords should be changed on a regular basis. Now with 
personal information extracted from you (or even via a search engine), hackers will 
attack your account with the same username (mike.johnson@example.com) and 
then each of the passwords created. This is an automated process and has a high 
success rate. Yes, this can take a while, but hackers will have used thousands of PCs 
they would have gotten control of via other techniques. Review this article to see 
how powerful this technique is: http://arstechnica.com/security/2012/12/25-
gpu-cluster-cracks-every-standard-windows-password-in-6-hours/.
Patches, updates, and security software
Always keep your software patches up to date. When you get notices from software 
vendors to update your software, never ignore these notifications, just do it. Most 
operating system and browser updates include security patches. Sometimes, it only 
takes your name and e-mail address for a hacker to slip through a security hole into 
your system. And it almost goes without saying, you should be protected by Internet 
security software.

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 80 ]
Be vigilant
Always be vigilant and proactive. If a "friend" e-mails and asks for a password or 
other information, call or e-mail (in a separate email) that friend and ask them to 
verify that they really contacted you. As we have noted before you need to check 
with your vendor (bank or other) and make sure these messages are valid. Keep in 
mind that most legitimate businesses will never e-mail you asking for passwords or 
account numbers. This may not sound fair, but it is up to you to be alert. If in doubt, 
don't select the link that is in the e-mail. Now regarding texting, please don't send 
personal information via text; this is just asking for trouble.
Cloud computing security
Cloud computing is a service that is provided on the Internet using shared computing 
resources such as hardware and software. These services are implemented, managed, 
and in many cases provide a controlled secure environment for customers. These 
services are available to users when requested via the Internet from a Cloud 
computing provider's servers, including hardware, software, and in many cases 
networking. This computing service does not use a company's own servers. Also, 
there are hybrid solutions that are provided to customers that can be used as 
transition services and/or a set of partial services that a customer can purchase. It is 
designed to provide users easy access to applications, shared resources, and services 
managed by the Cloud service provider. Some examples of Cloud services are online 
data storage, backup solutions, web-based e-mail services, hosted office suites, and 
document collaboration services. There are many public Cloud services that can 
be used to create, store, back up, and share data, including Google Docs, Dropbox, 
Microsoft 365 Apps, Carbonite, Apple iCloud, and SlideShare. Most likely, most of 
you out there have already used some forms of Cloud computing. If you have any 
kind of web-based e-mail service like Gmail, Yahoo! Mail, or Hotmail, you have some 
experience with Cloud computing. The software and storage is stored in your online 
account and it does not exist on your computer.
How it works
When speaking about cloud computing architecture, it's useful to separate it into three 
levels: the frontend, the network layer, and the backend. All these ends are connected 
through a  network, usually the Internet. The frontend is the user side of the computer 
or a mobile device, while the backend is the Cloud section of the system.

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
The following figure shows a sample Cloud solution:
Advanced
Applications
Music
Finance
Backups
The Cloud
Networking
Databases
Calendar
Tablets
Phones
Desktop
Laptop computer
$
$
Servers
Communication
Recently, cloud computing has picked up speed and is transforming the Internet 
computing infrastructure. Also, mobile applications and mobile devices have 
developed rapidly. Mobile devices can use the Cloud for data processing, storage, 
and other intensive processing operations. Mobile Cloud computing refers to the 
availability of Cloud services in a mobile environment. It is a combination of the 
mobile network and Cloud computing, thereby providing optimal services for 
mobile users. Cloud computing exists when tasks and data are kept on the Internet 
rather than on individual mobile devices, providing on-demand access. Applications 
run on a remote server and are then sent to the user.
Since mobile Cloud computing users are growing, the issue of Cloud security comes 
into picture. Cloud security threats comes in all shapes and sizes. Securing a mobile 
Cloud computing user's privacy and integrity of data or applications is one of the 
key issues most Cloud providers are giving attention too. Although mobile Cloud 
computing is a combination of mobile networks and Cloud computing, the security 
risks are divided into two areas: the mobile network user's security and Cloud security.

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 82 ]
The mobile user's security
Some of the greatest concerns for mobile devices include:
•	
Security: The idea of a company handing over important data to another 
company for computing services causes concern for some people. Users are 
very skeptical to take advantage of the Cloud computing system. The concern 
revolves around the security risks inherent with the use of mobile applications. 
The simplest ways to detect security threats will be installing and running 
through software and antivirus programs on their mobile devices.
•	
Privacy: Providing private personal information such as indicating your 
current location and user's important information creates scenarios for 
privacy issues. For example, the use of location-based services (LBS) 
provided by Global Positioning System (GPS) devices could expose the 
user's privacy to a threat. Threats could be minimized through selecting and 
analyzing the enterprise's needs and requiring only specified services to be 
acquired and moved to the Cloud.
The following table shows some of the mobile security features that are manifested 
between iOS and Android:
Features
iOS
Android
Methods of 
application 
distribution
By default, the iOS applications 
can only be downloaded 
through the Apple App store.
Android has larger distribution 
channels. More downloadable 
places are available to download 
applications from. Inadvertently, 
this makes it a higher risk.
Weaknesses
Every iOS device running 
on lower than version 4.3.5 
is vulnerable to a flaw called 
SSL MITM, which hackers can 
exploit easily.
Millions of Android phones that 
are still under contract cannot be 
updated to the latest version of the 
Android OS.
SandBox
Both iOS 5 and Android 
4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich 
use sandboxing to isolate 
applications from each other 
and from sensitive operating 
system features.
Both iOS 5 and Android 4.0 Ice 
Cream Sandwich use sandboxing 
to isolate applications from each 
other and from sensitive operating 
system features.
Remote wipe
Both platforms support remote 
wipe.
Both platforms support remote 
wipe.

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
Features
iOS
Android
Jailbreak or 
rooting
If a device owner chooses to 
jailbreak their phone, he/
she can be more vulnerable to 
malware.
If a device owner chooses to root 
their phone, he/she can be more 
vulnerable to malware.
Malware
iPhone jailbreak exploits 
security holes that may also be 
exploited by hackers.
The lack of review has led to an 
increasing volume of Android 
specific malware.
Android application marketplace has limited security 
implementation via limited inspection. In general, Google 
chose to allow nearly any application hosted on the 
marketplace for users to download.
Even with improved security over traditional desktop-based operating systems, both 
iOS and Android are still vulnerable to many existing categories of attacks.
Cloud security
The following list shows several cloud security/issues that users should be aware of:
•	
Data location: Cloud data can be hosted most anywhere. Your personal 
data and/or corporate data can be hosted on a server anywhere connected 
to the Internet. The data can be in any city or country. Before you host your 
data, or corporate data, be sure to learn about security hosting laws. One 
example is the Safe Harbor Act: http://export.gov/safeharbor/eu/eg_
main_018476.asp.
•	
Data segregation: This refers to storage of Cloud data stored in a shared 
architecture alongside others users data. In some cases, data can be encrypted 
within the Cloud. Also, data can be segregated within the cloud. Be sure to 
check with your provider and see how they manage your data in the Cloud.
•	
Privileged user access: When you host your data outside your own 
computer, someone will have access to that data. Make sure you obtain 
information about the people who manage this data and verify what 
processes they use to keep your data safe.
•	
Security compliance: At the end of the day, you are responsible for the 
security of your data, even if the data is hosted by a third party. Again, check 
with your service provider and ask how your data is managed.

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 84 ]
•	
Disaster recovery (DR): Disaster recovery is the process where data is hosted 
in several locations. If the primary site shuts down and/or is destroyed, 
a secondary site can bring your data back online. Contact your provider 
and ask about the service levels they use on hosting your data. If you are 
really interested in DR, check out NISSST800-34 (http://csrc.nist.
gov/publications/nistpubs/800-34-rev1/sp800-34-rev1_errata-
Nov11-2010.pdf). Contact your service provider and ask them how long it 
takes to bring your secondary data source online for your access.
Virus/worms/others
We, as mobile device users, think that we are not capable of getting infected by any 
kind of viruses on our mobile devices. But, the truth is, we are vulnerable to all kinds 
of threats. Anyone who has any kind of mobile device are at risk of getting a virus 
if you are not careful or do not protect yourself. Some of the most common notable 
mobile viruses, Trojans, and worms are:
•	
Skulls: This Trojan virus replaces all phone desktop icons with images of a 
skull and the device becomes useless.
•	
ZitMo: The ZitMo malware targets users' online banking information. Once 
this malware is installed, the bad software will forward all incoming SMS 
messages to a command and control center. Once this data has been shared 
with the hackers, they will use that data to attack your banking accounts.
•	
DroidKungFu: This is a powerful Trojan for Android applications that 
obtains manager/master privileges on your device. This virus collects and 
sends the data to a remote server.
•	
Zeus: Another Trojan horse that steals banking information. This malware is 
executed by a process known as man-in-the-browser keystroke logging. Zeus 
is spread mainly through drive-by downloads and phishing schemes.
•	
CommWarrior: This is one of the first worms that uses Multimedia 
Messaging Service (MMS) in order to spread to other devices.
•	
SpyEye: This injects new fields into a web page. This technique is called 
HTML injection. It results in a request for data from users trying to use their 
banking websites. This malware can include login prompts and password 
requests. Once hackers have this data, they can access your bank accounts.
•	
Ikee: This particular malware only works on phones that are jailbroken. This 
book discusses the risk with jailbreaking and this is one of the big ones.

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
•	
Gingermaster: This malware was created for the Android platform. This 
particular malware spreads by installing an application that contains a 
hidden set of code that runs in the background on the device. This virus 
exploits a specific release of the Android software, Gingerbread 2.3. The 
result is that the malware creates a service that steals information from the 
targeted device.
Future threats
In the short history of mobile devices, one of the areas that has received a lot of 
attention is BYOD. Bringing your own device to work is not only a significant part of 
recent history, but will be a part of our near future. Looking at the future, we judge 
that we will see more and more malware for mobile devices. Overall, we expect to 
see more of the following:
•	
Malware that takes advantage of your location via the Global Positioning 
System (GPS). You use this as part of your map programs, and vendors are 
also starting to use GPS to help identify customers as they walk in their door. 
More and more applications are using GPS.
•	
Hackers will take data from your device and use it for phishing and social 
engineering. This is why it is so important for you to protect your personal 
information. It is easy for hackers to violate your privacy and then use your 
data against you. 
•	
We also predict more applications that look to be legitimate, but in reality are 
a platform for hackers to attack you.
•	
More use of SMS and other messages to deliver infected payloads  
of malware.
•	
We will also see more malware that is customized to you.
•	
As more mobile devices are infected, a greater number of corporate networks 
will be infected. This will be a big issue for corporate administrators.
Steps you can take to protect yourself
If you are using a smartphone, tablet, or any other mobile device, follow these 
guidelines to protect yourself:
•	
Always use extra caution and install only approved applications available 
through your vendor's official application store.
Also, be sure to check any feedback from the download site. This can clue 
you into any known issues.

Mobile and Social – the Threats You Should Know About
[ 86 ]
•	
Do not jailbreak or root your smartphone or tablet computer, as this disables 
critical security features in the device's operating system.
•	
Before using Wi-Fi hotspot functionality, including smartphones and 
portable hotspot devices, WPA2 Wi-Fi encryption security must be enabled 
and configured with a strong password to prevent unauthorized access to the 
Wi-Fi network created by the device.
•	
Use a password/pin that is difficult for others to guess.
There is an advanced feature that you can use, known as two-factor 
authentication. Ask your vendor/application provider if they support this.
•	
Change your phone and voicemail password often. One suggestion is at least 
every three months. Also, make sure you don't use any "default" passwords.
•	
As you don't know who is lurking around or watching you, don't provide 
too much personal information online; this includes pictures.
•	
Don't view sensitive personal information on public Wi-Fi.
•	
It is very important for you to sign out of your applications when you  
are done.
•	
Check your Twitter/Facebook privacy settings.
•	
Don't reveal too much on social media sites and be discrete.
•	
Lock down your security on your mobile device.
•	
Avoid clicking e-mail links.
•	
Use mobile security software; for example, Lookout.
•	
Use mobile device management software.
•	
Install OS updates and security hotfixes as soon as it is available for 
download to ensure your mobile device firmware is up to date.
Summing it up
Mobile security threats are on the rise, and this trend is destined to grow as more 
people turn to using any kind of mobile device, whether smartphone or tablet, in 
their day-to-day lives. The best approach for any device user is to practice mobile 
security and be aware of the various issues and risks. Take all the necessary safety 
precautions or measures to protect yourself against hackers taking control of your 
mobile devices.

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at various types of scams and threats related to the use of 
mobile devices. The next chapter will show you the specifics on how to protect yourself 
from the various threats identified. We provided ways of recognizing or being aware 
of all the necessary threats that are out there, including the following details:
•	
Scams or threats have been increasing in the last four to five years.
•	
Malicious software (malware) written to benefit others at your expense.
•	
Toll fraud sends premium-rate SMS from your device, incurring charges on 
your phone bill.
•	
SMS spoofing allows a person to change sender's mobile number, which is 
the ID and also the name where the text messages come from.
•	
The increased use of mobile devices for shopping, banking, and other 
activities requiring personal and sensitive personal information.
•	
Social engineering and how it impacts mobile devices, divulging  
sensitive confidential information, and also manipulating users into 
performing actions.
•	
A fraudulent act of attempting to capture personal sensitive information by 
masquerading through a trustworthy/legitimate source e-mail.
•	
Several known types of phishing acts.
•	
Spear phishing is the new black mark in identity theft. It is important for you 
to recognize the known types of spear phishing.
•	
Recognizing and understanding what Cloud computing is.
•	
Knowing and understanding Cloud security risks.
•	
Mobile security is divided into two areas: mobile user's security and  
Cloud security.
•	
Android devices have higher security risk factors than iOS devices.
•	
Recognizing and understanding known viruses and worms.
•	
The permanence of your data once it reaches the Internet.
•	
Future threats to be aware of.
•	
Steps you can take to protect yourself.
Now that we have introduced you to mobile device threats, the next chapter will talk 
about a concept that many people are not aware of, Mobile Device Management 
(MDM), which is used by many companies today.


Protecting Your  
Mobile Devices
As you have learned from previous chapters, there is a staggering variety of methods 
that hackers can use to access your smartphone device without your permission. In 
this chapter, we will discuss the steps you can take to reduce the likelihood that your 
device will be hacked. We will also discuss the steps you can take in the event that 
you become the victim of an attack. You will learn about the following:
•	
What identification numbers are used to identify your smartphone
•	
Jailbreaking and rooting
•	
The importance of strong passwords
•	
Device encryption and antivirus
•	
How to manage a compromised device
•	
How you can protect yourself and your device, including protecting
Identifying your phone – the numbers 
that set your device apart
There are numerous identifiers for each device and network. A subscriber identity 
module (SIM) is an integrated circuit chip that stores the various identification 
numbers used by a mobile device. The SIM circuit is normally installed into a 
removable "SIM card".

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 90 ]
These may be considered in much the same way as an IP number on a personal 
computer; they assist carriers in distinguishing one device from another and, 
therefore, also assist in a carrier's efforts to track and monitor each device. The 
following are definitions for a few of these identifiers. As a user, these will be 
most important to you in the event that your device is hacked; you will be able to 
understand these terms in your efforts to recover or repair your device.
•	
IMEI – the International Mobile Station Equipment Identity number is a 
unique identifier, which is assigned to many mobile devices, from tablets to 
smartphones. In some countries, such as the United Kingdom and Australia, 
these numbers are used as a method of blocking stolen devices from 
accessing cellular networks. Some cellular carriers in the United States have 
recently begun to implement this sort of blocking feature as well, though the 
practice is still not widely in use.
•	
ICCID – the Integrated Circuit Card Identifier is a unique identifier attached 
to each SIM within every cell phone. Just as an IMEI may be used to track 
and identify a cell phone, an ICCID may be used to track a particular SIM 
card. Using the ICCID and a formula, it is possible to deduce a SIM card's 
IMSI number.
•	
IMSI – an International Mobile Subscriber Identity number is a 15-digit 
number, which contains network identifying information, such as a mobile 
country code and mobile network code. Using the IMSI, it is possible to 
significantly narrow the geographical location of a SIM card.
You would only be able to identify the name and the location 
of the original SIM issuer, that is, Vodafone, UK or AT&T, 
USA. If a user was roaming in a different country, obviously 
the location would be incorrect.
•	
eCID – an Electronic Chip Identifier is a unique number, which is primarily 
used by Apple to recognize its products. This number is often used by 
individuals interested in jailbreaking Apple products.
•	
MEID – the mobile equipment identifier is a globally unique number 
identifying a specific physical piece of CDMA mobile equipment.
These numbers, when taken in concern, form the identity of your smartphone device. 
This is how cell phone carriers and your device's manufacturer will recognize your 
device in the event that you report it stolen or in the event that you violate the terms 
of agreement. In fact, efforts at jailbreaking devices often involve an individual's 
ability to subvert this identification process.

Chapter 5
[ 91 ]
An easy method to check the numbers on your iPhone is the iPhone Configurator. 
You can find this at http://support.apple.com/kb/dl1466.
Take a look at the following screenshot; this is an example of the iPhone 
configuration utility:
The iPhone Configuration Utility can also be found in 
the XCode Organizer.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 92 ]
Preventative measures – how to  
reduce the likelihood that your  
device will be hacked
While it may sometimes seem otherwise, you are not helpless in protecting your 
device against potential attacks. Hackers rely on a few specific points of access in 
their attempts to hack your device; user ID entry, data encryption, and applications. 
By taking some simple steps to strengthen these potential access points, you can 
reduce the likelihood that hackers will be successful in their attempts at hacking  
your smartphone. Let's review a few important points.
iPhone
For an iPhone device, please consider the following points:
•	
Make sure you have a password enabled on your iPhone.
•	
Enable the Erase Data function. The Erase Data functionality adds another 
layer of security to your iPhone. This feature will erase all data after 10 failed 
passcode attempts. So, if a hacker steals your phone, it will remove all data 
after 10 unsuccessful attempted on the password. To enable this, you need to 
set Erase Data to ON in the Passcode Lock screen.
•	
Find my iPhone – if you ever lose or misplace your iPhone or iPad, you  
can use the Find My iPhone / Find My iPad feature. All you need to do  
is to download the application on your device and get it through iCloud 
(icloud.com).

Chapter 5
[ 93 ]
•	
Encrypted Backup – the Encrypt Backup setting is found in iTunes. This 
setting applies to the new iCloud service in iOS 5. Once enabled, this setting 
will ensure that the backup of your device is encrypted.
Android
For an Android device, please consider the following points:
•	
Enable lock screens – you can find this under the Settings | Security settings
•	
Disable USB debugging – you will find this under the Settings | USB 
debugging section
•	
Enable full disk encryption – this is found in the Settings | Security section
•	
Be sure and only use official application stores

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 94 ]
•	
Screen lock – make sure you have enabled a screen lock on your phone, that 
way it will automatically lock the phone after it is idle for a few minutes
For any device
Make sure that you have the latest OS installed.
Think twice before jailbreaking or rooting
Jailbreaking is the practice of cracking your own device. Jailbreaking in effect 
bypasses the limitations and restrictions that are put in place by the manufacturer 
that protect the device. By bypassing these restrictions, basically someone tries to 
install applications that are not compliant with the supporting applications for either 
Apple and/or Android. The practice can also unlock some of the restrictions that a 
specific telecommunications carrier may place on your device.
Rooting, on the other hand, pertains to Android devices. While Apple is stricter 
about application installation, some Android users feel it necessary to overcome 
what they feel are operating system limitations. The practice gives them the ability 
to control all functions on their device. In general, jailbreaking will violate the terms 
and conditions on the device and can violate your support and/or warranty.

Chapter 5
[ 95 ]
It has been estimated by Cyndia that only 10 percent of smartphones are now 
jailbroken or rooted. There are many reasons why this may be such a low number, 
not the least of which is the concern that doing this might turn the device into a 
very expensive and useless brick. The other may be that many providers have made 
more services available for the phones and that many more applications have been 
developed to meet the demand the public has.
Unfortunately, both practices compromise the device and may allow the leakage of 
passwords, location information, and other personal information that should not 
be made public. It also greatly increases the likelihood that insecure channels are 
created and make available a direct pathway on your device to allow malware and 
other malicious software to be loaded onto your device without your knowledge. 
The best practice is to not be tempted by the promised benefits. Contacting your 
provider regarding desired additions to your device may appear costly, but doing it 
yourself through other channels could be catastrophic. The temporary benefits could 
be far from acceptable but the consequences may be overwhelming.
Safety in numbers – passwords and user IDs
Today, it seems as though every service requires a user ID and password. We need 
them to access our bank accounts, our social networking accounts, our employee 
accounts, and much more. Because of the bewildering variety of account IDs, 
which we must manage, it can be tempting to re-use the same usernames, IDs, or 
passwords for multiple accounts. After all, this would reduce the likelihood that we 
might forget our user ID or password. According to a recent survey on ZDNet, about 
60 percent of users admit to using the same password for multiple online accounts 
(http://www.zdnet.com/blog/security/survey-60-percent-of-users-use-
the-same-password-across-more-than-one-of-their-online-accounts/9489).
Management of passwords can be a bit of a challenge. This can also be an issue with 
your corporate network and servers. The authors have worked with many large 
companies and we have found that, in some cases, the calls to a specific help desk 
can overload a help desk with just password changes. These changes are due to lost 
and/or forgotten passwords. Also, the authors find that these calls can be in excess 
of 60 percent of all calls into a help desk.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 96 ]
Hackers often target user ID and password information because of the prominence 
of duplicated login information. If a hacker can obtain the login information for 
one account, they can use that information to access some of that same user's other 
accounts. Hackers do not always obtain a user's login information by targeting a 
specific user's account; they are sometimes able to access a large database of user 
accounts by targeting a company's database. As of this writing, the most recent 
notable attack of this nature was the January 2012 hack of Twitter's user database.  
As many as 250,000 user accounts were compromised in the attack.
What this means for you, as a user, is that you should not feel secure if you utilize 
a complex password and user ID which, in your opinion, would be difficult for 
a prospective hacker to "crack". In the event that your account information was 
compromised as part of one of these large-scale attacks, the complexity of your login 
information would be insignificant if you have consistently used the same username 
and password for every one of your accounts.
Hackers can obtain your login information in numerous ways, many of which have 
been mentioned in prior chapters; large-scale attacks on companies, phishing scams, 
SMS spoofing, and so on. Because of the variety of methods available to hackers, 
you should also use numerous methods to reduce the damage a hacker can do once 
they have your login information. One issue is where a website/service can e-mail 
users their password in plain text; this shows the data is not being stored using one 
way cryptographic storage in their database. If the vendor can decrypt it to send it in 
plain text, so can the hacker.
Using strong passwords
The first place to start is to create strong passwords; these are passwords that are 
difficult for a hacker to guess.
You should not use any personal information. Consider how easily a hacker might 
be able to obtain this sort of personal information; much of it can be found through 
online searches or through browsing social networking accounts. If you decided to 
use personal information to form your password or user ID, a hacker may be able 
to deduce what it is based on what he or she knows about you personally or from 
information you have posted online.
You can negate this possibility by ensuring that your passwords do not contain any 
personally identifying information. Do not use, for example, your pet's name or your 
child's birth date as the basis for your passwords. Instead, your passwords and user 
IDs should be as nonspecific as possible. Logically consistent formulations such as 
nouns or number patterns should be avoided.

Chapter 5
[ 97 ]
Longer and varied passwords
Shorter passwords and user IDs are easier to crack because of their simplicity. 
According to a recent study by Carnegie Mellon, the length of a password is the most 
important variable that differentiates strong passwords from the weak. According to 
the researchers, strong passwords contain at least eight characters, with the strength 
of the password increasing with each additional character. In other words, the longer 
the password is, the better it is for you (http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/tech/
news/story/2012-07-28/techlicious-password-security/56540586/1).
Long and nonsensical passwords are stronger than logically consistent and short 
passwords because hackers do not always attempt to personally deduce targeted 
account information. Often, hackers will utilize a type of program known as a 
password cracker or password attacker. These programs use algorithms based on 
common password patterns to guess a user's login information. Given enough time, 
these programs can crack many seemingly impregnable passwords.
One example of a long password is:
Start with: My cat has a hat.
Your password is:
myC@1hasah0T
As a user, your best method of protecting against these sorts of programs is by 
lengthening your password and ensuring it is nonsensical. Making a password 
nonsensical means that your password contains no recognizable patterns; no 
words, no numerical patterns, and no consistency such as lowercase-to-uppercase 
variation. To test the effectiveness of a password and to obtain an estimate on the 
amount of time it might take to crack a password, you can use free online services 
such as passfault (https://passfault.appspot.com/password_strength.html) 
or password meter (http://www.passwordmeter.com/). Entering the word Cat 
on passfault, for example, reveals an estimated time to crack of less than one day. 
Alternately, passfault estimates 49eXp1nfL3 with a time of one century, two decades. 
While not an exact measure of password strength, these sorts of services can be 
helpful in recognizing a particular password's weaknesses.
In addition to creating a strong password, you should also develop different 
passwords and user IDs for each of your accounts. Do not use the same login 
information for numerous accounts, however convenient this may seem. While 
reusing the same login information can reduce the hassle of needing to remember 
multiple passwords and login IDs, this practice can be significantly more 
inconvenient in the event that your login information for one account is hacked.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 98 ]
Now, let's be realistic. You have the device to make your life easier. You use it daily 
and cannot walk around with a written card or sticky note to remind you of what 
every user ID and password actually is. The keyboard is less than friendly on mobile 
devices and complex usernames and passwords often sound like a good idea, but 
in ease of use on the device the good practice slides easily into dis-use. While it 
would be a simple task for the hacker to enter the user information obtained from 
one account into another. That is not what you are thinking about as you create a 
password or user ID.
There are various apps available for Android, iOS, and Blackberry devices to help 
you. They are available from the app store associated with your device platform 
and can make things simpler. Some are available free and others are paid apps. But 
a good rule of thumb for creating a new user ID could be something that makes 
sense to you. If you happen to like American Racing Breed horses and the letters 
A. R. B. are not your initials try something like this—you are creating a new online 
banking account. For the username, you key in ARB and the name of the bank with 
a number – ARB2chase or arb2chase. That will be much different than your e-mail 
address (hopefully) or anything associated with your name. Re-use those same first 
characters if need be or a variation of them.
One caveat; if people know you love race horses and you are constantly talking 
about it in one social media forum or another. Do not use it. Make sure that you 
choose something that only you know about you. Make sure you do not share the 
information and do not start posting pictures of horses on Facebook.
Passwords can be another matter. Those same keyboard limitations on a device 
make it difficult to key them in correctly and you could possibly be locked out of 
your account. If you are using your mobile device as your primary means to access 
an account, for example, your app store account—look at your keyboard and try to 
decide what would be the easiest phrase that you know combined with numbers. Do 
not replace the letter O with a zero or the letter I with the number one; that is much 
too obvious. So, let's say you opened the Chase account we previously discussed 
to buy stocks. Consider using the phrase buystocks as the password but with some 
significant changes. By choosing the numbers above certain letters, buystocks can 
become b87s6ocks in one variation. Just to clarify, the 8 is the number above the 
letter U on a normal QWERTY keyboard and the number 7 is the number above the 
Y, just as the 6 is above the T. By linking the password to what your purpose is on 
this site and substituting numbers in place of letters, you have created a more secure 
environment than if you used your email address or last name and repeated the 
same password as you did for everything else. By developing numerous passwords 
and user IDs, you can effectively contain the potential damage in the event that one 
of your accounts is hacked.

Chapter 5
[ 99 ]
The following is a sample of a strong password technique.
A strong password will be:
•	
At least eight characters long
•	
Different from other passwords
•	
Containing at least one character from each of 
the following categories:
•	
Uppercase letters: A, B, C
•	
Lowercase letters: a, b, c
•	
Numbers: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
•	
Symbols found on the keyboard: - + = { } [ ] 
\; " ' < > , . ?  |` ~ ! @ /# $ % ^ & * ( )/ _  :
A weak password includes:
•	
Your name, user name, or company name
•	
Less than 6 characters long
•	
Includes a complete word (example, Television)
Changing passwords
The third step you can take to protect your accounts against unwanted attention is 
by changing your passwords on a routine basis. Consider the password attackers 
previously mentioned; these programs would theoretically be able to crack any 
password given enough time. Additionally, you should not consider your password 
completely secure even if a service, such as passfault, estimates the time to crack 
your password at over one century. New and more complex password attackers  
are being developed all the time, which can therefore significantly reduce the time  
to crack your passwords. Therefore, the easiest way you can reduce the likelihood 
that one of these programs might be able to hack your account information is by 
changing your passwords on a consistent schedule. Generally, you want to change 
your passwords at least once every three months. In addition to reducing the 
effectiveness of password attackers, changing your passwords can also combat  
the effectiveness of large-scale hacker attacks, such as the one mentioned against 
Twitter. After all, the login information obtained in such a hack is only effective if  
the information remains unchanged.
Data encryption
By encrypting your data, you can increase the difficulty entailed in hacking your 
device or personal accounts. Data encryption is a method of protection in which data 
is altered, or encrypted, using a key. With data encryption, the only parties able to 
access encrypted data are those that possess the key.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 100 ]
Some terms that you may encounter while learning how to encrypt your device are 
data-in-transit, data-at-rest, and data-in-use. All of these terms deal with how data 
is transferred and accessed in the context of data encryption. Data-in-transit and 
data-in-use are interchangeable terms, which refer to any data being accessed over 
a network. Examples of this type of data might be e-mails, websites, downloads, or 
uploads. Alternately, data-at-rest is any data not currently being accessed over a 
network. Examples of this type of data would include music residing on a portable 
hard drive or word processor documents, which are not currently being altered 
or e-mailed. When used, these terms often refer to how data encryption operates 
depending upon how it is being used or accessed.
Encryption on iOS
In the mobile space, data encryption is becoming increasingly common. As of release 
5, iOS has encryption built into its operating system. IIRC, the key derived partly 
from the passcode and used for data protections, is used to encrypt certain data at 
rest on the device. By default, this is the e-mail store (messages and attachments), the 
keychain, and any third-party apps that have been written to make use of the data 
protection API.
To verify that this feature is active on your iPhone, iPad, or iPod, simply open the 
Passcode Lock submenu under General Settings, scroll to the bottom and look for 
the Password Protection subheader.
While the built-in data encryption is helpful, the feature does not extend to phone 
calls; if you wish to encrypt your outgoing phone calls, you will need to download 
some additional software. Kryptos and Cellcrypt are two of the better reviewed and 
regarded voice encryption apps currently available on the Apple App Store. To use 
this or any other encryption software, both the sender and the recipient must have 
the same encryption applications installed on both of their devices. Once installed, a 
user can simply place a call through the application, and the recipient will receive a 
notification on their device of the incoming phone call.
Encryption on Android
Android has had built-in full device encryption since Version 2.3.4 (Gingerbread) 
and all later versions of the OS (3.x, 4.x). They are some potential drawbacks,  
these being:
•	
Slower performance: Encryption always adds some overhead, so your  
device will be a bit slower. The actual performance decrease depends on  
the device hardware, and with modern multicore GHz clock speed CPUs  
is likely to be negligible.

Chapter 5
[ 101 ]
•	
Encryption is one-way only: After encrypting your device's storage, you can 
only disable encryption by resetting your phone to its factory default settings 
(so make regular backups).
It can be enabled via Settings | Security | Encrypt phone (or Encrypt tablet) 
under the Encryption subheading.
Downloaded applications
As of June of 2012, the Apple App Store contained over 650,000 apps, and over 30 
billion app downloads had occurred since the store's launch (http://mashable.
com/2012/06/11/wwdc-2012-app-store-stats/). By September of the same 
year, the Google Android Store achieved 25 billion downloads and hosted over 
675,000 apps (http://appleinsider.com/articles/12/09/26/google-android-
reaches-25-billion-downloads-675000-apps).
Considering the vast number of apps and large number of downloads, it should 
come as no surprise that Apple's and Google's attempts at policing their stores 
are not always successful. Admittedly, Google's Android Store contains more 
suspect apps than Apple's App Store; the first recorded instance of malicious 
software in Apple's App Store occurred in May 2012 (http://www.wired.com/
gadgetlab/2012/07/first-ios-malware-found/). Regardless of which store they 
use, users should be vigilant in protecting themselves against this potential security 
risk. Users can follow two basic steps to protect themselves against malicious apps: 
install antivirus software on smartphone devices and take the time to research apps 
before downloading.
Antivirus software on smartphones
Antivirus software for smartphones is still relatively new as a category of program 
in the mobile space. This may be the reason that such a large number of smartphones 
still possess no installed antivirus software.
Obtaining antivirus software for your smartphone is a simple task. You should not 
conduct a search for "antivirus software" or a related term on your app store; you 
have no way of knowing that the apps returned in such a search are not themselves 
some form of malware. Instead, users should take care to download antivirus 
software from a respected and well-known developer. Norton and McAfee, for 
example, have both released smartphone antivirus suites, which you can download 
and install on your device for a fee. To find these apps on your preferred store, enter 
in the exact name of the antivirus suite you wish to download.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 102 ]
Verifying that an application is legitimate
The second step any user should follow to protect themselves against malicious or 
misleading apps is to take the time to research apps before choosing to download. 
Just because a user has installed antivirus software on the phone, they should not 
expect that this software will catch all possible threats; just as on personal computers, 
it is important to remember that new Trojans and viruses are being developed at an 
extremely rapid pace.
It can be tempting to rely on an app store's search feature; searching for a particular 
term and reading reviews in the store before downloading can seem a convenient 
method for obtaining new apps. You may even decide to simply download the  
top-rated result of a particular search. Unfortunately, the ratings and listing results 
on app store search engines are not a reliable measure of an application's quality  
or legitimacy.
For example, the Geinimi Trojan gains access to smartphones when users download 
a game entitled Monkey Jump 2. You may believe that any application with 
malware would likely have negative reviews; after all, why would a victim of a 
malware attack positively review a malicious application? Surprisingly, however, 
Monkey Jump 2 has relatively positive reviews on the Android store; it possesses 
over one-hundred and eighty 5-star reviews! Despite this rating, Monkey Jump 2 
is one of over 30 apps on the Android store known to contain the Geinimi Trojan. 
If you were looking for a fun game and made the mistake of downloading this app 
based on positive reviews on the Android store, you might have unknowingly 
downloaded this devastating Trojan.
The easiest way to avoid downloading a malicious app is by taking the time to 
conduct some basic research through a traditional browser before downloading 
an app. If, for example, you wish to download a personal exercise trainer, you can 
simply enter some relevant search terms in your favorite search engine; Top Exercise 
Trainers for iPhone might be a good term. For additional security and reliability, 
you should consider only those results produced by a respected consumer or 
technology publication such as CNET or Wired; such publications routinely review 
certain categories of apps on both Apple and Android application stores.

Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
Once you've chosen which application you wish to download based on reliable 
reviews, you should carefully enter the exact name of the application in your 
application store's search box. Do not omit any terms in the application's title. For 
example, if the name of the application is Norton Security and Antivirus, you 
should not type Antivirus into your application store's search box. While you are 
likely to obtain some of the same results, it is also possible that some illegitimate 
results may also appear. To avoid the risk of downloading one of these illegitimate 
or intentionally misleading applications, you should enter in the exact name of the 
application you wish to download.
In the event that your device has  
been compromised
Despite your best efforts, it is possible that your device or data may at some 
point suffer an attack. This can occur in multiple ways; the device may have been 
mistakenly left at a public place, or a hacker may have been successful in obtaining 
login information through a large-scale attack. Regardless of the reason, there are 
certain steps which you can take to mitigate the damages in the event that your 
device has been compromised.
Has your device been hacked?
First, you will need to verify that your devices or accounts have been hacked. 
Hackers will commonly use hacked devices to remotely send e-mails, place phone 
calls, or use SMS messaging. Therefore, users should carefully monitor their 
outgoing and incoming data. Also, watch out for when your device connects to a  
Wi-Fi hotspot, as some hotspots are hosted by hackers.
Have you received any strange texts from unknown senders? One method by which 
hackers attempt to hack smartphones is by sending SMS messages with embedded 
malware; all the recipient needs to do is open the text to download the malware. 
Texts with embedded malware often contain a square or other abstract symbol in the 
body of the text. If you have received this sort of a text, you may have unknowingly 
downloaded malware into your smartphone.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 104 ]
Users should carefully monitor their outgoing texts, phone calls, and e-mails. If a 
hacker has been using your device to send messages or place phone calls, it is likely 
that your call or message history will reflect this activity. Pay careful attention to 
any messages or calls that were placed at strange times, such as when you know you 
were sleeping or otherwise not likely to have been using your device. You should 
also check the content of suspect outgoing SMS messages or e-mails to verify that 
you typed and sent the particular message. If you think that your phone is sending 
out SMS messages due to malware, contact your provider as soon as possible.
Often, hackers will use a compromised device to send messages to everyone in a 
user's contact list. If you discover that your device has been used for this purpose, 
you should immediately contact the individuals that received these messages and 
advise them not to open any links or attachments contained in such messages. By 
opening such links or attachments, the recipients could compromise their own 
devices or data. The previous example shows where a hacker is trying to get you to 
open a link via an SMS message.
Similarly, users should pay careful attention to activity in numerous online accounts. 
Facebook, Twitter, Paypal, personal banking, Amazon, eBay; these are only a few of 
the services that many users access through their smartphones. In the event that one 
of these accounts is hacked, it will be important to recognize the breach as quickly 
as possible so as to minimize the risk. Therefore, just as you should monitor your 
outgoing e-mails and SMS messages, you should also pay careful attention to your 
activities on these sorts of online accounts. As one example, if your Facebook friends 
suddenly begin to receive spam advertisements from your Facebook account, you 
should consider the possibility that your Facebook login has been hacked.

Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
Social engineering
Social engineering is the process of manipulating people into sharing their personal 
information. This can be executed in several ways; one way is to talk a person into 
answering questions from a supposed authority. For example, you think that your 
company calls you and says, "We are from your corporate help desk, we need to 
confirm your password." In this example the "hacker" is not from your company 
and is trying to extract your password from you. There are many different types of 
social engineering and these are discussed in the previous chapters. Overall the rule 
is never to give out information to people that call you; but there can be cases where 
you think you called the right place. In all cases, be careful and make sure you know 
who you are talking with before you share any information over the phone!
Trojans and malware on your smartphone
Your device may download a Trojan or malware through various methods: an SMS 
text message, a compromised Wi-Fi hotspot, a downloaded application, or an e-mail 
attachment. Depending upon the exact avenue of access, as well as the particular 
Trojan or malware, the best course of action can vary significantly.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 106 ]
SMS messaging attacks
Those Trojans that access a smartphone through a suspect SMS message are among 
the most damaging to a device; the surest sign that you were the recipient of such 
a message is if the body of the message contains nothing more than an abstract 
symbol, such as a circle or square. Commonly, this type of Trojan will automatically 
install the moment the user opens the text; this Trojan will thereafter allow a hacker 
to remotely access and control the device.
Unfortunately, the possible responses to this particular type of attack are 
relatively limited. Significantly, smartphone antivirus programs have been largely 
unsuccessful at isolating this threat. According to security researcher Charles Miller, 
the best course of action is to immediately power off the device; the longer the device 
is left on with the offending Trojan installed, the greater the possible damage to the 
user's personal identity. After all, if the hacker can remotely control the device, they 
then have a method of accessing a user's personal accounts through any downloaded 
applications or even through the user's browser history. Though an old attack, it is 
worth noting:
http://www.ibtimes.com/what-do-if-your-iphone-gets-hacked-
virus-302908
The user should then bring the device to a service provider or manufacturer 
storefront at the earliest possible convenience. The device should remain powered 
off in the interim, as turning on the device will only allow the Trojan to reactivate. As 
an example, if the device is an iPhone, the user should bring the device to the nearest 
Apple location. Alternately, if the device is an Android phone, the best option will 
likely be the nearest service provider's storefront. Often, these storefront locations 
will opt to wipe the device and restore it to factory settings, in the process removing 
all offending data. Users should follow up this activity by taking the steps listed in 
the section on compromised accounts.
Attacks through attachment and  
application downloads
The other two methods, by which a hacker may access a device, downloading 
applications or downloading attachments, are rarely as devastating as the SMS 
text method. This is because, unlike with the SMS text method, the user may avoid 
downloading the Trojan or malware in the first place. By conducting some research 
about an application and by deciding not to download any attachments from 
untrusted sources, users can reduce the likelihood that they will allow a hacker 
access to their device.

Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
In the event that a user believes they downloaded a Trojan or malware, they should 
first run a virus scan through their smartphone's antivirus software. Often, the 
software will be able to apprehend offending downloads even before a user decides 
to run a scan. Even so, users should remain vigilant and run scans on a scheduled 
basis so as to catch any additional threats. In the event that the antivirus successfully 
recognizes and isolates an offending virus, the user should consider that the virus 
may have been successful at hacking any accounts accessed by the device. As in 
the event of an SMS message attack, users should follow the advice contained 
in the following section on compromised accounts. Users should also carefully 
monitor their outgoing SMS text messages and phone calls; if you noticed any 
suspect messages or calls, you should immediately bring the device into the nearest 
manufacturer or cell-carrier storefront for a factory reset and data wipe.
Compromised accounts
Compromised login information is one of the most significant threats in mobile 
security. A device may be repaired or replaced, but a hacked account can 
significantly impact your identity and personal finances. If you believe that login 
information for one of your accounts may have been compromised, there are steps 
that you may take to limit the damage.
Check out http://www.sophos.com/en-us/medialibrary/PDFs/other/
sophossecuritythreatreport2013.pdf.
Regardless of the type of account that was compromised, the first step a user should 
take is try to access their account from a different device. This will allow you to see if 
you can get into your account and/or change your password. Do not continue to use 
your smartphone to manage the account in question; instead use a laptop or personal 
computer until the threat has been sufficiently managed. From a computer, the user 
should log in to the account and change the login password. Most accounts will 
have a link within the personal settings of an account where this may be easily and 
quickly done.
Depending upon the type of account and upon the activities for which the account 
was used, the user may wish to change the login ID as well as the password. For 
most accounts, such as Facebook or Twitter, this cannot be done without contacting 
customer service by phone or e-mail. If a service is unable or unwilling to allow this 
change, you may wish to consider deleting the old account entirely and creating 
a new one. If you think you have an issue with an e-mail account, check the 
forwarding settings to see if the mail is being redirected.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 108 ]
If the account was used for financial transactions or banking account management, 
the repercussions may be more severe. For example, if a user's Amazon shopping 
account information was compromised, they should follow the steps of checking 
your password and login ID. In addition to these changes, however, the user should 
also contact their banks for any associated credit cards. Your bank should be notified 
as early as possible if such an account is expected to be compromised.
The user should also monitor and, if necessary, dispute any questionable charges 
with their bank. Similar steps should be taken if the account in question was an 
online banking profile; most banks possess advanced responses to these increasingly 
common situations.
Many sites will have a set of URLs/pages that provide information if your account is 
compromised, for example:
•	
http://windows.microsoft.com/en-GB/windows/outlook/ 
hacked-account
•	
https://www.facebook.com/hacked
Stolen or lost devices
In the event that your device has been lost or stolen, you can potentially wipe the 
device's data remotely to protect against the possibility that any account used on 
the device will be compromised. Increasingly, companies have begun to rely on this 
method to mitigate these sorts of risks. As part of these capabilities, companies may 
decide to either partially or completely wipe a device. In a partial wipe, only certain 
data considered sensitive will be deleted from the device. Alternately, in a complete 
wipe, all data and the device's operating system will be altered so as to make the 
device practically unusable via a remote lock. Today, you as a user may be able to 
conduct a complete wipe depending upon your particular device and MDM solution.
Wiping an iOS device
In the event that your iOS device has been lost or stolen, you can decide to remotely 
wipe it. However, you may wish to first utilize the iCloud's Find my iPhone feature 
to verify that the device was not lost in a safe place such as your home or vehicle. 
The Find my iPhone feature is available as an application download for your iOS 
device, or by logging into icloud.com and clicking on the related Find my iPhone 
link. This feature utilizes the iCloud to locate the GPS signal of your device provided 
the device is powered on. Remember that you must first turn on the Find my 
iPhone feature on your device while it is still in your possession; you can do this by 
accessing the iCloud submenu within the Settings tab on your iOS device.

Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
Should you decide that you wish to completely wipe your device after conducting 
this search, you can do so either by using the Find my iPhone app or by logging 
into icloud.com. In either case, your iOS device's data will be wiped; it will have 
effectively been reset to its factory default configuration.
Wiping an Android device
One option that you can use to lock your Android is the Android Lost app to 
perform some of the same features as Apple's Find my iPhone application. Check out 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.androidlost&hl=en.
With Android Lost, a user can read the device's SMS text messages, set an alarm on 
the device, locate the device through its GPS signal, or wipe the device's data. Like 
with iOS devices, this wipe feature will effectively reset the device to its factory 
default configuration. In other words, this will not be a complete wipe rendering the 
device unusable; it will merely prevent another person from accessing any data or 
applications you added to the device after purchase.
Summing up
Smartphone capabilities will undoubtedly continue to expand just as they have 
over the past decade. More and more users rely on these multifunctional devices to 
conduct sensitive tasks such as personal banking and shopping. Therefore, it should 
come as no surprise that hackers consider smartphones an enticing, and an all-too-
often accessible target.
By taking a number of preventative steps, you can increase the difficulty entailed in 
hacking your device and personal accounts. While such steps will not create an iron-
clad barrier to attacks, they can decrease the likelihood of a successful attack on your 
smartphone. The best way to consider such steps may be by comparing smartphone 
security to home security; bars and alarm systems will not make home intrusions 
impossible, but they will present enough difficulty to persuade many would-be 
criminals to search for easier targets. The same concept applies to preventative steps 
such as creating strong passwords, changing your passwords often, encrypting 
your data, and installing antivirus software on your smartphone. Faced with such 
measures, many hackers will search for easier targets.

Protecting Your Mobile Devices
[ 110 ]
In the case that your device is hacked, there are essentially four steps that you  
can take:
•	
Run the antivirus software
•	
Return your device to a storefront for a factory reset
•	
Change passwords and user IDs
•	
Monitor your device and accounts to ensure that the issue has been resolved
Depending on the issue, it may not always be necessary to return your device to a 
storefront for a factory reset. However, you should always run an antivirus software 
and change your user IDs and passwords after any incident. Finally, if your device 
should be stolen or lost, you should remotely wipe the data from the phone to 
protect your personal information. The next chapter will walk you through warranty 
and insurance for your device.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed:
•	
Personal and device identification numbers
•	
Preventative measures to discourage hackers
•	
How to create strong passwords
•	
The disadvantages of reusing passwords
•	
Data encryption on smartphones
•	
How to research apps
•	
Signs that a device has been hacked
•	
SMS messaging attacks
•	
Trojans in applications and attachments
•	
What to do if an account has been compromised
•	
How to wipe a smartphone
In the next chapter we will see how to get your device serviced in the event of a 
significant malfunction.

Support and  
Warranty Insurance
In this chapter, we will help the user navigate the often complicated world of 
modern customer service and technical support. Also, this chapter will detail the 
concepts of support, warranty, and insurance for your mobile device. Included in 
this chapter are the following topics:
•	
Toby's story – this could be your story
•	
Determine the ownership of your phone and the impact on you
•	
The world of mobile support
•	
Your company's support processes and rules
•	
Why you should care about your company's Service Level  
Agreements (SLAs)
•	
How you can tell if you have a problem with your device
•	
Warranties – what you should know

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 112 ]
Toby's story
Toby travels weekly for work. He flies to distant locations, conducts his business, 
and often returns home for the weekend. Occasionally, he might even be required 
to stay for extended time periods without returning home. To conduct company 
business, Toby relies on a number of vital devices: his laptop, a company-based 
server, his smartphone, and his personal tablet. Each device is useful for completing 
specific tasks. On his laptop, for example, he completes the most complex tasks, such 
as creating or modifying company documents. Toby uses his home-based server to 
run power-hungry applications, which his laptop is incapable of running. Toby's 
tablet is useful as a way of bringing up documents for easy perusal and sharing; 
Toby might, for instance, bring up an attachment from an e-mail and hand the tablet 
to a colleague for consideration.
Toby's smartphone may be his most important device. In the modern mobile world, 
Toby uses his smartphone for e-mail, texting, chatting, updating his personal calendar, 
organizing contacts, and even tasks that he normally completes on his laptop, such as 
modifying and creating documents. While Toby's laptop is his company's approved 
device, and is thus the only device his company explicitly supports for completing 
company tasks, Toby nevertheless opts to use his smartphone for many of these tasks. 
Toby's smartphone is a personal device, which he has decided to use at his place of 
work; it is therefore an expression of Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) practices, 
wherein personal devices are used for professional purposes.
One week while on business to Toledo, Toby decided to leave his laptop at home 
because he knew he could complete the necessary tasks for his assignment from 
his smartphone. On the first day of his assignment, Toby accidentally dropped his 
smartphone down the stairs. Picking it up, he discovered that the device would not 
start up. To continue doing business, Toby absolutely had to resolve this issue in 
a quick and efficient manner, because he did not have his laptop to complete basic 
tasks such as accessing company e-mail. Toby decided to call his company's technical 
support line. After all, Toby reasoned, the company technical support department 
had previously assisted in replacing and repairing his company laptop not two years 
prior. He assumed that they would easily be able to solve this problem as well.

Chapter 6
[ 113 ]
Unfortunately for Toby, the technical support department's response was that Toby 
must contact his phone carrier's technical support department. Their reason? Toby's 
smartphone was not provided by the company, but was rather Toby's personal 
device, which he had purchased from his carrier as part of his cell-phone plan. 
Therefore, even though Toby was required to use the device for vital company 
tasks, the device's maintenance was Toby's responsibility alone. As noted, Toby is 
"required" to use the smartphone for vital company tasks and processes. This is an 
important point and one that sits at the heart of the BYOD debate. Continuing this 
story, we find that Toby decided to call his carrier's technical support. After waiting 
on the line for half an hour, Toby was greeted by a technical support representative 
over the phone. Toby informed the representative that his smartphone was broken, 
and asked if his carrier could provide him with a repair or replacement. Once again, 
the response was not what Toby wanted to hear; the representative told him that he 
would need to call the manufacturer's technical support line, and that his carrier's 
technical support would not be able to assist him with hardware malfunctions.
Becoming increasingly frustrated, Toby dialed the manufacturer's technical support 
number as the proper party to assist him with hardware malfunctions. After waiting 
for over an hour, Toby was finally able to speak to a technical support representative 
that would be able to assist him. The response was, once again, not encouraging. 
While the manufacturer would be able to provide Toby with a replacement device, 
Toby would have to spend a considerable amount of money to obtain it. This was 
because, the manufacturer's representative informed him, Toby's device was no 
longer under warranty. Additionally, the representative informed Toby that, even 
if the device had been within the warranty period, the manufacturer may not have 
been able to replace it because Toby's mistake in dropping the phone did not count 
as "normal use." Incensed, Toby pulled out his credit card and prepared to pay for 
his clumsiness.
The smartphone – a personal device,  
a company device, or both?
Toby's story is becoming increasingly common in the mobile world. Not so many 
years ago, most devices vital for conducting company business were mostly provided 
by the company. Therefore, when issues with the devices arose, employees could 
simply contact the company's technical support departments to have any issues 
resolved. This is still the case when the device is company-owned; many laptops, 
for instance, are still provided by companies and are therefore company-owned. 
Alternately, smartphones can be employee-owned. The company does not provide 
these devices to the employee and does not provide funding for the purchase of these 
devices; the employee is expected to purchase these devices and use them to complete 
company tasks. 

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 114 ]
As discussed previously, this is commonly referred to as BYOD. In most cases, when 
a BYOD smartphone malfunctions or breaks, the employee is expected to resolve the 
issue on their own. Consequently, if the employee is unable to complete company 
tasks due to a malfunctioning or broken smartphone, the employee may not blame 
this lack of productivity on their broken device. Many companies will publish a policy 
that the employee is responsible for the maintenance of their BYOD device. Customer 
service is something that is overlooked by most people, until they need it. We want to 
help you be prepared before you need help. Resolving issues with a malfunctioning 
or broken smartphone thus results in the same sorts of issues common to repairing 
or replacing any personal devices. For example, if your television breaks, you do not 
expect your employer to replace or repair it. This is because you purchased it with 
your own funds and you rarely, if ever, use it to complete company tasks. The same 
reasoning applies to your smartphone, except that you do use the device to complete 
company as well as personal tasks. In other words, because the phone was purchased 
with personal funds, it normally will be addressed the same as any other personally-
purchased device that malfunctions or breaks. In the case of a device/phone provided 
by the employee, there may be policy issues where the company will not allow you to 
use the phone for personal use, and the inverse can be true where if the device breaks, 
then the company will replace it free of charge. As we have noted several times, make 
sure you know what your company policy states.
The wide world of customer service and 
technical support
To resolve customer issues, companies have developed customer support systems 
that can address seemingly any issue a customer might have. These processes are 
accessed by customers through a variety of means; chat, SMS, phone, and even 
in person at brick-and-mortar stores. Of all of these methods, the phone-operated 
system may be the most familiar to many customers.
•	
Dial 1. Want to claim a rebate?
•	
Dial 2. Is your hardware malfunctioning?
•	
Dial 3. Have billing questions?
•	
Dial 4. Are you having a software issues?
By using such a system, companies can funnel particular issues to relevant personnel 
that can best help resolve a customer's issue.

Chapter 6
[ 115 ]
Decades ago, it was common for customers to bring their devices to an independent 
repair outlet at a strip mall. Today, however, it is far more common for a customer 
to contact a manufacturer to have a product repaired or replaced. The reasons for 
the decline of third-party repair solutions are numerous: the use of proprietary parts 
by manufacturers, the fact that replacement is often cheaper than repair and, in 
smartphones, the entangled relationship between our cell-phone plan and our devices.
What happens if you cannot get help from your vendor and/or the vendor does not 
provide help in the way you need or expect? You escalate the call. Many vendors will 
give you a call tracking number. If you are not happy with the services, ask the vendor 
to escalate the call. The following is a sample flow chart on how you can do this:
Yes
Close Call
Is Problem
Solved
The Vendor
assists and
solves issue
No Ask the
call rep to
Escalate the
call
The Call
Person
attempts to
help you
Select the correct
response to get
Help
1
2
3
4
Call 1-800-555-
Help

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 116 ]
Customer support in the mobile  
space – phone, chat, and text
As previously discussed, customer support systems can be accessed through 
numerous methods. Seemingly any method by which you might contact an 
individual can also be used to contact a company's customer support. Believe 
it or not, some companies still allow customers to send their customer support 
departments inquiries by postal mail. Of course, that method is becoming less and 
less common, as contacting such departments by other methods is far more efficient 
and helps resolve issues in a timely manner. Online call requests allow for better 
tracking of service calls.
Customer support by phone
This is the most common, and some might argue, a highly developed method by 
which customer service issues are resolved. Customer support systems can be 
divided into three basic categories of operations: personal, automated, and hybrid.
A personal customer support system would be a phone system where, upon dialing 
a company's customer support phone number, a customer would be greeted 
immediately by an in-person representative. Exclusively personal customer support 
systems are becoming increasingly rare; a customer is most likely to encounter these 
sorts of low-tech systems at independent or small companies, where customer volume 
is relatively low. The advantage of these systems is that a customer will be able to 
speak with a representative immediately and will in this manner be able to bypass 
the automated protocols present in automated and hybrid customer service systems. 
The disadvantage of this system is that, in able to reach the correct department within 
a business, a caller may have to explain their problem numerous times to different 
individuals. In other words, the system can be inefficient in certain circumstances.
An automated customer support system is one in which all customer support is 
conducted exclusively through an automated phone system. In this system, an 
automated voice message plays that informs a caller of which selections to make 
from a list of pre-designated choices. The two primary methods by which customers 
may navigate these automated systems is touchtone and voice-operated. For the 
former, callers will press the corresponding number on their phones to select a 
choice. For the latter, callers will speak a particular keyword, often in the form of a 
number, to make their selections.

Chapter 6
[ 117 ]
The exclusively automated system is advantageous when it comes to delivering 
limited information or to addressing common complaints. For example, a company 
might be aware that a large number of callers only call to request the address or 
business hours of a company, so the company may set up a separate line to provide 
just this information. These automated systems can also handle higher levels of 
call traffic. The caller will be able to access the desired information in a quick 
manner, and the company would not have to sacrifice productivity in man-hours 
to provide this information to customers. The disadvantages of this system become 
apparent when customers wish to obtain solutions to more complicated problems. 
For example, if a customer is having difficulty operating their smartphone because 
they downloaded an application that causes bugs on a percentage of devices, an 
automated system may not be the most ideal method for resolving this issue. This 
is because automated systems are, by their nature, best suited for addressing issues 
and questions that are common to most or all customers. A problem that manifests 
in only some users requires more layers of complexity within an automated system, 
thus defeating an automated system's original advantage; efficiency.
The hybrid system is a system that utilizes both automation and personal 
support methods. This system has become the most common customer support 
system utilized by large companies, such as cell phone carriers and smartphone 
manufacturers. In a hybrid system, callers will often initially be forced to navigate 
an automated message system. They will dial or say their choices and only be able 
to speak in person with a representative after they have exhausted the choices 
contained within the automated system. Often, this corresponds to a certain number 
of "layers" of messages within the automated system. At this point, the caller will 
often be provided with an option with the following or similar wording; "Speak with 
a customer service representative if your issue has still not been resolved." After 
choosing to speak to a representative, the caller will be placed in a queue and wait 
until a representative is available to speak with them.
Often, hybrid systems will be integrated on a department-by-department basis. 
What this means for the caller is that, should they progress through the automated 
system to a representative in one department, and should that representative need 
to transfer them to another department, the caller would then need to progress 
through the automated system of the other department as well. This system is 
advantageous for the company because it helps reduce the number of calls that 
representatives must spend their man-hours addressing; each department will be 
able to provide solutions to the most common problems in their automated systems. 
The disadvantage of this system is that, for those customers who need to address 
less common problems, customers will be forced to spend extra time navigating not 
one but two or even more automated systems before being funneled to the correct 
personnel; also in some cases customers can be stuck in an endless loop without 
getting their problem fixed.

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 118 ]
Although many express frustration at having to deal with automated customer 
support systems, it is important to remember that these systems, when implemented 
properly, can greatly increase the efficiency of company personnel in addressing 
the more complicated and uncommon customer issues. Imagine, for example, if 
every customer with a complex issue had to wait for every customer with a question 
about their current account balance before they could be helped. Of course, some 
companies have attempted to address customer antipathy toward automated 
systems by hiring more personnel to replace their automated systems, but these 
solutions are often prohibitively costly for smaller or medium-sized companies. As 
a result, we can probably expect that automated voice systems will be a prominent, 
and even growing, part of our interactions with customer support systems for the 
foreseeable future.
Chat and texting solutions
As the Internet becomes an increasingly pervasive aspect of our lives, companies are 
beginning to provide methods by which customers can contact their support systems 
online. One reason that customer and technical support systems have not been 
provided online is that, until recently, many customers only had a limited number of 
methods by which to access the Internet. Meaning, if a customer's laptop was broken, 
and this was their only Internet-connected device, providing a chat option for 
customer service would be not be a cost-effective decision. Today, however, many 
customers have a laptop, a tablet, a smartphone, and a desktop that can all connect 
to the Internet simultaneously. In such a context, it makes sense for companies to 
provide an online method for contacting their customer support, as it will have the 
benefit of removing some of the burden placed on their phone support system.
The methods by which online support can be accessed are often restricted to a form 
of Internet chatting, whereby a customer will type their question in on an Internet-
connected device, and a representative will answer their question in a text response. 
Some companies, however, are beginning to offer voice and video chatting solutions 
as part of their online customer support solutions, but these are still fairly uncommon 
as of the time of writing. Companies also provide intelligent response systems, where 
questions and answers can be provided based on specific issues, for example: "Have 
you tried..." Then, if this automated system is not able to fix the issue, you will be 
transferred to a representative. As an example, Verizon wireless provides customers 
with the ability to connect to a customer or technical support representative 
immediately through a chat application implemented on the company's website. 
Additionally, the correct department can be immediately accessed by simply clicking 
on the department's chat link. Unlike with the automated phone system, a customer 
does not need to navigate a general automated system before being funneled to the 
correct department. 

Chapter 6
[ 119 ]
Additionally, should a customer need to speak with a different representative, within 
many chat services, a user can be automatically and instantaneously transferred to a 
representative in the correct department. Often, this results in a far more efficient and 
speedy customer service system compared with the more common phone-operated 
customer service systems.
Some customer support systems implement a hybrid of phone-operated and 
Internet-based customer methods. Often, this takes the form of a request by the 
automated phone system to the user that they fill out an online form with relevant 
information about their issue. Then, they are requested to redial the customer 
support number. Alternately, some businesses allow a user to fill out a request 
online, and then they are contacted by a customer service representative by phone 
and the issue is resolved based on the information the user submitted online.
SMS text
SMS text messaging is becoming increasingly common as a supplementary method 
of delivering customer service. In practice, this customer service solution works the 
same as a text chatting customer service system; a user will send a text message to 
a designated customer service number, and then will be given responses via a text 
message from that number. As with text messaging, this is advantageous because 
it allows a user to bypass the often frustrating automated voice systems present in 
phone-operated customer service systems. In the future, it is likely that businesses 
will develop new methods for providing customer support in the mobile space. Right 
now, the primary method is through text message, but we would not be surprised 
if, in the near future, businesses began to provide voice and video customer service 
through a mobile phone application similar to Skype.
One cool feature today is the ability for a company to take remote control of your 
system. This is not automatic and by default companies will not attempt this. Also, 
in many cases special software needs to be installed and/or executed. This is a 
risk—make sure you know the company and that you called the company and the 
company did not call you. Once the company is connected to your device, they can 
diagnose the issues and install fixes and/or send you a fix as needed.

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 120 ]
This is an age old issue. Never give out information and/or allow 
access to your personal positions if someone has called you. There 
are always risks with giving access to your devices for remote 
control. The risk is very high if someone calls you and says, "I am 
from your help desk, I need remote access to your device." Make 
sure you know who you are calling and if in doubt, don't allow 
access or disconnect the network connection. Please don't get us 
wrong on this point, you can be ask risk even if you make a call. If 
you think that someone has connected to your system without 
authority, then call your company security department and your 
service provider and ask for help. If in doubt, don't allow access.
The Service Level Agreement (SLA)
It is important for you, the end user, to understand the various types of Service Level 
Agreements that can impact you. Understanding SLAs can provide information on 
what you can expect from your company and/or your service provider. For example, 
will your company help you 24 hours a day for 7 days a week, or just Monday to 
Friday? For companies, providing customer service and technical support for their 
products can be a costly and daunting endeavor. Primarily, this is due to the vast 
breadth of services, which must be provided for any released product. Consider a 
cell phone plan. A carrier must not only provide cell phone service to its customers; 
it must also develop a system for addressing customer concerns and to ensure that 
their cell phone service is meeting or exceeding customer expectations. Otherwise, of 
course, the carrier risks losing its customers to rivals. To meet customer expectations, 
a company must provide a customer-friendly method for addressing concerns.
These include the following:
•	
Account services, such as balances or adjusting payment methods
•	
Problems with service, such as outages or dropped calls
•	
Sales issues, such as hardware or plan upgrades
•	
Technical services, such as setup assistance or technical support
All these services address numerous problems, which fall into each corresponding 
category. To address this vast array of issues, companies have developed guidelines 
that specify the exact scope of service, which they will be willing to provide to 
their customers for any released product. These guidelines are called Service Level 
Agreements (SLAs).

Chapter 6
[ 121 ]
SLAs may be considered as a form of liability protection from the perspective of 
a company, as they specify both the extent and limits of service, which customers 
might expect. For example, an SLA agreement might contain information regarding 
those cases in which hardware malfunctions will be covered under the company's 
manufacturer warranty. This detail would, by extension, also reveal those situations 
in which the manufacturer would not replace or repair hardware without charging 
the customer.
Similarly, an SLA might also provide specifics on the amount of time a customer 
might wait before their call is addressed, or on the priority particular customer issues 
might be given within the company's support structure. High priority issues might 
be a cell phone, which is unable to make or receive calls. An example of a lower 
priority issue may be password recovery in the case of a customer that forgot their 
account password.
SLAs are important to you, the end user, because they clearly define the extent of 
services that you can expect and even demand if you feel that your needs are not 
being met. Alternately, of course, SLAs can also indicate the limits of a company's 
services. In most cases, SLAs can be easily located on a company's website. One 
example is https://business.verizon.com/MyBusinessAccount/one.portal?_
nfpb=true&_pageLabel=gb_policy&page_id=tos_fios_biz_bef_jan92006. 
Within the context of customer service and technical support, SLAs clearly define a 
number of expected metrics. These can range from the time it takes in seconds for a 
call to be answered to the percentage of calls in which the user disconnected while 
waiting for a representative. While, internally, SLAs are an important method for 
assessing efficiency within a technical support system, for the end user, these same 
SLAs can be used as a method of determining what sort of service you can expect 
when you call.
The following points show where you can start to get to know your SLAs:
•	
Ask your company what service levels they offer/support
•	
Ask your service provider what service level they offer
•	
Also, check with your hardware vendor (or extended warranty) what service 
levels they offer

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 122 ]
OS operators, manufacturers, and 
service providers
Depending on a smartphone's error, it is not always easy to know which company 
to call. For example, imagine that your iPhone spontaneously powers off every 
time you attempt to load your Angry Birds game application. In this case, you 
have three possible customer or technical support parties that you could contact: 
the Angry Birds developer Rovio, Apple's technical support for assistance with its 
hardware or OS, or your cell phone carrier (AT&T, Verizon Wireless, and so on). 
In this case, it is unlikely to be an issue with your cell phone carrier; the problem 
is more likely associated with the iPhone software or hardware, or with the Angry 
Birds application itself. As you can see, though, deciding which party to contact 
for technical support can sometimes be a difficult decision when it comes to your 
smartphone. Although one could decide to call each number until they get the 
solution they want, most of us would prefer to spend as little time as possible on the 
phone talking to technical support representatives.
The following three categories are the most common categories for technical support 
parties. However, it is important to keep in mind that these categories are not iron-
clad, as they do overlap in some cases. The previous example of the iPhone is one 
such case; Apple is the party to contact regarding both hardware and software 
issues. This is because, unlike other companies, Apple both develops the software 
and produces the hardware for its products. This may be contrasted with numerous 
Windows and Android phones, wherein the manufacturer and the software 
developers are different companies.
O/S Operators, Manufacturers, and Service
Providers
Applications
Hardware
Operating System or
User Interface

Chapter 6
[ 123 ]
Hardware
You should contact the manufacturer of your device if you have a hardware 
malfunction. Toby's example from the beginning of this chapter is a good example 
of a hardware malfunction; he dropped his phone and now the device will not 
work. Other examples of hardware malfunctions would be broken or cracked cases, 
water damage, and sun damage. In addition to these easily observable malfunctions, 
however, there are also numerous other nonvisible malfunctions, which are issues 
with the hardware rather than the software or applications.
Other device issues
Imagine that you turned on your smartphone one day and discovered that it failed 
to load your normal home screen. In other words, your smartphone was unable to 
launch its operating system. In this case, your smartphone may have experienced a 
hardware failure in the form of memory corruption. This could also be a processor 
malfunction or failure as well. These sorts of errors do not always occur from 
dropping or otherwise, physically damaging a device; they can occur from normal 
usage, thus seeming spontaneous to the average user.
Generally, a user may assume that an error or malfunction is a hardware issue if 
their phone is exhibiting one of the following examples:
•	
Discolored screen
•	
Distorted or "fuzzy" reception on calls or in music playback
•	
Cracked, peeling, or otherwise damaged casing on the device
•	
Failure to boot to the home screen (inability to load the operating system)
•	
Embedded operating system issues
•	
Device spontaneously powers off without user input
•	
Inability to turn on device (can be a broke device and/or firmware)
Operating system or user interface
You should contact your operating system or user interface developer if your 
device is experiencing a software error related to the device's basic interface. Every 
smartphone utilizes an operating system. The three most common mobile operating 
systems are as follows:
•	
iOS
•	
Android
•	
Windows

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 124 ]
In the case of iOS, Apple is both the developer and manufacturer. However, in the 
cases of Android and Windows phones, the user will need to determine if the error 
is hardware or software in nature, and then to contact the appropriate party. This is a 
key point—be sure and ask the sales person (or website)—who you should contact if 
you have an issue. The answer may not always be the company that makes the OS.
Here are a few examples of errors relating to the interface of an operating system 
for a smartphone. Imagine that you turned on your Windows phone, and it was 
able to load the home screen without issue. If you were then unable to load your 
phone's factory-installed e-mail application, and that attempting to load this 
application caused your phone to turn off altogether, this would likely be an error 
with the operating system or user interface. In this case, a user should contact the 
vendor technical support to resolve this issue, as it would most likely be an issue 
related to the operation of Windows on the smartphone. Another example of this 
sort of malfunction might be an inability to load a contact list, calendar, or to access 
the general settings on a device. Essentially, if a user is able to load the phone 
into the operating system, but is unable to access factory-installed or pre-installed 
applications or features, then the malfunction is likely to be an operating system or 
user interface error.
If a user experiences any of the following errors, he/she may assume that his/her 
phone is experiencing an operating system or user-interface error:
•	
Inability to load device settings
•	
Inability to load various factory-installed applications
•	
Phone crashes when attempting to access essential applications
•	
User is unable to change or update settings
Application issues
A user should contact the developer of a particular application if the error is isolated 
to the operation of the application and does not seem to be replicated with any other 
applications. Application errors are relatively common; how many times have you 
attempted to load an application after downloading it from the App store, only to 
discover that it fails to load or occasionally crashes while in use? Often, applications 
may experience difficulties if they were designed with an earlier operating system 
release in mind and were not updated to account for recent releases. In other cases, 
the applications themselves were simply not adequately bug tested before release, 
and thus some users experience problems with an application.

Chapter 6
[ 125 ]
Determining whether the issue is an application malfunction or an operating system 
malfunction can be difficult due to the nature of modern smartphones. Often, what 
may appear to be an error related to a particular application may actually be a 
more generalized malfunction within the operating system or even, occasionally, 
the hardware itself. The main criteria that might reveal your error as an application 
error is that the malfunction or issue is isolated within one particular application. For 
example, if your Angry Birds game application continually crashes, but if no other 
applications are exhibiting a similar behavior, then your error may be an application 
malfunction. Similarly, if your Twitter application fails to load, but all other 
applications operate normally, and you are experiencing no other issues in any other 
aspect of your phone, the error is probably an application malfunction.
To verify that a malfunction is an application malfunction, a user should take the 
following steps:
1.	 Determine which particular actions are causing the error (for example; 
loading the application, adjusting settings within the application, or 
performing a particular task within the application). Your support team may 
ask you if you can run the application on a difference device.
2.	 Open another application, and perform a similar task. If the error does not 
occur within another application, continue testing; a user should test at least 
three applications before making a determination.
3.	 If the error occurs in the other application, the issue is not with the particular 
application, but is likely an operating system or hardware malfunction.
4.	 If the error does not occur with any other applications, then the error is likely 
an application error related to one particular application.
5.	 Before calling customer service or technical support, a user should uninstall 
the application and re-download it. Contact customer service only if the error 
continues to occur after re-installing and running the application.
How to get the most out of your  
technical support experience if  
you have a malfunction
Even after determining that you have a malfunction, there are still a number of 
steps that should be taken before picking up the phone. While it may be tempting to 
simply make the call and work out the details as you go, you may find that, by taking 
the time to prepare the necessary information and complete some essential research, 
you can greatly reduce the amount of time spent on the phone. Additionally, you 
will likely find that the quality of the assistance you're given is greater.

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 126 ]
Before you make the call – information, 
password problems, and your malfunction
The first step to take before contacting customer service is to ensure that you 
have all the information, which they might request, already in front of you. This 
might include your address, credit card information, and account information. All 
information that you think might be relevant to your device should be prepared 
in advance; this includes basic personal information, which most customer service 
systems require to validate your identity. By preparing this information, you will be 
able to reduce the amount of time spent on preliminary questions before addressing 
the specifics of your malfunction. This information can also be useful before speaking 
to a representative, as it can assist you with navigating the automated touchtone 
menu that many customer service systems utilize.
You should also familiarize yourself with your device's warranty information. In 
some cases, your malfunction may render your device irreparable. For this reason, 
you should take the time to become familiar with warranty information, so that you 
understand whether the company will be able to replace your device. Information to 
which you should pay particular attention to is whether certain malfunctions will be 
considered as "normal use". The implications of this term will be discussed further on.
In addition to personal and device information, you should also be prepared to 
describe in detail the exact nature of your problem. This will enable support to 
find the issues quickly and/or see if support can repair the issues. For example, 
if the error seems to be an application error, you should be prepared to describe 
exactly how the error is manifested. Does it occur after loading an application, or 
only after performing a particular task? Does the application run effectively if you 
avoid performing a particular task, or does it crash after a certain amount of time 
without input? If you believe that describing the specifics of your malfunction will be 
challenging, do not hesitate to write or type some notes for your personal reference. 
By writing down the exact steps under which your malfunction occurs, you may find 
that describing it to a representative will be easier.
The following is a checklist of information, which you should prepare before 
contacting customer service or technical support: 
•	
Account-holder's personal information (name, address, and other  
personal details)
•	
Account username and password
Provided in Chapter 8, Getting Your Life Back After You've 
Been Hacked, is a tracking checklist for customer service 
and technical support.

Chapter 6
[ 127 ]
•	
Warranty information (or extended warranty) 
•	
Device-specific information (the device's serial number or model ID)
•	
Desired department (billing, technical support, hardware department, 
software department) – this is very important with BYOD and/or company 
assigned devices
•	
If necessary, prepare a written or typed outline of the nature of  
your malfunction
How to make the most of your time while  
on the line
You've spent five minutes navigating the company's touchtone system, and another 
fifteen minutes waiting on hold for a representative. Now, it is important that you 
take steps to ensure that your problem is addressed adequately and thoroughly. 
Otherwise, you may find yourself starting the process all over again once you realize 
that the malfunction has not been fixed.
Three important steps can be taken to obtain the best results from customer service 
and technical support representatives:
Please be polite and remain calm, remember the 
representative is only doing their job!
•	
Answer every question the representative asks.
•	
Do not "skip" steps when describing your problem to a representative.
•	
Be sure and get the representative's name and the call number. This is 
an opportunity for you to log your steps and who you spoke with. This 
information may be important later.
•	
Test your device numerous times before concluding your call.
Answer every question
Customer service representatives are often trained based on a "script"; a set of 
questions that they are required to ask in a particular order. These scripts vary from 
company to company, but many utilize similar questions. For example, one common 
preliminary question for customer support scripts at computer companies is related 
to the power supply of a device; "is your device plugged in?"

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 128 ]
Basic questions, such as these, can be frustrating to answer, as many callers will be 
knowledgeable enough to have checked into these matters themselves before calling 
customer service. However, it's important to remember that these questions are 
applicable to enough customers to justify their inclusion in the company's "script".
Imagine how much time might be wasted if a customer called in about a 
malfunctioning computer only to discover that, an hour later, they had forgotten 
to plug it into the outlet. By including these basic questions, customer service 
representatives can address those callers with the simplest issues in a short and 
effective manner.
Basically, take the time to help the representative; in this way they will able to more 
effectively pinpoint the nature of your malfunction.
Do not skip steps when describing your problem
If possible, you should refrain from the temptation to "skip" basic steps when 
describing the nature of your malfunction to a customer service representative. Basic 
steps might include: turning on the device, loading the offending application, or 
entering your password information. While it may seem intuitive to think that the 
representative will know that you have taken these steps to arrive at your malfunction, 
it is important to remember that the representative cannot see or interact with your 
device personally. The representative is entirely reliant on you to provide them with 
detailed information so that they can accurately conceptualize how the malfunction 
occurs on your device. If you leave out basic information, you may unknowingly 
provide the representative with an inaccurate understanding of your device's 
malfunction, which might then lead to an inaccurate diagnosis of the problem.
Test your device
At the end of your call, you have hopefully been able to resolve your malfunction, 
and your device is working properly once again. However, you should hold the 
representative on the line until after you have verified that the malfunction has 
actually been fixed. For example, if the malfunction occurs while loading your 
smartphone's e-mail application, you should load the application numerous 
times to test it. You may also wish to power off your device, then power it on and 
test the application once again. Only after numerous tests should you allow the 
representative to disconnect; after all, you don't want to have to start the customer 
support process over from the beginning.

Chapter 6
[ 129 ]
What to do if your malfunction has not been 
resolved
If, at the conclusion of the call, your problem has not been resolved, do not allow 
the representative to refuse responsibility for the error. Assuming that you have 
performed the steps previously listed to verify the nature of your malfunction, you 
should be confident that you have contacted the proper party. Therefore, you should 
insist that the representative addresses your malfunction and assists you with a 
resolution. If necessary, be prepared to request to speak to another representative or 
to the representative's supervisor. Be firm; this is their product, after all.
In some cases, the malfunction may be serious enough to render your device 
irreparable. Assuming that you took the preliminary steps, you will be aware of 
your rights as they relate to the company's warranty policy. While a representative is 
unlikely to misrepresent their company's warranty policy, you should still consider it 
your own responsibility to ensure that a company follows their warranty policies to 
the letter.
Warranties in the mobile space
Warranties are not new, and have been provided for seemingly countless 
commodities for decades. Smartphones present new challenges to the old 
warranty models because these devices are often simultaneously covered by their 
manufacturer and the cellular provider. Navigating this web of warranties to 
determine which one applies can be challenging. With some basic information, a user 
can determine the extent and limitations of warranties on their smartphones.
Basic terms
Go into a big-box store and purchase an item. In all likelihood, you will be offered 
an extended warranty of one type or another. Depending on the item, the price and 
duration of this warranty may fluctuate greatly. For a new television, for example, 
the warranty might cost thirty-five dollars and cover your television for damages 
for a period of three years. You may even be offered the opportunity to extend the 
warranty beyond three years for an additional thirty-five dollars.

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 130 ]
If you ask what sorts of damages the extended warranty covers, the associate 
might bombard you with an array of terms and stipulations. The associate might 
inform you; for example, that the warranty covers all damages outside of those 
caused by "normal use", or that the warranty extends beyond the limitations of 
the manufacturer's "lifetime warranty". The associate might also begin discussing 
particular damages such as water damage or sun damage. To determine whether 
an extended warranty may be a good investment, or even if an existing warranty 
applies to a malfunctioning device, a user should become familiar with some 
essential vocabulary, such as the ones mentioned as follows:
•	
Manufacturer's warranty: As indicated by the name, this warranty 
is provided by the manufacturer of a device. For most devices, the 
manufacturer's warranty provides for repair or replacement for a 
period of at least one year, and is often limited to a number of particular 
malfunctions. This warranty is usually intended as a method of ensuring 
customer satisfaction when a defective product manages to slip through a 
manufacturer's Quality Assurance department. Because most malfunctions 
are not due to a defective or faulty assembly, many consumers rarely utilize 
the manufacturer's warranty to repair and replace their devices. Two notable 
examples of a manufacturer's warranty in recent memory are Toyota's 2010 
Accelerator Pedal recalls and Microsoft's 2009 warranty extension on its Xbox 
360 games consoles.
•	
Lifetime warranty: This warranty is often, though not always, intended to 
cover a product for its "lifetime". Unfortunately, this term is problematic 
because the lifetime of a product is defined by the manufacturer or seller in 
the warranty's contract. For example, consider a consumer that purchases a 
mattress with a "Lifetime Warranty", and consider that this same mattress 
suffers severe damage eight years after its purchase. The warranty contract 
on the mattress may specify that the lifetime warranty is only applicable 
within a period of five years. In this case, the consumer would not be able to 
utilize the lifetime warranty to replace their product, because the damages 
occurred eight years after purchase. In fact, according to a 2010 Denver Post 
article, lifetime warranties are actually little more than a marketing tool 
because the supposed "lifetime" of a product is whatever the manufacturer or 
seller says it is (http://www.denverpost.com/business/ci_16380129).

Chapter 6
[ 131 ]
•	
Normal use/usage: This is a common term used to categorize a wide array of 
damages and malfunctions. Specifically, normal use means any damages or 
malfunctions that are not due to defective or faulty assembly. For example, if 
a user drops his/her phone and the phone's screen is cracked as a result, this 
damage would be considered normal use. The same may be said for other 
common malfunctions or damages, such as scratched casing, sun damage, 
or water damage. Companies utilize normal use as a method of assessing 
whether certain damages are due to manufacturer error, and therefore 
whether the manufacturer's warranty applies. If a malfunction is determined 
to be the result of normal use, a manufacturer may refuse to replace or repair 
a user's device.
•	
Extended warranty: These are warranties which, as evidenced by the name, 
often "extend" beyond the duration of the manufacturer's warranty. In 
many cases, extended warranties also cover a wider variety of damages and 
malfunctions than manufacturers' warranties do. For example, an extended 
warranty on a television may cover a television for a period of three years, 
or two years longer than the duration of many manufacturers' warranties. 
Additionally, this extended warranty may cover all damages aside from 
theft or loss; if the user can bring the item in, they can utilize the warranty to 
obtain a replacement or repair. For the consumer, this means that extended 
warranties cover both manufacturers' errors and those damages which may 
fall under normal use. Extended warranties are almost always provided as 
an additional purchase, or add-on, for products. The most familiar product 
for which extended warranties apply for most consumers is on automobiles. 
Increasingly, however, extended warranties are being offered on devices 
ranging from televisions to smartphones and MP3 players.
•	
Implied warranty: Unlike the other terms previously listed, this type 
of warranty is unwritten and assumed. Many countries, including the 
United States, contain legal stipulations that any product must meet basic 
requirements, which are related to a product's claimed functionality. 
Essentially, this means that a product must possess the capabilities claimed 
by its seller or producer. For example, if an item is sold as a toothbrush, the 
item must be capable of performing the function of adequately brushing 
teeth. While this concept of implied warranty can be subject to interpretation, 
it is most useful for the average consumer as it pertains to false advertising 
accusations; does the product do what the seller or manufacturer said it can?
•	
As is: Products sold "as is" rarely, if ever, have warranties of any sort. These 
products are often used or worn products, which the seller may offer at 
a discounted price. Some sellers will offer extended warranties for as is 
products, but many consumers should be aware that these products are more 
prone to problems than brand new ones. One common as is product at many 
big-box stores are display models.

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 132 ]
•	
Cell phone insurance: As it pertains to cell phones and smartphones, 
insurance is a type of warranty that may be considered as a type of extended 
warranty. Cell phone insurance is a product offered for an additional charge 
by many cellular providers. By purchasing the cell phone insurance, a user 
will be entitled to a replacement device should their device break or otherwise 
malfunction for various reasons. Some cell phone insurance products even 
guarantee replacement in the event that a device is stolen or lost.
In the United States, the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) 
contains the legal stipulations for warranties and insurance 
on goods. For the curious, the complete text of the UCC is 
available on Cornell University's website at http://www.
law.cornell.edu/ucc/.
Also, in the UK, consider the Sale of Goods ACT when caters 
for an "implied warranty"; refer to the following link:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1893/71/
pdfs/ukpga_18930071_en.pdf
Navigating the web of warranties
Knowing which warranty applies to your particular device or malfunction is not 
always easy. Just as it is important to know which party to call for customer support 
issues, it is also important to know which, if any, warranty applies to your issue in 
the case of a broken or malfunctioning device. 
Consider Toby's smartphone from the beginning of this chapter; he broke his device's 
screen by dropping it down the stairs. His device is unusable in its current state, 
and must be repaired or replaced. Toby ultimately decided to call the manufacturer, 
but he was unable to have the device replaced for free. This is because he dropped 
his phone down the stairs, and therefore the malfunction was due to "normal use" 
and would thus not be covered under the manufacturer's warranty. However, 
consider that Toby had decided to purchase some cell phone insurance from his 
cellular provider when he began his cellular contract over a year prior. Because he'd 
purchased this insurance, Toby could simply call his cellular provider and have them 
replace the device at no cost to him. Ask the company that is replacing the device if 
this device is new or a refurbished system.
The preceding scenario would appear to be fairly intuitive; Toby would choose to 
replace his device at no cost to himself because he had already purchased cell phone 
insurance. In some situations, however, this solution may not be so intuitive.

Chapter 6
[ 133 ]
If Toby's device had broken due to faulty assembly, he could have decided to utilize 
the manufacturer's warranty to replace his device instead of his cell phone insurance. 
Depending on Toby's cell phone insurance contract, using the manufacturer's 
warranty could be preferable; this is because most cell phone insurance contracts 
contain stipulations or limitations. For example, Toby's cell phone insurance contract 
may specify that the insurance only applies to one device. If Toby were to decide 
to have his device replaced by the cellular provider instead of the manufacturer, he 
would no longer have cell phone insurance, as it would have expired after one use.
As you can see, deciding which warranty applies to your device can sometimes 
be complicated. For this reason, it is important to carefully read the warranty or 
insurance contracts for your devices. This is especially important because warranties 
can vary much from one device to another and one cellular provider to another. 
Before purchasing any sort of extended warranty or cell phone insurance, you should 
carefully compare the particulars of such warranty contracts with the manufacturer's 
warranty. In some cases, an extended warranty may provide little benefit above and 
beyond the manufacturer's warranty, and therefore may not be a wise investment.
Summing it up
As we become increasingly reliant upon our smartphones to conduct essential 
business tasks, maintaining and replacing these devices is also becoming more 
important. Should your device break, it is not always easy to know which party to 
contact to have your device replaced or repaired. While it is possible to simply call 
one party after another until your issue has been resolved, this is simply not a wise 
use of your time. By familiarizing yourself with the nature of technical support and 
warranties, you can reduce the amount of time between the manifestation of your 
error and having your functioning device in hand.
As BYOD becomes increasingly common, more employees will be expected  
to maintain or replace their malfunctioning devices. With the preceding steps  
and information, you should be able to resolve your issue in an effective and  
efficient manner.
Warranties
So far in this book we have defined the various types of warranties:
•	
Manufacturer's warranty
•	
Lifetime warranty
•	
Standard warranties
•	
Cell phone insurance

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 134 ]
•	
Extended warranties
•	
Insurance
Our focus is on extended warranties and why you may want to invest or not invest 
into this type of warranty for your mobile device.
It is amazing that today you can purchase an extended warranty on almost any 
product. There are even companies that sell low priced snorkeling masks and will try 
to sell you an extended warranty. In general, extended warranties have a very high 
profit margin, so many companies will sell these warranties; even on toys.
Here is the scenario—you have an expensive mobile device and/or smartphone. You 
have obtained this device via a discount as part of a package that you purchased that 
comes with voice, data, and a device. One example is where you want to purchase 
a $500 device, but if you purchase the mobile service at the same time then you get 
the device for $150.00. Many companies will bundle services and devices together. 
At first glance this looks to be a really great deal. Now being a smart person you 
ask, "What if my device is damaged and/or stops working?" The person behind 
the counter now says, "We are here to help you, for just $19.99 a month you can get 
additional coverage if you damage your device." Also, the nice sales person tells you, 
"If you damage your device, you need to pay $500.00 to get a new one, unless you 
have our coverage." This story sound familiar?
Definitions
Before we get too far in this discussion let's define what type of smart device/phone 
you have. Your phone will fall into the following categories:
•	
A device for personal use only
•	
Work device provided by your company
•	
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) for company use
Overall there would be little use to purchase any type of insurance/warranty on a 
device that is provided by your company; check with your company and ask in any 
case. The question you need to ask is, "If I drop my device in the Gulf of Mexico, 
who pays for it?" Also, your company may limit the ability for you to purchase an 
extended warranty, even if you wanted to spend your own money.
The scenario is where you (the consumer) are paying for your own device; for either 
your personal use or BYOD.
Before you spend any money on the extended warranty and/or insurance be sure 
and check to see what the manufacturer's warranty includes. Most mobile devices 
will include a one to two year warranty.

Chapter 6
[ 135 ]
Types of extended warranties
There are several types of extended warranties, which include the following:
•	
Verbal: This is where the sales person tells you, "Sure that is covered!" 
Really? If I put my device in the driveway and back over it then your 
company will cover the repair? Always ask for the written details for any 
verbal promise.
•	
Included: Most to all devices have some type of warranty. There are rare 
cases where a device is warrantied for life.
•	
Cost based on a recurring charge: This is where you (the owner) will pay a 
monthly or yearly charge.
•	
Embedded charge: This is where a charge is added to your bill. This is very 
common and in some cases the consumer does not know they have been 
charged. There is also the issue that the consumer does not know they have 
this coverage.
Keep in mind that warranties will be specifically based on 
the manufacturer, the vendor that sells the product, and from 
what country the product is sold. We have just experienced 
this. We attempted to purchase a product from a company that 
is based in the United States. In this case we were physically 
located outside the USA in a Caribbean country. The seller 
told us that once we purchased the device that we would need 
to return the product back to the vendor in the USA in order 
to get service. In other words, once we walked out the door 
of the shop, we had no local warranty and/or support. The 
moral of this story is: just because you purchase a product 
from a known vendor, you may not get local service and every 
warranty can be different from country to country.
Extended warranty coverage
There are many different types of coverage; the following are a few examples:
•	
Product defects: Most products include some type of limited coverage if  
a device does not work. Most products will put a time limit on defect 
support; for example, 90 days or one year. Again, very few will provide 
lifetime support.

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 136 ]
•	
Damage: This is a broad category. In some cases the device can be covered 
in the event that it is physically damaged. In a few rare cases, a device can 
be covered if it gets wet. There are also device options that can provide 
"damage" coverage. If you determine you need this, read the details carefully, 
most companies that sell these options provide a lot of limits in the event of 
physical damage or if the device has water damage.
•	
Lost: Overall this is mostly some type of insurance. Check with the vendor if 
these rules apply to your device. This book covers in detail the impact to you 
if your device is used for work. Many companies will execute a remote wipe 
if you report your device as lost. Always check with your company if your 
device is lost.
•	
Software and applications: As part of this process be sure and check to see if 
a bad application will be covered. In most cases all you need to do is to reset 
the device. But you need to read the details of your manufacturer's warranty 
and any extended warranty in any case. Also, if you jailbreak your device 
then the warranty may be void.
Extended warranty considerations
As we have noted in this section, it is up to you if you think you need to spend 
additional money on an extended warranty. Let's review some of the considerations 
on why you may want one:
•	
Cost: This is always an important issue. If the warranty is free, then you are 
home free. But are you? As we have noted the cost may be embedded into 
your monthly bill. Make sure that free is really free.
•	
The written statement: As with any contract be sure and get a copy and read 
it. One example is, "This warranty does not cover water damage." Also watch 
out for:
°°
What country are you getting the warranty in?
°°
What state? Yes, there are differences from state to state.
°°
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC): This is a set of laws from the 
United States that describe the impact of implied warranties.
•	
As-is: Watch out for as-is devices; a good deal is not always a good deal.
•	
A multiyear plan: There are a lot of people who will purchase a multiyear 
mobile service plan. Along with these plans is an opportunity to purchase a 
device at a discount.

Chapter 6
[ 137 ]
To purchase an extended warranty or not?
Now that you have the basic definitions, let's now guide you through the decision 
process. Review these points and make your own decision:
•	
Is your company providing the device for you? Will your company cover the 
replacement if the device is lost or damaged?
°°
Be sure and ask up front. Your company may require that you sign 
a Mobile Acceptable Use Policy in order to receive a device. Be sure 
and read this document and then ask your company what the rules 
are if your device is lost or damaged.
•	
Is the warranty the same if you purchased the device online versus a  
physical store?
°°
Be sure and check the details of a potential purchase if you get your 
device online. Also, determine the process on how to get your device 
replaced/repaired.
•	
If you purchase an extended warranty or insurance then is there  
a deductable?
°°
Find out if there is a deductable charge that is applied if you try to 
get your device repaired or replaced. Be sure that you can add any 
deductable charges to the overall cost of your warranty changes.
•	
If you purchase an as-is device, is the warranty the same and/or can you 
purchase an extended warranty?
°°
There are limits to warranties and as-is devices based on the UCC
•	
Does the manufacturer's warranty provide the coverage you need?
°°
This is really the big question. At the end of the day you need to 
balance the coverage, the cost of the coverage, and your personal 
budget. Another important point is to read the terms and conditions 
of the base warranty as well as the extended warranty. It is OK to 
ask the sales person about what is covered, just also have the sales 
person show you the coverage in writing. Also, be sure and check the 
warranty on the battery. Ask if the manufacturer's warranty covers 
the battery during the life of the device and/or the warranty. If you 
are considering purchasing an extended warranty, consider the fact 
that you may be paying for a warranty on top of the manufacturer's 
warranty. Be sure and ask about the coverage time frame of the 
warranty. It is possible to purchase an extended warranty that covers 
the same time frame as the manufacturer's warranty. The overlap of 
coverage would not be cost effective.

Support and Warranty Insurance
[ 138 ]
•	
Is the warranty worth the paper it is printed on?
°°
Another important question. Ask the sales person, "Who actually 
owns the warranty?" In some cases the warranty is not being 
provided by the company that manufactured the device. If the third-
party company goes out of business, you cannot get your device 
repaired/replaced. Take the time to research the company that offers 
the warranty before you spend your money.
•	
How often do you change your device?
°°
Some companies will provide a clause in the warranty that you can 
"upgrade" to a new device. Some people like to change a device as 
soon as there is a new feature every three months, in this case you 
may not want to sign up for a two-year warranty.
•	
Does your device break often?
°°
Take a few minutes and check out your favorite Internet search 
engine. See how often small appliances need to be repaired. 
Consumer reports provide information on repair rates on a large 
range of devices. Check out http://www.consumerreports.
org/cro/electronics-computers/resource-center/buying-
electronics/overview/buying-electronics-ov.htm.
•	
Does your credit card offer better protection?
°°
Some credit cards offer to double the length of the manufacturer's 
warranty. Check with your credit card company and see what  
they offer.
In a nutshell
As pointed out, it is up to you if you think you need to spend money to add a 
warranty, or insurance, to your device or smartphone. At the end of the day you 
need to make that decision. Use this summary to guide you:
•	
Companies make a lot of money from extended warranties; today's 
electronics do not break that much.
•	
In some cases an extended warranty is redundant to the manufacturer's 
warranty.
•	
Is the device a company-owned device? If so, ask your company before you 
try to purchase any type of insurance and/or warranty.
•	
Are you buying an extended warranty for peace of mind?

Chapter 6
[ 139 ]
We do recommend that you review the data we provided and make your  
own decision.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed how to get your device serviced in the event of a 
significant malfunction. Topics covered include the following:
•	
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) and device malfunctions
•	
Service Level Agreements and how they matter to you
•	
Customer support systems: phone, SMS, or chat
•	
The three types of smartphone device malfunctions: hardware, operating 
system, and application
•	
Steps to take before calling customer support
•	
Steps to take while "on the line" with customer support
•	
Different types of warranty products, including extended warranties
•	
How to best determine which warranty applies to your malfunction


Baby Boomers, Teens,  
and Tweens
We have looked at managing your mobile device for ordinary usage, risks to your 
device and personal information, ways to protect them, and various types of support 
available to you if issues arise. Mobile devices have come a long way in a very short 
amount of time, from simple phones to fully functioning computers. The possibilities 
are almost endless. There are other, less obvious risks which may arise from using 
mobile devices. While they may never touch your life, it is important to be aware 
of them if you are responsible for minors or have family members or friends in the 
over-50 age group. In this chapter, we will look at some of the most important risks 
and developments.
A mobile device, by its nature, is usually small and portable. Small, portable things 
have a tendency to get lost. Shiny mobile devices are attractive to thieves, who 
can casually swipe them from a restaurant table or shopping counter as they walk 
by. The information stored for quick retrieval would be lost. Worse, it would be 
available to the thief for nefarious purposes. The same information, which is so 
helpful in reminding us how to contact people and where we need to be at a certain 
time, is also useful to a thief collecting personal information.
The thief could know where you are during your appointment, or where your 
children are. He or she could also know when you are not at home.

Baby Boomers, Teens, and Tweens
[ 142 ]
The thief can text your family members and friends with your mobile device, thus 
appearing to be you. There would be no vocal cues to warn the other person that you 
are not the person at the other end of the conversation. While some wording choices 
may provide clues, often the clues would not be noticed immediately. The family 
member or friend may provide the thief with personal or even sensitive information 
based on trusting you. The thief would be texting in order to obtain that information 
using social engineering techniques, with experience in doing so. Your contact would 
likely be unsuspecting and far less experienced, thus more likely to offer up the very 
information the thief is after.
The boom in baby boomers
Age has a funny way of changing bodies. The bones creak, the hearing starts to fail, 
the eyes lose some of their ability to focus, and the memory plays tricks by hiding, 
somewhere in the recesses of our minds, those things we have always known. We 
seek ways to compensate for these changes, such as pain medicines and hearing aids. 
Mobile devices can also provide compensation through built-in features that may not 
have been designed for that purpose, but can nevertheless prove helpful.
For example, many smartphones and tablets today allow you to expand the screen, 
thus increasing the size of the font and items displayed. This can be very helpful for 
eyes struggling to read normal-sized font. The devices also have an ever-expanding 
memory available for the user to save important information such as names, phone 
numbers, and appointments.
As more and more people reach the age 50 years and older, manufacturers of many 
types of products are finding it beneficial to target products to the needs of this age 
group. Mobile device manufacturers have been busy with that effort for quite a 
while. They have made available cell phones with large, easy-to-read number pads, 
and simple instructions (for people who are not used to technology). This effort will 
continue to grow in importance over the coming decades. Today, there are more 
people over the age of 60 years, than children under five years. By 2022, the number 
of people over 60 years will surpass 1 billion, an increase of about 200 million people 
since 2012 (http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2012/oct/01/un-
report-action-need-ageing-population).
The number of available features benefitting older people will continue to grow, 
whether through planning or through coincidence. Some features to look for: better 
coordination between hands-free earpieces and hearing aids, touch screens and key 
pads more compatible with shaking hands, and more apps targeting the interests of 
retired people. The device shown is one of the examples of a mobile phone with large 
font and buttons, making its use easier for people with poor eyesight or shaky hands.

Chapter 7
[ 143 ]
Imagine the benefits of a substantial amount of memory in a small mobile device to 
a person whose memory is starting to fail. With a few taps on the screen, the device 
can offer-up reminders for next week's doctor appointments, ring an alarm each 
time a medicine needs to be taken, and even display the name and dosage of the 
medicine. Searching for a lost address book would be a thing of the past, because all 
contact information for family, friends, acquaintances, and business contacts would 
be at one's fingertips. For people who forget ATM PINs, e-mail IDs and passwords, 
and bank account information, the mobile device could be a handy place to store it 
all, for quick retrieval when needed.
There is an inherent risk with that idea. As mentioned previously, all of the 
information stored in the device could be available to the finder, if the device were 
lost or stolen. Extra precautions, such as password protection, would be needed to 
ensure that access to the information was restricted.
Colliding generations
We've seen it coming, the workplace collision of two generations with very different 
communication skills. We are already working on the cleanup, but probably missed 
the moment of impact. Can you recall when you first realized that the new college 
hire in your meeting was responding in a way foreign to the experienced staff? 
Perhaps you couldn't quite put your finger on what was different, or maybe you 
noticed the tempo was a bit off, a bit faster than usual. Maybe you noticed that the 
new college hire reacted to levels of management differently, or paid no attention to 
the hierarchy that is long revered as an integral part of the organization.

Baby Boomers, Teens, and Tweens
[ 144 ]
You may be asking yourself, "What does this have to do with the future of 
technology and protecting myself?" The answer is, "A lot".
People growing up in the second decade of the 2000s communicate electronically 
far more than only one generation prior (http://www.educause.edu/research-
and-publications/books/educating-net-generation/convenience-
communications-and-control-how-students-use-technology, http://www.
cellular-news.com/story/45544.php?ModPagespeed=noscript). They not 
only communicate in person, but also via text, e-mail, and videoconferencing. On 
the positive side, they are able to remain in contact more often with more people 
simultaneously than their parents could. On the other hand, they are missing many 
valuable aspects of face-to-face communications and possibly even parts of the 
communications they are involved in due to multi-tasking.
In the late 2012, the New York Times revealed that the results of surveys focused 
on the attention span of students aged 8 to 18 years. Of the teachers surveyed, 90 
percent noticed a marked decline in attention spans and the quality of students' work 
compared to students even a decade ago. The teachers largely blamed this on the 
students' increased exposure to technology, its entertainment value, and its impact 
on attention spans. One teacher remarked, "What's going to happen when they don't 
have constant entertainment?" Teachers have implemented several approaches for 
addressing these challenges, as follows:
•	
Adding more individual tutoring sessions
•	
Developing more dynamic and flexible teaching styles
•	
Coaching students on how to work through challenging assignments
•	
Using educational video games and digital presentations
(http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/01/education/technology-is-changing-
how-students-learn-teachers-say.html?_r=0) A technologist at HP stated 
that technology's quick interactions will be detrimental to focusing on the harder 
problems, and that we will probably see stagnation in many areas of technology, 
even social venues, such as literature (http://mashable.com/2012/02/29/
technology-effects-on-childrens-brains/).
How does the shorter attention span tie to your business meeting? How is 
technology involved? The meeting requires concentration for an extended period of 
time, providing little drama (other than the occasional argument), and allowing only 
one person to act at a time. People reaching adulthood today grew up on technology 
that trained their brains to work in a contradictory environment. Meetings and 
the traditional work environment require long-term concentration, listening and 
absorbing verbal dialogue, and producing results that often take considerable time 
to develop. Today's technology reinforces instant results with drama. The challenges 
encountered by teachers in the classroom have migrated to the workplace.

Chapter 7
[ 145 ]
Speaking of the younger generation…
A US study in the spring of 2012 confirmed the continued rise in cell phone 
ownership among minors. The percentage of high school students with cell phones, 
85 percent, is not surprising, although finding almost the same percentage of 
ownership (83.5 percent) for middle schoolers is. The numbers continue to surprise 
as we go down a few grades, with fifth graders at 39 percent, fourth graders at 26.5 
percent, and third graders at 19 percent. Third graders are usually nine years old; 
thus the study's findings show that one in five nine year olds carries a cell phone 
(http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57411576-93/one-fifth-of-third-
graders-own-cell-phones/). This percentage will have even more meaning as we 
look at the corresponding risks children face due to mobile devices.
Cell phone ownership among the under-10 crowd in the UK is even higher than in 
the US with 33 percent owning a cell phone. One in 10 children under the age of 10 
years owns an iPhone. Of the parents surveyed, 50 percent stated that they did not 
install parental controls on their child's phone (http://www.digitaltrends.com/
mobile/survey-10-percent-of-uk-under-10s-have-an-iphone-a-third-have-
a-cell-phone/). Children in most other European countries are less likely to carry 
cell phones; only 12 percent of children aged 9 years to 16 years are able to access 
the Internet via personally-owned mobile devices. Swiss children are an exception 
at 49 percent (http://phys.org/news/2012-09-children-switzerland-mobile-
online.html). In Asia, children in the Philippines have an even higher percentage of 
cell phone ownership than Swiss children, with 66 percent of Filipino children aged 
7 years to 14 years owning a cell phone (http://www.mobilemonday.net/reports/
SEA_Report_2012.pdf).

Baby Boomers, Teens, and Tweens
[ 146 ]
Children carrying cell phones have the ability to instantly contact their parents, 
school staff, and friends. Yet, with so many children carrying mobile devices, it is 
important to recognize the corresponding risks and take steps to mitigate them.
Texting, sexting, and the Internet
Texting is a form of communication using short messages sent between mobile 
devices. Sexting is a form of texting which includes sexually explicit messages, 
photos, and videos. A child does not have to send a sexually explicit text message 
(sext) to receive one. In fact, the sender may not even know who is receiving the sext 
by simply entering any phone number, similar to prank calls on land-based phone 
lines. Depending on the age and personality of the child, the parents may not find 
out about the message, missing out on the opportunity to teach the child personal 
views on that type of content and ways to avoid it, if desired.
Children may also choose to be actively involved in sexting, sharing messages with 
a significant other or just friends. Recent surveys indicate that up to 40 percent of 
children have sexted and 20 percent have included nude or partially nude photos 
of themselves (http://www.thenationalcampaign.org/sextech/pdf/sextech_
summary.pdf). Once such a photo is sent, the child has no control over where it ends 
up. The recipient is free to post the photo on any social networking or other website, 
including websites geared towards pornography. In addition, uploading images 
often assigns certain rights of the image to the service that the image is uploaded to. 
Once posted, it is almost impossible to remove it from public viewing. While it may 
be possible to have a photo removed from one website, the photo may have been 
downloaded to and exist on an unknown number of computers.

Chapter 7
[ 147 ]
Children with mobile devices that allow Internet access have access to the full 
expanse of the Internet, unless limiting controls are put in place. Thus, a child has 
access to and could be exposed to sexually explicit content with or without intending 
to view such material. An innocent Internet search could produce unintended 
and explicit results. Adults can recognize and thus avoid material that does not 
align with personal preferences; however, a child may not even be aware that such 
material exists or understand its potential harm to minors. A child may view the 
content, seek out more, and even share the material with other children, all without 
the knowledge or consent of parents.
Commercial products exist which allow a parent to control the content that a child's 
phone can receive and what the child can do with the phone. The controls can be 
set more stringent when the child is younger and loosened up as the child ages. 
For example, on most devices, parents can control Internet access, downloading 
options, and texting. In addition, parents can choose to disable geo-tagging on 
devices to prevent unwanted tracking of their children (http://staysafeonline.
org/stay-safe-online/mobile-and-on-the-go/mobile-parental-controls). 
Unfortunately, not all parents activate these controls.
Products are only a part of the equation, however parents should actively train 
children on mobile device safety in an age-appropriate manner, repeating the 
training regularly as the children mature. Training should include rules on sharing 
personal information, such as name, age, address, family information, and future 
plans. An additional safety feature that can be implemented on a child's mobile 
device is a content filtering tool such as SafeSearch by Google. This tool screens 
results from search requests and only allows the display of results passing the safety 
filter settings.
Strangers and dangers
Strangers can contact children through mobile devices without parents or teachers 
being aware. Adults can also be contacted; however, the potential for harm to 
children is much greater. If a stranger contacts an adult wanting to chat, offering a 
free ride in a nice car, or suggesting a meeting somewhere, the adult will probably 
decline. Experience will tell the adult to question the person's honesty and motives. 
Children develop the ability to differentiate between truth and lies as they mature. 
Add to children's inexperience, the anonymity provided by technology and a person 
can pretend to be friendly, kind, fun, rich, anything desired. Mix in a home life of 
abuse or neglect and the temptation for loving attention may be too much for a 
child to turn down. Pedophiles and other predators know this and use it to their 
advantage to chat with children, develop relationships with them, and eventually 
convince the children to meet in person.

Baby Boomers, Teens, and Tweens
[ 148 ]
If this seems more like fantasy than reality, look at the 2010 case in California in 
which a 40 year old man posed as a friendly 16 year old boy in order to talk to 
teenage girls via a cell phone. He managed to convince the girls, as he was friendly 
and initiated sexting with them, talking several of them into sending him semi-nude 
photos. Once he had the photos he would threaten to post them on the Internet if the 
girls didn't provide him with the cell phone numbers of their friends.
The training mentioned previously should include discussion on ways to handle 
messages and phone calls from strangers. Similar to the long-standing rule of, "Don't 
talk to strangers", "Don't text with strangers", should be taught and enforced. Human 
nature causes us to want to believe that it could not happen in our family, but that is 
wishful thinking best saved for winning the lottery.
And unlimited damage
None of the dangers described previously have a greater impact than cyberbullying. 
Before children and teens had practically unlimited access to the Internet and social 
networking sites, bullying could only be done with limited scope. The taunting 
had to be done in person, in writing, or over the phone. The audience was small or 
nonexistent. The Internet and widespread use of cell phones by minors changed all 
that. One teen or child could torment another publicly and permanently.
Cyberbullying is defined as, "a young person tormenting, threatening, harassing, or 
embarrassing another young person using the Internet or other technologies, such 
as cell phones" (http://www.dosomething.org/tipsandtools/11-facts-about-
cyber-bullying). Like other items posted on the Internet, cyberbully posts last 
indefinitely, as can the scars produced. The content of cyberbullying can range from 
brief taunts posted once to constant lies intended to destroy a child's reputation. The 
goals of cyberbullies range from personal entertainment to severe harm.

Chapter 7
[ 149 ]
How serious is cyberbullying, and how widespread? According to DoSomething.
org, over 40 percent of minors in America have been the victims of cyberbullying, 
and 25 percent have been victimized more than once. By 2010, two-thirds of the 
states had passed laws addressing cyberbullying (http://www.ncsl.org/issues-
research/educ/cyberbullying.aspx). And the news has unfortunately included 
stories of children suffering serious consequences from cyberbullying or even 
committing suicide to escape its incessant torture.
How can a parent or guardian detect cyberbullying is occurring? Kidshealth.org 
offers the following signs to look for:
•	
Signs of emotional distress during or after using the Internet or the phone
•	
Being very protective or secretive of their digital life
•	
Withdrawal from friends and activities
•	
Avoidance of school or group gatherings
•	
Slipping grades and "acting out" in anger at home
•	
Changes in mood, behavior, sleep, or appetite
If bullying is suspected, either physically or via technical means, speak with the 
child. Get help for the child, either through the school counselor or a professional 
therapist. But be sure to respect the child's need for privacy. The same steps should 
be taken for children perpetrating cyberbullying. Often, they are acting out due 
to emotional issues and need help to resolve those issues before they become 
permanent behavior patterns. Both the bully and the victim can suffer long-term 
effects, so prompt and effective help is necessary.

Baby Boomers, Teens, and Tweens
[ 150 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at some benefits and risks for older people using mobile 
devices. While the devices can provide benefits, they can also open the door to the 
loss of personal information. We also reviewed technology's impact on children and 
young adults, and steps parents can take to make mobile devices safer for minors. 
Impacts to the workplace environment were discussed, focusing on technology's 
effects on the various working generations. Finally, we looked at the cruelty of and 
damage done by cyberbulling. The next chapter will deal with the steps to be carried 
out after knowing that your device is hacked.

Getting Your Life Back After 
You've Been Hacked
By following the advice contained in this book, you will be able to reduce the 
likelihood of your device or information getting hacked. However, it is important to 
remember that hackers may still, despite our best intentions, be successful in their 
attempts at hacking our devices. Every user should prepare a list of steps, phone 
numbers, and device information in the event that a device or information is hacked. 
With such a list in hand, a user will reduce the time and frustration entailed in 
containing the damage and getting life back on track after an incident.
This chapter will show:
•	
What is included in a device profile and why this is important to you
•	
Why backups are important
•	
What to do if you have been hacked
•	
A checklist of what you should do if your device is hacked/lost
•	
What to do if your device is lost
Device profiles
Every mobile device has a built-in profile. These profiles include information about 
the device, the device configuration, and your personal configurations. In effect 
the profile is the brain of your device. If the device is corrupted and/or hacked, the 
profile can be destroyed. This chapter will show an example of an Apple profile and 
an Android profile.

Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked
[ 152 ]
If the profile is not working, the device will not work. Information included in a 
device profile can include:
•	
Your name
•	
The device ID numbers (detailed in other chapters)
•	
Cell phone number (not all devices have cell numbers)
•	
The last time the device was used and in some cases if the device has been 
backed-up
•	
Messaging profiles
•	
Applications installed
These are example screenshots and can change between each release of Android 
and/or iOS.
The Apple profile
As with most phones/devices, Apple products have a profile. The Apple profile is 
found under Settings. An example is as follows:

Chapter 8
[ 153 ]
You will note that the preceding screenshot shows that a software update is needed.
If you need to process a hard reset, you can protect yourself by creating and 
managing a backup of your device. The method to back up and restore a device  
can depend on what type of device you have. The following are its examples.
Apple backup
Apple provides the ability to backup and restore your device via iCloud and iTunes. 
This is mostly an automated process that you can use to back up most data on your 
iPhone or iPad. The backup normally includes:
•	
The phone profile
•	
Applications
•	
Music
•	
Videos
•	
Books
•	
Pictures
The Android profile
As with an Apple device, Android also has profiles. Android profiles can be found in 
the Settings section.

Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked
[ 154 ]
A sample profile from an Android device is as follows:
Android backup
One easy method to execute a backup for your Android phone is via the  
Mobile Backup & Restore Tool available at https://play.google.com/store/
apps/details?id=com.trendmicro.backupandrestore&hl=en. This application 
will provide the same type of backup that the Apple iTunes application will  
provide, including:
•	
The phone profile
•	
Applications
•	
Music 
•	
Videos
•	
Books
•	
Pictures

Chapter 8
[ 155 ]
Other Android backup tools include:
•	
Mobile Backup II available at https://play.google.com/store/apps/
details?id=mobilehome.backup&hl=en
•	
Trend Micro Mobile Backup and Restore available at http://www.
trendmicro.com/us/home/products/mobile-solutions/online-backup-
restore/index.html
Have you been hacked?
Let's review some important points from Chapter 5, Protecting Your Mobile Devices. 
It is very important for you to recognize if you have been hacked. Believe it or not, 
many users remain unaware that their device or information has been compromised 
until significant damage has been done. This is confirmed from a study that 
Symantec executed in 2012. This study identified the following important points:
•	
55 percent of end users are not sure if their device is clean of virus  
or malware
•	
About 33 percent of end users don't know how to protect themselves online
•	
49 percent of the end users surveyed did not understand if there is a virus 
or malware on their computer based on the fact that the computer may be 
running slow
This survey can be found at http://now-static.norton.com/now/en/pu/images/
Promotions/2012/cybercrimeReport/2012_Norton_Cybercrime_Report_
Master_FINAL_050912.pdf.
Here's a list of signs that may indicate your device has been hacked:
•	
Deleted or installed files: If files have disappeared or appeared that you did 
not delete or install, this may be a sign that your device has been compromised.
•	
Photos: Check to see if there are unusual photos or videos that may have 
been removed or added to your device.
•	
Receiving strange text: Strange texts with abstract symbols may indicate that 
your device has been hacked. If you have received such texts, power off your 
device immediately. Do not power it back on until you have addressed the 
problem. See the next sections for details.
•	
Sent e-mails: Check regularly the sent items for text and e-mails to keep a 
check on what is being sent from your device.
•	
Rejected e-mails: If you see a lot of rejected e-mails, this can be an indication 
of an issue with your device.

Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked
[ 156 ]
•	
Outgoing phone calls, e-mails, or text: If your friends have received e-mails, 
calls, or text which you did not send, this should be considered a sign that 
your device or profiles have been hacked. Examine your outgoing mail, 
phone call, and text folders for unauthorized communications.
•	
Evidence of any unfamiliar activity on your device: Unfortunately, 
sometimes the only evidence that your device has been hacked is strange or 
unexplainable activity. Have you been experiencing sudden drops in service 
in places in which you normally receive a strong signal? Have your settings 
changed without you having changed them? It is important that you, as a 
user, not ignore any strange activity on your device:  if it seems strange, then 
investigate. Several sites will notify you if your password has been changed; 
if you receive an e-mail that your password has changed and if you did not 
change it, you have an issue with your device. Another point is that you 
should know what is listed in your device profile settings. If you see that 
your profile has changed, you may have malware on your device.
Knowing the difference – device hacks,  
profile hacks, or both
Having recognized strange behavior, it is then important to determine the exact 
nature and extent of the vulnerability. If your profile has been compromised, and 
you did not use the same credentials for multiple accounts, the solution may be 
relatively simple; change your credentials for the compromised account. If, on the 
other hand, you believe that your device has been compromised, the solution may 
entail additional steps.
A general rule of thumb for distinguishing between the two is whether the strange 
behavior occurs within one application, or if the strange behavior seems spread 
out over multiple applications or activities. For example, are your friends receiving 
both strange text and strange e-mails? Have multiple apps begun to malfunction or 
demonstrate strange behavior? If so, the nature of the hack may be related to your 
device and not limited to one profile. In such a case, the likelihood that your profile 
information has also been hacked increases, as a compromised device means that all 
applications accessed through the device may have been compromised.

Chapter 8
[ 157 ]
In the event of a hack
You've determined to the best of your ability that your device has been hacked. 
At the very least, you've determined that your device is demonstrating behavior 
that you cannot otherwise explain. The following are the steps you should take 
depending on the particulars of your hack.
The device type (BYOD or the  
corporate device)
Depending on whether your device is a Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) or is 
owned by your employer, the steps which you take should be similar. If you own 
the device, you may just initiate a device reset. Every device has the ability for a 
basic reset. In most cases, this will remove all the data and applications and place the 
device into an original setup state.
For example:
•	
Apple: http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1430
Apple also has on online assistant at http://www.apple.com/support/
iphone/assistant/
•	
Samsung: http://www.hard-reset.com/
Be sure and check each vendor for their support sites.
BYOD
If your device is a Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) or is owned by your employer, 
the steps which you should take may vary. In most cases, the company will instruct 
you to a specific help desk number. The company will inform you of what to do next 
depending on their policies.
If your device is a BYOD, you will likely need to address the problem as if it was 
a personal device. In addition, you will also need to inform your employer of the 
hack; depending on your employer's policies, they may decide to conduct a partial 
or complete wipe of your device to contain potential damage. Check with your 
company regarding the rules if a device can be wiped. The Mobile Acceptable Use 
policy can describe if this can happen to you. If a wipe is executed, it is possible that 
the Mobile Device Management tool can execute the wipe.

Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked
[ 158 ]
If your device is BYOD, you will need to consider whether your error is a hardware, 
operating system, or application malfunction. Depending on your device, the type 
of malfunction you are experiencing will determine which party can assist you. If 
the error is a hardware malfunction, you will likely need to contact your device's 
manufacturer. If your error is an operating system or user interface malfunction, 
you will likely need to contact the operating system's developer. In some cases, as 
with iOS devices, the manufacturer and operating system developer are the same 
party; with iOS it is Apple. However, with other devices such as Windows Phones, 
the manufacturer and operating system developers are usually different parties. 
One example is Nokia Lumia. In this case, you would contact Nokia for operating 
system issues and not Microsoft. Another example would be the Samsung Galaxy S3, 
where you would contact Samsung for any operating system issues and not Google. 
The final type of error, application malfunctions, would require you to contact the 
application's developer. By knowing which party to contact, you can reduce the 
amount of time it takes to resolve your issue. Be sure and ask how to get help when 
you purchase your device.
Once you know which party to contact, it is important that you prepare some 
essential information before picking up the phone. You should prepare any relevant 
account information so that you can easily access it for purposes of personal 
identification. You should also familiarize yourself with your device's warranty 
information, as it may allow you to obtain a replacement or repaired device at no 
personal cost. Finally, you should be prepared to describe your device's malfunction 
in detail.
Once on the phone, it is important to remain proactive in solving your issue; it is 
your responsibility to verify that your issue is solved before you hang up the phone. 
You should take the time to carefully answer every question the customer support 
representative asks you; answering even seemingly unnecessary questions may reveal 
important information about your malfunction. When describing your malfunction to 
the representative, do not "skip" even apparently rudimentary steps such as powering 
on your device or entering your password. By including all steps, you can ensure that 
the representative has an accurate understanding of your malfunction. Finally, do 
not allow the representative to disconnect your call until you have verified that your 
malfunction is resolved by testing your device numerous times.
In the event that your device needs to be repaired or replaced, you should familiarize 
yourself with the specifics of any warranty products that you have purchased, as well 
as the manufacturer's warranty for your device. It is your responsibility to understand 
which warranties apply to your device. Pay careful attention when numerous 
warranties apply, such as when your malfunction is covered by both a manufacturer's 
warranty and an extended warranty. Depending on the specifics of your malfunction 
and warranties, it may be more beneficial to utilize one type over another.

Chapter 8
[ 159 ]
Who to contact
As discussed earlier, regardless of whether your device is a BYOD or owned by 
your employer, you should contact your employer if you use your device to conduct 
company business. In addition to your employer, you will likely also need to contact 
at least one of a number of additional parties to address the issue.
If your device is still under warranty, you should contact your device's 
manufacturer. Depending on the nature of your hack, they may be able to provide 
you with a replacement device.
You should also contact your service provider. Depending on the nature and extent 
of the hack, you may need to change your phone number or account credentials. If 
you have purchased insurance from your provider, you may also be entitled to a 
replacement device should the current one be damaged beyond repair.
Finally, you will need to consider whether or not to contact additional parties 
depending on the sort of information which you believe may have been 
compromised. This includes, but is not limited to, your personal bank, social 
networking hosts, and e-mail provider. Any application or profile, which you 
accessed through your device, may have been compromised, and you may therefore 
need to contact those providers who manage each account.
To wipe or not to wipe – partial or complete
Depending on the specifics of your issue, you may need to remotely wipe your 
device. If the device was company-owned, this decision may be made by your 
employer and will not require your input. If the device was a BYOD, the decision 
to wipe may still be covered under your employer's BYOD acceptable use policies 
(example explained in Appendix D, Mobile Acceptable Use Policy Template). In some 
cases, employers may decide to wipe company data from compromised BYOD 
devices as a matter of policy.
In the event that your employer has no policy on whether or not to wipe 
compromised BYODs, the decision will fall upon you as to the best course of action. 
Some important questions to consider when deciding whether or not to wipe your 
device are:
•	
Did your device contain sensitive company or personal data?
•	
Did you use your device to access corporate or personal accounts?
•	
Have you lost access to your device due to it being stolen or lost?
•	
Do have you have good reason to believe that your issue is a hack rather than 
a simple malfunction?

Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked
[ 160 ]
If the answer to any of the above questions is Yes, then you may wish to conduct a 
partial or full wipe.
The decision to partially or completely wipe your device will depend on whether you 
wish to access your device in the future. Because a complete wipe will often render 
the device unusable or restored to factory settings, you will lose all data contained 
on the device. Losing all data is just that, you will lose your music, photos, and any 
stored files. In the event that the device is already unusable due to a complete hack, 
due to loss, or theft, a complete wipe may be the preferable course of action.
What to do and when to do it – a list in the 
event that you've been hacked
Below is a chart which you should fill out for personal use in the event that your 
device has been hacked or otherwise compromised. The following table also works 
if your device is lost. By filling out the following information, a user may reduce the 
difficulty entailed in collecting such information later. For example, if your device is 
stolen or lost, you may be unable to easily retrieve certain device-specific information 
(serial number, model number, and so on). Additionally, by having such information 
readily available, you will be able to decrease the time between discovering your 
device that has been compromised and resolving the issue.
Keep a list of essential applications (in case the device is wiped), and know where 
to locate serial numbers, encryption keys, and account codes for key applications 
(in case they need to be reinstalled). Immediately check your bills and request your 
latest credit card statements.
Never create a list of personal credentials such as account 
numbers or passwords. Doing so will increase the risk that 
your credentials will be compromised.
Issue
What to do
Relevant information
Lost or misplaced 
device
•	 Call your employer
•	 Call your device service 
provider
•	 Request a partial or complete 
device wipe
•	 Change credentials for all 
accounts accessed by device
•	 Employer's Phone: 
_______________
•	 Service 
Provider's Phone: 
_______________
•	 Device Serial Number: 
_______________
•	 Account Credentials: 
(Do not write down)

Chapter 8
[ 161 ]
Issue
What to do
Relevant information
Hacked account 
(e-mail, social 
networking, bank)
•	 Call account provider
•	 Change credentials
•	 Assess which other accounts 
may have been compromised
•	 Change credentials for 
additional compromised 
accounts
•	 Bank's Support Phone: 
_______________
•	 E-mail's 
Support Phone: 
_______________
•	 Social Networking's 
Support Phone: 
_______________
•	 Additional Account 
Support Phone: 
______________
•	 Account Credentials: 
(Do not write down)
Unauthorized 
outgoing calls or 
texts
•	 Turn off device
•	 Call service provider
•	 Return device to service 
provider location
•	 Change credentials for all 
accounts accessed by device
•	 Service 
Provider's Phone: 
_______________
•	 Service Provider's 
Location Address: 
_______________
Hacked or 
malfunctioning 
application
•	 Call the application's 
developer support line
•	 Identify who you need to 
call if you have an operating 
system issue
•	 Determine whether security 
risk is limited to the 
application or has spread to 
other applications and services
•	 Contact service provider to 
determine extent of security 
risk
•	 Call additional parties as 
necessary
•	 Change credentials for all 
accounts accessed by device
•	 Application 
Developer's Phone: 
______________
•	 Application 
Developer's Phone 
(Additional): 
______________
•	 Service 
Provider's Phone: 
______________

Getting Your Life Back After You've Been Hacked
[ 162 ]
Summing it up
These are the steps that you, as a user, can take in the event of a hack. Most 
importantly, each user should be aware of the steps to take depending upon 
the exact nature of the security risk. By preparing a list tailored for each type of 
malfunction or hack, you can more efficiently resolve any security compromises.
The second primary component to resolving a mobile security compromise relates to 
whether a device is a BYOD, an employer-owned device, or a personal device. If it is 
either a BYOD or an employer-owned device, the employer may enforce a policy of 
conducting partial or complete wipes of the device to protect corporate data.
While undesirable, a successful hack does not necessarily incur significant damage to 
your device or personal data. By contacting the correct parties and by understanding 
the extent of a hack, you can often contain much of the damage or restore the 
information. By filling out the preceding list, you, as a user, are better prepared in the 
event of an incident.
Be sure and back up or document your profile settings and/or unique profile 
settings. One important area to make sure you identify is how to reconnect back  
to your mail or corporate mail system.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed:
•	
What to do in the event of a hack
•	
The difference between device hacks and profile hacks
•	
Whom to contact in the event of a hack or a lost/damaged device
•	
Partial wipes and complete wipes
•	
Your checklist in the event of a hack or a lost/damaged device

IBM Notes Traveler
The delivery of electronic messaging and other services to mobile devices has 
evolved greatly in the past two decades. Initially, the delivery of mail, calendar, and 
contact information was limited to desktop synchronization with the device. The 
delivery of over-the-air services was limited greatly through proprietary devices such 
as the Blackberry and the Blackberry Enterprise Server technology. As mobile device 
technology evolved, the expansion of devices and varying operating systems has 
driven providers of electronic messaging services to expand offerings to allow for the 
use of varied devices to deliver services.
The services that were provided initially were limited and required proprietary 
server technology such as Good Technology to deliver a usable electronic messaging, 
calendar, and contact client with functional security. One example of this security 
capability is the ability to remove corporate sensitive information (wipe) from the 
devices in case they were stolen or lost. To help customers with mobile access, 
vendors of messaging systems, such as IBM and Microsoft, began to introduce 
technology to deliver information to the devices. The IBM approach was to add a 
service to the Domino Server offering to provide the messaging resources to non-
Blackberry devices, such as iPhone, Android, or Windows Mobile.
The IBM Notes Traveler service was introduced as an add-on to the base IBM 
Domino server product. Initially, the technology was focused on delivering 
electronic messaging, calendar, and contact services to iOS devices. As the 
technology matured, the IBM Notes Traveler service expanded its offering and now 
offers a fully functioning environment, including the introduction of a standalone 
client for Android devices to ensure compatibility across vendors.

IBM Notes Traveler
[ 164 ]
The architectural design of the IBM Notes 
Traveler service
The IBM Notes Traveler service has remained an add-on component to the IBM 
Domino server. This has allowed for the development of the service and delivery of 
modifications outside the normal delivery schedule of updates to the IBM Domino 
Server technology. This flexibility has allowed for the expansion of the IBM Notes 
Traveler services to include Mobile Device Management functionality such as a 
partial wipe, which allows for the removal of only corporate-based information 
without impacting the personal data that exists on the device. Another new feature 
is high availability through leveraging an Enterprise Database Architecture. This 
expansion continues to allow for the flexibility to meet the changing requirements, 
operating systems, and device changes of the mobile marketplace.
Determining the correct deployment approach
The IBM Notes Traveler service is a robust client that continues to expand and 
deliver flexibility for corporate environments leveraging the IBM Notes and 
Domino technology. The service can provide a robust environment that is flexible 
in deployment and delivery, but it is important that the organization determines 
the security and architectural model before deployment to ensure that all standards 
and requirements are met. Additionally, it is important to understand if third-party 
resources such as reverse proxy or enterprise device management exist within the 
infrastructure. The IBM Notes Traveler environment can leverage other tools that exist, 
but a thorough understanding of the requirements to leverage these assets is required.
Review of the IBM Notes Traveler Server
The IBM Notes Traveler service is a component of the IBM Domino Server 
technology that allows for the communication and synchronization of mail, calendar, 
scheduling, and contact information to Apple iOS, Android, Windows Mobile, and 
Nokia devices running the legacy OS. The IBM Notes Traveler Server codebase has 
been split out from the core Domino server to allow for flexibility in deployment 
and development of the product. The Traveler server is installed in the environment 
on an IBM Domino Enterprise Server and configured to provide support not only 
for communication and synchronization of the information from the messaging 
environment, but also to provide some Mobile Device Management (MDM) 
capabilities that allow for the management of devices attaching to the service. The 
following sections will provide an overview of the Traveler environment along with 
the current capabilities within the product. For a complete set of current product 
capabilities and information, please refer to http://www-01.ibm.com/software/
lotus/products/notes/traveler.html.

Appendix A
[ 165 ]
Overview of different clients
The IBM Notes Traveler configuration differs based on the mobile device that is 
being leveraged by the end user. The Traveler environment leverages the native 
mail, calendar, scheduling, and contact information clients on Apple iOS, Windows 
Mobile, and Nokia devices (legacy Nokia technology in addition to the new focus 
for the technology based on the Windows Mobile platform). The Android devices 
leverage a proprietary client developed by IBM to provide consistency throughout 
the environment. As a result of different implementations across the providers of 
Android-based mobile devices, the IBM Notes Traveler development team has 
developed a client that is deployed on the end user's device. The goal is to provide 
the required consistency across the end user community to allow for a simplified 
management and support organizations throughout the environment.
Access to the IBM Notes Traveler Servers
There are a number of configurations for the IBM Notes Traveler Server 
environment. This section will review the communication from devices to the 
infrastructure, along with the different topologies that can be deployed within the 
environment to provide support for the IBM Notes Traveler Server(s). It is important 
to note that the size of the organization, the demand on resources, security, and the 
requirements for redundancy/high availability will all significantly impact the final 
deployment configuration.
Communication to the devices
The standard configuration for the IBM Notes Traveler Server is to have devices 
connect to the infrastructure via HTTP or HTTPs. Alternatively, with Nokia, 
Windows, and Android devices (not Apple iOS), a Short Message Service (SMS) 
message can be sent to the devices to alert them that there is information on the 
server to initiate a pull from the device.
The IBM Notes Traveler Server connects to the IBM Domino servers through the 
standard NRPC 1352; so when planning the topology for the Traveler environment, it 
is important to understand where the servers are placed within the environment and 
how the end users will be accessing the servers. The largest concern is typically over 
the security of the environment and adherence to internal security policies on what 
can be placed in the DMZ and how access from the external environment, through 
the DMZ and to the internal environment, is accomplished. The environment may 
already have variances for the opening of ports or the placement of specific servers.

IBM Notes Traveler
[ 166 ]
Location of the IBM Notes Traveler Servers
The IBM Notes Traveler Server can be located on the IBM Domino Mail Servers or 
on a secondary server running the IBM Notes Traveler services. If the IBM Notes 
Traveler Server is located on the mail servers, the service will reference names.nsf 
on the server directly. If the IBM Notes Traveler service is located on a secondary 
server, the IBM Notes Traveler service will look up the mail server and the file on 
the local, names.nsf, and redirect to the appropriate server to fulfill the request. 
In some situations, to add an additional level of security, the IBM Notes Traveler 
Server can be established in another domain to allow for the isolation of names.nsf 
for IBM Notes Traveler specific configurations and updates or for more security. If 
the IBM Notes Traveler Server is established in its own domain, the environment 
will not contain the required mail server and file information. Therefore, the IBM 
Notes Traveler Server will require the establishment of Domino Directory Assistance 
to allow for the lookups. It is important that the administrator leverage the default 
traveler policies to ensure that consistency is maintained across the environments. 
Additionally, this will enforce the policies for any user that connects to the IBM 
Notes Traveler Server.
Location of the mail servers
The demand on the overall environment, mail, and Traveler servers, is dependent 
on the distance that the servers are located from each other in terms of network. It is 
not necessary to have Traveler servers located on each mail server or in each location 
that mail servers are supported, but the distance between the two will impact the 
delay in delivering information to the devices. This delay can cause a perception 
among the user community that the servers are not performing at optimal levels. 
Locating multiple servers within the infrastructure to reduce the distance between 
the traveler and mail servers should be given great consideration, particularly when 
regional geographical conditions exist.
Connection methodologies to the  
Traveler servers
While there are a number of different configurations that can be deployed with 
Traveler; the main configurations are through VPN technology, reverse proxy, 
or direct connection. Each topology has implications on costs and security for the 
environment; it is important to understand the placement of your Domino Servers, 
reverse proxy/VPN architecture along with the corporate security policies that are in 
place to ensure that the correct method is instituted. The following is a short overview 
of the architectures that are commonly put in place within the environment.

Appendix A
[ 167 ]
Direct connection
The simplest configuration of the traveler environment is a direct connection to the 
Traveler server in the DMZ. This allows for the mobile devices to access the Traveler 
server over HTTPs or HTTP and the Traveler Server will access the Domino Servers 
through the firewall over NRPC Port 1352. This configuration can be viewed as the 
least secure, as the Traveler Server is sitting in the DMZ and is accessible directly 
from the Internet. The following is a simplified example of this architecture:
Connecting Directly to the IBM Traveler Server
Mobile Clients
HTTP=80
HTTPs=443
IBM Traveller
Server
NRPC=1352
IBM Domino
Server
Reverse proxy
Deploying the IBM Notes Traveler environment leveraging a reverse proxy provides 
more security within the environment, although it adds another layer of complexity. 
This allows for the mobile devices to access the reverse proxy over HTTPs and then 
the reverse proxy maintains the access through to the Traveler Server over an HTTPs 
connection. The IBM Notes Traveler Server then will access the Domino Servers 
over NRPC 1352. In this configuration, the Domino Servers sit behind the firewall 
and the transaction is secured through the environment. Although the IBM Notes 
Traveler environment has only been tested against IBM Lotus Mobile Connect 6.1, IBM 
WebSphere Edge Server 6.1, and IBM Tivoli Access Manager 6.0, the environment is 
flexible and should leverage the current reverse proxy configuration deployed in your 
environment; it is encouraged that you test the environment to ensure complex fidelity.
IBM Mobile Connect
IBM Mobile Connect (formerly IBM Lotus Mobile Connect), known as IMC, provides 
a full-featured wireless VPN. This software provides the ability to send mobile data 
securely end-to-end through an enterprise. One of the features that IMC brings to 
the table is the ability to secretly access enterprise applications via a single frontend. 
Specific features include:
•	
Mobile device management into the enterprise—in particular access  
to Traveler

IBM Notes Traveler
[ 168 ]
•	
Any device access into iNotes (IBM iNotes, also known as DWA)
•	
iNotes is sometimes accessed through a device known as IBM Mobile 
Connect (IMC)
IBM Sametime client for mobile device access is provided by the IBM WebSphere 
Proxy Server and not directly via IBM Mobile Connect.
The next diagram shows a reverse proxy environment that your company can 
implement. IBM Mobile Connect can be an optional part of this configuration.
We have shown that you can use both HTTP (traffic that is not 
encrypted) and HTTPS (traffic that is encrypted). There is not a 
simple answer on when each of these protocols can and/or should 
be used. In some cases a company will use HTTPS for frontend 
access into a corporate network. Then the internal network may use 
HTTP (not encrypted). This "may" be done if the internal network 
is considered trusted. This is an advanced topic between you, the 
owner of your network, and your network experts. The authors do 
recommend that if in doubt, use HTTPS.
Connecting
to the IBM Traveler Server
via a Reverse Proxy
Mobile Clients
HTTPs=443
IBM Traveller
Server
IBM Domino
Server
Reverse Proxy
Environment
HTTPs=443
NRPC=1352

Appendix A
[ 169 ]
VPN connection
Deploying the IBM Notes Traveler environment leveraging a Virtual Private 
Network (VPN) environment allows for the device to access all elements of the 
network through a single communication channel. The VPN connectivity should 
work for all devices, and it should be noted that the VPN service on the iOS devices 
are required to be started and managed by the end user manually, and this could 
cause connection delays due to the lack of connection to the IBM Notes Traveler 
Server. The IBM Notes Traveler Server will allow for access to the servers and will 
treat the connection as if it were native on the network; therefore, it is recommended 
to deploy the VPN configuration leveraging HTTP to minimize the duplication of 
providing security both through the VPN connection and the HTTPS connection. The 
IBM Notes Traveler Server then will access the Domino Servers over NRPC 1352. In 
this configuration, the Domino Servers sit behind the firewall and the transaction is 
secured through the VPN technology or HTTPS if required or configured. Since the 
IBM Notes Traveler Server is separated from the VPN connection technology, there is 
no requirement for a specific product to be used or tested (it should be noted that the 
IBM Lotus Mobile Connect client is entitled within the IBM Domino environment on 
a per-user basis; please refer to the IBM Lotus Mobile Connect product information 
for more information), although it is to encouraged that you test the environment to 
ensure complex fidelity.
Mobile Clients
IBM Traveller
Server
IBM Domino
Server
HTTP or HTTPs
NRPC=1352
Connecting
to the IBM Traveler Server
via a VPN Architecture
VPN Tunnel
VPN Tunnel
VPN Infrastructure
VPN Connection to the IBM Notes Traveler Server

IBM Notes Traveler
[ 170 ]
Establishing appropriate security settings
The deployment of the IBM Notes Traveler Server in the environment can create new 
security considerations that have not existed with Mobile Device Management in the 
past, the Blackberry Enterprise Server was a very hardened and secure environment 
that required lock-down from the server and the device. As the shift is occurring to 
allow flexibility in devices, the establishment of strong security policies allows for 
flexibility on ownership of the device and continue to meet the corporate security 
requirements. The IBM Notes Traveler Server environment is configured to allow 
for a consistent deployment of security settings across the environment through the 
default device settings document located in the Traveler administration database. 
This policy document is designed to meet the standard security and device control 
settings that are required within an environment. If greater flexibility is required 
for specific users or groups of users, the deployment of security policies to differing 
groups in the environment, the administration of the environment can leverage 
Traveler Security policy settings. Both sets of security documents allow for the 
establishment of general polices in addition to device-specific settings.
The IBM Notes Traveler service meets the requirements for delivering messaging 
information from an IBM Domino environment to mobile devices without the need 
for additional software or services unless required to meet specific security policies. 
Included in Appendix B, Mobile Device Management, is a review of the requirements 
for mobile device management when addressing delivering technology to mobile 
devices.  The IBM Notes Traveler Service provides a robust set of MDM features and 
can provide a secure environment that meets the requirements of today.
Important review information
The IBM Domino Traveler service is updated periodically throughout the year, 
but also provides hotfixes to address issues and concerns with the product. It is 
important to refer to the product documentation to ensure that the latest information 
related to the product is being leveraged within the environment.

Appendix A
[ 171 ]
Licensing information for IBM Notes Traveler
IBM Notes Traveler is not considered a standalone product that can be purchased 
from IBM; it is entitled through the appropriate licensing of the client environment. 
The entitlement for the IBM Traveler environment is obtained through proper 
maintenance of the IBM Domino Enterprise or Messaging CAL (this includes express 
and Complete Enterprise Options) licensing model. Each end user that has an active 
subscription and support for either the Enterprise or Messaging version of the IBM 
Domino CAL has the ability to access the resources provided by the IBM Domino 
Servers running the service. As the deployment of the IBM Notes Traveler service 
on the Domino Server may be dependent on a more advanced release of the IBM 
Domino server code, active subscription and support would be required on the IBM 
Domino Server. Please contact your IBM Collaboration Services representative to 
ensure that you are properly licensed to deploy the IBM Notes Traveler product 
within your environment.
New in IBM Notes Traveler IBM is planning on releasing IBM Notes Traveler in the 
first half of 2013. As the mobile market place changes and grows, IBM has tried to 
evolve the Traveler product to meet the needs of users. The IBM Notes Traveler 9 
release is slated to include a new service for Apple and Android devices to handle 
the management of synchronizing to-dos between the devices and the Domino 
Server, additional support for Windows 8 and Blackberry 10 devices, and expanded 
support for server-based operating systems.
The new to-do functionality will allow Apple and Android devices to perform the 
following functions: review to-dos, complete to-dos or remove them entirely, create 
new to-dos, organize to-dos into lists, and sync attachments as part of to-do data. To 
perform the synchronization of the data with the Apple iOS will require that the end 
users download a new free IBM Notes Traveler to-do application from the App store.
The new IBM Notes Traveler 9 will also include support for Windows Phones  
(7.5, 7.8, and 8) along with Windows RT support. The support for the Windows RT 
environment is slated to be through the exchange account facility on the device.  
The initial release of support will contain limited functionality around managing the 
calendar facility. The Blackberry 10 device can be leveraged in a couple of different 
ways to gain access to the environment. If the device is personally owned and 
managed, the user can connect to the IBM Notes Traveler Server directly from the 
Personal Perimeter. If the device is intended to leverage the Work Perimeter, the device 
will connect to the Blackberry Enterprise Server (BES) 10 environment; the BES 10 
server will act as a proxy for the device to access the IBM Notes Traveler environment.

IBM Notes Traveler
[ 172 ]
It is intended that IBM Notes Traveler 9 will expand operating system support  
to include the IBM iSeries, Windows Server 12, Red Hat 6 (64-bit), and SUSE 11 
(64-bit). Support for older versions of Red Hat and SUSE have been phased out, as 
the current version of the Domino Server will not support those operating systems. 
Please refer to the product documentation for further information and configuration 
assistance on the new platforms.

Mobile Device Management
The concept of deploying mobile communication devices in the corporate 
environment began with the introduction of the pager and has progressed from early 
Personal Information Management (PIM) devices, to cell phones, to smartphones, 
and now tablet devices. As more corporate and client data is communicated through 
and stored on mobile devices, corporate security and Information Technology (IT) 
departments have sought to protect corporate information. The development of 
solutions to secure corporate data has grown and these technologies have been 
labeled Mobile Device Management (MDM) solutions.
The goal of MDM solutions is to secure not only the devices through controlling 
features such as cameras, GPS, and other functionalities, but also the ability to 
manage corporate data on the phone. It is important to understand the differences 
between corporate and personal data when deploying an MDM solution. Many 
corporate IT and legal departments are concerned about protecting sensitive data; 
this is often too narrow of a label as some contents within an e-mail or contact 
data may not contain sensitive data, but are protected because they fall within the 
corporate mail container.
The requirements and ultimate selection and use of a Mobile Device Management 
(MDM) product depends on the overall security requirements in the environment 
and what other functions are trying to be addressed through the implementation 
of the solution, such as device tracking or asset control. Prior to implementing an 
additional layer of complexity and potentially expense, it is important to understand 
the solutions that are available within the environment (such as IBM Notes Traveler 
or Microsoft Exchange Active Sync) and how they can be leveraged to deploy an 
effective solution.

Mobile Device Management
[ 174 ]
Types of devices in the environment
In the past, typically mobile devices were thought of as cell phones (or pagers) that 
had the ability for two-way communication. Securing simple communication devices 
was simple and was provided by the company that provided the technology, such 
as a cellular communication company. The company provided the technology and 
could control and secure the use of the device. With the expansion of corporate 
communications to include heavier reliance on electronic messaging to communicate 
internally and externally within the corporate environment, the expansion of 
evolution of technology such as Microsoft's ActiveSync technology and RIM's 
Blackberry Devices and Communication protocol made leveraging smartphone 
technology viable in a corporate setting.
The management and control of the devices were effective and efficient; the 
corporation typically owned the device, service, and delivery mechanism. Corporate 
IT security policies were typically built upon the level of security that could be 
provided through the mobile technology (or variances were granted) to ensure 
the ability to leverage the expanding technology within the environment. As the 
elements of the corporate communication devices expanded into the consumer 
market, vendors such as Microsoft and Google began developing and deploying 
solutions that mimicked the corporate solutions with consumer focus.
Consumer-focused devices
Consumer-focused devices such as the iPhone and Android-based smartphones 
were introduced into the corporate environment. There is great debate concerning 
the number of mobile devices currently being used globally, but it is clear that the 
growth of the use in this type of technology is far outpacing personal computers and 
eventually will exceed all other types of technology purchased and used.
These devices are being used for not only personal communications, but also for 
corporate communications as well. IT departments began purchasing devices and 
communication solutions to meet the demand of the end user community. Eventually, 
this led to many companies adopting a new strategy for mobile devices, Bring Your 
Own Device (BYOD). The BYOD strategy allows end users to procure and manage 
the technology that they choose to leverage for communication, and the corporation 
and IT department does not have to manage to a consumer-driven focus. Ultimately, 
the concept of BYOD has expanded for many companies to include tablets, personal 
computers, smart car communication systems, and eventually televisions.

Appendix B
[ 175 ]
The shift to BYOD has been popular with end users and some elements of the 
corporate structure, but it does bring more complications such as management 
of devices, information contained on the devices, and ultimately, the method of 
communicating with the device. The use of MDM within the environment allows 
for the management across devices and platforms to effectively secure corporate 
information. The protection and management of the end users' personal data may 
ultimately be assisted with the use of an MDM solution, but should not be the focus.
Mobile information
Mobile communications devices are leveraged for a wide variety of reasons, namely 
corporate and personal. As a result, it is easy to have different functions merge or 
connect through the use of end users. The following diagram outlines the different 
types of users for mobile devices:
Security
Messaging,
Calendar and
PIM
Collaboration
and
Corporate
Applications
Generally
Available
Applications
Messaging, calendar, and personal 
information management
This information is typically corporate in nature and is contained within the 
corporate communication tools. All information is synchronized with the device 
through a secondary source like an IBM Domino or Microsoft Exchange Server 
through a tool such as IBM Traveler or a proprietary service like Good Technology or 
Blackberry Enterprise Server. The security and information protection is handled by 
the tool managing the information in the environment.

Mobile Device Management
[ 176 ]
Collaboration and corporate applications
As mobile technology has evolved in the corporate infrastructure, tools and 
resources have evolved to allow for the corporate environment to extend to mobile 
devices. Tools such as File repositories and Instant Messaging can be extended 
to allow mobile users to communicate and leverage the corporate collaborative 
environment. This data is typically managed by the tool that is delivering the 
resources to the device or through tools that exist on the device; the management of 
these tools can effectively be accomplished through the use of an MDM solution.
Generally available applications
Consumer-based applications that provide corporate type functionality are available 
through consumer sites such as the Google and Apple App stores. These popular 
applications, such as Dropbox, are tools that allow for the storage and synchronization 
of files across many platforms. Some corporate environments want to limit the use 
of external applications to minimize the federation spread of corporate information 
outside the controlled corporate environment. Typical consumer-focused applications 
are provided by the vendor and do not meet the standards typically found in corporate 
security policies to protect data from leaving the corporate environment and being 
housed outside in an uncontrolled environment. The corporation may purchase a 
service and provide it to the end users to meet requirements; these solutions will have 
more corporate controls in place. The management and "lock down" of this type of 
utility will likely require an MDM solution.
Mobile security policies in the 
environment
It is important to determine the security policies that need to be put in place within 
the mobile environment and how it compares to other policies within the overall 
corporate architecture. The current mobile space is different from traditional IT 
implementations or those through proprietary vendors who tightly control all 
aspects of the security. It is very difficult to leverage current security policies as 
outlined and extend them to a mobile environment. It is critical to identify the needs 
of the environment and what components of the security policy can and should 
be met, given the device ownership and uses. Corporate information needs to be 
secured, but limiting the use of a device, whether it is the internal GPS or camera, 
needs to be managed appropriately to ensure all applications function properly 
for all uses of the device. The mobile security industry typically identifies data, 
communication, and device security as the three main topics that need to be handled 
in a security policy.

Appendix B
[ 177 ]
Corporate data and information
Some of the data that is stored on the device whether at rest or in transit needs to be 
secured; the broader question though is what data sets need to be covered. Personal 
data belonging to the owner of the device may be sensitive to the owner, but is not 
important or deemed to be corporate data and therefore, should be left out of the 
policy. Corporate data such as business contact information, electronic messages, 
documents, and corporate applications need to have their contents secured against 
theft of data. Defining what can and cannot be stored on the device and how 
to effectively secure the data while on the device or if stolen should be clearly 
identified. Each organization will need to determine the types of data that need to  
be secured, and the importance assigned to each data set.
Network/communications
The communication of information has to be secure. Typically, corporate IT 
departments will have IT security standards in place that govern the use of 
secondary authentication and where communication devices can be placed in the 
network. It is important to understand that this needs to extend to the ability for 
end users to leverage Wi-Fi resources (secured and unsecured) along with differing 
communication companies. Securing the transit of the data is important; therefore, 
leveraging HTTPs over HTTP and VPN technology over secure data networks will 
be important to articulate.
Devices
By definition, mobile devices are intended to move with the user of the device. This 
creates a situation where human error or malicious behavior can compromise the 
device and ultimately, the data and communication that the devices leverage. The 
ability to locate, identify, and ultimately manage the device remotely is important. 
The security policy should deal with the human factors of security, such as loaning 
the device or leaving it unattended in a public space, but also with the loss of control 
that comes from the human failures. The process for identifying data and resources 
to be removed and the ability to manage the removal of data and service is vital for 
an effective mobile security policy.

Mobile Device Management
[ 178 ]
Legal requirements and government 
regulations
There are a number of regulated industries that leverage mobile communication; it is 
important to understand the impacts of government regulations before completing 
a security policy. Government regulations such as the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) require the protection of personal sensitive data. It 
is important to understand how all prevailing laws and regulations affect the mobile 
environment and potential security requirements.
Determining the types of devices that will  
be supported
The next step is to determine what devices will be supported based on who owns 
the device and the service being provided. As noted earlier, the introduction of 
non-corporate owned assets through a BYOD program can add complexity to the 
device and service that is required. The ownership and maintenance of devices 
will significantly impact the policy and how it is developed. This is important 
because in many cases the device may be owned by the end user, but the service is 
being provided by the corporate environment. As noted earlier, when people think 
of devices, the first product many think of is a smartphone, but there are many 
other devices that exist in the world today that significantly impact the delivery 
of technology to end users; when looking at Apple technology as an example, the 
iPhone, iPad, and iPod must all be considered due to how they leverage different 
operating systems.
Although it seems strange to consider for some people, smart television usage is 
growing with the inclusion of Wi-Fi, Internet-based applications, and cameras. These 
sorts of smart televisions can connect to the corporate environment and allow for the 
hosting of a web conference through the corporate infrastructure. The management 
of these devices and the ability for end users to leverage them in the corporate 
environment need to be identified with the appropriate policies put in place.

Appendix B
[ 179 ]
Determine if a pure MDM solution is required 
in the environment
It is important to understand what is being gained through the deployment of 
an MDM solution over the native features that are present in the devices and the 
current infrastructure. These technologies offer the utilization of standard features 
that are delivered within the products such as the IBM Traveler service or Microsoft 
Exchange natively. It is also important to understand if the solution that is being 
considered can be leveraged within the environment for other elements of the 
technology infrastructure; adding another component that could be covered by 
another current infrastructure adds complexity and can potentially add little value.
Tools such as IBM Endpoint Manager and Microsoft System Manager can offer a 
robust environment that spans the complete IT environment within the corporation, 
if it is determined that an MDM solution is required to meet security standards. 
Broader MDM solutions will collect data on environment usage and should manage 
a complete inventory of devices and services being utilized within the architecture. 
If an MDM solution is identified as required, it is important to ensure that tools such 
as this should be leveraged rather than multiple point solutions that do not meet the 
security requirements of the environment.
Elements of device management
The following sections will review the aspects of traditional MDM solutions in 
the marketplace (this is not intended to be an exhaustive list or a comparison of 
solutions). These solutions will not only increase security within your environment, 
but they will also add complexity and costs.
The following gives a broad overview of the different elements of MDM that  
exist within product offerings on the market today. A lot of this technology is  
an outcropping of the technology that was delivered with the Blackberry  
Enterprise Server.
Specific management of the device
Managing the device and controlling it through an inventory process is key to 
understanding what exists in the environment and what assets are required to 
be supported. The specific management of the device as an asset is typically 
accomplished through the following functions:
•	
Inventory management: This determines the devices in the environment 
and identifying ownership of the asset. This allows for management of the 
physical asset as a part of the corporate IT asset management process.

Mobile Device Management
[ 180 ]
•	
Use of VPN, Wi-Fi, cellular, and so on: These perform managing the types 
of access that devices have to the network, whether the device is accessing 
the environment through cellular or Wi-Fi (secure or unsecure) technology 
will impact the protection afforded the environment.
•	
Updates and compliance: As new operating systems, applications, and 
policies are identified and deployed, it is important that the devices are 
maintained and do not stay in a static state. The MDM solution should be 
able to manage the compatibility and update process to ensure required 
software along with software and security policy updates are deployed.
Leveraging MDM for application management
Managing the applications on the device to ensure that all required applications 
exist, and those applications that could compromise corporate data are not installed 
or allowed cross-application access on the device.
•	
A review of installed applications: This compiles a list of applications 
installed on the devices. This can be invasive if the device is part of a BYOD 
strategy, but understanding exposure is a key first step.
•	
Distributing and managing corporate applications: These identify 
applications that are required on the device such as corporate VPN or 
security software that is required to ensure proper security on the device,  
or determine which applications should not be present as they represent  
a risk to corporate security.
•	
Recommended applications: These provide the recommended applications 
that exist within the app stores, such as editors, specific mapping, or  
GPS tools.
Management of data on the device
The data that exists on the device can be split into two easy categories: corporate and 
personal. No matter who the owner of the device or the provider of the connectivity 
services is, both types of data will exist on the device. It is important to understand 
how to manage both types of data; the removal of data should be selective, while the 
protection of the data should be universal. The entire device can be compromised 
through theft or loss; therefore, partial and complete wipe capabilities along with 
proper encryption and security need to exist.
•	
Selective wipe: This refers to removing only specific data that is relevant 
to the corporation, such as e-mail, calendar, and PIM data, ensuring that 
personal data to the device owner remains or is controlled by the owner is 
important. This includes specific applications and should not be limited to 
collaboration tools that exist on the device from one provider.

Appendix B
[ 181 ]
•	
Complete wipe: There are instances when a complete device needs to be 
wiped and all data should be removed. Some data, such as that located in 
programs like Dropbox, needs to be removed from the device even though 
the application is not a corporate app.
•	
Remote lock: Some devices that are stolen or accidently lost need to be 
locked down to avoid the loss of corporate data. The ability to lock the device 
remotely is a key requirement when dealing with mobile security.
•	
Password and encryption: The requirement of device-level password 
policies and the employment of encryption policies needs to be enforced on 
the devices to minimize security risks.
•	
Lockdown of select applications: If the security policy is set that devices 
attached to the corporate environment cannot leverage resources such as the 
camera or specific applications such as YouTube, Facebook, and so on, the 
solution should support the enforcement of internal policies.
•	
Location of data: With the extensibility of the corporate environment to the 
Cloud through readily available consumer services, there is a potential of 
mixing personal and corporate data in consumer containers in the Cloud. If 
limiting exposure of corporate data to the Cloud is within the security policy, 
it is important to identify known services and manage access.
Access control
Controlling access to the environment by certain devices, operating systems, or 
certificate credentials should be managed. Some devices and recently released 
operating systems may cause problems within the corporate environment due to 
incompatibilities. Additionally, if the end user mistakenly or intentionally stops 
communicating back to corporate resources, it is important to identify these issues 
and correct the situation to avoid complaints and issues.
•	
Synchronization: It is important that the device communicates with the 
corporate infrastructure and mail/calendar/PIM information along security 
processes which are extended to the devices. If this is not managed properly, 
the device will get out of sync and cause issues.
•	
Password/certificate management: The management of different passwords 
and certificates is important for the ease of the device usage, but can cause 
exposures to the corporate environment. The management of issuing, 
controlling, and removing security credentials is vital.
•	
Device type/OS management: The ability to restrict and manage the device 
based on the device type and operating system will greatly determine the 
level by which you upgrade and manage the corporate environment.

Mobile Device Management
[ 182 ]
Potential solutions
There are a number of strong MDM solutions on the market with each providing 
different advantages and disadvantages. MDM products and features change 
as the market environment changes, which is rapidly. It is important to identify 
changes that impact your environment and address changes within your deployed 
environment against the vendors providing the services. It is important to work 
with each provider to ensure compliance. This appendix is intended to provide an 
overview of the process; please conduct a complete security and device review prior 
to deploying the solution that best meets the corporate requirements.
A strong starting point to understand the current players in the market is the Gartner 
Magic Quadrant for Mobile Device Management Software (subscription to Gartner 
or purchase of the individual report may be required). While one analyst's view 
of a large and diverse marketplace should not be viewed as complete, the Magic 
Quadrant information does provide a strong foundation of the market, players, and 
information about solutions provided.
Summary
The management of mobile access to the environment is extremely complex and 
requires a thorough understanding of the corporate goals for mobile communication 
and security requirements in the environment. The expansion of differing types of 
mobile devices has allowed for more flexibility by the end users and management 
to meet the needs of the organization. It is important to ensure that the corporate 
environment is not compromised in delivering the resources to the end users.
Additionally, devices and data contained on them become assets of the corporate 
environment when they attach to the environment; therefore, the concept of BYOD 
or corporate-owned assets gets fuzzy once corporate data resides on the device. 
Deploy the right solution for the environment and the end users, while securing the 
corporate data and protecting the broader environment.

Tips to Help You Protect  
Your Mobile Device
The United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the National 
White Collar Crime Center (NW3C) established a unit called the Internet Crime 
Complaint Center (IC3) to provide a single point of contact for people reporting 
Internet-related criminal complaints. After researching the complaints, the IC3 
refers them to the appropriate law enforcement or regulatory agency. The IC3 also 
publishes warnings on new threats to people via technology. The unit developed 
a list of tips to help you protect your mobile device, available at http://www.fbi.
gov/scams-safety/e-scams, and copied here in its entirety (as of July 9, 2013).
•	
When purchasing a smartphone, know the features of the device, including 
the default settings. Turn-off features of the device not needed, to minimize 
the attack surface of the device.
•	
Depending on the type of phone, the operating system may have encryption 
available. This can be used to protect the user's personal data in the case of 
loss or theft.
•	
With the growth of the application market for mobile devices, users 
should look at the reviews of the developer/company who published the 
application.
•	
Review and understand the permissions you are giving when you  
download applications.

Tips to Help You Protect Your Mobile Device
[ 184 ]
•	
Passcode-protect your mobile device. This is the first layer of physical 
security to protect the contents of the device. In conjunction with the 
passcode, enable the screen lock feature after a few minutes of inactivity.
•	
Obtain malware protection for your mobile device. Look for applications that 
specialize in antivirus or file integrity that helps protect your device from 
rogue applications and malware.
•	
Be aware of applications that enable geo-location. The application will track 
the user's location anywhere. This application can be used for marketing but 
can also be used by malicious actors, raising concerns of assisting a possible 
stalker and/or burglaries.
•	
Jailbreaking or rooting is used to remove certain restrictions imposed by 
the device manufacturer or cell phone carrier. This allows the user nearly 
unregulated control over what programs can be installed and how the device 
can be used. However, this procedure often involves exploiting significant 
security vulnerabilities and increases the attack surface of the device. 
Anytime an application or service runs in "unrestricted" or "system" level 
within an operation system, it allows any compromise to take full control  
of the device.
•	
Do not allow your device to connect to unknown wireless networks. These 
networks could be rogue access points that capture information passed 
between your device and a legitimate server.
•	
If you decide to sell your device or trade it in, make sure you wipe the device 
(reset it to factory default) to avoid leaving personal data on the device.
•	
Smartphones require updates to run applications and firmware. If  
users neglect this, it increases the risk of having their device hacked  
or compromised.
•	
Avoid clicking on or otherwise downloading software or links from 
unknown sources.
•	
Use the same precautions on your mobile phone as you would on your 
computer when using the Internet.

Mobile Acceptable  
Use Policy Template
This appendix shows an example template that can be used by a company to create 
an Acceptable Use Policy for mobile devices. A company can have several types of 
these documents. The examples include:
•	
Acceptable use policy
•	
Privacy policy
•	
Conduct business guidelines
•	
Corporate social sharing policies
The appendix only shows an example for a mobile device acceptable use policy. 
You can have a single document that shows corporate owned document and 
one for BYOD. Another option is to have a combination of both policies into a 
single document that shows both. Keep in mind this is a sample template for your 
corporation to use. Your company will need to review local and/or government laws 
and determine what privacy issues that need to be addressed.
Mobile device acceptable use policy
A Mobile Acceptable Use Policy (MAUP) is a formal agreement between an 
organization and the employees from that organization. This document sets out 
the acceptable rules for mobile device usage. Also this document will review any 
penalties that could be applied resulting from the rule violation from incorrect use  
of mobile devices.

Mobile Acceptable Use Policy Template
[ 186 ]
Overview
The purpose of this policy is to define procedures, standards, and corporate impacts 
for end users that use a mobile device for access to corporate data. This device policy 
applies to, but is not limited to, any device that is used for corporate access. The 
device types, noted in this section, primarily are focused on Bring Your Own Device 
(BYOD) to work, but also can impact any mobile device provided by the company. 
These devices can include:
•	
Smartphone (of any type)
•	
Mobile phones
•	
Any style of tablet computers
•	
PCs
•	
Notebook or Laptop (or any device that has access to the corporate network)
•	
Portable media devices, netbooks, or PDAs
Policy applicability
This policy was created to protect corporate data and the corporation's reputation.  
It is imperative that each person manages their mobile devices to make sure that  
the corporate network and data is safe and secure. Every employee must sign  
this agreement and must follow all the corporate rules. This policy will apply to  
all employees, contractors, vendors, and/or anyone that will connect to the  
corporate network.
Rules
The following example rules can be used in your BYOD template. Each rule must be 
evaluated to make sure it fits your corporate environment:
•	
These rules include BYOD devices that all must be registered with the 
corporate Mobile Device Management (MDM) system or manager. This is 
an automated process and must be completed by all users. Before a device 
can be connected to the corporate network, the employee must obtain 
an approval from their manager. Management can terminate a device 
connection at any time for any reason.
•	
The corporation may install virus and/or protection software on this device 
any time. End users must accept the corporate network software or they will 
lose access to the network.
•	
Access and use of the device that connects to the corporate network will be 
tracked as needed by the corporation.

Appendix D
[ 187 ]
•	
If a device is deemed "compromised" then it will be blocked from accessing 
the corporate network.
•	
The end user will be responsible for notifying the company if a device is 
stolen within one business day.
•	
If the device is lost and/or stolen then all the data, personal and business, 
will be wiped from the device if the device goes online and the device will be 
blocked from accessing the corporate network.
•	
Since this is a BYOD device, the owner is responsible for replacing the 
physical device if the device is lost, stolen, or damaged.
•	
The company will enforce security on the device and will force a password 
change down to each device that will expire every 90 days. Passwords are 
never shared with anyone at any time.
•	
The end user will not jailbreak devices or execute any rooting on the  
Android devices.
•	
Data that is hosted on the mobile device (for example, corporate applications 
or e-mail) is never transferred or copied to a non-approved corporate 
application. Refer to https://corporate.mobile.example.com for  
more information.
•	
Sharing corporate data on any non-corporate site (for example, shared social 
sites) is a violation of the company policies and is grounds for termination.
•	
The user will keep the software on the mobile devices up-to-date with the 
latest version.
•	
The user will only install apps from trusted locations.
•	
It will be the end user's responsibility to make sure that people are not 
shoulder reading their material. In some cases, a glare screen can be 
purchased that can help with this issue.
Disciplinary action
Violating the corporate policy or any of its specific rules will result in specific 
disciplinary action. This action can include termination and can include notification 
of local and/or federal authorities under local, state, and/or federal laws.
Company owned devices
A Mobile Acceptable Use Policy (MAUP) is a formal agreement between an 
organization and the employees from that organization. This document sets out 
the acceptable rules for mobile device usage. Also, this document will review any 
penalties that could be applied resulting from the rule violation from incorrect use  
of mobile devices.

Mobile Acceptable Use Policy Template
[ 188 ]
Overview
This specific policy will focus primarily on devices that are provided to the employee 
by the corporation. These devices can include:
•	
Smartphone (of any type)
•	
Mobile Phones
•	
Any style of table computers
•	
PCs
•	
Notebook or Laptop
Rules for corporate devices
All corporate devices must be registered with the corporate Mobile Device 
Management (MDM) system. This is an automated process and must be  
completed by all users.
Before a device can be connected to the corporate network, the employee must obtain 
an approval from their manager.
Rules
The following example rules can be used when a corporate device is provided  
to you by the end user. Each rule must be evaluated to make sure it fits your 
corporate environment:
•	
Management can terminate a device connection any time, for any reason, to 
the corporate network.
•	
The corporation will install virus and/or protection software on corporate 
owned phone/devices. End users must accept corporate network software or 
they will lose access to the device and the corporate network.
•	
Access and use of the device will be tracked as needed by the corporation.
•	
If a device is deemed "compromised", then it will be blocked from accessing 
the corporate network. (This can happen without notification to the end user)
•	
The end user will be responsible for notifying the company if a device is 
stolen within one business day. All the data will be wiped from the device 
if the device goes online, and the device will be blocked from accessing the 
corporate network.
•	
If the device is lost and/or stolen then all the data, personal and business, 
will be wiped from the device if the device goes online, and the device will 
be blocked from accessing the corporate network.

Appendix D
[ 189 ]
•	
Since this device is a corporate device, end users may not use the device  
for personal use.
•	
The end users may only use the corporate provided device for business use 
only. The device may not be used to run a personal business and/or for any 
personal use.
•	
Since this is a corporate owned device, the corporation is responsible for 
device support, maintenance, and if the device is lost or damaged.
•	
The company will enforce security on the device and will force a password 
change down to each device that will expire every 90 days. Passwords are 
never shared with anyone anytime.
•	
The end user will not jailbreak the device or execute any rooting on the 
Android devices.
•	
The user will keep the software on the mobile devices up-to-date with the 
latest version.
•	
The user will only install apps from trusted locations.
•	
It will be the end user's responsibility to make sure that people are not 
shoulder reading their material. In some cases, a glare screen can be 
purchased that can help with this issue.
•	
Data that is hosted on the mobile device (for example, corporate applications 
or e-mail) is never transferred or copied to a non-approved corporate 
application. Refer to https://corporate.mobile.example.com for  
more information.
•	
Sharing corporate data on any non-corporate site (for example, shared social 
sites) is a violation of the company policies and are grounds for termination.
•	
The owner will not execute any illegal actions on the device.
Disciplinary action
Violating the corporate policy or any of its specific rules can result in specific 
disciplinary action. This action can include termination of employment and  
can include notification of the appropriate authorities under local, state, and/or 
federal laws.
Glossary
BYOD: This is a term that describes the users that will bring their own mobile 
device/tablet to the workplace. This is the inverse to where a company will purchase 
a device and provide it directly to the employees for business use on the corporate 
computing environment.

Mobile Acceptable Use Policy Template
[ 190 ]
Jailbreak/Rooting: Jailbreaking a mobile device (phone/tablets) is a method of 
removing the software limitations that mobile device companies will place on 
specific devices. These limits normally are a part of an overall security method and 
should not be removed. Device Jailbreaking is never allowed by the company.
MDM: This stands for Mobile Device Management. The company uses the MDM 
software to help protect the security of the device as well as the security of the 
corporate software and data.
Corporate Owned Device: This is the inverse of a BYOD device. The corporation will 
own the device and provide it to the end user/employee (in some cases a vendor)  
for use during the time of employment and/or a specific project. The device must  
be returned to the company if the employee is terminated and/or the end of the 
specific project.
Procedure to enable a device for  
corporate access
To enable a device for corporate access, complete the following steps:
1.	 Read the Mobile Device Acceptable Use Policy (present in this document).
2.	 Sign and date in the spaces following this section.
3.	 Return a copy of this signed document to the mobile device manager or  
your manager. Be sure you can print your name in the spaces following  
this section.
Your signature provides agreement to the following terms of this document/policy:
•	
I have read and received a copy of the Mobile Device Acceptable Policy 
(present in this document).
•	
I will only use the device for business requirements only (Company  
owned only).
•	
I understand and agree that mobile devices will not be connected to 
corporate systems, computers, or networks without proper approvals.
•	
If the device is employee-owned, then I understand and agree that the 
security and replacement of a device becomes my responsibility. If the device 
is corporate-owned, then the employee will work with the help desk to 
determine next steps and/or replacement processes. Also, the employee will 
call the help desk anytime the device may be compromised.

Appendix D
[ 191 ]
•	
I understand and agree that any violation of this policy can result in 
termination of my employment and civil or criminal penalties.
•	
I understand that the device can be removed from the corporate mobile 
system anytime.
______________________________________
Employee name
______________________________________
Employee signature
______________________________________
Employee title
______________________________________
Date


The History of Social 
Networking, the Internet,  
and Smartphones
Not so many years ago, when a new college student drove off to college for the first 
time the parents asked, "Do you have enough change to use a payphone and call 
home in an emergency on your trip?" Today, this concept of carrying change for 
a payphone is largely a thing of the past; the vast majority of us carry cell phones. 
Payphones used to be on the side of every highway and in the parking lot of every 
gas station. Now, these payphones are becoming rare. It is just assumed that 
everyone has access to a cell phone. In fact, a lot of people do not even have land 
lines in their home. After all, why should you pay for two phones when you are 
always reachable on your cell phone?
Now, when your child sets off to college, you warn them, "Do not text while 
driving". The cell phone is not just an instrument for making phone calls. Texting  
has become a preferred use.
E

The History of Social Networking, the Internet, and Smartphones
[ 194 ]
Texting allows the user to quickly communicate with another person without 
interrupting whatever they are doing. It is quiet and has even resulted in the creation 
of a new language. Instead of telling someone that their comment was funny, one 
might text LOL (laughing out loud). Do you need to take a quick break? Just type 
BRB (be right back). The list of acronyms can seem endless, and is changing at 
a breathtaking pace. Among some, these acronyms have even begun to leave the 
mobile space and enter our daily conversation, as commonly used words.
Another significant cultural force in recent decades has been the phenomenon of 
the so-called social networking sites. For example, if someone wants to keep up 
with you, the first thing they might ask is, "Are you on Facebook?" Families keep 
up on Facebook, sharing photos or videos of the baby's first steps. In fact, it has 
become rare for people to exchange phone numbers, because many would rather 
communicate online than by voice. With many modern smartphones, phone 
numbers have actually become relatively unnecessary, as you can simply click on the 
username or the Facebook ID of your friend, and then automatically get connected to 
them, through the account's associated phone number. Another primary advantage 
of social networking sites is that you can communicate on Facebook regardless of the 
time; no more worrying about waking your friend up in the middle of the night if 
you want to send them a quick message.
Another use that has become popular is to find people you may not have heard from 
in a long time. You can search Facebook and resume old friendships, and you can 
even rekindle old romances.
The Internet
In this world of Youtube, Facebook, Hulu, and Twitter, it may be hard to imagine that 
the Internet has only been an integral part of our society for some three decades. The 
Internet, as we know it today, was originally conceived in 1969 as a method by which 
colleges could share information and research. Two years later, in 1971, e-mail was 
born and the @ symbol was first used to separate the name of the user from the service 
provider. Later in the decade, the PC modem was introduced to facilitate transatlantic 
communication, and shortly thereafter the bulletin board was developed as a method 
of easily sharing messages on the network. In 1978, the first spam, unsolicited 
commercial e-mail, message was sent. One might say that, with spam's introduction, 
the essential elements of our modern technology culture were firmly in place.
For more information check out, http://www.zakon.
org/robert/internet/timeline/ and http://www.
internetsociety.org/internet/what-internet/
history-internet/brief-history-internet.

Appendix E
[ 195 ]
The explosion of the World Wide Web continued throughout the 1980s and into 
the 90s with CompuServe and AOL as early adopters. The web was formalized 
in 1994 when Tim Berners-Lee created the URL (Uniform Resource Locator). The 
significance of this innovation cannot be underestimated; it provided a reliable 
method for locating and accessing information on the Internet by organizing 
online data into addresses. This URL format made accessing the web data easier 
for humans to read. The notation of this method is familiar to most of us today, 
http:// followed by some site-specific title, which was then followed by .com, .org, 
or a number of other specifiers, also known as top-level domains. This innovation 
rendered the Internet truly accessible; to find information online, all you needed was 
the ability to type out a URL. You did not need to understand how to code or how to 
modify HTML.
Of course, the most significant development for most of us was the introduction, as 
early as 1990, of the search engine. Which search engine was first is still a matter of 
debate; some argue that the search tool Archie, developed by researchers at McGill 
University, was the first with the ability of finding files. Others argue that Gopher, a 
tool developed by students at the University of Minnesota, was the first true search 
engine. Regardless of which was first, the search engine quickly became one of the 
most vital innovations that rendered the resources of the Internet accessible to the 
general population. By the time Google was introduced in 1997, a number of other 
search engines, from Yahoo! to Altavista, had already been utilized by millions of 
people around the world. With a search engine, you didn't even need to enter a URL; 
you could just type the word you were interested in learning about, and a list of 
results would be displayed for your perusal.
Today, we can access the Internet from our laptop, our tablet, our cell phone, and 
even from certain appliances such as refrigerators and televisions. The Internet is 
an integral aspect of practically every part of our lives. With wireless Internet and 
telecommunications networks, the Internet can be accessed anywhere. Coffee shops, 
such as Starbucks and hotels, advertise the availability of wireless connections. Now, 
you can work, chat with friends, go on Facebook, blog, or play a game practically 
anywhere. Even resumes, which previously were done exclusively on paper, are 
compiled electronically on word processor applications and then e-mailed to 
potential employers online. Want to search for job openings? Go online and browse 
from a seemingly countless variety of job websites, from Monster to Indeed.com. 
This goes both ways, of course. Just as you can search for employers, employers can 
search for you on professional networking sites, such as LinkedIn. In 2012, it's hard 
to imagine that, only some three decades ago, job seekers had to peruse the paper for 
openings and students had to visit the library to do research for school projects.

The History of Social Networking, the Internet, and Smartphones
[ 196 ]
Social networking
Facebook was not the first social networking site. It wasn't even the first to provide a 
network of friends or a "wall", where friends could post messages, images, and links. 
Social networking, or the concept of using the Internet to form relationships and 
keep in touch with friends, may have begun as early as the mid 90s when sites such 
as Classmates.com and Geocities first gained prominence. Classmates.com, which 
is still operating today, was a social networking site that attempted to locate people 
based on publicly available information such as high school graduation classes or 
school enrollment databases. The idea was that, if you wanted to reconnect with an 
old high school flame, you could do just that with Classmates.com.
Sites such as Geocities and Tripod alternately offered the advantages of an online 
network of contacts. On these sites, a user would sign up for an account, and then 
begin to create their own online presence in the form of a dedicated website. The 
social networking aspect of these sites was manifested by the list of contacts or 
friends, which allowed members of these services to connect with one another, send 
messages, and link to each other's personal websites.
The first site to synthesize these two approaches to social networking was Friendster, 
which launched in the year 2002. Friendster developed the concept of degrees of 
social networks. Friendster attempted to connect its members with new contacts 
based upon how close they were with a member's other friends. For example, if 
you were friends with Jacob and Bill, and both of them were friends with Jane, then 
Friendster might attempt to connect you with Jane. This was a novel approach to 
social networking, because it allowed for an intuitive manner for building social 
networks in an online space. After all, just because a person hasn't personally 
connected with someone online, does not mean that they do not know them or that 
they would not like to connect with them. In effect, Friendster made it easier to 
interact with and find people they might already know.

Appendix E
[ 197 ]
Similar to Friendster, Myspace launched in the year 2003. This service's primary 
advantage was its introduction of a message-board style format to a member's 
homepage. By creating a "myspace", a member could organize a space in which 
their friends and contacts could leave comments. One way of thinking of this 
development may be by thinking of guestbooks which predated and inspired it; on 
a guestbook, a visitor could leave a comment about the site or the site's author. This 
comment would remain indefinitely for public viewing unless the site's author chose 
to delete it. The difference in Myspace was only that a member's entire site may 
be regarded as an elaborate and personalized guestbook. On Myspace, a member 
could adorn the top of their page with personal photos or even playable songs and 
videos. They could provide separate boxes that contained personal information, such 
as location, age, and marital status. While it was popular, Myspace was a primary 
destination within popular music, as most popular rock bands used the site in lieu of 
a permanent web address; they used it to announce things such as concert dates and 
C.D. release parties.
In 2003, LinkedIn introduced an entirely different approach to social networking. 
This site may be considered as a natural evolution of the social networking 
phenomenon; if many were already using social networking sites to connect with 
friends for informal purposes, why not use the same technology to allow employers 
and employees to find each other online? This is exactly the possibility that 
LinkedIn provided. On LinkedIn, an employer or employee could create an account, 
and populate that account with information about their qualifications or hiring 
requirements. Then, just as Friendster provided a search engine which allowed 
people to connect based on a matching profile criteria, LinkedIn would assist its 
members in matching qualifications with hiring needs. At its most basic level, 
LinkedIn was a professional database that allowed employers and employees to 
search for each other. What elevated this service, however, was the ability members 
had to then contact each other within LinkedIn's infrastructure; they didn't have 
to call each other if they didn't want to. They could just send a message online. As 
an additional benefit of this service, colleagues could create professional networks 
of friends within this formal networking context. LinkedIn was, for all intents and 
purposes, the professional version of social networking sites, such as Friendster.

The History of Social Networking, the Internet, and Smartphones
[ 198 ]
In 2004, the most successful social networking site to date was first introduced; 
Facebook. Many of us already know the story of Facebook and its founder, Mark 
Zuckerberg. We may have learned about it from seeing the award-winning film, The 
Social Network, or we may have picked up some of the details from countless articles 
written about the staggering success of one of the world's most wealthy individuals. 
Facebook originally began as a social networking site exclusive to Harvard students. 
One might think of it as an upgraded and advanced version of Classmates.com; with 
Facebook, members could easily find Harvard students by searching for classmates 
based on coursework. For example, if you were enrolled in the fall to take Psychology 
101, you could search the roll of other students and if they had accounts, peruse 
their Facebook profiles. If you so choose, you could then leave them a message that 
said you were excited to be taking a class with them. Facebook's success at Harvard 
quickly led to its expansion to many other universities. For the first several years of 
Facebook's existence, in fact, the service was exclusive to universities. It was only in 
2006 that Facebook was first made available to the general public.
Mobiles
The dream of a phone you could use anywhere may be as old as the telephone itself. 
Before cell phones, the only way to make a phone mobile was to install one in a car; 
many may remember that the car-phone was one of the more famous status symbols 
of the 1980s.
This changed when, in 1983, Motorola released the first commercially available cell 
phone, called DynaTAC. Its asking price was a meager $ 3,995, and it boasted a 
whopping 30 minutes of talktime for the would-be trendsetters. While it was not able 
to text or surf the Internet, it did include an LED screen that allowed a user to recall 
and redial previously used phone numbers. Unfortunately, it was also the roughly 
the size and shape of a brick.
While the paltry feature set and high price point of the DynaTAC may seem 
ridiculous to those of us living in the 21st century, consumer demand for the 
product back in the 1980s was quite robust. In fact, the DynaTAC sold well enough 
for Motorola to introduce numerous iterations, with the last being released in 
the year 1993. It even made an impact on 1980s popular culture when Michael 
Douglas's character in the era-defining film Wall Street used one. The DynaTAC's 
allure is understandable when we consider that the device was, after all, the first 
commercially released phone which was not permanently tethered to a residence or 
vehicle. It was the first truly mobile phone.

Appendix E
[ 199 ]
This first device paved the way for models produced by competitors that boasted 
longer battery life and a more accessible price point. Cell phones were such a 
successful product, in fact, that by the 1990s it seemed as though everyone had one. 
What once had been a status symbol of the excessively wealthy had, by the 90s, 
become a common commodity which could be had for free if you just signed a  
multi-year contract.
The next step was taken in 1993 when the first cell phone to include features such 
as an organizer and fax machine was released. Produced by IBM under the name 
Simon, this phone was the world's first smartphone. Though large by today's 
standards, it possessed functions well beyond simply making phone calls, and thus 
foreshadowed the development of cell phones into one of the most essential devices 
of the 21st century.
On regular cell phones, you may not be able to fax your documents or manage 
your calendar, and you most certainly will not be able to download Apps, such as 
Whatsapp or Angry Birds, through an online application store (App Store). The 
main reason for this is that regular cell phones, which include popular models such 
as Motorola's Razr, are designed primarily to make phone calls; the few additional 
functions supported by these regular cell phones are generally not as extensive 
as those present in smartphones. In other words, regular cell phones are just that, 
regular phones.
Smartphones come in a wide variety of shapes, sizes, brands, and models. Some, like 
the Apple iPhone, Sony, Nokia, and Samsung Galaxy S, feature multi-touch screens 
that can display videos and pictures in high resolution. Others, such as particular 
models of Research in Motion's Blackberry line, possess a full keyboard as a built-in 
attachment but do not possess a touch screen. Regardless of the particular differences 
in each model, all of these phones are similar, in that they are designed to do far 
more than simply make phone calls. You might say that this is what makes them 
smart; their focus on their additional functions as opposed to their ability to serve as 
mobile telephones.
Released in 2007, the iPhone was originally conceived as an iPod with the 
added functionality of a cell phone. The original iPhone could make and receive 
phone calls, but it could also play music and interact online using Apple's Safari 
application, and it could surf the Internet. One of the more significant features of 
the iPhone was its multi-touch screen, which allowed a user to manipulate icons 
and folders without the need for attached buttons. On top of all of this, the iPhone 
sported a 2 megapixel digital camera and included an application store (App Store).

The History of Social Networking, the Internet, and Smartphones
[ 200 ]
This robust feature set, combined with Apple's by then already established 
reputation as a technology trendsetter, resulted in the iPhone's unmitigated success 
upon its 2007 release. In fact, even before the device was released to the public, 
Apple's competitors were in the first stages of designing their own cell phones which 
would sport a similar set of features (http://ign.com/articles/2010.06/24/ 
the-history-of-the-iphone).
Upon its original release, the iPhone was most notable for the staggering array of 
tasks it could perform. A user could take a photo of a place they had visited, and 
then send this photo as an e-mail attachment to their friend. The user could then log 
onto Facebook or, at the time, MySpace through the Safari web browser and share 
comments on this or other photos with their friends. If the user wished, they could 
then download a game from the App Store and play for several minutes before 
deciding to text their friend on the included texting application. Most significantly, 
all of this could be done on the same device while the user rode the bus into town. 
The iPhone was a truly multi-functional device, which eliminated the need for other 
devices to perform the same number of tasks. Truly, the iPhone could do it all.
Subsequent iterations of the iPhone only cemented the success of the first release.  
In July 2008, Apple released the iPhone 3G. The primary feature of this device 
was in the title; it ran on the third generation of the mobile telecommunications 
network. The iPhone 3G was also the first generation of the device to include GPS 
functionality and an included maps application.
The iPhone 4S was released with some additional features in October, 2011. The 
primary feature of this release was the ability to save data to a cloud. The cloud 
functionality allowed a user to save data remotely, and to then access that data from 
either the same device or another device. This functionality also allowed a user to 
locate their phone geographically by utilizing a GPS tracking signal in the phone.
The difference between Android and iOS
Most of Apple's competitors use the Android mobile operating system to run  
their user interface. In fact, smartphones using the Android operating system 
composed 52 percent of the cell phone market share in the US as of October, 2012. 
(http://www.engadget.com/2012/10/02/comscore-iphone-moved-up-to-34-
percent-us-share-in-august/).
Comparatively, the iPhone runs on iOS (iPhone Operating System). This is Apple's 
internally developed operating system, which cannot be used to operate other devices 
without Apple's permission (and Apple has not, as of the time of this writing, provided 
such permission to any other manufacturers). From the perspective of maintaining 
your mobile security, this is significant because Apple is the sole entity which is able 
to operate and monitor this platform. No other parties, large or small, may alter or edit 
this infrastructure and this results in a more secure environment for the end user.

Appendix E
[ 201 ]
The best way to understand the difference between the Android and the iOS operating 
systems for smartphones is by considering the difference between the Windows and 
Apple operating systems that run on PCs and Macintosh computers. Also keep in 
mind that Android is open source which encourages developers to make their own 
branch of the operating system. The iOS on iPhones only runs on Apple products like 
Android, runs on a variety of devices produced by a variety of manufactures.
The Android operating system, like the iOS on iPhone, is an operating system 
designed for use on smart devices with a multi-touch screen. The Android  
operating system is currently open source, which means that anyone can access the 
code and make alterations. What this means for the consumer is that the Android 
operating system can run quite differently on different phones that use it. Also 
applications designed for one formation of Android may not be supported on other 
Android devices.
As one might imagine, this lack of parity between Android phones can also create 
some problems for the end user in terms of performance and functionality. Some 
apps purchased on the Android App Store may only work on certain phones, and 
thus it is the user's responsibility to ensure that their phone can run the application 
in question before they choose to download it.
Let's not forget Windows
Windows 8, which was released shortly before the time of this writing, may 
represent the introduction of the third major player in the mobile space. Although 
Windows mobile has, until recently, been Microsoft's primary effort in the mobile 
space, the operating system has not been nearly as successful as iOS or Android. 
With the introduction of Windows 8, Microsoft appears to be positioning itself to 
compete with these two major mobile operating systems. The primary feature of 
Windows 8, as it pertains to mobile, is the introduction of the Windows Store. The 
new Windows Store will, according to Microsoft, allow various Microsoft devices to 
access applications that perform equitably on most of the company's devices. This 
will be accomplished through the use of Windows Live IDs, which Microsoft has 
already successfully implemented in Windows Live PC.
The following is a list of common devices, both iOS and Android, within the  
mobile space:
•	
Apple iPad (various generations)
•	
Apple iPhone (various generations)
•	
Apple iPod touch (various generations)
•	
Blackberry Torch 9800
•	
HTC Droid Incredible 2

The History of Social Networking, the Internet, and Smartphones
[ 202 ]
•	
HTC Evo (various generations)
•	
HTC One X
•	
HTC Windows Phone 8X
•	
LG Lucid
•	
LG Intuition
•	
LG Optimus G
•	
Motorola Atrix HD
•	
Motorola Droid Razr
•	
Motorola Photon Q
•	
Nokia Lumia 920
•	
Samsung Galaxy Note II
•	
Samsung Galaxy Stratosphere
•	
Samsung Galaxy S III
•	
Nexus
•	
Samsung GALAXY S4
•	
Sony Xperia Z
•	
BlackBerry Z10 and Q10
•	
ZTE Grand S
•	
Huawei Ascend D2
•	
Asus Padfone
•	
Nokia Lumia 925
Text messaging, chatting, and video chatting
Throughout the 90s, the primary forms of online communication were e-mail, 
message boards, and newsgroups. As evidenced by the name, electronic mail 
(e-mail) was originally intended as an alternative to traditional mail. Those of us that 
remember e-mail in its earliest days may also remember how formal some of the first 
e-mails could be; users often imitated traditional mail format in every sense. Message 
boards and newsgroups were, however, a relatively informal method of online 
communication. Message boards and newsgroups were both advantageous because 
they allowed for topic-related threads, or conversation categories which could drive 
the focus of particular conversations. Additionally, of course, all of these forms of 
communication did not require an immediate response; unlike a phone conversation, 
a user could read a message and respond in their own time. The message, whether 
by e-mail or message board, would be posted regardless of whether the recipient was 
online or not.

Appendix E
[ 203 ]
To no small degree, these popular 90s technologies have influenced our mobile 
communications practices. Where, once, we might have posted a message to a friend 
on a message board or as a response to a newsgroup e-mail, today, many will simply 
send a text message as a part of their cell phone's Short Message Service (SMS). The 
SMS service, though first developed in the late 1980s, did not enjoy widespread use 
among cell phone users until well into the mid-1990s. The format of these messages, 
like message board responses, is often informal and brief; text messages are only 
rarely intended as detailed conversations.
Another form of communication is known as instant messaging (IM). Instant 
messaging is known as online chatting. IM provides real time exchange of messages, 
which is different from e-mail that in effect sends a batch of data. IM allows quick 
and efficient communication between people. This can be executed via one on one or 
even groups of users. Instant messaging is largely done through ICQ, Compuserve 
AIM (Aol Instant Messenger), and IBM at the same time.
For more complex discussions, a modern mobile user might decide to use an 
application such as Whatsapp, so that they could send and receive responses  
in real time. Chatting came to prominence during the 90s with the advent of 
computer programs, such as ICQ, AIM, and Microsoft Instant Messenger (MSN). 
These chat programs allowed a user the advantages of telephone conversations, 
in that they were real-time discussions, and a user would be aware when their 
conversant was connected or not through status notifications. Like with many 
previously computer-based activities, chatting has become increasingly popular  
as a mobile activity. Through applications such as WhatsApp, AIM, or MSN, a user 
can chat in real time with friends on their smartphones. Of course, this means that 
all of the risks inherent in chatting on computers have also been duplicated on the 
smartphone device.
A final method of mobile communication which is becoming increasingly popular 
is video chatting. This method may have no equivalent in the 1990s but, with the 
advent of programs such as Skype, has become an all too common method of talking 
and seeing our friends and family regardless of their physical location. Recent 
iterations of certain smartphones, in fact, even include a video chatting feature as a 
part of their integrated cell phone infrastructure; this means that there is no need to 
download a separate application if one wishes to video chat.
In our modern and mobile world, there seems to be no limit to the varieties of 
methods by which we can communicate and interact. We can video chat, text chat, 
send instant messages, comment on photos, send tweets, and of course, call someone.

The History of Social Networking, the Internet, and Smartphones
[ 204 ]
Many small businesses have even begun to use smartphones and tablets as a 
method of collecting payment from their customers. For example, Amy's Ice Cream, 
an ice cream store located in Austin, Texas, uses an app called Pay Anywhere, to 
swipe customer credit cards and collect payment. This popular app is associated 
with a credit card add-on that, when attached to the charger port on a tablet or a 
smartphone allows the device to read the credit information for payment processing.
Because of the bewildering possibilities afforded by App Stores, smartphones are 
increasingly being utilized as a method of simplifying our most common financial 
transactions. Today, we can use our smartphones to check our account balance, 
transfer funds from one account to another, pay for parking, purchase products 
through various online outlets, and even take payment for goods on those occasions 
when we are the ones selling goods. Although there are still some limits to what our 
smartphones can do, we should expect that these limits will only continue to recede 
as the capabilities of these devices are further realized.

Index
Symbols
@ symbol  194
A
acceptable use policy. See  AUP
access control  181
ACLU  56
ACME Anvil Corporation  27
AIM (Aol Instant Messenger)  203
Airwatch
URL  32
Altavista  195
Amazon Web Service  21
American Civil Liberties Union. See  ACLU
Android
about  15, 31, 163, 200
differentiating, with iOS  15-17, 200, 201
data encryption  100
mobile security features  82
Android configuration tools
about  36
Lookout  37
quick settings  37
simple router configuration tool  36
simple tether configuration tool  36
Android device
apps, downloading to  46
backup  154
list  201
preventative measures, for hacking  93
wiping  109
Android@Home technology  16
Android Lost app  109
Android operating system
differentiating, with iOS  16
Android profile  154
Android smartphones  46
antivirus software
installing, on smartphones  101
AOL  195
Apple
about  15, 152, 158
URL, for online assistant  157
future plans  55
Apple App Store  71, 101
Apple device
apps, downloading to  46
backup  153
restore  153
Apple iCloud  80
Apple iPhone  46, 199
Apple iTunes application  154
Apple profile  152, 153
applicability, Mobile Acceptable Use  
Policy (MAUP)
rules  186, 187
application
authenticity, verifying  102
application developer
contacting, for application issues  124, 125
application downloads
device, accessing through  106
application issues
application developer, contacting  
for  124, 125
application malfunction
about  125
verifying  125

[ 206 ]
application management
MDM, leveraging for  180
application servers  38
apps
downloading, to Android devices  46
downloading, to Apple devices  46
hidden features  49
scanning, Bouncer used  54
App Store  47, 199
Archie  195
As-is considerations  136
As is warranty  131
AT&T  50
attachment
device, accessing through  106
AUP
about  32, 185
basic format  32, 33
automated customer support system  116
B
backup, Android device  154
backup, Apple device  153
backup, mobile device  153
backup tools, Android
about  155
Mobile Backup II  155
barcode  18
Bell System telephone  46
BlackBerry  26, 163, 199
Blackberry Enterprise  
Server  163, 170, 175, 179
Blackberry Enterprise Server (BES) 10  171
Bouncer
about  16, 54
used, for scanning apps  54
BRB (be right back)  194
BREW  14
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
about  25, 112, 113, 134, 157, 174, 189
impacts  25
maintenance  114
malfunction, determining  158
used, for connecting to corporate  
network  27
C
Carbonite  80
car-phone  198
Carrier IQ  50
Carrier IQ app
personal information, collecting by  50-53
Cellcrypt  100
cell phone
about  198
tracking  56
cell phone insurance  132
cell phone ownership  145, 146
cellular
using  180
certificate management  181
Chase  20
chatting  203
check-in services  57
children, chatting
risks  147, 148
Classmates.com  10
closed systems  31
cloud computing
about  21, 22, 80
architecture  80
designing, for data retrieval  21
risks  23
working  80, 81
cloud computing, architecture
backend  80
frontend  80
network layer  80
cloud security
about  81-84
data location  83
data segregation  83
disaster recovery (DR)  84
privileged user access  83
security compliance  83
CommWarrior  84
companies
computer activities, tracking  12
demographic information, collecting  12
smartphone activities, tracking  12
company business
conducting, smartphones used for  113, 114

[ 207 ]
complete wipe  181
component
installing, to protect corporate data  38
installing, to protect corporate network  38
installing, to protect end users  38
compromised login information
protecting  107, 108
CompuServe  195
computer activities
tracking  12
concerns, mobile device
privacy  82
security  82
configuration, IBM Notes Traveler  165
configuration profile  35
consumer-based applications  176
consumer-focused devices  174
Content Injection phishing  74
cookies
about  43
persistent cookies  43
session cookie  43
corporate access
device, enabling for  190
corporate applications
distributing  180
managing  180
used, for communicating among mobile 
users  176
corporate collaborative environment  176
corporate communication
devices, used for  174
corporate computing
about  27
enterprise  28
corporate data
about  28, 177
MDM, managing on the phone  173
protecting  173
protecting, component installed  38
securing, MDM used for  175
security concern  28
corporate device. See Bring Your Own  
Device (BYOD)
corporate device, Mobile Acceptable  
Use Policy
about  187
disciplinary action  189
overview  188
rules  188
corporate help desks  33, 34
Corporate IT Security policies  174
corporate network
connecting, BYOD used  27
mobile device, accessing to  38
protecting, component installed  38
corporate owned device  190
corporate security policy  26
corporate security procedures  26
correct deployment approach
determining  164
cost based on a recurring charge, extended 
warranty  135
cost considerations  136
CueCat  17, 18, 20
customer concerns
addressing  120
customer issues
resolving, through customer support  
systems  114
customer location
tracking  57
customer service, contacting
checklist  126
customer service, guidelines
SLA  120, 121
customer service representatives
about  127
answering  127
malfunction, addressing to  127
malfunction, describing to  128
customer support system
about  116
automated operation  116
customer issues, resolving through  114
hybrid operation  117
internet chatting  118, 119
personal operation  116
SMS text messaging  119
cyberbullying
about  148, 149
signs  149

[ 208 ]
D
damage coverage  136
data
about  43, 173, 180
corporate data  173, 180
personal data  173, 180
data-at-rest  100
data encryption  99
data encryption, Android
about  100
drawbacks  100
data encryption, iOS  100
data-at-reset  100
data-in-transit  100
data-in-use  100
data location  83, 181
data management  180
data segregation  83
data theft  61, 74
data thieves  48
deceptive phishing  74
demilitarized zone. See  DMZ
demographic information
collecting  12
Developer Distribution Agreement  48
device
accessing, through application  
downloads  106
accessing, through attachment  106
access control, within corporate  
environment  181
data  180
data management  180
enabling, for corporate access  190
testing  128
types  174
used, for corporate communication  174
wiping  159
device hacks
about  156
addressing  157, 158
checklist  160
differentiating, with profile hacks  156
indication  155
post actions  157, 159, 162
unawareness  155
device profile
about  151, 152
Android profile  153
Apple profile  152, 153
device, types
about  181
consumer-focused devices  174
determining  178
device, wiping
decision making  159
full wipe  160
partial wipe  160
Digby  60
Digital Convergence Corporation  17
digital identity  42
digital information  42
Digital Rights Management. See  DRM
direct connection
configuring, to IBM Traveler Server  167
disaster recovery (DR)  84
disciplinary action  187, 189
DMZ  38
DNS-based phishing (pharming)  74
Domain Name System (DNS)  74
Domino Directory Assistance  166
Domino Server  163, 166
DoSomething.org  149
downloaded applications
about  101
antivirus software, on smartphones  101
DRM
about  31
URL, for info  31
DroidKungFu  84
Dropbox  80, 176
DWA  168
DynaTAC  198
E
Electronic Chip Identifier. (eCID)  90
electronic messaging  163
elements, MDM  179
e-mail  202
Encrypted Backup setting  93
encryption policies  181

[ 209 ]
end users
protecting, component installed  38
Engadget  14
Enterprise Database Architecture  164
Erase Data function  92
extended warranty
about  131, 135
considerations  136
purchasing  137, 138
recommendations  138
extended warranty, considerations
As-is  136
cost  136
multiyear plan  136
written statement  136
extended warranty coverage, types
about  135
damage  136
lost  136
product defects  135
software and application  136
extended warranty, types
about  135
cost based on a recurring charge  135
imbedded charge  135
included  135
verbal  135
F
Facebook  10, 74, 194, 198
Facebook Beacon  13
Facebook members
tracking  12
FakeInst
about  71
mobile device, infecting  71
Fandango  13
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)  183
file repositories  176
Find my iPhone feature  92, 108
FinFisher  68  69
firewall  38
Friendster  10, 196
frontend network
protecting, MDM used  28
frontend network devices  26
FTC  13
full wipe  160
functions, MDM  179
G
Gartner Magic Quadrant  182
Geinimi Trojan  9
Geocities  10, 196
Gingerbread 2.3  85
Gingermaster  85
Gizmodo  51
Global Positioning System (GPS)  9, 63, 82
Good Technology  163, 175
Google  16, 158
about  195
future plans  55
Google Android Store   101
Google Docs  80
Google Play  47
Google Play Store  16
Groupon application  74
H
hacker
device, accessing through application 
downloads  106, 107
device, accessing through  
attachments  106, 107
smartphones, protecting from  92
Hackerspace  18
hardware malfunction
manufacturer, contacting for   123
Health Insurance Portability and  
Accountability Act (HIPAA)  178
hidden app
benefits  49
hidden features, apps  49
home office  27
HTML injection  84
Hulu  194
hybrid customer support system  117
I
IBM  163, 203
IBM Domino  175
IBM Domino Enterprise Server  164

[ 210 ]
IBM Domino Server technology  164
IBM Domino Server technology, component
IBM Notes Traveler  164
IBM Endpoint Manager
about  179
URL  32
IBM iSeries  172
IBM Lotus Mobile Connect 6.1  167
IBM Mobile Connect (IMC)  167, 168
IBM Notes Traveler
about  163, 173
architectural design  164
clients  165
configuration  165
correct deployment approach,  
determining  164
features  164
licensing information  171
IBM Notes Traveler 9  171
IBM Notes Traveler Server
about  165
configuration  165
configuring, for creating security settings  
170
deploying, to VPN connection  169
location  166
IBM Tivoli Access Manager 6.0  167
IBM Traveler  175
IBM Traveler Server
direct connection, configuring to  167
IBM WebSphere Edge Server 6.1  167
IBM WebSphere Proxy Server  168
IC3  68, 69, 183
ICCID  90
iCloud
about  92, 153
URL, for downloading  92
identity fraud  44
identity thieves  45
IIRC  100
Ikee  84
imbedded charge, extended warranty  135
IMEI  90
implied warranty  131
IMSI  90
included, extended warranty  135
Indeed.com  195
information management  175
iNotes  168
installation
antivirus software, on smartphones  101
component  38
MDM  28-30
installed applications
reviewing  180
instant messaging (IM)  176, 203
Integrated Circuit Card Identifier. See   
ICCID
International Mobile Station Equipment 
Identity. See  IMEI
International Mobile Subscriber Identity. 
See  IMSI
Internet
about  194
history  194, 195
social networking  196
internet chatting  118, 119
Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3)  65
Internet Engineering Task Force  20
inventory management  179
iOS
about  15, 158, 200
data encryption  100
device, wiping  108, 109
differentiating, with Android  15-17, 200
differentiating, with Android  
operating system  16
list  201
mobile security features  82
IOS (Apple)  31
iPhone  14, 15, 72, 163, 199
iPhone 3G  15, 200
iPhone 4S  200
iPhone configuration tools  35
iPhone configuration utility  91
iPhone configurator
about  91
URL  35, 91
using  35
iPhone device
preventative measures, for hacking  92
iPhone Operating System. See  iOS
iPod  199
iTunes  153

[ 211 ]
J
J2ME  14
jailbreak  31
jailbreaking  94, 190
Jupiter Networks  47
K
Kaspersky  8
key  99
keyloggers attack  75
Kryptos  100
L
legitimate programs  9
licensing information, IBM Notes  
Traveler  171
lifetime warranty  130
LinkedIn  195, 197
location-based marketing, type
check-in services  57
location-based services (LBS)  82
LOL (laughing out loud)  194
longer password
creating  97, 98
Lookout Mobile Security
example, of toll fraud  70
Loozfon  68
lost coverage  136
lost devices
wiping  108
M
mail routing server  38
mail servers
about  166
location  166
malfunction
addressing, to customer service  
representatives  127
describing, to customer service  
representatives  128
determining, for BYOD  158
unresolved  129
malicious app, downloading
precautions  102
malware
about  44, 68, 69
FakeInst  71
FinFisher  69
Loozfon  69
mobile device, attacking  69
SMS spoofing  71
toll fraud  69
used, for hacking smartphones  9
used, for infecting smartphones  45
malware attacks
unawareness  8
malware-based phishing  74
manufacturer
about  122
contacting, for hardware malfunction  123
manufacturer warranty  130
McAfee  101  7
MDM
about  28, 38, 164, 173, 186, 190
benefits  30
elements  179
features  30
functions  179
installing  28, 29, 30
leveraging, for application  
management  180
managing, corporate data on the phone  173
used, for protecting frontend network  28
used, for securing corporate data  175
MDM products  32
MDM solution
about  179
availability  182
determining  179
MEID  90
message boards  202
messaging server  39
Microsoft  158, 163, 201
Microsoft 365 Apps  80
Microsoft ActiveSync technology  174
Microsoft Exchange Active Sync  173
Microsoft Exchange Server  175
Microsoft Instant Messenger (MSN)  203
Microsoft System Manager  179

[ 212 ]
mobiGlobal Positioning System (GPS)  85
Mobile Acceptable Use Policy (MAUP)
about  157, 185, 187
applicability  186
corporate device  187
disciplinary action  187
purpose  186
Mobile Backup II
URL  155
Mobile Backup & Restore Tool
URL  154
mobile banking
about  20, 62
security measures  62
mobile communication
about  175, 203
device, using  173
mobile cybercrime  68
mobile device
about  46
accessing, to corporate network  38
attacking, malware used  69
AUP  185
backup  153
benefits  46, 142, 143
buying  27
concerns  82
connecting, to IBM Notes Traveler Server 
via VPN connection  169
device profile  151
future threats  85
hacking  103
history  198
identifying, SIM used  89
infecting, FakeInst used  71
operating system  31
protection guidelines  85, 86
restore  153
security threats  68, 86
used, for business access  26, 27
used, for online shopping  60
users, types  175
using, at workplace  63
mobile device, hacking
preventative steps  109, 110
social engineering  105
verifying  103, 104
mobile device, identifiers
eCID  90
ICCID  90
IMEI  90
IMSI  90
MEID  90
Mobile Device Management. See  MDM  170
Mobile Device Management (MDM)  
solution  25
Mobile Device Management Software  182
Mobile Device Management tool  157
mobile device, protecting
tips  183, 184
mobile device, type
BYOD  157
personal  157
mobile equipment identifier. See  MEID
MobileIron
URL  32
mobile malware  68
mobile operating systems
Android  124
iOS  124
Windows  124
mobile purchasing
about  17
CueCat  17
Personal QR Code  18
mobile security
features  82
compromise, resolving  162
mobile security policies
about  176
corporate data  177
data communication  177
devices  177
government regulations  178
mobile shopping  61
mobile threats  68
mobile user
communicating, corporate applications 
used for  176
Monkey Jump 2  102
Monster  195
MSN Money  45
Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS)  84

[ 213 ]
multiyear plan considerations  136
Myspace  197
N
National White Collar Crime Center 
(NW3C)  65, 183
News Corporation  52
newsgroups  202
Nokia  158, 199
Nokia Lumia  158
normal use warranty  131
Norton  101
NRPC 1352  167, 169
O
online chatting  203
online communication
about  202
e-mail  202
history  202
message boards  202
newsgroups  202
online payments  60
online shopping
mobile device, used for  60
operating system  31
operating system developer
contacting, for software error  123
OS management  181
OS operators  122
P
Pandora  52
Paper Toss. Studies  52
partial wipe  160
passfault
about  97
URL  97
password
modifying  99
obtaining  78
password attacker  97
password cracker  97
password management  95, 96, 181
password meter
about  97
URL  97
password policies  181
payload  35
payment
collecting, smartphones used for  204
payphones  193
persistent cookies  43
personal computers
smartphones, comparing to  44
Personal Computers (PC)  28
personal customer support system  116
personal device
reset  157
Personal Identification Number (PIN)  27
personal information
collecting  58
collecting, by Carrier IQ app  50
collecting, Carrier IQ app used  52, 53
protecting  64, 65
selling  45
stealing  44, 45
Personal Information Management  
(PIM)  173
Personal QR Code  17-20
phishing  73
phishing, types
Content Injection phishing  74
data theft  74
deceptive phishing  74
DNS-based phishing (pharming)  74
malware-based phishing  74
search engine phishing  75
phreaking  69
pod2g
URL  72
power user
about  33, 34
tools  34
predictive analytics  58
premium-rate SMS malware  69
premium service abuser  69
privacy  82
privileged user access  83
product defects coverage  135
professional networking sites  195

[ 214 ]
profile hacks
about  156
differentiating, with device hacks  156
Pumpkin Maker  53
Q
QR boxes
reading  18
usage  18
QR code generator
URL  18
QR reader app  18
Quick Response Code (QR Code)
about  18
creating  18-20
R
Real Time Operating Systems (RTOS)  14
recommended applications  180
Red Hat 6  172
remote lock  181
restore, Apple device  153
restore, mobile device  153
retailers
customer location, tracking  57
reverse proxy  38, 166, 167
RIM Blackberry Devices  174
rooting  31, 94
Rovio  52
S
Safe Harbor Act  83
SafeSearch  147
Sale of Goods ACT  132
Salt Lake City  21
Samsung  158
URL, for online assistant  157
Samsung Galaxy S  199
Samsung Galaxy S3  158
screenloggers attack  75
search engine  195
search engine phishing  75
security  82
security compliance  83
security policy  181
security settings
creating  170
security threats  68
selective wipe  180
Service Level Agreement. See  SLA
service providers  122
session cookie  43
sexting  146, 147
sexually explicit text message (sext)  146
Short Message Service (SMS)  53, 165, 203
SIM
about  89
used, for identifying mobile device  89
SIM card  89
Simple tether configuration tool  36
Skulls  84
Skype  203
SLA  120, 121
SlideShare  80
SmartMan
URL  32
smartphone activities
tracking  12
smartphone revolution
precursors  10
smartphones
about  7
accessing, through SMS messaging  
attacks  106
categories  134
cloud computing, designing for data  
retrieval  21
features  14
hacking, malware used  9
hacking, viruses used  9
hardware issue  123
infecting, malware used  45
maintaining  133
operating system error  124
operating systems  14
personal computers, comparing to  44
preventative measures, for hacking  92, 94
protecting, from hackers  92
reach out  46
replacing  133
revolutionizing  13
risks  7, 8

[ 215 ]
usage  7, 42
used, for collecting payment  204
used, for conducting company  
business  113, 114
warranties  129
SMS messaging attacks
accessing  106
smartphones, accessing through  106
SMS spoofing
about  71
impacts  71
implementing  71
SMS text messaging  119
social engineering
about  72, 105
phishing  72
spear phishing  72, 75
social networking  10
social networking site
about  10, 194, 196
Classmates.com  10, 196
Facebook  10, 196
Friendster  10, 196
Geocities  10, 196
history  10, 196-198
LinkedIn  197
Myspace  197
tracking  12
Tripod  196
Twitter  10
software and applications coverage  136
software error
operating system developer, contacting  
for  123
Sony  199
spam  194
spear phishing
about  75
examples  76-80
working  76
Sprint  50
SpyEye  84
stolen devices
wiping  108
strangers
chatting, with children  147, 148
strong password
creating  96
technique  99
using  96
subscriber identity module. See  SIM
SUSE 11  172
Symantec Report  68
synchronization  181
system reconfiguration attacks  75
T
technical support
contacting  125
technical support, contacting
checklist  126
technical support parties
about  122
manufacturer  122
OS operators  122
service providers  122
technology
influences, on young generation  143, 144
Telegraph
URL  58
telephone  198
texting  146, 147, 194
text messages  203
TextPlus4  52
threats, mobile device
malware  68, 69
social engineering  72
virus  84
T-Mobile  50
toll fraud  69
tools, power user
about  34
Android configuration  36
iPhone configuration  35
traveler servers
about  166
configuration  166
Trend Micro Mobile Backup and Restore
URL  155
Tripod  196

[ 216 ]
Trojan
smartphones, accessing through SMS  
messaging attacks  106
Twitter  10, 194
two-factor authentication  86
U
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC)
about  132, 136
URL  132
United States Department of Justice  
(US DoJ)  56
United States Federal Bureau of  
Investigation (FBI)  65
updates and compliance  180
URL (Uniform Resource Locator)  195
U.S. Department of Justice  44
users
personal information, sharing on social 
networking site  11
V
varied password
creating  97, 98
VentureBeat
example  70
verbal, extended warranty  135
video chatting  203
Virtual Private Network. See  VPN
viruses
about  84
used, for hacking smartphones  9
VPN
about  169
using  180
VPN connection
configuration  169
IBM Notes Traveler Server, deploying to  
169
VPN technology  166
W
Wall Street Journal (WSJ)  53
warranties, smartphones  129, 134
As is  131
cell phone insurance  132, 133
extended warranty  131, 134
implied warranty  131
insurance  134
lifetime warranty  130, 133
manufacturer warranty  130, 133
normal use  131
standard warranty  133
utilization  132, 133
weak password  99
Whatsapp  203
Wi-Fi
using  180
Windows 8  201
Windows Live ID  201
Windows Live PC  201
Windows Mobile  31, 163
Windows Phones  158
Windows RT  171
Windows Server 12  172
Windows Store  201
wireless internet  195
workplace
mobile devices, using at  63
World Wide Web  195
written statement considerations  136
X
XCode Organizer  91
XML (Extensible Markup Language)  35
Y
Yahoo!  195
young generation
technology, influences  143, 144
Youtube  194
Z
ZDNet  95
Zeus  84
ZitMo  84

Thank you for buying  
Mobile Security: How to Secure, 
Privatize, and Recover Your Devices
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Spring Security 3.1
ISBN:  978-1-84951-826-0            Paperback: 456 pages
Secure your web applications from hackers with this 
step-by-step guide
1.	
Learn to leverage the power of Spring Security 
to keep intruders at bay through simple 
examples that illustrate real-world problems
2.	
Each sample demonstrates key concepts 
allowing you to build your knowledge of the 
architecture in a practical and incremental way
3.	
Filled with samples that clearly illustrate how to 
integrate with the technologies and frameworks 
of your choice
Oracle 11g Anti-hacker's 
Cookbook
ISBN:  978-1-84968-526-9            Paperback: 302 pages
Over 50 recipes and scenarios to hack, defend, and 
secure your Oracle Database
1.	
Learn to protect your sensitive data by using 
industry certified techniques
2.	
Implement and use ultimate techniques in 
Oracle Security and new security features 
introduced in Oracle 11g R2
3.	
Implement strong network communication 
security using different encryption solutions 
provided by Oracle Advanced Security
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

BackTrack – Testing Wireless 
Network Security
ISBN:  978-1-78216-406-7            Paperback: 108 pages
Secure your wireless networks against attacks, hacks, 
and intruders with this step-by-step guide
1.	
Make your wireless networks bulletproof
2.	
Easily secure your network from intruders
3.	
See how the hackers do it and learn how to 
defend yourself 
Instant Spring Security Starter
ISBN:  978-1-78216-883-6            Paperback: 70 pages
Learn the fundamentals of web authentication and 
authorization using Spring Security
1.	
Learn something new in an Instant!  
A short, fast, focused guide delivering 
immediate results
2.	
Learn basic login/password and two-phase 
authentication
3.	
Secure access all the way from frontend  
to backend
4.	
Learn about the available security models,  
SPEL, and pragmatic considerations
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

